
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧Bibliotheca Eliotae. ❧ Eliotis Librarie.
            
               ❧LONDINI❧ ANNO VERBI INCARNATI. M.D.XLII. Leaf
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧TO THE MOST ROYAL AND PVISSANT PRINCE, AND HIS MOST REDOVBTED SOVErayne lord kyng HENRY the eyght, kyng of England, Fraunce, and Irelande, defender of the fayth, and of the Churche of Englande and alſo of Irelande in erthe the ſupreme heade, his humble ſeruant Thomas Glyot knyght, deſyreth perpetuall felicitie.
            
               THE HONOVRABLE PHILOSOpher Plutarchus, mooſte worthye mayſter to Traiane the emperour, dothe define in a ſimilitude moſte apte and proper, what is ſignified by the dignitie and name of a kynge, ſaying: That which god is in heauen, and the ſonne in the fyrmament the ſame in erthe is a kynge to thoſe, whom he gouerneth. In almyghty god nothynge is greatter than Iuſtyce, wherby he rewardeth good men, aboue theyr merytes, and punyſheth yll men vnder theyr deſeruynges. The power of the Sunne is declared whan he ſurmountynge the rygorous ſtormes of ſturdy wynter, and being in his moſt dilectable progreſſe of luſty ſprynge tyme, ſheweth to the worlde his celeſtiall vyſage dyſcouered: than herbes, graynes, and fruites, both holſom and dylectable, be founde in abundance, the pleaſant verdure of trees doth delyte the beholders: the byrdes in theyr harmony do declare, howe moche they reioyce at the benigne aſpecte of that noble planete. Lykewyſe that kynge, whiche gouerneth for the weale of his countreye, beholdynge benygnely them that be ſtudyouſe, or occupyed aboute thynges that be vertuouſe, he not onely doth animate or gyue lyfe to theyr courages, but alſo rendreth to theyr wytt
                  ••••
                more ſharpneſſe, with a prompt dexteritie armed with hardines. It is ther
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                meruayle, that great kinges haue in their counſayles moſte wytty perſon
                  ••
               , ſeinge that the makyng of great wyttes is in theyr puiſſaunce, although vertue procedeth immedyately from god, and ſapience lykewyſe. And yet Sapience is oftentymes hydde in thoſe perſones, whome eyther malyctouſe wyttes hateth, or enuye purſueth, or fortune contemneth. Of the ſayd power annexed (as it were) vnto a kynges maieſtie, moſt noble prynce, mooſte gracious ſoueraygne lorde, I amonge dyuerſe other haue had good experience. For where aboute two yeres paſſed, farre aboue myn expectation, I receyued by wordes procedyng from the mouthe of your hyghneſſe, comfort incredible to the ſettyng forth of my Dictionary, whyche at that tyme I had lately begun, and that very ſengly, and with lyttell ſtudy. I all inflāmed with the ſayde comfort, dyd afterwarde procede therin moche more exactly, and dyd ampliate the warke aboue that that I purpoſed: ſo that your maieſtie (as I was infourmed) and dyuerſe other commended my diligence. Not withſtandyng, the ſayd comfortable wordes of your hyghnes, contynually reſortyng vnto my remembrance, ceſſed not to prouoke me to reade ouer eftſones, and reuolue
 my ſayd warke, fearyng (as god ſhall iudge me) leſt by my neglygence, eyther ſome wordes lackyng, or ſom interpretation being myſconceyued, my labors ſhuld be not only vnprofitable vnto the reders, but alſo vnworthy the moſt benygne and fauourable report of your excellent maieſty. I therfore moſte feruently ſtyrred by your gracis comforte, in pervſyng my ſayd Dictionary, haue proceded to the correction and amplifycation therof, in ſuche fourme, as hereafter foloweth. Fyrſt ſequeſtrynge my ſelfe from all other buſyneſſe (that onely except, wherein I was bounden to ſerue your hyghneſſe) I aſſembled all ſuche authours as I thought ſhulde be neceſſary, for the achieuynge of that whiche I toke in enterpryſe, whoſe names do immedyately folowe this proheme: and layenge them before me, I not onely dyd ſeriouſely and dilygently trye and examyne euery worde, which eyther in ſygnification or fourme of ſpeakynge, called a phraſe, moughte make any doubt to them that ſhulde reade it, and by the ſame authors dyd as truely correct it, as my lernynge wolde ſerue me: but alſo with a newe ſpirite of hardyneſſe, receyued by the often remembrance of your gracious ſayde comforte. I folowynge the exaumple of Suidas the greke, aduentured to make a generall collection by the order of letters of all notable countrays, cities, mountaynes, and ryuers, with theyr true deſcriptions, boundes and commodities, the names and natures of ſundry beaſtes, foules, ſerpentes, and fyſſhes: the declaration of a great number of herbes, trees, fruites, gummes, precyouſe ſtones, and metalles, whiche before me were neuer of any man (that I can here of) declared and ſette forthe in englyſhe: The true definitions of all ſyckeneſſes and kyndes of maladyes, whyche commonly do happen to men, with the cauſe, wherof they procede: Fynally the names of moſte notable perſonages, who from the fyrſt man Adam vntyll thre hundred yeres after the incarnation of CHRISTE, dyd any thynge worthy a ſpeciall remembrance, expedient and neceſſary to the moderation of our actes and procedynges, with the hyſtoryes or lyues of the ſayd perſones compendyouſely gathered. I haue not omytted fables and inuentions of paynymes, for the more eaſy vnderſtandyng of poetes. I alſo thought it neceſſary to enterlace the deteſtable heretykes, with theyr ſundry hereſyes, concernynge the ſubſtance of our catholyke faythe iuſtly condemned by the hole conſent of all true chryſten men, to the intente that thoſe hereſyes beinge in this wyſe diuulgate, may be the ſooner eſpyed and abhorred in ſuche bokes, where they be craftily enterlaced with holſom doctrine. Ne the knowlege of them as hereſyes may indamage any man in his conſcyence (as ſome men haue ſuppoſed) more than the cōmune knowlege and ofte recitation of treaſons, fornication, or felonies contriued or practyſed in ſundry facions, for as moche as theſe thynges do requyre leſſe ſtudy, than the maynteynynge of erronious and dyuellyſſhe opynyons, wherfore the knowlege thereof is moche more daungerouſe: And yet the knowlege bothe of the one and the other is ryght expedient, ſens in euery thynge it is as neceſſary to aforeſee, what ſhall brynge damage vnto vs,
 as contrary wyſe what mought be founden good and cōmodiouſe. As well in this parte as in the hyſtories and fables, I haue ſette out the computation of tyme callid Chronography, wherin it appereth how longe the perſons were eyther before the incarnation of CHRISTE, or howe longe after. Alſo I haue declared the auncient coynes, weyghtes, and meaſures, conferryng them with thoſe whiche be currant and vſuall amonge vs. I haue planted in prouerbes, callyd Adagia, ſuch as be founden in latyn authours, with theyr expoſitions. Alſo the proper termes belongyng to phiſyke and ſurgery, and other dyuers and ſundry artes and ſcyences. More ouer I haue declared dyuers greke wordes, whyche be vſurped of latyne authors. In this fourme haue I fynyſhed this warke, to the glorye of almyghty god, and the no lyttell porfyte (I truſte) of all englyſhemen, whiche are and ſhall be deſyrous of doctrine, whyche I ſhulde neuer haue enterpriſed, nor haue brought to concluſyon, had I not ben inflamed by the comforte receyued of your royall maieſty. By this it appereth, that the benygnitie of pryncipall gouernours, extended to them whiche be of honeſt exercyſe, dothe ſtere vp in them a more greatter ſpiryte, wherby theyr wyttes and courages do appere more abundant. Witneſſes therof be the great numbres of wonderfull lerned men, and moſte valyant and polytyke capytaynes, which were in the tymes of great Alexander, Octauian, Titus. Traiane, Hadriane, bothe Antonines, and Alexander Seuerus, moſte noble emperours, of whom dyuerſe by them were aduanced to dignities, many enryched, none vnrewarded. And truly in this your gracis realme there is a great numbre ſtudyouſely inclyned to lernynge, prouoked as well by your gracis moſte noble example, whych haue ſhewed your ſelfe not only ſtudyouſe in holye ſcripture, but alſo to be notably lerned, and to haue an excellent iudgement in all kyndes of doctrine, as alſo your byſſhops and chapleynes of honour, men famouſe in lernynge. And by ſuche wordes as your hyghneſſe hath openly ſpoken in comfortyng and alſo commandyng yonge gentylmen, to enbrace good letters, and to be occupied in readinge good authors, there be not a fewe yonge men of the ſtate of the temporaltie, by an honeſt emulation, do endeuour them to be founden in lernynge worthy to receyue lyke fruites of your gracis benygnitie, as the ſtate of the clergie hath done hytherto, wherof dyuers haue bene ryght worthy to haue it. But whan bothe your temporaltie and clergy do flouryſſhe in doctrine, as (your hyghneſſe procedynge to the ſettynge vp of good lectures with lyberal ſalaries) it is likely to happen right ſhortly: than this realme of Englande, lyke as it maye compare with any realme chriſtened in temperate ayre, and abundance of all thynges, whiche the neceſſitie of mans nature requyreth: ſo in all partes of honour and ſuretie ſhall it ſurmount all other countrays, your maieſtie gouernynge, whom almighty god hath abundantly endowed with the principall gyftes of grace, nature, and fortune. Fynally may it lyke your moſt royal maieſty to receyue this my ſymple labour and ſtudy, which I haue eftſones dedicate vnto your hyghnes,
 with lyke benignitie as you receyued my fyrſte edition, whyche neyther in dilygence, nor ſyncere exposition, nor in copy of wordes, nor in abundaunce of matter and ſentence, is in any wyſe to be hereto compared. And if I may perceyue your hygheneſſe to be pleaſed with this fourme of exercyſe, god gyuynge me helthe, and by your gracis aſſiſtence and fauoure, lyuynge in quietneſſe and out of neceſſitie. I intende to imploy the reſte of my tyme in ſuche ſtudy, as your maieſty ſhall haue cauſe to take no leſſe thankfully, than yf I ſerued your hyghneſſe in other affaires, wherin ſhuld be moche more trauayle of body: Suche truſte and aſſured iudgement I haue in your gracis moſte excellent wyſedome, whiche is the onely botreaux of my welthe and comforte, lyke as it is to all Englande the princypall bulwarke. I hartily beſeche god to augmente your hyghneſſe in all partes of felycitie.
         
         
            
               A QVIBVS phraſes colliguntur.
               MARCVS Tullius.
               C. Iul. Caeſar.
               Terentius.
               Titus Liuius.
               Saluſtius.
               Cornelius Celſus.
               Iunius Columella.
               Pla
                     •
                  tus.
               Vergilius.
               Cornelius Tacitus.
               Fab. Quintilianus.
            
            
               HISTORICI.
               Graeci,

                     HErodotus.
                     Thucydides.
                     Plutarchus.
                     Herodianus.
                     Dionyſius Halycarnaſſeus.
                     Laertius.
                  
               
               Latini,

                     Appianus.
                     Helianus.
                     Arrianus.
                     Polybius
                     Titus Liuius
                     Cornelius Nepos.
                     Suetonius.
                     Valerius Maximus
                     Quintus Curtius.
                     Iulius Capitolinus.
                     Lampridius.
                     Ammianus.
                     Aemilius Probus.
                     Iustinus.
                     Eurropius.
                  
               
            
            
               COSMOGRAPHI.
               STrabo.
               Pomponius Mela.
               Ptholomeus.
               Americus Veſputius.
               Petrus Martyr.
               Antonius Sabellicus.
               Raphael Volaterranus. Recentes Chronographi.
            
            
               PHILOSOPHI.
               PLato.
               Ariſtoteles.
               Xenophon.
               Theophraſtus.
               Plotinus.
               Porphyrius,
               Proclus.
               Philo.
               Alexander Aphrodiſcus.
               Xenocrates.
               Seneca
               Cenſorinus.
               Boetius.
               Iulius Firmicus.
               Hyginius.
            
            
               AVTHORES ſacri.
               MOſes.
               Agiographi.
               Euſebius.
               Tertullianus.
               Hieronymus.
               Epiphanius.
               Auguſtinus.
               Gennadius.
            
            
               AVTHORES ambigui tituli.
               graeci
               VArro.
               Plinius.
               Solinus.
               Aulus Gellius.
               Macrobius.
               Vitruuius.
               Vibius Sequester.
               Frontinus.
               Vegetius.
               Ludouicus Coelius.
               Hermolaus Barbarus.
               Iouianus Pontanus.
               Eraſmus Rotherodamus.
               Gulielmus Budeus,
               Lazarus Baph
                     •
                  us.
               Georgius Agricola.
               Robertus Senalis, de ponderibus & menſuris.
            
            
               MEDICI.
               HIppocrates.
               Galenus
               Dioſcorides.
               Paulus Aegineta
               Alexander Trallianus
               Conſtantinus Affricanus
               Serapio
               Mesu
                     •
                  h
               Io. Ruellius
               Io. Manardus.
               Antonius Muſa Braſceuola
               Io. Agricola
               Georgius Agricola.
            
            
               
               LEGVM interpretes.
               PAndectarum Authores
               Andreas Alciatus
               Vldericus Zaſius
               Claudius Cantiuncula.
               Fabularum ſcriptores.
               HOmerus
               Hesiodus
               Ouidius
               Diodorus Siculus
               Pauſanias.
            
            
               GRAMMATICI.
               SVidas.
               Iul. Pollux
               Eustathius
               Homeri interpres
               Ariſtophanis interpres
               Priſcianus
               Seruius
               Donatus
               Porphyrio
               Acron
               Pompeius Feſtus
               Pedianus
               Angelus Politianus
               Pomponius Laetus
               Beroaldus Bononiensis.
               M. Antonius Sabellicus.
               Vitellius.
               Baptista Pius.
               Baptista Egnatius.
            
            A recentioribus Ro. Stephno ac Steph. Doleto gallis aliquid traduxi in linguā nostrā, neutrum tamen us
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                adeo imitatus, quin diuersitatis utrius
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                linguae rationem habuerim.
         
         
            
               ❧ BONIS AEQVE AC DOCTIS VIRIS CONSTANTISS. AMICIS ELIOTA.
            
               IACTA EST ALEA, PRODIT IN MEDIVM OPVS, NON TAM RECENS, 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                uarium ac multiplex, at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ob id criticorum stylis ac morſibus uehementer obnoxium. Nimirū à uobis nihil eſt quod metuam, nempe qui in alieno ſtadio cum plumbeis pedibus aequis paſſibus incedere ſolebatis, non ignauorum hominum more hinc inde ſaltuatim procurrentes, uerba uellicantes quae litera uel accentu perperam inuertantur. Igitur tabula prius à uobis perlecta, in quam errores ac uitia, quae crebro soleant inter imprimendum contingere, bona fide collegimus: in lectionis curſu mox ad eandem tabulā uitia corrigetis, authoris
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                nomen ac dignitatem (quandoquidē incredibili ſtudio ſubueniendae Reipub. id opus occeperit) aduerſum illiuſmodi fucos▪ & crabrones fortititer defendetis. Caeterum pro mutua beneuolentia inter nos, ſtudiorū ac uoluntatum similitudine comparata, si quid uobis interlegendum occurrerit, quod ueſtris eruditis oculis minus ſatisfecerit, aliquantiſper ſtilum continebitis, quouſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                collecta obfirmata
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                memoria, ſcribentis uoluntatem ac diligentiam cum illis authoribus, à quibus aut uerbum aliquod, uel ſententiā, ſeu cuius
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                rei deſcriptionem coepiſſe uideatur, mature contuleritis. In traductione uerborum ac ſententiarum eloquentiā ullam non expectabitis in illa, quicquid mihi nimium feſtinanti interciderit, concinnabitis, tum legibus amicitiae tantum tribuetis, ut amicum dormitantem, seu uerius oneri ſuccumbentem, ab inuidorum dentibus, obiecto quopiam honeſto elogio uindicetis: & ſi non alio, ſaltem iſto,
            
                Eliota uir equeſtris ne in ullo malo otio, pernicioſouè negotio uitam infirmaret, ut
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                aliqua ex parte de Repub. bene meritus eſſe uideretur, aliis rebus omnibus neglectis, quae tum opes maximas, tum ſummas dignitates polliceri ſoleant, id oneris aſſumpſit, quo tū literas latinas ſcire cupientes facilius inſtrueret, tum iiſdem literis mediocriter imbutos, uaria uerborum ſuppellectili, multip lici
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                rerum cognitione, locorum at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                hominum spectaculo magis illuſtrium, ad ſtudium capeſcendum acrius incitaret. quod cum effecerit, se uoto liberabit. In tam arduo negotio ſi ab eo quic
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                imprudenter exciderit, quod ſolidae doctrinae fraudi non fuerit, uel puritatem linguae latinae minus infecerit, ne dum probitati morum offecerit, nec ſanitati corporis quic
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                nocuerit, eſſent medius fidius nimium ingrati, ne dicam improbi, qui labenti non potius manum porrigerent, 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                inſultando gratiam imminuerent. Id genus elogii uobis amici non minus honorificum, 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                mihi iure amicitiae debitum: quippe quod non ſolum humanitatis laudem, ſed & uerae ſapientiae apud homines opinionem ſit uobis allaturum, humanum quidem eſt labi, errare, decipi at labantem non ſuſtinere, aut errantem in uiam nō reducere, aut deceptū consilio aut opera nō iuuare si poſsis, amicum praeſertim, non modo inhumanum exiſtimatur, uerum etiam bonis omnibus execrandum. In moribus nihil habere commune cum beluis, bonis
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                fauere prorſus ſapientis eſt, at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ab omnibus amplectendum, modicum officium eſt, quod à uobis peto at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                parua res, quam nec inimico ne dum aduerſario ipſe pernegarem. tam chara ſemper mihi fuit Respub. ut quem in eam nouerim inſigne quoduis beneficium molientem, hunc non potuerim honorificis uerbis non proſequi, laudare, extollere, quamuis mihi caetera uita, ac moribus minus probaretur. In hoc opere ut ab omnibus bene audiam equidem non laboro, cū id ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Platoni, ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Ciceroni, ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Deo illi Maeonio contingere quidem potuerit. Gaudebo ſanè, ſi mea beneuolentia in Rempub. in Nobilitatem amor, charitas in plebem, tum à rege doctiſs. tū à uobis ueſtrum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſimillimisita comprobentur, ut me haud indignum exiſtimetis, quem ueſtro patrocinio aduerſus calumniatorum impetum defendere uolueritis. Hoc tandem uos neſcire nollem, tam uerbalia nomina, 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                etiam participia à me plaera
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                praetermiſſa, quod uerbis primigeniis ex literarū ordine facile compertis, leuiore negotio, quae ab eis deriuentur inuenire poteritis. At ne uobis ineptire uidear longis logis, hoc tandem breuiter capiatis. Si meū in hoc labore qualemcun
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                conatū à uobis liberaliter acceptum defenſum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                cognouero, à me longe maiora molimina opera
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                iis multo praeſtantiora breuiter expectabitis.
            SALVETI.
         
         
            
            ERRATA.
            OBSECRO TE AMICE LECTOR, ne quic
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                ex hac bybliotheca in tuum uſum capias, prius
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                errata typographi nimium feſtinantis, ex hac tabella caſtigaueris, ne author de ſua patria bene meritus, immerito gratiam illi debitam amittat, ac tu itidē ſpem ac fortaſsis laborem imprudenter perdideris.
            
               
                  FOr Aijt reade Abijt.
               Abiudicauit, put out Adiudicauit.
               Auita, put out Aulta.
               In Acer, for wyche, reade maple, and put out the reſydue.
               In Acus, aci, for hornebeke, reade hornkeke.
               In Adhaeſe, put out not.
               In Agnaſcentia, for were, reade where.
               In Albion, the .xli. lyne for noo whyter, reade any whyter.
               
                  In Alia, for Molimerus, reade Molmitius.
               In Amphimacrus, for the myddel ſillable long reade the myddell ſyllable ſhort.
               In Anagallida aquatica, for Alyſaundis, reade Alyſaunder.
               In Antaeci, put out zone or gyrdell, and put in contrarye.
               In Anthyllis, for herbe Iuye, reade herbe Iue.
               In Apſis, for name, reade naue.
               In Arcadia, the .vi. lyne, for bagpyde, reade bagpype.
               
                  Argemata, put out ta.
               
               
                  In Arnion, for Arnogloſſo, rede Arnogloſſa.
               
                  In Artamitae, for Ceclaminus, reade Cyclaminus.
               
                  After Aruum, for Ars, reade Arx.
               Atrengere ſenectam, reade Attingere.
               Aurea aetheria, reade Aura.
               
                  In Baſilius for quadriuales, rede Quadriuiales.
               Bedegnar, reade Bedeguar.
               
                  After Bellona, for Bollouaci, reade Bellouaci.
               
                  After Bipennis, for Biponella, rede Bipenella.
               In Brachylogia, for ſpethe, reade ſpeche.
               
                  In Bubonium, for Inguinali, reade Inguinalis.
               Bulapatham, reade Bulapathum.
               Buphonum, reade Buphonium.
               In Calecut, the tenthe lyne, yet is his necke, put out is.
               Calirrohe, reade Calirhoe.
               Cauere teſtamenta, reade Teſtamento.
               
                  Caute, wyſe, reade wyſely.
               Celebare ludos, rede Celebrare ludos.
               On Celtogallia, for hloe, rede hole.
               In Cibele, the .xvi. verſe for Peſsinuus, reade Peſsimus.
               
               In Complodo. put out pſi, and write ploſi.
               
               In Concilium Lugdunenſe, the laſt worde for dignitie reade diuinitie.
               In Corus, put out a ſoutheweſt wynde.
               Cuſtodio, reade Cuſtodia.
               Cuſtodia, reade Cuſtodio.
               De caltaria in carbonariam, rede De calcaria.
               
                  Decidus, reade Deciduus, in the .vii. lyne for cernis, reade ceruis.
               
               In Decies the .xxiiii. lyne, for Deciës, reade Deciens.
               
               
                  In Dediſco, dicere, reade dediſcere.
               In Delphmus, the .ix. lyne rede, There hathe ben of them knowen to loue chyldren, and receyue▪ them.
               Depuneo, nere, rede nire.
               Deſciſtere, reade deſiſtere.
               In Dirigeo, for ſtrynke, reade ſhrynke.
               Diſiecta milites, reade Diſiecti milites.
               In Domi nobiles, for honorably, rede honourable.
               
                  Dorſum, the .iii. lyne for ſhelpe rede ſhelfe.
               In Dracones, the .iii. lyne for Pyretum, reade Pyretrum.
               
               Eblandiri ſolitudidines, reade ſolitudines.
               
                  Eblanditus, gotten by ſlattery, rede by flattery.
               In Ebur, Dioſcorides calleth it Thamaeacte, put it out in that place, and ſet before in Ebu lus at the ende of the ſeconde lyne. Dioſcorides calleth it Chamaeacte.
               
               
                  Edere luci, for lyghe, reade lyght.
               In Efferre pedem, the .iii. lyne, for efferrat, reade efferat.
               
               In Eſaias, in the laſte lyne at the ende for .96. yeres, reade. 800. yeres.
               Ethopela, reade Ethopeïa.
               Exinantio, reade Exinanio.
               Facere conuitiam, reade Conuitium.
               Floreo, rui, rure, reade rere.
               In Folliculus, for eares of weate, reade eares of wheate.
               In Frumentum, for weate or rye, reade wheat or rye.
               
                  In Heraclia, Nemiphar, reade Nenuphar.
               
                  In Hippoſelinon, for the herbe callache or ſmallache, or marche, rede the herbe callyd ſmallache or marche.
               Hucertus, reade hubertus.
               Hyaccynthinus, reade Hyacynthinus.
               
                  In clauſulam diſputationi imponere, for an ende, reade an ende.
               Infici, reade Inficio.
               
                  In Intentio, but forthe, reade but the.
               
                  In Ioannes, the thyrd lyne, annes Baptiſta, rede Ioannes, the .liiii. lyne, Iolyſabeth rede Elyſabeth. the .liiii. lyne, reade .vi. monethes.
               
                  In Ioppe, the. iiii lyne, for the hauen callid wheche Port Iaffe, reade, the hauen whyche is called Port Iaffe.
               Iubilium, reade Iubilum.
               Lixinium, reade Lixiuium.
               
                  In lunaticus, for made, rede madde.
               In Lycoctones, for Aſconitum, rede Aconit̄.
               
                   Male precare, rede precari.
               
                  Manibus pedibus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ire in ſententiam, the .iiii. lyne, reade, Where the greater part.
               Marconiani, reade Marcomani.
               Mateaeotechina, reade Mataeotechnia.
               
                  Mater matrina, reade hath a mother lyuynge.
               Matrinuis, reade Matrimus.
               Mediouratrices, reade Mediomatrices.
               Melamirus, reade Melanurus.
               Meliſphillon, reade Meliſſophillon.
               Moroſi, reade Moroſe.
               
                  Moſcatulae, peacis, reade peares.
               Moſcena, reade Moſcua.
               
                  Mullus, for Seſtertia, reade Seſterrios, and in the ſpace after, put in .iii.li .xiiii.s .iiii. d.
               Naeuia, reade Nenia.
               
                  Narbonenſis prouincia, the .ii. lyne, reade the mountaynes callyd Alpes.
               
               Naſcitus uentus, reade Naſcitur uentus.
               
                  Nonae, put out the myddes.
               
                  Nouantum Cherſoneſum, reade a place in the weſt part of Scotlande.
               
                  Nugigerulus, reade a bearer aboute of fables.
               
                  Numa, the .viii. lyne, he brought, put out he.
               
                  Numerato, the .xi lyne, that notwithſtandyng put out that.
               
                  Nummus argenteus, the ſeconde lyne, was alſo that, put out alſo.
               Occurrit peruionibus, reade pernionibus.
               
                  Oculi eruditi, reade, whan one knoweth whether a thynge be well done or no.
               
                  Oculos tollere, put out, thing be weldone or no
               O dipodioniua, reade Oedipodionius.
               
                  Oenophorus, a cupbearer.
               
                  Oratoriae, rede oratorie, without a diphthōg.
               
                  Orthopnoea, whan a man ran not, rede can not.
               Ozinum, reade Ozimum.
               
                  Paciſcor, the fyfthe lyne, I agreed, reade, he agreed.
               Palangari, reade Palangarij.
               
                  Pannonia, the .iiii. lyne, for free, rede ferre.
               
                  Parthenium, the .vi. lyne, for helcine, reade helxine.
               
               Paratus, reade Paraſitus.
               Patiiactiuras, reade pati iacturas.
               Patrimis, reade Patrimus.
               
                  Pendo, the thyrde lyne, expen -rede expendo.
               
               Per ſilentium adeſſe aeque animo, reade aequo animo.
               
                  Perinde, the ſeconde lyne, uen, reade euen.
               Perniciſsimus, reade Pernicioſiſsimus.
               Petulenter, reade Petulanter.
               Peuxedanum, reade Peucedanum.
               Pharmacentice, reade Pharmaceutice.
               Piſarurus, reade Piſaurus.
               Padaris, reade Podaris.
               
                  Pono, the .xxviii. lyne, whe, rede where.
               
                  Poſſum, the ſeconde lyne, reade ſermone.
               
               
                  Poſterior, the ſeconde lyne, betwene feram, and ſubauditur, put a poynt.
               Praeſagiū, the .vi. lyne, cū exire, rede exirem.
               Praetereo, the .xiii. lyne, Nos nobilitate, reade Hos nobilitate. &c.
               
                  Praetexo, the .iii. lyne, retexta, rede Praetexta.
               
               
                  Praeuerto, the .vi. lyne, pulbamentum, rede pulpamentum.
               
               
                  Puppes, the foreparte, reade the hynder parte or docke of the ſhyppe.
               
                  Quadi, the ſeconde lyne, wuifes, reade wulfes.
               
                  Quadragies, the .xvii. lhne, committed, reade omytted.
               Quia, the ſecond lyne, beatae uixiſſe, rede beate.
               Quo non, the ii. lyne, ad locum, rede ad lacū.
               Rhodus, Caparthium, rede Carpathium.
               Sacamento teneri, reade Sacramento.
               Saliares coena, reade Saliaris.
               
                  Salinacis, the .ii. lyne, Helmophroditus, reade Hermophroditus.
               
               
                  Scordion, the .iiii. lyne, ranſoms, rede ramſons.
               Sceſſus, rede Seceſſus.
               
                  Seorſum, the fourth lyne, namely thē Demea, rede the.
               Seſquimodus, reade Seſquimodius.
               
                  Silphion, the .ii. lyne, Beuicyne, rede Beuioyn.
               Somnorinum, rede Somnium.
               Spina Aegyptia, the thyrde lyne, Bedegnar, rede Bedeguar.
               
                  After Stenoboea, for Sentor, reade Stentor.
               
                  Super coenam, at ſupper, reade after ſupper.
               
                  Syntaxis, the .v. lyne, ꝙ recte, rede 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   
                  recte.
               
               
                  Syrtes, ſhelpes, rede ſhelfes.
               
                  Tabulata, the thyrde lyne, not not, put out the one not.
               Taminea uua, the .iiii. lyne, Stauis agria, reade Staphis agria.
               
                  Taraxacon, for Soufyſtell, reade Southiſtell.
               
                  Theſſalia, the .x. lyne, Polybras, rede Polybius.
               
               
                  Tollere criſtas, the .ii. lyne, or them, rede to thē.
               TRbales, reade Trabales.
               Tracto, haec arte, reade hac arte.
               
                  Tragum, weate, reade wheate.
               
                  Trama, vn vnder, reade an vnder garment.
               
                  Tranſalpina gallia, on his ſide, rede on this ſide.
               
                  Traſimênus, the .iii. lyne, Roman, rede Romans
               Trcôlon, reade Tricôlon.
               
                  Turricula, a lyttell towne, reade a lyttel towre. Veritanus ager, a ſelde, reade a fielde.
               Veromanditi, rede Veromandui.
               Vertere. In fugam uertere, plyght, rede flyght.
               
               
                  Vitiſator, he that ſelleth vynes, reade he that ſetteth.
               Vrua, reade Vrna.
               Vſucapia, reade Vſucapio.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A ANTE B.
            
               
                  A SIGNIFIETH of, or from.
            
               Ab, and abs, be of the ſame ſygnifycation, only A, goeth before a word, which begynneth with a cō
               ſonant: Ab and abs, goth before a word, that doth begin with a vowel. It was alſo amonge the olde Romaines the note or marke of acquital of tranſgreſſours, and therfore of Cicero A, is called litera ſalutaris, the letter of ſaulfgarde.
            
               Aaron was ſonne of Amram, and brother to Moſes. The worde ſignifyeth, the mountaigne of fortitude, or a ſtronge hyll. This man was of the tribe of Leui, the fourthe from hym in lineall diſcent. He was in his proper tongue very eloquent, and was electe of god to be the fyrſt byſhoppe of the iewes, and lyued .Lxxiii. yeres, and dyed before all the people on the mount of Oreb, whan he had ben byſhop .xxxvi. yeres, afore the incarnation of Chriſte .M.CCCC.lxxi. yeres.
            
               Ab accidentibus, an officer, vnto whom it belongeth to wryte ſuch thynges as do chaūce.
            
               Abaci, the tables inbowed, wheron pyllars do ſtande.
            
               Abacti, officers depoſed, or ſuche as be conſtrayned to reſigne theyr authoritie.
            
               Abactor, a ſtealer of cattell.
            
               Abactores, theues that ſteale cattell.
            
               Abactus, tus, theft of cattell.
            
               Abactus magiſtratus, depriued of his office.
            
               Abacuk,
               Epiphamus. a prophet whiche was of the trybe of Simeon, who propheſied and lamented the takynge of Hieruſalem, by Nabuchodonoſor, Afterwarde as he caryed meate and drynke to his herueſt men, an aungell toke hym vp by an heare of his head, and caryed hym into Babylon, and broughte hym in to the dongeon, where Daniel the prophet was amonge lions, who beinge fed and relieued by hym, he was ofteſones caryed home the ſame day. And dyed .ii. yeres before that the Iewes retourned from Babylon, before the incarnation of Chriſte .D C. yeres.
            
               Abaculi, counters, whiche auditours do vſe.
            
               Abaculus, of Pliny is taken for accompte.
            
               Abacus, a countynge table, or cupbourd.
            
               Abagio,
               Varro de lingua latina. 
               gere, to fetche a compaſſe in ſpeking, and not to conſiſt or abyde in one oration or ſentence.
            Abalienatio, alienation.
            
            
               Abalienator, he that doth alyene or put away a thynge, or altereth the poſſeſſion therof, an alienour called of lawyars.
            
               Abalienatus, he whom a man putteth frō him.
            
               Abalienatus iure ciuium, outlawed out of the liberties of the citie.
            
               Abalienata morbis membra, Members mortified by ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Abalieno, aui, are, to put or turne awaye, or to make ſtraunge.
            
               Abambulo, aui, are, to aſcende, or mount vp.
            
               Abamita, my great graundfathers ſyſter.
            
               Abanec, a gyrdell, whiche prieſtes did weare, wrought with colours of ſcarlet and purple, in ſuche wyſe, that there ſeemed to be in it floures and precious ſtones ſet in order.
            
               Abania, is interpreted the father, vnto god acceptable, or gratifienge vnto god.
            
               Abaphus, vndyed or vncolored.
            
               Abarceo, cui, cere, to prohibite, or put of frō a thynge.
            
               Abarimon,
               Plinius. a countrey in Tartary, where men haue fete tourned backewarde, and be wonderfull ſwyft and wylde.
            
               Abas, the twelfe kynge of Argiues, and was graundfather to Perſeus. An other was a Troian, companion to Aeneas, and maketh in the geniti
                  ••
                caſe Abantis.
            
            
               Abaſter, one of the horſes of Pluto kīg of hel.
            
               Abathon, an yle in Egypt by the citie of Mē
               phis, where 
                  •
               ſyris, whom the Egyptians named theyr god, was buryed by his wyfe Iſis.
            
               Abatis, two wordes made of the prepoſition, a and the ablatiue caſe plural of batus, which in englyſhe is a meaſure, ſignifieth an officer, that hath the orderynge of meaſures,Eſdra. as a clerke of the market.
            
               Abauia, my great grandames mother.
            
               Abauus, my great grandfathers father.
            
               Abauuculus, my great grandfathers brother
            
               Abax, abacis, a cupbourd or dreſſar, alſo an aſtronomers table.
            
               Abba, a worde of the language of Syria, and ſignifieth father.
            
               Abbreuio, are, to abbreuiate, or make ſhorte.
            
               Abdêra, a citie in Thracia, whiche was firſt buylded by Hercules, in remembraunce of his minion called Abderitus, whiche was there eaten with the horſes of Diomedes. In this citie were borne Democritus the great philoſopher, and Prothagoras the famous rhetorician. This citie was afterwarde called Clazomene. In Spayne there is an other of that name, called nowe Almeria.
            
               Abderita, a citezen of Abdêra.
            
            
               Abd
                     •
                  ere ſe ex cōſpectu heri, to kepe him away that his maiſter ſe hym not.
            
               Abd
                     •
                  ere ſe literis, to lyue vnknowen in continuall ſtudy.
            
               Abdias, one of the .xii. prophetes, and is interpreted the ſeruaunt of our lorde.
            
               Abdicatio, an acte of the father, when he excludeth
 his ſonne and heyre from the inheritaunce of his poſſeſſions.
            
               Abdico, aui, are, to expel or put out of fauour, or reſigne an office, or to refuſe his ſonne or kynſeman.
            
               Abdicauit filium, he refuſed hym for his ſonne.
            
               Abdicauit ſe magiſtratu, he hath reſigned his office or dignitie.
            
               Abdico, ixi, cere, to deny or forſake.
            Abdite, ſecretly.
            
            
               Abditum, a ſecrete place.
            Abditus, ta, tum, hyd ſecretely.
            
            Abdo, di, dere, to hyde.
            
            
               Abdomen, minis, that whiche is vnder the mouth of the ſtomake, where it appereth outwarde vnder the gryſtell of the breſte bone. whiche is alſo called Hypocondria. It is ſometyme taken for the fatte aboute the kydneys. Alſo for the pappes of a ſowe with her mylke, cut of from her bely the day after that the hath farowed.
            
               Abduco, xi, cere, to leade awaye, or leade out, or pul away, or take with.
            
               Abduce,
               Plautus. for abduc, leade or haue away.
            
               Abduxi clauem, I toke out the kay.
            
               Abecedarius, he that ſetteth any thynge in order by letter.
            
               Abededos, a citie in Egypt, wherein was the palaice of Memnon, and the temple of Oſpris.
            Abedo, dere, to conſume.
            
            
               Abel, the ſeconde ſone of Adam, and is interpreted, brethe, vapour, or vanitie. He was borne together with his ſuſtar Delbora .xv. yeres after Cain. he is reputed to be the firſt martyr, beinge ſlayne by his ſayde brother, of enuy, for as moche as almyghtye god accepted his offrynge, and reiected the offering of Cain, whan the ſayde Abel was one hundred yeres olde. And was from his chyldhod of great vertue and fayth. He was ſlayne before the Incarnation of Chryſte. 1900. yeres.
            
               Abellinae, fylberdes of Abellino, a Citye in Naples.
            
               Abemo, emi, ere, to take or putte of a garmente.
            
               Abemito ueſtem, put of thy cote.
            
               Ab eo gratiam inibo, I wyll get his fauour.
            
               Ab epiſtolis, in ſuche offyce as nowe be clarites of the ſignet, or inferiour ſecretaries.
            
               Abeo, iui, uel ij, ire, to departe, or goo awaye.
            
               Aberceo, to forbyd. Eam abercet domo, he forbyddeth her his houſe.
            
               Aberro, aui, are, to erre or wander very moch, to departe far of, or a ſunder.
            
               Aberun caſſo, ſere, to turne vp.
            
               Aberuncare iram deorum, to withdraw the vengeaunce of god with prayers.
            
               Aberunco, aui, are, to weede oute, or plucke out.
            
               Abeſſa, the name of a iudge in Iſraell.
            
               Abeſſe, to be abſent.
            
               Abeſton, a ſtone of the coulour of yron, found in Arabia, whiche hath growynge aboute it a thynge lyke vnto wulle, and that is called the doune of Salamandre. this ſtone beinge ones made hote, can neuer be cooled.
            
               Abfore, to be awaye.
            
               Abgrego, aui, are, to ſeuer or take out of the floche, or to drawe ſhepe.
            
               Abhinc, before this tyme.
            
               Abhorreo, ruï, horrêre, to abhorte, to hate, to diſpyſe, to flee froo, to be vnlyke, or to diſcorde.
            
               Abhorreſco, to feare to beholde.
            
               Abhorreo ab urbe relinguenda,
               Cicero. I haue no mynde to forſake the citie.
            
               Abhorret ab illo mea ſententia, myne opinion is contrarye to his, or repugneth againſt it.
            
               Abhorret à ſuſpitione,
               Cicero de amic. it is contrarye to my ſuppoſall.
            
               Abhorret a charitate uulgi,
               Plaut. in Ciſtel. he tendreth not, or paſſeth nothynge on the poore people.
            
               Abhorret hilaritudo, thy myrthe is turned into ſadneſſe.
            
               Abhortatio, a contrary aduyſe.
            
               Abhortor, tari, to gyue contrarye aduyſe, to diſſwade.
            
               Abiecto, aui, are, to caſte often away.
            
               Abiectus, a vyle perſon.
            
               Abiectus, ta, tum, naught ſet by, vexed with aduerſitie.
            
               Abies, a tree called a fyrre.
            
               Abietarius, a carpenter.
            Abiegnus,Varro. a, um, of fyrre tree.
            
            
               Abigeatus, tus, felony in ſtealynge cattell.
            
               Abigena bos, was amonge the diuinours called Augures, the oxe, whiche was to be ſacrified, about whom the other beaſtes were ſet in an order.
            
               Abigêus, a ſtealer of cattell.
            
               Abigere ex aedibus, to dryue out of the houſe.
            
               Abigo, egi, gere, to dryue awaye any thyng, that is euell,Plaut. in Aſin. or oyous, alſo to dryue awaye cattel by theft or deceyte.
            
               Abi, a great ryuer in Englande called Humber.
            
               Adijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caſte away, to renoūce, to deſpyſe, to poure out, ſometyme to gyue awaye.
            
               Abijcior, ci, to be out of reputation.
            
               Abijt hora,
               Teren. in Eunu. the tyme paſſed.
            
               Abijt ſol,
               Plautus. the ſonne is gon downe.
            
               Abijt oppidum in uillas, the towne is turned into fermes: as manye be in Englande. I
 praye god amende it.
            
               Abijt in uulnus praeceps, he fell downe ſodenlye, and laye on the ſyde, wherin he was wounded,
            
               Aijt è medio, he vanyſſhed away, he was neuer more ſeene.
            
               Abijt incepto, he lefte his enterpriſe.
            
               Abijt in ſalem, it was tourned into ſaulte.
            
               Abit à ſenſibus, he is out of his wytte.
            
               Abibitur, I or he wyll departe or go awaye.
            
               Abi in malam rem,
               Plaut. in Mercat. go henſe with a miſchiefe.
            
               Abi tu ſane ſuperior, ſyt thou hygher, goo vpper.
            
               Abire peſsum, to run hedlynge, to come to a myſchiefe.
            
               Abire à iure, to do wronge.
            
               Abire, to ceſſe, to vanyſhe, or to be appeaſed, to ſlyp awaye.
            
               Mirabar hoc ſi ſic abiret, I meruayled if it ſhulde ſo paſſe away.
            
               Quid ad iſtas ineptias abis? what medleſte thou with theſe fantaſies.
            
               Ab illo tibi ſoluam, I wyll cauſe hym to paye you.
            
               Ab labore, after labour.
            
               A bonorum cauſa ſtare, to fauour the part of good men.
            
               Abintegro, yet agayne, efteſones.
            
               Abinteſtato, inteſtat, or without teſtament.
            
               Ab incunabulis, from his infancy.
            
               Ab ineunti aetate, from his chyldhode.
            
               Abitio, a departure, or goinge away, old wrytars toke it for deathe, as we maye calle it the deceſſe of one.
            
               Abitus, a departynge.
            
               Abiudico, aui, are, to take away by iudgement from oone, and gyue to an other by the ſame ſentence.Cicero cō
                  tra Rull. 
               Id ab eo contra ius aequitatem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad iudicauit, He toke that awaye from hym by iudgement agaynſte al lawe and reaſon.
            
               Abiudicare à ulta, to put to deathe.
            
               Abiudicabit nun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ab ſuo triobolum, He wyl neuer be of the mynde to gyue thre halfpens of his owne.
            
               Abiudicatum, adiudged, gyuen by iudgement from one to an other.
            
               Abiugo, aui, are, to vnyoke, diſcharge or put a ſonder.
            
               Abiungo, xi, ere, to ſeuer, or ſunder.
            
               Abiurati, ſworne brotherne, or confederates.
            
               Abiuratio, a forſwearynge, an abiuration.
            
               Abiuro, aui, are, to deny by an oth, or to kepe a thynge wrongfully.
            Ablacto, aui, are, to weane.
            
            
               Ablaqueo, aui, are, to ryd the erth from trees or vynes, and cutte awaye the vpper rootes, that they may beare no more fruite.
            
               Ablectae aedes, houſes well garnyſhed to ſtere men to bye them.
            Ablego, aui, are, to ſende awaye.
            
            
               Abligurio, iui, ire, to conſume goodes in bankettynge, or farynge delycately.
            
               Abloco, aui, are, to ſet or lette to an other. to take frome one and let to an other.
            
               Abludo, luſi, dere, to ſpeake of a thynge couertly, that other ſhal not eſpy what the mat ter doth meane.
            
               Abluo, uï, ere, to waſhe of.
            
               Ablutio, a waſſhynge.
            
               Abluuium, a vniuerſal floud wherwith a cuntrey is drouned.
            A media nocte, after midnight.
            
            Abneco, are, to ſtrangle.
            
            Abnego, aui, are, to deny vtterly.
            
            
               Abnepos, otis, a ſon in the fourth degre in liniall diſcent.
            
               Abneptis, a daughter in the fourth diſcent.
            
               Abnormis, out of rule.
            
               Abnuo, nui, ere, to deny or refuſe with countenaunce or becke, to becke awaye.
            
               Abnuto, ſignifieth to becke away often times.
            
               Ab octaua, after eyght of the clocke.
            
               Aboleo, êui, uel ui, êre, to put oute, or raſe out, to anull, or vndo for euer.
            
               Aboleſco, to brynge to naught.
            
               Abolitus, ta,
               Feſtus. 
               tum, raſed out, putte out of remembraunce.
            
               Abolla, a ſenatours habite, or a ſould youres cloke.
            
               Aboloes, olde wrytars vſed for ab illis.
            
            Abominalis, le, abhominable.
            
            
               Abominor, atus ſum, nari, to take for yllucke or haue in deteſtation.
            
               Aborigines, people, whiche fyrſte helde the countrey about Rome, and lyued abrode, hauynge noo houſes. They maye alſo be taken for any other people, whoſe beginnyng is not knowen.
            
               Aborior, abortus ſum, aboriri, to be borne afore naturall tyme.
            
               Aborſus, an vntimely byrth, nyghe to the conception, whiche maye be called aborſion.
            
            
               Aborſio, onis, & Abortiuus, the byrthe dyſtroyed with ſome hurte, or other myſaduenture, or medicine.
            
               Abortio, tiui, tire, to brynge forth a chylde or it be perfecte.
            Abortium idem quod abortus.
            
               Abortiuus, a, um, that thynge whiche procureth the ſayde vntymely byrth.
            Abortor, & aborto, idem quod abortio.
            
               Abortus, an vntymely byrthe, nygh to the luſt tyme of delyueraunce, wherby the chylde dyeth.
            
               Abpatruus, my fathers great vncle.
            
               A prima luce, after the ſprynge of the day.
            
               A primo cogitauit, he thaught at the fyrſt.
            
               Abrado, si, dere, to pare, to ſcrape away.
            
                
               Abradere be bonis, to poll, or ſpoyl a man of his goodes.
            
               Abtaham, an holy Patriarke, was the ſonne of Thare, borne in Caldey, and is interpreted, the father of many nations, or of people seinge. this man as well in vertue, and perfecte fayth, as in sondrye and mistical doctrines, was moſte excellente, he taught the Egyptians aſtronomy and geometry. He died before the incarnation of Chryſte.Ioſephus. 1838. yeres.
            
               Ab re, out of the matter, or out of the purpoſe vnſemely, vnconuenient.
            
               Ab re orare, to praye or deſyre in vayn.
            
               Ab re tua, agaynſt thy profyte.
            
               Non ab re, not without a cauſe.
            
               Abrenuntio, aui, are, to renounce or forſake.
            
               Abripio, pui, ere, to take fro, or take by force.
            
               Abripuit repentè ſeſe, he went away ſodenly.
            
               Abrogo, aui, are, to take awaye.
            Abrogare fidem, to brynge out of credence.
            
               Abrogare legi, to diſſolue or repell a lawe.
            
               Fidem homini abrogare, to beleue a man no more. to haue one out of credence.
            
               Vires benefiens abrogare, to eſteme the benefyte of no value.
            
               Abrogati, they whiche beinge at lybertie, ſubmyt them ſelues to an other mannes rule, by theyr conſent.
            
               Abrogatio, the dyſſoluynge or repellynge of a lawe.
            
               Abrotanum, an herbe called ſouthernwood.
            
               Abrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake of, plucke vp, or cut of.
            
               Abrupta loca, rockes and hylles, here and ther broken or dygged, ſo that oone maye vnneth go or crepe vp to them.
            
               Abrupte, out of frame, not agreyng with the begynnynge.
            
               Abruptum, that whiche hath ſuche a falle, or ſtepeneſſe downe, that no man maye paſſe by it, but onely fall downe.
            
               Abruptus, broken here and there, as rockes and great hylles.
            
               Abruptus ſermo, a tale that hangeth not together.
            
               Abs, of, or fro.
            
               Abſarus, a ryuer of Armeny, that incloſeth the leſſe Armeny.
            
               Abſcedo, ceſsi, dere, to go away.
            Abſcessus, & abſceſsio, a departynge.
            
            
               Abſceſsus, is of phiſitions taken for an impoſtume or botche, or for a courſe of euell humours to ſome parte of the bodye, wherby matter putrified is ingendred.
            
               Abſcido, di, ſcindere, to cut of.
            
               Abſcindo, ſignifieth the ſame.
            
               Abſcio, iui, ire, to go out of remembraunce.
            
               Abſciſsior iuſtia, ſharp iuſtice.
            
               Abſciſſus, a, um, broken, ſharpe.
            Abſcondo, di, dere, to hyde.
            
            
               Abſconſus, a, um, hyd.
            
               Abſens, tis, abſent, or awaye.
            
               Abſentaneus, a, um, that whiche in abſence is done.
            
               Abſentia, abſence.
            
               Abſento, tire, to thynke contrary.
            
               Abſento, aui, are, to be abſent.
            
               Abſimilis, moche vnlyke.
            
               Abſis, uel Apſis, idos, the ſtrake of a carte whele, wherin the ſpokes be ſet.
            
               Abſiſto, tere, to departe frome a place. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth to abſteyne or leaue of.
            
               Abſoleo, êre, to be out of vſe.
            
               Abſoletus locus, a place vnoccupied, or neglected.
            
               Abſoluo, ui, 
                     •
                  re, to loſe that which was boū
               den, alſo to performe or accomplyſhe. Alſo to ſpare or forgyue, to pardon, to ſpede, to aſſoyle.
            
               Abſoluere,
               Plaut. in Capt. in Amphit. to depeche of buſyneſſe.
            
               Abſoluere creditorem, to paye that he oweth.
            
               Abſoluere penſum, to worke oute his taſke.
            
               Abſoluerè ſuſpitione, to diſcharge or putte of all ſuſpition.
            
               Abſoluere vno uerbo, to tell at a worde, to make an ende ſhortely.
            
               Abſolutè, perfectly.
            
               Abſolutio, a dyſcharge, or depeche.
            Abſolutus, ta, tum, diſcharged, depeched.
            
            
               Abſono, aui, are, to dyſcorde, or ſowne euyll.
            
               Abſonus, na num, that whiche ſowneth not well, or dyſcordeth, or ſcantelye maye be harde.
            
               Abſonum fidei, not credyble.
            
               Abſonus voce, he that hath an vntunable voyce.
            
               Abſorbeo, bui, uel pſi, êre, to ſwalowe or ſup of all, to deuoure or conſume.
            
               Abſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , without.
            
               Abs quiuis homine,
               Terent. in Adelp. of euery man what ſoo euer he be.
            
               Abs re ſtat,
               Plaut. in Ruden. it ſtandeth vpon the, or it lyeth in the.
            
               Abſtemius, he that drynketh no wyne.
            
               Abſtentus, accurſed out of the churche.
            
               Abſtergeo, ſi, gere, to wype, to wype awaye.
            
               Abſtergere dolorem, to put awaye ſorrowe.
            
               Abſterreo, uï, 
                     •
                  re, to prohibite or lette, or put fro.
            
               Abſterrêre, to feate awaye, or dryue awaye with feare.
            
               Abſtinentia, abſtinence, a vertue in forbearynge to take an other mannes goodes.
            
               Abſtinenter, with abſtinence.
            
               Abſtineo, ui, ere, to abſteyne, or forbeare, or tempre.
            
                
               Abſtinere alieno, not to meddle with other mens goodes.
            
               Abſtinere in commoditate,,
               Plaut. in Mil. to behaue hym honeſtly.
            
               Abſtinere manum,
               Plaut in Rud. to holde his hande.
            
               Abſtinere manus, to refrayne from bribery.
            
               Abſtinere uerbis,
               Plinius in epiſt. to take hede what he ſpeketh.
            
               Abſtineas à me manum, Take heede that thou ſtryke me not.Sueton. in Clau.
            
            
               Abſtinuit diu publico, it was longe or he came abrode.
            
               Abſtinens alieni, he that medeleth not with other mennes goodes.
            
               Abſtro, ſtiti, ſtâre, to ſtande far of.
            
               Abſtorqueo, torſi, quêre, to gette by force or tourmentes.
            
               Abſtraho, xi, 
                     •
                  re, to take by force or by crafte.
            
               Abſtraxi me illinc, I gat me from thenſe.
            
               Abſtractum, taken by force.
            Abſtrudo, ſi, d
                  ••
               re, to hyde.
            
            
               Abſtrûdere colaphos, to buffet or gyue blowes.
            
               Abſtruſus, a, um, hyd, or ſhut vp.
            
               Abſtulit, of aufero, he hath byrefte, taken awaye, or borne awaye.
            
               Abſum, fui, abeſse, to be away, or far of, or to fayle, or to be diſtant, or abſent.
            
               Abeſt mihi animus, I haue no courage.
            
               Abſente nobis, while I was away.
            
               Abſit uerbo inuidia, a forme of ſpeakynge, whan oone wolde not be ſuſpected of arrogance in ſome thynge that he wyll ſpeake.
            
               Abſûmo, pſi, 
                     ••
                  re, to ſpende or conſume.
            
               Abſumedo, dinis, diſpence, waſte of moneye, or other lyke thynge.
            
               Abſumptio, a waſtynge, waſte.
            
               Abſumti ſumus, we are vndone.
            
               Abſurdè, without pourpoſe or reaſon, to noo purpoſe.
            
               Abſurdus, da, dum, inconueniente, foolyſhe, diſcordynge, dyſhoneſte, abhorrynge, or odious.
            
               Abſynthites, wyne, wherin wormwood hath ben infuſed or ſodden.
            
               Abſynthium, is commonly called wormwood. Howe be it there be therof thre kyndes: Seriphium, whiche ſemeth to be oure wormewood. Santonicum, wherof commeth worm ſeede: Ponticum, or Romanum, whiche hath a leſſe leafe than our wormwood, and hath a ſweter odour.
            
               Abſyrtides, be ylandes in the Venetian ſea.
            
               Abſyrtus, the brother of Medea, whome ſhe dydde cut in to pieces, and threwe in to the ſea, whan ſhe fledde frome her father with Iaſon.
            
               Abuerto, tere, to tourne from a place.
            
               Abundans, a ryche man.
            
               Abundanter, abundantly.
            
               Abundantia, abundaunce, more than ſuffycient, ryches.
            
               Abunde, abundauntly, plentuouſely, inough, and more than inoughe.
            
               Abunde est, it is inough.
            
               Abundo, aui, are, to habounde, to haue out of meaſure, more than inoughe. alſo to be ryche.
            
               Abundare ingenio, to haue a great wytte.
            
               Abuolo, aui, are, to flee away.
            
               Abuſiue, improperly, agaynſte nature, or cuſtome.
            
               Abuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   manè ad ueſperam, from morninge to nyghte.
            
               Abuſum, worne out.
            Abuſus, us, & abuſio, abuſe, yll vſe.
            
            
               Abutor, abuſus ſum, abuti, to abuſe, to vſe a thynge dyſhoneſtely, vncomely, contrarye to that, that it ſerueth for, oute of order, or in vayne. alſo to were out.
            
               Aburitur operam, he loſte his labour.
            
               Abydena, trifles, thinges of ſmall eſtimation, wanton toyes, thynges vnſemely for menne to uſe.
            
               Abydeni, a people in Aſia, whiche hauynge theyr citie diſtreſſed with a longe ſiege, felle into a fury, or madneſſe, and ſlewe all theyr wyues, theyr chyldren, and afterward them ſelfes.
            
               Abydeus, a man borne in the yle of Abydos.
            
               Ab
                     ••
                  dus, was a Cytie in Grecia, vppon the ſea ſyde, called Propontis, whiche dyuydeth Europam frome Aſia, where the paſſage ouer excedeth not moche thyrtye furlonge, called Stadia, contrarye vnto that, ſtandeth an other towne called Seſtus.
            
               Abyla, a hylle in the Occean ſea, agaynſte Spayne, whiche is called oone of Hercules pyllars.
            
               Abyſsus,
               Auguſtin. is a depenes without bottome.Ambroſi.
            
         
         
            A ante C.
            
               AC, ſygnifyeth ſometyme, and, as Doctus ac iuſtus es, thou arte hunnynge and iuſte. Sometyme it is taken for than, as: Haud secus ac iuſsi faciunt. They do none other wyſe than they be commaunded. Sometyme it ſignifyeth as, as, Superbis perinde, ac ſi rex eſses. Thou arte as proude, as if thou were a kynge.
            
               Acadaemia, a vniuerſytie, whiche toke that name of a place nyghe to Athenes, where Plato the great philoſopher taughte phyloſophy.
            
               Academici, were a ſecte of phyloſophers,
 whiche folowed and taughte the opinions of Plato.
            
               Acamas, an elbowe of lande in the yle of Cypres, towarde the eaſt.
            
               Acanthide, the olde name of the yle of Cypres.
            
               Acanthis, idis, a
                  •
                byrde that fedeth on thyſtles, and maketh her neſte with claye, and is called in englyſſhe, as I ſuppoſe, a lynnet. It was alſo a boye, whiche as the poetes doo fayne, was tranſformed into a floure of his name. It is alſo a buſhe, lyke a whyte thorn, with laſſe leaues, moſy, and pryckynge. Dioſcorides ſayth, that it is an herbe, that groweth in ſtony and moyſte grounde, and hath leaues broder and lōger than lettiſe, in forme lyke to rocket, ſomwhat blacke, and in broiſynge ſofte ad fatty, hauynge a ſtalke of .ii. cubytes hyghe, of thyckeneſſe of a mannes fynger, garniſhed vnder the top with lyttell longe leaues, and pryckynge, whervnto groweth a whyte floure. It is ſuppoſed to be that herbe, which is commonly called Branca urſina, It is alſo called Acanthus and Acantha, in englyſhe beare fote, as ſome doo ſuppoſe.
            
               Acapis, a ryuer in Aſia.
            
               Acapna, drye wood that ſmoketh not.
            
               Acar & Acarus, a lyttell worme that bredeth in waxe.
            
               Acara, a towne in the myddel of Hungary.
            
               Acarnania, a parte of a royalme in Grece, named Epirus. It is alſo a littell countreye in Egypt. and it is a citie by Syracuſis, in the royalme of Sicile.
            
               Acarnanes, the people of that countrey.
            
               Acarpia, lacke of fruite.
            
               Acarpos, vnfruitfull.
            
               Acaſta, a nymphe or mayden of the fayry.
            
               Acatalectos, a verſe wherin one ſyllable iacketh.
            
               Acatium, the greateſt ſayle in the ſhyp. alſo a bote.
            
               Accalaurentia, the name of her, that nouryſſhed Romulus and Remus, the fyrſte buylders of Rome.
            
               Acatia, the iuyce of a fruyte in Egypte, but in ſtede therof, men nowe do take the iuyce of ſides which lyke to the other do refrygerate, bind, and ſtryke heate backewarde.
            
               Accedo, ceſsi, dere, to goo to, or approche. ſometyme it ſygnifieth to gyue an eare or harken, to take hede, and to make moche of.
            
               Accede adiutare, come helpe me.
            
               Accedere ad amicitiam alicuius,
               Plaut. in trucul. to alye him ſelfe with one.
            
               Accedere alicui, to graunt to another, or to be of an other mannes opinion.
            
               Accedere illi, to be of his opinion.
            
               Accedere obuiam, to mete with one.
            
               Accedere periculum,
               Plaut. in Epidi. to take on hym the daungier.
            
               Accedit huc, more ouer than that.
            
               Accedit pretio, the pryce increſeth.
            
               Huc accedit ſummus timor, more ouet the feare was wonderfull great.
            
               Acceſsit, he went.
            
               Illi aetas acceſsit, he is become olde.
            
               Robur acceſsit, ſtrength in increaſed.
            
               Acceſsit ea res in cumulum, and that thyng moreouer is thervnto added.
            
               Accelero, aui, are, to make haſt or ſpede.
            
               Accelerare gradum to go apace.
            
               Acceleratio, haſte or ſpede.
            
               Accendo, di, dere, to kendle, inflame, prouoke, or gyue boldnes.
            
               Accensi, were ſouldiours appoynted to be about great offycers for defence of theyr perſons. Feſtus ſayth, that it were they, which after the deathe of ſouldyours were put in their places. Varro affirmeth, that they were miniſters redy at the commaundementes of principal officers.
            
               Accento, tare, to ſynge often.
            
               Accentus, an accent, or tunc, wherby a ſyllable is pronounced.
            
               Accepſo, in ſtede of acceperim, I haue taken.
            
               Acceptabula, all veſſayle or other thynge, that maye receyue and kepe what ſo euer ſhall be put in to it.
            
               Acceptilatio, an acceptaunce, a worde of the lawe, whiche happeneth in this wyſe. One ſaythe to an other: art thou contented with that that I haue promiſed the? or that by my bargayne I owe to the? the other ſayth: yea, I am contented. This is acceptilatio. Alſo wherin ſo euer I haue bounden my ſelfe by receyuynge of any thynge, it maye be called acceptilatio.
            
            
               Acceptum, thankefull, pleaſaunt, alowable.
            
               Acceptam facere pecuniam, to make a quitaunce for money receyued.
            
               Acceptum fero, to knowledge my ſelfe to haue receyued, that is not yet payde, alſo to take thankefully,
            
               Acceptum referre, to make a reckenynge of that whiche is receyued.
            
               Acceptus, receyued, entertayned.
            Acceptus, ta, tum, accepted, acceptable.
            
            
               Accepti & expenſi ratio, accompte of receytes and expences.
            
               Accerſio, ſire, to ſende or call for one.
            
               Accerſi iube filiam, commaunde thy daughter to be ſent for, or called for.
            
               Accerſitus, called for.
            
               Accerſo, ſiui, ſire, to call forth, or ſende for.
            
               Accerſo, fere, tertiae coniugat. to go to cal, or fetche.
            
               Accerſere orationi ſplendorē, to make the ocation
 lyght to vnderſtande.
            
               Acceſsio, an augmentation, alſo a goinge or commynge.
            
               Acceſsio febris, the courſe of the feuer.
            
               Acceſsio morbi, the begynnyng of a ſicknes.
            
               Acceſſus maris, the flowynge of the ſea.
            
               Accidens, is an accident which may be or not be, withoute corruption of that, wherein it may be.
            
               Accidere, to happen.
            
               Accidit, there hapned, it is chaunced.
            
               Accido, cîdere, to extenuate, or make feeble, to deſtroy.
            
               Accido, di, d
                     •
                  re, to falle downe in doinge reuerence.
            
               Accinere, to ſynge to an inſtrument, or to ſyng a parte, as a treble to a tenor, or a deſcante to a playne ſonge.
            
               Accingo, xi, gere, to gyrd, to prepare, to make redy, to do ſome thynge.
            
               Accinctus, gyrt, redy, quicke in his buſineſſe.
            
               Accio, iui, ire, to cal to, to ſend for one, to come.
            
               Accepto ferre, to acquyte one of his promyſe.
            
               Acceptrîca, ſhe that vſeth to receiue any thing
            
               Accipio, coepi, cip
                     •
                  re, to take, to here, to ſuppoſe, to knowe, to vnderſtande, to receyue, to intreate, or entertayne.
            Accipere auribus, to here.
            
            
               Accipere ad verbū, to take as he ſpeketh it.
            
               Accipere aliorſum, to take it other wyſe thā it was ſpoken.
            
               Accipere cauſam, to holde excuſed.
            
               Accipere cladem, to loſe the battayle.
            
               Accipere conditionem, to take the offre.
            
               Accipere corde, to perceyue well.
            
               Pol haud ſatis meo corde accepi quaerelas tuas, In good fayth I do not well perceyue the cauſe of thy griefe.
            Accipere aequis auribus, to here indifferētly
            
            
               Accipere durius, to take it diſpleſauntly.
            
               Accipere dictis, to take with one gentylly.
            
               Accipere dolorem, to take thought, to be heuy.
            
               Accipere fidutiam, to be infeoffed.
            
               Accipere grauiter, to take it heuyly.
            
               Accipere in ciuitatem, to make one a cytezen. Alſo to open the towne gates agaynſte hym that beſiegeth it, to yelde it vp.
            
               Accipere moderate, to take it patiently.
            
               Accipere mandata, to take charge by commiſſion.
            
               Accipere nomen, to take account.
            Accipere oculis, & animo, to ſe and remembre.
            
            
               Accipere poteſtatem, to haue leaue.
            
               Accipere uerberibus, to beate one.
            
               Accipere uulnus, to be wounded.
            
               Accipe ad omnia, take this anſwere for all.
            
               Ego à maioribus memoria ſic accepi. I remember that I harde myne elders ſo report.
            
               Accipiter, a hawke.
            Accipiter humipeta, a ſparhauke.
            
            
               Accipiter hierax, an hauke called a ſakre.
            
               Accipiter pecuniarum, a poller of people.
            
               Accipitrarius, a faulconer.
            
               Acclamo, are, to crye with reioyſynge.
            
               Acclamatio, a ſhowte.
            
               Acclino, aui, are, to enclyne, or bende to.
            
               Accliue, ſtepe wyſe, bendynge wyſe.
            
               Accliuis ſiue accliuus, ryſynge vpwarde to a ſmall top.
            
               Accliuis arbori, leauynge to a tree.
            
               Accliuitas, a rayſynge vp of a hyll.
            
               Accludo, to ſhut to.
            
               Accola, the next inhabitant called a borderar. Alſo he that commeth out of one countreye, and dwelleth in an other countrey or towne.
            
               Accola campi, he that dwelleth nexte to the fielde.
            
               Accolo, to dwell by or nyghe, ſpecially hylles or waters.
            
               Accommodo, aui, are, to accommodate, approper, to apply, make apt, ſet in order, giue or inclyne.
            
               Accōmodare enſem lateri, to gyrde a ſword about one.
            
               Accommodare curam auribus, to here dylygently.
            
               Accommodus, da, dum, apte, mete, conuenient.
            
               Accommodate, to the pourpoſe, handſomly.
            
               Accommodatus, ta, tum, applyed to a thing, beſemynge, couenable.
            
               Accommodatus ad flagitia, diſpoſed to miſchiefe.
            
               Accerdo, didi, dere, to gyue credence, to aſſent.
            Accreduo, uis, ûere, idem quod accredo.
            Accresco, creui, creſcere, to growe to.
            
            Accretio & Acrementum, increace.
            
            
               Accubatio, a ſyttynge at the table, alſo the liinge in of a woman with chyld. ſomtyme the ſyttynge on broode of byrdes and foules.
            
               Accubitores, they that ſyt at the table.
            
               Accubitum, a bed or couche to lye on by daye tyme, as it was the maner of the olde Romaynes, to eate lyenge on theyr beddes.
            
               Accubitus, the lyinge in the ſayde maner.
            
               Accubo, bare, to lye by, or to ſyt, or to lye downe to eate.
            
               Accûdo, ere, to beate a thynge on an anuile.
            
               Accumbo, cubui, accumbere, to lye downe, to lye by, to ly or ſyt downe at feaſtes and bankettes.
            
               Accumbere menſam, to ſyt at one table.
            
               Accumbere alicui, to ſyt by one at the table.
            
               Accumulo, aui, are, to accumulate, or gather in heapes, to increaſe.
            
                
               Accuro, aui, are, to take good hede. Alſo to do a thynge diligently.
            
               Accurare prandiū, to make redy the dyner.
            
               Accuratè
               Plaut. in Trucul. diligently curiouſly, exactly.
            Accuratio, diligence.
            
            
               Accuratus, ta, tum, wherin is moch diligence, curiouſe, exact.
            Accurata malitia, malice prepenſed.
            
            
               Accuratum habere, to prepenſe, or forecaſte a thynge curiouſly.
            
               Accurro, ri, rere, to run to, to ſpede thither.
            
               Accuſabilis, le, worthy to be blamed.
            
               Accuſatio, an accuſement.
            
               Accuſator, an accuſer, a rebuker.
            
               Accuſatorius, a, um, whiche conteyneth an accuſation.
            
               Accuſatorius liber, a byl of complaynt.
            
               Accuſatrix, a woman rebuker.
            
               Accuſo, aui, are, to accuſe, to blame.
            
               Acedaria, ſalettes, or meates lightly prepared.
            
               Acédia, ſlouth, penſifnes, heuynes of harte, werynes.
            
               Acèdior, diatus ſum, to be werye or waxe ſlouthfull.
            
               Acentra, & acentreta, thynges wherof the poynte in the middes is not knowen.
            
               Aceo, acui, ácere, to be ſowre or ſharpe.
            
               Acéphali, were heretikes which denyed to be two natures in Chriſte, affyrmynge the nature diuine to be in hym onely. This hereſy was condemned in the counſayle of Chalcedonenſe.
            Acéphalus, la, lum, without a head.
            
            
               Acer & áceris, a tree, the woode wherof is moſt gentyll to worke in, it ſemeth by the diſcription therof, to be that whiche is called wiche, alſo bowes be made therof.
            
               Acer, aceris, chaffe of mylſeede.
            
               Acer, cra, crum, & Acer, acris, acre, ſowre as vyneger. ſomtyme it betokeneth ſtronge, ſore, alſo diligent.
            
               Acer amator, a feruent louer.
            Amor acer, ardent loue.
            
            
               Acer animus, a great or luſty courage.
            
               Acer equus, a couragious or ſwyft horſe.
            
               Acer morbus, a greuouſe ſickenes.
            
               Acerſè comes, he that neuer cutteth his heare.
            
               Acerrima vxor, a very ſhrewd wyfe.
            
               Acerrime, excedynge ſharpely or ſtifly, eygrely or rigorouſly.
            Acerrimi inimici, mortall ennemies.
            
            
               Acerrimi teſtes, wytneſſes whiche do ſtyfly abyde by the matter.
            
               Aceratum, morter, or claye, myxt with hey or ſtrawe, wherwith walles are daubed.
            
               Acerbè, bitterly, vnripely, cruelly, vehemently.
            
               Acerbitas, bytternes of taſt, ſharpnes of time, crueltie of man, heuines, griefe, peyne.
            
               Acerbo, baui, bare, to trouble, to make bitter, or abhominable.
            
               Acerbus, ba, bum, vnrype, bytter, diſpleſant, difficult, or peynfull, as, Robuſtorum iuuenum acerba mors, The death of yong men is peynefull, as who ſayth, they dye with great difficultie.
            
               Acere, a citie by Naples.
            Acernus, na, num, of the tree called Acer.
            
               Acero, rare, to myxt with chaffe.
            
               Aceroſum frumentum, vnclene whete, whete not well wynowed or fanned.
            
               Aceroſus panis, browne bread not ranged.
            
               Acerra, a ſhyppe, wherin frankenſenſe is put. ſome do name it an auitare, whiche was ſet before a dead corps, wheron incenſe was burned. ſome call it a cuppe, wherin they dyd ſacrifice wyne.
            
               Aceruatim, in heapes, without order, in a mengley.
            
               Aceruo, aui, are, to gather into heapes.
            
               Aceruus, a heape or gatherynge together ſpecially of grayne.
            
               Aceſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe ſowre or tart, ſpecially in licour.
            
               Aceſinus, a great ryuer in Perſia, which runneth into the ryuer of Indus, wherin doo growe canes of ſuche greatnes, that they do make therof betwene euery knotte or ioynt, botes to rowe in.
            
               Aceſis, an herbe whiche is yelowe in colour.
            
               Aceſtis, a great ryuer in India.
            
               Acerabulum, a meaſure conteyninge in it of wyne two ounces and a halfe. It is alſo a litell veſſell, as a ſaucer, or other like. it is alſo a boxe or goblette wherwith iuglars doo make theyr conueyance. It is alſo a partition in the leg of a fyſhe called Polipus, whiche is lyke vnto a littel cup or goblet.
            
               Acetare, to moue or ſtyrre.
            
               Acertarium, a ſalate of herbes, it is alſo a garden, where ſalate herbes do growe.
            
               Acetoſitas, cygrenes or ſowreneſſe.
            Acetoſus, a, um, eygre, ſowre.
            
            Acetum, vyneger.
            
            
               Acetum in pectore). Nunc experiar, ſit ne acetum tibi, cor acre in pectore, Now wyll I proue, if thou haſte any thynge that dothe pricke the in the ſtomacke.
            
               Aceum, a citie in Colchis, on the banke of the ryuer called Phaſis.
            
               Achaei, people in Grecia. ſomtyme they be taken for Grekes generally.
            
               Achaemenes, was fyrſt kynge of Perſians or Parthians, of whom diuerſe kinges of Perſia, were called Achaemenes, and the people Achaemenii.
            
            
               Achaeron, rontis, is of Poetes taken for a riuer of Hell. In dede it is a ryuer in a parte
 of Italy, wherof the people be called Brutii.
            
            
               Achaia, a parte of Grecia conteynynge theſe countreys, Attica, Boeotia, Megaris, Actholia, and Phocis. It hath on the weſt Epyrum, on the eaſte, the ſea called Aegeum, on the north Macedonia, on the ſouth the ſea called Creticum. There is an other Achaia in the parte of Grecia, called Peloponeſus, nowe called Morea, where was the citie of Patras, in the whiche ſaynt Androwe the apoſtle was martryd.
            
               Achantia, a fyſhe, whiche ſome men doo ſuppoſe to be thornebacke.
            
               Achar, a citie in Siria, nowe called Niſibis.
            
               Achateon, the mayne ſayle of a ſhyppe.
            
               Achates, a precious ſtone, wherin are repreſented dyuers figures, for ſome haue had in them the ymage of the .ix. muſes, ſome of Venus, ſome haue the colour of Corall, ſome ar bryght as Criſtali. It was one of the .xii. ſtones, that god commaunded to be put on the veſtementes of Aaron. It was ſuppoſed that magitiens by burnynge of that ſtone,Plinius. and the ſmoke therof cummynge,Solin. dyd put away tempeſtes and ſtormes. Alſo of that name is a ryuer in Sicil. It was alſo the name of the cō
               panion of Aeneas the Troyan.
            
               Achei, or Achiui, be not onelye the people of Achaia, but alſo amonge the poetes, be often taken for the general name of Grekes.
            
               Achelous, a famous ryuer in Grecia, whiche rounneth out of Pindus.Solin. wherein is founde the ſtone Galactides, whiche is blacke, but beynge broken, it yeldeth licour as whyte as mylke, and is of the taſt therof.
            
               Acheloeus, of that ryuer, ſometyme it is put for aqueus.
            
            
               Achemenia, a countrey in Perſia.
            
               Acherontinus, & Acherontius, of the ryuer of Acheron.
            
               Acheruſia, a fen in the royalme of Naples.
            
               Acheruſius, an hole or caue, whiche the poetes dyd ſuppoſe was a way into Hell, out of the whiche Hercules brought Cerberum the dogge of Hell. And the painims beleued that all ſoules wente by that waye to the fenne or meere called Stygiae paludes, where Charon receyued them into his bote.
            
               Ach
                     ••
                  tae, greſhoppers, which chyrpe loude and pleaſauntly.
            
               Achillèa, an herbe called yarrowe.
            
               Achilleias, a kynd of barly, peraduenture that whiche is called beere corne.
            
               Achilleon, ſome do ſuppoſe to be mylfoyle.
            
               Achilleum, a ſponge, which is very ſoft, and hath ſmall holes.
            
               Achilles, one of the moſt valyante capitaynes of the Grekes agaynſt Troy, he was ſonne of Peleus, in his chyldehode he was inſtructed of Chiron in deedes of armes and ſurgerye. after he ſlewe the noble Hector, and Troilus his brother, the one ſodenly, the other cruelly. Wherfore afterwarde he by the ſlyght of queene Hecuba mother to Hector, was brought into the loue of Polyxena her fayre daughter, and vnder the colour of maryage was ſlayne by Paris, brother to Hector. He was in heyghte as Lycophron wryteth
.vii. cubites.
            
               Achras, a wylde peare.
            
               Achylus, without lyppes.
            
               Aciaeris, a hatchet of braſſe, whiche amonge the paynimes was vſed in ſacrifice.
            
               Aciale, harde yron.
            
               Acicula, a pyn.
            
               Acidalia, the name of Venus, of a fountayn in a citie of Bocotia, called Orchomenae.
            
            
               Acidula, peares that be ſowre. Alſo an herbe called ſorrell de boys.
            Acidus, da, dum, ſowre or ſharpe.
            
            
               Acidylus, a knot in the gyrdell of Venus.
            
               Acies, betokeneth the edge of a knyfe, or other weapon or toole. Alſo the front of an hoſt, at the ioyning of battayle. Moreouer that part of the eye whiche is called the ſyght.
            
               Acies animi uel ingenii, the ſharpnes or capacitie of the wyt, which ſome cal the ſpirit.
            
               Aciem trahere, to ſet in edge.
            Acinaceus, a, um, full of kernels.
            
            
               Acinacis, a croked ſworde that the Perſians vſed.
            
               Acini, be lyttell kernels, which be in grapes, raiſons, pomegranates, and other beryes.
            
               Acinoſus, full of kernels.
            
               Acinus, ſmall baſyll.
            
               Acipenſer, or Aquipenſer, a kynde of fyſſhe, whiche hath the ſcales turned towarde the head.
            
               Aciritani, were a people in Spayne.
            
               Acis, a ryuer in Sycil, whiche commeth from the mountayne of Aethna.
            
               Acitia, an ylonde, called alſo Melos in the ſea by Candy.
            
               Aclanes, he that neuer cryeth.
            
               Aclaſsis, a garment vnſowed frō the ſhulders.
            
               Aclytes, a weapon vſed in the olde tyme.
            
               Acon, onis, a fyſhe, whiche after the deſcription of Paulus Iouius, I ſuppoſe to be that whiche at London is called a ſhad.
            
               Aconitum, an herbe excedynge venemous, it hath leaues lyke a cucumber, but ſumwhat leſſe and roughe, the ſtalke one hande brode hyghe, the rote lyke the tayle of a ſcorpion, and is whyte as alablaſter. There is alſo an other kynde therof, whiche hath leaues lyke a plane tree, but the diuyſions are thycker, the leafe lenger and more blacke, and hath a ſtalke like a ferne, one cubite in heyghte the
 ſeede beynge in a longe codde, the rootes are blacke, and be lyke to the heares or hornes of a ſhrympe.
            
               Acontiae, certayne impreſſyons in the fyrmament, lyke to fyry dartes, whiche do ſeme to flye in the ayre.
            
               Acopa, medicins to remedy weryNes or labor.
            
               Acopis, a precious ſtoone lyke a glaſſe, with ſmall golden oroppes, wherewith if oyle be heate, and the body therwith annoynted, it diſſolueth all wearyneſſe.
            
               Acopus, an herbe called alſo Anagyris, full of braunches, and hath flowres lyke to colewortes, and hath an yl ſauour, the ſede therof is in longe coddes, harde and lyke in facion to kydneys.
            
               Acor, ris, a tarteneſſe, lyke vnto rype wyne or pomegranates, eygRenes.
            
               Acorus, an herbe with longe leaues, lyke the blade of a ſworde. Leonicenus and Antonius Muſa do ſuppoſe it to be galyngale, and not that whiche is callyd Gladiolus, in englyſſhe Gladen. This roote is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree.
            
               Acquieſco, eui, eſcere, to leane, as to leane my head or arme vpon any thynge. Alſo it ſignyfyeth to aſſent to other mens ſayenges. alſo to recreate.
            
               Acquiro, fiui, re, to atteyne a thynge that is ſought for.
            
               Acratiſmus & acratiſma, a breakefaſt.
            
               Acr
                     ••
                  on, pure wyne, without alay, or vnmixt.
            
               Acre, ſwyfte, ſowre, cruell, valiant, vehement, diligent, circumſpect.
            
               Acre ingenium, a quycke wytte.
            Acres oculi, clere eyes.
            
            
               Acredo, acritudo, acritas, ſharpnes, or ſowreneſſe that is in fruites that be not rype.
            
               Acredula, the wood larke.
            
               Acrimonia, tartnes, whiche byteth the tonge, and perceth the heed, as in the taſt of garlike oynions and other like thingis. It ſignifieth ſometyme ſharpenes in ſpeakynge or mynde, ſomtyme lyuelynes and quycknes of wytte.
            
               Acris, a ryuer of Italy.
            
               Acriſius, kynge of Argiues, the father of Danaes, on whom Iupiter begat Perſeus.
            
               Acritas, ſowrenes, crueltie, diligence.
            
               Acriter, ſharply, ſowrely, ſtyffely, ſwyftly, cruelly, vehemently, diligently.
            
               Acriter animum intendere, to ſet al his entent or ſtudye.
            
               Acriter iudicare, to iudge with a great deliberation, and as nighe the truthe as he can.
            
               Acrius, more ſharpely or ſtyffely.
            
               Acroama, a ſubtyl ſentence or leſſon, requiring moche ſtudye and ſerche. It is alſo taken for al thynges to be recited or done, to delyte the audience.
            
               Acroamata, were certayn lectures of Ariſtotle whiche he radde to his ſcholers, wherin was the mooſte ſubtyll and counnynge parte of philoſophye.
            
               Acrocaeraunia, mountaynes of wonderfulle heyght, betwene Armenia and Hiberia.
            
               Acrochordones, a kynde of wartes, ſo ſmalle at the rootes, that they doo ſeme to hange by a ſynewe.
            
               Acrocomus, one hauynge longe heare.
            
               Acrocorinthus, an hygh mountayne in Morea, betwene the two ſeas Aegeū & Ionium.
            
               Acrodria, be all fruites, whiche haue an hard rynde or ſhale, as pomegranodes, nuttes, the ſtyns, pyſtaces, and other lyke.
            
               Acropolis, a caſtell ſette on a hylle.
            
               Acta, water bankes, or whiche men doo calle ſtrondes, wheron the water floweth. Alſo it is that which we call actes concerning mens lyues, or priuate buſynes put in wryting, alſo ſuche dedes as haue hapned out of iugement.
            
               Actitata, be thoſe, whiche haue happened in iudgement, properly they whiche be in doing.
            
               Acta aetas, age whan youth is paſt.
            
               Acta agere, to do that whiche is all redy done.
            
               Acta circunducere, to cancell a ſentence ones determyned.
            
               Acte, an elder tree.
            
               Actaeon, the name of a man, whome Diana, bicauſe he dyd ſee her naked, tourned into an harte, and ſo was he torne and ſlayne of his owne houndes.
            
               Actaeus, of Athens.
            
               Actia, orum, playes made ones in fyue yeres.
            
               Actio, onis, betokeneth ſometyme pronunciation, ſomtyme an oration written, ſometyme an action in the lawe, ſometyme an hiſtory, ſomtyme a defence, otherwhile a recompence in wordes for a benefit receyued, as Gratiarū actio for thankes. Generally it is taken for act or dede in euery thynge.
            
               Action, the beary of an elder.
            Actioſus, buſye.
            
            
               Actitatio, a debating of a caſe in law, a pleding
            
               Actitatus, determined by iugement.
            
               Actito, taui, tare, to practyſe ſpeciallye in cyuile cauſes.
            
               Actius, a noble poet that wrate tragedies.
            Actiuus, actiue.
            
            
               Actor, whiche dothe the dede. Alſo in the law the playntife, complaynant, or demandaunt. Alſo a player of enterludes. alſo a mans factour or baylyffe that hath the charge of his buſyneſſe.
            
               Actualia nomina, names whiche doo procede of acte, as Rex à regendo, of gouernynge. Dux à ducendo, of leadynge.
            
               Actualis ſcientia, a ſcience that declareth thinges by theyr operation, of the which are thre
 partes, morall, diſpenſatiue, and ciuyle.
            
               Actuarius, a ſubſtantiue, ſignifieth a notarye or ſcribe, or any other that wryteth ſpedily.
            Actuarius, a, um, actiue.
            
            
               Actuaria nauis, a rowe barge, or other lyght ſhyppe whiche is rowed.
            Actum de me eſt, I am vndone.
            
            Actuoſe, braggyngly.
            
            
               Actuoſus, full of actes, alway in buſynes.
            
               Actuoſus ignis, fyre which alway bourneth.
            
               Actus, ta, tum, performed, alſo arryued, thruſt in, brought to, or feared.
            
               Actus, tus, a dede, the partes of a commedye or playe, a dayes warke in tyllage, whiche was accompted at .Cxx. feete ſquare. Alſoo the meaſure of grounde contayninge .Cxx. fete ſquare.
            
               Actutum, anon, without taryenge.
            
               Aculeatus,
               Seneca. 
               a, um, any thyng that pricketh.
            
               Aculeus, a prycke or ſtynge.
            
               Acumen, the ſharpnes of euery thing. it ſignifieth alſo clereneſſe of wytte, alſo the ſharpe bylle of a byrde.
            Acumino, aui, are, to ſharpen.
            
            
               Acuncula, a ſmalle nedle.
            
               Acuo, acui, acuere, to make ſharpe. by tranſlation, it ſignils;ieth to prycke forthe or ſtyre one to do a thyng, to p
                  ••
               ouoke. Ingenium acuere to quycken the wytte. Linguam acuere, to make the tongue to pronounce perfectly.
            
               Stilum acuere, to write ſharpely or curſedly.
            
               Acupedius, he that hath a quycke or apt foote to runne with.
            
               Acupictores, imbrowderers.
            Acus, aceris, chaffe.
            
            
               Acus, acus, a nedell, alſo chaffe of corne, alſo an order in battayle.
            
               Acus,
               Frāciſcus Maſsariꝰ in .9. li. Pl. 
               ci, a fyſhe of the ſea, long, ſmall, & ſmoth, and on the back hath a colour betwene grene and blewe, and hath a longe beake & a ſharp. It is callyd in ſome countreys here, an horne beake. In the tyme of ſpaunyng, the bealy of this fyſhe openeth, and ſo the ſpaune iſſueth, afterwarde the wounde is cloſed. This fyſhe is harde of digeſtion, but it is moyſt, and of good iuyce in a hole bodye.
            
               Acuſtici, they whiche doo here all, and ſpeake nothynge them ſelfe.
            
               Acute, quyckely, ſubtylly.
            
               Acutulus, he that hath a prety wytte.
            
               Acutus, a, um, ſharpe, but in voyce: it betokeneth hygh and ſmall as a treble.
            Acuti oculi, clere eyes.
            
            Acuti cibi, ſharpe meates.
            
            
               Acutum ingenium, a ſubtylle or quycke wytte.
            
               Acylon, an holy bearye.
            
               Acyphantes, a citie in Theſſalye, whyche is alſo callyd Pindus.
         
         
            A, ANTE D.
            
               AD, by hym ſelfe, or ioyned to an nother worde, ſignifieth to or at, as Vado ad oppidum, I goo to the towne. Erat ad ripam fluminis arbor, There was at the ryuers ſyde a great tree. Sometyme it ſignifieth agaynſt, as Ad illum mihi pugna eſt, Agaynſt hym is my warre. ſomtyme it betokeneth in comparyſon, ſomtyme cauſe, as, Ad quid hoc feciſti? For what cauſe, or wherto dyddeſt thou this? ſometyme aboute, as Ad duo millia hominum occiſa ſunt, There be ſlayne about two thouſande men. Alſo after, as, Ad haec, After this.
            
               Ad is alſo ſometime taken for Quantum ad.
               Cicero in Ver. 
               Vidi ſimul cum populo Romano forum, co mitium
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adornatū, ad ſpeciem, magnifico ornatu, ad ſensum, cogitationem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , acerbo & lugubri: I with the people of Rome behelde the places of iudgement and cōmon aſſemblies, as to the pleaſure of the eye, ſumptuouſely garnyſhed, but as to reſpect of wyt and imaginatiō, lamentably & heuily decked.
            
               Ad annum, duryng a hole yere.
            
               Ad aſſem,
               Plaut. in Ruden. to the vttermoſt peny.
            
               Ad annos ſedecim,
               Plin. in Panegy.
.xvi. yeres after.
            
               Ad breuiſsimū, tempus, for a very ſhort time.
            
               Ad cyathos ſtare, to awayte on the cuppe.
            Ad decem annos,Sueton. in Caeſare. 
               tenne yeres after. Neſcio quid interſit, utrum illuc nunc ueniam, an ad decem annos,Cicero ad Attic. 
               I wote not what diuerſitie, whether I comme nowe, or tenne yeres hereafter.
            
            
               Ad decimum ſextum calendas, aboute the xvi. calendes.
            
               Ad dextram, ad ſiniſtram, on the right hand on the lefte hande.
            
               Ad diem, at the day appoynted.
            
               Ad deſyderium, for the deſyre that they had Inde cum actae boues quaedam ad deſyderium,
               Tit. Liuius lib. 1. (ut fit) relictarum mugiſſent. Than whan ſomme of the nete whiche were dryuen away, for the deſyre whiche they had of the other that remayned (as they vſe to do) dyd lowe or bellowe.
            
               Ad ducentos,
               Cicero. about two hundred.
            
               Ad extremum, Ad poſtremum,
               Plau. in au Iular. at the laſt, fynally, in concluſion.
            
               Ad exemplum,
               Plinius. to the example or lykeneſſe.
            
               Ad hoc exemplum,
               Plaut. in Mercat. 
               nun
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   amaui, I neuer loued of that facion, or in that maner.
            
               Ad haec mala hoc mihi accidit,
               Teren. in And. beſydes theſe dyſpleaſures, this chaunced vnto me.
            
               Ad horam nonam in anchoris expectauit,
               Caeſar. he lay at ankor vntyll nyne of the clocke.
            
               Ad hunc modum, this way, or in this maner.
            
               Ad id tempus,
               Plaut. in Merc. at that tyme.
            
               Ad illam faciem, ita ut illa eſt, ut emerē ſibi
 mandauit mihi, He cōmanded me to bye for hym one, whyche had ſuche an nother face as ſhe hathe.
            
               Ad iudices dicere, to pleade before iudges.
            
               Ad iudicem,
               Cice. pro Roſ. before a iudge. Eius teſtis ad iudicem fidem informabit, His wytnes before a iudge, ſhall proue the truthe.
            
               Ad limina, a portat.
            
               Ad lucem, vntyll the day lyght.
            
               Ad manum ſeruus,
               Cic. de orato. 2. he that is a clerke to one, or wryteth for hym.
            
               Ad manus uenire, to come to hande ſtrokes, to cope togyther.
            
               Ad me,
               Ci. Attic. lib. 9. with me. Commodum ad te dederā literas, cū ad me bene mane Dionyſius fuit. I had ſcarſely ſent my letters vnto the, whan Dionyſe was with me erly in the mornyng.
            Ad meridiem, vntyll none.
            
            Ad meridiem ſpectat, aut uergit, it lyeth towarde the ſouthe.
            
            
               Ad me domum, at home with me.
            
               Ad multam noctem,
               Terentiꝰ. late in the nyght,
            
               Ad nummum conuenit, it is the trew ſumme.
            
               Ad pedem,
               ❀ a prouerbe whyche ſignyfieth agreable, as it were my ſhoe is mecte for my foote. Accordynge to this prouerbe is the ſentence of Paulus Acmilius, who herynge his wyfe Papyriam commended for her beaultie and dyuers other good qualities, he helde vp his foote to them that prayſed her, and aſked howe they lyked his ſhoe. They ſayd it was a good ſhoe. Than ſayd Aemilius, ye ſe that it is a newe ſhoe, and a well made ſhoe, but yet none of you do know where he wryngeth me. but yet I do fele it.
            Ad pedes, a lakay.
            
            
               Ad pedes deſilio, I lyght on my feete.
            
               Ad pileum uocare,
               Eraſ. chil. 2. centu. 1. to ſtyre men to ſedition, vpon truſt of libertie, or other commodities.
            Ad quindecim talenta, about .xv. talentes.
            
            
               Ad rauim poſcere,
               Teren. in Heauton. Plautus. to aſke vntyll one be hoorſe
            
               Ad rem facit, it maketh for the mattier, or is conuenient, or it ſerueth for the purpoſe.
            
               Ad rem pertinet, it belongeth to the purpoſe.
            
               Ad rem ſuam ſapere,
               Plaut. in Trucul. to be wyse for his owne profytte.
            
               Ad reſtem res redijt, the thynge is in diſpayre.❀ Eraſ. chil. 1. cent. 5. Whiche prouerbe came of them, whiche dyd hange them ſelues. bycauſe they had not ſo good fortune, as they loked for, or that thynges happened not accordynge vnto theyr expectation.
            
               Ad ſummum, at the moſte.
            
               Ad ſapientiam huius, nimius nugator fuit, In regarde of his wyſdom, he was but a fole.
            
               Ad tempus, in ſeaſon, ſomtyme according to the tyme. alſo for a tyme.
            Ad tria millia, about thre thouſande.
            
            
               Ad uerbum, worde by worde.
            
               Ad uiuum reſecare,
               
                  
                     •
                   Cic. de 
                     •
                   mic. & de finib. to towche it to the quycke. I prouerbe taken of paryng of nayles, vntyll the bloud dothe appere, which ſygnifyeth to touche a thynge nerer than nede requyreth.Plaut. in Bacch.
            
            Ad unguem,Cicer. de amicitia. 
               perfitely.
            
            
               Ad unum, not one left, at ones, vnto the laſt.
            
               Ad unū idē ſentiūt, they be al of one opinion.
            
               Ad Calendas graecas,
               Plinius. ſygnifieth neuer, for the olde grekes had no kalendes.
            
               Ad horam, at tyme appoynted.
            
               Adad, in the Syrian tongue, is the ſonne, alſo it ſygnifieth onely.
            Adactio, compulſyon.
            
            Adactus, ta, tum, compelled, put forth.
            
            
               Adaeque, ſemblably, ſo moche, as moche.
            
               Adaeque miſer, ſo moche a wretche.
            
               Adaequo, are, to make or be equall.
            
               Adaggero, rare, to gather or lay togither.
            
               Adagia, an olde wyfe, which late had a chylde.
            
               Adagum, a prouerbe, or as I mought ſay, an olde ſayd ſawe.
            
               Adam, the fyrſt man that was created, & dothe ſygnify man, or redde erthe, or a dweller, lyued
.ix.C.xxx. yeres. In the byble is mention made but of thre ſonnes that he had, and one doughter, Cayne, Abel, Seth, and Delbora, whiche of Philo is callyd Noaba. And the ſame Philo reherſeth .xii. ſonnes, and .viii. doughters, borne after Seth.
            
               Adamas, adamantis, a dyamonde, wherof be dyuers kyndes, one is founde in Inde, and is lyttell, bryght, heuy, and ſo hard, that nothing may breake it, except the bloud of a gote. An other is found in Arabia, whiche is leſſe than the other, and paler of colour. Som be found in Macedonia, and they haue more the color of yron, made bryght. Other be founde in Aethiopia, and they be mooſte darke in colour. And ſome be found in Cypres, and theyr color draweth towarde the colour of ayre, but they ar ſoft. The vertues of this ſtone ar theſe, to reſyſt agaynſt poyſon and witchecraft, it putteth away feare, it cauſeth hym that weareth it, to vanquyſh in contention, it helpeth them that be lunatike or phrenetike. I haue proued that a dyamonde layde by a nedelle, the lode ſtone myght not drawe hym vp to hym.
            
               Adamanteus, & adamantinus, of a dyamond or as harde as a dyamonde.
            
               Adamaſter, a gyant, whiche was of incredyble greatneſſe.
            
               Adamitae, were heretykes, whyche toke theſe begynaynge of a Pycard, who came into the lande of Boheme, and ſayde that he was the ſonne of god, and named hym self Adam. And he cōmanded al men and women to go naked. And who ſo deſyred to company carnally with any woman, he ſhulde take her by the hande,
 and brynge her to hym, and ſaye, that he feruentely deſyred her company, and than wolde Adam ſay, Go togither, and increace and multiply. This hereſy was begun the yere of our lorde .M.CCCC.xii. Sigiſmunde being emperour. And men ſuppoſe, that yet it endureth not only in Boheme, but alſo in other places.
            
               Adamo, aui, are, to loue verye welle, to deſyre feruently.
            
               Adamuſsim, by rule, ſtreyght as a lyne.
            Ad Apollinis, ad monetae, ad Saturni, ad Iunonis, at Apollos temple. &c.
            
            
               Adaperio, rire, to open a thynge.
            Adapertilis, le, for apertum, open.
            
            Adapto, aui, are, to ioyne to.
            
            
               Adaquatio, watrynge of cattell.
            
               Adaquo, aui, are, to water horſe or cattell.
            
               Adarca, a ſalt fome, whiche cometh of the rindes of canes or redes growyng in fennes.
            
               Adaſia, an olde eawe, whiche hath late eaned, or had a lambe.
            
               Adaſſo, olde wryters vſed for Adigo, to cōpel.
            
               Adaucto, are, to augment or increace.
            Adauctus,Non. Mar cellus. ta, tum, augmented.
            
            Adaugeo, êre, idem.
            
               Adaxint, for adegerint, let theym compelle or conſtrayne.
            
               Addebat hoc,
               Teren. in Eunu. he ſayd moreouer.
            
               Addere animum, to gyue courage.
            
               Addere gradum, to make hym go faſter.
            
               Addico, xi, c
                     •
                  re, to ſay, to iudge, to appoynte, or depute.
            
               Addicere animū, to gyue or apply his minde.
            
               Addictus, he that is iudged, appoynted, or deputed, or bounden.
            
               Addictus, ta, tum, openly ſolde. Alſo Addicere was, whan the iudge in the olde tyme delyue red the dettour to his credytours, to doo with hym what they lyſted.
            
               Addiſco, didici, diſcere, to lerne welle, or adde to in lernynge.
            
               Additamentū, a thing added to, an augmētatiō
            
            Additus, ta, tum, added or put to.
            
            
               Additus,
               Vergilius alſo for an enmy. Nec Teucris addita Iuno, us
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   aberit, Neyther Iuno ennemye to the Troyans ſhall lacke or be away.
            
               Addo, are, to gyue to one.
            
               Addo, didi, dere, to adde, ioyne, or put to.
            Addoceo, cui, cére, to lerne.
            
            Addormio, miui, ire, to ſleape.
            
            Addormiſco, ſcere, idem.
            Addubito, tare, to doubte.
            
            
               Adduco, xi, cere, to brynge to, or brynge forth, ſometyme to drawe or plucke togyther. alſo to meue or perſwade.
            
               Adduci, to be meued or perſwaded.
            
               Adducta frons, a frownyng forheade, ſomme tyme adducere, is to extende or thruſt out.
            
               Adduplico, are, to double any thynge.
            Adedo, edi, 
                  •
               ere, to deuoure.
            
            
               Adelphi, bretherne, it is alſo the name of a comedy in Terence.
            Ademptio ciuitatis, banyſhement.
            
            
               Adeo, ſo moch, moreouer, ſurely, without dout. ſometyme it ſignifieth euen, as, Tute iam adeo eius audies uerba, Thou thy ſelfe euen nowe ſhalt hers his wordes. Sometyme it ſignifieth, and that more is, as, Intra moenia at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adeo in Senatu uidetis,
               Cicero in Catil. ye ſee hym in the citie, and that more is in the ſenate. It hath dyuers ſignifications harde to be perceyued, but by the examples. Adeo mihi uiſus eſt lepidus, He ſemed to me ſo pleaſant a felowe. Adoleſcens tuus at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adeo noſter te ſalutrat, your chylde & myn cōmendeth hym vnto you. Aliquid at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adeo multa addunt de ſuo, ſom what they adde to, and that very moche of theyr owne.
            
               Id adeo ex me cognoſcite, Thus moch take ye of me. Id adeo (ſi placet) conſyderate, Hytherto (if it pleaſe you) conſyder. Haec Cicero.
               Terent. 
               Nihil herclè, aut ſi adeo, bidui, aut tridui eſt haec ſolicitudo, In fayth nothyng, or at the moſt, this ſorow or care wyl not laſt paſſynge two or thre dayes.
            
               Adeo res redijt, the mattier is come to that poynte.
            
               Adeo, iui, ire, to goo to, to demaunde, to attempte, to make aſſaulte.
            
               Adij te heri de filia, I came yeſterday to talk with the for thy doughter.
            
               Adire diſcrimen, to put hym ſelfe in peryll.
            
               Adire haereditatē, to entre īto his inheritāce.
            
               Adire inimicitias, to enter into diſpleaſure.
            
               Adire ad pactionem, to comme to a poynte concernynge the bargayne.
            
               Adire periculum, to take a dangerous thing on hande.
            
               Adeor, the paſſyue of adeo.
            
            
               Adeouſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , vntyll that.
            
               Adeps, adipis, the fatte of all thynge.
            
               Adeptus, opteyned, gotten, or founden.
            
               Ader, a place by Bethlem, where aungels dyd ſynge at the byrthe of Chriſt, and Iacob kept there his ſhepe.
            
               Adeſdum,
               Teren. in And. come hyther.
            
               Adeſſe, ſignifieth ſometyme preſence, ſomtime ayde, otherwhyle fauour.
            
               Adeſſe animo, to haue his mynde at lybertye, to take a good harte to hym, to be of good courage.
            
               Adeſſe praeſens, to be preſente.
            Adeſſe coram, idem.
            Adeſſe coram praeſentem. Corā aderit praeſens tibi, He ſhall come before the.
            
            
               Adeſſe alicui, to defende or helpe one.
            Adeſſe ad iudicium, to appere.
            
            
               Adeſſe iudici, to be aſſociate in commiſſion.
            
                
               Adeſt, he is at hande.
            
               Adeſt ei animus, he hath a good courage.
            
               Adeſto iſtic, tary here.
            Adeſus, a, um, conſumed.
            
            Ad exitam aetatem,Feſtus. 
               for ad ultimam aetatem, at the vttermooſte age.
            
            
               Adfabrum, wel wrought.
            
               Adnabito, aui, are, to dwelle by.
            Ad haec, moreouer.
            
            
               Adhaereo, to cleane faſt, to ſet ſure, to ioyne to, to holde or to take to any thynge.
            Adhaereſco, ſcere, idem quod adhaeteo.
            
               Adhaeſe.
               Gell. 
               Ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adhaeſe locutus eſt, nor he dydde not mumble, but ſpake out.
            
               Adhaeſio, a cleauynge togyther.
            Adhaeſus, a, um, cleaued to.
            
            
               Adhalo, aui, are, to blowe, or to breathe on a thynge.
            
               Adhamo, aui, are, to bynd to, or tye, or grappel.
            
               Adhibeo, ui, 
                     •
                  re, to put to, to haue by me.
            
               Adhibere animū, to take hede what is ſpokē
            
            
               Adhibere aures, to harken, to gyue an eare.
            
               Adhibere in conſilium aliquem, to aſke coū fſayle of one.
            
               Adhibere modum, to vſe moderacyon or temperaunce.
            
               Adhibere parſimoniam, to ſpare.
            
               Adhibere ſermonē, to deuiſe or talk togider.
            
               Adhibere teſtes, to bryng forthe wytnes.
            
               Adhibere uim, to doo a thynge by violence, to inforce.
            
               Celeritatem adhibere, to make haaſte, or to vſe dilygence.
            
               Coenae aliquem adhibere, whan one biddeth an other to ſupper, which is inferior to hym.
            
               Delectum adhibere, to put a difference, to diſcerne betwene thinges, whiche is the better.
            
               Religionem adhibere, to make conſcyence of a thynge.
            
               Adhinnio, to ney as a horſe doth after a mare.
            Cicero by a metaphor maketh it to ſygnyfye to reioyce.Cicero in Piſon.
            
            
               Adhoc, furthermore.
            
               Adhortator, toris, he that exhorteth or counſayleth.
            
               Adhortatio, an exhortation.
            
               Adhortor, tari, to exhorte or counſayle to the doynge of a thynge.
            
               Adhuc, yet, hytherto.
            Adhuc locorum,Plaut. in capt. 
               for adhuc.
            
               Adiabene, a countrey beyonde Armenia.
            
               Adiaceo, cui, c
                     •
                  re, to lye by.
            
               Adiantum, an herbe growynge aboute ſprynges of water, hauyng ſmal leaues lyke to Coriāder, ſome do nowe take it for Maydenheare.
            
               Adiaphoron, indyfferent.
            
               Ad
                     •
                  ides, ſhort battes of a cubite longe and an halfe, hauyng pykes of yron in them, & were tyed to a lyne, that whan they were throwen, he that dyd caſt them, mought plucke theym ageyne to hym, hurlebattes.
            
               Adigo, egi, igere, to procure or ſtyre, to bynde by othe or promyſe, to brynge or dryue to, to faſten or ioyne to, ſommetyme to compelle or dryue one to do a thynge.
            
               Adijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caſte to, to adde or put to, or increaſe.
            
               Adijcere album calculū, to approue a thing.Plinius in epiſt.
            
            
               Adijcere animū, to ſet his mīd or loue on one
            Adijcere oculū haereditati, Planè uidebant adiectum eſſe oculū haereditati.
               Cicero in Ver. They ſawe playnly, that the other went about to get the inherytaunce.
            
               Adimo, emi, imere, to take away, or diminiſhe
            
               Animam alicui adimere, to ſlee one.
            
               Adimereius, to prohibyte.
            
               Adimere ſuum alteri, to take an other mannes goodes from hym.
            
               Adimere uestem, to pull of his garment.
            
               Ciuitatem adimere, to banyſhe one.
            
               Adindo, didi, dere, to putte in.
            Adineo, iui, ire, idem quod adindo.
            
               Adinstar, lyke to.
            
               Adinuenio, to inuent a thynge.
            
               Adinuentum, an inuention.
            
               Adipales, feſtis that priſtes were wōt to make
            Adipatus, ta, tum, larded, baſted.
            
            
               Adipiscor, adeptus sum, to get optayn, ioyned with a perſon, it ſignifieth to ouertake.
            
               Adipiſci ſenectutem,
               Cicer. de ſenect. to come to age.
            
               Adipoſus, ryche.
            
               Adipſon, a ſwete roote callyd l
                  •
               korys.
            
               Adipſos, a certayne date tree growynge in Egypte, the frute wherof hath no ſtone. Plinius calleth it Myrobalanum.
            
            
               Aditiculus, a lyttell entrie.
            
               Aditio, onis, an acceſſe, or repayre.
            
               Adito, aui, are, to goo to.
            
               Aditus, acceſſe, commyng to, or entry.
            Adiudico, aui, are, to adiudge.
            
            
               Adiugo, aui, are, to yoke or ioyne to.
            
               Adiumentum, helpe.
            
               Adiungo, xi, ere, to ioyne to, to applye, to wyn or optayne.Teren. in andria. 
               Errat longe mea quidē sentētia, qui imperium credat grauius esse aut ſtabilius, ui quod fit, quam id quod amicitia adiungitur, He is foule deceiued in myn opinion, that thynketh, that rule to be more firme and ſtable, whiche is gotten by violence, than that whiche is opteyned by frendſhyp.
            
               Adiurati, confederate or alyed togither by oth.
            
               Adiuratio, a coniurynge.
            
               Adiurgium, debate.
            
               Adiurgo, are, to rebuke.
            
               Adiuro, aui, are, to deny with an oth, to cōiure.
            
               Adiuto, aui, are to helpe often.
            
               Adiutor, an helper. Adiutrix.
            
            
               Adiutorium, helpe.
            
                
               Adiuuamen, helpe.
            Adiuuo, aui, are, to helpe.
            
            
               Adlino, nere, to anoynt, or rubbe a thing with any thynge, liquyde.
            
               Ad liquidum, clerely, euidently, playnly.
            
               Adlubesco, scere, to pleaſe or content one.
            
               Admando, aui, are, to ſende to, to delyuer any thynge to one to bryng to another.
            
               Ad manus, at hande, redy.
            ❀ Admeti naenia, a prouerbe which ſignifieth an heuy or ſorowfull ſonge,Eraſ. chil. 2. cent. 6. or a lamentable complaynte.
            
               Admetus, was kynge of a people callyd Pherei, vnto whome Apollo (beynge exiled oute of heauen by Iupyter) came for reliefe, and kepte his cattelle, and by his crafce, cauſed euerye cowe to brynge forthe two calues, whyche thynge Adinetus thankefullys takinge, entertayned hym honourably. That beynge welle conſydered of Apollo, he opteined of the deſtenies callyd Parcae, that whan the day of the deathe of Admetus ſhulde be wounde vpon theyr ſpyndels, he ſhuld eſcape death vpon this condytion, that yf he coulde fynde any other, that wolde wyllyngely dye for hym, he hym ſelfe ſhoulde eſcape deathe at that tyme. Whan the day was come that Admentus ſhulde fynyſſhe his lyfe, all men and women (yea the father and mother of Admetus) refuſed to dy, only Alceſte his wife preferred the lyfe of her huſband before her owne, who beyng dead, there was in the palayce of Admetus contynual waylyng and heuyneſſe, vntyll Proſerpina meued with compaſſyon, ſente Alceſte agayne out of Helle vntylle her huſbande. Of this fable came the ſayde prouerbe Admeti naenia.
            
            Adminiculo, are, & adminiculor, aris, to ayde to ſuccour.
            
            
               Adminicula uitae, all thinges neceſſarye to the lyfe of man.
            
               Adminiculum, ayde, ſupportation.
            
               Adminiſter, a ſtewarde of houſeholde.
            
               Adminiſtratio, exploytynge, or dooynge of a thynge, ſeruyce.
            
               Administro, are, to doo ſeruyce, to exployte, to fournyſhe.
            
               Admirabilis. wonderfull.
            
               Admirabundus, he that dothe wonder or meruayle at a thynge.Ci. off. 1. de nat. deorum.
            
            Admirabilitas, tatis, idem quod Admiratio. wondryng or meruaylynge.
            
            
               Admirabiliter,
               Ci. Attic. honourably. Nos Aſia accepit admirabiliter, The countrey of Aſia receyuyd vs honourably.
            
               Admiratio, a wonderynge.
            Admiror, aris, atus ſum, ari, to wonder.
            
            
               Admiſceo, ſcui, ſcêre, to myngle or myxte one thynge with an other.
            
               Admissarius, a ſtalyon horſe.
            
               Admiſsio, nyghnes about a prynce, as admytted to be of his priuy counſayle, or priuy chā
               ber. It alſo ſignifieth the act of puttinge the male to the female, or contrary wyſe.
            
               Admiſsionales, vſhers of the chaumber.
            
               Admiſſum, beinge a ſubſtantyue, ſygnifieth a thynge committed or done.
            
               Admiſſura, the acte or tyme whan beaſtes do theyr kynd in generation, ſeſonyng of a mare.
            
               Admiſte, an aduerbe, ſygnifyenge one myxte with an other.
            
               Admiſtio, onis, a mynglynge or myxture.
            Admiſtura, idem quod admiſtio.
            
               Admiſtus, ta tum, put vnto a thynge and mingled with it.
            
               Admitto, miſi, mittere, to admytte, to put to, to brynge in, to ſuffer, to ſuſteyne, or take, to lette into a place.Plaut. in Men. Alſo to offende. Quid tandem admiſi in te? What haue I offeded the? Admittere diem,Plinius in epiſt. 21. to open the wyndowe that the lyght may come in.
            
               Admittere equum, to go to horſback, or take his horſe.Cicer. de finibus. Cū ſe deuouêret, & equo admiſſo in mediam aciem Latinorum irrubat, Whan he had made his vowe, and had takē his horſe, he thraſte hym ſelfe into the myddle of the hoſte of the latynes.Caeſar de bel. gall▪ 1. 
               Conſidius equo admiſſo ad eum accurrit, Conſidius toke his hors, and ranne agaynſt hym.
            
               Admittere marem foeminae, to put the male to the female.
            
               Admittere noxam, to do an offence.Plaut. in pen
            
            
               Admittere ſumptum, to do great coſte.
            
               Admittere uitam,
               Teren. in And. to retayne lyfe, to lyue.
            Salutatum ueniebant, admiſſus eſt nemo,
            They came to ſalute him,Saluſt but none was let in
            Cum tu nocte ſocia per tegulas admittere,Cicero in philip.
            
            Whan thou the night folowynge were. let in at the roufe of the houſe.Ibid.
            
            
               Admodum, very moche, ſomwhat, reſonably.
            
               Ad modum, as it were.
            
               Admolior, îris, îtus ſum iri, to put or adde to.
            
               Admoneo, uï, ere, to warne, to exhort.
            
               Admordeo, momordi, dêre, to byte ſore.
            
               Admoueo, ui, uêre, to moue to, or put to.
            
               Admurmurare, is proprely, where men at that thynge, whiche is doone or ſpoken, do murmure, blamynge or reprouynge the thynge. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth in a good parte to cō
               mende ſecretely.
            
               Adnato, tare, to ſwymme to a place.
            
               Adnecto, tere, to knyt to a thynge.
            
               Adnexio, a knittyng or faſtnyng to a thynge.
            
               Adnicto, nixi, nictere, to wynke on one.Feſtus.
            
            
               Adnitor, niteris, niti, to lean to a thing, to beare or ſuſteyne it.
            
               Adnixus, uel adniſus, a, um, cleauynge or ioynynge faſt to a thynge.
            
                
               Adnotatio, a tytlynge, or ſhort notynge of that whiche we do rede or heare.
            
               Adnumero, are, to adde to.
            
               Adolabilis, without griefe or ſorowe.
            
               Adoleo, leui, lui, lêre, adultum, to begynne to growe, to do ſacrifice with incenſe, or other fumes, to burne ſwete thynges.
            
               Adoleſcens, tis, a yonge man, whyche is yet growynge vnto .xxi. yeres.
            
               Adoleſcentia, is the age betwene chyldhoode, and mans age, which is betwene .xiiii. & .xxi.
            
               Adoleſcentior, aris, atus ſum, to be wanton, or full of youthe.
            
               Adoleſcentulus, a ladde.
            Adoleſcenturio, iui, ire, to play the boy.
            
            Adoleſco, leui, leſcere, to growe.
            
            
               Adonai, the name of god amonge the Iewes, whiche ſignifieth the lord of all creatures.
            
               Adonia, feſtyuall dayes, whiche were kepte in the honor of Adonis the derlyng of Venus.
            
               Adonis, the name of a chylde, whyche was ſon of Cynare, kynge of Cypres, whome Venus had for her derlynge, whiche was ſlayn with a bore, whom the poetes fayned, that Venus tourned into a purple flowre, ſomme ſay into a roſe.
            
               Adonidis horti, gardeyns for a lyttel tyme pieſaunt, whiche ſhortly decayen.
            
               Adoperio, rire, to couer or hyde.
            
               Adoptatiuus, he whome a man ordeyneth to be his heyre, and taketh vnto hym in ſteede of his ſonne.
            
               Adoptio, an electiō of an heyr out of the cou
                  •
               s of inherytance as by wyll or gyfte.
            
               Adoptitius, he that is adopted or taken in the ſtede of a ſonne.
            
               Adoptiuus, the ſonne of hym that is adopted.
            
               Adopto, aui, are, to elect or appoynt an heyre. Alſo to aſke helpe.Cic. fa. 5. 
               Ego quem potius adoptem aut inuocem, 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                  illum, quo defendente, uincere didici? Whom ſhulde I rather aſke helpe of, or call for, than him, who defending, I lerned to vanquyſhe?
            
               Ador, & Adoreum, a kynde of wheate, callid alſo Far, whiche by the deſcriptione ſemeth to be the wheate, whiche we call ducke byll.
            
               Adoratio, is an expreſſe motion or act of reuerence done with the body inclyned.
            
               Adorea, & adoreola, a prayſe that is gyuen to them that haue victorye. Alſo a cake of fyne wheate, which they vſed in ſacrifice.
            Adordior, iris, adorſus ſum, riri, to ſpeake to, to begynne.
            
            
               Adorior,
               Cic. de oratore. 
               riri, to go about to do a thynge. Ne conuellere adoriamur ea, quae non poſsunt commoueri: Let vs not go about to take away thoſe thynges, which may not be meued or put away. Alſo it ſignifieth to ſet vpon one in battayl, or in any forme of hoſtilite. A tergo hoſtes adoriri iubet:
               Caeſar. de bel. gal. 7. He bad them to ſet on theyr enemies at theyr backes.
            
               Adorno, aui, are, to apparayle, to prepare, to prayſe, to aduaunce to honour.
            
               Adoro, aui, are, to honour with inclination of the body, to beſeche.
            
               Ad pedes deſilire, to alyght from his horſe.
            
               Ad plenum, perfectly, fully.
            
               Ad primus, chiefe of all.
            
               Adpulſus, Adpulſio, the dryfte of ſhepe to the water.
            
               Adquiro, ſiui, ire, to gette, to conquer.
            
               Adquo, for quouſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , vntyll.
            
               Adramelech, an ydoll of Syria, whome alſoo the Samaritans honoured.
            
               Adraſtia, a countrey not farre from Troy, alſo the name of a citie there. It was alſo callid a goddeſſe, whiche toke from manne both memory and wytte.
            
               Adraſtus, was king of Argiues, whoſe doughter Argia was wedded to Polynices the ſeconde ſonne of Oedipus, & his other doughter callid Deiphyles was wedded to Tideus the kinges ſonne of Aetholia. This Adraſtus rayſed all the Greekes agaynſte the citie of Thebes, for to reſtore his ſonne in lawe Polynices to the kyngdom. But after that Polynices and Aetheocles beinge bretherne, had ſlayne one the other, after many conflyctes, the Thebans ſlewe down ryght the Argiues and dyd put to flyght Adraſtus, and ſlew his people, and after that, the Argiues had neuer vyctory in any batayle. wherof cam this prouerbe,Eraſ. 
               A draſtia nemeſis, th
                  ••••
               ll lucke of Adraſtus, whiche may be vſed there prowde men are beaten.
            
               Adrepo, pſi, pere, to reache at thynge, to take it with violence, to crepe to.
            
               Adriaus, a noble emperour of Rome, aboute the yere of our lorde .Cxix. he was Traianus ſyſters ſonne, e man of excellent wytte, and dyuers in maners, meruailous in lerning, ſpecially in Mathematicalles, alſo in muſyk, in karuyng and grauynge. In dedes of armes cunnyng and valyant. A great fauorer of wel lernid men, and liberal toward them. He was ſo great a trauaylour, that there were ſewe countrayes, but that he went through them. He lyued .lxii. yeres, and reygned .xx. and died in torment of the bowels.
            
               Adriaticum mare, the ſea that dyuideth Italy from Dalmatia, wherein ſtandeth the noble citie of Venetia, ſome doo call it the gulfe of Venyce.
            
               Adrumo, aui, are, to grudge or make rumour.
            
               Adruo, ui, ere, to turne the erthe in tyllage.
            
               Adſciſco, ſcere, to ioyne, or take to, as whanne one ioyneth an other with hym in auctoritie, or taketh one to ayde hym in his offyce.
            
                
               Adſcire, to ioyne or put to.
            
               Adſcriptitij, were men of warte, whiche were taken into an armye to ſupply the places of them, that were ſlayne, or otherwyſe lacked.
            Adſcriptiui, idem quod Adſcriptitij.
            
               Adſum, Fui, eſſe, I am here, or preſent, or at hād.
            
               Adſitis domi facite, See that ye be bothe at home.
            
               Ad ſummam, in concluſion, finally.
            
               Ad tempus, for a tyme.
            
               Ad ueſperam, vntyll the ſome went downe.
            
               Aduallas, a mountayne, frome the whiche the greafryuer callyd the Rene, runneth northewarde.
            
               Aduatici, people of a countrey in Fraunce callyd Boſleduc.
            
               Adubanus, the famous ryuer callyd alſo Danubius and Hiſter.
            
               Aduectio, a caryage ouer to a place.
            
               Adueho, xi, here, to bryng to, or cary to.
            
               Adu
                     •
                  ena, a ſtraunger.
            
               Aduelitatio, a mutuall reprochynge, or contention in wordes.
            
               Aduenio, ni, nîre, to come to.
            
               Aduētitius, he that cometh to a place by chāce.
            
               Aduentitia bona, goodes whyche doo come vnloked for.
            
               Aduentitius morbus, ſyckenes that cometh without our defaute, and of ſome men is callyd an vncome.
            Aduentito, aui, are, to come often.
            
            Aduento, aui, are, to come nygh.
            
            
               Aduentores,
               Plaut. in Muſtel. commune reſorters or haunters to a place.
            Aduentus, tus, a comynge.
            
            
               Aduerbialiter, lyke an aduerbe.
            
               Aduerſaria, a teckenynge booke of expenſes, wrytē afore that the boke of accompt be made.
            
               Aduerſarius, an aduerſary.
            
               Aduerſa
                     •
                  us, a, um, agaynſt or contrary.
            
               Aduerſus, a, um, that wherof only the forepart is ſene, as auerſus, wherof onely the hynder-part is ſene.
            
               Aduerſus, cōtrary, or agaynſt. alſo face to face.
            
               Aduerſa aeruma,
               Teren. in Phorm. aduerſitie, damage.
            Aduerſa ualetudo, ſyckenes.
            
            
               Aduerſo flumine, agaynſt the ſtreame.
            
               Aduerſis nulneribus,
               Plinius de uiris illuſt. Cice. fam. ep. 8. with woundes in the forepart, ouerthwart the breſt and face.
            
               Aduerſarium intendere, to be agaynſt one in his procedynges.
            
               Aduerſus gratiae homo, a rude frowarde felowe.
            Aduerſum cliuum, ſtrayte vp.
            
            
               Aduerſo animo, agaynſt my wyll, thy wyll, or his wyll, agaynſt his hart.
            
               Aduerſitor, a ſeruāt that ſeketh for his maſter.
            
               Aduerſitores, ſeruauntes which doo fetche home theyr mayſters after dyner or ſupper.
            
               Aduerſor, ſatus ſum, ſari, to repugne or be contrary, or to refuſe.
            
               Aduerſum, agaynſte. Quis eſt hic, qui aduerſum mihi fit? Who is he that cometh againſt me, or marcheth towarde me? Aduerſum is taken alſo for erga.
            
            
               Aduertebatur, one perceyued.
            
               Aduerto, ti, tere, to perceyue, to tourne to.
            
               Aduertere animum, to take hede, or harken.
            
               Aduertere oculos,
               Plin. in Panegy. to perceyue, to ſee, to beholde.
            
               Adueſperaſcit, the euenyng or euentyde is comen, or it waxeth late, or it is nyght.
            
               Aduigilo, are, to watche or take good hede.
            Aduiuo, uixi, uiuere, to lyue yet.
            
            
               Adulas, the hyll callyd ſaynt Gothard, entryng into Lumbardy.
            Adulatio, flattery.
            
            Adulor, arus ſum, ari, to flatter.
            
            Adulator, oris, a flatterer.
            
            
               Adulatrix, a woman that flattereth.
            
               Adulter, adultera, a man or woman auoutrer.
            Adulterinus, na, num, counterfayt or forged.
            
            Adulterinae claues, counterfayt keyes.
            
            Adulterium, auoutrye.
            
            
               Adultero, aui, are, to counterfait or forge.
            Adulteror, ari, idem quod adultero.
            Adultus, a, um, full growen.
            
            Adumbratio, loke in Adumbro.
            
               Adumbro, aui, are, to make or gyue ſhadowe, to repreſent or expreſſe, as peynters doo, that do ſhadowe ymages in playn tables, to make them ſhewe imboced or round. Some do ſuppoſe that it ſignifieth, to trycke a thynge, or drawe it groſſely, as paynters doo at the begynnyng. It ſignifieth alſoo to feyne or diſſemble a thynge.
            
               Adumbrata opinio, a falſe opinion.
            Adunco, aui, are, to make croked.
            
            
               Aduncus, crooked or hooked.
            Aduno, aui, are, to gather togyther.
            
            
               Adunum, eueryche one.
            
               Aduocatio, pleadyng, alſo aſſiſtance.
            
               Aduocatus, an aduocate, he that defendeth an other mans cauſe.
            
               Aduocito, tare, to calle for one often.
            
               Aduoco, aui, are, to calle to, or call to helpe.
            
               Aduolo, aui, are, to flye to or nygh a place, to go or come quyckely.
            
               Aduoluo, uere, to wrappe rounde togyther.
            
               Aduolutus genibus, fallen-downe atte his knees.
            
               Adourſem, olde wryters vſed for Aduerſarium.
            
            Aduorſor, for aduerſor.
            
               Aduo
                     •
                  um, after myne, thyne, or his appetite, as I wolde haue it.
            
               Aduro, uſsi, urere, to roſte, to bourne.
            
               Aduſtio, roſtynge or burnynge.
            
                Aduſtus, ta, tum, roſted or burned.
            
            Aduſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , vntyll.
            
            
               Adyticulum, a dyminutiue of Adytum.
            
            
               Ad
                     •
                  ytum, the chauncell or other ſecrete place of the temple, where none came but prieſtes. or perſones ſanctified.
         
         
            ¶A ANTE E.
            
               AEACVS was the ſonne of Iupiter and Europa, whome Paynyms dyd ſuppoſe, to be of ſuche iuſtyce, that he was appoynted by Pluto, callyd god of Hellè, to be one of the iudges there, with Minoes and Radamanthus, to diſcuſſe the tranſgreſſions of menne beinge deade, and to aſſygne to theym punyſſhement accordynge to theyr merytes.
            
               Aeantion, a towne in the promontory or hylle of Troy, callyd Sigeum.
            
               Aeas, aeantos, a ryuer of a countrey callyd Epyrus, whiche rounneth out of Macedonia, and fallyth into the ſee callyd Ionium.
            
               Aedepol, an othe among Gentiles, ſignifieng by Pollux houſe.
            
               Aedes, a howſe, and if there be ioyned thervnto the name of god, or of a ſaynt, it ſignifyeth a churche or a temple. Aedes ſaluatoris, ſaynt Sauiours church. it is alſo a chā
               ber. ſometyme a ſepulchre.
            
               Aedicula, an oratory, or place, where ymages were kepte.
            Aedificatio, buyldynge.
            
            
               Aedificator, a buylder.
            
               Aedificium, all the hole buyldyng of the hous.
            Aedifico, caui, care, to buylde.
            
            
               Aediles, offycers, whoſe charge was to ſee to the kepynge vp and maynteynynge of the temples and pryuate howſes, and to make prouyſyon for ſolemyne playes. Of theym ſom were callyd Aediles curules, of a chayre with croked feete, wherein they dyd ſytte.
            
               Aedilitas, & aedilitium, the office of the Ediles
            ❀ Aedilitatem gerit ſine populi ſuffragio,
            Aprouerbe,Palut. in Stich. Eraſ. chil. 3. centu. 1. whyche maye be ſayd vnto hym that meddleth in other mennes mattiers, or commaundeth in an nother mannes howſe or offyce.
            
               Aedilitius, he that had bene ones in that auctoritie.
            
               Aedilitius, a, um, pertaynyng to Ediles.
            Aeditimus idem qui Aedituus.
            
               Aedititius, a iudge or arbitratour choſen of the one parte.
            
               Aedituror, ari, to rule ouer the temple or houſe.
            Aeditus, ta, tum, hygh and ſtronge.
            
            
               Aedituus, the prelate of the Temple or churche, and maye be nowe callyd the perſone or paryſhe prieſte.
            
               Aedo, aedidi, to ſette forth or publyſſhe. alſo it ſignifyeth to brynge forth by generation.
            
               Aedere ſcriptum, to ſhewe forthe wrytynge.
            
               Aedere ſpiritum, to yelde vp the ghoſte.
            
               Aedere facinus,
               Ci. Attic. to do an yll dede.
            
               Aedere ſtragem, to make a ſlaughter of mē.
            
               Aedere nomina, to telle the names to be wrytten.
            
               Aedere praelium, to make battayle.
            
               Aedon,
               Vergil. a nyghtyngale.
            
               Aegae, a citie in Cilicia, alſo an yle in the ſea callyd Aegêum.
            
            
               Aegaea, a cite in Macedonia, an other in Mauritania.
            
               Aegealus, was a countrey callyed alſo Achaia in Grece.
            Aeger, gra, grum, ſycke or ſorowfull.
            
            
               Aegeria, a Nymphe or goddeſſe, with whom Numa Pompilius, the ſeconde kynge of Romaynes, faynyd to haue famylyar companye and communycation, concernynge relygion and worſhyppynge of Goddis, to the intent that he mough
                  •
                therby withdrawe the people from the appetite of warres, wherto they were inflamed.
            
               Aegêum mare, the ſea whyche is frome the mouthe of the greke ſea, vp in Syria and Arabia, wherin be many yles, beſydes Creta, nowe callyd Candy, Rhodes, and Cypres.
            ❀ Aegeum nauigat, he ſayleth the Egyptian ſea, A prouerbe applyed to theym, that refuſe noo perylle for moche lucre or profytte, for as moche as the ſayde ſea is full of dangers.
            
               Aegeus, the father of Theſeus.
            Aegides, of Aegeus, patronymicum.
            
               Aegylops, wylde ootes.
            
               Aegimuros, an yle callyd alſo Capraria, beyonde the yle callyd Corſica, or Corſe.
            
               Aegina, a cytie ioynynge of Peloponeſo or Morea, agaynſt the countrey of Athens. alſo an yle from Pyreum .xii. myles.
            
               Aeginenſes, the people of Egina the citie.
            
               Aeginîtae, people of the yle of Egina.
            Aegineticus, a, um, of Egina.
            
            
               Aegiochus, a name of Iupiter.
            
               Aegipanes, beaſtes lyke to men, hauyng feete lyke to gotes.
            
               Aegis, gidis, an haubergeon, whiche onely the goddis were paynted with.
            
               Aegium, a towne in Peloponeſo, nowe callyd Morea, where they fained that Iupiter was nouryſhed with a goote.
            
               Aegle, a Nymphe.
            
               Aegloga, a communycation of ſhepeherdes togyther.
            
               Aegocephalus, a byrde, whyche is withoute a ſplene.
            Aegocerus, idem quod Capricornus.
            
                
               Aegonomus, a goteherde or keper of gotes.
            
               Aegos, a ryuer in Thracia.
            
               Aegrè, with greatte peyne or difficultie, greuouſely, heuyly.
            Aegrefero, tuli, ferre, to be ſorye.
            
            Aegreſco, ſci, ſcere, to be ſycke.
            
            
               Aegrimonia, ſyckeneſſe, great heuyneſſe.
            
               Aegrio, I am ſycke.
            
               Aegritudo, inis, griefe of mynde, or ſorowe.
            
               Aegritudinem leuare, to eaſe or helpe the ſyckenes or heuyneſſe.
            
               Aegrius, more ſorowfully, more dyſpleaſantly.
            
               Aegrorario, ſyckenes of body.
            
               Aegroto, aui, are, to be ſycke, to faylle or be feeble of courage.
            
               Aegrotus, ſycke, feble of courage.
            Aegrum, idem quod aegritudo, ſorowe, diſpleaſure.
            
            
               Aegula, a kynd of brymſtone, wherwith in ſom places they do perfume wol to make it white.
            
               Aegylops, a fyſtula in the corner of the eye, by the noſe of a manne, oute of the whyche runneth matter.
            
               Aegyptij, people of Egyypte, not thoſe vacabounde Magitians, whyche nowe rounne into all countreys, callynge theym ſelues Egyptians, where they be of an yle remoued from Egypte. Reade the commentaryes of Volaterranus.
            
            
               Aegyptini, people of Ethiope, marchynge on Egypte.
            Aegyptius, & Aegyptiacus, a, um, of Egypte.
            
            
               Aegyptus, a countrey callyd Egypte: on the weſte it is bounded with Lybia, and the coū
               trey called Cyrenaica: on the northe with the ſea callyd Mediterraneum, and parte of Iudea: on the eaſte with Arabia, and the Arabian ſea: on the ſouth with Aethiopia. This countrey although it rayne there but ſeldome or neuer, yet by the ouerflowyng of the ryuer of Nilus, it is made ſo fertyle, that it hathe abundance of all thynges ſauyng vynes, and bryngeth forthe ſtrange beaſtis. Of the great cities, & other meruailous thinges in it, ſhalbe remēbred, where theyr names ſhalbe reherſed.
            
               Aegyſtus, he that ſlewe Agamemnon, and made hym cuckolde.
            
               Aelius, the proper name of a Romayne.
            
               Aelurus,
               Feſtus. a catte.
            
               Aemathia, a countreye in Grecia, after callyd Macedonia, the people wherof were firſt callyd Pelaſgi. Rede more herof in Macedonia.
            Aemidum, ſwollen.
            
            
               Aemilia, a countrey in Italy callyd alſo Flaminia & Romandiola.
            
            
               Aemilius, the propre name of a Romayne.
            
               Aemonia, a countrey callyd alſo Theſſalia.
            
               Aemulatio, enuy or imitation.
            
               Aemulor, atus ſum, ari, to enuye without malyce, or to folowe, or ſtudy to be lyke an other.
            
               Aemulus, he that foloweth or enuieth an other onely for deſyre of glory.
            
               Aenatores, blowers in trumpettes.
            
               Aenëas, a noble man of Troy, whyche with Anthenor betrayed the citie of Troy.
            Aen
                  •
               us, a, um, braſon.
            
            
               Aenigma, tis, a darke queſtion, hard to be vnderſtande or aſſoyled.
            
               Aenigmatiſtes, he that purpoſith hard queſtiōs
            
               Aenobarbus, the name of a Romayn, ſo callid bycauſe he had a berde as redde as braſſe.
            
               Aenum, a cawdron.
            
               Aeolia, is a region of the Grekes in Aſia, betwene Ioniā and Troadē. It is alſo a region conteinyng .vii. yles, betwene Italy & Sicile.
            
               Aeolium mare, the ſea ioyngng of Aſia.
            
               Aeolus, callyd the kyng of wyndes.
            Aequabilis, equall.
            
            
               Aequabilitas uitae, wherein is noo varietie or trouble.
            
               Aequabiliter, equally, in euen partes.
            
               Aequaeuus, of one age.
            
               Aequalis, equall, playne, of lyke age.
            ❀Aequales calculi, euen iudgementes, A prouerbe applied vnto theym, whiche lacked but lytel that they were not condemned. For aſmoche as in olde tyme the iudges gaue not ſentence openly, but being in diuers opiniōs, they dyd put into a pot lytell ſtones of ſundry colours, and of the which were moſt in numbre, that ſentence preuayled, and if they were equall in numbre, he that was accuſed was acquyted. Whyche ſtode with good reaſon, as Ariſtotle ſheweth in his problemes.
            Aequalitas, equalytie.
            
            Aequaliter, lykewyſe.
            
            Aeqnamentum, indyfferency.
            
            
               Aequanimis, he that is neyther extollyd with proſperitie, nor diſcomforted in aduerſitie.
            
               Aequanimitas, takyng in good parte.
            
               Aequanimiter, moderatly, paciently, coldly.
            
               Aequatio, the equall diuyſyon of a thynge, or where one thyng is made equal to an other.
            
               Aequare ſolo, to beate downe to the ground.
            
               Aequator, tôris, the lyne which diuideth heuen in the myddel callid alſo the equinoctiall lyne, into the whiche whan the ſonne commeth, the dayes and nyghtes ben of one length.
            
               Aequè, iuſtely, as well, euen as well, ſometime wyllyngly.
            Aeque ambo pares, all of one greatneſſe.
            
            Aeque pauci, euen as fewe.
            
            
               Aeque utrius
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   neceſſarius, as moche frende to the one as to the other.
            
               Aequi boni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   facio, I take in good part, I recke not or care not.
            
               Aequidiale, the tyme whan the dayes and the nyghtes be of one length.
            
                
               Aequidium,
               Varro. idem quod aequinoctium.
            
               Aequilanium, ſeu aequilaneum, the half deale of the holle.
            
               Aequilatio, of euen largeneſſe.
            
               Aequilibris, bre, of the ſame weyght.
            
               Aequilibrium, of euen weyght or poyſe.
            
               Aequimanus, he that vſeth the oone hande as well as the other.
            
               Aequimentum, hyre of a horſe or other beaſt.
            
               Aequinoctiale, the adiectiue of aequinoctiū.
            
            
               Aequinoctium, the tyme of the yere, whan the day is as longe as the nyghte, whyche is twyſe in the yere. In ſprynge tyme about the viii. calendes of Aprille, and in Autumne about the viii. Calendes of October.
            
               Aequiparatio, a comparyſon.
            
               Aequiparo, aui, are, to compare, or make equal
            
               Aequipollētia, equalite in eſtymation or value
            
               Aequipolleo, ui, ere, to haue lyke power, or be of lyke eſtimation.
            
               Aequipondium, of equall or lyke weight.
            
               Aequitas, equitie, iuſtyce, or euennes, lykenes of faſcyon.
            Aequiter, iuſtely.
            
            
               Aequiualentia, equall value.
            
               Aequiualeo, ui, ére, to be equyualente, or of lyke valour.
            
               Aequiuocatio, makyng dyuers ſygnifications to one worde.
            
               Aequiuocè, dyuerſely ſygnifienge in one word or terme.
            
               Aequiuocum, one worde hauynge dyuers ſygnyfycations.
            
               Aequo, aui, are, to make euen or playne.
            
               Aequor, the ſea, ſommetyme other waters, ſometyme lande.
            
               Aequore aperto, in playne fielde.
            
               Aequor maris; the ouermoſt or euen part of the ſea.
            Aequoreus, a, um, of the ſea.
            
            
               Aequus, euen or playne, equall, iuſt.
            
               Aequus animus, quietnes of mynde.
            
               Aequo animo ferre, to take it in worthe, or pacyentely.
            
               Ex aequo loco dicere, oone companyon to talke with an other.
            
               Aequum eſt, it is but reaſon.
            
               Aequum eſſe alicui, to be content with one.
            
               Aequum & bonum, is a diſcretion or moderation of ryght without rygour or extremitie of the lawe.
            
               Aequum certamen, where one hath no more aduantage than the other.
            
               A
                     •
                  r, the aire: ſomtime wind, blaſt, breth or ſoūd
            
               Aera, rae, money nūbred, ſomtime images of me tall. alſo dernel, whiche groweth in corne.
            
               Aeramentū, any thing made of copper or bras.
            
               Aerarium, a treaſorye, where a common treaſure of a citie or countrey is kept.
            Aerarij milites, ſouldiours waged.
            
            Aerarij praefectus, high Treaſourer.
            
            
               Aerarij Tribuni, were treaſourers whyche payde to the Souldiours theyr wages.
            
               Aerarius, he that was put from his fredome, of a citeſyn, and payde tribute as a ſtranger.
            
               Aeratus, mixt with copper, indetted.
            
               Aereolum uel Chalcus, the .xxxvi. parte of Dragma, by eſtimation the weyght of two barley cornes.
            
               Aerificium,
               Brutꝰ Ci.fa. ep. 11. the crafte to make any thynge of copper or braſſe.
            
               Aeripes, whiche is as ſwyfte as the wynde.
            
               A
                     •
                  rius, of the ayre, or lyke to the ayre.
            
               Aero, are, to dreſſe with copper or braſſe.
            
               Aeromantia, dyuination or coniecture of thinges tocome by the ayre.
            
               Aeroſus, a, um, that wherin braſſe or copper is, or wherof it is made.
            
               Arugo, ginis, ruſte or canker in mettall, ſpecyally in copper or ſiluer. It is taken in Horace and Iuuenall for money.
            
               Aeruginoſus, ruſty or cankred.
            
               Aerumna, labour peynfull, care of mynd with heuyneſſe, infelicitie.
            
               Aerumnalis, le, wherin is great peyn or labor.
            
               Aerumnatus, brought to myſerye.
            
               Aerumnoſus, a, um, myſerable, full of peyne, or trauayle.
            
               Aerumnulae, lyttell croked ſtaues, wherewith men do cary fardels & truſſes on their backes
            
               Aeruſcare, to get money by falſehode or vayn promyſes.
            
               Aes, aeris, is proprely copper or braſſe. It is often tymes taken for money, ſommetyme for trumpettes.
            
               Aeratus homo, a man indetted.
            
               Aere alieno exire, to come out of dette.
            
               Aere alieno obruere, to ouercharge oone with dettes.
            
               Aere alieno obſtringere,
               Plautus. to cauſe an nother man to be bounde or indetted for hym.
            
               Aere alieno premi, to be greuouſly indettid
            
               Aere diruti milites, ſouldiours, whyche for ſome defaut, were put out of wages.
            
               Aere meo. Multi. n. anni ſunt, cum ille in aere meo est. It is longe tyme paſſed, that I accompted hym in the numbre of my frendes, or for one of myne.6. Agricola .Ci. ad A
                     •
                  .
            
            
               In aere meo eſt, he is in my dette or danger.
            Aes caldarium, copper.
            
            Aes coronarium, lattyn mettall.
            
            
               Aes circumforaneum, moneye borowed of them, whiche are named bankers, and doo lende money by exchaunge.
            
               Aes conflare, to caſt mettall.
            
               Aes ducere, to melt mettall.
            
               Aes alienum, money that is borowed. alſo det
            
               Aes ductile, mettall that wol be ſone molten.
            
                
               Aes alienum afferre,
               Ci. fa. ep. Saluſt. in catil. to be indetted.
            Aes alienum habere, idem.
            Aes alienum cogere, conflare, contrahere, to be indetted.
            
            
               Aes alienum diſſoluere, exire, to pay dettes and be quytte.
            
               Aes alienum exonerare, to diſcharge the det.
            
               Aes alienum facere,
               Ci. Attic. to borowe money.
            
               Aes noſtrum, money that other menne doo owe vnto vs.
            
               Aes ſuum, money that other men do ow vnto hym, whome we ſpeake of.
            
               Aeſculus, a tree not moche vnlyke an oke, but that he is ſmother, and the leaues are broder and thycker: He bryngeth fruite in Autumne, wherewith people were fedde, before they vſyd to eate fleſſhe. I wote not what it ſhulde be in englyſhe, except it be the ſeruyce tree.
            
               Aeſculapius, the ſonne of Apollo and Coronides, and was callyd God of Phyſyke, and honoured in the fourme of a ſerpent.
            
               Aeſon, was the father of the valyant Iaſon.
            
               Aeſopus, an auncient wryter of fables. Alſoo the name of a famous player in tragedies.
            
               Aeſtas, ſommer.
            
               Aeſtimabile, that whyche may be valued.
            
               Aeſtimare litem, to taxe the damages and coſtes that a manne hathe ſuſteyned by wronge.
            
               Aeſtimatio, a peyne ſette, a valuation.
            
               Aeſtimator, he that valueth or ſetteth the price of a thynge, a preyſer.
            
               Aeſtimo, aui, are, to eſteeme, to valewe, to preyſe.
            
               Aeſtiua, places to be in for ſhadow in the ſommer tyme, wherevnto as well men as beaſtis do withdrawe them for heate.
            
               Aeſtiuo, aui, are, to dwell or be in a place durynge the ſommer tyme.
            
               Aeſtuaria, places wherevnto the ſea floweth and ebbethe, or meeres fyllyd with ſalte water.
            
               Aeſtuo, aui, are, to waxe hotte, to bourne, to flowe lyke the ſea, to be in anguyſhe or trouble of mynde.
            
               Aeſtuoſus, hotte or feruent.
            
               Aeſtus, tus, tui, heate of the wether, or bournynge of the ſonne. Alſo the vyolence or troublous motion of the ſea,Plinius in epiſt. ſommetyme doubtfulneſſe or flyttyng of the mynde, a ſcrupule.
            
               A
                     •
                  ta, a hylle in Theſſalye.
            
               Aetabula, chyldehoode.
            
               Aetalia, an yle in the ſea by Geane.
            
               Aetas,
               Cicero. age.
            
               Aetas acta eſt mihi, my tyme is paſſed.
            
               Aetas bona, the floure of youthe.
            Aetas grandis, auncientye.
            
            
               Aetas decrepita, age wherein a man loſeth the vſe of his membres.
            
               Aetas ingraueſcens, age increaſyng.
            
               Aetas matura, perfecte age.
            Aetas prima, youthe.
            
            
               Aetate adulta, of full age.
            
               Aetate affecta, of olde age.
            
               Aetate confectus, very aged, in extreme age.
            Aetate exacta, idem.
            
               Aetate integra, in the floure of youthe.
            
               Aetate prouecta, aged or of great age.
            
               Aetate anteire, to be elder.
            
               Aetatem meam me uiduam eſſe mauelim,
               Plautus. 
               quam iſtaec flagitia tua pati, quae tu facis, I had leauer be a wydowe all my lyfe, than to indure this trouble that I haue with the.
            
               Aetatem uelim ſeruire,
               Plautus. 
               Litanum modo ut conueniam, I wolde do ſeruice all the days of my lyfe, on the condition that I moughte mete with Litanus.
            
               Aetatis progreſſus, the courſe of age.
            
               Aetatis ſatis habere, to be olde ynough.
            
               Aetatem,
               Cice. pro Rabi. an aduerbe, ſignifyeng long time. Iam dudum aetatē lites ſunt inter eos, There hath bene variance betwene them long tyme.
            
               Aetatula, chyldehoode.
            
               Aeternè, euerlaſtyngly.
            
               Aeterno, are, to make perpetuall.
            
               Aeternus, euerlaſtynge.
            
               Aether, the fyrmament.
            
               Aethera, rae, the ayre.
            
               Aethra, ſignifieth the ſame.
            
               Aethereus, a, um, of the fyrmamente. Anaxas goras putteth it for the element of fyre.
            
               Aethiopia, a great countrey in Affrike, conteinyng many regions, callyd Aethiope, wherin be founde people, beaſtes, and ſerpentes of meruaylous forine. It hath on the weſte, the mountayns callid Athlantes, on the eaſt it extendeth to the marches of Egipt, on the ſouth it hath the ſea occian, on the north part, it is encloſed with the ryuer callyd Nilus.
            
               Aethiopem lauas, thou waſheſt a Moren, or Moore, A prouerbe applied to hym that praiſeth ❀a thyng that is nought, or teacheth a naturall foole wyſedom. This prouerb grew of one that bought a Mooren, and thynkynge that the blackeneſſe of his ſaynne happened by the neglygence of his fyrſte mayſter, he ceaſſed not to waſſhe the Mooren contynually with ſuche thinges, as he thought wold make hym whyte, by the whiche labour and waſhynge he ſo vexed the poore ſlaue, that he brought him into a great ſycknes, his ſkynne remainynge ſtyll as blacke as it was before.
            Aethiopicus, a, um, of Egypt.
            
            
               Aethiopiſſa, a woman of Egipt.
            
               Aethon, one of the horſes of Phebus.
            
               Aethruſci, the olde inhabyitantes of the countrey in Italy, callyd noweli. Tuſcana.
            
                
               Aetiologia, a reherſynge of the cauſe.
            
               Aerites,
               Dioſ. li. 5. a precyous ſtone founden in an egles neſt, whiche hath within it an other ſtone, as it were with yonge, whych maketh a ſound if the ſtone be ſhaken. If the bealy of a womā with chylde do falle downe lowe, this ſtone beinge hanged aboute the lefte arme, it retayneth the child, but if the womās time be com, and that ſhe dothe trauayle, than beinge taken away, and bounde to her thygh, ſhe ſhall be forthewith delyuered without any peyne. Alſo yf a piece of this ſtone be put into bread or a pouddynge, and gyuen vnto oone yf he be a thefe, it ſhall neuer paſſe or go throughe hym. Lykewyſe the brothe, wherin it is ſodden, yf a thiefe, or they, whiche be of counſayle with hym, do take it, he nor they may not ſwalowe it. Prepared with waxe and oyle of Cypres, it helpeth agaynſte the fallynge ſyckneſſe. Hermolaus Barbarus ſaith in Corolario, that excepte this ſtoone be taken out of the egles neſte, it hath no vertue in medicyne.
            
               Aetius, was the name of oone of Alexandria, whyche was bothe a great oratour and a noble phyſytion. Alſoo of an heretycke, whyche affyrmed, that noo ſynne, howe greatte ſoo euer 
                  〈◊〉
                were, ſhoulde be reputed to hym that ha
                  ••
               e faythe. He ſucceded immediately after Artius, the yere after the Incarnation of Chriſte. 358.
            
               Aetna,
               Strab. li. 6. is a meruayllous hylle in Sycyle, at the foote whereof,Solinus. is a lyttelle towne of the ſame name, and there is alſoo woddes and trees of dyuerſe kyndes planted. On the toppe thereof is a barayne grounde, myxte with aſſhes, and in the wynter tyme coueryd with ſnowe, whyche conteyneth in cyrcuyte twenty furlonges, whyche fylde is enuyronned with a bank of aſhes, of the height of a walle. In the myddell is alſo a rounde hylle of the ſame coloure and mattier, that the reſydewe is. Wherein be two greatte hooles faſſhyoned lyke vnto cuppes, and they be callyd Crateres. Oute of the whyche ryſeth ſommetyme ſundrye greatte flames of fyre, ſommetyme horryble ſmooke, ſommetyme are blowen oute bournynge ſtones in infynyte numbers. More ouer, before that the ſayde fyre appereth, there is harde within the grounde terryble noyſe and rorynge in dyuers horryble ſowndes. And alſo, whyche is more meruayle, whanne the ſmoke and fyre is moſt abundāt and feruent, yet rounde about the toppe of the ſayd hyll, are alway ſene ſnowe and hore froſtes. Plinius writeth, that the fyre appereth alwaye et nyghte. lib. 2. cap. 109. This hylle is nowe callyd Gibello monte.
            
            
               Aetolia, a region in Grece betwene Acarnaniam and Phocida.
            
               Aetolus, a man of Aetolia.
            
               Aeuitas, eternitie.
            
               Aeuum, longe or euerlaſtynge tyme.
         
         
            ¶A ANTE F.
            
               AFer, or Apher, a man borne in Affryke.
            
               Affabilis, a manne eaſye to be ſpoken vnto.
            
               Affabilitas, gentylneſſe in hearynge, courteſy.
            
               Affabre, counnyngly, craftily workemanly.
            
               Affabrum, counnyngly or craftily wrought.
            
               Affaniae, tryfles, thynges of ſmall eſtimation.
            
               Affatim, abundauntly.
            
               Affatus, ſpoken vnto.
            
               Affecta,
               Suet. in Veſp. almoſte fynyſhed, or nygh at a poynt.
            
               Affecta fides, credence almoſte loſte.
            
               Affectata oratio, a curyouſe fourme of ſpeakynge.
            
               Affectate, curyouſely, with to moch diligence.
            
               Affectatio, curioſitie.
            
               Affectio,
               Cicero. affection, ſomtyme trouble of mynde.
            
               Affecto, aui, are, to ſeke effectually, to trouble, whan it is put with damno, or other lyke.
            
               Affecta aeſtas, ſommer well nygh paſſed.
            Affector,Varro. aris, idem quod Affecto.
            
               Affectum bellum,
               Cicero. warres nygh at a poynt.
            
               Affectus, a, um, troubled or vexed.
            
               Affectus, ctus, ui, & affectio, affection or naturall motion, as gladneſſe, deſyre, and ſuche lyke.
            
               Affectus morbo,
               Plautus. vexed with ſyckenes.
            
               Affectus uirgis, beaten with roddes.
            Affero, fers, attuli, afferre, to brynge to.
            
            
               Affero ad te ſalutem, I come to ſalute you.
            
               Afferre auxilium, to helpe, to ayde.
            
               Afferre dentes,
               Varro de re ruſt. to byte.
            
               Afferre manus, to ſet vyolent handes on one.
            
               Afferre molestiam, to do dyſpleaſure to one.
            
               Afferre morbum, to make ſycke.
            
               Afferre pedem,
               Catullus. to come. Abite, unde malum, pedem attuliſtis, Go hens from whenſe with a myſchiefe ye came.
            
               Afferre uim alicui, to make aſſault on one.
            
               Afficio, eci, ere, to moue affection or dyſpoſytion eyther to good or to yll.
            
               Afficere bonis nuncijs,
               Plautus. to brynge good tydynges. Vti bonis uos, ueſtros
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   omnes, nū
                  cijs me afficere uultis, As ye will that I bring to you and yours good tydynges.
            
               Afficere cura, to brynge in care.
            
               Afficere lucro, to make oone to wynne or gayne.
            
               Afficere ſtipendio,
               Plautus. to pay to him his wages.
            
               Affecit eum laetali uulnere, he gaue to hym his deathes wounde.
            
               Affecit praeda at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   agro populares ſuos,
               Cicero. He
 his countreye menne ryche bothe of landes and goodes.
            
               Afficit me dolore, it maketh me ſorye.
            
               Afficit me gaudio, it maketh me gladde.
            
               Affici, to be moued with affection.
            
               Affigo, gere, to nayle to, or faſten.
            
               Affigere literas pueris, to make chylderne kunne by harte.
            
               Affingere aliquid alicui, to lye or make a lye on one.
            
               Affines, in fyeldes betokeneth adioynynge: in men it betokeneth alyaunce by maryage.
            
               Affinis negotijs publicis, he that meddleth with the affayres of a commynaltie.
            
               Affinis rei capitalis, gyltie of a great offence, which deſerueth deathe.
            
               Affinis ſceleris, guyltie of the treſpas.
            
               Affinitas, atis, affinitie, alyaunce.
            
               Affinitate attingere, to be of alyaunce to one.
            
               Affirmatio, affyrmaunce.
            
               Affirmatiue, with an affirmance.
            Affirmo, aui, are, to affirme.
            
            
               Afflare, to blowe wynde.
            
               Afflari ſydere, to be blaſted, as corne and flowres of trees ſometyme ben.
            
               Afflatus, tus, a blaſte.
            
               Affleo,
               Plautus. 
               fleui, flere, to wepe in the remembrāce of a thynge.
            
               Afflictare, to tourment hym ſelfe contynually.
            
               Afflictatio, puniſhmēt of the body with ſiknes
            
               Afflictus,
               Saluſt. ſtryken downe to the grounde.
            
               Affligo, flixi, gere, to throwe or beate downe to the grounde. alſo to punyſhe.
            
               Affligam te ad terram ſcelus,
               Plautus. 
               ſi me uno digito attigeris, I wyll beate the downe to the grounde wretche, yf thou towcheſt me but with one fynger.
            Affluens, tis, aboundaunte.
            
            
               Affluenter, aboundantly.
            
               Affluentia, aboundaunce.
            
               Affluo, xi, ere, to ouerflowe or abounde.
            
               Affodere, to dygge and laye more grounde to that we haue.
            
               Affor, fari, to ſpeake to one.
            
               Affore, to be here or preſēt. Hanc affore biduo. that ſhe be here within theſe two dayes.
            
               Afformido, are, to before aferde.
            
               Affrica, the thyrde parte of the worlde, wherin is Carthage, Numidia, and all the countreys now callid Barbary, and alſo the great countrey called Aethiopia.
            
               Affricanus, a man of Affrike. Alſo the moſt noble capitayne Scipio was callyd Affricanus bycauſe he ſubdewed that countreye to the Romaynes.
            
               Affrico, aui, uel ixi, are, to rub againſt a thing.
            
               Affrictus, ta, tum, rubbed agaynſt a thyng.
            Affricus, a, um, of Affryke.
            
            
               Affricus uentus, the ſouth wynde.
            
               Affrio, aui, are, to grate or breake ſmalle one thynge with an other.
            
               Affulgeo,
               Liuius. 
               si, gere, to ſhyne agaynſte a thynge. alſo to happen with gladneſſe. Sardiniae recipiendae repentina ſpes affulſit, A ſodayne hope ioyouſely hapned, that Sardinia ſhuld be recouered.
            
               Affundo, fudi, fundere, to ſhedde lycoure on a thynge.
            ❀ A fronte & a tergo, before and behynde. Sommetyme it is taken for a prouerbe, applyed to theym, whiche doo beholde thinges paſſed, with thoſe thynges whiche may happen. Alſoo the tyme paſſed, with the tyme commynge.
         
         
            ¶A ANTE G.
            
               AGabus, an Hebrewe name, which ſignifieth in latyne locuſta, a flye that dyſtroyeth corne. alſo Feſtiuitas patris, the myrthe of the father.Act. 11. &. 21. Of this name was a prophet in the tyme of the apoſtles, which prophecied of an vnyuerſall famyn to come, and that ſaynt Poule ſhulde be bounden, and put in gyues.
            
               Agag, is a worde of Hebrewe, which may be interpreted a ſolar in the vppermoſt parte or the houſe.Reg. 1. cap. 15. Of that name was a kynge of Amalech, the fatteſt of all men, whom Saule kynge of Iewes toke in battayle, and ſlewe hym not, as god had commanded, and therfore was God greuouſelye dyſpleaſed with Saule, as he declared by the prophete Samuel, whyche ſhewed vnto Saul, that God more requyred the obedience of his commā
               dementes, than ſacrifyce. And than Samuel dyd there cutte in pieces the ſayd fatte Aga
                  •
                in the preſence of God in Galgalis.
            
               Agallochum, mencyoned by Dyoſcorides, ſemeth by the deſcription therof to be the ſoote wood, callyd nowe Lignum aloes.
            
            
               Agamemnon, was ſonne of Atreus, and kyng of Mycenae, who in the preparation of the Grekes agaynſt the Troyans, for his wyſedome and magnanymytie, was by the conſente of all the Greekes, choſen of theym to be theyr generall capytayne. And accordynge to theyr expectations, he mooſte nobly gouernyd hym ſelfe, and that mooſte puyſſaunt armye, durynge the ſiege of Troye by the ſpace of tenne yeres. But beynge retourned to his owne royalme, and hauynge with hym Caſſandra, daughter of Pryamus kynge of Troye, his wyfe Clytemneſtra conſpyryng with Aegiſtus, with whom ſhe hadde lyued in aduoultrye, cauſyd her ſayde noble huſbande to putte on a garment, whyche hadde noo yſſue out for his heade,
 than Aegiſtus prepared for that pourpoſe, whyles he was ſtrugglyng therewith, ſtrake hym through with his ſworde, and ſoo ſlewe hym. And thus that noble prince, after that he had eſcaped the moſte dangerous warres, the valiāt hādes of Hector and his brethern, the manyfolde ſtormes and peryls of the ſea, wherein he had trauayled by the ſpace of one yere, finally in his owne proper royalme, by treaſon of them whom he moſt truſted, was ſhamefully murdred. Suche is the vnſuretye of this wretched worlde. He was afore the Incarnation of our lorde about .1194. yeres.
            
               Agamneſtor, was a kyng of Athenes.
            
               Aganae, was a noble woman, the daughter of Cadmus, who ſlew her owne ſonne Penthea kynge of Thebes, fynding hym in the mooſte laſcyuious and abhominable ceremonies of Bacchus, callyd Bacchanalia. A notable exaumple of a paynym ladye, who onely by the honeſtye of her nature, withoute knowledge of the lawes of god, beynge meued ſoo vehementely agaynſt dyſhoneſt wantonnes, to punyſhe her owne ſonne, excluded frome her all motherly pitie, rather wyllynge to haue her ſonne deade, than to lyue abhomynably.
            
               Aganippe, pes, a fountayne in a countreye of Grece, callyd Aonia, whyche was dedycate vnto the Muſes, whereof they be callyd Aganippides.
            
            
               Agapis, is a ſtone of the colour of ſaffron, the vertue whereof is to cure the ſtyngynge of ſcorpyons and ſerpentes, yf it be layde to the wounde.
            
               Agar, the mayden of Sara, on whome Abraham begatte Iſmael.
            
               Agareni,
               Paral. 1. cap. 5. a people which were al dyſtroyed by Saul kynge of Iewes.
            
               Agaſo, onis, a horſekeper or mulettout.
            
               Agatho, the name of one of the ſonnes of Priamus. alſo a boy whom Plato loued.
            
               Agathocles, a kynge of Sicyle, whyche was the ſonne of a potter, and by ſubtylle wytte and boldeneſſe of courage, grewe by ſundrye dygnyties at laſte to be kynge. And than becamme ſuche a tyraunt, that he ſlewe all the noble menne, the counſayllours and lerned menne of Sycyle, and deſpoyled all the ryche menne. Fynallye, he beynge attached in all the partes of his bodye, with incredyble tourmentes, and a peſtylencyalle humour, frettynge all his ſynewes, he contynuyng longe tyme in ſuche peines, at the laſte dyed.
            
               Agathyrſus, was one of the ſonnes of Hercules, whiche dwellid in a part of Scithia, and callid the people after his name, Agathyrſi, whiche in ſuche wiſe paynted theym ſelues, that the colour moughte not by any meanes be waſhed or putte away, and therfore they were callyd Picti Agathyrſi. And ſome men do ſuppoſe, that the auncient inhabytauntes of the ſouth parte of Scotlande, ioynyng to the marches of Englande, whiche were callyd Picti, were of the ſayde people callyd Athyrſi.
            
            
               Agdiſtis,
               Leonicus. li. 1. ca. 37. the Grekes feined to be a dyuel come of the ſede of Iupiter, whiche felle from hym whan he ſlepte. Who had bothe membres of a man and woman, of whom other dyuels beynge aferde, they dyd cut of the mans inſtrument, and threw it away, wherof dyd ſpring an almond tree, and brought forth almondes whan tyme ſerued.
            
               Age, goo to, take hede.
            
               Age, age, well well. Age, age ut luber, Well, goo to, do what ye 
                  •
               yſt.
            
               Age dicat, lette hym ſpeake on, lette hym ſpeake hardyly.
            
               Age, & agite, go forth, forth on, or tell on.
            
               Agedum, go to yet.
            
               Agea, a way in a ſhyppe.
            
               Agelaſtus, he that dothe neuer laugh.
            
               Agellus, a lyttell fielde.
            
               Agenor, a kyng of Phoenicia, ſonne of Balus, and father of Europa, whom Iupiter rauiſhed, and of Cadmus, who buylded the cytie of Thebes.
            
               Agendicum, a countrey in France callyd now Prouynce or Prouance.
            
               Ager, agri, a fielde. ſomtyme it ſignifieth a territory belongyng to a towne, wherin is included fieldes, medowes, woddes, and waters. Somtime a manour with the demeanes, ſomtyme the arable fielde onely.
            
               Agere,
               Plautus. to here, to perceyue. Vos agite ſpectatores, ye that behold, here, or take hede. Hoccine agis, an non? Perceyueſt thou this matter or no?Terentiꝰ. alſo to conclude. Herus me relictis rebus, iuſsit Pamphilum hodie obſeruare ut quid ageret de nuptiis, ſcirem, My maiſter hath commanded me, that layeng al thynges aparte, I ſhulde awayte vpon Pamphilus, to the intent I myght knowe, what he wolde conclude touchyng the maryage.Terent. Alſo to goo. Quo hinc te agis? Whyther goeſt thou from henſe? Somtyme it ſignifyeth to come. Vnde agis te nunc Dorpale? From whenſe comeſt thou nowe Dorpalus?
            
               Agere aetatem, to lyue.
            
               Agere ad praeſcriptum, to doo that, that he was appoynted.
            
               Agere ambages, to go about the buſhe, or to tell a lengar tale than nedeth.
            
               Agere aliquem,
               Plin. in Panegy. to purſue one.
            
               Agere amicum, to do lyke a frende, or play the parte of a frende.
            
               Agere apologum, to tell hym a fable.
            
                
               Aliud agere, to thynke on an other thynge.
            
               Animam agere, to be in the poynt of deathe.
            Agere cauſam, to pleade.
            
            
               Agere caudam,
               Plautus. to wag his tayle.
            
               Agere conuentus, to holde a parlyament.
            Agere cuniculos, to vndermine.
            
            
               Agere cum aliquo, to treat with one, or to ſpeake.Cicero. 
               Cum mecum ſaepe ageres, ut de amicitia ſcriberē, where often times thou diddeſt intreate, that I ſhulde wryte of frendeſhyp.Plautus. 
               Illo praeſente, mecum agito, ſi quid uoles. If thou wylte any thynge with me, ſpeke it in the preſence of that man.
            Agere diris malis, to curſe.
            
            
               Agere de pace, to treat of peace.
            
               Agere delectum, to choſe men, as in mowſters for the warre.
            
               Agere equum, to ſpur his horſe.
            
               Agere ex inſidijs, to do a thynge by treaſon, or martiall polycy.
            Agere ex ſponſo, uel ex ſponſu, to brynge an action of couenaunt.
            
            
               Agere ex ſyngrapha, to brynge an action of det vpon an obligation.
            
               Agere fabulam, to playe in a comedye, tragedy, or enterlude.
            
               Agere frondem, to put oute leaues, ſpoken of a tree.
            
               Agere furti, to appeale one of felony.
            Agere gemmas, to bourgen.
            
            Agere inter-homines, to lyue.
            
            
               Agere iniuriarum, to ſue oone for treſpas or wronges done.
            
               Agere lege, to ſue, to procede by the order of the lawe.
            
               Agere menſuras fideliter, to meaſure thynges iuſtely.
            
               Agere morem, to vſe for a cuſtome.
            
               Agere nugas,
               Cicero. to mocke, to trifle.
            
               Agere orationem, to pronounce an oration.
            Agere poenam ab aliquo, to punyſhe one.
            
            
               Agere primas partes, to be the chiefe perſonage.
            
               Agere radicem, to take rote.
            
               Agere reum, to ſue one in the lawe.
            
               Agere ſummo iure, to procede with rigour.
            
               Agere ſuo iure, to execute his auctoritie.
            
               Agere uineas, to laye ordinaunce to a thing.
            
               Agit uigeſimum annum, he is .xx. yeres old.
            
               Pectus mihi agit nunc cubito,
               Plautus. She hytteth me on the harte with her elbowe.
            Quo hinc te agis? whither wylte thou?
            
            
               Agunt adoleſcentiam, they occupie youthe.
            
               Ageſilaus, was kynge of Lacedemonia, which from his chyldhod was of excellent vertues, as in trouth, iuſtice, temperance, noble courage, liberalitie, and contin
                  ••
               e. Wherfore he was ſo moche honored, and proſpered ſoo wel, that he ſubdued to the Lacedemonians, innumerable cities and cuntreys in Aſia and Grece. whan one demaunded a thing of him, whiche was vniuſte, ſayinge, that he hadde promyſed it, he aunſwered: If it were iuſte, I promiſed it, but if it were vniuſt, I ſpake it, but I promiſed it not. Whan the Lacedemonians had gyuen to hym the treſour of Agis, whiche was kynge before hym, as ſone as he had receyued it, he incontinent dyd diſtribute it to them, whom he perceyued and knewe to be pooreſt. whan it was demanded of hym, why he laye no more rychelye than a priuate perſonne, he anſwered: that a prynce ought to excell other men, not in delycacy, but in temperaunce and moderate lyuynge. He ſpake with no woman, excepte his wyfe, but eyther in the temple, or afore al men, thinking thoſe two places to be voyde of ſuſpition, the one for holyneſſe, the other for multitude of wytneſſes. vndoubtedly the lyfe of this man was wonderfull.
            
               Ageſis, go to hardely, go to on goddis name.
            
               Agger, eris, a hepe of ſtones or tourfse. alſo a bulwarke, or a countremure to a fortreſſe or campe in battayle. ſometyme it ſygnifieth a caulſey.
            Aggero, aui are, to heape vp.
            
            
               Aggero, ſsi, gerere, to lay on a heape. alſo to brynge to one.Plautus. 
               Nam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ecaſtor, amor & melle & felle eſt foecundiſsimus, guſtu dat dulce, amarum uſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad ſacietatem aggerit: For in good fayth, loue hath abundance bothe of hony and galle, in taſte it is pleaſant, but it bryngeth with it bytterneſſe, ſo moch that it becommeth lotheſome.
            
               Aggeus, a worde of Hebrewe, in englyſſhe mery, ſolemne, or compacyng. It was the name of a prophete, one of the .xii. whiche propheſyed in the tyme of Zorobabel kynge of the Iewes, about a. 550. yeres afore the incarnation of Chryſte.
            
               Agglomero, are, to make vp on a heape, by addynge to.
            Agglutino, aui, are, to ioyne together.
            
            
               Aggrauatio, a griefe, a burdon.
            
               Aggraueſco, ſcere, to waxe more greuous.
            
               Aggrauo,aui, are, to be burdenous or chargeable. alſo to aggrauate or make a thyng more greuous.
            
               Aggredior, gredi, to go to, or come to, to inuade, to aſſayle, to begyn, to attempt.
            Aggrego, aui, are, to gather together.
            
            Aggreſsio, loke in Aggredior.
            Aggretus, idem quod Aggreſſus.
            
               Agilis, nymble, or lyghte.
            
               Agilitas, nymblenes, derteritie.
            
               Agiliter, lyghtly, nymbly, quickely, quiuerly.
            
               Agilla, an olde towne in Thuſcane.
            
               Agina, wherin the beame of a payre of balaunce
 
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                is hanged.
            
               Aginator, he that is meued with a littel gayn.
            
               Aginor,
               Cicero. 
               nari, to marchandiſe vyle thynges, or of ſmall value.
            
               Aginnū, the cuntrey of Angoleſme in Fraunce.
            
               Agiographa, bokes of holy ſcrypture.
            
               Agis rem actam, thou leſeſt thy labour. the thynge is done to thy hande.
            
               Agit rem ſuam, he gothe aboute his owne buſines.
            
               Agit hic perpetuum diem ſol,
               Plautus▪
                the ſonne ſhyneth here all the day longe.
            
               Agito, are, to intreate well, to go, to do often, to prycke, to compel, to trouble, to perſecute, to vexe, to conſyder, to reuolue, to ſolicite.
            
               Iam calcari quadrupedē agitabo aduerſum cliuum,
               Plautus. Nowe wyll I with a ſpur make my horſe runne vp the hyll.
            
               Agitare conuiuium, to bankette and make good chiere.Plautus. 
               Age ergo, hoc agitemus conuiuium, uino, & ſermone ſuaui: Therfore go to, let vs banket, drynke, talke, and make good chere.
            
               Agitare cuſtodiam,
               Plautus. to take good hede in kepynge of one.
            
               Agitare cum animo,
               Saluſt. to reuolue in the mind.
            
               Agitare diem,
               Plautus. to paſſe forth the daye.
            
               Agitare feras, to courſe wylde beaſtes.
            
               Agitare imperium, to gouerne. In pace uero, beneficijs magis quam metu imperium agitabant. In the tyme of peace, they gouerned more by gentylnes than by feare.
            
               Agitare iuſtitiam,
               Plinius in epiſt. to exercyſe iuſtyce.
            
               Agitare letitiam, to make ioye.
            
               Agitare mente, to conceyue in the mynde, to thynke.
            
               Agitare praeſidium,
               Saluſt. to be in garriſon.
            
               Agitare uigilias,
               Saluſt. to kepe watche.
            Agitare uitam, to lyue.
            
            
               Agitatio, a me
                  •
               yng or ſtyrryng: alſo exerciſe.
            
               Agitator, a dryuer of a carte, or of beaſtes.
            
               Agitur de capite, aut de fama, he is in dangier of his lyfe, or of his credence.
            
               Bene mecum agitur,
               Val. Max. de militia Terent. I am wel at eaſe, I am well content, or I am in good condition.
            
               Agitur res capitis, the queſtion or matter in debate, concerneth lyfe.
            
               Aglaia, one of the thre Gracis, whiche is interpreted bryghtnes, clerenes, beaultie, pleaſure, or maieſtie.
            
               Aglauros, was a mayden, which was daughter to Eritheus, kynge of Athenes: whome Ouidius fayneth to be turned by Mercurius vnto a ſtone.
            
               Agmen, an hoſt of men. ſomtyme a violence, a courſe of water.
            
               Agminalis, perteyninge to an hoſte.
            
               Agnaſcentia membra, members whiche are ſuperfluous, as were 
                  •
               one hath thre legges, or ſyxe fyngers on one hande, and other lyke.
            
               Agnati, kynſmen of the fathers ſyde.
            
               Ad agnatos, & gentiles deduci, to be commytted to his kynſfolke, as madde men were by the lawe ciuile: wherof was made a prouerbe, applyed to them, whiche do all thynges madly and without circumſpection.
            Ad agnatos & gentiles deducantur.❀
            
               Agnatū, that which is in byrthe more than the cōmon courſe of nature vſeth to bryng forth.
            
               Agnellus, a yonge lambe.
            Agnitio, knowledge.
            
            
               Agnomen, the ſurname that I haue by my father.
            
               Agnoſco, noui, noſcere, to knowe, to recogniſe, or knowledge.
            
               Agnos, is a tree, which is a kynde of wyllow, and is commonly called Agnus caſtus, in englyſſhe parke leaues, it hath leaues lyke to wyllowe, but that they be alwaye grene, and hath not ſo ſwete a ſmell, and floures fyrſte purple, and after whyte, and a ſede lyke pepper. There is an other kynde therof, whiche hath more braunches, the leaues whiter, and ſomewhat moſy, and the floure purple. Both of them do growe about ryuars. It is called Agnos, whiche is in englyſhe chaſt, for it is ſayde, that if a man or woman haue it about them, or vnder theyr beddes, it ſhall kepe them chaſte.
            
               Agnus, a lambe.
            
               Ago, egi, agere, to do, to leade, to dryue, to labour, to here, to ſpeke, to pronounce, to fain, to go. Nudi agunt, they go naked. to extend or ſprede, Radices agunt,
               Pom. M
                     •
                  
                they ſprede theyr rootes. to treate of a thynge, to gyue.
            
               Ago gratias, I giue thankes to bring forth. alſo to expell, Venena membris agit, It expelleth poyſon out of the members.
            
               Agolum, a ſtaffe to dryue cattell with.
            
               Agon, onis, a contention in furme of battaile, or a wraſtlynge: alſo the place where it was exerciſed.
            
               Agonalia, certayne feſtiuall dayes kept amōg the Romaynes.
            
               Agonenſis porta, a gate of Rome, called▪ alſo Colina.
            
               Agônes, were ſometyme called hylles.
            
               Agônia, feare and heuynes, or vexation of mynde. Alſo ſacrifice done on hylles.
            
               Agoniſma, the rewarde of vyctory.
            
               Agoniſta, a champion.
            
               Agonius, was named a god, whiche had preemynence ouer thynges to be done.
            Agonizo, aui, are, to contende, or fyghte valyantely.
            
            
               Agonotheta, 
               
                  〈◊〉
                that makith a common game, and payeth the rewarde to theym that doo wynne it.
            
                
               Agoraeus, a market mā, a haunter of markets
            
               Agoreus, was an ymage of Mercurius, whiche was in Pharis a citie of Achaia, ſet in the myddell of the market place, out of the whiche ydoll, the dyuell gaue aunſweres in fourme folowynge.Leonicus de uaria hiſtoria. li. 1. cap. 36. Before the feete of the ydoll was an aultar of ſtone, whervnto were bounden with leade, certayn lampes of bras, He that cam for an anſwere, burned franken ſence on the aultar, and made his prayers, and after poured oyle into the lampes, & dyd put in to the ydolles hande a piece of money of that countrey, whiche was of braſſe, and than ſecretly whiſpered in the ymages eare what ſo euer he wolde demaunde, and forthwith ſtoppynge his owne eares with bothe his handes, went out of the markette place, and than opened is eares, and what voyce he harde fyrſte, he toke it for a ſure counſayl in all thynges that he wolde do.
            
               Agoranomus, he that ſetteth the pryce of vittayle, a taſker.
            
               Agraria lex, a lawe made for the common diſpoſition of landes, as be our ſtatutes of incloſures and decayenge of huſbandry: but amonge the Romaynes they were ſuch lawes as dyd appoynt, howe moche lande a ſenatour ſhulde haue, and not excede, and howe moche ſhulde be deuyded amonge the people.
            
               Agrarius, a landed man, Alſo he that fauoureth the lawes that be made for the orderyng of poſſeſſions.
            
               Agrarius, a, um, perteyninge to landes or poſſeſſions.
            
               Agreſtis, e, wyld, growen without culture. Alſo he that is rude and beaſtely without gentyll maners.
            
               Agricola, a huſbande man
            
               Agricolator, the ſame.
            
               Agricolatio, tyllage, or huſbandry.
            
               Agricultor, an huſband man.
            
               Agricultura, huſbandry.
            
               Agrigentinus, a, um, of the towne of Agrigentum.
            
               Agrigentum, a citie in Sicil, which the Grekes do call Acragaritem, and the countreye Acragen. The people there buylded ſumptuouſly, and fed delycatly. And therfore Plato ſayde of them in bourde: The Agrygentines dyd buyld as they ſhulde lyue euer, and dyd eate as they ſhulde alway dye. Of this citie and countrey was prynce Phaleris the moſte cruell tyrant, of whom ſhall be ſpoken in the letter P.
            
               Agrimonia, an herbe called commonly in englyſhe Egrymoyn, is the ryght Eupatorium, as it appereth as well by the deſcription of Dioſcorides, as by the affyrmaunce of May nardus, Antonius Muſa, and other mooſte excellent phiſitions of this tyme. The dec
                  •
               
               ction of this herbe, or the poulder therof dryed, is an excellent remedy agaynſte oppylations of the lyuer by reaſon of fleume. It is hot in the fyrſte degree, and drye in the ſecōd.
            
               Agripetae, they that doo aſke theyr portion in diuiſion of landes.
            
               Agrippa,
               Ioſephus antiq. was the name of ſundry kynges, of whom one was moſte excellent, the ſonne of Ariſtobolus kynge of Iewes, which was by Tiberius the emperour caſt in priſon, where he liued miſerably the ſpace of .vi. monthes, And afterwarde Tiberius beinge deade, the emperour Caius Caligula toke hym ſodenly out of pryſon, and made him kynge of iewes, ſettynge a crowne of golde on his heade, and for the chayne of yron, wherwith he was boū
               den, he gaue to hym a chayne of golde of like weyght. So from extreme miſery, he ſodainly came to hyghe proſperitie. and beinge retourned in to his countrey, at the fyrſte liued honorably, and dyd many good dedes, and dyd amplyate and adorne the citie of Hieruſalem with buyldynges moſte magnifikelye. But at the laſte, beinge eleuate in pryde, and ſufferynge hym ſelfe to be honored and wondred at as god, ſyttynge in a hyghe trone in the citie of Cacſaria, apparailed in glyſtring golde, ſodeynlye he was ſtryken with an angel in the preſence of an infynite number of people, wherwith his body ſwelled, and wormes iſſued out therof with intollerable peynes, and horrible ſtenche. In the whiche tormentes he loked on his flatterynge counſaylours and ſeruantes, and ſayde: Lo I whom ye called a god, am nowe in the peynes of deathe. And in this wyſe he dyed, whan he was of the age of .lvii. yeres. A very notable and perpetuall myrrour to all them, whiche flowe in proſperitie, forgettynge them ſelfes to be mortall, reioyſynge in the commendation of flatterers.
            
               Agrippae, they which be borne with theyr fete forwarde.
            
               Agrippina, the mother of Nero the emperour, whoo was daughter of the noble Germanicus, and ſuſter to Caius Caligula, emperour after Tiberius, was fyrſte maryed to a noble man called Gneus Domitius, by whom ſhe had Nero, who after was emperor. After the deth of Domitius, her brother Caligula abuſed her as his cōcubine: & after his deth, Claudius beinge emperour, whan he hadde cauſed his wyfe Meſſalina to be ſlayne, for her moſte abhominable avoutrics, he toke this Agrippina to wyfe, for her excellente beaultie, who afterwarde by her crafty and ſhrewde wytte cauſed her huſbande Claudius to mary his daughter called Octauia, to
 her ſon Nero, and alſo to make hym companiō in the ſucceſſion of the Empire with his ſon called Britannicus. And leſt Britannicus in the lyfe of his father ſhoulde growe to the ſtate of a man, and be able to receyue the empyre incontinent 
                  ••
               er his deceſſe, and expell her ſonne Nero: He fyrſte poyſoned her huſbande Claudius, and afterwarde his ſonne Britannicus: But her falſehoode, abhomynation, and crueltie was not left vnpuniſhed. for ſoone after, her owne ſonne Nero, notwithſtandynge that he ioyned her with hym in equall autoritie, and as ſome men ſuppoſed, abuſed her carnally, hauyng her in moſt mortal hate, cauſed her to be put into a barge vpon the ryuer of Tyber vnder the colour of ſolace, ouer the whiche barge was hanged great poyſes, whiche ſodeynlye ſhoulde haue ben letten fall to haue kylled her: and alſo in the barge were certayne holes cloſed for the tyme, whiche beinge open, the veſſell ſhulde haue ſunken. But fortune at that tyme other wyſe prouyded for her, for the poyſes fel not on her, but on other and ſlewe them, and the barge beinge ſunke, ſhe ſwam to lande, and for that tyme eſcaped. wherof Nero heryng, ſent a capitayne with an hundred men to ſlee her, who entrynge in to the houſe, where ſhe was repoſynge her ſelfe, withoute any warnynge ſtrake her on the head, but ſhe holding forth her bealy, cryed, ſtryke here, ſtrike here the place, whiche bare the monſter of the worlde. By this ſtory it maye appere, that of an yll mother cam an vngratious ſonne, and that the ende of falſehoode and crueltie, was vengeance agaynſt nature and al humanitie.
            
               Agrippina, mother of the ſaid Agrippina, was doughter of M. Agrippa, and wyfe to Germanicus, whom Tiberius by the commandment of Octauiā had declared to be his heire apparant to the Empire, and not withſtandynge was afterwarde poyſoned by conſent of Tiberius: for whoſe deathe the ſayde Agrippina toke ſuche heuineſſe, that ſhe determyned to dye. wherfore ſhe abſteyned frome all meates and drynkes, and notwithſtandynge that the Emperour Tiberius cauſed meate to be put in to her throte, ſhe wold not receyue it, but in that voluntary abſtynence fynally dyed.
            
               Agrippina Colonia, the citie of Coleyne in Germany.
            
               Agyeus, a ſurname of Apollo.
            
               Ah, a voyce of lamentynge or ſorowynge.
            
               Ahenum, a pot to heate in drynke.
            
               Ahenus, a veſſell of whyte braſſe or copper, whiche is bryght bothe within and without.
         
         
            A ANTE I
            
               AIAX, the ſonne of Thelamon by Heſione, daughter of Laomedon kynge of Troy, was the ſtrongeſt man of al the Greekes nexte to Achilles. But after that Achilles was ſlayne, whan Aiax contended with Vliſſes for the armoure of Achilles, and that Vlyſſes by force of his eloquence opteyned sentence on his parte of the iudges: Aiax becam mad, and in his fury ſlewe manye beaſtes, ſuppoſynge that they had ben Vlyſſes and his company. There was alſo an other prynce called Aiax, ſonne of Oileus, and kynge of the Locrenſis in Grece, who was wonderfull ſwyfte and expert in handiynge a ſpeare: This man whan Troy was ſacked, dydde violate the noble virgin Caſſandra in the Temple of Pallas. wherfore as he returned homewarde, on the ſea, he and his ſhippes were burned with lightnynge. he was before the incarnation. 1190. yeres.
            
               Ailoth,
               3. Reg. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                was a citie in Iudea buylded by Ozias kynge of Iewes.
            
               Ain,
               Terent. for aiſne, is it as thou ſayeſt? Ain uero, idem.
            
            
               Aio, ais, ait, I ſaye, thou ſayeth, he ſayeth. Aiunt, they ſaye.
            
               Aioth, was the ſecond iudge of the Hebrews, a man of great ſtrength and valyant of courage, and had equal ſtrength and aptneſſe in bothe handes. This man ſlewe Eglon kinge of Moabites, by this meanes. Whan Eglon had longe tyme warred on the iewes, and taken from theym dyuerſe cities, and kepte them in moche myſerye, this Aioth came to hym to Hierico, bryngynge vnto hym certain preſentes, whiche lyked hym well, and deſyred to ſpeake with hym priuely, whiche was graunted vnto hym. And all other being cō
               maunded to auoyde, Aioth ſodeynlye ſtrake Eglon vnto the harte twyſe, the laſte tyme with ſuche puiſſaunce, that the knyfe with the hyltes remayned in the wounde, and Aioth ſo leauynge hym dead, departed without ſuſpition, and came to his people, and declared what he had done. who being gladde, armed theym, and fell on the Moabites, and ſlewe of them ten thouſand, and draue al the reſydue out of theyr countrey. And ſo the Iewes beinge delyuered by the wyſedome and vertue of Aioth, they made hym theyr iudge or prynce, who gouerned them peaſablye. 80 yeres, and dyed a very olde man in moch honour, before the incarnation of Chriſt about a. 1399. yeres.
            Aiutamini,Non 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               for adiuuate,
            
               Aizoon, an herbe called alſo Semper uiuum, barba Iouis, & Sedum, in englyſhe ſingrene
 or houſeleeke. There be therof thre kyndes, the more faſcioned lyke to a rounde tounge, growynge thycke to gether, the leaues thick and full of iuyce, and groweth on houſes or walles. An other is called the leſſe, and hath lyttell rounde leaues, and thycke, and is called in engliſh pricke ma 
                  •
               ame. An other there is, which is called Portulaca ſylueſtris, wild purſelane. Eueryche of them be colde in the thyrde degree.
         
         
            A ANTE L.
            
               ALA, lae, a wynge of a byrde, and a wynge of a battayle, whiche is properly of horſemen. ſomtyme a ſayle of a ſhyp. It is alſo the parte of the eare that is open. Moreouer Alae, be the noſe thrylles. Ala is alſo the piniō of the ſhulder of a beaſt
            
               Alabandae, a citie in Grece, in the countrey of Ionia.
            
               Alabandicus, a, um, of that citie.
            
               Alabandina, a ſtone redde, myxt with blue, it prouoketh bledynge.
            
               Alabarches, he that hath the rule ouer ſalte: & amonge the Egyptians it was an honourable name.
            Alabaſtrum, Alabreſtites, alabaſter.
            
            
               Alacer, cris, cre, quicke of ſpirite or of wytte, luſty of courage, mery, and he that lyueth in hope: properly he that is in a meane betwen glad and ſory. ſometyme it betokeneth a man redy and wyllynge, therof commeth Alacritas, redyneſſe or promptnes of wyll, alſo feruentneſſe of mynde.
            
               Alacrè, promptly, couragiouſely, gladly.
            
               Alacritas, chierfulnes, courage.
            Alacriter, idem quod Alacre.
            
               Alania, a region of Scithia in Europa which ſtretcheth vnto the great fennes of Meotis.
            
               Alani, people of Scithia, nyghe to the ryuer called Iſter or Danubius.
            
               Alapa, a blowe or ſtroke with the hande.
            
               Alaricus, kynge of Gothes, beſyeged Rome, and dydde put it to the ſacke, and burned it, the yere of our lorde. 408. in the which ſiege there was in the citie ſuche famyne, that the mothers for hungar were conſtrained to eate theyr owne chyldren. There was alſo an other Alaricus, whiche was vanguiſſhed by Clodoucus kyng of Fraunce, the yere of our lorde. 238. in whoſe tyme the part of Fraūce called Gallia Narbonenſis, and all Spayne were in the poſſeſſion of the Gothes.
            
               Alarij equites, horſemenne, whiche are in the wynges of a battayle.
            
               Alata Caſtra, a citie in Scotlande called Eden burgh, or the caſtell of maydens.
            Alatus, a, um, wynged.
            
            
               Alauda, dae, a larke. It was alſo the name of one of the legions of the Romaynes.
            
               Alauorſi, people in the vttermoſt parte of the Northe.
            
               Alba, a citie nyghe to Rome, which was builded by Aſcanius ſon of Aeneas. There was an other citie called Alba in Lumbardy.
            
               Albanenſes, were certayne heretykes in the yere of our lorde. 1120. This ſecte helde ſondry hereſies: One was that the ſoule of man after his deathe was put in to an other body. An other hereſye, that baptiſme was of no efficacy. The thyrde, that there were two goddes, oone good an other yll, of the good god proceded good thynges, of the yll god, yll thynges. The .iiii. that in hell were none other peynes than be in this worlde. The .v. that the generall iudgemente is paſſed, and that there is none to come. The .vi. that it is prohibited to al chriſten men to ſwere, and that it is not lefull for any manne to ſwere. The .vii. that man hath no free wyll, called in latine liberum arbitrium. The .viii. that the matter wherof the world was made, was not made of god, but is coeternal with god. The .ix. that there is no originall ſynne, and that chyldren be not borne in originall ſynne. Alſo that ſynne commeth not of free wyl, but of the dyuel. The.x. they denied that the bodyes of men ſhulde eftſones aryſe at the daye of iudgemente. The .xi. they abiecte all the olde teſtamente, as a vayne thynge, and of nonc autoritie.
            
               Albani, people of Alba in Italy.
            
               Albania, is a countrey in Aſia, hauyng on the eaſte the ſea called Caſpium, on the weſte Iberia, on the northe the hylles of Caucaſus. The people there were fyrſte poore, and lyued as ſhepeherdes, and were ſymple not knowyng money, nor any number aboue one hundred, but lyuyng by exchange, not knowynge weyght, meaſure, nor huſbandrye; but notwithſtandynge redy in warres. And honoured for goddes the ſonne and the moone, hauynge amonge them as Strabo wryteth .xxvi. languages. Of theſe people are ſuppoſed to come the Albanoiſes, whiche do nowe dwell in Morea, ſomtyme called Peloponeſus, whiche be nowe vnder the Turkes.
            
               Albanus, a ryuer not farre frome the citie of Rome. Alſo the name of two cities, one in Macedonia, the other in Armenia.
            
               Albanus, a, um, of Alban in Italy. Albani patres, the ſenatours of Albe.
            
               Albarium, the parget of a wall.
            
               Alba ſpina, Serapio ſuppoſeth it to be that whiche the Arabians call Bedeguar, ſome thynketh the contrary, and that it is a bremble growynge in hedges and dyches, hauinge
 floures whyte and of good ſauour. ſome ſuppoſe it to be a kynde of thyſtel ſquare and ful of pryckes.Anto. Muſa. Ruell.
            
            Albedo, Albetudo, Albor, whyteneſſe.
            
            
               Albegmina, parte of the inwarde of beaſtes, whiche was offred to Dis, called god of Hel.
            
               Albenſes, people of Alba in Lumbardy.
            
               Albeo, bui, bere, to be whyte.
            
               Albeſco, ſcere, to be whyte.
            
               Albeus, & Albeolus, a cheſſe bourde.
            
               Albi calculi, whyte ſtones, with whiche the people of Creta dyd note or marke the days, wherin they had good fortune: lyke as they marked yll dayes with blacke ſtones, called nigri calculi.
            
            
               Albia, a ryuer, whiche paſſeth through the realme of Boemia.
            
               Albicera, a kynde of olyue tree.
            
               Albiceratae ficus, brode figges with a ſmalle ſtalke.
            
               Albico, aui, are, to be whyte.
            Albidus, a, um, ſomwhat whyte.
            
            
               Albigenſes, were heretikes, whiche began by Tolouſe in Fraunce, the yere of our lorde.
120. which held the hereſyes of the Albanenſes, towchynge the ſoule, baptiſme, god, and the generall reſurrection. Moreouer that it was not leful for chryſten men to eate fleſhe.
            
               Albinga, a towne in Liguria.
            
               Albinus, the name of an emperour.
            
               Albion, was the moſte aunciente name of this yle, which conteyneth Englande and Scotlande: of the beginninge of the whiche name haue benne ſundrye opynions. One late fayned by hym whiche fyrſte prynted the Englyſh chronicle, wherin is neyther ſimilitude of trouth, reaſon, nor honeſtie: I meane the fable of the fyfty daughters of one Diocleci an kynge of Siria, where neuer any other hiſtorie made mencion of a kynge of Siria beinge ſo named. and alſo that name is greke and no part of the language of Siria. More ouer the commynge of them from Siria in a ſhyp or bote without any marinours thrugh the ſea called Mediterraneum, into the occean, and ſo fynally to fynde this yle, and to inhabite it, and haue generation by deuelles, is bothe impoſſible, and moche reproche for this noble royalme to aſcrybe her fyſte name and habitation, to ſuch inuentours. An other opinion there is, whiche hath a more hone ſte ſimilitude, which is, that it was named Albion, ab albis rupibus, of whyte rockes, bycauſe that vnto theym, whiche doo comme by ſea frome the eaſte or ſouthe, the bankes and rockes of this yle doo appere whyte. of this opinion haue I moſte meruaile, bycauſe it is wrytten of great lerned men. fyrſt for as moche as Albion is no latten word, nor hath the analogye, that is to ſaye, the proportion or ſimſlitude of latine. For who hath founde this ſyllable, on, at the ende of a latine worde. And if it ſhulde haue ben ſo called for the whyte colour of the rockes, men wolde haue called it, Alba, or Albus, or Album. And yet in Italye were townes called Alba, and in Aſia a countrey called Albania, and neither the one nor the other toke theyr begynnynge of whyte rockes or walles, as ye maye rede in the bokes of Geography. nor the water of the ryuer called Albis, ſemeth noo whyter than any other water. But where aunciente remembraunce of the begynnyng of thynges lacketh, if it may be lefull to men to vſe theyr coniectures, my coniecture may be aſwel accepted, as the coniecture of Plinie, althoughe he incomparably excelled me in wiſedome and doctrine, ſpecially if it may appere that my coniecture ſhall approche more nere to the ſymilitude of trouth. Wherfore I wyll alſo ſet forthe myne opinion, onely to the intente to exclude fables, lackynge eyther honeſtie or reaſonable ſimilitudes. Whan the Grekes began fyrſte to proſpere, and that theyr cyties became populouſe and waxed puiſſaunte, they whiche marcned on the ſees, and alſo the yles whiche were in the ſees, called Helleſpontus, Aegeum, and Creticum, after that they coulde practiſe perfytely the courſe of ſaylinge, and had founden therby profyte, they lyttel and lyttell attempted to ſerche and fynde oute the commodities of outwarde countreys, and lyke as Spanyardes and Portyngales haue late done, they experienced to ſeeke out countreyes before vnknowen, and at the laſte paſſed the Straytes of Marocke, & entred into the great occean ſea, where the wynd ſo fauouring them they founde dyuerſe and many yles. Among the whiche they perceyuynge this yle to be not only the greatteſt in circuite, but alſo moſte plentuouſe of euerye thynge neceſſarye to man: the ayre moſt holſome and temperate, the erthe apt to brynge forthe all thynge that may ſuſteyne a temperate ayre, the fleſhe of veoffes and muttons, moſte ſwete and delycate, the wull moſte fyne, not lackyng any kynde of mettal, hauing aboundaunce of wodde and tymber to buylde with: alſo great and fayre ryuers, with great lakes or mecres of freſhe water, and as well in them, as in the ſea, wherwith the countreye is enuironed, was great plenty of fiſhes of diuers ſortes, moſt apt to be eaten. they wonderyng 
                  •
                reioyſyng, at theyr good & fortunate ariuayle, named this yle in greke Olbion,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                whiche in englyſh ſignifieth Happy, in latin Foelix, lyke aspart of Arabia whiche is moſt fertile, is called Arabia felix. But in proceſſe of time, by the reſort of ſundry peple, hauyng dyuerſe langages. no meruaile if one letter were changed, and the
 fyrſte letter O, tourned in to A, and ſoo for Olbion it was at the laſt called Albion, whiche word hath no mauer of ſignification. the whiche chaungynge of letters is not vnlykely, ſens at this preſent time the Northern mē of this realm do vſe A, in wordes where ſouthern mē do vſe O, as a bane, a ſtane, a bare, a bande, for a bone, a ſtone, a bore, a bonde. And amonge the grekes were lyke alterations of letters. And it maye be more eaſely ſuſteyned, that one vowell may be chaunged in a worde, and ſpecially A, into O, whiche in ſome mannes mouthe, ſouneth often tymes lyke, than a ſyllable impertinente to the proportion of latine, ſhulde be vnaptly added to. Not withſtandynge Pomponius Mela maketh mention of a gyant called Albion, whō Hercules ſlewe in Gallia, whiche was ſonne of Neptunus. who moughte with more reaſon be named the fyrſte gyuer of his name to this yle, than that the other ſurmyſes ſhulde be likely. If any man can fynde matter more certayne, of the originall begynnynge of this yle, I wyll not be offended but congratulate with him his good fortune and diligence.
            
               Albis, a riuer in Boemia, whiche commeth to the citie of Prage.
            
               Albitudo, whiteneſſe.
            
               Albo, aui, are, to make whyte.
            
               Albogalerus, a hat, whiche the great prieſtes of Iupyter, called Flamines Dialis, dydde weare.
            
               Albor, the whyte of an egge.
            
               Alboſia, ſhyldes or targates.
            
               Albucus, ſome doo ſuppoſe it to be the herbe, whiche is called Aſphodelus. ſome do write, that it is onely the ſtalke of aſphodelus, and that the hole herbe is called haſtula regia. loke after in Aſphodelus.
            
            
               Albugo, inis, a whyte ſpot in the eyen. alſo the white of an egge.
            
               Albula, the olde name of the ryuer of Tiber. alſo a water in the fielde callid Tiburtinus, whiche was medicinable for ſore eyen.
            
               Album, a table openly ſette vp, wherin eyther the names of officers, or ſome publike decre is wrytten.
            Album plumbum, tynne.
            
            
               Albumen, inis, the whyte of an egge.
            
               Albunia, a woode and fountayne by the ryuer called Aniene in Italy.
            
               Alburnum, the fat that is in ſome tree.
            
               Alburnus, a mountayne in Lucania.
            Albus, ba, bum, whyte.
            
            
               Albus fluuius, the ryuer called Humber in the northe parte of Englande.
            
               Alcaea, a lion.
            
               Alcaeus, was a famous poet of them which ar called Lirici, which made ſonges to the harp, the yere afore the intarnation of Chriſt. 646
            
               Alcanna, is that whiche is commonlye called Cyprus.
            
               Alce, a wylde beaſte in the woodes of Germany, in faſcion and ſkynne lyke to a gote, but greatter, which haue no ioyntes in theyr legges, and therfore they do neuer lye, but onely do leane to trees, whan they do reſt them, whiche the hunters knowynge, do fawe the trees that they leane to, halfe a ſunder, wher by they fall downe, and be taken.
            
               Alcea, is one of the malowes, but the hath leaues diuided lyke veruin,Dioſco. and a floure lyke a roſe, longe rotes .v. or .vi, whyte and brode. Alſo Io. Agricola ſaythe, that it is called of the apothecaries herba Simeonis.
            
            
               Alcedines, & Alcyones, are byrdes of the ſea, which do hatche theyr yonge chickens on the lande, and do lay theyr egges on the ſandes, in the myddes of wynter, and whan the ſea is moſte troublous, if they do laye, it becommeth ſodeynelye calme, and the ſtormes and wyndes do ceaſſe, vntyll theſe byrdes haue al hatched, and brought vp theyr chickens, and made them redy to flye, which is in the ſpace of .xiiii. days. This byrde is lyttel more than a ſparowe, his fethers be purple of colour, myxt with whyte, and hath a long necke and a ſmall, his byll ſomwhat greene, longe and ſclender, and this byrde is ſene very ſeldome.
            
               Alces, a beaſte in Fraunce lyke a mule, but he hath his ouer lyp ſo longe, that whan he fedeth, he goeth backewarde, or elles he canne not byte of the graſſe and herbes, whiche he ſhulde eate. The horſckynde of theym haue hornes on theyr ouer browes. Suche a beaſt was late brought in to Englande, and ſcene in the kynges parke at Weſtmiſter.
            Alceſte, ſeu Alceſtis, loke before in Admetus.
            
               Alchabitius, is the name of a boke, whiche is an introduction in the indyciall parte of Aſtronomy.
            
               Alchech, in the Araby tongue, is the beaſte, whiche is called Linx, whiche is begotten betwene a lion and a lybarde.
            
               Alcibiadion, is that herbe which Dioſcorides calleth Echion. Ericius Cordus a famous phiſition of this tyme, ſuppoſeth it to be a kynde of our borage, the floures being ſomwhat lyke, but that they be deper in, and do not ſprede ſo brode, and be of a more pueple colour. the ſede therof is lyke the head of an adder, in ſoo moche as there doo ſeeme to be eyen therin. Some do ſuppoſe it to be wylde Borage.
            
               Alcida, was a terrible monſter, whiche was ſlayne by Pallas.
            
               Alcidamus, an auncient oratour of the Grekes
            Alcides, idem quod Hercules.
            
                
               Alcinous,
               Homerus Odiſſ. the name of a kynge of a people called Phaeaces, excellent in iuſtice, which had a fayre and magnifi
                  •
               e palayce, with orchardes whiche bare moſte plentuouſely fruytes twyſe in the yere.
            
               Alcman, a famouſe poete.
            
               Alcmenes, a cunnynge grauer.
            
               Alcmeon, a philoſopher, ſcholer to Pythagoras, whiche fyrſte wrate of the Nature of thynges
            
               Alcon, was a good archer of Creta, which beholdinge a dragon redy to deuoure his ſonne, dyd ſhote ſo craftily, that as the dragon was imbracynge of the chylde, the arrowe paſſed vnto his hart, and hurt not his ſonne, ſo that the dragon immediately dyed.
            
               Alcoranum, the boke of Mahumet, wherein are myxte moſte ſhamefull lyes and abhominations, with ſome part of ſcripture and neceſſary lawes, thoughe theſe be feweſte. For he gyueth libertie to men to haue great numbers of wyues, and concubines without nū
               ber. he imagineth angelles to be in loue, and commyt aduoultry with mortall women. he auaunteth, that he hym ſelfe went vp to god to receyue lawes, and that he was borne thither by an aſſe that Ieſus lent hym, that he founde god beatynge an aungell, betwene whoſe browes was the ſpace of a iourney of many hundred of yeres: and ſuche lies a gret number be there fayned. Not withſtandyng in the ſame boke he doth prohibit aduaultry, and commaundeth ſtraitely kepynge of promyſe, and other thinges not to be diſprayſed.
            
               Alcybiades, was the name of a noble man of Athenes, comen of the bloude of Aaiax Thelamonius. This man in beaultie, goodly perſonage, artiuitie, proweſſe, eloquence, and ſharpneſſe of wit, exceſſed al men of his time. In ſo moche that into what countrey ſo euer he came, he ſo adapted hym ſelfe, to the maners therof, that he was euerye where wonderfully beloued and honored, ſpecially of the wyſe man Socrates, who moſte entirely loued hym. But with thoſe moſte excellent qualyties, were ioyned ſundry vices, that is to ſaye, vntemperate, and diſſolute lyuinge in lethery and ryote, deceyte and vnconſtancye. In ſo moche as all men meruayled, that in one man moughte be ſuche dyuerſe natures. He acheued many great enterpryſes as well for his countrey, as agaynſte it. finallye beinge exiled by the meane of Liſander kyng of Lacedemonia, he being in Phrigia, the hous wherin he laye, was of pourpoſe ſet on fyre, whiche he eſcaped, and beinge halfe naked, and valiauntly defendynge hym ſelfe againſt his ennemyes, at the laſte was ſlayne, and his head brought to Pharnabazus, capitain of the Perſians. This man flouryſhed afore the incarnation of Chriſte. 428. yeres.
            
               Alcionae, the name of two ladies, wherof the one was wyfe to Ceiſis, who ſeinge the body of her huſbande caſte on lande, threwe her ſelfe into the ſea, whom the poetes fayned to be tourned into a byrde of that name. The other was daughter of Euene called alſo Marpeſia.
            
               Alcyonium, is the ſpume or fome of the ſea indurate.
            
               Alduaſdubis,
               Caeſar. a countrey in Fraunce, called Ledoux.
            
               Alea, a dye, playenge at dice. Somtyme it ſignifieth chaunce.
            
               Alea fortunae, the chaunce of fortune. ſomtyme perill.
            
               Aleator, a dyſar.
            
               Aleatorium, a dice playing, or a dyſyng hous. Suetonius calleth it Aleatorium forum.
            
            
               Aleatorius, a, um, belongynge to dice.
            
               Alebria, thynges whiche do nouriſhe well.
            
               Alec, is a ſauce made of the liuers of fiſhes. alſo a fiſhe called a hearynge.
            
               Alecto, one of the furies of Hell.
            
               Alectoria, a ſtone founde in a cockes gyſar or mawe, of the greatnes of a beane, of the colour of chriſtall.
            
               Alecula, a ſprote.
            
               Alemani, people of Germany, called Almains.
            
               Aleo, onis, a diſar, or diſeplayer.
            
               Alephanginae ſpecies, is a barbarous worde vſed of the Moores, wherby they do ſignify the poulder of ſote ſpices, as gynger, peper, cloues, maces, nutmigges, cynamome, and other lyke.
            
               Alere bellum, to mayntayne warres.
            
               Ales, alitis, a byrde. Sometyme it ſignyfiet
                  •
                ſwyfte in fleinge or runnynge, as, Alite plan ta, ſwyfte of fote.
            
               Aleſco, ſcere, to growe fatte.
            
               Aletudo, fatnes of the body.
            
               Alexander, was the name of many noble princes, but amonge other one was moſte excellente, whiche was the ſonne of Philip kynge of Macedonia, whoo in his chyldehoode was brought vppe by Ariſtotle in lernynge, wherin he profyted wonderfully, and was of ſuche courage, that after the deathe of Philip his father, beinge but .xx. yeres olde, he toke on hym the enterpriſe to conquere al the worlde, and fyrſte gatte Illiria, nowe called Slauonia, and after ſubuerted the Citie of Thebes, and brought in ſubiection al Grece, and entred into Aſia, and vanquiſhed in ſundry iourneys the great and puiſſaunte kynge Darius kynge of Perſia, and had his mother, his wyfe, and daughter priſoners, and neuer wolde company with any of them, not
 withſtandyng that they were moſt excellently fayre. Finallye he conquered. India, and all the eaſte parte of the worlde. And al this dyd he in lyttell more than .xii. yeres. But whan he had pacified the world from al rebellions, he fel into ſuche crueltie and pryde, ſleing his moſte truſtye counſaylours in his furye, and commaundynge hym ſelfe to be callyd a god, he became ſo odious to his owne people, that they deſyryng his deſtruction, at the laſt beynge in his moſte glory at the citie of Babylon, where he abode the ambaſſadours from al realmes, at ſouper with one of his phiſitions, was poyſoned by drynkyng out of a cup, whiche was ſuppoſed to be made of a horſes houſe. Whiche was thought to be doone by the deuyſe of Ariſtotle ſometyme his mayſter, and Antipater his lieutenant in Macedonia, whom a lyttell before he had greuouſly thretened. Thus Alexander aboundynge bothe in excellent vertues, and notable vices, after moſte happy fortune by his outragious pryde and crueltie ſhortened his lyfe, beinge at his deathe lyttell aboue .xxxiii. yeres olde. Which was afore the Incarnation of Chriſt
322. yeres.
            
               Alexander ſeuerus, was emperour of Rome, the yere of our lorde. 224. This man frome his chyldehode was of wonderfull grauitie and prudence, in ſo moche as where the citie of Rome was before brought by his couſyne the monſtrous emperour Heliogabalus into all abhomination of lyuynge, and dyſſolution of maners, this man by his vertue, prudence, and contynual iuſtyce, reduced it vnto a perfecte publyke weale, reformed the order of his army, ſtablyſſhed lawes, reſtored honeſtye, expellyd vicious perſones and brybours, aduanced men of vertue and lernyng to great offyces and dignities, renewed the ſenate, prepared alſo a great and a noble coū
               ſayle about his perſon, and ſo hated corrupted iudges, that he dyd not onely put theym to tourmentes, but whan any came in his preſence, he was redy with his two fyngers to put out theyr eyes. And yet this noble and gentyll prynce, by the falſe treſon of one Maximus, whom of a mulettour, he had made a great capytayne, he was in a ſodayne commocyon ſlayne of his owne people at Moguntia in Germany, with his mother Mammea a wyſe ladye and vertuouſe. Somme ſuppoſed, that it was bycauſe by her counſayle he was becomme auaritious, and was not ſo lyberall as he and other emperors had bene before.
            
               Alexandria, the name of dyuers cyties, of the whyche one was in Egypte, buylded by the greatte kynge Alexander. 320. yeres afore the Incarnation of Chryſte, in the ſpace of ſeuentene days, althowgh it conteyned within the walles, the ſpace of ſyx miles in length yt was made in the fourme of a mantell, and was dyuided with two broode wayes, oone croſſyng ouer the other for eaſy conueyeng of caryage, euery way beyng in bredth a hūdred feete. Whyche wayes lay in ſuche wyſe that the holſome wyndes dyd blow abundantly in to the citie, and refreſſhed the ayre. This cite was ſet betwene the fennes of Nilus and the ſea, and had nyghe vnto it the noble hauen of Pharus, in the whych citie euery kyng of Egypt after Alexander, buylded a royal palaice wherby it ſhewed ſoo beautyfull and magnifyke, that the lyke therevnto was not in the worlde. Moreouer manye excellente lerned men were borne or brought vp in that cytie, as Philo the Iewe, callyd the ſeconde Plato, Origenes, Clemens, Antonius, Dydimus, Maximus, Theophilus, and Athanaſius was there byſhoppe. Alſo ſaynte Marcus the Euangelyſte preached there, and was ordeined biſſhop by the apoſtles. It was deſtroyed by the Romaynes, and reedyfyed by Traianus the Emperoure. Afterwarde the yere of our lorde. 1230. Peter, brother vnto the kynge of Cyprus, with certayne frenche men and Catalones, eftſoones diſtroyed and robbyd it, ſoo that vnto this day it was neuer reducyd vnto the fyrſte eſtate: nowe is it in ſubiection of the Turkes. There is an nother cytie callyd Alexandria in Lumbardye.
            Alexandrinus,Caeſar. a, um, of Alexandria.
            
            
               Alexa, a countrey in Fraunce, nowe callydde Lauſſoys in Burgoyne. Allſoo the Towne callydde Arras in the Countye of Artoyſe.
            
               Alexicacon, a remedy to put away myſchefe, or any ylle thynge.
            
               Alexipharmacon, is properly a medycyne agaynſte poyſon. It is alſoo taken for ſuche thynges as be vſed to hange aboute mennes neckes, or theyr armes, or in howſes for a defence agaynſte poyſon, ylle ſpyrites, or greuous diſeaſes, and ſoo doothe Theophraſtus vſe it in his nynthe boke, where he treateth of Tripolium.
            
            
               Alexius, a mannes name, of the whyche were two emperours of Conſtātinople. Alſo there was one Alexius the ſonne of Ephimianus, a noble Senatour of Rome, who hauynge a wyfe of excellente beaultie, for the loue of god lefte her, and ſecretely departed in ſondry pylgrimages in the habite of a pore man. And after moche pacyence, and longe pouertie, retourned to his fathers howſe, beynge there vnknowen, vntyl after his death,
 that he was dyſcloſed by a letter, which was founde in his hande. At his buryenge God ſhewed many wonderfull myracles, than beynge preſent Honorius and Arcadius emperours of Rome, the yere of our lorde. 410.
            
               Alga, reytes or wedes of the ſea.
            
               Algenſes, fyſhes callyd alſo Purpurae.
            
            
               Algeo, ſi, gêre, to be in peyn, properly for cold, to chylle for colde.
            
               Algidenſe, a kynde of radyſhe, long and clere through.
            
               Algidus, a mountayne .xii. myles from Rome.
            
               Algida ſylua, a wodde at the foote of that mountayne.
            Algo, idem quod algeo.
            
               Algor, griefe. ſometyme it ſignifieth colde.
            
               Alguaſen, an herbe lyke to a lyly.
            Algus,Plautus. uel algu, colde.
            
            
               Alia, uel Allia, a ryuer not farre from Rome, where the hoſte of the Romayns was vtterly diſtroied by Brennus, whom we ſay was a Bryton, ſon to Molimerꝰ king of this realme
            
               Aliâs, an aduerbe, ſignifieth or els, els where, an other tyme, ſometyme.
            
               Aliâs res agis, Thou thinkeſt on other matters. Vnde annulum iſtum nactus? dic mihi. Ille alias res agere ſe ſimulare, Telle me, where gatteū thou this rynge? He made ſemblaunce as if he thought on an other matter.
            
               Alibi, els where.
            
               Alica,
               Ruellius. is a thyng made of wheat in this wiſe. They take wheate and ſtepe it in water, and afterwarde do beate it, than they drye it in the ſonne, and breake it groſſe, ſo that euery corne be broken in foure or fyue pieces. ſome do put into it chalke, ſome creame of mylke ſodden to make it ſeme very whyte.
            
               Alicarjae, common harlottes.
            
               Alicarii, they that do ſell alicam.
            
            
               Alicaſtrum, a dyminutiue of alica.
            
            
               Alicubi, ſomewhere.
            
               Alicundè, from ſome place.
            
               Alienatio, an alienation or alteration.
            
               Alienator, he that altereth a thynge.
            
               Alienatus, a, um, put away, altered, eſtrāged.
            
               Alienigena, a ſtraunger borne.
            
               Alienigenus, a, um, that which commeth oute of an other countrey.
            
               Alieno, aui, are, to alienate, to put away, or put of, to alyene or alter poſſeſſion.
            
               Aliena conſilii,
               Saluſt. vnmete for the counſell.
            
               Alienior aetate,
               Terent. of nōage, not of cōpetent age. Alieno more mihi uiuendum eſt, I muſte lyue after an other mans facyon.
            
               Alieno animo eſſe, to be diſpleſed with one.
            
               Alienos agimus, we becomme ſtraungers vnto theym.
            
               Alieniſsimum reipub. tempus, the warſt tyme that may be for a weale publyke.
            
               Alienum ſuis rationibus, vnprofytable for his purpoſe.
            
               Alienus animus. Iam primum illum alieno animo à nobis eſſe, res ipſa indicat. The thyng ſelfe declareth, that euen nowe he hath no fauour towarde vs.
            
               Alienus, a, um, dyuers, vnlyke, not agreable, out of acquayntance or fauour.
            
               Aliger, any thynge that hath wynges.
            
               Alimentarius, a, um, pertaynynge to lyuyng or ſuſtynaunce.
            
               Alimentum, ſuſtynance, foode, or lyuyng.
            
               Alimodi, idem quod aliuſmodi, of an nother facyon or maner.
            Alimonia, idem quod alimentum.
            
               Aliò, to an nother place.
            
               Alioqui, or els, excepte that.
            
               Aliorſum, to ſome other place.
            
               Aliouerſum, towarde an other place.
            
               Alipedes, ſwyfte runnynge horſes.
            
               Aliptes, he that anoynteth a man, and a ſurgeon that healeth woundes.
            
               Aliqua, by ſome place.
            
               Aliquando, ſometyme.
            
               Aliquandiu, any whyle.
            
               Aliquantiſper, a lyttell whyle.
            Aliquanto, idem.
            
               Aliquantulum, ſomewhat.
            Aliquantum, idem.
            
               Aliquatenus, in ſome part, by ſome reaſon.
            
               Aliquid, ſome thynge.
            Aliquis, aliquae, aliquod, ſome.
            
            
               Aliquis eſt, he is a mā of no ſmal reputatiō.
            
               Aliquò, to ſome place.
            
               Aliquorſum, towarde ſome place.
            
               Aliquot, ſome, nor many, nor fewe.
            
               Aliquoties, at ſome tymes.
            
               Alirei, Plautus vſeth for aliae rei.
            
            
               Aliſma, an herbe callyd alſoo Barba ſyluana, water plantayne.
            
               Aliter, or els, countrary wyſe.
            Aliter ac, aliter at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , aliter quam, otherwyſe thanne.
            
            
               Alites, great byrdes whyche are fedde.
            
               Aliubi, elles where. Aliubi, for alicubi, ſomme where.
            
               Alſunde, from an other place.
            
               Alius, alia, aliud, other, or another.
            
               Aliuſmodi, in an other maner, of an other faciū
            
            
               Aliura, olde wryters vſed for aliter.
            
            
               Alkakengi, is an herbe callyd alſoo Halicacabus, and Veſicaria, and in greke Phyſalides. out of the whyche groweth a ſtalke, hauynge on the toppe thereof, a rounde thynge lyke to a bladder, of colour betweene redde and yelowe, wherein is a redde beary, leſſe than a cherye, whyche in dyuerſe wayes is wonderfulle medycynable, agaynſte the ſtrangurye or ſtoppynge of vryne, beſydes other
 good vertues.
            
               Alla bor, labi, to flowe by, ſayle by, or rowe by.
            
               Allatus, brought.
            
               Allecto, aui, are, to allure or drawe to by fayreneſſe.
            
               Allectus, allured.
            
               Allego, aui, are, to ſende, to alledge, or brynge forthe, to depute or gyue auctoritie.
            
               Allego, lexi, ere, to aſcribe, to cheſe, to aſſigne
            
               Allegoria, a fygure or inuerſyon of wordes, where it is one in wordes, and an nother in ſentence or menynge.
            
               Alleluya, prayſe ye our lorde.
            
               Alleuo, aui, are, to lyft vp.
            
               Allex, & allux, the greate toe, whan he lyeth ouer the nexte toe.
            
               Alliatum, a ſawce made with garlyke.
            
               Allicefacio, ci, re, to allure, to drawe to.
            Allicio, exi, licere, to allure.
            
            
               Allido, ſi, ere, to ſquat, or throwe any thynge agaynſt the grounde or walles.
            
               Alligator, he that byndeth.
            
               Alligatura, a bonde.
            
               Alligare aliquem furto, to appeache oone of felonye.
            
               Alligare ſe furti, to charge hym ſelf of felony
            Allino, leui, linêre, to annoynte.
            
            
               Allium, garlyke.
            
               Allobr
                     •
                  oges, people of Sauoye and Pe
                  •
               
               mountaygne.
            
               Allcutio, a ſpeakynge to one.
            
               Allocutum ire, to commune with one.
            
               Allophylos, a ſtraunger.
            
               Alloquium, communication, ſpeche.
            
               Alloquor, to ſpeake to.
            
               Allubeſco, to do it gladly, to obey, to fauour, to conſent.
            
               Allucinatio, a blyndnes of mynde.
            
               Allucinor, to be deceyued in opynyon.
            
               Alludo, ſi, lûdere, to doo a thynge in iape, to ſpeake meryly, or conſent, ſometyme it ſygnifyeth to ſpeake ſome thynge, whyche ſecretely hath ſome vnderſtandynge.
            
               Alludere ad hyſtoriam, to ſpeake or doo ſome thynge agreable with ſome hyſtorye before wrytten.
            Alludor, idem quod alludo.
            
               Alluo, lui, ere, to flowe nyghe to, to waſſhe as the water dothe the grounde.
            
               Alluuies, is whan aboundance of water mixte with clay couereth the grounde.
            Alluuio, onis, idem.
            
               Alluuium, a floud cauſyd by rayne, or by ryuers whan they ryſe.
            
               Alma, a mayden hyd or ſecrete.
            
               Almities, quietneſſe, ſecreteneſſe.
            
               Almopia, parte of Macedonia.
            
               Almus, a, um, all thynge that nouryſſheth 
                  〈◊〉
                proprely the erth is ſo callid Alma tellus, bycauſe we haue therof our ſuſtynāce. ſomtyme it ſygnyfyeth quiet. Almus dies, a quiet day.
            
               Alnus, an alder tree. ſommetyme it ſygnifieth a ſhyppe or bote.
            
               Alo, alui, alere, to nouryſſhe or feede.
            
               Aloe,
               Vergil. 
               aloes, is a iuyce of an herbe congelyd lyke a gumme, wherof be two ſortes, one is namyd Succotrina, whyche is lyke a lyuer, redde, bryghte, and brokle. the other is callyd Caballina, and is ſandy and groſſe. The fyrſte clenſeth and confyrmeth the ſtomacke of a man, and therfore is myxte with pourgatyue medycynes, bycauſe they ſhall not anoy or hurte the ſtomacke, the laſte is occupyed about horſes and other beaſtes.
            
               Aloe lignum, or lignum aloes, is a ſwete & preciouſe wod, whych being receyued inmedicin comforteth the ſtomake, and all the inferior partes of a man, and maketh ſwete breathe.
            
               Aloeus, was the name of a gyaunt, ſonne of Titan, on whoſe wyfe Neptunus begat two ſonnes at one burdeyne, Oetus and Ephialtes, whyche were callyd alſoo Aloidae, and were great gyauntes, of whome Vergilius and Claudianus do make mention.
            
               Alogia, vnreaſonable or beaſtly fedyng, and in gurgitation of meate and drynke.
            
               Alogiani, were heritykes, whyche denyed, that the ſonne of god was Logos, whyche ſome doo interprete in to latyne Verbum, ſomme Sermo, and therfore they reiecte the goſpelle of ſaynt Iohn, and his Apocalypſis, ſayinge, that they were not his warkes.
            
               Alongè, farre of.
            
               Alopecia, is a chaungyng of the colour of the heed into more whitenes, whan the olde heares do fall of by the rootes.
            
               Alopecidae,
               Gal. in definition. dogges gotten betweene a wolfe and a bytche.
            
               Alopecurus, an herbe lyke a foxes tayle.
            
               Alopecus, he that hath a pylde heade, that is to ſay, the heares fallynge with ſcurfe.
            
               Alpes, the mountaynes, whyche do nowe departe Italy and Fraunce.
            
               Alphabetarii, they whyche doo lerne fyrſte the order of letters.
            
               Alphabetum, the order of letters, as A, B, C.
            
               Alpheus, a ryuer in Achaia, by the citie of Piſa. Alſo the name of a mount.
            
               Alphiton, meale of phiſitions. it is alſo taken for barlye meale fryed.
            
               Alphos, a morphy or ſtaynyng of the ſkynne.
            
               Alpinus, a, um, of the mountayns of Alpes.
            
               Alpus, pale, carefull, or ſtudyous.
            
               Alſine, an herbe, wherof ſome do ſuppoſe to be two kyndes: wherof one is that whyche is callyd in latyn Matriſsylua, in englyſhe wod bynde. The other is callyd Alſine minor, the ſeconde mouſe eare.
            
                
               Alſioſus, a, um, colde of nature. alſo that thyng whiche is ſoone hurte or anoyed with colde.
            
               Altanus, a wynde whiche is on the deepe ſeas.
            
               Altare, an aultare.
            
               Alte, on hygh.
            
               Altellus, the ſurname of Romulus of founder of Rome.
            
               Alter, rius, teri, an nother, the other, one of the two.
            
               Alius, an other, the other. Alter, the other, the ſeconde. Sometyme it ſygnifyeth bothe. Vnus aut alter, one or bothe. Vnus & alter, the one and the other.
            
               Alter & uiceſimus, one and twenty.
            
               Alter qui
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                  , any other.
            
               Alter, teris, ſiue alteres, teris, poyſes of leade, made to lyft vp in bothe handes, to exercyſe men, which may not otherwyſe labour, wher of there be many nowe in Englande, ſpecyally in the chambers of ſtudentes.
            
               Alteras, olde wryters vſed for alias.
            
            
               Altercatio, a contention in wordes, where one man purpoſeth, an other replyeth.
            
               Altercor, aris, to contende with wordes oone with an other on ſundry partes.
            Altercum, ſiue alter cagenum, an herbe callyd alſo Faba porcina.
            
               Alternatim, by tourne, one at one tyme, an other at an other tyme.
            Alterne, idem.
            
               Alternare, to do thynges by tourne, nowe one, and than an other.
            
               Alternatio, ſucceſſion by tourne.
            
               Alternis, nowe one, nowe an other.
            
               Alternis diebus, ſundry dayes, where oone day is betwene.
            
               Alterplex, icis, olde wryters vſyd for duplex, dowble.
            
               Altero, aui, are, to alter or chaunge.
            Alterta, idem quod alterutra.
            
               Alteruter, bothe the one and the other. alſo or the tone or the tother.
            
               Althaea, the great malowes or holy hocke.
            
               Alti lis, in plurali altilia, all thyng that is franked to make fat, be it beaſt, fyſhe, or fowle.
            
               Alti lis gallina, a henne franked or fedde.
            
               Altimetor, an inſtrument, wherewith hyghe thynges are mette.
            
               Altinates, people of Altinum.
            
               Altinum, an olde cite by the ryuage of Venice.
            Altior, altius, hygher.
            
            
               Altiîſonus, he that maketh noyſe from aboue.
            
               Altitonans, he that thondreth, which name the Paynyms gaue to theyr god Iupiter.
            
               Altitudo, heyght, or depenes.
            
               Altiuolans, all thynge that flyeth hygh.
            
               Altor, & altrix, he and ſhe, whyche nouryſheth and bryngeth vp one.
            
               Altrinſecus,
               Apuleius to the tone or the tother, to the tone parte, betwene the one and the other, in the hygher parte.
            
               Altrouerſum,
               Plautus. on the other parte, or on the other ſyde.
            
               Altus,
               Vergil. 
               a, um, hygh, depe, properly in the ſea. it ſygnifieth alſo excellent, glorious, auncient.
            
               Altum otium, longe rest, great leyſure.
            
               Aluearium, & alueare, a place where hyues be ſette. alſo a ſtocke of hyues.
            
               Alueolum & alueolus, a baſkette or maunde. alſo a culuer hole, a cheſſebourde, or tables to playe on.
            
               Alueus, & aluus, a hyue for bees, a veſſelle to waſſhe in, the bealy of any thing that lacketh lyfe, ſometyme it ſignifieth a ſhyppe.
            
               Aluini, they whyche haue frettynges in theyr bealyes with contynuall fluxe.
            
               Alumen, alume whereof be three ſortes, one is callyd Sciſsilae or Plumae, whyche naturally groweth lyke a ſtoone, and not withſtandyng maye be dyuyded with long ſtrakes, which be ſene in it. An other ſort is boyled in a cauldron, and therfore is callyd Alumen Catinae, and is made more pure by an herbe lyke to herbe Iuc bourned into aſſhes, and lye made therwith. An other ſorte is callid Alumen Zucharinum, whyche is made with alume relented, roſewater, and the whytes of egges, into the facyon of a ſugar lofe, whyche harlottes do vſe to paint theyr viſages to deceyue men, although they deceyue not god, who for theyr abhomynable curioſitie, ſhall commytte them to the fyry flouddes of Hell, there to bayne them perpetually.
            
               Alumnari, to nourſe or bryng vp.
            
               Alumnatus, nouryſhed.
            
               Alumnus, a ſonne or ſcholar that is broughte vp of a man, as of his owne father, eyther with ſuſtynaunce, maners, or lernynge.
            
               Aluta, lether proprely tawed. ſomtyme it is put for a bagge or a purſe.
            
               Alutamen, any thynge made of lether.
            
               Alutarius, a tawyer.
            
               Aluus, a bealy, alſo a hyue.
            
               Aluum bonam facere, to make ſoluble.
            
               Aluum ciere, uel elicere, to make the bealye louſe or ſoluble.
            
               Aluum deijcere, to pourge the bealy.
            
               Aluum ſiſtere, to ſtoppe or bynde.
            
               Alyba, a countreye not farre frome Miſia, where, as Homerus dothe wryte, were mynes of ſyluer.
            
               Alypos, in Dioſcorides is of ſomme ſuppoſyd to be that, whyche is commonlye callyd Sena, wherewith Melancholye is pourgyd.
            
               Alyſina, an herbe callyd water plantayne.
            
               Alyſius, the name of Bacchus.
         
         
            
            ¶A ANTE M.
            
               AMabile, thankefull.
            
               Amabilis, le, amyable, worthye to be loued.
            
               Amabo, of felowſhyp, a good felowſhyp, a familiar worde vſyd amonge frendes.
            
               Amabundus, he that is a greatte louer, or amorouſe.
            
               Amalec, a word of hebru, which may be interpreted a people lyckyng or ſtrykyng.Exod. 17. It was the name of a kyng in Siria, whych reſyſted the people of Iſrael, whan they came out of Egypt, and ſlewe many of them. Wherfore he was afterwarde ſlayne by the commandement of god.Deu. 25. it is ſomtyme taken for the coū
               trey wherof Amalec was kyng.
            
               Amalecitae, the people of Amalec,Reg. 1. 15. whome god commaunded Saul to deſtroy vtterly. And bycauſe he dydde not, he was reiect of god.
            
               Amalthea, a woman, whyche with her ſyſter callid Meliſſa, nouriſſhed Iupiter with the milk of a gote. alſo the name of a propheteſſe.
            
               Aman,
               Heſter. a name of hebrue, whyche ſygnifieth troublynge or murmurynge. Of that name was one whiche came of the howſe of Agag, whome Aſſuerus kynge of Perſia and Media exalted aboue all his lordes and counſailours, and wylled all thynges to be doone as he wolde commaunde it. Wherefore Aman extollynge hym ſelfe in outragious pryde, bycauſe Mardocheus a Iewe, vncle to queene Heſter, wyfe to Aſſuerus, dydde not humbie reuerence to hym, whan he paſſed by, he cauſyd commyſſyons in the kynges name to be ſente vnto all countreyes, beynge vnder the domynyon of kynge Aſſuerus, that all the Iewes in euerye countrey ſhoulde be ſlayne. But almyghty God, beholdynge the malyce and crueltie of Aman, gaue grace vnto the vertuouſe queene Heſter, to preuente his vengeable appetyte. Wherfore after ſhe had boden the kynge and Aman to dyner, ſhe with ſuche a ſpyryte declared to the kynge the cruelle vengeaunce, that Aman hadde preparyd to be doone on her countreye men, and kynsfolke, that ſhe ſoo ſtyrred the kynges indignation agaynſt Aman, that he commaunded incontynent, that Aman ſhulde be hanged on a gybet, whyche a lyttell before he cauſed to be rayſed to hang theron Mardocheus, whyche gybet was fyfty cubytes hye, And his howſe and all his poſſeſſyons and goodes were gyuen vnto queene Heſter. And moreouer, letters were sente by pooſte into all countreyes, that the Iewes ſhoulde lyue, and alſoo that they ſhoulde ſlea all theyr ennemyes, whyche was doone, and moreouer tenne ſonnes of Aman were hangyd.
            The noumber of theym, whyche were ſlayne by the Iewes, were thre ſcore and fyue tenne thowſande. This is a noble ſtorye, worthye to be contynually remembred of theym, whyche be in hyghe auctorytie vnder pryncis, that they maye feare God, abhorre crueltie, and alwaye dreade the mutation of worldly thynges, and to conſyder that kynges be not goddis.
            Amando, aui, are, to countremaunde.
            
            
               Amans, antis, he or ſhe whyche loueth truely and contynually.
            
               Amanter, louyngly.
            
               Amanthes,
               Solinus. people in Aphrica in the furthermooste parte of Ethiopia, who haue ſuche plenty of precyous ſtones and ſalt, that therof they make greate houſes. Amonge them is founden the carbuncle ſtone.
            
               Amantior, more louynge.
            
               Amantiſsime, moſte louyngely.
            
               Amantiſsimus, moſte louynge.
            
               Amanuenſis, a clerke, or ſecretary alwaye attendynge.
            
               Amanus, a mountayne callyd alſo Taurus.
            
               Amaracinum, an olyle made of maioram.
            
               Amaracus, an herbe callyd ſoote maioram, or maioram gentyl it is alſo callyd Sampſuchꝰ
            
               Amaramis,
               Ioſephus. the father of Moyſes.
            
               Amaranthi, be people of the countrey of Colchos, wherein was the ſheepe that bare the golden fleeſe.
            
               Amaranthos, & Heliocryſos, is al one herbe, and is ſuppoſed to be that whyche is commonlye callyd Stoecas or Sticados citrina, there is therof two kyndes. The flowre of the one is yelowe, and hath a ſoote ſauoure, the other hath a purple flowre, whyche hath noo ſauoure. The yelowe is layde amonge clothes to kepe them from mothes, and therfore of ſomme it is callyd Tinearia. The other is callid Flos amoris, the floure of loue. Somme ſuppoſe it to be gylofer gentylle, or floure gentylle.
            
               Amarantus, an herbe, whyche groweth a fote in heyghte, and hathe leaues lyke baſyll, and hathe a flowre faſſhyoned lyke an eare of wheate, of crymoſyn colour, whyche neuer dyeth, in frenche it is callyd Paſſeuelute. Some there be, whiche doo ſuppoſe it to be callyd in englyſhe Baldare.
            
               Amare, bytterly.
            
               Amareſco,ſci, ſcere, to waxe bytter, or to be bytter.
            
               Amarico, are, to make bytter, to make angry.
            
               Amarillis, the name of a ſhepeherde in the bucolicis of Vergyle.
            
               Amariſcus, an herb callid Mathis, or dogfenel.
            Amaritudo, dinis, bytterneſſe.
            
            Amaror, idem quod amaritudo.
            
                
               Amarulentus, vexed with malyce.
            
               Amarus, a, um, bytter, very angry.
            
               Amara mulier, a curſed queane.
            
               Amaſa, a name of hebrewe, whiche ſignifieth the people that ſpareth, or lyftinge vppe the people. It was the name of a noble manne, ſonne of Abigail ſyſter of Dauid. Alſoo of a Capytayne, whome Ioab ſlewe in kyſſynge and ſalutynge of hym, vnder the coloure of frendſhyppe.
            
               Amaſias, a name of hebru, ſignifieth the ſtrēgth of the lorde. Of that name was one kynge of Iudea, ſonne of Ioas. 853. yeres before the incarnation of Chriſt, and reygned .xxix. yeres. A man very eloquent, and at the begynning of his reigne was of moch humanite towarde all men, and obſerued competently the commandementes of god, but yet he dyd not vtterly take away ydolatrye. He was longe tyme fortunate and waxed ryche, but at the laſte he forgat god, and became prowde, and not being content with his aſtate, he wrate vnto Ioas kyng of Iſraelites, commandyng hym and his people to be vnder his ſubiection. But Ioas wrate vnto hym letters of defyance. Wherfore he gathered an army, and went agaynſt the kyng of Iſrael. But whan the battayle was ioyned, ſuche feare ſodaynly came amonge his men, that all tremblyng they fledde, or euer they came vnto ſtrokes. And as Amaſias wolde haue fledde, he was taken and broughte vnto kynge Ioas, who thretenyd to kylle hym, except he cauſyd the gates of Ieruſalem to be openyd agaynſte hym, whiche was done. Not withſtandynge Ioas cauſyd .CCCC. cubites of the walle to be beaten downe, and he entered into the cytie that waye in a charyotte, leadynge Amaſias with hym as a pryſoner, and toke al the treaſure of the Temple and of the kynges howſe, and cauſyd it to be brought into Samaria. Afterwarde beynge delyuered, his owne people conſpyred againſt hym, and ſlew hym in the citie of Lachis.
            
               Amaſenus, a ryuer in Italy.
            
               Amaſis, was a noble kynge of Egypt, whiche made a lawe, that euery yere, eche man ſhuld make a reckenynge to the heade offycers of his realme, of his lyfe, and ſhewe whereby he lyued, or by what occupation he was ſuſteyned, and he that dydde not make ſuche accompte, ſhulde be put to deathe.
            
               Amaſius, & Amaſia, he or ſhe that loueth, or is louyd.
            Amaſſo, idem quod amauero.
            
               Amaſtris, uel Amaſtrum, the pryncypall citie of Paphlagonia.
            
               Amath,
               Ioſephus. the ſonne of Chanaan.
            
               Amathus, untis, a citie in Cyprus, dedycate to Venus. alſo the name of an yle in the ſea callyd Egeum, whyche was dedycate alſo to Venus, in the whyche was plentye of all maner of metalles.
            
               Amathuntius, a, um, of the ſayd citie.
            
               Amathuſa, the yle of Cyprus.
            
               Amatio, a louynge.
            
               Amator, a louer, or he that is amorous.
            
               Amatorculus, a ſmall or ſymple louer.
            
               Amatorie, lyke a louer.
            
               Amatorium, a drynke charmed, to make a man a louer.
            
               Amatorius, a, um, that whyche pertaynethe to loue.
            
               Amauroſis, the dymneſſe of the eyen.
            
               Amazones, women of Scithia, whyche wan a great part of Aſia, who ſlewe all the men chyldren, and kepte the women chyldren, of whome they burned the ryght pappe, bicauſe it ſhulde not let them to throw theyr iauelyns or to ſhoote.
            
               Amazonicus, a, um, pertaynynge to the Amazones.
            
               Amazonicus, ci, a countrey callyd afterward Ceſaria.
            Amazonius, a, um, idem quod Amazonicus, a, um.
            
               Ambactus,
               Caeſar. a ſeruaunt.
            
               Ambages, a cyrcuyte of wordes, or a tale drawen in lengthe.
            
               Ambagioſus, a, um, that aboundeth in ſuche fourme of ſpeakyng.
            
               Ambarri, people of a countrey in France, now callyd Semar, & Monthar.
            
               Ambarualis hoſtia, was a ſacrifyce made for the fieldes with a ſowe great with farrowe.
            
               Ambedo, ere, to cate or gnawe about a thing.
            
               Ambegni, were an oxe and a ramme, on euerye ſyde of them, lambes were brought toke ſacryfyced.
            Ambeſt, idem quod circum eſt.
            
               Ambeſus, a, um, eaten rounde.
            
               Ambiani, ſeu Ambianenſes, people in France about Languedoke, callyd Amboiſe. Somme ſuppoſe it to be Amie
                  •
               s.
            
               Ambidentes, ſhepe of two teethe, of ſome callyd hogges, of ſome theaues.
            
               Ambidexter, he that vſethe bothe handes lyke well.
            
               Ambigo, to compaſſe, alſo to doubte.
            
               Ambigue, doubtfully.
            
               Ambiguitas, doubtfulneſſe.
            
               Ambiguum, a doubte.
            
               Ambilates, people in lyttelle Brytayne callyd Darenchis.
            
               Ambio, iui, ire, to compaſſe, to ſeke for promotion, to deſyre, to pray, or intreate.
            
               Ambitio, onis, inordynate deſyre of honoure or auctorytie.
            
                
               Ambitioſus, he that ymmoderately deſyrethe honour.
            
               Ambitioſae preces, affectuall deſyres.
            
               Ambitus, tus, a cyrcuite, incloſure. alſo the offence of ambition made by the lawes.
            
               Ambitus, a, um, enuyronned or compaſſed.
            
               Ambo, bothe.
            
               Ambra, a very ſwete thynge, whiche is founde on the ſea by a countrey callyd Zingi, in the caſte parte of the worlde, whyche for the graye colour, is commonly callyd of apothecaryes Ambra griſia, whereof is made verye precyous and cordyall medycynes. it is hotte in the ſeconde degree, and drye in the fyrſt degre.
            
               Ambratia, a cytie in Epiro, in a countraye, wherof the people be callyd Theſproti. This cytie was fyrſt callyd Eponia & Paralia. Of this citie beareth the name a goulfe or boſom callyd Sinus Ambratienſis, whyche is made as welle by arte, as by nature wonderfulle ſtronge, hauynge a double walle, and incloſyd on bothe ſydes with fennes, hauyng none entry, but by one narowe way.
            
               Ambratienſes, people of Ambratia.
            
               Ambrices, tyles, whyche be layde ouerthwart betwene other tyles.
            
               Ambrones, people in Fraunce.
            
               Ambroſia, was callyd of the Paynymes the meate of goddis. Somme doo ſaye, that it is an herbe of the kynde of mugwort. it is proprely tanſye, whiche is vſed to be fryed with egges at Eaſter. This name of Ambroſia wandred as Plynye ſaythe in dyuers thynges. For were hit meate or drynke or herbes, whiche for the delycatenes thereof was offered to the goddis in ſacrifice, they callyd it by that name.
            
               Ambroſius, the name of a man, of the whiche one mooſte excellent was byſſhoppe of Myllayne, the yere of our lorde. 373. who was a Romayne, borne of a noble and auncyente howſe, and hadde bene Conſule there. This man beynge ſent by Valentinianus the Emperour to Myllayn, to pacify a ſedition, whiche at that tyme was amonge the people, after the deathe of Auxentius late biſhop there of the ſecte of Arrianes, whan he in the churche hauynge the people before hym, perſwadyd theym vnto concorde, ſodainly the voyce of an infant was herde of all men, whyche cryed, Ambroſius is worthy to be byſſhop. By the whiche voyce the people were ſo feruently ſtyred, that they all togyther conſenced, that he ſhulde be theyr byſhop, although he was not yet baptyſed, but newely inſtructed in the faythe. And ſo he inſtantely refuſynge, they compellyd hym to take it vppon hym. And forthewith as ſoone as he was byſhoppe, all the people of Lumbardye agreed in one opinyon of true faythe, he was of ſuche holyneſſe, ſuche gentylneſſe, ſuche excellent wyſedome and lernynge, that not oonely in his lyfe, but alſo after his deathe, he was had through oute the worlde in honour and reuerence. A rare fourme of election, and as rare a thynge is it to fynde a byſhop or prieſt of Ambroſe qualities, although he were half a paynym and a temporal man, whan he was choſen byſhoppe, wherat they may be aſſhamed, that be chriſtened in theyr infancye, and twenty yeres or more prieſtes, er they be byſſhoppes, and yet ſome not worthye to occupy that holy and reuerende offyce.
            
               Ambuariti, people of a part of Brabande.
            
               Ambubeia, the commune cykory with the long leafe, and the blewe flowre, whiche wylle be cloſed at the goynge downe of the ſonne, and opened at the ryſynge.
            
               Ambubeiae, drunken drabbes, whiche wander about the ſtretes.
            
               Ambulacrum, a pryuate place to walke in, an aley in a gardeyne.
            
               Ambulatio, walkynge, and a walkyng place.
            
               Ambulatiuncula, a lyttell walke.
            
               Ambulator, a walker or ſtyrer.
            
               Ambulo, aui, are, to walke or ſtyre about.
            
               Ambulare in ius, to come before a iudge.
            
               Amburo, buſsi, rere, to bourne all aboute.
            Ambustus, a, um, bourned vp.
            
            Amecus, & ameca, olde wryters vſed for amicus & amica.Galenus.
            
            
               Amemelides, a kynde of medlars, wherein be .v. ſtones.
            
               Amen, a worde of Hebrewe, whyche after the interpretation of Aquila, ſygnifyeth fideliter, after the .lxx. interpretours, it ſignyfyeth fiat, be it.
            
               Amens, madde.
            
               Amentia, foly.
            Amentior, tius, madder.
            
            Amentiſsimus, a, um, maddeſt.
            
            
               Amentum, a thonge, or that whyche is bounden to the myddes of a darte or iauelyn, wherwith it is throwen the farther.
            
               Ameria, an olde cytie in Italy.
            
               America, a countrey late founde in the weſte parte of the worlde, by Americus Veſputius the yere of our lorde a thouſand foure hū
               dred
.lxxvii.
            
               Amerinum, a citie in Italy.
            
               Ames, itis, a perche for a hauke.
            
               Amethyſtus, callyd alſo Anterites, is a precyons ſtone callyd an ametyſt, whyche is of a purple colour, but the more it is myxte with roſe colour the better it is.
            
               Amethyſtinus, a, um, of an ametyſt.
            
               Ametor, he that lacketh his mother.
            
                
               Amia, a fiſh like to a Kuny, but he hath no ſcales, but a playne ſkynne, whiche ſhineth lyke to ſyluer myxte with blue, and his tayle is in facyon lyke a newe moone.
            
               Amianthon, is of Eritius Cordus ſuppoſed to be a ſtone, wherof be made matches lyke to thredes, whiche beinge ones on fyre, ar neuer extincte or put out.
            
               Amica, a woman that is loued. alſo a cōcubine.
            Amicabilis, le, frendly.
            
            Amice, idem.
            
               Amicibor, for amiciam, I wylle clothe or put on a garment.
            
               Amicinum, a canue or potte, whereout they powre wyne.
            
               Amicio, cui, cire, to cloth, to put on a garment.
            
               Amicior, ciri, to be cladde.
            
               Amiciſsime, moſte frendely.
            Amiciſsimus, a, um, idem.
            
               Amiciter, frendly.
            
               Amicitia, amitie or frendſhyppe.
            
               Amicius, more frendly.
            
               Amictorium, a lynnen rayle that women doo weare.
            Amictus, a, um, cladde.
            
            
               Amictus, ctus, a garment or apparayle.
            
               Amicula, a diminutiue of amica.
            
            
               Amiculatus, he that weareth a ſhort cloke.
            
               Amiculum, a ſhorte cloke.
            
               Amicus, & amica, a frende, a louer.
            
               Amicus, a, um, ioyned to a thyng lackyng lyfe, ſygnifieth profytable or holſome.
            
               Amineae uites, vynes growynge in a countreye by Salerne, in the royalme of Naples.
            
               Amiſsio, the loſſe of a thynge.
            Amiſſus, a, um, loſte.
            
            
               Amita, my fathers ſyſter, myn aunte.
            
               Amiternum, a town in Campania, where Saluſt was borne nowe callyd Aquilae.
            
               Amites, perches wheron haukes be ſette.
            
               Amitini, couſyns germains by brother & ſyſter.
            
               Amitto, ſi, tere, to ſuffre, to departe, to loſe, to ſend, to let paſſe, to take fro.
            Amitere iusiurandum,Plautus. to breake an oth, to loſe credence. Quod ſi non dederit, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   hic dies praeterierit, ego argentum, ille iusiurandum amiſerit, If he doo not paye it, and this day doo paſſe, I ſhall loſe my money, but he ſhall loſe his credence.
            
               Amittere libidinem, Iam non poſſum amiſi omnem libidinem: I may do no more, I am paſt all pleaſure.
            
               Ammi, Ammios, uel Ammium, a lyttel ſede and whyte, and hathe the taſt of Origanum, and is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree. It groweth mooſte commonlye in Ethiopia. The Apothecaryes (ſaythe Ioan. Agricola) hathe not the very trewe Ammi, but in ſtede therof, they do ſelle the ſede of cheruile.
            
               Ammon, an hebrewe name, whyche ſygnyfyeth the ſonne of my people. By the whyche name was callyd the ſonne of Lot,Gen. 19. whyche he gatte on his yonge daughter, whan he was dronke. Of this Ammon came the people in Syria callyd Ammonitae. Ioſephus dothe calle theym Ammanitae. By this name was Iupiter alſo worſhypped in Egypt.
            
               Ammoniacum, callyd alſo gutta Ammoniaca, is a ſoote gumme, whyche the Apothecaries doo calle Beniewyne. it yſſueth out of a caane, whyche groweth ſpecyally in Lybia, where the temple of Iupiter Hammon ſtode.
            
               Ammonitrum, a bunche of whyte glaſſe.
            
               Amneſtia, forgetfulnes of thinges paſſed.
            
               Amnicus, a, um, of the brooke.
            
               Amnis, a ryuer or brooke.
            
               Amo, aui, are, to loue hartyly.
            
               Amodo, from henſeforthe.
            
               Amoeno, aui, are, to make merye or glad.
            
               Amoen, meryly, pleaſauntly.
            
               Amoenitas, atis, pleſure, delectablenes or mirth.
            
               Amoenus, a, um, pleaſaunt or dylectable.
            
               Amoenum ingenium, a pleaſant wytte.
            
               Locus amoenus, a delectable place.
            
               Amolior, I remoue with great peyne.
            
               Amomum, is a lyttell buſſhe wrappyd rounde togyther, lyke a cluſter of grapes, and hath a lyttell flowre lyke a whyte vyolette, the leaues be lyke to the leaues of Withwynde or whyte vyne. The beſte commeth out of Armenia, whyche is yelowe as golde, the wood ſomewhat redde, and verye ſoote in ſauour. They be deceyued (as ſaythe Ruellius and Agricola) which do take it for the roſe of Ieruſalem, callyd alſo our ladyes roſe.
            
               Amor, loue.
            
               Amores, idem. Sometyme wanton paſtimes, or pleaſures, wherin we delite.
            
               Amorgis, ſuche a kynde of lyne, wherof is made Raynes or Cipres.
            
               Amorrhaei, a worde of Hebrewe, whiche ſygnifieth cruell rebelles, or great bablars. Of that name was a people, whiche were neighbours vnto the Iewes, and oftentymes ſubdued by them,Reg. 3. and at the laſte kynge Salamon made them tributories vnto hym.
            
               Amos, was father of the prophete Iſai, and than it ſignifieth ſtronge or puiſſaunt. There was an other Amos, whiche was one of the xii. prophetes, and that name ſignified burdeyned or charged, the fyrſte hath in the begynnynge the letter called Aleph, the other hath the letter called Aijn. This man was borne in a towne called Thi
                  •
               me, and was a ſhepeherde, and ſente by god in to Samaria to propheſye, and whan he hadde there propheſied agaynſt .x. tribus, and ſomwhat ſpake of the other two, Amaſias cauſed hym
 often tymes to be beaten, but whan he could not reſiſt the holye goſte, Ochozias, ſonne of kynge Amaſias, cauſed hym to be thraſt into the temples with a greate nayle, and beynge halfe deade, he was caryed in to his owne countrey, where he ſone after dyed.
            Amoſio,Feſtus. 
               for annuo.
            
               Amoueo, ui, uere, to remoue, to put frome a place, or a thynge.
            
               Amouere crapulam,
               Plautus. to parbreake whan one is dronke.
            
               Amouere ſegnitiem, to caſte awaye ſlouth.
            
               Ampendices, old wrytars vſed for appēdices.
            
            
               Ampelos agria, a wylde vyne.
            
               Ampeluſia, an yle called now Tinge.
            
               Ampheſibene, a ſerpent, hauyng two heades, wherof the one is before, the other behynde, where his tayle ſhulde be.
            
               Amphiaraus, was ſonne of Oileus, an Argiue borne, and was a ſouthſayer, whome Adraſtus kynge of Argiues wold haue taken with hym, whan he made war agaynſte the Thebans, but he knowynge that he ſhuld not retourne, hyd hym ſelfe. At the laſte was dyſcouered by his wyfe, and compelled to goo with the kynge. And the fyrſte daye that he came to Thebes, the erthe opened and ſwalowed hym.
            
               Amphibea, beaſtes or byrdes, whiche do lyue as well on the water, as on the lande.
            
               Amphibolum, a doubtfull ſentence.
            
               Amphibrachus, a fote of meter, beinge of thre ſyllables, the fyrſte and laſte ſhorte, the middel ſyllable longe, as Cupido.
            
            
               Amphictiones, was a noble coūſayle in Grece whiche aſſembled at a place, called Termopolae. In this counſayle were theſe .xii. ſundrye people of Greece. Iones, Dores, Perrhebi, Boetii, Magnetes, Achaei, Phthiotae, Melienſes, Dolopes, Aenianes, Delphi, and Phocenſes: of this counſayle do make mention Suidas, Strabo. li. 9. Dioniſius. lib. 14.
            
               Amphicyrtos, is the ſtate of the moone, as wel whan he is ſomwhat increaſed aboue the diameter or iuſte middell, and groweth toward a roundnes, as alſo whan he is in the wane, paſſed the myddell, and waxeth holowe, and the endes ſharpe.
            
               Amphilochus, a philoſopher.
            
               Amphibologia, a forme in ſpeakynge, where a ſentence maye be taken two ſundrye or contrary wayes.
            
               Amphimacrus, a foote in meter, hauynge the fyrſte ſyllable and the laſte longe, the myddel ſyllable longe.
            
               Amphimalla, clothe or garmentes fryſed on bothe ſydes.
            
               Amphimerinon, a feuer cotidian, whiche cō
               meth of fleume.
            
               Amphion, a man, whiche with naturall eloquence, brought rude and wylde people to a ciuile forme of lyuynge, and as ſome do ſuppoſe, founde fyrſte harmony.
            
               Amphipolis, a citie nyghe to Macedonia.
            
               Amphiroe, a nymph or mayden of the ryuers.
            
               Amphiſa, a ryuer in Phocide, a countreye in Greece.
            
               Amphitana, a preciouſe ſtone, the brymme or edge wherof ſhyneth lyke to golde.
            
               Amphitapetes, garmentes on bothe ſydes roughe.
            
               Amphithearrum, a rounde place made with ſeates or ſcaffoldes, where men beheld plays.
            
               Amphitreatrales ludi, plays exerciſed in thoſe places.
            
               Amphitrio, onis, the huſebande of Alemena, mother of Hercules.
            
               Amphitrionides, he that commeth of the line of Amphitrio.
            
               Amphitryte, was the daughter of Nereus, 
                  〈◊〉
                wyfe to Neptunus god of the ſea, and ſometyme it is taken for the ſea.
            
               Amphora, called alſo Quadrantal, an old meſure of Rome, whiche is a fote ſquare euery waye, and hath in it .xlviii. of the olde meaſures, called Sextarij, of oure englyſhe meaſure .v. gallons. In weyght it conteyneth .lxxxli. of wyne .lxxii.li. of oyle, of hony .Cxx.li.
            
               Amphorarius, he that bearethe the potte, a tankarde bearar.
            
               Amphryſus, a riuer in Theſſalſa, by the whiche Apollo kept the ſhepe of Admetus.
            Amphitapa, idem quod Amphimalla.
            
               Ampiruo, are is proprely where in daunſyng lyke meuynge or countenaunce that one makyth, he vnto whome it is made, ſhall do the ſemblable. It was fyrſte vſed of the prieſtes callyd Salij.
            
            
               Amplant, olde wryters vſed for amplificant, they enlarge.
            
               Ample, amply, largely.
            
               Amplector, ti, to imbrace, to loue hartily.
            
               Amplexa,
               Non. Mar cellus. for Amplexare, imbrace or take to you.
            Amplexari, for amplecti.
            
               Amplexor,
               Cic. in fa. epi. & ad Q. fra. 
               ari, to imbrace or loue well.
            
               Amplexus, imbracynges.
            
               Ampliatio, a deferryng of indgement concernynge mans lyfe.
            
               Ampliatus, a man repried, whoſe iudgemente is deferred vppon ſomme dyfficultie or conſyderation.
            
               Amplificatio, an augmentation.
            
               Amplifico, are, to augmente, to make better. ſomtyme to extolle.
            
               Amplio, aui, are, to make more, to drawe to, to defer or delay a thyng in iugement, to repry.
            
                
               Amplior, larger, greatter.
            
               Ampliſsimus, a, um, greatteſt, largeſt,
            
               Ampliſsimus ordo, was vſed for the ſenate of Rome.
            
               Ampliſsimus magiſtratus, the higheſt office
            
               Ampliter, largely, abundantly, magnifikely.
            
               Ampliter occupatus,
               Plautus. let with moch buſines.
            
               Ampliter teſtis, witnes of al the hole matter.
            
               Amplitudo, greatnes of power or maieſtye. ſomtyme it ſignifieth largeneſſe.
            
               Terrae āplitudo, the largenes of the coūtrey.
            
               Ampliuagus, moche wandrynge.
            
               Amplius, more ouer, more largely.
            
               Amplius horas quatuor fortiſsime pugnauerunt:
               Caeſar. They foughte myghtely more than foure houres. Coeperunt amplius tria millia hominum: They toke priſoners .iii. thou ſande men and aboue.
            
               Amplus, a, um, large, wyde, gret, abundant.
            
               Ampluſtra, Ampluſtria, uel Apluſtra, the tacklynge of the ſhyp.
            
               Ampron, a corde or chayne faſtened to the yokes, wherby beaſtes do drawe a wayne.
            
               Ampulla, an oyle pot. alſo a bottell or flagon. ſomtyme it ſignifieth a thyng that is blowen or puffed.Sueton. in Domitian Suetonius vſeth that worde for a drinkynge glaſſe. it maye be called a vyole.
            
               Ampullarius, a bottell maker.
            
               Ampullor, I ſwell for pryde.
            
               Amputo, aui, are, to cut of.
            
               Amula, a water pot, and it maye be vſed for a holy water pot.
            
               Amuleus, the gret vncle of Romulus & Remꝰ.
            
               Amuletum, any thing that is ordeined againſt poyſonynge. It is alſo taken for euery thing whiche is hanged about ones necke or arme, to preſerue hym frome any inconuenience or ſickenes.
            
               Amurca, the mother or 
                  •
               ome of all oyles.
            
               Amuſsis, the maſons or carpenters rule.
            
               Amuſsitatus, a, um, made by lyne, wel proportioned.
            
               Amuſus, he that knoweth no lernyng.
            
               Amyclae, a citie in Lacedemonia, where Caſtor and Pollux were borne. alſo an other citie in Italy.
            
               Amyclaeus, a, um, of that citie.
            
               Amygdalus, an almonde tree.
            
               Amigdalum, an almonde.
            
               Amylū, is a thyng made of wheate thre monthes, olde, whiche is layde in water vntyll it waxe ſofte, the water beinge chaunged .v. tymes in the daye, and as often in the night, and whā it waxeth tender, the water is poured out faire and ſoftly. After whan it is as ſoft as may be, than the water beinge ſoftly poured out, it is trodden with mennes feete, eftſones the water is poured out, and troden agayne, finally the bran, whiche ſwymmeth on the water, is taken away with a ſyue and that whiche remayneth, beinge ſtrayned, is layd on newe tiles, and ſet in the hot ſon, vntyl it be through dryed. This is very medicinable againſt diſtillations into the eies & pimples of the eyes,Ruell. agaynſt ſpyttyng of bloude, and myxt with milke, it cauſeth one to be fat.
            
               Amyſon, a famouſe Citie in the realme of Pontus.
            
               Amynthas, was the .xv. kyng of Macedonia.
         
         
            A ANTE N.
            
               AN, whiter, or if.
            
               Ana, a riuer of Spayne, whiche diuydeth the realme of Granato, from the realme of Portugall, and it ſpryngeth in a countrey in the hithermoſte part of Spayne called Amitanus ager, and ſometyme ſpreadynge hym ſelfe into great pondes or meeres ſomtyme ſcante apperynge in lyttell brookes, or elles hydden vnder the ground, at the laſt, it falleth in to the great ſpayniſhe ſea.
            
               Anabaptiſtae, is a ſect of heretikes, which began about the yere of our lorde. 1524. in Germany: wherof the firſte author was one Balthazar, which taught that baptiſme dyd nothynge profyt vnto chyldren, but that they ought eftſones to be baptiſed whā they come to yeres of diſcretion. wherefore they which were of that ſect of heretikes be called Anabaptiſtae, whiche do ſignify rebaptiſours.
            
               Anabaſius, he that rydeth by poſt horſes. Hieronimus contra Rufinum.
            
            
               Anabathrum,
               Iuuenal. a pulpit or other lyke pla
                  •
               e, whiche ſtandeth on hyghe, wherunto a man muſt go vp by a ladder or grifes.
            
               Anabula,
               Plinius. a beaſt in Aethiope, hauynge a head like a camell, a necke like a horſe, legges like an oxe, and is of colour a bryght red, full of whyte ſpottes.
            
               Anacardus, uel Anacardū, a tree vnknowen to the old Greekes, it groweth in India, alſo in Sicilia in the mountaynes, out of the which commeth fyre. The fruite therof is lyke the harte of a littell byrde, and hath a red iuyce, lyke to bloudde.Ruell. & Io. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . The vulgare people of Sicile and Naples do cal it Pediculū elephanti an Elephantes louſe. There is conteyned in the fruite, hony, whiche doth exulcerat, and burneth the bloud and other humours, roteth vp wertes, and is holſome for the ſynewes whiche be hurt with could. By it ſelfe taken it is venym, but there is therof a confection made by Raſis agaynſt al colde diſeaſes.
            
               Anacephaleoſis, a ſhorte recapitulation or repitition of thynges before reherſed.
            
               Anacharſis, a philoſopher of a meruaylouſe wiſdome, albeit that he was borne in the barbarous
 coūtrey of Scithia whom Plini ſuppoſeth to haue fyrſt found the potters whele. And beinge in the tyme that Solon made lawes to the Athenienſes, he ſayd: That lawes were like to copwebs, which tyed faſt lyttel flies, and the gret flies brake them, and went cleane through them: In lyke wiſe the poore and meane men are faſte wounden in the penalties and daungiers of lawes, but lordes and men in great auctoritie dayly breake lawes, and are not corrected.
            
               Anachorita, an hermite, the interpretation therof is, he that lyueth a parte, and out of company.
            
               Anaclinterium,
               Spartian. a mattreſſe.
            
               Anacreon, an olde poete, whiche ſonge to the harpe, he was borne in a towne of Ionia called Teum. This man being aged, was ſtrā
               gled with the kernel of a grape, and ſo died.
            
               Anadendromache,
               Gal. li. 14. Meth. a playſter made of the leaues of holy hocke.
            
               Anadiploſis, is a doublynge of a worde, as the laſte worde of the fyrſte verſe, is the firſt worde of the ſeconde verſe, as, Certent & ſignis ululae, ſic Tytirus Orpheus,
            
            Orpheus in ſyluis inter delphinas Arion.
            
               Anagallida aquatica, called alſo Sion & Lauer, an herbe whiche groweth in water, with a ſtrayght vprighte ſtalke, whiche is fattye, and hath brode leaues lyke alyſaundis, but they be leſſe, and haue a good ſauour. Surgions do vſe it to heale woundes.
            
               Anagallis, an herbe called vulgarlye morſus gallinae, in englyſhe (as I ſuppoſe) Chickeweede.
            
               Anaglypha, & Anaglypta, veſſell or plate of golde or ſyluer chaced, as cuppes or bolles beaten with the hammer, and not ingraued.
            
               Anaglyptes, he that worketh ſuche veſſell.
            
               Anaglyptice, the craft to chace or imboce plate
            
               Anagnoſtes, he that redeth to other men, as bible clerkes, or any other clerke, whiche redeth while an other wryteth.
            
               Anagoge, the hyghe and ſubtylle vnderſtandynge of the ſcripture.
            
               Analecta, fragmentes of meate, whiche fall vnder the table, and be afterwarde ſwepte awaye.
            
               Analectes, he that gadereth vp brokelettes.
            
               Analeptice,
               Gal. Met. li. 7. a forme of diet to nouryſhe hym, whiche is late recouered from ſickenes.
            
               Analeſia, is a ſickeneſſe of the heade, whiche taketh awaye ſenſiblenes from the hole partes of the heade, and cummeth of the wekeneſſe of the ſtomake, or of to moche meate, or of to moche lechery, or drinkynge moche cold water, or to moche ſtudy, or of indigestion.
            
               Analogia, conueniency or proportion, whoſe propertie is to confer that whiche is doubtfull, with that whiche is lyke to it, which is more certayne, to make it more playne.
            
               Analogos, proportionable.
            
               Ananias, the cloude of the lorde, or diuination of the lorde. It was the name of one of the thre Hebrewe chylderne,2. Para. 26 whiche by the commandemente of Nabugodonoſor were put in a fournaiſe of fyre, and came forthe without damage. Alſo it was the name of one of the captaynes of kyng Ozias. Alſo of one of the diſciples of the apoſtelles, which with Sapphira his wyfe ſolde his lande, and broughte a portion therof to the apoſtelles, and kepte backe the reſidue. Wherfore beinge rebuked of ſaynte Peter, they bothe fel downe deade, for that they wolde haue deceyued the holye goſte. Of that name was alſo an other dyſciple of Chryſt, which baptiſed ſaynct Paul. Moreouer a byſhop, who commaunded that ſayncte Paul ſhuld be ſtriken on the mouth, whan he preached.
            
               Anapeſtus, a fote in meter of .iii. ſyllables, hauyng the two fyrſt feete ſhort, the laſt longe.
            
               Anapis, a riuer in Sicile, tenne, furlonge from the citie of Siracuſis.
            
               Anarchos, without a prynce, or without a begynnynge.
            
               Anas, anatis, a ducke.
            
               Anaſtrophe, a tournyng out of a commune order, as Italiam contra, for contra Italiam.
            
            
               Anaticula, a lyttell ducke.
            
               Anatarius, a, um, of a ducke.
            
               Anatinus, a, um, lyke a ducke.
            
               Anathema, in holy ſcripture betokeneth ſeparation, els where it ſignifieth a thing offered or ſet vp in a temple or churche, as thynges offred and hanged vp.
            
               Anathematizo, aui, are, to curſe or gyue to the dyuell.
            
               Anatiborum, Prouaunce in Fraunce.
            
               Anatociſmus, receyuynge of vſery.
            
               Anatolius, was b
                  •
               ſhop of Laodicea, the yere of our lord. 278. a very holy man and of gret lernynge.
            
               Anatomia, or Anatomice, anotomye or cuttynge of men by phiſitions, to conſyder the inward partes and membres.
            
               Anatorius, a keper of duckes.
            
               Anauros, a riuer in Theſſalia.
            
               Anaxagoras, a famous philoſopher, noble of bloudde, but more noble in vertue and wyſedome, whiche abandonynge all his poſſeſſions, gaue hym all holye to the ſtudy of naturall philoſophy, and whan one ſayde to hym: Haſte thou no care for thy countrey, he aunſwered: yes verylye, I haue excedynge care for my cuntrey, poyntyng vp to heauen with his fynger. Alſo whan he had ben longe out of his countrey, and was eftſones returned,
 and beheld his poſſeſſions diſtroyed and waſted, he ſayde: I hadde not ben ſaulfe except theſe thynges had ben loſte.
            
               Anazarba, a towne in Cilicia, where Dioſcorides the noble phiſition was borne.
            
               Anaxarcus, a philoſopher, whiche fallynge in the indignation of a tyraunt called Nicocreon kynge of Cyprus, was by hym apprehended, and put in to a greatte morter of ſtone, where he was beaten or pounde with yron peſtelles: whiche tourmente he toke ſoo pacientlye, that he doubled theſe wordes worthy of remembraunce: Beate on, beate on Anaxarchus wynde bagge, for Anaxarchus thou beateſt not. By the whiche wordes he accoū
               ted his body but a bagge full of wynde.
            
               Anaximander, a philoſopher, whiche fyrſte founde the deſcription of the compaſſe of the ſea and lande, and made fyrſt the ſphere.
            
               Anaximenes, a philoſopher, diſciple of Anaximander: who ſayde, that the begynnyng of all thinges was the ayre, And that the ſters 
                  •
               es dydde moue infinitely, not ouer the erthe but about it.
            
               Ancaeſa, grauen veſſell.
            
               Anceps, itis, doubtfull. ſometyme it ſignifieth double: alſo cuttynge on bothe ſydes.
            
               Anchialea, a citie in Cilicia, which was builded by Sardanapalus, where alſo was his ſepulture.
            
               Anchilops,
               Gal. in definition. is ſuperfluous fleſhe in the greater corner of the eye, wherevnto humours be gathered.
            
               Anchiſes, the father of Aeneas.
            
               Anchora, An anchore.
            
               Anchorarius, a, um, pertcyning to an anchore.
            
               Anchyle, is an inciſion or cuttynge of the cordes of the necke or ioyntes, wherby the vſe of the member is let.
            
               Ancile, a ſhielde without corners, ſuche one in the tyme of Numa kyng of Rome, was ſene fall out of the ſkye.
            
               Ancilla, a mayden ſeruaunt, it was properlye taken for a bonde woman.
            
               Ancillor, to ſerue humblye and diligently.
            
               Ancillula, a lyttel or poore wenche ſeruaunt.
            
               Anclabra, vyſſels, whiche prieſtes vſed.
            
               Anclare, ſeu antlare, to empty a veſſell.
            
               Ancona, a noble citie and hauen in Italye, in the countrey called Picenum, whiche ſtandeth vpon the ſea called mare hadriaticum, and was ſoo called bycauſe that the ſea bankes there do bende in fourme lyke to an arme with the elbowe. It was fyrſte buylded by people of Siracuſis a citie in Sicilia, afore the incarnatiō of Chriſt. 179. yeres & the hauen was augmented by the noble Traianu
                  •
                emperor of Rome. After was it deſtroyed by ſaraſins, and efteſones buylded and inhabited, and is nowe a famous citie.
            
               Ancones, the coynes or corners of a wall.
            
               Anculi, & Anculae, goddes and goddeſſes of ſeruynge women.
            
               Anchuſa, an herbe, of whoſe roote commeth a red iuyce, wherwith ſanguine colour is dyed.
            
               Ancus, he that hath a croked elbowe.
            
               Ancus Martius, was the fourth king of Rome and was ſon to the daughter of Numa Pō
               pilius, and ſucceded Tullus Hoſtilius, afore the incarnation of Chriſte. 642. yeres. This prynce as well in martiall prowes, as in cyuile policie was equall to any that were before hym. Alſo he enlarged the citie, & made a brydge ouer the ryuer of Tiberis: alſo a priſon in the middes of the citie, to the terror of offendours, whiche than dayly increaſed.
            
               Ancyra, the name of .ii. cites, the one in Phrigia, the other in Galatia.
            
               Andabatae, certayne menne that foughte with ſwordes winkynge.
            
               Andegauia, a countreye in Fraunce called Angewe.
            
               Andes, the people of Aniewe in Fraunce. it was alſo a village by Mātua in Italy wher Vergil the poete was borne. wherfore he is ſomtyme called Andinus uates.
            
            
               Andianum uinum, wyne of Aniewe.
            
               Andrachni, in greeke, is in latine Portulaca, in englyſhe purſlane.
            
               Andrago, a woman hauynge a mans harte.
            
               Andreas, was one of the .xii. apoſtelles. brother to Peter, who preachynge at a citie called Patrias in the countray of Achaia, was impriſoned and beaten, and at the laſt hanged on a croſſe, wheron he preached .ii. days, and than died.
            
               Andricus, an hyll in Cilicia.
            
               Androdamanta, ſeu Androdamas, a pretious ſtone, harde and ponderous, & is as it were of the colour and bryghtnes of ſyluer, and in fourme is of diuers lyttel ſquares. It is foūd in the ſande of the red ſea. it putteth awaye the fury of yre and the rage of lechery.
            
               Androgeus, the ſon of Minos kyng of Crete, whiche by enuy was ſlayne of the Athenienſes. For the which many yeres after the ſonnes of the Athenienſes were ſente to Crete, to be delyuered to the monſter called Minotaurus, whiche was afterward deſtroyed by Theſeus. It was alſo the name of a noble Briton, whan Iulius Caeſar came hyther in to this realme of Brytain.
            
               Androgynae, people in Aſia, beinge of bothe kyndes in one perſon, man and woman.
            
               Androgynos, a man hauynge bothe members of a man, and alſo of a woman.
            
               Andromache, the wyfe of the valiant Hector.
            
               Andromede, the wyfe of Perſes, whome he
 ſaued from a monſter of the ſea.
            
               Andron, a chaumber, wherinto men onely do come, and not women. Alſo a ſpace betwene two houſes, wherinto rayne falleth.
            Andronitis, idem.
            
               Andronae, feaſtes, whervnto onely men doo come.
            
               Andros, an yle betwene Greece and Aſia, directly agaynſte the citie of Epheſum.
            
               Androſace, Cordus and ſome other do ſuppoſe it to be that, whiche is alſo called Cuſcuta, in englyſhe withwinde, whiche wyndeth about lyn and hempe. Muſa and Maynardus do thynke the contrary: beleue whom ye lyſt, Dyoſcorydes deſcrybeth hym in this wyſe: Androſaces is a bytter herbe, ſpreadynge abrode ſmalle ſtalkes lyke ruſhes, withoute leaues, hauynge lyttell coddes on the toppe, wherin be ſeedes. It groweth on the ſea coſtes of Siria.
            
               Androſaemon, an herbe called ſayncte Ihon̄s worte.
            
               Andruare, olde wryters vſed for recurrere, to run agayne.
            
               Anellus, a lyttell rynge.
            
               Anemonae, wylde popy, with red floures, growynge in corne fieldes.
            
               Anethum, an herbe called dyll.
            
               Aneuriſma, the cuttyng a ſonder of the ſinew, whiche conteyneth the receptory of bloudde, or takynge away the matter, wherin the ſpirites be conteyned.
            
               Anfractus, wyndynges and tournynges, ſpecially in the grounde.
            
               Angaria, a conſtraynt or compulſion.
            
               Angariae, arum, ſome do expounde it a prouiſion of poſtes in ſundry places for ſpedines of meſſages.
            
               Angarij, poſtes or currours whiche go in meſſages.
            
               Angario, aui, are, to conſtrayne one to doo a thynge.
            
               Angelica, called alſo Smyrnium, is taken of Mainardus for that which is called Alexander. Io. Tanſtetterus, a well lerned man at this tyme, ſuppoſeth that whiche Dioſcorides calleth Morrida, to be our Angelica.
            
            
               Angelus, an angell, In greeke it properlye ſignifieth a meſſager.
            
               Anger, a certayne ſerpente, after whoſe ſtyngynge hapneth intollerable peynes.
            
               Angerona, was called the goddeſſe of pleaſure, called alſo Volupia.
            
            
               Angilae, people in Affryke, of whome the women, the fyrſt night that they be wedded, do accompany with all men, whiche come to the weddynge, but euer after they be chaſte.
            
               Angina, of the Greekes called ſynanche, is an inflammation of the muſcule of the inner gargil. Of this dyſeaſe be thre kyndes: the fyrſte is Synanche, wherin appereth neyther ſwellynge nor rednes, but the bodye waxeth leane, the members are leuſed, and the breth is ſtopped. The ſeconde is called Vtiſynanche, there apereth rednes and ſwellyng, and let of ſpeche with yexinge. The thyrde is called Paraſynanche, wherein onely the chekes doo ſwell, the other tokens do not folowe.
            
               Angiologia, is a poynte of ſurgery in the vaines of the temples hyd, being deuided from temple to temple in depenes.
            
               Angiportus, a great hole in the erthe with many tournynges, or that whiche hath none iſſue out, or a lane in a towne, whiche leadeth the nexte waye to a ſtrete, or that whiche lyeth on an hauen, wherby marchandiſe is caryed from the water, or recaried.
            
               Angleria, is nowe a caſtell in Lombardy, whiche ſometyme was a citie forty myles frome Myllane, ſet on a very hyghe mountayne.
            
               Anglia, the royalme of Englande, part of the yle called Britannia, the people are called Angli, of a people of Saxony, whiche were at that tyme moſte of reputation, and therfore theyr name lengeſt continued, as well in the people as in the countraye. Reade more hereof in Britannia.
            
            
               Ango, anxi, angere, to tourment or vexe.
            
               Angon, the inner parte of the elbowe.
            
               Angor, anguyſhe of body or mynde.
            
               Anguilla, a fyſhe called an ecle, whiche as the beſt autors do affirme, commeth without generation or ſpawne: neyther there is of that kynde eyther male or female, but they be ingendred of that whiche is called the bowels of the erthe, whiche is of claye myxte with moyſte erthe. And that apereth by ſtandynge pooles, where after that the erthe hath ben throwen out cleane, after dyuerſe ſhoures of rayne, eeles haue ben founde in them. for in drye wether they do not increaſe, thoughe it be in a ryuer. And they whiche fyndynge littell thynges lyke heares or eaſis ioyned with them, ſay that they be yonge eeles, are deceiued. In the ryuer of Ganges in India, haue ben founde eeles .xxx. feete in length.
            
               Anguimanus, an olyphant.
            
               Anguinus, a, um, of a ſerpente, or wyndinge and crepynge lyke a ſerpent.
            
               Anguis, a ſnake.
            Angularis, re, cornerde.
            
            
               Angulatim, corner wyſe.
            
               Anguloſus, full of corners.
            
               Angulus, a corner.
            
               Anguſte, an aduerbe, ſignifienge ſtrayghtlye, naroly, peynfully,
            
               Anguſtia, ſtraytnes, or perplexity of mynde.
            
               Anguſtitas, a ſtrayte, or ſtrayt place.
            
                Anguſtus, a, um, ſtrayt.
            
            
               In anguſtum uenire, to be in ſome neceſſitie: to haue great lacke of helpe.
            
               Anhelator, he that fetcheth his wynde often, or bloweth moche, called a purſy man.
            
               Anhelitus, brethe or wynde of a man.
            
               Anhelo, aui, are, to fetche wynde, or drawe breathe.
            
               Anhelus, he that draweth his breth peynfully.
            
               Ania, a Romayne woman, whiche being faire and yonge, after that her huſcbande was deade, was counſayled to take an other, but ſhe wolde not conſent therto. for if (ſayd ſhe) I ſhall hap to haue as good as I haue had, I wyll not be in feare to loſe hym: if I ſhall haue an yll huſbande, what ſhall I nede, after a good manne, to ſuffer a ſhrewe.
            Anicetum, idem quod Anethum, dyll.
            
            
               Anicula, a lyttel olde woman.
            
               Aniliter, lyke an olde foole.
            
               Anima,
               Auguſt. li. Definito. is a ſubſtaunce created, inuiſible, moſt lyke vnto the immortall god, hauynge none ymage or figure, but onely of his creatoure.It is called in englyſhe the ſoule. ſomtyme it is taken for lyfe. alſo it ſygnifieth the breth. otherwhile the wynde. ſomtyme the water.
            Animā adimere, uel extinguere, to kyll.
            
            
               Animam debet, he oweth more thanne he is worthe. he oweth ſo moche, that he hath not his lyfe but in lone.
            
               Dic amabo, an foetet anima uxoris tuae? Tel me of good feloweſhyppe, dothe thy wyues brethe ſtynke?
            
               Animam comprime,
               Plautus. holde thy brethe.
            
               Si ſitulam iamiam caepero, nun
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   aedipol tu mihi diuino quid credas post hunc diem, ni ego illi puteo, ſi occepſo, animam omnem intertraxero: If I take the bucket, neuer beleue me for a prophete after this daye, if I drawe not cleane out (if I ones begynne) all the water of the well.
            
               Animaduerto, tere, to conſider, to take hede, to perceyue, to ſet mynde on a thynge, to beholde, and to thynke.
            
               Experrecta nutrix animaduertit dormientem,
               Plautus. 
               circumplicatum ſerpentis amplexu. The nourice awaked, & perceyued the chylde beinge on ſlepe, wrapped all aboute in the wyndynge of the ſerpent.
            
               Date operam,
               Terentiꝰ. 
               & cum ſilento, animaduertite? Take you heede, and with ſylence perceyue what I wyll ſaye to you.Cicero. 
               Ea ſunt animaduertenda peccata maxime, quae difficilli me praecauentur. Thoſe offences ought to be moſte ſharply corrected, whiche moſte hardly are eſchewed.Caeſar 
               Hac re animaduerſa, Caeſar iubet ſigna conuerti: After that the offence was punyſhed, Caeſar commaunded to aduaunce the ſtandarde.
            
               Animaduertere in Aliquem, to puniſhe one.
            
               Animaduerſi, they whiche are punyſſhed or corrected.
            
               Animaduerſio, conſideration, punyſſhmente. ſometyme ſtudy.
            
               Animaduerſor, he that puniſheth.
            
               Animaequius, a, um, pacient, or ſufferinge.
            
               Animal, all thyng that hath lyfe, and is ſenſible, commonly it is taken for a beaſte.
            
               Animalis, le, that wherin is lyfe.
            
               Animans, idem quod Animal, ſauinge that it is more larger. for it maye ſignifie all thynge that hath ſpirite of lyfe.
            
               Animatus, a, um, that hath ſowle or lyfe. Alſo hauynge a fantaſy or fauour to a thynge, or to be dyſpoſed.Plau
                     •••
                  . 
               Ita animatus fui, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nunc sum, ut ea te patera donem. I hadde ſuch a fantaſye, and yet haue, that I wolde gyue the cup to you.
            
               Amabo ſi quid animatus eſt facere, faciam ut ſciam. If he be diſpoſed to do any thynge, let me knowe it.
            
               Animitus, from the very ſowle or lyfe.
            
               Animo, aui, are, to gyue courage or boldenes, to quicken.
            
               Animos addere, to make one bolde, or to prycke hym forwarde to do a thynge.
            
               Animos comprimere, to abate ones courage.
            Animos retardare, idem.
            
               Animos efferre, to loke highe, or be proude.
            
               Animos lactare, to drawe mennes hartes with fayre promyſes, to make fooles fayne, to bryng men in fooles paradiſe.
            
               Animi pendere, to be in doubte what to do.
            Animi cauſa, for pleaſure. Cur eam emit?
            
               T. Animi cauſa.
               Plau
                     •••
                  . wherfore dyd he by her? T. for his pleaſure.
            
               Animo male eſt, it greueth hym at the very harte.
            
               Animo praeſenti, with a bolde ſpirite or courage.
            
               Animo bono eſſe, to be of good chere.
            
               Animo iniquo pati, to ſuffer vnpatiently.
            
               Animo obsequi, to take pleaſure, to folowe appetite or wyll.
            Animo morem gerere, idem.
            
               Animum adijcere ad uirginem, to ſette his loue on the mayden.
            
               Animum adiungere, to applye or set mynde to a thynge.
            
               Animum aduertere, to take hede.
            
               Animum appellere, to diſpose or apply him to do a thynge.
            
               Animum e
                     •
                  cere, to put awaye affection or fantaſy.
            
               Animum recipere, to take harte or courage Alſo to fetche brethe.
            
               Animum ſumere, to take a good harte.
            
                
               Animus impotens, an vnpaciente courage. a proude or dogged harte.
            
               Animus tibi pendet, thou ſtandeſt in doubte what thou mayſte do.
            
               Anime mi, my dere harte.
            Animule, idem.
            
               Animoſe, couragiouſely, Iuſtily.
            
               Animoſitas, boldneſſe.
            
               Animoſus, bolde.
            
               Animus, the mynde, the wyll. ſometyme it is put for the ſoule. ſometyme for affection or delectation. ſometyme for wynde or blaſte, ſom tyme for wrathe. ſomtyme for a ſowne.
            
               Anio, enis, a ryuer in Italy in the fielde called Tiburtinum.
            
            
               Aniſum, an herbe called anyſe, whereof commeth anyſe ſede, whiche is hotte and drye in the thyrde degree.
            
               Anna, a name of Hebrewe, whiche ſignifieth gratious, pitifull, reſtinge, or gyuinge. Of this name haue ben many noble women. One was a iewe, wyfe to Elcans, whiche beinge a longe tyme barrayne, by continuall prayer at the laſt obteyned of god to be fruiteful, & broughte forthe by her huſbande, the good and holy prophet Samuel, who afterwarde was the chiefe prieſte and buſhop in Iſraell. Ano ther was an olde widowe and a propheteſſe in Hieruſalem, at the tyme whan Chriſt was preſented in the temple: whiche woman ſerued god daye and nyght, in prayer and faſtynge, and beholdynge Chriſte, declared all that was propheſied of hym, to them that abode the redemption of Iſrael. Another Anna was daughter of Iſachar of the tribe of Leui, or as Damaſcenus ſaythe, of the tribe of Iuda, and was maryed to Ioachim of the ſame tribe, whiche beinge longe barrayne, at the laſte brought forthe the bleſſed vyrgin Mary, mother of Ieſu, god and man: and after the death of Ioachim ſhe was maried to Cleophas, and after his death to Salome
            
               Annales, hiſtories of actes, yerely done.
            
               Annalis, le, that whiche is done yerely.
            
               Annaria lex, was a lawe in the .xii. table of the Romaynes,
                  
                     •
                  ex. Pōp. 
                     •
                  ext. Cae
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  lius. whereby was appoynted at what age and duringe what tyme, great offices in the publyke weale ſhoulde be taken and kept.
            
               Annarius, a, um, aged, or that whiche is done yerelye.
            
               Annas, was buſhop amonge the iewes, whan Chriſte began to preache.
            
               Annaſcor, to growe, or to be borne by a plate or man.
            
               Anniculus, a, um, that whiche is of one yeres olde.
            Annilis, le, aged.
            
            
               Annilis fabula, an olde wyues tale, or a tale without fruite.
            
               Annitor, to reſyſte, or to helpe, to ſette to my mynde.
            
               Anniuerſalis, the compaſſe of the yere.
            
               Anniuerſarius, a, um, that euery yere retourneth at one tyme.
            
               Annona, vyttayles, ſuſtinaunce, or lyuynge.
            Somtyme it betokeneth fyndynge in meate, drynke, and apparayle.
            Annonarius, & Annotinus, a, um, perteynynge to vyttayle.
            
            
               Annonariae expenſae, expenſes in vitayle.
            Annoſus, a, um, aged
            
            
               Annotatio, a notynge or markynge of thinges for ſpeciall remembraunce.
            
               Annoto, aui, are, to nots, to intitle.
            
               Annotinae naues, ſhyppts that cary corne.
            
               Annuatim, yerely.
            
               Annularis, re, perteynynge to a rynge.
            
               Annuntiare, to declare a meſſage.
            
               Annuo, ere, to conſent or graunt.
            
               Annus, is commonlye called a yere, not withſtandynge Annus is diuided in .ii. ſignifications, one is called Annus uertens, whiche the Egyptians made but of .ii. monethes, the Romaynes in the tyme of Romulus .x. monethes: After Numa Pompilius, which reigned nexte after Romulus, added to .ii. monethes, and made it .xii. monethes, whiche Iulius Caeſar accompted to contayne. 365. dayes, and the fourth part of a natural day. Annus magnus after the ſayinge of Ariſtote les, is the ſpace, where in all the ſpheris ſterres and planettes be retourned into the ſame ſtate and poynte, as they were at the tyme, from whenſe we do accompte, whiche ſome do ſuppoſe to be in. 2484. yeres, called uertentes, ſome ſaye. 5552. ſome ten thouſande and eyghte hundred yeres. Ioſephus calleth a thouſande yeres Annum magnum.
            
            
               Annuum, a pention, or annuitie.
            
               Annuus, a▪ um, that dureth one yere.
            
               Anodina, thynges, whiche do put away peine or griefe.
            
               Anomalum, vnequall, diuers, roughe.
            
               Anonium, an herbe called deade nettle, or archaungell.
            
               Anonymum, without a name.
            
               Anophytus, ſprōgen or growen vpon a thing.
            
               Anquina, the cord wherwith the ſaile is bound to the maſte.
            
               Anquiro. to ſeke.
            
               Anſa, the care or handell of a pot, or cup. And ſometyme it ſignifieth occaſion. ſomtyme a buckle.
            
               Anſanctus, on euery parte holy.
            
               Anſatus, a, um, hauynge an handell.
            
               Anſer, ſeris, a gooſe. They treade to ingender in the water, they ſyt on theyr egges in colde
 countrayes .xxx. dayes, in warme countreys or wether .xxv. dayes, as Columella ſaythe. They were moch made of by the Romayns, for as moche as when the frenche men beſieged the capitole of Rome, they whiche were within beinge on ſlepe, the capitole had ben betrayed and wonne, if that a certayne number of geeſe, perceyuynge the ennemies, had not cryed, wherwith the Romaynes beinge wakened, by the valiant prowes of M. Mā
               lius, they ſlewe and draue oute the frenchemen, and ſaued the capitol. wherefore geeſe were had in great reputation, and prouiſion was made that they ſhuld neuer lacke meate.
            
               Anſerinus, a, um, lyke a goſe, or perteyninge to a goſe.
            
               Anſula, the diminutiue of anſa.
            
            
               Antacei, as Strabo wryteth, be fyſſhes in the ryuer called Boryſthenes, lyke to Dolphins without fynnes, and be verye delycate and pleaſaunt to eate.
            
               Antae, iambes, alſo poſtes on euery ſyde of the doore.
            
               Antaeci, people whiche dwell in the countrary Zon
                  •
                or gyrdell, to Anticthones.
            
            
               Antandros, a citie in Phrigia.
            
               Antapocha, the counterpane of a deede in wrytynge.
            
               Antarcticus, the fifthe cercle in heauen, called the ſouth pole.
            
               Antarium bellum, battayle before a Citie or towne.
            Antea, Ante, before.
            
            
               Ante alios, aboue other, before other, more than other, or beſyde other.
            
               Anteambulo, lonis, a lackey, or other ſeruaut that goeth afore his maiſter.
            Antecapio, coepi, capere, to preuent.
            
            
               Antecedo, ceſsi, dere, to go before, to excell.
            
               Antecello, lui, lere, to excel or haue preeminēce
            
               Anteceſsum, payde before hande.
            
               Antecoenium, a colation or drynkyng betwene dy
                  •
               er and ſupper.
            
               Ante eo, iui, ire, to precede or excel, or go before.
            
               Antefero, to put before, or ſet more by.
            
               Antefixa, thynges caſte in mouldes, and ſet ouer doores.
            
               Ante hac, before this tyme, or before that time.
            
               Antelapides, ſtones ſette at bothe the ſydes of a doore for ſtrength.
            
               Anteloquium, the fyrſte tourne in ſpeakynge.
            
               Antelucanus, a, um, that which is before day lyghte.
            
               Antelucani uenti, wyndes that doo blowe from the water, or from ſome creke.
            
               Anteluco, an aduerbe, before daye.
            
               Anteluco, aui, are, to wake before daye.
            
               Anteluculo, before daye lyghte, or an howre afore ſon.
            
               Antenna, the croſſepiece, wherto the ſayle is faſtened.
            
               Antenor, was of alyaunce to Priamus kynge of Troye, and after the deſtruction of Troy, remayned there with the Troyanes, whiche were lefte on lyue, and afterwarde beinge dryuen thenſe by the ſonnes of Hector, he fled with .ii. thouſande Troyans, and entred into the countreye called Venetia, and there buylded the noble citie of Patauium, called commonly Padua, and there reigned during his lyfe.
            
               Ante oculos, before his eyes, but it ſignifieth further of than Coram oculis.
            
            
               Antepagmentum, a portall.
            Antepono, ſui, nere, to preferre.
            
            
               Ante
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                  , before, ere.
            
               Ante
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   de repub. dicam, ete I ſpeake of the weale publike.
            
               Anterius, longe before.
            
               Antermini, the inhabitauntes of the marches or frontiers of a countrey.
            
               Anterotae, loue mutually ſette betwene two perſones.
            
               Anterotes, the warſte kynde of Amatiſtes, whiche hath a white purple colour, towarde a chriſtall.
            
               Antes, outwarde pyllars or poſtes, wherby the houſe or frame is ſuſteyned.
            
               Anteſignani, they whiche be nexte the ſtanderd, appoynted for to defende it.
            
               Anteſto, to excell, or ſtande before.
            
               Anteſtor, to aſſigne a iudge.
            
               Anteſum, antefui, ante eſſe, to excell an other in any thynge.
            Anteuenio, ueni, nire, to preuent.
            
            
               Anteuerto, to preuente, to ouer tyde one. ſomtyme to do one thynge before an other: to do a thynge fyrſte, and before an other man.
            
               Anteurbanus, a, um, nygh to the citie, as Anteurbanum praedium, a manour nygh
                  •
                to the citie.
            
               Antexpectatus, a, um, come before that he was loked for.
            
               Anthedon, a kynde of medlars, whiche hath leaues lyke an almonde tree, the fruite laſſe than the common medlar, but moch pleaſanter, and wyll be lengar kepte.
            
               Anthemis, an herbe called chamomyl.
            
               Anthenodorus, a philoſopher of the ſecte of them, whiche were called Stoici, flouryſhed xv. yeres before the incarnation of Chryſte. Of whom this wyſe ſentēce proceded: Thou mayſte thynke that thou arte free frome all couaytiſe, whan thou art come to that point that thou wylte deſyre nothynge of god, but that thou mayſte openly craue.
            
               Antherae, a certayne ſalue, whiche hath a floryſhynge and orient coloure, rede Cornelium
 Celſum. All be it Ioan. Manardus ſaythe in the fourthe boke of his Epiſtoles, that phyſytions doo calle Antheras, compounde medycines for dyſeaſes of the mouthe, wherin Roſes be myngled. But he that readeth Galenum de compoſitione medicamentorum, ſhall fynde Antheras withoute the flowres of Roſes.
            Anthericon, idem quod Aſphodelus, Daffadylles.
            
            
               Antheus, was a man in Mauritania of meruayllous ſtrengthe, before the Incarnation of Chryſte .1588. yeres, with whome Hercules wraſtlyd, who perceyuyng that as often as he threwe hym to the erthe, ſoo often he efteſoones recouered his ſtrengthe: He at the laſte toke hym in his armes, and dydde lyfte hym aboue grounde, and ſo helde hym vntylle the ſowle wente out of his body, and there dyed. Antonius Sabellicus wrytetth, that Sertorius founde the Sepoulchre of Antheus, in a citie callyd Tigena, in Barbarye, whiche was in length .xl. cubytes.
            
               Anthias, a fyſhe, a greate deuourer of mannes fleſſhe, hauynge teethe lyke to a combe, yet not withſtandynge in the partes where this fyſſhe breadeth, there is no monſter of the ſea, and therefore he is callyd Sacer piſcis, the holy fyſſhe. He is alſoo callyd Callionymus.
            
            
               Anthirrhinos, an herbe lyke to lynne, hauyng no roote. It hathe a purple flowre, and groweth commonly amonge corne. The ſeede is lyke to a calues heade with the noſethrylles open.
            
               Anthos, is commonly taken for the flowres of Roſemary. All be it, it is the generall name of euery flowre.
            
               Anthraceus, a colyar.
            
               Anthracia, a bournynge cole.
            
               Anthracides, a ſtone, in the whiche there ſeemeth to be ſparkes, as it were of fyre.
            
               Anthracinus, a, um, blacke as a cole.
            
               Anthropophagi, people whiche doo deuoure men in eatynge of theym.
            
               Anthyllis, is the herbe commonlye callyd herbe Iuye.
            
               Antiae, the heare of a woman, that is layde ouer her forhead, gentylwomen dyd late call them their rolles.
            
               Antibacchius, a fote in meter, hauyng the firſt ſyllable and the laſte ſhorte, and the myddell ſyllable longe.
            
               Antica, all that is before vs.
            Anticipo, aui, are, to preuent.
            
            
               Anticlus, was one of the Grekes, which was incloſyd in the braſen horſe, wherby the cytie of Troy was betrayed. And whan the fayre Helene, myſtruſtyng that engyn, cam vnto it, and feining the voices of the ladies of Grece,Homerus ſpake as if euery of them had ſpoken to theyr huſbandes, and none of them, which were in the braſon horſe, regarded her: onely Anticlus thynkyng that he herde the voyce of his wyfe named Laodomia, wold haue anſwerd had not Vlyſſes with his hande ſtopped his mouthe, vntyll Helene commaunded by Pallas, was departed, by the occaſyon whereof Anticlus was ſtrangled.
            
               Anticthones, people dwellynge in the vttermoſte part of the worlde, directly ageynſt vs.
            
               Anticyra, an Ile in Aſia, where the herbe callyd Elleborus groweth, whyche pourgeth melancholy, and there it may be taken without any daunger. Whereof grewe this prouerbe ſpoken to men in theyr melancholy:
            
               Nauiga ad Anticyras, Go ſayle to Anticyra. as who ſaythe, Pourge your melancoly.
            
               Antidicomaritae, a ſecte of heretyques, whiche affirmed, that the bleſſed vyrgyn Mary, after that ſhe had brought forth Chriſt, was carnally knowen of Ioſeph, and had by hym other chylderne. The authour of the whyche hereſy was Heluidius, about the yere of our lorde . 406.
            
               Antidora, gyfte for gyft, one for an other.
            
               Antidotarius, a boke of medicines.
            
               Antidotum, a medicine to expelle poyſon.
            
               Antigerio, olde writers vſyd for very ſhortly, forthewith, or the thynge were done.
            
               Antigraphareus, a controller.
            Antigrap
                  ••
               eus, idem.
            
               Antigraphum, an example.
            
               Antila, a poumpe to drawe water.
            
               Antilena, a peutrell.
            
               Antimetabole, a fygure in ſpeche, where wordes are repeted to a contrarye ſentence, as, Non ut edam uiuo, ſed ut uiuam edo, I lyue not to eate, but I eate to lyue.
            
               Antiochia, a noble citie in Syria, callyd fyrſte Epiphane or Beblata, and afterward was augmented by Seleuchus, ſonne of Antiochus, one of the noble companyons of great kynge Alexander .330. yeres afore the commynge of Chryſte, who callyd it by the name of his father Antiochia. Thoroughe this Cytie rounneth the ryuer callyd Orontes.
            
            Of this cytie ſayncte Peter the apoſtle was byſſhoppe ſeuen yeres, and after hym ſaynt Lucas the Euangelyſte other ſeuen yeres.
            There was the fyrſte Synodus or Counſell celebrate, where the name of Chryſten men fyrſte beganne. This Citie was in the handes of Chryſtyan menne oone thowſande yeares, and there hathe beene in ſucceſſyon. Cliii .byſhoppes, and had within it .366. Churches.
            
               Antiochus, was the name of the kynges
 of Siria, of the whiche the fourthe of that name, and ſyxte kynge of Siria, was callyd the greate Antiochus, whyche was afore the commynge of Chryſte .212. yeres. He was alſo callyd Hierax, whyche ſygnyfyeth a fawlkon, for the rauenye that he vſyd in takynge frome euerye manne theyr poſſeſſyons and goodes. To this kynge camme Hannyball duke of Carthage, after that the Cytie of Carthage was delyuered by appoyntemente, to whome Antiochus ſhewed his armye gatheryd agaynſte the Romaynes, whyche was wonderfully rychely armyd with golde and ſyluer, and he reioyſynge therein, demaunded of Hannyball, yf he thoughte not that that was ynoughe for the Romaynes, meanynge the puyſſaunce of his armye. Hannyball lyttell eſteemynge the rycheſſe, aunſweryd in ſkorne: yes althowghe the Romaynes of all other were mooſte couetouſe. Fynallye, the Romaynes vanquyſhed bothe Antiochum, and Hannyball, who fledde to Pruſias, kynge of Bithynia. And Antiochus was conſtrayned to deſyre peace, and to relynquyſſhe to the Romaynes all his intereſt in Europa and Aſia, and to leaue his ſonne Antiochum in hoſtage, and he hym ſelfe to departe to the hyl
                  •
               e of Taurus, and to be contente with the countreye there aboute. At the laſte beynge efteſoones ſtyrred with a couetouſe mynde, deſyrynge to haue a greate treaſure, whyche was ſuppoſed to be in Perſide, the chiefe cytie of Perſia, in the Temple Nanea or Fortuna, was deceyued by the prieſtes of that Temple, and cutte in ſmalle pyeces, and caſte oute to be deuowred of byrdes. And this was the ende of a rauenouſe and couaytouſe prynce, after that he had moſte gloryouſely reygned ſyxe and thyrty yeres.
            
               Antiochus illuſtris, the noble Antiochus, was ſonne to great Antiochus, whyche was left hoſtage in Rome by his father. This man gaue his ſyſter in maryage to Ptolomeus kynge of Egypte, that by pretence of famylyarytie, he mought take the royalme of Egypte frome hym, whyche he dydde, for commynge vnto hym vnder the colour of alyaunce, he ſlewe Ptolome ſyttynge at ſupper. He alſo ſubdewed the Iewes in Hieruſalem, and robbed the Temple and Cytie, and dydde ſette vp Idolles, and with ſundrye tourmentes, compellyd the Iewes to breake the lawes of god, and commytte idolatrye. But he eſcaped not vnpunyſſhed, for whan he had reygned .xi. yeres, he felle into an horryble ſyckeneſſe and tourment, ſo that wourmes yſſewed aboundauntly out of his body, whyche ſo corrupted his fleſſhe, that it dydde ſtynke ſoo greuouſelye, that his armye, nor noo manne aboute hym mought ſuſteyne the ſauour. At the laſte he retourning to the knowledge of God, with greate contrition dyed, oppreſſyd with tourmentes. Dyuerſe other haue bene of that name, ſome kynges, ſome phyloſophers, whyche I paſſe ouer for as moche as I fynde not of theym any thynge notable.
            
               Antipagmenta, garnyſſhynge of porches in ſtone or tymber wrought.
            
               Antipater, was the name of dyuers kynges, as well of Macedonia, as of Iudea. Alſo of a noble Capytayne, whome the great kynge Alexander made his ly
                  •
               utenaunte of Macedonia, whyles he was in his Conqueſte, who dyd many valyaunt actes in the abſence of Alexander, and kepte the royalmes and domynyons of his mayſter in good ſtate with his wyſedome and proweſſe. But beynge at dyſcention with queene Olympias, mother to great Alexander, who wrate many great complayntes to her ſonne agaynſte hym. fynally, dreadynge the crueltie as welle of Alaxander, as of his mother, it is ſuppoſed, that he conſented to the poyſonynge of his maiſter.
            
               Antipater, was a phyloſopher borne in the cytie of Tirus, of the ſecte of Stoici, whyche from the tyme of his byrthe, vntyl his death, had alwaye a feuer, and not withſtandynge he liued tyll he was olide.
            
               Antipater, is alſoo an herbe, whiche hathe an harde ſtemme, and leaues lyke Roſemarye, but they are broder, and not ſoo longe. The propretie therof is, that the flowres, whiche growe laſte, do ſprynge vp hygheſt, therefore Pandecta calleth it Filius ante patrem, the ſonne afore the father.
            
               Antipathia, a repougnauncie, or naturall contraryetie.
            
               Antipelargeſis, one good tourne for an other.
            
               Antiperiſtaſis, is that thynge, wherby, where heate commethe, colde is expellyd, where colde is, heate is expelled. By this well water in the wynter tyme is warme, foraſmoche as the hygh partes of the ayre beynge colde, the heate withdraweth hym to the loweſte partes. Lykewiſe in the bodye of man, the ſpirite is kepte in more feruente by the outwarde colde, by the ioynt conſent and tolleration of all partes of the body.
            
               Antiphonae, 
               
                  •
               e interpreted Antemnes, whiche be ſongen after Pſalmes. Theſe were fyrſte ordeyned to be ſongen in the Churche by Saynte Ignatius, the dyſcyple of ſaynt Iohan the Euangelyſte, Archebyſſhoppe of Antiochia, the yeare of oure Lorde, about

.109.
            
               Antiphraſis, a worde or ſentence, hauynge a contrary meanyng: as Parcae, the myniſters of deathe be ſoo callyd, bycauſe they ſpare to man.
            
               Antipodes, people whyche doo inhabyte the parte of the worlde, in reſpecte of the roundneſſe therof, vndernethe vs, that it ſeemeth that theyr feete be agaynſte our feete.
            
               Antiquarius, he that ſercheth for antiquities, or redeth olde warkes, or vſeth to ſpeake or wryte wordes of ancient tyme, whyche haue bene longe out of cuſtome.
            
               Antiquatio, an abolytion of a lawe.
            Antiquitas, atis, auncientye.
            
            
               Antiquitus, of auncient or olde tyme.
            
               Antiquo, aui, are, to make voyde, to reduce to the fyrſte ſtate, to repell.
            
               Antiquare legem, to abolyſhe a lawe.
            
               Antiquus, a, um, auncyent or olde. ſometyme it ſygnifieth noble or worſhypfull. Alſo it ſignifieth moche ſet by. Nihil antiquius, nothing more ſette by or fauoured.
            
               Antiqua ratio, the maner of tyme paſſed.
            
               Antiqua terra, a noble countrey.
            
               Terra antiqua, potens armis, & uberae glebae,
               Vergil. A noble countray puyſſaunt in warres, and of a fertyle ſoyle.
            
               Antiqui homines, menne of the olde faſſhyon.
            
               Antiquum obtinere, to keepe the olde faſſhyon.
            
               Antiquus hoſpes, myne hoſt of longe tyme.
            
               Antiſpaſis, a pluckynge the contrary way.
            
               Antiſtes, itis, a prelate.
            
               Antiſthenes, was a famouſe Philoſopher in Athenes, thre hundred ſyxty and ſyx yeres afore the commynge of Chriſte, who to here Socrates, wente euerye daye on his feete frome Pyreus to Athenes, whyche was fyue myles out, and fyue myles home. He fyrſte beganne the ſecte, callyd Cinici, but he dyd ſuppoſe the chiefe goodneſſe to be in Vertue.
            
               Antiſtita, on abbeſſe or prioreſſe.
            
               Antiſtitium, prelacy or preeminence.
            
               Antiſtitor, he that hathe ouer other preemynence, or that ſtandeth before them that do worke,Galen. and controllyth them, a controller or ouerſeer of workemen.Meth.
            
            
               Antitaſis, a pluckynge backe.
            
               Antitheſis, a fygu
                  •
               e, where one letter is ſette for an other, as olli for illi.
            
            
               Antitheton, a fygure, wherby one contrary is ioyned with an other.Ouidiꝰ in Metamor
            
            Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia ſiccis.
            Mollia cum duris, ſine pondere habentia pondus:
            Colde thynges contended with theym that were hotte, moyſte thynges with dry: Harde thynges with ſofte, lyght thynges with h
                  •
               
               uy, kepte not one note.
            
               Antium, a citie in the parte of Italye, callyd Latium, by the ſea ſyde.
            
               Antlantes, ymages of antyque,Martial. ſet ouer doores in the corners of the haunce.
            
               Antlia, a poumpe, or lyke thynge to drawe vp water.
            
               Antonius, a name, by the whyche was callyd dyuerſe Emperoures of Rome. And amonge other, oone was callyd Antonius Pius, whyche ſucceded Hadryane, the yere of oure Lorde. 141. and reygned two and twentye yeres and three monethes with Aurelius and Lucius. His progenytours were Spanyardes, as Capytolinus ſaythe. He was a meruayllous good manne, for after that he was Emperoure, he gouernyd with ſuche moderation and gentylneſſe, that he was therefore callyd Pius, and father of the countraye, he was neuer cruelle for any pryuate or commune cauſe: he vſyd often this ſayenge: He hadde leauer ſaue oone ſubiecte, thanne dyſtroye a thowſande ennemyes. For his deuoute lyuynge, ſweeteneſſe of maners, mercye, Iuſtyce, and temperaunce, he was compared to Numa. Wherefore manye kynges and pryncis of dyuerſe nacyons, layenge warre aparte by his commaundemente, commytted all theyr contencyons vnto his Iudgemente, and helde theym therewith contented. For bothe loue and feare of hym, cauſyd theym to exchewe warres, honourynge hym for his vertue as a god. Yet was not he ſoo deſyrous of glory or rycheſſe, that he wold attayn thervnto by other mens damage. He dyed at the age of .70. yeres.
            
               Antonius Muſa, was phyſition to Octauyane the Emperoure, whome he delyuered of a daungerouſe ſyckeneſſe, and therefore the Emperoure cauſyd an Image to be made of braſſe, and to be ſette vp by the Image of Eſculapius. There is nowe lyuynge a phyſytion of that name in ferrare, who is ryghte lykely to ſette forthe a wonderfulle knowledge in phyſycke, as welle in ſpeculation as alſo in practyſe, yf ambition or auarice lette hym not, as it dothe other menne of greate lernynge.
            
               Antrax, acis, quycke ſyluer erthe.
            
               Antropomorphitae, a ſecte of heretyques, whyche affyrmed, that God had a body and members as a man had. This ſecte beganne in Egypte about the yere of our lorde. 380.
            
               Antrum, a denne vnder the erthe.
            
               Antuacutum,
               Pthol. the towne of Andwarp in Brabande.
            
                
               Anubis, was a god of the Egyptians, whiche they honoured for Mercurius in fygure of a dogge.
            
               Annuicallia, & Annuifera, bene herbes whyche are drye, but hauynge rootes, whyche yerely do ſprynge into newe braunches, as hyſſope, penyroyall, ſorell, fenelle, and dyuerſe other, whoſe ſtalkes in wynter are dry, and ſeeme to be deade, but towarde ſommer there ſprynge grene leaues and ſtalkes out of the rootes.
            
               Anularius, a ieweller that ſellyth rynges.
            
               Anulus, a rynge.
            
               Anus, nus, an olde wyfe.
            
               Anus, ni, an arſe.
            
               Anxie, curiouſely, with great peyne.
            
               Anxietas, care, heuyneſſe, anguyſſhe or ſorowe.
            Anxietudo, idem.
            
               Anxifer, he that cauſeth ſorowe.
            
               Anxius, a, um, carefull or heuy.
            
               Anxia oratio, an oration made with to moche dilygence.
            
               Anxur, a citie callyd alſo Tarraſina.
            
               Anygrus, a ryuer in Theſſalia.
         
         
            ¶A ANTE O.
            
               AOnia, a parte of the countreye callyd Boetia.
            
               Aonius, a, um, of that countrey.
            
               Aornos, a place whervnto no byrd may come.
         
         
            ¶A ANTE P.
            
               APage,
               Plautus. fy, fy. Apage, haud nos deceat fugitiuos imitari, Fye fye, it wyll not beſeme vs to playe the mychers. alſoo remoue, putte awaye, or dryue awaye. Alſo it hathe a ſygnifycation of a more vehemencye, as, Apage hanc caniculam, Awaye with this bytche, or, henſe away with this bytche.
            
               Apage à me, haue away from me.
            
               Apage te, gette the henſe.
            
               Apage ſis, lette be, gette the henſe.
            
               Apagina,
               Galen. in definitio. is a cuttynge of the bone of, in the ouerpart apperynge, deſcendynge downe in the partes ioynynge to the rupture. Or it is whan the ende of a bone, where he is ioyned with an other bone,Galenus Meth. 6. is broken.
            
               Apalaeſtris, he that can neyther wraſtle, nor do any other mayſtry.
            
               Apamia, was a cytie in the leſſe Aſia, through the myddell wherof ranne the ryuer callyd Marſia. It was the name alſo of an nother citie in Parthia.
            
               Aparme, an herbe, whiche ſomme menne ſuppoſe to be burres, ſomme that herbe whiche is callyd Rubea tinctorum, in englyſſhe madder.
            
               Apathes, were philoſophers, whiche of a frowarde and ſtubbourne nature, helde opinyon, that a wyſe manne had none affections or paſſyons.
            
               Apedes, a byrde, whoſe fete be ſo lyttell, that they ſeeme to haue none, I ſuppoſe they be martlettes.
            
               Apelles, was a name, whereby the Iewes were callyd in deryſion, as it were Sine pelle, bycauſe the ſkynne of theyr inſtrumente was cutte of, whanne they were circumcyſed.
            
               Apelles, was alſo an herelyke in Grece, the yere of oure lorde .174. whoſe hereſye was, that he knewe not the god, whiche he worſhypped. And that Chriſte was not god in verye dede, but a fantaſye apperynge to men as a man.
            
               Apelles, an excellent paynter in the tyme of great Alexander, borne in the yle of Cos, of whome onely Alexander wolde be paynted. Whan he dyed, he lefte an ymage of Venus vnperfourmyd, whome neuer manne afterwarde durſte enterpriſe to fynyſhe, for the incomparable beauitie therof.
            
               Apello, lere, pulſum, to amoue or put of from a thynge.
            
               Apeptia .i. cruditas, cruditie or lacke of good dygeſtion.
            
               Aper, apri, a bore. It is alſo a fyſſhe, whiche hath a voyce.
            
               Aperio, ui, ire, to open, to dyſcloſe, to expounde.
            
               Aperte, openly, playnly, euidently, withoute diſſimulation or colour.
            
               Apertus, a, um, open, playn, euident, diſcoueted, without colour or cloke.
            Apes, uel apis, a bee.
            
            
               Apeſus, untis, a mountayne in Grece.
            
               Apex, icis, the crowne of the heade; the toppe of euerye thynge, It ſommetyme ſignifieth a mytar.
            
               Apexabo, a puddyng, called a bluddyng.
            
               Aphaereſis, a figure, whereby a letter or ſillable is taken from a worde, as Pone metum, for Depone metum, Mi for Mihi, Tun for Tune.
            
            
               Aphiae, a kynde of litle fyſſhes in brokes lyke vnto gougins, whiche are ſuppoſed to haue none other begynnyng but of abundaunce of rayn: for they be found all tymes of the yere, and the more that the water is troubled, the better they are. Plinius calleth this fyſhe Apua. Theodorus nameth hym Aplua. I ſuppoſe they be dacis.
            
               Aphilos, he that hath no frend.
            
               Aphracta, a litle barke or brygantine.
            
                
               Aphractum, a kynde of ſhyppes, whyche the Rhodians vſyd.
            
               Aphrica maior, the thyrde part of the worlde, whyche is ſeuered frome Europa on the eaſt by the ryuer of Nylus: on the weaſte by the pyllars of Hercules. The hyther parte is nowe callyd Barbarye, and the people Mores. The inner parte is callyd Lybia and Aethiopia.
            
               Aphrica minor, is in this wyſe bounded. On the weaſte it hathe Numidiam, on the eaſte Cyrenaicam, on the northe the ſea callyd Mediterraneum. In this countrey was the noble citie of Carthage.
            
               Aphricanus, was a naſe gyuen to two noble Romaynes callyd Scipiones, bycauſe the one vanquyſihed Hanniball, and ſubdewed Carthage: The other afterwarde Carthage rebellyng, ſubuerted and diſtroyed it vtterly.
            
               Aphricus uentus, a ſouthwynde.
            
               Aphrodiſia, dayes dedycate to Venus, or Veneryall paſtymes.
            
               Aphronitrum, the fome of ſalte peter, callyd of the Arabiens Baurach.
            
            
               Aphtha, is an exulceration or breakyng out in the mouthes of chyldren, whiche do ſou
                  •
               e.
            
               Apianus, a, um, that wherin bees doo delyte.
            
               Apiarium, the place where as hyues be ſette.
            
               Apiarius, he that nouryſſheth bees.
            
               Apiaſtra, a byrde whiche dothe deuour bees.
            
               Apiaſtrum, an herbe calllyd bawlme, alſo melyſſa.
            
            
               Apiceones, ſheepe hauynge ſmall bodyes, and lyttell woulle.
            
               Apicius, was a Romayne, whyche delyted in delycate meates, ſoo moche that he profeſſed cookery, and infected Rome with gluttonye, whyche before was the myrro
                  •••
                of temperaunce. And whanne he hadde conſumed in gourmandyſe Millies ſeſtertium, whyche do amounte after the computacyon of Senalis, to two myllyons and fyue hundred thouſande crownes, whyche is after oure rate, fyue hunderde foure ſcore and three thowſande fyftye and fowre poundes. Whanne he grewe in dette, and made his reckenyng, that there was lefte but Centies ſeſtertium,
               Seneca. whyche amounteth to this rate in our money, fyftye and nyne thouſande fyue hunderde and fyue poundes, and eyghte ſhyllynges, fearynge that in that ſubſtaunce he ſhoulde lyue in penurye, he wyllyngly drank poyſon and dyed.
            
               Apicula, a yonge bee.
            
               Apiculus, the dyminutiue of apex.
            
            
               Apidanus, a ryuer in Theſſalia.
            
               Apina, a tryſle.
            
               Apinae, nuttes without ſhales.
            
               Apinus, a tree wherof commeth pytche.
            
               Apionia mala, rounde appulles, whyche I take to be they, that are callyd Pomeroyall.
            
               Apios, wylde radyſhe.
            
               Apium,
               Io. Agric. properly our common perſely.
            
               Apiria, infynyteneſſe, where there is none ende.
            
               Apis, callyd alſo Serapis & Oſyris, whome the Egyptianes honouryd for theyr chyefe God.
            
               Aplanes, the parte of heauen, whyche neuer moueth.
            
               Apluda, wheaten branne.
            
               Apluſtre, & apluſtria, orum, the tackelynge of a ſhyppe.
            
               Apnoea, the vyce of a ſhorte wynde or breathe.
            
               Apocalypſis, ſios, a reuelation.
            
               Apocle
                     ••
                  , counſayllours of the pryuye counſayle.
            
               Apocope, a fygure, by the whyche a letter or ſyllable is taken awaye, as peculi, fo
                  •
                
               peculij.
            
            
               Apocopi, men beinge gelded.
            
               Apocroti, men that be harde and myſerable in lyuynge.
            
               Apocryphi libri, bokes, the authors whereof be vnknowen.
            
               Apocryphus, a, um, hydde, not knowen.
            
               Apocynon, a lyttell bone in the lefte ſyde of a frogge, wherewith it is ſuppoſed, thynges may be done, whiche were not expedient to be openly knowen.
            
               Apodixis, an euidence, a demonſtration.
            
               Apodyterium, the place by a bayne, where they whyche be bayned, doo putte of theyr clothes.
            
               Apogaei, wyndes that doo aryſe oute of the grounde.
            
               Apogeum, an habytacyon vnder the ground.
            
               Apolactizo, are, to ſtryke with the heeles. alſo to deſpyſe or ſette at nought.
            
               Apollinares ludi, playes made in the honour of Apollo.
            
               Apollinaris, an herbe callid Henbane.
            
               Apollinaris, a name of a manne, whereby was callydde oone whyche was byſſhoppe of Hierapolis, a cytie in the yere of our lorde .145. who was a greatte lernyd manne, and wrate a greatte booke of the faythe of Chryſte, an nother warke agaynſte the Gentyles, dedycate vnto Marcus Antonius the Emperour. Alſoo agaynſte the heretyques callyd Cataphrigae. An nother of the ſame name was byſſhoppe of Laodicea, whyche alſoo was a noble lernyd manne, and wrate thyrtye bookes for oure faythe agaynſte Porphyrium▪
                Not withſtandynge he felle into hereſye, ſayinge: that Chriſte receyued not fleſſhe of the vyrgyn Mary, but that in the acte of his incarnation ſome parte of the worde was conuertyd into fleſſhe. He ſayde that Chriſtis ſowle was not of that parte, whiche was ra-tionall, but onely of that parte, whyche kept the body lyuynge, and therfore in his Incarnation he toke oonely the bodye and not the ſowle.
            
               Apollinea, a citie in Lumbardy, nowe callyd Vercellae.
            
            
               Apollo, inis, whome the Gentyles honouryd for God, referrynge to hym the inuention of Muſyke, of poetry, and of phyſyke it is ſomtyme taken for the ſonne.
            
               Apollonia, a bleſſyd vyrgyn borne in Alexandria, who for confeſſyng the fayth of Chriſt, the yere of our lorde .265. had all her teethe pullyd out of her heade, and after, whanne the tyraunt menacid her, that except ſhe wold blaſpheme Chriſte, ſhe ſhulde be bourned in a great fyre, whyche was therfore preparyd, After that ſhe had aduyſed her ſelf, ſhe brake from the myniſters, and wyllyngly lepte into the fyre, whyche was greatte and horryble. Her body is buried at Derdona in Lumbardye.
            
               Apolloniatae, people of Apollonia.
            
               Apollonia, is alſo the name of a citie in Epiro, nowe callyd Valonia, an other in Creta, an other in Siria, alſo an yle by Thracia.
            
               Apollonius, a phyloſopher borne in Grecia, aboute the yere of our lorde .90. This man from his infancye ſoo profytted in lernynge, that beynge but a chylde, was a great phyloſopher, and folowed the ſeete of Pythagoras, gooynge alwaye in lynnen, and neuer eatynge any thynge, whyche hadde lyfe. And not withſtandynge that he was excellentely lernyd in the myſtycalle knowledge of phyloſophye and naturall magyke, yet to haue more knowledge, he went into Egypt, Perſia, Ethiope, and Inde, and lernyd of the Bragmanes, and Gymnoſophiſtae, and retourned into Grece and Rome, where he was hadde in greatte admyration for the meruaylles, whyche he ſhewed, and at the laſt beynge aboue the aege of eyghtye yeres, he beynge in a greatte aſſemblye of people, ſodeynely was conueyed awaye, no manne knoweth howe or whyther, as Philoſtratus ſaythe, who wryteth his lyfe.
            Alſoo ſayncte Hierome makyth mencyon of hym in his prologue to the olde Teſtament more haboundauntlye. There were of this name three greatte phyſytions, oone the dyſcyple of Eraſiſtratus, whoo fyrſte of any phyſytion wrate of the partes of mannes bodye, he was callyd Apollonius Memphites. The other two were of Antioche, the father and the ſonne.
            
               Apologia, a defence or aunſwere to a rebuke.
            
               Apologo, aui, are, to requyre or aſke.
            
               Apologus, a fable wherin beaſtes or trees do ſpeake.
            
               Apomel, uel apomeli, a drynke made with honye combes ſodden in honye, vntylle the waxe be cleane ſkymmed awaye, and than koolyd, be putte in a fayre erthen potte.
            
               Apophasis, a denyenge of a thynge, alſo an inuentorye.
            
               Apophlegmatiſmus, a medycine, whyche cauſyth one to vomyte vp fleume.
            
               Apophoretum, a preſente.Gal. in i
                     ••
                  troduct.
            
            
               Apoplexia, uel Apoplecticus morbus, is a ſyckeneſſe ingendryd of haboundaunce of groſſe humoures, whyche doo fylle thoſe Receptoryes or veſſelles of the heade, from whenſe commeth feelynge and mouynge of the bodye. And therefore they whyche haue this dyſeaſe, be depryued of felynge, ſpeche, and mouynge.
            
               Apoplecticus, he whyche hathe the ſayde ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Apophthegma, atis, a ſhorte and quycke ſentence.
            
               Aporeta, caſkettes or coffers, wherein were putte ſecrete thynges, or mooſte precyouſe iewelles.
            
               Aporia, doubte, neceſſitie.
            
               Apoſiopeſis, where ſomwhat is lefte out, ſpecyally in ſpeakyng, and left to the coniecture of them that be herers.
            
               Apoſtaſia, rebellyon or forſakynge of a mans profeſſion or aliegiaunce.
            
               Apoſtata, a rebelle or runnagate. It is nowe vſyd for theym, whyche do forſake the relygyon of Chryſte.
            
               Apoſtema, an impoſtume, wherein corrupted humours haue recourſe in any parte of the bodye.
            
               Apoſteparniſmos, is a cittynge awaye of the bone with the wounde.
            
               Apoſtolus, an apoſtle. it proprely ſygnifieth a meſſanger.
            
               Apoſtrophe, a conuerſyon in ſpeakynge from one to an nother.
            
               Apoteleſma, a pronoſtication or declaration of the ſygnifications of ſterres at a mannes natiuitie, or the begynnynge of any thynge, what therof ſhall happen.
            
               Apotheca, a wyne ſellar or ſhoppe, wherein thynges be ſette to ſale, a ſtore howſe.
            
               Apotheoſis, a dedycation or conſecration proprely of men into goddis.
            
               Apoximenos, he whyche wypeth away fylthe
 from ones bodye.
            
               Apozema, a decoction of water with herbes or barley, whiche the grekes vſed in ſtede of our ſyrupes.
            
               Apparatus, tus, apparaylynge or deckynge.
            
               Apparatus belli, preparation for warres, artyllery.
            Appare, rui, rere, to appiere.
            
            
               Apparere quaeſtioni, to ſerue proceſſe, as ſergeantes and baylyffes done.
            
               Apparitores, offycers of Iuſtyce, attendynge on the great miniſters, to ſommon or attache whom they wyll commaunde.
            
               Apparitura, the offyce of a ſergeaunt or baylyffe.
            
               Apparo, aui, are, to apparayle or trymme, to be redy to do a thyng, to prepare or ordeyne.
            
               Appellatio, a namynge or appealynge to a hygher iudge.
            
               Appello, aui, are, to name or calle familyarlye to me. Alſo Vipian the greatte lawyer wylle haue it to ſygnify to wowe a mayden to haue her virginitie. ſommetyme it ſygnifieth to arryue, ſommetyme to appeale to a hygher Iudge.
            
               Appellare blande, to talke pleaſauntelye with oone.
            
               Appellare Caeſarem, to appeale to the Emperour.
            
               Appellare literas, to pronounce letters.
            
               Appello, puli, pulſum, to arryue. ſometyme to applye or ſette the mynde, to dyrecte. alſo to approche.
            
               Appellere animum ad aliquid, to ſette the mynde to ſomewhat.
            
               Appendeo, dis, dere, to hange by or nygh.
            
               Appendicula, a diminutiue of Appendix.
            
            
               Appendix, that whyche hangeth at an nother thynge.
            
               Appendeo, dis, dere, to hange vp, to way in a balaunce or beame.
            
               Appenninus, the parte of the mountaynes of Alpes, whyche begynne by Geane, and diuideth Italye, and extendeth vnto the ſea betwene Naples and Sicile.
            
               Appetens, deſyrous of a thynge.
            
               Appetentia, inordynate appetite.
            Appetitio, idem.
            
               Appetitus, appetite.
            
               Appeto, tij, tere, to deſyre moche, to goo to, ſommetyme it ſygnifieth at hande. Dies appetebat, The daye was comme, or at hande. ſommetyme to wounde or ſtryke at, as Leuans ſe alis, os oculos
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   hoſtis roſtro & unguibus appetit, Ryſynge vp with his wynges, his talons and beake, he wounded the face and eyes of hym that faughte on the other parte. Sommetyme to aſſaye to doo a thynge.
            Appiades, were amonge the paynymes theſe goddeſſes, Venus, Pallas, Pax, Concordia, Veſta. Of theſe doo make mention Ouidius de arte amandi .2. & de remedio amoris. & Tullius .3. epiſt. fam.
            
               Appia uia, the name of a hygh way at Rome.
            
               Appiana poma, a kynde of appulles as greate as quynces, and hauynge as greate a fauour as they.
            
               Appianus, a noble hyſtorian borne in Alexādry, who wrate moſt excellēt warkes of the ciuile warres of the Romayns, which bokes I wil counſell all them that be ſtudious in Tullies warkes to rede diligently, whereby they ſhall vnderſtand many thingis, that without them ſhall not be well vnderſtande.
            
               Appion, a famous grammaryan borne in Egypte, agaynſt whome Ioſephus wrate his warke De antiquitate Iudaeorum.
            
            
               Applaudere, to moue handes or feete for ioye, or to beat any thing to the grounde.
            
               Applico, aui, are, uel applicui applicere, to ioyne to, to lay or ſette to, or to applye.
            
               Applicatus, ioyned to, ſommetime occupied aboute a thinge.
            
               Applicat primum ad Chryſidis patrem ſe, He firſt made repaire to Chriſis father.
            Applodo, ploſi, dere, supra applaudere.
            
               Appono, ſui, nere, to putte or adde to, or ſette to, to appoint.
            
               Apporto, aui, are, to brynge to.
            
               Appoſco, ſcere, to aſke more.
            
               Appoſite, aptely, conueniently.
            
               Appoſitus, a, um, put to, or ſet to. ſommetyme it ſignifieth conuenient, or to the purpoſe.
            
               Appotus, well weatte with drinke.
            
               Appraehendo, dere, to take, to attache, to laye hande on a thynge.
            
               Appraehendere palmam, to gette the victory.
            
               Apprime, chiefly, principally.
            
               Approbo, aui, are, to approue or allowe.
            
               Approbus, very honeſte.
            
               Appropero, aui, are, to make haſte to come.
            
               Appropinquatio, an approchynge or drawynge to.
            
               Appropinquo, are, to aproch, to draw nigh to.
            
               Appulſus, us, comyng of beaſtes to watrynge.
            
               Apricari, to ſytte or goo abrode in the ayre, or in the ſonne.
            
               Apricus, a place ſet agaynſt the ſonne.
            
               Apricus dies, a ſunny daye.
            
               Aprilis, the moneth of Apryll.
            
               Aprinus, bores fleſſhe.
            
               Apronia, an herbe callyd alſoo Vitis nigra, a blacke vyne, whyche rounneth vppe, and wyndeth about trees and ſtalkes of herbes, and hathe a leafe lyke an yuye, but greatter, and bearyth bearyes in cluſters, whyche at the begynnynge are greene, and blacke
 whan they be rype: alſoo the roote is blacke without, and within is yelowe lyke boxe.
            
               Aprono in genua,
               Plinius li. 24. ca. 17. I knele on my knees.
            
               Aproxis, an herbe, the roote wherof kyndleth fyre farre of.
            
               Aprugna, the venyſon of a wylde boore.
            
               Aprunum uel Aprugnum callum, the brawne of a bore.
            Aprurius, & aprugnus, a, um, of a bore.
            
            
               Aprutium, a part of Italy, the people wherof were ſometyme callyd Samnites, agaynſte whome the auncient Romaynes hadde longe tyme warres. In it be theſe cities, Aquileia, Adria, Sulmo, Ortona, Arpinū, Aquinum.
            
               Apſis, the name of a cart whele.
            
               Apſorus, an yle in the Venetian ſea.
            
               Aptera, a cytie in the countrey of Licia, and a towne in Crete.
            
               Aptitudo, apteneſſe.
            
               Apto, aui, are, to ioyne, to agree two thynges togyther.
            
               Aprus, a, um, apte, agreable, mete, neceſſary.
            
               Apud, at, whan it is ioyned with a perſon, it ſygnifieth with.
            
               Apud eum eſt primus, he is his princypell mynyon.Teren.
            
            
               Apud me priores partes habet, he maye do moſte with me.Teren. 
               Facio te apud illum deum, I wyll make hym to take the for a god. Per eam te obſecramus ambae,
               Terent. 
               ſi ius, ſi fas eſt, uti aduerſa eius per te tecta, tacita
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   apud omnes ſint, We bothe deſyre you, on her behalf, yf it may be by any meanes poſſible, that by your policie, her myſfortune may be keuered, and from all men kepte ſecrete.
            
               Apud aliquem mentiri, to make a lye to one.
            
               Apud nos imperium tuum eſt, we remember your commaundement.
            
               Apud animum meum ſtatuo, I determyne in my mynde.Saluſt.
            
            
               Apud forum, in the market.
            
               Apud aedes, in the howſe.
            
               Apud horcum, in helle.
            
               Apud quem, in whoſe preſence.
            
               Apud maiores noſtros,
               Ci. in off. in the tyme of our forefathers.
            
               Apud ſe non eſt, he is out of his wyt, or he is not in his ryght mynde. Vix ſum apud me, ita animus cōmotus eſt metu, ſpe, gaudio, mirando hoc tanto, tam repentino bono, I am well nygh out of my wy
                  •
               , my mynde is ſo vexed with feare, hope, and ioye, with this good chaunce, whiche is ſoo wonderfull, ſoo great, and ſo ſodaynly hapnyd.
            
               Apud te ſis, thynke what thou haſte to doo, remember thy ſelfe.
            
               Apud ignem,
               Saluſt. by the fyre. Apud aquam, by the water. Apud quem, by whome. Apud cum, by hym.
            
               Apud te exemplum experiendi habes,
               Plautus. 
               non eges foris, Ye haue the experyence at home, ye nede not to ſeke for it abrode.
            
               Apuleius, a phyloſopher borne in Aphrica, not withſtanding he floriſhed in Athenes, & after wrate in latin diuers ſtiles, as De uita & moribus Platonis, & de Deo Socratis, in a ryght eloquent and temperate ſtyle. In his bokes callyd Floridorum, & De aſino aureo. he wrate ſo affectately and flouryſhingly, that he is therfore more to be mocked than prayſed. He made alſo a ryght commendable boke of the names and vertues of herbes, he was about the yere of our lorde .300.
            
               Apulia, is a countrey whyche is a part of Italye, bordyng on the ſea callyd Mare Adria
                  
                     •
                  icum. This countrey is populous, and hath in it many townes and caſtelles, and is aboundaunt of corne, wyne, and oyle, and good courſers for the warre. The chiefe cytie or ſee therof is Brunduſium, there is alſoo the mount of ſaynt Michael callyd Gargarum. This countreye is callyd alſo by other names, as Iapegia, Meſſapia, Calabria, and Salentina, and the people are callyd Apuli.
            
            
               Apus, odis, a byrde lyke a ſwalowe, but he hath larger wynges, and is moſte commonly about the ſea coſtes, where alwaye he eyther flyeth or houereth in the ayre, and bredeth in a rocke.
            
               Apyrena, ſwete pomegranates.
            
               Apyrotus, a ſtone that no fyre may dammage, or deface.
         
         
            ¶A ANTE Q.
            
               AQua, water.
            
               Aquae Auguſtae, a towne in Gaſcoyns callyd Baiona.
            
               Aquae Calidae, a citie in England callid Bath.
            
               Aquaelicium, rayne water vſyd in medicine.
            
               Aquae Sextiae, a towne in Prouance now callyd Aquenſis.
            
               Aquagium, a cundyte.
            
               Aquaintercus, water whiche runneth betwene the ſkynne and the fleſhe, the dropſye.
            
               Aqualiculus, a lyttell trough.
            
               Aqualicus, the panche.
            
               Aquaricola, a place wherin water is caſte.
            
               Aquarioli, boyes whiche do attende vppon comon harlottes.
            
               Aquariolum, a waſhynge place.
            Aquarium, idem.
            
               Aquarius, one of the .xii. ſygnes.
            
               Aquarius, a, um, pertaynynge to water, a
                  •
                
               aquarius ſulcus, a forowe, by the which water is drayned.
            
               Aqua
                     •
                  icus, that whiche haunteth the water, or lyueth therin.
            
                
               Aquatilis, the ſame.
            
               Aquatio, a watringe.
            
               Aquatus, a, um, that wherinto water is put. Vinum aquarum, alayed wyne.
            Aqueus, a, um, watry.
            
            
               Aquifolia, a wyld medlar, or a tree lyke a wild medlar.
            
               Aquila, an egle. It is alſo a fyſhe of the kind
                  •
                of them, whiche haue griſtelles.
            
               Aquila, was alſo a name of a man borne in the countrey of Pontus, of a gentile be commen a iewe, whiche tranſlated the olde teſtament the ſeconde tyme out of Hebrew into Greke.
            
               Aquilegium, a gourde of water, whiche commeth of rayne.
            
               Aquileia, uel Aquilegia, an aunciente citie in the part of Italy called Forum Iulij, the whiche citie was ſometyme of ſuche eſtimation, that therin was kept the great marte of all Europa. And the great emperour Octauian delyted principally to repayre thyther often. Afterward it was dyſtroyed by the Gothes, and the inhabitantes fled thenſe, and were the fyrſte, whiche beganne to buylde the citie of Venice. But nowe it is ſoo ſymple, that none dwell there but fyſhers and a fewe ſhepherdes.
            
               Aquilex, he that ſercheth for water, or conuayeth it.
            
               Aquilifer, the ſtandard bearer of the Romains
            
               Aquilo, the northeaſt wynde.
            Aquilus color, ruſſet.
            
            
               Aquiminaria, all water pottes.
            
               Aquitania, a countrey, whiche is accounted to be the thyrde parte of Fraunce. It hathe on the weſt the occean ſea, on the northe the ryuer of Loyre, or as Caeſar wryteth, the riuer of Gerond, on the eaſte the parte of Fraūce called Lugdunenſis, on the ſouthe the mountaynes called Pyrenei, which diuide Fraūce from Spayne. Albeit a portion therof, conteyninge Caſcoigne, Foix, Bigor, & a fewe countreyes mo, is called Aquitania, in Englyſhe Guyen.
            
               Aquo, aui, are, to fetche or beare water.
            
               Aquor, quari, to fetche or prouyde water.
            
               Aquoſus, a, um, full of water.
            
               Aquula, a lyttell water.
         
         
            A, ANTE R.
            
               ARA, an aulter.
            
               Arabarches, a lorde of Arabia.
            
               Arabes, in the ſyngular noumber Arabs
                     •
                  , the people of Arabia: all be it in Arabia, are ſundry ſortes of people, whiche haue dyuerſe names, as, Sabaei, Charaeni, A
                     •
                  taceni, Gebbanitae, Edumaei, Atramitae, Achomeni, Troglodytae, Saraceni, uel Syraceni.
            
            
               Arabia, in Hebrew named Saba, is a countrey in Aſia, whiche is diuided in to thre regions, Petream, deſertam, & felicem. Petrea whiche ſignifyeth ſtonye, marcheth on Aegypt and Iudeam, and of Plinius is called Nabathea, the chiefe city wherof is Petra, whiche nowe is called Arach, in holy ſcripture it is called Petra deſerti. By this countrey paſſed the chylderne of Iſraell whan they went out of Egypt. It is (as Strabo wryteth) playne, enuyroned with rockes of a greate heyghte, in the whiche be many ſpringes of freſhe water, without that circute towarde Iudea, the more parte of the countrey is deſerte and without water. There is the grete mount or hyll of Sina, called of Ptolomeus Melanes, where the olde lawe was gyuen to Moyſes. and alſo where the body of the holy vyrgin ſayncte Catharine is buryed. alſo an other mounte called Caſius, where the great Pomp
                  •
               ius is buryed. Arabia deſerta, whiche Strabo calleth Saenetis, hath on the ſouth the mountaygnes of Arabia foelix, on the north Meſopotamia, on the weſt Petrea, the people of this countrey haue no certayne habitation, and do dwell in tentes, hauynge no houſes. Arabia foelix, on the ſouth, lyeth betwene the two ſeas Arabicum & Perſicū, whiche is ſo plentyful, that it bryngeth forth corne and fruites twyſe in the yere, hauynge plenty of all fruite and cattell, excepte horſes mules, and ſwyne: all foules, excepte geeſe, cockes, and hennes. Alſo there groweth all kyndes of ſpice and ſwete gummes, as frankenſence, and myrre. The townes are vnwalled, bycauſe the people doo alwaye lyue in peace.
            
               Arabrica, a towne in Portugall.
            
               Arachne, the name of a woman, whiche fyrſte inuented ſpynnynge of lynnen, and makynge of nettes. It is alſo taken for lynnen yarne, or the woufe of clothe.
            
               Arachneus, a lyttell beaſte, whiche goeth a ſofte pace.
            
               Arachnion, fyne threde.
            
               Arachoſia, a countraye in Aſia.
            
               Arachthus, a great ryuer in the vttermoſt borders of Epirus.
            
            
               Araciae ficus, fygges brode and whyte, whiche do growe on a lyttell ſtalke.
            
               Aracynthus, a mountain in Boeotia in Grece, where Minerua was ſpecially honoured.
            
               Aradus, a citie in the yle of Tripolis towarde Siria, where (as Poſſidonius writeth) was ſene a ſerpent lye deade, that was in lengthe one hundred and .xxv. pacis, and of ſuche greatneſſe, that he moughte deuoure a man on horſebacke, and euery ſeale of his ſkynne was greater than any ſhylde.
            
                
               Aram, was brother to Abraham.
            
               Aranea, a copweb. ſomtyme a ſpyder.
            
               Araneolus, a yonge or lyttell ſpyder.
            
               Araneus, a ſpyder. It is alſo a fyſſhe of the greatneſſe of a gougeon, in coloure dyuerſe, hauynge on his backe nyghe to his head .iii. prickes.
            
               Arar, a countrey in Fraunce called Sone.
            
               Araris, a ryuer in Fraunce, called nowe Sagona, whiche commeth in to the ryuer of Rone, not farre from Lyons. This ryuer is ſo quiete, that vnneth it maye be perceyued whiche way it runneth. Ouer this ryuer Iulius Ceſar made a brydge, with his ſouldyars in one day.
            
               Ararus, a ryuer in Scithia, whiche runneth throughe the realme of Armeny.
            
               Arath, a Countreye in Armeny wonderfull fertyle.
            
               Arator, a ploughe man. Sometyme a plough oxe.
            
               Aratro, aui, are, to ploughe eftſones land that is ſowen, to make the grounde fat.
            
               Aratrum, a ploughe.
            
               Aratus, a poete of Aſia, in the yere before the incarnation .246. amonge dyuers other warkes, wrate certayne verſes of heuen, and the ſterres, whiche warke was tranſlated by Tulli, and alſo by Germanicus, the ſon adoptyue of Tiberius the emperour.
            
               Araxes, a ryuer in Armenia, ouer the whiche the great kynge Alexander made a brydge, and lyke wyſe dyd Auguſtus the Emperour.
            
               Arbea, a citie in Iudea, where Adam and other three patriarhes were buryed.
            
               Arbela, a countrey in Perſia, where the great Alexander vaynquiſhed kynge Darius kinge of Perſia.
            
               Arbiter, tri, an arbitratoure.
            
               Arbitrarium, arbitrabic.
            
               Arbitratus, tus, arbiterment or iudgement.
            
               Arbitratu meo, in my iudgement, ſometyme it ſignifieth at my pleaſure.
            
               Arbitri, they whiche are preſente. Sometyme wytneſſes.
            
               Arbitris remotis mecum loquebatur: They whiche were preſent, beinge commaunded awaye, he talked with me.
            Arbitrium, idem quod Arbitratus.
            
               Arbitror, to trowe, to iudge, or awarde.
            Arbor, & Arbos, a tree.
            
            
               Arborator, a lopper of trees.
            
               Arboreſcere, to waxe to a tree.
            Arboreus, a, um, of a tree.
            
            
               Arboſes, olde wryters vſed for Arbos.
            
            
               Arbuſto, aui, are, to ſet a fielde with trees.
            
               Arbustum, a place where trees be ſet, properlye elmes, wythy, or ſalowe. It maye be taken for an orcharde, or a hopyarde, or a vine yarde, where vynes do growe vp by trees. It is alſo a vyne that runneth vp in heyghte or by a pole.
            
               Arbutum, an appull called a wyldynge.
            
               Arbutus, a wyldynge tree.
            
               Arca, a coffer.
            
               Arca Noe, was a greatte veſſell, whiche god commanded Noe to make, to the intent that he, his wyfe, his thre ſonnes, and theyr wyues mought be preſerued from the vniuerſal floudde,Philo. antiq. li. 1. the yere of the age of the worlde.
1652. and before the incarnatian 2310. yeres. This veſſell conteyned in lengthe. 300. cubites of geometry, whiche after the expoſition of ſayncte Auguſtine, were thre hundred perche, euerye cubite of geometrye, beynge ſyxe common cubites: in breade it was .50. perches, and in depeneſſe frome the hatches to the bottome thyrty perches, from the hatches vpwarde one perche. Noe at the tyme of the fynyſhinge of this arc, was of the age of ſyxe hundred yeres. Beroſus writeth, that after the floudde, this arke remayned on a mountayn in Armenia called Cordiei, where he in his tyme ſawe parte therof.
            
               Arca teſtamenti, was a coffer or cheſte made by Moyſes in the deſerte, wherein were put the table of the olde lawe, the rodde of Moyſes, wherwith he ſhewed meruayles, and parte of Manna, whiche god rayned in the deſerte. This art was made of ſtronge wod and ſoote, and was keuered as well within as without with fyne golde, and on the top were two ymages of aungelles Cherubim: whiche ark was in lengthe fyue cubites, and in brede thre cubytes. This was alſo called Arca foederis.
            
            
               Archades, be people of the countraye of Arcadia, whiche be alſo called Proſilini, as Lycophron ſaythe, ſignyfienge that they were afore the mone, for as moche as at the tyme of the floudde of Deucaleon, they ſaued theym ſelfe on the mountaynes, and therfore were acompted the moſte auncient people.
            
               Arcadia, a countrey in Greece, ſet in the myddell of Peloponeſus or Morea, ſoo called of Arcas the ſonne of Iupiter, whoo reigned there. It was alſo called Pelaſgia, & Parrhaſia, & Lycaonia: there was fyrſte inuented the bagpyde. Alſo there is the greatte fenne callyd Lernea, where the monſter Hydra was ſlayne of Hercules, and the greate ryuer called Erymanthus, and a mountayne of the ſame name. There is alſo founde the ſtone called Abeſton, whiche beinge ones het maye neuer be quenched, and is of the colour of yron.
            Arcadicus, a, um, of Arcadia.
            
            
                Arcanè, ſecretely.
            
            
               Arcanum, a thinge ſecrete, or of fewe knowē.
            
               Archas, the ſonne of Iupiter and Caliſthona, doughter of Lycaon, was the fyrſte kynge of Archadia, before the incarnation. 1470. yeres. This man herynge that his mother (beinge a virgin conſecrate) was defloured by Iupiter, whan he was begotten, and therfore expelled of the other vingines, wolde haue ſlayne his mother, who being aferde of him, fled in to the wilderneſſe, & did hyde her ſelfe, tyll at the laſte ſhe and her ſonne were reconciled by Iupiter. Afterwarde they bothe beinge deade, the Paynims fayned that they were tranſlated amonge the ſterres, and ſet nigh to the Pole artike, and the mother was called Vrſa minor, and the ſon Vrſa maior.
            
            
               Arcâtus, a, um, bent lyke a bowe.
            
               Arceo, cui, cêre, to ſtrayne, to put of, to dryue awaye.
            
               Arcera, a horſe lytter.
            
               Arceſilas, a philoſopher of the ſecte of Academici, who was the ſcholer of Crantor. There was alſo of that name a kunnynge keruer of ymages, ſpecially the ymage of Diana.
            
            
               Arceſſo, to accuſe, to call for.
            
               Arceſſere, to purchaſe or get a thinge. Cauſam ſibi mortis arceſsere: To be the cauſe of his deathe.
            
               Archarius, a treaſorer, or cofferer.
            
               Archelaus, a mannes name, of the which were dyuerſe famous menne. One was a philoſopher, diſciple to Anaxagoras, borne at Miletum, and mayſter to Socrates, and was the fyrſte that broughte naturall philoſophy out of Ionia, to Athenis. Of this name were dyuerſe kinges of Cappadocia, alſo one was kynge of Macedonia, whom Plato calleth a tyrant, and was ſlayne by one Cratena his minion. Of this man theſe thynges be remē
               bred, that whan he hyred the famouſe payntour Zeuzis to paynt his palayce: Socrates ſayde meryly: that he dyd it to prouoke men to reſorte vnto hym, althoughe they wolde not come for his ſake, at the leaſt waye they ſhuld gladly come to beholde his fayre houſe. Alſo whan he had with hym at ſoupper dyuerſe lerned menne, a poete there deſyred of hym a ſumme of moneye, he cauſed it to be brought to hym, and forthwith gaue it to Euripides, who dyd not aſke it, ſayinge: Thou arte worthye to take it, and he to deſyre it.
            
               Archemorus, ſonne of Lycurgus kyng of Nemêa, ſlayne by an adder as his noryce layde hym in the gras by the ryuers ſyde. for whoſe ſake were made playes called Nemêi. He was alſo called Opheltes.
            
            
               Archeptholomeus, was charyot man to Hector of Troy.
            
               Archeſilaus, a philoſopher of the countreye of Acolide, who fyrſte inuented and vſed the fourme of diſputation by oppoſynge and anſwerynge, as it is nowe vſed, he brought in the ſecte called Media academica. And althoughe he were a wyſe man, yet dyed he by immoderate drynkynge of wyne.
            
               Archerypus, the fyrſt example or paterne.
            
               Archias, called alſo A. Licimus, was a poete of Antioche, moche fauoured and honoured of the noble men of Rome, ſpeciallye of Lucullus and Tully, who defended hym in a noble oration, where he ſpeketh moche to the commendation of poetry.
            
               Archiater, tri, a chiefe phiſition.
            
               Archidâmus, a noble man of Sparta, who beinge demaunded, howe moche money wolde ſerue to the warre of Peloponeſus, aunſwered, ſayinge: that warre foughte for noo certayntie.
            
               Archigenes, the name of a famouſe phiſition. It is alſo he that wolde be taken for the wyſeſt of his kynne.
            
               Archigrammatêus, a chauncellour or chiefe ſecretary.
            
               Archilochus, a poete of Lacedemonia, whiche wrate in the kynde of verſes called Iambici, wherin he was ſo vehement, that where Licambes his wiues father, toke from hym his wyfe, and maryed her to an other manne, he ſo rated hym with verſis, that he compelled hym for ſorow and indignation to hange him ſelfe. He was afore the incarnation of Chriſt
650. yeres.
            
               Archimagirus, chiefe cooke.
            
               Archimedes, a famouſe geometricien of Siracuſis in Sicile, who by his arte reſyſted a longe tyme Marcellus captaygne of the Romaynes, who beſieged the Citie of Siracuſis: But fynally the citie beinge wonne, and he ſente for by Marcellus, was founde drawynge fygures of geometry in the grounde, wherto he was ſoo attentife, that whan he was boden to come to Marcellus, he aunſwered: that whan he hadde finiſhed the fygure, whiche he was in makynge, he wolde come: at the whiche aunſwere the meſſager diſdaynynge, ſlewe Archimedes, for the whiche Marcellus was excedyngly ſory. Some do ſuppoſe, that he fyrſte inuented the makynge of materiall ſpheris, and the globe. He alſo made a doue of wood, whiche had in it ſuche equall poyſe, that it wold hange in the ayre by a longe ſpace. Alſo he made an horologe, wherin mought be ſene, the true courſe of the heauens and ſpheris. He was afore the incarnation about .192. yeres.
            
               Archimimus, the mayſter or chiefe of the players.
            
                
               Architas Tarentinus, a noble philoſopher of the diſcipline of Pythagoras, and captayne of the armye of the Tarentines inuyncible. He was maſter of Plato in geometry, whom he alſo delyuered from Dioniſius the tirant of Sicile. He was afore the incarnation of Chriſte about .370. yeres.
            Architectonice, ces, idē quod Architectura.
            
               Architectonicus, a, um, perteynynge to diuyſynge of buildynge.
            
               Architector, & Architectus, a diuiſer of buildynge, or a maiſter of the warkes.
            
               Architector, aris, ari, to make craftelye, or to deuyſe buyldynge.
            
               Architectura, the counnynge of diuyſynge of buildynge.
            
               Architriclinus, mayſter of the feaſte.
            
               Archiuum, the treaſory of minumentes and euidences belongynge to a kynge or a citie.
            
               Archon, was the chiefe dignitie in Athenes.
            
               Archiontici, certayne heretikes, whiche affyrmed, that the vnyuerſall ſtates of thynges was not made by god, but by prynces, and they alſo denyed the reſurrecton of the body.
            
               Arcirna, a lyttell carte, a whele barowe.
            
               Arconicum, a minorall called Arſenyke.
            
               Arctium,
               Io. Agric. the great burre.
            
               Arcto, aui, are, to ſtrayne often tymes.
            
               Arctophylax, a certayne figure of ſterres, folowynge Charles wayne, called alſo Bootes.
            
            
               Arctos, a fygure of ſterres called Charles wayne. alſo Vrſa maior.
            
            Arctous, & arcticus, a, um, of the Northe.
            
            Arctus, a, um, ſtreyght.
            
            
               Arcturus, a ſterre, whiche is at the tayle of that, which is called Arctos, or urſa maior.
            
            
               Arcuatim, bent lyke a bowe.
            
               Arcuatus, faſcioned lyke a bowe.
            
               Arcubaliſta, a croſſebowe.
            
               Arcula, a lyttell coffer or caſket.
            
               Arculus, a roll that women do weare on their heades, to beare water or mylke eaſelye.
            
               Arcuor, ari, to be made bente lyke a bowe, or to be vaulted.
            
               Arcus, a bowe, the vault of a roufe.
            
               Ardea, a byrde called an heron. It is alſo the name of a citie in Latio, beinge from Rome about .xxii. miles, wherein was the palayce of Turnus, whom Aeneas vaynquiſhed, and the people there were called Rutuli.
            
            
               Ardeates, people of the citie of Ardea.
            
               Ardelio, a buſy man medlyng with many thinges, and can ſkyll of nothynge.
            
               Ardens, tis, haſtye in doynge, quycke wytted burnynge, ardent.
            
               Ardenter, feruently,
            
               Ardeo, arſi, dêre, to burne, to loue ardentely or excedyngely, to make haſt, to be conſumed, to deſyre: alſo to ſhine. Tyrio
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ardebat murice laena. His mantell dyd ſhyne of fine purple of Tyre.
            
               Ardêre cupiditate, to couet ardently.
            
               Ardêre iracūdia, to be inflamed with anger.
            
               Ardêre maxime flagitio,
               Plautus: to haue done, or be infamed of a myſcheuous deede.
            
               Ardeola, an hernſewe. It is alſo a byrd, wherof there be .iii. kyndes: One is called Pella, whiche ingendreth with moche dyffycultie, and lyke wyſe ſytteth: in the tyme of treadynge the bloud yſſueth out of his eyes The other is called Alba, or in a greke name leuce, whiche amounteth to as moche. The .iii. is called Stellaris or piger.
            
            
               Ardeſco, to be haſty.
            
               Arduenna, a great wod in Gallia belgica, whiche taketh in ſpace .500. myles, comming frō the ryuer of the Rhene throughe the lande of Luke vnto the citie of Tournay.
            
               Ardum, olde wryters vſed for arduum.
            
            
               Arduus, hygh and difficult, harde to come to.
            
               Area, a large place in a citie kept euer cleane. where marchauntes do aſſemble, as I haue ſene in diuerſe cities in Almayne. Alſo it is euery place marked out to buylde or to ſet an houſe in. Alſo a floore where corne is thraſſhed. It is more ouer a quarter of a garden, wherin herbes be ſowen or ſet.
            
               Areator, a threſhar.
            
               Arefacio, to make drye.
            
               Arelate, a citie in Fraunce called Orleaunce.
            
               Arena, ſande.
            Arenaceus, a, um, ſandy.
            
            
               Arenarius, a, um, perteynynge to a fyghtinge place.
            
               Arenarium, a pyt where ſande is dygged.
            
               Arenatus, a, um, pergetted with lyme & ſande.
            
               Arenoſus, ſandy.
            
               Arenula, fyne ſande.
            
               Areo, rui, rere, to be made drye.
            
               Areola, a bedde in a garden.
            
               Areopagitae, were iudges, whiche ſatte in a place by Athenes, and iudged cauſes of murder, and weyghty thynges concernynge the common weale.
            
               Areopâgus, the village of Mars, where the ſayde iudges dyd ſyt in iudgement.
            
               Areopôlis, a citie in Araby, called alſo Aloab
            
            
               Areopolitae, the inhabitantes of Areopôlis.
            
            
               Areſco, ſcere, to waxe dry, or to be made drye.
            
               Aretalogus, a bragger or a vaūter of his own vertues. Somtyme a forger of lyes, to make men mery.
            
               Arête, in latine uirtus, in englyſhe vertue. It was alſo the name of the wyfe of Alcinous kyng of Phaeacis, of whom Homer wryteth in Odyſſea.
            
            
               Arethuſa, the companion of Diana. It is alſo the name of a fountayne in Sicile, and of an
 other in Metia.
            
               Arethyſſa, & Arethuſa, a ryuer in the greate Armeny.
            
               Aretium, a Citie in Tuſcana, fyfty myles frō Peruſe.
            
               Aretinus, a, um, of that citie.
            
               Arferis, wyne or water offered to the infernall goddes, or rather dyuelles.
            
               Arganthonius, an hyll nyghe to Bithinia, by the citie of Pruſias, nygh thervnto is a wel, where Hilas the companiō of Hercules was taken ſodeynly away by the nymphes, whan he was at that well to fetche water.
            
               Argatilis, a kynde of foule, whiche bredeth in water bankes, makynge her neſte with lynnen threde in fourme of a ball, ſoo cloſe that the entrynge in to it maye not be founde.
            
               Argemata,
               Galen in Iſagog. a ſore in the eyes, whiche being in the blacke of the eye, is white, in the whyte of the eye, is redde.
            
               Argémone,
               Dioſco. an herbe, whiche hath leaues like wylde poppy, ragged, alſo a pourple floure, the top in a cod, lenger than the heade of popy, and brode aboue, a rounde rote: the iuice of it is of the coloure of ſaffron, and tarte.
            
               Argentaria, a banke of exchaunge.
            
               Argentariam facit, he maketh or occupieth a banke for exchaunge.
            
               Argentaria cura,
               Plautus. care for money.
            
               Argentaria inopia, lacke of money.
            
               Argentariae illecebrae, thynges gettynge money.
            
               Argentarius commeatus, prouiſion of money.
            
               Argentarius, a banker, with whom men doo make theyr exchaunge of money.
            Argenteus, a, um, of ſyluer.
            
            
               Argentina, a fayre Citie in Germany, on the weſt ſide of the riuer of Reine, called Strauſburgh. it was alſo called Argentoracum.
            
            
               Argentum, ſyluer. ſomtyme it ſignifieth plate.
            
               Argentum uiuum, quicke ſyluer.
            
               Argeſtes, the wynde whiche bloweth oute of the ſouthe weſte.
            
               Argeus, a, um, of the citie of Argos.
            
               Argia, a countrey in Peloponeſo or Morea.
            
               Argiae plurali, a citie in Laconia.
            
               Argiletum, the ſepulchre of Argus. It is alſo a place, where potters claye is dygged. It is alſo a ſtrete in Rome, where the boke ſellars dwelled.
            
               Argiletanae, bokeſellars dwellyng in the ſaid ſtrete called Argiletum.
            
            
               Argilla, potters claye.
            
               Argimiſſae,
               Stra. li. 13. thre lyttell yles in Aſia, by the yles of Mitele and Leſous.
            
               Argis, at the citie of Argos.
            
               Argo, the ſhyppe wherin Iaſon and his companye ſayled in to Colchos, to wynne the the flieſe of golde.
            
               Argonautae, were the companions of Iaſon, whiche ſayled with hym vnto Colchos, as, Caſtor, Pollux, Hercules, Thelamon, Orpheus, Zetus, Calais, and manye other noble men, as well of bloudde, as in proweſſe. This voyage was afore the incarnation of Chriſte. 1254. yeres.
            
               Argos, a countrey & citie in Theſſalia, where raigned Inachus. In this countreye be the famous mountaygnes of Olympus and Oſſa. Alſo Argos was a citie not far from Athenes, an other in Achaia.
            
               Argumentatio, the declaration of an argumēt
            
               Argumentor, aris, ari, to argue or reaſon.
            
               Argumentoſus, a, um, that whiche is doone with great reaſon.
            
               Argumentum, is a reaſon makynge a profe, wherby one thynge is gathered by an other, and the whiche confirmeth that, whiche is doubtefull. ſometyme it ſignifieth a mater, ſomtyme coniecture, ſometyme a ſhorte expoſition of that whiche foloweth, othewhyle ſentence. Alſo a ſygne or token. Sine argumento, without coloure.
            
               Argumentū picture, the deuiſe of the thing portrayed.
            
               Argumentum ſcripturae, the matter whiche is wrytten of.
            
               Arguo, gui, ere, to reproue, to impute to accuſe, to ſhewe.
            
               Arguere aliquem pecuniae interuerſae, to accuſe one for ſtealynge of money.Plautus.
            
            
               Argus, the ſon of Ariſtor, the .v. kynge of Argiues, after that Oſiris wente into Egypte, whiche made the ſhyp, wherin Iaſon and other ſayled to Colchos, the poetes fayned, that he had an hundrede eyes, ſignyfyenge thereby his wyſedome and circumſpection. Moreouer that Iuno appointed him to kepe Io, whom ſhe had tranſformed in to a cowe. But Mercurius being ſent by Iupiter, with his ſwete armony broughte Argus on ſlepe, and than ſlewe hym, and toke Io from him, and broughte her in to Egypt. Than Iuno toke the eyes of Argus, and ſet them in the fethers of a pecockes tayle, wherfore the pecocke is called Auis Iunonia, Iunos byrde.
            
               Argutatio, reaſonynge, debatynge.
            
               Argute, an aduerb, ſignifieng wittyle, ſubtyly.
            
               Argutiae, ſharpe wordes or ſhreude.
            
               Argutioſa, a prety taunte, or quippy.
            
               Argutor, aris, ari, to ſpeke ſharpelye, ſhrewdly or pertly.
            
               Argutulus, ſomewhat perte, quicke in aunſwerynge.
            
               Argutum, ſelender or ſmall.
            
               Argutum, caput, a ſharp or piked head lyke a ſugar lofe.
            
                
               Argutus, a, um, reproued, ſometyme it ſignifieth ſhrewde, and he that can in ſpeakynge ſharply inſerche a mannes wytte. Alſo ſhyrle of voyce, ſomtyme leane.
            
               Arguta diuiſio, a ſubtyl diuiſion.
            
               Arguti homines, they that ſpeake moche in fewe wordes.
            
               Arguti oculi, rollyng eies, or alway moving.
            
               Argyranche, the ſyluer ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Argyraſpidae, men bearynge ſhyldes of ſyluer. Theſe were ſouldiours of the great kinge Alexander, whiche after his deathe were retayned with ſundrye prynces, as the launce knyghtes be with vs.
            
               Argyrini, a certayne people in Epiro.
            
               Argyritis, the ſpume or ſome of ſyluer.
            
               Ariadne, a lady, the wyfe of Theſeus, whom he forſoke, notwithſtandynge that ſhe had ſaued his lyfe.
            
               Aricia, a citie in Italy.
            
               Aricinum noemus, a wood by the ſayde Citie, where Numa kynge of Romayns fayned to ſpeake with Aegeria the fayry.
            
               Aricinus lacus,
               Plautus: a brooke by Aricia.
            
               Ariditas, dryneſſe.
            
               Aridus, drye.
            
               Arida uita, a ſtraight lyfe.
            
               Aridus uictus,
               Plinius. harde fare.
            
               Aridus homo, a drye felowe, of whome nothynge maye be gotten. ſome do call hym, a pelt, or a pynchebeke.
            
               Aries, etis, a ram. Alſo a piece of ordyuaunce or ingine, made lyke a rammes heed, to beat downe a wall. It is alſo oone of the .xii. ſignes that the ſum paſſeth by. It is alſo a fiſhe hauynge hornes lyke to a ramme, whiche he ſometyme holdeth with his heade out of the water, and if he eſpy any man ſwymmynge, he goeth vnto hym, and pulleth hym vnder the water, and deuoureth hym.
            
               Arietinus, of a ramme.
            
               Arieto, aui, are, to hit or throwe downe.
            
               Arimaſpi, people in Sithia, whiche haue but one eye, and that is in theyr foreheade, whiche do fyghte continuallye with griphons or gripes. Herodotus ſayth, that they haue .ii. eyes, but they vſe to wynk with the one, that they may haue the other more ſtedfaſt whan they do ſhote.
            
               Ariminum, an olde citie in Flaminea, a countrey of Italy by the ryuer of Rubicon.
            
               Arimpaei, people vnder the domynyon of the prynce of Moſcouites, whiche lyue alwaye in woodes, and be gentyl in maners and iuſt, whiche eate nothinge but bearies and maſte.Herodo.
            
            
               Arinca,
               Gellius. called rye.
            
               Arion,
               Plinius. a famous harper, whom the mariners wold haue throwen in to the ſea, for to haue his moneye: but he deſyryng them to let him playe a ſonge on his harpe or he dyed, afterwarde lepte into the water, but a dolphin receyuynge hym on his backe, brought hym to lande a lyue.
            
               Ariſta, the berde of corne. Sometyme it is put for wheate.
            
               Ariſtathea, the malowe with the great leafe.
            
               Ariſtarchus, a grāmarien of Alexandria, whiche taught the ſon of kynge Ptolomeus called Philometor: he was of ſuch iudgement, that it was thoughte, not to be the verſe of Homere, whiche he dyd not approue. He dyed by abſtinence, bycauſe he wold not ſuſtein the peyne of the dropſy, whan he was of the age of .72. yeres. He was before the incarnation of Chriſte .127. yeres.
            
               Ariſtheus, the ſonne of Apollo and Ceres, called of H
                  •
               ſiodus Apollo paſtoralis, whiche was ſlayne with dogges: the gentiles painted hym, a yong lad berdleſſe, ſtandyng betwene the .ii. tops of the mountayn of Parnaſus, out of the whiche ranne the fountain of Caſtalius, hauynge far from hym the ſerpent Pithon, whom he ſtrake through with his arrowe. They did alſo dedicate vnto him the grype and the rauen.
            
               Ariſtides, was a noble manne of Athenes, in wyſedome, iuſtice, and temperaunce excellēt: For where in the gouernaunce of the commō weale of Athenes, he was ioyned with Themiſtocles, a man of great proweſſe and rycheſſe, who ſayinge in the counſayle, that he knewe a thynge, whiche was expedyente to the common weale, but it was not neceſſary, that it ſhulde be openly knowen, and deſired to haue one appoynted, vnto whom he ſhuld diſcloſe it. The counſayle aſſigned to hym Ariſtides, to whom he ſhewed, that the nauye of the Lacedemonians mought be ſhortly ſet on fyre, and ſoo ſhulde theyr puiſſaunce be abated, whiche Ariſtides herynge, he retourned vnto the counſayle, and ſayde, that the aduyſe of Themiſtocles was profitable, but it was not honeſt. The Athenienſes herynge that it was not honeſt, iuged that it mought not be profytable, and wolde not let it than to be diſcloſed, ſuche credence had they in Ariſtides. Alſo not withſtandynge that the Atheniences had exiled him without any cauſe but onely bycauſe he excelled in Iuſtice, yet at his departynge, he prayed to god, that what ſo euer they deſyred, it moughte come to good effect and concluſion. And whan he was called agayne out of exyle, he neuer remembred any olde diſpleaſure, in ſoo moche that he alway honoured Themiſtocles, with whom he euer contended in the weale publyke. Of his temperaunce this was a greate token, that not withſtanding that he had ben
 in the greteſt dignitie and offices in the common weale of Athenes: yet dyed he ſo poore, that he left not ſufficiently to bury hym worſhypfully. And his doughters were maryed at the charge of the citie. And to his ſon Lyſimachus was gyuen by the people one hundred Minae, whiche amounteth of our money to .CC.xxxix. li. xi. s. viii. d. O howe maye chriſten men be aſhamed, whā they rede this ſtory, beholdynge in his temperaunce Iuſtice and charitie, a more reſemblance of Chriſtis doctrine, than is in them, whiche wyl do nothynge vnhyred, meaſure iuſtice by theyr affections. Of this name were .iiii. other, whiche deſerued not ſo good a remembrance. He was afore the incarnation. 474. yeres.
            
               Ariſtides, a chriſtian philoſopher in Athenes, the yere of our lorde. 132. made an eloquente defence for Chriſtes religion, and delyuered it to Hadriane the emperoure, wherwith he was ſo perſwaded, that he gaue commandement to the proconſull of Aſia, that he ſhulde put no chriſten man to death, except he were conuicte of ſome crime notable.
            
               Ariſtippus, was diſciple to Socrates, notwithſtandynge he dyd put the chyefe goodnes in volupte or pleaſure, wherfore Diogenes called hym the royall dogge, bycauſe he alwaye folowed them that were ryche, and taughte for money. On a tyme he beinge on the ſea, whan a ſtorme came, that the ſhyppe was in peryll, he was ſore aferde. After that the peryll was paſte, men aſked of hym why he feared ſo moche ſens he was a philoſopher. The peryl (ſaid he) in loſſe of an ignorant knaue, and of a noble philoſopher, is not of lyke eſtimation. The folowers of hym were called Cirenaici. Saynct Auguſtine ſaythe of hym: It is not requiſite to aunſwere Ariſtippum, who in euery part lyued ſo, as betwene hym and a beaſte was no diuerſitie. His ſecte by other diſciples of Socrates and noble phyloſophers, was vtterly exterminate. He had a doughter called Arête, excellentely lerned. He was afore Chryſte. 366. yeres.
            
               Ariſtobolus, was ſon of Hircanus, captayne and chiefe buſhop of the Iewes. 92. yeres afore the commynge of Chryſte. This man attempted to tranſlate the dignitie of a byſhop vnto the dignitie of a kynge, and was the fyrſte, whiche after the returnynge from the captiuitie of Babylon, toke on hym to weare a crowne. He ſubdued the people called Iturei, in Siria, and compelled them to be circumcided: but afterwarde by the yll counſayl of his brother Antigonus, he put his mother and yonger brethern in pryſon, & after ſlewe his ſayd brother Antygonus in famyſhynge hym, for the whiche crueltie god ſoo ſtrake him with vengeance, that hsi bowelles were rente in his bely, and he vometed vp all the bloude in his body, and ſo dyed.
            
               Ariſtocratia, the fourme of gouernaunce of a weale publyke, where they do rule, whiche are of moſte vertue.
            
               Ariſtolochia, an herbe, wherof be thre kyndes One is called rounde, whiche hath leaues in faſcion lyke iuy, but ſomwhat rounder, wher in is a ſharpe and delycate odour, the floure white lyke a lyttell bonet vppon a red knop, the rootes are rounde and manye. An other called longe Ariſtolochia hathe lengar leaues, ſmall braunches, and a pourple floure, whiche ſtynketh: and whan it ſpryngeth, it is of the facion of a peare: the rote therof is longe, and of the greatneſſe of a mannes fingar, bothe of them do beare bearyes lyke to capers, within of boxe colour, which ar bitter and ſtynkynge. The thyrde is longe and hath ſmal braunches, ful of leaues ſomwhat rounde, lyke to the leſſe ſyngreene, and hath floures lyke vnto rewe, the rootes longe and ſmal with a thicke rynde, and ſote in ſauour.
            
               Ariſtomenes, a man of Meſſene, whiche was called Iuſtiſsimus, moſte iuſte. This manne whan he was dead, was foundē to haue his harte all hearye.
            
               Ariſtophanes, a poete mooſte eloquent in the tunge of Athenes, althoughe he was borne at the Rhodes: he wrate .liiii. commedyes, wherin he ſpared not them, whiche than lyued. he was in diſpleaſure with Socrates, and therfore he reprehendeth hym in his commedy called the Cloudes.
            
               Ariſtopherum, a dyſhe wherin meate is borne to dyner.
            
               Ariſtoteles, ſonne of Nicomachus the phiſition, borne in Stagera in Greece, conſumed his youthe ryottouſely, afterwarde he was ſcholer to the noble Plato .xx. yeres continually. he excelled all men in ſharpnes of wytte, and knowledge in dyuerſe ſciences, wherfore kynge Philipe of Macedoni ſente his ſonne Alexander to hym to be taughte, ſayinge: that he thanked god, that he had a ſon borne in his tyme. This man began a ſecte, the folowers wherof were called Peripatetici, and taught after the deathe of Plato .xxiii. yeres He was banyſhed out of Athenes, bycauſe it was ſuppoſed, that he demid not wel of their goddes. It is written, that he dyed by this occaſion: As he wente by the ſea ſyde, he perceyued fyſher menne ſyttynge and doinge of ſomwhat. And whan he aſked what they did they tolde hym a ryddell, whiche whan by longe ſtydye he coulde not aſſoyle, for ſhame and ſorowe he dyed. Of hym Quintilian writeth in this wyſe: what ſay you by Ariſtotle,
 whom I wote not, whether I maye iudge more excellent in knowlege of thynges, or in abundaunce of wrytynge, or in ſwetenes of eloquence, or in ſharpneſſe of wyt, or elles in diuerſitie of workes. Not withſtandynge he was lyttell of perſonage, crooke backed, yll ſhapen, and ſtuttyng. He was. 345. yeres before Chriſtes incarnation.
            
               Arithmetica, the Scyence of numbrynge, of whom it was fyrſte founden, it is vncertain. Albeit Abraham fyrſte taught it vnto the Egyptians. Longe tyme after Pythagoras declared it vnto the Greekes. Plato wylleth that before all other thynges, the numbers be taught vnto chyldren, whithout the whiche nothynge eyther priuate or commone can be well ordered. This ſcience is diuided into. viii. partes, that is to ſaye, Numbryng, Addition or puttynge to, Subtraction or takynge away, Mediation or partynge in the myddes, Duplication or doublynge, Multiplication or augmentynge one number by another, Diuiſion or diuidynge one number by an other. Progreſſion, as one, two, thre, maketh ſyxe. More ouer in this ſcience Digitus is the ſingle numbers vnto ten, as 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
6. 7. 8. 9. Articulus is any of the hole numbers, as. 10. 20. 30. 40. and ſo forthe. Number compounde is of digitus and articulus, as. 12. 23. 34. 46. &c. This ſcience is of ſuch excellency, that as well diuines as phyloſophers do therby declare the moſte diffuſe miſteris of theyr ymagination. And Pythagoras ſuppoſed, that the world, and al thynges were fyrſte created of numbers. And Ariſtotle affirmeth, that the beſte profe of a naturall foole is, that he can not number truelye.
            
               Aritudo, drythe, or dryneſſe.
            
               Arma, orum, harnayes and weapon. alſo the inſtrumentes of al maner of craftes. alſo ſtandardes and baners. ſomtyme battaylles.
            
               Ad arma uocare, to commaunder men to be in harneys redy.
            
               Armamenta, tooles, inſtrumentes, al ſtore for warres or ſhyppes, armour, tacklynge.
            
               Armamentarium, an armory or ſtorehouſe for ſhyppes or ordinaunce.
            
               Armarium, where bookes are layde, or other ſtuffe of houſeholde.
            
               Armati, armed men.
            
               Armator, an armorer.
            
               Armatura, armure.
            
               Armenia, of that name be, ii. regions, the one is called Armenia minor, the other Armenia maior. Minor hath on the northe & weſte parte Cappadociam, on the Eaſte the noble ryuer of Euphrates and Armeniam maiorem, on the ſouth the mountayn of Taurus.
            
               Armenia maior hath on the Northe Colchidem, Iberiam, and Albaniam, on the weſte parte Cappadocia, on the eaſte parte the ſea called Hircanum, on the ſouthe Meſopotamiam, and the mountaygne Taurum.
            
               Armeni, people of Armenia, whiche were chriſtened of late yeres, but nowe they are ſubiectes vnto the Turkes. They in ſome thing erred frome the churche of the Latines and Greekes, they haue one great byſhop, whom they call Catholicum, they celebrate moche lyke vnto our faſcion, but they doo not kepe holy neyther the natiuitie of Chriſte, nor his baptiſine, ſaying that he neded not to be purged or clenſed of ſynne. Alſo they take frome all ſacramentes the vertue to conferre grace. alſo they efteſones baptiſe them, which come from the churche of latines to them, ſayinge that we be not of the Catholike faythe but they. Alſo they ſaye that no man may be chriſtened, excepte he receyue the ſacramente of the aultare. Alſo that infantes nede not to be baptiſed, affyrmynge that in them is no oryginall ſynne. Alſo that the holy ghoſte procedeth of the father and not of the ſonne. Alſo that the ſacrament of the aultar maye not be cōſecrate of bread cleane without leuen. alſo in the conſecration they put no water to the wyne. Moreouer they ſay, that the receyuing of the ſacrament profyteth onely to the body, and not to the ſowle. Alſo they ſay, that whā Chriſte deſcended into hell, he led with hym all the ſoules that were there. alſo that matrimony is no ſacrament, and that it may be diſſolued at the wyl of the man or the womā. alſo that Chriſte dyd ryſe the ſaterdaye after Paraſceue or good fryday. All theſe hereſies and other whiche I paſſe ouer for briefneſſe, are condemned by ſondry generall counſailes and the conſente of all Chriſtendom.
            
               Armeniacum malum, is a fruyte accompted among the kynde of Peaches: the Italianes do call them Armelini, the frenche men ſez abricotes. I knowe not that there be any of them in Englande.
            
               Armeniaca malus, the tre which beareth that fruite.
            
               Armentarius, the keper of an armery. ſometime Eſquiar de Eſquiry.
            
               Armentum, ſtore of horſe or nete. ſometyme it ſignifieth cattell.
            
               Armiger, geri, properly an eſquire for the body, or he whiche alwaye attendynge aboute a knyght, beareth his head piece, his ſpere, and his ſhylde.
            
               Armillae, rynges that gentyll women vſed to weare aboute theyr armes, as at this daye ſome men and womē do vſe, called bracelets.
            
               Armille neut. gen. an inſtrumente of falſhode or craft.
            
                
               Armillum, a veſſell, wherin they vſed in theſe ſacrifice to put wyne.
            
               Armiluſtrum, was a feſtyuall day, in the whyche the Romaynes dyd ſacrifyce armed, and trumpettes dyd blowe bluddy ſoundes. Alſo the place, wherin ſuche ſacrifice was made.
            
               Armipotens, puiſſant in armes.
            Armo, aui, are, to arme.
            
            
               Armocea, a wylde radyſhe.
            Armoracia,Io. Agric. Ruellius. idem.
            
               Armon, a ryuer that cometh from the hylles of
            
               Arabye, and diuideth Moabitide, frome Amonitide.
            
            
               Armorica, the auncient name of Brytayne in Fraunce.
            
               Armus, the ſhoulder of a beaſte, or the pynion of a fowle.
            
               Arnentis,
               Oppianꝰ f. Maſſariꝰ a fyſſhe whiche Plinye calleth Hippuris. Theodorus callyth hym Equiſelis, whiche is lyke to a horſes tayle. She ſpauneth in ſprynge tyme, and of a verye lyttell fyſhe ſhortly groweth to be greate, and vſeth to repayre of ſhippes that be wrecked.
            
               Arnion, uel Arnogloſſo, an herbe callyd plan tayne, whiche is colde and drye in the ſecond degree, the iuyce wherof in curyng of feuers certiane, and in ſtoppynge of bloud, is of ſouerayne vertue, lyke as the ſede and the water therof is againſt the ſtone if it be drunke.
            
               Arnobius, a noble rhetorician of Affrike, maiſter to Lactantius, who wrate agaynſte the gentiles, the yere of our lorde. 305. whoſe expoſition we haue vpon the pſalter.
            
               Arnus, a ſwyft ryuer in Italy, which runneth by the citie of Florence.
            
               Aro, aui, are, to eare or plowe lande.
            
               Aroma, atis, pleaſant ſauour, alſo ſpice.
            
               Aromaticus, a, um, ſwete of ſauor, odoriferous.
            
               Aromatites, a precious ſtone, which hath the ſauour of myrre.
            
               Aromatorius, & Aromatopola, he that ſellith thinges hauyng ſwete ſauour.
            
               Aros, an herbe callyd wake Robyn. it is callid of ſome Serpentaria minor, bycauſe it hath leaues lyke to Dragons, but broder, and hauyng black ſpottes, it groweth about hedges.
            
               Arpinas, a man or woman of Arpinum.
            
               Arpinum, an aunciente towne in Italye, famouſe and noble by the byrthe of Plautus, Tulli, and Marius.
            
               Arquatus morbus, the ſyckeneſſe callyd the Iaundiſe.
            
               Arquites, olde wryters vſed for an archer.
            
               Arquus, qui, the raynbowe.
            
               Arrectarij parietes, walles made with tymber and parget, to diuide chambers.
            
               Arreptitius, he that is obſeſſed with an ylle ſpyrite.
            Arrha, & arrhabo, erneſt money.
            
            
               Arrideo,
               Plautus. 
               riſi, dêre, to ſmyle at a thynge, ſometyme to lyke or content. Aedes mihi arridebant, The houſe lyked me well.
            
               Arrexit animos, it aduanced theyr courage.
            
               Arrige aures,
               Saluſt. lay to thyne eares, or gyue an eare to that whiche is ſpoken.Terent.
            
            
               Arrigo, rigi, ere, to water grounde.
            
               Arriminenſis ſynodus, was a generall counſell kepte at Arriminum in Italye, the yere of our lord. 360. the .xxii. yere of the raigne of the emperour Conſtantius, where the grekes aſſayd by their ſubtyl wyttes to cōdemne the noble counſayle of Nicene, but by the wyſedome of the Latines, that dyſpution was defeeryd, and at a generall counſayle at Rome, the opinions of the Arrians were condemned.
            Arripio, pui, ere, to take.
            
            
               Arripere conditionem,
               Sueto. de claris grā. to take the offer.
            
               Arripere maledictum, to take heede of an ylle reporte.Cicero. 
               Quare cum iſta ſis authoritate, non debes Marce arripere maledictum ex triuio, aut ex ſcurrarum aliquo conuitio, Wherfore in as moche as ye are in this auctoritie, or of this eſtymation, ye oughte not Marke to take hede of an ylle worde ſpoken abrode, or of the rebuke of a raylyng knaue.
            
               Arripere ſermonē,
               Plautus. to take hym at his worde.
            
               Arripere ſe foras, to gette hym oute of the doores.
            
               Arrius, an heeretycke, beynge a prieſte in the Churche of Alexandria, the yere of our lord, CCC. & twenty, Conſtantinus magnus beynge emperour, this Arrius was a fayre perſonage, and hauynge a verye ſharpe wytte, he was hadde in moche eſtimation. But fallynge at the laſt into pryde and ambition of honour, he purpoſed and helde this hereſye. That the ſonne in deitie was not equall vnto the father, nor of the ſame ſubſtaunce, but was a meere creature. Vnto this errour he inducyd not onely a great parte of the worlde than chriſtened, but alſo a greate number of noble clerkes. for the whyche was callid the great counſel of Nicene, where themperour, was preſent with. 318. biſhops. Where after ſundry and many aſſemblees & longe diſputation, it was at the laſte determined, that the ſon was equal & of one ſubſtance with the father, as touching the diuinite. Which decree was apꝓued by thēperor, & Arrius with .vi. byſhops, which obſtinatly perſeuered in their hereſy, were banyſhed. Afterward Arriꝰ, who with his foul hereſy had corrupted the world finyſhed his lyfe with an horrible deathe. for as he was diſputyng, beinge prouoked to the ſtole, in exoneratynge nature, he poured oute all his bowelles, and ſo dyed.
            
               Arrius, an hyſtorian borne in Nicomedia, amonge other warkes, wrate in greke the lyfe
 of great Alexander. This man for his lerning and vertue optayned greate honors at Rome of the emperours Hadrian and Antonine, in ſo moche that he was one conſull.
            
               Arrogo, aui, are, to gyue to moche, to preſume.
            
               Arrogans, arrogant, or preſumptuous.
            
               Arroganter, preſumptuouſely, proudely.
            
               Arrogantia, arrogancy, preſumption.
            
               Arrogare filium, to make one his heyre by adoption.
            
               Arrogare pretium, to inhaunce or ſette vp the pryce.
            
               Arrugia, a myne of golde, a coney.
            
               Ars, artis, a crafte, ſubtyltie.
            
               Ars paraſitica, the feate of flattery.
            
               Arſaces, was the generall name of the kynges of Parthia.
            
               Arſenothelea; a beaſte whiche is bothe male and female, as ſome doo ſaye that a hare is, one yere male, an other yere female.
            
               Artaba, a meaſure of the Egyptians, conteynynge. lxxii. Roman meaſures callid Sextarij.
            
            Artamitae, an herbe callyd alſoo Cecla minus, & Vmbelicus terrae.
            
               Artaxata, a citie in Armeny the greate, at the ryuer of Arexis.
            
            
               Artaxerxes, a name, whereby many kynges of Perſia were callid, of whom one is callyd in the Byble, Aſſuerus, an other whiche was his ſonne by Heſter, callyd alſo Ochus. An other was callyd Longimanus, bycauſe that his armes and handes were ſoo longe, that ſtandynge vpryght, he moughte touche his knees with his handes. He loued peace, and was of moche gentylneſſe, wherfore he was well beloued of all his people. He was before the incarnation of Chriſte. 485. yeres, who had to ſurname Memnon.
            
               Artemis, is a name of Diana.
            
               Artemiſia, was the name of a noble princeſſe, who was wyfe to Mauſolus, kynge of Caria, and was of a notable chaſtytie, and in loue towarde her huſbande ſoo excellyd, that whan he was deade, ſhe cauſyd his harte to be dryed in a veſſell of golde into pouder, and by lyttell and lyttell dranke it vp, ſayinge: That theyr two hartes ſhulde neuer departe aſunder, and that ſhe thoughte, that there mought be made no worthy ſepulchre for it, but her owne bodye. Not withſtandynge ſhe made for his body ſuche a ſepulchre, that for the excellent workemanſhyp that was in it, alſo the beaultie and coſtlynes, it was taken for one of the meruayles of the worlde, and for the notable fame thereof, all ſumptuouſe and great ſepulchres were afterwarde callyd Mauſolea. She founde alſo an herbe called Artemiſia, mugwort or motherworte in englyſhe, of great vertue in womens diſeaſes.
            
               Artemiſius, the moneth of Maye amonge the Macedonians. alſo an hyll in Arcadia.
            
               Artemius, a mountayn of Achaia in Argo.
            
               Artemon, onis, a troukle, whereby ropes doo runne. It maye alſo be taken for any inſtrument that hath troucles.
            
               Artemon, was an heretyke, whyche affirmed, that Chriſte was pure man, takynge his begynnynge in our ladye. This hereſye beynge ones condempned, was eftſoones reuyued by Paulus Samoſatenus.
            
               Arteria, a ſynew lyke to a vayn, wherin the ſpiryte of lyfe dothe walke, myxte with bloude.
            
               Arthetica paſsio, callyd alſoo Morbus articularis, the ioynte ſyckeneſſe, is thus dyuyded into Coxendix,
               Galen. callyd Sciatica, whyche is in the huckle bone:Plautus 
               Podagra, the goute of the legges and feete: and Chiragra, the goute of the fyngers.
            Arthuntis, idem.
            
               Arthurus, a kyng of Englande, whan it was callyd Britannia, a man of excellent proweſſe, who had .xv. great batayles agaynſt the Saxons, and vanquiſhed them, and finally draue the more parte of them out of this royaulme. And alſo ſubdewed Scotland and Ireland at that time being wel inhabited and in culture. And after kepte a great and moſte honourable Courte of valyant and noble perſonages, wherin was ſuche magnificence, that it gaue occaſion to frenchemen and Spanyardes to exerciſe theyr wyttes in the aduaunſynge of Arthurs maieſtie with incredible fables. whiche is noo more to be meruayled at, than the ſemblable inuentions & fantaſies of the grekes. Al be it this Arthur was a very noble & famous prince, yet of them, which wrate hyſtories about his time, he was vnremembred. He floryſhed about the yere of our lorde. 510.
            
               Arthritica, ſome do ſuppoſe it to be that herbe and flowre, whiche is callyd Prymeroſe.
            
               Articularius, he that hath the goute.
            
               Articulate, articulately, as whan one doth expreſſe euery ſyllable.
            
               Articulatim, from ioynt to ioynt.
            
               Articulo, aui, are, to ioyn one ioynt to an other.
            
               Articulus, a ioynt. alſo a moment or parcell of tyme. alſo a colour of rhetoryke.
            
               Artifex, a craftes man.
            
               Artificium, the practiſe of a crafte.
            
               Artitus, well inſtructed inſciences.
            
               Arto, aui, are, to ſtrayne, to thraſte togyther, to wrynge.
            
               Artocopus, a baker.
            
               Artocrea, may be callyd a paſtye or pye, with fleſhe or fyſhe baken.
            
               Artolaganum,
               Plautus. fyne cakebreade.
            
               Artomici, people of a countrey in France, callyd Arminake.
            
                
               Artopta, a bakynge panne, wherin they bake tartes, or other thynges made of fyne paaſte, ſommetyme a brake, wherewith breadde is wrought in dowe.
            
               Artopteſii, tartes or cakes baken in a panne.
            
               Artoptitius panis, browne breade, or breadde of courſe wheate.
            
               Artotyritae, people, whyche dydde offer vnto god breade and cheeſe.
            
               Artuo, aui, are, to cut aſunder.
            
               Artus, membres.
            
               Aruales fratres, were ſuppoſed to be the foſter bretherne of Romulus, to whom he gaue the dignitie of prieſtehode, to make ſacrifice for growynge and increace of corne, and preſeruation of the corne fieldes.
            
               Aruina, talowe.
            
               Aruiſium, an hyll on the ſea coſte of the yle callyd Chium, where groweth the wynes callid Aruiſia uina.
            
            
               Arunca, a towne in Italy.
            
               Aruncus, the berde of a gote.
            
               Arundinetum, a place where redes do growe.
            
               Arundo, a rede or cane.
            
               Aruſpex, he that telleth of thinges to come, by lokynge in beaſtes bowelles.
            
               Aruum, a falowe fielde.
            
               Ars, arcis, a fortreſſe or caſtell, ſpecially ſtandynge hygh.
         
         
            ¶A ANTE S.
            
               AS, aſsis, a pounde weyghte. In the olde tyme in the partition of lande, or other lyke thynge inheritable, they callyd the hole As, & the partes diuyded, oūces.
            
               Aſa, a worde of the language of Siria, and ſygnifieth a phiſytion, or a healer of ſyckneſſes. Of that name was the .v. kyng of Iuda, the ſonne of Abia,3. Reg. 15. who reigned .xli. yeres, and was a good kynge, honored god, and diſtroyed ydolles, and was fortunate in battayle, ſo that he is comparyd to kynge Dauid in his perſonage and vertuouſe qualyties. He ſlew the kyng of Aethiopia with an infynite number of people. Fynally he dyed well and gracyouſely in a dyſ
                  •
               aſe of his feete. He was afore the incarnation. 973. yeres. After whom ſucceded his ſonne Ioſaphat.
            
               Aſaph, an hebrue worde, ſygnifyenge gatherynge or fynyſhinge. Of this name was one, whyche was a ſyngynge man in the houſe of god, to whome kynge Dauyd aſſygned certayne titles of his pſalmes.
            
               Aſarótum, pauynge tyle with pyctures enelyd, whyche maye not be ſwepte with a beſome, but the douſte and other thynge muſte beſwepte with a wynge, and gatheryd vp.
            
               Aſarum, an herbe, whoſe leaues are lyke vnto yue, but they be leſſe and tounder, and hath a good ſauour, the floure is purple, lyke to the flowre of Henbane, but it ſauoureth ſwetely, and groweth betwene the leaues by the roote, the ſtalke is edged, and ſomewhat roughe, the rootes are ſmall, croked, and like to graſſe, fulle of knottes. It is commonlye callyd Aſarabaccha, ſomme calle it wylde Spykenarde.
            
               Aſarus, a ryuer in Macedonia, whiche paſſeth by the citie of Heraclea.
            
               Aſcalon, an hebrewe worde, ſygnifieth a poyſynge, or a balance, or fyre of infamy. Of that name was a citie in the higher Idumea, whiche was from Hieruſalem. 90. myles, as Ege ſippus ſaythe. The people of this cytie were callyd Aſcalonitae.
            
            
               Aſcaloniae, a kynde of onyons callyd ſcalyons.
            
               Aſcania, one of the yles callyd Cyclades.
            
            
               Aſcanius, the ſonne of Eneas the Troyan and of Creuſa his wyfe, doughter of Priamus kynge of Troy, who commynge into Italye with his father, ſuſteyned ſundye labours, and finally after his father, reigned ouer the Latynes, with his brother in lawe Syluius Poſthumus, and buylded the cytie of Alba longa, he was alſo called Iulus, he began to reygne the fyrſte yere of Sampſon, and reigned. xviii. yeres.
            
               Aſcarides, lyttell rounde wourmes, whych do brede in the longe gutte of a man, but ſpecially of chyldren.
            
               Aſcendo, di, dere, to clym, to aſcende, to go vp.
            
               Aſcia, a chyppe axe.
            
               Aſcio, aui, to chyp or cut with an axe.
            
               Aſcio, is, to knowe ſurely.
            
               Aſciſco, ſciui, ſcire, to preſume, to take vpon me a thynge.
            
               Aſciſco, aſciſci, aſciſcere, to admit, to take to me
            
               Aſcitae, Arabians.
            
               Aſclepades, the name of a famous phiſitian, alſo of a philoſopher, whiche beinge blynde, was demanded in ſcorne, what his blyndnes dydde profytte hym, and he aunſwered, that he had the more companye by one boye that dyd leade hym.
            
               Aſclepas, ſome men thinke to be the herb, whiche is commonly callid grounde yuy.
            
               Aſconius Paedianus, the moſt excellent expoſitor of the orations of Tulli, whan he was. 73. yeres old becam blind, and liued afterward .xii. yeres in great eſtimation and honour. He floriſhed about the tyme of Nero themperour.
            
               Aſcopera, a bagge of lether.
            
               Aſcra, a towne in Boeotia in Grece, by the moū
               tayn callid Helicon, where the Muſes dwellyd. In this towne was borne Heſiodus the famous poete, and therfore he is callyd ſom tyme Aſcraeus.
            
            
                
               Aſcribo, pſi, bere, to adde to, to attribute, to impute.
            
               Aſcripti, were they that were appoynted to inhabyte townes or cities made by the Romanes callyd Coloniae.
            
            
               Aſcripti milites, ſouldiours, whoſe names are regyſtred or entred with other.
            
               Aſcriptitius, he that is added to the number of other, whoſe name is regiſtred or inrollyd.
            
               Aſcriptiuus, idem quod aſcriptitius, he that is regiſtred with other.
            
               Aſcriptor, oris, he that foloweth the exaumple of an other, or he that writeth many copies of others examples.
            Aſcriptus, a, um, inrollyd.
            
            
               Aſcy
                     •
                  es, one of the kyndes of dropſye, whiche is cauſyd by lacke of good digeſtyon, wherby is ingendred in al the membres a ſalte and yelowe humour, at the laſte falleth into the bealy, and is turnid into water, and therin is meued, as it were in a gret veſſel, whan the body meueth, the bely beyng ſwollen and great.
            
               Aſdrubal, was a name of dyuers noble men of Carthage, amonge whome one had maryed the ſyſter of Hanniball, and after the deathe of Amilehar father of Hanniballe, he rulyd the cytie of Carthage, and ſente Hanniball into Spayne, and there exerciſed him in contynuall labours. At the laſte in the myddell of his frendes and ſeruauntes, he was ſlayn by a Morayne ſlaue, whoſe mayſter he hadde ſlayne a lyttell before. Whyche ſlaue ſo lytle feared deathe, that whan he was putte vnto moſte horryble tourmentes, he being in them, ſhewed alwaye a laughynge countenaunce. Of this name were dyuerſe other, whome I paſſe ouer, as men of no great meryte.
            
               Aſella, the arme hole.
            
               Aſellus, is a fyſſhe, whyche the Greekes doo call Onon & oniſcon, and hath the coloure dunne lyke an aſſe, and hath in his head two ſtones facyoned lyke mylſtones. In the canycular dayes he can not be founde, as Athenaeus wryteth. Oppianus ſayth, that he hath his name of ſlownes. Many doo ſuppoſe, that it is the fyſſhe, whyche we call an haddocke, other do thynke that it is the codde fyſſhe. Of the dyuerſe kyndes of them ſhall be written in their places.
            
               Aſia, is the thyrde parte of the worlde, dyuyded from Europa, by the ſea callyd Boſphorus Thracius, and the gret ryuer of Tanais, and frome Affrica, by the famouſe ryuer of Nilus, and is in quantitie ſuppoſyd to be as great as bothe Europa and Affrica.
            
               Aſia minor, is a parte of the other Aſia, whiche nowe is callyd Turkay, and contayneth in it theſe royalmes, Pontus, Bythinia, Phrigia, Caria, Lycia, Lydia, & Lycaonia.
            
            Aſianus, a, um, of Aſia.
            
            
               Aſia
                     •
                  icus, a ſurname gyuen to one of the Scipions, bycauſe that he ſubdued the leſſe Aſia.
            
               Aſilus, a greatte flye, whyche byteth beaſtes, and is callyd a horſe flye. It is alſo a worme that is founde in fyſſhes.
            
               Aſinarius, an aſſeherde.
            
               Aſine, a towne of Achaia in Grece.
            
               Aſinius Pollio, a noble Senatour and oratour Romayne, whome the Emperour Octauian ſpecially fauoured: He was verye eloquent, but he was noted of to moche diligence, whiche toke awaye the grace of his Orations. He was in his Iudgement verye exquiſyte, and vſyd to reproue other, whyche were moche better lernyd than hym ſelfe, as Tullye, Ceſar, Saluſte, and Liuie. He made the firſt commune lybrarye, wherein he ſette the Image of Varro, and had vyctorye ouer the people of Dalmatia. To the honour of hym the poete Vergille made one of his eglogas. He lyued to the age of .80. yeres.
            
               Aſinius Gallus, was ſonne to Pollio, a man of great lernynge, who wrate a boke comparynge his father with Tullye, and alſo preferrynge hym, whyche boke was afterward anſwered by Claudius the emperour, he was commanded to be ſlayn by Tiberius the emperour, for what cauſe it dothe not appere.
            
               Aſinus, an aſſe.
            ❀Aſinus ad liram, an aſſe at an harpe. A prouerbe applyed vnto theym, whyche haue no iudgement in wyſedome or lernyng.
            ❀Aſinus auriculas mouet, The aſſe waggeth his eares. A prouerbe applyed to theym whyche althowghe they lacke lernynge, yet wyll they babble and make countenaunce, as if they knewe ſomewhat.
            ❀Aſinus inter ſimias, an aſſe amonge apes. A prouerbe where a good ſely body commeth amonge ſhewde wytted felowes, and being ſcornyd of them, dothe not perceyue it.
            
               Aſion, an owle, whyche hath fethers on euery ſyde of her heade, lyke vnto eares.
            
               Aſiortum, a kynde of ſpyders, with white ſtrakes, of whom if one be ſtunge, his knees ſhal howe and waxe faynt.
            
               Aſmod
                     •
                  us, the name of a dyuelle, and ſygnyfyeth a dyſtroyer, or aboundaunce of ſynne, or meaſurynge fyre.
            
               Aſomatos, vnpalpable, or that can not be felt.
            
               Aſopus, a ryuer in Achaia.
            
               Aſotia, ryotte.
            
               Aſotus, riotous, prodygal, wanton, incōtynent.
            
               Aſpalathus, a thorne growyng in the eaſt partes of the worlde, the rynde wherof is ſomewhat redde, and within, the wodde is of a ſadde purple, and ſmelleth very ſweete, and therfore is vſyd in parfumes.
            
                
               Aſparagus, an herbe callyd of common apotecaries Sparagus, in englyſhe Sperage.
            
               Aſpaſia, a woman of Miletum in Grece, of no table lerning in rhetorike, and taught the eloquent Pericles duke of Athenes, and loued hym. Wherfore not withſtandynge that ſhe was a captiue, he toke her to his wyfe. It is writen, that ſhe was one of the concubines of Cyrus kynge of Perſia, after whoſe deathe Pericles toke her, and afterward by her procurement, for diſpleaſure that ſhe bare to the Peloponeſians, he was the cauſe that the Athenienſes made warre againſt them. Wherin is to be noted, that in a fayre woman eloquence is of ſuche puiſſaunce, that if ſhe wyll abuſe it vnto ylle affections, ſhe may peruert the wyſedome of men, and be occaſion of moche vnhappyneſſe.
            
               Aſpecto, aui, are to beholde ſtedfaſtly.
            
               Aſpectus, ſyght, beholdyng.
            
               Aſpello, aſpuli, aſpellere, to driue awey 
                  〈◊〉
                one
            
               Aſper,
               Plautus. vnpleaſant, as wel in ſight and hering, as in taste, alſo harde or greuous.
            
               Aſperum uinum, a rough wyne.
            
               Aſper nummus, money new coyned.
            
               Aſperſus infamia, ſtayned with diſhonour.
            
               Aſpergillus, an holy water ſtycke.
            
               Aſpergo, ginis, a ſpringyng of lycour.
            
               Aſpergines parietum, ſweatynge of ſtoone walles.
            ❀Aſpergo, ſperſi, gere, to ſprynge or caſt water.
            
               Aſpergere comitatem ſeueritate,
               Cicero. to myxt famyliaritie and grauitie togither.
            
               Aſpergere aliquid in epiſtolis, to touche a thynge quyckely in a letter.
            
               Aſpergere maculis uitam alicuius, to make yll reporte of a man.
            
               Aſpergere aquam, to ſprynge water, A prouerbe, which ſignifieth to put one out of fere.
            
               Aſpergit hoc mihi moleſtiae haec epiſtola, This letter hath brought me īto this trouble.
            
               Aſperitas, ſharpenes, rudenes of maners.
            
               Aſpernabilis, he that is worthy to be diſpiſed, or refuſed.
            
               Aſpernor, aris, ari, to deſpiſe, to refuſe, to abhorre.
            
               Aſpero, aui, are, to make ſharper or harde.
            
               Aſperſus, a, um, ſproungen or wette with any lyquour.
            
               Aſphaltum, a water in Siria, wheerin noothyng that hath lyfe may be drowned. It is callyd Mare mortuum, the deade ſea: it is ſuppoſed, that in that place ſtoode the cyties of Sodoma. it is alſo a certayne lyme myxte with brymſtone, which beinge ones het, may neuer be extincte.
            
               Aſphodelus, an herbe callyd Da
                  ••
               adyll.
            
               Aſpicio, ſpexi, ſpicere, to beholde, to ſee.
            
               Aſpidiſca, a lyttell tergat or ſhielde.
            
               Aſpilates, a ſtone lyke to ſyluer.
            
               Aſpiratio terrae, vapour of the erthe.
            
               Aſpiratio ſtellae, the influence of a ſterre.
            
               Aſpiro, aui, are, to aſpire, to loke to come to a thinge, to blowe, to fauour, to gyue ayde, to gyue all my ſtudy and wyt tooptayn a thyng, to touche, to goo to.
            
               Aſpis, is a lytel ſerpent, which bredeth in Affrica, whoſe ſtyng is ſo venomous, that nothing may cure it, except onely a ſtone taken of the ſepulchre of an auncient kynge, whyche beynge waſhed, the water drunken with wine, the inhabitauntes doo affyrme, that it onely cureth the ſayde ſtroke. Plinius ſaythe, that the male and female gothe alwaye togyther, and if one of them be ſlayne, the other continually foloweth the ſleer, and wyl neuer leue hym, vntyll he haue ſtryken hym, althoughe he be in a great aſſembly of people, except he paſſe ouer a ryuer. Not withſtandynge this name Aſpis, is ſoo generall, that it conteyneth dyuers other kyndes, of the whiche ſhal be written hereafter.
            
               Aſplenium,
               Io. Agric. an herbe called alſo Scolopendra, hath many leaues growyng out of one rote, lyke to the wourme, whiche is callyd a palmer, that hath many feete, and is ſomewhat lyke vnto ferne, and hathe neyther flowres nor ſede, and is callyd of the cōmon apothecarie
                  •
                
               Citrac, ſome calle it ſtone ferne.
            
               Aſplenos,
               Ruell. is an herbe growynge on ſtone walles,Dioſc. or amonge flyntes in the ſhadowe, hauynge leaues with many dyuiſyons lyke to Polypodium, many growynge out of oone roote, whyche nygh to the grounde are tawny coloured, aboue grene, and hath neyther ſtalke nor flowre, it is alſoo callyd Scolopendra.
            
            
               Aſporto, aui, are, to cary away.
            
               Aſſae, dry ſtoones.
            
               Aſſaracus, the ſonne of Trois kynge of Troyanes.
            
               Aſſatura, roſted meate.
            
               Aſſ
                     •
                  cla, a page, and he that foloweth in all thyng the wyll of an other man.
            
               Aſſectator, a companyon.
            
               Aſſector, aris, ari, to kepe company.
            
               Aſſentatio, flattery.
            
               Aſſentatiuncula, a flatterynge tale.
            
               Aſſentio, si, tire, & aſſentior, to conſent, or aſſent. Alſo to perceyue.Plautus. 
               Sed aſſentio aperiri foras, quae abſorbent, quicquid uenit infra peſſulos, But I perceyue the doores are openyd, whyche deuouren all that commethe within the boltes.
            
               Aſſentor, aris, to flatter in commendyng an other mans actes that be yll.
            
               Aſſequor, eris, qui, to folowe, to gette, to optayne, ſometyme to render as moche to one
 as he hath deſerued. Nullam partem uidear tuorum meritorum aſſecutus,
               Cicero. It maye not be founde in me, that I haue rendred to you any thynge after your merites, or haue done ſo moche for you, as ye haue deſerued.
            
               Aſſequi nomen, to gette renoume.
            
               Aſſer, eris, a pole.
            
               Aſſerculi, & aſsiculi, lyttell bourdes or lathes.
            
               Aſſeres, bourdes.
            
               Aſſero, ris, to ſow or plant by. alſo to claym, to affirme or approue, to manumiſe or make fre.
            
               Aſſerere aliquem manu, to ſet one at libertie, or to manumyſe a bondman.
            
               Aſſerere in ſeruitutem,
               Plautus. to bryng in bondage or ſeruytude.
            
               Aſſerere ab iniuria, to defende from wronge or daungier.
            
               Aſſerere ſe ſtudijs, to leaue all other buſynes to applye ſtudye.
            
               Aſſertio, an affiyrmance.
            
               Aſſertor, oris, he that ſetteth one at lybertie, or defendeth hym from bondage.
            
               Aſſeſſor, oris, aſſocyate to a man in offyce or auctoritie.
            
               Aſſeruo, to kepe diligently, to take hede of one.
            Aſſeuero, as, are, to affyrme.
            
            
               Aſsidela, a byſhops ſeate or chayre, wherin he ſytteth whan he miniſtreth.
            
               Aſsideo, I ſyt with or by an other, or I am aſſocyate, to be continually at a thynge.
            
               Aſsido, is, dere, to reſte me, to ſytte downe, to ſytte by.
            
               Aſsidere li
                     •
                  eris, to be alway ī ſtudy of letters
            
               Aſsidue, & aſsiduo, aduerbes, whiche doo ſygnifie continually,Cicero. often.
            
               Aſsiduitas, continuance in a thynge.
            
               Aſsidui fideiuſſores, ſufficient ſureties.
            
               Aſsiduus, contynuall, or ſuffyciente, ryche or well at eaſe.
            
               Aſsiduus ſcriptor, an author apꝓued, whoſe ſentence is holden for certayn and trewe.
            
               Aſsigno, aui, are, to aſſygne or appoynt.
            
               Aſsignare famae, to apply hym ſelfe to gette renoume.
            
               Aſsilio, ui, ire, to leape forth. alſo aſsilire, is to leape, as a horſe leapeth a mare.
            
               Aſsimilis, le, lyke, or ſemblable.
            
               Aſsimiliter, all ſemblable.
            
               Aſsimilo, are, to do a thynge lyke to an nother man, to imitate or folowe one.
            
               Aſsimulatio,
               Plautus. a dyſſembled countenaunce.
            
               Aſsimulo, are, to fayn to do a thing, and not to do it. alſo to compare, to counte
                  •
               fayte.
            
               Aſsipondium, a pounde weyght.
            
               Aſsis, is, a ſawen bourde.
            
               Aſsiſia, one of the n
                  •
               mis of Pallas or Minerua.
            
               Aſsiſto, ſtiti, ſtere, to be here, to defende a mannes cauſe.
            
               Aſſo, aui, are, to lay bourdes: to 
                  •
               oſte.
            
               Aſſoleo, 
                     •
                  ere, to be wont or accuſtomed.
            
               Aſſolet, it is vſed.
            
               Aſſono, are, to ſowne or make a ſowne.
            
               Aſſauoce cantare, to ſynge without an inſtrument.
            
               Aſſuefacio, wont.
            
               Aſſuefactio,
               Vano. a bryngyng of one in cuſtome.
            
               Aſſueſco,ſcere,
               Cato. to vſe of a cuſtome.
            
               Aſſuetudo, wont, or cuſtome.
            
               Aſſuetus, accuſtomed.
            
               Aſſuerus, ſygnifyeth prynce or heade, he was kynge of Perſians, who is alſoo callyd Artaxerxes & Memnon.
            
            
               Aſſula, a chyppe.
            
               Aſſulatim, & aſſuloſe, in faſcion of ſhyngle or ſlates. alſo piece meale, in chippes.
            
               Aſſumo, ſumpſi, ſumere, to take, properly it ſignifieth to take to moche on me.
            
               Aſſumptio, a takynge.
            
               Aſſuo, ui, ere, to ſowe to, or piece.
            
               Aſſur, a cite in Iudea, builded by king Salomō
            
            
               Aſſurgo, rexi, gere, to ryſe to an nother better than my ſelf, to giue place, to grow vpward.
            
               Aſſus, a, um, toſted or roſted.
            
               Aſſyria, a regyon in Aſia, callyd nowe Syria, in englyſhe Surry, whyche marcheth on the eaſte vpon Inde, on the weſt on the noble riuer of Tigris, on the ſouthe it hath the coū
               trey callyd Media, on the northe it hathe the hylle callyd Caucaſus.
            
            
               Aſt, but, alſo therfore, as well, more ouer.
            
               Aſta, depart not, ſtande ſtyll.
            
               Aſtacus, a lopſta
                  •
                of the ſea, whiche in ſome thinges dothe vary from the crauayſe callyd Locuſta, for his eight hinder legges be greater and broder: he hathe two tethe as a crauayſe, but the hornes, whiche be aboue them, be ſhorter and ſmaller, He hath alſo fsoure other hornes, lyke the other two, but they be ſhorter and leſſe, ouer them be his eyen, whiche are very lyttell, the forhead ouer the eies ſharpe and rough, the breaſt broder than of a craueyſe: Al the bodye within hauynge more ſubſtance and ſhorter, his .viii. feete foure of them are forked, and foure be cloſe. This I ſuppoſe ſufficient to knowe the fyſhe, he that wyll knowe more, let hym reade the comment of Marius, on the .ix. boke of Plinius.
            
               Aſtaphis, raiſons in confection.
            
               Aſtare, to ſtande by, or to be preſent.
            
               Aſtare aduocatus, to aſſyſt or ſpeake for one.
            Aſtare in genua, to knele.
            
            
               Aſtaroth, a name of hebru, which ſignifieth riches or flockis. alſo makīg ſerch, or the mouth of the law. it was the name of an ydol, which the iewes honored. Iud. 2. & lykewyſe Salomon.
4. Re. 25. Alſo it was the name of a citie in Siria, whiche was gyuen to the chyldren of Gerſom of the kinred of Manaſſes. 
                  
                     •
                  . Par. 6.
 Alſo of a countray, wherof mention is made Geneſ. 14.
            
               Aſter, a ſterre.
            
               Aſter atticus, is alſo callyd Bubouium, of Plinius Inguinaria, hath a ſtycky ſtalke, on the toppe a flowre purple or yelowe, diuided l
                  •
               ke to flowres of wylde camomyll, the leaues beynge longe and rough, compaſſeth the ſtalke lyke a ſterre.
            
               Aſterias, a kynde of hearons, I ſuppoſe that it is an Egret.
            
               Aſtericum, an herbe callyd Pellitory.
            
               Aſterie, was doughter of Caeus, ſyſter to Latona.
            
            
               Aſteriſcus, a lyttelle marke in wrytynge lyke a ſterre.
            
               Aſterte, a goddeſſe of the Sirians, to whō Salomon, to pleſe his concubine, raiſed an altar.
            
               Aſthma, atis, a ſyckenes, where one maye not fetche his wynde, but with moche difficultie, with weaſynge of the breaſt: which hapneth by ſtaytnes of the pipes ſtopped with tough flewme, or of ſomme impoſtume growen in the pypes.
            
               Aſthmaticus, he that draweth his wynd ſhort.
            
               Aſtipulator, he that is of one accorde or conſent with an other.
            
               Aſtipulor, to leane to, to fauour.
            
               Aſto, aſtiti, to ſtande by, to be preſent.
            
               Aſtomi, people of Indie, hauyng no mouthes, whyche lyuen by ayre, and ſmelle of ſweete thynges.
            
               Aſtraea, ſignifieth iuſtyce.
            
               Aſtragalizo, to play at dyce or tables.
            
               Aſtragalus, the play at tables.
            
               Aſtragalus, callid of cōmon apothecaries Cicer montanum, an herbe with an hard ſtalke beinge in the leafe and braunches lyke to Cicer, and hath a lyttell purple flowre, and a roote lyke to radyſhe, hauynge certayn thinges growyng to it, hard lyke to hornes woūd togither. It commonly is found in ſtony places, where cometh abundance of wyndes.
            
               Aſtrea, was doughter to Iupiter and Themis, who for her equitie was callyd iuſtyce.
            
               Aſtricte, cloſe.
            
               Aſtricta frons, a frownyng countenance.
            
               Aſtringo, to ioyne or bynde togyther, to bynde by couenaunt or promyſe.
            
               Aſtringere fidem, to promyſe.
            
               Aſtringere ſe furti, to confeſſe to haue done felony.
            
               Aſtroites, a ſtone lyke to a fyſhes eye.
            
               Aſtrolabium, an aſtrolabe, or inſtrumente of aſtronomye.
            
               Aſtrologia, the ſpeculation and reaſonyng concerning the celeſtiall or heuenly motions.
            
               Aſtrologus, an aſtorologyen, he that ſtudyeth the ſpeculation of aſtronomy.
            
               Aſtronomia, the parte of aſtronomy that concerneth iudicialles and practyſe.
            
               Aſtronomus, an aſtronomer.
            
               Aſtrum, a celeſtiall bodye compacte of many ſterres, as a ſygne.
            
               Aſtruo, to buylde, to ioyne one houſe to an nother, to fortify, to affirme.
            
               Aſtruere dignitati alterius,
               Plinius in epiſt. to augmente an other mans dignitie or honour.
            
               Aſtruitur his, is putte for more ouer, or furthermore.
            
               Aſtur, uris, a nowne poſſeſſiue, and ſignifieth of Aſturia, as Aſtur homo, a mā of Aſturia. Aſtur equus, a ſpanyſhe horſe, callid a genet. Aſturcones, idem.
            
            
               Aſtura, a towne and ryuer in Italy.
            
               Aſturco, conis, a geldyng or genet of Spayne.
            
               Aſturia, a countray in Spayne betwene Galitia and Portugall, whiche ſommetyme was famouſe for my
                  •
               es of golde, and aumblynge hackeneys callyd Aſturcones.
            
            
               Aſtu, craftily or ſubtylly.
            
               Aſtus, crafte, or ſubtiltie.
            
               Aſtute, craftyly.
            
               Aſtutia, crafte.
            
               Aſtutiae, ſubtilties.
            
               Aſtutus, a, um, ſubtyll or craftye.
            
               Aſtyages, was the laſte kyng of Medes, who was father to Mandane, mother to the noble kynge Cyrus, who was .597. yeres before the incarnation, and reygned .38. yeres, & at the laſt was depoſed of his royalmes by Cirus. Rede more therof in the ſtory of Cirꝰ.
            
               Aſtyanax, actos, was ſonne of Hector, whom after th
                  •
                winnyng of Troy, the Grekes cruelly dyd throwe downe from a towre, ſo that his braynes cleaued on the walles.
            
               Aſtypalea, an yle in the ſea callyd Aegeum, It is alſo a mountayne in Creta, an nother by Athenes.
            
               Aſueſtinum, lynnen threde, whyche maye not be bou
                  ••
               ed.
            
               Aſylum, a ſaynctuarie.
            
               Aſylus, an ymage, whervnto men were wonte to runne for ſuccour, as to a ſanctuary.
            
               Aſymbolus, he that commeth to a bankette, without appoyntment, an vnboden geſt. alſo he that gothe ſcot free, and payeth nothinge.
         
         
            ¶A▪ ANTE T.
            
               AT, a voyce, whyche dothe ſygnifye in the wordes that do folowe, wrathe or indygnation. Sometyme it ſignifieth yet, or at the leaſt waye. Si non propinquitatis, at aetatis ſuae, ſi non hominis, at humanitatis rationem haberet: All thowghe he hadde not conſyderacyon of kynredde, yet ſhulde he haue hadde regarde to his age: and
 though he caryd not for the perſone, yet ſhuld he haue had reſpect vnto good humanite. ſomtyme it ſignifieth ſed. alſo at, ſometyme it is put for ſaltem. Si non eodem die, at poſtridie, If not the ſame day, at the leſte way, the nexte day folowynge.
            
               At at, tuſſhe, or fye.
            
               At contra, contrary wyſe.
            
               Atabulus, a feruent wynde, whyche whan it bloweth in the realme of Naples, peſtylence immedyately inſueth.
            
               Ataceni, people in Arabia.
            
               Atalanta, was a mayden, daughter of Iaſius a prynce in Arcadia, who with dyuers noble men of Greece came into Aetolia to ſlea the great boore, whiche diſtroyed that countray, whych ſhe with her owne handes fyrſt ſtrake and wounded. But after he was ſlayne by Meleager, ſonne of the kynge of Aetolia, who loued Atalantam, and toke her to his wyfe, and had by her a ſonne callyd Parthonopaeus, whiche was ſlayne at the battaylle of Thebes. An other Atalanta was doughter of Caeneus, kyng of the ile called Scyrus, who contended in runnyng with them which came to wowe her. And whan ſhe hadde vanquyſhed many, and put theym to deathe (for that was the wager, or els to haue her, who ſo coulde ouer rounne her.) At the laſte a noble yonge man named Hippomanes, by this meanes ouercame her. Whyles they were rounnynge, he hauynge thre fayre appulles of golde, threwe at ſundrye tymes the three appuls from hym, whyche ſhe in takynge vp was therby taryed, and by that meanes Hippomanes ouerranne her. At the laſt (as Ouidius wryteth) as they two medlyd togyther in the temple of Cybeles, that goddeſſe hauinge therat indignation, tranſformed them bothe into lyons.
            
               Atauus, a great graund father.
            
               Atechna, thynges vnkunnyngly handlyd.
            
               Ategia, a bouthe, or place made vp with trees and boughes.
            
               Ater, tra, trum, blacke or darke.
            
               Ater panis, browne breade.
            
               Athacus, a byrde with foure legges, hauynge the longeſt behynde.
            
               Athalia, was doughter of the curſed quene Iezabel, and mother to kyng Acab, kyng of Iewes. This woman beinge alſo miſcheuous, whan that ſhe herd that her ſonne Ochozias was ſlayn, and Ioram with all his houſholde to be diſtroyd, ſhe being inflamed with deſire to reigne, laying apart all womanly pitie, determined to diſtroye vtterly all the poſteritie of Dauid, but through the goodnes of god, Ioas the ſonne of Ochozias an infant, was vnwares to her conuayed away by Ioſabeth his aunte, and hyd in the houſe of Ioaides the biſhop, and there kept .vi. yeres. And after that this curſed woman Athalia had reygned ouer Hieruſalem .vii. yeres, Ioas, whiche was ſuppoſed to be ſlayn, was by Ioaide made kynge.4. Reg. 11. Wherof ſhe being aduertyſed, and cryeng to the people to ſle Ioas,2. Par. 22. ſhe was taken of the men of warre,Ioſeph. 9. cap. 7. & ſhamefully drawen to the gate of the citie callid Mularia, & there was ſlayne. She was afore the incarnation of Chriſt .900. yeres.
            
               Athanaſius, was biſſhoppe of Alexandria, the yere of our lorde .348. A man in holines of lyfe and great lerning very excellent, who ſuſteyned greate and many perſecutions of the Arrianes, for whan in the counſell holden at Laodicea, he had confounded the Arrianes with moſt puiſſant argumentes, he ſtired almoſt all the world againſt him. Wherfore he fled, and .vi. yeres continuall he aboode hyd in a dry ceſtern, where he neuer ſaw the ſonne ſhyne. But than was he diſcouered by a maiden, and fled eftſones by the helpe of god, and wandred about the world, not withſtanding that princis, the people, and their hoſtes, did continually perſecute hym, ſo that he mought not fynd any place to abyde in. Alſo bringing againſt him a cōmon harlot, which affirmed, that he had accompanyed with her. But he alway ſuſtayning all thinges with a wonderfull pacience, at the laſte dyed, the yere of our lorde .379. Valentinianus and Valens being emperours, and is accompted in the number of ſayntes.
            
               Athanatos, immortall.
            
               Athenae, arum, the citie of Athenes.
            
               Athenaeum, a place at Rome, where all ſciences were radde.
            
               Athenodorus, a philoſopher, whiche left with Octauian the emperour this leſſon, whan he toke his leue of him: Noble prince, whā thou art attached with wrath, neither ſaynor do any thynge vntyll thou haſt pervſed the .xxiiii. greke letters, and remembred the order of the places where they ſtande, to the intente that the paſſion of pre, by withdrawyng the mynd to an other thing, mought languiſhe and vanyſhe away.
            
               Atheos, he that dothe not beleue that god is.
            
               Atheromata, littell pouſſhes in the necke, and vnder the armes.
            
               Ath
                     •
                  eſis, a ryuer in the coūtray of Venetia, rū
               nyng by the cite of Trent, & through Verona & ſo paſſeth into the ſea callid Adriaticum.
            
            
               Athleta, a great wraſtlar, or a great runner at common games.
            
               Athletheta, the iudge in games of wraſtlynge or runnynge.
            
               Athletica, the crafte of wraſtlyng or runnyng.
            
                
               Athos, a hyll in Macedonia of a wonderfull heyght,
            
               Athraciars, art magike.
            
               Athrax, a citie in Theſſalia.
            
               Atinia, a kynde of elme tree.
            
               Atlanticae inſulae, the yles called nowe Fortunatae, where fruites and herbes doo growe without labour.
            
               Atlantides, the doughters of Atlas. alſoo certaine ſterres.
            
               Atlas, antis, was brother of Prometheus, whō as the Grees do ſuppoſe, dyd fyrſt fynde out the courſe of the ſterres, by an excellent ymagination. And therfore the poetes fayned, that he ſuſtayned the firmamente with his ſhulders. It is ſuppoſed, that he was about
1599. yeres, afore the incarnation. It is alſo the name of a hyll in Barbaria, highe and ſmall, whiche perſeth the cloudes.
            
               Atlantes, Moores dwellynge about that hyll.
            
               Atocia, medicines, wherby the tyme of byrthe of chyldren is preuented.
            
               Atocius, a certayne ſpyder, whiche is heary.
            
               Atomus, a thynge ſo ſmall, that it maye not be deuided or made ſmaller. alſo atomi, be motes of the ſun.
            
               Atnepos, potis, the fyfthe of lyneall dyſcente from me, or my neuewes neuewe.
            
               At
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , and ſo, as it were, euen as. Locus eſt at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                
               optabam. The place is euen as I wyſſhed. alſo than.
                  
                     •
                  autu. in 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  d. 
               Illi ſunt alio ingenio at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tu: They be of an other maner of wyt than thou arte. Non Appolinis magis uerū,
               
                  
                     •
                  erent. in 
                     ••
                  dri. 
               at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   hoc reſpō
                  ſum eſt: Appollos anſwere was neuer trewer than this is.
            
               At
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adeo,
               
                  
                     •
                  aut. in 
                     •
                  aſina. and that more is. Eſurio hercle, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adeo nunc haud parum ſitio: I am hungry, and that more is, I am a thyrſte not a lyttell.
            
               At
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eccum, but lo were he is.
            
               At
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   audin? but hereſt thou?
            
               At
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   uides? doeſt thou not ſe 
                  •
               
            
            
               Aliter at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , other wyſe than.
            
               Atqui, ſurely albeit, but yet.
            
               Atraba, in a meaſure of the greekes, and contayneth .v. modios romanos, of englyſſhe meaſure, a buſſhell, a pottell, a pynte, and 4 ounces of meaſure.
            
               Atrabaticae, blacke garmentes.
            
               Atrabilis, melancoly.
            
               Atractilis, an herbe hauynge a longe ſte
                  ••
                and roughe, with longe leaues growynge by the top, the reſidue without leaues, the top full of prickes, and a yelowe floure, women were wont to make ſpyndels of the ſtalkes therof.
            
               Atractilis, an herbe called of apothecaries Cartamus, in greeke Cnicos, of ſome men wyld ſafron. it is hot in the ſeconde degree. Paulus Aegineta putteth it in the thyrde degree. the late experiencers do fynde, that the iuyce and the ſeede purgeth aduſte humours, and increaſeth mannes ſede.
            
               Atramentarium, an ynke horne.
            
               Atramentum, ynke, blache that ſhowemakers do occupy.
            
               Atratus, a mourner that goeth in blacke.
            
               Atrebates, a contrey in Fraūce called Artoys.
            
               Atreus, was the ſonne of Euriſtheus kyng of Mycenae, and founde fyrſte the eclips of the ſon. Moreouer for as moche as his brother Thyeſtes had lyen with his wyfe, he ſlewe his ſayde brothers chyldren, and cauſynge theym to be roſted, made his brother to eate them. Who knowynge it, and aſkynge therfore vengeance, he had anſwere made of the god Apollo, that if he dydde carnally knowe his owne daughter Pelopia, he ſhuld on her get a ſonne, whiche ſhulde reuenge hym. So begat he Aegiſtum, whoo afterwarde ſlewe his vncle Atreus, and in lyke wyſe Agam
                  •
               mnon his eldeſt ſonne, after that he returned frome the battayle of Troye. This was before the incarnation of Chriſte .1258. yeres. Readynge this tragedye marke well the ſucceſſe of abhominable lyuynge and crueltri
                  •
               .
            
               Atricapilla, a byrde with blacke fethers on the crowne of his heade.
            
               Atricus, a porter that kepeth a gate.
            
               Atri dies, diſmal dayes.
            
               Atrienſis, an huiſher of the hall.
            
               Atrifer, a ruſhe that beareth a blacke ſeede.
            
               Atriolum, a lyttel inner court.
            
               Atriplex, an herbe called orache or arage.
            
               Atritas, blacknes.
            
               Atrium, an inner courte.
            
               Atrocitas, cruelty, fierſeneſſe.
            
               Atrociter, cruelly.
            
               Atrophia, an affecte or diſcraſye, wherein the body can not be nouriſhed with any thynge, but conſumeth with leanneſſe.
            
               Atrophus, he that hath that affecte.
            
               Atropos, one of the fatall Ladyes, whiche is fayned to breake the chrede of lyfe: It is ſomtyme put for neceſſitie of deathe.
            
               Atrox, ocis, cruell, terrible, or ſoure in countenaunce.
            
               Atta, is he that goeth ſo on the ſoles of his fete that he ſwepeth the grounde, rather than walketh.
            
               Attagen, & Attagena, a byrde which is foūd in Ionia, and is verye delycate, and hath fethers of ſondry colours, and being at large is alwaye ſyngynge or chatterynge: whan he is taken, he maketh no noyſe, nor ſemeth to haue any voyce. They are deceiued that take hym for a woodcocke.
            
               Attalus, a kynge in the laſſe Aſia, of meruaylouſe rycheſſe, of whome all magnifyke and
 ſtately thynges, are called Attalica. Attalica ueſtis, a garment of cloche of golde.
            
               Att
                     •
                  men, but yet.
            
               Attamino, aui, are, to foule or defyle.
            
               Attegiae, arum, ſhepeherdes cotages.
            
               Atte
                     •
                  ae, a citie in Campania, not far from Naples, whiche nowe is called Auerſa.
            
            
               Attelanae fabulae, were commedies or enterludes, whiche onelye were in ieſtes and merye ſcoffes or bourdynges.
            
               Attendo, di, dere, to take hede, to conſyder, to intende.
            
               Attente, intentifly, with a fyxed mynde.
            
               Attentio, a mynde ſet or fyxed.
            
               Attento, to attempte.
            
               Attentus, he that hereth diligently, attentiue. Attentus adrem, carefull to get goodes.
            
               Attenuate, ſclenderly, ſubtilly, fynely.
            
               Attenuo, to appayre, to make weaker.
            
               Attero, triui, terere to rub againſt a thynge. Atterere famam.
               Saluſt. 
               Poſt ubi eorum famam at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   pudorem attriuerat, maiora alia imperabat: After that he had made them conſume theyr good name and honeſtie, he ſet them in hande with other greatter attemptates.
            
               Atteſtari, to call to wytneſſe.
            
               Atthis, was doughter of Crancus, who (ſome do ſuppoſe) gaue the fyrſte name to the coū
               trey called Attica.
            
            
               Attica, a countray in Greece, wherin ſtode the famous citie of Athenes, the nouryce of all ſciences.
            
               Attice, an aduerbe, ſignifienge in the eloquēce of ſpeche of Athenes.
            
               Atuciſmus, the fourme of that ſpeche.
            
               Atticiſso, to ſpeke lyke a man of Athenes.
            Atticus, a, um, of Athenes.
            
            Attigo, idem quod attingo.
            
               Attiguus, by or nyghe ioynynge to.
            
               Attila, was capitayne of the people called Hū
                  ni, and wan Hungary from the Romaynes, & gaue that name to it, where before it was called Pannonia. This man called hym ſelfe the ſcourge of god, and raigned aboute the yere of our lorde. 400.
            
               Attilius Regulus, was a noble conſul of Rome who in the fyrſte warres of Carthage, vainquiſhed often tymes the Carthaginenſis. At the laſte was taken by a ſleyght, and beinge bounden was ſent vnto Rome, to the intente that for hym they moughte exchaunge with the Romaynes for a great number of pryſoners of theyr people. But at his commynge Attilius exhorted the Romaynes, that they ſholde not make ſuche exchange, conſidering his age and debilitie. And ſoo he with a glad wyll retourned to his ennemyes, knowynge that he ſhuld be cruelly put to death, ſo moch he loued his countrey. wherfore at his commynge, the Carthagynenſis cauſed his eye lyddes to be cutte of, that he moughte neuer ſlepe, and hym to be put in a holowe tree, beynge ſtycked fulle of nayles, the poyntes inwarde, where he continued vntylle he dyed, whoſe valyaunt courage is notably commended by Tully in his boke of offices.
            Attineo, ui, êre, to perteyne.
            
            
               Attinet, it beſemeth, it is conuenient.
            
               Attingo, tigi, tingere, to touche almoſte. Attingit me ſanguine,
               Plin
                     ••
                  
                he is nygh of my blud Attengere ſenectam, to come to great age. Attingere partes naturae,
               Ver
                     ••
                  
                to come to the knowle
                  •
               ge of naturall cauſes.Geo
                     ••
                  
                
               Attingere ſtudia, to ſauour of letters.
            
               Attingitur, it is nyghe.
            
               Attollo, to auaunce, to lyfte vp, to brynge to, to take awaye.
            
               Attollere ſigna, to dyſplaye ſtanderdes and banners in the fielde.
            
               Attollere partum, to nouryſſhe or brynge a chylde from his byrthe.
            
               Attondeo, d
                     •
                  re, to clyp or ſheare a thyng nigh.
            
               Attondere arbores,
               Pla
                     ••
                  
                to ſhred trees.
            
               Attondere auro, to ryd one of his money, to take all away from hym.
            
               Attonite, baſhefully.
            
               Attonitus, a, um, amaſed or abaſhed.
            
               Attonſus, a, um, ſhorne or clypped.
            
               Attrahere ad ſe aliquem, to make one come to hym.
            Attrecto, aui, are, to fele.
            
            
               Attrectare uxorem alterius, to meddel with an other mannes wyfe.
            
               Attribuo, bui, bere, to attribute, to put vpon one by blamynge or accuſynge, to aſſigne, to commyt.
            Attributus, a, um, attributed.
            
            
               Attributa pecunia, moneye delyuered to be gyuen to an other man.
            
               Attritus, tus, rubbynge or wearynge.
            
               Attritus calciamentorum, the wearynge of ſhoes with moche goinge.
            
               Attropatia, parte of the countraye of Media.
            
               Attyla of ſome called Athyla, a valiant prince. which came out of the countray of Scithia, and after that he hadde ſubdued Pannonia, he entred in to Italy, and deſtroyed the citie called Aquileia, and came towarde Rome, wherof Valentinianus the emperour beinge a ferde, ſente vnto hym Leo that tyme being byſhop of Rome, with the conſules and certayne ſenatours, who ſubmytted them ſelfes vnto hym. And whan his hoſt ſuppoſed that he wolde haue had them in contempte, and haue continued his iornay to diſtroy Rome, contrary to theyr expectation, he pardoned them, and departed. wherat all men meruailynge, and demaundynge of hym, why he ſo
 dyd, he aunſwered: that whiles the byſſhop and ſenatour ſpake vnto hym, he beheld ſtandynge on euery hand of him, a man of armes of excellent perſonage, euery of them holding a naked ſworde ouer hym, menacynge to ſlee hym, if he ſpake any vnſyttyng worde, or did make any farther attemptate. Wherfore he diſcharged the Romaynes with gentyll language, and perſwaded his hoſt to hold them contente. Afterwarde he entred into Germany, and waſted the countreye, and in retourninge towarde Hungry, he maryed a wyfe. In the whiche mariage he ſo exceſſiſly fylled hym ſelfe with meates and wynes, that therby he fell into a great bledyng. He was after the inca
                  •
               nation of Chryſte .401. yeres. And at the begynnyng called hym ſelfe, the ſcurge of god.
         
         
            A ANTE V.
            
               AVARE couetouſly, nighly, nigardly.
            
               Auarus, a, um, coueytouſe of moneye.
            
               Auarus, a nygarde, a ſparar, a couetouſe man.
            
               Auaricum, Vieron in Berry in the royalme of Fraunce. Ptholomeus calleth it Varicum.
            
            
               Auceps, a fouler or byrder.
            
               Auctio, onis, an increaſe, or an open ſale of pryuate goodes.
            
               Auctio haſtae, porte ſale of the godes of mē attainted for treaſon or felony: but more properly of menne and goodes taken in warres and ſolde by the chiefe capitayne.
            
               Auctionarius, the ſaleſman.
            
               Auctionor, to ſell by porte ſale.
            Auctior, tius, greatter.
            
            
               Aucto, aui, are, to gayne, to wynne, to augment or multiply.
            
               Auctuarium, uel auctarium, ouer meaſure or weyghte, ſurpluſage in number.
            Auctus, a, um, increaſed, aduaunced.
            
            Auctus, tus, increaſe.
            
            
               Auctus filiolo, he is rycher than he was, for he hath a ſon borne.
            
               Auctus damno, he hath yet more harme.
            
               Auctus honoribus, aduaunced to honour.
            
               Auctus praeda, he is made ryche with robbynge and pyllynge.
            
               Auctus re fortuniſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , he is very ryche.
            
               Aucupatorij, lyme twygges.
            
               Aucupium, & Aucupatio, byrdyng or fouling.
            
               Ancupor, to go a byrdynge, or a fowlynge, or hewkyng. Alſo it ſignifieth to ſerche by crafty meanes.
            
               Aucupare ſermonem alicuius, to harken or take hede what one ſayth.
            
               Aucupari famam, to get renoume.
            
               Aucupari tempus, to eſpye the tyme.
            
               Audatia, hardines, courage, truſt.
            
               Audacter, & Audaciter, boldly, aduenturuſly.
            
               Audaculus, hardy, ſpoken in deriſion, or contempte.
            
               Audax, acis, bolde or hardy, or truſtynge well in hym ſelfe.
            
               Audens, hardy.
            
               Audentia, hardyneſſe.
            
               Audeo, ſi, dere, to dare, to preſume.
            
               Audio, diui, dire, to here, to conſyder, to perceyue, to graunte that whiche is aſked, to do the thynge that is commaunded.
            
               Audin tu? hereſt thou not?
            
               Audire bene, to be well reported of, to haue a good name.
            
               Audire male, to be yll reported of, to haue an yll name.
            
               Audire Platonem, to be Platos diſciple.
            Audias pro audire poteris, thou mayſt here.
            
            
               Audiens dicto, redy to do that he is commanded, at commaundement, obedient.
            
               Audienciam facere, to commaunde or make ſilence, as they do whiche are cryers in places of Iuſtice.
            
               Audiri, to be beleued.
            
               Auditio, herynge or audience.
            
               Auditorium, a place where men do here leſſons or propoſitions.
            
               Audirus, tus, herynge, one of the fiue wyttes.
            
               Aue, be thou gladde or ioyfull, as the vulgare people ſayth, Reſt you mery.
            
               Auere te iubet, he greteth you well.
            
               Auelio, here, to cary frō one place to an other.
            
               Auellana, a ſylberde nut.
            
               Auello, uulſi, uellere, to plucke awaye by violence.
            
               Auellere ſe à meretrice, to withdrawe hym, or go awaye by force from an harlot.
            
               Auena, otes. ſomtyme it is put for an ote ſtraw or a whete ſtrawe, or reede.
            
               Auenaceus, a, um, made of otes.
            
               Auenaria, a kynde of graſhoppes, whiche appere not, vntyll the corne be rype.
            
               Auenarius, beynge amonge otes.
            
               Auentinus, a hyll at Rome.
            
               Auenuiorum colonia, Auynion, a Cytie in Prouaunce.
            
               Aueo, uere, to couayt.
            
               Auerni,
               Caeſar. people of a countray in Fraunce called Aue
                  •
               gn.
            
               Auernus, a lake in Campania, which was dedicate vnto Pluto kynge of Hell, where men ſuppoſed, that there was an entry or paſſage to Hell.
            
               Auerrois, a great philoſopher and phiſiiyon, ennemy to Auicen, and alſo to Chryſte, and for his great commentes wrytten on Ariſtotle, he is named Commentator. He was about the yere of our lorde .1145.
            
                
               Auerrunco, aui, are, to turne awaye, to put awaye, or ſcrape of.
            
               Auerruncare deûm iram, to pacyfy goddes wrathe.
            
               Auerſor, aris, to abhorre, to refuſe.
            
               Auerſus. ſtraunge, vnacquaynted: ſometyme backeward, or on the backe halfe. alſo angry Aduerſus, & auerſus, forwarde and backewarde.
            
               Auerſa pars, the backeſyde of a thynge.
            
               Auerſa pecunia publica, the cōmon treaſure to a particuler aduauntage.
            
               Auerſis poſt crura planus, the feete tourned backewarde.
            
               Auerta, thes peutrell of an horſe.
            
               Auerto,
               Vergil. 
               ti, tere, to tourne awaye.
            
               Auertere ab aliquo loco, to let or prohibit one to enter.
            
               Auertere ſe ab aliquo, to leue hym there.
            
               Auertere hoſtes, to dryue awaye ennemies.
            
               Auertere ſe a ſermone, to turne away from the tale.
            
               Auertere culpā in alterum, to lay the blame or fault in an other.
            
               Auertere haereditatem, to put one from his inherytaunce.
            
               Auertere flumen, to tourne the ryuer out of his courſe.
            
               Quod omen dij auertant, god kepe vs from that lucke or chaunce.
            
               Auertor, teris, ti, to diſdayne. ſometyme it ſygnifieth to tourne awaye, to tourne fro.
            
               Auerruncus, god which putteth away all euyl.
            
               Aufero, abſtuli, auferre, to take awaye.
            
               Auferre caput alicui, to ſtryke of ones head.
            
               Auferre formam, to diſfigure.
            
               Auferre nomen alicui, to take from one his good name.
            
               Aufer te hinc,
               Terent. get the henſe.
            
               Aufer te domum, get the home.
            
               Auferas iurgium,
               Plautus. leaue thy chyding.
            
               Auferent quindecim dies hi ludi. thoſe plais wyll let vs theſe .xv. dayes.
            
               Aufer nugas, leaue theſe tryfelynges, leaue your mockes.
            
               Auferre litem, to get by action or proces of the lawe.Plaut. in Rud. 
               Maiore mulcta mulctat, quam litem auferunt. He maketh theym to ſpende more, than they maye wyn by theyr ſuite.
            
               Auferre petitionem, to haue the thynge that he aſketh.Plaut. in Cur. 
               Tuo arbitratu, dum auferam abs te id quod peto: Euen as ye wyll, ſo that I may haue the thyng that I aſke or demande.
            
               Auferre pignora, to take a diſtreſſe or gage.
            
               Auferre tacita, to make one to cōfeſſe a thīg ſecrete.Plaut. in Aſinar. 
               Suſpendas potius me, quam tacita haec auferas: Thou mayſte rather hange me, than make me confeſſe that ſecrete.
            
               Auferre inultum, to goo quyte without punyſhment. Ergo pretium ob ſtultitiam fero,
               Terent. i
                     •
                   Andria. 
               ſed inultum id nun
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   auferet: I am well rewarded for my folyſhnes, but yet he ſhall not go quyte.
            
               Auferri ſibi,
               Cic. 
                     〈◊〉
                   queſt. 3. to be vexed in mynde, or frome hym ſelfe.
            
               Aufugio, gi, ere, to flee henſe.
            Augeo, xi, gere, to increaſe.
            
            
               Augere auxilia, to make a newe hoſte after a diſcomfite.
            
               Augeſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe greate, or be gret, to be growen.
            Augifico, for augeo.
            
               Augmento, aui, are, to increaſe, or make more.
            
               Augur, guris, he that telleth by byrdes voyces or by theyr flying or ſitting, what ſhal happē
            
            
               Auguralis, le, perteynynge to diuynation. loke Augurium.
            
            
               Auguratus, the dignitie of them, whiche were Augures, of whom was a college in Rome, as there be nowe of pryeſtes in cathedralle churches.
            
               Augurium, dyuynation or tellynge before of thynges whiche ſhal happen, ſpecially by the flyght or voyces of byrdes.
            
               Auguro, as, are, to tell by ſuche crafte what ſhall happen.
            Auguror, ari, Idem quod Auguro.
            
               Auguror opinione,
               Cic. pro L. Mu
                     •
                  e▪
                I ſuppoſe in myne opinyon.
            
               Auguſta Ceſaria, a citie in Spayne, vpon the ryuer of Iberus.
            
               Auguſta Emerita, a citie in Portugall.
            Auguſta Taurinorum, Turine.
            
            
               Auguſta Triuerorum, the citie of Trier.
            
               Auguſta Rauricum, a citie in Almayne called Baſyle or Baſilaea.
            
            
               Auguſta Vindelicorum, a goodly and beautiful citie in Germany, called Auſbourgh.
            
               Auguſta Veſsonum, Soiſſon in Champaign.
            
               Auguſtalis, le, the Emperours palayce or pauyllion.
            
               Auguſtae, nobly, with a maieſtie.
            
               Auguſtinus, the noble and mooſte famous doctour of Chriſtis churche, was borne in Affryca, in a towne named Gathenſis, whoo was of ſuche an excellente wytte, that in his chyldhode he lerned all the .vii. liberall ſciences, without an inſtructour, and in al partes of philoſophy was wonderfully lerned, ſpeciallye in the doctrine of Plato, whereby he was the rather induced to imbrace the chriſten faythe. Notwithſtandynge he fauoured the errours of them, whiche were called Manichaei: But by the continuall prayer of his good mother, called Monica, and the perſuaſion of holy ſayncte Ambroſe, he at the laſte was conuerted vnto the trewe faythe, they bothe replenyſhed with the holye goſte, dyd
 ſynge to gether the pſalm Te deum, anſweryghe mutually one to the other. Afterwarde in prayer: wrytynge and preachynge he ſoo moche profyted, that he was had in great reuerence of all men, and wrate mo bokes than euer dyd any in the churche of Latines. Finally beinge of the age of .76. yeres, whan he had ben byſhop .40. yeres, he dyed in the yere of our lorde .437.
            
               Auguſtonemetum, Neuers in Fraunce.
            
               Auguſtus, noble or full of maieſtie. wherefore the emperours of Rome were and yet be called Auguſti.
            
            
               Auguſtus, is alſo the moneth next after Iuly.
            
               Auia, a grandame.
            
               Auiarium, a thycke wood without way. Alſo a place where byrdes be kept and nouryſhed. ſomtyme buſſhes ſet for byrdes to haunt and ſyt in.
            
               Auiarius, & Auiaria, he and ſhe that hath the charge of the kepyng of pultry or wildfoule. It maye alſo be vſed for a pultar, which ſelleth pultry.
            
               Auicenna, or Abicena, a famouſe phyſytion, whom ſome men do ſuppoſe to be of a cyte in Spaine called Hiſpalis or Siuile. ſome name hym prynce of Ab
                  •
               alim, ſome do ſaye that he was kynge of Bithinia. Fynally he was excellentlye lerned, and wrate in the Arabike tongue many noble warkes of philoſophy naturall and metaphiſike. Alſo he comprehended phiſike in .v. volumes, wherin he calleth hym ſelfe the interpretour of Galene: albeit men exactely lerned in the greke tongue, doo wryte, that he fayled in his interpretatiō, not truely declarynge Galens ſentence in manye places. Notwithſtandyng ſenſe his tyme, vntyll within theſe .xi. yeres or lyttel more, men partely for lacke of vnderſtandyng the greke tunge, partly bycauſe the warkes of Galene were yll tranſlated into latine, alſo not ſuſteinynge the flowynge copye of Galene, & thynking this man more compendious in writing they haue ſtudied his warkes rather thanne Galenes. wherby the cure of ſicknes hath bē founde very vncertayne. Not withſtandyng there is in his warkes moch notable knowlege, not conuenient to be omytted of theym, whiche wolde aſpire to the perfection of phiſike. He was about the yere of our lord .1151. and as ſome men do ſuppoſe, was poyſoned by Auer
                  •
               ois, whome not withſtandynge he ſlewe before that he dyed.
            
               Auicula, a lyttell byrde.
            
               Auide, affectuouſly, couetouſly, ardently, with great deſyre.
            
               Auiditas, deſyre of a thynge, couetiſe, ardente affection.
            Auidus, a, um, couetiſe, deſyrou
                     •
                  .
            
            Auidus cibi,Terent. 
               hungry.
            
            
               Auidis moribus, of an excedynge coua
                  •
               tous appetite.
            
               Auilla, a lambe lately y
                  •
               aned.
            
               Auis, a byrde.
            
               Auirus, a, um, that which is left by anceſtars. Auitus ager, olde inheritaunce.
            
               Auius, a, um,
               Plautus. wherby there is no paſſage or waye.Vergil.
            
            
               Auia uirgulta,
               Saluſt. buſſhes ſo thycke that no man maye paſſe.
            
               Auius, he that goeth out of the waye.
            
               Aula, a haule. ſometyme the palaice or courte of a prynce. It was alſo of olde wryters vſed for olla, a pot.
            
               Aulae, ſhaumles or waytes.
            
               Aulea, tapeſrye, hangynges of noble mennes houſes.
            
               Aulerci,
               Caeſar. people of a cytie of Normandy called Roane.
            
               Aulercij, people of Orliance in Fraunce.
            
               Auletes, a pypar.
            
               Auletris, tridos, a woman pypar.
            
               Auleticus, he that playeth beſte on a ſhalme or wayte.
            
               Auli, a kynde of ſhel fyſhe lyke vnto muſkelles.
            
               Aulicotia, boyled meate.
            
               Aulicus,
               Sueton. in Nerone a courtiar.
            
               Aulicus, a, um, of the courte, as Aulicus apparatus, courtly apparayle, but mooſte properly of prynces.
            
               Aulis, idis, a lyttell countrey or ſhyre in Boeotia in Greece. It was alſo a great Citie and hauen, where the princes of Grece aſſembled & conſpired togither the diſtruction of Troy.
            
               Auloedus, a mynſtrell.
            
               Aulon, the name of a mountayne and Citie in Calabria, where groweth excellente good wynes. Alſo of two other Cities, the one in Macedonia, the other in Cilicia.
            
               Aulula, a lyttell pot, wherof commeth Aulularia, a commedy of Plautus, wherin is declared the couetous mynde of on, which hyd his money in a pot, thynkyng that no man knew it but hym ſelfe, and yet was he deceyued of it.
            
               Auocamentum, paſſetyme, recreation, that withdraweth the mynde from heuynes or melancholy.
            Auocatio, loke Auoco.
            
               Auoco, aui, are, to call away
                  •
               .
            
               Auocare animum, to withdrawe the mynde from a thynge.
            
               Auolo, aui, are, to flye awaye.
            
               Aura, Sometyme betokeneth a ſofte wynde. ſometyme bryghtnes, ſomtyme fauour of the people.
            Aurea aetherea ueſci, to lyue.
            
            Auras uitales carpere, to lyue.
            
            
                
               Auram captare, to haue good hope.
            
               Aurae popularis homo, a man that ſeketh fauour of the people.
            
               Auramentum, gyltynge.
            
               Auraria, a golde myne.
            
               Aurarn, gylters. ſomtyme it ſignifyeth mainteynours.
            Auratus, a, um, gylte.
            
            
               Aurata, a fyſhe of the ſea, whiche I ſuppoſe to be a gylte heade, for he hath in his forehead a thynge congelat, whiche in the water ſhyneth lyke golde, and alſo hath a ſette of tethe lyke check tethe, wherwith he hath ben hard of fyſhers in the nyghte to cruſhe cockelles, and ſuche other lyttell ſhell fyſhes, wheron he feedeth.
            
               Aureae, the hedſtall of a horſe.
            
               Aureus, a piece of golde in money.
            Aureus, a, um, of golde.
            
            
               Aurichalcum, latten metall.
            
               Auricomus, he that hath heare as bryghte as golde.
            
               Auricula, the eare lap.
            
               Auricularius, a ſecretary or pryuy councellour.
            
               Auricularius, a, um, perteyninge to the eares.
            
               Auricularis confeſsio, confeſſion made ſecretly, as prieſtis do here it.
            Auricularis, re, Idem.
            
               Auris, an eare.
            
               Aurem uellere, to put in remenbraunce.
            
               Aurem in utramuis dormire, to ſlepe ſurely to take no though or care for any thynge.
            
               Aures ſitientes, eares deſyrous to here.
            
               Aures arrigere,
               Terent. in Andria. to lyft vp the eares, to here attentiuely.
            
               Aures calent illius criminibus,
               Cicero in Saluſt. myne eares glowe or bourne to here of his miſcheuouſe actes.
            
               Aures hebêtes habet,
               Cic. pro G. Planco he is dull in herynge, or he lyſteth not to here.
            
               Auricula infima mollior, a ſofte man, with whom a man may do what he lyſteth.
            
               Auribus accipere,
               Plaut. in Trinum. to haue herde.
            
               Auribus capere ſpolia, to harken, and beare awaye our ſecreſies,Plaut. in Milit. or ſecrete counſayle.
            
               Auribus dare, to flatter, to ſpeke that whiche ſhall content a mannes eare.Treboni.
            
            
               Auribus aequiſsimis alicuius uti,
               Cicero. to be fauourably harde of one.Volſi.
            
            
               Auribus prouehi,
               Apuleius to be caryed by the eares. It is properly vſed, where we wyll declare, that being in iourney with one, we delyte ſo moch in his communication, that we fele no labour or peyne by goynge or rydynge. Soo may we ſay Auribus prouehimur, in hering of hym, our peynes are relieued, or in hering hym talke, our iourney ſemeth ſhorte, or is abbreuiate.
            ❀Auribus lupum tenêre, to holde the wulfe by the eates: whiche is a prouerbe, and doth ſignifie to be in two ſondry daungiers, and knowe not what is beſt to be done.
            
               Auriferum, that beareth golde.
            
               Aurifex, ficis, a goldſmyth.
            
               Aurificina, a goldſmithes ſhop.
            
               Aurifur, a theefe that ſtealeth golde.
            
               Auriga, a cartar, or a dryuer of a carte.
            
               Aurigo, a ſyckeneſſe called the yelowe iaūdiſe.
            
               Aurigor, aris, to dryue a carte, or ſome thyng lyke. Alſo to gouerne.
            
               Aurilegus, he that hath ſtolen golde.
            Auripigmentum,
            
               Auriſcalpium, an eare pyker.
            
               Auritus, great eared, or he that harkeneth dilygentely.
            Auro, aui, are, to gylt.
            
            
               Aurora, the morynge or ſon ryſynge.
            
               Aurum, golde.
            
               Aurum obrizum, fyned golde.
            
               Aurum coronarium, was gold gathered of the people, to make crownes, to ſende to emperours, after theyr victories.
            
               Aurum captare, to hope.
            ❀Aurum Toloſanum habere,
               Eraſ
                     •
                  
                a prouerbe, whiche ſignifieth to peryſhe myſerably: whiche prouerb had this beginning: whan Quintus Cepio toke by aſſaulte the Citie of Toloſa in Italy, there was found in the temples there, great plenty of golde, which being taken awaye, all they whiche had therof any parte, dyed afterwarde myſerablye. wherof happened this prouerbe, that whan any man fyniſhed his lyfe in myſerye, men wolde ſay, that he had golde of Toloſa.
            
               Auſculto, aui, are, to here diligentely, or gyue good care. alſo to obeye.
            
               Auſcultabitur,
               Pla
                     •
                   i
                     •
                   Merc
                     •
                  
                he wyll do as ye byd hym.
            
               Auſcultare alicui, to obeye one, or be at his commandement.
            
               Auſcultare inter ſeſe, to whyſter one in an others eare.
            
               Auſim, ſis, ſit, is put for audeam, as, at.
            
               Auſitis, the countreye called Hus, where Iob dwelled.
            
               Auſonium, Italy. Auſones, were the auneyente kynges of Italy.
            
               Auſpex, ſpicis, idem quod augur. Alſo it ſygnifieth the perſon that maketh the mariage on the mannes parte. alſo the chiefe captain in warres.
            
               Auſpicalis, a lyttell fyſhe called alſo Remora, whiche cleauynge faſte to the kele of a ſhyp, holdeth it ſtyll agaynſt the puiſſaunce as wel of wyndes as of ores. This fyſhe is alſo called Echineis, rede Plinium .li. 32.
            
               Auſpicatò, happyly, with good lucke.
            Auſpicatus, a, um, honourably enterpryſed.
            
            
               Auſpicium, the ſigne or token ſhewed by birdes
 of thynges that ſhall folowe. Alſo it betokeneth fortune, conduct, or diſpoſition of a capitayne. alſo it is a token or ſignification of thynges to come. Somtyme it ſignifieth authoritie.Vergil. 
               Communem ergo hunc populum, paribuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   regamus Auſpicijs. Therfore let vs gouerne this people mixt now together, with equall or lyke authoritie.
            
               Auſpicia optima, tokens of good lucke.
            
               Auſpicia malo, with yll lucke, or in an yll tyme.Plaut. in Aulul. 
               Nae ego aedepol uenihuc auſpicio malo: I cam hither in an yl tyme, or, an vnhappy or vnlucky fortune brought me hyther.
            
               Auſpicium liquidum,
               Plaut. in Perſa. a manyfeſte ſygne or token.
            
               Auſpico, aui, are, to ſeke for a thynge by diuination.
            
               Auſpicor, aris, ari, to take likelyhood. alſo to begyn or enter into a buſyneſſe.
            
               Auſter, ſtri, the ſouthe wynde.
            
               Auſteritas, ſharpnes, cruelty.
            
               Auſterus, ſoure or ſharpe. alſo ſore or without pitie.
            
               Auſterus color, a ſad colour.
            
               Auſtralis, le, ſoutherne, or of ſouthe part.
            
               Auſtria, is a great countray on the vttermoſte caſte parte of Germany, and was ſometyme called Pannonia ſuperior. It boundethe on the eaſte vpon the royalme of Hungarye, on the weſt vpon the countraye called Noricum & Tauriſium in duche, on the ſouth vpon Italy, on the north it is incloſed with the gret riuer of Danubius or Hiſter, in duch Donow In it is the noble citie of Vienna, ſet vppon the ſayde ryuer: there is alſo a famous vnyuerſitie, where ſpecially is taught the mathe maticall ſciences moſte exactly and perfectly.
            
               Auſtrinus, a, um, from the ſouthe parte.
            
               Auſtro, aui, are, to make moyſte.
            
               Auſtrum, the ſpoke of a whele.
            
               Aut,
               Cicero in Bru. or, eyther.
            
               Aut certe, or at the leaſte. Quo enim uincebamur a uicta Graecia, id aut illi ereptū eſt, aut certe nobis communicatum: That one thynge, wherin we gaue place to Grece, whiche is vainquiſhed by vs, eyther it is taken cleane awaye from them, or at the leaſte we be therin equall vnto them.
            
               Autem, a coniunction diſcretiue, whiche is neuer put in the fyrſte place, but in the ſeconde. It ſignifieth but.Terent. 
               Ah quid faciam? quid meaautem? quid faciet mihi? Oh what ſhall I do? but what haue I herewith to do? what wyll he do to me? It ſignifyeth etiam. Abite, tu domum, tu autem domum. Go your waye, get the home, and alſo goo thou thy waye home. Porro autem, more ouer Tum autem, afterwarde. Autem is ſomtyme vſed in the repetition of a queſtion, as, Non feciſſent? feciſsent autem: wolde they not haue done it? yes in ſaythe wolde they haue done it. It ſomtyme ſignifieth nothynge, but fylleth vp the number in the ſentence.
            Autenticus, a, um, of authoritie.
            
            
               Author,
               Tit. Liui. the fyrſt inuētour or maker of a thing alſo a reporter of newes.Paul. iure conſultus alſo a ruler or tutor alſo he that dothe ſell or delyuer a thynge on warrantiſe.Cicero in Ver. alſo he whom a man foloweth in doynge of any thynge.
            
               Author tibi non ſum te profugere,
               Plaut. in Cur. I wyll not counſayle the to run thy way.
            
               Author id tibi ſum, I wyll thus aduiſe the.
            
               Authore te, by thy counſayle.
            
               Authorem dabit rem, the dede ſhall proue.
            
               Authores claſsici, authors receyued, and of all men allowed.
            
               Authoramentum, an indenture or obligation, wherby a man is bounden to do ſeruice. alſo erneſt money, wages, or hyre.
            
               Authoratus, he that is bounde to ſerue ſpecially in warres.
            
               Authoratus, a, um, bounden by couenaunte.
            
               Authoritas,
               Terent. in prol. An. authoritie, credence, puyſſaunce, iugement, the inioyeng of poſſeſſion.
            
               Authoritatem defungi,
               Plaut. in Paenul. to deny to haue don any thynge, or to haue ben the cauſe that it was done.
            
               Authoritatem defugere,
               Terent. in Eunu. to refuſe to do that he is commanded.
            
               Authoritatem interponere, to commande a thynge to be done.
            
               Authoritatis iure, by ryght of preſcription.
            
               Vſus & authoritas, properly in a thynge by preſcription.
            
               Authoro, are, to binde one by couenaunt to do ſeruice.
            
               Autocthones, people whiche beganne in the countrey that they do inhabit, whiche name was gyuen to them of Athenes.
            
               Autodidactus, he that lerneth withoute a mayſter.
            
               Autographum, his owne hande wrytynge.
            
               Autolycus, a mayſter thefe.
            
               Automata, thynges without lyfe, whiche ſeme to moue by them ſelfes, as it maye appere in olde horologes and ymages, whiche by vyces do moue. It is alſo taken generally for al thynges which happen without any notable cauſe.
            
               Autopyron, browne bread.
            
               Autumnalis, le, belongynge to Autumne:
            
               Autumnus, the tyme of the yere betwene ſommer and wynter, whiche begynneth the .vi. day of Auguſte, and endeth the .vi. daye of Nouembre.
            
               Autumo, to ſuppoſe, to affyrme.
            
               Auulſio, a pluckynge of, or pullynge awaye.
            
               Auunculus, the vncle of the mothers ſyde.
            
                
               Auus, the grandefather.
            
               Auxiliaris, re, wherin is ayde or ſuccour.
            
               Auxiliares copiae, ſuccours from a ſtranger.
            
               Auxiliarius, he that ſuccureth, or commeth in ayde of an other.
            
               Auxilior, aris, ari, to ayde or helpe.
            
               Auxilium, ayde or helpe, ſuccour.
            
               Auxilio eſse, to helpe.
            
               Auxumae, the yonge fyſhe whiche commeth of the ſpawn of Tunyes.
         
         
            A ANTE X.
            
               AXAMENTA, verſes made by the pryeſtes of Mars, called Salij, in quicke tauntynge of all men.
            
               Axare, olde wryters vſed for nominare, to name or aſke.
            
               Axes, bourdes ſawen.
            
               Axilla, the arme hole.
            
               Axioma, a ſentence ſpoken and proued: as If Plato walkethe, Plato mouche. If it be daye, the ſunne is aboue the erthe. It is put by Tully for that whiche ſophiſters doo call a propoſition, whiche is a ſentence true or falſe.
            
               Axis,
               Iuuenal. an extree of a carte, ſometyme the hole carte. ſomtyme it is ſhyngle, wherwith houſes are couered in the ſtede of tyle.
            
               Axis mūdi, is a lyne ymagyned to go ſtreight from the northe to the ſouthe, diuidynge the worlde as it were in two partes: at the endes are ſuppoſed to be two pointes in heauē, whiche are called the Northe pole and the South pole.
            
               Axona,
               Caeſar. a countrey in Fraunce called Deſne.
            
               Axungia, ſwynes greaſe, or barows greaſe beinge olde.
         
         
            A ANTE Z.
            
               AZAN, an Hyll in Arcadia, where Cibele, called the mother of the goddes was honoured.
            
               Azanium, was a wel, the water wherof being drunke, cauſed menne to hate the ſauour and taſte of wyne.
            
               Azotus, a citie in Siria.
            
               Azymus panis, vnleuened breade.
         
         
            B ante A.
            
               
                  BAAL, IN THE tongue of Siria, ſignyfyeth Lorde, and is attribut to Iupiter. After ſome interpretation it ſignifyeth hauinge dominion, ſubiection, or poſſeſſion.
            
               Babae, an interiection of wondrynge.
            
               Babel, ſignifieth confuſion or myxture. It was the name of a toure buylded by Nemroth, be fore the incarnation of Chriſte. 2174. yeres. At the buyldynge wherof was the fyrſte dyuyſion of tunges: this was done in the land of Sennaar, in the countray of Caldea.
            
               Babylon, a great citie in Caldey, and ſygnifyeth confuſion or tranſlation: where was a towre edifyed by Nemroth, whiche was in heyght fyue myles,Philo. and a hundred threſcore and ten paces.Ioſeph
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                Afterwarde beynge enlarged by Semiramis,Diodo. the wyfe of Ninus kynge of Aſſiria, it was ſo great, that it conteyned in compaſſe three ſcore myles, and the walles were in heyght. 300. feete, and in thyckenes or bredth. 75. fete, and had a hundred gates of braſſe, and there ran through the myddell therof the noble and moſt famous ryuer Euphrates, whiche is one of the ryuers, wherof the ſprynge or head is in Paradyſe.
            
               Babylonia, the countray where the citie of Babylon ſtode.
            Babylonicus, a, um, and Babylonius, a, um, of Babylon.
            
            
               Babylonica, are clothes wouen with ſondrye colours.
            
               Bacca, a bery, as a baye bery, an hawe berye, an eglantine bery.
            
               Baccae, margarites, or perles.
            
               Baccalia, a kynde of bay trees or laurell, but it hath larger leaues, and greate plenty of beryes. It is alſo called Auguſta.
            
            
               Baccar, aris, & Baccharis, is an herbe hauyng a leafe in facion and greatneſſe betwene violet leaues, and the herbe which is called molein or long worte, the ſtalke ſquare and ſomwhat roughe, whiche is in heyght a fote and a halfe, hauynge a floure lyke purple myxte with white, the roote blacke, but that it ſauoureth lyke vnto Cinamome: ſome do call it Aſdrabacca, ſome our ladyes gloues. it is alſo a wyne potte.
            
               Baccaricum, a ſwete oyntmente, made of the rote of Aſdrabacca.
            
               Baccatus, a, um, garnyſhed with perle.
            
               Bacchanal, lis, the place where the ſolemnytie of Bacchus was kepte.
            
               Bacchanalia, feaſtes of the paynyms, whiche they dyd celebrate with al abhominations of lecherye.
            
                
               Bacchatim,
               Coelius. lyke a madde man.
            Bacchius, a, um, of Bacchus.
            
            
               Bacchor, aris, ari, to celebrate the feaſt of Bacchus, to do a thynge lyke a madde manne, or vexed with ſpirites, to be woode.
            
               Bacchus, chi, callyd alſoo Liber & Dionyſius, was the ſonne of Iupiter by Semeles doughter of Cadmus. The poetes fayned, that after that Iupiter hadde gotten Semeles with chylde, ſhe deſyred hym to company with her, lyke as he dyd with Iuno his wyfe in his diuine maieſtie, wherfore he bryngynge with hym his thunder and lyghtning came to her: but ſhe not able to ſuſtayne his preſence, felle in trauayle, and beinge delyuered longe before her naturall tyme, than dyed. Iupyter toke the chylde, and delyuered hym to Mercurius, who by his commaundement caried it vnto the caue of Niſa, whiche was betwene Pheniciam and Nilum, where it was nouryſhed and brought vp by the Nymphes. Lyke foolyſhely other imagyned, that Iupiter made a hole in his thygh, and dyd put in the chylde, where it remayned vntyll the full tyme of his byrthe was come. What ſo euer his begynnynge was, this man amonge the Grekes, was the fyrſt that dyd ſet vines, and made wyne. alſo he fyrſt yoked oxen in the plough, and gatheryng to hym a great number of men and women, went a greate parte of the worlde, diſtroyinge tyrantes and monſters, and conquered the countrey of India: but his people delytynge in wyne, and drynkynge ſuperfluouſely of it, felle to fyghtynge amonge them ſelues. Wherfore he prouided, that whan they dranke, they ſhoulde haue in theyr hādes nothing but canes, or other light ſtickes. He that wyl knowmore of Bacchus, let hym rede. th .v. boke of Diodorus Siculus, where he ſhall fynde of hym a fable more pleaſant than trewe.
            
               Baccifer, a tree bearynge bearyes.
            
               Baccula, a lyttell bearye.
            
               Bacenis ſylua, a wodde in Fraunce callyd foreſt Neigre.
            
               Bacillum, a lyttell ſtaffe.
            
               Bacrio, onis, a veſſell of an olde facion.
            
               Baculus, a ſtaffe.
            
               Bactra, a countrey in the furtheſt part of Perſia, the people wherof are callyd Bactri & Bactriani, in whome is ſuche inhumanytie, that whanne theyr parentes be very ſycke or olde, they throwe theym vnto fyerce dogges, whiche do rent them in pieces, and deuour them.
            
               Bactriani, people of that countrey.
            
               Bactrianum, a countrey wherein were a thouſande cities.
            
               Badius color, bay colour.
            
               Badizare,
               Plaut. in Aſin. to go.
            
               Baetica, is a countraye in Spayne, whiche taketh his name of a ryuer callyd Baetis, whiche doth runne through it, and was alſo callyd Turdetania, and is the ſouthe parte of Spayn, where nowe be the cities of Cybile and Corduba, and the royalme of Granado, and extendeth to the pyllers of Hercules.
            
               Baeticatus, he that weareth a blacke or browne garment.
            
               Baeticus, a, um, blacke or browne.
            
               Baetis, a ryuer in Spayne by Grando callyd nowe G
                  •
               adalqueni
                  •
               .
            
               Baeuis, a ryuer in Portugall.
            
               Baganum, the citie of Tourney.
            
               Bagôus, in the Perſian tunge ſignifieth a geldynge, or a man geldyd.
            
               Bagrada, a ryuer in Affrike by the citie callyd Vrica, where Attilius Regulus and the hoſt of the Romaines ſlewe a ſerpent, which was in length. 120. fete.
            
               Bahal, the ydoll of Tyre.
            
               Baiae, arum, a towne in Campania, on the ſea ſyde, betwene Puteolos, and Miſenum, for the temperatenes of ayre & fayrenes of buyldynge, moche haunted of the aunicent Romayns, where alſo ben hotte waters natural, whiche are bothe pleaſaunt and holſome, and therfore it hath bene ſuppoſed, that all other hotte bathes naturall, were callyd Baiae.
            
            Baiulo, aui, are, to beare.
            
            
               Baiulus, a porter or caryer of burdeyns.
            
               Balaam, ſignifieth the age of the people, the deuourynge or deſtruction of them. It was the name of a ſouthſayer,Nu. 22. & 23. who by Balac the king of Moabites, beinge deſyred to curſe the Iſraelites, by the waye was let by an aungelle, whome the aſſe, wheron he rode, dyd behold, and the aſſe ſpake, and aſked why he dydde beate hym: alſo if euer he dydde ſoo before. And than he hym ſelfe perceyued the aungell, who had hym that he ſhuld go to Balat, and that he ſhuld nothynge ſpeake but that he cō
               manded him. And ſo finally he bleſſed the Iſraelites, cōtrary to the expectation of Balac.
            
               Balaena, a gret fiſh of the ſee which hath an hole in his heed, wherby he takith ayre, & ſpouteth out great abūdance of water. Some do ſuppoſe, that it is a thirlepoole, ſhe hath pappes lyke a beaſt. Plinius writeth in hi .18 boke, that there hath ben ſounde of them, whyche haue ben in length .240. fete.
            
               Balanites, a ſtone, which is a lyghte grene, and hath a veyn in the middel like a flame of fire.
            
               Balanitis, a kind of roūd cheſtēs, or cheſt nuttis
            
               Balanus, a kynde of acornes: it is alſoo a ſuppoſitory to helpe theym that be coſtife. alſo a ſwete oyntment made of Myrabolanes.
            
               Balatus, bleatynge of ſhepe.
            
                
               Balauſtium, the flowres of wylde pomegranades.
            
               Balbucinor, aris, to maffle in the mouthe.
            
               Balbus, he that can not prouounce wel his wordes, whan he ſpeaketh.
            
               Balburio, iui, ire, to ſtammer or ſtutte.
            
               Baleares inſulae, two yles by Spayne, in the ſea callyd Mare mediterraneum. The one is nowe callyd Maiorca, the other Minorca.
            
            
               Balinêum, a bayne or bathe.
            Balius, a, um, bay colour.
            
            
               Balius, a horſe of bay colour.
            
               Balliſta, a croſbowe, or a brake. It may be vſyd for a gunne.
            
               Balliſtarium, the place where a great brake or ſlynge is layde.
            
               Balito, are, to bleate often.
            
               Balnea plural. a commune bayne.
            
               Balnearia, all thynges belongyng to a bayn.
            
               Balnearius, of a bayne.
            Balneatorius, idem.
            
               Balneator, the keper of a bayne, or he that ſerueth in a bayne.
            
               Balneolum, a lyttell bayne or bathe.
            
               Balneum, a priuate bayne.
            
               Balo, aui, are, to bleate lyke a ſhepe.
            
               Balſamum, baulme.
            Balſaminus, a, um, of baulme.
            
            
               Baltheus, & Baltheū, a belt, a ſworde girdell.
            
               Bambalio, onis, he that ſtammereth or ſtutteth for feare.
            
               Bambatium, cotton.
            
               Bambia, a kynde of olyue tree.
            
               Banauſus,
               Coelius. an artificer, which worketh by fire.
            
               Banchus, an haddacke.
            
               Baphia, a dyehouſe.
            
               Baphicus, a, um, pertaynynge to dyenge.
            
               Baptes, a ſtone grene of the colour of a frogge
            
               Baptae,
               Angel. were certayne comedies, wherein were reproued thingis diſhoneſt and abhominable
            Baptiſmus,Politian. & baptiſmum,Miſcell. cap. 10. & Baptiſma, atis, baptiſme.
            
            
               Baptiſterium, a bathe or veſſell to waſhe in the body, a dyenge vate, a fonte.
            
               Baptizo, aui, are, to baptiſe, to deepe.
            
               Barathrum, an vnmeaſurable depenes.
            
               Baratro, an vnthriſt, that in lechery and gluttony deuoureth his ſubſtance.
            
               Barba, a bearde.
            
               Barba tenus, in or touchinge the bearde.
            
               Barba Iouis, an herbe callyd Syngrene, and groweth on tyles.
            
               Barba ſaenis, is an herbe whyche groweth amonge ſtones, the leaues wherof be lyke vnto longe heares. It is alſo callyd Barba petrae, it hathe a yelowe floure, and the roote therof is bytter.
            
               Barbare, barbarouſelye, rudelye, withoute eloquence.
            
               Barbari, in the olde tyme were all people, excepte Grekes, properly it be they, whiche do ſpeake groſſely, without obſeruynge of congruitie, or pronounce not perfectely, ſpecially greeke or latyne. Alſo they that abhorte all clegancy. Moreouer it ſygnifieth them, whiche he without letters, fiers or cruell of maners or countenaunce.
            
               Barbaria, the countrey where dwelleth people rude or beaſtely.
            
               Barbaricarii, weauere of clothe of baudkyn.
            
               Barbaricus, barbarous.
            
               Barbaries, rudenes, lacke of ciuilitie.
            
               Barbariſmus, the corrupte fourme of ſpeakyng or pronouncynge.
            
               Barbatulus, he that hath a yonge berde.
            Barbatus, a, um, bearded.
            
            
               Barbeſola, a towne in Spayne callyd Barbeſull.
            
               Barbitium, the bearde.
            
               Barbitos, an inſtrument of muſyke, whiche I ſuppoſe is that, that men calle doulſymers, ſome thynke it to be a double harpe, callyd a roote.
            
               Barbula, a lyttell bearde.
            
               Barbus, & barbo, a fyſſhe called a barbyll.
            
               Barce, a citie in Lybia, alſo an other citie callid Ptolomais.
            
               Bardana, the herbe callyd the great burte.
            
               Bardeſanes, was an excellent aſtronomer.
            
               Bardi, were certayne wytches or prophetes in Gallia.
            
               Bardiacus, a certayne garment.
            
               Bardocucullum, a thrummed hatte, or a ſhepeherdes cloke.
            
               Bardus, a foole. Sometyme a mynſtrell that ſyngeth ieſtes or fables.
            
               Bariona, Iohnonſon, or the ſonne of Iohn̄, as Barptholomeus, Ptholomeus ſonne. Wher by it ſeemeth, that Bar in the tongue of Siria or hebrewe ſygnified ſonne.
            
               Baris, idos, uel baridis, a bote in Egypt, wherin they caryed deade bodyes to buryenge.
            
               Barnacida, a garment that chyldren dyd wear.
            
               Barrire, to bray lyke an olyphant.
            
               Barritus, the brayenge of an olyphant.
            
               Barrus, an olyphant. It alſo ſignifieth a tothe.Martial. 
               Quid tibi uis mulier, nigris digniſsima barris? What woldeſt thou haue woman, that arte worthy blacke tethe?
            
               Barſinon, a towne in Spayne callyd Barſelona.
            
               Baſan, a countreye beyonde the ryuer of Iordane in Iudea, whyche was dyuided to two of the Tribes, whyche maye be interpreted moſte fertyle and fatte.
            
               Baſcanda, a certayne veſſelle,Martial. whyche camme oute of Englande, whanne it was callyd Brytayne.
            
                
               Baſcania,
               Coelius. lyte tryfles, whyche ſmythes were wont to haue hanging before theyr ſhop windowes to exclude enuy.
            
               Baſcauda, a certayne kynde of veſſell.
            
               Baſia, honeſte kyſſes, ſwete kyſſes.
            
               Baſiatio, a kyſſynge.
            
               Baſiator, a kyſſer.
            
               Baſium, a kyſſe.
            
               Baſilaea, a citie in Germany.
            
               Baſilia, an yle in the north occean ſea.
            
               Baſilica, a place where people doo aſſemble for ſuites in the lawe, and ciuile iugementes be exercyſed, and counſayles holden. Alſo it may be taken for a hall, or other large place, where ſuiters do attende, or men doo wayte on rulers, or great feaſtes be kepte. It alſo ſignifieth a cathedrall churche.
            
               Baſilica nux, a wall nutte.
            
               Baſilicanus,
               
                  
                     •
                  laut. in 
                     •
                  erſa. he that keepeth the place callyd Baſilica.
            
            
               Baſilice,
               Plaut. in Epid. royally.
            
               Baſilice agere, to do a thynge royally.
            
               Baſilicon,
               Plaut. in 
                     ••
                  urcu. a kynges robe.
            
               Baſilicus, a certayn chaunce at dyee.
            Baſilicus, a, um,Plaut. in Trinum. 
               royall.
            
            
               Baſilica facinora, actes or geſtes of kynges.
            
               Baſilicae edictiones,
               Plaut. in Capt. the kynges ordynances or commaundementes.
            
               Baſilides, was the name of an heretyke, whych affirmed, that Chriſte was not crucified, but Simon Cyreneus, who (as the euangeliſtes do write) was conſtrained to beare the croſſe whan our ſauyour waxed faynte by effuſion of bloude by his ſcourgynge. This man ſayd alſo, that it was none offence to deny Chriſte in the tyme of perſecution. He alſo denied the laſte reſurrection. He alſo affyrmed, that virginitie was of no greatter meryte than mariage, but equall with it. He was ſoone after the tyme of the apoſtles, about the yere of our lorde. 110.
            
               Baſilidiani, the folowers of Baſilides.
            
               Baſiliſcus, callyd alſo Regulus, in englyſſhe a cocatrice, whiche is a ſerpent in the deſertes of Affrica, with a white circle about his hed, hauynge a ſharpe heade, redde eyen, and is ſomewhat blacke of colour, and is ſoo venomous, that he ſleeth men and beaſtes with his breath, and with the ſyght of his eyen.
            
               Baſilius, a proper name of a man, of the whych one was byſhoppe of Ceſaria, a man in his tyme of incomparable vertue and lernynge. he was borne in the countrey callyd Cappadotia, of a noble houſe, and as Gregorius Nazianzenus wrytethe, his parentes were chriſtians and catholycke, his fathers name was Baſilius magnus, by the which name he was alſo called, he was taught of his father, as welle grammer as other lernynges callyd Quadriuales. After he went to Ceſaria, and from thenſe to Conſtantinople, where he lerned rhetorike and logyke more perfectly, and alſo philoſophy. from thens he came to Athenes, where dyuerſe greate lernyd men diſputed with hym, and fynally were by him vanquiſhed. but whiles he exactly ſtudied in philoſophy, Gregory callyd Nazianzens, beynge than hollye dedycate to the ſtudye of Scrypture, and ſeruynge God, louynge Baſile entierly, came in to the ſchoole, where he radde in a chayre, and takynge hym by the hande, brought hym to a monaſterye, where he layenge aparte all bokes of philoſophy, onely intended to the redynge of holy ſcripture. And at the laſte the ſpirite of god leadyng theym, they diuided them ſelfes, Baſyl goyng about the countrey callid Pontus, taught the people the true fayth. After he was byſhoppe of Ceſaria, and than was exiled by Valens the emperour, whiche fauoured the Arrian hereſy. he was of ſuche a reuerent grauitie with humblenes, that the people loued hym, themperour and men in authoritie fearyd hym, in ſo moche as whan he was eftſoones reuoked from exile, whan other of the true faith were put out of the countray, Baſile only for feare was reſerued. He was about the yere of our lorde. 367.
            
               Baſis, the foote of a pyller, or that whiche ſuſtayneth any thyng. Alſo it ſignifieth the foū
               dation or grounde of a matter.
            
               Baſſaris, idis, a prieſt of Bacchus.
            
               Baſterna, a certayne ſorte of charyottes.
            
               Baſternae, people on the northeſyde of Thracia about the ryuer of Iſther of Danubius.
            
               Bat, a worde ſpoken reprochefullye or ſcornefully, as ruſſhe, or tut. Sometyme it is vſyd for a worde of ſylence, as peace, or huyſht.
            
               Batauia, a countray in lowe Germany, callyd Hollande.
            
               Batauus, an Hollander, or man of Hollande.
            
               Batalus, an effeminate perſon.Eraſ. chil.
            
            
               Batilus, a fyre panne.
            
               Batiochus, a lyttell potte, oute of the whyche wyne is poured at the table.
            
               Batis, or batos, is the fyſhe callyd raye or ſkeat.
            
               Batrachion, or Batrachium, an herbe, whyche I do ſuppoſe is that whych is commonly callyd goldknappe or yelow cray. It is alſo callyd of Democritus Chriſanthemon, for it hath a floure as yelow as golde, and the leafe is ſomewhat lyke vnto percily, but that it is moche greatter.
            
               Batris, a veſſell with a longe handell.
            
               Battiola, a wyne potte or flagon.
            
               Battologia, a longe patteryng or ſuperfluous ſpeakynge.
            
               Batuo, i, ere, to beate with a rodde.
            
                
               Batus & Ephil, hebrewe meaſures, the oone of drye thynges, the other of lycour, by the computation of Senalis, contayneth .vi. galons one pottell, and one quarte.
            
               Bauaria, callid alſo Baioaria in duch Berne, in french Bauiere, a contray in high Germany, lyeng in the eaſt, on the ſouth it boundeth on the mountaynes of Alpes, whyche dyuideth Germany from Italy, on the weſte lyeth the countrey callyd Sueuia, in douche Swane, on the eaſt Auſtria, callid in douch Owſtryk, on the northe the royalme of Boheme.
            
               Bauari, uel Baioarn, people of Bauier.
            
               Baubare, to barke lyke a dogge.
            
               Baxiae, ſlyppers, properlye of phyloſophers, or ſuche other.
         
         
            ¶B ANTE D & E.
            
               BDelium, is a tree growynge in Arabia and Scithia, alſo a gumme commynge of the ſame tree, lyke to waxe, but clere as gumme, within vnctuous or fatte, verye ſwete of ſauor, whan it is rubbed or burnid, and bytter in taſte.
            
               Beatè, happily, fortunately.
            
               Beatitudo, & beatitas, is a heape of good thinges gatheryd togyther, of it ſelfe ſuffycient without lacke, and a verye perfection accordynge to vertue.
            
               Beatus, is he whiche hath aboundaunce of all thynge that is good, and is perfect in al thynges that be worthy prayſe, or ought to be deſyred of a good man. ſomtyme it is taken for fortunate or noble.
            
               Bebritium, ſeu bebriacum, a towne in Italye betwene Cremona and Verona.
            
               Bebrytia, a countray callyd the great Phrigia.
            
               Bebrytius, a, um, & bebryx, icis, of the countrey of great Phrigia.
            
               Bedegnar, a worde vſyd of the barbarous phiſytions, is after the ſayenge of Serapio, the white brier, whiche, as Dioſcorides writeth, hath a whyte flowre and ſweete. Manardus ſuppoſeth it to be a certayn kynde of thiſtels with ſharpe pryckes and a ſquare ſtalke, and nowe ſome do tak it for the thyſtell, which is callyd Carduus benedictus.
            
            
               Beelphegor, a gapyng ydoll.
            
               Beelſebub, an ydoll callyd god of flyes.
            
               Beelſephon, lorde of the northe, an ydoll ſet vp in the places of eſpyall.
            
               Beemoth, the dyuell, and ſygnifieth a beaſte.
            
               Belbus, a beaſte callyd alſo Hiena.
            
            
               Belerium, or Bolerium promontorium, is a place in Cornewall callid ſaynt Burien.
            
               Belgae, were the people whiche do inhabyte in the countreys and townes incloſed with the Occean ſea, and the ryuers of Rhene, Marn, and Seyne, wherein be the cities of Trire, Colaigne, Magunce, and Reynes. Alſo the countrayes of Flaunders, Hollande, Gelder, Iuliers, Cleuis, Hennaw, part of Friſelande, Pycardy, the greateſt parte of Champaigne, and all the foreſt of Arderne. And all this countraye was ſommetyme callyd Gallia belgica.
            
            
               Belgium, the towne of Beauuoyſyne.
            
               Belial, the deuyll, whiche is interpreted Apoſtata, without yoke.
            
               Bellaria, bankettynge dyſhes, as tartes, march paynes, and other lyke.
            
               Bellarius, a, um, apt for the warre.
            
               Bellator, a warryour.
            
               Bellator equus, e horſe of warre.
            
               Bellatrix, a woman warriour.
            
               Bellatulus, bellatula, a wanton worde, whiche is as moche to ſay,Plauns
                     •
                  
                as ioly, proper, lyttel fayre one, well fauoured chylde, lyttel ſwete harte, prety mayden, prety boy.
            
               Bellax, acis, vſed or haunted in warres.
            
               Belle, well.
            
               Belle ſe habet, he dothe or fareth well.
            
               Bellerophontes, ſeu Bellerophon, the ſonne of Glaucus kynge of Ephyra, who beynge a man of moche bealtie and proweſſe, was ardentelye belouyd of Stenobea, the wyfe of Pretus kynge of Ephyra, nexte after Glaucus, and whan ſhe deſyred hym to commytte adultrye with her, he fearyng the vengeance of Iupiter god of hoſpitalitie, and remembrynge the frendeſhyp ſhewed to bym by her huſbande, refuſyd her, and dydde put her away from hym, whyche ſhe dyſdaynyng, and beinge in a wodde rage, accuſyd hym to her huſbande, that he had rauyſſhed her, but he lyke a ſober man, wolde not ſlea hym in his owne houſe, but delyuerynge hym letters to his wyues father, ſent hym into Lycia, who perceyuynge therby the mynde of Pretus, encouraged Bellerophon to diſtroye the two monſters callid Solymos and Chymaera, and ſente hym therto, that he moughte be ſlayne vnder the coloure of a valyaunt enterpryſe, but he acheuynge it noblye, retournyd with honour.
            Belliatus,Plaut. is Ruden. a, um, beautified.
            
            
               Bellica, was a pyllour in the temple of Bellona, callyd goddeſſe of battayle, wherat they vſed, whan warres were proclaymed, to caſt a iauelyn.
            
               Bellicoſè, valyantly.
            
               Bellicoſus, valiant in armes, fiers or warlſhe.
            
               Bellicrepa, a certayne fourme of daunſynge in harneyſe.
            
               Bellicus, a, um, pertaynyng to warre.
            
               Belliger, a warryour.
            
               Belligero, are, to make warre.
            
                
               Bellipotens, puiſſaunt in armes or battayle.
            
               Bellis, ſeu Bellium, the whyte dayſy, callyd of ſome the Margarite, in the northe it is callid Banwort. It is alſo a fyſh with a long beake lyke a crane, whyche is callyd of ſomme a hornebeake.
            Bello, & bellor, aris, ari, to make warre.
            
            
               Bellocaſsii,
               Caeſar. a countreye in Fraunce nowe callyd Bayenx.
            
               Bellona, callyd goddeſſe of battayle.
            
               Bollouaci,
               Caeſar. a countreye in Fraunce, nowe namyd Beauuoys.
            
               Bellua, a great cruell beaſt, or a monſter.
            
               Bellum, ſygnifieth all the tyme that the warres do contynue, alſo a battayle or warre.
            
               Bellum ciuile, warre betwene menne of one countraye.
            
               Bellum inteſtinum, warre in one countrey amonge the inhabitantes.
            
               Bellum nauale, warre on the ſea.
            
               Bellum inſtruere, to prepare for warre.
            
               Bellicum canere, to blowe to the fielde. It is alſo vſyd in this ſignification, to animate or incourage.
            
               Bello premere, to trouble one with warres.
            
               Bellum componere, to make a concluſion of warres, to make peace betwene two whiche are at warre.
            
               Bellum conflare, to ſtere vp warres.
            
               Bellum indicere, to declare warre.
            
               Bellum moliri, to prepare warre.
            
               Bellum ponere, to ſet aſyde warre.
            
               Bellum profligare, to fyght out a battayle.
            
               Bellum merum loquitur,
               Cic. Atti. he ſpeaketh onely of warre.
            
               Belluatus, a, um, paynted or kerued with great beaſtes.
            
               Belluata taperia, tapeſtry, wherin is wrought or paynted the figures of beaſtes.
            
               Baelon, a towne in Spayn callyd Tariffa.
            Belūinus, a, um, beaſtly.
            
            
               Belūina rabies, a beaſtly fury.
            
               Beluoſus, a, um, full of monſters of the ſea.
            
               Bellulus, a, um, ſomwhat fayre, minyon, tricke galaunt.
            
               Bellus, a, um, fayre, pleaſant, good.
            
               Bellus homo, an honeſt man.
            
               Belus, was an auncient kynge of Aſſyria, to whom the fyrſte image or ydoll to be honoured,Cael. anti lect. was made. It ſygnyfyeth after ſomme mens opinion the compas of the fyrmament: of ſome the aire that incloſeth al thynge. it ſignifieth alſo a pauement, alſo the firſt entrye in at a doore. alſo the feruent heat of the heauen. It is alſo put for the ayre, whiche is vnder the firmament. it is alſo a ryuer in Siria whiche hathe ſande of the nature of glaſſe, alſo it tourneth all other mettall that cometh into it, into glaſſe.
            
               Belzahard, is a barbarous worde, but for the efficacy of the thyng, it is neceſſary to knowe the ſignification therof. It is a ſpeciall and ſoueraygne medicine agaynſt poyſon beinge drunke.Abēzoar. Auenzoar wryteth, that agaynſt poiſon, whyche is excedyngly hot, he made it in this fourme, thre graines of barley, with fiue ounces of the water of a gourde. But ſome men thynke, that the mooſte excellent Belzaharde is this whiche foloweth:Plin. li. 8. cap. 32. li. 28. cap. 9. The propertie of the harte is (as Plinius doth write) to be at contynuall debate with the ſerpente, in ſo moche as he purſueth hym, and ſeketh for hym at the hoole, where he lyeth, and with the breath of his noſethrylles compelleth him to come forthe. Now after that the hart hath fought with the ſerpent and caten hym, he becommeth thyrſty, and runneth vnto ſome water, and leapeth into it, but he than doth not drynk. For if he ſhuld take neuer ſo lytel water, he ſhulde dye incontinent: than do yſſue out of his eyes dropes, whiche by lyttell and lyttell do congeale, and waxe as greate as a cheſten nutte. After that the harte is comme out of the water, men do awayt where thoſe dropes do fall, and taketh them, and layeth them amonge treaſure, as a thynge moſt precious, and agaynſt all maner of poyſon moſt certayne remedye. This haue I taken oute of the boke of Ioan. Agricola de recentioribus medicamentis.
            
            
               Bembina, a towne by the forreſte callyd Nemaeus.
            
            
               Bembinatus, of that towne or wodde.
            
               Benacus lacus, a lake in Italy callyd Gardae.
            
            
               Bene, well, honeſtly, or proſperouſely.
            
               Bene accipere aliquem, to intreate one well, or intertayne hym.
            
               Bene acceptus, well intertayned.
            
               Bene agitur,
               Plautus. the thynge is well done.
            
               Bene ambulato, god be with the.
            
               Bene audire,
               Plinius. to be well ſpoken of.
            
               Bene cogitare de aliquo, to haue a good opinion of one.
            
               Bene conuenire inter eos, they agreed well togyther.
            
               Bene curare aetatem, to lyue pleaſantly.
            
               Bene de te mereo, I intreate the well, thou art beholden vnto me.
            
               Bene ferre gratiam,
               Plaut in Rud. to do pleaſure to one.
            
               Bene habere, to behaue me or hym well.
            
               Bene hercle denuncias,
               Plaut. in Trinum. thou telleſt me good tydynges.
            
               Bene hoc habet,
               Plaut. in Epid. this mattier commeth well to paſſe.
            
               Bene longus ſermo, a very longe tale.
            
               Bene magnus, very great.
            
               Bene mane, very tymely.
            
               Bene mereri, to do pleaſure to one.
            
                
               Bene multi, very many.
            
               Bene nummatusm marſupium, a purſe welle ſtoryd with money.
            
               Bene nummatus homo, a well monied man.
            
               Bene ſucceſsit, it came well to paſſe.
            
               Bene uale, farewell, adewe.
            
               Bene ualere, to be in good helth.
            
               Bene uertere, to turne to good. Precor deum ut haec res bene uertat tibi, I praye god this thynge may tourne the to good, or may be for thy profyte.
            
               Bene uiuere, to make good chere.
            
               Bene uolo tibi, I wolde the good.
            
               Benedicè, an aduerbe, ſignifyeng in prayſinge or ſayeng well.Plautus. 
               Cum illiciebas me ad re blande & benedice, Whan thou dyddeſt trayne me vnto the with pleaſant wordes and prayſynge of me.
            
               Benedico, dixi, dicere, to prayſe, to ſaye welle of a man.
            
               Benedicus, a man wel tunged, or fayre ſpoken.
            
               Benefacio, cere, to do well.
            
               Benefacta, benefites, pleaſures.
            
               Benefactum, it is well done.
            
               Beneficentia, is not onely liberalitie in gyuing of money, or poſſeſſiōs, or other like thinges, but alſo in helpyng a man with counſell, ſollicitation, or other labour.
            
               Beneficiarij, were they whyche in the warres were not charged with watche or other labours pertaynyng to the field or hoſte.
            
               Beneficiariꝰ, he that receiueth a benefit or good tourne of an other.
            
               Beneficiarius fundus,
               Alciat. in cōmen. de uerb. ſign. lande gyuen in fee ſymple or fee tayle to be holden of the donour by ſome ſeruice.
            
               Beneficium, a benefyt, a pleſure, or good turne.
            
               Beneficus, he that is beneficiall or lyberall.
            
               Beneuolens, beneuolente, he that loueth welle an other.
            
               Beneuolentia, fauour, or good wyll, an intent to doo well.
            
               Beneuolus, fauourable.
            
               Benignè, an aduerbe, whyche ſygnifieth curteyſly, graciouſely, bounteouſely.
            
               Benignitas, bounteouſnes, curteſye, lyberalytie, gentylneſſe
            
               Benignus, a, um, gentyll, benygne, and bounteouſe, or lyberall.
            
               Benigna terra, a grounde that is fertyle.
            
               Beo, aui, are, to comfort, to make happy.
            
               Berecynthia, called the mother of goddis.
            
               Bercynthus, a mountayn and towne in Phrigia, where Cybele was worſhypped, wherof ſhe was namyd Berecynthia.
            
            
               Berengarius, was the name of an heretycke, whyche affyrmed, that in the ſacramente of the aultare was not the very body of Chriſte in the ſubſtaunce of fleſhe and bloudde, but onely in a ſygne and figure. He was a french man borne, and of lytell lernyng, ſauyng that he was a ſubtyll logician. Afterwarde he dyd recant. And in the counſayle of Lateranens his errour was condempned, the yere of our lorde 1082.
            
               Berilus, is a precious ſtone in facion as it were ſyxe ſquare, in colour like oyle or water in the ſea. His properties are to make theym that do weare hym mery, it conſerueth and increſeth the loue betwene man and wyfe. If it be hanged aboute ones necke, it putteth awaye dreames, it cureth diſeaſes of the throte and chekes, and all thoſe whyche come of moyſtnes of the head. It helpeth women, whiche do trauayle with chylde.
            
               Berſabë, a citie in Iudea, callid alſo Puteus iuramenti, the pytte of the othe, where Abraham dwellyd, whiche is the confynes of the lande of beheſte.
            
               Bes, beſsis, a weight of .viii. ounces.
            
               Beſtia, a beaſte.
            
               Beſtiarij, men which in olde tyme fought with beaſtes in the ſyght of the people.
            
               Beta, an herbe callyd betis. therof commeth a verbe betiſare, whiche ſignifieth to be vnſauery in communication or writing. Eraſ. chil. And men vnſauery or vnwitty were in ſcorn callyd Betae. Laert. de Diogene.
            
            
               Bethania, a towne two miles from Hieruſalem on the ſyde of the mount Olyuete.
            
               Bethaſij, people dwellyng aboute the towne of Maſtreyghte, within the dioceſſe of Luke in Germany.
            
               Bethel, a citie in Samaria, where the people dwellyd, whyche were callyd Iebuſaei.
            
            
               Bethleem, the cite of Dauid the prophet, wher he was borne and dyed, where alſo our ſauiour Chriſte Ieſu was borne, there alſo dyed Rachel the wyfe of Iacob the patriarche: it was aſſigned to the tribe of Iuda, and was dyſtant from Hieruſalem .vi. myles, and was fyrſt callyd Euphrata, and ſignifyeth in the hebrue tounge, The houſe of breade.
            
               Bethſaida, or Betheſda, was a greate ponde in Hieruſalem, wherin the prieſtes waſſhed the ſhepe, whiche ſhulde be ſacrificed, and maye be interpreted, The houſe of cattelle. it was alſo the name of a towne, where Peter and Philyp the apoſtles were borne.
            
               Bethſamis, a cytie in Galile, where Chriſt dyd many myracles.
            
               Bethſamitae, people of Bethſamis.
            
               Bethſura, & Bethſurae, a ſtrong fortreſſe of the Iewes.
            
               Beto, to walke forthe.
            
               Betonica, an herbe callyd Betayne, whiche is hote and dry in the fyrſte degree, and hath innumerable vertues.
            
                
               Betonica alti
                     •
                  lis, ſiue coronaria, I ſuppoſe it to be gylofers.
            
               Betphage, a towne in Iudea, and maye be interpreted the houſe of a mouth or a iawe.
            
               Bettere, a towne callyd Beſics in Guyen.
            
               Betula, a tree callyd byrche.
         
         
            ¶B ANTE I.
            
               BIAEON, wheate, whyche is harde to be beaten out of the huſkes.
            
               Bias Priencus, was one of the ſeuen wiſe men of Grece, who beholdynge his countreye gotten with enemies, fledde. And other men, carieng with theym ſuche of their goodes as they mought bere, he toke with him nothing. And whan it was demanded of hym, why he dyd ſo, he anſwered: Truly I cary al my goodes with me, meaning vertue and doctrine, reputyng the goodes of fortuue not to be his.
            
               Bibaculus, he that drinketh often.
            
               Bibax, acis, biboſus, a great drynker.
            
               Bibiſia, bybbynge.
            
               Biblia, the wyfe of Duilius the Romayn, whiche was of ſo great chaſtitie, that ſhe was at that tyme an example, whan it was a thynge monſtrous to here of vnchaſtitie.
            
               Biblio, blere, to make a ſowne as a pot dothe, whan drynke is drawen into it.
            
               Bibliographus, a wryter of bokes.
            
               Bibliopola, a ſtacioner, or a bokeſeller.
            
               Bibliotheca, a lybrary.
            Bibo, bibi, bere, to drynke.
            
            
               Bibitur.
               Ci. in. Ver 
                     •
                  ct. 3. 
               Mature uemunt, diſcumbitur, fit ſermo inter eos, & inuitatio, ut graeco more biberetur: They come at the tyme appoynted, and there was amonge theym talkynge and quaftyng, that euery man mought drynke after the Grekes facion.
            
               Bibractae, people of a countraye callid Beuray Dautume.
            
               Bibrax, a towne in Fraunce in the countye of Rochel callyd Bray.
            
               Bibulus, a, um, that ſucketh vp ſhortly.
            
               Biceps, cipitis, that whiche hath two heddes.
            
               Biclinium, a chamber with two beddes.
            
               Bicornium, that whiche hath two hornes.
            
               Bicorpus, that whiche hath two bodies.
            
               Bicurgium, a citie in Almayn callyd Herfford.
            
               Bidental, a place where they vſed to ſacrifyce ſhepe, whanne any houſe was bournyd with lyghtnynge.
            
               Bidentes, ſheepe with .ii. teeth, callyd in ſome place hogrelles, or hogattes.
            
               Biducenſes, people, of Normandy.
            
               Biduum, the ſpace of .ii. dayes.
            
               Biennis, ne, any thynge of .ii. yeres olde.
            
               Biennium, the ſpace of two yeres.
            
               Bifariam, in .ii. partes, or .ii. maner of ways.
            
               Bifarie, the ſame.
            
               Bifera arbor, that beareth twyſe in a yere.
            
               Bifidus, clefte.
            
               Bifores, that hath two doores.
            
               Bifrons, that hath two forheades.
            
               Bifur, a double thiefe, or he that hathe ſtollen twyſe.
            Bifurcatus, a, um, double forked.
            
            
               Biga, a carte drawen with two horſes.
            
               Bigamus, he that hath had two wyues.
            
               Bigenera, beaſtes comen of two ſundry kindes, as betwene a dogge and a wolfe, or betwene an aſſe and a mare, and ſuche lyke.
            
               Biiugi, cattell or beaſtes, yoked two togither.
            
               Bilanx, ancis, a beame with two balances.
            
               Bilbilis, a towne in Spayne.
            
               Bilibris, bre, wayeng two poundes.
            
               Bilinguis, dooble tongued.
            
               Bilioſus, he that is cholerike.
            
               Bilis, without any addition, mooſte commonly ſignifieth choler.
            Bilis atra, melancoly.
            
            
               Bilis flaua, choler mixt with fleume.
            
               Bilis rubea, choler mixte with bloudde, or redde choler.
            
               Bimaritus, he that hath had two wyues.
            
               Bimembris, of .ii. partes, hauing .ii. membres.
            
               Bimeſtris, two monthes olde, or two yere, accompted of the moone.
            
               Bimulus, of two yeres age.
            
               Bimus, of two yeres.
            Binus, a, um, two, idem quod duo.
            
               Binae litterae, two letters.
            
               Bini tabellarij, two meſſangers.
            
               Bina iuga boum, two yoke of oxen.
            
               Binarius numerus, the number of two.
            
               Binominus, & binominis, he that hathe two names.
            
               Bion, the name of a philoſopher.
            
               Biothanatus, he that is violently ſlayne.
            
               Bipalium, a mattocke with two bittes.
            
               Bipara, ſhe that hath had .ii. byrthes.
            
               Bipatens, open on bothe ſydes.
            
               Bipennis, hauyng two wynges, alſo a twybyll wherwith carpēters do make their mortaiſis.
            
               Biponnella, an herbe callid Pympernell.
            
               Bipertior, iris, iri, to diuide in two partes.
            
               Bipedalis, & bipedaneus, two foote longe or brodde.
            
               Bipes, pedis, hauyng two fete.
            
               Biremes, ſhyppes whyche haue two raunges of oores.
            
               Bis, twyſe, Bis ter
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , ones or twyſe.
            Bis deni, twenty.
            
            
               Bis tanto, twyſe as moche.
            
               Biſaltae, a people in Scithia.
            
               Biſellium, a ſeate or fourme, wheron two men only may ſytte.
            
               Biſextus, one day added to, in foure yeres.
            
                
               Biſextilis annus, the leape yere.
            
               Biſon, tis, a beaſte hauynge one horne, and a very longe mane.
            
               Biſtonia, the countray called Thracia.
            
               Biſtonis, a citie, and alſo a great mere or pole in the countrey of Thrace.
            Biſulcus, a, um, clouen foted.
            
            
               Bithymum, hony gathered by the bees of two ſortes of tyme.
            
               Bithynia, a royalme in Aſia, whiche nowe the Turke hath, on the Northe it hath the ſea called Ponticum, on the Southe Miſia and Phrigia.
            
               Bithynium, a citie in Bithynia.
            
               Bitumen, a kynde of naturall lyme, whereof the olde walles of the citie of Babylon were made.
            
               Bituminatus, a, um, of the lyme or claye called Bitumen.
            
            
               Biturges, Bourges in Fraunce.
            
               Biuium, awaye hauynge two pathes.
            
               Biuius, a, um, done two ſundry wayes.
            
               Bizen, a Citie of Thracia, of Pliny called Bizian.
            
         
         
            B ANTE L.
            
               BLANDA, a towne in Spayn called Blanes, they be alſo delectable thinges in readynge.
            
               Blande, an aduerbe ſignifienge, with fayre or pleaſaunt wordes, graciouſely, amorouſely, flatteryngely.
            
               Blandimentū, thynge pleſantly done or ſpoken
            
               Blanditia, flatterye, pleaſaunt motion, intiſement by wordes.
            
               Blandicus, he that flattereth.
            
               Blandidicus,
               Plaut. in Trinum. a fayre ſpeaker or flatterer.
            
               Blandi loquentulus, a pleaſaunt ſpeaker.
            
               Blandior, iris, iri, to flatter, to ſpeke fayre for aduauntage.
            
               Blanditiae, flatterynge, fayre ſpeche.
            
               Blandus, a, um, flatterynge, or fayre ſpoken, pleaſaunte.
            
               Blapſigonia, loſſe of generation, properlye in bees.
            
               Blaſphemia, curſynge, reprochynge, commonly blaſphemy. whiche is nowe onely referred to the deſpite of god.
            
               Blaſphemo, aui, are, to curſe, to reproche, to ſpeke in the derogatiō or deſpyte of an other.
            
               Blatero, onis, a bablar, he that talketh to no purpoſe.
            
               Blatero, aui, are, to bable in vayne, and from the purpoſe.
            
               Blatio, iui, ire, to ſpeake or talke lyke a foole, or without any purpoſe or reaſon, to bable.
            
               Blatta, is properly the longe flye, that fleeth in the leame of a candell, and is of the kynde of mothes. It is alſo a ſylke worme.
            
               Blattaria, an herbe callyd Moleyn.
            Blatteus, a, um, purple.
            
            
               Veſtis blattea, a purple garment.
            
               Blax, ſofte, delycate, wanton, that can not decaerne thynges, and he whyche vaynely boſteth hym ſelfe.
            
               Blemmiae, monſtruous people in India, which haue none head, but theyr eyes and mouthe be in their breaſtes.
            
               Blepharo, onis, he that hath great browes.
            
               Bleptae, a people in Aphrike, which haue their vyſages in theyr breaſtes.
            
               Blaeſus, he that ſtammereth, omyttynge ſome letters in ſpeakynge.
            Blitteus, a, um, vnſauery.
            
            
               Blittea meretrix, an vnſauery queane.
            
               Blittus, an herbe beinge of the kynde of bietes, hauynge no ſent.
            
               Blitum, an herbe callyd ſpynache.
         
         
            ¶B ANTE O.
            
               BOA, a ſerpent in Italy, ſo great & large that on a tyme whanne one was kylde, there was a chyld all hole founde in his bealy,Plinl
                     ••
                   cap. 
                     ••
                  
                as Pliny writeth. Boa is alſo a ſyekenes, wherin the body is ful of redde blyſters.
            
               Boalia, playes made for the healthe of oxen and kyen.
            
               Boaria, an herbe callyd a clote or burre.
            
               Boarium forum, the market place where oxen be ſolde.
            
               Boca, uel Bocas, a fyſhe whiche hath his back as it were paynted with ſundry colours. Iouius ſayth and affyrmeth, that he is taken in all coſtes in great ſculles, not withſtandyng I do not yet fynde his name in englyſhe.
            
               Boces, callyd of Theodorus Bocae, is a fyſſhe, that onely hath a voyce, whiche mought ſeme to be dogfyſhe, whiche is ſayde dothe make a noyſe lyke the barkynge of a dogge, after he is taken.
            
               Bocchyris, a mans name.
            
               Bodellium, a kynd of ſwete ſmellyng gumme.
            
               Boebis, a lake in Theſſaly.
            
               Boēmia, is a royalme callyd Beame, incloſyd with the boundes of Germany, hauynge on the eaſte Hungary, on the ſouthe Bauier, on the weſte, the countreye callyd Noricum, on the northeaſte Polonia or Poole. It is equall in length and in bredthe, eche of them beyng about thre dayes iourney. And is enuyroned with the famous foreſte callyd Sylua Hercynia, and through the myddell therof paſſethe the greate ryuer callyd Albis, and an nother ryuer namyd Multania, vppon the ryuage whereof is ſette the pryncipall cytie namyd Braga or Praga. The language there is not
 duche, but the ſlauoin tungue: not withſtandynge in the churches 
                  〈◊〉
                people art taughte in the duche tunge, in the church yardes they are taughte in the beame tunge. They varye from the catholyke faythe, in ſundry opinyons, and do ſkorne all ceremonies. In ſome places there they pryuyly obſerue the ſecte of the Adamites and Waldenſes in the acte of lecherye. whereof is wrytten in the wordes Adamitae & Vualdenſes.
            
            
               Boeodurum, a Citie in Almayne, nowe called Patauia or Paſſaw.
            
               Boeotia, a countrey in Greece, wherin was the citie of Thebes: nowe it is called Vandalia.
            
            
               Bogud, a towne in Affryke: alſo the name of a kynge.
            
               Boiae, gyues or fetters.
            
               Boij, people of Burbon in Fraunce, and Bauiar in Almayne.
            
               Boletus, a muſhrom.
            
               Bolis, idis, a darte with wyld fyre. alſo a plū
               met and lyne wherwith ſhypmen doo ſounde in the ſea, to fynde lande.
            
               Bolus, a maſſe or lumpe of mettal or other like thynge. alſo a throwe or caſte at dyſe. alſo a draughte with a net in waters. It is alſo a morſell.
            
               Bombax,
               Plautus. an aduerbe ſpoken of hym, that ſetteth naught by that whiche is ſpoken, as one wolde ſaye, whan he is rebuked of a faulte. And what than? or tuſhe, I care not for that.
            
               Bombitatio, the noyes that bees make.
            
               Bombus, a great ſowne or noyſe, as it were of a trumpe, or gunne, a bounce.
            
               Bombix, icis, a ſylke worme.
            Bombycinus, a, um, of ſylke.
            
            
               Bombycina ueſtis, a garment of ſylke.
            
               Bomolochus, a common ſcoffar, or he that ſuſteyneth all villany for to get money. It was alſo taken for a boye, that ſtode at the altars ende, to ſtele away the candels.
            
               Bona dea, was ſhe that ſome called Farua, or fauna, of whom: Varro wryteth, that in her lyfe neuer man dyd ſe her, nor harde her named, but onely her huſbande.
            
               Bona caduca, the goodes of them that be damned, goodes eſcheted.
            
               Bona praedia, the goodes whiche be lyable to euery action.
            
               Bonaria, caulmnes of the ſea.
            
               Bonaſus, is a beaſte in fourme lyke a bull, but broder and ſhorter, and hath a mane lyke an horſe downe to the ſhulders, but the heare is ſofter, and commeth downe to his eyes: the heare of his body is lyke a bryght ſorrell, his mane is darker couloured. The fleſhe of him is pleaſaunte in eatinge, and therfore he is hunted, but he runneth continually vntill he be wery, and in his runnynge flyngeth, and ſhoteth forthe his ſharde and dunge thre furlonge from hym, as Plinius writeth.
            
               Bonitas, goodnes, honeſtie, and iuſtyce.
            
               Bonum, good, whiche is contrary to ylle.
            
               Bonus, a good man. alſo beneuolent, peaſyble, lyberal, playne, eaſy to ſpeake to, worſhypful, treatable, mercyfull.
            
               Bona dicere, to report well.
            
               Bona fide dicere,
               Terent. in Andria. to ſay truely and playnely.
            
               Bona pars, the more part.
            
               Bona uenia, By your lycence, Noo diſpleaſure to you.
            
               Bona uerba quaeſo, ſay well I pray you.
            
               Bonae aedes, a ſubſtancyall houſe.
            
               Bonae fidei poſſeſſor, a feoffee of truſt.
            
               Boni conſulas, take it in good parte.
            
               Boni frugi, honeſt, of good conditions.
            
               Bona ualetudo, good helthe.
            
               Bonae notae uinum, wyne of a good ſorte.
            
               Bonae fidei emptor, he that meaneth good faythe, in byenge, intendynge no deceyte.
            
               Bonus horas male collocare, to looſe tyme, whyche mought haue ben better ſpent.
            
               Bonis auibus, of good lucke.
            
               Bono animo eſſe, to be of good chere.
            
               Bono animo dicere aut facere, to ſpeake or do a thynge for a good intent.
            
               Bono ingenio eſſe, to be debonayre.
            
               Bono publico facere, to doo it for the commune weale.
            
               Boo, as, are, to belowe lyke a cowe.
            
               Boōtes, a ſterre, which folowith Charles wain
            
               Borbetomagus, or Vormatia, a towne callyd Wormes in Almayne.
            
               Boreae, Iaſper ſtones.
            
               Boreas, the northeſterne wynde.
            
               Boreus polus, the northeſterre callyd the lode ſterre.
            
               Borith, an herbe that fullers vſe.
            
               Borſyrites, a kynde of olyue hauynge manye boughes, white and ſpotted with ſanguyne.
            
               Boryſthenes, a greatte ryuer in the countreye of Scithia.
            
               Bos, bouis, a rother beeſt, be it bul, oxe, or cow.
            ❀Bos in lingua, A prouerbe touchyng them whiche dare not ſpeake the truthe, or wyl not for bicauſe they haue receiued money to hold theyr peace.
            
               Boſphorus, the name of a part of the ſea, whiche lyeth in two ſundry coſtes, one by Conſtā
               tinople, the other more northe.
            
               Boſra, a citie of Idumea.
            
               Boſtar, an oxe houſe.
            
               Boſtrychites, a preciouſe ſtone lyke to womennes heare.
            
               Botrys, or botrus, a cluſter of grapes.
            
               Botrytes, a precious ſtone, like to a black grape
            
               Botuli, they whiche haue moche bloud.
            
               Botulus, or botellus, a puddynge made of the
 inwarde of a rother beaſte.
            
               Botytillus, a lyttell cluſter of grapes.
            
               Bouatim, lyke an oxe.
            
               Bouicida, a ſlauter man.
            
               Bouile, an oxe ſtall.
            
               Bouillae, arum, a towne not far from Rome.
            
               Bouillus, a, um, belonginge to neate.
            
               Bouinator, he that with greatte noyſe cryeth out on an other man.
            
               Bouinor, aris, to belowe out lyke a cowe.
         
         
            B ANTE R.
            
               BRABEVTA, & Brabeutes, he that is ordeyned iudge in any game of wraſtelinge, runninge, or leapynge.
            
               Bracca, that kynde of mantell, whiche nowe commeth out of Ireland, or a longe garmēt made of roughe friſe.
            
               Braccharij, the makers of ſuche clothe.
            
               Brachiale, the wreſtbone of the hande.
            
               Brachialia, bracelettes, whiche ſome gentyll men and gentylwomen doo vſe aboute theyr armes.
            
               Brachiatus, that whiche lyke an arme, holdeth any thinge vp, a prop, or ſhore.
            
               Brachicatalecton, where one ſyllable lacketh at the ende of a verſe.
            
               Brachicatalecticum carmen, a verſe lacking one ſyllable or mo.
            
               Brachium, an arme.
            
               Brachylogia, ſhortneſſe of ſpeche.
            
               Bracmanae, philoſophers of Inde.
            
               Bractea, thyn plates of metal, horne, or wood.
            
               Bractearius, a worker of plates.
            
               Bracteator, the ſame.
            
               Bracteola, lyttell plates or aglettes.
            
               Bracara Auguſta, a towne called Briga in Spayne.
            
               Bragada, a ryuer nere to Vtica in Affrica.
            
               Branchiae, the gilles of a fiſhe.
            
               Branchos, the reume or catarre, which falleth downe by the chekes.
            
               Brannouites, people of a countrey in Fraunce, called Le vafe de Moriane.
            
               Braſsica, colewurtes.
            
               Brauium, or Brabium, the rewarde for wraſtlinge, runninge, or leaping, commonly called the chiefe game.
            
               Brauum, the citie of Burgus in Spayne.
            
               Breno, a capitayne or leader of the frenchmen called Galli, whiche builded Verona, a citie of Venice.
            
               Brephotrophia, an hospitall, where chyldren be kepte and nouriſhed.
            
               Breue, ſhortely.
            
               Breuia, places in the water where oone maye wade.
            
               Breuiculus, a lyttell ſhorte man.
            
               Breuiloquium, a ſhorte fourme of ſpeakynge.
            
               Breuiloquentia, the ſame.
            
               Breuiloquus, he that ſpeaketh his mynde in fewe wordes.
            
               Breuiarium, a bridgment.
            
               Breuitas, ſhortneſſe.
            Breuis, breue, ſhorte.
            
            
               Breui poſtea, ſone after.
            
               Breuiori ſumma emere, to bye at a leſſe pryce.
            
               Breuiſsima terra, a lyttell grounde.
            Breuiter, ſhortly. Breue. idem. quickely.
            
            
               Briarêus, a gyant, whiche was of an exceding greatneſſe.
            
               Brigantes, were auncient people in the northe parte of Englande.
            
               Brigantium, a Citie in Galitia called Compoſtella.
            
            
               Britanica, an herbe lyke great ſorrell, but blacker, thycker, and therewith moſy, the roote blacke and lyttell, and in taſtynge ſtrayneth the tunge.
            
               Britania, is the moſte noble yle of the worlde, wherin be conteyned both countreis Englād and Scotlande: It lyeth frome Germania weſt, from Fraunce and Spayne, weſte and northeweſt.Plin. li. 4. The fourme therof is lyke a triangle, and as ſome haue wrytten, lyke the blade of a gleyue. the lengthe is extended into the Northe, to the furthermoſte parte of Scotlande called Calidonia, whiche Plinius, Solinus, and Martianus doo agree, to be eight hundred myles. alſo in breade, after Martianus,Mart. li. 6. thre hundred myles: accompting them Italion myles, whiche be not ſo moche as our Englyſſhe myles. The dyſtaunce betwene this yle and Calays ſandes, called of Plinius Geſſoriacum, in Gallia, where the narroweſte paſſage is betwene bothe countreys, is. 50. Italion myles, after the ſame Pliny, it is nowe geſſed to be lyttell aboue xxx. englyſhe myles. Of the fyrſte occaſion of the name of this yle there is not yet found any certayne determination, for as moche as there remaineth not any autentique, and ancient hiſtory, makynge therof remembrance, the olde bookes of the Britonnes (ſuche as were) beinge all deſtroyed by the Saxons, who indeuored them ſelfe to extincte vtterlye the honourable renoume, with the name of Britons: Lyke as the Gothes delt with the Romaynes. Alſo the parte of Titus Liuius, where the conqueſt of Britain is remembred with the hiſtories of Iulius Ruſticus, & dyuerſe other noble wrytars, who wrate ſpecially of this countray, are vtterlye peryſſhed. They whiche do remayne, as the Commentaries of Iulius Caeſar, Cornelius Tacitus, Diodorus Siculus, and they whiche wrate of coſmography, haue omytted the origynall
 begynninge of the name. The hyſtorye of Gildas the Briton, canne not be founde, who not withſtanding was after that the Saxons had inuaded this realm: and therfore mought lack ſuche bokes as mought beſt inſtructe him. And as for Beda, a vertuouſe and ryght well lerned man, ſemeth to haue ſeene nothynge wrytten of that matter. For where he ſaythe, that this yle toke the name of Britania, of the inhabytauntes of Britania in Fraunce, it is nothynge lyke to be true: for that countrey not verye longe afore the tyme of Beda was named Armorica & Armoricus tractus: at whiche tyme, & long before, this yle was called of the moſt aunciēt wrytars Britania: and as Solinus wryteth, ſemed to be an other worlde, for as moche as the weſt coſt of Gallia was thoughte to be the vttermoſte boundes of this worlde. Alſo Iulius Ceſar wryteth,Caeſ. li 5. that the places of this yle were vnknowen to frenche men, ſauynge to a fewe marchauntes, and yet they noo farther knewe than the ſea cooſte towarde Fraunce. Moreouer the ſame Britons inhabitantes of this yle dyd affirme, that it was lefte amonge them in remembraunce, that the innermooſte parte of the countray was inhabited of theym, whiche had theyr fyrſte begynnynge in the ſame yle. This well conſydered, with the aucthoritye of the wrytar, who was bothe an excellent prince and alſo a great lerned man, and beinge hym ſelfe in this yle, it is not to be douted, but that he moſte diligently ſerched for the true knowelege of the auncienty therof. And if he mought haue founden, that the inhabitantes had come of the ſtocke of Aeneas, of the whiche progeny he hym ſelfe came, he wolde haue reioyced not a lyttell therat, for the proweſſe and valyaunte courage, whiche he hym ſelfe commended in them. Moreouer, that the name began of Brutus, whome our wrytars haue of theyr owne heades ymagined to haue diſcended from Aeneas the Troyane, it is no more lykelye, than that this yle was called Albion of Diocleciās daughter, or of whyte rockes, whereof I haue before writen, & that for dyuerſe cauſes. Firſte all the olde latine hiſtoriens do agree, that the ſon of Syluius, whiche was the ſeconde in ſucceſſion from Aeneas, and of theym named the ſonne of Aſcanius, was Aeneas called alſo Syluius. whervnto the Greekes doo alſo accorde, but that they name Syluius to be brother to Aſcanius, and borne after the deathe of Aeneas: and therfore was called Poſtumus. but neyther the Romayns, nor the Grekes do writ of any man called Brutus, eyther ſonne of Aſcanius, or any other afore Iunius Brutus, whiche expelled kynge Tarquinus oute of Rome: whiche name was alſo gyuen to hym in deryſion by the ſonnes of Tarquine, bycauſe he ſeemed to theym folyſhe and dull wytted. Moreouer there is ſo moche diuerſitie betwene Britania and Brutus, that it ſemeth vnlykelye and agaynſte reaſon, that the one ſhulde procede of the other. For if Brutus had ben the gyuer of the fyrſte name to this yle, he wold haue called it Brutia, or Brutica, rather than Britania, whiche hath noo maner of proportion or analogie with Brutus. But now, as I haue done in the worde Albion, ſo wyll I here declare a reaſonable cauſe of coniecture, why this yle was named Britania. About .xxx. yeres paſſed, it hapned in wildſhere at a place called Yuy churche, diſtant about .ii. myles from the Citie of Sariſbury, as men were digginge to make a fundation, they founde an holowe ſtone faſt keuered with a nother ſtone, whiche beinge broken there was in it a booke hauynge lyttell aboue xx. leues (as they ſayd) of very thyck velome, wherin was ſome thyng wrytten: but whan it was ſhewed to pryeſtes and chanons, whiche were there at that tyme, they coulde not reade it: wherfore after that they had toſſed it from one to another (by the meane whereof it was torne) they dyd neglect it, and dyd caſt it a ſide. Long tyme after a piece therof hapned to come to my handes, not with ſtandinge that it was alſo rent and defaced, which I ſhewed and delyuered to maiſter Richarde Pace, than chiefe ſecretary to the kynges moſte royall maieſtye, wherof he excedyngly reioyced. but bycauſe it was partly rente, partely defaced, and bloryd with weate, whiche had fallen on it, he coulde not fynde any one ſentence perfyte. Not withſtandynge after longe beholdynge of it, he ſhewed me, that it ſeemed, that the ſayde boke cō
               teyned ſome auncient monumente of this yle, & that he perceiued, that the word Prytania was there put for Britaniae: but at that time he ſaid no more to me. Afterwarde I gyuynge moche ſtudy and diligence to the reading of hyſtories, conſyderynge wherof the worde Britania firſte came, fyndinge that all the yles in this part of the Oceane were callid Britaniae, after my firſt coniecture of Albion, the ſayde olde wrytynge was reuiued in my remembrance, and by chāce fynding in Suidas (whom I than vnderſtod) that Prytania in greke, with a circūflexid aſpiration dothe ſignifie mettalles, fayres or martes, alſo reuenues belongynge to the commune treaſour, I than conceyued this opinion, That whan the Greekes flouriſhed in wiſedome and proweſſe, and were mooſte experte in ſaylynge, and being ones entred into our Ocean ſea, had founden in the yles there great plenty of tyme, leade, yron, braſſe, and in dyuerſe places golde & ſyluer in great quantitie, wherof there came vnto the comune treaſores of theyr cities yerely great reuenues, they called all thoſe yles by
 this generall name Prytania,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . ſignifienge the place, by that whiche came out of it, as one wolde ſaye, that he wente to the mart, whan he goeth to And warp or Barowe: or to the fayre, whan he goeth to Sturbrige, or to his reuenues, whan he goeth to any place, oute of the which his reuenues do come. And yet bicauſe this yle excelled all the other in euery condition, it was of ſome priuatelye called Olbion, that is to ſay, more happy or richer, as I haue before wrytten, This is myne onely coniecture, whiche doth nerer approche to a true ſimilitude, than the other inuentions, excepte there be any aunciente hyſtorye, I mean before the tyme of Geffraye of Monemouthe or Beda, whiche can more probably confute that whiche I haue declared: and to ſuche wyll I gladdely gyue place. Fynally I haue alwaye thought and yet doo, that it is more honourable vnto this countrey, to haue receyued his fyrſt name by ſuche occaſion as I haue reherſed, and the generation of the inhabitauntes therof, to be eyther equall with the moſte aunciente, or myxte with the moſte wyſe and valyaunte people of Greece, vainquiſſhours and ſubduars of Troyanes: than to take the name and fyrſte generation, eyther of a vayne fable, or of a man (if any ſuche were) whiche after he had ſlayne his father, wandred about the worlde, vncertayne where to dwell. Alſo to aduaunte vs to come of the Troianes, cauſours of the deſtruction of theyr owne countreye, by fauourynge the 
                  •
               uoutry of Paris and Helene, of whom neuer proceded any other notable monumente, but that they were alſo breakers of theyr oth and promyſe. And yet this foly is founde allmoſte in all people, that euery of them do contende, to haue theyr progenitours come firſt out of Troy, the whiche fantaſy among wiſe men, maye be well laughed at. The fayth of Chryſte was fyrſte receyued in this yle after the incarnation of Chriſt. 156. yeres.
            
               Britannus, & Brito, a man of that countrey.
            
               Brixia, Breſſa, a citie in Italy.
            
               Bromus, one of the names of Bacchus.
            
               Bronchoſcele,
               Galen. in diffin. a ſwellynge by the cheeke.
            
               Bronchus, is he that hath the nether iawe farther out, than the ouer iawe.
            Brochus. idem.
            
               Bronteus, the ſurname of Iupiter.
            
               Bruchus, a flye, whiche eatethe corne as it groweth.
            
               Bruma, wynter.
            
               Brumalis, le, belongynge to wynter.
            
               Brunci, they whiche haue tut mouthes.
            
               Brunduſium, a citie in the realme of Naples.
            
               Brupeo, ere, olde wryters vſed for ſtupeo, pére, to be abaſhed.
            
               Bruſcum, a bunche or knur in a tree, ſpecially in boxe.
            
               Bruſeum, an herbour or hedge made with thornes and briers wounde together.
            
               Brutij, people in the royalme of Naples, ioynynge to Sicile.
            
               Brutus, dul and groſſe wytted lyke to a beaſte.
            
               Bryon thalaſsion, or marinum, a thinge growyng on the rockes, wheron the ſalte water beateth, ſomwhat lyke to moſſe, and is called of the northern men, ſlawke.
            
               Bryonia, a wylde vyne, which groweth in hedges, and hath red beryes, the iuyce wherof touchinge the ſkyn, wyll cauſe it to blyſter. ſome do call it Bryony.
            
               Bryſſo, aui, are, to bruiſe out.
         
         
            B ANTE V.
            
               BVA, the worde of yong chyldren, whā they aſke for drynke: with vs they vſe to ſaye bumme.
            
               Bubalus, a beaſte called a bugill.
            
               Bubaſtis, a citie in Egypte.
            
               Bubinda, Slane in Irelande.
            
               Bubile, an oxe houſe.
            
               Bubo, a ſhriche oule. alſo a botche.
            
               Bubonium,
               Dioſ
                     •
                  . an herb, ſome call it Aſter atticus, ſome Inguinali,
               Plini. whiche hath a lyttell ſtalke harde, a purple or yelowe floure, on the top lyke to chamomyle, and hath a knap with lit tell leaues, in fourme of a ſterre. aboute the ſtalke are ſome leaues, ſomwhat long: it groweth amonge ſtones in a roughe grounde.
            
               Bubonocele, where the bowell is braſte by the ſhare of a man, towarde his priuy members
            
               Bubſequa, a cowe herde.
            
               Bubula, beofe.
            
               Bubulcito, as, to playe the herde man.
            
               Bubulcus, a herde man.
            
               Bubulus, a, um, that whiche longeth to an oxe or cowe, as Lac bubulum, cowe mylke.
            
               Bucardia, a ſtone lyke to a bugles harte.
            
               Bucca, the holoweneſſe of the cheke.
            
               Buccea, a morſell.
            
               Buccella, the ſame.
            
               Buccellatum, breade called biſket.
            
               Buccina, a trumpet.
            
               Buccinator, a blower in a trumpet, a ſpreader of fame.
            
               Buccino, aui, are, to blowe a trumpet, or ſette forthe a mannes prayſe or diſpraiſe.
            
               Buccinum, the ſowne of a trumpet. it is alſo a ſhell ſuche as be made at ſayncte Cornelys, wherin one maye blowe as in a trumpet,
            
               Buccones, they whiche haue great chekes.
            Bucculenti, idem,
            
               Buccula, a lyttell cheke alſo that part of a helmet, wherby wind is taken. alſo a hekfare.
            
                
               Bucculus, a ſteere, or bullocke.
            
               Bucea, a thyn huſke in a bean within the hull.
            
               Bucentaurus, a great ſhyp or carrike.
            
               Bucentes, ſtinginge gnattes.
            
               Bucentrum, a pricke of a gode.
            
               Bucephalus, was an horſe, whiche wolde nat ſuffer any other perſon to come on his backe, but only the great kyng Alexander: on whom he ſyttinge, dyd meruaylous battaylles, and eſcaped wonderfull dangers. And fynaly beinge. xxx. yeres olde, not by woundes, but onely by extreme labours and ſondry bruiſes, at the laſt died. Ouer whom Alexander builded a citie, and called it Bucephala, by the horſes name, in India, where Alexāder vainquiſhed Porum. Bucephalus ſignifieth alſo an oxe head.
            
               Bucera armenta, herdes of neate.
            
               Bucerum paecus, an herde of rother beaſtes.
            Buceras, fenugraecum, fengreke.
            
            
               Bucheides, an herbe hauynge leaues and floures lyke to Satyrion, but it hath two rootes lyke vnto two handes, and in the leaues are blacke ſpottes.
            
               Bucolica, herdes of nete.
            
               Bucolicus, a, um, perteyninge to the kepynge of bullockes.
            
               Bucolicum carmen, a poeme made of herde men.
            
               Bucolus, an herde man that kepeth bullockes.
            
               Budoris, a citie in Almayn called Heydelbergh, belonging to the Palſgraue or coūt palatine.
            
               Bufo, onis, a tode.
            
               Bugloſſa, or Bugloſſos, an herbe called borage which although in frenche it ſignifieth langue du buef, & ſo do we cal a common herbe: yet by the deſcription of olde wryters it ſemeth not to be that herbe, but rather that whiche is called Borage.
            
               Bugones, bees.
            
               Bulapatham, an herbe called pacience.
            Bubine, nes, ſcalions.
            
            
               Bulbito, aui, are, to caſte durte on one: properly it is of chyldren, which nouriſſes do name cackynge.
            
               Bulboſus, a, um, hauynge lyttel round heades in the rootes.
            
               Bulbus, is taken generally for euery roote that is rounde, as an onyon or turnepe.
            ❀Bulbos quaerit, he looketh for onyons. & prouerb applyed to them, whiche behold the ground as they go.
            
               Bulenta, one of the co
                  •
               nſaylours of a citie.
            
               Bulga, a male of lether, wherein clothes be caried.
            
               Buli,
               Cael. lect. ant. bowelles.
            
               Bulimia, great famine or hunger. It alſo ſignyfieth the hungrye ſyckenes called Apperitus caninus.
            
            
               Bulis, a name of a citie.
            
               Bulla, a tablet or other thynge hanged aboute ones necke, properly whan it is holow. A buble of water. ſōtime the head of a naile other whyles ſtuddes in gyrdels or other thynges.
            
               Bullatus, he that is garniſhed with tablettis or ſtuddes.
            
               Bullatae nugae,
               Eras. chil. auauntinges or boſtinges, or elles a vayne clatteryng, wherin is no ſubſtantiall ſentence.
            
               Bullare, to buble, as water whan it boyleth.
            
               Bullio, iui, ire, to boyle or ſeeth.
            
               Bullula, a lyttell water bell, or boble.
            
               Bumaſtos, a great teate.
            
               Bumelia, a kynde of aſhe.
            
               Buphonum, an herbe, whereof if cattell eate, they do dye of a griefe in theyr throte.
            
               Buphthalmon, an herbe, called alſo Cotula fe tida, and is lyke to comomyl, but it groweth more vpright, maywede.
            
               Bupina, great thyrſte.
            
               Bupodes, great fete.
            
               Bupreſtis, a fly lyke to a blacke bytell, but he hath lengar legges, whiche if a beaſte dothe eate, he ſwelleth, and therwith dyeth.
            
               Bura, or Buris, the hynder parte of a ploughe whiche is croked.
            
               Burbarus, a fyſhe, which by the deſcription of Paulus Iouius, ſemeth to be a carpe.
            
               Burcana, an yle in the Occean of Germanye.
            
               Burdigala, Burdeaux in Gaſcoigne.
            
               Burdo, onis, a mulet.
            
               Burgundia, Burgoyne.
            
               Burrum, a depe red colour.
            
               Buſicon, a great fyg.
            
               Buſtiarij, ſworde players, which fought at the burnynge or buryeng of one.
            
               Buſtum, a place where deade bodyes haue ben brente.
            
               Buſyris, a tyrant, which was kynge of Aegypt who fed his horſes with mennes fleſhe, and was ſlayne at the laſt by Hercules.
            
               Buteo, a kynde of haukes whiche hath three ſtones, a buſſarde.
            
               Buthyſia, was called a great ſacrifice, ſuch as Hecatumbe is.
            
               Buttubata, a trifle of no value.
            
               Butyrum, butter.
            
               Buxentum, a towne that the Greekes calle Pyxunta.
            
               Buxeta, a place where boxe trees growe.
            Buxeus, a, um, of boxe.
            
            
               Boxus, or Buſſus, a boxe tree.
         
         
            B ANTE Y.
            
               BYRSA, a hyde of a beaſt.
            
               Byrſeus, a tanner or cordyner.
            
               Byſsinus, a, um, of fyne lynen.
            
                
               Byſsina uerba, wordes, wherin is a magnificent eloquence, expreſſyng an authoritye. Paryſates mother to the kinges, Cyrus and Antaxerxes vſed to ſaye:Plutarch. that he that wolde ſpeake to a kynge boldely,Apopth. muſt haue wordes lyke to fyne threde. In latine more properlye Verba byſsina.
            
            
               Byſsus, a maner of fyne flaxe or lynnen.
            
               Byzantium, a Citie of Thrace, nowe called Conſtantinople, whiche was ſomtyme builded by a kyng of Spartane, called Pauſania, wherof the people and inhabitauntes were called Byzantii, Afterwarde it was augmented by Conſtantine the Emperour, and was the chyefe and head of al the empire oriental.
            
               Byzari, fantaſticall men, and of ſtraunge inuentions.
         
         
            C ANTE A.
            
               
                  C BY HYM SELFE ſignifieth Caius, the proper name of a manne, and therfore is ioined with an other name, as C. Iul. Caeſar, Caius Iulius Caeſar. Cl. ſignifieth Claudius. Cabala, a tradition of the ſewes, lefte amonge them by Moyſes without wrytyng, but from the father to his ſon, and ſo continually in theyr generation, wherin is included the vnderſtandynge as well of the ſecretes of nature, as the miſticall ſence, included in the wordes of holy ſcripture.
            
               Cabaeſi,
               Cael. meaſures that can not be fylled.
            
               Caballi, people of Aſia.
            
               Caballinus, a, um, perteyninge to an horſe.
            
               Caballinus fons, the riuer called alſo Helicon, about the whiche ryuer was the moſte commune haunt of the .ix. muſes.
            
               Caballus, a horſe. yet in ſome partes of Englād they do call an horſe a cable.
            
               Cabus, a meaſure of the Hebrewes, conteyning two ſextarios and a halfe .vi. ounces, and. 3. drammes of Athenes meaſure, which amunteth to foure pounde, thre ounces, and three drammes.
            
               Cabyle, a citie in Thracia.
            
               Cabyria, a citie of the lower Aſia, althoughe Cabyrii be people in India.
            
               Cacabus, a pot or cauldron, wherin meate is ſodden.
            
               Cacabo, as, are, to call lyke a partriche.
            
               Cacadêmon, an yll ſpirite. A dyuell which ſtirreth a man to do euyll. ſometyme it is taken for yll fortune.
            
               Cacalia, an herbe called wylde carwayes.
            
               Cacaturio, to deſyre to go to the ſtole.
            
               Cachexia, a ſpice of a conſumption, which procedeth of an yll diſpoſition of the bodye, and the body and vyſage is therwith very leane, and yll coloured.
            
               Cachinnatio, a great laughter.
            
               Cachinnor, aris, ari, to laughe immoderately, and with a loude voyce.
            
               Cachinnus, a ſcorne, or a loude laughter in deriſion.
            
               Cachinnos commouere, to make menne to laughe.
            
               Cachinnum ſuſtollere, to laughe oute of meaſure.
            
               Cachrys, a rounde thyng growyng on an oke, whiche I ſuppoſe to be that which is called an oke appull.
            
               Cacia, vicioſity, or that whiche we commonly do call, a faute in a thynge.
            Caco, aui, are, to ſhyte.
            
            
               Cacoblepa, a lyttel beſt in Egypt in the bankes of the ryuer of Nylus, whiche hath ſuch venenoſitie in his eyen, that who that beholdeth hym, dyeth incontinent.
            
               Cacochexia, an yll habite or deformitie of the body, cauſed by ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Cacochymia, yll digeſtion, or rather yll iuyce gathered in the condutes of the bodye, for lacke of perfyt digeſtion.
            
               Cacoêthe, a vyce or ſore ingendred in one from his infancy, harde to be recouered or cured.
            
               Cacologia, yll ſpeche.
            
               Cacologus, an yll ſpeaker.
            
               Cacophaton, is an yll fourme of ſpenkyng, or where the wordes do not ſowne wel and conueniently.
            
               Cacoſyntheton, an yl or defourmed cōpoſitiō.
            
               Cacozelus, an yll folower or imitatour.
            
               Cacula, a page.
            
               Cacumen, the top of an hyll.
            
               Cacummatus, a, um, with a ſharpe top.
            
               Cacus, a gyant whom Hercules ſlewe in Italy
            
               Cadauer, eris, a deade body, or carrayne.
            
               Cadere, to happen.
            
               Cadere cauſa, to be nonſuite in an action
            
               Cadere formula, idem.
            
            
               Cadmaea uictoria. A prouerbe applyed to that victory, wherof enſueth more harme thā good, or that it were better to leſe thanne to get. Rede hereof in Chil. Eraſmi.
            
            
               Cadiſcus, a veſſell, whereinto are gathered ſcedules, bylles, or lottes, where thynges are done by a conſene of many counſaylours, or of the people.
            
               Cadiuus, a, um, that whiche falleth by it ſelfe.
            
               Cadiua folia, leaues fallen down by thē ſelf.
            
               Cadiua poma, appuls whiche do fall dowe without violence.
            
               Cadmites, a ſtone which hath lyttel blue ſparkes about it.
            
                
               Cadmia, the owre of braſſe.
            
               Cadmus, the name of a pryuce, ſonne of Agenor, and brother to Europa, who buylded Thebes, and brought out of Phoenicia in to Greece ſixtene letters, and founde out the fuſynge and caſtynge of mettalles. There was an other Cadmus, whiche was the firſt that euer wrate in proſe.
            
               Cado,
               Plaut. in Amphit. 
               cecidi, dere, to fall, to dye, to the ſlayn.
            
               Cadit illi animus, his harte or courage fayleth, or is abated.
            
               Cadere in deliberationem, to come to communication.
            
               Cadit ſolutio in diem calende, the payment was the fyrſte daye of the moneth.
            
               Caduarij, men hauynge the fallynge euyll.
            
               Caduca, thynges that wyll ſhortely peryſhe or decay, olde writers vſed them for ſignifications of that whiche ſhulde happen.
            
               Caduceator, an ambaſſatour or herault at armes, ſente to demaunde peace, or to take a truſe.
            
               Caduceus, & Caduceum, a rodde whiche poetes ſuppoſed, that Mercury bare in his hād in token of peace, as meſſanger of Iupiter.
            
               Caduci,
               Vergil. 7. they whiche are deceſſed.
            
               Caducor, ceris, duci, to be ouerthrowen.
            
               Caducus, a, um, fallynge, decayenge.
            
               Caduca haereditas,
               Cic. in Phil. an inheritaunce whiche is fallen in excheate, for lacke of heyres.
            
               Caducae literae,
               Plinius. letters whiche wyll be ſhortly put out, blynde letters.
            
               Caduci tituli,
               Plini. in pan. honours and dignities, which endure but a lyttell whyle.
            
               Caducus labor, lobor loſt.
            
               Caducus morbus, the fallynge euyll.
            
               Cadulae guttae, drypinge of roſt meate.
            
               Cadurcenſes, Cahors in Fraunce.
            
               Cadurcum, a keuerlede of lynnen, mooſt properly a quylt.
            
               Cadus, a wyne veſſell, it maye be taken for a pype. It alſo contayneth the ſame meaſure that Amphora dothe.
            
               Caea, an yle in the ſea called Aegeum. It is alſo called Coa, where ſilke wurmes were fyrſt founde. The countreye of Hyppocrates the prynce of phiſitions.
            
               Caebus, an ape with a tayle, we maye take it to be a munkay.
            
               Caeca dies, oculata dies, the day whā the money is payed, and the daye whanne it is not payd.Plautus in Pſeud. 
               Eme die caeca hercle oleum, id uendito oculata die. Bye not that day that the money is payde and layde out, but promiſing it at a day, ſell it agayne whan the moneye is brought forthe. Eraſ. Chil. Alſo the ciuile lawiars do call thoſe days and wytneſſes, whiche only be certified by them that are abſent, Caecas dies, & Caeca teſtimonia.
            
            
               Caecias, the eaſte northeſt wynde.
            
               Caecigeni, they whiche are borne blynde.
            
               Caecilia, a ſlowe worme that is blynde.
            
               Caecitas,
               Lucre. 2. blindnes, not onely of the bodely eies, but alſo of the mynde,
            
               Caeculto, aui, are, to haue a dym ſyght.
            
               Caeco, aui, are, to make blynde.
            
               Caecus, a, um, blynde, alſo darke.
            
               Caeca ueſtigia, where one maye not ſe his way that he rydeth or goeth.
            
               Caeci haemorroides, emeraudes or pyles, whiche are within the fundemente, and doo not appere.
            
               Caeci morbi, ſyckneſſes which be not apparant, the cauſes where of be hid frō phiſitions
            
               Caecum inteſtinum, is a bowell, which commeth from the ryghte ſyde, at the poynte of the huckle bone, and goeth to the lefte ſyde in length, and is alſo called Monoculus.
            
            
               Caecum uallum, a trenche, whiche in tyme of warre is pight priuily with ſharpe ſtakes whiche are hyd with brakes or buſhes.
            ❀Caecus caeco dux, one blynde man leadeth an other. A prouerbe ſignifienge, one ignorant perſon to teache an other vnlerned. One fole to gyue an other foole counſayle.
            
               Caecutio, iui, ire, to ſee but lyttell, to be halfe blynde.
            
               Caedes, deathe, ſlaughter or murder.
            
               Caedem facere, to kyll, to make a ſlaughter.
            
               Caedo, dis, caecidi, caedere, to beate or whyp, to cut,Vergil. to ſtryke, to kyl, to breake. Somtyme to ſacrifice. Caedunt binas de more bidentes: Accordynge to the cuſtome they ſacrifyced two hoggrelles.
            
               Caedere calcibus, to kycke.
            
               Caedere ianuam ſaxis, to breake the doore with ſtones.
            
               Caeditur teſtibus,
               Cic. ad Q fratrem. he is conuict by wytnes.
            
               Caedua ſylua, wodes vſed to be cut, Copeyſes.
            
               Caelebs, he or ſhe that is vnmaryed.
            
               Caelibatus, the ſtate vnmaryed.
            Caelebs uita, idem.
            
               Caementarij, daubers, pargetters, rough maſons, whiche do make onely walles.
            Caementitius, a, um, of morter.
            
            
               Caementum, morter, or any other groſſe matter, wherwith walles be made.
            
               Caene, a citie.
            
               Caeneus, the ſurname of Iupiter.
            
               Caepe, an oynion.
            
               Caepi, the preterperfette tenſe of Capio, I haue taken.
            
               Caepula, a chybboll.
            
               Caera, waxe.
            
               Caeratum, a ſeared clothe.
            
               Caeratura, the waxinge.
            
               Caere, were writing tables couered with wax.
            
               Caerefolium, an herbe called cheruyll.
            
                
               Caereolus, a ſyze candell.
            
               Caeremoniae, ceremonies.
            
               Caerete, an auncient citie in Tuſcana.
            
               Caereus, a taper, or waxe candell.
            
               Caereus, a, um, of waxe. Alſo fat or tydy.
            
               Caerinthe, thre leued graſſe, whiche bryngethe forth white hony ſuckels, called cliuer graſſe.
            
               Caeris, a ſor
                  •
                lyke an hony combe.
            
               Caero, aui, are, to laye waxe on any thynge.
            
               Caeroferarij, they whiche do beare candels in the churche before the croſſe in proceſſion, or do any lyke ſeruice in the churche.
            
               Caeroferarium, a candell ſtycke, where vpon tapers are ſet.
            
               Caeroma, & Caeromatum, an oyntment made with oyle and netes dunge, wherewith men that wraſtled, vſed to anoynte theyr bodyes, to make them the more delyuer and ſtronge. Alſo it ſignifieth the place where wraſtlers were annoynted.
            
               Caeroſus, a, um, that whiche is myxte with waxe.
            Caerulus, a, um, & Caeruleus, a, um, blewe of colour.
            
            
               Caeſa, a weapon, ſomtyme vſed in Fraunce. It is alſo a parte of an oration, not concludinge a ſentenſe, as it were a piece of a ſentence.
            ❀Inter caeſa & porrecta,
               Eraſ. chil. betwen the cutting and the gyuynge. A prouerbe ſignifienge tarienge and doutyng what to do, & as it were the ſpace betwene leauing of from the thinge whiche is begun, and the begynnyng of that whiche is newely enterpriſed.
            
               Caeſar, the emperour: it was the ſurname of a noble houſe of the Romaynes, of whome came Iulius Caeſar, the fyrſte Emperour of Rome.
            
               Caeſarea, a citie of the countrey of Paleſtina.
            
               Caeſar Auguſta, a citie in the realme of Arrogon, called Sarragoſa.
            
            
               Caeſareus, a, um, perteynyng to the emperour
            
               Caeſaries, heare, or a buſhe of heare.
            
               Caeſenna, a citie in Italy.
            
               Caeſim, edglynge, or with the edge.
            
               Caeſim dicere, to ſpeake nowe one word and than an other.
            
               Caeſio, a ſtrype.
            
               Caeſitium, a ſhete, a cleane napkyn or handekerchefe.
            
               Caeſius, graye of colour or blunkette. Alſo he whiche hath grey cyen.
            
               Caeſones, they whiche be cutte out of the mothers or dammes bealyes.
            
               Caeſpes, Caeſpitis, a turfe.
            
               Caeſpitius, a, um, made of turfes.
            Caeſpito, aui, are, to ſtumble.
            
            
               Caeſtrum, a lyttell towre.
            
               Caeſtrum, is alſo an inſtrument, wherwith Iuory was bored. Alſo a weapō like a dagger.
            
               Caeſtus, tus, a weapon hauynge greate plummets hangynge at it.
            
               Caeſtus, ſti, a gyrdell or corſe, whiche the huſbande dyd put about his wife, whan he was maryed, and at nyght dyd plucke it of.
            
               Caeſuliae, they whiche haue blewe eyes.
            
               Caeſura, a cut, a garſe, an inciſion. alſo intaylynge, or caruynge in ſtone, or tymber. Alſo a piece as it were cut of from the remenaunte, properly of a verſe.
            
               Caeſuratim, briefely, ſuccinetly.
            
               Caeſus, ſlayne.
            
               Caeter, cae
                     •
                  era, rum, the remenaunt or reſidu.
            
               Caetera doctus,
               Cic. de 
                     ••
                  
                  tura de
                     •
                  
                  rum. lerned in other thinges.
            
               Caeteróquin, or elles.
            
               Caeterum, & Caetera, be aduerbes ſignifyeng ſomtyme moreouer, ſomtime from henſforth: ſomtyme Caeterum is a coniunction, and ſignifieth ſed, but.
            Caeus, uel Cous, a, um, of the yle called Caeauel Coa.
            
               Caffrani, althoughe it be neyther greke nor latine, nor haue not bene knowen but of late yeres: yet for as moch as in the chartes and hiſtories of the newe found countreyes, that worde is frequente, I wyll therfore declare what it ſignifieth. Caffrani, be that ſorte of Idolatres dwellynge in Inde the more, whiche do wurſhyp dyuelles in moſte terryble fygure, beleuynge that they are permytted of god to puniſhe or ſpare men at theyr pleſure. wherfore vnto theym they do ſacryfice theyr chyldren, and ſometyme theyr ſelfes: They haue many wyues, but they companye not with them, vntyll that they be defloured by other, hyred to that purpoſe. Alſo they lette theyr prieſtes to knowe carnally theyr wiues with them, whan they be abſente. They haue bulles and kyne in great reuerence, all be it they neuer eate fleſhe, but theyr ſuſtinance is ryce, ſugar, dyuerſe ſwete rootes, and doo drynke the lycour whiche commeth of rype dates. Reade more hereof in Calecute and India.
            
               Caiani, were heretykes, whiche worſhypped Cain, ſayinge: that he was made of the one vertue or power, that is to ſaye of the dyuel, and Abell of the other, and that the vertue of Cain preuayled ſo, that he ſlewe Abel. They alſo do ſaye, that Iudas was a godly man, and that his act was a benefyt to mankind: for he perceyuynge howe moche the paſſion of Chriſte ſhoulde auayle, delyuered hym to the Iewes, that by his deathe, man mought be redemed. They alſo affirmed, that the old lawe was naughte, and denyed the generall reſurrection.
            
               Cain,
               Philo. was the fyrſte ſon of Adam, who had to wyfe his owne ſuſter, whiche of Philo is named
 Themech, and was the firſte that buylded cities. And for enuy that he hadde to his brother Abell and malyce, he ſlew hym. wherfore being in deſperation he continually wandred, and his body trembled. fynally he was ſlayne by Lamech, whan he was of the age of. 730. yeres, after Philo.
            
               Caius, a proper name of a man.
            
               Caycus, the name of a ryuer in Phrigia.
            
               Cala, a byllette.
            
               Calabra, a conuocation place, where matters concernyng deuotion were treated.
            Calaber, bra, brum, of Calaber.
            
            
               Calabria, a coūtrey ioining to Naples, callid before Meſſapia, & afterwarde magna Graecia.
            
            
               Caladrius, a byrde.
            
               Calae, arum, a citie in India.
            
               Calagurium, a towne in Biſkay.
            
               Calamarium, a pennar.
            
               Calamintha, an herbe, of the which ar .iii. kyndes, the one hath leues like to great baſyl, but that they be hore, & hath ſquare ſtalkes, with many knottes or iointes, and that now is callyd cōmonly calamynte. The other is lyke to penyroial or puliole roial, but that the leaues ar greatter,Dioſc. and that is cōmonly callyd wyld peny royal.Conſtant. The thirde groweth hygher than any of the other, & hath a larger leafe lyke to wyld mint, & hath a yelow floure, & is cōmonly callid nep or cat mynte, bicauſe that cartes do delyte to rubbe them ſelues againſt it, and eate of the braunches. All the thre kyndes be hotte and dry in the thirde degree.
            
               Calamitae, lyttell grene frogges.
            
               Calamitas, generall diſtruction, or myſery.
            
               Calamitoſe, myſerably.
            
               Calamitoſus, myſerable, or full of aduerſitie.
            
               Calamiſtrum, a pin of wod or yuory, wherwith men & women do ſet or trym vp theyr heare.
            
               Calamus, a rede, or wheat ſtraw▪ alſo a pen▪ it is alſo takē for a pipe or whiſtel▪ alſo a fiſhing rodde, and a twyg, wheron byrd lyme is put. Alſo ſmal branches of trees, alſo it is a pole to mete with, conteining ſix cubites and a ſpan, a mete pole. it is alſo a meſure, which the Iewes vſed, as we do a pole, but there was of it two ſortes, one was callid Calamus ſanctuarij, whiche conteyned .x. fete, and a halfe, the other was callyd Calamus uulgaris, or the common pole or perche, whiche conteyned ix. fete, of our meaſure thre yardes.
            
               Calamus aromaticus, uel odoratus, is a cane or rede growyng in Arabia, Syria, & India, which hath many knots or ioyntes, & is of a pale red colour▪ whan it is broken, it fallith in to longe pieces as it were cut, & hath within it lyke vnto copwebbes.Dioſcori. It ſendeth forth of it a meruaylous ſwete ſauour far of,Conſtaut. & being taſted,
                  
                     •
                  fer. it cleaueth to the tunge, and ſtrayneth it.
            It is hote and dry in the ſeconde degree.
            
               Calantica, a tyre or burlet for a woman.
            
               Calanus, a philoſopher of Inde, whiche in the preſence of the great Alexander, being of the age of .73. yeres, felyng hym ſelfe ſycke, made a bonefyre, and went into the toppe thereof, and burnyd hym felfe.
            
               Calaris, a citie in Sardinia.
            
               Calaſter, tri, he that hath a ſhyll & loude voice.
            
               Calaſtri pueri, were children, whiche hadde ſharp voyces and loude,Vitruuius. & were moch ſought for of great princis.
            
               Calathis, the name of a citie.
            
               Calathus, a baſket or hamper.
            
               Calatores, ſeruauntes, whyche were alwaye callyd for.
            Calcaneus, & calcaneum, the heele.
            
            
               Calcar, a ſpurre.
            
               Calcar addere, to ſpurre. It is vſed for a prouerbe, ſignifienge to pricke one forwarde, whiche is of hym ſelf wel diſpoſed to a thing.
            
               Calcaria fornax, a lyme pyt, or kylle.
            
               Calcarius, a lyme bourner.
            
               Calcata, a houſe whiche is pargeted.
            
               Calcatus, a, um, pargetted or white lymed.
            
               Calceamen, & calciamentum, a ſhowe, pynſon, or ſocke.
            
               Calcearium, a ſhowmakers ſhop, alſo a ſhow.
            Calceatus, tus, idem.
            Calceatus, a, um, ſhodde.
            
            
               Calceo, aui, are, to putte on ſhoen, to ſhowe an horſe or mule.
            
               Calceolarius, a ſhowemaker.
            
               Calceus, a ſhowe.
            
               Calceus lunatus, a ſhowe faſſhyoned before lyke a moone, whiche only the Senatours of Rome dyd weare.
            
               Calcitro, aui, are, to kyche or wynſe.
            
               Calcitro, onis, a horſe that doth flyng or kycke
            
               Calcitroſus, a, um, that oftentymes flyngeth or kycketh.
            
               Calco, aui, are, to treade or preſſe downe.
            
               Calculo, aui, are, to caſt accompt.
            
               Calculoſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , he that is moch diſeſed with the ſton
            
               Calculoſus, a, um, grauelly or ſtony.
            
               Calculoſus locus, a ſtony place.
            
               Calculus, a peble ſtone. alſo the ſtone in the body. alſo a cheſſe man, alſo accompt. alſo the leſt weyghte or poyſe that maye be. Moreouer a knyfe made of a ſtone.
            
               Calculum album deijcere, to approue or allowe a thynge.
            
               Calculum ponere, to yelde accompt.
            
               Calculū permittere uel porrigere, to put it to ones libertie, to gyue a ſentence, or to gyue his voyce in election as he lyſteth.
            
               Calculū reducere, to reuoke a ſentence, wher of one repenteth, or to tourne that purpoſe, whiche was not well or cōmodiouſly diuiſed.
            
                ❀ Calculo mordere,
               Eraſ. chil. A prouerbe ſignifienge to hurt one in giuing a ſentence, or in election
            ❀ Calculum albū addere, to approue a thing. which prouerbe hapned of this occaſion. In the old tyme in iugementes, litell ſtones were put into a potte, ſome white and ſom blacke, whiche the iudges dyd take out of the potte, & if the more parte of the ſtones were white, he that was accuſed, ſhoulde be acquited by iugement. If the more part were blacke, the partie ſhuld be condemned. If the white and the blacke were equall in number, than ſhuld he be acquited.
            
               Caldariae, hotte bathes.
            
               Caldariae cellae,
               Budeus. places ioynynge to an hotte houſe or drye bayn, whiche be made warm by the heate that procedeth from the ſaid bayns.
            
               Caldarium, a cauldron wherin water is hette.
            Caldor, idem quod calor.
            
               Calecut, is a famous citie in Indie the more, ioyning vnto the Indian ſea, where as is the greateſt mart & recours of marchantes that is in all Inde, from the countrayes not onely adioyning, but alſo out of Arabia, Syria, Egypt, Lybia, and Ethiopia, for to ſell and by all maner of ſpices & ſwete gummes, muſke, and ambregriſe, and myrobalanes. The kyng of that countrey is ineſtimable ryche, and althoughe he doo weare no garmentes, yet 
                  〈◊〉
                his neck, armes, and legges be adorned with precious ſtones of wonderfull greatenes and beautie, as with diamādes, ſaphires, rubies, emerauldes, and balaiſes. The king and people be idolaters, callid Caffrani. Alſo they vſe thoſe maners and deteſtable cuſtomes, which I haue before ſpoken of, where I haue wrytten of Caffrani.
            
            
               Calefacio, to make hotte.
            
               Calefio, I am made hotte.
            
               Caleua, a town in Englād, callid Oxford, wher in is the firſt & chiefe vniuerſitie of chriſtendom, flouriſhing in all kyndes of lernyng.
            
               Calendae, the fyrſte day of euery moneth.
            
               Calendarium, a calender, declaryng the dayes of the monthes. it is alſo among the ciuilyan lawyers, as Budeus ſaith, a denial or refuſel to lende money. Not withſtanding by the exā
               ples which he bryngeth, it ſeemeth to me (except I be deceyued) that it ſhuld rather ſignify ſuche a boke as marchauntes vſe to haue, wherin is writen the names of their dettors, with the det, & day whan it was due. The examples be theſe.Vlpianus. 
               Calendarij quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   curatio & quaeſtura in aliqua ciuitate, inter honores nō habetur, The hauynge of the cuſtody & order of the boke, wherin dettes are writen, and the treaſorerſhip in any cite, is not reputed amōg honorable offices.Africanus 
               Ita
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ipſae pecuniae ſi adhuc calendario, id eſt nominibus faciendis deſtinatae eſſent, fidei cōmiſſo cedere ſolēt. More ouer the goodes yf they were aſſygned vnto the calender, that is to ſay, to be lent out for agayn, ar wōt to be left vnto them that ar put in truſt for the performaunce of a wylle. This haue I not written in contempt of Budeus, whom I know to be excellētly lernid in greke & latin, but only to declare myn opiniō, which I wyl be cōtent to chāge whā I here a better.
            
               Calendula, an herb callid ruddes or marygoldes▪
            
            
               Calaenum, a citie in the coūtrey of Naples.
            
               Calent iuditia, the iudges haue moch to do.
            
               Caleo, ui, êre, to be hotte or warme.
            
               Cales, a towne in Fraunce.
            
               Caleſco, to waxe hotte.
            
               Calete, the towne of Calyce.
            
               Calidi pedes, lyght feete.
            Calidus, da, dum, hotte.
            
            
               Caliga, a hoſe, or legge harnayſe.
            
               Caliga Maximini, A prouerbe applied to men of great ſtature and perſonage, and hauyng yl conditions or properties, or be had in contempt or hatred. Which prouerb grew of themperor Maximinus, who being in height viii. fete and an half, his greaues were lōger than any other mans more than one fote, not withſtāding he was of maners barbarous & beaſtly, and extremely hated of all men.
            
               Caligatio, a dymmynge of the ſyght.
            
               Caligatus, hoſed.
            
               Caliginoſus, darke.
            Caligo, ginis, darkenes.
            
            
               Caligo, aui, are, to make darke, or be darke.
            
               Caligare in ſole, to be deceiuid in a plain matter▪
            
            
               Calligante animo, with a blynde imagination.
            
               Caligula, the ſurname of an emperor, callyd alſo Caius, who ſucceded Tiberius themperor and was ſon of the noble Germanicus, & had the name of Caligula gyuen to him by the mē of war, which were with his father, foraſmoche as to allure the loue of the people toward hym, his mother ſomtyme wold ſhewe him to the army, with greaues on his legges, like to the facion of warre, which greaues were named in latin caliga, and bicauſe they were litel, they were by a diminutiue callid caligula whiche the ſouldiors in diſport & reioycinge, applied to his ſurname. This man at the begynnynge of his reigne was of maners right cōmendable, but ſone after he became of conditiōs deteſtable, as wel in lechery as in beaſtly crueltie. Wherof happened this prouerbe. There was neuer a better prince than Caligula at the begynning, nor a wars tyrāt than he at his later ending. Wherby (not withſtā
               ding that at the beginning he was moſt derely beloued of the Senate and people) afterwarde he was ſo deadly hated, that they ſlew him, whan he hadde reygned but four yeres,
 beinge than .xxviii. yeres olde, after the incarnation of Chryſte .xl. yeres.
            
               Calim, olde wryters vſyd for clam, priuily.
            
               Caliphus, was the name of dignitie of the kinges of Egipt, from the yere of our lord .704. vntyl the yere. 1050. At the which time Almericus being kyng of Hieruſalem, and making warre on Egipt, the Calyf ſent vnto the ſouldan of Babylon for ſuccou. 
                  •
               3, whiche ſent an army with one Sarraco, who firſte expellyd the Chriſten men, and afterward dyd caſt the Calyf in priſon, and takynge on hym the rule of Egipte, cauſed hym ſelfe to be callyd ſouldan of Egypt. Caliphus, is alſo the dignitie of him, whiche is the chief byſhoppe of Ma
               
                  •
               hometes lawe.
            
               Calirrohé, the name of .ii. fountaynes, one by Ieruſalem, the water wherof is medicinable and healeth diuers ſykneſſes: An other is by Athenes, whiche fountayn hath .ix. heades.
            
               Caliſthenes, was a noble philoſopher, diſciple of Ariſtotle, whome the greate Alexander for his excellent lerning and wyſedom toke with him whan he went in his conqueſt, & had him in great honour. But afterwarde Alexander imbracyng the pride of the Perſians, and cō
               mandyng the Macedons to honour him proſtrate, after the fourme of the Perſians, and wold be callid the ſonne of Iupiter, Caliſthenes rebuked and diſſuaded hym from that foly. Wherfore Alexander commaunded that his armes and legges ſhuld be cut of, and like wiſe his eares, noſe, and lippes, & to be throwen into a dungeon. Whoſe greuous peynes and deformitie, one Liſymachus a noble man pitieng, gaue to hym poyſon, wherof he died.
            
               Caliſtho, the mother of Archas, whiche gaue the name to the countrey of Archadia, whom poetes fayned to be tranſformed into a beare.
            
               Calix, a cuppe. alſo a pot wherin potage is ſodden. it is alſo the lyttell grene leaues on the toppe of the ſtalke, out of the whiche cometh the floure,Ruellius. and after the ſeedes. it is alſo the ſkynne of an apple or other fruite.
            
               Callaria, a cole whitynge, meane betwene an haddocke and a whitynge.
            
               Callens, wyſe, or perfite in a thynge.
            
               Calleo, ui, ere, to be harde as brawne. alſo to perceyue, to know perfectly by long experiēce
            
               Calleſco, ſcere, to become harde.
            
               Calliblephara, medycynes to make heares to growe in the chekes or browes.
            
               Calliblepharon, a medicine for the eyes, ſpecially whan the eye lyddes do cleaue togyther.
            
               Callide, wyttyly, prudently.
            
               Calliditas, ſlyeneſſe.
            
               Callidum mendatium, a crafty lye.
            
               Callidus, ſlye or crafty, ſometyme wyſe.
            
               Calligonō, an herb cōmonly callid Sāguinaria.
            
               Callimachus, the name of a poete.
            
               Calliope, one of the virgins whiche be named Muſae.
            
            
               Callipaeda, an olde man playeng the boy, being wanton and buſy.
            
               Callipolis, a citie in Thracia.
            
               Callis, a way moche vſyd.
            
               Calliſcere, to waxe harde, proprely in the ſkyn and fleſhe.
            
               Callitrichon, an herbe callyd maydenheare.
            
               Calloſus, thycke ſkynned.
            
               Calloſa ulcera, ſoores hauynge the fleſſhe about them harde.
            
               Callus, brawne, or hardenes of the feete made with goynge.
            
               Callum obducere, to harden, to make to indure labours or peynes.
            ❀Callum ducere, A prouerbe ſignifienge to be longe exerciſed or vſed in any thyng.
            
               Calones, ſhowes of wodde. alſo ſcullyons and boyes, whiche do folow an hoſte to cary baggage, wodde, coles, or other lyke thynges.
            
               Calophanta, a mocker.
            
               Calopodium, a paten, or ſlypper.
            
               Calopus, a beaſte in Syria, whiche with his hornes throweth downe great trees.
            Calor, & caliditas, heate.
            
            Caldor, idem.
            
               Calorificus, a, um, that whiche heateth or maketh a thyng hote or warme.
            Calous, a, um, hotte.
            
            
               Calotechnus, a good workeman.
            
               Calpar, a runne.
            
               Calpae, one of the mountaynes which be callid Hercules pyllers, by the whiche is the paſſage out of the Spanyſhe ſea, into the ſea callyd Mediterraneum. Alſo the name of a citie within the realme of Granado.
            
               Calta, an herbe growynge amonge corne, hauyng a yelowe flowre.
            
               Calthae, is a yelowe flowre lyke to a violet, hauynge many leaues, and a greatte ſauour, it flouryſſheth at the latter ende of ſommer. Ruellius ſuppoſeth 
                  〈◊〉
                be marygouldes, bycauſe it ſpreadeth in Autumne, wherof I meruayle, ſens they be founde here in the begynnynge of ſommer, or ſoone after. Neuer the leſſe I ſuppoſe it to be a kynde of yelowe violettes, which ar callyd hartes eaſe, ſom think it to be a ſtocke gylofer, ſome a wall roſe.
            
               Calthula, a garmēt of the colour of hartes eaſe.
            
               Calua, the ſculle.
            
               Caluaria, the hole head of a man or beaſt, whā the fleſſhe is awaye. It was alſo a common place of buriall. Some men do ſuppoſe, that it was the place where Adam the fyrſte man was buried.
            
               Caluaſter, a man ſomwhat balde.
            
               Calueo, I am balde.
            
                
               Calueſco, to waxe balde.
            
               Calueta, downes or playnes, wheron do grow neyther corne nor trees. They be alſo callyd of Columella, Glabreta.
            
            
               Caluire,
               Alciat. in cōmen. de uerb. ſign. amonge the olde Romaynes ſygnified to deceyue or diſapoynt.
            
               Calumarius porcus, a ſwyne fedde with graines, and ſuche other vyle thynges.
            
               Caluiſius Sabinus, was a very ryche manne in Rome, who had ſo ſmal a remembrance, that ſometyme he forgat the name of Vlyſſes, ſomtyme of Achilles, ſometyme of Priamus, whiche before he knewe as perfectely as chyldren do theyr tutours. Not withſtanding he wold be ſene to be lernyd, wherfore he founde this redy waye, he broughte dyuers ſlaues, of the which one had the warkis of Homer by hart, an other had likewiſe Heſiodum. Likewiſe to euery of the .ix. poetes callid Lyrici, he appointed one ſeruāt to kan them by hart. And whā he had gotten this companye, at ſupper they ſhulde ſytte under the bourde at his fete. Of whom he receyuing verſes, wold oppoſe them whiche ſat with him. Yet ſomtyme he forgat the myddell of the verſe. Not withſtandyng he thoughte that he knewe as moche as any man in his houſe. A mery felowe callyd Satellius perceyuynge his folye, exhortyd hym to wraſtelle, he beinge leane, ſycke, and pale. Than ſayd Caluiſius,Seneca. Howe may I wraſtle, ſens vneth I maye lyue for feblenes? O ſaye not ſo, quod Satellius I pray you, do not you behold what a ſort of tal men ye haue to your ſeruantes? This hiſtorye haue I wrytten as well for the mery concept therof, as alſo that therby men, whiche wolde ſeme wyſe or well lerned, if they haue aboute them ſeruauntes well lerned or wyſe, they them ſelfes lackyng wyſedome and lernynge, may by this tale be warned, that they not withſtanding 
                  〈◊〉
                eſpied and mocked for theyr vayne arrogance.
            Caluities, & caluitium, baldneſſe.
            
            
               Calumnia, a falſe or crafty accuſation.
            
               Calumniator, he that accuſeth or ſueth a man vniuſtely.
            
               Calumnior, aris, ari, to accuſe or ſewe a manne vniuſtely.
            
               Caluo, aui, are, to make balde.
            
               Caluo, ui, êre, to deceyue or diſapoynt.
            
               Caluor, eris, eri, to be diſapoynted.
            
               Caluus, he that is balde.
            ❀Caluum uellis, Thou pluckeſt of heare of a balde mannes head. A prouerbe, where one wold haue any thing of a mā that he lacketh.
            
               Caluus comaus, a bald man with a buſh A prouerbe applyed to theym, whiche ſhewe them ſelues ryche with other mens goodes, or do ſet forthe warkes for theyr owne, whiche other men laboured or deuyſed.
            
               Calx, calcis, maſc. gender, the heele.
            
               Calx, feminine gend, lyme made of ſtones 
                  •
               uened. it is takē ſomtime for the end of a thing.
            
               Calydon, a citie in Greec.
            
               Calydonia ſylua, was a great foreſte in Scotlande, wherein were whyte bulles and kyen, whiche had manes lyke to lyons.
            
               Calypſo, the daughter of Atlas, a nymphe or woman of the ſea.
            
               Calypſos, the name of an yle. alſo of a woman whiche receyued Vlyſſes, whan he eſcaped drownynge.
            
               Calyptra, a womans cappe or bonet.
            
               Camarina, a ſtynkynge herbe, the ayre wherof prouoketh one to vomyte.
            
               Cambalu, is a great citie in the countreye of Cathay, whiche is in circuite .xl. miles, which is ſtrongely wallyd, and hath .xii. gates, In the myddell therof is the palaice of the great Cham or Cane of Cathay, whyche is there called the palaice of Iuſtyce, whiche palaice in circuite contayneth .iiii. myles, and in it be foure great pyllers of fyne golde.
            
               Cambio, iui, ire, to chaunge. In the olde tyme it ſignified to fyght, to begyn a iourney, or to tourne in a iourney.
            
               Camboduum, a citie in Weſtphalia, callyd Monachum and Munchen, whiche late was diſtroyed, bicauſe that the people maynteined the hereſy of the Anabaptiſtes.
            
               Cambyſes, a kyng of Perſia, 
                  〈◊〉
                father of Cyrus. It is alſo the name of a ryuer in the countrey of Hircania.
            
               Camelerij, they whiche do ryde on camelles.
            
               Camelelaſia, a dryuer of camelles.
            
               Camelinus, a, um, of a camell.
            
               Camelus, a beaſt callyd a camell, whiche hath a long necke and a lytel head, and ſom haue on theyr backes two būches like to hillockes, ſome haue but one. They of the countrey of Bactria be hygher thanne horſes, and more ſwyfte,Col. in ſo moche as ſome wyl runne aboue one hundred myles in one day.
            
               Camelus bactriana, is a prouerbe, applyed where one bryngeth forthe a thynge to be meruayled at or feared, whiche in deede is to be contemned and laughed at. Some take it in the maſculine gender for an ancre cable.
            
               Camera, the faulſe roufe of a houſe, ſollar, or chamber, or vault.
            
               Camerare, to make a ſauce roufe of a howſe, or to make a ſollar, or to ſylde, or make a vaulte.
            
               Camerarius, a, um, what ſo euer groweth hanging ouer perches, or on the roufes of houſes Camerata uehicula, chariottes or lytters coueryd with bourdes.
            
               Camerium, a towne of Italy, in the countrey of Picenum.
            
                ❀ Camerinam mouere, is a prouerbe ſpoken to one, ſignifyeng that he hurteth him ſelf, by that thīg that he ſtirith or goth about to haue done. And it proceded of a fen ſo callyd, which beinge dryed vp there hapnyd a great peſtylence, whereof the people adioynynge aſked of Apollo, yf they ſhuld make it dry for euer. Who aunſweryd, Ne moueas camerinam, as he ſhoulde ſay, ſtyre not myſchief to thy ſelf.
            
               Camertes, the inhabitantes of Camerinae, a towne in Sicile.
            
               Camillus, & camilla, was in olde tyme a boye or wenche that ſeruyd the byſhoppe, whan he dyd ſacrifice.
            
               Camillus, was alſo the ſurname of a noble Romayn, whiche was dictatour fiue tymes, and triumphed foure tymes: who was of ſo gentyll a courage towarde his countrey, that not withſtandyng that the people of Rome had expellyd hym, & that he was in exile, yet whā the Galles had taken the citie of Rome with an aſſaulte, and compellyd the Romaynes to redeme theyr heades with golde, he perſwading the people callid Ardeates, with whom he lyued in exyle, to ſuccour the cytie, entred with them or any was ware of his commyng and ſlewe the Galles, and diſcomfyted them, and ſaued or rather reſtored the citie frome bondage. He was before the incarnation of Chriſte. 350. yeres.
            
               Caminatus, a, um, made lyke a ſournays or chymney.
            
               Caminus, a chymney or fournays.
            
               Cammarus, or gammarus, a fyſhe callid a creuyſe, ſpecially of the freſſhe water, a crenyſe deau doulx.
            
               Camoenae, the Muſis.
            
               Camomilla, & camoemêlum, an herbe callyd Camomyll.
            
               Campana, a belle.
            
               Campania, a countray in the royalme of Naples, callyd alſo nowe Terra laboris.
            
            
               Camparius, the keper of the fieldes.
            
               Campe, a worme which eateth herbes, and is rough with may fete, and is callid a palmer
            
               Campeſter, tris, tre, of the playne countrey. Campeſtria loca, playne countrays.
            
               Campigeni milites, thoſe men of warre, whiche be alway about the ſtanderd, and by their proweſſe and actiuitie do kepe the hoſt in exercyſe of armes.
            
               Campſo, aui, are, to tourne an other way.
            
               Campſores, exchaungeours of money, or they whiche delyuer money by vſury.
            
               Campus, a playn fielde great and large.
            
               Campus Martius, a field nigh Rome, and ioynyng to the riuer of Tiber, where the Romanes not only exerciſed them ſelfes in running, leapyng, wraſtlyng, and ſwymmyng, but alſo had there aſſemblies for the election of great offycers in the commune weale.
            
               Camuri boues, oxen or kien with croked horns
            
               Camus, a byt or ſnaffle. alſo a rayne or corde, wherwith men being condemned, were boūd.
            
               Canaan, the ſonne of Cain, ſonne of Noe, of whom commeth Cananaeus.
            
            Canabatius, & canabinus, a, um, of hempe.
            
            
               Canabis, hempe.
            
               Canabus, a wyne ſellar.
            
               Canales, pypes, wherby water dothe runne into a cundyte.
            
               Canaliculus, or canalicula, a lyttell pype.
            
               Canaliculatus, faſhioned lyke a pype.
            
               Canaliculata folia,
               Plinius leaues whiche be holowe & turned round lyke cundite pipes or wafers Canalitium aurum, golde digged in pittes.
            
               Canan, the countrey callyd Arabye.
            
               Cananaea,
               Ioſeph. in antiquit. a part of Siria nowe callid Iudea.
            Cananîtis regis, idem.
            
               Canariae inſulae, are yles in the greate occeane
400. myles from Spayne, whiche ſome ſuppoſe to be thoſe that of the olde wryters are callyd Inſulae fortunatae. The newe names of theym be theſe, Lanzelota, Fortis uentura, Magna canaria, Tenerife, Gomera, Palma, & Ferrea. In theſe yles of late yeres grewe great numbre of canes, wherein was ſugar, but cither by diſtemperance of wette wether, or by conyes, whiche ſome men ſuppoſe were brought thyther, that commoditie is almoſt diſtroyed.
            
               Canarius, a, um, pertaynyng to dogges.
            
               Canatim, an aduerbe, ſignifieng lyke a dogge.
            
               Cancellarius, in the olde tyme was taken for a ſcribe or notary, now it is callyd a chancellor.
            
               Cancellatim, lattiſe wiſe.
            
               Cancelli, lattyſes, or any thynge mude lattyſe wyſe. Alſo ſecrete places to looke out. Alſoo wyndowes made with barres of wodde or yron with dyuerſehooles. Alſo lytell crabbes of the ſea.
            
               Cancello, aui, are, to raſe or put out, to cutte or teare any thynge that is written.
            
               Cancer, cri, a kynd of fyſhe callyd a crabbe alſo a ſygne in heauen.
            
               Cancer, eris, a diſeaſe callyd a canker.
            
               Cancri, is the ſame that cancelli be.
            
               Cancris, a pyll in medicine.
            
               Candax, acis, a queene of Egypt.
            
               Candefacio, cere, to make white.
            
               Candela, a candell.
            
               Candelabrum, a candelſtycke.
            
               Candeo, ui, dêre, to glowe lyke a burning cole. alſo to be white.
            
               Candico, aui, are, to be whyte, or to make whyte.
            
               Candide ueſtitus, trymmely apparayled.
            
               Candoſoccus, a ſea gulle, or a Camoſe.
            
                
               Candidati, were amonge the Romaynes they, whiche laboured for ſome of the great offices in the publike weale, and they were ſo named bycauſe they dyd weare in the tyme of theyr election white apparayl. It may be taken by tranſlation at this tyme for them that in vniuerſities be callyd inceptours or regent maiſters. Alſo for them that be lately chriſtenyd, or newly entred into ſome honorable or worſhypfull ſtate. Vegetius ſaythe, that Candidati were men of warre, whiche had a priuilege before other.
            
               Candidati Caeſaris, were ſuch as ſued for great offices, and were recōmended of the emperor to them which had election. Who preſuming alway that themperors recōmendation ſhuld take place, dyd ſolicite but negligētly, Wherof hapned this prouerbe, Sic petis tan
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   Caeſaris candidatus,
               ❀ Whan any man aſked any thing in ſuch form as he thinketh that no māwyl deny hym. As who ſayth, ye aſke it as if themperor had ſpoken for you. They were alſo callid Candidati principis,
               Budeus. where that facion is vſed may neuer be publik weie perfit.
            
               Candide, gentylly, or eaſyly.
            
               Candido, aui, are, to make whyte.
            
               Candidus, a, um, whyte, more than Albus, orient white. It is ſometymes taken for fortunate, gentyll, or eaſy.
            
               Candidus iudex, a gentyll or eaſy iudge.
            
               Candidus lector, a gentyl reder, which doth not openly reproue that which he readeth.
            
               Candifacio, to make white, to bleache, to make to glowe lyke a burnyng cole.
            
               Candifico, aui, are, to make white.
            
               Candor, oris, brightnes or whitenes.
            
               Canentae, were of the old Romayns named the apparayle pertayning to the head.
            
               Caneo, & caneſco, ſcere, to be hoore, or graye heared.
            
               Canephora, a mayden, which bare on her heed a baſket or coffer, wherein were iewels or ymages of the goddis.
            
               Cangrena, a ſoore callyd a canker.
            
               Cani, be taken for white heares for age.
            
               Canicae, branne, of wheate.
            
               Caniceps, a beaſt, whiche hath onely the face of a dogge.
            
               Canicula, a lyttell dogge or bytche. alſo a ſterre wherof canycular or dogge dayes be named Dies caniculares.
            
            
               Caniculus, a whelpe.
            
               Caninus, doggyſhe, or of a dogge.
            
               Canis, a dogge, a kynd of fyſhe, callid dogfiſh, a play at tables, a ſygne in heauen, whereof there be two ſterres, one called Canis maior, the other Canis minor.
            
            ❀Canis feſtinans caecos aedit catulos, The haſty bytche bryngeth forth blynde whelpes. A prouerbe applied to theym, whiche beynge haſty in ſettyng forth theyr warkes do make them vnperfecte.
            ❀Canis reuerſus ad uomitum,
               Salom
                     ••
                   in pro
                     ••
                  
                The dogge turneth agayn to eate that he vomited. A prouerbe referred to hym,Petrus epiſtola. whiche beinge reconciled vnto god, returneth eftſones to his olde conditions and vices.
            ❀Canina facundia, dogge eloquence. A prouerbe applyed to ſuche as doo neuer exerciſe theyr tunge or penne, but in reprouing or blamynge other men.
            ❀Caninū prandiū, a doggis diner. A prouerb vſed where there is no wyne at dyner or ſupper, for dogges of theyr nature do abhor wine.
            
               Caninus appetitus, is a ſycknes with an vnſatiable appetite to eate.Galen. It procedeth of fyue cauſes, of abundance of melancholy flowing from the ſplene to the mouth of the ſtomack, or of a cold diſtemperance of the ſtomack, or of the louſnes of the body, the poores beinge to open, or of to moche labour reſoluynge, or of the conſumyng of naturall moyſture, wher with the body is nouriſhed.
            
               Caniſtrum, a baſket.
            
               Canities, hooreneſſe, or whitenes of heares. it is ſometyme taken for grauitie.
            
               Canna, a poete, whyche was in the tyme of Martialis.
            
               Canna, a cane or rede: alſo a canne or oyle pot. Alſo a village in the countrey of Galilee.
            
               Cannabis, hempe.
            
               Cannabinus, a, um, made of hempe.
            
               Cannae, arum, a towne in the countrey of Apulia, where a great hooſte of Romaynes was ſlayne by Hanniball.
            
               Cannetum, a place where canes or reedes doo growe.
            
               Cannitiae, thatched houſes.
            
               Cano, cecini, canere, to ſynge, to playe on the ſhalme or other inſtrument. Alſo to prayſe, to propheſye.
            
               Canere claſsicum, uel bellicum, to blowe to the fielde, or to the aſſault.
            
               Canere eandem cantilenam, to tell one tale twyſe, or to recite often tymes one thyng.
            
               Canere fidibus, to play on a harpe, or other inſtrument hauynge ſtrynges.
            
               Canere receptui, to blowe the retraicte in battayle.
            
               Canere ſibi,
               Cicer. de lege agraria. to ſpeake for his owne profyt.
            
               Canere ſibi & muſis, to ſyng or write for his owne pleaſure, and for them that doo fauour hym, nothyng caryng for any other.
            
               Canere ſigna, to blowe whyles men do ſight in battayle.
            
               Canere ſurdis auris, to gyue counſaylle in vayne, to loſe labour in ſpeakynge.
            
               Canon, a rule, alſo the inner parte of a tergate,
 whiche keuereth the hande alſo the reuenues in cuſtoms and fee fermes of townſhyps.
            
               Canonarij, gatherers of taſkes and tallages.
            
               Canonia, the tranſomes in a ſhyppe, whereon the hatches are made.
            
               Canonici, be thoſe ſort of muſitians, which do trye muſyke by raiſon, as the Pythagorians dyd: lyke as Harmonici, iudged by the dilectation of the eares, accordynge to the folowers. of Ariſtoxenus.
            
               Canonium, a place aſſigned to deuout perſons,Coelius antiq. 3. whiche lyued vnder a certayn rule.
            
               Canopicon, is an herbe, whiche is one of the kyndes of ſpurge. Rede more in Pityuſa.
            
            
               Canópus, a ſterre of a meruaylous bryghtnes.
            It was alſo the name of hym, which was maſter of Menelaus ſhyppes, which beyng dead in an yle at the entrye of the ryuer of Nilus, was the cauſe that the yle was called by his name. And he was there honoured for a god, of whom this prety hyſtory is remembred of Suidas, where it hapned, that the people of dyuers countreys contended for the preemynence of theyr goddis, whiche they honored. it was at the laſte agreed, that thoſe ydolles, whiche were vanquyſſhed by any notable experience, ſhulde giue place to the vanquiſher. That perceiuyng an Egyptian prieſt of Canópus, a wytty felowe, he gat a water potte full of ſmalle holes, ſuche as in that countrey ſeruyd to make water to runne pure, and ſtop pynge the holes, and fyllyng it full of water, he paynted it, and made it in the forme of an ydoll, and craftily dyd ſet it in the old image, knowyng that the Caldeys honoryng the fire for God, did cary it about into all countreys, and therwith conſumyd all other ydols, made of mettalle or other mattier. But whan they came to Canópus, and dyd ſet the fyre about hym, the wax wherwith the holes were ſtopped, dyd melt quyckely, and the water diſtillyng into the fyre, quenchyd it. Wherfore Canópus was demed vanquyſher and chiefe of the goddis.
            
               Canor, ôris, melody, loude.
            
               Canoroſus, a, um, full of melody.
            
               Canôrus, a, um, loude or ſhylle.
            
               Canta, olde writers vſed for cantata.
            
            
               Cantabri, people of a countrey in Spayne callyd nowe Biſkay.
            
               Cantatio, a ſyngynge.
            
               Cantator, a ſyngar.
            
               Canterij, be the pieces, whiche do lye vnder a piece of tymber whan it is ſawen, which ſom do call ſtrynges.
            
               Cantherius, a gelding of an hors only. it is alſo the rail of a vine born vp with forkis or poſtes
            
               Cantharia, a ſtone whiche hath the prynte of a blacke flye callyd a byttell.
            
               Cantharis, idis, uel cantharida, ridae, a greene wourme ſhynynge with a gloſſe lyke golde, bred in the toppe of aſhes, whiche layde to a mans bodye, maketh it to blyſter. Some doo ſay that it is a flye keueryd with a ſkale lyke a byttell, but that he is greene.
            
               Cantharus, a pot or a iugge. Alſo a beaſt, wher of there is founde no female. alſo a kynde of fyſhe. alſo the blacke flye callyd the byttell.
            
               Cantherij, gootes.
            
               Cantheriate uineae, vynes rayſed vppon frames or perches.
            
               Cautherium, a maner of a chariot or wagan. alſo a perche or a rayle.
            
               Canthes, organ pipes.
            
               Canthus, is the corner of the eye, as well that whiche is by the noſe, as that whiche is next to the temples. It is alſo the yron, wherwith the extremitie of whecles be bounden, the ſtrake of a carte.
            
               Canticum, a pleaſant or mery ſonge.
            
               Cantilena, is taken of Cicero for a ſpceche or tale commonly or to often vſed, and is of a ſmale effecte.
            
               Cantio, a ſonge.
            
               Cantiuncula, a ſonge of lyght matters.
            
               Cantito, aui, are, to ſynge often.
            
               Canto, aui, are, to ſynge or to charme. ſomtyme to monyſhe or exhort. Haec dies, noctes
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tibi canto,
               Plaut. in Trinum. 
               ut caueas: This I exhorte the daye and nyght, that thou mayſt beware.
            
               Cantus, a ſonge.
            
               Canus, an olde man.
            
               Canus, a, um, gray or hoore.
            
               Cana fides, the faythfulnes of olde tyme.
            Cana ueritas, idem.
            
               Canuſium, a towne in the countrey of Apulia.
            
               Capacitas, aptues to take.
            
               Capax, acis, that taketh or conteyneth anye thynge, able to receyue.
            
               Capax amicitiae, he that conſydereth what belongeth to frendſhyp.
            
               Capêdo, the greatnes of a veſſell, or lyke thing that conteyneth.
            
               Capella, a yonge gote.
            
               Capêna, a towne by Rome.
            
               Caper, a geldyd gote. ſomtyme it is taken for the bucke gote. It alſoo was the name of an olde grammarian.
            
               Capero, qui, to frowne or lowre.
            
               Capeſſo, ſi, fere, to take, or to go about to take, to receyue,Plautus. ſometyme it ſignifieth to bring in.
            
               Capêtus, the name of a kynge.
            
               Caphareus, a mountayne in Grece.
            
               Capharnaum, the chiefe citie in Galilee.
            
               Capidulum, a hoode.
            
               Capillamentum, the heare of a mans headde. ſometyme the toppes of herbes, where the ſedes do growe.
            
                
               Capillatia uela, be clothes of heare.
            
               Capillatus, a, um, that hath heare.
            
               Capillitium, the heare of the head.
            
               Capillo, are, to make heare.
            
               Capillotenus, iuſte to the heare.
            
               Capillus, the heare.
            
               Capillus Veneris, an herbe callid maydenhear
            
               Capio, coepi, capere, to take wyllingely or vnwyllyngly. ſometyme it ſignifieth to delite, to mitigate, to deceyue. Capti dolis, deceyued with cautels. ſomtime to conteyne. Dij boni, quid turbae? aedes noſtri, uix capiunt, Good lorde, what a company? vneth our houſe wyll conteyne them. alſo to make.
            
               Capere rationem, to fynde the meane.
            
               Rationem coepi, ut & amāti obſequerer, & patrem non offenderem, I found the mean to pleaſe my louer, and not withſtandynge I dyſpleaſed not my father. Alſo to knowe the cauſe why.Terent. in Heauton. 
               Scio tibi eſſe hoc grauius multo, ac durius cui fit: uerū ego haud minus aegrè patior id qui neſcio, nec rationem capio, niſi quod tibi bene ex animo uolo. I knowe wel that to you, whom the thynge toucheth, it is moche more diſpleaſant and greuous, but yet it greueth me no leſſe, I can not tell why, but onely bycauſe I loue you.
            
               Capere conditionem, to accept the offre.
            
               Capere fugam, to runne away.
            
               Mente capere, to haue in mynde.
            
               Miſeriam capere, to be in miſerye.
            
               Miſericordiam capere, to haue pitie.
            
               Coepit eum ſatietas, he was wery of it.
            
               Capere ſomnum, to ſleape.
            
               Capere rationem oculis,
               Plaut. in Pſeud. to iudge by ſyght.
            
               Hi loci ſunt at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   hae regiones, quae mihi ab hero ſunt meo demonſtratae, ut ego oculis rationem capio: Theſe are the places and ſtretes that my mayſter ſhewed me, as farre as myne eyes can iudge, or as farre as I can perceyue.
            
               Capere uoluptatem, to delyte.
            
               Capere uerſoriā, to chāge a purpoſe, to turne ſayle, to do the contrary to that he intended.
            
               Capere uſuram corporis uxoris alterius, to cōmyt adultery with an other mans wyfe.Plaut. in Amphit.
            
            
               Capis, dis, a cuppe.
            
               Capiſtro, are, to halter or put on a rope or cord.
            
               Capiſtrum, an haltar.
            
               Capitatio, head ſyluer, or ſubſidye gatheryd of euery man after the rate of his ſubſtance.
            
               Capitale, & capital, an offence puniſhed by deth
            
               Capitale eſt, it is death, or deſerueth deth.
            
               Capitalem fraudem admittere, to do a thynge worthy punyſhement by deathe.
            
               Capitales Triumuiri, iuges in cauſes of deth.
            
               Capitalis noxa, an offence worthy death.
            
               Capitalis aduerſarius, a mortall ennemy.
            
               Capitalis dies, a day appoynted to done to receyue iugement of deathe.
            
               Capitalis homo, a man that deſerueth deathe. alſo that is pro
                  •
               e or redy to murder.
            
               Capitalis ira, mortall wrathe.
            
               Capitalis locus, the place of execution.
            
               Capitaliter, mortally.
            
               Capitatus, a, um, that groweth greate in the heade.
            Capitati caules, cabages.
            
            
               Capite cenſi, were amonge the Romaynes the poore ſorte of the people, whiche were dyſcharged of al exactions, and remayned in the citie onely for generation.
            
               Capitellum, a lyttell heade or top of a thynge. Alſo the hygheſt parte of a pyllar.
            
               Capitium, any thinge that couereth the heade, commonly they do call it a hood.
            
               Capito, onis, he that hath a great heade. alſo heady or obſtinat in opinion. It is alſo a fiſh which by his deſcription, ſemeth to be a cod.
            
               Capitolinus, was the ſurname of hym that founde the heade, whan the capitol ſhulde be buylded.
            
               Capitolium, the palayce of the citie of Rome.
            
               Capitoſus, he that hath a great head or a dull head.
            
               Capitulatum, any thynge that is growen to a heade.
            
               Capitulo, are, to diuide by chapiters.
            
               Capitulum, a lyttell heade, alſo a chapiter.
            
               Capnion, an herbe called fumitory.Plinius li. 26. It is alſo called Capnios.
            
            
               Capo, a fyſhe called a Gurnarde.
            
               Cappa, the name of a greeke letter, for which the latines vſe C.
            
               Cappadocia, a countrey in Aſia, & hath on the ſouth the mountayn called Taurus, & the coū
               trey callid Ciliciā: on the eaſt the countrey of Armeny, & diuers other nations: on the north the ſea called Euxinum: on the weſte Paphlagoniam. and is diuided from Armeny the more with the famous ryuer of Euphrates. In that countreye are bred plentye of excellent good horſes. It was ſomtyme called Alba Siria, for as moche as the people be whyther than they of the other Siria. The people therof are called Cappadoces, whiche were reputed to be of ſo yl conditions, that among the commune people, if one had ben ſene to be of yll facion, they wolde ſaye that he was of Cappadocia. yet not with ſtandynge in that countrey was borne the bleſſed martyre and valiant chriſten knyghte ſainte George, whoſe noble vertues and conſtante faythe is wrytten in the boke of lyfe, and alſo remayneth an immortall example amonge vs. Alſo Baſilius magnus, and Gregorius Nazianzenus, holye byſhoppes and moſte excellente doctours.
            
                
               Cappadox, ocis, a man of the countreye of Cappadocia.
            
               Cpparis, a fruite called Capers, wherewith we do make ſalates and ſauce for mutton, whiche eaten afore meales, be very good for the ſtomake, & agaynſt diſeaſes of the ſplene.
            
               Capra, a gote.
            
               Capraria, an yle in the ſea called Liguſticum.
            
            
               Caprarius, a goteherde.
            
               Caprea, a beaſte whiche dothe ſe wonderfull quickelye. It is alſo a kynde of vines ſo named. Moreouer an yle by Naples.
            
               Capreolus, a kyd. alſo a beaſte called a too. It is alſo the tendrell of a vyne, which windeth dyuerſe wayes, called alſo Pampinus. Alſo a forke to ſet vp a vyne.
            
               Capreus, a, um, that whiche is of a gote.
            
               Capricornus, a ſygne in heauen, conteynynge xx. ſtertes.
            
               Caprificacio, the parynge awaye of the barke of a tree.
            
               Caprificiales dies, the dayes called canicular dayes, whiche were dedicate vnto Vulcanꝰ.
            
               Caprificus,
               Plinius. a wylde fyg tree, whiche runneth vp by walles.
            
               Caprigenus, a, um, that which is of the kind of a gote.
            
               Caprîle, a ſtable or pen where gotes be kepte.
            
               Caprilis, le, of a gote.
            Caprillus, a, um, idem.
            
               Caprimulgi, byrdes lyke to gulles, whiche appere not by daye, but in the nyght they come into gote pennes, and do ſucke the gootes, wherby the vdders of them be mortifyed.
            
               Caprinus, a, um, of a gote.
            
               Capriſans pulſus, is whan the pulſe ſemethe to ryſe,Galen. in definit and ſodeynly is chaunged in to an other fourme of meuynge.
            
               Caproneae, the top or lytel mane, that is in the forhede of a horſe.
            
               Caprótina, a ſurname of Iuno.
            
               Caprunculum, a great veſſell
            
               Capſa, a coffer or cheſte.
            
               Capſaces, a veſſell wherin oyle is kepte.
            
               Capſarius, he that kepeth cheſtes or apparell.
            
               Capſis, for cape ſiuis, take it and thou wylte.
            
               Capſus, a couered carte.
            
               Captatio, a purchaſe, the acte or crafte to get fauour. alſo deceypte or ſubtyltie.
            
               Captator, oris, he that vſeth that crafte.
            
               Captio, onis, the acte of takyng or deceyuing, or that whereby any thyng is taken.
            
               Captioſus, captious, or deceytful.
            
               Captiuncula, the diminutiue of Captio.
            
            
               Captiuitas, captiuitie or bondage.
            
               Captiuus, a pryſoner taken in warres, or a ſlaue.
            
               Capto, aui, are, to get the fauour of one with fayre wordes, pleaſaunt dedes or rewardes, alſo to deceyue or take quyckely.
            
               Captare coenam,
               Martialis. to get a ſupper of fre coſt.
            
               Captare impudicitiae, to ly in awayt, to take one in the acte of lechery.
            
               Captare ſermonem, to harken pryuily what men talke.
            
               Captura, the apprehendyng or gettynge.
            Captus, a, um, taken.
            
            
               Capti oculis, blynde. alſo greatte iouers be callyd Capti.
            
            
               Captus mente, out of his wytte, or madde.
            
               Captus, tus, chaunce, alſo deceyte, perceyuyng of a thynge, or capacitie. Captus hominum, mens capacitie. ſometyme dilectation. Non poſſum adduci, & ſuſcipere è pecunia captum, I may not be brought therto, and take dilectation of the money.
            
               Capua, a citie in the royalme of Naples.
            
               Capula, a cuppe with an handell.
            
               Capularis ſenex, an olde mn redy to be layde in his biere.
            
               Capulum, a rydyng knotte.
            
               Capulus, & capulum, what ſo euer may receiue any thyng into it: properly it is a beere, wher in deade corpſis are borne. alſo the hyltes or handell of a ſworde.
            
               Capus, a capon.
            
               Caput, a head. Alſo the begynnynge of euerye thynge. alſo a chapter of a boke. alſo an author or begynner of a thyng. ſomtyme chiefe, otherwhiles peryll. ſomtyme eſtimation.
            
               Ad capita rerum peruenias, com to the point of the matter.
            
               Capita frumenti & uectigalium, the articles concernynge grayne and reuenues.
            
               Capita rerum expedite, goo quyckely to the principall mattier.
            
               Capite damnatus, condemned to dye.
            
               Capite decernere.
               Cicero. 
               Vtinâ meo ſolum capite decernerem, I wolde god I mought trye it at myn owne peryll.
            
               Siue capite manere res, whan one knoweth not wherof the bruite is ſpronge.
            
               Capitis anquirere, to procede in iugement agaynſt one for treaſon or felony.
            
               Capitis arceſſere, to appeache one of treaſon or felonye.
            
               Capitis diminutio, a condemnation, wherby a man looſeth eyther libertie of his perſone, and is made bonde, or is banyſhed his countrey, or put out of the kynges protection, or renouncyng his owne family, is adopted or taken into another, whiche is not nowe vſed,
            
               Capitis iuditium, proceſſe crimynall.
            
               Caput facere, to gather a ſoore to a head.
            
               Capys, a mans name that buylded Capua.
            
               Carabus, ſeu caramus, a fyſhe callyd a lopſter, lyke to a creuyſe, but that he is greatter, and is redde whan he is alyue.
            
                
               Caraxus, was the brother of Sapphus.
            
               Carba, a wynde that bloweth from the ſouthe
            
               Carbaſus, in plural. Carbaſa, a kynd of lynnen cypres: alſo the ſayle clothe of a ſhyp. It is ſumtyme taken for lynnen clothe.
            Carbaſeus, & Carbaſinus, a, ū, of fyne threde.
            
            
               Carbo, a cole. It was alſo the name of a Romayne.
            ❀Carbone notare, to marke with a cole. It is alſo a prouerbe ſignifienge to condemne a thyng. ſomtyme to take a thyng for yl lucke.
            
               Carbonarius, a colyar.
            
               Carbonarius, a, um, perteynynge to coles.
            
               Carbunculatio, a red wynde, whiche burneth trees.
            
               Carbunculatio in uitibus, is a faute in vines whan the cluſters of grapes ar not ſufficiently couered with leaues, by the which occaſion they be withered and dryed.
            
               Carbunculo, are, to be burned lyke a cole.
            
               Carbunculus, a botche whiche commeth of inflammation. It is alſo a kynde of pretious ſtones, whiche do ſhyne lyke a burnyng cole. Moreouer a defaulte in a vyne, and other trees, wherby they are burned, whiche hapneth about the canicular dayes. Alſo it ſignifieth erthe, wherin is founde blacke ſlat ſtones. Alſo erthe whiche with the heate of the ſon is ſo hot, that it burneth all thynges that be ſowen or ſet in it.
            
               Carcer, eris, a priſon.
            
               Carceres, plural. the place where horſes ſtand whan they runne for prices, and from thenſe do take theyr courſe. wherof commeth a prouerbe. A carceribus ad calcem, from the beginnynge to the ende of an enterpriſe.❀
            
            
               Carcerarius, a, um, of a priſon.
            
               Carchedonius, a kynde of carbuncle ſtones, whiche in the houſe ſeme of purple colour, abrode in the ayre they are fyrye, agaynſte the ſonne they ſende out ſparkes, and if waxe be touched with them, it melteth.
            
               Carcheſium, a ſtandynge cup with handelles.
            
               Carchoquios, a kynde of frogges, hauynge on theyr belies yelowe ſpottes.
            
               Carcina, a citie.
            
               Carcinodes, the cancre in the noſe.
            
               Carcinoma, atis, the eatynge 
                  •
               anker in the ouer partes of the body.
            
               Carcinus, a crab.
            
               Cardamine, an herbe called water creſſis.
            
               Cardamomum, is a ſpyce, which is lyke a ſede ſomewhat longe, the beſte of it is harde to be broken, and ſone perſeth the noſe in ſmellyng in taſte quicke and ſomwhat bytter. In ſtede of this ſpyce, whiche commethe out of Arabia or Indie, they nowe do commonly vſe a ſpice, whiche the apothecaries do call grana Paradiſi, in englyſhe graynes.
            
               Cardiacus morbus,
               Galen
                     ••
                  
                
               uel Cardiaca paſsio, is a ſickeneſſe procedyng of an humour in the celles of the harte.Celſ
                     •••
                  
                if the humour be of bloud or choler,Confr
                     ••
                  
                there is with the tremblynge of the harte an heate alſo, with moche thyrſte, and a depe fetchynge of wynde. if it be of groſſe bloude and melancholy, than is there feare, ſorowe, and dulnes, without thyrſte. Some tyme it hapneth by dymynution of thynges neceſſary to the comfortynge of the harte, as good and ſubſtantiall bloud and clere, commynge frome the lyuer. ſometyme humours ſharpe and prychynge do gather to gether in the ſtomake, and cauſeth that ſickeneſſe. Otherwhiles it hapneth in a feuer, wherin the pacient ſweateth moche: Alſo of the feblenes of the ſtomake, ſpecially where the vaynes are lyttel, the pulſe feble, ſweate oute of due meaſure and tyme, about the ouermoſt parte of the body, the necke and heade, the legges and fete beinge than colde and drye.
            
               Cardinalis, le, chiefe or principal.
            
               Cardineus, the ſame.
            
               Cardinum, an herbe, whiche ſome do ſuppoſe, is creſſis.
            
               Cardo, dinis, the poſte wheron the dore hangeth, and is moued. Alſo a mere or boundes, whiche paſſeth through the fielde, frome the ſouthe to the north. It is alſo the tenon, whiche is put into the mortayſe.
            
               Cardines temporum,
               Plinius. the foure tymes of the yere: Sprynge tyme, Somer, Autumne and Wynter.
            
               Cardo cauſae, the yſſue of the matter.
            
               Cardo rei, the effect of the matter or thyng: the chiefe poynte of the matter.
            
               Cardopos, an huche or coffar, wherin breade is layde
                  •
               n I the northe countreye it is called an arke.
            
               Carduelis, a byrde called a lyuet.
            
               Carduus, a thyſtell.
            
               Care, derely, at a great pryce.
            
               Carex, icis, ſedge that groweth in fen groundes or watry.
            
               Carectum, the place where ſedge doth grow.
            
               Careo, ui, ere, to lacke, properlye thoſe good thynges, whiche ones were had. Somtyme it ſignifieth to be without a thyng: as Careo culpa, I am without faulte.
            
               Careo febre, I am without feuer.
            
               Cares, the name of a keruer, the ſcholer of Lyſippus.
            
               Caria, a region in Aſia, hauynge on the northe ſyd
                  ••
               he great ryuer of Meander, on the weſt the great ſea called Icarius, on the eaſt Licia, and dyuerſe other countreyes, towarde the ſouthe the mountayne of Taurus. The people therof were called Cares, whiche were good men of warre, and therfore they were
 euery where reteyned for ſoudiours, as Suyzars or Suychynars be nowe.
            
               Carica, cae, a drye fyg, ſuch as is eaten in lent.
            
               Carica, lyttell houſes ſet on hyghe places, whiche be ſtronge by the naturall munition of the place.
            
               Caricus, a, um, of the countray of Caria.
            
               Carides, a fyſhe called a prane, lyke to a ſhrīp.
            
               Caries, a lyttell worme that eateth wood. It is alſo putrifaction or fylthe growen by age or continuaunce.
            
               Cariem trahere, to waxe rotten, or to be putrified or vinnewed.
            
               Carina, the kele or bottome of the ſhyp.
            
               Carinae, arum, a ſtrete in Rome, wherin Pō
               pey dwelled.
            
               Carinatus, a, um, made in fourme of the kele of a ſhyp or bote.
            
               Carino, aui, are, to make any thynge lyke to the keele of a ſhyp.
            
               Carinthia, a countrey by Ouſtrike, ioynynge on the ſouthe to the mountaynes called Alpes, and Italy, on the Eaſte and Northe to Stiria. The fourme of election of the newe prince or gouernour there, declared by Pius in his coſmographye, is very ſtraunge, and right pleaſaunte to knowe. In the town called Sancti Viti, is a great valey, where, in a medowe is ſet a ſtone of marble, of a good height, whervpō aſcendeth an huſband man, vnto whom by inheritaunce that office belō
               geth: On his right hande ſtandeth a blacke cowe, on the lefte hand an yl fauoured mare, about him ſtandeth a great multitude of carles. On the other ſyde of the medowe cometh the duke, accompanyed with his noble men in theyr robes of aſtate, before him goeth the erle of Goritia, the gret maiſter of his hous, betwene .xii. banners, bearynge the princes ſtandarde. The other noble men doo folowe with the prynce clad lyke an huſbande man, with a ſhepe croke in his hande, lyke as he were a ſhepeherd. whom as ſone as the earle, whiche ſtandeth on the marble ſtone, doth ſe commynge, he aſketh with a loude voyce in the ſlauon tungue: who is this that cometh with ſo proude a gate? They whiche ſtande about him, don anſwere, that it is the prince of that countrey. Than anſwereth eftſones the earle: Is he a rightuouſe iudge, ſekinge for the weale of the countreye, a free manne borne, and worthy to haue honour? Is he a trewe chriſten man, and defendour of Chriſtis fayth? They all anſwere: yea, he is and ſhall be. Than ſayth the earle, by what right maye be put me from this place? Than aunſwereth the erle of Goritia: Thou ſhalt haue for thy place .lx. grotes, theſe two beaſtes ar thyne (ſhewyng to hym the cowe & the mare) the prynces aparayle whiche he dyd late put of, thou ſhalt alſo haue, thy famyly or kynne ſhall be free from all maner of tribute. Than the carle gyuyng to the prynce a lyttel blowe on his checke, byddeth hym be a good iuge, and commynge downe frome the ſtone, gyueth hym place, and ſoo departeth, takynge with hym the cowe and the mare. Than the prynce goeth vp on the ſtone, and holdynge a naked ſworde in his hande, and brandiſhing it, tourneth to euery parte of the ſtone, promyſyng equall iugement vnto all the people. Than is there brought to hym cold water in a huſbande mannes cappe, whiche the prince drynketh, ſignifienge that he condempneth drynkynge of wyne. Thanne goeth he to a church of our lady there by, where after that he hath harde maſſe, he putteth of the ruſticall apparayle, and putteth on other apparayle of honour, and dynynge with his nobilitie ſumptuouſelye, he commeth eftſones to the medowe, where he hereth matters, and mynyſtreth Iuſtice. This hyſtorye I haue thought neceſſary to be knowen amonge vs. wherfore I haue not ſpared my labour to delyte other. The duke of this countreye is as it were chiefe maiſter of the game, vnto the imperiall maieſtie.
            
               Cariophillon, a ſpice called cloues.
            
               Carioſus, a, um, as erth is after that it is wel dunged & ſtered. it is alſo putrified or rotten.
            
               Cariota, a date.
            Cariotis, idis, idem.
            
               Caritas, tatis, ſcarcitie, derth properly of that whiche ſerueth for the ſuſtinaunce of manne.
            
               Caritas, annonae, derthe of vitayle.
            
               Carius, the name of Iupiters ſonne.
            
               Carmania, a countrey in India, whiche after Ptholomeus is diuided in two partes, oone parte is very fertile, an other is very barain. The peple in the ſtede of garmētes do weare the ſaynnes of fyſhes, and do eate only fiſhe, and theyr bodyes be all roughe and keuered with heare, excepte theyr vyſages, and they haue no townes nor other certayne habytation,Strabo. but are alwayes wandrynge. Of this countrey I fynde one thynge worthye of remembraunce. Who ſo euer wyll mary there, muſte brynge fyrſte to the kinge of that countrey, the head of an ennemy, which the king ſetteth vppe in his palaice, and taketh fyrſte out the tungue, and cauſeth it to be cutte in pieces, and mengled with breade, and giueth parte therof to him which brought the head. And if there be many heades, he deuideth the tunges amonge his gentylmen, as moſte delycate meate.
            
               Carmelus, the name of two ſundrye hylles in Iudea.
            
                
               Carmen, minis, a verſe or meire. Alſo the hole warke whiche is made in verſis. ſomtyme it ſignifieth a charme.
            
               Carmentis, the name of a lady, whiche hadde the ſprite of propheſy, and gaue aunſwere in verſis. She was alſo called Nicoſtratis, and was mother of Euander.
            
               Carminare, to carde wull, or other like thing.
            
               Carminarij, they that do picke or make cleane wull, or carde.
            
               Carmites, people of a countrey in Fraunce called Chartres.
            
               Carmon, a place in Meſſenia, and the temple of Apollo in Laconia.
            
               Carna,
               Macrob. was ſuppoſed to be the goddeſſe of mā
               nes lyfe, of her they deſyred the harte and lyuer to be preſerued.
            
               Carnarium, a larder, wherein hangethe ſalte fleſhe. Sometyme it ſygnifieth a bouchers ſhambles.
            
               Carnarius, a boucher.
            
               Carnarius, a, um, that perteyneth to fleſhe.
            
               Carneus, a, um, that whiche is of fleſhe.
            
               Carni, the people of a countrey in Almayn called Carinthia, belongynge to the duke of Auſtrike. It is alſo the name of an other people in Italy, in the countrey called Marca Taruiſina.
            
            
               Carnifex, ficis, an executioner or hange man, that cutteth men in pieces. ſometime a murderer.
            
               Carnificina, the place where ſuche execution is done. Alſo the office or acte of a hange man▪ alſo great murder, cruelty.
            
               Carnificium, the ſame acte.
            
               Carnificinus, a, um, perteynynge to the act of murderynge or ſleinge.
            
               Carnificor, aris, ari, to playe the hangemans parte.
            
               Carniuorns, a, um, any thynge that deuoureth fleſhe.
            
               Carnoſitas, abundaunce of fleſhe.
            
               Carnoſus, fleſhye.
            
               Carnoſium folium, & Carnoſa radix, a thicke leafe or a thycke roote.
            
               Carnotum, the myddell region of al Fraunce.
            
               Carnuntum, a town in the border of Germany
            Carnus, a, um, fat.
            
            
               Caro,
               Donatus. 
               carnis, fleſhe, properly of that whiche is deade.
            
               Caros, exceſſe of meate and drynke. Alſo an herbe and ſeede called carwayes, It is alſo an herbe called caret, the rote wherof is like a perſenepe, but ſome are yelowe, and ſome red, and be in eatyng more pleſant than perſnepes, and wyl be ſoner digeſted.
            
               Carorae,
               Cel. ant. lect. 
               uel Carotici, be the greatte 
                  •
               ynewes, whiche do holde vp the necke, called alſo Tenondes, which in Cornelius Celſus in ſome prynte be called Cerotes, which wolde be amended and written Carotas.
            
            
               Caroticae,
               Ariſto▪ a
                     •
                  al
                     ••
                  ; be the great vaynes on euery ſyde of the necke.
            
               Carpâthium mare, the ſea ioynyng to Egypt, wherin be the yles called Sporades.
            
            
               Carpathos, an yle agaynſte Egypt, the myddes betwene Rhodes and Candy.
            
               Carpâtinae, ploughmens bootes, made of vntanned lether, they maye be called okers.
            
               Carpentarius, a cartwright, or carpenter.
            
               Carpentarius equus, a carte horſe, or chariot horſe.
            
               Carpentum, a chariot, or waggen.
            
               Carphos, an herbe called Sengrene.
            
               Carpinus, a tre, called among the frenche men carpi, or carme.
            
            Carpineus, a, um, of carme.
            
            
               Carpio, a fyſhe called a carpe.
            
               Carpo, pſi, pere, to gether or plucke. Alſo to theſe out, to reproue, or taunt, to vſe .i. fiuor, to paſſe ouer quickely.
            
               Carpere agmen, to aſſayle an hoſt on euery ſyde.
            
               Carpere cibum, to eate.
            
               Carpere iter, to take a iourney.
            
               Carpere lanam, to toſe wull, or carde wull.
            
               Carpere maledico dente, to reproue malyciouſely.
            
               Carpere uiam, to walke.
            
               Carpere, uires, to debilitate or infeble.
            Carpere uitales auras, to lyue.
            
            
               Vnum quicquid quod quidem erit be
                     •
                  liſsimum carpam.
               Te
                     ••••
                  
                One, whiche ſo euer ſhall be the fayreſt, I wyll cheſe.
            
               Genio carpamus dulcia, lette vs make good chere.
            
               Carpere exercitum in multas partes, to dyuyde an hoſte or army.
            
               Carpet citius aliquis, 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   imitabitur: One ſhal ſoner fynde faulte, than do lyke it.
            
               Carpocrates, an heretike, whiche denied that Chriſte was god, affyrmynge that he was pure man, of whom the ſect was called Carpocratitae, or Carpocratiani. They alſo affyrmed, that the worlde was made by aungelles, and not by god. they reiecte the olde teſtament, and do deny the generall reſurection. They alſo denyed that Chriſte was born of the virgin Mary, ſaying, that he was got ten of the ſede of Ioſeph. Alſo that his body ſuffered, and that onely his ſoule was receyued in to heauen. This Carpocrates lyued about the yere of our lorde .142.
            
               Carpophyllon, a tree, whiche hath leues lyke to laurell.
            
               Carptim, pykinge out here and there.
            
               Carptim breuiter
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   perſtringere aliquid, to touche a thynge ſummarily & in few wordes.
            
                
               Carptim dicere, to touche thynges here and there quickely.
            
               Carptura, a gatherynge to gether of ſoundrye thynges.
            
               Carra, rae, a citie in Arabia.
            
               Carrodunum, the chiefe citie of Polonia called Cracouia, or Cracaw.
            
            
               Carruca, a carte.
            
               Carrucarius, a, um, perteynynge to a carte,
            
               Carrus, a chariot.
            
               Carteia, a towne in Spayne.
            
               Carthaginenſes, people of Carthage.
            
               Carthaginenſis, perteyninge to Carthage.
            
               Carthago, was a famous citie in Affrike called Cartage, almoſte enuironed with the ſea whiche citie was in compace about the walles
.360. furlunges, whiche are .45. Italyon myles whereof .vii. myles and an halfe ran in length on the rydge of an hyl, which went from ſea to ſea, where as were ſet the ſtables of olyphantes, which was a very large place. Almoſte in the myddell of the citie was a caſtell or towre called Byrſa, hauynge an hy! on the top, whervpon ſtode the temple of Aeſculapius, called god of medicine: vnderneth were hauens or kayes of the caſtell, and a littell yle called Cothon, whiche was rounde, ſtandynge as it were in a great ponde, about the whiche were ſet the houſes, that ſerued for the nauy of Carthage. This citie contynuwed warres with the Romayns .xl. yeres, and had many excellente menne of warre, of whom Hannibal was the moſt noble and famouſe. That citie had in ſubiection not onely a great parte of Affrike, but alſo Sicile, the more part of Spayne, and the yles of the myddell ſea, which now the emperour Charles enioyeth. It was at the laſt deſtroyed by Scipio, and the Romayns, before the incarnation of Chriſte .144. yeres. The countrey where it ſtode, is nowe called Tunyſe.
            
               Carthallum, a baſket.
            
               Carthumandua, a queene in this Britayne, of the people called Brigantes.
            
            
               Cartilâgo, ginis, a griſtell.
            
               Cartilaginoſus, a, um, full of griſtelles, or of a griſtell.
            
               Caruncula, a lyttell piece of fleſhe.
            Carus, a, um, deere.
            
            
               Carya, the name of a citie in Grece.
            
               Caryatides, the images of womenne holdyng garlandes, or other lyke thyng, ſet vp to garnyſhe houſes.
            
               Caryca, reade in Carica.
            
            
               Caryon Indicū, uel nux indica, a great fruite lyke to a nut, whiche the Arabians do ſay ar the dates of Inde, out of them cometh a lycour more ſwete than butter. This nut is hot in the ſecond degre, and moyeſt in the fyrſte.
            
               Caryon myriſticō, uel Moſthocaryon, is that ſpice whiche is alſo called Nux muſcata, in englyſhe nutmygges, whiche is hot and drye in the ſeconde degree.
            
               Caryopos, the iuyce of a nut.
            
               Caryorae, reade in Cariotae.
            
            
               Carynus, a, um, of a nut, as Oleum carynū, the oyle of nuttes.
            
               Caryſte, & Caryſtos, an yle in the ſea called Euboicum, wherin is plentye of marbyll of dyuerſe colours.
            
               Caryſtaeus, a, um, of that yle.
            
               Caſa, a cottage.
            Caſabundus, a, um, fallynge often.
            
            
               Caſaria, the woman that kepeth the cotage.
            Caſcus, a, um, olde.
            
            
               Caſeale, a ſtable.
            
               Caſeus, cheeſe.
            
               Caſeus muſteus, Rowen cheeſe.
            
               Caſia, a ſpice whiche hath the vertue of Cinamome, and is wonderfull ſoote in ſauour, it is called of the apothecaries Caſsia lignea.
            
            
               Caſito, aui, are, to fall or drop oftentimes.
            
               Caſia fiſtularis, is that whiche is called commonly Caſsia fiſtula.
            
            
               Caſius, a hyll in the borders of Egypt.
            
               Caſner, in the oſk tungue, is an olde man.
            
               Caſpiae portae, are places broken in the rockes of the mountaynes of Caucaſus toward Hyrcania and Perſia, whiche are in length
                  •
                (as Plinius ſayth.) vii. myles, as Solinus wryteth .viii. myles: in breade they are ſoo narrow, that a carte may hardly paſſe throw them. Martianus wryteth, that thoſe gates were faſte ſhyt with greate yron beames, to let that no man ſhulde paſſe. In the ſprynge tyme and ſommer all ſerpentes doo repaire thyther from all countreys aboute, wherfore the paſſage that way is peryllous.
            
               Caſpij, a people nowe in Iartaria, ioyuynge to the ſea called Caſpium. In them is this in humanytie, as Strabo wryteth, that when theyr parentes do excede the age of .lxx. yeres, they put them into a cloſe place, and doo famyſhe them, and than do they laye them in a deſerte, and do beholde them farre of. And if byrdes do plucke them out of theyr couches, and deuoure them, they accompte them bleſſed: if dogges or wylde beaſtes do it, they do not accompte it ſo happy. if bothe do it, they eſteme thoſe men vnhappy. Other do wryte, that they nouryſhe dogges of purpoſe to deuoure them.
            
               Caſſa dote virgo, a mayden hauynge nothyng towarde her maryage.
            
               Caſſa nux, a pypped nutte.
            
               Caſſes, ſis, nettes, whiche may be called haies. Alſo an helmet: But than it hath caſsidis in the genitiue caſe.
            
                
               Caſsiculus, a lyttell hay.
            
               Caſsinum, an olde market plate.
            
               Caſsiopa, an hauen on the Southe parte of Sicile.
            
               Caſsiope, called alſo Caſsiopeia, a ſygne in heauen that hath .xii. ſterres, and is fygured lyke to a woman, ſyttynge in a chayre.
            
               Caſsita, a larke.
            
               Caſsiterides, be .x. Iles in the Spanyſſhe ſea, wherin was digged moche tynne, and they be not far from the weſte parte of Spayne.
            
               Caſsiterus, tynne.
            
               Caſsitias, the gumme that droppeth oute of a fyrre tre.
            
               Caſsius, a propre name of a man.
            
               Caſſo, aui, are, to put out or make of none effecte.
            
               Caſſus, a, um, voyde and of none effecte.
            Caſſus lumine, deade.
            
            
               Caſſutha,
               Ruellius. is that herbe whiche is commonlye called Caſcuta, in englyſhe withwinde.
            
               Caſtalius, a fountayne in the foote of the hyll of Pernaſſus, whiche was dedycate to the Muſes.
            
               Caſta mola, was a kynde of ſacrifice, that the virgines veſtales made.
            
               Caſtanêtum, a place ſet with cheſten trees.
            
               Caſtaneum, a cheſten or cheſt nut.
            
               Caſte, chaſtly, honeſtly, vncorruptly.
            
               Caſtellani, the inhabytauntes of a lyttell walled towne.
            
               Caſtellatim, one lyttell walled towne after an other.
            
               Caſtellum, a lyttell walled towne. It is alſo a cundyte, out of the whiche water runneth. it is alſo the name of a countrey called Iuliers or Gulike.
            
               Caſterium, a houſe, wherein the tackelynge of ſhyppes is kepte.
            
               Caſtigatio, Correction.
            
               Caſtigabilis, le, that whiche may be corrected or amended.
            
               Caſtigo, aui, are, to chaſtiſe with wordes, alſo to correct or amende, to refourme, to puniſh.
            Caſtitas, atis, chaſtitie.
            
            Caſtimonia, idem.
            
               Caſtor, a beuer, whiche hath the tayle of a fyſhe, in the reſidue is lyke to an ottar.
            
               Caſtor, & Pollux, were bretherne bothe born at oone byrthe, whiche were honoured for goddes.
            
               Caſtra, orum, an army of men of warre whan they lye or abyde in any place. Alſo the place where the hoſt lodgeth. Alſo the pauyllions beinge pitched. Alſo they do ſignifie Stationes, reſtinge places, where the hoſtre taryeth to refreſhe theym, whiche amonge the olde Romaynes conteyned .ix. myles, as Senalis doth wryte.
            
               Caſtris exuere, to compel the ennemies to 
                  •
               aiſe theyr campe.Ti. L
                     •••
                   bell. P
                     ••
                  
                
               Nec ante abſceſſum eſt, quam caſtris exuerunt hoſtem: Nor they departed not awaye, vntyll they had conſtrayned their ennemies to rayſe theyr tampe.
            
               Caſtramêtor, to laye or lodge an army.
            
               Caſtrata reſpublica, a weake or feble common weale.
            
               Caſtrenſe peculium, that which a man of warhath gotten in the warres.
            
               Caſtrenſis, ſe, that which perteyneth to an hoſt or army, or warre.
            
               Caſtro, aui, are, to gelde. Sometyme to cut of generally.
            
               Caſtrum, a caſtell or fortreſſe.
            
               Caſtula, lynnen clothe, wherwith maydene did gyrde them ſelfe vnder their pappes.
            
               Caſtus, a, um, chaſte, honeſt, and continente, or vncorrupted.
            
               Caſu, by chaunce.
            
               Caſura, a fall or decaye.
            
               Caſurgis, a citie in Boeme, now called Praga.
            
            
               Caſus, hap, ruine, miſfortune, or myſery, alſo a caſe.
            
               Catabaſis, the ſun ſet.
            
               Catabathmus, a place in Affryke ioynynge io Egypt.
            
               Catachreſis, a figure, wherby the property of a worde is abuſed: as, Facies ſimillima lauro, where facies onely belongeth to a man, and not to a tree, althoughe it doth ſignyfye there a ſimilitude or figure.
            
               Catachyſmata, amonge the Athenienſis the vſage was whan newe ſeruauntes were fyrſte come into an houſe, as they ſtode by the chimnaye or herthe, there were poured on theyr heades, fygges, nuttes, dates, beanes, and peaſon, whiche were catched vp of the other ſeruauntes. And the lyke was doone on the newe bryde in token of good lucke. And this was called Catachyſmata, for catachyſis, in greke, is in englyſhe a pourynge out.
            
               Cataclyſmus, an vniuerſall floudde.
            
               Cataclyſta, a garment cloſe all about.
            
               Catacryſis, a condemnation.
            
               Catadromus, the place where men do rum horſes for prices or wagers.
            
               Catagrapha, ymages lokynge dyuerſe wayes, and in dyuerſe fourmes.
            
               Catalecticum metrum, a verſe wherin one only ſyllable lacketh.
            
               Catalepſis, occupation, or deprehenſion.
            
               Catalexis, a finiſhynge of a thynge.
            
               Catalogus, ſpeache or wrytynge, where thynges be recited in order and number. A reherſall or table of the number of thynges
            
               Catalyma, refection. alſo an ynne.
            
               Catamidio, are, to ſet one vp with a paper on his heade to be mocked or rebuked for ſome
 offence, as they uſe to do with men periured, or with forgers of euydences.
            
               Cataphora,
               Galen. in 
                     •
                  agoge. a deade ſleape, or dyſpoſition to ſlepe or wake.
            
               Cataphractus, armed and fenced on al partes.
            
               Cataphracti equites, men of armes on barbed horſes.
            
               Cataphractae naues, keuered ſhyppes,
            
               Cataphriges, were heretives, which toke that name of one Montanus of Phrigia, an arch heretike, who affirmed, that the holye goſte was gyuen to them, and not to the apoſtles. They baptiſed not in the name of the trynytie: they baptiſed alſo menue after that they were deade, and damned the ſeconde maryages. This ſecte beganne the yere of our lorde .170.
            
               Cataplaſma, a playſter made with herbes and ſewet.
            
               Catapotia, pyiles in medicine.
            
               Catapulta, an arrowe, or a quarell.
            
               Catapultarium pilum, a bolte.
            
               Cataputia maior, the greatter ſpurge. loke in Racinus.
            
            
               Cataputia minor, an herbe called the leſſe ſpurge. loke more in Tithymalus, and alſo in Lathyris, whiche is the ſame herbe.
            
               Catarrhacta, a portculious. Alſo cloudes. ſomtyme caues in the erthe, alſo a web in the cie.
            
               Catarrhactae, great courſes of water, fallinge downe frome hyghe places. Alſo the places from whenſe they do fall.
            
               Catarrhus, a rewme or ſtillinge downe of water or fleume from the head.
            
               Cataſcopium, a ſhyp that watcheth or eſpieth for other, a brigandine.
            
               Cataſta, a cage wherin men be ſet, whiche are to be ſolde. alſo wherin they were punyſſhed.
            
               Cataſtroma, parte of a ſhyp or pauement.
            
               Cataſtrophe, a ſubuerſion, or a volume.
            
               Catatypoſis, a figure, where one thynge is deſcribed by an other.
            
               Catecheſis, an inſtruction or teachynge properly by mouth and not by writyng.
            
               Catechiſo, aui, are, to inſtructe, to infourme, or teache.
            
               Catechumenus, he that is newely inſtructed.
            
               Categoria, accuſation.
            
               Catellus, Catella, a lyttell hounde, a brache.
            
               Catena, a chayne.
            
               Cateno, aui, are, to chayne to gether.
            
               Catenula, a lyttell chayne.
            
               Caterua, a company of men of warre. ſomtime a multitude of people.
            
               Cateruarij, they that do aſſemble in companis.
            
               Cateruatim, by companyes.
            
               Cathalanū, a towne in Fraunce called Chalon
            
               Catharctica, purgatiue medicines.
            
               Cathari, were heretikes, whiche affirmed, that it was not lefull to a chriſten man to ſweare, for any cauſe, or at any tyme. They alſo denied al the ſacramentes of the churche.
            
               Catharmos, a certayne purgation with fyre.
            
               Cathay, is a great region in the eaſte parte of the worlde, extendynge vnto the eaſt occean ſea, and on the ſouthe vnto the ouer India, and is alſo called Synarum regio. It is deuided into nyne royalmes, whiche be all vnder the great Cham. This countrey is wonderfull ryche in golde and ſylke, and aboundeth in grayne and wynes and al other thinges neceſſary for mannes ſuſtynaunce. The people for the more part doth honour Chriſt as god, but they are not baptyſed, they are courtayſe and reaſonable, and very kunning artificers,
            
               Cathedra, a benche or ſtoole.
            
               Cathinea, a kynd of erthe, wherof latyn metall is made.
            
               Catholicus, vniuerſall, now it is vſed for him that kepeth the faith, as the vniuerſal churche hath obſerued it. Alſo the buſſhop of the Armenians was ſo called.
            
               Cathortoma, the right worke of vertue, a dede iuſtely done.
            
               Cathortoſis, a right affection.
            
               Catillatio, a great reproche layd to gentylmen, whiche had robbed the countreys that were alyed to the Romaynes, and had riottouſlye conſumed the goodes.
            
               Catillo, are, to eate lyke a glutton.
            
               Catillones, lycke dyſhes, gluttons.
            
               Catillus, the ouer ſtone of a myl, called the runner. Alſo a potager.
            
               Câtina, a citie in Sicile.
            
               Câtinus, a dyſhe.
            
               Cato, onis, was not fyrſte a ſurname, but a name of merite, for the aunciente Romaines called hym Cato, that was wyſe by moche experience. Of this name were dyuerſe, of whom two were moſte excellent perſons: the one of them was called Marcus Cato Cenſorius, bycauſe that he alwaye vſed the grauitie and rigour, whiche was wonte to be in the correctours of maners called Cenſores, and alſo he hym ſelfe beynge Cenſor was aboue all other moſte ſharp and rigorous. Valerius Maximus wryteth, that he was almoſte an olde man er he lerned latine letters, and than it ſemeth he was olde er he lerned greeke. And yet notwithſtandinge by gatherynge bridgmentes oute of Tucidides and Demoſthenes warkes, he became the greatteſte oratour of his tyme, and was called the Romane Demoſthenes. He being made conſul, wan moo cities in Spayne, than he had aboden dayes in that countrey, In the whiche iourney he nothyng retayned to him ſelfe
 of all that was founde there, but meate and drinke onely: but made his ſouldiours riche, gyuynge to euery of them a pounde weyght of ſyluer, ſayinge: That better it were that manye Romaynes retourned with ſyluer to Rome, than a fewe Romayns with gold. He taughte his owne ſonne grammer, not withſtandyng that he had a ſeruaunt called Chylo, whiche was an excellente grammarian, and taughte a great ſchoole, ſayinge: that it was not conuenient, if his ſonne were ſlowe in lernynge, that he ſhulde be rebuked or pulled by the cares of hym, whiche was of a ſeruyle condition. He alſo taughte hym the cyuile lawes, and all maner of exerciſe, not only to handle al weapons and to ride well, but alſo to fyght with the ſiſtes, and to ſuſteyne bothe cold and heate, & alſo to leape into waters, and to ſwymme againſt ſwift running ſtreames. Beinge Cenſor he ſpared none eſtate, whom he founde corrupted in maners, or ſuperfluouſe in liuing, wherby he brought into the citie a meruailouſe image of vertue. His ſentences reherſed by Plutarch be wonderfull, of the whiche I wyll remember thre for the excellencie of them. Lyke as the diars (ſayde he) do die moſt oſten that colour, whiche they perceiuen moſte men do delite in: ſo yonge men do moſte ſtudiouſelye haunte and imbrace that, whiche they ſe olde menne and counſailours haue in moſt eſtimation. He alſo blamed the people of Rome, for as moche as they commytted authorities and offyces, often tymes to one perſon, ſayinge: They ſemed not to eſteme rule and auhoritie, or elles that they ſuppoſed that there were but a few that were worthy promotion. The one was a ſigne of contempt, the other was diſcorage to good wittes, and rebuke to theyr countrey. Alſo whanne there were thre ambaſſadours choſen to be ſente in to Bithynia, of whom one had the goute, an other had peine in his heade, the thyrde was timerous, Cato laughinge, ſayde in the ſenate: The people of Rome, ſendeth an ambaſſade, whiche hath neither feete, heade, nor yet harte. The lyfe of this man, & alſo of the other Cato, are worthy to be often tymes radde, ſpecially of coūſaylours and men in authoritie. He was before the incarnation of Chriſte .182. yeres.
            
               Cato Vticenſis, was ſo called bycauſe he ſlewe hym ſelfe in the town called Vtica in Affrike. His great graundfather was the other Cato called Cenſorius. This man in childhood ſhewed a wonderfull conſtance and grauitie, ſeldome very mery, or ſene to laughe, and if he dyd, it was a very lytel ſmyling, nor wold lyghtly be angrye, but if he were angrye, he was not ſhortely appeſed. Alſo he was harde to lerne, but that whiche he lerned, he perfectly reteyned, and was verye ſtudious in all morall philoſophye, practiſynge in his actes and lyuinge that which he rad of vertue and honeſty, and alſo ſtudied eloquence, onely to the entente that in counſaylynge and rayſonynge he mought adde vnto philoſophy more force & ornamente, and yet wolde he not ſhewe it, or practiſe it openly. And whan one ſayde to hym, mē dyſprayſe thyne obſtinate ſilence, he anſwered: I force not, ſo that they diſprayſe not my liuing But I wyll breake out of this ſilence, whan I can ſpeake that, which is not worthy to be vnſpoken. Beinge Tribunus militum, that is to ſaye capitayne of a thouſande men, or as Budeus reſembleth, marſhall of an army, and beynge ſente in to Macedonia, He with his meruaylouſe grauitie, prudence, and peynefulnes, made all them, whiche were vnder hym, fierce and hardy agaynſte theyr ennemies, gentyll to theyr felowes, fearefull to do iniury, prompte to get prayſes: and hym ſelfe labourynge with them, and vſynge his apparayle, feedynge, and goinge, lyke vnto them, he contrary to mennes expectation (not withſtandynge his ſeuerytie) wan the hartes of them, goinge on foote and talkynge with euery manne. And was of ſuche conſtance, and ſoo far from ambition and flattery, that neyther by Pompeye nor Caeſar in theyr chiefe pryde, whan all menne eyther for dread or for fauour inclyned to theyr deſyres, he moughte be by no meanes perſwaded, to agree to theyr myndes, in caſes where it ſemed to be agaynſte the weale publyke, nor any maner of menacynge or dreadfull tokens, mought from that conſtaunce remoue hym. In ſo moch that whan he harde, that Iulius Ceſar hadde vainquiſſhed Pompeye, and that his frendes wold haue ſent to Caeſar to deſyre his fauour, Cato aunſwered: They whiche are vainquyſhed or haue any wiſe treſpaced, ought to make ſuite, but ſenſe he in al his lyfe was neuer vainquiſhed, and in innocency he ſurmounted Caeſar, whiche in makynge war agaynſt his owne countreye, hadde condemned hym ſelfe to haue done that thynge, whiche he had often denyed. Fynally not for malyce of Caeſar, but bycauſe he wolde not beholde the weale publyke deſtroied, he ſlewe hym ſelfe at Vtica, hauynge with hym at ſouper, the euenynge before, the greatteſt officers of that citie, and many of his frendes. Alſo this ſentence beinge ſpoken amonge other: Onely a good man is a free man, all yll men are bonde▪ whan one hapned to reaſon agaynſte it, Cato beinge therwith chaufed, diſputed with the other ſo vehemently and longe, that all men ſuſpected, that he wolde not longe lyue. He dyed afore the incarnation of Chriſte
.44. yeres.
            
                
               Catoblepas, a beaſt full of poyſon, called a baſylyſke.
            
               Catularia, one of the gates of Rome.
            
               Catulinus, a, um, of a catte.
            
               Catulire, the deſyre of female kynde, to company with the male kynde, proprely to go aſſaut, to rudder, to horſyng, or to blyſſonynge.
            
               Catulitio, the goyng aſſaut. &c.
            
               Catullus, the name of a poete.
            
               Catulus, a kytte
                  •
               n or yonge catte. alſo it is put generally for the yonge kynde of all beaſtes. alſo for a dogge.
            
               Caturactonium, a cytie callyd Carlyle in Englande.
            
               Catus, a cat. ſomtyme wiſe or wyttye▪ alſo the name of a noble and wyſe family in Rome.
            
               Caua, a hole, wherin byrdes do brede.
            
               Caucaſus, an hyll, one of the higheſt in all Aſia, and ſtretcheth of a meruailous length, and is named of ſome men Caſpij montes, foraſmoche as it ſtretcheth forth by the ſea callid Caſpium. Not withſtandynge in the chart, callyd Charta marina, the hylle of Caucaſus is ſette on the Northe parte of that ſea, and Caſpij montes, are on the ſouthe parte, hauynge on the northe Alania, and a parte of Media, and on the ſouthe Aſſyria.
            
            
               Cauda, a tayle of a beaſte. ſomtyme a mannes priuy member.
            
               Caudacus, gentyll and pleaſaunt.
            
               Caudecae,
               Plaut. in rudente. lyttell coffers of wickers, or a iunket, wherin eles are taken in ryuers.
            
               Caudeus, a, um, of the ſtemme of a tree.
            
               Caudex, dicis, the lower part of a tree next the roote. alſo a table hauyng many leaues or tables. It alſo ſignifieth a dulle foole, ſuche as can neyther well ſpeake nor do.
            
               Caudicalis, le, pertaynyng to the ſtem of a tree.
            
               Caudicariae naues, ſhyppes made of thyk plankes, or a ſhyppe whiche carieth vitayles.
            
               Caudis, a towne of the Samnites.
            
               Cauea, a caue or darke place in the ground. alſo a cage or coupe, wherin byrdes be kepte. Moreouer a place where a comedye or enterlude is playde.
            
               Cauaedium, is a place at large, hauynge manye porches, whiche ſerueth to a commune, lyke a markette place. It is alſo a lyttell court with in a houſe.
            
               Caueo, caui, cauêre, to beware, to eſchewe. alſo to prouyde diligently, to take hede. and ioyned with an accuſatiue caſe, ſygnyfyeth to bydde to beware.
            
               Caue tibi, take hede of thy ſelfe.
            
               Caue tibi illum puerum, beware of that chylde.
            
               Caue facias, take hede what thou doſte.
            
               Caetera cauebuntur, the reaſte I wylle prouyde for.
            
               Cauêre alicui, to gyue counſaylle to oone in matters of lawe, or concernynge contractes, to inſtructe one what he ſhall do.
            
               Cauêre capite,
               Pli. li. 54. to put in ſureties to appere in matter of lyfe and deathe.
            
               Cauere ſibi ab aliquo, to take a quytance or other dyſcharge for the payment of money, or delyuerance of any thynge. At uero, inquam tibi ego Brute non ſoluam,
               Cicer. in Bruto. 
               niſi prius à te cauero, amplius eo nomine neminem, cuius petitio ſit, petiturum, Truely ſayde I, Brutus, I wyll not pay the, excepte I haue fyrſte a quyttaunce of the, that thou ſhalt not efteſones demaunde it of hym, of whome thou moughteſt aſke it.
            
               Quid iſti caueam? B. Vt reuehat domum,
               Plaut. in Bacch. What ſhall I prouyde for hym? B. one to brynge hym one.
            
               Cauêre teſtamenta, to gyue in charge by teſtament a thynge to be done.
            
               Caueri, to be taken hede of.
            
               Caueares hoſtiae & cauae, were partes of the beaſtes next to the tayle, to be ſacrifyced for the byſhoppes.
            
               Cauerna, a caue or holow place in the ground, ſometyme Cauernae, do ſygnifie eares.
            
               Cauernoſus, a, um, full of caues.
            
               Cauilla, uel cauillum, a mocke or a ſkoffe.
            
               Cauillatio, a cauillation, a ſubtil forged tale.
            
               Cauillator, a mocker, a bourder.
            
               Cauillo, aui, are, uel cauillor, ari, to ieſte, to mocke, to bourde.
            
               Caula, a ſhepehouſe, but propely a folde.
            
               Cauleſcere, to growe into a ſtalke.
            
               Caulias, liae, the iuyce whiche is preſſed oute of the herbe callyd Laſerpitium.
            
            
               Cauliculus, a tender ſtalke.
            
               Caulis, a ſtalke or ſtemme of an herbe or tree. It is ſometyme taken for all pot herbes, the rumpe of a beaſt, and for a ſhafte or iauelyn, it is alſoo an herbe callyd colewortes. Rede Braſsica.
            
            
               Caulon, a towne, whyche as Plynie ſaythe, is ſytuate in the fyrſte region of Italy.
            Cauma, atis, heate.
            
            
               Caunus, an yle in the occean ſea.
            
               Cauo, aui, are, to make holowe.
            
               Caupo, onis, a howkſter that ſellethe meate and drynke.
            
               Caupona, a woman that ſellyth wyne. alſo the tauernar.
            
               Cauponaria, tauerners crafte.
            
               Cauponius, a, um, pertayninge to the tauerne.
            
               Cauponor, to ſelle as houkſters do.
            
               Cauros, was an yle, whyche afterwarde was callyd Andros, and after that Antandros.
            
            
               Caurus, a weſterne wynde.
            
               Cauſia, an hatte or cappe after the faſcion of Macedony.
            
                
               Cauſima,
               Cael. anti. a drye wodde, that wyll burne quyckly.
            
               Cauſon, is an hote continuall feuer, ingendred of red choler and ſharpe, in the vaynes nexte to the harte, and in the vaynes of the mouthe of the ſtomake, and in the holownes of the liuer or lunges. The ſignes of the which feuer is intollerable heat, with continual thyrſt, horrour, a ſwyft pulſe, kepyng none order, ſhorte breathe, the vrine high coloured and thynne.
            
               Cauſſa, a cauſe or matter in ſuite.
            
               Cauſſam accipere, to take the mattier in hande, alſo to take an excuſe.
            
               Cauſſam capere, to take an occaſion.
            
               Cauſa cadere, to loſe his action.
            
               Cauſſam agere. to pleade a matter.
            
               Cauſſam dicere,
               Plaut. in Capt. to anſwere vnto that, which is layde vnto his charge.
            
               Cauſſam dicere, to ſay cōtrary, to deny. Hoc ſi ſecus reperies, nullam cauſſam dico, quin mihi & parentum, & libertatis apud te deliquio fiet, If thou doſte fynde it other wyſe, I wyll not ſay contrarye, but that it is at thy pleaſure, that I ſhall loſe bothe, my parentes and libertie.
            
               Cauſam dicere ex uinculis, to aunſwere in warde, or being a priſoner.
            
               Cauſſas nectere,
               Liuius. to fayne matters, to make excuſes or delayes.
            
               Cauſſam orare, to pleade.
            
               Cauſſam quaerere,
               Ci. Attic. to ſeke an occaſion.
            
               Cauſſam ſuſtinere, to beare the blame.
            
               Cauſſam tenîre, to optayne in iudgement.
            
               Cauſſa mea,
               Terent. in Heauton. for my ſake. Syro ignoſcas uolo, quae mea cauſa fecit: I wylle that ye forgiue Syrus al that he hath done for my ſake.
            
               Cauſſa inferior, the laſſe right, or weker title.
            
               Cauſſa ſuperior, the better right or title.
            
               In cauſſa haec ſunt, the raiſon is this.
            
               Cauſſarij, they whiche be eſſoyned in our lawe, or excuſed for a ſpeciall cauſe.
            
               Cauſſaria miſio, a diſcharge of a ſouldiour for a reaſonable cauſe.
            
               Cauſſarij milites, ſouldiors, which for cauſes reaſonable, were diſcharged out of the army, for ſycknes, as Politianus writeth.
            
               Cauſſario, an inwarde ſycknes.
            
               Cauſſatiuus, a, um, that is cauſe that a thynge is doone.
            
               Cauſsidicus, a man of lawe.
            
               Cauſsificor, aris, to complayne me of a thynge that doth greue me.
            Cauſſo, aui, are, to cauſe.
            
            
               Cauſſor, aris, to fynde the matter, or to brynge for excuſe.
            
               Cauſtica medicamenta, medicines, whiche do bourne the ſkynne or the fleſhe.
            
               Cautêres, & cautêria, is a markyng yron, or an inſtrument, wherwith ſoores are bourned.
            
               Cauteriatus, a, um, marked or bourned with that inſtrument, or marked with an yron.
            
               Cautes, a raggyd rocke, or hylle fulle of greatte ſtones.
            
               Cautè, wiſe, circumſpectly, ſubtylly.
            Cautim, idem.
            
               Caute loquatior,
               Eraſ. in chil. more clatteryng than a rocke. ❀ A prouerbe applyed to great ſpekers, gatheryd of the continual clackyng that the ſea maketh, whan it ſtryketh agaynſt a rocke.
            
               Cautio, is a promyſe or writing made diligently for the aſſurance of any thynge.
            Cautio, onis, prouiſion.
            
            
               Cautio eſt, it is nede to prouyde or beware.
            
               Cautum eſt praedibus ac praedijs, aſſurance taken by bondes and ſureties.
            
               Mittere cautionem chirographi, to delyuer writynge ſigned with his owne hande for aſſurance.
            
               Cauto eſt opus procedere, it nedeth to be wyſely handlyd.
            
               Cautor alieni periculi, he that warneth an other man of any daunger.
            
               Cautor formularum, he that can ſkyl of a kindes of actions to be ſued.
            
               Cautum eſt, it is ordeyned or prouyded by an acte of parlyament or counſayle.
            
               Cautus, a man that is circumſpecte.
            
               Caua uena, the vayne of the lyuer.
            Cauus, a, um, holowe.
            
            
               Cauus, an holowe place.
            
               Cauſter, a floudde of Lidie.
            
               Cayſtrus, foem. gen. citie of Cilicie.
         
         
            C ANTE E.
            
               CEcrops, opis, was an auncient kynge of Athenes, whoſe ymage was made hauing two heades, as ſom men do ſuppoſe, bicauſe he dyd firſt inſtitute matrimony in Grece. Other do write that it was bycauſe he was borne in Egipt, and alſo dyd vſe both languages, greke and egyptian. He was afore the incarnation of Chriſt. 1584. yeres.
            
               Cecropidae, men of Athenes.
            
               Cecropidis, a man or woman comyng of hym.
            Cecropius, a, um, of Cecrops.
            
            
               Cecriphalea, a rocke in the ſea, or an yle.
            
               Cedar, a region of Araby.
            
               Cedo, ceſsi, dere, to giue place, to depart, to go awaye, to voyde, to withdrawe, to obeye, to graunt,Plaut. i
                     •
                   capt. to gyue, to ſuccede.
            
               Cedere authoritati, to be of laſſe authoritie.
            
               Cedere ad factum,
               Sueto. 
                     〈◊〉
                   clar. gri. to come to effect.
            
               Cedere creditoribus, is proprely where one not beynge able to pay his dettes,Plaut. in Pſeud. leaueth all his goodes or landes to his creditours.
            
               Cedere ex tranſuerſo, to goo ſydelynge lyke a crabbe.
            
               Cedere famae, to regarde more his honeſty.
            
                
               Cedere interceſsioni, to procede no further, to admytte the contrary.
            
               Cedere iuri, to gyue ouer a right or title.
            
               Cedere pro, to be in the ſtede of an other thīg.
            
               Nam pro pulmentario cedit ſicuti ficus, for it is in ſtede of the meate, lyke as figges be.
            Cedere uita, & cedere fato, to dye.
            
            
               Cede manum, gyue me thy hande.
            
               Cedere poſſeſsione, to leaue the poſſeſſion.
            
               Cedere periculo, to flee from the daunger.
            
               Cedere precibus, to graunte to the requeſte or prayer.
            
               Cedere tempori, to accommodate hym ſelfe to the tyme.
            
               Cedere remedijs, the ſicknes is vanquiſhed.
            
               Cedit dies,
               Ci. de Se. Pli. ep. ſo. among the lawyers is, The time is come, that the dette is due to be payde.
            
               Cedit huic quaeſtus ille, he hath that auātage by it. Cedit illi res, his matter cometh wel to paſſe. Quin tu mihi argentum cedo, But yet gyue thou me the money.
            
               Cedunt mihi ea bona, thoſe goodes are come or happened vnto me.
            
               Cedo, in the imperatiue mode, telle thou, reherce, tell on.
            
               Cedo cuium puerum? telle or ſaye, whoſe chylde or ſeruant?
            
               Cedunt dies, the dayes paſſe away.
            
               Ceſsit, it happened.
            
               Ceſsit parum gratus, he hadde lyttell thanke for his labour.
            
               Ceſsit in prouerbium, it became, or was turned into a prouerbe.
            
               Cedentes cepilli, heares hanging down ryght.
            
               Cedrati libri, bokes whiche wyll neuer periſhe, nor be eaten with wormes.
            
               Cedrelate, tes, a great cedre tree.
            
               Cedria, the roſyn that runneth out of the cedre.
            
               Cedrides, the fruite or bearies of cedrus.
            
               Cedrinus, a, um, of a cedre tree.
            
               Cedrium malum, & Cedromelum, was of old tyme taken for an orenge, as Atheneus and Dioſcorides do write.
            
               Cedropolis, a towne in Caria.
            
               Cedros, an ylande in the coſtis of Germany.
            
               Cedroſis, a white vyneyarde.
            
               Cedrus, dri, is a tree hauing leues like to iuniper, bearies like myrtils, but they be yelowe, ſwete of ſauor & pleſant to eate, they beare all tymes of the yere new fruit & old, as the orenges do, & the leaf neuer fallith. The tree ſweateth out of him a lycour like to roſyn, meruailous odoriferous. In the lande of cypers there haue ben ſene of them growynge, which were in length .130. fete, and in cōpaſſe fiue fathom Of like greatnes or greater be in Siria. The wodde therof neuer rotteth, nor wormes may breede in it. Wherefore it is moche prayſed in buyldynge.
            
               Cedris, dridis, the fruit of the cedre tre.
            
               Cedro digna, thynges worthye perpetualle memory.
            
               Celatura, grauyng in mettall.
            Celatus, a, um, hydde.
            
            
               Celeberrimus, a, um, moſt honourable, or moſt in reputation.
            
               Celebrare nuptias, to make a feaſt at a mariage. Celebrare epulas, to make bankettes.
            
               Celebrare conuiuium, to make a great feaſt or bankette.
            
               Celebrare exequias, & funera, to bringe one ſolempnely to burienge.
            
               Celebare ludos, to make plays with greate aſſemblye of people.
            
               Celebrare ſuum natalem, to make a greate feaſte at the day of his byrthe.
            
               Celebrare coetus hominum, to aſſemble a great numbre of people.
            
               Celebratio, ſolemniſation.
            
               Celebratus, a, um, moche ſpoken of, or haūted.
            
               Celebreſco, I am in gret fame, or am renomed.
            
               Celebris, bre, famons, alſo ſwift, honourable.
            
               Celebris locꝰ, a place moche hanted & knowē.
            
               Celebritas, tatis, renoum. alſo a great aſſembly.
            
               Celebriter, honourably.
            
               Celebro, aui, are, to celebrate or brynge in renoume, to make good report. alſo to haunte, to honour or worſhyp.
            
               Celer, eris, ſwyfte, quycke.
            
               Celeris copia.
               Plautꝰ in Mercat. 
               Date dij quaeſo conueniundi mihi eius celerem copiam, God graunte that I may very ſhortly mete with hym.
            
               Celeranter, for celeriter, haſtily or quickly.
            Celeratim,Actius. idem.
            
               Celeres,
               Siſenna. olde writers vſed for Equites, horſmē.
            
               Celeritas, quyckenes, ſwyftenes.
            Celeritudo, idem.
            
               Celeripes, ſwyfte of foote.
            
               Celeriter, celerius, celerrimè, ſwyftely, ſwyftlyer, ſwyftlyeſt.
            
               Celero, aui, are, to doo a thynge quyckely, to make haſte
            
               Celetes, runnynge horſes.
            
               Celeuſma, the ſhoute or crye that ſhyppemen or botemen doo make, whan the mayſter dothe whyſtell or calle.
            
               Celeuſtes, he that calleth on the maryners in comfortynge them.
            
               Cella, a cellar, wherin any thinge is kept, alſo where we be priuily waſſhed, alſoo a ſecrete place in the temple, a chauncell.
            
               Cella penuaria, a garnere, or ſtorehouſe.
            
               Cellaria, a wyne ſellar.
            
               Cellarium, a ſtoorehouſe.
            
               Cellarius, he that hath the charge of a cellar or ſtorehouſe.
            
               Cellulae columbarum, culuer hooles.
            
               Celatim, priuily.
            
                
               Celo, aui, are, to hyde, or wyll not knowe.
            
               Celare aliquem.
               Ci. ep. fa. 
               Balbus noſter me de hoc libro celauit, Our frend Balbus told me nothynge of that boke.
            
               Celox, a ſwyft ſhyp, callid a Brigantine.
            
               Celſus, highe. it was alſo the name of a noble Romayn, whiche wrate in phiſycke and huſbandry in moſte eloquent latyne.
            
               Celtae, frenche men.
            
               Celtiberia, Biſkay.
            
               Celtiberi, people of that part of Spayn, which is callyd Biſkay.
            
               Celtis, a kind of ſwete trees growing in Affrik.
            
               Celtogallia, is that part of France, which conteyneth Aquitaniā, Lugdunenſem, Belgicā, & Narbonenſē, wherof the french king hath iii. partis h
                  •
               oc. Belgicā
                for the more part hath the emperour that nowe is, Charles the .v. Reade of eueryche of them in theyr letters.
            
               Celydrus, a womans apparayle.
            
               Cemellio, a towne in Liguria.
            
               Cemēta, pl. litle ſtones & rubbel, which ar layd betwene great ſtones in the making of a wal.
            
               Cementum, morter.
            
               Cenchris, a byrd lyke an hauke, which maketh a greatte ſowne whan he crieth. Alſo it is the name of a towne or countrey in Grece.
            
               Cenina, a citie of Italy.
            
               Cenodoxia, vaynglory.
            
               Cenomani, people of Lumbardy.
            
               Cenotaphium, a monument of theym whyche are deade.
            
               Cenſio, ſui, ere, to ſuppoſe, to ſhewe myne opinion or ſentence, to determine, to be diſcontēt, to number people, to thentent to take theym, whiche be apt for the warres, or to leuy a tax or a ſubſidy; to ſpeake or tell.
            
               Ne uobis cenſeam,
               Varro. 
               ſi ad me referretis, leſt I wolde be angry,Plaut. in Sticho. yf ye tolde me.
            
               Quid grauare cenſeas? Telle me, what is that,Plinius. 8. that greueth the?
            
               Cenſeri, to be had in eſtimation, or to be ſet by, alſo to be meruayled at.
            
               Cenſio, onis, a chaſtiſement, a pryce, aduyſe, or opynyon.
            
               Cenſor, a iudge of mens maners. alſo ſuche as was appoynted to value mens goodes.
            Cenſitor, idem.
            
               Cenſorius, a, um, pertaynyng to them, whiche had ouerſyghte of the maners of the people, whiche were callyd Cenſores.
            
            
               Cenſorius uir, he that hath ben a Cenſour, or is worthye for his grauitie to iudge and correct other mens maners.
            
               Cenſoria animaduerſio, was a puniſhement of them, whiche were of yll maners.
            
               Cenſoria nota, the rebuke or checke of the maſter of maners.
            
               Cenſualis, he that dothe aſſyſte or accompanye the iudges of maners called Cenſors.
            
               Cenſura, the authoritie or iudgement of a cenſour. alſo correction of maners, lawe or decree, concernynge maners.
            
               Cenſuram uini facere, to taſte wyne, to aſſay whether it be good or badde.
            
               Cenſus, ſus, yerely reuenues, alſo valuation of goodes, alſo a ſubſidi, the nūbrīg of the people Cenſui agri, were thoſe fieldes, which by the lawe cyuile mought be bought and ſolde.
            
               Cenſus equeſtris, was the eſtimation or value of them, whiche were in the order of gentilmen, callid ordo equeſtris, which rate was
400. Se
                     •
                  tertia, and that ſome amounted after the rate of our money at this day, to .2635. li.
6. s. 8. d. wherby it appereth howe rych Rome was at that tyme, ſens that was the general eſtimation of one order or ſtate.Plutar
                     ••
                  
               
            
            
               Cenſus ſenatorius, was the eſtymation of them which were ſenatours, and was double the rate of equeſtris, and in Auguſtus tyme it was treble ſo moche, which amounted of our money now currāt to .7900. & vi. li. not with ſtāding, that there were aboue .600. ſenators.
            
               Cenſus, ſi, he that is aſſeſſed or taxed.
            
               Capite cenſi, taxed by the poll, or he that paieth head ſyluer.
            
               Centauri, a people in the countrey of Theſſaly, whom the poetes dyd fayn to be the one half lyke a man, the other halfe lyke a horſe. alſoo they be certayn great ſhyppes.
            
               Centaurium, an herbe, whereof there be two kyndes, the great which apothecaries do call Reuponticum, and the laſſe whiche is callid Centory, alſo Fel terrae, & Febrifugia.
            
            
               Centaurꝰ, a riuer, which was firſt callid Euenꝰ
            
            
               Centenariae coenae, were ſuppers, on the which by a lawe callid Licinia, was beſtowed but one hundred of the braſon coyne callyd Aſſes.
            
            
               Centeſimus, a, um, the hundred, as Centeſima pars, the hundred part.
            
               Centeſimae urſurae, were gaynes of the hundred one peny for euery moneth lone.
            
               Centimanus, hauyng an hundred handes.
            
               Centipeda, a worme callyd a palmer, which is heary, and hath many feete.
            
               Cento, a quilt, or a iacke, or other lyke thyng
                  •
                ſtuffed with lynnen, flox, or cotten, or a 
                  •
               uſhen made of pieces of cloth of diuers colou
                  ••
               s.
            
               Centies, a hundred tymes.
            
               Centralis, le, that which is ſet in the very 
                  ••••
               ddes of a thynge.
            
               Centrones, moūt Sineis going into Lūbat dy.
            
               Centrum, the poynt, which is in the very my
                  •
               ddes of a thynge.
            
               Centum, a hundred.
            
               Centūuiri,
               Budacns. wher as the people of Rome were. 
                  ••
               
               uided into .35. tribes, of euery tribe were thre men choſen to be iuges in commune matters,
 which company was callid Centumuiratus, & they were callid Centumuiri, although that there were .v. mo thā a hūdred in that company, & their iugement was named Centum uirale iuditiū, and Centū uiralis haſta, foraſmoche as thoſe iudges, whiles they ſate in iugement, had a ſpeare pitched vp before them.
            
               Centunculus, a vyle garment.
            
               Centuplex, plicis, an hundred folde, an hundred double.
            
               Centuria, a parte of an hooſte, conteynyng an hundred men. alſo a portion of grounde in the field, contayning an hundred acres.
            
               Centuriata comitia, were generall congregations of people to traite of cōmune affayres,
                  
                     •
                  udeus. whiche aſſembly was not gathered by diuiſiō of pariſhes or wardes, but by the rate of their ſubſtance, or by theyr age.
            
               Centuriatae leges, lawes whiche were inacted by the people aſſembled after the rate of theyr ſubſtance or age.
            
               Centuriatim, by a hundred togither, alſo plentuouſely, or in a great numbre.
            
               Centuriatus, tus, the office of a centurio.
            
               Centurio, onis, a capitayne ouer one hundred of foote men.
            
               Centurio, aui, are, to diuide men into a company, contayning an hundred perſons, or fieldes into an hundred acres of lande.
            
               Centurupe, a fielde in Sicile, wherof is Centurupinum crocum.
            
            
               Cētuſsis, a rate of money at Rome, which was of ten of their grotes callyd Denarij, whych amounteth in the rate of our money at this tyme to .v. s. vi. d. ob. halfe ferthyng, halfe an halfe farthynge.
            
               Cepa, pe, & cepe indeclinab. an oynion.
            ❀Cepas edere, to eate oynyons: was a prouerbe ſpoken of them, which do ſeme to wepe or do wepe often.
            
               Cephale, or cephalis, ſignifieth the head.
            
               Cephalea, is a greuous and longe continuynge pein in the hed, of euery light cauſe ſuſtening moch griefe, neither abidyng noyſe nor light, nor ſwete ſauors. The pacient feleth as if his head were broken in pieces with hammers. It hapnith ſomtime of cold, ſomtime of heat.
            
               Cephalenia, an yle beyond Corcyra in the myddel ſea, which is alſo callid Vlyſſes yle.
            
               Cephalocruſtes, a worme, which is in the leaues of a peache tree.
            
               Cephalus, the name of a man, and of a fyſhe.
            
               Cephenes, vnprofitable bees, whiche make no hony, but only with the multitude of theym, do kepe warm the yong bees. it was ſomtime the name of Perſians, as Herodotꝰ writeth.
            
               Cephéus, the name of a kyng of Ethiope.
            
               Cephiſia, the region Attica.
            
               Cephiſis, a lake nere to the ſea Athlanticum.
            
            
               Cepina, an herbe callyd cyues.
            
               Cepites, a precious ſtone, hauing many whyte ſtrekes.
            
               Cepius, a, um, of an oynion, or like to oyniō.
            
               Ceporus, a gardiner.
            
               Cera, waxe, alſo waxed tables.
            
               Cerabaroa, is a contrey late found by the Spaniardes in the weſt occean, where all the men do go naked, and haue their bodies paynted with diuers figures, wearyng onely garlādes made with ſūdry floures, mixt with the cleys of lyons and tygres, in that countrey hathe bene founde plenty of golde.
            
               Ceramicus, a place in Athenes, where mē being ſlayne in battayle, were buried. alſo an other place, where cōmune women dwellyd.
            
               Ceramion, the ſame meaſure that Amphora is.
            
               Ceraſtes, a ſerpent whiche hath hornes lyke a ram, the body very lytel, wherby he deceiueth men, hidynge his body in the graſſe.
            
               Ceraſum, a chery.
            
               Ceraſus, a chery tree.
            
               Cerates, a ſmall weight or poyſe, which is the fourth part of a ſcruple, the. 48. part of an vnce
            
               Ceratia, is an herbe whiche hath but one leafe, and a great rote full of knottes.
            
               Ceratinae, is of Quint. callid a kinde of argument, whiche can not be reſoluyd.
            
               Ceratium, is the fruit, which is callid Siliqua, loke there, for the deſcription. By the weight therof, the auncient phiſitions made all their poyſes, whiche tryers of golde do now call a cartacte, wherof Dragma conteyned .18. as Leonardus Portius writeth.
            
               Ceratum, ſiue Cerotum, a playſter made with waxe, roſeyn, or gummes. it is callid in greke Dropax.
            
            
               Ceratura, the dreſſynge of a thinge with waxe.
            
               Cerberus, the porter of hell. alſo a dogge with thre heades, whiche Hercules drewe oute of Hell, as paynyms ſuppoſed.
            Cercius, uide Circius.
            
               Cerea, a certayne drynke, whiche the Spanyardes vſed.
            
               Cereales, were .ii. of theſe offices callyd Aediles in Rome, whiche had authoritie ouer the markette.
            
               Cercope,
               Coelius. a lyttell graſſehoppe.
            
               Cercopithêcus, an ape with a tayl callid a marmoſet. it may be alſo taken for a munkay.
            
               Cercurus, a certayn ſorte of ſhyppes.
            
               Cerdo, nis, a cobblar. ſometyme generally all craftes vſynge ſowynge.
            
               Cerdon, dônis, an heretike, whiche affyrmed, that Chriſt was neuer borne of a woman, & that he had no fleſhe, nor ſuffred any paſſion, but that he fayned to ſuffer. Alſo he taughte that the god, which was declarid by the law
                  •
                prophetes to be god, was not the fader of our
 ſauiour Chriſt, for he was knowen, the other was vnknowē, thone was iuſt, the other was good. alſo he ſaid, that the old teſtament was naught. moreouer that ſom creatures of them ſelf ar yl, and that they were not made of that god, that was the chief goodnes, but of an other the begynnyng of al yl, which he nameth the principal miſchief. He was about the yere of our lord. 144. whoſe hereſies ben al cōdemned by the generall conſent of al chriſtendom.
            
               Cerrale, pertaynynge to Ceres the goddeſſe.
            
               Cerebroſus, a man beinge braynſycke, or wyld brayned, truſtyng onely to his owne wyll.
            
               Cerebrum, the brayne.
            
               Ceres,
               Diodorꝰ Siculus. callyd alſo Iſis, was wyfe of Oſyris, kyng of Egypt, who as the Grekes ſuppoſed dyd fyrſt inuent the ſowyng of wheate & barley, whiche before dyd growe wylde amonge other herbes. Alſo that ſhe fyrſt made lawes, wherby iuſtyce ſhuld be equally minyſtred to all men, violence and wronge beinge by feare of punyſhment taken away. Herodotus writeth, that the Egyptians do affirm, that Ceres & Bacchus do beare the chief rule in hell.
            
               Ceretani, a people in Spayne.
            
               Ceretum, a towne in Italy.
            
               Cereus ſubſtant. a taper, or other lyke candelle of waxe.
            
               Cereus,
               Horatius. 
               a, um, ſofte, alſo fatte, alſo of waxe.
            
               Cerea pruna, wheaten plummes.
            
               Cerinthe, an herbe hauynge the taſte of waxe and hony togither, a honyſuckle.
            
               Cerinthus, the meate of bees, which is founde in hony combes, ſeperate from the hony, whiche is in taſte bytter, and is alſo moyſt.
            
               Cerinum,
               Actius. a garment of the colour of waxe.
            
               Cerits, madneſſe or frenſy.
            
               Cerium, a ſoore lyke a hony combe.
            
               Cero, aui, are, to dreſſe a thynge with waxe.
            
               Ceroma,
               Cic. in ca. an oyle wherewith wraſtlers were annoynted.
            
               Ceroſtrotum, an ymage of waxe.
            
               Cerno,
               Ci. Dolobellae, & ad Attic. Plin. 18. 
               creui, cernere, to ſe or perceyue▪ alſo to conſyder, ſomtyme to iudge, or determyn. ſomtyme to trye out. Alſo to ſyft or raunge floure of corne. Otherwhyle to deuyſe togyther, or talke one with an other.
            
               Vere cundari neminem apud mēſam decet,
               Plautus in Trinum. 
               nam ibi de diuinis at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   humanis cernitur: No man ought to be abaſhed at the table, for there men do deuyſe and talke of matters concernynge as well god as man.
            
               Cernere falſam haereditatē alienae gloriae, To get praiſe to him ſelf of an other mans actis. Cernere hereditatem, to entre into land fallen by inheritaunce.
            
               Cerno animo, I do foreſee or conſyder before
            
               Cernulus,
               Hier. con. he that is buſye to fynde faute in an other man.Ruffi nū.
            
            
               Cernus, nus, a certayne ſhowe.
            
               Cernuus, ſtoupynge or lokynge downewarde.
            
               Cerrus,
               Rue
                     ••
                  
                a great tree lyke to a poplar, hauyng a longe ſem and a ſtraight he beareth a kinde of maſt, rough without lyke a cheſtin, but not apt to be etē, but only of ſwine, & yet is it not very good for them, there hangeth on the bowes longe pendantes lyke drye ruſſet moſſe, whiche is ſwete in ſauour. The tymber therof is not conuenient for buyldyng.
            
               Certamen, a conflict or byckring, a contētion.
            
               Certamina ſacra, were certayn great games in Grece, where men contended in featis of wit, ſtrength, and agilitie. Of theym were foure: Nemaea, Pythia, Iſthmia, & Olympia, the price of Olympia was a garlande of wyld olyue, at Iſthmus a garlande of pyne apple, in Nemea of percily, in Pythiis, of apples growynge by the temple of Apollo. Vitruuius remembreth, that the auncient grekes ordeyned that the people there aſſembled, ſtāding with palme in their handes, ſhuld ſinge their prayſes, whiche had victorye at thoſe games, and alſo whan they retourned home to their houſes, the citie or towne, where they dwellyd, ſhulde receyue them with moch honour, they riding in chariots, & during their lyues, they ſhuld haue pencions out of the comon treſure.
            
               Certatim, one contendyng or ſtryuyng with an other, who ſhall do moſt or beſt.
            
               Certe, truely, verily, aſſuredly. Certò, idem.
            
            
               Certatio, debate, ſtryfe, ſtudy, prouocation.
            
               Certiſſo, aui, are, to be certified or ſure.
            
               Certitudo, dinis, certayntie or ſuretie.
            
               Certo, without doubte.
            
               Certo, aui, are, to ſtriue, to contend, to fight, to ſue one an nother.Cicera 
               Certare damnis, to goo about to diſtroye one an other.
            
               Certare pignore, to lay in a paun in cōtentiō
            
            
               Certus, a, um, certayn, ſure, without dout. ſome tyme it ſignifieth euen as we wold haue it.
            
               Certae opes, rycheſſe that is permanent.
            
               Certi homines, ſure men and faithfull.
            
               Certi, certayn other.
            
               Certiorem facere, to aduertiſe, to lette me to wete or vnderſtande.
            
               Certo certius, as ſure as may be.
            
               Certum habere, to knowe ſurely.
            
               Cerua, an hynde.
            
               Ceruchus, a cabin in the higheſt part of a ſhip.
            Ceruicale, & ceruical, a bolſtar.
            
            
               Ceruinus, a, um, of a harte.
            
               Ceruiſia, ale or biere.
            
               Ceruix, icis, the hynder part of the necke.
            
               Ceruici imponere, to laye on his necke, to charge one with a thynge, wyll he or no.
            
               Ceruices dare alicui, to offre to one his heed.
            
               Cerunina, care waxe.
            
               Cerus, a kynde of oken trees.
            
                
               Ceruſſa, ceruſe or white leade, wherwith ſome women be paynted.
            Ceruſſatus, a, um, paynted white.
            
            
               Ceruus, a harte, or a forke, wherwith cotages were propped vp.
            
               Ceryx, cis, a purſyuaunt or bedell. It is alſoo a ſhell fyſhe of the kynd of purples.
            
               Ceſpes, pitis, a tyrfe▪ ſom do call them ſoddes, graſſe and erthe togither.
            
               Ceſſatio, ſlackenes in doing, ydelneſſe.
            
               Ceſſator, he that is ſlowe in doing his dutie.
            
               Ceſsio, where one claymeth a thynge, whiche an other man hath, who denyeth it not, nor maketh contrary clayme.
            
               Ceſim ferire, to ſtryke edgelyng.
            
               Ceſsim, in reculynge.
            
               Ceſſo, aui, are, to ceſſe, to leaue warke, to abide to do nothyng, or to be ydell.
            
               Ceſticillus, a garland of cloutes, which womē do lay on their heedes whā they cary any thīg.
            
               Ceſtreus, a kind of codfiſh, which neuer eateth any other fyſhe, wherof came this prouerbe,
            
               Ceſtreus ieiunat, the codde faſteth, ſpoken of good and iuſt men, which do no rauyn, nor taketh any other mens goodes from them.
            
               Ceſtrum, an inſtrument wherwith yuory is made holowe. alſo a 
                  〈◊〉
                or a wym
                  ••
               e▪ alſo an herbe, whiche is 
                  〈◊〉
                Betayne.
            
               Ceſtus, a gyrdell, wherwith the huſbande dyd gird his wife, which was ſet full of ſtuddes.
            
               Cetariae, places nigh to the ſea ſyde, where Tuny & other great fiſhes be taken and ſalted.
            
               Cetarius, a fyſhmonger or taker of great fiſhes
            
               Cetra, a lyght tergate.
            
               Cetrati milites, ſouldiors with lyght tergats
            
               Cete & Cetus, a great fyſhe callid a whale.
            
               Ceu,
               Ci ad At. as it were, euenas.
            
               Ceua, a lytle cowe that giueth moch mylke.
         
         
            C ANTE H.
            
               CHaam, callid alſo Gog Chaam, is the name of a dignite of the great emperor of Tartariās, callid alſo the gret Chan of Catay or Cambalu, whoſe dominion extendeth from the furtheſt part caſt, vnto the coū
               trey of Ruſſy northweſt, & ſo northe vnto the ſeptentriall or north ſea, and on the ſoutheaſt vnto the ſouth or Indiā ſea. on the ſouthweſt vnto Perſia. ſo that by the chart it appereth that there is vnder hym as moche mayn land within lyttell, as is the reſydue of all Aſia, Europa, and Affrica.
            
               Chabrias, a noble capitayn of the Athenienſis, of whome this inuention in armes is lefte in remēbrance. Whan he came in the ayd of the Thebans agaynſt the Lacedemonians, Ageſilaus king of the Lacedemoniās vāquyſhing the aray of the ſouldiors retayned, & putting them to flyght, Chabrias reſtrayned the reſidue, cauſyng them to ſet their tergats againſt their knee, & thraſting forth their ſpeare, to abyde and receyue the brunt of their enemies, which Ageſilaus beholdīg durſt not go forth but cauſed the retreate to be blowen. This man in a batayle on the ſea, againſt theym of Chius, was ſlayne, choſyng rather to dye honorably, than forſakyng his ſhyp (as the reſydue dyd) to throwe awaye his harneys, and ſwymme with his company.
            
               Chaere, the imperatiue mode of a verb of greke whiche in latin is ſalue, god ſpede, wel mette, and ſuche other ſalutations.
            
               Chaerephillon, an herbe callyd Cheruyle.
            
               Chalame, a citie of Perſy, whiche now is callyd Aetiſiphon.
            
            
               Chalaſis, the knot, wherwith womens garmentes were knyt about theyr neckes.
            
               Chalaſtra, a certayne apparayle.
            
               Chalaſtricum nitrum, ſalte peter, which is very pure and lyke to ſalte.
            
               Chalaza, a gatherynge vnder the ſkynne lyke the diſeaſe callyd Bubo.
            
               Chalazia, a ſtone lyke to hayle, and ſo cold, that no fyre may heate it.
            
               Chalazium, a lytell round werte in the eye lyddes, whiche may be moued with ones fynger hyther and thither.
            
               Chalcantum, cop
                  •
               roſe, or vitriole.
            
               Chalcedonia, a cite in Aſi againſt Cōſtātinople
            
               Chalchis, a fiſh of the ſec, of the kind of turbut.
            
               Chalcis, dis, the name of a citie in Grece. alſo of an yle, and of a byrde.
            
               Chalcites, a ſtoone of the colour of braſſe, but more blacke, wherof braſſe is tried.
            
               Chalcographus, a prynter.
            
               Chalcos, ſeu Aereola, the .xxxvi. part of a dram
            
               Chaldaea, a countrey, whiche as Strabo wryteth, doth ioyne to Arabia, & to the ſea callyd Mare Perſicū, Solinus and Plinius nameth that countrey Chaldaea, where the great city of Babylon ſtode. In the new chartes it is in this wyſe ſet, on the weſt it ioyneth on Meſapotamia, on the north vpon Aſsiria, and Media, on the eaſt vpon Perſia, on the ſouth vpō 
               Arabia deſerta, & ſo is it far frō 
               Iudaea. They haue a proper language, ſomwhat lyke to hebru, but their letters ar vnlike to any otherletters. Strabo nameth the countrey, where the people callid Chalybes dwell, Chaldea li. 12.
            
               Chaldei, be taken for great aſtronomers of the countrey of Aſſiria.
            
               Chaleſtra, a citie of Theſſaly on the ſea coſt.
            
               Chalybes, a people in the laſſe Aſia, in the coū
               trey callyd Pontus, whiche people do dygge great plentie of yron, they beinge naked. alſo it is the name of a fludde in Spayne.
            Chalybs, lybis, ſteele.
            
            
               Chalyx, a flynte ſtone, out of the whiche fyre is ſtryken.
            
                
               Cham aeciſſos, an herbe callyd grounde yuy.
            
               Chamedaphne, an herbe, whyche groweth in lengthe, wyndyng togither in dyuers partes, and hath leaues lyke to laurell or bayes, and hath a floure lyke to a violet, and is callyd of ſome men perwyncle.
            
               Chamaedris, drios, an herbe callid Germander.
            
               Chamaeleo albus, is a maner of a thyſtel growyng by the ground without any ſtalke, puttynge vp prickes lyke an hedgehog, hauinge in the middle a knap ful of prickes on a ſhort ſtalke, in the whiche doo appere purple floures, whiche growe into plumes, and do fly away with the wynd, lyke as of other thyſtels, and hath a white roote and ſwete, & groweth on olde landes and bare hylles.
            
               Chamaeleo niger, is the cōmun thiſtle, whiche hath a great ſtalke and longe, ſomwhat ruddy, hauyng on the toppe a rounde knap with ſharpe floures chaungeable of colour.
            
               Chameleon, ontis, a lyttell beaſt, hauynge his ſkyn ſpotted lyke to a lybarde, which chaungeth into dyuers colours, accordynge to the thing that he ſeeth. They be ingendred in India, and is of the quantite and figure of a liſarde, but that his legges be lengar, and goth vpryght, and hath a ſnowte lyke a ſwyne, a longe tayle and ſmall at the ende, his eyen be neuer cloſed, he dothe neuer eate or drynke, but is nouryſhed onely by ayre.
            
               Chameleuce, ces, an herbe growing by ryuers hauing leues like a poplar, but moch greater.
            
               Chamaemelon, an herbe callyd ca
                  ••
               omyll.
            
               Chamelopardalis, a beaſte whiche is as great as a camel, of ſkin and colors like a Panther, hauyng ſpottes of ſundry color, and hath his forelegges and necke longe, and the heed lyke a camell, his fecte and legges lyke an oxe.
            
               Chamelus, a beaſt callyd a camelle, commonly knowen.
            
               Chamemirſynne, is a buſhe or tree, which hath ſharpe pryckes in the leaues, and redde bearyes cluſtered. I ſuppoſe it to be a kynde of holy or holme.
            
               Chamaepyris, an herbe, wherof be .iii. kyndes, the one is commonly callyd herbe yuy, but it is not that whiche is deſcribed by Dioſcorides, although it haue ben proued to haue lyke vertue. The ſeconde is the ſmall cipres ſet in pottes. The .iii. is ſuppoſed to be that which is callyd ſaynt Iohn̄s worte.
            
               Chamaeterae, maydens, whyche were wonte to ſyt at theyr mayſtreſſes feete.
            
               Chamezeleon, an herbe callyd cinquefoyle.
            
               Chamitterae, & Chamitteridae, lyttell ymages made folowynge a greatter ymage.
            
               Chaniſcus, the hyndermoſt part of a ſhyppe, by the whiche the anker hangeth.
            
               Chanona, a tarte or marchpayn, or other lyke delycate thynge.
            
               Chaones,
               Strabo. people of the countrey of Epirus in Grece. The countrey is callyd Chaonia.
            
            
               Chaonides, wolues that do ſlee hartes.
            
               Chaos, a confuſe matter without for me, made fyrſt of nothyng, wherof poetes ſuppoſed all other thynges to procede.
            
               Characatae umeae, vynes incloſed with canes or reede in the ſtede of pales.
            
               Characias, an herbe callyd ſpourge.
            
               Characote, a frame, about the whyche vynes be wounde and tourned.
            
               Character, a token, a note made with a penne, a figure, a ſtyle or fourme of ſpeakynge.
            
               Characteres, letters.
            
               Charadrius, a great deuouring byrd of the ſea.
            
               Charax, a fyſhe callyd alſo Dentix, with teethe ſtandyng out of his lyppes, & is a brode fyſh, & ſomwhat red, with a chaungeable colour.
            
               Charaxes, the brother of Sapphus.
            
               Charcheſia, a cup longe, and ſmall in the myddell, and full of handels.
            
               Chariophilon, a kynde of 
                  •
               oote ſpice that groweth in India, I ſuppoſe it to be cloues.
            
               Chariſma, grace, a thankefull gyft.
            
               Chariſtia, plura, is as it were a Chriſtmas feeſt or a wake, where kinrfolk do reſort togither, bryngyng or ſendyng preſentes mutually.
            
               Chariſius, the name of a grammarian.
            
               Chariſtium, a grene marble.
            
               Charitas, charitie or loue, proprely towarde a mans countrey or neighbours.
            
               Charites, the graces, whiche were ſuppoſed to be the doughters of Iupiter, thre in number, whoſe names were, Aglaia, Thalia, Euphroſyne. And where in ſpeakyng or wrytyng appered to be a meruailous dilectation or ſwetenes, it was ſayde that therin was a grace, in latyne Charis.
            
            
               Charmeſynum, a kynde of ſylke, whiche delyteth the beholders. I thinke it to be crymſyn.
            
               Charon, tis, was named of the Paynyms, the boteman that caried ſoules ouer the thre ryuers of hell, Acheron, Stix, and Cocytus.
            
            
               Charopus, amyable, pleaſaunt, or hauynge a good grace.
            
               Charta, paper, alſoo a leafe of paper, or other lyke thyng, wherin we do write. Moreouer any thynge contaynynge the deſcription of a place in pycture. Alſo a mayden that had neuer chylde.
            
               Chartaceus, of paper.
            
               Chartariae officinae, paper mylles.
            
               Chartilago, ginis, a gryſtell.
            
               Chartophylacium, a place where wrytnges or monumentes are kept, as the place callyd the rolles. And the maiſter of the rolles maye be callyd Chartophylax, or Magiſter ſcriniorū, which offyce had Vlpianus the great lawyer
 with themperour Alexander callid Seuerus.
            
               Chartula, alyttell leafe of paper.
            
               Charundas, the name of a man, whiche gaue lawes to the Atheniens.
            
               Charus, well beloued.
            
               Charybdis, a gulfe of the ſea by Sicile, wherin is daungerouſe ſaylynge, by reaſon of ſtremes flowynge contrary eche agaynſte other, wherby ſhyppes be therin deuoured.
            
               Chaſma, a gapynge or openynge of the firmament, or of the erthe.
            
               Chelae, the klees of a crab, crauayſe or ſcorpiō.
            
               Cheledonia, an herbe called ſelandine: alſo a weſtern wynde.
            
               Chelenophagi, a people in Carmania, which lyue by eatynge torteyſes.
            
               Chelonalopices, I ſuppoſe to be the byrdes whiche we do call barnacles.
            
               Chelonium, the ſhell of a torteyſe.
            
               Chelydonij, lyttell ſtones founde in the mawe of a ſwalow.
            
               Chelydros, a ſea ſnayle.
            
               Chelys, a torteyſe: ſometyme it is taken for an harpe or lute.
            
               Chema, is a meaſure of the grekes conteining two cochlearia, which receyueth of wyne in poyſe or weyght .ii. drammes .i. ſcruple .iiii. graynes, and .iiii. fyue partes of a greyne.
            
               Chemiſcus, a parte of the foreſhyppe, wherby the anker dothe hange, ſometyme it is taken for all the ſhyp.
            
               Chemites, a maner of tombe, lyke to yuory.
            
               Chennis, is an yland as Pomponius writeth.
            
               Chenoboſcion, a place where greſe be fed.
            
               Chenopus, a gooſe fote.
            
               Chenotrophia, a houſe or place where water-foule are kept.
            
               Cheoſpes, a kynge of Egypt, which made the great ſteple at Memphis, wheron were ſoo many men workynge, that the ſame kynge ſpente onely in perſely, oynions, and garlike a thouſande and thre ſcore talents, whiche if it were the great talent, it amounted of our money, to CCI. thouſande fyue hundred and fifty poundes.
            
               Cherinthus, an heretike, which affyrmed, that Chryſt ſhulde come and raygne in the worlde the ſpace of a thouſande yeres, and durynge that tyme men ſhoulde lyue in all carnall delytes, and afterwarde ſhulde come vp to heuē, where they ſhuld euer lyue in the pleſures of gloteny and lecherye. Alſo he denyed that Chriſt was god, but pure man. Alſo that the world was made by god, but of principates. He alſo receyued onely the goſpell of ſayncte Mathew, and reiected the other euangelyſtes, and the actes of the apoſtels. He was about the yere of our lorde. 88.
            
               Cherroneſus. the parte of Greece called nowe Morea. It is ſomtyme taken for the northe parte of the greate Aſia. It is alſo called Cherſoneſus.
            
            
               Cherſina, a kynde of londe ſnayles.
            
               Cherſydrus, a kynde of ſerpentes in Calabria whych liue bothe on lande and water.
            
               Cherubin, one of the holy orders of angelles, wherin is the ſcience diuine and miſticall.
            
               Cheruſci,
               Coelius. ant. a people of Germany.
            
               Chia, a ſerpentes den.
            
               Chibis, an herbe.
            
               Chiliarchus, a capitayne of a thouſande men. It is the ſame office, whiche Tribunus militum was amonge the Romaynes.
            
               Chilias, adis, the numbre of a thouſande.
            
               Chiliaſtae, were chriſten men, whiche had this opinion, that Chriſt ſhulde come perſonally, and raign as a kynge in this worlde a thouſande yeres.
            
               Chilon, one of the .vii. wyſe men of Greece.
            
               Chilones, men hauynge great lyppes.
            
               Chilorus, a ryuer of Macedony.
            
               Chimaera, a gote. Alſo a mountayne in Licia. alſo a monſter hauynge thre heades, one like a lyon, an other lyke a gote, the thyrde lyke a dragon.
            
               Chimerinos, a cercle of heauen, in to the whiche whan the ſon commeth, the dayes be at ſhorteſt.
            
               Chymus, the iuyce procedynge of meate digeſted, whiche by the vaynes commeth into the members, and reſtoreth that whiche is conſumed by heate.
            
               Chiragra, the goute in the fingers.
            
               Chiragricus, he that hath ſuche a diſeaſe.
            
               Chirographum, & Chirographus, an oblygation or lyke inſtrument, wherby a man is bounden, and hath put to his hande.
            
               Chirogylius,
               Leuit. 11. and hedghog.
            
               Chiromantes, he that telleth mennes fortune by palmeſtry.
            
               Chiromantia, palmeſtry.
            
               Chiron, nis, the name of a man, who fyrſt did fynde the vertues of herbes, and taught Aeſculapius phiſicke, and Apollo to harpe, and aſtronomy to Hercules, and was mayſter to Achilles, and excelled all other menne of his tyme in vertue and iuſtice.
            
               Chironia, is a foule ſore harde to be cured, by lykelyhod it is that which comonly is called, Noli me tangere. It is alſo a wylde vyne.
            
               Chironium, an herbe called Centauria maior,
               Ruellius. in englyſhe Centory the more. It is hot and dry in the ſeconde degree.
            
               Chironomia,
               Conſtan. a faſcion of geſture with the hā
               des vſed in danſyng, or in keruyng of meate.
            
               Chironomus, he that daunſeth with geſture of the handes.
            
               Chirotheca, a gloue.
            
                
               Chirurgia, ſurgery.
            
               Chirurgus, a ſurgeon.
            
               Chius, an yle by Greece in the ſea called Aegeum, whiche as Strabo wryteth, is in compace.
900. furlonge: whiche is a hundred Italion myles. In this yle do grow very good malmeſyes and other hotte wynes. It is remembred amonge the authors in greke, that it mought neuer be remembred, that within that coūtrey was any aduoutry committed, or vnlaufull accompanienge with women amonge them ſelfes, whiche is a thynge worthy to be put in remembraunce.
            
               Chlamis, idis, a cloke which properly is worn, by men of warre.
            
               Chlamidatus, cloked.
            
               Chlorion, a grene byrde as great as a turtyll, whiche is neuer ſene but in ſommer.
            
               Choa, a certayne meaſure, alſo veſſell, wherin was put licoure, which was offred to ydols.
            
               Choaſpes, a famous ryuer in Aſia, which runneth into the great ryuer of Tigris.
            
               Chobar, ſignifieth all the great floudes, whiche be in the region of Caldee.
            
               Choemis, was a ſpace of grounde amonge the Iewes, conteyninge, iiii, miles italyon.
            
               Choenix, nicis, a meaſure of the Greekes, whiche conteyneth after Rullius .ii. Sextarios, whiche amounteth to .xl. meaſure ounces, or ynche meaſures, ſo is it laſſe than our quart. After Georgius Agricola it conteyneth three Cotylas, and than is the meaſure vncertain, for as moche as Galene ſayeth, that there were dyuerſe opinions of the meaſure of Cotyla. Rede more in Cotyla, notwithſtanding this meaſure was ſoo commune amonge the auncient grekes, that therby they meaſured as moche meate as ſhoulde ſuffyſe theyr ſeruauntes for one day, as Suidas remembreth in expoundynge a place in Homer.
            
               Choenici ne inſideas, was one of the coūſels of wyſe Pythagoras, whiche ſaynct Hierom doth in this wyſe expound: be notmoch careful how thou ſhalt liue to morow. Plutarchꝰ in this wyſe: Leue ſome for to morow, for he ſaythe, that in the olde tyme it was not leful to take vp the table without any thyng left. whiche expoſition is contrary to ſaynct Hieromes.Chil. 1. But Eraſmus doth declare it in this wyſe: men ought not by ydelneſſe and ſlouth eate that whiche other men paye for, but by his owne labour or ſtudye gette ſome what, wherby he may honeſtly lyue. Nowe ye haue all three expoſitions, euery manne take that whiche he lyketh beſt.
            
               Cholera, one of the foure principall humours called choler. It is alſo a ſickenes of the ſtomake & bowels, wherin hapneth both vomit and flyx, with tourment in the bowelles, ſendinge forth choler vpward and downwarde, firſt watry, afterward lyke as fleſhe had ben waſhed in it. That ſickenes ingēdred with inordinate fedynge of longe tyme, ſpeciallye of rawe fruites and muſhroms, moche vſe of cucumbers and pompones, and all fruytes very colde, whiche eaten after meales or the meate be digeſted, are corrupted in the ſtomake, and ingendreth a venomous iuyce, whiche nature may not ſuſteyne, and therfore ſhe expelleth it with violence.
            
               Cholericus, & Cholerica, he or ſhe that is cholerike.
            
               Cholerica tormina, tourmentes or frettinges, whiche come of choler.
            
               Choliambi, a kynd of verſes, made of the fote of meter called Iambus.
            
            
               Cholon, is the gut, wherin the ordure or dregges of the meate is fourmed, and commeth from the lefte hednay, & toucheth the ſplene, and ryſeth vp to the right ſide of the ſtomak, and cometh by the lyuer, and receyueth a little choler from the gal, by the ſharpnes wherof the ordure is prouoked to diſcende, and made redy to paſſe.
            
               Chomata, water bankes to kepe in ryuers that they ouerflowe not.
            Chomer, idem quod Chodrus.
            
               Chonca, a ſhell fiſhe.
            
               Chondrilla, is an herbe of the kynde of cichorye, by the deſcription therof it is an herbe growynge in corne fieldes, hauynge leaues lyke vnto wyld cicory, but that they be more full of mylke, and the ſtalke is greatter, and more tender and holowe: oute of the whiche commeth moche mylke. Sauynge that whiche Dioſtorides doth wryte of, hath maſtyr comminge out of the braunches, whiche may happen to be, where the contray is very hot, which althoughe it happen not here, yet may our herb be Chondrilla, & haue his vertues.
            
               Chondrus, rede more in Alica.
            
            
               Choragiū, ſtuffe, properly wherwith that place is adorned, where as ſhalbe enterludes or diſguiſinges. Alſo the apparayle of the players.
            
               Choragus, he that kepeth ſuche ſtuffe or apparayle.
            
               Chorannei, certayne men that lyue in woodes in Perſia, which are ſo ſwyft, that they take hartes with runninge.
            
               Choraula, the craft to blowe trumpettes, or to playe on ſhaulmes, or other lyke pypes.
            
               Choraules, minſtrels that do play for danſing.
            
               Chorda, a ſtrynge of a harpe or lute, or other inſtrument.
            
               Chordapſon, the ſikneſſe called Illiaca paſsio. reade more in Illica paſsio.
            
            
               Chorea, a daunce.
            
               Chorebus, was one of Athenes, which firſt inuented
 the makynge of erthen veſſel.
            
               Choriambus, a fote in meter, whiche hath the fyrſte ſyllable and the laſte longe, and two in the mydde
                  •
               l ſhorte.
            
               Chorius, a fote in meter, whiche by an other name is called Trochaeus, and is but of two ſyllables, the fyrſte longe, the ſeconde ſhorte.
            
               Chorobates, a meaſure to meete ground with, or a maſons rule.
            
               Chorocithariſta, he that leadeth a daunce, and playeth hym ſelfe on an inſtrument.
            
               Chors, tis, a place incloſed, wherein cattell is kepte, a barton called in ſome place. Chortales aues, pultry fedynge abrode in a barton or courte of huſbandry.
            
               Chortos, haye or graſſe mowen.
            
               Chorus, the company of players or dauncers, alſo a quyar.
            
               Chorus, ſiue Chomer, a meaſure of the Hebrues, whiche conteyneth ten tymes as moche as Batus, or Ephi, and amounteth to .vii buſhelles and a halfe of our meaſure.
            
               Chreſis, is vſe. & Catachreſis, is abuſion.
            
               Chreſton, an herbe called cykory.
            
               Chreſtus, the name of a noble author of Athenes.
            
               Chria, a notable ſentence, ſpoken ſhortly, to exhorte to vertue, or diſſuade from vice.
            
               Chriſis, vnction.
            
               Chriſtus, annoynted, the ſurname of our redemar.
            
               Chromaticus, whoſe colour neuer chaungeth, but is alway one.
            
               Chronica, orū, an hyſtory of actes done, with the tymes expreſſed, Chronicles.
            
               Chronicus, a, um, temporall, or perteynynge to tyme.
            
               Chryſanthemum, is the herbe called crow fote which hath yelowe floures commonly called golde knappes.
            
               Chryſe, an yle whiche Plinius and Solinus do ſet out of the mouthe of the famous riuer of Indus, where as Martianus writeth, is ſuche abundaunce of fyne golde, that therof the yle toke his name: for Chryſos is in englyſhe golde,
            
               Chryſendeta, a cup hauyng a border of golde, lyke as our maſers and nuttes were wont to haue, and therfore they maye be ſo called.
            
               Chryſes, the name of a prophette amonge the Gentiles. Alſo of a mayden gyuen by the grekes to kynge Agamemnon at the battayle of Troy.
            
               Chryſia, a Citie in Phrigie, and an ylande in Indie.
            
               Chryſippus, a noble philoſopher borne in Cilicia, in a towne called Soloe, as Solinus wryteth: but Laertius writeth, that he was borne in Tarſus, he was of the ſecte called Stoici.
            
            
               Chriſtis, the ſkym, whiche is on golde beinge molten.
            
               Chryſoaſpides, knyghtes that had ſhyeldes of golde.
            
               Chryſoberillus, a chriſtal ſtone, wherin the colour of golde ſhyneth.
            
               Chryſocolla, a ſtone, with the poulder, wherof paynters doo make a golden colour: alſo goldſmythes do vſe it to ſowder golde.
            
               Chryſocoma, golden heare.
            
               Chhryſocomus, he that hath golden heare.
            
               Chryſogonum, that bryngeth forthe gold.
            
               Cryſolachanon,
               Ruellius. an herbe called orage, in latine Atriplex.
            
            
               Chryſolampis, a ſtone of fyry colour by nyght.
            
               Chryſolitus, a pretious ſtone of the colour of golde.
            
               Chryſomela, yelowe quinces, of Vergilius they are named Aurea poma, as Ruellius ſuppoſeth.
            
               Chryſopraſſus, a ſtone grene as a leke, hauing ſpeckes of golde.
            
               Chryſoſtomus, the name of a buſhop of Conſtantinople, and alſo of an hyſtoryen, whiche were ſo called for theyr eloquence, for Chryſoſtomus is in englyſhe, A golden mouthe.
            
               Chryſothemis, the doughter of Agamemnon and Clytemneſtre.
            
               Chus, uel Choa, is a meaſure of the greekes of the whiche there is three ſortes, one is called Attica or Medica, and conteyneth .vi. ſextarios atticos, whiche is of englyſhe meaſure one pottle and halfe a pynte. An other is called Georgica, or of huſbandry, and is of englyſhe meaſure .vi. pyntes a halfe and a quarter, that is in poyſe of oyle .xi.li. and .iii. ounces: of wyne .xii.li. and di. of hony .xviii.li. and .ix. ounces. An other is Veterinaria, or of theym whiche cure cattell, whiche receyueth of our meaſure a pottell and a quarte, and in weyghte of wyne .xi.li. one ounce .ii. drammes .ii. ſcriples: of oyle .viii .li. of hony
.xvi.li.di. one ounce .di. and one dramme.
            
               Chymoſis,
               Galen. in defini. is a moyſture in the ſkynne, whiche incloſeth the eye.
            
               Chytra, a pot with fete, or a triuet.
            
               Chytracus, a triuet or cradel, whereon pottes are ſet to boyle meate.
         
         
            C ANTE I.
            
               CIBALE perteyninge to meate.
            
               Cibarium, meate.
            Cibarius, a, um, vyle.
            
            
               Cibarius homo, a vyle perſon.
            
               Cibarius panis,
               Cice. tuſ. queſ. 1. ranged breade, or cribble breade.
            
               Cibarium uinum,
               Varro. ſmall or yll wyne.
            Cibatus, tus, vittayles.
            
            
                
               Cibele, les, the doughter of Minois kynge of Creta, nowe Candy, ſhe beinge caſte out into a deſerte, was nouriſhed with beaſtes, and founden by a womanne that kepte ſhepe, ſhe was by her nouryſhed, after becam meruaylouſe fayre, and alſo wyſe, and founde fyrſte the pipe and rabour, and alſo the cymbales amonge the greekes. Moreouer the education of chyldren, ſhe tenderly louynge them al, in ſo moche as for the deathe of a childe, called A
                     •
                  ys, whom ſhe moche loued, ſhe became madde. Afterwarde ſhe was honoured of the gentiles for a goddeſſe. She was alſo called Rhea, mother of the goddes, and Veſta. Her ymage beinge ſpecially honoured in a citie of Phrigia called Peſsinuus, was by the counſayle of Sybilla, fetched thenſe by Scipio Naſica, and brought vnto Rome, and there had in great reuerence.
            Cibo, aui, are, to feede.
            
            
               Ciborium, a kynde of appuls of Alexandry.
            
               Cibus, meate.
            
               Cibi repoſiti,
               Quintili. meate ſet vp to be kepte.
            
               Cibum facere,
               Plautus in Trucul. to make redy meate. Mane aliquid fie
                     •
                   cibi, There ſhall be ſome meate made redy betyme.
            
               Cibum ſub ducere, to take meate away from one.
            
               Cicada, a graſhopper.
            
               Cicatrico, are, to ſtryke one ſo that a marke alwaye remayneth.
            
               Cicatricoſus, he that hath manye tokens of woundes.
            
               Cicatrix, icis, a token or ſcar where a wounde had ben.
            
               Cicatrizo, idem quod Cicatrico, alſo to heale a wounde, ſoo that onely a ſeme or ſcar maye appere.
            
               Ciccum, the tender rynde of a pomegranade.
            
               Cicer, eris, a grayne lyke to peaſon, whereof ſome are red, ſome blacke, & ſome are white.
            
               Cicercula, is leſſe than Cicer.
            Cicerculum. idem.
            
               Cicerbita, an herbe called ſouthyſtell.
            
               Cicero, onis, the ſurname of Marcus Tullius whoſe diuine eloquence, abundant lernynge, ſharpneſſe of wyt, dexteritie in actes, & moſte ardent loue to the comune weale of his countray, can not be ſufficiently expreſſed by noo mortall mannes tunge or pen. He was linyally diſcended from the auncient kynges of the people called Volſci, all be it tyme and occaſion wearynge out dignities in bloudde, his name continued long in the ſtate of worſhyp: his aunceſtours were named Cicerones, bycauſe that Tullius Appius, a noble kynge of Volſcis, one of them had on his noſe a mark lyke a chiche peaſe called Cicer. In his child hood he ſo excelled in wyt all other childrene, that the fathers of them meued with his fame, went purpoſly to the ſchole to behold and here hym. He ſo profited in the eloquence of greeke and alſo of latyne, that not onely his companions were in a meruaylous admiration of hym, but alſo Apollonius, the moſte excellent orator at that tyme, in herynge hym beinge ſore abaſhed, and not ſpeakynge a great ſpace, ſayd at the laſte: Truly Cicero I prayſe the, and meruayle at the, but I lament the fortune of greekes, whan I conſyder that by the, lernyng and eloquence, whiche onely was lefte vnto vs, is euen nowe tranſlated vnto the Romayns. whiche ſayenge of Apollonius, was founden afterward true. ſor loke what ſubtiltie is in logike, what commoditie in morall philoſophye, what ſecrete knowledge in philoſophye naturall, he knewe it (as Tacitus writeth) and declared it in latine in moſte perfecte eloquence. And whiche is to be wondred at, not withſtanding that beinge a verye yonge man, he came to practyſe in Rome, and had ſtudied abundauntly the ciuile lawes, and was meruaylouſly occupied in greate and weyghtye cauſes, and after that he was ſenatour, was continually (as it ſemed) moſt buſy about the weale publike: yet he that dothe exactly reade and ſtudy his warkes, ſhall thynke, that he neuer dyd any thynge but rede great authors and wryte bokes. for there was no ſecte of philoſophers, none oratour, no poete afore his tyme, that eſkaped hym, but that he rad his warkes, as in his bokes ſufficientely it appereth. And yet howe many bokes mde he? ſens we haue not the thyrde parte of them, yet ſuche as we haue of them, if any man now did wryte ſo moche and ſo well, we ſhoulde thynke hym to haue ſpente the more parte of his tyme in wrytynge. And yet noble Cicero, lorde god, howe many thynges dyd he exploit by his wiſdome and diligence in moſte weighty affayres, as well in warre as in peace? Howe dyd he by his dexteritie and prudence ſaue the Citie and people of Rome from the moſt pernicious confederacy and rebellion of Catiline, and manye other of the nobility, whiche went about to deſtroye the weale publike, and robbe the citie? Howe preſerued he the ſame citie and people, after the deathe of Caeſar, that they were not oppreſſed by Marcus Antonius? for his incō
               parable actes the hole Senate and people gaue to hym firſte before any the name of father of the countray. what trouble and miſery ſuſteyned he, beinge exyled, by the procuremente of Clodius, onely for the puttynge of the ſayd rebelles to dethe? Suche is the reward of people vnſtable. Like wyſe for dryuinge Antonius out of Rome, and by his ſharpe orations cauſynge hym to be proclaymed ennemy to the weale publyke, he made Antony ſo moch his enemy, that
 in the treaty of peace betwene hym and Octauius, he demaunded Cicero, to doo with hym at his pleaſure. which beinge graunted of the vnkynd Octauius, whom Cicero had brought vp, and by his meanes cauſed hym to be made the chiefe gouernour of the Romaynes: finally Antony ſent one Herennius, whom Cicero had ſaued from deathe by his eloquence, who purſued hym as he fled: whiche Cicero perceyuynge, abode his comynge, lyinge in a horſe lytter for waikenes, & with conſtant eyes prepared his throte to Herennius, who, all other men therat abhorringe, ſtrake of his head and his handes, & brought them to Antony, who reioycynge therat, cauſed the heade and the handes to be ſette ouer the place of ciuile iugementes at Rome, whiche beholden of the ſenat and peple was daily lamented. This haue I purpoſely written, to the intente, that this moſte noble counſailour ſhulde not be hyd to ſuche as can not yet vnderſtande his lyfe wrytten in greeke or latine, and that all men ſhoulde be inflamed to reade and vnderſtande his warkes, whiche afore all other gentiles, wold be chiefely red and folowed of Chriſten menne, fyndynge in them incomparable wiſedom and eloquence. And truely I wyll affyrme Quintilianes ſaiinge: He may well thynke, that he hath moche profyted, whom that Cicero ſpecially lyketh, he flouriſhed about .xl. yeres before the incarnation of Chriſte.
            
               Ciceronianus, he that coueyteth to folowe Cicero in eloquence.
            
               Cichorea, & Cichoreum, an herbe called ſucchory.
            
               Cicina, a nyght crowe.
            
               Cicindula, a fly whiche ſhyneth by night.
            
               Cicinia, a lyttell leane ſerpent in Italy.
            
               Ciclades, be yles in the ſee Ionium called Ciclades, bycauſe they lye rounde together, orels bycauſe in ſaylinge to them menne muſte fetche a great compaſſe aboute, by reaſon of promontories: whiche are in number. 53
            
               Cicones, a people of Thrace.
            
               Ciconia,
               
                  
                     •
                  riſot. a byrde whiche ſome do ſuppoſe to be called a ſtorke, and is of the fygure of an heron,
                  
                     ••
                  nius. but that he is greater, and is whyte, ſauynge that the toppes of his wynges are blacke, and his byll and legges are red. ſome thynke that they haue no tungues. they naturally be ennemies to ſerpentes, and do ſlea them. Of them it is wrytten, that whan they be olde, theyr byrdes do fede them, and prouyde meate for them, for the which cauſe the ymage of them was the token of iuſtice. and the auncient kinges had it on the top of their ſeptours, as they had in the lower parte the beaſte called Hippopotamus, which contrarye wyſe ſleeth his father, and rydeth on his mother, wherby they were exorted to aduāce iuſtice and pitie, and to oppreſſe iniuſtice and crueltie.Eraſ. in chil. Of this byrde came a greke worde for a prouerbe, Antipelargein, which ſignifieth (as I mought ſaye) to be lyke a ſtorke. whiche prouerbe is to exhort men to be kind to theyr parentes, or to theyr mayſters, whiche teacheth them or bringeth them vppe, requitynge them the benefyte, whiche they receyued of them.
            
               Ciconius, the name of him that bylded Brixia.
            
               Cicorium, an herb that groweth euery where.
            
               Cicum, a thynne ſkynne, whiche is within a pomegranade.
            
               Cicur, euery beaſte or byrde, whiche ones beynge wylde, is made tame.
            
               Cicuro, aui, are, to make tame.
            
               Cicuta, a venemous herbe, which groweth .ii. cubites in heyght, with a grene ſtalke full of knottes, buſhy in the toppe, hauynge leaues ſmaller than Coriander, and ſeedes greater than anyſe ſeede, and is horrible in ſauouor. ſome do nowe vſe that name for hemlocke.
            
               Cidaris, a cap, whiche the kynges of Perſia dyd vſe, and alſo the buſhops in the old law.
            
               Cieo,
               Feſtus. 
               & Cio, ciui, to meue a thynge, to cal or name: alſo to trouble or make one angrye. Quid negotij eſt,
               Plautus. 
               Piſtoclerum Lydus quod herum tam ciet? What is the matter, that Lyous thus trubleth or angreth his maſter? Bellum ciebant, they did ſet forth in bataile.
            
               Ciere aluum, to prouoke one to the ſtoole.
            
               Ciere urinam, to make one to pyſſe.
            
               Cileo, ui, ere, to meue or ſtyrre a thynge.
            
               Cilicia, is a countray in Aſia beyond the moūt of Taurus, partly incloſed with the hygheſt parte of the ſayd mount, and hardeſt to paſſe by. Strabo deuideth Cilicia in to two partes, one called Tracher, that is to ſay rough or rocky: The other Campeſtris, that is to ſaye playne. Ioſephus writeth, that it was of olde tyme called Tarſus of Tarſis, oone of the ſonnes of Iaphet, the yōgeſt ſon of Noe. Herodotus ſayeth, that the people were called Cilices of Cilix, the ſon of Agenor kinge of Phoenitia, where before it was called Hypatus. Saynct Hierom doth interpret Cilicia, a congregation, a lamentation, an aſſumtion, a lamentable callynge, or vomyte. The people were by nature inclyned to lien
                  •
                and ſtealynge, whereof grew this prouerbe:
            ❀Cilex non facile uerum dicit, The Cilician not lyghtly ſayeth trouth. A prouerbe applyed to a couetous man, which alway lyeth for his particular aduauntage, as nowe a dayes mooſte parte of men doo, whiche lyue onely by ſellynge.
            
               Cilicinus, a, um, made of hearen clothe.
            
                
               Cilicium, any cloth or garment made of heare.
            
               Cilium, the ouer ſkynne wherwith the eye is cloſed.
            
               Cilix, icis, an inhabitaunt of Cilicia.
            
               Cillibe & Cilliba, a rounde table.
            
               Cilones, men hauyng great round foreheades.
            
               Cima, the tender part of the ſtalke of herbes.
            
               Cimaria, thynges that be foure ſquare.
            
               Cimbalaris, an herbe whiche groweth in ſtone walles, whiche hath a lyttell leafe, ſomwhat in faſcion lyke to an iuy, and hath a lyttell purple floure. It is ſuppoſed to be the herbe, whiche is called Vmbelicus Veneris.
            
            
               Cimbices,
               Plutarch. they whiche do make moch of a little, or greately eſteme a thynge whiche is of ſmall value.
            
               Cimbri, were the people whiche dyd inhabite Denmarke and Norway, who hadde a meruaylous cuſtome, whiche Strabo wryteth: that with theyr wyues, who folowed theym in warres, were alſo women kunnynge in diuination, whoſe heare was whyte, and likewyſe theyr gownes, vnder the whiche they hadde launde clothes made faſte with pynnes or taches, beynge gyrte with gyrdelles of braſſe, and wente bare foted. They alwaye, as priſoners were taken, with naked ſwordes bete them to the grounde, & drewe them vnto a braſen cauldron, whiche conteyned fyfty Amphoras, of our meaſure .250. gallons, and hauynge an haulte place made for the purpoſe, they went vp quickely, and liftynge on hygh the men that were taken, they dyd cut theyr throtes ouer the cauldron, and by the droppynge of the bloudde, they declared theyr propheſies. Some other openynge mens bealyes, ſerched theyr bowelles, and propheſied victory vnto the people.
            
               Cimeliarchon,
               Budeus. a iewell houſe.
            
               Cimeliarchus, maiſter of the iewell houſe.
            
               Cimex, a ſtinkynge worme bredynge in wood or paper.
            
               Cimmerij, are people inhabitynge in the furtheſt parte of Europa, not fer from the great fennes called Paludes Meotidis, and about the ſea called Boſphorus Cimmerius, northeaſte from Grecia. Plinius and ſome other do affirme, that by the farre diſtaunce of the ſon from it, that countraye is alwaye verye darke, wherof hapned this prouerbe:
            ❀Cimmerijs tenebris atrior, Blacker than the darke of Cimmeria. applyed to moche darkeneſſe, or dulnes of wytte, or lacke of wyſedome.
            
               Cinabulum, a cradle.
            
               Cinaedus, of Nonius Marcelleus is expounde to be an exerciſer of wonton daūces and motions of the body in dyuers fourmes. Perottus in Cor
                  ••
               copie declareth it to be a perſon exerciſynge actes of lechery deteſtable, and agaynſte natural fourme and order, whiche I wyll not expreſſe, and if he had omytted it alſo, he had nothyng offended, being a thing worthy to be out of remembraunce.
            
               Cinamomum, a kynd of ſpyſe odoriferous and dilectable, called Cynamome, of ſome canell, It groweth in Ethiope, lyke a lowe buſhe in dyuerſe ſtemmes, whiche do not excede two cubites in heighte, hauynge leaues lyke to organum, the ryndes thereof is that whiche we haue in vſe. It is hot and dry in the third degree.
            
               Cinara, an herbe, whiche ſome men do ſuppoſe to be an artochoke.
            
               Cincinnati, men that haue curied heares.
            
               Cincinni, heares that be curled.
            
               Cinclidae,
               Ca
                     〈…〉
                  
                are bayes or parcloſis made aboute the places of iudgement, where men not beinge ſutars, maye ſtande, beholde, and here what is done and ſpoken amonge the iuges and pledours. Suche a lyke thing is at weſtmynſter hall about the common place, and is called the bekens.
            
               Cinclidarius,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ant. 3. was he whiche kepte the place, where monumentes or recordes were kepte, that euery manne ſhoulde not enter without leaue. As he which now kepeth the recordes in the towre, or the porter of the rolles maye be ſo called.
            
               Cincticulus, a ſhorte cote called a ierkyn.
            
               Cinctus, tus, a ſhort garment, which the conſull dyd weare, whan he profered battayle.
            
               Cinediae, ſtones founde in a fyſhes heade.
            
               Cineraceus, & Cinereus, a, um, of the colour of aſhes.
            
               Cenericius, a, um, baken or roſted vnder aſhes.
            
               Cingo, xi, gere, to gyrde or compaſſe about.
            
               Cingria, a ſhorte pype hauynge a ſmal ſounde.
            
               Cingula, a gyrth for beaſtes.
            
               Cingulus, a gyrdell for men.
            
               Cinifactum, broughte into aſhes, as thynges whiche are burned.
            
               Ciniflo, onis, he that maketh hote the inſtrumentes, wherwith men or women dyd trym theyr heare.
            Cinis, neris, aſhes.
            
            
               Cinna, a citie of Theſſaly. Alſo the name of a Romayne, whiche exceded in crueltie.
            
               Cinnabaris, a ſtone called a ſanguinarye, it is alſo called in latine Sanguis draconis, dragons bloud. It is put in to ſondry medicines to ſtaunche bloud.
            
               Cinnamolgus, called of Pliny, and Cinnamomus of Ariſtotle, is a byrde whiche makethe her neſt with cynamome.
            
               Cinniligium, a gyrdell, whiche a bride or new wedded wyfe weareth, a corſe.
            
               Cinnus, a heare of a man or womans head, or
 a medley of dyuerſe thynges together.
            
               Ciperum, a ſoote plante or herbe, whiche is good to breake and expulſe the ſtone.
            
               Cippus, a payre of ſtockes. Alſo a lyttell hyll, whiche men cal a barrowe. It is alſo a croſſe or other marke, whiche ſheweth the ryghte way to a place.
            Cio, ciui, cire, reade Ci
                  •
               o.
            
               Circa, about, nighe.
            
               Circania, a byrde, which in his flyght fetcheth a compaſſe.
            
               Circe,
               
                  
                     •
                  odorus 
                     •
                  ul. li. 5. was doughter of Ceta, kynge of the yle of Colchos and Hecate the wyche, and was the ſuſtar of Medea. This woman knew the meruaylous operations of ſundry herbes, & howe to cure al maner of poyſons. Not with ſtandynge at the laſte ſhe ſlewe her huſbande kyng of Scithes with poyſon, and vexed the people with moch tyranny. wherfore ſhe was expelled the countrey, and fled in to a deſerte yle in the occean ſea. Homerus nameth her the ſuſter of Aeta, and ſheweth howe Vliſſes arryuynge in the yle, where Circe dwelled, dyuers of his companyons were by her tranſformed in to ſwyne, and afterwarde by the interceſſion of Vlyſſes, ſhe eftſones reſtored them vnto theyr priſtinate fourme, and were more beautiful and yong in ſyght, than they were before.
            
               Circerus, a great ſhyp, whiche they of Aſya vſed.
            
               Circino, aui, are, to compaſſe, to make a cerkle.
            
               Circinus, an inſtrument called a compaſſe.
            
               Circiter, about, and is referred ſometyme to tyme.
            
               Circiter caledas Iunias, About the firſt day of Iune.
            Sometyme it is referred to the place.
            
               Circiter in media arce, Aboute the myddes of the caſtell.
            Somtyme to the thynge. Circiter duo millia hominum caeſa ſunt, There were nyghe two thouſande men ſlayne.
            
               Circites, houpes of yron or braſſe.
            
               Circitores, officers in cities, whiche do go aboute to ſe that good rule be kepte.
            
               Circius, a ſouthern wynde, whiche is wonderfull vehemente.
            
               Circuitio, a compaſynge, goinge about, or enuironynge.
            
               Circuitus, a circute, a compace about.
            
               Circius, the name of an yle in Miſia.
            
               Circuitores, the ſerchers of watches▪ alſo they whiche do go about the ſtretes to ſelle garmentes or lynnen clothe.
            
               Circulatim, by cercles, or in the fourme of a cercle.
            
               Circulator, he that goeth about to ſhewe hym ſelfe what he can do, or to deceyue the people with crafte or ſubtiltie.
            
               Circulatorius, a, um, perteynynge to ſuche auanters or deceyuers.
            
               Circulatrix, ſhe that goeth about to get money with daunſynge or tumblynge.
            
               Circulo, aui, are, to compaſſe or cloſe with a dyche, or other lyke thyng, or to make a cercle or compaſſe about a thynge.
            
               Circulus, a cercle or compaſſe.
            
               Circum, about.
            
               Circumago, egi, agere, to leade about, to tourne about.
            
               Circumcelliones, tauerne haunters, or raylers about.
            
               Circumcidaneus, a, um, cut rounde about.
            
               Circumcido, cidi, cidere, to cut about a thing.
            
               Circumſiſus, cut rounde about, circumcided.
            
               Circumcirca,
               Ser. Sul. ad Cice. all about.
            
               Circumciſe agere, to make an oration by pecis,Sueto. de claris rhetor. without comynge to the purpoſe.
            
               Circumcidaneū muſtum, wyne, whiche after that the grapes are preſſed, is taken oute of the ſame grapes, being cut and newe preſſed.
            
               Circumcludo, ſi, dere, to incloſe rounde.
            
               Circumcolo, colui, colere, to dwell now here nowe there.
            
               Circumcolumnium, a place ſet aboute with pyllars.
            
               Circumcurſo, are, to run hither and thither.
            
               Circundo, are, to enuyron or compaſſe about, as a rynge dothe about a mans fynger, or a dyche about a cloſe.
            
               Circumduco,
               Paulus de re iudicata. 
               duxi, ducere, to leade one about. It is alſo to abolyſhe or put a ſyde an acte. Quod ſi is qui edictum peremtorium impe trauit,
               Vlpia de iudicijs. 
               abſit die cognitionis, tunc circumducendum erit edictum peremptorium: And if that he that hath opteyned the peremptory decree, be abſent the day whan the matter ſhuld be determined, than the peremptory decre is to be diſſolued or abolyſhed. It is ſomtyme to deceyue by cautelles.
            
               Circumducere aliquē argento,
               Plaut. in Pſeud. to get ones money by falſehod.
            
               Circumductrio, deceyte.
            Circumductus, a, um, led about.
               Plaut. in cap.
            
            
               Circumeo, iui, ire, to go about any thynge.
            
               Circumfero, to carye or beare aboute. alſo to clenſe.Vergil. 6. 
               Idem ter ſocios, pura circumtulit unda: Alſo he clenſed his company three tymes with clene water.
            
               Circumferre ſe, to goo braggynge aboute the ſtreetes.
            
               Circum
                     •
                  ecto,
               Vergilius 
               tere, to tourne hyther & thither.
            
               Circumflexus, bowed.
            
               Circumfluo, to abounde. It is alſo to flowe or runne aboute, as water aboute a Citie or countrey.
            
               Circumfluus, a, um, that floweth aboute.
            
                
               Circumforanei, malaperte gueſtes, and tellers of tydynges in markettes.
            
               Circumforaneus, a, um, that maye be, or is caryed about.
            
               Circumfundo, dere, to caſt water or other licour about.
            
               Circumfundere hoſtes, to ſlee ennemies on all partes.
            
               Circumfuſus,
               Vergilius 
               a, um, gathered about, as peple whan they deſyre to ſe a thynge. Sometyme wrapped about lyke an adder or ſerpente.
            
               Circumiaceo, ieci, ijcere, to put about.
            
               Circumlino,
               Pli. de uiris illuſtr. to annoynt about.
            
               Circumlinitio, onis, bourniſhynge, clenſynge, or polyſhynge.
            Circummiſſus, a, um, ſente aboute.
            
            
               Circummitto, to ſende about.
            
               Circūmunio, iui, ire, to incloſe, wal in, or dich in. Alſo to enuiron ſtrongely, to fortify with walles or men.
            
               Circumnaſcor, to growe about.
            
               Circumpedes,
               Cicero. lackayes awaytinge at theyr mayſters ſtyrop. alſo foote men of princis.
            
               Circumſcriptus, ta, tum, put out, raſed, abolyſhed.
            
               Circumſcriptè dicere, to ſpeake in a certayne numbre and meaſure.
            
               Circumſcriptor, a deceyuour.
            
               Circumſcriptus, deceyued or abuſed.
            
               Circumſcripta oratio, a meaſurable oration.
            
               Circumſcriptio, abuſyng, or deceyuynge.
            
               Circumſcriptio temporis, a certayne meaſure of tyme.
            
               Circumplector, to imbrace or cloſe in.
            
               Circumſcribo, pſi, bere, to wryte, or drawe about with a lyne. Alſo to deceyue one in bargaynynge with hym. Fratrem circumſcripſit in diuiſione haereditatis: He deceyued his brother in partition of the inherytance. Alſo to gather, cōprehende, or deſcryue throughly. Cuius ſcientiae ſummam breuiter circumſcribo: The effecte of whoſe lernynge I wyll comprehende or deſcriue ſhortely. Somtyme to put out that whiche is written.
            
               Circumſecus,
               Apuleius on bothe ſydes.
            Circumſedeo, ceſsi, cedere, to beſiege.
            
            
               Circūſido, ſedi, fidere, to go about to beſiege.
            
               Circumſiſto, ſtiri, ſiſtere, to ſtande aboute one to defende hym.
            
               Circumſpectatrix, a woman that beholdeth about, or watcheth.
            
               Circumſpecto,
               Plautus. 
               are, to beholde about.
            
               Circumſpectus, circumſpecte.
            
               Circumſpicientia, circumſpection.
            
               Circumſpicio, exi, cere, to loke about.
            
               Circumſpicuus, a, um, that maye be beholden on all partes.
            
               Circumſto, ſteti, ſtare, to ſtande about.
            
               Circumtego,
               Plautus. 
               texi, tegere, to couer all aboute.
            
               Circumuado, to inuade, or perſe on all partes.
            
               Circumueho, uexi, uehere, to cary about often tymes.
            
               Circumuecto, tare, to cary about often.
            
               Circumuenio, to compaſſe a man, to deceyue hym, to cloſe hym in, as in warres, to oppreſſe.
            
               Circumuenire iuditio, where iudges doo condemne one by a confederacy, contracye to iuſtice and reaſon.
            
               Fenore circumuentus, oppreſſed with vſury.
            
               Circumuerto, tere, to tourne about.
            
               Circumuolito, aui, are, to flee about.
            
               Circuo, iui, ire, to go about.
            
               Circus, was a place in Rome walled aboute, wherin was fightynge with the fiſtes, runnynge with horſes. About it were ſondry galeries, where the ſenatours and gentylmen behelde the paſſetyme.
            
               Circenſes Iudi, were thoſe games, whiche were exerciſed in Circo, and were ſoo called as it were Circum enſes, amonge ſwordes. for as moche as before there were any ſuche place made as Circus was, the homely antiquitie vſed to haue thoſe games in the open fielde, enuirroned with ryuers, and ſwordes the poyntes vpwarde, that on euery part he that was a cowarde, ſhulde be in danger.
            
               Cirnea, a wyne potte.
            
               Cirratus, he that hath his heares brayded.
            
               Cirri, heares curled, or fethers that do growe on the top of a byrdes heade, as a larke or hearon. Alſo lyke thynges growinge on herbes, whiche maye be clypped of. alſo thinges lyke heares about oyſters.
            
               Cirſion, an herbe, which is comonly called bugloſſe, not that whiche is called languedebuefe, but that whiche hath the great leafe, whoſe prickes are not ſo harde.
            
               Cirſocele,
               Gal
                     ••
                   defi
                     ••
                  
                is a louſyng or pullyng out of their place of thoſe veſſelles, whiche do nouryſhe the ſtones of a man, and a gatherynge of yll humour in the bag.
            
               Cirtacus, a kynde of brawne.
            
               Cis, a worme amonge corne, whiche I ſuppoſe to be called weuyls. alſo it ſignifieth on this ſyde: as, Cis Rhenum, on this ſyde the ryuer of Rhine: Cis Alpes, on this ſyde the mountaynes called Alpes, Sometyme it ſignifieth laſſe.
            
               Cis nature leges, leſſe than the lawes of nature maye ſuffer. Saluſt vſeth it ones for beyonde: Cis Rhenum, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   intra mare noſtrum & oceanum: Beyonde the ryuer of Rhine, and within our ſea and the occeanſe.
            
               Cis paucos dies,
               Pla
                     •••
                  . within fewe dayes.
            
               Cis undi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , in all places about.
            
               Ciſalpina Gallia, was ſomtyme that countrey, which is from the mountaynes called Alpes.
 vnto the ryuer of Rubicon.
            
               Ciſium, aut Ciſsium, a carte with two wheles.
            
               Ciſiar ius, a carter.
            
               Ciſpello,
               
                  
                     ••
                  aut. in 
                     ••
                  mph. 
               puli, pellere, to kepe one out that he come not into the houſe.
            
               Ciſpius, a mountayne in Rome.
            
               Ciſſanthemos, an herbe, whych the apothecaries do calle Sigillum Mariae.
            
            
               Ciſſeus, a kynge of Thrace, father of Hecuba quene of Troy.
            
               Ciſsites, a precious ſton like an yuy leaf, bright of colour.
            
               Ciſſos, in greke is yuy.
            
               Ciſſybium, a cuppe or boll made of yuy.
            
               Ciſta, a cheſte, coffer, or baſket.
            
               Ciſtella, a caſket.
            
               Ciſterna, a ceſterne.
            
               Ciſtophorus, a certayne auncient coyne, wherin was a man hauynge a panyar on his head of the whych .vii.M. and. D. were in the talent, callyd Talentum Euboicum. This wold be ſet for Coſtrophinari, in the .xvi. boke of the digeſtes. tit. depoſiti .L. publia.
            
            
               Ciſtula, a caſket.
            Cita aluus, a louſe bealye. Aluo cita eſt, He hath a laſke.
            
               Citatim, quyckely, ſwyftly.
            
               Citato gradu, with quycke ſpede.
            
               Citatus, callyd, ſummoned, or cited.
            
               Citerior, nerer.
            
               Citerior Gallia, Lumbardy.
            
               Cithaeron, onis, kynge of Plateae, in Grece, of whome this hiſtory is remembred: Iuno beinge on a tyme angrye with Iupiter her huſbande, departed from him into Boeotia. Iupiter deſyrous to haue her agayne, wente to Plateas to Cithaeron, beynge than reputed a man of great wiſedom and moch experience, to aſke his aduiſe, who gaue to hym coūſayle in fourme folowyng, he cauſed an ymage to be made of wod, and to be cladde rychly, and in the apparayle of a bryde to be ſet in a charyot, and that it ſhulde be publyſhed amonge the people, that Iupiter was determyned to mary Plateam the doughter of Aſopus. But as this ymage was ſolempnely caryed, Iuno inflamyd with ieloſy, met with the chariotte, and entryng therinto, fyrſt dydde rent the clothes and apparayl about the ymage, and thā fyndynge that therein was but an ymage of tree, and noo bryde, delyted at the inuention, wherwith ſhe was begiled, and tournyng her anger into laughyng, ſhe was forthewith reconcyled to Iupiter.
            
               Cithara, a harpe.
            
               Cithariſta, whiche onely playeth on the harpe. It is alſo an angle of Fraunce by Marcile, lyenge out to the ſea.
            
               Cithariſtria, a woman harper.
            Citharizo, aui, are, to harpe.
            
            
               Citharoedus, an harper, whyche ſyngeth to his harpe.
            
               Citimus, a, um, the laſt, the nexte vnto vs.
            
               Citius, ſooner.
            
               Citius dicto, ſooner than one may ſpeake it.
            
               Citiſsime, as ſoone as is poſſible.
            
               Citò, ſoone, ſhortly.
            
               Cito, aui, are, to cite, to ſummon, or calle. Cita re teſtes, to bryng wytneſſe, to recyteor name.
            
               Citorus, a mountayne where groweth plentye of boxe trees.
            
               Citra, on this ſyde, ſometime without.
            
               Citra adulationem, without flattery.
            
               Citra pulueris tactum, without any duſte. A prouerbe applyed vnto them, whiche commeth to a thynge without any labour.
            
               Citrago, ginis, the herbe whiche is commonly callyd baulme, of the apothecaries Melyſſa.
            
            
               Citrea malus, an orenge tree.
            
               Citreum, an orenge.
            
               Citrum, a fruite callyd pome citron.
            
               Citrus, is another maner of tree, whereof in the olde 
                  •
               yme were made fayre tables and cofers, as nowe ben of cypreſſe.
            
               Citta, a pye.
            
               Cittium, a towne of Cyprus.
            
               Citus, quycke, haſty, ſwyfte, ſometyme diuyded or parted.
            
               Ciuicus, a, um, is the ſame that ciuilis is.
            
               Ciuica corona, a garlande of oken leaues, vſed to be giuen to them that had ſaued a citeſyn in battayle.
            
               Ciuilis, le, that pertayneth to a citeſyn.
            
               Ciuilis homo, a man expert in thoſe thynges that appertayn to the miniſtration of a common weale.
            
               Ciuilitas, tatis, curteſy, ciuilitie, good humanite
            
               Ciuiliter, lyke a citeſyn, alſo curteyſely or with good maner.
            
               Ciuis, a citeſyn or denyſen. alſoo Ciuis meus, my countrey man.
            
               Ciuitas, tatis, a citie, proprely it is the multitude of citeſyns gatheryd togyther, to lyue accordyng to lawe and ryght.
            
               Cius, a ryuer in Thrace.
            
               Cizicus, a citie in Aſia, the leſſe.
         
         
            C ANTE L.
            
               CLades, dis, a diſcomfiture in battayle, a deſtruction of men,Plaut. in Amph. loſſe.
            
               Clam, priuilye, vnwares. Is amare occoepit Alcumenā clam uiro, He loued Alcumena, vnware to her huſband. alſo by ſtelthe.
            
               Clam alter alterum, the one knoweth not of the other.
            
               Clam me profectus est, vnwares to me, he went his wayes.
            
               Clam me,
               Plaut. in Aulul. 
               clam te, I or thou not knowyng.
            
               Clam omnes, vnwares to euery mā, no man
 knowyng or wyttynge.
            
               Clamito, tare, to crye often.
            
               Clamo, aui, are, to crye, to calle.
            
               Clamor, oris, a crye, a clamour, a noyſe.
            
               Clamoſus, a, um, clamorous or full of noyſe.
            
               Clancularius poëta, a poete that wryteth, not ſhewynge his name.
            
               Clanculum, ſecretely.
            
               Clandêſtino, priuily or ſecretely.
            
               Clandêſtinus, a, um, priuy or ſecrete.
            
               Clango, xi, gere, to ſowne a trumpet.
            
               Clangor, oris, the ſown of a trumpet. ſomtyme the cry that geſe or other lyke byrdes do make
            
               Clanius, a citie of Champaigne, nere to the citie Acertas.
            
               Clarè, clerely, apparantly.
            
               Clare audire, to here perfytely.
            
               Clareo, ui, ere, to appere, to be well knowen, to be clere, to be renoumed. Clareſco, idem.
            
            
               Clarifico, aui, are, to make clere or apparant.
            
               Clarigatio,
               Alciatus ī cōmēt. de uerb. ſig. a clerynge, a ſubſidy or taſke granted by a commune conſent. It is alſo authoritie gyuen to arreſt one.
            
               Clarigo, aui, to demande a thyng with a loude voyce, it was properly a worde pertaynynge to the kynge of armes of the Romaynes, callyd Pater patratus,
               Plinius li. 22. whan he went to the borders or marches of them, which had done iniury vnto the Romayns, & there with a loude and clere voyce demanded of them amendes.
            
               Claritas, tatis, clerenes, ſommetyme nobilytie or honour.
            Claritudo, idē quod claritas, alſo brute, renom.
            
            
               Clarium, a town in Grecia, where Apollo was honoured, in that towne was an hole in the grounde, out of the whiche ran a lytell broke, wherof if any man dyd drynke the water, he gaue meruaylous anſweres, but he lyued not longe after. Of this towne was Apollo ſurnamed Clarius.
            
            
               Claro, aui, are, to make noble or honorable.
            
               Claros, a citie in Grece.
            
               Clarus, a, um, clere, honorable, famous.
            
               Clara pugna, a battayle worthy memory.
            
               Clarus clamor, Clara uox, a lowde crye, a lowde or ſhyll voyce.
            
               Clara res, a playne matter.
            
               Clarus genere, of a noble or honorable hous.
            
               Clarus, a ryuer, whiche runneth from the high mountayns of Alpes into the ryuer callyd Danubium.
            
            
               Claſsiarius, a man of warre on the ſea.
            
               Claſsiarius,
               Vergilius dylygent.
            
               Claſsici, they which in a towne were moſt rych and ſubſtanciall.
            
               Claſsici authores, writers of moſt eſtimatiō.
            
               Claſsici teſtes, witneſſes hauīg moſt ſubſtāce
            
               Claſsicum, a peale or noyſe of trumpets or belles, to call men togither, or to go to battayle.
            
               Claſsica bella, warre on the ſea.
            
               Claſsicus, an offycer, whyche with a trumpet or tabore callyd people togither. ſometyme a man beinge in reputation.
            
               Claſsicus, a, um, pertaynyng to nauyes.
            
               Claſsis, is, a nauy of ſhippes. it is alſo an order of fourmes or ſtoles ſet in a place, where men do ſytte accordyng to theyr degrees, authorities, promotions, in kunnynge or ſubſtance. The people of Rome were deuided by Seruius Tullius, the .vi. kynge of Romaynes into tyue bandes, whiche were callyd Claſſes, and they whiche were of the fyfth bande, were of no value. The three places of iudgement in Weſtm̄ hall, may be callyd Claſſes.
            
            
               Clatrum, & clatrus, a lattyſe wyndowe, or any thyng made lyke a latriſe, or with barres callyd a grate. ſome do write it Clathrum, with an aſpiration.
            
               Clatro, aui, are, to ſhut a wyndowe, ſpecially a lattyſe wyndowe.
            
               Claua, a clubbe.
            
               Clauam extorquere Herculi, to take from Hercules his clubbe. A prouerbe applyed to hym, whiche gothe about to get a thing, that an other man hath, moch ſtrōger thā him ſelf
            
               Clauarius, an officer, appointed to deale themperours gyfte of money or corne amonge the ſouldyours.
            
               Clauator, he that vſeth a clubbe.
            
               Clauatus, ſette with nayles.
            
               Clauata ueſtis, was a garmente ſette with ſpangles lyke to the heades of nayles, as we do nowe behold in ſome veſtementes in churches wrought in braunches and flowres, and if the garment were wyde, it was callyd Latus clauus, whiche in Rome no man mought weare, except he were a ſenatour.
            
               Claudeo, to halte, ſomtyme to erre.
            
               Claudia, was a gentylle womanne of Rome, whiche for the curioſitie that: ſhe vſed in apparaylynge her ſelfe, was infamyd to be vnchaſte. But whan the image of Idēa, callyd mother of the goddis, was broughte out of Phrigia to Rome, being caried in a barge by the ryuer of Tyber, it hapned to ſtyck ſo faſt in a ſhalowe place, that it moughte not be remoued with no force. This mayden knelinge downe, deſyred that goddeſſe, that the beinge a cleane virgine, and falſely ſclaundered, the ſayde ymage wolde wytſaulfe to folowe her to the cytie, and thanne ſhe onely tyenge her gyrdelle to the barge, eaſylye drewe it to the lande, whyche all the youth of the citie were not able to do.
            
               Claudianus, a famouſe poete.
            Claudico, caui, are, to halte.
            
            
               Claudicare in aliquo officio, to be neglygent in doinge a mans duetie.
            
                
               Clauditas, haltynge, lamenes.
            
               Claudius, was the proper names of dyuers Romaynes, and alſo a ſurname of a noble family in Rome, whiche were euer repugnant to the actes of the commune people.
            
               Claudo, ſi, dere,
               Saluſt. to ſhytte, ſomtyme to compas, alſo to put of, alſo to halte. ſomtyme to turne about. Claudite nymphae Dictéae, nymphae nemorum, iam claudite ſaltus, Turnc about ye goddeſſes of Dictea, ladyes of the foreſtes, tourne your daunce about.
            Claudus, a, um, lame.
            
            
               Clauena, the duchy of Cleues.
            
               Clauicula, a lyttell kay or clubbe.
            
               Clauicula, or clauiculus, diminutiues of clauis.
            
            
               Clauicularius, he that beareth the kayes.
            
               Clauiculus, the tendrell of a vyne.
            Clauiger, idem quod clauicularius.
            
               Clauis, a kaye.
            
               Clauola, a griefe.
            
               Clauſtrarius, a maker of kayes and lockes.
            
               Clauſtrinus, a keper of the cloyſter, or of any other place, wherein any lyuynge thynge is incloſed.
            
               Clauſtrum, a cloyſter, or other place where any lyuyng thyng is incloſed.
            
               Clauſula, a lyttell ſentence, or a parte of a ſentence.
            
               Clauſura, a ſhuttynge in.
            
               Clauulus, a diminutiue of clauus.
            
            
               Clauus, a nayle, alſo the ſterne of a ſhyppe, alſo a corne on a mans toe or fynger. Moreouer claui, be lyttell ſwellynges of harde fleſſhe in the corner of mens eyen. Alſo puffes growing in the ſtemmes of great trees. alſo in harneis, that whiche is callyd the ryuette. Moreouer clauus is a garmente pyrled or poudred with ſpangles, lyke nayles heades. Wherfore the proper garmente of a ſenatour, was callyd Latus clauus.
            
            
               Clauus aeneus, a braſyn nayle. Coelius writeth it for a prouerbe, ſignifieng a ſure remedie agaynſt all miſhappes, whiche prouerbe he ſaythe proceded hereof. In the olde tyme hunters whan they had ouerthrowen a wyld ſwyne or hart in places farre from habitation, they draue into the beaſte a braſon nayle, beleuyng that therby the fleſhe ſhuld be kept from putrifaction, and of this ſuperſtytion came the ſayde prouerbe.
            
               Clauum clauo pellere,
               Eraſ. in chil. to dryue out oone nayle with an nother. A prouerbe, ſignifieng one yll to putte away an other, oone labour an other labour, oone griefe with an nother griefe, one deceypte with an other deceypte, extreme pleaſure with extreme peyne.
            
               Clazomenae, a cite of Ionie, whiche Paralus buylded.
            
               Clazomenia, an ylande, whyche is callyd Marathuſa.
            
            
               Cleantes, the name of a noble phyloſopher, whiche ſucceded Zeno in his ſchole.
            
               Clearchus, the name of a phyloſopher, There was a noble capytaine of the ſame name, of whom Xenophon writeth in the expedition of Cyrus the leſſe.
            Clemens, tis, mercyfull.
            
            
               Clementia, mercy. ſomtyme pacience.
            
               Clementia aeſtatis,
               Plaut. in Sticho. the temperateneſſe of ſommer.
            
               Clementer, mercifully, gentilly, without anger
            
               Clementer tractare, to entreate gentylly or ſwetely.
            
               Clementer uolo, I am well content.
            
               Cleobulus, was done of the ſeuen ſages of Greece, who had a doughter callyd Cleobulina, whiche was an excellent poet, and made a boke of ryddelles contayned in three thouſande verſis.
            
               Cleodamas, the name of a geometrician in the tyme of Plato.
            
               Clena, a cloke.
            
               Cleombrotus, the ſonne of Pauſanias, capytayne of the Lacedemons.
            
               Cleopatra, the name of dyuers greate ladyes, ſpecially quenes of Egypt, of whome one excellynge in pleaſantnes and ſharpenes of wyt fyrſt allured vnto her Iulium Caeſarem, afterward Marcum Antonium, companyon in thempire with Auguſtus, whom ſhe brought into ſuche dotage, that in folowynge her appetite, be aſpired vnto the hole empire, wherfore he was afterwarde diſtroyed by Auguſtus. This woman ſo moch exceded in ſumptuous gluttony, that ſhe puttyng an excellent perle into tarte vyneger, wherin being conſumed ſhe receyued it into her bodye, the perle beynge eſtemyd at. 100. Seſtertia, whiche is of our money. This lady after the death of Antony, incloſed her ſelf in a tumbe, being on lyue, and hauing two ſerpentes ſuckynge at her pappes, ſo dyed.
            Clepo, pſi, pere, to ſteale.
            
            
               Clepſydra, a dyall, whyche dyuided the houres by the rounnyng of a certayne meaſure of water. It was alſo the name of a fountayne in Athenes.
            
               Cleronoma, herytage.
            
               Cleronomos, an heyre.
            
               Clerus, choſen by lotte. Alſo a worme whiche deſtroyeth and corrupteth hony combes.
            
               Clibananus, he that fyghteth in Iuſtyng herneyſſe.
            
               Clibanus, an ouen, or the mouthe of a fourneyſe.
            
               Cliduchus, he that beareth a mace.
            
               Cliens, tis, is he which belongeth or retaineth to ſom man in authoritie, to haue his defence
 and aſſiſtence in cauſes honeſte. it is alſo he which hath retayned a lawyer to ſuſtayn his matter, callyd a clyent.
            
               Clientela, the noumber of clyentes or of ſeruantes retayned, or duetie. ſometyme ſafegard by reaſon of a great mans fauour.
            
               Clientulari um, an yerely fee, for counſayle or aſſiſtence.
            
               Clima, tis, is a portion of the worlde betwene ſouthe & northe, wherin is variation of tyme in the length of the day, the ſpace of halfe an houre, which is ſet out in the tables and chartes of coſmographye.
            
               Climactericus, a, um, ſignifieth the degrees of mans lyfe by ſeuen yeres, in the whiche he is in daunger of deathe or miſfortune.
            
               Climactericum tempus, the ſayde daungerous tyme.
            Climacterum, idem.
            
               Climax, a ladder, & the figure callid gradation
            
               Clingo, gere, olde wryters vſyd for cingere, to gyrde.
            
               Clinicus, a phiſition, that healeth with medycines, alſo he that is ſo ſycke, that he can not aryſe out of his bedde.
            
               Clinopale, wraſtlynge in the bedde.
            
               Clinopodium,
               Ruellius. the herbe whiche is callyd Pulyole mountayne.
            
               Clio, the name of one of the Muſes.
            
               Cliſis, declination.
            
               Clitellae, a packe ſaddell. alſoo the name of a place in Rome.
            
               Clitellarij, packehorſes or mules, that do ſerue for cariage.
            
               Cliterini,
               Coelius. the cullions or ſtones of a man.
            
               Clitomachus, the name of a philoſopher.
            
               Clitorius, a fountayne in Grece.
            
               Clitumnus, a ryuer in Italy.
            
               Cliuia,
               Feſtus. all thynges harde to be brought to paſſe
            
               Cliuoſus, a, um, pytching down or ſtiepe down
            
               Cliuus, ſeu cliuum, the pitche of an hylle. ſome tyme the ſyde of an hyl. ſomtyme a lyttel hyll, wheron is ſome thyng buylded.
            
               Cloaca, a ſynk or gutter wherby water paſſeth
            
               Cloacare, to defyle or pollute.
            
               Cloacarium, ſkot in a towne for clenſynge of commune draughtes.
            
               Clodius, was a name of the Romaynes, wherof were two, whyche by theyr yll actes gatte ſpecialle remembraunce. One was ſonne to Aeſopus the player in tragedyes, vnto whom the father lefte meruaylous greatte rycheſſe, whyche he ſhortly conſumyd in bankettynge, wherin he was ſo ſūptuous, that vnto theym whyche ſouped with hym, he wold gyue perles of great value, relented in vyneger to eat. An nother Clodius was of a noble howſe of the Romaynes, who ſo moche hated Tully, for bearynge wytneſſe agaynſt hym, whan he was accuſed for commyttynge adultery with Pompeya, the wife of Iulius Ceſar, that afterwarde beynge Tribune of the people, he neuer ceaſſed to ſtyre the people againſt Tully, vntyll he compellyd hym to go into exyle.
            
               Cloris, a mayden or nymphe, whiche was maryed to Zephirus, vnto whom was aſſigned for her dower, to haue rule ouer flowres.
            
               Cloſtrum, olde writers vſyd for clauſtrum.
            
            
               Clotho, one of the fatall ladyes, hauynge power ouer mannes lyfe, in dyſſoluynge therof.
            Cludo, ſi, dere, to ſhytte.
            
            
               Clumae, the huſkes of barley.
            
               Clueo, ui, ere, to contende or fyght.
            
               Clunaculum, a bouchers choppynge knyfe.
            
               Clunes, the buttockes or haunches.
            
               Clupea, a citie of Affrike, nexte to Cartage.
            
               Clymene, the mother of Promotheus, doughter of Oceanus.
            
               Clypeus, a ſhielde or tergat of footemen.
            
               Clyſmus, a purgation or waſhynge.
            Clyſter, eris, & clyſterium, a tergate.
            
            
               Clytemneſtra, the wyfe of Agamemnon.
         
         
            C ANTE N.
            
               CN, uel Cneus, the name of a man.
            
               Cnicus, an herbe callyd of the apothecaries Carthamus, of the which be two kyndes, the one is of the gardeyne, the other is wylde. Of the fyrſte is a notable confection made, callyd Diacarthami, which louſeth the bealy, and pourgeth watrye fleume. It is of ſome callyd wylde ſaffron, and is hote and dry in the ſeconde degree.
            
               Cnipes, is a lyttell wourme, whiche is founde bred in an elme tree.
         
         
            C ANTE O.
            
               COaccedo, cedere, to be added to the princypall ſumme.
            
               Coacceſſo, ceſsi, ceſſere, to waxe ſowre or tarte.
            
               Coaceruo, aui, are, to heape vppe, or gather into heapes.
            
               Coacta pecunia, moneye gatheryd for ſomme pourpoſe.
            
               Coactio, a particular receypte.
            
               Coactores, particular receyuours.
            
               Coactura, a great gatherynge togither.
            
               Coaduno,
               Bude
                     ••
                  
                
               are, to aſſemble.
            
               Coaequalis, equall.
            Coaequare, idem quod aequare.
            Coaequus, a, um, lyke, euen.
            
            
               Coaetaneus, of one age.
            Coagito, idem quod ſimul agito, rede Agito.
            
               Coagmento, aui, are, to ioyne togyther, or make lyke.
            
                
               Coagulo, aui, are, to gather in to a courde or creame.
            
               Coagulum, courde or creame.
            
               Coaleſco, ui, eſcere, to gather togider. to īcreas
            
               Coarcto, aui, are, to ſtrayn, or preſſe togither.
            
               Coarctus in oppido, kept within the towne by force.
            
               Coarguere, to rebuke with other.
            
               Coaſto, to planke or bourde, or to ioyne bourdes togither.
            
               Coaxare, to make a noyſe lyke a frog or tode.
            
               Cocalus, a kyng of Sicile, to whom Dedalus fled out of Creta, whā Minos king of Crtte purſued hym.
            
               Coccalus, a pyne appull.
            
               Coccentum, a meat made of hony & popy ſede.
            Cocceus, a, um, & coccineus, a, um, of ſcarlet colour.
            
            
               Coccina, a ſcarlet veſture.
            
               Coccinatus, he that weareth a ſcarlet gowne.
            Coccinus, & coccus, ſcarlet colour.
            
            
               Coccis, igis, a byrde callyd a cuckowe.
            
               Coccum, grayn wherwith cloth & ſylk is grained. Coccos baphice, idem.
            
            
               Coccum cnidiū, is a beary like to myrtils, blak and hard without, & within white, the herbe wherof ſom to call Thymaelea, ſom Oliuella, ſome Leo terrae, ſome Linum ſylueſtre. The bery is medicinable to purge choler, water, & fleme, ſom authors do call it Granū cnidium.
            
            
               Cochlear, a ſpone. It is alſo a meaſure, which conteyneth .iii. drammes, and one ſcriple, and is the fourthe part of Cyathus.
            
            
               Cochlearium medicum, ſeu atticū, conteyneth one dramme, half a ſcriple .ii. graynes .ii. fyue partes of a grayne in meaſure, and in weight of wyne as moche, of oyle one dramme, and two ſcriples.
            
               Cochlium, a wyndynge ſtayre.
            
               Coclea, a ſnayle hauing a ſhell. alſo a fyſhe callyd a pyrwynke.
            
               Cocles, itis, he or ſhe that hath but one eye.
            
               Coclides, wyndyng ſtayres. alſo a ſtone found in Araby, which being boiled ſeuen days and as many nyghtes in hony, and all the erth taken from it, it is made wonderful pleaſant in ſyght, hauing being and ſpottes of ſundry colours, and is ſo great, that ſomtyme therof is made horſeharneys for kynges.
            
               Coctie, a part of the mountaynes of Alpes.
            
               Coctilis, le, ſodden or baken.
            Coctito, aui, are, to boyle.
            
            
               Coctinus, a, um, eaſy to be boyled.
            
               Coctona, quynces.
            
               Coctonum, cotton.
            Coctus, a, um, ſodden ynough.
            
            
               Coculum, a pot to boyle in. ſometyme Cocula do ſygnify ſtyckes, which wyll ſone be on fire
            
               Cocus, a cooke.
            
               Cocynthum, a mountayne in Italy, that diuydeth two ſeas.
            
               Cocytia, ſacrifyces, that were doone in honour of Proſerpyne.
            
               Cocytus, a ryuer of Helle.
            
               Coda, a tayle.
            
               Codatremula, a byrde callyd a wag tayle.
            
               Codex, icis, the body of a tree, or a great boke or volume.
            
               Codicariae naues, ſhyppes or barges made of thycke plankes.
            
               Codicilli,
               Suetonius. epiſtles. ſometyme it is taken for letters patentes of a prynce.
            
               Codicillus, ſignifieth properly a letter miſſiue.
            
               Codiculus, a diminutiue of codex, whan it is put for a boke.
            
               Codonia, an yland that the Almayns kepe.
            
               Codrus, the propre name of a kynge of Athenes, whiche to ſaue his countrey, wyllyngely loſte his lyfe.
            
               Coea, of Politianus is vſyd for Coa, of the yle of Cos.
            
               Coelator, he that graueth.
            
               Coelatura, the grauynge.
            Coelatus, a, um, grauen.
            
            
               Coelebs, a ſyngle man or woman, alſo euerye chaſte perſone.
            
               Coeleſtis, coeleſte, heauenly, or of heauen.
            
               Coeleſtis aqua, rayne water.
            
               Coeliaca,
               Alexāder Trallianꝰ. is a peyne in the bealy, with a contynuall flyt, dyuers in colour, with loſſe of appetite, and coldnes in the extreme partis, whiche ſyknes hapneth of the feblenes of vertue digeſtiue in the ſtomake and bealy. Some do ſuppoſe it to be that, whyche is callyd Cholica paſsio, I thinke it rather to be Lienteria uentriculi, reade in Lienteria.
            
            
               Coelibaris haſta, was the ſtaffe of a ſauelyn, whyche had ben in the body of one of theym, whyche were callyd Gladiatores, and was ſlayne, with the whyche ſtaffe the head of a mayden newe maryed, was kempt and ſtryken, ſignifieng that likewiſe as the ſtaffe had ſtiked faſt in the body of him that was ſlain, ſo ſhuld ſhe ſtyck faſt, and be ioyned with him that maryed her.
            
               Coelibatus, a ſyngle lyfe without mariage.
            
               Coelicola, he that inhabiteth heauen.
            Coelicus, a, um, of heauen.
            
            
               Coelifer, was the ſurname of Atlas, whom poetes fayne to beare heauen on his ſhulders.
            
               Coelipotens, almyghty god.
            
               Coeliſtomia, the pronouncyng of the voyce low in the mouth, without perfect digeſtion.
            
               Coelites, heauenly creatures.
            
               Coelitus, heauenly.
            
               Coelo, aui, are, to graue in mettalle.
            
               Coeloma,
               Galen. in definit. 
               tis, is a rounde and holowe ſoore about the cercle of the eye, nigh to the ſyght.
            
                
               Coelum,
               Plinius. heauen or the firmament. alſo the palat or roufe of the mouthe, ſometyme a grauynge yron.
            
               Coelum digito attingere, to touche heauen with his fynger. A prouerbe applyed to them which ſuppoſe them ſelfes able to do thynges impoſſyble.
            
               In coelo eſſe, A prouerbe ſignifienge to be in felicitie, or to be moſt happy.
            
               Coelus, the father of Saturnus and Titan.
            
               Coemeterium, a churcheyarde.
            
               Coemptio, where two or moo perſons doo bye togyther.
            
               Coena, a ſoupper.
            
               Coenacularia, the way or craft to ordeyn a ſupper. Coenaculariam facere, to let a houſe in diuers partes to ſundry perſons, wherin are many parlers or drinkyng houſes.
            
               Coenacularius,
               Vlp. de pi gnor. act. l. ſolutum he that dothe let ſuche houſes to hyre.
            
               Coenaculum, a parler or other place, where men do ſoupe.
            
               Coenaticus, a, um, pertaynynge to ſoupers.
            
               Apparatus coenaticus, ordinance for ſupper.
            
               Sermo coenaticus, communication mete for ſuppers.
            
               Coenatio, a lower parlar to ſoupe in, a ſommer parler.
            
               Coenatiuncula, a lyttell drynkynge houſe.
            
               Coenatorius, a, um, belongyng to ſoupers.
            
               Coenaturio, ij. ire, to labour or endeuour my ſelfe to ſoupe.
            
               Coenatus, he that hath ſouped.
            
               Coenipeta, a goer about to ſoupers vnboden.
            Coeno, aiu, are, to ſoupe.
            
            
               Coenare alienū,
               Plautꝰ in perſa. to ſup atan other mās coſte.
            
               Coenabis hodie magnum malum, thou ſhalt haue thy ſouper ſoone in ſhrewde reſt.
            
               Coenobium, a monaſtery or other place, where men lyue in commune.
            
               Coenoſus, a, um, full of myre, dyrty.
            
               Coenula, a lyght ſouper.
            
               Coenum, myer, or dyrte.
            Coepio,Cato. piui, pire, to begyn.
            
            
               Coepra, torum, thinges or matters begun.
            
               Coepto, tare, to begyn.
            Coeptu, a, um, begunne.
            
            
               Coepulonus, a banketter or reuellar.
            
               Coetus, an aſſembly of people.
            
               Coëo, iui, ire, to come togyther, to aſſemble, to ioyn to, to draw togither, to gather togither, to do the act of generation, to ioyn togither in action by maintenance or champertie.
            
               Coire in foedera, to make alyance.
            
               Coire ſocietatem,
               Plautus. to be familyar.
            
               Coeli, the part of Siria, that ioyneth to Araby.
            
               Coërceo, cui, cere, to reſteayn, to bynde harde, or ſtraight, to compelle or conſtrayne, to kepe within a compaſſe, alſo to comprehend or cō
               tayn, to correcte or punyſhe.
            
               Coercere ignes, to ſtynte the fyre, whyche burneth a houſe, or other lyke thynge.
            
               Coërcitus, ta, tū, reſtrayned, compellyed, kept in.
            Cogitate, aduyſedly. Cogitatim, idem.
            Cogitatio, onis, a thought. Cogitatus, tus, idē.
            Cogitatum, idem quod cogitate.
            
               Cogito,
               Plaut. 
                     〈◊〉
                   mili. 
               aui, are, to thynke, to imagyne.
            
               Cogitat curas, he thynketh on his matters.
            
               Cognati, kynſemen. Cognatio, kynrede.
            
               Cognitio,
               Cicer. a knowledge, it ſometyme ſignfieth iugement.Attis. 
               Qua lex earum rerum, quas Caeſar ſtatuiſſet, decreuiſſet, egiſſet, Conſulibus cognitionem dedit. The whiche lawe gaue to the Conſules iudgement of thoſe thinges, whiche Ceſar ſhoulde haue iudged, decreed, and executed.
            
               Cognitor, oris, an atturney or ꝑctor in the law
            Cognitus, ta, tum, knowen: Cognobilis, idem.
            
               Cognomen, a ſurname whiche a man hath of his anceſters. Cognomentum, idem.
            
            
               Cognomines, dyuers men of one ſurname.
            
               Cognomino, aui, are, to gyue a ſurname.
            
               Cognoſco, noui, noſcere, to know, to conſider, to vnderſtand, to ly with a woman, to iuge a matter, or here a matter to iuge it.
            
               Cogo, egi, gere, to conſtrain, to gather togither, to mylk a beaſt, to make licour thyck or hard, to preſſe, to ſet or bring in order. Cogere in arctū, to kepe one ſtrait, or frō his liberte. Cogere in ordinē, to abate ones pride. Cogere oues, to put vp the ſhepe into a ſtable or folde.
            
               Cohaereo, haeſi, haerere, to be ioyned, to be familiar togither, or to cleue to a thīg alſo to com to paſſe. Nuptiae non cohaerent. The mariage come not to paſſe. alſo to agree togither.
            Cohaereſco, ſcere, idem.
            
               Cohaeres, he that is ioyned with an other in inheritance it may be vſed for a ioynttenant.
            
               Cohibeo, ui, ere, to reſtrain, to kepe of, to let, to reſtraine, to kepe one ſhorte, alſo to retayne or kepe to him ſelf.Plaut. 
                     〈◊〉
                   miline. 
               Cohibere filium, to kepe vnder his ſon.Cicer. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Sen. 
               Cohibere intra limen, kepe you within the doores. Cohibere ſe, to moderate himſelfe, or to refrayne.
            Cohibitus, a, um, let, refrayned.
               Pla
                     ••
                   Mer
                     ••
                  
               
            
            
               Cohors, tis, was company of men of warre. There were in euery legion .x. Cohortes, but the fyrſte excellyd the reſydue, as well in preeminence as in multitude. Therein was the chiefe banner of the Romaynes, wherin was painted the egle. And the capitayn of that cō
               pany callyd Centurio, was of more reputation than any other Centurio, for as moche as in that companye required to be menne of good byrth, wel lerned, & of valiant courage, alſo the capitayn wiſe, valiant, ſtronge in armes, and plitike in leadyng. In that company were .1105. footemen, and .142. men of armes,
 and was callyd Cohors miliaria. The ſeconde Cohors had .555. fotemen, and 66. men of armes. The thyrde had as many fotemen, and but .56. menne of armes, but therin were the ſtrongeſt men, bycauſe it was ſet in the myddes of the battayle. The fourthe had lyke number of fotemen, and .lxvi. men of armes. The fyfth had as many fotemen & hors men, but therin were choſen mē, bicauſe that lykewiſe as the fyrſt bende was on the righte wyng of the battayle, ſo the fifth was on the left wyng: for fiue Cohortes or bendes made the firſte battayle. The other fiue had equall number euery of them with the ſayd fourthe and fyfth bend, ſo that theſe ten bendes made vp a legion, contaynyng. 6100. fotemen, and
730. men of armes. Cohors, is alſo taken for the domeſtical company of ſeruantes and miniſters, attendyng vpon a man of high dignitie or authoritie, and ſuch was Cohors Praetoria, the companye whiche awayted on hym that was Praetor or gouernour of countreys. Cohortes conſcribere, & cohortes contrahere, haue one ſignification, to get togither or aſſemble bendes or companies of menne of warre.Caeſar de 
                     •
                  el. ciuil. 1. 
               Ex finitimis regionibus, quas potest, contrahit cohortes ex delectibus Pompeianis: Out of the countreys adioynynge he gat bendes togither of theym that had be choſen of Pompey.Saluſt. in Catal. 
               Ille cohortes ueteranas, quas tumultus cauſa conſcripſerat, in fronte, poſt eas caeterum exercitū in ſubſidijs locat, He dyd ſet in the front of the battayle the bendes of olde ſouldiours, which he had gatheryd togither bycauſe of the ſodayn commotion, behynde them he ſet the reſydue of the hoſte for ſuccours if nede were.
            
               Cohortes complere, to make vp bendes of men of warre,Saluſt. in Catalina. after the rate of the companye that is aſſemblyd. Catalina ex omni copia, quam & ipſe adduxerat, & Manlius habuera
                     •
                  , duas legiones inſtituit, cohortes pro numero militum complet, Catalyne of all the men of warre, that as well he had broughte with him, as alſo Manlius had there alredy, he ordeyned two legions, and made vp bendes accordyng to the numbre of ſouldiours.
            
               Cohors, ſeu cors, tis, a barton or place incloſed wherin pultry & al other kind of pultry is kept.
            
               Chortalis gallina,
               Varro. 
               & chortalis anſer, an hen or gooſe that fedeth abrode.
            Cohortor, aris, ari, to exhorte.
            
            
               Cohum, a thonge or lyngell, wherwith the oxe bowe and the yoke are bounden togither.
            
               Coinquino, aui, are, to ſoyle or ſtayn. alſo to defame a man or woman.
            
               Cois, a garmente of fyne ſylke.
            
               Coirio, an aſſēbly, it is alſo a ſecret part or agremēt amōg mē to do ſom act, which they wold not haue other mē know: it may be taken for couine.
            
               Coitus, tus, the acte in generation.
            
               Coix, a baſket. it is alſo a certayne kynde of oſyars, hauyng a leafe lyke a rede, wherewith baſkettes were made at Athenes.
            
               Cola, a ſtraynour.
            Colaphizo, aui, are, to buffette.
            
            
               Colaphus, & colaphum, a buffette or blowe on the cheke.
            
               Colaſis, a kind of puniſhmēt that is don for chaſtyſement.
            
               Colchi, people in Aſia, wherof the coūtrey is of Strabo callid Colchis, by the ſea callid Pontus, where the top of the hil callid Caucaſus, turneth to the moūtains callid Riphei, thone ſide bending to the ſea callid Euxinū, & the fe
                  ••
                callid Meotis, the other ſyde towarde the ſee callyd Caſpium. In this countrey is the famous riuer callyd Phaſis. And it was the contrey of Medea wyſe to Iaſon.
            
               Coles, the yarde of a man.
            
               Colei, the ſtones.
            
               Coleus, the cod whiche contayn the ſtones.
            
               Colica, a paſſiō callid the colyli, bred in the gut named colon, the grief wherof in felt .iiii. fingers brede aboue the nauyl on the right ſyde, extending like a girdel vntil the left ſide.Conſtaut. The occaſion wherof ꝑcedeth of one of theſe cauſes, either by a coletik heat drieng vp the moiſture of the ordure, whiche therfore may not paſſe out of the bealy, or that the meate eaten was dry & bīding, letting the ſaid paſſage, or els that viſcouſ & clāmy fleme is ſo augmented in that gut, that it ſtoppeth the iſſu therof or that a groſſe & thik wind is there ingēdred either by coldnes of the natural cōplexion, or by weakenes of the ſtomake in digeſtion, or of the lyuer, or by meates fatte and windy, or it hapneth by an impoſtume in the ſaide gut, or by wourmes wrapped in the ordure, or for the inſenſiblenes of the gutte, wherby one feleth not the annoyance of the ordure.
            
               Colicus, colica, he or ſhe that hath the colyke.
            
               Coliculus, a tender ſtalke of an herbe.
            
               Colidos, an ylonde in the occean of Indie.
            
               Colina, for culina, a kytchen.
            
               Coliphium, a kynde of bread, which wraſtlers dyd eate, to make them ſtronge.
            
               Colis, the lyttell tender ſtalke of colewortes or cabages, alſo the branche of a vyne.
            
               Colitia, a great furrow for water to run into, for ſauynge of the corne.
            
               Colla, a kynde of glewe.
            
               Collabaſco, ſcere, to be redy to falle.
            
               Collabefactari teſtula, to be banyſſhed out of the citie by lottes of ſhelles, as it was vſed in Athenes. Se after in Oſtraciſmos.
            
            
               Collabello, aui, are, to ioyne lyppes togither, that is to ſay, to kyſſe on the lyppes.
            
                
               Collacrimo, aui, are, to wepe with other.
            
               Collactaneus, he that ſouketh with me of one nourſe, a foſter brother.
            
               Collacteus, he that ſouketh of the ſame breaſt, and at the ſame tyme.
            
               Collare, a collar for a hounde.
            
               Collatia, a towne by Rome, whereof one of the gates of the citie was callyd Collatina.
            
            
               Collatina dea, was ſuppoſed to be the goddeſſe ouer ſmall hylles.
            
               Collatina porta, the name of a gate in Rome.
            
               Collatinus, the name of a noble Romane, whiche was huſbande to the chaſte Lucrece.
            
               Collatinus uenter, a great panche or bealye, whiche worde Plautus vſyd.
            
               Collatio, a taſk or ſiſe: alſo a cōferring togither
            
               Collatitius, a, um, that which is gatheryd and brought togyther.
            
               Collatis ſignis pugnare, to fight ī a field pight
            
               Collaudo, aui, are, to praiſe that whyche other do commende.
            
               Collectanea, thynges written gathered out of many warkes,
            Collectè & collectim, compendiouſely.
            
            
               Collectio, a gatherynge.
            
               Collectitius, a, um, that whiche is gatheryd.
            
               Collega, a felowe or companyon in offyce.
            
               Collegium, a company of theym, whiche haue equall authoritie. alſo a company of men, whiche be of one myſtery or crafte.
            
               Collibet & collubet, collibuit, collibitū eſt, collibêre,
               Plaut. in Amph. to lyke, to pleſe. Vtcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   animo collibitū eſt meo, Euē as it pleſeth me, or liketh me.
            
               Colliculus, an hyllocke.
            
               Collido, ſi, dere, to beat or knocke togither.
            
               Colligo, aui, are, to bynde togither.
            
               Colligo, egi, igere, to gather togither, to take away, to brīg togither. alſo to prepare. Se colligit in arma,
               Vergilius Ci. tuſ. 4. he made him redy to fight. Seipſum colligere, to bryng home agayn the partes of the mynde that were diſperſed.
            
               Colligo rationem, I make accompte.
            
               Colligere ueſtem, to tucke vp his garment.
            
               Collimare, to wynke with one eye, or to looke ſtreight on the marke.
            
               Collina porta, a yate at Rome.
            Collineo, as, are, idem quod collimo.
            
               Collino, linis, lini, uel leni, linere, to rub or frot ſoftly togither many thinges, as one maketh an oyntment of a thyng.
            
               Colliquiae, great gourdes of water, rounnynge through fieldes, after great rayne or ſnowe.
            
               Colliquo,
               Varro. 
               qui, liquere, to molte.
            
               Colliquor,
               Vergilius 
               liqueris, liqui, to be molten.
            Colliqueſco, ſcere, idem.
            
               Collis, a hylle. alſo Colles, the backe.
            
               Colloco, are, to ſette in a place.
            
               Collocare ſe in arborem,
               Plaut. in Amph. to clym vpon a tre.
            
               Collocare aliquē in ſoporē, to ſtryke one in ſuche wyſe that he is amaſed, and lyeth as he were on ſleape, or to ſpeake it more ſhortly, to lay one a ſlepe with a ſtroke.
            
               Colloces te in otium, drawe the to eaſe.
            
               Collocare in lecto aliquem,
               Pla
                     •••
                  
                to brynge one to bedde,Me
                     ••••
                  
                or to lay one in his bedde.
            
               Collocare filiam nuptui in dimidia parte agri, to gyue halte his lande in mariage with his doughter.
            
               Collocare patrimonium in ſalutem populi, to employ his inheritaunce to the wealthe of the people.
            
               Collocare beneficium, to do pleaſure.
            
               Dotem in fundo aliquo collocare, to aſſigne dowery to one in ſome lande.
            
               Male collocare horas, to beſtow the time yl.
            
               Inſidias collocare, to laye in wayte to do one harme or diſpleaſure.
            
               Praeſidium collocare, to ſette a garriſon in a place to defende it.
            
               Spem in aliquē collocare, to put truſt in one
            
               Collocare ſe palā in meretricia uita, to gyue her ſelfe to lyue lyke a common harlot.
            
               Collocare ſe in otium, to diſpoſe hym to liue quietly and without labour.
            
               Collocare nuptum, to beſtowe a woman in maryage.
            
               In luce benefacta collocare, to cauſe benefites or good tournes to be openly knowen.
            
               Collocare aliquem in aliquo gradu, to exalt or aduaunce one to ſome degree or dignitie.
            
               Collocatus, a, um, put or ſet in ſome place.
            
               Collocupleto, tare, to enryche.
            
               Collocutio, a communication.
            Colloquium, idem.
            
               Colloquor, queris, qui, to talke with one, or to talke togyther.
            
               Colloqui alicui, to deuyſe or talke with one.
            
               Colloqui aliquem, to ſpeake to one.
            
               Colloſtrati, be chyldren whiche do ſouke of the fyrſt mylke of theyr mothers as ſoone as they be borne.
            
               Colloſtratio, a ſiknes, whiche children haue by ſucking curdy mylk of a womā new deliuered.
            
               Colluco, aui, are, to make a glade in a thik wod
            
               Colluceo, cere, to ſhyne.
            
               Colluctatio, a wraſtlynge.
            
               Colludo, dere, to playe with one, or togither, alſo amonge ciuilians it ſygnifieth to pleade togither by couyne, to the intente to deceyu
                  •
                ſome other man.
            
               Collum, a necke.
            
               Colluo, lui, luere, to waſhe or rynce.
            
               Collue poculum,
               Plant. 
                     〈◊〉
                   cap. rynce the cuppe.
            Collus, idem quod collum.
            
               Colluſor,
               Pla
                     •••
                  
                he that dothe any thyng by colluſyon or couyne.
            
               Colluſor, oris, a play felowe.
            
               Colluſtrare, to beholde on all partes.
            
                
               Colluſtrare lumine, to make very clere.
            
               Collutilo, aui, are, to diſhoneſt or defyle.
            
               Colluuiarium, a ſynke or gutter.
            
               Colluuiaris porcus, an hog that walloweth in the myre, and there hath meate giuen him.
            
               Colluuies, whan the erthe is couered with water by great flouddes.
            
               Collybia, fygge tartes, fartes of Portingall, or other lyke thynges.
            
               Collybiſtes, & Collybiſte, he that delyuereth money by exchaunge, a banker.
            
               Collybus, money receyued by exchaunge, or in banke, as men do whiche goo in to ſtraunge countreyes, delyueynge moneye of this realme, to receyue as moche of an other coyne, where he commeth.
            
               Collyra, a lofe of bread, or a bunne.
            
               Collyrida, a cake.
            
               Collirium, a medicine for ſoore eyes.
            
               Colere queſtum ſuum, to ſeke his own profit.
            
               Colo, aui, are, to ſtrayne out licour.
            
               Colo, ui, ere, to worſhyp, to loue, or fauour, to haunt, to inhabite or dwell, to tyll or huſband grounde, to leade, to haue in eſtimatiō 
               Hanc uitam colo, I leade this lyfe.
            
               Colere officiū, to do his duetie or indeuour.
            
               Colere pietatem, to haue his parentes in reuerence.
            
               Colere ſe, to apparayle hym ſelfe.
            
               Colere uitam,
               Plautus. to lyue.
            
               Colobium,
               Plaut. in Rude. a iacket or cote withoute ſleues.
            
               Colocaſia, a beane of Egypt.
            
               Colocynthis, a kynde of wylde gourdes, called of the apothecaries Coloquintida, whiche moſte vehemently pourgeth fleume, afterwarde choler, finally bloude. Many men by this medicine haue finyſhed theyr lyues, whan they haue thought therby to haue purged theyr bodies.
            
               Colon, a gut, whiche goeth from the left ſyde vnto the ryght, in the whiche the dunge taketh his fourme, and there is the diſeaſe called Colica, the colyke. It is alſo a member or parte of a ſentence.
            
               Colona
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  , ruſticall people, tenauntes in villenage.
            
               Colonarium, was a certayne pention, whiche the Romaynes were compelled by the three prynces called Triumuiri,
               Aldatus 
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ōmēt. de 
                     •
                  erb. ſig. to paye for theyr houſes at Rome. Alſo a rent payed for thynges belongynge to huſbandry.Coelius. It may be taken for ſuche tenour, whiche with vs was called villenage, where the tenant was boū
               den eyther to ploughe, or to hedge, or to repe the corne of the lorde.
            
               Colonia, people ſent to dwell in a place, which is not inhabited, It is alſo a citie, the people wherof cam from an other citie buylded before. It is ſomtyme a graunge where huſbandry is kepte.
            
               Colonias nouas deducere, to make a newe citie, and to brynge inhabitauntes of an other citie to dwell there.
            
               Colonicus, a, um, perteynynge to huſbandry.
            
               Colonus, a huſbande manne. Alſo Coloni be they, whiche are ſent to inhabite a countrey or town. Alſo a high place in Athenes, where Neptune was worſhipped.
            
               Colophon, nis, a cite of Ionia in Grece, where as was the temple of Apollo called Clarius, and Homerus the famouſe poete was borne.
            
               Colophonem addere, to achyeue or brynge to concluſion the thynge that is enterpryſed or taken in hande.
            
               Colophonia, is the herb called alſo Scammonium, wherof is made the vehement purgation of choler: oute of the roote diſtylleth a gumme, whiche in greeke is named Diacridion, whiche ſignifieth a lyttell teare, which worde is nowe corrupted, and for Diacridion, they call it Diagredium, which medicine beynge gyuen without diſcretion, killeth many men.
            Color, ôris, colour.
            
            Colos. idem.
            Coloratus, a, um, coloured.
            
            
               Coloria eueſtes, garmentes made of wull vndyed.
            
               Colorificus, he that maketh colour.
            
               Coloro, aui, are, to gyue or make a colour.
            
               Colos, the fundment.
            
               Coloſseus, & Coloſsicus, a, um, in fourme of Coloſsi, or great ymages.
            
               Coloſsi, were ymages of horryble greatneſſe lyke vnto toures, wherof there was oone of Apollo in the capitole at Rome, whiche was xxx. cubites hyghe. Alſo at Tarentum, was one made by Lyſippus the famouſe maſon, whiche was .xi. cubites hyghe. But at the Rhodes was one of the Sun, excedyng al other, whiche was in heyghte .lxx. cubytes, made by Colaſſis, ſcholer to Lyſippus: the thombe of that image few men might fathō. It was in makyng .xii. yeres, and the charge therof drewe to .300. talentes, whiche amoū
               teth to thre and fortye thouſande, oone hundred, and .xxv.ii. Strabo writeth, that the ymage was of Iupiter, & was made by Chares Lyndius: Beſydes this were a hundred leſſe Coloſsi in the Rhodes, and at Rome were many made of mettall.
            
               Coloſtrum uel Coloſtra, as Palladius ſayth, was called of ſhepeherdes the thycker parte of mylke, whiche I deme to be creame, other thynke it to be the kurdes.
            
               Coloſtrati infantes, chyldren whiche haue ſouked curdy mylke.
            
               Colôtes,
               Quit. li. 2. the name of a mā that was a painter.
            
                
               Coluber, a ſerpente, whiche lyeth in the ſhadowe of woodes.
            
               Colum, a ſtraynour, a colander.
            
               Columbar, aris, a pyllory.
            
               Columbaris, re, of a doue.
            
               Columbarium, uel Columbaria, a douehouſe or culuerhouſe.
            
               Columbaria, an ylande in the Tuſkan ſea,
            
               Columbarius, he that taketh doues.
            
               Columbatim, in the maner of doues.
            
               Columbinus, a, um, of a culuer.
            
               Columbulus, a pygeon.
            
               Columbus, & Columba, a culuer or doue.
            
               Columella, the name of one that wrate of huſbandry moſte eloquently.
            
               Columellares dentes, cheke tethe.
            
               Columen, luminis, the ſuccour or ſtaye, the wynde beame of a houſe.
            Columis, & hoc colume, hole.
            
            
               Columna, a pyller.
            
               Columnae Herculis, are two mountaynes, one at the vttermoſt parte of Spayne, the other in the vttermoſt weſt parte of Affrike, where as nowe are the ſtrayghtes of Cyuil or Marrocke. Some holde opinyon, that it is two yles in the ſayde ſtraightes: ſome (as Strabo ſayth) do affyrme, that it were in dede .ii. pyllars of braſſe in the yle called Gades longynge to Spayne, ſet there in the temple of Hercules, in the honour of hym: where they whiche trauayled by the myddell ſea, & were come to the vttermoſte parte therof, and entrynge in to the occean ſea, came and dyd ſacrifyce to Hercules. which opinion Poſſidonius thought to be moſt trew. They that ſuppoſe it to be two yles, do ſay, that the one of them is in Europe, the other in Affryke.
            
               Columnus, was in olde tyme, that whiche we call nowe culmus.
            
            
               Coluri, ar two great cercles in the ſphere, whiche do declare the tymes called Aequinoctia & Solſtitia, that is to ſaye, whan the daye and nyght is equall in lengthe. Alſo whan the day is lengeſt, and the nyght at moſt lengthe.
            Colurnus, a, um, of haſyll.
            
            
               Colus, a diſtaffe.
            
               Colûtea, the tree called Sene, wherof the leaues and coddes are miniſtred in medicines, to purge melancholy.
            
               Colimbades, olyues, or oyle bearies condite in bryne or pickell.
            
               Colyrides, lyttel ſmal loues lyke maunchettes.
            
               Coma, all the heare together, called a buſhe. it is alſo ſomtyme taken for the laues of trees
            
               Comagene, a parte of Siria.
            
               Comare, to haue moch heare, or a gret buſhe.
            
               Comata, a ſhepeherdes name in Theocrite.
            
               Comata Gallia, all Fraunce, on this halfe the mountaynes.
            
               Comatulus, a boy with a fayre buſhe of heate.
            
               Comatus, ta, he or ſhe that hath a great buſhe. By tranſlation it is ſayde of trees or herbes, that haue longe leaues or floures.
            
               Combe,
               Coe
                     •••
                  
                  ▪
                a mayden that inuented the armure of Aeneas.
            
               Combino, aui, are, to combyne or confederate to gether.
            
               Comburo, buſsi, burere, to burne or conſume with fyre.
            
               Come, an herbe called gotes berde.
            
               Comedim, olde wryters vſed for comedam.
            
            Comedo, edi, edere, to eate.
            
            
               Comedo, onis, he that conſumeth his owne goodes riottouſly.
            
               Comedere patrimonium, to conſume his inheritaunce in riotte.
            
               Comedere beneficium, to forget a good 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            
               Comes, mius, a companion or felowe. Alſo a name of dignitie, whiche we call an erle.
            
               Comeſſabundus,
               Q. C
                     ••
                  
                  ▪
                vſynge to banket. alſo ouer charged with meate and drynke.
            Comeſſans, idem quod Comeſſor.
            
               Comeſſari, to banket.
            
               Comſſatio, a banket after ſoupper, or a ryottous bankettynge.
            
               Comeſſator, a riottour.
            
               Comeſſe, for comedere, to eate.
            
               Comeſt, for comedit, he eateth.
            
               Comêtes, & Comêta, a blaſynge ſterre.
            
               Comis, gentyll, full of good humanity.
            
               Comitatus, tus, a felowſhyp.
            
               Comiter, gentylly, courtayſely.
            
               Comitialis dies, the daye whan people aſſembled at Rome, for the election of officers.
            
               Comitialis, morbus, the fallynge ſyckenes.
            
               Comitia, a congregation or aſſembly of the peple for election of officers, or for prouulgation of lawes, lyke to our parlyament.
            
               Comitia edicere, to calle or ſummon a parlyament.
            
               Comitium, the place where the aſſembly was.
            
               Comitor, ari, to accompany or go with one, or kepe felowſhyp with other.
            Comma, a poynte endynge a ſentence, where many ſentenſes be: as, Nihil tibi profuit nocturnum praeſidium palacij, nihil urbis uigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil concurſus omnium bonorum? There is comma foure tymes.
            
            
               Commata, trenches, wherby water is let out of a ponde or ryuer.
            
               Commanducare, to chew meate.
            
               Commanducatus cibus, chewed meate.
            
               Commeatus, tus, a ſaulfe conduct, or leaue to departe. ſomtyme vytayles for an armye or multitude of men. Sometyme for a paſſage of men.Plaut. in Milit.
            
            
               Commeminere, to remember.
            
                
               Commemini, I remembred, or doo remembre well.
            Commemoro, aui, are, to remembre.
            
            
               Commendatitius a, um, that wherwith a man is remembred or recommended.
            
               Commendo, aui, are, to commende or prayſe. ſomtyme to recommende.
            
               Commentaculum, a marſhals or huſhers rod.
            
               Commentarienſis, was called a gaylour.
            
               Commentarium, uel Commentarius, a brigemente or other booke, conteyninge thynges briefely written. Alſo it ſignifieth a comment alſo a booke of remembraunce, or a regiſter, or expoſition.
            
               Commenticius, a, um, fayned or deuyſed for the tyme.
            
               Commentor, ari, to thynke on, to make mention, to diſpute, to wryte commetaries or bokes for remembraunce. alſo to deuyſe.
            
               Commentum, a cōment or expoſition, a matter fayned.
            
               Commeo, aui, are, to go hyther and thyther, or to go to, or with an other.
            
               Commereo, ui, êre, to deſerue, to commytte. Si ſenſerit te timidum pater,
               
                  
                     •
                  erent. in 
                     •
                  orm. 
               arbitrabitur cō
                  meruiſſe culpam: If thy father do perceyue the to be aferde, he woll ſuppoſe, that thou art gylty, or haſt committed the offence.
            
               Commereri culpam, to do an offence.
            
               Commertium, an entercourſe or lybertie to cary marchandiſe from one place to an other. Alſo a commutation or fourme of byeng and ſellyng togither. Alſo a familiarite or cuſtom.
            
               Commeſſari,
               Q. Cu
                     •
                  ti. to fede more than ynoughe.
            
               Commigro,
               
                  
                     •
                  aut. in 
                     •
                  ulul. 
               are, to go with one to a place. alſo to go from one place to dwelle in an other.
            
               Commilitium, felowſhyp in warres.
            
               Commilitones, felowes together in warres.
            
               Cōminiſcor, ſceris, ſci, to call to remembrāce.
            
               Comminuo, to cut in ſmall pieces.
            
               Comminus, forthwith at hande, hand to hād.
            
               Commiſceo, ſcui, ſcêre, to myxe to gether.
            
               Commiſereſco,
               
                  
                     •
                  erent. in 
                     •
                  ecyra. 
               ſcere, to haue compaſſion.
            
               Commiſſa, confiſcations.
            
               Commiſsio, a conferrynge to gether by exerciſe, as two lerned men together, or herynge the one after the other.
            
               Commiſsiones Praetorum,
               
                  
                     •
                  oelius. were the celebration or publyſſhynge of playes made by the great officers called Praetores.
            
            
               Commiſſura, a ioynt of any thynge that is cloſed and opened, as properly of tables which be ioyned.
            
               Commiſſus, a, um, commytted to the kepyng of one.
            
               Commiſſum bellum,
               
                  
                     •
                  i. Liuius 
                     •
                  erent. open warre.
            
               Commitigo, aui, are, to knocke. Tibi uti commitigari uideā ſandalio caput: That I may ſe the knocked on the head with his ſlypper.
            
               Committo, miſi, mittere, to commytte, or inioyne, to offende, to ioyne together. Alſo to do and begyn.Saluſtius. 
               Quibus dictis mox praelium commiſere: That ſpoken they began battayle. Alſo to delyuer, to compare, to brynge in contention, to put to gether, to confiſca
                  •
               e or ſeaſe for a forfayture, to prouoke or ſteare.Cicer. in Ver. act. 3
            
            
               Commodatarius, he that taketh a thynge of lone, he that boroweth.
            
               Commodata res, a thynge lende withoute aduauntage.
            
               Commodè, well, or to the purpoſe.
            
               Commode cadere, to happen or ſuccede wel or to the purpoſe.
            
               Commodè uerba facere, to ſpeake thynges to the purpoſe.
            
               Commoditas, tatis, a commoditie.
            
               Commoditas hominis,
               Terent. in Adelphis the facility or curteſy of one, the whiche agreeth to any requeſt.
            
               Commodo, aui, are, to do for an other mans commodity. Alſo to lende.
            
               Commodare capillum,
               Plaut. in Moſtel. to kembe his head, or decke his buſhe.
            
               Commodare loquelam,
               Plaut. in Rude. to ſpeake.
            
               Commodare operam, to helpe.
            
               Commodum, profyt, or cōmoditie Alſo good apte, or conueniente. Sometyme it is an aduerbe, and than it ſignifieth the ſame tyme, in good tyme, leyſure or oportunitie, ſcarſely. Commodum diſceſſeras heri, cum Trebatius uenit: Thou were ſcarcelye departed, whan Trebattus was come.
            
               Commodus, a, um, profytable or apt.
            
               Commodus capillus, a buſhe well decked or kempt.
            
               Commodus homo,
               Plaut. in Pſeud. a tractable or reaſonable man.
            
               Commoda & faceta mulier,
               Plaut. in Moſtel. a pleaſant and mery woman.
            
               Commoda ſtatura homo,
               Plaut. in Aſin. a man of good ſtature, nor to great nor to lyttell.
            
               Commodum id non eſt,
               Terent. in Eunucho it maye not be eaſely done.
            
               Commodum obſonare, to vſe moderat fare
            
               Commoereo, rui, 
                     ••
                  re, to be all heuy or ſory.
            
               Commonefacio, feci, facere, to warne or aduiſe one.
            
               Commonefieri, to be warned.
            Commoneo, ui, êre, idem.
            
               Commonere aliquem,
               Terent. in Andria. to remember one of a thynge.
            
               Commonere aliquem officium ſuum,
               Plaut. in Pſeud. to ad uertiſe one what he ought to do.
            
               Commonſtro, to ſhewe a thynge that is hyd.
            
               Commorior, ri, to dye with one.
            
               Commoror, rari, to abyde with one. alſoo to dwell in a place for a tyme: Alſo to tary one that is goynge.Plaut. in Amph. 
               Male facis, properantē qui me commorare, ſol abit: Thou doſt nought
 to tary me ſenſe I go in haſte, and the ſunne is howe ſet.
            
               Commotari,
               Plaut. in Amph. to cauſe one to tarye. An te auſpicium commoratum eſt? an tempeſtas cō
                  tinet, qui non abiſti ad legiones, ita ut dudum dixeras? Dyd the token ſhewed by the vyrdes cauſe the to tary? or elles the wether kepe the backe, that thou wenteſte not vnto the armye, as thou ſaydeſt a whyle ago that thou woldeſt?
            Commoſſem, for commouiſſem.
            
               Commotria, a mayden that doeth araye or apparayle her mayſtreſſe.
            
               Commotus,
               Donatus. 
               a, um, meued, troubled, afrayde, angry: alſo quicke.
            
               Commoueo, ui, êre, to trouble, to tourne or chaunge a mannes mynde, to hurt. ſomtime to departe.Ci. Tyro. 
               Tu & cura, ut valeas, & te iſtincne temere commoueas: Farewel, and take hede, that thou departe not henſe to haſtely.
            
               Communico, aui, are, to communicate or departe ſome thynge with an other, whiche. I haue.
            
               Communio,
               Cic. de oratore. 3. mutuall participation together.
            Communis, commune, common.
            
            
               Communes dies, were vnlucky dayes to go about any thynge, ſuche as we call dyſmoll dayes, or croſſe dayes.
            
               Communiter, in commune.
            
               Commutabilis, le, that whiche maye be changed eaſyly.
            
               Commutatio, an exchaunce, oone thynge for an other.
            Commutatus, a, um, chaunged.
            
            
               Commuto, aui, are, to chaunge oone thynge for an other.
            
               Commutare uerba, to chyde, or to gyue a ſhrewde worde for a good.
            
               Como, pſi, ere, to apparayle gorgiouſely, to trym, properly it belongeth to women.
            
               Comoedia, an enterlude, wherein the common vices of men and women are apparantly declared in perſonages.
            
               Comoedice, gentylly, and pleaſauntly.
            
               Comoedior, aris, to ieſte or ſcoffe.
            
               Comoedus, a player in enterludes.
            
               Comicus, a maker of enterludes.
            
               Compactum, an agrement or appoyntmente.
            
               Compacto rem agere, to cōſpire a matter, or to do a thynge by one accorde.Plaut. in cap.
            
            
               Compagino, aui, are, to put or ioyne together a thynge that is louſed.
            
               Compago, ginis, a ioynynge to gether of thynges.
            
               Compar, aris, equall, or euen lyke.
            
               Comparatio, comparyſon, preparation, or byenge.
            
               Comparatiuus, a, um, comparatit
                  •
               e, wherein begynneth exceſſe in compariſon.
            
               Comparatus, a, um, ordeyned or receyued in an vſage.Plaut. 
                     •
                   Pho
                     •
                  . 
               Quam inique comparatum eſt, hi qui minus habent, ut ſemper aliquid addāt ditioribus? What an yl vſe is this, that they whiche haue but a lyttell, ſhall gyue more to them that be ryche?Ci. de
                     •
                  
                
               Quando quidem ita ratio comparata eſt uitae naturae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   noſtrae, ut alia aetas oriatur ex alia: Senſe the fourme of our lyfe is ſoo ordeyned by nature, that of one age cometh an other.
            
               Compareo, rui, rêre, to appere, or to be ſeene.
            
               Comparebunt quae imperas:
               Plaut. is Amph. you ſhall ſe al thynges done, that ye commaunde.
            
               Comparet ratio argenti:
               Plaut. Tri
                     ••
                  
                It doth apper how the money is ſpente.Cice
                     ••
                  .
            
            
               Comparo, aui, are, to compare or make equal or more, to ordeyne, to prepare, to ioyne to, or by, alſo to gette or purchaſe. to fynde the meane or deuiſe. Nunc hoc tibi curandum eſt Chryſale.
               Plaut. Bacc
                     ••
                  
                
               C. Quid uis curem? M. Vt ad ſenem etiam alteram facias uiam, compara, fabricare, finge quod lubet: Nowe Chryſalus thou muſte take good hede .C. what wilt thou that I ſhulde do? M. Deuyſe yet to go an other waye to warke, ymagine, contryue euen as thou thynkeſt beſt.
            
               Comparare conuiuium, to prepare a bāket.
            
               Comparare malum,
               Plaut. to purchaſe an yl turne or a myſchiefe.
            
               Comparare ſe, to dyſpoſe hym ſelfe to any thynge.
            
               Compaſco, to fede or kepe cattell.
            
               Compaſcuus ager, a common fielde.
            
               Compedes, gyues or fetters.
            
               Compedio,
               Va
                     •••
                  
                
               diui, dire, to gyue or fetter one.
            
               Compeditus, a, um, fettred or gyued.
            
               Compello, aui, are, to ſpeake to, to accuſe.
            
               Compello, puli, pellere, to compel or conſtrain to ioyne or brynge together.
            
               Compelluceo, luxi, lucere, to ſhyne verye bryghte.
            Compellucidus, a, um, very bryght.
            
            
               Compendiarius, a, um, compendious or brief.
            
               Compendium facere, to make briefe, or be ſhorte in ſpeakynge.
            
               Compendifacio, to make compedious.
            Compendioſus, a, um, very profitable.
            
            
               Compendium, a ſauynge or ſparynge, or aduauntage, a compendiouſe or ſhorte fourme in wrytynge or other acte.
            
               Compenſatio, onis, a recompenſs, or ſatyſfaction.
            
               Compenſo, aui, are, to make recompenſe or amendes.
            
               Comperendinatio, a delaye, or prolongynge of tyme.
            Comperendinatus, a, um, adiourned.
            
            
               Comperendinaria dies, a daye ouer in matters of lawe.
            
                
               Comperendinati rei, they whoſe iugemente is deferred vntyl an other tyme.
            
               Comperio, ij, ire, to knowe of an other man.
            
               Comperior, iris, to fynde, or ymagine in mine owne opinion.
            
               Compertus furti, founden gylty of felony.
            
               Compertum habeo, I knowe or perceyue.
            
               Compernis, he that hath his knees nyghe together, or longe feete.
            
               Compeſco, ſcui, ſcere, to aſſuage, to mitigate
            
               Compeſce in ilium iniuſte dicere,
               
                  
                     •••
                  ut. in 
                     ••
                  cchi. leaue to ſaye yll of hym.
            
               Competitor, he that ſueth for that, whiche an other man ſueth for.
            
               Competit, it is mete or conueniente. Hocilli competit, that is mete or conueniēt for hym. Alſo it is ſufficient.
            
               Competo, tij, tere, to aſke or ſue for an offyce or other lyke thynge agaynſte an other that doth the ſemblable.
            
               Compilati, pollyd by extortion.
            
               Compilo, aui, are, to take by extortion or wrōg or as the vulgar ſpeche is, to polle and ſhaue.
            
               Compingo, pegi, pingere, to thruſte. Quid faciam nunc, ſi tres uiri, me in carcerem cō
                  pegerint? Howe ſhall I do nowe, if the offycers thruſte me in to priſon. Somtyme compingere is to compacte or put together.
            
               Compingere axibus, to bourde or planke a floore or roufe.
            
               Compingere in oculos,
               
                  
                     ••
                  aut. in 
                     ••
                  en. to thruſte it in his eyes.
            
               Compita, many pathes goinge in to one way, or places where many wayes doo meete, or where two ſtretes do croſſe.
            
               Compitalia, feaſtes or drynkynges, made where as be many pathes or hyghe wayes in a place.
            
               Compitalicius, a, um, belongynge to the ſayd feaſtes.
            
               Complaceo, cui, cere, to pleaſe or lyke well.
            
               Complacitum eſt,
               
                  
                     ••
                  aut. in 
                     ••
                  ph. it lyketh or contenteth.
            
               Complano, are, to make playne.
            
               Complector,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . fam. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 14. 
               eris, ti, to imbrace or holde ſtrait alſo to loue well. alſo to entertayne: Quare uelim eum 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   liberaliſsime complectare: wherfore I wolde that ye dydde entertayne him very lyberally.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               Peto ut eum complectare, diligas, in tuis habeas: I requyre you entertayne hym well, fauour hym, and take hym amonge your frendes. Nos inter nos eſſe complexos: One of vs to loue well another.
            
               Complector te amore, I loue the h
                  •
               rtely.
            
               Complector cogitatione, I beare in mynde.
            
               Complector animo, I conſyder.
            
               Compleo, eui, ere, to fulfyl, or fyll to the top, to fyniſhe or perfourme, to make vp or ſupplye that lacketh.
            
               Complex, plicis, partner, companion in acte.
            
               Complexus, imbracynge or collynge. Alſo agrement in wordes or ſentences.
            
               Complico, aui, are, to folde or wrap together,
            
               Complodo, pſi, dere, to clappe to gether the handes for ioy.
            Complures,Plautus. complura, & compluria, many.
            
            
               Compluries, very often.
            Compluſculi,Terent. ſcula, many.
            
            
               Compluuium, a gutter, wherin falleth rayne from many houſes.
            
               Compluuius lacus, a dyche whereinto water falleth out of dyuers gutters.
            
               Compono, to put or ioyne together, to make, ordeyne, or diſpoſe. Alſo to compare, to adorne, to gather, to recreate, to appeaſe, to conclude, to accorde or agree, to redeme, to diſſemble or fayne.
            
               Componere lites, to agree men to gether. whiche are at variance.
            
               Compos, potis, he that hath his purpoſe or deſyre. alſo euer contente.
            
               Compos animi, of ſounde remembraunce, not madde.
            
               Compos culpae,
               Plaut. in Trucul. he that hath done an offence, gylty or culpable.
            
               Compos laudis, he that is prayſed.
            
               Compos patriae, he that is come home into his countrey.
            
               Compos praedae, he that hath gotten the praye that he loked for.
            
               Compos uoti,
               Ti. Liuius he that hath his owne deſyre or appetite.
            
               Vix prae gaudio cōpotes: for ioye they could not tell what they ſhulde do.
            
               Compoſitio, onis, a makynge, an ornament, a compoſition or agrement.
            
               Compoſitiones gladiatorum, were the bringynge in of ſwordplayers in to the fightynge place.
            
               Compotatio, a banket.
            
               Compotio,
               Plaut. in Rude. 
               tiui, tire, to getee oone the thynge that he deſyred.
            
               Compoto, aui, are, t
                  •
                drynke with an other man.
            
               Compotrix, ſhe that drynketh with an other.
            
               Compraedes, pledges or ſureties together.
            
               Compraehendo,
               Cicero. 
               dere, to take holde on a thing to comprehende or contayne. Alſo to fauour and defende.
            
               Comprecor, cari, to deſyre or praye.
            
               Compreſſis manibus ſedêre, To be ydell or vnoccupied.
            
               Compreſſus, a defloration, or rauiſhement.
            
               Comprime,
               Plaut. in Trucul. let be, peaſe.
            
               Epiſtolam comprimere, to cloſe a letter.
            
               Comprime te, be ſtylle, leaue of.
            Vix comprimor, quin inuolē illi in oculos:
            I can vnneth forbeare to take hym by the face.
            
                
               Comprime, Peace, gette the hence.
            
               Comprimo, preſsi, primere, to preſſe or thruſt together, to hold or refraine alſo to defloure a woman.
            
               Comprimere aliquem,
               Plaut. in rudente. to beate or tourment one.
            
               Comprimere animam, to holde in a mans breathe.
            
               Comprimere manus, to holde his handes that he ſtryke not.
            
               Comprimere ſe,
               Plaut in Caſina. to ceaſſe or refrayne to doo a thynge.
            
               Comptum, a certayne offeryng of lycour, whiche was made with meale.
            
               Comptus, tus, freſhe apparayle.
            
               Compulſus, a, um, compelled or hytte with any thynge.
            
               Compunctus, a, um, marked or ſpotted.
            
               Compungo, xi, gere, to punche, or pryck, or ſtryke.
            
               Computo, aui, are, to deme, to account, to decerne, to impute.
            
               Comum, a Citye of Fraunce on this ſyde the mountaynes, the inhabitantes whereof are called Comenſes.
            
            
               Conatus, endeuour, inforcement, power, might ſometyme diligence.
            
               Concaleo, lui, ere, to be het, to be made warme.
            
               Concalfacio, feci, facere, to inflame, to be ſtered or prouoked.
            
               Concalleo, lui, lere, to be made harde, as a mannes handes with moche workynge, or his feete with moche goinge.
            
               Concameratio, a warke made lyke to a vaulte with arches.
            
               Concaſtigo, gare, to chaſtiſe with an other.
            
               Concateno, aui, are, to bynde to gether with chaynes.
            Concauus, a, um, holowe.
            
            
               Concedo, ceſſi, dere, to graunte, to permyt, or ſuffer, to departe awaye, to go to a place, to conſente.
            
               Concede hinc,
               Plautus. go henſe a lyttell.
            
               Concedere fato, to dye.
            
               Concedamus huc, let vs be here.
            
               Concedere octauam partem, to abate or remyt the eyght parte.
            
               Concedere alicui, to gyue place to one.
            
               Concede ad dexteram, go on the ryght hande.
            
               Concede huc domum, go thy way home.
            
               Conceſsit in 
                     •
                  ras, he is angry.
            
               Concelebro, brare, to celebrate with other.
            
               Concelebrare platêam hymenaeo, to make ioye abrode with ſyngynge and daunſyng in the honour of mariage.
            Concelo, are, idem quod celare.
            
               Concento, tare, to agree in one tune.
            
               Concentus, tus, a conſent, many voyces in one tune, or accorde in muſike.
            
               Conceptaculum, or Conceptabulum, any thynge holowe or apte to receyue and holde,Fe
                     ••
                  
                as a veſſell.
            
               Conceptiuae feriae,
               Co
                     ••
                  
                holye dayes kept at a tyme certayne yerely.
            
               Conceptus, a, um, conceyued, purpoſed, ſometyme gathered. Ne cum à uerrice torrens im bribus conceptus affluxerit, fundamenta conuellat, Leſt whan the ſtreame gathered by the ſhoures of raine, ſhall runne vnto it, it ſhall pull vp the foundation of that whiche is buylded.
            
               Concepta uerba, wordes expreſſed and pronounced.
            
               Conceptis uerbis iurare, to take an othe, recitynge the wordes of the othe.
            
               Conceptus, tus, & conceptio, the thynge that is conceyued.
            
               Concernere, to concerne.
            
               Concerpo, pſi, pere, to pull in pieces.
            
               Concertatum, debated in reaſonynge.
            
               Concerto, tare, to contende, to fyght.
            
               Concertatio, debate, diſputation.
            Conceſſo, aui, are, to ceaſe.
            
            Conceſſus, a, um, graunted, gyuen.
            
            Conceſſus, us, ui, permiſſion, ſufferaunce.
            
            
               Concha, properly a muſkle. ſomtyme the ſhell of a muſkle, oyſter, or cockle. Alſo euery veſſell that is holowe and open aboue, properly a bolle, wherin linnen clothes be waſhed. ſomtyme a wyne veſſell. Alſo a trumpet, as it ſemeth made of erthe, lyke to ſuche as th
                  ••
               ore men do vſe, whiche haue the fallyng ſicknes, and do come from the place in Duchelande, called ſayncte Cornelius.
            
               Conchula, the diminutiue of Concha.
            
            
               Conchis, a meate made of beanes.
            
               Conchon, is called a veſſell of the greekes, or the holowneſſe of the eyes.
            
               Conchus, a perle.
            
               Couchyle, & conchylium, a kynd of ſhelfiſh, out of the whiche a lycour is taken, wherewith ſylke is dyed purple. It is ſomtyme taken for the purple colour.Cae
                     ••
                  
               
            
            
               Conchyliata ueſtis, a purple garment.
            
               Conchyta, he that ſeketh for the ſhell fyſhes, out of the whiche commeth purple: we may take hym for a fyſher of oyſters and muſkels.
            
               Concido, cidi, ere, ciſum, to cut in pieces, to dye. Virgis concidere, to beate one vntyll▪ he blede.
            
               Concidit crimen, The action is abated or fallen.
            
               Concido, concidi, ere, concaſum, to fal down all together. Et muri ciuitatum concident: And the walles of all Cities ſhall fall all together.
            
               Concidere nucleum dentibus, to knak a nut with ones teeth.
            
                
               Concidere & delumbare ſentētias, to make feble or confounde mennes argumentes.
            
               Conciſae ſententiae, briefe ſentences.
            
               Conſiſe, in pieces, ſometyme briefely.
            
               Concidit animus, my hart is done, or my hart fayleth me.
            
               Animo, uel mente concidere, to lacke courage, or comforte.
            
               Concidere in optima cauſa, to be uanquiſhed in a good quarell.
            
               Concidit fides, he hath loſt his credence.
            
               Conciliabulum, a counſayll houſe.
            
               Conciliabundus, he that is redye to gyue coū
               ſayle.
            
               Conciliatrix, a woman that endeuoureth her to make agrement betwene menne and theyr wyues.
            
               Concilio, aui, are, to accorde or make frendes together, to geate.
            
               Conciliare affinitatem, uel pacem, to make alyaunce, or peace.
            
               Conciliare beneuolentiam, to get fauour or loue.
            
               Conciliare odium, uel inimicitias, to get hatred or diſpleaſure.
            
               Conciliare pecuniam,
               Cicer. in 
                     •
                  er. act. 4 to gather moneye of the people.
            
               Concilium, counſayl, or the aſſembly of counſaylours.
            
               Concilium Antiochenum, a generall counſell kepte at Antiochia in Syria, in the yere of our lorde. 346.
            
               Concilium Ariminenſe, was a generall counſayle holden at Ariminum in Italy, the yere of our lorde. 361. In the whiche, the articles of the counſayle of Nice, were confyrmed.
            
               Concilium Arelatenſe, a generall counſayle holden at Orleance, the yere of our lord. 814.
            
               Concilium Baſilienſe, a general counſayle holden at Baſil in Almayne, the yere of our lord
1345.
            
               Concilium Chalcidonenſe, ageneral counſail holden at Chalcedon in Bithinia, the yere of our lorde. 453: in the whiche counſayle the hereſies of Neſtorius & Eutiches were condemned, and all the bokes of the Maniches hereſies were burned.
            
               Concilium Carthaginenſe, a general counſail holden at Carthago, in Affryke, the yere of our lorde. 419.
            
               Concilium Conſtantiae, a generall counſayle holden at Conſtaunce in Heluetia, the yere of our lorde 1414. and dured .iii. yeres and mo.
            
               Concilium Conſtantinopolitanum, a counſail holden at Conſtantinopole, the yere of oure lorde. 869.
            
               Concilium Ferrarienſe, a generall counſayle holden at the cite of Ferraria in Italy, wher the churches of Latines and grekes became one churche, the yere of our lorde. 1438.
            
               Concilium Lateranenſe, a generall counſayl holden at Rome in the palayce of the byſſhop of Rome, called Lateranum, the yere of our lorde. 1215.
            
               Concilium Lugdunenſe, a generall counſayle holden at Lions in Fraunce, the yere of our lord. 1273 where the greekes accorded with the latines in procedynge of the holye goſte from the father and the ſon in dignitie.
            
               Concilium Nicenum, the fyrſte generall counſayle, whiche was holden at Nicaea a cite in Bithinia, the yere of our lorde .327.
            
               Concinere, to agre in one ſonge, or one tune.
            
               Concinnatitius, a, um, compendiouſly and aptly gathered together.
            Concinnatus, a, um, apparayled, trymmed.
            
            
               Concinnè, properly, honeſtly, trymly.
            
               Concinnitudo, aptenes, or propernes, a conueniencie.
            
               Concinno,
               Plaut. in cap. 
               aui, are, to make apt or proper, or fytte. alſo to make. Vt illi maſtigiae cerebrū excutiam, qui me inſanum uerbis concinnat ſuis: I wyll ſurely brayne this knaue, that with his wordes maketh me out of my wyt.
            
               Concinnare lutum, to make morter.
            
               Concinnare ſe leuem ſuis, to put his frendes to no coſte.Plaut. in Trinum. 
               Nun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   erit alienis grauis, qui ſuis ſe concinnat leuem: He ſhall neuer be greuous to other, whiche wyll not be bourdenous to his frendes.
            
               Concinnare ſtruices patinarias, to make ſon dry bankettynge dyſhes.Plaut. in Men.
            
            
               Concinnare uinum,
               Idem. to mengle ſpyces with wyne.Plaut. in Sticho.
            
            
               Concinnare ueſtem, to amende a garmente.
            
               Concinnare viam, to make rome that a man maye paſſe.
            
               Concinnare uxorē lachrymantem, to make his wyfe to wepe.Plaut. in Amph. 
               Lachrymantem ex abitu concinnas tu tuam uxorem: By your departynge henſe, ye make your wyfe to wepe.
            
               Concinnus, a, um, proper, well facioned, mynyon.
            
               Concinnitas, tatis, properneſſe, feateneſſe, aptneſſe.
            
               Concio, ciui, cire, to cal together a multitude.
            
               Concio, onis, a pulpet or ſtage, wherin he ſtandeth that exhorteth people. Alſo an aſſembly or congregation of people, called together to here the commaundement of the kynge, or other in auctoritie in the weale publyque. Alſo it is the oration or propoſition made vnto them, called a concion.
            
               Concionem habere, to make an oration or ſermon to the people.
            
               Concionalis, he that is wonte to make orations or propoſitions to the people.
            
               Concionatorius, a, um, perteining to a cōtion.
            
                
               Concionator, oris, he that preacheth or purpoſeth an oration.
            
               Concionor, aris, ari, to preache or purpoſe a matter to the people.
            
               Concipere curam, to take charge of a thinge.
            
               Concipere dedecus, to take dyſhonour or ſhame.
            
               Concipere furorem, to become madde.
            
               Concipio, coepi, 
                     ••
                  pere, to conceyue or apprehende, to deliberate, or determyne in minde.
            
               Concipere foedus, to make a leage.
            
               Concipere iuſiurandum, to ſweare in recytynge the othe, as it is miniſtred.
            
               Concipere metum, to be aferde.
            
               Concipere oculis,
               Plaut. in penu to ſe or beholde.
            
               Concipere ſcelus, to ymagine to doo an ylle deede.
            
               Concire,
               Terent. in Heauton. to moue or ſteere. Diſperij, ſceleſtus, quantas turbas conciui inſciens? I am vndoone wretche that I am, what a buſynes haue I made vnwares.
            
               Concire lites, to moue debate.
            Concito, aui, are, to ſteere.
            
            
               Conclamare ad arma, whan al the world crieth warre.
            
               Conclamata uaſa, proclamatiō made truſte, to gather bag and baggage, as is vſed in the rayſynge of a ſiege, or remouynge of a camp in battayle.
            
               Conclamatum eſt, it is at a poynte, or paſte remedy.
            
               Conclamito, tare, to make many cryes.
            
               Conclamo mare, to crye to one. Vbi abijt conclamo,
               Plaut▪ in milit. 
               heus quid agis tu in tegulis? Whan he was gone, I cryed vnto hym, ho ſyrra, what doeſte thou amonge the tyles? Alſo to make a cry or proclamation. Vis conclamari auctionem fore quidem? wylt thou haue it proclaymed,Plaut. in Men. that there ſhalbe port ſale.
            
               Conclaue, a priuy or ſecret chamber. ſomtyme a bankettynge chamber.
            
               Conclauia,
               Fectus. many chaumbers or places vnder one kaye.
            
               Concitare equum, to threaſte the ſpurres to an horſe.
            
               Concitare equum in aliquem, to ſpurre his horſe, and runne ageynſte one.
            
               Concitare ſui expectationem, to cauſe men to haue a truſt or expectation in hym.
            
               Concitare inuidiam in aliquem, to brynge one in to an hatred.
            Concitare odium, idem.
            
               Concitare ſomnum, to cauſe one to ſleape.
            
               Concitare vrinam, to make one pisse.
            
               Concita
                     •
                  us; ta, tū, ſtered, prouoked, meued.
            
               Concitatior curſus, a more vehement or quicker courſe.
            
               Concitatio, a ſterynge, a prouokynge.
            Conclauium, idem quod conclaue.
            
               Concludo, fi dere, to conclude, or make an ende, ſometyme to hyde.
            Concluſa oratio, pro numeroſa.
            
               Concluſio, onis, a concluſyon, or ende of a matter.
            
               Concolor, of the ſame colour.
            
               Concoctio, digeſtion in the ſtomake.
            Concoquo, coxi, coquere, to digeſt.
            
            
               Concoquere odia, to ſuffer dyſpleaſures or malyce.
            
               Concordare, to be at a concorde or agremente.
            
               Concordia, concorde, or agrement.
            
               Cocorditer, by aſſent or agrement.
            
               Concorporo, aui, are, to make one thynge of dyuers.
            
               Concors, dis, of one mynde or wyll, agreable of one aſſente.
            
               Concratitij parietes, walles made with lathes or bourdes vpright and ouerwhart.
            
               Concredo, didi, dere, to delyuer or commyt a thynge vpon truſt.
            
               Concredere uites teneriores calido ſolo, to plant vynes in an hotte grounde.
            
               Concrepare, to make a great noyſe, or to creke as a dore doeth in the openynge.
            
               Concreſco, creui, creſcere, to growe together.
            
               Concretio, a gatherynge to gether and waxynge harde.
            
               Concretum, congeled or conglutinate.
            
               Concretus, a, um, ioyned or congeled together, as a thynge that is liquide, to be made harde.
            
               Concreta labes, a ſpot which will neuer away.
            
               Concubinatus, hordome, fornication.
            
               Concubitor, oris, he that meddleth with a woman.
            
               Concubina, a woman vſed in the ſtede of ones wyfe.
            
               Concubium, the fyrſte ſleape in the nyghte, or the depeſt of the nighte.
            Concubia nox, idem.
            
               Conculco, care, to treade vnder the foote.
            
               Concumbo, bui, bere, & Concubo, aui, are, to lye to gether, to accompanye to gether, in the acte of generation.
            
               Concupiſcentia, a feruente deſyre, or appetite carnall.
            Concupitus, ta, tum, deſyred feruently.
            
            
               Concupiſco, piui, piſcere, to coueyt, or deſire feruently.
            Concupio, piui, pire, idem.
            
               Concuro, rare, to care for a thynge.
            
               Concurro,
               Plaut. in Bacchi. 
               rere, to runne with an other. ſome tyme to accorde.
            
               Concurſare, to run often together.
            
               Concurſus, ſus, a runninge of people together to one place.
            Concurſio, idem. Concurſatio, idem.
            Concutio, tij, tere, to ſhake.
            
            
                Concuſſus, a, um, ſhaken.
            
            
               Condalium, a rynge.
            
               Condecenter, agreably.
            
               Condecentia, a beſemynge.
            
               Condecet, it well becommeth.
            
               Condecoro, aui, are, to make klenly or honeſt, to polyſhe. alſo to honour a thynge in making it more commendable.
            Condemno, aui, are, to condemne.
            
            
               Condenſare, to make thycke.
            
               Condico,
               Ti. Liuius 
               xi, cere, to appoynt, to ordeyn, to promyſe, to aſke agayne, to denye, to aſſigne by mouth, to denounce or declare.
            
               Condictio, onis, an action in the lawe, or appointment to a day certayne.
            
               Condictum, a promyſe.
            
               Condign
                     •
                  , worthyly, honeſtly.
            
               Condignus, a, um, worthy and accordynge as it is eſtemyed.
            
               Condimentum, that wherwith thinges be preſeruid from corruption, or els made dilectable in taſte, ſauce, ſeaſonynge.
            
               Condio, iui, uel dij, dire, to ſeaſon meat, to pouder, or otherwyſe order it, to preſerue it from corruption.
            
               Condire triſtitiam hilaritate, to temper wiſely ſorowe with myrth, or to mitigate.
            
               Condiſcipulus, a ſchoolefelowe.
            
               Condiſco, ſcere, to lerne.
            
               Cōditaneus, a, ū, that which is to be preſeruid.
            
               Conditio, onis, condition, fortune, eſtate, election or choyſe.
            
               Conditione uti, not to refuſe the offer.
            
               Conditionem accepit, he toke the bargayne or promyſe, or he agreed.
            
               Condititia cibaria, powdered meate or otherwyſe preſeruyd.
            
               Conditinus, a, um, that whyche may be powdered or kepte.
            
               Conditor, oris, a maker.
            
               Conditorium, a ſepulchre, a place wherin ordinaunce for warre is kepte.
            
               Condere captiuos in cuſtodiam, to put the priſoners in ſaufegarde.
            
               Conditura, ſauce, or pickle made with ſpices.
            
               Condiuincum, Nauntes in Fraunce.
            
               Condo, didi, dere, to lay ſaulfe, or hyde, ſometyme to make or buylde.
            
               Condocere, to teache.
            
               Condocefacio, feci, facere, to make to knowe.
            
               Condolet caput,
               Plautus. my head aketh.
            
               Condonatus, pardonyd.
            
               Condono, are, to gyue, to forgyue a dette or duetie, to pardon.
            
               Condormio, ire, to ſleape with other.
            
               Condormiſco, ſcere, to ſleape a lyttell, to nap.
            
               Condrillon, wylde cykory.
            
               Condris, an herb callyd fals dittayne, bycauſe it is lyke dittayne, but it hath leſſe leaues.
            
               Conducibile, profytable.
            
               Conducit, it is profitable.
            
               Conduco, xi, cere, to brynge with me, to hyre, to take a houſe or lande, alſo to gather, to conuerte. Conducere, is alſo to profite.
            
               Conduci non poſſum,
               Plaut. in Aſin. I can not be made to beleue, no man can make me beleue.
            
               Conductitius, a, um, that whiche may be hired or taken, or is vſyd to be hyred.
            
               Conductor, he that hyreth a thynge.
            
               Conductus, a, um, to be ſet to hyre.
            
               Conduplicatio, doublynge.
            
               Conduplico, care, to pay the double of a thing.
            
               Condus, a ſtewarde of houſeholde, or he that kepeth the ſtore of houſeholde.
            
               Condylóma, matis, a ſwellynge of the tuell or fundement, procedynge of an inflammation.
            
               Condylus, of Feſt. Pom. is expowned a ryng, ſome other do declare it to be the roundneſſe of the bones in the knee, the ancle, the elbow, the knuckles of the fyngers.
            
               Confarratio, a mariage betwene a man & a woman, whiche was done with certayne ſolemnities in the preſence of the byſhop.
            
               Confecta, thingis voided or cōcluded by reaſon▪
            
            
               Confectum, is declarid by Nonius, exanimate or kylled.
            
               Confercio, to ſtuffe or porre.
            
               Confero, tuli, ferre, to put togither, to ſet forth to prepare,Plautus. to deuiſe, to talke togither, to put in. Ne poſterius in me culpā conferas, Put not at the lauſ the defaut in me. Conſilia con ferunt, They kepe their coūſels togither. To lay to,Terentius or ioyn. Nouiſsima conferam primis, I wyll lay to, or ioyne the laſt to the firſt. alſo to profyte, to lay togither. Sit
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   utri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   proxi mum horreum, quo conferatur ruſticum inſtrumentum,
               Columel. To both, next there muſte be a barne, wherin may be laid vp togither, inſtrumentis longyng to huſbādry. alſo Confero, I gyue. Multa contuli in Catonē, I haue gyuē or attribute moch to Cato. I haue fauoured moch Cato. Cōtuli me domū, I went home. Contuli me ad Catonem, I wēt vnto Cato.
            
               Confero me in campum, uel ad campum, I go into the felde.
            
               Conferre amorem, to loue.
            
               Cōferre animū alio, to ſet his mind els wha
            
               Conferre capita, to aſſemble for counſaylle, to lay theyr heades togyther.
            
               Confer gradum,
               Plautus. come forthe.
            
               Conferre in pauca, to conclude ſhortely.
            
               Conferre manus, to aſſayle eche other.
            
               Conferre pedem, to come to the poynt, proprely in contention, where the parties doo ioyne.
            
               Conferre ſe in pedes,
               Plaut. in Bacch. to runne awey, to take his legges.
            
               Conferre ſtudium, to employ his ſtudy.
            
                
               Conferre tempus in aleam,
               Plinius in pan. to ſpende the tyme in playenge at the dyce.
            
               Conferre uerba ad rem,
               Terent. in Eunucho to do as he ſayth.
            
               Confert, it is profitable.
            
               Conferum, in a buſhement.
            
               Confertus, a, um,
               Caeſar in cōment. full. alſo in a flocke or multitude, in abuſſhement. Vt nun
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   conferti, ſed rari magniſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   interuallis praeliarentur, That they mought fight, not a multitude togither, but a few at ones, and a great diſtance on ſunder.Ti. Liuius. 
               Turba confertaiter clauſit, The people gathered in a buſhement, ſtopped the waye.
            
               Qua parte hoſtiū acies cōfertiſsima uiſa eſt,
               Caeſar. 
               erupit, He brake out on that ſyde, where the hoſte of the enemies femed to be moſt thycke of people.
            
               Confertiſsima turba, in the thyckeſt preaſe.
            
               Conferua, an herbe whiche groweth in freſſhe waters lyke to a ſpounge.
            
               Confeſsio, a confeſſion.
            
               Confeſſor, oris, a confeſſour.
            
               Confeſtim, eftſoones.
            
               Confibula, a clapſe or tache.
            
               Conficientiſsimus literarum,
               Ci. pro L. Flacco. he that putteth all thynge in wrytyng.
            
               Conficio,
               Lactantiꝰ. Cic. off. 
               feci, ficere, to performe or fynyſhe, to peryſſhe or be conſumed, to diſtroye or ſlea, to explycate or declare. Honeſtaris pars confecta eſt, quā tibi cupio eſſe notiſsimam. The part of honeſtie is declared, whyche I wolde ſhoulde be vnto the perfectly knowen. alſo to bryng to paſſe. Si me amas, confice, If thou loueſt me, bryng it to paſſe, alſo to gather money. Permagnam dices ex illa re pecuniam confici poſte, Thou wylt ſaye that a greate ſūme of money myght be made of that thing. Conficere, to breake. Nucem dentibus conficere,
               Plinius. To breke a nut with his teethe. alſo to conſume or wa
                  •
               te. Qui cum hic non uideant me,
               Terent. 
               credant me conficere argentum ſuum, Who bicauſe they ſe me not here, they beleue I waſt theyr money. alſo Confici to be made. Quomodo poteſt ex multorum deorum aceruo, unus deus confici? By what meanes may there be of a heape of goddis one onely god made.
            
               Conficere penſum,
               Plautꝰ in Mercat. to ſpyn out her threde, it is tranſlated into this ſentence. To haue done or brought to an ende that thynge, whiche he was commanded or appoynted.Plaut. in perſa.
            
            
               Conficere prandium, to haue dined. Pallium ad phrigionem fert confecto prandio,
               Plaut. in Men. when dyner was done, or whan he had dined, he caryed her mantyll to the brouderer.
            
               Conficere ſolicitudines alicui,
               Terent. in Andria. to brynge one into heuynes, or to make hym ſorowfull.
            
               Confidens, tis, he that regardeth no lawes, nor feareth any thynge, ſommetyme it ſygnifieth conſtant, aſſured.
            
               Confidenter, conſtantely, aſſuredly. ſometyme hardily, boldly, aduenturouſely.
            
               Confidentia, truſt, hope, certayn aſſurance. alſo madde hardynes.
            
               Confidentiloquus, he that ſpeakethe boldlye, without feare.
            
               Confido,
               Plautus. 
               di, dere, to truſt, to be ſure, to dare.
            
               Cōfigo, fixi, figere, to ſtyk or thruſt into a thīg
            
               Confingo, finxi, fingere, to ſayne a thynge to be trew. Confingere dolum, to fynd a mean to deceyue one.
            
               Confinis, ne, next to, or adioynyng.
            
               Confinium, a border or march of a countrey or lande.
            
               Confirmitas, aſſurednes.
            
               Confirmo, are, to confirme or aſſure a thinge, to be as it is ſpoken.
            
               Confirmare animum,
               Ci. Tym. to take courage.
            
               Confirmare ſe, to make hym ſelf ſtronge after his ſyckenes.
            
               Confiſcare, to ſeaſe for a forfayture.
            
               Confit, it is made togither.
            
               Confiteor, eris, to confeſſe.
            
               Conflages, places whereinto many wynde
                  •
                do blowe.
            
               Conflagro, are, to be on fyre, to be inflamyd.
            
               Conflare, to blowe togyther, to blowe lyke as one bloweth the fyre. Alſo Conflare, to gather. Cōflauit ex his omnibus populum, Of all thoſe he gatheryd a great multitude. alſo to make.Vergilius. 
               Et curuae rigidum falces conflantur in enſem, And the crooked ſythe into the harde ſworde is made.
            
               Conflare inuidiam, nimicitias, odium, To ſtyre or procure enuy, hoſtilitie, hate.
            
               Conflare mendatium, to imagin a lye.
            
               Conflata pecunia, money coyned.
            
               Conflauit aes alienum, he is runne in dette.
            
               Conflatile, that whiche is apt to be wroughte lyke mettall.
            
               Conflictatio,
               Donatus. is where as one thynge beateth agaynſt an other.
            
               Conflicto, aui, are, to fyght often.
            
               Cōflictor, aris, to be vexid or troublid, to fight.
            
               Conflictatus graui morbo, to be tourmented with greuous ſyckenes.
            
               Confligo, fligi, gere, to fyghte as men doo in battayle.
            
               Confluens, where two riuers do mete togither.
            
               Confluere, to come or run togither, or flowe, to aſſemble togither out of dyuers countreys.
            
               Confluges, places, into the whyche many ryuers do flowe.
            
               Confluuium, & confluxus, a metyng togither of many ſtreames.
            
               Confluus, a, um, that whiche floweth togither.
            
               Confodio, dere, to dygge.
            
               Confoeduſti,
               Terent. in Andria. olde writers vſyd for them which were ioyned in leage, confederates.
            
               Confore, to be brought to paſſe.
            
                
               Conformis, me, of a conformitie, or lyke in faſcion, conuenyent.
            
               Conformo, are, to bryng to a facion or figure, to make apte or lyke to a thynge.
            Conforto, aui, are, to comforte.
            
            
               Confragoſus, a, um, rough, as a ground, whiche is not playne, yll to go in. alſo harde to be vnderſtande, rude in language.
            
               Confringo, fregi, fringere, to breake or bruſe.
            
               Cōfringere rē, to ſpend away al his ſubſtāce.
            
               Confringere teſſeram, to be out of fauoure, or no more welcome to one.Plaut. in Caſtel.
            
            
               Confugio, fugi, gere, to flee with other. Confugere ad aliquid, to reſort for ſuccour or excuſe
            
               Confundo, fudi, dere, to confound, to medle togider, to trouble al, alſo to myxe out of order.
            
               Confutatio,
               Liuius. 6. a diſprouīg of that which is ſpokē
            
            
               Confuto, aui, are, to reproue or vanquyſſhe by wordes. alſo to ſtyrre.
            
               Congedus, a ryuer in Spayne, nere to a town callyd Bilbilis.
            
            
               Congelatur, it is froſen or congelyd.
            
               Congelo, aui, are, to congele and wax thycke.
            
               Congeminatio, a doublynge.
            
               Congemino, nare, to double.
            
               Congeneres, they whyche haue wedded the doughters of one man.
            Congenulo, aui, are, to knele.
            
            
               Congeries, an heape.
            
               Congermino, nare, to growe ioyntly togither.
            
               Congero, geſsi, gere, to gather togyther, or heape vp.
            
               Congerro,
               Plaut. in Moſtel. 
               onis, a mery companion, he that kepeth cōpany only in paſtyme & mery deuiſing
            
               Congeſtitius, a, um, caſte vp in a heape.
            
               Congeſtus, a, um, made in an heape.
            
               Congiarium, an almes, or other lyberall gyfte, gyuen by the prince vnto his people, be it in money corne or vytayles.
            
               Congius, a meaſure contayning .vi. Sextarios and receyueth in weight of oyle .ix. li. of wine x. li. of hony .xv. li. and is of our meſure a pot tell and one pynte.
            
               Conglacio, aui, are, to freſe or let to freſe. Conglaciat Tribunatus Curioni,
               Cicero. Curio lettethe the office of Tribune to freſe, as who ſaythe, he dothe nothynge in the offyce worthy of remembraunce.
            
               Conglobare, to bryng or come round togither
            
               Conglobatim, in a rounde fourme, lyke to a bottome of threde.
            
               Conglutinatio, a ioynyng or glewyng togider.
            
               Conglutino, nare, to ioyne togither as it were glewed.
            
               Congraecor, cari, to eat and drynk excedyngly after the comon word, to make good chere.
            
               Congratulor, aris, ari, to reioice with an other man of his good fortune.
            
               Congredior, eris, gredi, to goo with an other to fyght or diſpute.
            
               Congrego, aui, are, to gather togither.
            
               Congreſtus, us, a battayle, alſo company with other. Congreſsio, idem.
            
            
               Congrex, of the ſame flocke.
            
               Congruens, accordyng, lyke.
            Congruo, grui, ere, to agree.
            
            
               Congruum, agreable.
            
               Congrus, & conger, a fyſhe callyd a conger.
            
               Coniectarium, effectuall, or perfect.
            
               Coniecto, aui, are, to ſuppoſe, to iudge.
            
               Coniector, oris, an interpreter of dreames, a coniecter, that doth coniect what ſhal happē.
            
               Coniectura, a coniecture.
            
               Coniecturale, that whiche is coniected, or gatheryd by coniecture.
            
               Coniectus, us, a certayn direction of reſon vnto the trouthe.
            
               Conifera arbor, a tree whiche beareth fruites being ſmaller at the one ende thā at the other lyke a pyne appull.
            
               Conijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caſte, to coniecte.
            
               Coniecit ſe in fugam, he put him to flight.
            
               Coniecit ſe intro, he went his way in.
            
               Coniecit ſe in pedes, he toke hym to flyght. he toke hym to his legges.
            
               Conijcere pecuniam, to beſtowe money.
            
               Conijcere in letitiam, to bring to a gladnes.
            
               Conijcere in ſaginam, to put to fattynge, to go where he may fyll his bealy.
            
               Conijcere in uincula, to caſt into priſon, or to lay a man in the ſtockes or gyues.
            
               Conijcere tela, to caſte dartes, or to ſhoote.
            
               Coniſco, care, to bouſſhe one at an other with theyr heade
                  •
               , as rāmes do, bulles, and dere.
            
               Coniugalis t
                     •
                  orus, the chamber where the huſbande and wyfe do lye.
            
               Coniugata, be thoſe wordes, which being of one kind, be deriued one of an nother, as of Iuſtitia, iuſtus, & iuſtū, wherof an argument may be made in this wiſe. If iuſtice is to be chiefly honored & louyd of men, a iuſt man is to be had in eſtimation & reuerence amonge men.
            
               Coniugatio, a ioynyng togyther.
            
               Coniugium, maryage.
            
               Coniugo, aui, are, to yoke togither, or mary.
            
               Coniugus, a, um, that whiche ioyneth.
            
               Coniunctim, togyther.
            
               Coniunctio, onis, a ioynyng togither, ſomtime affinytie,Cic. fam. epi. 5. ſometyme familyaritie or acquayntance. Vetuſtus eſt amor, conſuetudo, ſtudia paria, quod uinculum, quae res deeſt noſtrae coniunctioni? There is olde loue, acquayntance, ſtudies like, what bond, or what thing lacketh, that we ſhulde not be familiar? Spero
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   & opto, nobis hanc coniunctionem uoluptati fore, I deſire & alſo I truſt, that this alyance ſhalbe ioyfull vnto vs.
            Coniunctura, idem.
            
                
               Coniunctus, a frende, or verye famylyat and well truſted.
            Coniunctus, a, um, ioyned.
            
            
               Coniungo, xi, ere, to ioyne togither.
            
               Coniux, iugis, a wyfe.
            
               Coniuola,
               Pom. Feſ. hydde, ſecrete.
            
               Coniuratio, a conſpiracy.
            
               Coniuro, aui, are, to coniure or conſpire with other for an yl purpoſe. ſomtyme to ſweare.
            
               Coniza, of ſome is callyd herba pulicaris.
            
            
               Connatio, a ſwymmynge togither.
            
               Connato, tare, to ſwymme togither.
            
               Connecto, nexui, nectere, to bynde togither.
            
               Connexio,
               Quintil. a binding togither, alſo a concluſiō.
            
               Conniuentia a ſufferance of a thyng, or a faynyng not to ſee or eſpye.
            
               Conniueo, & conniuo, is, iui, uel xi, to wynke, and is vſed to be ſpoken, whan men woll let thynges paſſe that ought to be loked on.
            
               Connubium, matrimony, wedlocke.
            
               Connubo, bere, to mary togither.
            
               Conoides, the female of the cypreſſe tree.
            
               Conon, nis, the name of a kynge of Athenes.
            
               Conopoeum, a canapy, proprely ſuche one as hangeth ouer beddes, and is wrought lyke a a uet, to kepe out gnattes, whiche do ſtynge men in theyr beddes.
            
               Conor, aris, ari, to endeuour or inforce to bring a thynge to paſſe.
            
               Conari alicui obuiam, to make haſte for to mete with one.
            
               Conquaſſatio, a bruyſyng togyther.
            
               Conquaſſare, to breake to pieces. ſometyme to vexe, to ſhake.
            
               Conquaſſatio, a ſhakynge, a vexation, or trauaylynge.
            
               Conqueror, queri, to complayne.
            
               Conquieſco, eui, eſcere, to ceaſſe, to leaue of.
            
               Conquiniſco, quexi, niſcere, to ducke with the heade.
            
               Conquiro, quiſiui, quirere, to ſeke all aboute, to ſerche for.
            
               Conquiſitor, a ſercher. alſo an officer, whyche is ſent to attache a man for a great offence.
            
               Conregione,
               Fectus. olde writers vſyd for è regione, on the other ſyde, or agaynſt a thyng.
            
               Conſalutare, to ſalute one an other.
            
               Conſalutatio, a ſalutyng togither.
            
               Conſaneſcere, to become hole.
            
               Conſanguineus, couſyne.
            Conſanguinitas, tatis, kynrede.
            
            
               Conſcelerate aures paternas, violate your fathers eres with tellyng thinges abhominable
            Conſcendo, di, dere, to clymbe.
            
            
               Conſcientia,
               Ci. ad At. Ti. Liuius. conſcience.
            
               Conſcindo, ſcidi, ſcindere, to cut with other. alſo to ſcorne or rebuke one priuily.
            
               Cōſcindere ſibilis, to whiſtle one out of a place
            
               Conſcio, ſciui, ſcire, to know with other.
            
               Conſcium facere aliquem, to make one priuye to a matter.
            
               Conſciſco, ſci, ſcere, to conſente, determyne, or grant to a matter willingly. alſo to draw to. Diligens paſtor ſtabulū cotidie cōuerrit,
               Columel. 
               nec patitur ſtercus humorē conſciſcere, A diligēt ſhepeherde euery day ſwepeth his ſtable, and letteth not the dunge draw moyſture vnto it.
            
               Conſciſcere mortem, to kyll wylfully.
            
               Conſcius, conſcia, that knowith with an other.
            
               Conſcius ſceleris, partie or priuie to the offence, acceſſary.
            
               Conſcius mihi ſum, I knowe certaynly.
            
               Conſcribello, are, to write togither.
            
               Conſcribo, pſi, bere, to write thynges togither alſo to inrolle or regiſter.
            
               Conſcriptio, an enrollement.
            
               Conſcripti, they whoſe names be writen or regiſtred to ſupply a number, which do lacke, or ſuch as be new choſen or added vnto thother.Tertullianus.
            
            
               Conſecranei, ſuche as be dedicate to one ſecte or opinyon.
            
               Conſecro,
               Ci. ad At. 
               aui, are, to dedicate or conſecrate. alſo to put in remembrance by writyng.Cicer. ad
            
            
               Conſecrare memoriam nominis,
               Q. fratrē. to put his name in perpetuall remembrance.
            
               Conſectanei, they whiche be of one ſecte.
            
               Conſector, aris, to folowe all togither.
            
               Conſeneſco, ſenui, ſeneſcere, to be or wax old.
            
               Conſenſio, a conſente or accorde of one mynde or purpoſe.
            
               Conſenſus, conſent.
            Conſentaneus, a, um, agreable.
            
            Conſentio, in, tire, to conſent.
            
            
               Conſepio, piui, ire, to incloſe with an hedge.
            
               Conſeptum, an incloſure, or place incloſyd.
            Conſeptus, a, um, incloſed.
            
            
               Conſequentia, thingis which do folow or inſu.
            
               Conſequiae, ſequeles.
            
               Conſequor, to folow immediately, to optayne or get, to expreſſe. Verbis conſequi nō poſsūt They may not be expreſſed in wordes.
            
               Conſero, ſeui, ſerere, 
               
                  •
                ſowe, or ſette herbes togither.
            
               Conſerere manus, to fyght hande to hande.
            
               Conſeruo,
               Cic. off. 
               are, to kepe, to preſerue, to gather goodes.
            
               Conſeruus, & conſerua, a felowe or companion in ſeruyce.
            
               Conſeſſus, ſus, men ſyttynge togither. it maye be taken for a ſeſſions or ſittyng of men, whiche be commyſſioners.
            
               Conſido, ſidi, dere, to ſyt or abyde togyther. it may be vſed to ſytte at a ſeſſions.
            Conſignatus,Cic. Aca. a, um, ſygnified, teſtified.
            
            
               Conſignifico, are, to ſhewe by tokens.
            
               Conſigno,
               Cicero. 
               are, to ſeale and cloſe vp, as letters. alſo to ſignify or declare proprely by letters.
            
               Conſiliarius, a counſellour.
            
                Conſilio, iui, uel lui, lire, to leape togither.
            
            
               Conſilior, aris, to take counſayle.
            
               Conſilium, a counſayle. It maye be taken for commiſſioners or iudges aſſigned.
            
               Conſilium eſt ita facere, I haue pourpoſed ſoo to doo.
            
               Conſimilis, le, in all thynges lyke.
            
               Conſiſto,
               Cice. pro Roſ. 
               ſtiti, fiſtere, to ſtande faſt or ſure, to abyde boldly by a thynge.
            
               Conſiſtit aluus, the bealy is coſtyue.
            
               Conſiſtit morbus, the ſyckenes is at the extremitie.
            
               Conſiſtere mente, to be of ſounde memory.
            
               Conſiſtorium, a counſell howſe, ſpecially in a pryncis houſe.
            
               Conſobrini, coſyns germayns of two brethern or two ſyſters.
            
               Conſoceri, they two, whoſe ſonne and doughter are maryed togyther.
            
               Conſolabilis, he that may be comforted.
            
               Conſolabundus, he that comforteth a man.
            
               Conſolatio, comfort in aduerſitie.
            
               Conſolida, the name of an herbe, callyd confery or camfry.
            
               Conſolor, aris, ari, to gyue comforte, or take comforte.
            
               Conſomnio, are, to dreame.
            
               Conſono, nui, are, to make one ſown togither. alſo to accorde or agree.
            
               Conſors, tis, a felowe or companyon, ſomtyme it ſignifieth lyke.
            Conſortio,Ci. off. 3. onis, felowſhyp.
            
            
               Conſortium, felowſhyp or comapany.
            
               Conſpectus, tus, a beholdyug or ſyght.
            
               Conſpergo, ſperſi, ſpergere, to ſcatter or ſperkle about abundantly.
            
               Conſpicilia, ſpectakles.
            
               Conſpicilium, a loupe to loke out of a howſe, or walle.
            
               Conſpicio, ſpexi, cere, to ſee or beholde.
            Conſpico, ſpexi, ere, & conſpicor, aris, ari, to beholde.
            
            
               Conſpicuus, a, um, circumſpect, witty, or of a ſharpe and quycke w
                  •
               tte. alſo apparaunt or playne to perceyue.
            
               Conſpirare, to wynde rounde like an adder.
            
               Conſpiratio, nis, a conſpiracye.
            
               Conſpiro, aui, are, to conſpyre or conſent. alſoo to blowe togyther.
            
               Conſpondio, di, dere, to promyſe mutually.
            
               Conſponſi, they whiche haue mutually promiſed one to the other.
            
               Conſponſor, oris, he that byndeth him ſelf by promyſe, to hym that hath made lyke promiſe
            
               Conſpuo, ere, to ſpyt on one.
            
               Conſpurcare, to violate, defile, or make foule.
            
               Conſputo, to ſpet often on one.
            
               Conſtabilio, liui, lire, to make ſure.
            
               Conſtans, tis, conſtant, or ſtedfaſt.
            
               Conſtanter, conſtantly, ſtedfaſtly.
            
               Conſtantia, conſtance, or ſtedfaſtnes.
            
               Conſtantinopolis, a citie in Thracia, ſomtime callyd Byzantium, and afore that Lygos, It ioyneth to the ſea callyd Pontus Euxinus, on the naroweſt part betwene Europam and Aſiam, whiche ſomtyme was the chief palaice of the moſt chriſten emperour Conſtantine, & is nowe the pompous den of the great Turk enemy to Chriſtes fayth, by the vengeance of god, prouoked by the vnfaythefulnes, arrogance, and beaſtly lyuynge of the princis and people there inhabiting. It was taken of the Turkes the yere of our lorde. 1452. Mahumetes beynge great turke, and Conſtantine beyng emperour of Grece.
            
               Conſtantinus, was a name of diuers emperors of whom the fyrſt was moſt excellent, & was ſonne of Conſtantius (a noble and valyaunt prince, felow in the empire with Maximinꝰ) and of Helene, a woman borne in England, than callyd Brytayn. This man after he had attayned the monarchy, hadde the faythe of Chriſte in ſuche reuerence, that he dayly moſt ſtudiouſely laboured for to augmente it, not withſtandyng that in his tyme were dyuerſe hereſies, and horrible contentions among the byſhops, whiche he eyther diſſolued, or at the leaſt wayes dyd reuerently moderate with a wonderful temperance. He raigned. 30 yeres and was buryed in Conſtantinople. He dyed in the yere of our lorde. 330.
            
               Conſtat, it coſteth, it is ſolde for.
            
               Conſternati, mē ouerthrowē. ſomtime abaſhed.
            
               Conſternatio, onis, an abaſhement.
            
               Conſternium, a place where men whan they were hayned, layde theyr garmentes.
            
               Conſterno, aui, are, to ſtrawe, to paue, to keuer the floore with any thynge.
            
               Cōſterno, ſtraui, ſternere, to make one abaſhid
            
               Conſtituo, ſtitui, ſtituere, to ordeyn, to gouerne, to prouide, to couenant, to fourme, to be aduiſed or determined to do a thyng.
            
               Conſtituere in diem tertium, to determyn to do a thynge thre days next folowyng.
            
               Conſtituere diſceptationē, to make his plea formall, or to foreſee that which ſhall come in contention.
            
               Conſtituere iudicium,
               Ci. in parti. ora. after our maner of ſpekynge is to demurre in lawe, or dwell in law, to remytte a thynge to the better opinyon of the Iudges.Saluſt.
            
            
               Conſtituere maieſtatê, to confirme or aduāce the reuerence dewe to the ſupreme auctoritie.
            
               Conſtituere quaeſtionem, to decree, that vpō ſtraite examination, execution be done.
            
               Conſtituere ſtatum cauſae, is whan the iuge doth determin, where it be a matter in law, or a matter in dede, which is in controuerſy.
            
                
               Conſtituere uadim onium, to put in pledgis.
            
               Conſtitutio corporis, the complexion.
            
               Conſtitutio cauſae, which our lawyers do cal the matter in debate.
            
               Conſtituere teſtem aliquem in aliū, to cauſe wytneſſe to be brought forthe.
            
               Conſtituere pecuniā, to promiſe money to be payde, which was before due by an obligatiō
            
            
               Conſtitutū patrimonium, Cicero. Exiſtim at patrimonium fore ſuum per te conſtitutum, He recogniſeth, that the lādis which he hath, camme by your meanes, or that ye were the cauſe, that he came to his lyuelode.
            
               Conſtitutio, ſomtyme ſignifieth an ordinance, ſomtyme an inuention.
            
               Conſtitit nus
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                  , it is no where.
            Conſtitutus, a, um, ordeyned.
            
            
               Corpus bene conſtitutum,
               Cicero. a body well complexioned.
            
               Conſto, ſtiti, ſtare, to perſyſt or abide in a thing, to ſtande togyther, to be manifeſt or knowen, to agree, to pertayne.
            
               Conſtant ſententiae, the opinions do agree.
            
               Conſtat animo, he is of ſtedfaſt mynde.
            
               Conſtat pedibus, he is ſure of his feete, or hole in his legges or feete.
            
               Conſtat hoc mihi tecum, we he both agreed.
            
               Conſtat ratio, there is a reaſonable cauſe.
            
               Conſtare ſibi, to abyde in his opinyon.
            
               Conſtet modus, let there be a meaſure.
            
               Conſtitit nun
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                  
               
               Pli. in epi. he abode in no place.
            
               Conſtrepo, pui, ere, to make a noyſe togyther.
            
               Conſtringo, ſtrinxi, gere, to bind faſt, to wring hard. Cōſtringere ſupplicio, to cauſe him to dy
            
               Conſtruo, ſtruxi, ſtruere, to buylde, to ordeyne.
            
               Conſtruere pecuniam, to gather money.
            Conſtuprare, idem quod ſtuprare.
            
               Conſuefacio, to accuſtome.
            
               Conſueſco, ſueui, ſueſcere, to be wont. ſomtime to vſe carnally. Cū eius conſueuit matre clan culum,
               Terent. He had companye with his mother priuily. Alſo to vſe for a cuſtome, ſomtyme to lyue. Nec magis humo 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   ſtagno couſueuerunt,
               Columel. They liue aſwel on lande, as on water.
            
               Conſuetudo, dinis, cuſtom or vſage, alſo company or conuerſation, ſomtyme familyaritie.
            Conſuetus, a, um, accuſtomed.
            
            
               Conſul, lis, a chief offycer amonge the Romanes, wherof were two, whiche had the chiefe rule in the citie for one yere.
            
               Conſularis, he that had bene conſule, or were mete to be conſull.
            
               Conſulatus, tus, the offyce of conſull.
            
               Conſulo, lui, ſulere, with a datiue caſe, to gyue counſaile, with an accuſatiue caſe, to aſk coū
               ſayle, alſo with a datiue caſe, it ſignifieth to prouyde, to help to. Grauiter de ſe conſulere, to do ſome hurt to hym ſelfe.
            
               Conſulto, taui, tare, to gyue or aſke counſayle often, to delyberate or ſhewe myn aduiſe ofte.
            
               Conſultò, delyberately or aduiſedly.
            
               Conſultor, oris, he that giueth counſayl, ſometyme he that aſketh counſayle.
            
               Conſultus, ta, tum, wyſe, or well aduyſed.
            
               Conſultus, tus, & conſultum, the thyng that is conſulted ſomtyme an acte of counſayle.
            
               Conſummatus, a, um, perfect at a poyut.
            
               Conſummo, aui, are, to ſumme vp in a reckenynge, to fynyſhe or performe, or make vp, or make perfecte.
            
               Conſumo,
               Terent. in Andria. 
               ſumpſi, ſumere, to conſume or dyſtroy, ſomtime it ſignifieth to finiſhe or make vp, or to bryng to a poynt, alſo to ſpende.
            
               Conſumere diem in apparando, to ſpend al the day in preparynge.
            
               Conſumere fidem,
               Saluſt. to loſe credence.
            
               Conſumere operam,
               Terent. in Heauton. to employ labour.
            
               Conſumere orationem, to telle a longe tale without a concluſyon.Sa. in lug.
            
            
               Conſuo, ui, ere, to ſowe togither, or ioyne.
            
               Conſurgo, ſurrexi, gere, to aryſe to gyther with other.
            
               Conſyderate, with a conſyderation.
            
               Conſyderatus, he that doth a thynge with conſyderation.
            Conſydero, aui, are, to conſyder.
            
            
               Contabeſco,
               Plaut. in Mercat. 
               ſcere, to waſt away, or relent, like ſalt put in water.
            
               Contabulare, to bourde, or to lay bourdes on a roufe or floore.
            
               Contabulatio, a floore bourded.
            Contactus, ta, tum, touched.
            
            
               Contacti relligione dies,
               Plautꝰ in Pſeud. dayes reputed of the paynyms to be infortunate to begyn any enterpryſe.
            
               Contagium, & contagio, onis, & contages, an infectiue ſyckenes. alſo any infection.
            
               Contamino, aui, are, to violate or defyle, with myxtyng thynges togither, to diſhoneſt.
            
               Contechnor,
               Plaut. in Pſeud. 
               ari, to inuent ſom thīg, to deceiue
            
               Contego, texi,
               Terent. in Hecyra. 
               tegere, to hyde a faute, that it be not eſpied.
            Contemero, aui, are, to vyolate.
            
            
               Contemno, tempſi, temnere, to deſpiſe, or contepmne, whiche is laſſe than deſpyſynge.
            
               Contemplatio, onis, a beholdynge, ſpeciallye in the mynde, with deuotion to god.
            
               Contemplator, he that beholdeth with great affectyon.
            
               Contemplo, are, & contemplor, aris, ari, to beholde intentiuely with great affection.
            
               Contemporanei, they whyche be at one tyme.
            
               Contemptibilis, he that is to be deſpyſed, or not regarded.
            
               Contemptim, dyſdaynfully.
            
               Contemptor, aris, to ſette lyttell by.
            
               Contemptus, tus, deſpite, contempt.
            
               Contemptus, a, um, contemned, not eſtemed.
            
                
               Contendo, di, dere, to cōtend or teſyſt, or ſtriue to caſt or ſhote a darte or arowe, to continue, to make haſt, to inforce.
            
               Contendere aliquid ab aliquo, to requyre ſome thyng of one.
            
               Contendere ſacramento, to wage the lawe.
            
               Contentio, onis, reſyſtence, ſtryfe, or debate. alſo a ſharpe oration apte to confirme or repreue, a continuance, an inforcement or ſettynge forth with vehemence.
            
               Contentus, a, um, that whiche is contayned, alſo content, or ſatisfied.
            
               Contereo, rui, rere, to make aferde.
            
               Contero, triui, terere, to weare out with occupienge, alſo to make warre.
            
               Conterere aetatem, to ſpende his lyfe.
            
               Conterere diē,
               Plaut. in Bacch. to ſpēd the day vnprofitably.
            
               Conterere operam, to loſe labour or peyne.
            
               Conterere queſtū,
               Terent. in Hecyra. to ſpende all that he hath gotten or wonne.
            
               Conteris tu tua me oratione mulier,
               Plaut. in Caſtel. Thou makeſt me wery woman with thy talkyng.
            
               Conterraneus, countrey man.
            
               Conteſtari, to aſke togither wytneſſe.
            
               Conteſtari litem, to perpleade, where the one hath full purpoſed, the other hathe fully anſweryd.
            
               Conteſtatus, a, um, proued by wytneſſe.
            
               Contexo, ere, to ioyne togither.
            
               Contexere dolos, to fynde crafty meanes.
            
               Contextus, tus, a ioynyng or ſowyng togither.
            
               Contextu pennarum corpori tegmenta faciebat, He made hym garmentes with the fethers of fowles ſowen or glewed togyther.
            
               Contextu longiore loqui, to ſpeake with a longe deliberation or tracte of tyme.
            
               Conticeo, ticui, cere, to holde my peace with other.
            
               Conticeſco, ſcere, to kepe ſylence with other.
            
               Conticinium, bedde tyme, or the fyrſt parte of nyght, whan men prepare to take theyr reſt, and all thynge is in ſylence.
            
               Contignatio, onis, the roufe of an houſe.
            
               Contigno, aui, are, to raufter a houſe.
            
               Contignus, a, um, that whiche toucheth or is nexte to a thynge.
            
               Continens, tis, firme land, that is none yle, alſo continuall, ſomtyme ioynyng.
            
               Continenti biduo, two dayes continuall.
            
               Continenter, continually, cōtinently, or firmly
            
               Continentia, continence, a vertu, refuſyng thinges that are pleaſant. alſo reſiſtence of yll.
            
               Contineo, nui, nere, to refrayn, to kepe backe, to contain, to kepe togither, to withhold, to let.
            
               Continebat me tempeſtas,
               Plaut. in Amph. the fowle wether letted me.
            
               Continere se domi, to abyde at home.
            Contingo, tigi, tingere, to touche.
            
            
               Contigit, it hath happened.
            
               Continuè, continually.
            Continuo, aui, are, to contynue.
            
            Continuus, a, um, contynuall.
            
            
               Contollam gradum,
               Plaut. in Aulul. I wyll go forwarde.
            
               Contor, tari, to abyde, to inquire diligently.
            
               Contorqueo,
               Vergilius in georg. 
               torſi, quêre, to pluck vp, & draw with hym.
            
               Contorquere telum,
               Vergilius Aenei. 2. to ſhoote an arrowe or darte, and therwith to hyt or perce a thynge.
            
               Contortae res, thynges wounden and twyſted. alſo ſuche matter, as one parte can not agree with an nother.
            
               Contortuplico, are, to wray or wynd a thing, that with great peyne it may be vnwounde.
            
               Contortuplicata nomina,
               Plaut. in perſa. names ſo diffuſe, that they may vneth be pronounced.
            
               Contra, agaynſt a place, a perſon, or a thynge, on the other part.
            
               Contracto, aui, are, to attayn, or comprehend.
            
               Contractio animi,
               Ci. tuſcu. quaeſt. ſtonieng of the mynde.
            
               Contractio neruorū, ſhrinking of the ſinues.
            
               Contractus, tus, contract, bargayn.
            Contractus, a, um, gotten.
            
            
               Bona contracta, goodes gotten by conqueſt.
            
               Contradico, dixi, dicere, to contrarye in wordes, to ſay contrary.
            
               Contraeo, to go contrary or agaynſt a thynge.
            
               Contraho,
               Pli. in ep. 
               traxi, trahere, to gather togither, to commmyt, to make a contract or bargayn, to drawe togither. alſo to ſhrynke. Nerui contrahuntur, the ſynewes be ſhrunken.
            
               Contrahere aes alienum, to be indetted.
            
               Contrahere animum,
               Cic. tus. q. to take thought.
            
               Contrahere bona,
               Ci. in off. to get goodes.
            
               Contrahere frontem,
               Ti. Liuius to lowre.
            
               Contrahere tempus,
               Quidiꝰ in Metamo. to abridge the tyme.
            
               Contrahere ualitudinem, to get ſyckenes.
            
               Contractio, feare.
            
               Contractio frontis, frownyng or lowrynge.
            Contrarius, a, um, contrary.
            
            
               Contraſto, are, to be agaynſt one, to repugne.
            
               Contrauenio, ire, to happen contrary or come contrarye.
            
               Contrecto, tare, to touche often.
            
               Contribuo, buere, to attribute.
            
               Contribuere in regna, to dyuide it into royaulmes.
            
               Contribuere ſe alicui, to become one of his, to be at his commandement.
            
               Contriſto, tare, to make one ſory.
            
               Controuerſia, a controuerſy or variance.
            
               Controuerſor, aris, to contende or vary.
            
               Controuerſus, litigious, or ful of controuerſy.
            
               Controuerſus, a, um, contrary, or in contrarye wyſe. Res controuerſa, mattier in controuerſye.
            
               Contrudere in naues. to brynge into the ſhyppes. alſo to put or thruſte in.
            
               Contrunco, care, to mynyſhe.
            
                
               Contubernalis, a felowe or compaynyon, or of one company.
            
               Contubernium, a felowſhyp or a company.
            
               Contueor,
               Plaut. in Sticho. 
               eri, to defende, to ſee, to regarde very ſtedfaſtly.
            
               Contumacia, dyſobedyence, a ſelfe wyll, or frowardenes.
            
               Contumaciter,
               Ci. in clo. dyſobediently.
            
               Contumax, macis, diſobedient or frowarde in oppinyon, he that wylle not be perſwaded. ſomtyme it ſignifieth conſtantly ſuffryng.
            
               Contumelia, a reproche, a thynge done or ſpoken to a mans rebuke, an iniury.
            
               Contumelioſus, he that vſeth to ſpeake rebukefully.
            
               Contundo, tudi, tundere, to breake to pieces, or ſtryke downe.
            
               Contundere facta alicuius,
               Plaut. in Sticho. to put an other mans actes out of eſtimation or remēbrance.
            
               Contuor,
               Plaut. in Aſin. 
               eri, to ſee.
            
               Contuoſi oculi, eyen lokyng narowe.
            
               Conturbo,
               Ci. as At. 
               are, to trouble. alſo to ſpend in waſt Conturbare fortunas, to ſpend al his goodes in waſte.
            
               Conturbare rationes, to ſpende all that he ſhulde haue made reckenyng of.
            
               Contus, a long ſpeare or moryſpyke, alſo a lōge pole with yron at the end, wherwith ſhipmen do gauge the water.
            
               Conuador, dari, to cōpel one to fynde ſureties.
            
               Conuallis, a valey hauing hilles on both ſides.
            
               Conuaſo, aui, are, to gather by ſtelth.
            
               Conuector,
               Cic. Atti. 
               oris, a maryner that conueyeth ouer many.
            
               Conueho, uexi, uehere, to cary or brynge from many places vnto one place.Plinius. 11
            
            
               Conuello,
               Plautꝰ in Amph. 
               uulſi, uellere, to ſhake or pull out of his place. alſo to take from one by robbery.
            
               Conuellere gratiam, to bryng out of fauour or credence.
            
               Conuenae, people aſſemblyd of dyuers countreys, dwellyng in one countrey or towne.
            
               Conueniens, conuenient.
            
               Conuenientia, a congruence. alſo a commynge togyther of people.
            
               Conuenire, to come togither, or to aſſemble in one place. Alſo to agree, to ſewe at the lawe, or bryng in iudgement, alſo to determyne to ſpeake with one, to accorde.
            
               Conuenit inter me at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   hunc, It is agreed betwene him and me. De precio conuenit, We are agreed of the price. In manum conuenit, She is my wyfe.
            
               Conuenire in manum, to be affianced or betrouthed on the parte of the woman.
            
               Conuenit, I am contented. Alſo it is conuenyent, meete, or ſyttynge.
            
               Pax conuenit,
               Saluſt. in Catal. peace was accorded.
            
               Conuentae, couenantes of maryage.
            
               Conuenticulum,
               Cice. p
                     ••
                   Sexto. a congregation, a lyttell aſſembly, moſte commonly for an yll purpoſe.
            Conuentio, onis, & conuentum, a couenant.
            
            
               Conuentus, an aſſembly of people, warned by the chiefe officers commaundement.
            
               Conuentus maximus, maye be taken for a parlyament,
            
               Conuentus iuridici, maye be vſed for the foure termes.
            
               Minores conuentus,
               Saluſt. in Iugurt. ſeſſions of the peace.
            Conuentus, a, um, accorded.
            
            
               Conuenta pax,
               Plaut. in rudente. peace accorded.
            
               Conuerro, rere, to ſwepe together in to oone place. alſo to rub.
            
               Conuerſatio, conuerſation, or familiaritie.
            
               Conuerſè,
               Cato. klenly.
            
               Conuerſor, aris, to be conuerſant.
            
               Conuertere ſe in fugam, to runne awaye.
            
               Conuerto, uerti, tere, to conuerte or tourne.
            
               Conuerſio, alteration or chaunge.
            
               Conuexitas, the imboſing or roundenes of the backſyde of that whiche is holowe.
            
               Conuexum, the outwarde parte and roundnes of a thynge that is holowe.
            
               Conuexus, a, um, imboſed rounde and holow within.
            
               Conuiciator, he that ſpeketh to mens rebuke.
            
               Conuicinium, a neyghbourhod.
            
               Conuicior, aris, ari, to ſpeake in reproche.
            
               Conuicium, a reproche or rebuke.
            
               Conuicium dicere, to ſpeake to a mannes rebuke.
            
               Conuicium facere, to do a thyng to a mans rebuke.
            Conuinco, cere, idem quod uinco.
            
               Conuictor, oris, a dayly companyon at table, or a dayly gueſt.
            
               Conuictus, tus, a lyuynge to gether in houſe, or at one table.
            
               Conuiua, & Conuictor, a beden gueſt, he that is inuited or beden to dyner or ſupper.
            
               Conuiuam abducere, to brynge one to a dyner on banket.
            
               Conuiualis, le, perteynynge to feaſtes.
            
               Conuiuator, oris, a feaſter or banketter.
            
               Conuiuiones, companyons at drynkynge or bankettynge.
            
               Conuiuium, a feaſte or banket.
            
               Conuiuo, uixi, uere, to lyue together with one.
            
               Conuiuor, aris, ari, to feaſte or bankette, or to take meales with other men.
            
               Conuoco, are, to call to gether, or to aſſemble many together.
            
               Conuolo, are, to fly together.
            
               Conuoluo, ui, uere, to wrap or wynde aboute a thynge.
            
               Conuoluolus, a lyttel worme with many feete and heary, that eateth the leaues of vynes.
            
               Conuoluulus, or Ciſſampelos, is an herbe,
 whiche hath a leafe lyke to yuye, but moche thynner, and a floure lyke a lylly, and wyndeth about lyke a vyne, ſome hath white floures, ſome violet. I ſuppoſe it to be withwind
            
               Conuoti, ſworne bretherne, or men makynge one auowe or promyſe.
            
               Conifera arbor, a tree whiche beareth fruyte of the fourme of a pyne appull.
            
               Conus, properly the pyneaple tree, by tranſlation it is a figure in faſcion lyke to a pyneaple. Alſo the creſt of an helmet or ſalet.
            
               Conoides, pineaple trees female.
            
               Conuulſio, is the ſame ſyckeneſſe whiche in greeke is called Spaſmos,
               Hippocr. whiche is an affecte of the ſynewes and muſcules,Aph. li. 10 wherein ſome tyme all the bodye, ſometyme parte of the body is drawen or ſtretched, wyl he or no that ſuffereth: If it be in parte of the bodye, it is called in englyſhe the crampe: If it be in all the body, it hath yet no name in englyſhe, bycauſe it hapneth ſeldom. The cauſe of this grife is of two contrary and dyuerſe occaſions, eyther of repletion, or of to moche emptineſſe and lacke of nouriſhement.
            
               Coos, uel Cos, uel Co, uel Coum, the name of an yle nyghe to the Rhodes.
            
               Cous, a, um, of that yle.
            
               Copen, olde wryters vſed for Copioſum, plentuouſe.
            
               Cophinus, a baſket.
            
               Copia, plentye, eloquence, power, leaue or lycence, multitude. Alſo ayde.
            
               Copiam dare,
               Terent. in Heauton. to gyue power, or lycence. alſo to gyue occaſion.
            
               Copia eſt,
               Idem. 
               Nam apud patrem tua amica tecū ſine metu ut ſit, copia eſt. For thou maiſt nowe brynge to paſſe, that thy wenche maye be with thy father without any dreade.
            
               Copia eſt, I maye or mought: Ego in eum incidi infelix locum,
               Terent. in Phorm. 
               ut neque eius ſit amittendi, nec retinendi copia: I am vnhappily come to that point, that I may neither leaue her, nor kepe her.
            
               Copia uix fuit eum adeundi, with great difficultie or peyne mought I come vnto hym.
            
               Copia cuntandi non eſt tibi,
               Plaut. in Epidic. thou haſte noo leyſure to tary.
            
               Copia eſt tibi magis,
               Plaut. in cap. thou maiſt more eaſely
            
               Copia nulla eſt tibi in illo, he can nothynge helpe the.Plaut. in Epidi.
            
            
               Copiam efficere alicui, to fynde the meanes that one maye come in.Plaut. in milite.
            
            
               Copiam facere argenti, to lende one money.
            
               Copiam facere,
               Pli. in epi. to communicate any thynge with an other.
            
               Copiae cornu, was the horne of a gote, with whoſe mylke Iupiter was nouriſhed in Creta nowe called Candy, of two maydens, one called Adraſtea, the other Ida, doughters of Meliſſeus, the which horne Iupiter gaue to his ſayd nouryces inreward, hauīg therwith this cōmoditie, that what ſo euer thyng they wyſhed for, it ſhulde abundantly come out of that horne. Wherof it came afterwarde into a prouerbe, that whan men wolde declare to be plenty of any thyng, they ſignify it in theſe two wordes Copiae cornu.
            
            Copi, for copioſo.
            
               Copio, are, to gather moche togither.
            
               Copioſa, ſome plenty.
            
               Copioſè, aboundauntly.
            Copioſus, a, um, plentuous.
            
            
               Copis, plentuouſe.
            
               Copula,
               Plautus. a couplynge or ioynyng togither, couples or fetters.
            
               Copulatiuus, a, ū, that coupleth, or may couple.
            
               Copulo, aui, are, to couple togither, to bynd or ioyne togither.
            
               Coquina, a kytchyn.
            
               Coquinaria, cookery.
            
               Coquinarius, a, um, pertaynyng to cookery.
            
               Coquinor, aris, ari, to do the offyce of a coke.
            
               Coquito, tare, to boyle often.
            
               Coquo, coxi, coquere, to ſeeth or boyl, to make rype, to make redy, to digeſt.
            
               Coquus, a cooke.
            
               Cor, cordis, the harte, ſomtyme it is taken for the mynde.
            ❀Cor ne edito,
               Eraſ. in chil. do not tourment thy mynde with care and heuines, it was one of Pythagoras counſayles.
            
               Cora, a citie that Dardanus buylded, of whyche the inhabitantes are callyd Corani.
            
            
               Coracinus, a, um, of a crowe.
            
               Coraceſius, a part of the hyll Taurus.
            
               Coralium, a ſtone callyd corall, whiche beynge in the ſea is a tree or bouſſhe, and out of the water it becometh a ſtone. Solinus wryteth, that it alſo changeth his colour, after that it is out of the water. It is founden in dyuers places, as Hermolaus writeth, that is to ſay in the red ſea, in the Perſian ſea, & about Sicile, alſo in the north ſea about the yles callid Orchades, not far from Scotlande. he ſaith alſo, that whiles it is in the water, it is grene of colour. Auicen affirmeth to be thre kyndes therof, white, red, & black. alſo that it is cold in the fyrſt degree, and dry in the ſecond. But Conſtantyne ſayth, that it is alſo colde in the ſeconde degree.
            
               Corallobachates, a ſtone with golden rayes.
            
               Coram, before, openly, in preſence.
            
               Corambla, an herb that maketh the eyes duſks and weake of ſyght.
            
               Coraxicus, a part of the hyll Taurus.
            
               Coraxis, a mountayn in Aſia, alſo a floud.
            
               Corbis, a baſket.
            
               Corbita, a great ſhyppe callyd a foyſt.
            
                
               Corbito,
               Plaut. in Caſina. 
               tare, to caſte into a baſket.
            
               Corbona, the treaſure of the temple amonge the Iewes.
            
               Corbula, a lyttell baſket.
            
               Corchorus, a vyle herbe called chickeweede.
            
               Corculum, ſwete harte. Alſo wyſe men were ſo called amonge the Romanes.
            
               Corcyra, an yle in Greece.
            
               Cordapſus, a ſyckenes that is nowe called Illi acus, whiche is a peyne in the guttes.
            
               Cordatè, wyſely.
            
               Cordatus homo, a wytty man, and of great memory.
            
               Cordi eſt, it is to my mynde, it contenteth me.
            
               Cordilla, the yong fry of the fyſhe called tuny.
            
               Cordolium, ſorowe, grefe at the harte.
            
               Corduba, a citie in Spayne.
            
               Cordumenum, a ſpice called Cardomomum, wherof one kynde is that, whiche is called in englyſhe graynes.
            
               Cordus, a, um, that thynge, whiche ſpringeth or commeth late in the yere.
            
               Cordi agni, latewarde lambes.
            
               Cordum foenum, latewarde haye.
            Coreaceus, a, um, of lether.
            
            
               Corgo, olde wryters vſed for Profecto.
            
            
               Coria,
               Victruui. 
               coriorum, are in buyldynge certayne ſettynge or layinge or thinges in one order, eyther in height, or in thyckenes.
            
               Coriago, aginis, the ſyckenes of cattayl, whā they are clunge, that theyr ſkynnes do cleaue faſte to theyr bodyes.
            
               Coriandrum, an herbe and ſeede called colyander.
            
               Corianum, that whiche is commonlye called Coriandrum, in englyſhe Colyander.
            
               Coriarius, a tanner.
            
               Coriatium, of lether.
            
               Corinthiacus, a, um, that whiche is of the cytie of Corinthus.
            
               Corinthia uaſa, plate of the mettall of Corinthe, whiche was a myxt mettall.
            
               Corinthus, a citie in Achaia, whiche was in that parte of Greece, that is now called Morea, wherof came a prouerbe. Non eſt cuiuslibet Corinthū appellere. It is not in euery mannes power to aryue at Corinthus: whiche dothe ſignyfie. It perteyneth not to euery manne to attempte thynges daungerous, or harde to achieue. Vide originem in chiliadibus adagiorum Eraſmi, uel in Aulo Gellio.
            
            
               Corium, a bowe caſe.
            
               Coritus, the ſkynne of a beaſt, alſo lether, the pane of a wall made with lyme and ſande.
            
               Corna, nae, the name of two cities.
            
               Cornelia, the proper name of dyuerſe noble women, of the whiche one was ſuſter to Scipio, and mother to Tyberius Gracchus, and Caius Gracchus, who beinge men of excellent eloquence in the latine tunge, were therin tought onely of theyr ſayde mother: This woman was of a meruaylous temperaunce. For on a tyme ſhe was in companye with other ladyes of Rome, whoo beholdynge her to be but meanely apparayled, they demanded of her if ſhe had no better raymente: ſhe poyntynge to her two ſonnes, whiche than wente before her, aunſwered, ſayinge: here is my freſhe apparayll, wherin I do delyte. The ſame noble woman knowynge that her huſband dyd priuily company with her bond woman, diſſembled and wolde not here of it, thynkynge that it were inconueniente, that her huſbande, who had ben oftentimes in the greateſte and moſte honourable romes in the citie, and alſo had vainquiſhed many greate prynces, ſhulde be rebuked by her. And after his deathe ſhe maried that woman in a worſhyppefull place, gyuynge with her a great ſum of money. whoſe example very fewe women haue folowed ſenſe her tyme.
            
               Cornelius, a proper name of dyuerſe noble Romaynes, of whom mention ſhall be made in theyr ſurnames.
            
               Cornetum, a groue of hauthorne.
            Corneus, a, um, of hauthornes.
            
            
               Cornicen, a blower in a horne.
            
               Cornicor, aris, ari, to make a chatteryng like a choughe, or to gape for a pray, as Eraſmus doth expounde it.
            
               Cornicularius, a certayne office in armes, concernynge capitall ſentences.
            
               Corniculum, a garment perteyninge to ſouldiours. Alſo ſomtyme a towne in Italy.
            ❀Cornicum oculos, configere, to prycke out the crowes eyes.Eraſ. in chilli. Is a prouerbe vſed, whan we wolde ſignifie, that one with a newe deuyſe, had obſcured the doctrine or eſtimation of them, whiche had ben afore hym, and had made them to ſeme, that they knew or ſe nothynge. It maye be alſo ſayde, where one man wyll make all other menne blynde, that haue bene before hym, and dothe reproue or diſſolue that, whiche hath benne allowed by wyſe men.
            
               Cornigenus, a, um, of the kynde whiche hath hornes.
            
               Corniger, geris, al thing that beareth a horne.
            
               Cornix, nicis, a byrde called a crowe.
            
               Cornu, a horne, by tranſlation the corners and wyndynges of ryuers. Alſo the two wynges of a battayle be called Dextrum cornu, & ſiniſtrum cornu,
            
            
               Cornucopiae, was a horne that Hercules plucked from Achelous, whiche horne the Nymphes or immortall ladies fylled with ſweete floures and fruites: There is before an other opinion therof.
            
                
               Cornupes, pedis, euery beaſte that hath horne on his feete.
            
               Cornupeta, a beaſte that ſtryketh with his hornes.
            
               Cornus, nus, a tree called in frenche vng Corneillier: there be none of them in Englande: and therfore it lacketh an englyſhe name.
            
               Cornutus, a, um, that whiche hath hornes.
            
               Corolla, a garlande.
            
               Corna, the fruit of Cornus, and be called Corneilles in frenche, whiche be lyke to olyues, but that they be red and ſomewhat lengar.
            
               Corallarium, an addition or aduantage.
            
               Corona, a crowne, a garlande, a chaplette, a company of people ſtandynge rounde lyke a cercle. Alſo the cerkle about the moone.
            
               Coronae militares, were garlandes of dyuers ſortes. One named Triumphalis, was firſt of laurel or baye leaues, afterward of golde, whiche the chiefe Capytayne waare on hys heade, whan he hadde the hoole vyctorye agaynſte hys ennemies, and hys ſeruauntes dydde weare garlandes of olyue. An nother was called Obſidionalis, whiche was gyuen to the chiefe capitayne, whan he had raiſed any ſiege, beinge about any of their townes or fortreſſes, and that garlande was of the graſſe growynge in the place where the ſiege was layde. An other was called Ciuica, whiche was of holly beynge euer greene, and was wouen with oken leaues, this garlande was gyuen to hym, whiche had ſaued a Romayne, that he were not taken of manye ennemies fyghtinge valyantly for him. Muralis was gyuen to hym that fyrſte didde ſkale the walles maulgre the enemies: and therfore it was made like vnto imbatilmentes. Caſtren ſis was gyuen to hym, whiche fyrſte entered by force the campe of the ennemies. Naualis was put on his heade, whiche in battayle on the ſea, fyrſte bourded the ſhyp that was aſſayled. Oualis was worne of the chiefe capitayne, whanne the victory was without ſhedinge of bloude, or that the battayle lacked his circumſtance in the appoyntment. Muralis, Caſtrenſis, & Naualis, were of goulde, Oualis was of the lyttell ſweete buſhe called Myrtus.
            
            
               Coronamentum, a multitude of crownes or garlandes.
            
               Coronarius, ria, a maker of crownes or garlandes.
            
               Corone, a towne in Grece, in the partes now named Morea.
            
            
               Coronea, a Citie in the parties of Boeotia in Greece.
            
               Coronis, nidis, the noſe of a ſhyppe. Alſo an ende, the extreame parte, the top, the horne, or other lyke
            
               Corono, aui, are, to crowne, or ſet on a crown or garlande.
            
               Coronopus, an herbe whiche by the deſcription of Dioſcorides and Theophraſtus, I do ſuppoſe to be Dent de lyon.
            Corporalis, le, corporall.
            
            
               Corporatio, Corporatura, the quantity, ſtate, or facyon of the body, corporature, corpulēcy
            
               Corporeus, a, um, that whiche is of a bodily ſubſtaunce.
            Corporo,Ennius. aui, are, to kyll.
            
            
               Corpulentus, corpulēt or groſſe in body, ſleſhy.
            
               Corpus, corporis, a body. ſomtyme it ſignifieth but ſleſhe onely. alſo ſometyme all maner of ſubſtaunce.
            
               Corpuſculum, a lyttell or ſmall body.
            
               Corpore uiciati, they whiche do lacke ſome member at theyr natiuity.
            
               Corrado, raſi, dere, to ſhaue or ſcrape, to take awaye, ſpoyle, ſell, or alienate.
            
               Corrector, toris, a correctour or amender of faultes.
            
               Corrigia, a thonge of lether, a lachet of a ſhoo.
            
               Corrigo, rexi, rigere, to correct or amende.
            
               Corrigiola,
               Dioſcori. an herbe whiche runneth on the grounde lyke graſſe,Ruellius. but it hath leaues lyke rue, but ſomewhat longer and ſofter, vnder the whiche the ſede ſpryngeth, and hath floures partely whyte, partly red. But Manardus ſayth, that it hath leaues like to an aſhe. and therfore is called Fraxinella.
            
            
               Corripio, pui, pere, to rebuke, properly it is to take a thynge quickely, and with haſte
            
               Corripere ſeſe ad aliquem,
               Terent. in Hecy. to go to one haſtelye.
            
               Corripere ſeſe intro, to enter haſtily.
            
               Corripere ſe repēte,
               Plaut. in Mercat. to go his way ſodeinly.
            
               Corripitur febre, he is taken with a feuer.
            
               Corripitur, ſomno, he is faſt a ſlepe.
            
               Corriuales, they whiche do loue to gether one woman.
            
               Corriuare, is properly of beaſtes, to go to gether to watrynge.
            
               Corriuor, uari, is of waters whā they of ſmal brokes do become ryuers.
            
               Corroboro, are, to make ſtronge or bygge, to harden.
            
               Corruda, an herbe called wylde ſperage.
            
               Corrogo, are, to gather greetſūmes of money.
            
               Corrugi, furrowes made in hylles, to conuey water, to waſhe the owre of mettall.
            
               Corrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to corrupt, to viciate, to diſtroy, to ſuborne, to tempt, or procure by gyftes,.
            
               Corrumpere igni, to burne vp.Saluſt.
            
            
               Corrumpere oportunitates, to loſe oportunity or occaſion.
            
               Corrumpere rem familiarem,
               Saluſt. in Iuguri. to waſte his ſubſtaunce.
            
                
               Corruptela, corruption or defylynge.
            
               Corruptor, a diſtroyer, a waſter, a corrupter of thynges.
            
               Corruptus, ta, tum, corrupte, viciate, rotten.
            
               Corruo, rui, ruere, to fall downe to gether, to fall greuouſly, to fayle.
            
               Corruerunt opes, the goodes were waſted.
            
               Cors, cortis, idem quod Chors, a court, whiche ſerueth for pultry, to fede at large.
            
               Corſica, an yle in the myddell ſea betwene Geane and the yle of Sardinia, called Cors.
            
            
               Corſicum mare, the ſea about the yle of Cors.
            
               Cortex, corticis, a rynde or barke.
            
               Corticatus, ta, tum, hauynge a rynde or bark.
            
               Cortina, a dyers fat. Alſo it is the table of Apollo, from the which he gaue aunſwere. Cato taketh it for a veſſell, oute of the whiche oyle is let runne. Alſo that whiche is called a corteyne of lynnen clothe or ſylke. Alſo places deuided with cortaynes be called Cortinae.
            
            
               Cortinale, the place where veſſayles be ſette, wherin wyne and hony be ſodden.
            
               Cortinon radyſhe ſede.
            
               Cortona, a citie in Tuſcane.
            
               Cortyna, or Gortyna, a Citie in the yle of Candy.
            
               Corus, the northweſterne wynde, a ſouthweſt wynde.
            
               Coruſco, aui, are, to brandiſhe or glytter.
            
               Coruinus, a, um, of a crowe. Coruinus, was alſo the name of a noble oratoure. Reade in Meſſala.
            
            
               Coruns, a crowe.
            
               Corybantes, the prieſtes of the ydoll Cybeles, whiche as madde men waggynge theyr heades and daunſynge, playinge on cymbales, ran about the ſtretes, prouokynge other to do the ſemblable.
            
               Coryces, curious perſons, craftye inueſtigatours or ſerchers of matters. Alſo a hyll in Crete lyinge on the ſea ſyde.
            
               Corycium, a gardeuiandes or walet, or other lyke thynge to put in vytayles.
            
               Corycum, the name of a citie and mountayne in Sicyle.
            
               Corydalus, a larke.
            
               Coryletum, a groue of haſylles.
            
               Corylus, a haſyll and a haſyll nut, or fylberde.
            
               Corymbi, bearies of an yuy, or other whiche do growe in the ſame fourme.
            
               Corymbifer, an yuy tree.
            
               Corymbites, a kynde of ſpurge.
            
               Coryphaeus, the chiefe in euery order, or in knowledge.
            
               Corythus, a towne in Tuſcane nere to Arctiū
            
            
               Corytus, a bowe caſe, or a quyuer for arowes.
            
               Coryza, the poſe or diſtillation out of the hed into the eyes and noſe.
            
               Cos, or Ceos, or Cea, an yle not farre from Grece, wher Hippocrates the phiſition was borne.
            
               Cos, cotis, a whet ſtone.
            
               Coticula, a lyttell whetſtone.
            
               Coſmeta, a chamberer, or woman that apparayleth her maiſtres.
            Coſmicus, a, um, worldely.
            
            Coſmitto, for Committo.
            
               Coſmographia, the deſcription of the worlde.
            
               Coſmographus, he that deſcribeth the worlde.
            
               Coſmus, a proper name.
            
               Coſsi, wormes bred in trees, whiche the people of Phrigia dyd eate for a delycate meat. Alſo men or women that haue theyr bodyes riueled or ſull of wrynkels.
            
               Coſta, a rybbe.
            
               Coſyros, an yle in Affrike.
            
               Cotaria, a quary where whetſtones be foundē.
            
               Coticula, a touche ſtone, wheron they try gold and ſyluer.
            
               Cothurnus, a ſlypper, ſpeciallye hyghe ſolyd, ſomtyme it is taken for a hyghe and arrogāt fourme of ſpeakynge or writynge.
            
               Cotidie, dayly, day by day.
            
               Coton, an hauen made with ſtone. Alſo a town in Siria, of the whiche a certayne kynde of ſmalle fygges, are called plurally, Cotona, uel coctona.
            
            
               Cotonea, a quince tree.
            
               Cotoneum, a quince.
            
               Cottalus, the ſounde whyche a ſtroke maketh with any thynge.
            
               Cotula, is an herbe, whiche hath leaues lyke camomyll, and a yelow floure lyke to an oxe eye. Of this be dyuerſe kyndes, one is called Buphthalinos, an other Cotula fetida.
            
            
               Coturnix, nicis, a byrd called a quayle, whiche (as Plinius and Solinus do wryte) appereth not vntyll in the ende of ſommer, and thanne they flee ouer the ſea eaſely without makyng haſte, and whan they perceyue lande, they do aſſemble in flockes, and fly moche faſter. They wryte alſo, that theſe byrdes doo fede on ſeedes of venomous herbes, and therfore in the olde tyme they were not eaten of wyſe men: for that byrde hath the ſyckeneſſe called the fallynge euyl. Auicen in the ſeconde canō, and Galene de complexionibus, and Lucretius. li. 4. do affyrme, that this byrd fedeth on the herbe called Elleborus, or Veratrum, whiche of it ſelfe is venomous: all be it phyſitions do gyue it ſometyme for the purgation of melancholy. Auicen in the ſayde place wryteth, that it is to be feared in carynge of quayles, leſte thereby maye be ingendred the crampe and ſickeneſſe called Tetanus.
            
            
               Cotyla, or Cotyle, was a meaſure, whiche after the ſayinge of Galene, was in ſome place xii. ounce meaſures, in ſome place .xvi. Iulius
 Pollux ſayth, that it is the thyrde parte of Choenix, that whiche is called Georgica, or perteynynge to huſbandrye, receyueth in weyght of wyne .i .li. and halfe an ounce, of oyle .xi. ounces, of hony .i .li. di. and .vi. drā
               mes, of our meaſure a pynte and one ounce meaſure. That whiche is called Veterinaria, or belongynge to horſe leaches, is in meaſure xii. ynches, and conteyneth of wyne .xi. ounces, and .ii. ſcriples, oone obolum, and one ſiliqua: of oyle .x. ounces, of hony .i .li .iiii. ounces di. one dramme, and one ſcriple. It is of our meaſure iuſte halfe a pynte. Cotyla, is alſo a veſſell or cup to drynke of, ſuche as Diogenes vſed, before he lerned of a child to drynke out of his hande. Alſo Cotyle ſom tyme ſygnifieth al the holownes of a cup. alſo the ioynt of a mans thyghe.
            
               Cotylum, a place in the mountayn of Ida, out of the which runneth thre great riuers, Sea mander, Granicus, and Acſopus.
            
               Couinum, a maner of a charyot.
            
               Couinarius eques, a horſeman that faught leapynge out of a chariot vnto a horſebacke.
            
               Counium, a towne in Dorſ. ſhyre called Dorcheſter.
            
               Counos, the yle of Shepey in Kente.
            
               Cous, a man of the yle of Cos.
            
            
               Coxa, the haunche, properly the bones of the buttocke.
            
               Coxendix, dicis, the hyp or houkill bone.
            
               Coxendicis morbus, the ache of the hyp. commonly called Sciatica, whiche commeth of a groſſe fleumatiue humour, whiche lyeth about the ſynewe called Iſchias, in the holowe bone of the hyp.
         
         
            C ANTE R.
            
               CRABRO, onis, a great waſpe called a hornet.
            
               Cracentes,
               Pom. Feft men that are leane. Sometyme it is taken for graciles.
            
            
               Crambe, a kynde of colewurtes.
            
               Cramben repetitiam, is called of Iuuenalis a declamation to be often herde, with moche tediouſnes to the herers.
            
               Cranaus, a kynge of Athenes, whoo ſucceded Cecrops.
            
               Craneum, a place of exerciſe at Corinth.
            
               Cranium, the foremoſte parte of the ſkull.
            
               Crantor, oris, the name of a philſopher.
            
               Crapula, an inflammation and head ache, whiche commeth of exceſſe of drinkynge. It is alſo taken for drunkennes.
            
               Crapulam edormiſcere, to ſleape out drunkennes vntyll he be freſhe agayne.
            
               Crapulam exhalare, to vomyte whan one is drunke.
            
               Cras, to morowe, in tyme commynge.
            
               Craſis, a greke worde, ſignifieth complection, temperature, or mixture of natural humours
            
               Craſſamen, & Craſſamentum, the thyckneſſe of any thynge
            
               Craſſa Minerua, a groſſe wyt, whiche doth no thinge exactely.
            
               Craſſeſco, ſeſci, ſeſcere, to make fatte or ful of fleſhe, or thycke.
            
               Craſſiore Muſa, with a more playne or intelligible ſenſe.
            
               Craſsities, & Craſsitudo, fatneſſe, thyckenes groſſenes.
            
               Craſſo, are, to make fat.
            
               Craſſus,
               Plaut. in Pſeud. 
               a, um, fatte, fleſhye, thycke, groſſe, poyſy.
            
               Craſſae compedes, weyghty gyues
            
               Craſſus, was the ſurname of noble Romaines, of the whiche two ſpecially are worthy to be remembred, for the notable qualities whiche were in them. The one of them was named Lucius Craſſus, whiche nexte to Tully was the moſte excellent oratour that euer was amonge the Romains, of whom and of Quintus Sceuola, Tully in his boke called Brutus, wryteth in this wyſe: Thynke not (I ſaye) Brutus, that in this Citie were euer two more excellente perſons, for where it is well knowen, that of all counſaylours, the one (that is to ſay Sceuola) was moſte eloquent, the other (that is to ſay Craſſus) was in counſaylinge moſte excellent. Lyke wiſe in all other thynges they were vnlyke one to an other. But ſo as ye coulde not tell, vnto whō of them ye wolde wyſhe to be lyke. For Craſſus of all them that were delycate and ioly, was the moſt ſober. Sceuola of al them that were ſober, was the moſt freſhe and pleſant. Craſſus with gentilnes had ſufficient ſeueritie: in the great ſeueritie of Sceuola, there lacked no gentylneſſe. This commendation of Tully declareth theſe two men worthy to be counſaylours in a weale publyke.
            
               Craſſus, called Marcus, beinge none Emperour, was the rycheſt man of a pryuate peron that was of the Romayns. Plutarchus wryteth, that he was ſente generall capitain agaynſte the Parthians. He had in his treaſure ſeuen thouſand and a hundred talentes, whiche do amounte of our money to a thouſande thouſande, a hundred thouſande, thre hundred and fifty poundes, ouer and beſides that he had gyuen the .x. parte of his moueables to Hercules in offerynge. and had made a feaſte to all the people of Rome, appoyntynge to euery man the rate of three Minas, euery Mina beynge of our moneye .xxxv. s. xi. d. q. whiche is in thre Minas .v .li .vii. s. ix. d. ob. q. for euery mans portion. whiche
 conſyderyng the multitude of people, whiche were at that tyme in Rome, beinge than the greateſt citie and mooſte populous in all the worlde, it ſemeth that the ſumme was ineſtimable. He wolde ſay, that he ought not to be called a ryche man, excepte he could with his yerely rente maynteine a legion, whiche conteyned
.vi. thouſande foote men, and .v. hundred men of armes commonly. By the which wordes of Pliny recited in his .xxxiii. boke▪ the .x. chapiter, it may wel be ſuppoſed, that where a lyttell before, the ſame Plinye eſtemeth the ryches of Craſſus to be .xx. thouſande Seſtertia, which in the rate of our money is ſyxe ſcore and .xi. thouſande, thre ſcore and fyue poundes, the ſame ſumme was the yerely reuenewes of Marcus Craſſus, euerye Seſtertium beinge .vi. li. xi. s. ix. d. ob. the whiche reuenewes were not onely of his poſſeſſions, grayne, fruite, and cattell, but alſo of the labours of a greate multytude of bonde men, whiche he dyd lette to hyre vnto them that had nede of theyr ſeruyce, they beinge inſtructed in all maner of ſciences and artes. Of whom there were .v. hundred carpentars, of al the other a moch greater number, all that they gayned, cam to his cofers. Moreouer he practiſed vſury, lendynge lightly to all men that wolde borowe, but if they brake promyſe with hym, he was in exacting therof extreame and rigorous. He gat infynite ſubſtance by the poſſeſſions & goodes of men attaynted in the tyme of Sylla, who fauoured hym. Therwith he was excedyng conaytous and vnſtable, but vſynge moche lyberalitie and affabilitie towarde the people, he was alwaye in great eſtimation amonge them, he was alſo eloquent, and wold plead in euery commune cauſe. Fynally beinge ſtered with couaytous, and enuye, whiche he hadde to the great honours that Caeſar and Pompey had obteyned, he procured warre agaynſte the people called Parthi, by whom bothe he and his ſonne, with .xxx. thouſande Romaynes wereſlayne, and many alſo were taken, whiche (as Plutarch wryteth) happened by his negligence, he beinge more induſtrious about the gatherynge of moneye, than he was in gouernynge and orderynge his armye. He dyed afore the incarnation of Chriſte. 51. yeres.
            
               Craſtino, aui, are, to deferre from day to day.
            Craſtinô, idem quod Cras.
            
               Craſtinus, a, um, perteininge to to moreowe, or tyme to come.
            
               Crater, is a baſon of a water cundit, whereinto the water runneth out of pipes or cockes.
            
               Cratera, uel Crater, teris, a great cup. Alſo a great hole on the top of the meruaylous hyll of Aetna in Sicile, out of the whiche yſſueth flames of fyre. It is alſo the veſſell of a well.
            
               Craterra,
               
                  
                     •
                  would
                     •
                  
                a buckat to take vp water.
            
               Crates, grates of yron or wood. They be alſo the watling of a wal or houſe klayed or thatched. Alſo the name of a philoſopher, whiche to the entente he moughte the more quyetlye ſtudy philoſophy, he beinge ryche, threwe al his goodes into the ſea, ſayinge: henſe with a miſchiefe ye vngratious appetites, I had leauer drowne you, than ye ſhoulde drowne me. Suppoſynge, that he moughte not haue vertue and ryches to gether.
            
               Crathis, the name of two ryuers, the oone in Grece, the other in Calaber.
            
               Craticula, a gredyron, wheron meate is broiled
            
               Cratinas, a ryuer in Affryke.
            
               Cratinus, a poete, whiche wrate comedies.
            
               Cratio, iui, ire, to couer with grates, to wattil.
            
               Cratippus, the name of a philoſopher.
            
               Cratos, power or dominion.
            
               Cratilus, the name of a philoſopher, to whom Plato wrate a boke.
            
               Crea, the ſhyn, behynde the which is the cauſe of the legge.
            
               Creator, the fyrſte maker of a thynge.
            
               Creator urbis, the founder or fyrſt buylder, the firſte maker, or cauſer.
            
               Creatu
                     •
                  a, a creature or thynge made of nothinge.
            
               Creber, bra, brum, frequente, or accuſtomed. Alſo ſtandynge or beynge thycke to gether, as trees.
            
               Crebreſco, brui, breſcere, to be wonte, to be commune.
            
               Crebritas, & Crebritudo, oftnes, or thicknes in beinge or growynge together.
            
               Crebro, often,
            
               Credibile, that whiche maye be beleued.
            
               Creditor, oris, he vnto whom a manne oweth any thynge.
            
               Creditum, that thynge that is owed.
            
               Credo, didi, dere, to beleue, to truſte, to commyt, or delyuer a thynge to be ſaufly kept, to publyſhe.
            
               Credere uerba alicui, to tell to one his counſayle.
            
               Creditur tibi,
               Plaut. i
                     •
                   Sticho. I truſte the.
            
               Creditur male, it is yll lente.
            Creduis,Plaut. i
                     •
                   curcul. uel Creduas, for credas.
            
               Credulitas, tatis, light beleue.
            
               Credulus, he that beleueth lyghtly.
            
               Cremaſteres,
               Colum. 
                     •
                   capi. 25. the ſynewes, wherby the ſtones of a man or beaſte do hange.
            
               Crementum, increaſe.
            
               Cremera, a ryuer.
            
               Cremium, fryed meate burned to the panne.
            
               Cremo, are, to bourne.
            
               Cremôna, a towne of Italy.
            
                
               Cremor, ôris, the iuyce of barley ſteped in water, beaten and preſſed.
            
               Crenae, the dentes about the leafe of an herbe or tre lyke to a ſawe. Alſo it is the ſcores whiche menne vnlerned doo make on ſtyckes for theyr remembrance. Alſo Crena, is the nocke of a bowe or arrowe.
            
               Creontes, the name of a kynge, whoſe doughter Iaſon maryed, whan he had left Medea.
            
               Creophilus, the name of a poete.
            
               Creo, aui, are, to gyue the fyrſte beinge vnto any thynge: alſo to geat a chylde, to cauſe.
            
               Creare magiſtratum, to ordeyne an officer.
            
               Crepa, of olde wryters vſed for Capra, a gote
            
               Crepare,
               
                  
                     •••
                  gilius to be broken, alſo to ſpeake or preach
            
               Crepêrus, a, um, doubtfull, ambiguous.
            
               Crepida, & Crepis, pidis, a ſhoow with latchettes, ſome take it for a corked ſhoe or ſlipper, bycauſe of the noyſe, whiche it maketh whan a man goeth.
            
               Crepidarius, rij, he that maketh ſhowes or ſlyppers.
            
               Crepidatus,
               
                  
                     ••
                  oratius. he that weareth ſlyppers.
            
               Crepido, inis, a creke on the waters ſide, wheron the water beateth. Alſo the mouthe of a well, and the extreme parte of any place.
            
               Crepidula, a lyttell ſlypper.
            
               Crepitaculum, a tymbrell, or other inſtrument whiche beinge touched with the hande, maketh a ſounde.
            
               Crepito, ani, are, to make a noyſe or boūſing.
            
               Crepitare dentibus,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   in 
                     ••
                  ente. to craſhe with the tethe.
            
               Crepitat mihi uenter, my bealy courleth.
            
               Crepitulum, an ornament of the heade, which with meuynge of the head, yeldeth a ſowne.
            
               Crepitus, a bounſe or great dyn or noyſe.
            
               Crepo,
               Vergilius 
               pui, pare, to make a great noyſe, or ſounde, alſo to be broken.
            
               Crepuit foris, the dore craked.
            
               Crepundia,
               Pla
                     •
                  tꝰ in Amph. tryfles or ſmall gyftes gyuen to litell chyldren, as lyttel belles, tymbrelles, and ſuche lyke toyes. Alſo the fyrſte apparayle of chyldren, as ſwathels, waſt cotes, and ſuche lyke. And by traſlation they ſay, A crepundijs erat uirtuti deditus: From his chyldehode he was euer gyuen to vertue.
            
               Crepuſculum, the breake or fyrſte ſprynge of the daye, called the twylyghte.
            
               Creſco, creui, creſcere, to growe or increaſe.
            
               Creuit haereditatem, he is increaſed in his lyuclode, or he hath inheritaunce fallen vnto hym.
            
               Creta, an yle lying betwene the part of Grece called Peloponeſus, nowe Morea, and the Rhodes, and it hath on the northe parte the ſea called Aegeum and Cretenſe, on the ſouthe the ſea of Aegypte and Affrica, it is now called Candy. In this yle was Iupyter nouryſhed, whome the paynimes named theyr chiefe or principal god. There alſo Minos raigned, & Radamāthus gouerned vnder hym with moſte exquiſite iuſtice, as ye may rede in theyr places. Of whoſe lawes other countreys toke theyr fyrſte paterne, and yet not withſtandynge the people of that countrey were noted of olde authors to be vicyouſe and ſhameful lyars, as Epimenides the great philoſopher, wrate in a verſe recited by ſaynct Paule in his epiſtoll to Titus, ſaying Cretes alwaye ben lyars, vngratious beaſtes, and ſlouthfull paunches.
            
               Creta, is alſo chalke.
            
               Cretatus, a, um, layde with chalke.
            
               Cretaeus, & Cretenſis, a manne of Crete or Candy.
            
               Creterra, a bucket to drawe vp water.
            
               Crethmos, uel Cretamus, an herbe growyng on the ſea rockes, whiche we call Sampere. it is of ſome called Creta marina, the leaues are kepte in bryne or ſalte to be eaten with fleſhe, as a ſauce.
            
               Creticus, a, um, of Crete of Candy. Alſo a fote in meter, whiche hath the fyrſte and thyrde ſyllable longe.
            ❀Cretizare cum Cretenſibus.
               Eraſ. in chilli. A prouerb vvſed where a craftye man wyll deceyue hym that is crafty: a theſe ſteale from a thefe: or a lyer lye before theym, whiche vſe to make leaſynges.
            
               Cretoſus, a, um, full of chalke.
            
               Cribro, aui, are, to ſyfte or ſarce.
            
               Cribrum, a ſieue or a ſarce.
            
               Crimen, minis, a faulte, an offence, blame, matter layde agaynſte on by action or ſuite. ſomtime a faulſe ſuſpition.
            
               Criminale, criminall, wherin is an offence or faulte.
            
               Criminatio, blame, falſe reporte, or reproche.
            
               Criminor, aris, ari, to blame, to rebuke, to lay to ones charge, to accuſe.
            
               Criminoſus, a, um, rebukefull, worthy blame.
            
               Crimiſſus, a ryuer of Grece.
            
               Crines, heare of the heade.
            
               Crinire, to laye forthe the heare.
            
               Crinita ſtella, a comete or blaſynge ſterre.
            
               Crinitus, he that hath moche or longe heare.
            
               Crinon, a red lyly.
            
               Criſa, the name of a towne buylded by Criſus, Phocus ſonne.
            
               Criſpina, by the deſcription of Io. Agricola, ſemeth to be the bryer called Reſpis.
            
               Criſpulus, he that hath his heare kurled.
            
               Criſpus, kurled. It was alſo the name of Saluſtius: reade in that place.
            
               Criſta, a kreſt, or any thynge growynge on the heade of a foule or beaſte, as a cockes combe or the feathers on the head of a byrde, called a coppe.
            
                
               Criticus, he that iudgeth the actes or warkes that men do wryte.
            
               Critici dies, the dayes wherein phyſitions gyue iudgemente of the contyn
                  •
               aunce of the ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Crito, a philoſophers name of Athenes.
            
               Critobulus, was a phiſition, of whom Pliny ſpeaketh. li. 7.
            
               Crobylon, a caule to were on ones heade.
            
               Crociatus, a, um, coloured lyke ſaffron.
            Crocinum, idem.
            
               Crocitus, the noyſe that a rauen or crowe maketh, called crokynge.
            Crocitatio, idem.
            
               Crocodilus, an yll beaſte, whiche is bredde in Aegypte, and lyueth partely in water, partely on lande, and is in facion lyke a dragon, but he hath ſmall eyes, very longe tethe lyke to a ſawe, & lacketh a tunge, and meueth only the ouermoſte ſawe, and not the nether, and hath great nayles and ſtrong on his fete: there hath ben ſene of theym .xx. fecte longe, and the ſkinne on his backe is vnpenetrable. He deuoureth not only men, but alſo beſtes, whiche do come nighe to the ryuer of Nilus or other there aboute. And yet not withſtandinge the Egyptians dyd honour that beaſt, in ſo moche as if any were kylled, they cauſed hym to be ſalted and buryed. They bring forthe egges no more than geeſe egges, and that .lx. at a tyme, the male and female ſyttyng on them by tourne. Reade more in Trochilus of this beaſte.
            
               Crocodili lachrimae, Crocodiles teares. A prouerbe applyed vnto theym, whiche hatynge an other man, whome they wolde deſtroye, or haue deſtroyed, they wyll ſeeme to be ſory for hym. It is taken of the propertys of Crocodilus the monſter, who beholdynge a man commynge, whom he wolde deuoure, he wepeth, and after that he hath eaten the body, he waſheth the heade with his teares, and than eateth it alſo.
            
               Croco, & Crocito, to make a noyſe lyke a rauen.
            
               Crocomagma, matis, the duſte or refuſe of ſaffron.
            
               Crocotirium, cakebreade.
            
               Crocotulae, garmentes of the coloure of ſaffron.
            
               Crocotularius, a dyet.
            
               Crocus, & Crocum, ſaffron, whiche of al mē is knowen. It is hotte and drye in the fyrſte degree.
            
               Croceus, a, um, of the colour of ſaffron.
            
               Crocuta,
               Conſtant. a beaſte, whiche Solimus calleth a monſter, begotten betwene the beaſte called Hyena and a lyo
                  •
               eſſe: he neuer cloſeth his eyes or wynketh, on both ſydes of his mouth he hath as it were but one tothe, they breake all thynges with theyr tethe quyckelye, and ſwoloweth, and forthwith dygeſteth it. The nature of them is betwene a dog & a wulfe, but he is moche worſe than any of them. He counter fayteth the voyce as well of men, as of other beaſtes.
            
               Croeſus,
               Conſt
                     ••
                  . was kynge of Lydia, ſonne of Halyattes, who ſubdued many greatte countreys in Aſia and Greece, and gathered innumerable ryches. He on a tyme demaunded of the wyſe man Solon: Who was the happyeſte man that euer he ſee. He ſayd, Tellus a man of Athenes, whoo had honeſte and good ſonnes, and they alſo had lyke good chyldren, al whiche he ſawe in his lyfe. And whan he had lyued a good tyme honeſtlye, he at the laſte fyghtynge agaynſte the ennemies of his coū
               trey, after that he had vainquiſhed them, he dyed a fayre deathe, and in the ſame place was honourably buryed of the Athenienſes. And whā Croeſus aſked, who was moſt happy next Tellus, he ſayde: Cleobis and Bito, whiche were Argiues, and had a competent lyuynge, and were of ſuche ſtrength, that in all games in prouynge of ſtrengthe, they obteyned the pryce. On a feſtiuall daye of Iuno theyr goddeſſe, theyr mother being an old woman, wolde be caryed vnto the temple in a wayne, but the oxen, whiche ſhulde drawe it, were not come from the fielde, wherfore her two ſonnes, takynge the beame of the wayne, drewe theyr olde mother therein .vii. myles and more, and ſoo broughte her to the temple of Iuno, all men meruaylinge and cō
               mendynge the yonge men, al womenne prayſynge the mother for bryngynge vp of ſuche chyldren, the mother beynge ſurpryſed with ioye, as wel for the acte of her ſonnes, as alſo for the fame and commendation thereof, ſtandynge afore the ymage of Iuno, prayed, that her ſonnes mought haue that thyng giuen them, whiche were the beſte thynge that euer mought happen to men▪ whan they had ſacrifiſed, eaten and drunke with moch pleaſure and ioye, they fell on ſleape, and neuer awaked,▪ whoſe ymages al the people of their countrey did ſet vppe with moche honour at Delphos. Croeſus beinge abaſhed, ſayd vnto Solon: My frend of Athenes, ſetteſt thou ſo lyttell by our felicitie, that thou preferriſt before vs theſe priuate perſons? Solon anſwered, Truely Croeſus, in proceſſe of tyme many thynges are ſene, which men wold not ſe: and many thynges be ſuffered, that men wolde not ſuffer. And after that he had moch ſpoken of mans calamitie, at the laſte thus he concluded his ſayinge: The ende of euery thynge is to be loked on, whereto it ſhall
 come, for god pluckith vp by the roofes many men, vnto whom he gaue all fortune at pleaſure. Creſus made hereto no coūtenance, but eſtemyng Solon to be but a fole, conſyderyng that he paſſynge ſo lyght vppon the thinges, whiche appered to be good, bad hym to take heede of the ende of all thynges, he ſettynge lytell by Solon, let hym depart. A good ſpace after, Creſus by the comfort of the anſweres of Apollo at Delphos, attemptynge warre agaynſt Cyrus kyng of Perſia, at the laſt was taken of him, who cauſid a great pyle of wod to be made redy, and Creſus beinge in gyues to be ſet on the toppe therof, than forthwith Croeſus remembryd the wordes of Solon, that no man lyuyng was bleſſed, or on al partes happy, and therwith lamentyng, he cried, O Solon, Solon, Solon. Whyche Cyrus heryng, cauſed to be demanded of hym, who it was that he namyd. Croeſus with moche difficultie at the laſt tolde what he was, and finally declared all that before was reherſyd. Whiche after that Cyrus had herde, he recogniſyng hym ſelf to be alſo a man, ſoore repented, that he went aboute to bourne hym, whyche was equall to hym in honour and rycheſſe, and cōmaunded hym to be taken from the fyre, whiche than beganne to flame, and ſoo with great difficultie he was delyuered. And afterwarde Cyrus entertayned hym honourably, and vſyd his counſayle, whyche in many thynges he founde verye profytable. Moche more Herodotus the noble hyſtoryan wryteth hereof in Clio, whyche I wold god were radde oftentymes of kynges and theyr counſaylours, for whoſe commoditie I haue wrytten this Epytome or abbreuiation, to no man tedious, whiche hath a good nature.
            
               Cromis, was he, to whome Hercules gaue the horſes of Dyomedes, whyche wold cate menne.
            
               Cronia, were the feaſtes dedycate to Saturnus, whiche were alſo callyd Saturnalia.
            
            
               Cronium, is the northe ſea callyd Mare concretum, or glaciale, the froſen ſea.
            
               Crotalum, an inſtrument, whyche the Egyptians vſyd in ſacrifyce, made of two plates, whiche beaten togither, made an harmony.
            
               Crotalus, he that hath a ſownynge voyce, and a ſhylle.
            
               Croton, loke after in Ricinum.
            
            
               Cruciabilitas, tourment, affliction.
            
               Cruciatus, tourment.
            Cruciatio, idem.
            Crucifigo, fixi, figere, to crucifye.
            
            
               Crucio, are, to tourment.
            
               Crudaria, a veyne of ſyluer.
            Crudelis, le, cruell.
            
            
               Crudeſco, dui, deſcere, to be rawe.
            
               Cruditas, tatis, rawneſſe of humours, or ylls dygeſtyon.
            
               Crudus, a, um, rawe, freſſhe, or newe made, not rype.
            
               Crudus homo, whoſe ſtomacke can not dygeſt well.
            
               Crudus enſis, a cruell ſworde.
            
               Cruda poma, fruites that are not rype.
            
               Cruentati oculi, eyen redde as bloudde.
            
               Cruento, aui, are, to make blouddy.
            Cruentus, a, um, blouddy, cruell.
            
            
               Crumena, a pourſe.
            
               Cruor, bloud, whiche cometh out of a wounde.
            
               Crus, cruris, the parte of the legge, whyche is from the knee downe vnto the ankle, callyd the ſhanke.
            
               Cruſculum, a lyttell or ſmall legge.
            
               Cruſta, the vtter part of euery thynge that is not eaten. Alſo the ſcurfe of a ſcab or wound▪ alſo playſter of a wall.
            
               Cruſtarius, a pargettour.
            
               Cruſtata, wheron is layde playſter, or thynne ſhardes of ſtone.
            
               Cruſto, aui, are, to lay playſter or parget.
            
               Cruſtulata, a meate made of cruſtes of breade.
            
               Cruſtulum, a cruſt of breadde, of a paſtye, or of meate roſted,Vergilius. broyled, or fryed.
            Cruſtum, idem.
            
               Cruſtumnia pira, peares red on the one ſyde.
            
               Cruſtuminium, a towne in Italy.
            
               Crux, crucis, a croſſe, galowes, or other lyke, alſo all maner of tourment.
            
               Cruci dare aliquem,
               Flaut. in milite. to hange one.
            
               Crypſorchis, is where a mans ſtones are remouyd out of theyr place.
            
               Crypta, a voult lowe in the grounde.
            
               Crypticus, a, um, ſecrete or hyd vnder the erth.
            
               Cryptoporticus, a place vnder the grounde, with wyndowes lyke to a parler, where men do dyne in the ſummer tyme for heate.
            
               Cryſtallina, veſſell and cuppes of cryſtal ſtone.
            
               Cryſtallus, & Cryſtallum, a ſtone callid criſtal.
         
         
            ¶C ANTE T.
            
               CTenes, the foreteethe.
            
               Cteniatrus, a horſe leach, he that healeth diſeaſes of horſes and cattell.
            
               Cteſipho, or Cteſiphon, the name of a warkeman, whiche made the great temple of Diana at Epheſus, a worke wonderful, and renomed through the world, the which was after burned of one Heroſtratus, onely bycauſe he wolde for ſome dede be ſpoken of.
         
         
            ¶C ANTE V.
            
               CVbatio, a lyenge.
            
               Cubatus, tus, a ſyttynge on broode, as a henne dothe.
            
               Cubicularis, re, that pertayneth to the chābes.
            
                
               Cubicularius, a ſeruāt that awaiteth in the chā
               ber, a chamberlayn or grome of the chamber.
            
               Cubiculum, a bed chamber.
            
               Cubicus, a, um, ſquare as a dye.
            
               Cubile, a bed. ſomtyme it is taken for a cloſet.
            
               Cubitale, a foreſleue of a garment, which keuereth the arme from the elbowe downewarde.
            
               Cubito, aui, are, to lye often with one.
            
               Cubitor, toris, an oxe or horſe, whiche wyll lay hym downe whan he ſhulde warke.
            
               Cubitus, & cubitum, an elbow. ſomtyme a meſure callyd a cubite, that is to ſaye, one foote and an halfe, but a cubite in geometrye contayneth
.vi. of our common cubites.
            
               Cubo, bui, bare, to lye downe, properly it is of ſycke men, or of women with chylde.
            
               Cubus, is a fygure foure ſquare on all partes lyke a dyce.
            
               Cucubo, aui, are, to make a noyſe lyke an owle.
            
               Cuculió, onis, a keuerynge of the head, whiche men dyd vſe whan they walked in the nyght.
            
               Cuculus, & cucullus, a byrde callyd a cuckow.
            
               Cucullus, a hoode, whiche men or women doo weare for the rayne, or whan they mourne.
            
               Cucuma, a veſſell of braſſe or tynne, faſcyoned lyke a cucumer, wherwith bathes were filled and emptyed.
            
               Cucumer, eris, & cucumis, a fruyte callyd a cucumber.
            
               Cucumerarius, a gardyn, where cucumbers to growe or be kept.
            
               Cucurbita, a fruite callyd a gourde. Alſo Cucurbita, & cucurbitula, is a cuppe, wherwith ſurgions do drawe out bloud with ſcarifieng of the ſkynne, callyd cuppynge.
            
               Cucurbitarium, a place where gourdes be ſowē
            
            
               Cucurbitarius, a louer of gourdes.
            
               Cucurio, iui, ire, to make a noyſe lyke a cocke.
            
               Cudo, cuſi, cudere, to ſtryke as ſmythes do▪ alſo to coyne.
            
               In me haec cudetur faba, this thing ſhal light on my necke.
            
               Cuias, cuiatis, of whenſe.
            Cuius, a, um, whoſe.
            
            
               Cuium pecus,
               Plaut. in Men. whoſe cattall?
            
               Cuiuſmodi, what, what faſcion, what maner.
            
               Cuiuſmodi homines erunt?
               Cice. pro Cluen. What maner of men ſhall they be?
            
               Cuiuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  modi.) Vereor enim cuiuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  modi es Roſci,
               Cice. pro Roſcio. 
               ne ita hunc uidear uoluiſſe ſeruare, ut tibi omnino non pepercerim, I feare me, that in what ſo euer ſtate thou art in Roſce. leſt it ſhalbe thought, that I wolde ſo excuſe or defende him, foraſmoch as I haue not alway ſparyd the.
            
               Cuiuſcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  modi genus hominum,
               Saluſt. in Catal. of all maner of ſortes of men.
            
               Culcitra, a mattreſſe.
            
               Culcitrula, a lyttell mattreſſe.
            
               Culcitula, a lyttell ſtaffe.Feſtus.
            
            
               Culeus, amonge the Romans was the greateſt meaſure, and receyueth twenty of the meaſures callyd Amphora, whyche amounteth to two thouſand, eyght hundred, foure pounde of meaſure, euery pounde beinge xii. ounces▪ of our meaſure .v. ſcore galons. It was alſoo a ſacke of lether, whereinto they whyche had ſlayne theyr fathers or mothers were ſowen, and with them alſo were put alyue, a cocke, a ſerpente, and an ape, and throwen all togyther in to the ryuer of Tyber. And this was the punyſhement of paricides or murderers of theyr parentes.
            
               Culex, culicis, a gnatte.
            
               Culicem colant, camelum deglutientes, they ſtrayn a gnatte through theyr tethe, and ſwolow downe a camell. An apt prouerbe applyed by our fauiour Chriſt vnto the Pharyſeys, whiche dyd aggrauate ſmalle offences, and mayntayned great enormities. It may be nowe vſed agaynſte ſuche perſons, whyche ſeeke out and doo punyſhe ſmall offendours, and let the great treſpaſſours againſt the law go quyte vnpunyſhed. alſo them, whyche are ſcrupulous in thynges of lyttell importance, and in ambytion, auaryce, extortion, aduoutrye, thefte, murder, treaſon, or hereſy, they fynde no daunger of conſcience.
            
               Culigna, a bolle or dyſhe to drynke of.
            
               Culina, a kytchyn. ſommetyme the meate that is dreſſyd.
            
               Culinor, aris, ari, to do the offyce of a cooke.
            
               Culleolum, the vtter ſhale of a nutte, whyche is grene.
            
               Culmen, minis, the roufe of a houſe.
            
               Culmus, the reede or ſtrawe of corne, from the roote to the care.
            
               Culpa, is an offence doone not wetynge, or not intendyng to do hurte.
            
               Culpa carere,
               Plaut. in capt. not to offende.
            
               Culpam commereri to commyt an offence.
            
               Culpam in alterū conferre, to lay the blame to an other.
            
               Culpa teneri, to be in faute.
            
               Culpito, tare, to blame often.
            
               Culpo, pare, to blame.
            
               Cultellum, a lyttell knyfe, or a whyttyll.
            Culter, & cultrum, a knyfe.
            
               Cultrarius, was he that kylled the beaſt, and diuyded hym in the ſacrifyce to ydols. it may to nowe taken for a ſlaughter man.
            
               Cultus, tus, apparaile, ſomtyme it is taken for honour done to god.
            
               Culullus, an erthen cuppe, ſuche as the galye cuppes be.
            
               Cululus, a lytle chalyce or cup of erthe, whyche
 the byſſhoppe vſed in ſacrifice.
            
               Cum, with, whan, whyles, where, foraſmoche, as well. Cum mihi tum illi, as well to me as to hym. In Cum, is ſome thyng laſſe vnderſtande, in tum, ſome thyng more. Quod cum omnibus confitendum eſt, tum nobis praecipue, Which thing ought to be confeſſed of al men, and of vs moſt ſpecially. alſo Cum ſignifieth albeit. Nam cum ſedulo, munditer nos habemus, uix aegre amatorculos inuenimus, Although we appoint vs neuer ſo clenlye,Plaut. in 
                     〈◊〉
                  . yet vneth fynde we any louers. The ancient writers, whan it ſignified, whan, where, and for as moche, they wrate it Quom.
            
            
               Cū dicto, forthwith, as ſone as it was ſpokē
            
            
               Cum imperio eſt, he beareth a rule.
            Cum maxime, excedyngly.
            
            
               Cum maxume, to moche.
            
               Cum poteſtate eſt, he is in authoritie, or in an hygh offyce.
            Cum primis, very. Cum primis nobilis, dery noble. Cum ſtomacho, dyſdaynfully.
            
            
               Cum tempore, in a certayne ſpace.
            
               Cum tua pace,
               Terent. in Elecyra. ſauyng your diſpleaſure.
            
               Cum uenia tua, with your lycence.
            
               Cuma, a towne in Greece.
            
               Cumae, a citie in Campania.
            
               Cumanus, a man of that citie.
            
               Cumatilis, le, a colour callyd blewe.
            
               Cumera, a great veſſel, wherin corne was kept eyther of wykars or of erthe.
            
               Cumerum, a veſſell vſed at weddynges.
            
               Cuminum, an herbe and ſede callyd cummyn.
            
               Cumueni, Bigor in Fraunce.
            Cumulate, abundantly.
            
               Cumulatim, in an heape, or heaped vp.
            Cumulatus, a, um, augmented.
            
            
               Cumulo, aui, are, to make an heape, to fylle, to adde more.
            
               Cumulus, an heape.
            
               Cumae, & cunabula, cradels, wherin chyldren be rocked. ſomtyme it is taken for the age of infancy alſo for the begynnyng of thynges.
            
               Cunctanter, ſlowly, ſofte and fayre.
            
               Cunctatio, & contatio, a taryeng, an abidyng, a prolongyng of tyme, a doubtyng.
            
               Cunctator, oris, a taryer, a differrer. it is alſo he whiche ſpeaketh lyttell, and taryeth longe in his ſpeakyng, as ſome doo, more to ſeeme wyſe, than that they be wyſe.
            
               Cuncti, altogither.
            
               Cunctor, & contor, aris, to tarye, to prolonge tyme, to abyde, to doubte.
            Cunctus, a, um, all togither.
            
            
               Cuneus, an axe to cut wod, which is ſmall and thyn before, and brode and thycke after, that the wod may ryue the better. alſo a wedge to cleaue wodde with. By tranſlation it is a company of footemen in battayle, that gothe in a lyke order, ſmall before, & brode behinde. There was a lyke fourme in the Theatre or place, where men behelde playes. It is ſome tyme taken for a company of people.
            
               Cuneatim, in the ſourme afore declared.
            
               Cuneatus, a, um, that whiche appereth to be in the ſayd fourme of Cuneus.
            
            
               Cuniculum, an hole in the grounde.
            
               Cuniculus, a beaſt callyd a cony.
            
               Cunila, is an herbe, wherof be iiii. kyndes, one is callyd Capitata, which is our ſauerye. An other gallinacea, which ſom do call Origanū heracleoticum, in englyſh the maioram, whiche hath the ſmal leaf. The thyrd is that, whiche is alſo callyd Origanū, which I ſuppoſe to be peny royall with the brode leafe.
            
               Cunire, to ſhyte.
            
               Cunilago, a kynde of ſauery.Pom. Feſt
            
            
               Cunnus, a womans wycket.
            
               Cupa, a cuppe.
            
               Cupedinarius, an huckſtar that ſelleth meate and drynke.
            
               Cupes, Cupedia, & Cupedula, delycate meates, or deſyre of deynty meates.
            
               Cupido, dinis, the ſonne of Venus, god of loue.
            
               Cupido, in the feminine gender, vehement de ſyre or appetite.
            
               Cupide, deſyrouſely.
            Cupiditas, tatis, couaytiſe.
            
            
               Cupidus, a, um, deſyrous. ſomtyme it ſignifieth a louer.
            
               Cupiens, he that deſyreth a thynge.
            
               Cupiens tui eſt, he loueth the hartily.
            
               Cupienter, with great deſyre.
            Cupîtus, a, um, deſyred.
            
            
               Cupreſſus, a cypreſſe tree.
            
               Cupreſsinus, a, um, of cypreſſe tree.
            
               Cuprum, mettall callyd copper.
            
               Cur, wherfore, or why.
            
               Cura, care, thought, ſtudy, diligence, warke or labour, alſo loue.
            
               Curabitur, it ſhall be done.
            Curae habere, Curae eſſe, to care fore.
            
            
               Curas adimere, to ſet all care aſyde.
            
               Curam figere, infigere, defigere, configere, to ſet care and ſtudy on a thynge.
            
               Curis laxari, to be out of care.
            
               Curatio, cure, charge.
            
               Curatio mea eſt,
               Plaut. in paenu. it is myne offyce or charge.
            
               Curator, gardeyn in ſocage, or he to whom the cuſtody of a madde man or foolyſſhe is committed. alſo he to whome any thing is cōmitted, to ſuruey, or to prouide thinges neceſſary for a wele publick, or to order ſuch thingis, as he hath in charge, concernyng as wel priuate thingis as they that do belōg to a cōminalte. he may be ꝓperly callyd a ſurueyour.
            
               Curatorius, a, um, belonging to the ſayd office.
            
               Curatus, in good poynt or ſtate.
            
                
               Curatus, a, um, done with dylygence.
            
               Cures, a cytie of the Sabines.
            
               Curculio, onis, a lyttell worme in grayn callyd a myte or wyuelle. It is alſo the weſyll of the throte of a man, wherby he draweth wynde.
            
               Cur cura, an ylande in the ſea Adriatike.
            
               Curêtes, were the prieſtes of Cybeles, whyche fyrſt inhabyted Italye. they were alſo callyd Corybantes. There were other people ſo callyd, whiche were next to Aetolia, alſo other in Dalmatia,Leonicus in uaria hiſtor. now callid Slauonia. Curêtes callyd alſo, Idaei dactyli, were .v. brethern in the yle callid Creta, vnto whom Rhea cauſed her ſonne Iupiter to be brought, fearyng the yre of Saturnus her huſband. Theyr names were theſe, Hercules, Iolaeus, Paeonius, Epimedes, Iaſius, & Idas.
            
            
               Curetis, was the olde name of the yle callyd Creta.
            
               Curia, Romulus the fyrſt kynge of Romaynes diuided the people of Rome into .xxx. partes, and bycauſe the cure or charge of the weale publike was depeched by the conſent and ſentence of theym, he callyd theym Curias, and afterwarde he added vnto theym other fyue, and that euerye manne in his owne Curia, ſhoulde obſerue holye dayes, and doo ſacryfyce. Curia, was alſo the courte of the Senate, and ſommetyme vſyd for the courte or ſeſſyon of 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               udges, whyche haue 
                  〈…〉
               , whome we name iudges 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            
               Curiae dominicales, maye be taken amonge thoſe courtes, whyche we call courte barons. Of the occaſion and begynnynge of Curiae dominicales, rede the coment of Zaſius vpon the title of the lawe ciuile, De origine iuris. Curiae ueteres, where prieſtes minyſtryd aboute theyr ceremonies.
            
               Curia hoſtilia, was a place buylded by Tullus Hoſtilius kynge of Romayns, where the Senate dyd ſytte aboute the affayres of the citie of Rome.
            
               Curiata commitia, were great aſſemblies callyd of the people, out of euery of the .xxxv. diuyſyons callyd Curiae, whiche beinge ſette in xxxv. ſundrye particions, affyrmed or denyed ſuche lawes or conſtitutions as were purpoſyd vnto theym, and the lawes ſo made, were named Leges curiatae.
            
            
               Curiales, they whiche be of that court.
            
               Curio, of Varro is taken for a place, where prieſtes conſulted of thynges concernynge diuine ceremonies alſo a curate, or he that hath the ſpyrytuall charge in a paryſh alſo it was the ſurname of a familye in Rome, whereof were many excellent oratours.
            
               Curio magnus, as Sipontinus writeth, is taken of Plautus for oone made maygre or leane with care and buſynes.
            
               Curionem agnum, Plautu
                  ••
                
               
                  〈…〉
                be.
            
               Curionatus, the offyce of a 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            
               Curionium, the moneye 
                  〈…〉
                acurate for doinge his offyce 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            
               Curioſitas, tatis, curioſiti
                  ••
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
            
            
               Curioſus, is of Robertu
                     •
                  
                
               
                  〈…〉
                his dictionarie of latine and 
                  〈…〉
                to be the mayſter of the 
                  〈…〉
                to ſende in haſte 
                  〈…〉
                affayres. But of what 
                  〈…〉
                it. I knowe not.
            
               Curioſus, a, um, 
               
                  〈…〉
                ſommetyme on the yll parte, 
                  〈…〉
                is vſyd, than is 
                  〈…〉
               : ſometyme on the better 
                  〈…〉
                very careful and buſy about 
                  〈…〉
                eyther oure ſelfes, or 
                  〈…〉
               .
            
               Curius, the ſurname of noble Romans, of whō chiefly was one callid Marcus Curius, a mā of meruailous honeſty, conſtance, & grauitie, which after many great victories, whiche he (being capitayn) had ageynſt the Samnites. Sabines, & the noble king Pirrhus. he deuided among the people of Rome, the feldes, appointing to euery man .xl. acres, & retained by their conſentes as moch to him ſelf, and whā they wold haue giuen to him more, he refuſed it, ſaying, He was an yl citeſyn, that thought it not ynough for him, which was inough for other. Whan the ambaſſadors of Samnites brought hym a great ſumme of golde, he ſyttyng by the fyre boylyng of rapes, ſayd vnto them: I had leauer eate in my erthen dyſſhe, and haue dominion ouer them, that haue ſoo moche golde. Whan he was accuſed of with holdynge of money, he brought forth a tree
                  •
                barrelle, whyche he occupied whan he dydde ſacrifice, and toke a ſolemne othe, that of all the pray that was gotten of theym, whom he vanquyſſhed, he kepte no more but that barrell to his owne vſe.
            
               Curmundula, peares verye delycate, hauynge ſo thynne parynges, that men dyd eate theym vnpared.
            
               Curo, aui, are, to care for a thyng, to take hede, or be diligent about a thynge, to be doinge of a thinge.Terent. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Andria. 
               Cura ut ualeas, Loke to thy helthe. Curaſti probe, thou haſte done euery thynge well. ſomtyme to prepare, to heale one that is ſycke, to take refection or comfort.
            
               Curabo, I wyll doo my dilygence. Curabo illi pecuniam, I wylle prouyde that he ſhall haue money.
            
               Curabitur,
               Terent. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Heauton. it ſhal be prouided, it ſhalbe done with dilygence.
            
               Curareaedes, to take hede to the houſe, that nothynge be loſte.
            
                
               Curare aliena, to meddle with other mennes buſyneſſe.Plaut. in Sticho.
            
            
               Curare amicos, to entertayne frendes or atquayntaunce.
            
               Curare faciendum, to cauſe or make it to be done.
            
               Curare fidem, to kepe promyſe.
            
               Curare munus ſuum,
               Plaut. in Trinum. to do his offyce.
            
               Currens, he that runneth.
            
               Currentem incitare, to exhorte or ſette forwarde hym, that of his owne courage is wel dyſpoſed to a thynge.
            
               Curriculo, quyckely.
            
               Curro, cucurri, currere, to rounne. it is alſo to paſſe away faſt, as a ſhyp dothe.
            
               Curriculum, a ſhort ſpace of tyme. Alſo a runnynge place.
            
               Curriculus, a lyttell carre.
            
               Curruca, a lyttell byrde, whiche hatcheth and bryngeth vp cuckowe byrdes▪ it is ſuppoſyd to be an hedge ſparowe.
            
               Currus, a carre.
            
               Curſim, runnyng, with all ſpede, very ſpedily.
            
               Curſito, aui, are, to runne often.
            
               Curſo, aui, are, to runne alway or often.
            
               Curſor, oris, he that runneth in poſte.
            
               Curſorius, a, um, pertaynyng to runnynge.
            
               Curſura, a courſe.
            Curſus, us, idem.
            Curtus, a, um, ſhorte.
            
            
               Curta ſupellex, lyttell or ſmalle ſubſtaunce.
            
               Curuamen, minis, a crokednes.
            
               Curueſco, ueſci, ueſcere, to be croked.
            
               Curuipes, he that hath a crooked foote.
            
               Curulis, & curulae, were lytell carres or drays, hauynge in theym chayres of yuory, wherein they ſatte, whych were hed officers in Rome. ſommetyme it is vſyd of poetes for the ſame offycers.
            
               Curuatio, curuamen, curuatura, a bowynge or bendynge.
            
               Curuo, aui, are, to bowe, or make croked.
            Curuus, a, um, crooked.
            
            
               Cuſcuta, a weede, whiche twyneth about herbes, hauyng a redde ſtalke.
            Cuſpidatus, ta, tum, poynted.
            
            
               Cuſpidatim, poyntyng, or poyntwyſe.
            
               Cuſpis, idis, ſometyme ſignifieth the poynte of any weapon. ſometyme the ſteele, ſometyme a ſpeare head.
            
               Cuſtodi
                     •
                  , the cuſtody, kepyng, or warde. ſometime he that kepeth, ſomtime he that is kept: ſometyme the priſon.
            
               Cuſtodia, iui, dire, to kepe, to obſerue, to retain.
            
               Cuſtoditio, the kepynge.
            Cuſtoditus, a, um, kept.
            
            
               Cuſtos, cuſtodis, a keper, a warden, or garden.
            
               Cuticula, a thynne ſkynne.
            
               Cutiones, they whiche in ſellynge make many prices er they come to a poynt.
            
               Cutis, the inner ſkynne.
            
               Cuturnium, a veſſell, out of the whiche wyne was poured in ſacrifices.
         
         
            C ANTE Y.
            
               CYamea, a ſtone, whiche being broken, 
                  〈◊〉
                lyke to a beane.
            
               Cyaneae, or Cyanitae, ylandes or rather rockes vnder Boſphorus Thracius.
            
               Cyaneus, a, um, & Cianus, a, um, a bright blue colour lyke a ſaphyre loupe.
            
               Cyanus, a blewe floure Arowynge amonge corne, callyd a blewebottell.
            
               Cyathiſſo, are, to ſyppe or to quafte all out, or halues.
            
               Cyathus, a cuppe. it is alſo a meaſure conteynynge of oyle one ounce and an halfe, of wine one ounce .v. drammes, and done ſcriple, of hony two ounces and dī.
            
               Cybele, & Cybeles, was the wyfe of Saturn, and was namyd of paynymes, the mother of the goddis, which hath diuers other names, as it ſhall appere in their places.
            
               Cybium, a fyſhe whiche is foure ſquare.
            
               Cyborium, a kynde of appuls of Alexandry.
            
               Cyclades, ben fifty yles in the ſea callyd Egeū
            
            
               Cyclaminus, is an herb, which the apoticaries do name Panis porcinus. An other is of the ſame name, which they call Sigillum Mariae.
            
            
               Cyclas, cladis, a womans gowne with a long trayne.
            
               Cyclops, clopis, an ancient people inhabiting the yle of Sicile, whiche were lyke giantes, hauyng but one eye in theyr forheades.
            
               Cyclus, a rounde place in Athenes, where thinges were ſolde. alſo a coyne or poyſe.
            
               Cydarum, a bote.
            
               Cydnus, a ryuer in Cilicia, whyche rounneth frō the great moūtayne callid Taurus, & paſſeth through the citie callyd Tharſos, which ryuer is ſo colde, that whan the great Alexā
               der, in his iourney agaynſt Darius, went into it to refreſh hym, he was ſo mortified with colde in all his body, that he ſhuld haue died, had not that excellent and faythfull phiſition Philyp recouered hym.
            
               Cydon, one of the notableſt townes of Candy.
            
               Cydonium, a quynce peare.
            
               Cygneus, a, um, of a ſwanne.
            
               Cygnus, a ſwanne.
            
               Cylindraceus, a, um, in the forme of a laugat.
            
               Cylindraceus, a, um, lyke a roller.
            
               Cylindrus, an inſtrument, which is round like a pyller, & turneth, wherwith 
                  •
               loddes of erth are broken, callyd commonly a roller.
            
               Cyllene, an hylle of Archadye, where they ſaye Mercurius was nouryſhed.
            
               Cyllenius, one of the names of Mercury.
            
                
               Cylydros, a ſerpente that rolleth hym ſelfe as he gothe.
            
               Cyma, yonge colewortes, alſo the tender parte of the ſtalke of euery herbe.
            
               Cymatilis, chamblette.
            
               Cymba, a bote.
            
               Cymbalaris herba, an he
                  •
               be that groweth in mudwalles, hauynge a leafe lyke to yuy, but moche laſſe, and a lyttell purple floure.
            
               Cymbaliſtae, they that play vpon cymbals.
            
               Cymbalum, an inſtrument of muſyke.
            
               Cymbium, a piece or cup to drynke wyne in.
            
               Cymbrica Cherſoneſus, the countrey of Denmarke.
            
               Cyminum, cummyn.
            
               Cyminus, a lake in Italy.
            
               Cynaethium, a citie of Archady.
            
               Cynanche, a ſyckenes callyd the ſquynce, whyche is in the throte and iawes.
            
               Cynara, an herbe nowe callyd Artochokes.
            
               Cyneas, was an excellente wyſe man, who being ſent from kynge Pirrhus ambaſſadour to Rome, the next day after he came thither, he ſaluted al the ſenate & gentylmen by theyr names. Seneca in prologo libri primi declamationum, ſayth, that he ſaluted the ſenate, and all the people ſtandynge about to beholde hym, by theyr names.
            
               Cynegetica, volumes writen of huntyng.
            
               Cynici, were a ſecte of philoſophers, which do ſignify doggiſh for the ſimilitude of theyr conditions with dogges: for they barked at all men, & occupied women openly, & liued without any prouiſiō, the fyrſt author therof was Antiſthenes, next hym folowed Diogenes.
            
               Cyniphes, bytyng gnattes with longe legges.
            
               Cyniphia, the ſkynne of a gote.
            
               Cynnaberis, is that whiche apothecaries doo call Sanguis draconis.
            
            
               Cynocephalus, ſiue Canips, is a beaſt lyke an ape, but greater and more puiſſant, and hath the head more lyke a dogge. Diodorus Siculus ſaythe, that in bodye and fourme they be lyke to a man, and hath a lyke voyce. I ſuppoſe it be thoſe, whyche we do call Baboris. Horus Apollo writeth, that they pyſſe .xii. tymes in the day, and as often in the nyght, declaryng euery houre of the day and the nyght by makyng their vrine▪ alſo that the dogge of that kynde ſoo lamenteth the wane of the moone, that during the tyme that ſhe is dark before the chaunge, he loketh neuer vpward, nor eateth any thynge, but hangeth downe his head; and ſheweth a countenāce of ſorow▪ alſo peple vnder the great Cane, hauing heades lyke dogges be ſo callyd.
            
               Cynodontae, are dogges teethe, whyche doo growe in the latter age.
            
               Cynogloſſa, an herbe callyd houndes tunge.
            
               Cynomyia, a fly that dothe ſucke the bloud of beaſtes▪ ſome call it a hors fly▪ all be it by the etimologye of the worde, it mought be better called a dogflye.
            
               Cynorrhodos, eglantyne.
            
               Cynos, in latyn is Canis, a dogge, alſo a citie in Locris.
            
               Cynoſarges, a place in Athenes, where chylderne were exercyſed, whyche were baſſtardes.
            
               Cynoſbatos, the wylde eglantyne, which doth beare lyttell thynges lyke to ſpounges, and alſo a floure lyke theother eglantyne.
            
               Cynoſura, a fygure of ſterres in heauen, callid Vrſa minor.
            
            
               Cynozoon, a ſtynkynge herbe.
            
               Cynthia, one of the names of Diana.
            
               Cypariſſus, a cypreſſe tree.
            
               Cyperus, is that whiche of the apothecaries is callyd Iuncus oderatus.
            
            Cyperus Babylonicus, Galyngale.
            
            
               Cyperus, & cyperis, an herbe hauynge leaues lyke ſedges▪ alſo a roote lyke gynger.
            
               Cypria, was one of the names of Venus.
            
               Cyprium, mettall callyd copper.
            
               Cyprus, an yle in the ſea callyd Carpathium, agaynſt the coūtray callid Siria, on the north it hath Ciliciam, on the ſouthe and the eaſt Egypt. It is in lengthe after the deſcription of Strabo .175. myles, after .viii. furlonges to a myle. Some ſuppoſed, that it was at the fyrſt a portion of Siria, deuided by erthquakes. This contrey abūdeth in wyne, oyle, mettal, & vitriol, & canes, wherof ſugar is made. Alſo Venus was ther had in moch reuerence, in ſo moche as men before they dyd ſet forthe theyr doughters in mariage, offred theym to ſuche ſtraungers as came into the countrey, to be by them defloured, and afterward maryed them to huſbandes.
            Cyprinus, & Cyprius, a, um, of Cypers.
            
            
               Cypſeli, byrdes callyd martlettes.
            
               Cypſelos, the waxe of the eate.
            
               Cypſelus, was kyng of Corinthus, father of Periander, one of the ſeuen ſages of Grece.
            
               Cyrſerum, a great ſhyppe or carryke.
            
               Cyrenaica ſecta, was a ſecte of philoſophers, who affirmed the chiefe felicitie to be in carnal diſertation, of the whiche ſecte Ariſrippus was chiefe.
            
               Cyrene, nes, a famous citie in Libia▪ alſo a citie in the yle of Cypers.
            
               Cyreneus, a man of that citie.
            
               Cyrnea, a goblet to drynke wyne in.
            
               Cyrnus, the yle whyche is callyd Corſica or Corſe, Cyrnij, people of the yle of Corſe.
            
               Cyrrhea, a citie in the mountayne of Helycon.
            
               Cyrrus, the name of ii. riuers, one in Armenia, the other in Media.
            
                
               Cyrus, was a noble kyng of Perſia the ſonne of Cambiſes and Mandanes, whyche was doughter of Aſtyages kynge of Media, who bycauſe that he dreamed, that he ſawe ſpring out of the ſecrete places of his onely doughter, a vyne, with whoſe branche all Aſia was keuered, he cauſed the chylde to be throwen in to a deſerte, to be deuowred of beaſtes: but by goddes prouydence a bytche gaue it ſucke, vntylle it was founde by a ſhepeherd, who brought it vp. At the laſte he was kyng of Perſia and Media, and ſubdued the more parte of Aſia. This man excelled all menne in his tyme in goodly perſonage, gentylneſſe, proweſſe, lyberalitie, wyſedome, and memorie. Sollinus wryteth, that of the excedynge multitude of menne, whiche were in his hoſte, he ſoo retayned the names, that commynge daylye amonge theym, he named euery manne by his propre name, whan he ſpake vnto them, The reſydue of his wounderfull vertues be written by Xenophon moſt eloquentely in greke. At the laſte he beynge vnſatiable in couaytynge countrayes, was ſlayne by Tomiris the queene of Scithia, with .CC. thouſande Perſians.
            
               Cyſſus, uel Cyſthus a kynde of yuye that groweth alone alſo the name of a ryuer.
            
               Cythera plural. an yle agaynſt Candy.
            
               Cytherea, one of the names of Venus.
            
               Cytheron, an hyll in Boeotia.
            
               Cyrinus, the fyrſte bud of the floure of pomegranate.
            
               Cytiſus, an herbe, whyche is good to gyue to cattell agaynſt the rotte.
            
               Cytrago,
               Coelius. 
               ginis, the herbe, whych is commonly callyd baulme, of the apothecaries Melyſſa.
            
               Cyttarus, the hyghe parte of the fyrmament▪ alſoo the hooles of a honye combe be callyd Cyttari, and alſo wherin akornes be ſette on the ſtalke.
            
               Cyzicus, the name of an yle by Grece.
         
         
            ¶D ANTE A.
            
               
                  DACIA, A. CVNtreye beyonde Hungrye, on the northe parte of the riuer of Dano, or Danubius. Now is Denmarke callid by that name, whyche in the olde tyme was callydde Cymbrica Cherſoneſus, and the people were callyd Cimbri.
            
            
               Daci, & Dani, people of the coūtrey of Dacia.
            
               Dacicus, a, um, pertaynyng to that countrey.
            Dacus, a, um, idem.
            
               Dactylides, grapes beinge longe lyke a finger.
            
               Dactylus, a fynger, a foote in meter, hauynge one longe ſyllable, & .ii. ſhort. it is alſo a date.
            
               Daedala,
               Leonicus in uarſa hiſtor. were feaſtes celebrate yerely in honor of reconcilynge of Iuno to Iupyter rede before in Citheron. Alſo Daedala, was the generall denomynation of ymages wroughte, of whome it ſemeth to ſome that Daedalus toke his name. Daedala of Lucretius is vſyd for Terra, for the diuerſitie of thynges and fourmes, whiche be in it.
            
               Daedalus, the name of an excellent carpentar of Athenes, whiche fyrſte founde the ſawe, the twybyll, and the augor, and made the place in Crete callyd Laberynthus.
            
            
               Doemogorgon, onis, whom Paynyms callyd the god of the erth, fyrſt creatour of the erth.
            
               Daemon, monis, as Proclus writeth, is taken in diuers ſignifications, one is that, whiche euery where hath ſouerayntie, and prouideth next vnto god, and ſo Iupiter callith Saturn Daemon. Alſo that which for euery man particularly prouideth▪ alſo the reaſonable ſoule is of Plato in his boke callyd Timaeus, callid Daemon animalis, & in his boke callyd Sympoſium, the loue of the mynde about the contemplation of the diuine pulchritude, or vnſpeakable beautie is callid Daemon. Porphyrius ſuppoſid, that Daemon in euery mā was nothyng els but vnderſtandynge. Plato alſo affirmeth in his boke callid Phoedo, that vnto the ſoules, which to come into this lyfe, is gyuen Daemon, whiche is the beholderand ſercher of his thoughtes and deedes, whiche after that the ſoule is departed from the body, remayneth ſtyll with hym, and forthewith bryngeth hym ſodaynely before the Iudge, where by his teſtymony he eyther delyuereth or condempneth hym. Theſe wordes of Plato approcheth nygh to the aſſertion of chryſten doctours, whyche do affyrme, that God appoynteth to euery reaſonable ſoule, a good aungell and a bad. Sommetyme Daemon, is
 taken for god, and therfore Apuleius intitled his boke De deo Socratis, and not De daemone Socratis, although Socrates hym ſelf alwaye ſoo named that thynge, that reſtrayned hym from doing or admitting any thing that was yll or inconuenient. Porphyrius hath of Daemon manye other opynions, whyche I paſſe ouer, bicauſe they may ingender in buſy wyttes, rather errour than wyſdome. More ouer this wold be alſo remembred, that Daemon beynge a Greke worde, is dyuerſely writen in Grecke, one waye with their lyttell o, callyd omicron, and than dothe ſignifie that whiche the latynes do cal Genius. Cicero nameth it Lar, whyche ſygnifieth pryuate goddes or ſpyrites appointed to euery particular perſone or howſe, which in effect is our good aungell, or our badde. Sometyme it is written with the great O, callyd of the grekes Omega, and than doth it ſignifye, God, wyſedome,Daemoniū
                or fortune. Lykewiſe Doemonium in the neutre gender ſygnifieth god, godheade, the power of god, whiche doth order and gouerne the hole worlde.Daemoniꝰ. Daemonius in the maſculine gēder, had diuers ſignifications, and the one contrary vnto the other. for it ſignyfied happy, like to god, diuine, or meruailous, contrarywiſe, miſerable, vnhappy, vnfortunate. Therfore where this worde Daemoniū
                is written amonge the auncient grekes, that onely ſentence, wherein it is, wylle not be well vnderſtande, without conſydering what gothe before, and what foloweth after. Not withſtandyng among chriſten authors, Daemon & daemonium, be indifferently taken for a diuel or damned ſpirite. This haue I remē
               bred not for children onely, but alſo for ſuche as perchaunce be ryght well lerned in the latyne tunge, and yet in ſuche wordes made of greke, may happen to myſſe the proper ſignificatiōs of them, not readyng greke authors in their owne tongue.
            
               Daemoniacus, & daemonioſus, poſſeſſyd with an yll ſpirite.
            Daemonicus, a, um, dyuellyſſhe.
            
            
               Dagnades, a kynde of byrdes, whyche the Egyptians vſyd to tye with theyr garlandes,Pom. Feſt. whanne they were drynkynge, whyche with contynuall ſyngyng, bytynge, and pluckyng at theym that dranke, wolde not ſuffer them to ſleape.
            
               Dahae, people in Scithia, valyaunt and cruell in battayle.
            
               Dalida, uel Dalila, an harlot dwellyng in Gaza, in the countrey of the Philliſtians, whiche deceyued the ſtronge Samſon. reade more of her in Samſons deſcription.
            
               Dalmatia, is part of the great countrey callyd Illiria or Slauonia. It hath on the weſt Croatiā, on the eaſt Boſsinā, on the north the great mount callyd Albanus mons, and the coūtry callyd Seruia, on the ſouthe the ſea callyd Adriaticum, or the goulfe of Venyce.
            
               Dalmata, a man of that countrey.
            
               Dalmaticus, a, um, of that countrey.
            
               Dalmaticatus, apparailed ike a Slauonoyſe.
            
               Dama, a falowe decre.
            
               Damaſcus, a famous and moſte auncient citie in Siria or Surry, dyuyded frō Iudea with the mountayn callyd Antilibanus, and boundeth vpō 
               Arabia petreia. To this citie is the greateſt reſort of marchauntes from the partes of the ſouth and eaſt that is in the world, for ſpices, and clothes of ſylke, and of golde, It is ſuppoſed to be the fyrſte citie that euer was inhabited, and alſo that in the fyeldes of Damaſcus, callyd Ager Damaſcenus, god made Adam the fyrſt man.
            
               Damaſcena pruna, ar damſins, which do grow about Damaſcus, and be greater and lengar than other damſyns whan they be dryed, we call them prunes Damaſcene, whiche of Galene are more commended than other of that kynde, they louſe the bealy, but they reſtrayn diſtyllations.
            
               Damaſonium, is nowe callyd among the Grekes, that moſte excellent and precious fruite, whiche is callyd Myrobalanum, which kynd is nowe callyd Myrobalanum Indum.
            
            
               Damia, one of the names of the goddeſſe Cybele.
            
               Damatris, the prieſt of her temple.
            
               Damnas, for damnatus, is ſometyme vſyd amonge olde Ciuilions.Marcu
                     •
                  . 
               Quiſquis mihi haeres erit, dare damnas eſto, fidei
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eius cōmitto, uti det quantas ſummas dictauero, Who ſo euer ſhalbe myn heyre, ſhalbe bounden to pay it, whom I put in truſt to pay al ſuche money as I ſhall appoynt.
            
               Damnatior,
               Cice. in L. more worthy deathe.
            
               Damnatus,
               Piſonem. condempned, reproued, compellyd, boūden by neceſſitie.Terent. 
               Tuus eſt damnatus gnatus, non tu, Thy ſonne is bounden to doo it, and not thou.
            
               Damnifico, feci, facere, to do harme.
            
               Damno, aui, are, to condemne, to diſ
                  •
               herite, to compell, to delyuer, to blame, to reproue. Damnari cauſa indicta, to be condemned being abſent, or not ſuffered to ſpeake.
            
               Damnari uoti, to perfourme the auowe, and optayn that, wherfore the auowe was made. Inter ipſam dimicationem,
               Ti. Li
                     •••
                  . 7 aedem Iunoni Monetae uouit cuius damnatus uoti, cum uictor Romā reuertiſſet, Dictatura ſe abdicauit, In the myddle of the fyght, he auowed to make a temple to Iuno Moneta, which vowe after that he had performed, and hauing his deſire was retorned to Rome, he ſurrēdrid the great office of Dictator. Damnari uotis, is takē of
 Virgil, to auowe or bynde with a vowe.
            
               Damnoſus, a, um, harmefull, or hurtefull, or hauynge moche harme.
            
               Damnum, harme or hurte.
            
               Damni dati formula, an action of treſpaſſe, for takynge awaye any thynge from vs.
            
               Damno auctus, he that is indamaged.
            
               Damnum contrahere, to get loſſe or harme by any thynge.
            
               Damnum dare, to hurte, or to do harme.
            
               Quid facias illi,
               Terent. in Andria. 
               qui damnum dederit, aut malum? whate wylte thou do to hym, that doeth hurte or diſpleſure?
            
               Damnum reſarcire, to recompenſe for harmes that are done, to make ſatiſfaction or amendes.
            
               Damoetas, a ſhepeherdes name in Vergil.
            
               Damon, a philoſophers name of Pythagoras ſecte.
            
               Dan, a towne, whiche is in the boundes of Iudea, on the northe parte.
            
               Danaē, was doughter of Acriſius kynge of Argiues, vnto whom beinge cloſed in a ſtronge toure Iupiter came in the fourme of a ſhure of golden raine in at the top of the hous, and lyinge with her, gat on her Perſeum, afterwarde a valyant knyght, whiche gaue that name fyrſte vnto the countrey and people of Perſia. By this fable is ſignified, that Iupiter ſente treaſure priuely vnto Danaē and alſo to them whiche had the kepynge of her, wherwith they beinge corrupted, dyd ſuffer Iupiter to enter into the towre and accomplyſhe his pleaſure. The fable declareth the force of money and gyftes in the aſſaultynge of chaſtitie.
            
               Danaides, the doughters of Danaus.
            
               Danaus, the kynge of Argyues, that had fyfty doughters, the whiche al, ſauynge one, ſlew all theyr huſbandes in one nyghte.
            
               Daniel, elis, an holye prophete of the trybe of Iuda, a noble man horne, and of the kynde of honourable perſonages, that ſerued the kynge: he being a yonge chyld was brought vnto Babylon, and became a manne of ſuche temperaunce, that among the iewes he was taken for to be Eunuchus, or a man gelded. He continuallye bewayled Hieruſalem, and in faſtynges refrayned from all concupyſcence. In fourme of bodye he was drye and leane, but in the fauour of god he was beautyful. He by his prayer reſtored Nabuchodonoſor, in to his fyrſte fygure, where he was trāsformed of god in to a monſtrous beaſte, not with ſtandynge that a lyttell before, he by the ſame Nabuchodonoſor, kynge of Babylon, was throwen in to a dungeon among hungrye lyons, whiche neuer wolde touche hym to hurte hym. He beinge afterward delyuered, propheſied bothe of the comynge of Chriſte, and of the empires of Babylon, Media, Perſia, the Grekes and the Romayns, and fynally died at Babylon, and there was buryed. he lyued before the incarnation of Chriſte. 619. yeres.
            
               Daniſma, vſury.
            
               Daniſta, an vſurar.
            
               Daniſticus, a, um, perteynynge to vſury.
            
               Danubius, a famouſe ryuer called Dunow, after the deſcription of Plinie hath his begynnynge in Germany out of an hyll called Arnoba,
               Li. 4. ca. 12 and paſſynge by countreys innumerable, reteyneth his name: but as ſone as he entreth into Illiria, he is than called Iſter, and receyueth in to hym .lx. other ryuers, well nigh the one half of them, being nauiagable. fynally beinge in ſyxe wonderfull greate armes, he falleth in to the ſea called Pontus. The ſame is affyrmed by Tacitus, ſauynge that he nameth the hyl, where Dunow ſpringeth, Arbonā, and not Arnobam.
            
            
               Danunt, Plautus doth vſe for dant, they giue.
            
               Dapalis coena, a ſupper, wherat be many and dyuers incares.
            
               Dapatice, feaſtfully, plentuouſely.
            
               Dapes, delycate and precious dyſſhes, or bankettes.
            
               Daphne, the proper name of a lyttel mayden, and alſo of a wood.
            
               Daphnis, nidis, in latine is a laurell. Alſo the ſonne of Mercury. It was alſo a dylectable place withoute the citie of Antioche. Alſo it was the name of a portion of Lycia by the ſea ſyde.
            
               Daphnites, one of the names of Apollo.
            
               Daphnoides, an herbe lyke to laurel, now called lorell or laury, whiche cauſeth a vehemēt purgation. In the plurall number, they be the beryes of laurell.
            
               Daphnon, a place where laurell groweth.
            
               Dapifer, he that beareth a dyſhe at a banket.
            
               Dapino, to gyue, as it were a delycate diſhe.
            
               Dapſa, a ſacrifice, whiche was made in wynter, and in ſprynge tyme.
            
               Dapſile, abundantly.
            
               Dapſilis, abundant, liberall, or large.
            
               Dapſilis lectus, an excellent good bed.
            
               Dapſilia dicta,
               Plaut. in Trucul. wordes frankly ſpoken.
            
               Dardanarij, foreſtallers of markettes, whiche do bye before hande, to ſell dere afterwarde.
            
               Dardania, the countrey where Troy ſtode.
            
               Dardaniae artes, wytchecrafte.
            
               Dardanus, the name of a prynce, reigninge in that parte of Phrigia, where Troye ſtode, whiche was of hym called Dardania.
            
            
               Daricus, money of Perſia.
            
               Darideus, the name of a kyng of Perſia in the tyme of Tyberius, Caius, Claudius the emperours.
            
                
               Dariorigum, Vanes in Britayne.
            
               Darius, the name of dyuerſe kinges of Perſia.
            
               Daſeia, thycknes of breath.
            
               Datarius, a, um, giuen. Alſo an officer in Rome whiche ſubſcribed the date of letters.
            
               Datatim, one gyuyng to an other, as at the toſſynge of a ball.
            
               Daucus, yelowe caret, wherof the rootes ſodden in brothe, are pleaſaunte and holſome. Conſtantine ſayeth, that it is hotte and dry in the ſeconde degree. Other kyndes there bē of this herbe, whiche I wyll not ſpeake of, bycauſe they are not ſo neceſſary.
            
               Daunia, a parte of Italy nowe called Apulia.
         
         
            D ANTE E.
            
               DE, of, but ioined with a verb or nown, it ſignifieth withdrawynge or takynge awaye, as Decortico, I barke or take awaye the rynde. Depilo, I plucke awaye the heare: ſomtyme it ſignifieth downward, as, Deorſum deſcendo, I go downewarde. Somtyme contrary, as, Dehortor, I gyue contrarye aduyſe: Dedoceo, I teache contrary.Terentius Somtyme it ſignifieth for, as, Quantum me amas de fidicina hac? Howe well doeſt thou loue me for this ſynging wenche?
            
               De die,
               Cicero. to day. Ergo ne una, orationis pars de die dabitur mihi:
               Plautus. Than ſhal I not be ſuffered to ſpeake one lyttell worde to day.
            
               De die uiuere,
               Cicero. in phil euery daye, or frome daye to day, to lyue.
            
               De compacto,
               Pla. in cap Terent. in Hecy. by agrement.
            
               De filia te adij, I come to ſpeake with you for your doughter.
            
               De illis uerbis caue tibi,
               Plaut. in Bacch. beware howe thou ſpeakeſt ſuche wordes.
            
               De imperio decertatur,
               Plaut. in Men. they fyghte for the empyre, or chiefe rule.
            
               De improuiſo,
               Plautꝰ in Trucul. at aduenture, vnſoughte for, or vnloked for.
            
               De induſtria,
               Terent. in Heauton. of purpoſe.
            
               De integro, eftſones from the begynnynge.
            
               De manu in manum,
               Cicero. from hand to hande.
            
               De iſtac te amo,
               Terent. in Eunucho I loue the for her ſake.
            
               De mea ſententia, by my counſayle.
            
               De meo,
               Plaut. in perſa. of my good.
            
               De tuo, of thy good.
            
               De meo exemplo aedificet,
               Plautꝰ in Moſtel. lette hym buylde accordynge to my plat.
            
               De more, as it hath ben accuſtomed.
            
               De nihilo nihil eſt iraſci,
               Plaut. in Epidic. It is foly to be angry for nothynge.
            
               De nocte abijt,
               Plaut. in rudente. he wente awaye at nyght.
            
               De nocte uigilare, to wake in the nyght.
            
               De pace legatos mittebat, he ſente ambaſſadours to treate of peace.
            
               De praefacili exores, Thou ſhalte lyghtely opteyne.
            
               De proximo ſenex,
               Plautus. the olde man that dwelleth hereby.
            De repente, ſodeynly.
            
            De ſubito, idem.
            
               De ſcripto dicere, to ſpeake that which was before written vnto hym.
            
               De ſua ſententia, of his owne heade or fantaſy without other counſayle.
            
               De ſententia alicuius, by ones counſayle, as one aduyſed hym.
            
               De uia languebat, he was ſycke by reaſon of his iourney.
            
               Dealbo, aui, are,
               Ti. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                to make whyte, to blaunche.
            
               Deambulatio, a walkynge forthe, or abrode, out of the houſe.
            
               Deambulatorium, an aley to walke in. it may ſometyme be vſed for a galery.
            
               Deambulatorius, a place wherein men vſe to walke.
            
               Deambulo, aui, are, to walke vp and downe.
            
               Deamo, aui, are, to loue or fauour.
            
               Deartuo, aui, are, to ioynte, or to cut of by the ioyntes, to diſmember.
            
               Deauro, aui, are, to gylte, to laye ouer al with golde.
            
               Debacchor, aris, ari. to rage, as it were in a drunkennes, to be wood angry.
            
               Debellare, to vaynquiſhe,
            Debeo, bui, ere, to ows.
            
            
               Debilis, weake or feble.
            
               Debilito,
               Feſtus. 
               tare, to make feble or weake.
            
               Debitio, onis, the acte of owynge.
            
               Debitor, oris, he that oweth, a dettour.
            
               Debitum, a det or duetie.
            
               Debiti iudicatus, condemned in an action of dette.
            
               Deblatero,
               Non. Ma
                     •
                  
                
               rare, to ſpeake folyſhely, to bable rebukefully.
            
               Deebrior, aris, ari, to be drunke.
            
               Debris,
               Sol. ca. 4
                     •
                  
                a towne in Aethiopia, where as be the people called Garamantes, in the whiche towne is a wel wherof, the water in the day tyme is colde as yſe, and in the nyght is boylynge hotte, the countrey beinge the hotteſte parte of all Aethiopia.
            Decachinor, aris, ari, to ſkorne.
            
            
               Dechachordū, an inſtrument with .x. ſtringes.
            
               Decacumino,
               Pom. F
                     ••
                  
                
               aui, are, to ſtrike of the top.
            
               Decalcatum, waſhed ouer with lyme.
            
               De caltaria in carbonariam, oute of the lyme kyll into the cole pyt.Eraſ. in chil. A prouerbe, wherby is ſygnified frō one myſchiefe to an other.
            
               Decalogus, the boke of holy ſcripture, conteynynge the ten commaundementes.
            
               Decaluo, to make very balde.
            
               Decaphorus,
               Ci. ad At. a lytter borne by ten men.
            
               Decapolis, a countrey in Iudea, beyonde the riuer of flume Iordane, conteining .x. cities.
            
                
               Decaprotiae,
               Aldatus 
                     〈◊〉
                  . generall receyuours of tributes and finances, which ſtande always charged with any thynge that is miniſhed or lacketh.
            
               Decapulo, aui, are, to empty pots or cuppes.
            
               Decarchus, a capitayn ouer ten men of armes.
            
               Decedo, cedere, to depart from a place, to miniſhe or appayre, to gyue place to an other, to dye.
            
               Decedamus hinc, go we henſe.
            
               Decedere de ſuo iure, to remytte ſomewhat of his ryghte.
            
               Decedere de ſuo more,
               T
                     •
                  . Liui. to chaunge his cuſtome.
            
               Decedere inſtituto ſuo,
               Ci. in Ve. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . to do other wyſe thā he was wonte.
            
               Decedere itinere,
               Plautus. to tourne out of the waye for ſome pourpoſe.Ci. in Ve.
            
            
               Decedere officio,
               Terent. in Adel. to do agaynſte his duety, to do no more his duety,
            
               Decedere uia, to goo out of the waye, or to gyue the way to an other of courteſie.
            
               Decedet nihil de ſumma,
               Cic. At. 1. there ſhall be nothynge minyſhed.
            
               Decedi,
               Cic. de ſe
                  
                     •••
                  tute. to haue place or waye gyuen. Haec enim ipſa ſunt honorabilia, quae uidentur leuia at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   communia, ſalutari, appeti, decedi, aſſurgi, deduci, reduci. For thoſe thynges ar honorable, whiche ſeme to be of ſmall effect and commune, to be awayted on, to be ſued vnto, to haue the way gyuen, to be ryſen vnto, to be brought vnto the courte, & brought agayne home.
            
               Decem, the number of ten.
            
               December, the name of one of the twelue monethes.
            
               Decemiugis, a teme of ten horſes.
            
               Decempeda, a perche or polle .x. fote longe.
            
               Decempedator, he that meteth with a polle.
            
               Decem tabulae, were the olde lawes of the Romaynes fetched out of greece, whervnto afterwarde were two tables added by theym, whiche were called Decem uiri.
            
            
               Decemu
                     •
                  ri, after that the lawes of the Grekes were broughte vnto Rome by Spurius Poſthumius, Publius Sulpitius, and Aulus Manlius, ambaſſadours ſente for that purpoſe to Athenes, than were there ten men choſen and appoynted, which of the ſame lawes and auncient cuſtomes of the citie, ſhuld make lawes, wryte them, and publyſhe them. And theyr authorite was aboue al other, that they mought make lawes, and if nede were, interprete them. And where before were but 
                  •
               . tables of lawes, they added vnto them .ii. mo, and ſo al thoſe lawes together, were called Leges duodecim rabularom, and the dignitie of thoſe men was called Decemuiratus,
               Decēuir. and euery of them 
                  〈◊〉
                called Decēuir, and theyr authoritie Dece
                     ••
                  iraleius.
            
            
               Decendium, the ſpare of ten dayes.
            
               Decennalis, le, of ten yeres.
            
               Decenium, the ſpace of ten yeres.
            Decens, tis, conuenient,
            
            
               Decentes,
               Terent. comely ſemely, or as it is conueniēt.
            Decenus,Hecyra. a, um, a 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               Decermina, thynges pulled 
                  〈◊〉
               , in makinge thynges cleane.
            
               Decerno, creui, cernere, to decre, determyne, purpoſe, or diſcuſſe. Alſo to contende, to trye by battayle.
            
               Decernere quaeſtionem, to ordeyne. that an examination be made.
            
               Decerpo, pſi, pere, to pull or plucke of.
            
               Decerto, aui, are, to contende or fyghte together.
            
               Deceſsio, a departynge from any thynge.
            
               Decet, it beſemeth, it is conuenient.
            
               Decet me haec ueſtis, this garmente becommeth me well,
            
               Dedecet, it is inconuenient, vnſyttyng.
            
               Decido, di, dere, to cut of. Alſo to decide or diſcuſſe a matter in variaunce.
            
               Decido, ere, to fall of, or awaye.
            
               Decidere ab arch
                     •
                  et
                     •
                  ypo, to vary from the copy or paterne.
            
               Decidere á ſpe, to be diſappoynted of that, that he loked for.
            
               Decidit fructus, he loſte all the profyte that ſhulde come of it.
            
               Decidua, are thoſe thynges that fall awaye, as leaues of trees.
            
               Decidus, a, um, ſubiecte to fallynge. Sometyme it ſignifieth hangyng downe. Teſtes pecori armento
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad crura decidui: The ſtones of ſhepe & ruddar beſtes ben hanging downe to theyr ſhankes. In the fyrſte ſygnification, Omnibus caua cornua & in mucronem demum concreta ſunt,
               Plin. 11. 
               cernis tantum ſolida, & omnibus annis decidua: Al haue theyr hornes holowe, but beynge ſharpe at the endes, there be they concrete or without holownes, onely decre haue hornes full and maſſy, whiche euery yere do fall of or to ſpeake it more properlye, whiche heades euery yere they do caſte.
            
               Decies, ten tymes. Leonardus Portius, in his boke De ſeſtertio, wryteth, that he had obſerued, that where Decies and other aduerbes of number,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                hauynge that termination, whan they were added to an other number for multipiyenge therof, they ſygnified no
                  •
                more than they repreſented, as decies centena, ten hundred. Decies millena, ten thouſand. But whan they were founden by them ſelues to ſignify the quantity of a thyng that folowed,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                they were multiplied by an hūdred thouſand, as Decies ſeſtertium, ten hundred thouſande ſeſtertij. Duodecies talentum, for
 xii. hundred thouſande Talenta. Of the fyrſt he bryngeth examples of Martianus Capella, Macrobius, Plinius, Varro, and Columella: Of the ſeconde he bryngeth oute of Tacitus, Tranquillus, Plinius, and Ciceto in ſecunda Philippica Afterward he ſuppoſeth, that in the olde tyme, whan the ſaid numbers were multiplied with an hundred thouſande, they dydde than put an, N, betwene the
                  •
               e, and the, s. as Deciens, duodeciēs, milliens, and to the profe therof he bringeth in Varro de analogia, & Pedianus in ſecundam actionem Ciceronis in Verrem. Concerninge the computation of Decies Seſterium, the ſame is affyrmed by Budeum, and the reuerente father Cuthbertus Tonſtallus, at the wrytynge hereof mooſte worthy buſhop of Durham, in his boke De ſupputatione.
            
            
               Decima, a tenthe parte.
            
               Decimanus, ſiue Decumanus, a, um, great, as, Decumana porta, the great yate or entry into a campe of an army.
            
               Decimo, aui, are, to take away the tenth part from the reſydue.
            
               Decimari legiones, was whan the tenth perſon of euery legion was put to deathe.
            
               Decimus, a, um, the tenthe, the chiefe or principall, as, Decimum quod
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ouum, euerye tenth egge.
            
               Decimus quis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fluctus, euery tenthe ryuer.
            Decipio, cepi, cipere, to Deceyue.
            
            
               Decipula, a gyn or trap to take byrdes.
            
               Decircino, aui, are, to vnbowe, or to brynge out of compaſſe, or roundnes.
            
               Decius, the name of a noble houſe of the Romaynes.
            
               Declamatio, onis, an exerciſe in fayned orations, or amonge our lawiars a moote.
            
               Declamatorius, a, um, perteynynge to ſuche exercyſe.
            
               Declamo, aui, are, to declame or exerciſe in pleadynge fayned argumentes, whiche amonge the lawyars of this realme is called mootynge.
            
               Declaro, aui, are, to declare, to open a thinge whiche is darke.
            
               Declino, aui, are, to eſchewe, to leaue, to turne away, to leade awaye, to alienate.
            
               Decliuis,
               Plinius. 
               ue, that whiche is redy to fall.
            
               Decliuis aetate,
               Varro. fallen in age.
            
               Decoctor, oris, he that hath waſted all his ſubſtaunce, and is brought to extreme pouertie, ſpecially by lechery and diſcplayinge.
            
               Decollo, aui, are, to ſtryke of a headde by the necke. Alſo to fayl, to deceyue or diſappoint.
            
               Vna eſt,
               Plautus. 
               quae decollauit, One woman there is, whiche hath deceyued hym.
            
               Decolor, oris, yll coloured.
            
               Decoloro, aui, are, to ſtayne, to ſpyl the colour.
            
               Decolorus, a, um, lackynge colour, or yll coloured.
            Decoloratus, a, um, idem.
            
               Decoquo, coxi, coquere, to boyle, or to ſethe very moche. Somtyme to chaunge, or digeſt perfectely. Alſo to conſume or waſte a mans ſubſtaunce, or to brynge detriment or loſſe.
            
               Decoxit domino ſuo foetura, the increaſe of cattell came to lyttell aduauntage vnto his mayſter.
            
               Decor, decôris, the grace that one hath, that what he dothe or ſpeaketh, becommeth hym well.
            
               Decore, honeſtly.
            
               Decôro, aui, are, to beautifie or make fayre or pleaſaunt to the eyes or eares.
            
               Decoro, aui, are, penultima correpta, to do honour to a man. as, Magnum principem decorat ſapientia: wyſedome dothe moche honour vnto a great prynce.
            
               Decorum, a ſemelyneſſe, or that whiche becometh the perſon, hauynge regarde to his nature, degree, ſtudy, office, or profeſſion, be it in doinge or ſpeakynge, a grace. ſometime it ſignifieth honeſty.
            
               Decorus, a, um, honeſt, ſemely, fayre.
            
               Decortico, aui, are, to barke a tree.
            
               Decotes, thredebare garmentes, or garmentes worne to the vttermoſte.
            
               Decrepitus, a very olde man.
            
               Decrepita ſenectus, extreme age.
            
               Decreſco, ſcere, to waxe leſſe.
            
               Decretorius, a, um, iudiciall. Alſo decreed, ſtablyſhed.
            
               Deretorij dies, dayes in the whiche phyſitions maye perceyue the importaunce of a ſyckenes by certayne tokens in the paciente, whiche be alſo called Dies craetici.
            
            
               Decretorium tempus, Decretorium ſydus, wherby iudgement is gyuen of the increaſe that ſhall ſuccede of any thynge.
            
               Decretum, a decre, a thynge determyned.
            
               Decubo, aui, are, to lye downe.
            
               Decubo, cubui, cumbere, to lye downe. Alſo to dye.
            
               Deculto, aui, are, to hyde vnder.
            
               Decumanus, a general receyuour or collectour of taxes or ſubſidies, or other lyke exactions.
            
               Decumbo, bere, to lye downe.
            
               Decuplatus, a, um, ten tymes doubled, or ten folde.
            
               Decuplo, aui, are, to double .x. tymes. If it be an aduerbe, it ſignifieth ten tymes, or ten folde. Decûplum, lyke wyſe.
            
               Decuppa, he or ſhe that ſelleth wine by the pot
            
               Decuriatio, makyng of knyghtes or capitains.
            
               Decures, olde writars vſed for Decuriones.
            
            
               Decurio, ouis, an offyce or dignitie, hauyuge
 authoritie eyther ouer ten men of armes,Cicero. in Paſonem. or the tenthe parte of a companye. Alſo it was taken for the lorde Chamberlayne to the emperour. alſo they were in other cites the ſame that Senatours were at Rome.Sueto. in Demit.
            
            
               Decuria, was the order, offyce, or companye, whiche was vnder the offyce of Decurio. Alſo the company of iuges, as we haue of the kynges benche, commune place, and Eſcheker, and Decurio, he that is chiefe of them.
            
               Decurro, cucurri, currere, to runne downe. by tranſlation it ſignifieth to run from the one ende to the other: to iuſte.
            
               Decurſio,
               Ti. Liuius. de bel. Ma 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 10. iuſtes, as at the tilte or randon.
            
               Decurſionem indicere, to proclayme iuſtes.
            
               Decurſorium, a tournayeng of many together in fourme of battayle.Suetonius in Neron.
            
            Decurtatus, a, um, ſhortned, abbreuiated.
            
            Decus, decoris, honour.
            
            
               Decuſſatim, in tenne partes, or in euen portions cut.
            
               Decuſis, tenne hole partes or ten Aſſes. Alſo pieces equally cut, more ouer the diuyſions of tymber ſawen in equall partes. It is alſo a fourme in any thynge repreſentyng the letter, X, whiche parted in the middel, maketh an other figure called Quincunx, V.
            
            
               Decuſſo, aui, are, to cut or drawe out in length, or to cut or diuide in ten partes.
            
               Decutio, cuſsi, cutere, to ſtrike of.
            
               Dedecet, it is not honeſt or conuenient.
            
               Dedecoro, aui, are, to diſhonour, dyſhoneſte, reproue, or defyle.
            
               Dedecus, coris, diſhonour, diſhoneſty, reproche
            
               Dedico, aui, are, to dedicate, or tell a meſſage.
            
               Deditio, a rendrynge vp of a place beſieged.
            
               Dedignatio, diſdayne.
            Dedignor, aris, ari, to disdayne.
            
            
               Dediſco, didici, dicere, to vnlerne or forget.
            
               Dedititius, a, um, recreante, or he that yeldeth hym ſelfe.
            Deditus, a, um, gyuen, rendred.
            
            
               Dedita opera, by his owne conſente, of his free wyll, purpoſely.
            
               Dedo, didi, dedere, to gyue vtterly or for euer, or to become ſubiecte, to render vp, to yelde hym ſelfe to an other in battayle.
            
               Deditionem facere, ſignifieth the ſame.
            Dedere aliquem morti, to ſlea.
            
            
               Dedoceo, cui, cêre, to teache a man otherwiſe than he hath before lerned.
            
               Dedoleo, lui, lere, to ceſſe frome ſorrowe or peyue.
            
               Dedolo, aui, are, to hew or cut lyke a carpēter.
            
               Deduco, xi, cere, to brynge downe, or to leade or drawe, or brynge frome one place, or one thynge to an other. Somtyme to moue from his purpoſe. ſomtyme to bringe home honourably from any place. Alſo to abate of a ſum.
            
               Deducere riuos, to tourne the ryuer.
            
               Deducere uocem, to ſpeake ſmall.
            
               Deducta eó res eſt, the thynge is come to that poynte.
            
               Deerro, aui, are, to go out of the right waye, or reaſon.
            
               Defaecatus, a, um, fyned or cleane from the lyes or dregges, as wyne, whiche is not troubled
            
               Defaecatus animus, a cleane and vncorrupted mynde.
            
               Defaeco, aui, are, to drawe from the dregges, or to let wyne lye vntyll it be fyne.
            
               Defalco, aui, are, to cut of, take away, or myniſhe, whiche nowe maye be ſayde defalcate.
            Defamo, aui, are, to defame.
            
            
               Defatigatio, weryneſſe.
            
               Defatigo, gare, to make one werye, or to fatigate.
            
               Defectio, where a countrey, fortreſſe, or army dothe forſake theyr lorde or capitayne, and taketh the cōtrary part. alſo lacke or default.
            
               Defector, toris, he that ſo departeth or rebelleth, or goeth from one to an other.
            
               Defectus, a, um, that which lacketh any thing.
            
               Defectus, tus, lacke, rebellion, or departynge agaynſte couenant or promyſe.
            
               Defectus ſolis & lunae, the eclyps of the ſun and the mone.
            
               Defectus animi, ſownynge or lyenge in a traunce.
            
               Defecta corpora, bodyes conſumed with ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Defendo, di, dere, to defende, to putte of, to prohibite.
            
               Defenſito, aui, are, to defende often.
            
               Deferro, detuli, deferre, to brynge to, to dyſcloſe, to accuſe, or appeale, to beſtow, to giue office or dignitie, to attribute.
            
               Deferre ad aliquem, to reporte vnto one.
            
               Deferre aliquē furti, to appech one of felony.
            
               Deferre mandata, uel poſtulata, to doo a meſſage.
            
               Deferre nomen, to complayne.
            
               Deferre primas, to gyue place or pr
                  •
               eminē
               
                  ••
                to one.
            
               Deferunt de me apud uos,
               Cicero de lege agra they reporte of me falſely vnto you.
            
               Deferueo, ferui, êre, to be colde or paciente.
            
               Deferueſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe pacient or cold, to appeaſe hym ſelfe, or with drawe his fury.
            
               Defetiſcor, ſci,
               Priſcianus to be wery.
            Defeſſus ſum, idem.
            
               Deficio, feci, ficere, not to ſuffiſe, to lacke, to leaue, to diſagre, to rebell, or departe frome hym, with whome he is retayned, or goethe from one capitayne to an other, to reuoite. Alſo to forſake or fayle.Cicero. 
               Prudentia nun
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   deficit oratorem. Prudence neuer fayleth an oratour. Quem ſanguis uires
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   deficiunt:
                Whom bloude and ſtrength fayleth.Caeſar. 
               Ab co defecerat, he went from hym to his ennemy.
            
               Defigo, fixi, figere, to dryue in a nayle or other thynge.
            
               Defigere all quem colaphis,
               Plautꝰ in perſa. to gyue oone a cuffe on the eare, or to beate oone with the handes.
            
               Defigere curas, to ſet al care on any thinge Defigere in animis, to make it cleaue in mennes myndes.
            
               Defigere in oculis populi, to make all the worlde loke on it.
            
               Defigere oculos, to loke deſyrouſely on a thynge.
            
               Defigi diris precationibus, to be accurſed.
            
               Defixerat pauor cum admiratione, feare & wonder ſtrake them to the hartes.
            
               Defixa radicibus, ſtyckyng hard to the rotes.
            
               Definio, iui, ire, to defyne, determyne, or dyſcuſſe.
            
               Definite, expreſly, ſhortely, or at fewe wordes.
            
               Definite & diſtincte, particularly and ſpecially.
            
               Definitio, onis, a defynition, whiche expreſſeth in fewe wordes, what it is that is ſpoken of as, Homo eſt animal rationale, mortale: a man is a thynge lyuely, reaſonable, and mortall.
            
               Definitum eſt, it is concluded.
            
               Defioculus, he that lacketh ſyght in one eye.
            
               Defit, there lacketh.
            
               Deflacco, aui, are, to weare out.
            
               Deflagro, aui, are, to burne excedyngely, or to be burned.
            
               Deflecto, xi, tere, to bowe downe.
            
               Deflectere ex itinere, to tourne oute of the waye.
            
               De recto deflectere, to go out of the ryghte waye.
            
               Deflexit de uia conſuetudo, the cuſtome is chaunged or tourned.
            
               Deflectemus in Thuſcos, let vs tourne our waye to the Tuſcanes.
            
               Defleo, eui, ere, to wayle or lament, to beſory.
            
               Defloccatus,
               Plaut. in Epidic. worne for age. ſometyme paſſed the floure of youth.
            
               Defloreo, & Defloreſco, ere, to fade, or to fal awaye as floures do, or to leſe beaulty. ſome tyme it ſignifieth to burgen or floure.
            
               Defluo, xi, ere, to flowe downewarde, to fall of or awaye, or come to nothynge.
            
               Defluus, a, um, that whiche floweth or falleth awaye from any thynge.
            
               Defluuium, Defluxus, the fallyng of the heare.
            
               Defodio, di, dere, to bury or hyde a thynge in the grounde, to dyg downe, or in to the erth.
            Defoetus, a, um, deſtitute.
            
            
               Defore, neuer to be here after.
            
               Deformis, me, foule, deformed.
            
               Deformo, aui, are, to deſtroy or waſt, to make in picture the fourme of a thynge.
            
               Deformare areas, to ſette out quarters in a garden.
            
               Defraudo, aui, are, to begyle, to myniſſhe or take awaye the profyte of an other.
            
               Defrico, aui, are, to rub moche, or to rub of.
            
               Defrigo, xi, gere, to fry moche.
            
               Defringo, xi, re, to breake down or cut down.
            
               Defrugo, aui, are, to weare out laud, or make grounde barrayne by any meanes.
            
               Defruor, frui, to take the fruite of any thyng.
            
               Defrutare, to boyle newe wyne.
            
               Defrutum, newe wyne boyled vntyll the oone halfe therof be conſumed.
            Defugeo, gi, ere, to refuſe.
            
            
               Defunctorie,
               Vlpian. remyſly, lyghtly, without ſtudy, diligence or care.
            Defunctus, a, um, dead.
            
            
               Defuncta morbis corpora,
               Liuins. bodyes recouered from ſickenes or diſeaſes.
            
               Defunctus fato,
               Idem. eſcaped his deſtiny.
            
               Defundo, fudi, dere, to powre downe.
            
               Defungor, geris, to vſe no lengar, to leaue or reſygne, to perfourme, to eſcape. Alſo to be diſcharged properly of an offyce or commandemente.
            
               Defungi in hac re,
               Terent. in Phorm. to be out of this buſines, to be diſcharged of this matter.
            
               Defungi regis imperio, to do the kynges cō
               maundement.
            
               Defunctus iam ſum, I haue nowe done my duetye.
            
               Degener, is, he that in his maners is vnlyke to his aunceſtours, or baſe of lygnage.
            
               Degenero, aui, are, to be vnlyke to his aunceſtours in maners. It maye be ſayde of fruytes, whiche waxe wylde.
            
               Dègero,
               Plaut. in Aulul. 
               geſsi, gerere, to carye awaye, and waſte.
            
               Degerere laborem alicui, to eaſe one of his labour.
            
               Deglabro, aui, are, to plucke of heares.
            
               Deglûbo, bi, bere, to pul of the rynd, or other lyke thynge, to blauncue.
            
               Deglutino, aui, are, to louſe that whiche kleueth faſte, or is glewed.
            
               Dego, gi, gere, to dwell in a place, to brynge to an ende.
            
               Degere aetatem, to lyue.
            Degere uitam, idem.
            
               Degere tempus, to paſſe the tyme.
            
               Degrummor,
               Lucill
                     ••
                  . 
               ari, to directe, to lay by lyne.
            
               Degulo,
               Affra
                     ••
                  
                
               aui, are, to conſume in gloteny.
            Degummo,Pom. Fe
                     •
                  
                mi, mere, idem quod Deguſtare, to taſte.
            
            
               Dehinc, from henſeforthe, more ouer.
            
               Dehiſco, ſci, ſcere, to gape, or open by it ſelfe, or kleue as a tree dothe.
            
                
               Dehiſcit fios, the floure ſpredeth.
            
               Dehoneſtamentum, a disfigurynge, or diſhoneſtie.
            Dehon eſto, aui, are, to diſhoneſte.
            
            Dehoneſtus, a, um, diſhoneſte.
            
            
               Dehorroi, tari, to dyſcourage, to exhorte to the contrary.
            
               Deianîra, the wyfe of Hercules.
            
               Deidamia, the concubine of Achilles, on whom he begat Pirrhus.
            
               Deiectus,
               
                  
                     •
                  xe. pro 
                     ••
                  cina. 
               & Deiectio, a caſtynge oute of poſſeſſion, or a diſſeiſon.
            
               Deiectio alui, a ſiege cauſed by medicine.
            
               Deiectus arborum, fallynge of trees.
            
               Deiectus gemmae uel collis, the imboſment of a ſtone or tree.
            
               Deierator, toris, a great ſwearer.
            
               Deiero, aui, are, to ſweare depely, or a greate othe.
            
               Dencio, ieci, ijcere, to throwe downe, to caſte downe, to tourne awaye, to put oute of offyce.Clad At. 
                     〈◊〉
                   16. Alſo to dyſeaſe or put out a man of his poſſeſſyon.
            
               Deijcere aluum, to go to the ſtoole.
            
               Deijcere de gradu, to brynge out of a conſtante mynde. Alſo it ſignifyeth to put out of his place, to depryue of dignytie or autorite. Deijcere de poſſeſsione, to put out of poſſeſſyon.
            
               Deijcere de ſententia, to make one chaunge his opinion.
            
               Dein, moreouer, furthermore.
            
               Deinceps, one after an other, in order, from henſeforthe, or thensforth, afterwarde.
            
               Deinſuper, vpwarde
            
               Deintegro, eftſones.
            
               Deiphile, the mother of Diomedes.
            
               Deiphoebus, the name of a ſonne of Priamus and Hecuba.
            
               Deiugo, aui, are, to vnyoke, to vnioyne, to diſſeuer.
            Deiungo, xi, gere, to vnioyne.
            
            
               Deiurium, a great and ſolemne othe.
            
               Deiuro, to ſweare depely.
            
               Deiurus, he that ſweareth ſolemnely.
            
               Delabor, delabi, to be let downe, to fal downe of a hyghe place, to be waſted, conſumed, or come to naught, to decay.
            
               Delacero, are, to teare in pieces.
            Delachrimo, idem quod delacrimor.
            
               Delachrimor, aris, ari, to wepe or ſend out dropes lyke teares.
            
               De lana caprina. A prouerbe where men do contende for a trifle, as who ſayeth, whether a gote beareth wull or heare.
            
               Delanio, aui, are, to cut in pieces.
            
               Delapidata, pauementes.
            
               De lapide emptus, A prouerbe ſignifieng a perſon of moſte vyle condition, lyke as ſlaues boughte ſtandynge on a ſtone in the market place, were moſte vyle.
            
               Delaſſo, aui, are, to make wery.
            
               Delatio, an accuſation ſecretly made, or a ſecrete complaynte.
            
               Delator, oris, a ſecrete accuſat, a complayner.
            
               Delauo, uare, to waſhe mightely.
            
               Delebile, that whiche maye be put out, or put awaye.
            
               Delectamentum, paſtyme, ſolace.
            
               Delectatio, delectation in the ſences of hering ſeinge, taſte, and ſmellynge.
            
               Delecto, aui, are, to delyte, to leade, to allure to a thynge.
            
               Delector, aris, ari, to take delectation or pleaſure.
            
               Delectus rerum, choyſe or election of thynges alſo of men apte for the warre.
            
               Delectum habere, ſometyme ſignifieth to take muſters for the warres.
            
               Delego, aui, are, to aſſigne to ſome offyce, meſſage, or other neceſſary and great buſynesto commit a cauſe or matter to be determyned, to ſende in ambaſſade or meſſage.
            
               Delêneo, niui, nire, to pacify, appayſe, or ſet in quiete.
            
               Deleo, leui, ere, to diſtroye, to put oute any thynge that is wrytten, to remoue, or put awaye.
            
               Deleterion, venome.
            
               Deletile, that diſtroyeth or putteth out.
            
               Deliacus, a, um, of the yle of Delus.
            
               Delibatio, taſtynge, or the takyng of aſſay. It is alſo ſacrifyce of meate or drynke.
            
               Delibatorium, a place apte for ſuche ſacrifyce.
            
               Deliberabundus, he that aduiſeth hym, or aſketh counſale in euery thynge.
            
               Deliberatio, aduiſement, or conſultation.
            
               Deliberator, he that taketh leyſour to be aduiſed what he ſhall do or ſaye.
            
               Deliber
                     ••
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ratio, wherein any thynge is conſulted.
            
               Delibero, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                to be aduyſed, to take aduyſe, to 
                  〈…〉
                to doubt, to conſulte.
            
               Delibo, aui, ari, to taſte a thynge. ſometyme to violate, 
                  ••
               urte, to diſtroy, or corrupt, to ſacrifice, to 
                  ••
               aine water by forowes, to take awaye by lyttell and lyttell.
            
               Delibare de gloria alterius, to miniſh or take awaye ſome portion of an other mans praiſe or honour.
            
               Delibro, aui, are, to pull of the barke or rinde of a tree.
            Delibutus, a, um, oynted.
            
            
               Gaudio delibutus,
               Gellius. repleniſhed with ioye.
            
               Delibutus periurns,
               Saluſt. ſtayned or defyled with periury.
            
               Delicatè, wantonly.
            
               Delicatus, a, um, delicate wantonly broughte vp.
            
                
               Delicia,
               Feſtus. the tymber whiche maketh the ende of a houſe aboue, called a gable.
            
               Deliciares regulae, the tyles at the gable ende
            
               Delici porci,
               Varro. yonge ſuckynge pygges.
            
               Delicium, cij, & Deliciae, arum, delyces, recreations, paſtymes, pleaſaunt fantaſies, generally all thynge, wherin one taketh ſyngular pleaſure or delyte. ſometyme it is taken in a good parte, ſomtyme in a bad. And whan it is ſpoken by one, of any perſon whom he ſpecially loueth or fauoreth, it may be interpreted in this wyſe: Meum delicium, or meae deliciae, my derlynge, my ſweete harte, and ſuche other like elegancies of Venus ſecretaries. And whan it is ſpoken of a thynge, than in this wyſe: Quid agit Comum, tuae meae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                deliciae? Howe is it with Comum our moſt pleaſaunt and dilectable place of reſort?
            
               Deliciarum cauſa, for paſtime or recreation.
            
               Delicias, facere, to be wanton, to be ſquaymyſſhe, to playe the cockney.
            Delico, aui, are, to explane.
            
            
               Delictum, an offence whan a thyng is vndone, omiſſion.
            
               Deligo, légi, ligere, to choſe or picke out.
            
               Delimo, aui, are, to fyle or ſhaue of frome any mettall.
            
               Delingo, xi, gere, to lycke of.
            
               Delinimentum, delectation, an allectyue, or ſweteneſſe in felynge.
            
               Delinio, iui, ire, to annoynt, to rub pleaſantly, to touche.
            
               Deliniare, to drawe as a paynter doethe, er he do laye on colours.
            
               Delinitus, touched ſwetely, annoynted, pacified, appeaſed.
            
               Dilinquo, liqui, linquere, to omyt to do well, to offende.
            
               Deliquium, lacke.
            
               Deliquium animi, whā a man is in a ſwoun.
            
               Deliquium ſolis, the eclips of the ſonne.
            
               Delirans, dotynge.
            
               Deliratio,
               Cicero. dotage, foly.
            Deliramentum, idem.
            
               Deliro, aui, are, to go out of the ryghte waye, properly to go out of the forowe, and make a baike, as pioughmendo. Alſo to dote.
            
               Delirus, he that ſwarueth from reaſon, a dotarde or dotynge foole.
            
               Deliteo, tui, ere, to lye hyd.
            Deliteſco, idem.
            
               Delitum, blotted.
            
               Delius, a, um, of the yle called Delus.
            
               Delius natator, was one perfecte in ſwimmynge, whiche became a prouerbe, that whā a thynge was ſpoken or written, harde to be vnderſtande, and requyred a cunnynge expoſitout, than wolde they ſay, Delio natatore eget It requireth a counynge or ſubtylle expoſytour.
            
               Delos, an yle by Grece, where Apollo and Diana were borne, and is one of the yles called Cyclades.
            
            
               Delphi, a citie and people in Greece.
            
               Delphicus, a, um, of that citie.
            
               Delphicum oraculum, the anſwere made at the temple of Apollo in Delphos.
            
               Delphinus, a greatte fyſhe of the ſea called a Dolphin, whoſe mouth is almoſt at his bealy, or elles no fyſhe mought eſcape hym, he is ſo ſwyfte in ſwymminge, but he can not take any fyſhe but lyinge vprighte, his tungue is moueable and apte for voyce, contrary to other fyſhes, and hath a camoyſed noſe, and a compaſed backe. He delyteth in muſyke.
            There hath ben knowen to loue children, and receyued them to ryde on theyr backes by the ſpace of .xxx. myles in the ſea, whiche haue ben beholden of moche people. who that readeth Plinium & Appianum in uaria hiſtoria ſhall fynde of this fiſhe thynges to be wondred at.
            
               Delphos, a citie in the countrey called Phocis, on a mountayne in Greece called Parnaſſus, there was the great and famous temple of Apollo called Delphicus, where the diuel gaue aunſweres by women, whiche there ſerued for the purpoſe.
            
               Delta, is the letter D, in greeke. It alſo ſignifieth the number of foure, as in latine letters it ſignifieth fyue hundred. Alſo at Memphis the moſte famous citie of Egypt, the ryuer called Nilus maketh a place in the furme of this letter, whiche is this 
                  〈◊〉
                wherfore that place was called Delta.
            
            
               Delûbrum, a place wherin be dyuers ymages of god and ſaynctes.
            
               Deludificor, cari, to begyle.
            
               Deludo, ſi, ere, to mocke, to deceyue, to abuſe.
            
               Delumbis, be, weake. ſometyme wanton.
            
               Delumbatae radices, rootes nypped of, or broken, to the intente that they ſhal wax greater
            
               Delumbo, bare, to debilitate, or make feble, or of no ſtrengthe.
            
               Deluo, lui, ere, to waſhe cleane, or waſhe out.
            
               Delutamentum, clayenge.
            
               Deluto, aui, are, to laye claye on any thynge.
            
               Dêmades, a great oratour in Athenes, who in ſodayne orations without any ſtudy, excelled Demoſthenes, in ſo moch as Plutarch wryteth, that whan Demoſthenes was conſtrayned to ſpeake vnto the people vnprouyded, who beyng tymorous ſomtyme ſtayed in the myddell of his oration, Demades wolde aryſe out of his place, and fyniſhe that oration, which Demoſthenes had begun, wherin appered the diuerſities of wyts, which now adays is alſo perceyued. But Demades was
 of ſo corrupte maners, that Antipater was wont to ſaye of hym, whan he was olde and decrepite, that he was lyke to beaſtes, which were offred in ſacrifyce, of whom nothynge remayned but theyr tungues and bealyes. finally the ende of his auaryce, prodygalitie, flattery, and falſehoode was this He with his ſonne callyd Demea, commyng vnder colour of frendſhyp into Macedonye, where in dede he had ſecretely conſpired with Antigonus, ennemy to Antipater kyng of that countrey, he and his ſon were takē by Caſſander, chief capytain of Antipaters army, and firſt his ſonne Demea was ſlayne in his armes, that the bloud ſprange into the fathers face, and than him ſelf after many reproches touchynge his treaſon and vnkyndnes, was alſo cruelly kylled.
            
               Demagis, moche more.
            
               Demando, aui, are, to commytte any thynge to one for to do.
            
               Demarchus, a ruler of the people.
            
               Demeauculum, a place to diſcend into, a cellar.
            
               Demeare, to go downe, or go away.
            
               Demens, madde, he that regardeth not what he dothe.
            
               Demenſum,
               Terent. in Phorm. a certayn quantite of meat, drink, or grayn, gyuen to euery ſeruant, to fynd him one moneth. it is alſo a meaſure conteynyng foure Romaye buſhels.Plaut. in Men.
            
            Demenſus, a, um, meaſurerd.
            
            
               Dementer, madly, foolyſhly, vnaduyſedly.
            
               Dementia, madnes.
            
               Dementio, tiui, ire, to be madde.
            
               Demento, aui, are, to be madde, to make mad, to make foolyſhe.
            
               Demereo, rui, ere, to wynne or gette.
            
               Demereor, eris, reri, to bynde by frendſhyp, to wynne ones fauour, to make a frende, to deſerue thanke.
            
               Demergo, ſi, gere, to drowne a thyng, or depe it in water or other lycour.
            
               Demergere ſemen, to caſt ſede īto the groūd
            Demerſus, a, um, drowned.
            
            
               Demerſus aere alieno, deepe indetted, or in great dette.
            
               Demerſae leges opibus, lawes ſubdued with money, or lawes layde in water for money.
            
               Demeter, the name of Ceres.
            
            
               Demetio, to mete dyligently, to eſteme.
            Demetior, idem.
            
               Demeto, tii, tere, to repe. ſometyme to gather.
            
               Demetrias, a towne of Theſſaly.
            
               Demetrius, was a proper name of dyuerſe Greekes, of whome two were excellente, the oone a kynge of Macedonye, the other was a noble oratoure ſurnamed Phalarêus. The kynge Demetrius was ſonne of Antigonus kynge of Macedonye, where he alſoo raygned: He was of a goddlye ſtature, and of ſoo excellent fauour and beaultie, that no paynter or karuer mought truely counterfaite hym. for it ſemed, that there were in his vyſage bothe terriblenes and mercy, grauitie and gentylnes, wherwith was ioyned a princely maieſtie. He was in tyme of recreation of all kynges moſt pleaſant, whan great affayres were in hande, he ſurmounted al other in ſtudy, dilygence, and greatnes of wyt. He had his father and mother in wonderfull reuerence excedynge all men. Not withſtanding he was noted moche of incontinence. he was full of proweſſe and valyaunt, and delyuered Grece from Ptholomees tyrannye, and vanquiſhed him on the ſea, he alſo ſubdued Athenes, and all the countreye of Boeotia, with the citie of Thebes, he hadde warre at one tyme with Ptholomeus kyng of Egypt, Lyſimachus kyng of Aſia, and Seleuchus king of Syria, and Pyrrhus Kyng of Epyrus, and oftentymes vanquyſhed theyr armies, but in concluſyon he beynge vanquyſhed by Seleucus, was by hym commytted to an honourable pryſon, that is to ſay, kepte in a towne of Syria, callyd Cheroneſus, where he hadde appoynted vnto hym fayre palayces, pleſant orchardes and gardeynes, and had the company of ſuche as he lyſted, where, with ydelneſſe and exceſſe of voluptuous pleaſures, he fell ſycke and dyed, wham he was of the age of .lxiiii. yeres.
            
               Demetrius Phalareꝰ, was a noble philoſopher & orator, diſciple to Theophraſtus, of whom Tully writeth in his fyrſt boke of offices, ſayeng, that he was a ſubtyll diſputer, but noo vehement oratour, yet was he ſwete and dilectable. he for his excellent vertues was gouernour of the Atheniēſes ten yeres. And bicauſe he had greatly enryched the citie of Athenes in yerely reuenues, and adorned it with commodious buylding, the people in the honor of hym dyd ſet vp .CCC. and .lx. of his images made in mettal. But afterward he being abſent, by the meanes of certayne enuious perſons, the people condemned hym to dye, & alſo pullyd downe his images, and ſomme they dyd breake, and ſome ſolde, onely oone was kepte hole in the caſtell, wherof herynge Demetrius, he ſayde: yet haue they not plucked down vertue, for the which they did ſette vp thoſe images. This mā cauſyd Ptholomeus the kynge of Egypt to make his great libratye, and to ſende to the Iewes to haue theyr lawes and propheſyes tranſlated into greke, who ſente vnto hym of euery trybe, twelue great lerned menne, who dydde accomplyſhe his deſyre, and are callyd Septuaginta interpretes, all though there were of theym.
 lxxiiii. perſones. This manne lyued afore the incarnation of Chriſt .277. yeres.
            
               Demigro, aui, are, to chaunge habytations or lodgynges, to remoue frome one place to annother.
            
               Demigrare ab improbis, to forſake vnthrifty or yll company.
            
               Demigrare de ſtatu, to chaunge the faſcion or forme of lyuynge.
            
               Demigrare de uita, to dye, to deceaſſe.
            
               Deminuo, nuere, to mynyſhe or make laſſe.
            
               Demiror, aris, ari, to meruayle moch. ſomtyme it ſignifieth to knowe not.
            
               Demiſſe, aduerb. with great humilitie.
            
               Demiſſae aures, hangyng eares.
            
               Demiſsi homines, men fallen from rycheſſe to pouerty.Cice. pro murena.
            
            
               Demiſsio, abaſhement, lacke of courage, falsnes of harte.
            
               Demiſsitia tunica, a longe cote.
            
               Demiſſa loca, lowe groundes.
            
               Demiſſa toga, a longe gowne.
            
               Demiſſo capite, the hed hangyng downward
            
               Demiſsis labijs, hauyng babberlyppes, baberlypped.
            
               Demiſsis humeris uirgo, a mayden hauynge lowe ſhulders.
            Demiſſus, a, um, humble.
            
            
               Demitto,
               Vergilius georg. 2. 
               miſi, tere, to ſende downe, to humble my ſelfe, to lay downe. alſo to dygge.
            
               Demittere equum in flumen, to make his horſe to leape into the ryuer.
            
               Demittere in pectus, to ſette at his harte, to kepe in remembraunce.
            
               Demittere animum, to abate courage, to loſe courage.
            
               Demiurgus, an offycer or magyſtrate amonge the people, whiche purpoſed to them al thinges, whervpon they ſhuld treate, as the ſpeaker of the parlyament amonge vs.
            
               Demo, mere, to take away or abate.
            
               Demere fidem fabulis, to make that mē ſhal not beleue tales.
            
               Demere ſoleas alicui, to pull of ones ſhoes.
            
               Demere ungues,
               Plaut. in Aulul. to pare ones nayles.
            
               De capite demptum, appayred in ſubſtance or valewe.
            
               Democratia,
               Tit. Liui. a fourme of a common wealthe, where the people haue authoritie without any other ſtate.
            
               Democraticus, he that fauoureth the commonwelth, where the people haue auctoritie.
            
               Demôcritus, an excellent philoſopher, who being a chylde, lernyd of certayne wyſe men of Chaldea aſtronomy, and theyr diuinitie, after warde he went into Perſe to lerne geometry, and than into Chaldea, to knowe dyuine miſteries, longe after he retourned to Athenes, where he gaue his poſſeſſyons and rycheſſe innumerable vnto the weale pulyk, reſeruing a lyttell gardeyne, wherin he mought at more lybertie, ſerche out the ſecretes of nature. He wrate many wonderfull warkes in naturall phyloſophye and phyſycke. Alſo whan he behelde the Cytie of Athenes, he contynually laughed at the foolyſſhe diligence of theym. whyche ſparyd for no peynes to get authoritie and ryches, whiche they were not ſure to kepe, other whiche laboured to gette theyr chylderne great poſſeſſions, who eyther dyed before the fathers, or els ouerliuing theyr fathers, ſhortly ſpent ali that theyr fathers left vnto theym. But the Athenienſes, not perceiuyng the cauſe of his laughter, thinking him to be madde, cauſyd Hippocrates the phiſytion to go vnto him. Who perceiuyng the occaſion of his laughter, ſayde, Democritus is not madde, but the Athenienſes be madde, at whom he dothe laughe. He was before the incarnation of Chriſt. 492. yeres.
            
               Demodocus, the name of an harper, of whom Homer maketh mencion.
            
               Demogorgon, was an enchaunter, whyche was ſuppoſed to be of ſuche excellencye, that he had authoritie ouer all ſpirites, that made men aferde.
            
               Demolior, iri, to throw downe any thyng that is buylded.
            Demolio, idem quod demolior.
            
               Demoliri culpam,
               Plaut. in Bacch. to dyſcharge hym of the faute or blame.
            
               Demolitio, a ſubuertion or beatynge downe of a thynge.
            
               Demonſtratio, onis, a ſhewynge.
            
               Demonſtratiuus, a, um, that ſheweth, or is ſhewed, or mete to be ſhewed.
            
               Demonſtratiuum genus, a fourme of ſpeakynge, wherin oratours dyd eyther cōmende or dyſprayſe any man openly.
            
               Demonſtro, aui, are, to ſhewe openly.
            
               Demophon, the ſon of Theſeus and Phedra kynge of Athenes.
            
               Demorior, iri, to dye vtterly.
            
               Demoror, aris, to tary longe, to kepe backe, or cauſe to tary.
            
               Demoſthenes, was the moſte excellente oratour of the Greekes, and was fyrſte a dyſcyple of Plato, but after he folowed Ebulides an oratour, and vſyd ſuche wonderfulle diligence and labour to attayne to the perfection of eloquence, that where he hadde an impedymente in his pronuncyation, he by puttynge ſmalle ſtoones into his mouthe, and inforcynge hym to ſpeake treatably, He at the laſte attayned to mooſte perfecte fourme of ſpeakynge. Of his wyſedome remayneth amonge other this praty exaumple. Whan kynge Philyp, the father of great Alexander
 beſieged Athenes, and ſore diſtreſſed it, vpon certayn treatiſes offered by them, he requyred to haue delyuered vnto hym ten oratours, of the whiche Demoſthenes was one, and than wolde he rayſe vp his ſiege. That herynge Demoſthenes, and commyng into the cōmon counſayle, he reherſed this fable. On a tyme the wolues exhorted the ſhepherdes to be in league with them, whervnto the ſhepeherdes accorded, than the wolues requyred to haue delyuered vnto them theyr maſtiues, whiche were the cauſe of debate betwene theym, the ſhepeherdes thervnto graunted, and delyuered to the wolfes theyr dogges, the moſt vigilant kepers of theyr flockes, afterwarde the wolues beyng without any fear, not only dyd eate now & than a ſhepe, to alay their hunger, but alſo for their pleſure did tear & rent other in peces. In lykewiſe ſaid Demoſthenes, king Philyp, after that he hathe taken from you your oratours, whyche by theyr wyſe aduertiſementes haue hitherto preſerued you from his tyranny, he wyl do the ſemblable. Which the Athenienſes herynge, they agreed to his counſayle, and valyauntly defended and preſerued the citie. This man was afore the incarnation of Chriſt .345. yeres.
            
               Demotus, put abacke.
            
               Demoueo, uere, to remoue.
            
               Demoueri gradu, to be dryuen backe, to be conſtrayned to recule.
            Demptus, ta, tum, put out.
            
            
               Demulceo, cêre, to ſtryke gentylly and ſoftely with the hand, as we do to chyldren or houndes, whan we make moche of them.
            
               Demum, at the laſt. ſometyme it ſignifieth only, or alway, fynally.
            
               Demuſſata contumelia, dyſpleſure done by diſſymulation.
            
               Demuto, tare, to change his maner or facion.
            
               Denaria,
               Tōſtallus. the numbre of .xxxix. M. of the coyne callyd Denarij.
            
               Denarius, in weight is the ſeuenth parte of an ounce: In coyne it was as moche in poyſe and valuation as our grote, whiche wayeth of our money nowe currant .vi.d. ob. and the vii. parte of an halfe peny.
            
               Denarius, a, um, that whyche conteyneth the number of tenne.
            
               Denarro, aui, are, to tell in order.
            
               Denaſcor, denaſci, to ceaſſe to be, to dye.
            
               Denaſo, to cut or pull of the noſe.
            
               Denato, aui, are, to ſwymme downe.
            
               Denego, aui, are, not to giue, or to deny to giue.
            
               Deni, ten togither. Vxores habent deni duodeni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   inter ſe communes,
               Caſ. li. 5. Ten or twelue to gither haue wyues in common amonge them.
            
               Denigro, aui, are, to make blacke.
            
               Deni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , in concluſyon, finally.
            
               Denominatio, the namynge of a thynge.
            Denomino, aui, are to name.
            
            
               Denormo, are, to ſette out of rule, or order.
            Denoto, aui, are, to blame.
            
            
               Dens, dentis, a toothe. alſo euery thyng, wherwith an other thyng may be holden faſt.
            
               Dens arator, the coulter of a plough.
            
               Denſe, an aduerbe, ſygnifieth thycke or cloſe togither, as whan many be aſſemblyd in a lytell roume.
            Denſitas, tatis, & denſitudo, dinis, thyknes.
            
            
               Denſo, aui, are, to thycken or make thycke.
            
               Denſus, a, um, thycke, harde, cloſed togyther, compact, plentuouſe.
            
               Dentale, the ſhare of a plough.
            
               Dentatim, in order lyke teethe.
            
               Dentatus, he that hath great tethe, ſtrong tethe or many teethe.
            
               Denticulare, to thruſte in his teethe.
            Denticulus, a, um, dentatus, a, um, dentoſus, a, um, toothed.
            
            Denticulatae falces, ſyckles.
            
            
               Denticulatus, he that hath lyttell teethe.
            
               Dentifrangibilium, a thynge wherwith teethe are broken.
            
               Dentifricium, a medicine wherwith the teethe be rubbed, to make them whyte.
            
               Dentiloquus, he that ſpeketh betwene the tethe or lyſpeth.
            
               Dentio, ire, to put forth tethe, or breede tethe.
            
               Dentiſcalpium, an inſtrument, wherwith tethe be ſcraped.
            
               Dentirio, onis, a puttynge forthe or growynge of teethe.
            
               Denubo, pſi, bere, to marye, or wed on the womans parte.
            
               Denudo, aui, are, to dyſpoyle or make naked.
            
               Denumero, rare, to pay money.
            
               Denunciatio, menaſſynge.
            
               Denunciatio teſtimonij,
               Caeſar. an iniunction to appiere.
            
               Deuncio, aui, are, to ſhewe or tell a thynge to an other man, or denounce. alſo Denunciare teſtimonium, to bryng wytnes into the court of iudgement, as they do in the Chauncerye, where wytneſſes are compellyd to come.
            
               Denuntiauit ut adeſſet, he ſummonyd hym to appiere.
            
               Denuntiare inimicitias, to declare hym to be his ennemy.
            
               Denuntiare bellum, to proffer warre or battayle.
            
               Denuò, agayne, efteſoones.
            Denus, a, um, the tenthe.
            
            
               Deocco, care, to harrowe lande, or breake it with rollers.
            
               Deonero, rare, to dyſcharge or dyſburdeyn.
            
               Deoratus, deſyred, hartyly prayed.
            
               Deoro, aui, are, to deſyre hartily. Amonge oute
 lawyers is to plete or to conclude in pledyng.
            
               Deorſum, downewarde.
            
               Surſum deorſum, vp and downe, hyther and thyther.
            
               Deorſum uerſum, downe ryght.
            
               Depaciſcor, ſci, to make couenaunt, to agree vpon certain couenātes, to promiſe, or to patiſe
            
               Depactus, a, um, couenanted or patiſed.
            
               Depactus eſt cum hoſtibus, he patiſed with the ennemyes.
            Depalmo, aui, are, to buffette.
            
            
               Depango, xi, gere, to plant or ſette.
            
               Depaſco, paui, paſcere, to eate as a beaſt doth, to feede beaſtes in paſture.
            
               Depaſce poſſeſsionem alienam, to feede his cattell on an other mans paſture.
            Depaſcor, idem.
            
               Depaſtus, ta, tum, eaten with beaſtes.
            
               Depaſtio, feedynge of cattell.
            
               Depaupero, rare, to impoueryſh or make poore
            Depecto, xui, uel xi, tere, to kembe diligently.
            
            Depectus, uel depexus, a, um, kempt, trimmed
            
            
               Depeculor, aris, ari, to robbe a common weale, a prynce, or a place halowed.
            
               Depeculator, a robber.
            
               Depello, puli, pellere, to put down, put away, or remoue, to put aſyde.
            
               Depelli portenta, whā monſtrous or ſtrange thynges do happen, betokenyng ſome yll aduenture, to happen, to repeale it by prayers, auowes, or other good dedes.
            Depulſio, idem quod propulſio.
            
               Depulſus, put downe.
            
               Dependeo, ere, to hange downe of a thynge, to depende.
            Dependo, di, dere, to paye.
            
            
               Dependere operā, to take peyn about a thīg
            
               Dependere poenas, to be punyſſhed, to ſuffer peynes.
            
               Deperdo, ere, to loſe.
            
               Deperio, ij, ire, to peryſhe, to dye, to loue inordinately, to be loſte.
            
               Depeſco, ſcui, ſcere, to dryue cattell.
            
               Depeſſus, rente, torne.
            
               Depexus, well trymmed.
            
               Ego ne ſi uiuo adeo exornatum dabo, adeo depexum, ut us
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   dum uiuat meminerit ſemper mei?
               Terent. Trowe ye that I wyll not ſo decke hym and trymme hym, that he ſhall thinke on me, as longe as he lyueth?
            
               Depilis, without heare.
            
               Depilo, aui, are, to pull of heare.
            
               Depingo, gere, to depaynte, to deſcribe.
            
               Deplano, to make playne.
            
               Deplanto, to plante, or ſette.
            Depleo, pleui, plere, to fylle.
            
            
               Deplortus, a, um, without hope of recouerye or remedy.
            
               Amedicis deploratus, forſaken of phiſitiōs.
            
               Deploro, aui, are, to lament, to bewayle.
            
               Deplure, to rayne downe ryght.
            
               Deplumis, me, that whiche hath fewe fethers or none.
            
               Depono, poſui, nere, to lay downe, to depriue or take away, to put away, to leaue.
            
               Deponere arma, to put of his harneys.
            
               Deponere bellum, to ceaſte from warres.
            
               Deponere exercitum, to diſcharge the army.
            
               Deponere imperium, to leaue the rule or gouernaunce.
            
               Deponere inimicitias, to leaue all malyce.
            
               Deponere negotium, to leaue buſynes.
            
               Deponere ſemina, to plante.
            
               Deponere ſoleas, to put of ones ſhoes.
            
               Deponere onus, to diſcharge a bourdeyne, or charge. Deponere aliquid apud aliquē, to lay a thynge in guage or pledge, or to delyuer to one a thynge to kepe.
            
               Depoſitarius, he vnto whom one hath delyuered a thyng to kepe. alſo to whom any thyng is layde in gauge.
            
               Depoſitus, a, um, layd downe, lefte in an nother mans kepyng. ſomtyme it dothe ſignifie deſperate,Ci in Ver. or he whyche is in deſperation. Ita
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                
               mihi uideor magnam & maxime aegram & prope depoſitam reipub. partem ſucepiſſe, Therfore me ſemeth I haue taken in hand a great part of the weale publike, not only being feble, but alſo almoſt ī extreme deſperatiō 
               Depoſitum ſubſtantiuum, that which is left in the cuſtody of one. alſo a guage.
            
               Depopulatio, deſtruction or deſolation of a coū
               trey, depopulation.
            
               Depopulor, ari, to deſtroy or waſte a countrey.
            
               Deportati, they whyche are exyled, hauyng no ꝓpertie left in any goodes or landes, after the definition of lawiers, how be it other authors do vſe that worde generally for men exyled.
            
               Deportatus, banyſhed.
            
               Deporto, aui, are, to cary or bryng away, to banyſhe. ſomtime it ſignifieth to reporte.
            
               Deportare exercitum, to bring home agayn the army. Deportare triumphum, to brynge home the victory. Captiuos Romam deportare, to cary priſoners to Rome.
            
               Depoſco, popoſci, poſcere, to deſire moch or require. Depoſcere omnibus pollicitationibꝰ, to demand or ſollicite with faire promyſes.
            
               Depoſitorius, he that leaueth a thynge with an other man.
            
               Depoſitum, that which is left in an other mās kepyng, or that is layd to pledge.
            
               Depoſtulare, where the inferiour requireth a thynge of his ſuperiour.
            
               Depraedor, ari, to robbe a countrey or towne.
            
               Deprauatus indulgentia, marred with to moch liberte. Deprauati mores, yl or leud cōditiōs.
            
               Deprauate, contrary to right or rayſon.
            
                
               Deprauo, aui, are, to make yll, to depraue.
            
               Deprecatio, whan we confeſſe that we haue offended.
            
               Deprecator, he that ſueth or intreateth for an other man that he ſhuld not be punyſhed.
            
               Deprecor, cari, to beſech, to refuſe, to deſyre the contrary to put away, or deny that which we wold not haue, to haue in deteſtation, to reſyſt to delyuer a man by prayer.
            
               Deprecari ueniam, to aſke forgyuenes.
            
               Deprecari alicui ne uapulet, to make a requeſt or deſyre for one that he be not beaten.
            
               Deprecari iniuriam, to requyre that he wyll not do to hym any wronge.
            
               Deprecari auaritiae crimina, laudibus frugalitatis, To requyre to haue oone excuſyd for his nygardeſhyppe: bicauſe that his temperaunce in lyuynge is worthy cōmendation.
            
               Deprecari maleuolentiam, to excuſe him of blame, for the ioy that he hath of an nothers myſfortune.
            
               Claudij inuidiam Gracchi charitas deprecabatur, Gracchus was ſo welle beloued, that for his ſake, the fautes of Claudius were hid and not ſpoken of.
            
               Deprecari munus, to excuſe hym in takynge on hym an offyce or charge.
            
               Deprecari culpam to excuſe hym ſelfe, and deſyre that the faute be not layde to hym.
            
               Deprecari periculum, to praye that he falle not into perylle, or that he be in no daunger.
            
               Deprecari mortem, to deſyre pardon of deth, or to endeuour hym to ſaue ones lyfe.
            
               Depraehendo, di, dere, to take a man vnwares to knowe, to perceyue.
            
               Depraehenſus eſt in ſermone, he was taken in his wordes.
            
               Depraehenſus eſt in ſcelere, he was taken with the fault.
            Depreſſus, a, um, lowe.
            
            
               Deprimo, ere, to kepe down, to thruſte downe.
            
               Deprimere naues, to make ſhyppes to ſynke and be drowned.
            
               Deprimunt me quae porto, My burdeyn maketh me to ſtoupe.
            
               Depromo, to draw out, to declare, to fetch out
            
               Depromere ex libris, to fetche out of bokes.
            
               Depromit ex ſenſu ſuo, he fetched it frome his owne wytte.
            
               Depropero,
               Plaut. in paenu. 
               rare, to make moche haſte.
            
               Depſo, pſi, pſere, to wark a thing with the handes, to the intent to make it ſofte, to kneade dowe, waxe, or other lyke thyng.
            
               Depuber, depuberis, a chylde or yonge beaſte, whiche are not come to rype yeres.
            
               Depudet, he hath layde aſyde ſhame.
            
               Depudico, aui, are, to dyſhoneſte or vyolate a woman.
            
               Depugnatur, the batayle was fought.
            Depugnatus, a, um, well fought.
            
            
               Depugno, aui, are, to fyght valyantly.
            
               Depulſio, a puttyng of, or lettynge a thyng that it can not approche.Ci. phil. 8. 
               Quae cauſa iuſtior eſt belli gerendi, quam ſeruitutis depulſio? What better cauſe is there to fyghte, than that we wolde let, that we were not brought into ſeruitudo.
            
               Depurgo, aui, are, to clenſe any thynge vnder foote.
            
               Depurgare crimen, to dyſcharge hym of the faulte whyche is layde vnto hym.
            
               Depuro, to make cleane or pure.
            
               Deputo, aui, are, to cut of, to eſteme, to iudge, to repute.
            
               Deputare rationes,
               Terent. to recken or make accompte.
            
               Depunio, nere, to beate.
            
               Derado, ſi, dere, to ſhaue of, or barke of.
            
               Derbices, people in Aſia, aboute the ſea callyd Mare Caſpium, whyche haue this cuſtome, that whan theyr frendes come to the aege of lxx. yeares, they ſlea theym, and eate them, callynge all theyr neyghbours vnto the feaſt. Olde women they ſlea not, but oonely doo ſtrangle theym, and afterwarde doo burye theym. Semblably, yf menne dye before the ſayde age, they alſoo do burye theym. They punyſſhe euerye offence, be it neuer ſo lyttel, with deathe.
            
               Dercaei, a people of Greece, in the cooſtes of Thrace.
            
               Derce, a welle moſte colde in ſommer.
            
               Derelinquo,
               Cice. poſt redditum. 
               liqui, linquere, to forſake vtterly.
            
               De repentè, ſodaynly.
            Derelictus, ta, tum, forſaken. Pro derelicto rem aliquam habere, to forſake a thynge.
            
            
               Derelictui habere,
               Au. Gel. to care not for a thynge, or to neglect it.
            
               Deribitores, they whiche do number an army, and do pay to the ſouldiours theyr wages.
            
               Derideo, riſi, dere, to laugh to ſkorne, to mock.
            
               Deriduculum, a ſcorne or mocke.
            
               Deripeo,
               Plaut. in Men. 
               ripui, pere, to take away, to diſpile.
            
               Deripere aliquem capillo, to pull one down by the heare of the head.
            
               Deriſus, a, um, mocked at or had in contempt.
            Deriſus, us, mockery.
            
            
               Deriſor, a mocker.
            
               Deriuo, aui, are, to deriuate from one to an nother, to lay to one, as to lay to a mannes defaute, or charge, to take frome one, and gyue to an other.
            
               Derogito,
               Plaut. in Aſin. to make inſtaunt deſyre, to praye hartyly.
            
               Derogo, aui, are, to mynyiſhe, to derogate, to take away.
            
               Derogare fidem alicui, to putte noo truſte in one.
            
                
               Deruncinare, to cut or pulle of that whyche is ſuperfluous.
            
               Deruo, ui, ere, to fall downe.
            
               Des, a poyſe of eyght ounces.
            
               Deſaltare, to daunce.
            
               Deſaeuio, ſaeui, uire, to be wod angry, ſomtyme to ceaſſe to be angry.
            
               Deſcendo, di, ere, to go downe, to deſcend, ſomtyme onely to go.
            
               Deſcendere in altum, to go depe downe.
            
               Deſcendere in aciem, to go into the batayle.
            
               Deſcendere in ſeſe, to humble hym ſelf, or to conſyder in him ſelf the baſenes of his eſtate.
            
               Deſcendere in cauſam, to come in ſtryfe.
            
               Deſcenditur gradibus, one goth down by ſteppes.
            
               Deſcenſus, fus, a goyng downe.
            Deſcentio, idem.
            
               Deſcio, iui, ire, to knowe not.
            
               Deſciſco,
               Perſius. 
               iui, ſciſcere, to diſagree, to leaue one, and go to an other, to rebell.
            
               Deſciſcere a ſe, to chaunge his fourme of lyuyng or faſcion.
            
               Deſcribo, pſi, ere, to write out of a copy, to order or appoynt, to paynt or wryte aduyſedly, to declare or deſcribe.
            
               Deſcriptio, a copy, a deſcription.
            
               Deſcribere pecuniam in ciuitates, to aſſeſſe ſummes of money in a taxe to be payd in ſundry cyties.
            
               Deſcribere rationes, to make accomptes in an order.
            
               Deſcribere in genere, to dyuyde a thyng into dyuers kyndes.
            
               Latronem & ſycarium aliquem deſcribere, to ſygnifie one by the name of theefe or murderer without reherſyng his proper name.
            
               Deſcriptius, in better order.
            
               Deſcriptio populi, a deuydyng of the people into dyuers partes or bandes in a quarell betwene two perſons.
            
               Deſcriptiones temporū, the hyſtory of thynges whiche haue hapned, accordyng to the order of tyme.
            
               Deſeco, aui, are, to cut in ſunder, to cut of.
            
               Deſecare prata, to mowe medowes.
            
               Deſectio, a cuttīg or mowing down of ſtraw or graſſe.
            
               Deſedeo,
               Columel. li. 6. cap. 3. 
               dere, to ſytte downe.
            
               Deſero, ui, ere, to leaue or forſake.
            
               Deſerere pignus, to loſe his gage.
            
               Deſerere uadimoniū, to make defaut, where one is bounde to appere before a iudge, or other great officer.
            Deſerto, aui, are, to forſake.
            
            
               Deſertor, he that leaueth his countrey, & gothe to his ennemyes.
            
               Deſertus miles, a ſouldiour whyche departeth without lycence.
            
               Deſerta regio, a countray not inhabited.
            
               Deſertus ager, a fyelde out of tylthe.
            
               Deſertus, forſaken, not inheritable, where no man dwelleth, a deſert or wyldernes.
            
               Deſeruit me fides & fama, I haue loſte my credence and good name.
            
               Deſeruio, uiui, ire, to obey or ſerue humbly, ſomtyme to do yll ſeruyce.
            
               Deſeruire ſtudijs,
               Pli. in epi. to apply lernyng or ſtudy.
            Deſes,Terenti
                     ••
                  . deſidis, vnoccupied.
            
            
               Deſiccare,
               Plautus. to drye vp.
            
               Deſideo, ſedi, deſidere, to ſytte ſtylle, to abyde in a place, to be ydell.
            
               Deſidia, ſlouthfulneſſe.
            
               Deſidioſus, a man full of ydelneſſe, ſlouthfull.
            
               Deſido, ſedi, ere, to ſyt ſtyl or contynually, to ſit on a thing, to ſyt on a chamber ſtole. It is alſo properly whan the erthe doth gape or thynke. Terra deſedit, the groūde openeth or gapeth.
            
               Deſignata, for praedeſtinata.
            
               Deſignatio, a diu
                  ••
               e or ordināce, an appointmēt.
            
               Deſignator, toris, a marſhall, whiche ſetteth or appoynteth euery man to his place, conuenyent to his degree or offyce.
            
               Deſignatus, aſſygned, ordeyned.
            
               Deſignati Conſules, Praetores, Tribuni, they which were elected & apoynted to ſuccede thē which at that tyme exerciſed the ſayd offices.
            
               Deſigno, aui, are, to aſſigne, to note or ſygnify, to do a thyng newly, alſo to choſe a thing, and appoynt it for ſome purpoſe.
            
               Deſilio, lui, ere, to leape or lyght downe.
            
               Deſinas, holde thy peace.
            
               Deſino, ſii, nere, to leaue, to ceaſſe.
            
               Deſinere artem, to leaue the crafte.
            
               Deſinit in uiolam, it draweth to the coloure of vyolette.
            
               Illae orationes legi ſunt deſirae, thoſe oratiōs are no more radde.
            
               Deſciſtere conatu, to leaue his enterpriſe.
            
               Deſiſtente autumno at the ende of Autumne or harueſt.
            
               Deſipio, pui, ere, to do folyſhly, to wax folyſhe.
            
               Deſiſto, deſtiti,
               Terent. in Phor. 
               deſiſtere, to leaue of.
            
               Deſiſtere litibus, to leaue ſuite.
            
               Deſita ars, a ſcience out of vſe, not ſpoken of. Primus Papiſius eſt uocari deſitus, He was the fyrſt which was left to be callyd Papiſiꝰ.
            
               Deſolatus, a, ū, that is made deſolate or diſtroyd.
            
               Deſolo, aui, are, to make deſolate.
            
               Deſolor, ari, to com forte.
            
               Deſpectio, onis, a diſpitīg, a lokīg downward
            
               Deſpecto, aui, are, to loke behynd.
            
               Deſpectus, tus, regard or ſight, ſomtime deſpite.
            Deſpectus, ta, tum, deſpyſed.
            
            
               Deſperanter, deſperately.
            Deſperatio, onis, deſpayre.
            
            
               Deſperatus, a, um, deſperate, alſo wherin oone hath none hope.
            Deſpero, aui, are, to deſpayre.
                imperfection, corruption.
            
               Vitium offerre uirgini, to defloure a vyrgin.
            
               Vito, care, to eſchewe or beware.
            
               Vitrearius, a glaſſemaker, or a glaſyer.
            
               Vitreolum, an herbe growing on walles, whet with veſſell beinge ſkoured, is made wonder full bryght.
            Vitreus, a, um, of glaſſe.
            
            Vitrinus, na, num, idem.
            
               Vitricus, a father in lawe, or ſtepfather.
            
               Vitriolum, a diminutine of uitrum.
            
               Vitroſus, a, um, whiche hath plenty of glaſſe.
            
               Vitrum, glaſſe.
            
               Vitra, a fyllet or headbande.
            
               Vitula, an he flat, or yonge cowe.
            
               Vitulari, to reioyce.
            
               Vitulatio, reioycynge.
            
               Vitulinus, a, um, of a calfe.
            Vitulinae carnes, beale.
            
            
               Vitulus, a calfe, not onely of a cowe, but alſo of an elyphant, and of great fyſſhes. It is alſoo a fyſhe callyd a ſeale.
            
               Vituperium, a rebuke.
            
               Vitupero, rare, to rebuke.
            
               Vituperatio, a rebuke gyuen.
            
               Vituperator, he that rebuketh or blamethe annother.
            
               Vituperones, rebukers.
            
               Viuacitas, & uiuatia, amonge olde wryters bodyly ſtrength.
            
               Viuaciſsimus, moſt lyuely or ſtronge of nature.
            
               Viuaciter, ſtrongely.
            
               Viuarium, a place, where wylde beaſtes, byrdes, or fyſſhes be kepte. It may be callyd as well a ponde, as a parke, a counnyngar, a walke for byrdes.
            
               Viuatior, more lyuely.
            
               Viuatus, & uiuidus, full of lyfe or naturalle ſtrengthe.
            
               Viuax, uacis, lyuely, ſtronge of nature.
            
               Viuerra, a ferrette.
            
               Viuidus, da, dum, lyuely, quycke.
            
               Viuior, & uiuiſsimus, olde wryters vſed for more lyuynge or moſte lyuynge.
            
               Viuiradix, dicis, a yonge vyne ſet with the rote it is alſo euery plant, wherof the rote is quik though the flemme or ſprynge be deade or corrupted.
            
               Viuitur. Quid agitur? T. Viuitur. Howe is the matter? T. I lyue as well as I may.
            
               Viuo, uixi, uiuere, to lyue, to haue a mery lyfe.
            
               Viuere diem, to lyue without any prouyſyon or ſtoore.
            
               Viuus, ua, uum, that whych lyueth, alſo quyck, naturall, ſtronge, vehement, or great.
            Vix, vnethe, ſcantly, hardly. Vix dum, idem.
            
               Vix tandem, in concluſyon.
            
               Vix, for Non. Vix Priamus tanti, tota
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Troia fuit, Kynge Priamus and all Troye was not ſo moche worthe.
            
               Vix, with moche a do. Si idem iſtuc imitamuur, ita tamen uix uiuimus. Although we doo the lyke, yet with moche adoo we lyue.
         
         
            ¶V ANTE L.
            
               VLcero, rare, to make a ſcabbe alſo to exaſperate or make grefe.
            
               Vlcerariae herbae, herbes that make blyſters.
            Vlciſcor, ſceris, ſci, to auenge.
            
            
               Vlcus, ceris, a hydde myſchiefe. It is alſo corrupt matter gathered within the ſkynne, and couered with a ſcabbe. It is any maner of ſoore where the ſkynne is broken.
            ❀Vlcus tangere, to rubbe one on the gall, to ſpeake of a thynge whiche is dyſpleaſaunt to one for to haue remembred.
            
               Vlex, an herbe lyke to r
                  •
               ſemary, whyche draweth to it golde.
            
               Vliginoſus, ſa, ſum, ſoked with longe aboode of water.
            
               Vligo, ginis, naturall moyſture of the erthe alway remaynynge.
            
               Vlius, a name of Apollo.
            
               Vllo, olde wryters vſed for ultus fuero, I ſhall be reuenged.
            Vilus, la, lum, any.
            
            
               Vlmus, a tree callyd an elme.
            Vlmeus, mea, meum, of elme.
            
            
               Vlmarium, a groue of clmes.
            
               Vlna, a fathom, alſo an elle.
            
               Vlpicum, great garlyke.
            
               Vls, of whome commeth ultra.
            
            
               Vlterior, ulterius, further, more beyonde.
            
               Vltimus, ma, mum, laſte, ſometyme it ſignifyeth fyrſte.
            
               Vltima platea, at the ende of the ſtrete.
            
               Vltimis aedibus, on the back ſide of the hous.
            
               Vltio, vengeaunce.
            
               Vltor, & ultrix, he or ſhe that taketh vengeāce.
            
               Vltra, beyonde, more, moreouer. ſommetyme ſhrewdly or frowardly.
            
               Vltrò, wyllyngly, without deſyre or cohertion.
            
               Vltro citro
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , hyther and thyther, ſometyme it ſygnifieth from one to an other.
            
               Vltroneus, a, um, wyllyng, with a free wylle.
            
               Vlubrae, a citie in Italy.
            
               Vlula, a ſhryche oule.
            
               Vlulatus, a barkynge.
            
               Vlulo, lare, to howle as a dogge or a wolfe.
            
               Vlua, teke or weedrs of the ſea.
            
               Vlyſbona, a citie in Portugal, called Iuſhbon.
            
               Vlyſſes, the ſon of Laertes and Autholia kinge of the yles of Ithaca and Dulichium, a man excelling all other grekes, which cam againſt Troy, in eloquence and ſubtiltye of wit, who after the ſubuercion of Troy, whan he hadde
            
                wandred ten yeres on the ſeas, and marches thereof, and hadde ſeene many countrayes. Fynally he retourned home, and there a good ſpace of tyme remayned vnknowen, and ſuffred many dyſpleſures of the wowars of his wyfe the chaſte Penclope, whom by the help of Thelemachus his ſonne, and his ſwyneherdes, he at the laſt ſlew. Not withſtandyng afterward he him ſelfe was ſlayne by Thelegonus his baſtarde ſonne, with an arrowe, nat beyng knowen of the ſame Thelegonus.
         
         
            ¶V ANTE M.
            
               VMbella, a lyttell ſhadowe. alſo a ſkryne to kepe away the lyght of the ſonne.
            
               Vmber, of the countrey of Vmbria.
            
               Vmbilicatim, in the facyon of a nauyll.
            
               Vmbilicatus, ta, tum, made lyke a nauyll.
            
               Vmbilicus, the myddes of euery thynge. alſoo the nauyll. alſoo a lyttell cerkle made in the grounde, to knowe whyche waye the wynde ſtandeth. Alſo it is a lyttell ſmothe ſtoone, or pyppell ſtone, a boſe, ſuche as is ſette on the backe of a boke.
            
               Ad umbilicum adducere, to bryng to a poynt Vmbo, bonis, the boſe of a bucklar or ſhield.
            
               Vmbra, a ſhadowe. It was alſo that, whyche was callyd a goſte of a man being dead, whiche not onely paynyms but alſo chryſten men ſuppoſed dyd appere vyſybly vnto men.
            
               Vmbraculum, a place, where menne mought be oute of the ſonne, or that whyche made ſhadowe.
            
               Vmbraticus, ca, cum, lyke a ſhadowe.
            
               Vmbraticus homo, a man lyuynge at eaſe, and out of all labour or buſyneſſe.
            
               VMbraticae artes, craftes exerciſed in the ſhadowe, as the more part of handy craftes.
            
               Vmbratilis, le, that whyche is done in the ſhadowe, or as it were with eaſe, and withoute any ſweate or peyne.
            
               Vmbratiles res, tryflynge thynges or trifles.
            
               Vmbratilis pugna, exerciſe of fetes of warre out of batayle as in a houſe.
            
               Vmbri, people in Italy now callyd Spole tani.
            
            
               Vmbria, a parte of Italy.
            
               Vmbrifer, ra, rum, makynge ſhadowe as a great wodde dothe.
            
               Vmbrina, & umbra, a fyſſhe, whyche by the deſcription of Paulus Iouius, ſeemeth to me to be an Halybutte, for the greatteneſſe and delycacye of the head, and ſymylitude to a ſturgyon.
            
               Vmbro, brare, to ſhadowe.
            
               Vmbroſus, umbroſa, broſum, hauynge moche ſhadowe.
            
               Vmbro, bronis, a ryuer in Lumbardye, callyd alſo Lamber.
         
         
            ¶V ANTE N.
            
               VNA, togyther. Vna cum Cicerone, togyther with Cicero.
            
               Vnanimis, & unanimus, of oone mynde and wylle.
            
               Vnanimus conſenſus, one hole conſent.
            Vnanimitas, tatis, concorde.
            
            
               Vncia, an ounce. alſo an ynche.
            
               Vnciarius, a, um, of an ounce.
            
               Vnciatim, ynche by ynche.
            
               Vncinatus, a, um, hooked or crooked.
            
               Vncinus, a lyttell clubbe or batte crooked at the ende.
            
               Vnciola, an ynche.
            
               Vnctio, an annoyntynge.
            
               Vnctuarium, a place nyghe to a ſtoufe or hotte howſe, where men be annoynted after that they haue ſwette.
            
               Vnctum, the leafe of a hogge, whyche is the fatte that lyeth by the backe and rybbes, whiche huſbandes vſe to rolle vp, and keepe for to make ſaulues, orels or frye meate, as frytowes and pancakes.
            
               Vnctura, an annoyntynge.
            
               Vnctus, ta, tum, annoynted or greaſed.
            
               Vncus, a batte or croked clubbe. alſo any thyng croked at the ende.
            Vncus, a, um, croked.
            
            
               Vnda, water, proprely a wawe.
            
               Vndabundus, da, dum, makynge great or many wawes.
            
               Vndans, wawynge or mouyng lyke to wawes.
            
               Vndatim, lyke to wawes of the ſea.
            
               Vndeunde, of what place ſo euer it be, or from whenſe ſo euer it commeth.
            Vndecun
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , idem.
            
               Vnde, from whenſe, wherto, wherby, wherof, wherfore, what to do. Vndegentium, idem.
            
            
               Vndecim, eleuen.
            Vndecimus, ma, mum, the eleuenth.
            
            Vndenus, na, num, idem.
            
               Vndelibet, from whens thou wylt.
            Vndeuigeſimus, a, um, the nynetenthe.
            
            
               Vndeuiginti, nynetene, lackynge one of .xx. The lyke ſignification is, where unde is ioyned to any gret nūbre, as triginta, quadraginta &c.
            
            Vndeuis, idem quod undelibet.
            
               Vndique, on euery ſyde.
            
               Vndicola, he that dwelleth on the water.
            
               Vndiſonus, na, num, that maketh a noyſe lyke to wawes, whan they ryſe and fal in the water, or dothe roore as the water dothe at a greate floudde.
            
               Vndiuomus, a, um, that whyche caſteth water out from hym.
            
               Vnedo, a kynde of wylde fruite lyke appuls, whiche is bytter, and hurteth bothe the head and the ſtomake.
            
                
               Deſpicabilis, to be deſpyſed.
            
               Deſpicatus, tus, deſpite, diſprayſe.
            
               Deſpicatus, he by whom no man ſetteth.
            Deſpicientia, deſpectio, deſpyte.
            
            
               Deſpicio, ſpexi, cere, to loke or behold downe, to deſpiſe. alſo for Aſpicere, alſo to ſet litle by
            
               Deſpicor, cari, to deſpiſe or diſprayſe.
            
               Deſpicus, a watche man, to ſee who commeth, as it is in Calyce.
            
               Deſpolio, aui, are, to diſpoyle or to robbe.
            
               Deſpoliare digitos, to pull the rynges from ones fyngers.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . in 
                     ••
                  ite.
            
            
               Deſpondeo, di, ere, to affiaunce or betrouthe. alſo to promiſe ones ſon or doughter in mariage. Deſpondere animum, to be in deſperation, or wery of lyfe, to deſpayre of any thyng that a man ſeketh for.
            
               Deſpondere ſapientiam, to deſpaire to come to great wyſedome.
            
               Deſpondêre prouinciam,
               Cicero de prouinc. conſu. to gyue charge or rule of a countrey.
            
               Deſpondêre ſibi domum alicuius, to make hym ſelfe aſſured to haue an other mās hous.
            
               Deſpondebitur, one ſhall make them agreed.
            
               Deſponſo, are, to affiance a woman.
            
               Deſponſus, & deſponſa, affianced or promiſed in mariage.
            Deſponſatus, idem.
            
               Deſponſata & deſtinata laus, prayſe looked for and dewe.
            
               Deſpumo, aui, are, to ſkym or clarify any likor.
            
               Deſpuo, ui, ere, to ſpet down, or ſpet on a thing
            
               Deſpuere in mores, to blame the maners or conditions of one.
            
               Deſquamo, aui, are, to ſkale a fyſhe.
            
               Deſquamare piſces, to take of the ſkaales from fyſhes.
            
               Deſquamare arbores, to barke trees.
            
               Deſquamare ueſtem, to burle clothe.
            
               Deſtino, aui, are, to purpoſe, to appoynt, to depute, to prepare, to cheſe, to tye to a thinge, to ſende, to ſet a price. Quanti deſtinat aedes? For how moch wyll he ſell his houſe?
            
               Deſtinare puellam, to promyſe the mayden in mariage to one.
            
               Deſtinare diem necis alicui, to apoynt a day whan one ſhall be kylled.
            Deſtinare animo, uel animis, & in animo, to purpoſe in his mynde.
            
            
               Deſtinatio, a purpoſe to dye.
            
               Deſtituo, ui, ere, to forſake, to leaue, to depriue, or take fro, to louſe, or vnbynde, to ſet downe a man. Deſtituit omnes ſeruos ad menſam ante ſe,
               Cecilius. He dyd ſet downe all his ſeruantes at the table before hym.
            
               Deſtituere ſpem, to diſapoint one of the truſt that he had in hym.
            
               Deſtituit aliquem, he brake promiſe with one
            
               Deſtituit ciuitatem, he dyſapointed the citie.
            Deſtitutus, ta, tum, forſaken, deſtitute.
            
            
               Deſtringo, xi, gere, to bynde harde or cut.
            
               Deſtringere, for Abradere, alſo to abate.
            
               Deſtrinxit aciem, it blemyſheth the ſyght.
            
               Deſtructile, that whiche ſhalbe diſtroyed.
            
               Deſtruo, xi, ere, to diſtroy or throw down that whyche is buylded.
            
               Deſtruere teſtes, to diſtroy the wytneſſes.
            
               Deſubitò, ſodaynly, vnprouided.
            
               Deſubulo, aui, are, to perce, properly with an awle or bodkyn.
            
               Deſudaſco, ſcere, to labour vntyll he ſweate.
            
               Deſudo, aui, are, to ſweate moche or labour.
            
               Deſueſco, ſu eui, eſcere, to dyſvſe or brynge out of cuſtome.
            Deſuefacio, Deſuefio, idem.
            
               Deſuefactus, out of cuſtome or vſe.
            
               Deſuetudo, dinis, a dyſvſe.
            
               Deſuetus, ta, tum, out of vſe.
            
               Deſultor, toris, he that can vaulte a horſe, and leape from one horſe back vnto an other. Alſo thoſe men of warre, that in tyme of battayle wolde leape downe of theyr horſes quyckely, and fyght on foote, and leape vp agayne as quyckely, were callyd Deſultores.
            
            
               Deſultorij, equi, horſes which ſeruid for that purpoſe.
            
               Deſultura, lyghtynge vp and downe, 
                  •
               autynge of an horſe.
            
               Deſum, defui, deeſſe, to lacke, to fayle.
            
               Deſum ere, to take, or to cheſe.
            
               Deeſſe cauſſae, not to defend one, not to take ones parte.
            
               Deeſſe occaſioni, not to take a thynge whan occaſion hapneth.
            
               Deeſſe officio, not to do his dutie or indeuor.
            
               Deeſſe ſibi, to be negligēt in his own buſines.
            
               Defuit animus, his courage fayled.
            
               Non deſunt qui interpretentur, ſome men to interprete.
            
               Deſuper, from aboue.
            Deſurſum, idem.
            
               Deſyderabilis, le, worthye to be wyſſhed for or deſyred.
            
               Deſyderatio, & deſyderium, deſyre, loue, ſtudy, delyte, ſommetyme it ſygnifieth abſence. Multarum rerum deſyderio te angi, neceſſe erat, Nedes muſt ye be greued with the ſorow full remembrance of dyuers thynges.
            
               Deſyderati, men dead or ſlayn in batayle. In eo prelio trecenti capti, quin quaginta millia de ſyderata ſunt, In that batayle three hundred were taken, & fifty thouſande ſlayne & dead.
            Deſyderium, idem quod deſyderatio, ſommetyme abſence.
            
            
               Deſydero, aui, are, to deſire, to with for a thing alſo to require, to loke for. Lepidꝰ qdego deſyderabā, fecit, That I deſired Lepidꝰ did. Ne
                  
                     ••
                   nunc uires deſydero adoleſcētis nō plus
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                   adoleſcens, tauri uires deſyderabam, Nor I nowe do more wyſhe to haue a yonge mannes ſtrength, than whan I was yonge, I wyſhed the ſtrength of a bulle. Virtus nullam aliam mercedem ſuorum laborum deſyderat, praeter hanc laudis & gloriae, Vertue requireth none other rewarde for her labour, but this onely of prayſe and renoume. Quis ab eis ullam rem laude dignam deſyderat? Who loketh for of them any thyng worthy cōmendation? Si erit bellū, ut uideo fore, partes meae non deſyderabuntur, If we chaunce to haue warre, as I perceyue there wyll be, there ſhal lacke nothyng in me, in doing my dutie: or ſor my parte I wyll not fayle.
            
               Curia uires meas non deſyderat, The ſenat hath no nede of myn ayde.
            
               Deſydero abs te aliquid, Me ſeemeth thou doſte not as I wolde haue the to do.
            
               Deſyderauit nōnun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Agrippae patiētiā, He was ſory that Agrippa was no more pacyent. Vt ego tuum dolorem, amorem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   deſydero, I fynde lacke that thou doſt not loue, nor arte not ſoory.
            
               Deſyderata in magno philoſopho grauitas, The grauitie whiche is requyred to be in ſoo great a phyloſopher.
            
               Deſyderio urbis flagrari, to be very ſorye for the citie.
            
               Detectus, ta, tum, dyſcouered, diſcloſed, made apparant and manyfeſt.
            
               Detectus caput, he that hathe his heed vncoueryd.
            
               Detego, tegi, tegere, to dyſcloſe or dyſcouer.
            
               Detegere ſtomachum, to utter his ſomake or mynde.
            
               Detendeo, di, dere, to ſtretche out, or ſtretche forthe.
            
               Detentio, a withholdyng or retaynyng.
            
               Deter, lackyng ſomewhat, yll. Deterior, warſe.
            
               Deterrimus, warſte.
            
               Detergo, & detergeo, ſi, gere, to wype of, to make cleane, to ſcoure.
            
               Detergere faſtidia, to put away lothſomnes.
            
               Deterior, deterius, wars, in wars condition.
            
               Deteriore iure eſſe, to be in wars condition.
            Deterrimus, a, um, warſte.
            
            
               Deterrimè, an aduerbe, whyche ſygnifieth in warſt condition, moſte vngraciouſely.
            
               Determino, aui, are, to determyne, to diſcuſſe.
            
               Detero, teri, terere, to bruyſe, to beate oute, as grayne is beaten oute of the eare with threſſhinge or treadyng, to empayre.
            
               Deterere calces, to weare out ſhoes.
            
               Deterere ſumptū, to loſe his coſt or expencis.
            
               Deterreo, ui, ere, to put in feare, to let by feare.
            
               Deterritus, abaſhed.
            
               Deteſtabile, abhominable, deteſtable.
            
               Deteſtatio, abhorrynge, execration, ſummonynge with witneſſe. alſo Apuletus taketh it for geldynge.
            
               Deteſtor, ari, to abhorre. Among Ciuilians Deteſtari is to ſummon a man with wytnes.
            
               Deteſtari inuidiam, to eſchue reproche.
            
               Detexo, xi, xere, to wayue, or to wynde.
            
               Detineo, nui, êre, to withhold, to reſtrayn from lybertie.
            
               Detondeo, detondi, dere, to ſheare or clyppe.
            
               Detono, aui, are, to make a great ſounde.
            
               Detorqueo, torſi, quêre, to bow, to turne out of the ryght way. alſo to tourne a thynge frome the one ſyde to the other.
            
               Recte facta detorquêre, to interprete in an yll part that whiche is well done.
            
               Praue detorta opinio, an opinion myſtaken, and far from the true meanynge.
            
               Detractio, pluckyng away or from one. it is alſo diſprayſing or yl reporte. it ſignifieth alſoo withdrawyng of any thyng neceſſary.
            
               Detractio ſanguinis, lettyng of bloudde.
            
               Detractio alieni, the takynge away of an other mans goodes.
            
               Detractor, toris, he that reporteth ylle or ſpeaketh yll of one.
            
               Detraho, traxi, trahere, to drawe or plucke of.
            
               Detrahere alumnū māma, to wean a chylde.
            
               Detrahere de coelo, to pull out of heauen, or from heauen.
            
               Detrahere alicui, to report yll or ſay yl of one.
            
               Detrahere de authoritate Senatus, to haue the ſenate in contempte.
            
               Detrahere de ſe, to blame hym ſelfe.
            
               Detrahere de pecunia, to abate of the money
            
               Detrahere de ſuis commodis, to mynyſh his commoditie or profyte.
            
               Detrahere in iudicium, to bryng in iugement.
            
               Detrahere ſanguinem, to drawe blud of one.
            
               De fama alicuius detrahere, to mynyſſhe the eſtimation of one.
            
               De pōdere detrahere, to abate of the weight
            
               De ſuo iure detrahere, to remit or abate ſomwhat of his ryght.
            
               Fidē uerbis alicuius detrahere, to cauſe one not to be beleuyd.
            
               Ex ſummo detrahere, to abate of the ſumme
            
               Ex redditu detrahere, to miniſh his reuenues
            
               Precio detrahitur, the price is abated.
            
               Detrectatio, a refuſell or denier to do a thing.
            
               Detrectator, tôris, he that refuſeth.
            
               Detrecto, tare, to refuſe to do a thyng. it alſoo ſygnifyeth to abate. Aduerſae res etiam bonos detrectant, Aduerſitie abateth mens reputation, although they be good men.
            
               Detrimentum, detriment or damage.
            
               Detrimentum facere, to ſuſtayne damage.
            
               Detrimentoſum, that which is cauſe of moche damage or hurte.
            
               Detrudo, ſi, ere, to thruſte downe: ſometyme
 to conſtrayne or inforce, to caſte or putte one out of any place.
            
               Detrudere comitia in aduentū alicuius, To deferre or put of the parliamente vntyll his commynge.
            
               Detrudi in carcerem, to be put in priſon.
            
               Detrudere regno, to put one oute of his royalme.
            
               De ſententia detrudere, to make one to forſake his opinion.
            
               Detrudunt naues ſcopulo, they pulled backe the ſhyppes from runnynge on the rocke.
            
               Detrullo, aui, are, to put from one veſſell into an other.
            
               Detruncatio, a cuttynge ſhorte.
            
               Detrunco, aui, are, to cut of ſhort, or in pieces. alſo to lop or ſhrede a tree.
            
               Detruncare uitem, to cut a vine.
            
               Detulit, he broughte.
            
               Detulit illi laudem, he referred all the prayſe vnto hym.
            
               Detrubo, aui, are, to beate downe, or to pulle from a thinge, to throwe downe one frome a hyghe place.
            
               Deturbare aliquem aedibus, to thruſte oone out of the houſe.
            
               Deturbare de mente, to make one madde.
            
               Deturbare poſſeſsione, to put one out of poſeſſion.
            
               Deturgeo, gi, gêre, is whan a thynge whiche is ſwollen or blowen, doeth aſſuage it ſelfe.
            
               Deturpo, aui, are, to make foule or defyle.
            
               Deua, a ryuer in Scotlande called Dee, and the towne called Dondee is alſo Deua.
            
            
               Deuana, a towne in the North parte of Englande called Dancaſter.
            Deuaſto, aui, are, to waſte.
            
            
               Deucalion, was the ſonne of Prometheus, a man of moche wyſedome and vertue, whoo ſaued moche of the people of Greece in the tyme of an vniuerſall floudde, whereby the more parte of Greece was drowned: The poetes fayne, that after the floude, he aſked counſayle of the goddeſſe Themis, howe mā kynde mought be reſtored, and it was aunſwered: If he and his wyfe Pyrrha did caſt the bones of theyr mother behynde them.
            Deucalion beynge verye wytty, perceyued that the erthe was mother of al thynges, and that ſtones were the bones of the erth. Therfore he threw ſtones behynde hym, and they became men, and his wyfe dyd lyke wiſe, and they became women: But in dede he ſaued the people by bryngynge them vp to the hyll called Parnaſus. He was before the commynge of Chriſte. 1534. yeres.
            
               Deueho, xi, ere, to cary from a place.
            Deuello, uulſi, uellere, to pull away.
            
            
               Deuenio, ueni, nire, to come down from high to low, frō ryches to pouertie, from proſperitie to aduerſitie: ſomtyme generally to come.
            
               Deuenuſto, aui, are, to make foule.
            
               Deuerbero, aui, are, to beate moche.
            
               Deuerbium, the laſte ende of a worde.
            
               Deuerro, ri, ere, to ſwepe 
                  •••
               ane.
            
               Deuerſus, turned downewarde.
            
               Deueſtio, ſtij, ire, to vnclothe.
            
               Deuexitas, holownes.
            
               Deuexo, aui, are, to vexe moche.
            
               Deuexus, a, um, holowe or lyke to a valey.
            
               Deuictus, ouercome.
            
               Deuincio, xi, cire, to bynde faſte.
            
               Deuincit ſe ſceleri, he bryngeth hym ſelfe in daunger for the offence or miſſedede.
            
               Deuinco, uici, uincere, to vaynquiſhe.
            
               Deuinctus, bounden, properly in duety or offyce.
            
               Deuio, aui, are, to go out of the waye.
            
               Deuirgino, aui, are, to defloure a mayden.
            
               Deuîto, aui, are, to eſchewe.
            
               Déuius, a, um, out of the ryght w
                  •••
               e.
            
               Deuium iter, a waye not haunted or vſed to be gone.
            
               Deunx, deuncis, xi. ounces, and a meaſure. whiche was as moche as a temperate man vſed to drynke at .xi. draughtes. It is ſometime taken for the .xi. parte of any thynge.
            
               Deuoco, aui, are, to call aſyde, or call way, 
                  〈◊〉
                call or fetche downe.
            
               Deuocare in ſuſpitionem, to brynge in ſupition.
            
               Deuolo, aui, are, to flee or runne from a hygher place to a lower, to go with ſpede.
            
               Deuoluo, ui, uere, to tumble or roll downe: by tranſlation it ſignifieth, it is fallen, or come from one to an other, or hapned.
            
               Deuolui ad otium, to be gyuen to ydelneſſe.
            
               Deuolui retro, to be tourned backe.
            Deuolutus, ta, tum, toumbled downe.
            
            
               Deuoluta eſt hereditas, the inheritaunce is fallen or come.
            
               Deuona, a town in Almayn called Newemark betwene Nurenberg and Rentzburg.
            
               Deuoro, aui, are, to deuoure. Sometyme to beare.
            
               Hoc taedium mihi deuorandum eſt, this labour muſte I ſuſteyne.
            
               Deuorare dicta, to take good heede vnto wordes.
            
               Deuorare hominum ineptias, to ſet lyttell by mennes foly.
            
               Deuorare libros, to reade ouer manye and ſundry boke haſtely.
            
               Deuorare moleſtiam paucorum dierum, to paſſe lyghtly ouer a thynge, whiche is a lyttell whyle greuous.
            
               Deuorare nomen alicuius, to forgette a mannes name.
            
                
               Deuorare orationem, to here a tale without takynge any heede.
            
               Deuorare pecuniam, to conſume al his ſubſtaunce.
            
               Deuorare ſpe lucrum, to couayte a thynge ſo moche, that he thynketh that he all redye hath it.
            
               Deuoratae urbes, cities beynge ſunke with erthe quakes.
            
               Deuoti, men whiche promyſed to lyue and dye in the ſeruyce of princes or capitaynes.
            
               Deuotio, onis, a curſe, a vowe to dye, or to make a man dye.
            
               Deuotiones, dyuilyſhe inuocations to the damage of one.
            
               Deuoto, aui, are, to bynde by a vowe.
            
               Deuotorius, a, um, concernynge a vowe or curſe.
            
               Deuotoria carmina, inuocations, curſes.
            
               Deuotus, faythfull and obedient. Alſo gyuen or determined to do ſome thynge.
            
               Deuotus, a, um, vowed or curſed, dedicate.
            
               Deuoueo, êre, to vowe or curſe, to conſente to dye.
            
               Deuouére ſe, to make a vowe to dye in any quarell, or for ſaufegarde of other.
            
               Deuotus, he that maketh the ſayde vowe.
            
               Deuouêre ſe amicitiae alicuius, to gyue hym ſelfe hole to the loue of one.
            Deüro, uſsi, ûrere, to burne.
            
            
               DEVS, God.
            
               Dextans, tantis, a weyght beinge .x. ounces. ſome haue taken it for .x. doſayne.
            
               Dexter, tra, trum, ryght or apte.
            
               Dexter, dextri, of the ryght hande. ſometyme it ſignifieth apt, conuenient, quycke, and diligent, proſperous, fauourable.
            
               Dextera, uel Dextra, the ryght hande: ſometyme on the ryghte ſyde.
            
               Dexteram tender, to gyue to one his hand.
            
               Dextram dare, to helpe or ayde.
            
               Dextram dextrae committere, to promyſe faythe and trouth in hande.
            
               Dextere, properly, aptely, featly.
            
               Dexterior, Dexterius, more proper or apte.
            
               Dexteritas, tatis, aptenes and redynes in the thynge that a man goeth about.
            
               Dextero, aui, are, to leade in the ryght hande, to couple horſes, in a teeme.
            
               Dextimi, horſemen beynge on the ryght wynge in battayle.
            
               Dextimus, olde writars vſed for dexter.
            
            
               Dextrale, a bracelet to weare on the ryghte arme.
            
               Dextrocherium, the ſame.
            
               Dextrarij, horſes ioyned in a teeme.
            
               Dextrorſum, towarde the ryght hande.
            Dextrouerſum, idem.
         
         
            D ANTE I.
            
               DIA, an addition to womens names, whan theyr folyſhe louers wyll make them equal to goddeſſes. It is alſo auyle by Greece called Naxus, Fynallye this worde Dia is a worde ſet before al noble confectiōs deuyſed by the Grekes, as, Diacalaminthe, Diacitonites, Diapapauer. &c.
            
            
               Diabathra, a certayne ſorte of ſhoes vſed in Greece.
            
               Diabethe, a ſickenes whiche cauſeth, that one can not holde his veryne.
            
               Diabolus, the dyuell. Howe be it in greeke it ſignifieth properly a falfe accuſar.
            
               Diacôdion, is a ſyrupe made with the heades of the herbe called popy, and water, whiche profyteth agaynſte reumes, and to cauſe one to ſleape.
            
               Diaconus, a deacon, in Greeke it ſignifyeth a myniſter.
            
               Diacytoniten, or Diacydonium, a confection made with the iuyce of quinces and hony or ſugar, whiche is an excellent medicine to feble ſtomakes.
            
               Diadêma, a highe cap, wheron an Emperour or kynge weareth his crowne.
            
               Diaeta, a parler to ſoup in. Alſo diete in eatyng or drynkynge. Alſo a place where iudgementes were gyuen.
            
               Diaetarij, ſeruauntes that do awayte on the table. Somtyme ſuche as do haunt dyners and ſuppers to the intente to ſteale ſomewhat.
            
               Diaetetica, that parte of phiſike whiche cureth by dyete.
            
               Diagridion, a certayne confection made with Scammony, for to pourge choler.
            
               Dialectia, is the arte, whiche teacheth to inuent quyckely, to diſpute aptely, and fynally to trye what is trewe and what is falſe. It is commonly called logike.
            
               Dialecticus, a logician.
            
               Dialectus, a maner of ſpeche, as we wold ſaye diuerſities in englyſhe, as Northern ſpeche, Southern, Kentyſhe, Deuenyſhe, and other lyke.
            
               Dialexis, diſputation.
            
               Dialis, Iupiter. Alſo it ſignifieth of one daye, as, Conſul dialis, a conſull of one daye.
            
               Diâlogus, a diſputation betwene two.
            
               Diâmeter, a lyne, whiche diuideth any figure in to two equal partes.
            
               Diâna, the doughter of Iupiter, whiche fleinge the company of men, to the intente that ſhe wold not be meued with carnal luſtes, ſhe continuallye exerciſed her ſelfe in huntynge wylde beaſtes, and for her chaſt lyfe, ſhe was honoured of the paynyms for a goddeſſe. ſhe is alſo taken for the moone.
            
                
               Diapaſma, is a compoſition of dyuerſe ſweete pouldres to caſt on the body, to thintent that ſuperfluous ſweate maye be put awaye. It maye be alſo taken for a ſwete perſume or pomeambre.
            
               Diapaſon, a concorde in muſyke of fyue tunes, and two halfe tunes.
            
               Diapente, of fyue.
            
               Diaphanum, clere throughe out, as chriſtall.
            
               Diaphonia, a diſcorde.
            
               Diaphora, a difference.
            
               Diaphoreſis,
               Linac. in 
                     •
                  eth. Gal digeſtion, or euaporation.
            
               Diaphoreticus, ca, cum, that whiche doth diſſolue and ſende forthe humours or vapours.
            
               Diaphragma,
               
                  
                     •
                  andinꝰ. is a ſkyn in the loweſt parte of the breſt,Alex. Be. whiche diuideth the place where the harte and lunges ben, from the ſtomacke and bowelles, ſoo that the vapours ryſinge vpwarde ſhall not come to the ſpiritual members, wherby the mynde and rayſon mought be indamaged.
            
               Diapyganon, a confection made with the herb called Rue, whiche is alſo called Diaſpoliticon, an excellent medicine agaynſte lacke of good digeſtion, agaynſte peyne in the breſte, the ſydes, the lyuer, and the raynes, it mollifyeth the bely, comforteth the ſtomacke, and maketh good digeſtion.
            
               Diaria febris, a feuer whiche dureth but oone daye, if the ſicke man do kepe good dyet.
            
               Diarium, prouiſion for one daye: Alſo a booke declarynge what is done daye by day.
            
               Diarrhaea, a laſke or flyxe without inflammation or exulceration, which of the late phiſitions is called fluxus humoralis.
            
            
               Diaſtole, a diſtintion or poynte, whereby oone worde or ſentence is diſtinete from an other.
            
               Diateſſeron, of eyght.
            
               Diatretum, a cuppe imboced, and cunnyngely wroughte.
            
               Diatritos, abſtinence by the ſpace of iii. dayes
            
               Diaulus, a meaſure of grounde conteyninge .ii. furlonge, euery furlonge being of a hundred fiue and twenty fete.
            
               Dibapha, any colour in ſilke or clothe, whiche is twyſe ſteped in the dye vate, we calle it a depe colour.
            
               Dica, a cauſe, an accuſation, a iudgment.
            
               Dicam impingere,
               Terent. in 
                     •
                  horm. to brynge an action agaynſte one.
            
               Dicam ſcibere alicui,
               Plaut. in 
                     •
                  ulul. to enter an action agaynſte one.
            
               Dicacitas, tatis, ſcoffynge or bourdynge.
            
               Dicaculus, & Dicacula, mery in talkynge.
            
               Dicaearchus, a iuſte prynce. Alſo the name of a philoſopher.
            
               Dicaſsis, for dicas, tell on.
            
               Dicax, cacis, a rayler or reprocher.
            Dice, for dic.
            
               Dichas, a meaſure of two palmes, or .viii. fyngers.
            
               Dico, caui, care, to vowe, to offer, to dedicate to gyue for euer.
            
               Dicamus tibi hunc totum diem, this day is youres to do with vs what it ſhall lyke you.
            
               Dicare operam ſuam, to offer his ſeruyce.
            
               Dico, xi, cere, to ſaye, to tell, to byd, to promyſe, to affyrme, to defende: as, Cicero dixit cauſam Milonis: Cicero defended Milos cauſe. Alſo to appoynte, to call a thynge by name.
            
               Dicere cauſam, to make anſwere to an action or playnte.
            
               Dice illi, for dic illi, tell hym hardely,
            
               Dicere diem, to ſewe a man, or call hym vp, (as we vſe to ſaye) by action, wryte, or commaundement, properly to cauſe a man to be bounden to appere and make aunſwere.
            
               Dicere Dictatorem, to name or make a Dictatour.
            
               Dicere dotem, to aſſigne dowry.
            
               Dicere doti,
               Terent. in Heauton. to aſſigne dower by promyſe.
            
               Dicere ex animo, to ſpeake as a manne thynketh.
            
               Dicere ex tempore, to make an oratiō with out ſtudy. Alſo to ſpeake vnaduiſedly.
            
               Dicere ius, to gyue commaundement or ſentence on a peyne. Somtyme it ſignyfieth to gouerne by lawes a towne or countrey.
            
               Dicere contumeliam, to outrage or rayle on one.
            
               Dicere leges, to appoynt lawes, or conditions of peace, as by the vāquiſher to him that is vaynquiſhed.
            
               Diem dicere nuptijs uel operi: to appoynte a day for meryage. &c.
            
               Dicere mulctam, to ſette or aſſeſſe a fyne or ſumme of money to be payed by hym, which hath commytted a treſpaſſe.
            
               Dicere in utran
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   partem, to ſuſteyn the ſayinge of bothe parties.
            
               Dicere nummos, to promyſe money.
            
               Dicere ſacramento, to take an othe, properly as they do, whiche be retayned in warres.
            
               Dicere ſalutem, to ſalute or recommende hym vnto one: alſo to pray god to ſend hym good helth and well to do.
            
               Dicere ſententiam, to gyue ſentence or iudgemente.
            
               Dictamen, a thyng wrytten by an other mans inſtruction.
            
               Dictamum, an herbe, whoſe leaues are lyke penyroyall, but greatter and ſomewhat hore and moſy, and byteth the tunge lyke gynger, but it hath neyther floure nor ſeede. Conſtā
               tinus calleth it Dictamum, and ſaythe that it is hote and drye in the thyrd degre. There is in this herbe wonderfull and incomparable
 vertues, as well agaynſte all poyſon, as alſo in drawynge forth any thynge, whiche ſtiketh faſte in any parte of the body.
            
               Dictator, the hygheſte offyce in the publyke weale of the Romans, which was alſo callyd Magiſtor populi, the mayſter of the people, whiche for the ſpace of ſyxe monethes, hadde the authoritie of a kynge. And therfore that dignitie was neuer gyuen but only whan the ſtate of the citie was in any ieoperdy.
            
               Dictatura, the office or dignitie of Dictatour.
            
               Dicta, ſignified mery ſentences.
            
               Dictata, interpretations, expoſitions, or declarations, made by maiſters vnto theyr ſcolers whiche they do wryte.
            
               Dictatum, a mynute gyuen by one to an other to wryte a letter by.
            
               Dicte, a citie in the yle of Crete or Candy.
            
               Dicteria, mery quippies or tauntes wyttyly ſpoken.
            
               Dictito, onis, a worde, a fourme of ſpeakynge
            
               Dictio, aui, are, to ſpeake of or in dyuers places, to tell a thynge ofte.
            
               Dicto, taui, tare, to reherſe to one that whiche he ſhall wryte. Alſo to inueſtigate or expound the ſence of any author. Alſo to brynge to remembraunce.
            
               Dictare rationem, to yelde accompt.
            
               Dictum, ſpoken or ſayde.
            Dictum factum, ſodaynely.
            
            
               Dictum puta, I knowe what thou woldeſt ſaye.
            
               Dicto obediens, he that dothe that, whiche he is commaunded.
            
               Dicturio, iui, ire, to go about, or prepare to ſpeake.
            
               Dictynna, one of the names of Diana.
            
               Dictynnus, a hyll, wherin the temple of Diana was ſituate.
            
               Dictys, one of the Centaures, and an hiſtographier of Candy.
            
               Didaſcalus, a ſchole maiſter.
            
               Dido, the name of a ladye that buylded Carthage.
            
               Didrachma, two of the coynes called Drachmas, of our money nowe .xi. d. ob.
            
               Diduco, xi, cere, to brynge into ſondry partes, or to diuide or pull aparte, to open a thynge that is ſhut.
            
               Diducere argumenta in digitos, to marke & deuyſe an argument on his fyngers endes.
            
               Diductum ſtare, to ſet one foote here, an other there.
            
               Didymae, arum, ylandes of Aphrike, that bounde on Egypt.
            
               Didymus, is in latine Geminus, in Hebrewe Thomas, in englyſhe, a twynne in byrthe, or bouble a man.
            
               Diecula, a lyttell whyle.
            
               Dierecta, in an yll tyme.
            
               Dies diei, a daye. Somtyme it ſignifieth tyme or ſeaſon.
            
               Dies critici, the dayes in whiche phiſitions do gyue a certayne iudgement in ſickenes.
            
               Dies legittimi, amonge lawyars be called ordynary dayes, or dayes in courte.
            
               Die decies, ten tymes in a daye.
            
               De die, for Interdiu, in the daye tyme.
            
               Diem de die expectabam, I looked frome daye to daye.
            Diem dicere, a
                     •
                  i, Dicere diem.
            
               Dieſcit, it is daye, it waxeth daye.
            
               Dieſpiter, one of the names of Iupiter.
            
               Dieteris, the ſpace of two yeres.
            
               Diffamo, aui, are, to ſprede by fame.
            
               Diffarreatio, a certayne ſacrifice, whiche was betwene a man and his wyfe.
            
               Differitas, olde wryters vſed for differentia, dyfference.
            
               Differentia, a difference.
            
               Differo, diſtuli, differre, to ſpare or deferre. ſomtyme to bryng from one place to an other Somtyme to reporte abrode: ſomtyme to deuyde or cut a ſonder:Cicero. ſomtyme to ſet in order: ſommetyme to dyffer or be in dyfference. At uide quid differat inter meā opinionem & tuam: But ſee nowe what dyfference is betwene thyne opinion and myne.
            
               Differ
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  mam alicui, to ſprede ones name abrode.
            
               Differre ſitim, to endure thyrſte.
            
               Differre uadimonium, to gyue a daye ouer to hym, whiche is bounden for his apparaunce.
            
               Differri, to be ſo vexed in mynde, that a man woteth not what to do.
            
               Diffibulare, to vnbuckle, to open, to vngyrde.
            
               Difficile, aduerbium, hardely, difficultly.
            
               Difficilis, le, harde, vneaſy.
            Difficul, for difficile,
            
               Difficultas, difficultie.
            
               Difficulter, with great peyne or labour.
            
               Diffidentia, miſtruſte.
            
               Diffidenter, without great truſte or hope.
            
               Diffido, dere, to miſtruſt.
            
               Diffindo, di, ere, to cleaue in ſunder.
            Diffindere diem, loke in Diffundere.
            
               Diffindere medium, to cut of in the myddel.
            
               Diffindere minute humum, to cut cleane by the grounde.
            
               Diffiſum ſaxū, a ſtone clefte or cut on ſunder.
            
               Diffinio, iui, ire, to diffyne or declare in fewe wordes playnely the ſignification of a thing.
            
               Diffinitio, onis, a diffinition or declaration of the nature, qualite, or proper ſignifycaon of a thyng by generaltie, ſpecialtie, & difference.
            Diffiteor, fiſus ſum diffiteri, to deny.
            
            
               Difflo, are, to blowe downe.
            
                Diffluo, xi, ere, to flo
            
            
               Diffluere otio, to be drowned in ydelnes.
            
               Diffringo, fregi, fringere, to breake in pieces.
            
               Diffugio, gi, gere, to flye hyther and thyther, to refuſe to do.
            
               Diffugium, Refuge.
            
               Diffundere diem,
               
                  
                     •
                  daeus in 
                     ••
                  ota. to put of a matter vntyl the nexte daye. But Policianus, in Miſcellaneis dothe affyrme, that it ought to be rad Diffindere diem, as well in the digeſtes, as in all other authors: who of them ſaye moſte truely, I remyt it to the iudgement of the reders
            Diffundo, ſi, dere, to ſcatter.
            
            
               Diffuſum uinum, wyne drawen into the veſſell.
            
               Diffuſiora conſepta, greate groundes, in cloſed.
            
               Diffuſa, ſus, a great Sowe and a fatte.
            
               Diffuſe, an aduerbe, ſygnifieng, ſcatered here and there.
            
               Digama, a woman that hath hadde two huſbandes.
            
               Digamus, he that hath had two wyues, commonly called Bigamus.
            
            
               Digamma, amonge latines is the letter F.
            
            
               Digeries, a diſpoſion or order.
            
               Digeri, to be reſolued.
            
               Digero, geſsi, gerere, to diſpoſe, to order, to interprete or make playne, to deuyde, to dygeſt, to cary hyther and thyther, to declare.
            
               Digerere crines, to trymme the heare.
            
               Digerere mandata, to do in order that oone is commaunded.
            
               Digerere cibum, to digeſt meate.
            
               Digeſtio, an order of thynges. It is alſo digeſtion of meate and drynke in to the vaynes and members.
            
               Digitalia, thynges worne on the fyngars, as thymbelles.
            
               Digitalis, le, perteynynge to the fyngar.
            
               Digitali craſsitudine, the thyckenes of a fynger.
            
               Digiti,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                are muſkylles, or a lyke kynde of ſhell fyſhe.
            
               Digitulus, a lyttell fyngar.
            
               Digitus, a fyngar. It is alſo a meaſure, wherof foure doo make .iii. ynches, and it is the xvi. parte of a fote.
            ❀Digitis extremis uel ſummis attingere, to touche a thynge with the fyngers toppes, vſed for a prouerbe: where one hath vneth attayned to any part of a thynge.
            
               Digitum tollere, to fauour or conſent.
            
               Digitum trāſuerſum, ſignifieth in a ſentence a lyttell or ſmall diſtaunce. Digitum tranſuer ſum ab eo, non diſcedebat: He wente not from hym a fyngar breade.
            
               Digladiari, to fyght together with ſwordes. by tranſlation to contende or ſtryue.
            
               Digladiatio, a fyght, a ſtryfe, a debate.
            
               Dignatio, great eſtimation: ſometyme fauour or familiaritie with noble men.
            
               Dignè, worthily.
            
               Dignitas, tatis, honour gyuen or due to a man for his merites: ſomtyme a ſtate of nobilitie, or great authoritie: ſomtyme beautie properly of a man, ſpecially in geſture and communication.
            Dignatio, idem.
            
               Dignitas uultus, a ſygnification of honeſtie or worſhyp.
            
               Dignitatem ſuam tueri, to ſaue his honour.
            
               Dignari, to be reputed worthy.
            
               Digno, aui, are, & Dignor, ari, to iudge oone to be worthy, or to be eſtemed worthy.
            
               Dignoſco, noui, ſcere, to diſcerne or know by dyuers meanes,
            
               Dignoro, aui, are, to marke as menne marke beaſtes to knowe them.
            
               Dignus, a, um, worthy, meete or apte.
            
               Digredi in latus, to tourne on the one ſyde.
            
               Digredior, dieris, gredi, to departe or go awaye.
            
               Digreſsio, a departing.
            Digreſſus, idem.
            
               Digredi ad pedes, to lyghte on fote.
            
               Dijouis, Iupiter.
            
               Dijudicatus, ta, tum, determyned by ſentence.
            
               Dijudico, caui, care, to iudge betwyxte two thynges.
            
               Dilabor, eris, labi, to ſlyp or go away, to fall downe as a houſe dothe: ſometyme it ſignyfyeth to fayle, to decaye.
            
               Dilacero, aui, are, to teare or rent in pieces.
            Dilaneo, are, idem.
            
               Dilapido, aui, are, to conſume goodes, or ſpēd riottouſly or waſtfully.
            
               Dilapſa & diffluxa, fallen and ſcatered here and there.
            
               Dilatio, delaye.
            
               Dilapſi domos, departed home to their houſes without any buſyneſſe.
            
               Dilato, aui, are, to ſtretche out in breadthe.
            
               Dilemma, tis, an argument, whiche on euery parte taunteth hym, to whom it is ſpoken.
            
               Diligens, tis, diligente or louynge.
            
               Diligenter, diligently, aduiſedly.
            
               Diligentia, diligence or loue.
            
               Diligo, lexi, ligero, to fauoure or loue meanly ſomtyme to diuide.
            
               Dilorico, aui, are, to vndo, or cut a cote, or other thynge beinge ſowed.
            
               Diluceo, cere, to be bryght or clere.
            
               Diluceſcit, the daye appereth.
            
               Dilucide, euidently, clerely.
            
               Dilucido, dare, to declare or make a thynge playne to vnderſtande.
            
               Dilucidus, clere, bryghte.
            
                
               Diluculò, an aduerbe, which ſignifieth betime in the mornynge.
            
               Diluculo, laui, lare, to waxe daye, to appere to be daye.
            
               Diluculum, that portion of day, whiche is before that the ſonne ryſeth.
            
               Diludium, the leuynge of playe, or the ſpace betwene recreations or playes.
            
               Diluo, ui, ere, to waſhe or make cleane, to put awaye, to releaſe, to alaye as wyne is alayde with water, or to temper, to purge, or diſcharge a cryme, or faulte layde to one.
            
               Dilutum, is wyne or other lycour, wherin any herbe or other thynge is deaped by a certain ſpace, whiche ſome phiſions call infuſed.
            
               Dilutus, ta, tum, alayde or tempred.
            
               Dilutus color, a faynte colour or vnperfecte colour.
            
               Diluuium, & Diluuies, is whan the erthe is ſurrounded or drouned with moche rayne.
            
               Dimâno, aui, are, to flowe abrode, as dyuers ſtreames out of one ſprynge.
            Dimembro, aui are, to deuyde.
            
            
               Dimenſio, meaſurynge.
            Dimenſum, & Demenſum, meaſured.
            
            
               Dimetior, dimenſus ſum, dimetiri, to meaſure or meete.
            
               Dimetiri digitis, to accompte on his fingers.
            
               Dimeriens, that wherewith a thynge is meaſured.
            
               Dimicatio, battayle.
            
               Dimicatio prelij, the rage or whurle of the battayl.
            
               Dimicatio capitis, a battayle for the ſauyng of a mannes honour.
            
               Dimico, aui, are, to fyghte or contende with ſome thynge.
            
               Dimidiatus, a, um, the halfe deale of that whiche is not ſeuered or diuided.
            
               Dimidio, an aduerbe ſignifieng halfe.
            
               Dimidio plus, dimidio minus, halfe more, halfe leſſe.
            
               Dimidius, a, um, the halfe deale of that whiche is diuided.
            
               Dimidium plus toto, is ſpoken where a man intendeth to ſhewe that the meane is beſte.
            
               Diminuo, ui, ere, to myniſhe, or cut of.
            
               Diminutio, the miniſhinge or abatynge.
            Diminutus capite, & Diminutio capitis, Vide ante, Capitis diminutio.
            
               Dimiſſus, a, um, is ſome tyme taken for abiect.
            
               Dimiſſoriae litterae, letters miſſiue, ſente frō one to an other.
            
               Deiecit uultum, & dimiſſa uoce locuta eſt, She dyd caſte downe her loke, and with an humble voyce ſayde.
            
               Dimiſsio, a leaue to departe.
            
               Dimitto, ſi, tere, to ſende dyuerſe perſons into dyuerſe places. ſome tyme it ſignifieth to let to depart, to gyue leaue, to ceaſſe, to leaue, to let paſſe, to ſuffer, to humble. Alſo to gyue, to let downe, to forgyue.
            
               Dimittere literas, to ſende letters.
            
               Dimittere boues in paſcua, to put kyne to paſture.
            
               Dimittere conſilium, to diſſolue a counſayle.
            
               Dimittere è manibus, to let one eſcape.
            
               Dimittere ſanguinem, to let bloude.
            
               Dimittere de ſumma, to abate of the ſumme totall.
            
               Dimittere debitorem, to releaſe a dettour.
            
               Dimittere creditorem, to paye his det to his creditour.
            
               Dimittere facultatem rei gerendae, to loſe or let ſlyp that power, whiche one hath to do a thynge.
            
               Dimitri oſculo, to kyſſe at departing.
            
               Dimixos, a lampe with two lyghtes.
            
               Dimoueo, uere, to remoue or put out of a place or roume.
            
               Dim ouere perfrangere
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cuſtodias, to breake the preaſe, and paſſe throughe the kinges garde.
            
               Dimulgo, aui, are, to publyſhe abrode.
            
               Dindymene, & Dindyme, one of the names of Cybele, called the mother of the goddes.
            
               Dindymus, the rydge of the hyll of Ida in Phrigia.
            
               Dinumero, rare, to paye money.
            
               Diobolaris, a common and vyle harlot.
            
               Diobolares meretrices, harlottes, whiche be hyred for lyttell money.
            
               Dioeceſis, ſios, a iurisdiction, a gouernaunce. Alſo the dioceſe of a byſhop.
            
               Diodôrus, a philoſopher of Socrates ſect. and Diodôrus Siculus,
               Ci. in B
                     ••
                   & 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                a ſtory wryter: and an other Diodôrus a ſtoycke philoſopher of whō Cicero wryteth.
            
               Diogenes, a famous philoſophers name.
            
               Diomedes, a noble capitayne of the Greekes at the ſiege of Troye.
            
               Dione, a goddeſſe of the ſea, mother of Venus
            
               Dion, was ſone of a noble man of Sicile called Hipparinus, and brother to Ariſtomacha, wyfe to the elder Denyſe. wherfore he was longe tyme in great fauour with hym, in ſo moche as Denyſe commaunded his officers, that they ſhuld gyue to Dion al that he wold aſke. But after that Dion had ben the herar of Plato, and folowed his doctrine and grauitie. Deniſe no more fauoured hym. Semblably the ſeconde Denyſe, not withſtandyng that Dion with al diligence indeuoured him ſelfe to brynge hym vp in vertue and honour: yet bycauſe he was graue in maners and of great ſeueritie, and was not pleaſaunte, the fauour lyttell and lyttell relented, and at the laſt Denyſe gathering ſuſpition of Dion, ſēt
 hym in exyle: who retournynge after diuers conflictes for the liberty of his countrey, beynge often betrayed of his frendes, and deceyued by them, whome he truſted, fynallye was ſlayne in Siracuſis, the chiefe Citie of Sicile. He was a man of excellente vertue & wyſedome, and of a great courage, and therfore was aboue all other fauoured of Plato. But by to moche lybertie in ſpeche, and procurynge libertie vnto the commune people, more than was neceſſarye, he broughte hym ſelfe to perpetuall inquietnes, and at the laſt to confuſion. The tyme of his beinge ſhall be declared in the ly
                  ••
                of Plato.
            
               Dionyſius, reade in Bacchus. It was alſo the name of two kynges of Sicile, whiche for theyr crueltie and auarice were called tyrantes. The fyrſte was ſonne of Hermocrates a ryche man of Sicile, whom for his valiantneſſe in armes the Sicilians ordeyned to be theyr capitayne agaynſte the Carthagynenſes, whiche inuaded theym, and menaced to diſtroye theyr countrey, and take from them theyr liberte. But after that the enmies were vanquiſhed, Denyſe, which preſerued his con
               
                  •
               ray from bondage, of a benefactour became a cruell tyrant. This man deſyrouſe to ſe the wyſe Plato, who thanne was famous, with importunate requeſtes cauſed him to come to Sicile from Athenes. But hauyng with him communication, in the whiche Plato commended rightwyſe gouernaunce, and diſpraiſed tyranny, Denyſe beinge therwith offended, wolde haue ſlayne hym, but beinge let by the interceſſiō of Dion and Ariſtomenes, he gaue him to Polydes the ambaſſadour of the Lacedemonians, to ſell whan he came in to Grece. the reſidue ye may rede in myboke of the knowlege, which maketh a wiſe man. The other Dionyſius or Denyſe was ſon to this man, like in conditions, but that he was better lerned. He alſo made meanes to haue Plato come vnto hym, and a good ſpace had hym in moche reuerence, and herde his leſſōs in philoſophy. Fynally ſuſpectinge hym, that he conſpired agaynſte hym with Dion, and other, whom he had expelled, vnethe at the deſyres of Architas prynce of Tarentum and other, he ſuffered him to retourne vnto Athenes. So lyghtly are the myndes of great men towarde lernynge ſatiſfied, and for ſmall occaſions offended, excepte ſuche as do ſet all theyr delyte in vertue, and do eſteme it aboue other pleſures. the tyme of this man ſhal appere in the lyfe of Plato. The father was noted of rauin & crueltie, for the which he was ones dryuen out of Sicile, and by pouertye conſtrayned to teache chyldren in Italy. Alſo he was reproued for hauynge his eares alwayes open and redy to here detractours, 
                  〈◊〉
                for his timerous and ſuſpitiouſe lyuing, that he wolde be enuyroned with a great gard of ſtraungers and bondemen, miſtruſtynge his owne people and kyſemenne: that he wolde ſpeake to the people from the top of a towre: that he wolde haue his berde neyther ſhauen or klypped by any man, but onely with walnut ſhales very hot, he cauſed it to be burned. And yet at the laſte was he ſlayne of the people, curioſitie not ſo ſaulfly kepynge hym, as Beneuolence mought haue done, if he had folowed the doctrine of Plato, as he ſemed to do.
            
               Dioptra, a geometrical inſtrument, to dyſcerne altitudes and diſtaunce. Victruuius vſeth it for wayinge or pluckyng vp of water.
            
               Dioſcorides, called alſo Pedacius and Phacas, was a worſhypfull knyghte of Egypte, who ioyninge lernynge to chiualry, being in the hoſte of the Romaynes in ſundrye countreys, in tymes vacant from battayle, made diligent ſerche of the figures and vertues of dyuerſe herbes and other thynges neceſſarye for medicine, and moſte truely wrate of them in greke, as Galenus teſtifieth. He lyued vnder Cleopatras and Antonius.
            
               Dioſcoron, an yle in the borders of Italy.
            
               Dioſpolis a citie of Aegypt. There be .iiii. other of the ſame name in Aegypt, but verye ſmall cities in comparyſon of this.
            
               Diotae, veſſelles of erthe with handels, wherin wyne was kepte.
            
               Diphthera, a ſhepeherdes cote made with ſhepe ſkynnes.
            
               Diphthongus, two vowelles ioyned to gether called a diphthonge, as ae, oe, au, ei.
            
            
               Dipois, idis, any garment lyned, but it is taken for a doublet.
            
               Diploma, tis, a charter of a prynce or citie, or a wryt.
            
               Dipondium, a weyght of two pounde.
            
               Dipſacon, whyte brere.
            
               Dipſacus, a wylde taſyll.
            
               Dipſas, a lyttell worme lyke a ſerpente, of colour whyte, the tayle diuided with .ii. black lynes.Pau. Aeg. He is alſo called Praeſter, he that is ſtungue of this worme, feleth forthwith intollerable heate, and therwith ſo great drith, that no drynke maye extincte his thyrſte, althoughe he ſhall neuer ceſſe from drynkynge, and ſoo dyeth he without remedye, as ſome do ſuppoſe.
            
               Dirae, curſinges.
            
               Dirce, a womans name, the wyfe of Lycus kynge of Thebans.
            
               Directe, or Directo, an aduerbe ſignifienge right or ſtreyght, or in a right fourme.
            
               Directus, a, um, ſtrayght or right.
            
                
               Diremptio, a breakynge or diſſoluynge, or ſeparation.
            
               Diribitores, diſtributers of money, or paye mayſters.
            
               Diribitorium, the place of payment.
            
               Dirigeo, gui, gêre, to ſtrynke for colde, or for feare.
            
               Dirigere acumina ad caelum, to rayſe theyr toppes highe or vpwarde.
            
               Dirigere aciem, to ſet a battayle in order.
            
               Dirigo, exi, gere, to make ſtreight, or ryght, to order.
            
               Dirimo, remi, ere, reptum, to breake or leaue of.
            
               Ea res conſilium diremit, that thynge brake or diſſolued the counſayle. Alſo to put of, or deferte.
            
               Dirimere bellum, to cauſe warre to ceaſſe.
            
               Dirimere controuerſiam, to make the parties agreed.
            
               Dirimere actionem, to delaye a matter.
            
               Dirimere litem,
               Cicero. to make an ende of a matter in varyaunce or ſuite.
            
               Dirimere ſocietatem, to breake felowſhyp.
            Diripio, Vide in deripio.
            
               Diripere oppidum,
               Plinius. to ſacke a towne.
            
               Diris, an hyghe hyll of Mauritania, nowe called Atlas,
            
               Diritas, ratis, cruelty, vengeance.
            
               Dirumpo, rupi, rumpere, to braſſe or breake a ſunder.
            
               Diruncio, iui, ire, to wede out, or purge that whiche is naught.
            
               Diruo, rui, ruere, to breake downe to the grounde.
            
               Diruptus, ta, tum, braſte or broken.
            Dirus, a, um, vengeable.
            
            
               Dirutus, 
                     •
                  a, tum, broken dow
                  ••
                to the ground dyſtroyed.
            
               Dis, diris, called the god of ryches: ſometyme it ſignifieth ryche.
            
               Ditior, rycher.
            
               Diſcalceatus, vnſhodde.
            
               Diſcalceo, ceare, to pull of ones ſhoes.
            
               Diſcapidino, aui, are, to vncloſe or open.
            
               Diſcedo, ſceſsi, dere, to departe. ſome tyme it ſignifieth an exception, as, Quum diſceſſerim à fratre, nemo eſt mihi te charior. Excepte my brother, no man is to me more dere than thou arte. Alſo it ſignifieth diuiſion or openynge: as, Quum terra diſceſsiſſet magnis quibuſdam imbribus, diſcendit in illum hiatum: whan the erthe by occaſion of moch rayne opened, he wente downe in to the cleft or ſwalowe.
            
               Diſcedere à ſeſe, to forgete hym ſelfe, or to be out of his mynde.
            
               Diſcedere ſuperiorem, he wente awaye vaynquiſher.
            
               Diſcedere inferiorem, he wente awaye vanquiſhed.
            
               Diſcedere ab armis, to put awaye theyr harneyſe.
            
               Diſcedere ab officio, to do no more his duety
            
               Diſcedere à iure, to do agaynſt the lawe.
            
               Diſcedere a ſententia, to change his opiniō,
            
               Diſcedere in diuerſa, to be of ſondry opiniōs
            
               Diſcedit uſus fructus, he loſeth the poſſeſſion and profyte.
            
               Diſceſcit mos, that maner or vſe is lefte.
            
               Diſceſsio, a departynge.
            Diſceſſus, us, idem.
            
               Diſceſsio facta in eius ſententiam, the more part went on his ſyde, & was of his opinion.
            
               Diſceptatio, diſputation or contention.
            
               Diſceptatio libera, iudgement accordynge to the conſcience of hym that iudgeth.
            
               Diſceptatio legittima, iudgement accordyng to the lawe.
            
               Diſceptator, a iudge, arbitrour, or dayes man.
            
               Diſcepto, aui, are, to diſpute or contende, to arbiter or iudge.
            
               Diſceptare armis, to trye by battayle.
            
               Diſcerniculum, a pynne or other lyke inſtrument, wherwith women dyd diuyde the ſhed of theyr heare before.
            
               Diſcerno, decreui, cernere, to departe or ſunder one thynge from an other. Alſo to ſtryue or vary, to knowe diſtinctely.
            
               Diſcernere armis, to fyghte in battayll.
            
               Diſcerpo, pſi, ere, to pluck or teare in pieces.
            
               Diſcinctus, dyſſolute, or negligent, or vnable for the warres, cowarde.
            
               Diſcindo, ſcidi, ſcindere, to cut of.
            Diſcingo, xi, gere, to vngyrde.
            
            
               Diſciplina, lernynge, as it is perceyued of the ſcholer, doctrine as it is tought of the mayſter. It is alſo a good fourme of lyuynge.
            
               Diſciplinoſus, apte to lerne.
            
               Diſcipulus, a ſcholer or diſciple.
            
               Diſcludo, ſi, dere, to ſhut out.
            Diſco, didici, diſcere, to lerne.
            
            
               Dediſco, ere, to forget that whiche was▪ ones lerned.
            
               Diſcobolus, he that throweth a diſhe.
            
               Diſcobinatus, wounded or cut.
            
               Diſconuenio, ni, nire, to diſagree or dyſcorde.
            
               Diſcolor, dyuerſe of coloure.
            
               Diſcoquere, to make to boyle.
            
               Diſcorda, dyſcorde.
            
               Diſcordo, are, to diſcorde or agree yll.
            
               Diſcors, dis, dyſcordant, agreynge yl together
            
               Diſcrepo, aui, are, to diſagree or diſcorde.
            Diſcrete & Diſcretim, Seuerally.
            
            
               Diſcrepantia, difference.
            
               Diſcretio, onis, a ſeparation. ſome tyme election of good from euyl, diſcretion.
            
               Diſcretus, ſeuered or parted. Valla ſayth, that
 it is he that diſcerneth the qualities of men, and value of thynges.
            
               Diſcrimen, minis, diuerſitie or difference. alſo the ſhedynge or partyng of the heare. alſoo it ſygnifieth peryll or danger, ſomtyme battayl.
            
               Diſcriminale, an inſtrumēt wherwith the hear is parted or ſhadde.
            
               Diſcriminatim, diſtinctly a ſunder here & there
            
               Diſcriminatus, ta, tum, diſtincte, in a diuerſitie.
            Diſcrimino, aui, are, to deuyde.
            
            
               Diſcrucior, ari, to be moche vexed or troubled in mynde.
            
               Diſcûbo, bare, to lye downe, to ſleape.
            
               Diſcumbo, cubui, cumbere, to ſyt at meales.
            
               Diſcumeatus, openyd with a wedge or other lyke thynge.
            
               Diſcupio, to deſyre very moche.
            
               Diſcurro, rere, to runne hyther and thyther, to wander.
            
               Diſcurſus, runnynge hyther and thyther.
            
               Diſcuſſoria medicamenta,
               Plaut. in 
                     〈◊〉
                  . medycines, whyche do diſſolue or breke thinges congelid or tough
            
               Diſcus, a dyſhe. alſo a rounde ſtone hauynge an hole in the myddle, whyche in olde tyme men vſed to throwe vp into the ayre, to the intent to exercyſe them ſelfe.
            
               Diſcobolus, he that throweth ſuche a ſtone.
            
               Diſcutio, ſsi, tere, to caſt or ſhake downe, to remoue, to examyne, or dyſcuſſe. alſo to diſſolue humours gatheryd into an impoſtume.
            
               Diſertus, well ſpoken.
            
               Diſerte loqui, to ſpeke wel and to the purpoſe.
            
               Diſijcio, diſieci, diſijcere, to caſte a ſunder.
            
               Disiecta milites, the hoſte dyſperſed.
            
               Diſiunctio, a ſeparation.
            Diſiunctus, ta, tum, ſeparate.
            
            
               Diſiungo, xi, ere, to vnioyne, to ſeparate.
            
               Diſpaleſcere, to publyſhe abrode.
            
               Diſpalo, aui, are, to wander hither and thither.
            
               Diſpalati, ſcattered.
            
               Diſpando, ſi, dere, to ſtretche out.
            
               Diſpar, vnlyke, vnmete.
            
               Diſparo, rare, to ſeuer.
            
               Diſparatum, is that whyche is ſeparate frome any thyng by layeng to his contrary.
            
               Diſpartior, tiri, to diuide, or be dyuyded.
            
               Diſpello, diſpuli, diſpellere, to expelle or putte from many places, or many wayes.
            
               Diſpendioſus, ſa, ſum, harmefull, vnprofitable.
            
               Diſpendium, loſſe by negligence or ſuperfluous expenſes. Alſo it ſignifieth harme.
            
               Diſpendo, di, ere, to ſpende. alſo to ſtretch out.
            
               Diſpenno, ere, to ſtretche.
            
               Diſpenſator, toris, a ſtewarde or other offycer, ſayinge out money for houſeholde, a diſpenſer of thynges.
            
               Diſpenſatio, layēg out of mony for an other mā
            
            
               Diſpenſo, aui, are, to lay out money.
            Diſpendo, di, ere, to loſe.
            
            
               Diſpereo, rij, rire, to be loſte vtterly.
            
               Diſpeream, I pray god that I dy: It is a word vſyd in the ſtede of an othe, in the affirmance or denyenge of a matter.
            
               Diſperij, I am vndone.
            
               Diſpergo, ſperſi, gere, to ſowe abrode, or to ſcatter.
            
               Diſpertio, tiui, ire, to gyue parte to one, parte to an other. Iniuriam diſpertiuiſti, pinguiorem agnum iſti habent, Thou haſte not parted it equally, for they haue the fatter lambe.
            
               Diſpeſco, cui, ere, to dryue beaſtes from theyr paſture.
            
               Diſpeſſo, ſsi, ere, to ſprede abrode.
            
               Diſpicientia, circumſpection, aduyſement, diligent conſyderation.
            
               Diſpicio, xi, cere, to diſcerne, to eſpy, to cōſider.
            
               Diſplicio, cêre, to dyſpleaſe.
            
               Diſplina, ſhe that hath dyſpleaſed.
            Diſplodo, ſi, dere, to ſpreade.
            
            Diſpolio, idem quod deſpolio.
            
               Diſpoliabulum,
               Plaut. in Bacch. a deſpoylle, a place where all myſchiefe or robbery is done.
            
               Diſpondaeus, a foote in meter, that hath foure ſyllables longe, as Oratores.
            
            
               Diſpono, ſui, ere, to dyſpoſe, to order.
            
               Diſpoſitè, ordynately.
            
               Diſpoſitus uir, he that ſetteth his wordes in good order.
            
               Diſpudet, I am aſhamed, or he is aſhamed of that whiche is done.
            
               Diſpulue
                     •
                  o, are, to make a thynge in poulder.
            
               Diſpumo, are, to ſkymme of.
            
               Diſpunctio, an examination.
            
               Diſpungo,
               Budaeus in annota. 
               xi, gere, to put out thynges writen, ſettynge pryckes vnder euery letter.
            
               Diſpungere rationes, to examyn an accompt
            
               Diſputo, taui, tare, to dyſpute, to make playne to be vnderſtande, to rayſon.
            
               Diſquiro, ſiui, rere, to inſerche dylygentely, to inquyre.
            
               Diſquiſitio, where euerye mannes opynyon or ſentence is demaunded vppon a mattier in iudgement.Budeus in anno.
            
            
               Diſraro, aui, are, to make thynne that whyche is thycke.
            
               Diſrumpo, for dirumpo.
            
               Diſſecatus, ta, tum, cutte as a bodye is in an anotomye.
            
               Diſſe co, caui, care, to cut in pieces.
            
               Diſſectio, onis, an anotomy.
            
               Diſſemino, are, to ſowe ouer all.
            Diſſentaneus, a, um, not accordynge.
            
            
               Diſſentio, tire, & Diſſentior, tiri, to thynke contrary or to dyſagree.
            
               Diſſeparo, aui, are, to dyſſeuer one frome an nother.
            
               Diſſepimentum, the partition in a wall nutte, wherwith the kernell is dyuided.
            
                
               Diſſereno, aui, are, to waxe fayre wether.
            
               Diſſero, rui, rere, to ſowe ſeedes, ſometyme to dyſpute or declare.
            Diſſerto, idem.
            
               Diſſertabundus, a great dyſputour.
            
               Diſſertatio, diſputation or treaty of any thyng.
            
               Diſſertio, a partition of landes.
            
               Diſsideo, ere, to be at varyance or dyſcorde.
            
               Diſsidioſus, one that loueth diſcord or variāce.
            
               Diſsidium, variance or dyſcorde.
            Diſsidentia, idem.
            
               Diſsignatio, a gatheryng togither of people to wonder at one which is of myſcheuous condytions.
            
               Diſsignatores, men that had the ordrynge of playes vſed to be made at the buryell of notable perſonages, whyche dydde appoynt the ſtandynges and ſeates to euery ſtate.
            
               Diſsigno, aui, are, to make a ſygne or token, ſomtyme to appoynt.
            
               Diſsilio, liui, ire, to leape downe frome a place. ſometyme to braſte, to leape here and there.
            Diſsimilis, le, vnlyke.
            
            
               Diſsimiliter, in a dyuers facion.
            
               Diſsimilitudo, dinis, diuerſite, varietie in form
            
               Diſsimulanter, without any ſemblaunt or countenaunce. Diſsimulatim, idem.
            
            Diſsmulatio, dyſſemblyng. Diſsimulantia, idē.
            
               Diſsimulator, toris. Vt qui diſsimulatòres ſtudiorum fuerint, They made ſemblaunte as they had not ſtudyed.
            
               Diſsimulo, aui, are, to dyſſemble, to make as yf he knewe nothynge, to ſhewe countenaunce contrary to his thought.
            
               Diſsipatio, a ſcattering, or bryngyng one thing into many ſmall pieces, or a waſtynge.
            
               Diſsipalis, le, eaſy to be broken in pieces.
            
               Diſsipo, aui, are, to ſcatter or ſprede abrode. alſo to bringe vnto nought, to breake into pieces.
            
               Diſsitus, ta, tum, ſet farre of, dyſtant.
            
               Diſſocio, are, to breake company.
            
               Diſsoluo, ui, uere, to loſe or vnbynd, to ſpede, to pay ſeueral dettes, to pay that which is owid
            
               Diſſoluere aliquem,
               Plaut. in Mercat. to dyſpatche one frome longe taryenge.
            
               Diſſoluere religionem, to do agaynſt the relygyon, to breake the religion.
            
               Diſſoluere interrogationem, to aſſoyle a queſtion.
            
               Diſſoluere, to depeche hym ſelfe of buſynes.
            
               Diſſolutis criminibus, after that he had made aunſwere to that whyche was layde to his charge, & was therof acquyted.
            Diſſolutio ſtomachi, uide Nauſea.
            
               Diſſolubilis, le, eaſy to louſe.
            
               Diſſolui, to be payde or dyſcharged.
            
               Diſſolutè, an aduerbe whiche ſignifyeth diſſolutely, without care.
            
               Diſſolutio, a diſſoluyng or louſynge.
            
               Diſſolutio criminis, a pourgation.
            
               Diſſolutus, ta, tum, louſed. alſo he which liueth at his owne pleaſure, contrarye to the lawes or good cuſtomes.
            
               Diſſonantia, a dyſcorde in voyces.
            Diſſono, naui, nare, to dyſcorde.
            
            
               Diſſonus, na, num, that whiche doth not agree.
            
               Diſſuadeo, ſi, dêre, to diſſwade, to aſſay to turn one from his opinyon or purpoſe.
            
               Diſſuaſio, the acte of diſſuadyng, diſſuaſion.
            
               Diſſuaſor, ſôris, he that diſſuadeth.
            
               Diſſuauiatio, the acte in kyſſyng ſwetely.
            
               Diſſuauior, ari, to kyſſe ſwetely, and with moche delectation.
            
               Diſſuefacio, & diſſueſco, ſcere, to leaue the olde maner and cuſtome.
            
               Diſſue tudo, lacke of vſe.
            
               Diſſuetus, ta, tum, vnwont, not accuſtomed.
            
               Diſſulto, aui, are, to leape hyther and thyther.
            
               Diſſuo, ere, to vndoo a thynge.
            
               Diſtaedet, I am weary of a thynge.
            
               Diſtantia, dyſtance.
            
               Diſtendo, di, dere, to ſtretche out, or retche, to fyll as a bottell is fylled.
            
               Diſtentus, full, bollen out.
            
               Diſterminatio, a dyuiſion of grounde.
            
               Diſtermino, aui, are, to dyuide one place from an other.
            
               Diſtero, ſtriui, ſterere, to breake ſmall, to pound or braye a thynge in a morter.
            
               Diſtichon, two verſes contaynyng one matter.
            
               Diſtillatio, onis, a diſtryllyng, ſpecially from the heade, called a reume or catarre, the poſe.
            
               Diſtillo, aui, are, to diſtyll, or drop downe.
            
               Diſtincte, diſtinctely, ſeuerallye, where euerye thynge is in his place and order.
            
               Diſtinctio, a dyuerſitie, diſtinction, ſeparation.
            
               Diſtineo, nui, ere, to let or withholde with buſyneſſe or vrgent cauſes, to hold or put backe.
            
               Diſtineri, to be let.
            
               Diſtinguo, xi, ere, to dyuyde. alſo to make diſtynction.
            
               Diſtito, aui, are, to ſtande aparte, or be dyſtant one from an other.
            
               Diſto, aui, are, to differre, to be diſtant, or to be a certayne ſpace from a thynge.
            
               Diſtorqueo,
               Ter
                     •••
                   i
                     •
                   Eunuc
                     ••
                  
                
               ſi, quere, to ſette awrye. Ah illud uide, os ut ſibi carnifex diſtorſit, O, loke how the hangeman ſetteth his month awrye.
            
               Diſtortus, wry, out of faſcion, defourmyd.
            
               Diſtractio, ſeparation, alienation, or pullynge away, or a ſunder.
            
               Diſtractus, ta, tum, pullyd on ſunder.
            
               Diſtraho xi, ere, to plucke away, or to dyuyde, or to withdrawe a thynge, ſomtyme by tranſlation it is taken for to ſel, alſo to fynyſhe or conclude matters in variaunce.
            
               Controuerſias diſtrahere, to ende controuerſies or ſuites.
            
                
               Diſtribuo, ui, ere, to diſtrybute, or gyue in ſundry partes.
            
               Diſtribuere cauſam, to diuyde his pleadyng into ſundrye partes, or to make many plees of one matter.
            
               Diſtribute, in partes or portions.
            
               Diſtributio, partition, diſtribution.
            
               Diſtricté, ſtraytely.
            
               Diſtrictus, let from doinge of a thynge.
            
               Diſtringo, xi, gere, to bynde faſt, or to ſtrayne harde, to rubbe of or clenſe the fylthe or ſoyle of the body, to thretten to ſtrike, or to drawe out a ſworde. Gladium diſtrinxit, he drewe out his ſworde. ſomtyme to gather, as Sereno coelo manibus diſtringi oliuam oportet,
               Colu
                     ••
                  el. In a faire clere day the oliues muſt be gathered by hande.
            
               Diſtringere cruſtam panis, to chyp bread, or to part of the cruſte.
            
               Diſtrictus negorijs, let with buſynes.
            
               Diſtrunco, care, to cut of a piece of a thynge.
            
               Diſturbo, aui, are, to caſte downe, to lette the enterpriſe or purpoſe of one.
            
               Diſulcus, an hogge, whiche hath the briſtels of his necke diuyded.
            
               Diteo, & diteſco, ſci, ſcere, to make riche, or be ryche. Dito, taui, tare, idem.
            
            
               Dithyrambus, a verſe made in the honour of Bacchus.
            
               Ditio, onis, a dominyon.
            
               Ditior, rycher.
            
               Ditiſsimus, rycheſt.
            
               Ditrochaeus, a foote of foure ſyllables in verſe, hauyng one longe, an other ſhorte, an nother louge, the fourthe ſhort.
            
               Diu, longe tyme. alſo the day tyme, wherof cometh Interdiu, in the day tyme.
            
               Diua, a woman ſaynte.
            
               Diuagor, ari, to wander from place to place.
            
               Diuarico, aui, are, to ſtryde, or to ſpreade wyde one from an other, as boughes of a tree.
            
               Diuello, li, ere, to pull away by violence.
            
               Diuendo, didi, dere, to ſell to dyuers perſones, or in dyuers parcelles.
            
               Diuerbia, the partes of a comedy or interlude, where many perſons ſpeake togither.
            
               Diuerſa pars, the contrary parte.
            
               Diuerſito, aui, are, to tourne often to a thynge, or to reſorte.
            
               Diuerſitas, diuerſitie.
            
               Diuerſor, ari, to reſorte, or repayre to a place.
            
               Diuerſorium, an Inne, wherto men in iourney do reſort to bayt or be lodged, a lodgyng.
            
               Diuerſorius, a, um, pertaynynge to anyune or lodgynge.
            
               Diuerſus, a, um, dyuers or ſeparate.
            
               Diuerſum diſtrahi, to be drawen hyther and thyther. Diuerſe, idem.
            
            
               Diuerticula, bywayes, or ſyde wayes, oute of the hygh waye.
            
               Diuerticulum, a bayte.
            
               Diuerto, ti, tere, to turne from one thyng to an other, to take lodgyng or to bayte.
            
               Diuerto ad te, & apud te, I comme to lodge with the, or to tary for a tyme with the.
            
               Diuertere uia, to turne out of the hygh way.
            Diues, diuitis, ryche.
            
            
               Diues auis, whoſe ancetours were great mē.
            
               Diuexo, aui, are, to vexe or trouble.
            
               Diuexare rem ſuam, to waſte his ſubſtance.
            
               Diutius, lengar. Diutuſsime, longeſt.
            
               Diuidia,
               Plaut. in Bacch. tediouſnes, ſomtyme it betokeneth diſcorde, buſynes, trouble, variance.
            
               Diuidiculum, an head of a cundyte.
            
               Diuidium, a partition or dyuident.
            
               Diuido, ſi, dere, to dyuyde or part in ſunder.
            
               Diuidere ſententiam, wher in a counſayl one in his rayſon ſemeth partely to affirme, partly to diſaffyrme any thynge, whyche is to be done: he that reaſoneth nexte, requyreth hym that hath ſpoken, to diuyde his argument, & abide vpon one part, whiche he wyll eyther confyrme or reproue, lyke as our lawyers vſe to do, whan dyuers titles are brought in one pleadyng, they pray the court, that the contrary part may abyde vpon one of them, whervnto they wyll aunſwere.
            
               Diuiduum, that whiche maye be ſeuered or diuided.
            
               Diuinatio, onis, a foreiugement or coniecture. alſo where a matter commeth in iudgement, without writing or witnes on any of the partes, that iugement may be callyd Diuinatio, a dyuynation.
            
               Diuinipotens, he that hathe power in dyuyne thynges.
            
               Diuinitas, godheade.
            
               Diuinitus, godly, or of god.
            
               Diuino, aui, are, to telle truthe, as well of thynges preſent, as of thynges paſſed: for the more parte it ſygnifieth to coniecte of thinges preſent, what ſhall happen.
            
               Diuinus, a, um, that whiche pertayneth to god, diuine.
            
               Diuiſio, onis, wherby we declare what is in varyaunce, or wherby we expreſſe, of what thinges we wyll treate. alſo a diuyſion into ſundry partes.
            
               Diuiſor, oris, amonge the olde Romaynes was he whiche at the election of great officers, diuided or gaue money to the people, in the names of them, which ſued for the offyce, to the intent for to attayne it.
            Diuiſus, a, um, dyuided.
            
            Diuiſus, idem quod diuiſio. Diuiſura, idem.
            Diuitiae, diuitiarum, diuitijs, diuitias, rycheſſe.
            
            
               Diuito, aui, are, to make ryche.
            
               Dium, the daye lyghte vnder the fyrmamente.
 whan we ſaye. Sub dio aliquid fieri, it ſygnifieth ſome thynge to be done abrode, or out of the houſe.
            
               Diunt, olde authors vſed for dent or dederint.
            
            
               Diuortium, a diuorſe or ſeparation of a manne and his wyfe. ſomtyme a departynge from any other thynge.
            
               Diurno, aui, are, to lyue longe.
            
               Diurnus, na, num, perteynyng to day, as Diurni libri, bokes contaynyng the actes done euery day. ſomtyme a dayes hyre.
            
               Dius, dia, come of a gentyll ſtocke.
            
               Diutinus, na, num, longe contynuynge.
            
               Diutiſsime, very longe, or to longe.
            
               Diutius, lengar.
            
               Diutule, a lyttell whyle.
            
               Diuturnitas, a longe ſpace of tyme.
            
               Diuturnus, na, num, longe contynuynge.
            
               Diuulgatio, a publycation, or makyng a thyng common to all men.
            
               Dinulgo, aui, are, to publyſhe abrode, to ſette a thynge in ſuche condition as euery man may vſe it at his pleſure, to make a thing common
            
               Diuus, ua, uum, worthy a diuine remembrance. Nowe they take Diuum & diuam, for a man or woman ſaynct.
         
         
            ¶D ANTE O.
            
               DO, dedi, dare, to gyue. alſo to offer or proffer.Terentius 
               Vt res dant ſeſe, As thynges offer them ſelues. alſo to bring. Magnā dabit ille ruinam arboribus, He ſhall bringe a great fall vnto trees.Vergilius alſo to ſay, tel, or declare, to do. Quamobrē has partes didicerim paucis dabo. For what cauſe I lerned that part, I wyll tell the in fewe wordes. Pol haud paternum iſtud dediſti,
               Terent. In fayth thy father neuer taught the to do this. alſo to obey, to conforme. Da te mihi, Conforme the to my wyll.
            
               Do manus, I reder me, or I am vanquiſhed.
            
               Do lego, I gyue by teſtament or laſt wyll.
            
               Dare auribus, to flatter, or ſpeake to pleaſe.
            
               Dare damnas, to paye damages, or to make ſatisfaction.
            
               Dare facultatem, to gyue lybertie or power to do a thynge.
            
               Dare fidem, to promyſe faythfully.
            
               Dare in pedes, to flee or runne away.
            
               Dare in ruborem, to make aſhamed.
            
               Dare inſidias, to deceyue one.
            
               Dare in uiam, to take a iourney.
            
               Dare iusiurandum, to take an othe.
            
               Dare malum alicui, to do one a ſhrewd turn.
            
               Dare mancipio, to delyuer on warrantyſe.
            
               Suo periculo is emat, qui eam mercabitur, mancipio ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   promitter, ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                quis
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                dabit, He that wyll haue her,Plautꝰ in perſa. let hym bye her at his owne peryll, for no man ſhall promyſe or deliuer her on warantyſe.
            
               Dare manum, to put in his hand priuyly, as they do to men of law, or priuy ſolicitours, or corrupt offycers.
            
               Dare mutuum, to lende.
            
               Dare negotium, to aſſigne or appoint biſſyneſ, or a thynge to be done.
            
               Dare operam, to apply, to gyue or take hede, or to helpe.
            
               Dare poteſtatem, to cōmyt authoritie or power, or remyt a thyng to an other mans pleaſure or lybertie. Suarum omnium rerum illi poteſtatem dederat, He gaue hym the rule of all that he had.
            
               Dare poenas, to ſuffre punyſhement.
            
               Dare ſe alicui, to folow one, or to obſerue his commaundementes.
            
               Dare ueniam, to forgyue.
            
               Dare uerba, to deceyue by fayre promyſes.
            
               Dare uitio, to dyſprayſe, to blame.
            Danunt, idem quod dant, they gyue.
            
            
               Datarius, a, um, that whiche is to gyue.
            
               Datatim ludere, to toſſe from one to an other as men play at tenyſe.
            
               Datu meo, of my gyfte.
            
               Datum eſt, it is predeſtinate.
            
               Doccus, a tymber piece.
            
               Doceo, cui, cêre, to teache or gyue knowledge, or to informe, to aduyſe, to proue.
            
               Docêre fabulam, to play a comedy.
            
               Docibilis, apt to be taught.
            
               Docilis, le, lyghtly taught or inſtructed.
            
               Docilitas, aptnes to lerne.
            
               Doctè, connnyngly.
            
               Doctor, he that teacheth other.
            
               Doctrina, ae, doctrine, which procedeth of the teacher. Diſciplina, lerning takē of the ſkolat.
            
               Doctus, ta, tum, lernyd, that is to ſay, knowing a thyng without experyence. Vide peritus.
            
            
               Documentum, a leſſon.
            
               Documentum ſtatuere, to gyue to oone the fyrſte inſtruction.
            
               Documento habere aliquem, to take example by one, to beware by an other man.
            
               Dodona, a citie in Grece, wherby was a wod, in the whiche men thought that trees ſpake.
            
               Dodone, the doughter of Iupiter & Europa.
            
               Dodra, was a drynke made of nyne thynges, herbes, iuyce, water, wyne, ſalt, oyle, breade, hony, and pepper.
            
               Dodrans, antis, a poyſe wayenge nyne ounces. It is alſoo nyne of the meaſures callyd Ciathi. Alſo it is ſometyme taken for the nynthe parte of any thynge dyuyded. It alſo ſignyfyeth the length or bredth of twelue fyngers. Caulis Dodrantalis, a ſtalke or ſtemme .xii. fyngers hygh.
            
               Dogma, atis, a certayne determination, which in ſectes of philoſophers euery one had, with
 out the whiche the ſect fayled. ſometyme they be callyd Placita.
            
            
               Dogmatiſtes, he that induceth any ſect or new opynyon.
            
               Dolabra, a carpenters axe.
            
               Dolabro, aui, are, to hewe as a carpentat.
            
               Dolenter, ſorowfully.
            
               Dolentia, griefe.
            
               Doleo, ui, ere, to fele peyne or grief, to be ſory.
            
               Dolere caput, pedes, oculos, the head, fete, or eyen to ake.
            
               Doleo tuis rebus aduerſis, I am ſory for thy myſfortune or trouble.
            
               Doleo tuam uicem, I am ſory on thy behalf.
            
               Dolium, any great veſſell of wyne as a tunne, pype, butte, or hoggeshead. In the olde the olde tyme it contayned .xxx. of the meaſures callyd Amphoras.
            
               Doli
                     •
                  ris, great as a tunne.
            
               Doliaris heluo, a gorbealyed glutton.
            
               Doliarium, a wyne ſellar.
            
               Dolichus, a ſpace of grounde contaynynge .xii. furlonges.
            Dolio, iui, ire, to graue in metall.
            
               Dolo, aui, are, to cut or hew with an axe or ſith.
            
               Dolare opus aliquod, to make a thyng rudely or groſſely, as it were to rough hewe it.
            
               Dolobella,
               Varro. an hatchet.
            
               Dolon, the proper name of a manne of Troy, that was very ſwyft of foote.
            
               Dolones, a ſcurge, hauīg a dagger, or other like thing cloſed within it. It is alſo a certayn tacklyng of ſhippes.Seruius. alſo a lytel ſayl callyd a trynket.
            
               Dolopes,
               Liuius. a people of Theſſaly.
            
               Dolor, is, griefe or peyne of bodye or mynde, alſo ſorowe.
            
               Dolorificus, ca, cum, that which maketh grefe or ſorowe.
            
               Doloro, aui, are, to cauſe one to haue ſorowe or peyne.
            
               Doloſè, deceytfully.
            
               Doloſus, deceyptfull or crafty.
            
               Dolus, deceypt.
            
               Dolus malus, euerye crafty deceypt to compaſſe a man, whereby he receyueth damage, mal ingin.
            
               Doma, atis, a ſolar or flat keuering of a hous. It is ſomtyme taken for the houſe.
            Domator,Sueton
                     •
                  . idem quod domitor.
            
               Domeſticatim, by houſeholdes, hous by houſe.
            
               Domeſtici, houſeholde ſeruantes.
            
               Domeſticus, ca, cum, pertayning to houſehold. ſometyme it ſignifieth tame, famyliar. Domeſtica exēpla, exāple of their own kynrede.
            
               Domi, at home.
            
               Domi nobiles, honorably in their own coūtry
            
               Domi belli
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , in deedes as well of warre as of peace.
            
               Domi & militiae, aſwel in peace as in warre.
            
               Domicilium, a manſion place.
            
               Domicoenium, an home ſupper.
            
               Domina, the lady or mayſtreſſe.
            
               Dominatus, tus, domination, or authoritie ouer other, mayſterſhyp. Dominatio, idem.
            
            
               Dominum, a lordſhyp or rule ouer other.
            
               Dominor, ari, to rule or haue ſoueraynty.
            
               Dominus, a lorde or maiſter, to whom other do ſeruyce. alſo an owner.
            
               Domiporta; a pyllar or other lyke thynge, that beaneth vp an houſe.
            
               Domis, was taken of old writers for dominus
            
            
               Domitalis, apt, to be tamed or broken.
            
               Domitio,
               Lucretius. 
               onis, a retournyng home.
            
               Domitor, toris, a tamer or breaker of that, whyche is wylde.
            
               Domitura, the act of tamynge or breakynge of any wylde beaſt.
            
               Dominus, ta, tum, made tame, ſubdued, or vanquyſhed.Tibullus.
            
            
               Domnonij a people of a countrey in England callyd D
                  ••
               onſhyre.
            
               Domo, aui, are, to make tame, ſomtyme to vanquyſhe.
            
               Domare hoſtes, to vanquyſhe enemies.
            
               Domuitio, a departynge home.
            
               Domo,
               Cicero de diuina. from home.
            
               Domū, to the hous, or home, ſomtyme at home.
            
               Domuncula, a lyttell or poore houſe.
            
               Domus, mus, mui, a houſe generally. ſometime a temple or church. alſo a family or kynrede. alſo a mans countrey. alſo a neſt of byrdes.
            
               Domus,
               Liuius. the accuſatif caſe plurel, home to their houſes.
            
               Domus, mi, mo, a dwellyng houſe.
            
               Donarium, a howſe, where ſuche thinges were kept, that were giuē to the goddis. It is ſomtyme taken for a gyft or rewarde.
            
               Donatio coronae, garlandes that in the olde tyme were worne in playes.
            
               Donatio, a gyfte.
            
               Donatio propter nuptias, a womans dowerye.
            
               Donatiſtae, wer cher
                  •••
               es, whiche affirmed, that the congregation of chriſten people was no where but with theym. Wherefore thoſe, whiche came from the catholyke parte vnto them, they did eftſons baptiſe them. alſo they affirmed, that in the churche were not people good and yll, but onely good, and that they onely pertayned vnto the churche. The author of this hereſy was named Donatus, and was of the countrey of Numidia, aboute the yere of our lorde. 353.
            
               Donatiuum, a gyft in money or grayne, gyuen by emperours vnto the people. Alſo to ſouldiours aboue theyr wages.
            
               Donatiuus, he that is able to gyue.
            
               Donatus, he to whome any thyng is gyuen.
            
               Donax, cis, a reede or caue, wherof thy made arowes.
            
                
               Donec, vntyll, ſometyme as longe.
            
               Donec uiuo, as longe as I lyue.
            
               Dono, aui, are, to gyue lyberally or freely.
            
               Donare ciuitate, to make a cyteſyn. Donare aeternitate, to make a ꝑpetual memorial of one
            
               Donum, a gyfte.
            
               Donyſa, a yle in the ſea Aegeum.
            
               Dorcas, cadis, a bucke or a doo.
            
               Dores, was a generall name of dyuers people in Grece, as of Creta, Rhodus, Sicilia, and dyuers other countrayes, ſo callyd of a people inhabiting by the mountayn callid Oeta, which wandryng lyke to the Gothes, by fors wanne certayn places in the ſayd countrays, and fynally ſubdued the olde inhabitantes.
            
               Doria, & Dorica, names of countrays ioyning to Athenes.
            
               Dorica lingua, the langage of the people callyd Dores, & was the .v. tunge of the Grekes
            
               Dorica, was a certayne fourme of muſyk, whiche repreſented a wonderful grauitie, & therfore was aſſigned to noble perſonages, and vſed in Tragedies.
            
               Dorion, a towne of Achaie.
            
               Doriphori, were certayn gentylmen attending about the perſonnes of kynges, whiche bare iauelyns in theyr handes. Suche of late yeres princis haue alſo vſed to haue, and ar callyd ſpeares, although they beare only in their handes battayle axes.
            
               Doris, a nymph of the ſea, and is interpretate bytterneſſe.
            Dormio, miui, ire, to ſleape.
            
            
               Dormire in urramuis aurem,
               Terent. in Heauton. is a prouerbe which ſignifieth to be without any maner of care. It may be englyſhed, To ſleape ſoundly on bothe ſydes.
            
               Dormiſco, ſcere, to begyn to ſleape.
            
               Dormitator, a ſleaper.
            
               Dormito, aui, are, to ſleape ſoundly.
            
               Dormitorium, that which pertayneth to ſlepe.
            
               Dorodocia, corruption of Iudges with gyftes and rewardes.
            
               Doronicum, a precyous & holſom rote brought from Mauritania, whiche is of the quantitie of a mans fynger, and knottye as it were ioyntes. And is putte into confections made for the diſeaſes of the ſtomacke, and lacke of perfecte dygeſtion. Ruellius ſuppoſeth it to be that, whyche of the Grekes is callyd Arnabo, of ſome Carnabum, or Zamabum, It is hot and dry in the thyrde degree.
            
               Dorophorus, he that carieth a preſent.
            
               Dorpia, were certain days, which the Atheniē
               ſes kept ſolemne, in open feaſting & bāketting
            
               Dorſualia, panels, whiche horſis doo weare on their backes, whan they cary or drawe.
            
               Dorſuarius, a, um, that whiche beareth or carieth any thyng on the backe.
            
               Dorſum, a backe of man or beaſte.
            
               Dorſum in mari,
               Seruius. a heape of ſande gathered in the ſea, whiche watermen do calle a ſhelpē.
            Dorſus, idem.
            
               Dorylás, the name of a ryuer in Phrigia.
            
               Dos, dotis, dowery, land giuē in mariage to the huſbande for cauſe of the mariage only, it is alſo a qualitie of a ꝑſon gyuen of nature.
            
               Dores animi, indowmentes of the ſoule, that is to ſay, the giftis of grace. Dotes corporis. indowmētes of the body, that is to ſay, braulty, ſtrength, helth. &c. the giftes of nature.
            
               Doralis, le, that pertayneth to dowry, as Bona dotalia, dotalis fundus, goodes or landes giuen in mariage with a woman.
            Doto, aui, are, to indowe.
            
            
               Doxa, in greke ſignifieth opiniō, ſomtyme glorye.
         
         
            ¶D ANTE R.
            
               DRacêna, the female dragon.
            
               Drachma, the .viii. parte of an ounce in weight or meſure. It was alſo a coyne ſygned with a bullocke, which counteruailed as moche as a poyſe grote, being .viii. grotes the weight of an ounce.
            
               Drachma auri, was .xii. ſyluer dragmas, of our money nowe .v.s.ix.d.
            
               Draco, onis, a dragon. It was alſoo the name of hym, whiche firſte dyd gyue and write lawes to the people of Athenes, wherein he appoynted death for euery ſmall theft. wherfore it was ſayde, that he wrate his lawes with the bloud of men.
            
               Draconarius, a ſtanderde bearer.
            
               Dracones, of Pliny be taken for old branches of vines, alſo it is an herbe, whiche is otherwyſe callyd Pyretum, it bourneth and byteth the tunge, as well the leafe as the roote, in englyſhe Pelytory of Spayne.
            
               Dracontias, a ſtone taken out of the heade of a dragon, the head beinge ſodaynly ſtryken of, or els it reſolueth in the brayne, whyle the dragon dyeth. it is alſo callyd Draconîtes.
            
            Draconîtes, idem.
            
               Dracontium, an herbe callyd Dragons.
            
               Dracunculus, a lytel dragon. it is alſo an herbe callyd Dragons, namyd alſo Dracontea.
            
            
               Dragma, a grype or handfull.
            
               Draguntea, an herbe callyd Dragons.
            
               Drama, matis,, where in a comedy or interlude, dyuers perſonages be brought in, ſome abydyng, ſome departynge.
            
               Drangiana, a prouynce in Aſia the more.
            
               Drepanum, the name of a citie in Italy callyd nowe Trapani.
            
               Dromedarius, & Dromada, a certayn kynd of camelles, whiche haue two bunches on their backes, and are meruaylous ſwyft, and may
 ſuſtayn to be thre dayes without drynk whan they be iourneyed.
            
               Dromus, the place where men do runne horſes, to try the ſwyftnes of them.
            
               Dropax, a noble oyntment made with pytche, excellentely cōmended of Galenus, and other famous phiſitions.
            
               Druides, were ſomtyme in France callyd Gallia, one of the two eſtates, of like cōdition as the ſpiritualtie is nowe among vs. They had in great eſtimation woddes of greatte okes, where they vſed theyr ſacrifices and ſuperſtious ceremonies. And they had in a meruayllous reuerence al thyng that grew on an oke, ſpecially myſſelden, affyrmynge that it was ſent from heuen. Theyr ſacrifice was in this fourme: Fyrſte vnder an oke, wheron grewe myſſelden, they cauſed meate to be prepared and ſette, than to as there brought forth two white bulles, whoſe hornes were than newe bounden, that is to ſaye, were fyrſt ſet in the plough or wayne. Than the prieſt being clad in whyte, clymmed vp to the tree, and hauing a byll of golde in his hande, he dyd ſhread or cut of the myſſelden, than offred they the ſacrifice, prayeng vnto god, that the gyft whiche ſhulde be gyuen, mought be to theym that receyued it, proſperous & fortunat, ſuppoſing that the beaſte, whiche was barrayne, yf he dranke of the myſſelden, ſhoulde be fruyteful, and that it was a ſure remedye agaynſte all poyſon. It is ſuppoſed, that theyr ſuperſtition came firſt out of this yle callyd Britayne.
            
               Drupae,
               Ruellius. are olyues or oyle bearies, whiche are betwene grene and rype, and doo begynne to waxe blacke.
            
               Druſus, the name of a Romayn, of ryght noble lygnage and eloquence, but he was proude and ambitious.
            
               Dryas, the proper name of a man of Theſſaly, frende of Neſtor.
            
               Dryades, were fayries of woddes.
            
               Dryinus, a lytell worme, ſomtime founde in the rootes of an oke, whiche is ſo miſcheous a poyſon, that if one treade on hym barefoted, forthwith the ſkyn cometh of, & all the legge ſwellyth. And which is more to be meruayled at, they which do handle him, that is hurt, loſeth his ſkyn. About the place where the ſayd worme hath bitten, there is a rednes with a ſwellyng, & there riſeth lyttel wheales, out of the which cometh a watry humour. alſo there hapneth to him, which is hurt, frettynges in the ſtomake and bealy.Galen. Pau. Aeg. One remedy therfore is akornes beaten in a morter, & drunke with wyne. Alſo the roote of an holy bruiſed & laid to the place, dothe mitigate the peyne.
            
               Drylon, a ryuer of Slauony.
            
               Drymodis, afterwarde Pelaſgus, is now callyd Archady.
            
               Dryopteris,
               Dioſcori. is an herbe, which groweth on old oken trees amonge the moſſe, and is lyke to ferne, but the creues or inciſions of the leaues be leſſe, and the rotes be rough and twiſted togither, and in taſte ſomewhat ſweete. Some call it Oſmende royall.
            
               Dryos, ſlyme growynge in okes.
         
         
            ¶D ANTE V.
            
               DVBENVS,
               Pom. Feſ. was of the old Romans taken for Dominus.
            
            
               Dubio,
               Plautus. 
               aui, are, to be in doubte.
            
               Dubiat quid agat,
               Vergilius. he is in doubte what he ſhulde do.
            Dubitatim, Dubiè Dubitanter, doubtfully.
            
            Dubitatio, & dubietas, doubte.
            
            
               Dubito, aui, are, to be in doute, or to tract time, to myſtruſte. Dubitatur, men doubte.
            
               Dubius, a, um, doutfull. Dubius, is he that hath two ways, and woteth not which to take.
            
               Dubia coena, a banket, wherat are ſoo many and dyuers meates, that a man knoweth not of whiche he may eate.
            
               Dubiae res, thinges doubtfull or daungerous.
            
               Ducatus, tus, the gouernāce or condute of men. Alſo a duchy. alſo Ducatus, ti, a coyne callyd a ducate.
            
               Ducatus praeſtare, to be capitayn of an hoſt, to bryng men to battayle.
            
               Ducenarius, a capytayn of .CC. men.
            Ducenti, tae, ta, two hundred.
            
            
               Ducenteſimus, a, um, the two hundred.
            
               Ducenties, two hundred tymes.
            
               Duceni anni, two hundred yeres.
            
               Duco, xi, cere, to leade them that be wyllynge, to haue reſpect to a thynge, ſomtyme it ſignifieth to allect or ſtyre with ſom pleſant mean. alſo to reuolue, alſo to draw, as a mā drawith a ſword. alſo to get. ſomtyme it ſignifieth doing, as Ducere ſomnos, to ſleps. alſo to build or make vp. ſomtime to turn awey, as Ducere uultus, to turne away the viſage. To delay or prolong to go down. Ego me duco ab arbore. I went down of the tree. alſo to wed, or do the act of mariage ſomtime to ſuppoſe. Hanc eſſe in te ſapiētiā exiſtimāt,
               Cicero de amicitia. 
               ut oīa tua in te poſita eſſe ducas, Men thinke that wiſedome to be in you, that ye thynke all that which is your owne, to be in your ſelfe and not in fortune.
            
               Ducere aetatem, to ſpend ones tyme. Ducere animā, to lyue. Ducere animo, to cōſider, to think. Ducere animum, to recreate the mynd. Ducere aquā, to conuey water from a ſpring.
            
               Ducere bellum, to prolong battayl or warre.
            
               Ducere colorem, to waxe ruddy.
            
               Ducere dāno, to take it for a damage or loſſe
            
               Ducere aliquem ex aere, to counterfaite one in mettalle.
            
                
               Ducere diem ex die, to put of frō day to day
            
               Ducere foſſam, to caſt or make a dyche.
            
               Ducere honori, to eſteme it honourable.
            
               Ducere horas extremas, to lye in dyenge.
            
               Ducere infra ſe omnia humana, to eſteeme all thynges leſſe than hym ſelfe.
            
               Ducere lateres, to make tyles.
            
               Ducere laudi, to tourne it to prayſe.
            
               Ducere lineam, to drawe a lyne.
            
               Ducere minoris,
               Plautus. to eſteme it les, to ſet les by.
            
               Ducere mortuum, to be dead. Meos ne ego ante oculos illam patiar, alios amplexarier? mortuum herclè me duco ſatius. Shall I ſuffer hym to imbrace her before myne eyes? by god I had rather be deade.
            
               Ducere mucronem, to drawe a ſworde.
            
               Ducere noctē iucundis ſermonibus, to paſſe forth the nyght in pleaſant talkynge.
            
               Ducere nomen ex re aliqua, to be named after ſome thynge.
            
               Ducere officij, to ſuppoſe it to be his duetie.
            
               Ducere parui, to ſet lytell by.
            
               Ducere prae ſe neminem, to ſet by noo man but hym ſelfe.
            
               Ducere principium, to begynne, or to take a begynnynge.
            
               Ducere probro, to dyſprayſe.
            
               Ducere pro falſis, to take it for lyes.
            
               Ducere ſimilitudinem ex aliquo, to take a paterne of a thynge.
            
               Ducere ſomnos, to ſleape.
            
               Ducere ſpiritū, to fetch or draw breth, to liue.
            
               Ducere ſulcos, to make furrowes.
            
               Ducere ſuſpiria, to ſygh.
            
               Ducere utilitatem, ex re aliqua, to get profyt by a thynge.
            
               Ducentur ſuſpitiones ex ipſo facto, of that acte men ſhall gather ſuſpition.
            
               Ducere uſuras, to contynue payment of money taken by vſury.
            
               Vallum ducere, to make a trenche.
            
               Vultum ducere, to frowne or lowre.
            
               Duci errore, to be deceyued, to be in a wrōge opynyon.
            
               Duci ineptijs ac fabulis, to take pleaſure in fantaſies and fables, to beleue leaſynges and flatterynges.
            
               Duci uentre, to loue good morſels.
            
               Rationem ſalutis ducere,
               Steph. to regard helthe.
            
               Nihil ducere in bonis praeter uirtutem, to eſteme nothyng to be good beſyde vertus.
            Duco,Verro. aui, are, to gouerne.
            
            
               Ductarius funis, a torde that is drawen.
            
               Ductilis, & ductile, eaſy to be drawen.
            
               Ductim, with leyſure.
            
               Ductito, aui, are, to leade about often.
            
               Ducto, aui, are, to leade about, to take a wife, alſo to eſteme.
            
               Ductare reſtim, to leade the daunce.
            
               Ductor, toris, a guyde.
            Ductus, ta, tum, ledde.
            
            
               Ducta cicatrix, a wounde cleane healyd, nothyng remainyng but a ſeame or marke.
            
               Ductus, tus, tui, a cundyte, wherby water doth rounne.
            
               Ductus aquarū, the courſe of water by trenches or pypes.
            
               Ductus oris, the faſcion of the face.
            
               Ductus literarum, the order of letters in any wrytynge.
            
               Dudum, but late, ſometyme longe agone, or a great whyle.
            
               Dudum, ſometyme it ſignifieth before. Incertior multo 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   dudum, more vncertayne than it was before.
            
               Duella, the thyrde parte of an ounce.
            
               Duellator, a warryour.
            
               Duellica ars, the feate or ſcience of armes.
            
               Duello, aui, are, to fyghte within lyſtes, or in battayle.
            
               Duellum, battayle betwene two.
            
               Duellona, men in olde tyme called Bellona.
            
            
               Duicenſus,
               Fe
                     ••
                  s. the taſke of two men ioyntly, as of the father and the ſonne.
            
               Duidens, a ſhepe of two teethe.
            
               Duillus, a citeſens name of Rome, which fyrſt triumphed for victory on the ſea.
            
               Duis, of the āciēt writers was vſid for dederis
            
            
               Dulcadium, euery ſwete meate.
            Dulce, & dulciter, ſwetely, gentylly.
            
            Dulcedo, dulcitas, Dulcitudo, & Dulcor, ſwetenes
            
            
               Dulceo, cere, to be ſwete.
            
               Dulceſco, ſci, ſcere, to become ſwete.
            
               Dulciarius, a paſtlar.
            
               Dulciarius panis, a marchepayne made with almondes and ſugar.
            
               Dulcidulus, a, um, a lyttell ſwete.
            
               Dulcifluus, flowynge ſwetely.
            
               Dulciloquus, he that ſpeaketh ſwetely.
            
               Dulcis, ce, ſwete, pleaſant, contrarye to ſharpe or vehement.
            
               Dulciſonus, ſownynge ſwetely.
            
               Dulco, caui, care, to make ſwete.
            
               Dulia, the ſeruyce of a bondman or ſlaue.
            
               Dulichium, an yle in the ſea Malyake, or as ſome ſay Ionio.
            
               Dum, ſomtyme ſygnifieth whan, or whyles, as Dum dormis, fures domum intrant, whiles thou ſleapeſt, theues enter into the houſe. ſomtyme vntyll, ſomtyme as longe. Vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ne ualuiſti? C. Perpetuo recte dum quidem illic fui, Dyddeſt thou well all that whyle? C. ye alway well, as longe as I was there. alſo it ſignifieth wherfore. alſo, ſo that. Somtyme it dothe but make vp a word, as Adeſdum, paucis te uolo, Come hither, I wold a fewe thinges with the. Nihil dum, not yet.
            
               Dumetum, a thorny or buſhy grounde.
            
                
               Dummodo, ſo that.
            
               Dumoſus, a, um, roughe of brembelles and thornes.
            
               Dumtaxat, onely, at the leaſte waye. Non dumtaxat, for non ſolum.
            
            
               Dumoſus, a, um, full of brembels or briars.
            
               Dumus, all kyndes of thornes or briers.
            
               Donum, a countrey in England called Durhā.
            Duo, dui, ere, to gyue.
            
            Duo, Duae, two.
            
            
               Duodecim, twelue.
            
               Duodecies, twelue tymes.
            Duodecimus, a, um, the twelfe.
            
            
               Duodecies, Seſtertium .xii. hundred thouſand Seſtertia.
            
            
               Duodeni, twelue to gethether. Vide deni.
            
            
               Duodeuiginti, eyghtene.
            
               Duodeuiceni denarij .xviii. penſe.
            
               Duodetriginta, xxvii.
            
               Duonum, olde writers vſed for Bonum.
            
            
               Duplares, knyghtes or ſuche ſouldiours as had double alowaunce.
            Dupliciarij, idem.
            
               Duplaris numerus, a noumber doubled.
            
               Duplex, duplicis, double or two: or twyſe as moche.
            
               Dupli, double ſo moche.
            
               Duplicato, at the double.
            
               Dupliciter, two wayes.
            
               Duplico, aui, are, to make double.
            
               Duplio, onis, the double.
            Duplus, a, um, double.
            
            
               Dupondius, & Dupondium, two pounde weyghte.
            
               Durabile, durable.
            
               Duracinae uuae, grapes with thycke ſkynnes.
            
               Duram, ſome thynke to be the name of a riuer, neere to the whiche the Gyauntes made the towre Babell.
                  
                     ••
                  lel. 3. Some woll it to be a fielde, as in Danyell.
            
               Duramen, & Duramentum, the arme of a vyne.
            
               Durateus, a, um, wooden, or of wood.
            Duratus, ta, tum, hardened.
            
            
               Durè, & Duriter, hardely or cruelly, with moche peyne.
            
               Dureo, rui, ere, to be harde or cruell,
            
               Dureſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe harde.
            
               Dureta, the Spanyardes call a veſſell, that they vſe to waſhe and bain them in.
            
               Duria, or Turia, the name of a ryuer nere to Valentia
            Duricia, & Duricies, & Duritas, hardenes, rudenes, rigour.
            
            
               Duricoria, thynges whiche haue harde ſkins.
            
               Duricors, dis, harde harted.
            Duriuſculus, a, um, the diminutiue of durus.
            
               Duro, aui, are, to endure or contynue, to ſuſteyne or ſuffer, to harden or make harde.
            
               Durus, ra, rum, harde, peynefull, or cruell.
            
               Dura prouincia, a ſore charge, a thyng hard to be brought to paſſe.
            
               Duri oris uir, a rygorous perſon.
            
               Duro ingenio, dull wytted.
            
               Duumuiratus, tus, an offyce, wherin the authoritie is commytted to two men.
            
               Dux, ducis, a capitayne or leader.
         
         
            D ANTE Y.
            
               DYaſtole,
               Galen. in definit. is a lyftyng or ryſyng vp of the harte, the arteryes, the brayne, and rymes whiche do incloſe the brayne, and that is in lengthe, breade, and depenes, ſenſible to feele by the poulſes.
            
               Dynaſta, uel Dynaſtes, a lorde of great power, a prynce, a ruler.
            
               Dynaſtea, a rule or gouernaunce.
            
               Dynaſtia, myght, power.
            
               Dyrrachium, a citie in Cicyle, whiche fyrſte was called Epidamnus.
            
               Dys, in compoſition, ſignifieth yuell, difficile, or impoſſible.
            
               Dyſcolia, difficulty.
            
               Dyſcolus, intractable.
            
               Dyſenteria, is a perylous flyxe with excoriation or raſynge of the bowels, continual tourmentes, and ſome bloude yſſuynge forthe.Galenus. The cauſes therof be ſharpe or venemons humours,Alex. Cō. procedynge of yelowe choler vnnaturall, ſharpenes of the bloud, ſalte fleume, melancholy aduſte. ſomtyme of yll medicines or impoſtumation of the lyuer. ſometyme by defaulte of the members annexed. ſometyme by the yll habite of all the body.
            
               Dyſpnoea, is difficulty in fetchynge of brethe. The cauſes therof be theſe: ſtoppynge of the wayes, wherby the brethe ſhoulde paſſe: deſtillations, or reumes hot and ſharpe, or cold and fleumatike. ſome tyme lepry by knorres in the throte, or lunges, comen of a melancholy matter.
            
               Dyſuria,
               Galen. a ſycknes, whiche letteth a man that he can not pyſſe. The cauſes therof be theſe, Extention or bollynge out of the bladder after vehemente retention or kepynge backe of vrine: congelynge of bloud or matter in the necke of the bladder or inſtrumente of vrine: of ſtones or impoſtumation there. Alſo of ſtones, grauell, apoſtume, werte, or hard fleſhe bred in the reynes of the backe.
         
         
            
            E ante A.
            
               E FOR THE more parte ſignifieth of.
            
               E conſpectu fugere, to go out of ſight.
            
               E diuerſo, on the contrary part, or on the other ſyde.
            E facili, eaſyly.
            
            
               E longinquo, fer of.
            
               E me ne quidem metuas, as for me be not aferde.
            
               E Pamphilo grauida est, ſhe is with chylde by Pamphilus.
            
               E Pamphilo peperit, ſhe had a chylde by Pamphilus.
            
               E proximo aſpicere, to ſe nighe hande.
            
               E proximo uicinus, my nexte neyghbour.
            
               E regione, face to face, one dyrectly againſt the other, or on the other ſyde directely.
            
               E re nata, conſyderynge the matter. Ere nata melius fieri haud potuit, conſyderynge the matter, or as the caſe required, it mought be no better.
            
               E renibus laborat, he is ſycke in his backe, or grieued with the ſtone.
            
               E re tua, perteynynge to thy profyt.
            
               E re publica, concernyng the common weale.
            
               E uia languet, he is wery of his iournaye, or ſycke with goinge or ridynge.
            
               Eueſtigio, forth with.
         
         
            E ANTE A.
            
               EALE is a beaſte in Inde founde about gret ryuers,Sol. ca. 65 Plinius. li. 8. ca. 21. like to a horſe, ſaue that he hath a taile like an Oliphant, in colour blacke or day, & hath iawes like a bore, and therin tuſkes a cubite longe and more, which are apte to what vſe the beaſte wyll, for they do not ſtand faſt, but are bowed as he liſteth, ſo that whan he doth fight, he ſetteth vp the one, and holdeth downe the other, to the intent that if the one in fyghtynge waxeth dul, or is broken, the other ſhall ſerue hym.
            
               Eantes, the name of a ſtorye wryter, whiche was in that age, that Pygmalion reygned in the eaſte parte.
            
               Eatenus, vnto that, in that maner of wyll, till that tyme, vntyll, vntyll than.
            Eatenus, ne, quid, pro ſolum.
         
         
            E ANTE B.
            
               E BEATI, they which from great proſperitie are fallen into myſery.
            
               Ebeo, are, to brynge out of proſperitie.
            
               Ebenus, uel Ebenum, a tree whiche is black in colour, and is odoriferous, whā it is burned it hath vertue to clenſe the eyen. This tree groweth in India,Vergil. 2. whiche beinge cut, waxeth as hard as ſtone.Georg. 
               Sola India nigrum fert ebenū: India alone bryngeth blacke ebenns. it is alſo written with, h. rede Hebenus.
            
            Ebibo, ebibi, ebibere, to drynke all out.
            
               Ebionitae, were heretikes, which denyed that Chriſt was god. And affirmed that al partes of the olde lawe, oughte to be kepte with the newe lawe. And they receyued onely the goſpel of ſaynt Mathew, and reiected the other, and alſo all the epiſtols of ſayncte Paule. The author of that ſecte, was one Ebion, about the yere of our lorde .88.
            
               Eblana, a citie in Irelande called Dublyn or Deuyllin.
            
               Eblandior, diri, to get a thynge by ſlattery. alſo to lyke.
            
               Eblandiri ſolitudidines ruris, to make, that lacke of company in the countrey ſhall not be greuouſe.
            
               Eblanditus, ta, tum gotten by flattery.
            
               Eboracum, or Eburacum, a citie in Englande called Yorke.
            
               Eboratus, a, um, of yuory without.
            Eboreus, a, um, of yuory.
            
            
               Eboſus, an yle betwene Sardinia and Affrica, the erth wherof wil not ſuffer any venemous thing to liue, where alſo do brede ſuch number of conies, that they diſtroy the iles nexts adioyninge.
            Ebriatus, drunke. Ebrietas, tatis, drunkennes.
            
            Ebrio, aui, are, to make drunke.
            
            
               Ebriolus, la, lum, a lytell dunke, or a lyttell perſon drunke.
            Ebrioſus, a, um, often drunke.
            
            
               Ebriulo, are, to make drunke.
            
               Ebrius, ia, um, drunken. ſometyme abundant.
            
               Ebron, a mountayne in Paleſtina.
            
               Ebudes, yles in the ſea about England, where the people do lyue by whyte meate and fiſhe. I ſuppoſe they be the yles nyghe wales and the weſt countreye.
            
               Ebuleus, the ſon of Iupiter and Proſerpine.
            
               Ebullio, liui, lire, to buble vp, as water dothe whan it rayneth.
            
               Ebullirio, bublynge.
            
               Ebullo, are, to buble out, or braſte out.
            
               Ebulus, an herbe called walworte, whiche is lyke to yonge elder tree.
            
               Ebur, & Ebor, oris, yuory: Dioſcorides callith it Thamaeacte.
            
               Eburatus, couered with yuory.
            Eburneus, ea, um, Eburnus, of yuory.
            
            
               Eburones, people of the countreye called Liege or Luke, beyonde Brabant.
         
         
            E ANTE C.
            
               ECardia, a kind of amber which hath in it the figure of an harte blacke or greene.
            
               Ecaſtor, an othe, by Caſtor, whiche may ſtande for, By my fay.
            
                
               Ecbaſis, a fygure in ſpeakynge, called digreſſion, where a manne leaueth for the tyme the pryncipall matter.
            
               Ecbatana, the chiefe citie of the realme of Mede. there is a citie in Siria of the ſame name ſome tyme called Ephiphania, and maye be written Egbatana.
            
            
               Ecce, an aduerbe demonſtratiue, whiche ſignifyeth Lo, ſee, properly where a thynge ſodaynely hapneth.
            
               Ecce tibi, wylte thou ſee, take heede.
            
               Ecce me, lo here I am.
            
               Eccere, an aduerbe of ſwerynge, ſignifieng as moche as Per Cererem. Some vſe it for ecce, lo nowe, or ſe nowe.
            
               Eccentrici orbes, are ſpheres one incloſyng an other, ſo that the one is ouer the other, and the one is conteyned within the holownes of the other.
            
               Eccillum,
               Plautus. for ecce illum, ſee hym.
            
               Ecciſtam,
               Terentius for ecce iſtam, ſee her.
            
               Eccleſia, an aſſemblye, a counſayle. Amonge chriſten authors, it ſignifieth the congregation of people in the fayth of Chriſte.
            
               Eccleſiaſtes, a preacher.
            
               Eccubi, lo where.
            
               Eccum, eccam, eccos, eccas, lo he is here, lo ſhe is here, lo theſe men be here, lo theſe women be here.
            
               Echemythia, taciturnitie or ſtylnes,
            
               Echenëis, a fyſhe called alſo Remora, whiche cleauynge to the keele of a ſhyp, wyll retayne hym, not withſtandynge the violence of any wynd that bloweth.
            
               Echi,
               Columel. lyttell narrowe valeyes or dales betwene two hylles.
            
               Echidna, a water ſerpent.
            
               Echinades, ben ylandes in a riuer of Grece called Achelous, which diuideth Aetolia from Acarnania.
            
               Echinatus, ta, tum, hauynge a rough and prie kynge ſhale or ſhell.
            
               Echinata folia,
               Plinius. leaues hauynge prickes.
            
               Echimus,
               Hermola. in Corell. cap. 201. the kouerynge or vttermoſte ſhale of a cheſten nut, or other whiche is roughe and prickynge. It is alſo a ſea fyſhe whiche hath on hym a ſhelle with pryekes, and hath the pryckes in ſtede of fete, but he goeth not but onelye tumbleth, for whan he is taken, the prickes ſeme to be worne and made blunte. ſome haue very long pryckes and lytel ſhels, and they be called Echinometrae. Theſe fiſſhes be of ſundry colours, ſome whyte, ſome red, ſome purple, ſome blue, and ſome grene, as Perottus wryteth in his Cornucopiae, that he ſawe them, but he ſayeth, whan they be deade, the freſhe and dilectable colour vaniſheth awaye. It is alſo a beaſte called an yrchen or hedgehog. It was alſo a veſſell of braſſe amonge the Greekes, whereinto the ſayinge of witneſſes were put and ſealed. Alſo a parte of hey, and a ſorte of pottes. Alſo a certayne fourme of bracelettes, whiche women vſed to weare.
            
               Echion, an herbe called alſo Alcibiadion, growynge in wayes and roughe groundes, lyke to languedebeaſe, & hath floures like borage, but er they be full ſpred, they be purple of colour, and the ſeede therof is lyke the head of an adder.
            
               Echioni, Thebanes, ſo called of Ethion, one of the fyue that holpe Cadmus, to buylde Thebes.
            
               Echites, a ſtone ſpecked lyke a ſerpent.
            
               Ecnephias, a ſtorme, where a cloude is broken and falleth.
            
               Echo, a ſound, whiche reboundeth to the noiſe or voyce, that is made in a valeye, or in gret woodes.
            
               Eclegma, aris, a medicine, whiche muſte not be eaten or chewed: but beinge in the mouth ſuffred to ſtyl downe in to the ſtomake by littell and lyttell. The Arabian phiſitions doo cal it Lohoch.
            
            
               Eclipſis, a wanynge or faylinge.
            
               Econa, an ymage.
            
               Econcula, a lyttell ymage.
            
               Econtra, contrary wyſe.
            Econtrariò, idem.
            
               Ecpetala,
               Coelius. were cuppes amonge the Greekes, whiche were large and wyde. Our flat bolles, wherin we drynke wyne, maye nowe be ſo called.
            
               Ecphractica medicamenta, medicines, whiche deopilate, or open the condutes or paſſages in the bodye whiche are ſtopped or farted.
            
               Ecph
                     ••
                  ſis, a plaine interpretation of the letter, leauynge no parte vndeclared.
            
               Ecquando, at what tyme, or lo whan.
            
               Ecquis, but lo who, ſe who.
            
               Ecquid, but what, lo what.
            
               Ecſtaſis, a ſtoonyinge, a damp, a traunſe, whā a man forgetteth hym ſelfe.
            
               Ectaſis, a figure, wherby a ſyllable naturally ſhorte, is produced or made longe.
            
               Ecthlipſis, where the letter M, ioyned with a vowell, is not ſonned.
            
               Eccrapeli, they which abhorre the common faſtion or olde vſages.
            
               Ectropium, whan the nether lyd of the eie falleth, and cannot ioyne with the our lyd.
            
               Ectypum, that whiche is made accordynge to a paterne.
         
         
            E ANTE D.
            
               EDACITAS, vnſatiable fedynge.
            
               Edax, edacis, a great eater or conſumer.
            
               Edo, edonis, the ſame.
            
                
               Edearrae, they whiche haue the orderynge of the kynges meate.
            
               Edem, ſignifieth pleaſure dilectation.
            
               Edentatus, he that hath his tethe taken out, totheles.
            
               Edento, aui, are, to make toothles, to beats out ones tethe.
            
               Edentulus, totheles.
            
               Edera, yuy.
            
               Edeſſa, a citie beyond the ryuer of Euphrates.
            
               Edico, xi, cere, to commaunde, to ordeyne, to declare or publyſhe.
            
               Edicta, ordinaunces or commaundementes of them, whiche be in great authoritie.
            Edictio, idem quod edictum.
            
               Edicto, tare, to declare or pronounce often tymes.
            
               Edilia, all thynges that appertein to be eaten.
            
               Ediſſero, ui, rere, to explane or declare, to tell or reherſe. Ediſſere nobis fabulam hanc, Tell or reherſe vnto vs that tale.
            
               Editio, a ſettynge forth or publyſhynge of a thynge, as of bokes or proclamations.
            
               Edititius iudex,
               Cice. pro planc. a iudge named and choſen of the one parte.
            
               Edituus, a ſextan of a churche.
            Edo, es, edi, eſum, uel eſtum, to eate or feede.
            
            
               Ede naſturtium, is applyed to a dulle and groſſe perſon: and for as moche as Nafturtium, called Creſſis, beynge eaten, doth make the noſe tynkell, and therby cauſeth the dull ſpirites to wake, therfore by this prouerbe is ment: Plucke vp thy ſpirites: or, Awake dullarde or luſke.
            
               Edor, ederis, edi, to be eaten.
            
               Edo, edidi, edere, to execute or do a thynge, or to cauſe a thynge to be done, to brynge or ſet forth, to delyuer in wrytynge, to publiſhe.
            
               Edere animam, to dye.
            
               Edere annos, to tell what age a man is of
            
               Edere authorem, to name the author.
            
               Edere caedem, to make a great ſlaughter.
            
               Edere cantus, to ſynge
            
               Edere certamen, to fyght valyauntly.
            
               Edere clamorem, to crye out.
            
               Edere exemplum, to ſhewe an example.
            
               Edere facinora, to do myſcheuous dedes.
            
               Edere foetus, to brynge forth fruite.
            
               Edere frondē, to burgen, to put out leaues.
            
               Edere indicium, to tell or diſcloſe who were his companyons in any yll deede.
            
               Edere iudicium, to reherſe or gyeue iugemēt.
            
               Edere leges, to gyue lawes.
            
               Edere librum, to ſet forthe a boke.
            
               Edere luci, to brynge to lyghe.
            
               Edere ludibrium, to mocke at a thynge.
            
               Edere ludos & ſpectacula, to cauſe playes and pageantes to be ſhewed to the people.
            
               Edere mandata, to declare his meſſage as he was commaunded.
            
               Edere nomen, to gyue a name to one.
            
               Edere nomina, to brynge forthe names in wrytynge, as we vſe to do in taſkes, ſubſidies, and mouſters.
            
               Edere operam annuam, to ſerue one yere.
            
               Edere opera uirorum fortium, to do valiantly and as men of great proweſſe.
            
               Edere oracula, belonged to god, or that whiche was taken for god, to make aunſwere to the thynge whiche was demaunded.
            
               Edere ouum, to laye an egge.
            
               Edere partum, to be delyuered of chylde.
            
               Edere poſtulara, to delyuer a byll of requeſt conteynynge many thynges.
            Edere praelium & bellum, to make warre.
            
            
               Edere pugnam, to fyght.
            
               Edere rationes, to make accompte.
            
               Edere riſus, to laughe.
            
               Edere ſcelus, to do a myſcheuous dede.
            
               Edere ſcriptum, to ſhewe by writinge.
            
               Edere ſignum, to make a token.
            
               Edere ſpecimen, to ſhew a proufe.
            
               Edere ſpiritum, to dye.
            
               Edere ſtragem, to make a great ſlaughter of men,
            
               Edere ſtrepitum, to make a noyſe.
            
               Edere teſtes, to brynge forth wytnes.
            
               Edere uitam, to dye.
            
               Edere uerba, to ſpeake.
            
               Edere uoces, to crye.
            
               Edere urinam, to pyſſe.
            
               Edoceo, cui, cêre, to inſtructe or infourme one of a thynge.
            
               Edolo, aui, are, to hewe or cut cleane and ſmothe.
            
               Edom, Eſawe was ſo called, and the countrey where he reigned.
            
               Edomus, a hyll nexte to Pangeum in the borders of Theſſaly.
            
               Edones, people of Thrace, neere to the ſea cooſte.
            
               Edonides, were women, whiche ſtyred with a diuine furour, dyd celebrate the myſteries of Bacchus.
            
               Edonij, people of Thrace.
            
               Edonus, a hyll where the ſame people inhabyteth.
            
               Edormiſco, ſcere, to ſleape ſoundly
            
               Edormiſcere crapulam, to ſleape vntyll he be ſober agayne, whan that one is drunke.
            
               Edormire crapulam, to ſleape out a ſurfet.
            
               Educo,
               Vergi
                     ••
                  
                
               xi, cere, to brynge forthe. alſo to draw out, as, Hoc dicens, eduxit corpore telum, That ſayinge, he drewe the weapon oute of his body. Somtyme to reyſe vp. ſome tyme it ſignifieth educare.
            
            
               Educatio, nouriſhynge or bryngynge vp of chyldren.
            
                
               Educo, aui, are, to nouryſhe or brynge vp from chyldhode.
            
               Edulco, aui, are, to make very ſwete.
            
               Edulis, le, that maye be eaten.
            
               Edulium, is what ſo euer is ſet on the table at dyner and ſupper to be eaten, ſaue the bread.
            
               Eduro, rare, to make very harde.
            
               Edurum, not harde.
         
         
            E ANTE E, & F.
            
               EETON, Andromaches father, that reigned at Thebes in Cilicia.
            
               Effari, to ſpeake, but properly it perteyned to byſhoppes and Augures, whan they dyd dedicate any place, or conſecrate any thynge.
            
               Effartio, effarſi, ire, to ſtuffe or fyl a thynge.
            
               Effaſcino, aui, are, to bewyche a thynge, wherby eyther the forme is chaunged, or the thing dyeth, or is in ſome wyſe deſtroyed. By this worde Solinus maketh mention, that in Affrica be certayne kynreds, wherof the men and women, if they prayſe fayre trees, goodly corne, pretye chyldren, galante horſes and fat, forthwith they dye: Plinius wryteth of ſome, whiche beholdynge any perſonne ſtedfaſtely with an angry countenaunce they do diſtroye them. Lyke experience haue ben ſene in this realme, as credyble perſonnes haue reported.
            
               Effata, were certayn prayers, whiche the diuynours vſed to make at the ende of theyr diuination or tellynge the ſucceſſe of thynges.
            
               Effaxillo, aui, are, to cut of by the arme pyt.
            
               Effectus, effecte.
            
               Effectum dare, to brynge to paſſe.
            
               Effero, extuli, efferre, to carye forthe, or put out, to deuulgat or tell abrode, to aduaunce or promote. Some tyme to ouercome or ſubdue. Alſo to commende: ſome tyme to holde vp, to ſet forthe. Some tyme to myniſhe orappayre.
            
               Efferre aliquem laudibus, to extoll one with prayſes.
            
               Efferre cadauet, to cary a body to be buried
            
               Efferre clamorem, to crye out.
            
               Efferre in humeros, to beare on his ſhulders
            
               Efferre manum, to lyfte vp his hande.
            
               Efferre ſeſe, to aduaunce hym ſelf.
            
               Efferre pedem,
               Plaut. in capt. to go out or go forthe.
            
               Seruate iſtum ſultis intus ſerui, ne quoquam pedem efferrat, Kepe hym in, ſyrs if ye woll, that he go forth no whether.
            
               Efferre ſe letitia, to be glad without meſure.
            
               Efferri funere, to be caryed to buryenge ſolemnely.
            
               Effero, aui, are, to make ymages of wyld beaſtes. alſo to make wood as a beaſte.
            
               Efferueo, êre, to boyle moche.
            
               Efferueſco, ſcere, to begyn to boyle or ſethe.
            
               Efferueſcentia uerba, hot angry wordes.
            
               Effexis, for effeceris.
            
               Efficatia, effecte or vertue.
            Efficax, acis, effectuall.
            
            Efficientia, idem quod effectus.
            
               Efficio, feci, ficere, to brynge to effecte.
            
               Efficere argentum alicui, to get money for a man by ſome meane or deuyſe.
            
               Efficere morbos, to iugender diſeaſes.
            
               Efficere nuptias alicui, to be the cauſe of the maryage of any.
            
               Efficere pollicita, to kepe promyſe.
            
               Id ſimilitudinem panis efficiebat, it ſerued in the ſtede of bread.
            
               Efficiam tibi, tua ut ſit, I wyll brynge it to paſſe, that ſhe ſhall be thyne.
            
               Effigies,
               Plautus. a ſigne made to the ſimilitude of a man or beaſt.
            
               Effigia, the ſame.
            
               Effigio, are, to counterfayte ones ymage in payntynge or keruynge.
            
               Effilatum, that whiche is ſowed or ſtitched on a garment, as a garde or purfle.
            
               Effilo, lare, to ſowe.
            
               Effingo, xi, gere, to make lyke.
            
               Effio, fieri, to be done.
            
               Efflagito, aui, are, to deſyre or aſke a thynge importunately.
            
               Efflictim, excedingly.
            
               Effictim amare, to loue ardently, oute of meaſure.
            
               Effligo, flixi, fligere, to tourment.
            
               Efflo,
               Plaut. in perſa. 
               aui, are, to blowe away, or blowe forth.
            
               Efflare animam, to dye.
            
               Efflauit animam ſpes, I haue no maner of hope or truſte.
            
               Effloreo, & Effloreſco, to bloo, as a floure dothe at the fyrſte comyng out.
            
               Effluo, uxi, ere, to flow or runne out, as water dothe out of a fountayne.
            
               Effluet,
               Plaut. in Trucul. it ſhal be tolde abrode, I wyl not kepe counſayle, all men ſhall knowe it.
            
               Effluxerat, it was out of remembrance, it was forgotten.
            
               Effluxit,
               Terent. in Eunucho it is quite gon.
            
               Effluit aeſtas, the ſommer is paſſed.
            
               Effluunt uoluptates, pleaſures do paſſe awaye lyghtly.
            Effodio, ſsi, & di, ere, to dyg out.
            
            
               Effoeminati, men wanton and delicate, or tender, endurynge no hardnes.
            
               Effoemino, aui, are, to effeminat or make delicat
            
               Effoeta, ſhe that hath latelye broughte forthe a chylde. Alſo a woman paſte teemynge.
            
               Effoetus, ta, tum, hatched, as a byrde that is come out of the egge. Alſo barrayne, couſumed, feeble.
            
                
               Terra effacta, lande ſpente or worne with bearynge of moche grayne.
            
               Effoetum corpus, a weake body.
            
               Effreno, nare, to vnbrydle.
            
               Effrenus, na, num, without a brydle, raſhe in maners.
            
               Effringo, effregi, gere, to breake to pieces.
            
               Effractus fame, made feble for lacke of meat
            Effugio, gi, ere, to eſcape.
            
            
               Effugit memoria, it is forgotten.
            
               Effugere nuptias,
               Plaut. in Bacch. not to be maryed.
            
               Effugium, diſcomfiture or flyght.
            
               Effundo, fudi, dere, to poure out. ſomtyme it ſignifieth to conſume, to put out.
            
               Effundere aerarium, to waſte the treaſure.
            Effundere extremum ſpiritum, to dye.
            
            
               Effundere honores in mortuum, to make for hym that is dead a ſumptuous buryal, or an honorable entierement.
            
               Effundere patrimonium, to ſpende and conſume his inheritaunce.
            
               Effundere peditatum, to di
                  ••
               co
                  ••
               fit the fotemen.
            
               Effunduntur omnibus portisad opem ferendam, they gathered to gether in greatte routes at euery gate to defende the citie.
            
               Effuſe, effuſius, effuſiſsime, oute of meaſure, excedynge, abundantly: more vehemently.
            
               Effuſio, pourynge out ſometyme it ſignyfieth prodigalitie, or outragious expenſes.
            
               Effuſus, ſa, ſum, diſcomfited, ſcattered, put out, or poured out.
            
               Effuſa laetitia, excedynge ioye or myrthē.
            
               Effuſi in fugam, they ranne awaye on euerye ſyde.
            
               Effuſus curſu, he that runneth with all his myghte.
            
               Effutio, iui, ire, to ſpeake vnaduiſedly, or foolyſhely, or haſtely, or that whiche ſhoulde be kepte ſecrete.
         
         
            E ANTE G.
            
               EGELASTE, a towne in the hygher parte of Spayne.
            
               Egelidor, ari, to relent or diſſolue, as yſe that thaweth.
            
               Egelidus, da, dum, neyther hot nor colde, but a lyttell out of the colde. ſomtyme it is taken for colde.
            
               Egens, lackynge.
            
               Egens eſt conſilij, he lacketh counſayle.
            
               Egenus, nedy, or lackynge ſomewhat.
            
               Egeo, egui, ere, to nede or lacke.
            
               Egeria, was an ydoll, to whom women with chylde did offer, ſuppoſynge that therby they ſhulde trauayle eaſely.
            
               Egero, ſi, rere, to beare out.
            
               Egerit aquam fons, the fountayne pouſheth out water.
            
               Egeſta, a city in Sicile, which Aeneas builded.
            
               Egeſtas, tatis, neceſſity, or lacke of thynges neceſſarye, pouerty.
            
               Egeſtio, onis, diſtribution abrode. It is alſo the puttynge forth of ordure or dunge.
            Egeſtoſus, a, um, very poore.
            
            
               Ego, I.
            
               Egomet, I my ſelfe.
            
               Ego ne? whoo I? Potin eſt hic tacere? P. ego ne? optime. Can this felowe kepe counſail? P. who I? in the beſt wyſe.
            
               Egredior, eris, gredi, to go forth, or go out.
            
               Egregie, excellently.
            Egregius, a, um, excellent.
            
            
               Egurgito, aui, are, to drawe out, as lycour out of a place.
         
         
            E ANTE H & I.
            
               EHEM, is a word ſpoken, whan a man is moued with ſome thyng, whiche is newly hapned.
            
               Eheu, alas.
            
               Eho, an interiectiō of callyng, it ſignifieth how
            
               Ehodum ad me, how come hether to me.
            
               Eho tu, how ſyrra, whan one calleth a man to hym, forgettyng his name.
            
               Eia, ſomtyme it exhorteth, ſomtyme it blameth.
            
               Eia haud ſic decet, well. it wolde not be ſo.
            
               Eia uero age, dic, well, go to, ſpeake on.
            
               Eiectitius, a, um, beynge caſt out.
            
               Eiecto, tate, to throwe out.
            Eiectus, ta, tum, caſte out.
            
            
               Eijceo, ieci, ijcere, to caſte out or put out.
            
               Eiulatio, a brayeng out with lamentation.
            
               Eiulo, aui, are, to crye out, to wayle.
            
               Eiurare, to do beſyde the lawe, to renounce.
            
               Eiuratio, renouncynge.
            Eiuſmodi, & Eiuſcemodi, the ſame.
            
            
               Eiuſdem farinae, of the ſame ſort or condition.
            
               Eiuſdem notae, of the ſame eſtimation or ſtate.
         
         
            E ANTE L.
            
               ELabor, eris, elabi, elapſum, to ſlyp orſlyde. ſomtyme to eſcape.
            
               Elaboratus,
               Ci. in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               ta, tum, perfectly or kunningly wrought or done. Omnes apud hunc ornati, elaborati
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſunt uerſus, All the verſes that he writith, at elegant & cunningly made.
            Elaboro, aui, are, to labour.
            
            
               Elacatena, a ſauce vſed in the olde tyme.
            
               Elacteſco, ſcere, to tourne into mylke, or waxe whyte as mylke.Ruell
                     ••••
                  .
            
            
               Elaeomeli, is a certayne kynd of gumme, thicker than hony, thynner than roſen, fatty and vnctuous, which runnith out of the ſtemmes of olde trees, which groweth in a countreye callyd Palmyris in Syria.
            
                
               Elamitae, be called the prynces of Perſians, of Elam the ſonne of Sem, as Ioſephu
                  •
                ſayth.
            
               Elangueo, êre, to be ſycke.
            
               Elangueſco, ſcere, to waxe feble.
            
               Elaphoboſcon, an herbe, whiche ſome do calle Gracia dei,
            
            
               Elapſus, a, um, eſcaped out of ſome daungier.
            
               Elapſa eſt ſpes, hope is loſte.
            
               Elapſa ex oculis hominum anguis, the adder ſtale awaye out of euery mannes ſyght.
            
               Elate, of Dioſcorides, is that wherin a palme or date tree bearynge fruite is wrapped. Galene taketh it for the tender and yonge branche of a palme. Heſichius dothe affyrme the ſame.
            
               Elaterium, wylde Cucumbers, whiche hath leaues lyke to gardeyne cucumbers, but the fruit is moch leſſe lyke as it were long akornes, and hath a great roote & a whyte. They be called of ſome men Cucumeres anguini. There is alſo a medicine ſo called, made of the iuyce of them, to pourge choler & fleume vpwarde and downewarde.
            
               Elatine, is an herbe, whiche hath leaues lyke to pelytory of the wal, but laſſe and rounder, heary and thyn, hauynge braunches halfe a fote hye, fyue or ſyx comming out of the rote, full of leaues, byndinge in taſte: it groweth for the more parte amonge corne. Ruellius ſayeth that it is communely called Campeſtre Rapiſtrum, wylde rapes.
            
               Elatio,
               Cic. offi. 1. is taken ſometyme in a good part, ſomtyme in an yll parte: in a good parte, In hac elatione & magnitudine animi, facillime pertinatia, & nimia cupiditas, principatus, innaſcitur:
               Cic in To In this hyghnes of harte and greatnes of courage, there is breadde verye lyghtly wylfull appetite, and to moch deſire of great authoritie. In an yll parte. Parium comparatio, nec elationem habet, nec ſubmiſsionem: The comparyſon of theym that are equall, hath in it neyther arrogance, nor yet ſubmiſſion.
            
               Elatus, hyghe or aduaunced, properly in harte or courage. ſometyme it ſygnifieth proude or arrogante.
            
               Elauo, elaui, elauare, ſiue elauere, to waſhe cleane, to rynſe clothes.
            
               Elauare ſe bonis, to be cleane waſhed frome all his goodes, to ſpende all, and leaue nothynge.
            
               Elea, a citie in the countrey of Lucania.
            
               Eleates, a man of that citie.
            
               Electio, onis, an election, an approbation.
            Electo, aui, are, to choſe.
            
            
               Electrum, that which is in englyſhe called amber,Plinius. wherof beades be made. It is alſo taken for a mettall, parte golde, parte ſyluer.
            
               Eleemoſina, almes.
            
               Elegans, tis, elegant, freſhe, gorgious, cleane. polyte.
            
               Elegantia, elegancy, gorgiouſnes, cleannes, beauty in wordes.
            
               Elegîa, a lamentable ſonge or verſe.
            Elegiacus, ca, cum, perteynynge therto.
            
            
               Elegiographus, a wryter of lamentable verſes, or balades.
            Elego, elêgi, eligere, to choſe.
            
            Elegus, idem quod Elegia,
            
               Elei, people in Grece in the countrey ſomtyme called Peloponeſſus, nowe Morea.
            
               Eleliſphagos, the herbe called ſaulge.
            
               Elementa, the fyrſte or pryncipal matter, wher of all thynges do take theyr begynnyng, whiche be .iiii. in number, fyre, ayre, water and erthe. Alſo the letters where of ſyllables be made, are called Elementa.
            
            
               Elenchus, an argument, reprouynge ſubtyllye an other argumente. It is alſo a table in a boke, to ſhewe the places by letter or other wyſe. It is more ouer a great perle, or other precious ſtone, whiche women were wont to hange at theyr eares.
            
               Eleo, eui, ere, to ſpot or ſoyle.
            
               Eleoſelinum, is an herbe whiche is called Smalache.
            
               Elephantezographi, be called theſe peynters, whiche paynte with yuory.
            
               Elephantia,
               Conſtant. 
               ſeu Elephantiaſis, a kynd of lepry, wherein the fleſhe dothe ſwell, and is full of ſpottes, and is ingendred of blacke choler.
            
               Elephantiacus, a lepre.
            
               Elephantiae be ſerpentes ſoo called bycauſe he whom they do byte,Solinus. falleth in to that kynde of leprye called Elephantia.
            
            
               Elephantini libri, amonge the olde Romaynes were bokes, wherin theyr lawes were wrytten, whiche concerned the nobilitie.
            
               Elephantinus, pertayninge to an olyphant.
            
               Elephas, a puiſſant beaſte called in englyſhe an Olyfant,Ariſto. de natura anima. li. 2. ca. 1. 5. 6. li. 9. c. 46. whiche is the greatteſt of all foure footed beaſtes, whoſe fore legges be lengar than his hynder legges, and hath ankelys in the lower parte of his hynder legges, and alſo fyue toes on his fete vndeuyded, his ſnout or noſe is ſo longe, and in ſuche fourme, that it is to hym in the ſteede of an hande, for he neyther eateth nor drynketh, but by brynging his noſe to his mouthe, therewith he helpeth vppe his maiſter or keper, therwith he ouerthroweth trees. He hath but .iiii. tethe on euerye ſyde of his mouthe, wherewith he eateth or gryndeth his meate. He hathe alſoo two greatte tuſkes, the male greatter than the female, and they are bowyng downward His tungue is very lyttel, and further within his mouthe than in other beaſtes, ſo that vneth it maye be ſeene. Of all beaſtes he is
 the moſte gentyll and tractable, for by many ſondry wayes he is taught, and doth vnderſtande, in ſo moche that he lerneth to do due honour to a kynge: he hath a great perceyuynge, and excelleth in ſharpeneſſe of wytte, the female, whiche he ones ſeaſoneth, he neuer afterwarde toucheth. The male Oliphāt lyueth .CC. yeres, at the leaſte C.xx. yeres, the females almoſte as longe, but the floure of theyr age, they ſaye, is about .lx. yeres.
            They can not ſuffer wynter nor colde. He loueth ryuers, and wyll often go into them vp to the noſe, wherwith he bloweth and taketh wynde, but ſwym he can not for the weight of his body wyll not let hym. Plinius and Solinus do wryte, that they vſe none aduoultry: and if it happen that they mete with a man in wyldernes being out of any way, gentylly they wyll go before hym, and bryng him into the playne way. In battayle ioyned they haue no lyttell regarde to them that be woū
               ded, for they brynge them that be ſoore hurte or wery into the mydle of the hoſte to be defended They are made tame with drynking the iuyce of barley. They haue contynuall warre agaynſt dragons, whiche deſyre their bloud, and therfore lyinge in a wayte as the Olyphant paſſeth by, the dragon (beinge of an excedynge lengthe) wyndeth his tayle aboute the hynder legges of the Olyphant, & letteth hym to go, & than thraſteth his heade in to the Olyphantes noſe, and exhauſteth his breathe, or elles byteth hym in the eare, wherto he maye not reche with his noſe, and whan the Olyphant waxeth faynte, he falleth downe on the dragon, whiche is full of bloud, & with the poyſe of his body breaketh hym, ſo that his owne bloud, with the bloud of the Olyphant runneth oute of hym mengled together, whiche is called Cinnaberis, in englyſſhe Synopre.
            
               Eleuies, a purgation.
            
               Eleuo, aui, are, to lyfte vp. ſometyme to take awaye, to myniſhe, to extenuat.
            
               Eleus, a ryuer whiche watreth a great parte of Media.
            
               Eleuſina ſacra, ceremonyes of Ceres the goddeſſe.
            
               Elices, furrowes in the fyldes, to conueye water.
            
               Elicio, cui, cere, to drawe out, to get out or picke out a thynge or a worde.
            
               Elicito, to drawe often.
            
               Elico, aui, are, to tourne vp ſo downe.
            
               Elico, onis, he that turneth thynges oute of order.
            
               Elido ſi, dere, to hytte agaynſte a thynge, to breake, to preſſe out, to exclude, to ſtrangle, to kyll.
            
               Elidere ignem è ſilice, to beate fyre out of a flynte.
            
               Elidere ſonum, to make a noyſe in beatinge one thynge agaynſte an other.
            Eligo, legi, eligere, to choſe.
            
            
               Elimino, aui, are, to put or caſte forthe frome a place fer of.
            
               Elimo, aui, are, to fyle or make cleane.
            
               Elinguis, without a tungue, ſpecheles.
            
               Elinguo, aui, are, to plucke out ones tungue.
            Eliquo, aui, are, to melte.
            
            
               Elis, a citie of Archady.
            
               Eliſſa, one of the names of Dido.
            
               Elix,
               Colum
                     ••
                  
                
               licis, a furrowe made for water to paſſe.
            
               Elixo, aui, are, to ſethe or boyle.
            
               Elixus, a, um, ſodden boyled.
            
               Elleborus albus, an herbe called lyngwort, the roote wherof is called neſynge pouder.
            
               Elleborus niger, an herbe called beares foote.
            
               Ellobia, thynges whiche were hanged at the eares of women.
            
               Ellum,
               Dona
                     •••
                  . for ecce illum, ſee where he is.
            
               Elocutio, onis, a proper fourme of wordes and ſentences.
            
               Elogium, a teſtification or wytnes in wordes, of prayſe or diſprayſe, of honour or reproche. It is ſomtyme a ſuperſcription on a tombe.
            
               Elongo, aui, are, to remoue far of, to make longe, to deferre.
            
               Elops, a fyſhe called alſo Accipenſer.
            
            
               Eloquentia, eloquence.
            
               Eloquium, ſpeche in a pleaſant maner.
            
               Eloquor, eris, qui, to ſpeake, properlye it is, whan I ſet a thynge forthe in ſpeakyng, that the herers maye vnderſtande it, as I conceyue it.
            
               Elotae, amonge the Lacedemonians was as moche to ſaye, as commune myniſters, or ſeruauntes, as ſergeantes, or ſuche as in London they do call yomen.
            
               Elpénor, a companyon of Vliſſes, which with other, Circe tourned into an hog.
            
               Eluceo, cere,
               Verg
                     •••
                  
                to ſhyne.
            
               Eluceſco, ſci, ſcere, to be very bryght.
            
               Elucido, aui, are, to ſhyne or make bryghte outwarde.
            
               Eludo, ſi, ere, to mocke or deceyue. Alſo to leaue playenge.
            
               Elucefico, caui, care, to depryue of lyght.
            
               Elucus, he that is ſicke of the drynke of yeſterdaye. Alſo a louer of trifles.
            
               Elugeo, gi, gere, to leaue mornynge.
            
               Elumbus & Elumbis, he that hath feble loynes, and can not ſtande vpryght.
            
               Eluo, lui, luere, to waſhe out.
            
               Eluo, aui, are, to lyue in glotony, or to ſpende ſuperfluouſly.
            
               Eluſa, an yle agaynſte Cipers.
            
               Eluſco, aui, are, to make one purblynde.
            
                
               Eluſis, & Eluſin, a citie in the prouince of Attica, not farre from Athens.
            
               Elutheria, fredome, gentylneſſe.
            
               Eleutherius, the name of a man, and is interpretate, free, gentyll.
            
               Eluto, aui, are, to ſoke out water.
            
               Elurrio, aui, are, to powre out of one veſſell into an nother.
            
               Eluuies, ordure or fylth cauſed of abundance of water or other lycour.
            
               Elychnium, the matche whyche is in a lampe, and ſtandeth in oyle.
            
               Elyſium, a place where poetes dyd ſuppoſe the ſoules of good men to dwelle.
            
               Elyſii campi, the ſame place.
         
         
            ¶E ANTE M.
            EMaciatus, ta, tum, made leane.
            
            
               Emacio, aui, are, to make leane.
            
               Emacitas, affection or deſyre to be always byeng of ſome thynge.
            
               Emancipati, are they whyche are out of theyr fathers rule,Feſtus. or they whiche are made ſubiectes to an other man.Cicero in Catal.
            
            
               Emancipator, a feoffour or alienour.
            Emancipatus, ta, tum, alyened.
            
            
               Emancipo, aui, are, to infranchiſe or make fre, or ſet at libertie. ſomtyme it is vſed in the contrary ſence, to binde or make bond. It is moſt cōmonly where a man diſpoſſeſeth hym ſelfe and puttith an other man in poſſeſſion of lād.
            
               Emaneo, manſi, nere, to well out of a place.
            
               Emano, aui, are, to iſſue or flowe out.
            
               Emanſor, oris, he that wandreth longe, and at the laſt returneth home, a l
                  •
               rker.
            
               Emargino, aui, are, to take away ſcurfe aboute the brymmes of woundes or ſ
                  •
               ores.
            
               Emaſculo, aui, are, to geld, or to take away the courage of a man, or to abuſe a man chylde in lecherye.
            
               Emath, a citie that is nowe callyd Antioche.
            
               Emathia, a part of the royalme of Macedonia.
            
               Emaus, a notable cite of Paleſtine, which now is callyd Nicopolis.
            
            
               Emax, cis, he or ſhe that is redy to bye any thīg.
            Embamma, matis, ſawce.
            
            
               Embata, a ſhyppe callyd a barque.
            
               Emblema, blematis, pictures made of wodde, ſtone, or mettall of one colour, ſette in wodde, ſtone, or mettall of an other colour, as we ſee in cheſſe bourdes or tables callyd counters, it is moche vſyd in Italy. It is of ſom taken generally for ſmalle ymages, floures, or other lyke thynge attached to any other thynge, as on cuppes of golde or ſyluer.
            
               Emboliſmus, the addyng of a day in the yere.
            
               Embolium, the argument or fyrſt entry into a play or enterlude.
            
               Embrio, onis, ſygnifieth the chylde conceyued before it receyueth perfecte ſhappe of a man or woman.
            
               Emedullo, aui, are, to take out marrow.
            
               Emendico, caui, care, to aſke in fourme of beggynge.
            Emendo, aui, are, to amende.
            
            
               Emergo, emerſi, gere, to iſſue or come out of the place where a thyng is drownyd.
            
               Emergere ex aliquo negotio, to depeth him ſelfe of the buſyneſſe.
            
               Emergere ex incommoda ualitudine, to be recouered of a noyous dyſeaſe.
            
               Emerſeram commode ex A
                     ••
                  tio in Appium,
               Cicero. I departed in good tyme from Antium to Appium.
            
               Emereor, emereri, to deſe
                  ••
               e to the vttermoſt.
            
               Emeriti ſenes, olde w
                  •
               rne ſouldiours, which were pardoned of warres, and not withſtandynge had pencyons, whyche were callyd Emerita ſtipendia.
            
            
               Emeritum ſtipendium, the laſte wages that a man taketh in warres.
            
               Emeriti ſenes, olde men excuſed from labour by age.
            
               Emico, care, to ſhyne forth, to hold vp the fynger, or ſome other thyng, to daunce or leape.
            
               Emigro, grare, to go from one place, to dwelle in an other.
            
               Emineo, nui, eminere, to ſhewe or excell aboue all other, to be hygher than other.
            
               Eminulus, a, um, a lyttell ryſing in height.
            
               Eminus, farre of.
            
               Emiſſarium, a ſ
                  •
               uſe, or place to let water out of a ponde or ryuer.
            
               Emiſſarius, ſomtyme it ſignifieth hym, whyche is ſent before in battayle to eſpye, or to ſkyrmyſhe. ſometyme a ſeruaunt, whiche is alway at hand, redy to be ſent forth. alſo it ſignifieth ſuche a perſone, whyche is ordeyned of hym that is in any great office or authoritie, to aduaunce his bryberye. alſo it ſignifieth a horſe ſtalyon, whiche ſerueth to get coltes.
            
               Emiſsiſsius, a ſpyall.
            
               Emitto, miſi, mittere, to ſend forth, to publyſhe, to manumyſe.
            
               Emmanuel, is interpreted, God is with vs.
            Emo, emi, emere, to bye.
            
            
               Emodus, a hylle, whyche about the border of Indy, is dyuided into two boughtes.
            
               Emolumentum, profyte gotten of labour.
            
               Emorior, emori, to dye vtterly.
            
               Emortualis dies, the day of deathe.
            
               Emoueo, uere, to put away.
            
               Empedocles, the name of a phyloſopher, whiche ſuppoſed all thynges to haue theyr beinge of amitie and varyance.
            
               Empetron, is an herbe which is comonly called Sampier, which groweth on the ſea rockes, and is kept in ſalt or brine to ſerue for ſauces.
 it is medicinable agaynſt the ſtone. It is alſo callyd Calcifraga, of ſome Creta marina.
            
            
               Emphaſis, an expreſſe ſignificatiō of that, whiche is intended.
            
               Emphracta,
               Galen. in definit. ſhyppes or barges coueryd.
            
               Emphyſodes febris, a vehement heate whiche cauſeth to be in the mouthe wheales and inflammations.
            
               Emphyteoſis, the making of a thing better thā it was, whā it was receiued or letten, as land.
            
               Emphyteota, he that taketh a thinge, and promyſeth or couenanteth to make it better than he receiued it.
            
               Empiricus, a practyſer, properly of phiſyke.
            
               Emplaſticum, a playſter.
            
               Emplaſtratio, is graffynge betwene the barke and the wodde.
            
               Emplaſtrum, a playſter.
            
               Emporetica charta, paper wherin marchantes or groſſers do put theyr wares.
            
               Emporium, a place wherein is kepte a marte or fayre.
            
               Emporeuma, ſhypmanſhyp.
            
               Emptitius, a, ū, that which is or may be bought
            
               Emptito, aui, are, to vſe to bye.
            
               Empyrema, a collection of matter in the bulke of a mans body.Galen.
            
            
               Empyrium coelum,
               Met. li. 1. the heauen, whiche is next aboue al the ſeuen ſpheres, and ſignifieth the fyry heauen.
            
               Emunctorium, an inſtrument, wherewith the ſnuffe of a candell is taken away, a ſnuffer.
            
               Emunctae naris,
               Terent. of a clene & ſure iudgement.
            
               Emunctus auro,
               Horatius. ſpoyled of his treaſure.
            
               Emungo, xi, gere, to ſnuffe a candell. alſoo to make clene a mans noſe ſomtime it ſignifieth to diſpoyl a man of money, properly by craft.
            
               Emuſsicata, made or wrought by rule.
            
               Emutio, tire, to hūme or make any other ſowne lyke a man that is dumme.
         
         
            E ANTE N.
            
               EN, lo, ſee.
            
               Enaema,
               Galen. iu definitio. a medicine of a duſky color, good to heale freſhe woundes.
            
               Enarratio, a playne declaration or expoſition.
            
               Enarro, rare, to tell a thyng at length.
            
               Enaſcor, ſceris, ſci, to grow or ſpring of a thing
            
               Enato, tare, to ſwymme out.
            
               Encaenia, an innouation or renewyng. It was amonge Iewes the feaſte of dedycation of theyr temple.
            
               Encanthis, a dyſeaſe in the eyes.
            
               Encauſtes, he that formeth or facioneth a thing with fyre.
            
               Encauſtice, makyng of ymages with the fyre.
            
               Encauſtum, vernyſhe, enamyl, or other picture, wrought with fyre.
            
               Enchiridion, a handle of a thynge, ſometyme a dagger. ſometyme that parte of an ore, that the waterman holdeth. It is vſurped for a boke in ſo lyttell a volume, that a man maye alway cary it with hym.
            
               Enchiros, a beaſt bred in the orient, as gret as a bull.
            
               Enchriſta, thynne oyntementes.
            
               Encimibomata, maydens kyrtels or petycotes.
            
               Encyclios, & Encyclia, the circle or courſe of all doctrynes.
            
               Encyclopaedia, that lernynge whiche comprehendeth all lyberall ſcyences and ſtudies.
            
               Endelechia, a conſummate perfection, whiche Ariſtotle dyd put beſides the foure elementis.
            
               Endeploro, aui, are, to make interceſſion with teares.
            
               Endoprocinctum, whan men went out of the campe vnto battayle.
            
               Endromis, a certayn garment whiche is heary and rough lyke to yryſſhe mantelles, whyche men vſed in baynes and places of exercyſe.
            
               Endymion, the name of a man, whiche founde the courſe of the moone. Wherfore the poetes fayned, that the mone loued him, and deſcended downe to kyſſe hym, whyles he ſlepte.
            
               Enectus, ſlayne.
            
               Energia, a demonſtration, whan a thyng is ſo deſcriued, that it ſemeth to the reder or herer, that he beholdeth it, as it were in doynge, an efficacye or operation.
            
               Energificus, effectuall.
            
               Eneruis, & eneruus, without ſynewes.
            
               Eneruo, aui, are, to debilitate or make feble.
            
               Engaddi, a citie in Iudea, from whens the precyous balme commeth.
            
               Enim, forſothe. ſomtyme it is expletiue, & doth but fyll vp a ſentence, to make it ſounde well. ſometyme it is a copulatiue.
            
               Sed enim, but for as moche.
            
               Enimuero, forſothe.
            
               Enipeus, a ryuer of Theſſaly, nere to which the batayl was fought betwene Ceſar & Pempei
            
               Eniteo, tui, ere, to indeuor, to inforce to do a thīg
            Enitor, teris, enixus ſum eniti, idē quod eniteo.
            
               Enixa, a woman late delyuered of chylde.
            
               Enixe, & enixum, diligently, with all force.
            
               Enixus, us, delyuerance of chylde.
            
               Enixa opera, trauayl, wherin a man imployeth all his puiſſance.
            
               Enna, a citie of Sicile, ſituate in a hygh place.
            
               Ennius, an old latin poete, borne at Tarentū, a citie now in the royalm of Naples, as ſom do ſuppoſe at a towne callyd Rhudii in Italy, & was brought to the cite of Rome by Cato the Cenſor. for his lerning and moſt honeſt conditions he was interly beloued of Scipio Affrican, wherfore he cauſid his image to be ſet on his ſepulchre. he made many bokes in ſundry kindes of verſis, but the ſtile that he vſid was
 very ancient and homely, but they contayned moche graue and ſubſtancyall ſentences of greatte wyſedome. He dyed atte the aege of
.lxx. yeres.
            
               Enoch, a mans name in holy ſcripture.
            
               Enodis, enode, without a knot.
            
               Enodo, aui, are, to cut away the knottes, or to vnknytte.
            
               Enormis, me, great out of meaſure.
            
               Enos, was a great citie nygh to the mountayn callyd Lybanus before Noes floud, wherein dwellyd Gyantes, whiche had dominion ouer all the worlde from the ſonne goynge downe to the ſonne ryſynge.Beroſus. li. 1. They truſtynge in the greatnes of theyr bodies and ſtrength, inuentynge armure and weapon oppreſſed all men, and gyuyng them ſelues to all bodylye luſtes, they founde pauillyons, inſtrumentes of muſyke, and all wanton pleaſures. They alſo did eate men, procured delyueraunce of chylderne before theyr ful tyme, and prepared them into delycate meates. They companyed carnally with their owne mothers, theyr doughters, theyr ſyſters, with men and with beaſtes. And no myſchiefe there was, whiche they dyd not 
                  •
               ommyt, deſpiſours of god and all relygion.
            
               Enoteſco, ſcere, to come to knowledge.
            
               Ens, entis, the beinge of euery thynge.
            
               Enſis, a ſworde.
            
               Enterocele, a dyſeaſe, whan the bowels be fallen into a mans codde.
            
               Enthymema, matis, an imperfecte ſyllogiſme lackyng the maior, or the minor.
            
            
               Enucleatè clerely.
            
               Enucleo, aui, are, to take oute the kernelle of a nutte. It is alſoo to declare or make playne a ſentence.
            
               Enyalius, the ſonne of Bellona.
         
         
            ¶E ANTE O.
            EO, is, iui, ire, to goo.
            
            
               Eo inficias, I denye.
            
               Eo obuiam. I go to mete with one.
            Eo uenum, ire uenum, to be ſolde.
            
            
               Eò, therfore, foraſmoche, vnto that.
            
               Eo loci, in that ſtate.
            
               Eodem loci, in the ſame place or ſtate.
            
               Eo ſecius, neuer the leſſe.
            
               Eo uſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , in ſo moche.
            
               Eon, the compaſſe of the eye.
            
               Eous, the eaſte.
         
         
            ¶E ANTE P.
            
               EPACTA, thynges added to.
            
               Epaminondas, was a Theban borne, ſon of an honeſt gentylman callyd Polymnus: he was in ſundry qualities excellent, as welle of the bodye as of the mynde. For in all kyndes of muſycke he was perfectely inſtructed, and therwith daunced excedyngely welle. He wraſtelyd and ranne no man better, and in armes he was ſtronge, valyant, and hardy, and in marcyall polyrye equall to any than lyuynge. Alſo he was wonderfull well lerned in phyloſophy, ſpecially in that whyche was taughte of Pythagoras, whyche was the moſte dyffuſe 
                  •
                pure doctrine, contaynynge moſt ſecrete and diuyne myſteries, whervnto he added moſt noble vertues, for he was temperate, wyſe, of great grauitie, vſyng tyme wyſely, perfect in chiualry, of courage inuincible, ſoo diligent in obſeruyng trouth, that he wolde at no tyme lye, neyther in game nor in erneſte. He was alſo continent, mercyfull, and wonderful pacient, ſuffring wronges not onely of the people, but alſo of his frendes. Moreouer he was ſecrete and truſtye, ſo faythefull and louynge to his frendes, that when any of them were taken in warres, or any of theyr doughters redy to be maryed, and they not able to ſet them forth accordyng to theyr degres, he wolde aſſemble the reſidue of his frendes, and exhorte theym to gyue to hym whyche lacked, accordyng to theyr powers. And he him ſelfe wolde lyberallye gyue to the quantitie of his ſubſtaunce, which was but lyttel, although he were in great authoritie (for he refuſed al rewardes, ſauynge thankes onely.) And whan he hadde made a good ſumme of that whyche was granted, before he receyued it, he brought hym that ſhoulde haue it, vnto them that ſhuld gyue it, that he of them mought receyue it, and knowe howe moche he was beholden to euerye of them. he oftentymes refuſed greate ſummes of money and ryche preſentes ſente to hym by pryncis, all thowghe he were poore, ſayinge: If the thynge were honeſte whyche he was requyred to doo, he wolde doo it bycauſe it was good without any rewarde: if it were yll or not honeſt, all the goodes of the worlde, ſhulde not make hym to do it: If it were profytable vnto his countrey, he was bounden and redye to do it freely. If it were otherwyſe, all the ryches of the worlde moughte not counteruayle the loue that he bare to his cōmune weale. In eloquence no Thebane moughte be compared vnto hym, and his ſentences were graue and very compendious, wherwith in counſayles he vanquiſhed and dyd put to rebuke greate and famous oratours. In battayle he ouercame the Athenienſes and Lacedemones, and in one daye had the vyctory of all Grece. At the laſt in a battayle at Mantinea, betwene the Thebanes and the Lacedemones, he was ſtriken and wounded vnto deathe with a longe ſpeare, the heade remaynynge ſtylle in his bodye, yet retayned he lyfe vntylle it was tolde hym that his hoſte hadde
 the vyctory, than ſayd he: I haue lyued longe ynough, for I dye vnuanquiſhed, the yron beinge drawen out of his body, he dyed, before the incarnation of Chriſt .CCClxxii. yeares. This one thynge is to be well conſydered (as Probus fayth) The citie of Thebes before Epaminondas was born, and alſo after that he was dead, was vnder the rule and in ſubiection of other people. But during the tyme that he was a gouernor in the weale publike, that citie was heade and pryncipall ouer all Grece, by the which it may be wel perceiued, that one ſuch noble mā is more thā a hole city
            
               Epanalepſis, a replication or repetition.
            
               Eparcus, the preſident of a prouynce.
            
               Epatica, an herbe callyd lyuerwort.
            
               Epauxis, an increaſe.
            
               Ephabus, the ſonne of Iupyter that buylded Memphis in Egypt.
            
               Ephebia, the age wherein one entreth into the ſtate of a man .xv. or .xvi. yeres.
            
               Ephebus, he that is of that age.
            
               Ephemera febris, is a feuer ſo callyd, bycauſe that it is apt to be curid in one day,Galen. but being neglected,Met. li. 10. it cometh to be in dyuers ſortes of feuers, & accordyng to the natures of them cō
               tynueth lengar The cauſe therof is of ſūdry occaſyons, ſomtyme of outward heates, ſomtyme of moch labour or werynes.Alex. Tral lian. li. 5. ſomtyme of oppilation, ſomtyme of replecion, ſpecially of dyuers meates and drynkes, otherwhiles of longe abſtinence or watche, or of corruption of that wherwith the body is nouryſhed.
            
               Ephemeris, a boke wherin is writen that, whiche is done dayly, or a boke of reckenyng.
            
               Ephemeron, is that which apothecaries do cal Hermodactilus, an extreme purger of fleme.
            
               Epheſus, a noble and auncient city in Aſia the leſſe, it is interpreted by ſaynet Hierom. My vvyl, there runneth by it a great ryuer callyd Cayſtrus, out of the which be deriued many other ryuers. In this citie was the famouſe temple of Diana, which was numbred amōg the ſeuen wonders of the worlde. It was edified by all Aſia in a Cxx. yeres, & was ſette in a ferme or maryce, the foundation being firſt layde with coles troden or rammed hard, thā flyces of wolle layde theron, and all this was to ſaue it from erthquakes. The temple was in length. 425. fote, in bread. 220. In it were
127. pyllours, euery of them .lx. foote highe, made by kinges, the roufe was of cedre trees and the doores of cypres. This temple was burned by a leude perſon of purpoſe to get a renoume in hyſtories therby, for as moche as he was couetous of glory, and hauyng none excellent qualitie to attayne thereto, he puttyng wylde fyre into the roufe, dyd burne all the temple. his name was Heraſoſtratus, as Strabo writeth. Therof proceded a prouerb, Heraſoſtrati gloria, applied to them, whiche do ſeeke for a renowne or prayſe of a myſcheuous acte.
            
               phi, a meaſure contaynyng .iii. buſſhels.
            
               Ephialtes, is a dyſeaſe, where one ſlepyng thinketh, that a great weight lyeth on hym, and taketh his wynd from hym, it is of ſom callid the mare, whiche is none other thynge but a fumoſitie riſynge from the ſtomacke or harte vp to the brayne, there oppreſſynge the vertue animall.
            
               Ephimeron, the great wylde lylye.
            
               Ephippium, the harneys of a horſe or mule.
            
               Ephira, rae, or Ephire, res, a towne of Achaie, whiche nowe is callyd Corinthus.
            
               Ephod, a ſtole, whiche a prieſte weareth about his necke, whan he is at maſſe.
            
               Ephori, were certayn men in authoritie among the Lacedemonians, as Tribuni were amōge the Romaynes, to whom men mought appele from the kynge, as in Rome they mought appele from the cōſules vnto the Tribunes. It was alſoo the name of a wryter of hyſtories ſcholer to Ariſtotle.
            
               Epibata, a ſouldiour on the ſea.
            
               Epibarra, the ladder that goth vp to the toppe caſtell of a ſhyppe.
            
               Epicedium, verſes in commendation of a dead man.
            
               Epicharmus, the name of an excellent phyloſopher of Syracuſe.
            
               Epicheremata, argumentes made in reaſoning.
            
               Epicoenum, of bothe kyndes male and female.
            
               Epicterus, the name of a ſtoike philoſopher.
            
               Epicurus, the name of hym, which dyd put the principall goodnes in voluptuoſitie.
            
               Epidamnus,
               Stra. li. 7. a towne in the ſouthweſt parte of Grece on the ſea ſyde, callyd alſo Dyrrachiū.
            
            
               Epidaurus, a citie in Grece in the countrey callyd Achaia, wherin there was a famous temple dedicate to Aeſculapius, to the whyche a great multitude of ſycke people dyd reſorte, and ſom in their ſlepe had ſhewed vnto them that medicine, wherby they ſhoulds be cured of theyr ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Epidicticon, demonſtratyue.
            
               Epidromes, the armynge of a nette.
            
               Epigaſtrium, al the bely, from the boulke down to the priuy membres, whyche is callyd alſo Abdomen.
            
            
               Epigloſsis, or Epiglottis, a ſmalle thyng in the innermoſt part of the tunge, like a litle tunge
            
               Epigramma, a ſuperſcription.
            
               Epigrammatarius, he that writeth verſes callyd Epigrammata.
            
            
               Epigriphus, he that hath a croked noſe.
            
               Epijcia, or Epijces, is that part of iuſtice callyd in latyn Aequum & bonum, in engliſhe there
 is not yet any one word ſounden therfore, but that therby may be vnderſtande, that equitie whiche omitteth parte of the rigour or extremitie of a lawe that is written, or cōformeth iuſtyce to the occaſion newely hapned, which was not remembred of the makers of the law applyeng it to the thyng whereof leaſt detryment may ſeme to enſue.
            
               Epilepſia, callyd alſo Morbus comitialis, & Morbus ſacer, & morbus Herculeus, in englyſhe the fallyng ſycknes, or foule euyl, is after Alexāder an affection of the heed & brayn in the part wherein is contayned vnderſtandyng, the chief of al ſencis. Galen ſaith it is a cold humor, wherwith the celles of the brayn ar not perfectly ſtopped, prohibiting the ſoule to execute his operatiō, vntyl nature hath eft ſones openid the natural cūdites of the brain, remouing that humour. It hapneth (as Conſtantinus writeth) of one of thre cauſes, eyther of a humour fleumaticke or melancholye bredde in the hyndermoſte part of the brayn, or of a wynde groſſe and colde, oppreſſing the brain, or of humors aboūdyng to moch in the ſtomacke, ſo that the ſume therof aſcendeth vp to the brayne by the ſynewes, by whoſe groſſenes the wayes or paſſages of the vitall ſpirites are ſtopped.
            
               Epilepticus, he that hath that dyſeaſe.
            
               Epilogus, a concluſion in writyng or ſpeaking.
            
               Epimelis, is a kynde of medlar tree, the fruite wherof hath in it thre ſtones.lo. Agric.
            
            
               Epimenides, a noble phyloſopher in the yle of Creta, now callid Candy, who being a yong man ſent by his father to ſeke for a ſhepe, beynge weary, and for the heate of the day, he went into a denne or holowe place in an hylle to reſt hym, where he ſlepte continually .lvii. yeres, and than being awaked, he went forth to ſeke for his ſhepe, and not fyndynge hym, he retourned home, and fyndyng an other mā dwelling in the hous, which was his fathers and beholdyng euery thyng alteryd, he wente into the citie, where at the laſt he founde his yonger brother, beinge a man of great yeres, of whome he knewe all that was happened, and after became a meruaylous philoſopher, and wrate of the nature of thynges, and of the diuyne generation, and had the gyfte of prophecy as ſom do ſuppoſe. He lyued as Lacrtius writeth .Clxxix. yeres, after other mēs ſayinges .Cxciiii. yeres, and was before the incarnation of Chriſt .Cxlvii. yeres.
            
               Epimythion, the declaration of a fable in a morall ſence.
            
               Epinicia, verſes contaynynge prayſes.
            
               Epinicium, feaſt or ioy made for victory, as bon fyres and bankettes therat.
            
               Epinyctides, a wheale or pouſhe, which ryſeth on the ſkyn by nyght.
            
               Epiphanes, notable or famous.
            
               Epiphania, a manifeſtation, it is alſo a ſolemne feaſte in the churche.
            
               Epiphonema, an exclamation.
            
               Epiphora, a ſyknes of the eyes callyd the droppynge of the eyes.
            
               Epirrhedium, a waggen or carte.
            
               Epiroticus, ca, cū, of the contray callyd Epirus.
            
               Epirus, a regyon in the ſoutheweſte parte of Grece, ioynyng to the ſea callid Ioniū, & marcheth on the north vpon Theſſaly, on the eaſt vppon Achaia, on the weſte vpon Albania.
            
               Epiſcopatus, a byſſhopryche.
            
               Epiſcopium, a byſhops palayce or houſe, or a place to eſpy out of.
            
               Epiſcopius, a, um, pertaynyng to eſpiall.
            
               Epiſcopus, a byſhop, ſometyme an eſpye. ſometyme a clerke of the market.
            
               Epiſtathmi, by the interpretation of Budeus, are harbigers, appoynters of lodgynges, for the trayn of princis, whervnto Budeus deuiſeth a latyn name calling them Deſignatores manſionarij, or cretarij, but in myne opinyon the greke name may be vſyd well & properly.
            
               Epiſtola, a letter ſent from one to an other.
            
               Epiſtolium, a lyttell epyſtle.
            
               Epiſtomium, a ſpoute ſendynge forthe water from a cundyte, a tappe or other lyke thynge.
            
               Epiſtylium, the chapiter of a pyllar.
            
               Epitaphium, a ſcripture wrytten on a graue or ſepulchre.
            
               Epithalamium, a ſonge beinge sunge at a weddynge, or verſes made in the prayſe of theym that are maryed.
            
               Epithema, a medicine layde to the region of the harte or lyuer, to coole it.
            
               Epithetes, a deceyuour.
            
               Epitheton, an addition, properly applyed to a thing for ſom notable qualitie, which it ſignifieth, as Senum mare, the rough ſea, Garrula pica, the chattering pye. Crudelis Nero, the cruelle Nero. Campi florigeri, the flouryſſhing fieldes.
            
               Epithymia, miae, concupiſcence, deſire.
            
               Epithymum,
               Ruelliꝰ. is the floure of the harder tyme like vnto ſauery, the toppes beyng thinne and light, and hauynge the ſtalkes like vnto heares. The difference betweene that and the other floure of tyme, is, that this is greene of the colour of an herbe, the other is white. It groweth moſte ſpecially in Creta,Conſtant. nowe callyd Candy. It is hotte and dry in the myddell of the thyrde degree, and purgeth melancoly or blacke choler.
            
               Epitogum, ī, a garment worne vpon a gowne.
            
               Epitome, mes, a brydgement or breuiate.
            
               Epitritus, a foote of foure ſyllables, of whiche one differeth euer from the other thre.
            
                
               Epithyrum, a meane to conſerue olyues.
            
               Epitrope, procuration, wardſhyp.
            
               Epityrum, a cheſe cake.
            
               Epothedice, good breakers of horſes.
            
               Epos, epôdos, a kynd of verſe or ſong, whiche contayneth thynges concernyng as well god as man alſo which hath the fyrſt verſe lengar than the ſeconde, as,
            Beatus ille qui procul negotijs
            Vt priſca gens mortalium.
            
               Epulae, arum, meates, alſo a bankette made to many perſons.
            
               Epularis, are, belongynge to a feaſte or banket.
            
               Epularis ſermo, communication mete for a feaſt or banket.
            
               Epulatorius, a, um, apte to be eaten at a feaſte or banket.
            
               Epulis, fleſhe that groweth on the gummes about a mans teethe.
            
               Epulo, nis, plurali epulones, men boden to a great feaſt, or they whiche come vnboden, to eate the reuertion. Amonge the Gentiles they were callyd by the prieſtes, to eate that whyche was lefte of the ſacrifice.
            
               Epulor, ari, to eate at feaſtes or bankettes.
            
               Epulum, a great feaſt, whervnto all the people aſſembled, whyche amonge the olde Romaynes was made eyther to the honour of ſome of theyr goddis, or at the buryenge of ſome notable perſonage. It may be nowe taken for a churche feaſte,Ci. pro L. Planco. or feaſt of a brotherhead, or dyner made at a buryal or interment. It hath ben ſomtyme vſed to be taken for a banket.
         
         
            ¶E ANTE Q.
            
               EQuappium, an herbe callid alſo Hippoſelinon, in englyſhe Alyſander.
            
               Equa, a mare.
            
               Equarius,
               Val. Max. 
               a, um, pertaynynge to horſes.
            
               Equarius medicus, a horſe leache.
            
               Eques, a horſeman contrary to a foteman. ſome tyme it is taken for a knyght: but I ſuppoſe that amonge the Romanes Equites, were taken for them, whiche we call gentylmen.
            Equeſter, ſtris, ſtre, pertaynyng to Eques, as,
            
            
               Equeſtris ordo, the ſtate or degree of gētylmē
            
            
               Equeſtres copiae, the number or company of horſemen.
            
               Equeſtria, the placis aſſigned to gētilmē, where they ſat to behold any ſolemn ſightis or placis
            
               Equiceruus, a beaſt in the orient hauing hornes and a long mane to the ſhulders, and a beard vnder his chyn, and feete rounde like a hors, and is as great as an harte.
            
               Equidem, verily, truly. ſomtyme in a ſentence it ſygnifieth nothyng but to ſupply the numbre in a ſentence.
            
               Equiferus,
               Plinius. a wylde horſe.
            
               Equila,
               Varro. a lyttell mare.
            
               Equile, a ſtable for horſes.
            
               Equimentū, the hire of a ſtalliō to ſeſon a mare.
            
               Equinus, na, num, of a horſe.
            
               Equio, iui, ire, whā a mare deſireth to be ſeſoned.
            
               Equiria, runnyng with horſes, a playe dedicate to Mars.
            
               Equiſeſſor, a man on horſebacke.
            
               Equiſetum, an herbe callyd horſetayle.
            
               Equiſo, onis, a horſbreker, ſomtime a horſkeper
            
               Equitabilis, le, able to be ryden. alſo a place, in whiche horſes mought eaſily walke.
            
               Equitatio, a rydynge.
            
               Equitatus, an hoſt of horſmen. alſo the act of ridyng, ſomtyme the ſtate or order of gētylmen.
            
               Equitium, the eſquyry or company of the ſtable.
            
               Equitius, the proper name of a man, & ſurname of a family in Rome.
            Equito, aui, are, to ryde.
            
            
               Equuleus, a horſecolt. alſo a maner of torment made of burnyng plates, lyke to a horſe, wher in men were tourmented.
            
               Equulus, a nagge or lyttell horſe.
            
               Equus, a horſe.
            
               Equus carpentarius, a cart hors, or charyotte horſe. Equus citatus, a horſe taken vp.
         
         
            ¶E ANTE R.
            
               ERadico,
               Plaut. in Epidi. 
               care, to plucke vp by the rootes.
            
               Eradicare aures alterius, to pulle oone harde by the eares.
            
               Erado, raſi, ere, to ſcrape of, or out of a thyng.
            
               Eranthemum, a kynde of camomylle hauynge purple floures.
            
               Eraſi,
               Pli. in pa
                     •
                   neg. men put out of wages.
            
               Eraſinus, the name of a ryuer.
            
               Eraſiſtratus, a noble phiſition of the houſe of Ariſtotle, who for healinge of kyng Antiochus receyued of Ptholomeus his ſon, a hunderde talentes, which to amoūt in our money .xiiii.M.CCC.lxxv.li. he was afore the incarnation of Chriſt .CCxliii. yeres.
            
               Eraſus, a, um, raſed or ſcraped out.
            
               Erato, the name of one of the Muſes.
            
               Eratoſthenes, the name of a philoſopher.
            
               Ercinia, a wonderfull great wod in Germany.
            
               Erciſcere, to deuyde properly landes.
            
               Erciſcunde familiae, of houſehold to be diuyded or parted amonge dyuers heyres.
            
               Ercius, one of the names of Iupiter.
            
               Erebus, one of the ryuers of Hell.
            
               Erectiore aīo eſſe, to haue a more luſty corage.
            
               E regione, on the other ſide, on the contrary ſide
            
               E re mea, uel tua, for my profyt or thyne.
            
               E re nata, by occaſion wherof.
            
               E re publica, for the profit of the publike weal.
            
               Erenibi, people in Arabia, which go naked.
            
               Eremodicium, defaut of apparance at the day whan one is bounde to appere, whych in the
 digeſtes, tit de minor, infra. Et in cod. de iudicijs,
               Budaeus in anno. is corruptly rad Hermodicium.
            
            
               Erêmus, a deſert or ſolytary place.
            
               Eretum, a ſtrete in the Sabines towne.
            
               Erga, towarde. Erga feſtum natalis Chriſti, agaynſt Chriſtmaſſe.
            
               Ergaſterium, a warkehouſe.
            Ergaſtes, ſiue Ergaſticus, a workeman.
            
            
               Ergaſtularius, the gayler or keper of the priſon.
            
               Ergaſtulum, a houſe where men were compellyd to work on ſtone or mettall. now it is takē for a priſon, and ſomtyme for the priſoners.
            
               Ergaſtulus, a gayler, ſommetyme it ſignifieth a labourer.
            
               Ergaſylus, the proper name of a man.
            
               Ergatum, an engyne to drawe vp thynges of great poyſe or weyght callyd a crane.
            
               Erginus, was a tyraunt, whiche Hercules ſubdued and ſlewe.
            
               Ergo, therfore. ſometyme it is ſpoken diſdaynouſely. Fac ergo quod lubet, than do as the lyſt. ſomtyme exhortyng. Ergo age, go to. ſomtyme it ſignifieth bicauſe Illius ergo, for his ſake. Virtutis ergo, bycauſe of vertu.
            
               Erguminus, a man poſſeſſed with an yll ſpirite
            
               Erib
                     ••
                  a, the ſtepmother of Mercury.
            
               Erica, an herbe growyng in wodes, and is like to Maioram.
            
               Erîce, the ſweete broome, whyche hath leaues lyke to roſemary, but that the leaues are ſom what pryckynge.
            
               Erichinus, a fyſhe of the ſea callyd a rochet.
            
               Ericthonius, the fyrſt kyng of Athenes, which inuented a charyot.
            
               Eridanus, a ryuer in Italy, nowe callyd Padus in Italyon Po, nigh to the citie callid Patauiū
               
            
            
               Erigerō,
               Io. Agric. an herb callid alſo ſenecio, groūdſwel
            
               Erigo, rexi, rigere, to ſet vp, to lyft vp.
            
               Erigere ſcalas ad moenia, to ſet vp ladders or a ladder to the walles of a towne.
            
               Erigere ad ſpem, to put in hope.
            
               Erigite animos, lyft vp your ſpirites.
            
               Erimantus, a dyuynour.
            
               Erinaceus, an hedgehogge or vrchyn.
            
               Erinnys, the name of one of the furies of helle.
            
               Eriphyle, the wyfe of Amphiaraus, and ſyſter of Adraſtus, whyche betrayed her huſbande for a bracelet at the ſiege of Thebes.
            
               Eripio, pui, pere, to take away, to delyuer. ſomtyme to make haſte.
            
               Eripe fugam, flee away in haſte.
            
               Eripuiſti à me librum, thou haſte taken my boke from me.
            
               Eripuiſti me á periculo, thou haſte delyuered me from peryll.
            
               Eripuiſti mihi pecuniam, thou haſte taken my money from me.
            
               Eris, an herbe growynge in Egypt, and may be interpretate contention.
            
               Erîthace, the meate of bees while they do warke
            
               Erodius, a fowle, the greatteſt that flyeth, and ouercommeth and eateth the egle.
            
               Erogatio, diſtribution of thinges to other men, a lyberall gyunge.
            
               Erogito, tare, to deſyre hartily.
            
               Erogo, aui, are, to employ or beſtow on a thing.
            
               Eros, loue.
            
               Erotema, tis, a demaunde.
            
               Erotematicus, he that often demaundeth.
            
               Errabundus, moche wanderyng, or vacabunde.
            
               Erratica, herbes which do grow of them ſelfes without culture, ye may call them weedes.
            
               Erraticus, ca, cum, that crepeth here and there, as Vitis erratica, a creping vyne, that ſhoteth out in dyuers places.
            
               Erratica herba, a runnyng wede.
            
               Erratio, a goynge out of the way.
            
               Erratus,
               Terent. in Adelphis dus, Erratun, ti, n errour or ſynne. Erro, aui, are, to erre, to wander.
            
               Errrare de uerbis alicuius, to myſvnderſtand the wordes that one ſpeaketh.
            
               Errones, ſtarters aſyde, vagabundes.
            
               Error, properly where falſehode is affirmed or taken for trouthe, or trouthe for falſehod. ſom tyme ignorance, alſo deceypt.
            
               Erubeſco, bui, beſcere, to be aſhamid, or to bluſh
            
               Eruca, an herbe callyd Rokat. alſo a worm callyd the canker worme, whyche commonly is vpon colewortes.
            
               Eructo, taui, tare, to belke or breake wynde out of the ſtomacke.
            
               Erudero, aui, are, to throwe out, or cary away rubbel, as morter, ſtones, & other like thinges of olde buyldyng decayed or pullyd downe.
            
               Erudio, iui, ire, to teache any arte of ſcience.
            
               Eruditio, doctryne or teachynge.
            
               Eruditus, lernyd or taughte.
            
               Erugo, an vnkyndely moyſture, wherby corne growynge is putrified.
            
               Eruila, a grayne callyd tares.
            
               Eruilia, ſome do ſuppoſe to be frenche beanes.
            
               Erumpo, rupi, rumpere, to braſte out. ſomtyme to leape forthe.
            ❀Erumpet in neruum iſtaec fortitudo, is a prouerbe, whyche is dyuerſely expound, for it may ſignify: This courage of thyn may bring the to a halter, or to ſytte by the heeles: or it may ſignifie. This great ſtrength or courage of thyne wyll come vnto nothyng. which prouerbe is taken of archers, which oftentymes when they put forth moſt ſtrength, they breke the ſtrynge of theyr bowe, and the arrowe falleth downe at theyr fete, wherby the ſhote is loſt, and cometh to nothynge.
            
               Erunco, caui, care, to wiede out.
            
               Eruo, ui, ere, to drawe out with force.
            
               Eruptio, is whan an hoſte iſſueth haſtily out of a campe or fortreſſe, & fallith on their enmies.
            
                
               Eruum, a kynde of pulſe, callyd alſo Orobos, there is of it bothe whyte and redde.
            
               Erymanthus,
               Plin. li. 4▪
                a mountayne in Archady, where Hercules ouercamme a boore, that diſtroyed the fieldes. There are alſo a wodde and a ryuer of the ſame name.
            
               Eryngium, or Erynge, a kynde of thyſtels hauynge longe leaues, a long ſtalk with a round knap full of long pryckes in the fourme of a ſtarre. The rote wherof beinge condite or cō
               ſeruyd in hony with cynamome and cloues, comforteth nature, and ſtyreth courage. It is callyd Yringium, & Centum capita.
            
            
               Eryſipelas,
               Galen. an inflamation with rednes, wherwith is a feuer or horrour in the body.
            
               Erythace, bees meate, whyle they labour.
            
               Erythacus, a byrde callyd Robyn redbreaſt.
            
               Erytheus, was a kyng of Athenes.
            
               Erythios, an herbe callyd redde beetes, as I do ſuppoſe.
            
               Erythraeum mare, the redde ſea, ſo callyd of a kyng callyd Erythrus, which in englyſh ſignifieth redde. For in dede the water of that ſea is of the colour of water, as dyuers greatte authors, and alſo experyence do affyrme.
            
               Eryx, the name of a mountayne in Cicyle, and of a city theron buylded, wherin was edified a temple to Venus, whereof Venus is callyd Erycina.
            
            
               Quid geminas Erycina meos ſine fine dolores? O Venus, why doſte thou contynually double my ſorowes.
         
         
            ¶E ANTE S.
            
               ESalas,
               Epiphaniꝰ was a prophete in Ieruſalem the tribe of Iuda,Hierony. in whom was ſuch abundance of the ſpirite of prophecye,Euſebius. that he prophecyed ſo moch of Chriſte, that he ſemed to be rather an Euangeliſte, than a prophete. He was of ſuche holyneſſe, that in the tyme of kynge Ezechias, whan a citie was beſieged, he by his prayer optayned of god, that water ſprange vp in lyttell quantitie, ſo that the people dyd not periſhe for lacke of water, And whan the ennemyes ſought euery where to aſſwage theyr thyrſte, they moughte not fynde water. And whan the enmies had won the cytie, and beſieged Seloum, as often as the Iewes came for water, the water ranne out of the earthe abundantly, and they toke water, but the ſtraungers whan they came, coulde not fynde it. This holy man for his libertie of ſpeche in rebukyng the ſynne of the pryncis and people, and prophecienge of the vengeance of god vpon the coūtray and people, was cut in two partis with a ſaw, & buried vnder an oke, but afterwarde he was trā
               ſlatid & laid by the ſepulture of kīgis, he was before the incarnation of Chriſt .96. yeres.
            
               Eſalon, is a byrde, which breaketh crowes egges, and her byrdes be diſtroied by the wolfe, and lykewiſe ſhe kylleth the wolfes whelpes, yf ſhe may come by them.
            
               Eſau, the ſonne of Iſaac, and brother of Iacob.
            
               Eſca, all maner of meate, as well for menne as beaſtes.
            
               Eſcarius, a, um, pertaynynge to meate.
            
               Eſcaria menſa, a table wherat men doo eate meate.
            
               Eſculentus, ta, tum, any thyng to be eaten.
            
               Eſculus, an oke bearynge akornes.
            Eſito, aui, are, to eate.
            
            
               Eſſe in amicis, to be one of his frendes.
            
               Eſſeda,
               Cic. fam. epiſt. a wayne.
            
               Eſſedarius, a charyot man.
            
               Eſſedo nes, a people whiche do eate theyr frendes whan they be dead, and drynk in the ſculles of theyr heades.
            
               Eſſeni, or Eſſei, people inhabytynge the innermoſt part of Iudea towarde the weſt,Plinius. 5. whiche do lyue without women,Solinus. & do contemne golde and ſyluer, and all other ryches, and do lyue by eatyng of dates. There reſorteth continually vnto them by the ordināce of god men frō diuers partes, ſo that their company do neuer faile, but none is receiued, except the merit of his vertue and chaſtitie doth aduaunce hym.
            
               Eſto, be it.
            
               Eſtrix, a woman rauenour or deuourer.
            
               Eſuriales feriae, wake dayes.
            
               Eſuries,
               Varro. hunger.
            Eſurigo, idem.
            
               Eſurio,
               Plautꝰ in perſa. 
               onis, an hungry felowe.
            
               Eſurio, iui, ij, ire, to be a hungerde.
         
         
            ¶E ANTE T.
            
               ET, and, as wel. Te admirantur & ciues & hoſpites, as well thy countrey menne as ſtraungers doo wonder at the. Sometyme it ſygnyfyeth but, by an interrogation, ſomtyme that is to ſay. Annos natus iam ſexaginta, & ſenex. Nowe thre ſcore yeres old▪ that is to ſay, an olde man.
            
               Etenim, for alſo, ſemblably, ſurely.
            
               Eteſiae, wyndes whiche do commonly blowe in ſommer, about the Canycular dayes.
            
               Ethalia, the name of an yle in the ſea callyd M Liguſticum, whiche is by Ieane.
            
               Ethanion, the name of a certayn veſſell.
            
               Etheocles, the ſonne of Oedipus and Iocaſta his mother.
            
               Ethicus, morall.
            
               Ethmus, the myddell brydge of the noſe.
            
               Ethnicus, a Gentyle.
            
               Ethologos, he whiche with voyce, geſture, and countenance expreſſeth the maners of men.
            
               Ethopela, an imitation of other mens maners.
            
                
               Ethici pictores, paynters, whiche in pictures do lyuely ſet out the maners and affections of men.
            
               Etiam, alſo, more ouer, yea, ye forſothe.
            
               Etiamne, is it ſo? is that inoughe?
            
               Etiamnum, yet, vntyll than, vntyl that time.
            
               Etiamnunc, vntyll nowe.
            
               Etiamſi, althoughe.
            
               Etruria, a countrey in Italy called Tuſcana.
            
               Etruſca lingua, the Tuſcane tungue.
            
               Etruſci, Tuſcanes.
            
               Etſi, albeit.
            
               Etymologia, true ſayinge, or true expoſition, or reaſon.
         
         
            E ANTE V.
            
               EVANDE, Mars daughter of Thebes the wyfe of Aeſopus: and the wyfe of Capanei was alſo ſo called, whiche loued her huſbande ſo feruently, that whan ſhe harde he was taken at Thebes, ſhe fell nere deade in a ſwowne, and after whan his funerall was celebrate, ſhe lepte in to the fyre.
            
               Euado, ſi, uadere, to eſcape, to paſſe, with daungier, to appiere, to clyme, to delyuer, to be, to come to.
            
               Euadere ad frugem bonam,
               Cice. pr
                     ••
                  lio. to come to good thryfte, to thryue, to waxe honeſt.
            
               Euaenetus, a kynge of the Lacedemonians.
            
               Eualeo, lui, ère, to waxe hole or ſtronge.
            
               Eualeſco, ſcere, to waxe very ſtronge.
            
               Eualuo, aui, are, to put out of the dores.
            
               Euan, an exclamation to the prayſe of Bacchus and is as moche to ſaye, as Bone puer, O good chylde.
            
               Euander, the proper name of Carmentis ſon, and is interpretate a good man. He lefte his countrey Archadia, and came into Italy, and entrynge into the mouthe of Tiber, and expulſynge the inhabitauntes, reſted in the hil Palatine, where he beganne to buylde the towne Palanteum.
            
            Euaneo, & Euaneſco, ſcere, to vanyſhe away.
            
            
               Euangelia, orum, pluraliter. were ſacrifyces and ſolemne prayers made after good tydynges.
            
               Euangelium, good tydinges. It is alſo a rewarde gyuen for good tidinges. nowe it ſygnifieth the goſpell.
            Euanidus, a, um, vnfruitfull.
            
            
               Euanno▪ are, to van corne or other lyke thing.
            
               Euapelus, a foole or ydeote.
            
               Euax,
               Plautus. an interiection of reioyſynge. Euax iurgio uxorem tandem abegi. Heida, I haue yet at the laſte dryuen my wyfe awaye with chidynge.
            
               Euboea, an yle in the Greeke ſea, and the name of the citie ſituate in the ſame.
            
               Eubulus, the name of a ſtory writer, and is interpretate prudent.
            
               Eucarpia, a citie of Phrigia, where growe great plenty of very fayre grapes.
            
               Euceria, oportunitye.
            
               Euchariſtia, good grace, a rendrynge of thāke. It is nowe taken for the ſacrament of the aultar.
            
               Euchila, meates of good iuyce.
            
               Euclides, the name of a famous geometrician.
            
               Eudoxia, good renoume, or good fame.
            
               Eueho, uexi, uehere, to cary out. ſomtyme it ſignifieth to extoll or lyfte vp.
            
               Euemerus, the name of an olde ſtory wryter.
            
               Euenire, to happen by chaunce.
            
               Euenit ex ſententia, it came to paſſe as I, thou, or he wolde haue it.
            
               Euenit praeter ſententiam, aut praeter ſpem, It hapned other wiſe than I, thou, or he thought, or truſted.
            
               Euenus, a ryuer deſcendynge from Thrace, and deuidynge Calydonie.
            
               Euenta, thynges whiche happen in conclusyō.
            
               Euentus, tus, hap. ſomtyme it is taken for the ende or concluſion of a thynge.
            
               Euentum praeſtare, to warrante all that whiche ſhall happen.
            
               Euerriator, he that hath goodes of the teſtatour with condition, that if he perfourm not his laſte wyll, or do diſturbe it, he ſhall loſe all that he hath.
            
               Euerriculum, a fyſhynge net called a drag.
            
               Euerro, ri, rere, to ſwepe cleane.
            
               Euerſio, diſtruction.
            Euerſus, a, um, dyſtroyed.
            
            
               Euerto, ti, tere, to tourne vp ſet downe.
            
               Eueſtigio, by and by, at an inſtant.
            
               Euganei, people of Venece.
            
               Euganei montes, mountaynes in Italy by Padowe.
            
               Euge, well done.
            
               Euhoe,
               Plaut. in Men. a noyſe, whiche they do make that are in great heuynes and waylynge.
            
               Euidens, entis, euydent, apparaunte.
            
               Euidenter, clerely.
            
               Euilla, a countrey in the oryent, about the whiche the ryuer Phiſon, whiche we call Ganges, that commeth out of Paradyſe, dothe runne.
            
               Euiratus, of womanly or chyldiſhe conditions. alſo he that lacketh his genitours.
            
               Euireſco, ſcere, to become grene.
            
               Euiro, aui, are, to take awaye a mannes members of generation.
            
               Euiſcero, aui, are, to bowell or drawe out the guttes of any thynge.
            
               Euiſcus, called alſo Althea, an herbe named great malowe.
            
               Euito aui, are, to flye, to eſchewe or beware.
            
                
               Eulogium, a worde well ſpoken, a prayſe, a benediction.
            
               Eumelus, the ſon of Admetus kyng of Theſſaly, gotten on Alceſta his wyfe.
            
               Eumenides, furies of hell.
            
               Eumolpus, a mans name of Athenes, whome Suidas wryteth to be the ſonne of Muſeus the poete.
            
               Eumonides, a mannes name of Thebes.
            
               Eunomia,
               Budeus. a iuſte conſtitution or ordinaunce of lawes. Alſo due obedience of the lawes.
            
               Eunomius, was a great heretike of the ſect of Arrius, whervnto he added of his owne malyce, that the ſonne was in euery thynge vnlyke to the father. And that the holy goſt had no medlynge with the father nor the ſonne. Moreouer he affyrmed, that all they whiche kepte the faythe that he taught, ſhulde be ſaued, hadde they committed neuer ſo great a ſynne, and continued in it. He was about the yere of our lorde .353.
            
               Eunucho, & Eunuchiſo, to gelde men.
            
               Eunuchus, a man gelded.
            
               Euocati, ſouldiours, whiche for ſomme neceſſitye be ſodeinly called out of the fieldes vnto battayle.
            
               Euoco, aui, are, to call out, to call forthe, or call away.
            
               Euocare teſtes, to brynge forthe witnes.
            
               Euolo, lare, to fle awaye. Alſo to eſcape. It ſignifieth ſomtyme to take away by ſtelthe.
            
               Euolao, uere, to turne hyther and thyther.
            
               Euoluere ſe turba, to wynde hym ſelfe out of trouble.
            
               Euomo, mui, mere, to vomyte, to caſte out.
            
               Euomere iram, to wreake anger.
            
               Euomere uirus, to ſpyt out his poyſon.
            
               Eupalia, a towne in Locris, whiche ſome call
            
               Eupalion, and ſome Eupolyon.
            
            
               Eupatorium, an herbe called agrimony.
            
               Euphonia, good ſounde.
            
               Euphorion, a poetes name of Calcidony, whō Gallus dyd tranſlate.
            
               Euphragia, an herbe called eyebryght.
            
               Euphraſinum, an herbe called bugloſſe.
            
               Euphrates, one of the ryuers, that come out of Paradiſe, whiche paſſeth throughe the citie of Babylon.
            
               Ephroſine, bourage.
            
               Euphroſyna, the proper name of a woman. Alſo the name of one of the thre graces called Charites.
            
            
               Eupilis, a lake in Fraunce Ciſalpine.
            
               Euripides, the name of an excellente poete amonge the Grekes, whiche wrate tragedies moſt excellently.
            
               Euripus, a ſmall cundite ryſynge of a greatte heyght. Alſo a dyche made to incloſe places to playe in, in the ſtede of hedges▪ ſome doo take it for a ſmalle ponde or ſtewe. Alſo an arme of the ſea, or a narrowe paſſage betwene two places.
            
               Eurotonus, a northeaſt wynde.
            
               Europa, is the thyrde parte of the worlde, and is diuided from Aſia with the great ſeas called Helleſpontus, Propontis, & Boſphorus Thracius, & Pontus Euxinus. And hath the vttermoſte boundes in the northeaſte the ryuer called Tanais. And from Affrike it is dyuyded by the ſea called Mare mediterraneū. It was alſo the name, of a fayre mayden doughter of Agenor king of Phoenicia, whō Iupyter transformynge hym ſelfe in to the fourme of a bull, dyd rauyſhe, as poetes dyd wryte: which of ſome is interpreted, that Iupiter caryed her awaye by force in a ſhyp, in a decke or maſte wherof was a baner or ſtremer, wherin was paynted a bull.
            
               Eurotas, a ryuer that runneth before the town of Lacedemonia.
            
               Eurus, the caſte wynde.
            
               Euryale, the doughter of kynge Minois. there was an other of that name, he doughter of Proetus kynge of Argiue.
            
               Euryalus, the name of oone of the prynces of Peloponneſe. Vergil feyneth a Troian to be ſo called.
            
               Eurydame, was the wyfe of Leutichis, kynge of Spartans.
            
               Eurydice, the wyfe of Orpheus.
            
               Eurylochus, the kynge of Phlegia, which deſtroyed Thebes, before Cadmus bulded it.
            
               Eurynomus, a dyuell whome as the aunciente Greekes dyd ſuppoſe eate and conſumed the fleſhe of deade men, leauyng the bones bare. whom they paynted in a terrible figure, hauynge longe tethe or tuſkes, ſyttynge in the ſkynne of a vulture, of colour betwene black and blewe.
            
               Eurypylus, one of the ſonnes of Hercules that reigned in the yle Cous.
            
               Eurythmia, is a beaultye in the true furminge of the members, where the heyght accordeth with the bread, and the breade alſo with the length. fynally all thynge anſwerynge to his iuſte proportion.
            
               Euterpe, one of the Muſes.
            
               Eutheca, a ſtore houſe.
            
               Euthymia, quietnes, ſurety of mynde, or hartes caſe.
            
               Eutices, was an heretike and abbot of a monaſtery in Conſtantinople, about the yere of our lorde .450 He affyrmed that Chriſte had but one onely nature, that is to ſaye, diuine, or of god, lyke as he was one perſone. This hereſy was condempned in the counſayle of Epheſine, and Eutices ſent into exyle.
            
               Eutrapelia, gentylnes good maners.
            
                
               Eutrapelus, gentyll and pleaſaunt.
            
               Euxinus pontus, a parte of the ſea, whiche deuideth Europa from Aſia.
         
         
            E ANTE X.
            
               EX, ſignifieth of, or fro.
            
               Ex aduerſum,
               
                  
                     ••
                  rent. in 
                     •
                  el. euen agaynſte it, on the other ſyde.
            
               Ex aduerſum ei loco, agaynſte that place.
            
               Ex aequo & bono, accordynge to equitye and reaſon.
            
               Ex aequo & bono facere, to do iuſtely or indifferently.
            
               Ex animo, of good wyll, of a good courage.
            
               Ex ante diem Nonarum Iuniarum, the ſeuenth daye of Iune.
            
               Ex argumento, in token therof.
            
               Ex compoſito, as it was agreed.
            
               Ex dignitate tua, & ex repub. facis. Thou doeſt according to thyne aucthoritie, and for the weale of thy countrey.
            
               Ex dignitate noſtra,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . epiſt. accordynge to our eſtate or dignitie.
            
               Ex dignitate tribuere, to gyue accordynge to his eſtate.
            
               Ex equo pugnare, to fyght on horſbacke.
            
               Ex fide,
               
                  
                     •
                  ad At. 
               fama. Summa erit haec, ſtatues, ut ex fide fama, re
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mea uidebitur This ſhall be the hole effecte, that thou doo, as it ſhall ſeme for myne honeſty, accordyng to the truſt that I put in the, and for my profyte.
            
               Ex inſidijs, by treaſon.
            
               Ex more, accordynge to the cuſtome.
            
               Ex ſuperabundanti, more ouer.
            
               Exacerbeſco, ere, to wax ſharpe.
            
               Exactio, a pyllynge of the people.
            
               Exactor, a demaunder of money. ſome englyſh it a Comtroller. I take it to be a gatherer of toll or tax.
            
               Exactus, ta, tum, paſſed, very diligent, exact, expelled, demaunded, perfectely done or performed.
            
               Exacuo, cuere, to make very ſharpe, to ſteere.
            
               Exaedifico, aui, are, to buylde perfectly. alſo to dryue out of the houſe.
            
               Exaequo, quare, to make egall.
            
               Exaeuio, uire, to waxe gentyll or mylde.
            
               Exaggeratio, a heapynge to gether.
            
               Exagito, aui, are, to vex, to anger.
            
               Exagoga, rente, reuenewes.
            
               Exagogae, they whiche cary any thyng out of the houſe.
            
               Exalburno, nare, to take out the fat iuyce that is in ſome woode.
            
               Exalto, aui, are, to mount or lyft vp. ſometime to prayſe very moche.
            
               Exaluminati, oryent perles.
            
               Examen, minis, a ſwarme of bees. Alſo the nedyll or tungue in balaunces and beames. Some tyme it ſignifieth a iuſte examination or tryall.
            
               Exanima infantium, a company or ſorte of chyldren.
            Examino, aui, are, to examine.
            
            
               Examo, mare, to loue well.
            
               Examurco, aui, are, to drawe oyle cleane from the mother.
            
               Examuſsim, iuſtely, by rule.
            
               Exanclo, aui, are, to drawe out cleane, to emty. ſomtyme to ſuffer, to vanquiſhe, to make. Non poteſt hic ſine tua opera exanclari clauus, This nayle can not be made withoute thy helpe.
            
               Exanguis, gue, without bloude, tymerous, or fearefull.
            
               Exanimalis, without ſoule or lyfe.
            
               Ex animo eſt, it is as nature requireth.
            
               Ex animo facio, I do it with my good wyll, or as my mynde gyueth me.
            
               Ex animi ſententia, accordynge to myne appetite, or as I wolde deſyre it.
            
               Ex animo illi faueo, I fauour hym with all my harte.
            
               Exanimatus, ta, tum, made aferde, or troubled in mynde. ſometyme it ſignifieth dead.
            
               Exanimo,
               Plautus. 
               aui, are, to kyll. ſome tyme to make aferde. Priuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   intus redij exanimatus fui. Or euer I came in agayne I was made aferde.Q. Curt. 
               Multos exanimauit rigor inſolitus niuis. The vnaccuſtomed chyllyng of the ſnow depryued many of theyr lyues.
            Exanimus, ma, mum, & Exanimis, me, dead, put in feare.
            
            
               Exanio,
               Columel. 
               aui, are, to put cleane away.
            
               Exanthema, a wheale or a pouſhe in a mans ſkynne.
            
               Exardeo, ſi, dere, to be vehemently inflamed.
            
               Exardeſco, ſcere, to waxe hotte, or to be vehemente.
            
               Exare
                     •
                  io, fieri, to be dryed vp.
            
               Exareo, rere, to be drye.
            Exareſco, ſci, ſcere, to drye.
            
            
               Exarmo, aui, are, to make tame, properly to breake the tethe of wylde beaſtes. Alſo to vnarme, or to take harnes from a man.
            
               Exarmare actionē, to make the action faint or feble.
            
               Exarmare nauem, to take awaye the tackelynge from a ſhyp.
            
               Exaro, aui, are, to care well. alſo to wryte.
            
               Exaſceare, to polyſſhe, or make play
                  •
               e, as carpenters do after that they haue hewed.
            
               Exaſpero, aui, are, to make ſharpe. Alſo to make very angry.
            
               Ex aſſe, of the hole. Haeredem fecit ex aſſe. He made hym heyre of all the hole.
            
               Exauctorati, ſouldiours or ſeruauntes put out
 of wages, or diſmiſſed of theyr ſeruice.
            
               Exauctoratus, depoſed or put out of office.
            
               Exauctoro, aui, are, to put out of wages. ſometyme to diſgrade a knyght, or other lyke.
            
               Exaudio, iui, ire, to here beneuolentely or perfectely.
            
               Exaugeo, gere, to increaſe moche.
            
               Exauſpicaui ex uin culis, I haue had yll lucke ſens I cam out of priſon.
            
               Exbaliſto, aui, are, to trumpe or deceyue. Ego hunc communem meum, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   noſtrum omnium hoſtem exbaliſtabo lepide, I wil featly deceyue this myne ennemie, and all oures in commune.
            
               Excalceo, ceaui, are, to pull of hoſen or ſhoes.
            
               Excalfacio, cere, to make very hote.
            
               Excandefacio, feci, facere, to chaufe or make angry, to make very hote.
            
               Excandeſcentia, vehement anger or wrathe.
            
               Excandeſco, ſci, ſcere, to be very angry.
            
               Excanto, aui, are, to charme. ſome tyme to ſhute out.Plautus.
            
            
               Excarnificatus, torne or rent with tourmentes
            
               Excarnifico, caui, care, to rente or cutte in pieces.
            
               Excedo, ceſsi, dere, to departe or go forth, to paſſe or excede.
            
               Exceſsit ex ephebis,
               Terent. in Andria. he paſſed boyes age
                  •
                he waxed a man.
            
               Excedere ex pueris, to be paſſed boyes age.
            
               Excedere officium, to do more than his duetye.
            
               Excellens, excellent, ſurmountinge.
            Excello, li, ere, to excell.
            
            
               Excelſitas animi, the valyantnes or heyght of courage.
            
               Excelſus, a, um, hyghe or great.
            
               Exceptio, an exception.
            
               Excepto, aui, are, to take or drawe to.
            
               Exceptor, oris, he that wryteth faſte that whiche other men do ſpeake.
            
               Excerebro, aui, are, to beate out the brayns of any thynge.
            
               Excerno, creui, cernere, to ſhyte, properlye it is to trye out the yll from the good.
            
               Excerpo, pſi, pere, to gather here and there the chiefe of any thynge.
            
               Excetra, a ſerpente, of whom the heade beinge cut of, thre came vp for it. It was alſo called Hydra.
            
               Excidium, the ſackynge of a towne or citie, or the vtter diſtruction therof.
            
               Excido, cidi, cidere, to fall out of a thynge, to deſtroye, alſo to cut out of a quary of ſtone.
            
               Excidit animo, it is out of my mynde.
            
               Excidere animo, to be forgotten.
            
               Excidere formula, to loſe his action.
            
               Excidit numero ciuium, he is not of the nū
               ber of citezens.
            
               Excieo, ciui, cire, to moue or ſhake out.
            
               Excio, ciui, ire, to moue vehemently, or to call out, to waken.
            
               Excipio, excepi, excipere, to excepte, to take or receyue, to trye or inſerche, to ſeparate, to take by crafte, to gather, to hyde, to ſuccede to reſiſte without any buſynes. Alſo to take vnwares or ſodeynly.
            
               Excipere furem,
               Plaut. i
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                to receyue a felone as an acceſſarye.
            
               Excipere notis, to wryte in cifer, or other compendiouſe fourme.
            
               Excipula, a weele to take fiſhe.
            
               Excipuus, a, um, wherwith any thynge is taken.
            
               Exciſo, aui, are, to crop, to teare, or to beate.
            Exciſus, a, um, gelded.
            
            
               Excito, aui, are, to ſtere, procure, or incourage.
            
               Exclamo, aui, are, to cry out, to cal for aloude.
            
               Excludo, to ſhyt out, to delyuer, to hatche egges, to make to appiere.
            
               Excogitatio, inuention.
            
               Excogito, tare, to fynde or inuent by thinking
            
               Excolo, excolere, to garnyſhe or decke. Alſo to haue in reuerence.
            
               Excompoſito, in order appoynted.
            
               Exconſules, & Exqueſtores, reherſed in the Code of ciuile lawe do ſignifie (as Alciatus dothe affyrme) they whiche are or haue bene in the dignytie of Conſul or Quaeſtor, but they dyd neuer miniſter in thoſe offyces, or toke the aduauntages thervnto belongynge. Alſo they whoſe fathers were Conſules or Queſtores whan they were borne. whiche aſſertion is contrary vnto Petrus Crinitus, who in the .xv. boke De honeſta diſciplina, ſayeth that they were called by thoſe names after they had accomplyſhed theyr miniſtration. whiche ſentence Alciatus ſharpelye repr
                  •
               ueth. Diſpunctionum. li. 4.
            
               Excoquo, quere, to boyle a thynge vntyll it be drye.
            
               Excorio, aui, are, to plucke of the ſkyn or hide of a beaſte.
            
               Excors, excordis, a ſole or a man harteles.
            
               Excreo, aui, are, to ſpyt out.
            
               Excrementa, thynges of digeſtion expulſed, moyſte or drye,Gale
                     •
                   defin
                     •
                  
                wherof there ben .ix. ordure, fleume, choler, melancholy, vrine, ſweat, fylthe of the noſe, ſpyttle, mylke.
            
               Excreſco, excreui, excreſcere, to growe out, or to growe moche.
            
               Excretio, is the ſuperfluitie of excrementes beinge in the body.
            
               Excretum, the refuſe or offall of any thynge.
            
               Excruciabilis, le, worthy to be tourmented.
            
               Excrucio, are, to tourment.
            
               Excubiae, arum, watche as well by daye as by nyghte.
            
                
               Excubitor, he that watcheth.
            
               Excubitus, watche.
            
               Excubo, aui, are, to watche, as they which in battayle, or in the garde of a prynces perſon do.
            
               Excudo, excuſi, excudere, to beate or ſtryke out, ſome tyme to fynde out with ſtudye, to hatche.
                  
                     •
                  ergilius 
               Vt primum ſilicis, ſcintillum excudit Achates. as ſone as Achates had ſtryken fyre of the flynte.
            
               Exculco, care, to treade out or wrynge out.
            
               Exculpo, pſi, pere, to graue or intayle ymages, alſo to get any thynge by hearynge of one.
            
               Exculpere oculum, to thruſte out ones eye.
            
               Excurio, aui, are, to put oute of companye or courte.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               Apollonium ideo, excuriauit, quia nihil habeba: Therfore dyd he put Apollonius out of the courte, bicauſe he had nothinge
            
               Excuro, rare, to dreſſe a thynge curiouſly.
            
               Excuratus uictus, meate curiouſly dreſſed.
            
               Excuratus homo, a galyarde felowe.
            
               Excurro, rere, to runne out of a place.
            
               Excurſio, a digreſſion in ſpeakynge, a ſkyrmiſh in warres.
            
               Excurſor, a currour.
            
               Excurſus, ſus, where one paſſeth his boundes.
            
               Excuſabilis, le, that whiche maye be excuſed.
            
               Excuſatius, more excuſed.
            
               Excuſatoria epiſtola, a letter of excuſe.
            Excuſo, aui, are, to excuſe.
            
            
               Excuſſores equi, gambaldynge horſes.
            
               Excuſſorium cribrum, a rengynge ſyue. Alſo a courſe bulter.
            Excuſſus, a, um, ſhaken.
            
            
               Excutio, ſsi, tere, to ſhake, to choſe. Iuuentutem ex tota Aſia excuſsimus. we haue choſen out all the yonge men that are in Aſya.
            
               Excutere aliquem, to rob one, to ſhake one out of his clothes.
            
               Excutere iugum, to ſhake of the yoke.
            
               Excutere lachrymas alicui, to make the teares come out of ones eyes.
            
               Excutere uomitum, to make one to ſpue.
            
               Excuſsi grandine, beaten with hayle ſtones.
            
               Excutiunt cerebrum tua dicta, thy wordes do trouble my brayne.
            
               Exdecimo, aui, are, to tythe out.
            
               Ex diametro oppoſita, ſo contrary the one to the other, that they maye neuer agre.
            
               Exdiſpoſito, by an order, of a purpoſe.
            
               Exdorſuo, aui, are, to breake the backe bone.
            
               Execo, aui, are, to cut without.
            
               Execratio, curſynge.
            
               Execro, aui, are, to abhorre, to curſe.
            Execror, idem.
            
               Exectus, gelded.
            
               Exedo, di, dere, to eate as a worme or ſore doth, to eate vp.
            
               Exedra, a parlour, or other lyke place.
            
               Exegematicus, a fourme of ſpeakynge, where the poete onely ſpeaketh.
            
               Exegeticon, idem quod expoſitiuum, uel enar ratiuum, by the whiche one expoundeth or declareth a thynge.
            
               Exemplar, a ſample, wherby we attempte to make a thynge lyke to it
                  •
               s ſometyme the oone is vſed for the other. Often tymes they bothe do ſignifie an example, where one thynge is compared with an other.
            
               Exemplum, an example to folowe, eſchewe, or beware.
            
               Exemptilis, le, that whiche maye be taken awaye. or taken out.
            
               Exemptus, exempte, or priuileged.
            Exemptus eſt rebus humanis, he is deade.
            
            
               Exeo, exiui, exire, to go out, to eſchewe, to braſte out.
            
               In memoriam exire, to be in remembrance.
            
               Exit in fabulam, it is made a tale.
            
               Exit de poteſtate, he is not able to gouerne hym ſelfe: he is in ward, or vnder a gardain.
            
               Exentero, aui, are, to make a hole in a thinge.
            
               Exequiae, funeralles, the whiche are doone in the buryall of any perſone.
            
               Exequior, aris, ari, to execute the funeralles.
            
               Exequor, eris, qui, to do or execute. ſometime to declare or expreſſe.
            
               Exequi mortem, to dye.
            
               Exequi ſermonem, to ſpeake.
            
               Exerceo, cui, cere, to exerciſe. ſome tyme to dryue oute of the houſe, to ſet on warke, to vſe.
            
               Exercere aetatem, to lyue.
            
               Exercere Bacchanal, to be drunke.
            
               Exercere diſcordias, & ſimultates, to haue varyaunce or contention. alſo to get or win.
            
               Exercere ſumptus, to get theyr expenſes.
            
               Excercere tellurem, to tyll well the grounde.
            
               Exercio, ciui, ire, to amende or repayre.
            
               Exercitatio, exerecyſe, vſe, or cuſtome.
            
               Exercitatus, exercyſed.
            
               Exercitium, exercyſe or vſe.
            Exercito, taui, tare, to exercyſe.
            
            
               Exercitus, tus, an hoſte of men of warre.
            
               Exercitus, ta, tum, exerciſed, vſed in labour, weryed, hardened.
            
               Exero, erui, erere, to go forthe, to drawe out, as a man wyll drawe out a ſworde.Statius. 
               Fulgentem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   exerit enſem, And he drewe oute his bryght ſworde. alſo to lyfte vp.
            
               Exerere uincula, to ſtryke of his gyues, or to take out of pryſon.
            
               Exerto, aui, are, to ſhewe forthe abrode.
            Exertus, ta, tum, ſhewed forthe.
            
            
               Exfio, I purge or clenſe.
            
               Exfodio, dere, to dyg out.
            
               Exgurgito, tare, to take or caſt out of the chanell or ſtreame.
            
                
               Exhaeredatus, diſinherited.
            Exhaeredo, aui, are, to diſherite.
            
            
               Exhaereſimus dies, the daye whiche maketh the leape yere.
            
               Exhalo, aui, are, to puffe out.
            
               Exaurio, iui, ire, to drawe out cleane, to make empty.
            
               Exhaurire labores, to ſpende labour.
            
               Exhebenum, a ſtone wherwith goldeſmythes do polyſhe golde.
            
               Exherbare, to plucke vp herbes or weedes.
            
               Exherbandus eſt locus,
               Columel. the place muſte be weeded.
            
               Exherbatio, weedynge.
            
               Exhibeo, bui, bere, to proffer, to ſet abrode, for all men to beholde.
            
               Exhibere negotium, to put to buſynes, or trouble.
            
               Exhibere rationes, to make accompte.
            
               Exhibere ſpectaculum, to make commune playes or triumphe.
            
               Exhillaro, rare, to comforte or reioyſe.
            
               Exhomologeſis, confeſſion.
            
               Exhorreo, rui, rere, to feare horribly, or with tremblynge.
            
               Exibilo, aui, are, to whiſtel or hyſſe a man out of the place.
            Exifilare, idem.
            
               Exigo, exegi, exigere, to expell or ſhut out. alſo to requyre, to inqui
                  ••
               , to do.
            
               Exigere aetatem,
               Plautus. to lyue.
            
               Exigi matrimonio, to be deuorced.
            
               Exigere nomina,
               Ci. in Ve. to compell men to paye theyr dettes.
            
               Exigere pecuniam, to demaunde money.
            Exigere ſuppliciū ab aliquo, to puniſſhe one.
            
            
               Exigere tempus, to paſſe forthe the tyme.
            
               Exigue, an aduerbe whiche ſignifieth verye lyttell.
            Exiguus, a, um, lyttell.
            
            
               Exilio, lij, iui, ire, to go out haſtely, or to leape out.
            
               Exilis, le, ſclender, ſmall.
            
               Exilium, exy
                  •
               e.
            
               Exilica cauſa, a matter agaynſte them, whiche were in exyle.
            
               Eximie, excellently.
            
               Eximium, excellent, very great.
            Eximius, a, um, excellent.
            
            
               Eximo, exemi, mere, to take away, to except.
            
               Eximere actionē, to barre one of his action.
            
               Eximere ex aerarijs, where one hath his Qui etus eſt in the Eſcheker, or other lyke place, to diſcharge one vpon his accompte.
            
               Eximere ex reis, to acquite one of an offence.
            
               Eximere noxae,
               Ti. Liuiꝰ to releaſe one of a treſpaſſe commytted.
            
               Exin, from thenſforthe.
            Exinde, idem quod exin, afterwarde, frome thenſforthe.
            
            
               Exinantio, niui, ire, to emptye, to bryng to naughte.
            
               Exinſperato, vnloked for, whiche noo man hoped.
            
               Exiſtimatio, ſuppoſell. ſometyme reputation.
            
               Exiſtimo, aui, are, to trowe or ſuppoſe, to decerne or iudge.
            
               Exiſto, extiti, exiſtere, to be, to appere, to be ſet vp, or aduaunced.
            Exitiabilis, le, deadly.
            
            
               Exitialis, le, deadely, or that cauſeth deathe or myſchiefe.
            
               Exitium, deathe or myſchiefe.
            
               Ex iure manu conſertum uocare, was a fourm of contention for lande in this wyſe: The demaundant before the iudge ſayd in this wiſe vnto the tenaunte.Cice 
                     〈◊〉
                   Murea
                     •
                  
                The lande whiche is in S. is myne. I ſaye it is myne by the lawe, I require the, trye it there with me accordynge to the lawe. The tenaunte anſwered: frome whenſe thou haſte requyrred me to trye with the accordynge to the lawe,Ge
                     •
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                thenſe I doo eftſones appeale. Than went they together to the place in demaunde, to thintent that they ſhulde bryng with them a tyrfe of that grūde to the iudge in the citie, and in his preſence demaunde and anſwere as for the hole lande whiche was in contention.
            
               Exlex, he that lyueth without lawe, or out of lawe.
            
               Exloquor, qui, to ſpeake as it is, to ſpeake al.
            
               Exobſecro, crare, to make great deſyre.
            
               Exoculatus, whoſe eyes be put out.
            
               Exoculo, lare, to put out ones eyes.
            Exoculaſſo,Plaut. i
                     •
                   rude
                     ••
                  
                ſere, idem.
            
               Exodia, were wanton toyes myxte with verſes in a comedy or interlude.
            
               Exodium, a ſonge at the ende of a comedy or interlude. alſo the ende of a matter.
            
               Exoleſco, leui, leſcere, to leaue growynge. ſomtyme to growe myghtely.
            
               Exoletus, he that is paſſed growynge. alſo old or out of vſe. It ſignifieth alſo a man chylde abuſed agaynſte nature.
            
               Exoluo, ui, uere, to vnbynde, to paye all clerely, to recompenſe or gyue in rewarde, to delyuer. Suſpitione exoluere, to delyuer from ſuſpition.
            
               Exoluere religione, to diſcharge from vow or conſcience.
            
               Exomida, a garment with our ſleues, a taberd or chymere,
            
               Exonero, rare, to diſcharge or vnburden.
            
               Exopolis, he that dwelleth in the ſuburbes of a towne or citie.
            
               Exopto, tare, to deſyre feruently, or wyſhe.
            
               Exorabilis, he that is eaſy to be intreated in a matter.
            
                
               Exorabulum, a crafty fourme of deſyringe or aſkynge a thynge.
            
               Exorbeo,
               
                  
                     ••
                  ut. in 
                     •
                  idi. 
               bui, bere, to ſucke vp.
            
               Exorbito, aui, are, to go out of the tracke or carte loſe, or to go out of the ryghte way.
            
               Exorbo,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   in phi. 
               bare, to make one that he can not ſe.
            
               Exorciſmus, an adiuration or coniuringe.
            
               Exorciſo, aui, are, to adiure or coniure.
            
               Exorciſta, an adiourour or coniurour.
            
               Exordine, without ceaſſynge.
            Exordior, iris, iri, to begyn.
            
            
               Exordium, a beginninge.
            
               Exorior, iris, iri, to be borne, to appere out, to ryſe as the ſun doth, to inuade.
            
               Exorno, aui, are, to garnyſſhe or make fayre, to apparayle rychely, to ordeyne. ſomtyme to make foule, or out of apparayle.
            
               Exoro, aui, are, to induce or optayne by deſire, to deſyre hartely.
            
               Exorare ueniam, to aſke pardon.
            
               Exors, exortis, out of felowſhyp.
            
               Exos, without bones.
            
               Exoſſo, aui, are, to bone, or plucke out bones. Alſo to pull out the ſtrynge of a lamprey.
            
               Exoticus, a, um, a ſtraunger, that is come out of an other countrey, and dwelleth here.
            
               Expalleo,
               
                  
                     •
                  li. in epi 
                     •
                  laut. in 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ina. 
               lui, lere, to be pale.
            
               Expallio, aui, are, to robbe one of his garmentes.
            
               Expalpo, aui, are, to grope out.
            
               Expando, di, ere, to ſprede out.
            
               Expapillo, aui, are, to make naked to the pappes.
            
               Expato, aui, are, to come abrode, or in to an open place.
            
               Expectatio,
               Donatus. deſyre of thynges certayne and loked for.
            Expectus,Donatus. ta, tum, deſyred.
            
            
               Expectati parentes,
               Terent. in 
                     •
                  idelphis were yll parentes, and worthy to be hated, as who ſaith, theyr death were dayely to be deſyred.
            
               Expecto, aui, are, to tary or abyde, to obſerue or take hede. Expecto quid uelis, I marke what thou wylte ſaye: or elles, I deſyre to knowe what thou woldeſt. Alſo to hope. Expectate uenis: Thou comeſt euen as I wold haue the.
            
               Expectoro, aui, are, to put out of the breaſt or ſtomake.
            
               Expeculiatus, he that hath nothynge of his owne.
            
               Expedio, iui, ire, to delyuer, to ſpede, to cary out.
            
               Expedire manus, to holde vp the handes.
            
               Expedire rationes, to diſpatche matters.
            
               Expedire rem, to declare the matter plainly
            
               Expedire ſe cura to diſcharge hym of care.
                  
                     ••
                  rent. in 
                     ••
                  orm.
            
            
               Expedi, tell on quickely.
            Expedibo,Pl. in epi. 
               for expediam.
            
               Expedir, ſignifieth alſo, It is expedient or neceſſary, it is come to paſſe.
            
               Expeditum erat, it was expedient.
            
               Expeditio, a ſettynge forthe towarde battayl.
            Expeditus,Plaut. in Trucul. ta, tum, delyuered, diſpatched.
            
            
               Expediti milites, ſouldiours in lyght harnes
            
               Expello, puli, pellere, to expell or put out.
            
               Expendo, di, ere, to ponder or waye, to conſider, to examine ſtraightly, to paye truely, to ſpende money.
            
               Expendere ſcelus, to be punyſhed iuſtely for his offence.
            
               Expenſae, expenſes, or diſpenſes.
            
               Expenſum,
               Caeli. Ci. 
               uel expenſam, hath alſo an other proper ſignification. Mentio facta eſt de legione ea, quam expenſam tulit C. Caeſari Pōpeius: Mention was made of the legyon which Pompey reckened to be at the charge of Caeſar.Sceuola. 
               Creditores ſuae expenſum ferre debent: The creditours oughte to beare the loſſe, whiche is hapned by theyr negligence.
            
               Expenſum ferre, to ſpende or lay out money.
            
               Expergiſcere, Expergefacere, Expergificare, to wake a man out of his ſleape.
            
               Expergiſcor, eris, Expergifio, I am waked, or wake.
            Expergefactus, ta, tum, wakened.
            
            
               Expergitus, ſlepte inoughe, wakened by an other.
            Expergo, experexi, expergere, to waken.
            
            
               Experge te,
               Cicero awake.
            Expergere facias, idem.
            Experrectus, idem quod expergefactus.
            
               Experientia, experience.
            
               Experior, iris, iri, to attempte, or aſſaye, or proue.
            
               Expers, tis, without any parte, lackynge experience.
            
               Expers doloris, without peyne.
            
               Expers lucis, without lyghte.
            
               Expers mortis, neuer dyenge.
            
               Expertus, a man of experience.
            Expertus, ta, tum, attempted, taughte.
            
            
               Experſus, ſa, ſum, ſpronge with lycoure, or weate.
            
               Expes, without hope.
            
               Expetendus,
               Plaut. in perſa. 
               da, dum, worthy to be deſyred.
            
               Expeteſſo, ſere, to demaunde.
            
               Expetiſſo, ſere, to deſyre vehemently.
            
               Expeto, iui, tij, ere, to deſyre moche, or coueit, to happen, to wyll. ſomtyme to take, to paſſe ouer.Plaut. in Ruden. Alſo to purchaſe. Mirum quin tuum ius meo periculo expetam. It is meruayle, but I ſhall purchaſe thy right with my great dā
               gier.Plaut. in Amph. It is alſo to redounde or turne. Nam deum non par uidetur facere, delictum ſuum, ſuam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   culpam expetere in mortalem ut ſinat: It is not ſittinge for god to do, that his offence and faulte, ſhulde redounde to a
 mortall perſon.
            
               Expetit tuam aetatem illud facere:
               Plaut. in penulo. Thyne age requireth to do it.
            
               Expetunt multa iniqua, many vnhappye thynges chaunceth.
            
               Expiamentum, ſatiſfaction.
            
               Expilator,
               Aſconius. a robber, whiche leaueth nothynge behynde hym.
            
               Expilo, aui, are, to rob, poll, or take by extortion, or deceypte, to ſpoyle.
            
               Expio, aui, are, to pacify god with ſatiſfaction or prayer, whan we thynke he is diſpleſed Expiare ſcelera.) Tua ſcelera dij immortales in noſtros milites expiauerūt:
               Cicero in piſonem. God hath punyſhed our men of armes for thyn offēces.
            Expiro, aui, are, to dye.
            
            
               Expiſcor, aris, ari, to ſeke for fyſhe, to fyſſhe out, or ſerche priuily, to get or wyn. Tandem neſcio quid ab eo expiſcatur: Fynally I can not tell what he wynneth or getteth by hym, or what he truſteth to haue of hym.
            
               Explano, aui, are, to make playne.
            
               Explanto,
               Columel. 
               tare, to pull vp that whiche is ſet.
            
               Explendeſco,
               Sueton. in Tito. 
               ſcere, to appere clerely.
            
               Expleo, eui, ere, to fyll, fulfyl. Alſo to ſaciate, to comforte.
            
               Exple animum curis,
               Terent. in Hecyra. put all care out of thy mynde.
            
               Explico, aui, are, to extende. alſo to vnfolde, to declare, to tell or ſhewe a thynge playnely.
            
               Explicat enſem,
               Ouidius. He draweth out his ſword.
            
               Explicat & coenas unica menſa duas:
               Martialis. He maketh two ſuppers at oone table. Alſo to brynge to paſſe.
            
               Explica aeſtum meum,
               Cic in piſ. put me out of this fantaſy or doubte.
            
               Explicata, broughte to paſſe.
            
               Explodo, oſi, dere, to dryue out with noyſe or rebukes, or clappynge of handes.
            
               Explorator, an eſpy, or priuie ſerchour.
            
               Exploratus,
               Cic. de ſenectute. 
               a, um, well knowen, or ſuerlye knowen.
            
               Exploratum eſt mihi, I knowe ſurely, I am ſure.
            Exploratum habeo, idem.
            
               Exploro, aui, are, to bewayle with exclamation, to ſerche out diligently, to proue with ſerchynge, to be aduiſed, to drye or exhauſte, to eſpy.
            
               Exploſus, ſa, ſum, conuicted or reiected.
            
               Expono, ſui, nere, to expowne or declare, to ſet or brynge a thynge out of that, wherin it is, ſome tyme to caſte out a thynge, to the intente that it maye peryſh. Alſo to ſpende, to ſette forthe to be ſhewed.
            
               Exporto, tare, to beare or cary out.
            
               Expoſco, poſcere, to aſke or deſyre inſtantly.
            
               Expoſiti, chylderne caſte out to be peryſhed.
            
               Expoſititij, the ſame.
            
               Expoſitio, an expoſition or declaration of any thyng difficulte or harde to be vnderſtande.
            
               Expoſtulatio, a quarell or complaynt.
            
               Expoſtulator, he that complayneth of wronge done by his frende.
            
               Expoſtulo, aui, are, to complayne, to make a quarell. alſo to wyll.
            
               Expoſtulare iniuriam, to complayne of wronge or diſpleaſure, to hym that dothe wronge.
            
               Expreſſe dicere,
               Plin
                     •••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   epiſto▪
                to ſpeake properly and to the poynte.
            
               Exprimo, to preſſe or wrynge out, to expreſſe or declare playnely.
            
               Exprobratio, a reproche.
            
               Exprobro, aui, are, to imbrayde, to twi
                  •
               e. alſo to laye in reproche.
            
               Expromitto, miſi, mittere, to promyſe or vndertake for an other.
            
               Expromiſſor, he that promy
                  •••
                or is ſuertye for an other.
            
               Expromo, prompſi, mere, to ſhewe forthe, or open.
            
               Exprompta memoria, a redy wyt.
            
               Expugno, aui, are, to wyn by aſſaulte or force.
            
               Expulſo, aui, are, to meue a thyng with moch thruſtynge, or to put awaye.
            
               Expulſor, & Expultrix, a putter awaye, man or woman.
            
               Expuncti, were ſouldiours diſcharged, or put out of wages.
            
               Expungo, punxi, pungere, to put awaye, or remoue.
            
               Expungor, geris, gi, to be cancelled, or put oute, or raſed. it is alſo ſpoken of iudges, whan they be put oute of commiſſion. It is alſo to quite. as, Munus munere expungitur: One good turne is quyt with an other.
            
               Expuo, pui, puere, to ſpyt out.
            
               Expuere miſeriam ex animo,
               Tere
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                to put myſery cleane out from the mynde, to forget myſery.
            
               Expurgo, are, to make all cleane.
            
               Expurgare ſe,
               Plaut. i
                     •
                   Mili
                     •
                  . to declare hym ſelfe innocente. of that whiche is layde vnto hym.
            Expurgationem habere, idem.
            
               Exputo, aui, are, to ſhrede or lop a tre, to cutte cleane awaye.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Alſo to vnderſtande perfectely to coniecte.
            
               Exputreſco,
               Plaut. in curcul. 
               ſcere, to rot.
            
               Exquiliae, a mountayn in Rome, where watch was kepte.
            
               Exquilinus mons, the ſame mountayne.
            
               Exquiro, exquiſiui, exquirere, to ſerche out.
            
               Exquiſite, & Exquiſitim, exquiſitly, with moche ſtudy and diligence.
            
               Exquiſitus, ta, tum, exquiſite, moche ſerched for.
            
               Exquiſito opus eſt, it muſt be loked for.
            
               Ex ſyngrapha agere, to do thynges extremely
 or rigorouſly, as it were that one ſued an nother vpon an obligation ſcalyd.
            
               Exta, the inward, as the hart, the lyuer, the lū
               ges or lyghtes, and the ſplene.
            
               Extemplo, forthwith.
            Extemporaneus, a, um, ſodayne.
            
            
               Extēporalis, & extēporanea oratio, an oration or matter ſpoken or writen without ſtudy.
            
               Ex tempore, ſodaynely, without ſtudye, or for the tyme.
            
               Extendo,
               Plautꝰ in Bacch. 
               di, dere, to extēd, to continu, to ꝓlōge
            
               Extentare uires, to thruſt out ſtrength in doing a thynge.
            
               Extenuo, aui, are, to minyſhe, or make lyttell.
            
               Exter, ra, rum, ſtraunge, commen farre of.
            
               Exterebro, aui, are, to perce through. alſo to inſerche curyouſely.
            
               Extergeo, terſi, tergere, to wype cleane.
            Extergo, idem.
            
               Exterminatus, banyſhed.
            
               Extermino, aui, are, to driue out, or pul downe.
            
               Externo, aui, are, to make madde.
            
               Externus, na, num, whiche is not of that countrey, a ſtraunger.
            
               Extero, reri, terere, to beate out. alſo to whet or grynd.
            
               Exterreo, ui, ere, to put in feare.
            
               Exterus, ra, rum, that which is not of this coū
               trey or place.
            
               Extillo, aui, are, to droppe out.
            
               Extimeo, mere, to haue great feare.
            
               Extimeſco, extimui, extimeſcere, to drede moch
            
               Extimus, a, um, the outwardmoſt, or laſte.
            
               Extinguo, xi, gere, to put out, proprely as fyre, whiche may be eftſones kyndled. ſomtyme it ſignifieth to ſlea or dyſtroy, ſomtime to make a diſtinction or diuerſitie betwene thyngis.
            
               Extirpo, are, to plucke vp by the rootes.
            
               Extiſpices, ſotheſayers by lookynge in the inwardes of beaſtes.
            
               Extiſpiciū, & extiſpicina, the craft of ſothſayēg.
            
               Exto, titi, tare, to be, to remayn, to be apparant.
            
               Extollo, extuli, extollere, to aduant or prayſe, alſo to lyft vp, to prolonge, to magnify.
            
               Extollere liberos,
               Plaut. in 
                     ••
                  loſtel. to bryng vp chyldren.
            
               Extorqueo, torſi, ere, to finde out the trouth by tormētes, to take away by force, or pluck away.
            
               Extorris, is he that is made to voyd, or is dryuen out of his countrey. alſo a vagabunde.
            
               Extortus, conſtrayned by tourmentes.
            
               Extra, without, excepte.
            
               Extra iocum, in erneſt.
            
               Extra precium,
               Cicero. aboue any pryce.
            
               Extraho,
               
                  
                     •
                  ueto. in Claud. 
               traxi, trahere, to drawe out.
            
               Extrahere diem, to put of a matter from day to day.Caeſar.
            
            
               Extrahere certamen,
               Ti. Liuiꝰ to deferre battayle.
            
               Extrahere iudicium,
               
                  
                     •
                  aulus iu
                  
                     ••
                   conſ. ad 
                     ••
                  hib. to deferre iugement.
            
               Extraneus haeres, he that is not the very heire.
            
               Extrarius, he that is not of the ſame howſe or kynrede.
            
               Extra telorum iactum, out of arowe ſhotte, out of gunſhotte, ſignifyeth out of daunger, or in ſaulfegarde.
            
               Extremus, a, 
                     •
                  , ſomtyme it ſignifieth the beginnyng, ſomtyme the ende, ſometyme 
                  ••••
               arſt.
            
               Extrema linea, is ſpoken where a man wold ſignify a thyng to be laſt, and after all other.
            
               Extremis digitis attingere, to touch with the fynger toppes, is ſpoken, where is ſignified, that a mā hath vneth touched or felt a thyng.
            
               Extrico, aui, are, to delyuer, to ſhake of anye thynge that letteth.
            
               Extrinſecus, outwarde.
            
               Ex tripode, whan we ſpeake of thynges, which are very true, & not to be doubted, as it were ſpoken of goddis owne mouthe.
            
               Extro, aui, are, to go out.
            
               Extrorſum, from without.
            
               Extrudo, ſi, dere, to thraſte out.
            
               Extruo, ſi, truere, to ordeyn, to buyld or ſet vp.
            
               Extubero, aui, are, to ſwell moche.
            
               Extundo, tudi, tundere, to fynde out with moche labour.
            
               Exturbo, aui, are, to put awaye, or to put out or from a thynge by vyolence.
            
               Exubero, aui, are, to abounde.
            
               Exuccum, without iuyce.
            
               Exudo, aui, are, to ſende forth lycour.
            
               Exuerrae, the ſweepynges of a houſe.
            
               Exuerto, tere, to preuente.
            Exugo, exugi, gere, & exugeo, to ſucke out.
            
            
               Exul, exulis, a banyſhed man.
            
               Exulcero, aui, are, to make a ſoore.
            
               Exulcerare animum, to diſpleaſe the mynde greuouſely.
            
               Exuinculis cauſam dicere, to plede in warde.
            
               Exulo, aui, are, to be baniſhed, to liue in exyle.
            
               Exultabundus, reioycyng very moche.
            
               Exulto, aui, are, to reioyce excedyngly, to brag, to leape out.
            Exundo, aui, are, to ouerflowe.
            
            Exungo, xi, gere, to annoynte.
            
            
               Exungulo, are, to cut of ones nayles.
            
               Exuo, ui, uere, to put of, to dyſpoile, or vncloth, to depryue.
            
               Exue mentem, put away that mynde.
            Exupero, aui, are, to excede.
            
            
               Exurdo, aui, are, to make deaffe.
            
               Exurgo, gere, to aryſe vp.
            
               Exumae, clothing alſo hides or ſkyns of beaſtis.
            
               Exu
                     •
                  iae ſerpentis, an adders ſkyn.
            
               Exybaphon, a ſalate of herbes.
         
         
            ¶E ANTE Z.
            
               EZechiel,
               Epiphaniꝰ de ꝓphet. a prophete of the countrey callyd Sarera in Syria, of the line of biſhops. This manne hadde meruayllous reuelations and vyſyons, and by hym god ſhewed many greatte myracles. For in the tyme of a
 great ſcarſitie, he by prayer optayned of god abundance of fyſhe, whereby the people were ſufficiently refreſſhed. Alſo whan the people was oppreſſed with their enemies, he ſtoode agaynſt them, & made them ſo abaſſhyd with myracles & wōderful ſightes, that they being ſore aferd, dyd ceſſe of theyr enterpriſe. More ouer being in the countrey of Caldey, he told to the people many thinges that were done in the temple of Ieruſalem. He alſo brought the people out of Caldey vnto Hieruſalem, to the reproche of the infidels. He being in Babylon iudged the tribe of Dan & Gad, for that they had wickedly done againſt the lorde, in perſecuting them which beleued in the law. And he ſhewed vnto them a terrible token, for adders deuoured their children and al theyr cattel. At the laſt he was ſlayn at Babylon by the duke of the people, bicauſe he reproued him of idolatrye. And he was buried in the fielde callyd Maur, in the monumēt of Sem & Arphaxad progenitours of Abraham. he prophecyed of the returne of the children of Iſrael, and alſo of the commyng of Chriſt. He lyued afore the incarnation of our lord .DC .xvii. yeres.
         
         
            ¶F ANTE A.
            
               
                  FABA, a beane. Eritius Cordus, a phyſytyon of our tyme, affirmeth that the pulſe, whiche we call benes, is not Faba, wher of Dioſcorides, Celſus, Galenus, and Plinius do wryte. For that wher of they write, is rounde & leſſe than our bean, wherof .xviii. made a dramme, where ours be ſo great, that ſome one beane weyeth a dram, and is ſomewhat longe and flatte.
            ❀Faba cudetur in me, The beane ſhall be knocked on me, ſygnifieng the peyn or blame ſhall lyght on me.
            
               Faba inuerſa, ſom do ſuppoſe it to be that herb, whiche is callid Lunaria, or Solanum ſomnificum, reade in Solano.
            
            
               Faba Pythagorica, ſygnifyeth the counſelle of Pythagoras the phyloſopher, where he byddeth that we ſhoulde not eate beanes, ſaying: Faba abſtineto, whiche is by dyuers men diuerſely expounde. Some declare it for a bare precepte, ſayenge: That foraſmoche as beanes doo make the ſyght dull, and cauſeth ylle dreames, as Plynye ſayth, or as Tully affirmeth,In diuinatione. prouoketh inflation or moche wynde in the bodye, therfore Pythagoras forbare the eatynge of theym. But Ariſtoxenus affirmeth, that Pythagoras dyd not eate more of any kynde of pulſe than of beanes, bycauſe they eaſily louſed the bely. Empedocles ſaith that Pythagoras commaunded to abſteyne frō beanes, as it were from the act of lechery, becauſe Cyamos ſignifieth not only a bean, but alſo the genitours. Plutarchus expoundethe this precepte of Pythagoras in this fourme, as yf he hadds ſayd: Abſteyn from the miniſtration of a commun weale, bycauſe it is full of perylles, nor may not be without eyther rebuke or damage. In the olde tyme the conſente of people was declared by beanes, whiche yet dothe remayne at Venyce, as well in election of offycers, as in iudgementes and ſentences, for by white beanes thynges are affyrmed, by blacke beanes they are denyed or refuſyd.
            
               Fabacia, a beane 
                  ••
               ke.
            
               Fabalia, the refuſe or of falle of beanes.
            
               Fabariae calendae, the calendes of Iune.
            
               Fabarius, ria, rium, pertaynyng to beanes.
            
               Fabella, a ſhorte tale.
            
               Faber,
               Plin. li. 32. a fyſhe of the Spanyſhe ſea, alſo callyd Zeus,
               Colu
                     •
                  . 3. and is in fygure rounde, and of a ruſſet colour.Oppi
                     •••
                   lib. 1. It is lyke to be that fyſſhe, whiche is callyd a lympe, and of late yeres, was foūd in the ſea about Deuonſhyre.
            
               Faber, fabri, almooſte euerye craftes man that warketh with the hande.
            
               Faber lignarius, a carpentar.
            
               Faber ferrarius, a ſmythe.
            
               Auri faber, a goldeſmyth.
            
               Faber, bra, brum, pertaynyng to a ſmythe.
            
               Faberrime, cunnyngly, very craftyly, or well.
            
               Fabianus, the proper name of a man.
            
               Fabitor, in the auncient tyme was taken for a maynteynour.
            
               Fabius, was the ſurname of a noble howſe of the Romaynes, whyche had fyrſte that name of ſowyng or ſellynge of beanes, as Cicero of the grayne callyd Cicer, Piſo of peaſyn, Porcius of ſwine. Of this name were diuers valyant capitaynes and wyſe counſaylours, of whom one was callyd Fabius Maximus, who in his youthe exercyſed bothe eloquence and proweſſe, and therefore he after became as well in armes as in counſayle, a capytain mooſte excellente, and ſubdowynge manye countrayes vnto the Romaynes, he tryumphed fyue tymes. Beynge made Dyctatour agaynſte Annyball, he ſo temperyd prudence with manhoode or proweſſe, that by des tractyng of battayle and traynynge Anniball frome place to place, and at ſundrye aduauntages ſkyrmyfſhynge with hym, he minyſhed his puyſſaunce, and preſerued the publyke weale of his countrey, where Minutius the Conſule, who enuyenge hym, in fyghtynge
 with Anniball, was vanquyſhed by the Carthaginenſes, and had ben ſlayne with all his armye, had not Fabius come vnto reſcuſe, who delyuered his aduerſary & all his trayn, & cauſed Annibal for to retyre, who ſayd than to his hoſt, Did I not tel you before, that this clowde wolde at the laſte brynge vs a ſtorme? callynge Fabius a cloude, bycauſe of his houeryng. This man was afore the incarnation of Chriſt .CC. yeres and ſomewhat more.
            
               Fabius Quintilianus, rede after in Quintilianꝰ.
            
               Fabrè,
               Plautus. workmanly, craftily. Vt apologum facit? quam fabre? See what a defence be maketh? how craftily he handleth it?
            
               Fabrefacio, fabrefeci, fabrefacere, to warke cū
               nyngly, to buylde.
            
               Fabrica, a warkehouſe, or forge, ſometyme the frame or warke.
            Fabrico, aui, care, & Fabricor, cari, to make, to inuent.
            
            
               Fabrilis, le, belongyng to handy craftes.
            
               Fabritius, a noble Romane, who being wonderfull poore, not withſtandyng refuſed a greate ſumme of money, ſent to him by king Pirrhꝰ touching with his handes all his membres, & ſaying vnto the kynges meſſangers, As long as he mought rule al that, whych he touched, he coulde lacke nothynge.
            
               Fabula, a fable or tale. ſometyme an interlude.
            It is alſo a lyttell beane.
            
               Fabula palliata, a comedy of Greke.
            
               Fabula togata, a comedy of latyne.
            
               Fabulae, ſpoken in an anſwere without any other worde ioyned therwith, amounteth to as moche, as if one wold ſay, fables, trifles, fantaſies, iapes. ſomtime is added merae, as Merae fabulae, very trifles or fātaſies, or as one wold ſay, that which ye ſay is not to be regarded.
            
               Fabulator, a teller of fables.
            
               Fabulinus, was ſuppoſed of the Paynims to be a god, whiche hadde the rule ouer chylderne, whan they began to ſpeake.
            Fabulor, aris, ari, to talke.
            
            
               Fabuloſus, moche talked of.
            
               Faceſſo, ceſsi, ceſſere, to go about to do a thing. ſometyme to go away.
            
               Faceſſe hinc, get the hens.
            
               Faceſsit tibi negotiū, he putteth the to buſynes.
            
               Facetè, meryly, pleaſantly.
            
               Facetiae, mery wordis or dedes without diſhoneſty.
            Facetus, ta, tum, merily, pleſantly.
            
            
               Facies, a face ſomtyme the proportion of al the body, a vyſage, a ſimilitude.
            
               Facile, lyghtly or eaſily, without let or doubt.
            
               Facilis, le, lyght, eaſy, good to be entreated.
            
               Facilitas, eaſynes, gentylnes.
            
               Facinoroſus, full of myſchiefe.
            
               Facinus, an acte or dede. ſometyme an yll dede.
            
               Facio, feci, facere, to do, to be occupied, to make, alſo to ſacrifice, to profyte.
            
               Facere aucupium auribus,
               Plaut. in milit. to harken as a ſpye.
            
               Aequi boui facere, to take in good parte, or in good worthe.
            
               Animos alicui facere, to gyue one courage.
            
               Facere carnificinam,
               Pla. in cap to execute the offyce of an hangeman, in hangynge, beheaddynge, or quartryng of men.
            
               Facere caſtra, to ſette a campe.
            
               Facere certiorem,
               Cic. Cato. to aſcertayne or aduertyſe one by letter or meſſager.
            
               Facere compendium,
               Plautus. to make ſhort, to abrige, to go a ſhorte waye to worke, to doo a thynge the ſooner.
            
               Facere compotem, to gyue to one that thynge whiche he deſyreth.
            
               Facere coniecturam, to coniect or deme, to diuine or eſteme.
            
               Facere contum eliam,
               Plautꝰ in Aſina. to do dyſpleaſure.
            
               Facere conuiciam, to rebuke or put to rebuke.
            
               Capitale facere, to make it felony or death.
            
               Cautiorem facere, to make hym wyſer.
            
               Concilia facere, to gather togither for counſailyng one with an other.
            
               Facere copiam, to gyue leaue.
            
               Facere copiam alicuius, to lette hym take his pleaſure of one.
            
               Facere copiam argenti, to lende money.
            
               Gopiam coſilij ſur facere,
               Terent. in Phor. to here theym that come for counſayle, and to gyue it to them.
            
               Facere conſuetudinem,
               Cic. fami. epiſt. 13. to be famylyar.
            
               Deditionem facere, to yelde vp, as men vanquyſhed in warres.
            
               Facere delitias,
               Plaut. in penulo. to ſpeake for pleaſure or in mockage.
            
               Fac eſſe,
               Ci. in phi. admyt it be ſo, or admyt the caſe.
            
               Fac te eſſe qui ſum, ymagyne that thou were, as I am.
            
               Eruptionem facere, to iſſue out vpon enmies.
            
               Facere fidem, to make one to beleue hym.
            
               Facere frugem,
               Plaut. in paenu. to brynge gaynes.
            
               Facere funus, to minyſter funeralles.
            
               Gradum facere, to ſteppe forthe, or ſteppe vp, to wynne ſomewhat.
            
               Gratiam facere, to thanke, to releaſe or acquite one of a thyng,Plaut. in curcul. to gyue leaue, to pardon.
            
               Facere gratum, to do pleſure to one, or to wyn a mans fauour.Terent. in Eunucho.
            
            
               Facere grauidam, to gette with chylde.
            
               Facere iacturam, to haue a great loſſe.
            
               Impetū facere, to run on a thing with al force.
            
               Facere inditium, to tel or to gyue warnyng of a thynge that he knoweth.
            
               Facere ingenium ſuum, to do accordyng to his wytte or nature.
            
               Facere inſidias, to ly in await to do harm to one
            
               Facere iter, to go or ryde.
            
               Iuſta alicui facere, to performe all obſequies be longyng to deade men.
            
                
               Lenocinium facere, to kepe bawdry.
            
               Facere lucrum, to wynne.
            
               Facere ludos,
               Terent. in Phorm. to mocke or ſkorne.
            
               Facere magni, to eſteme moche.
            
               Modum facere, to kepe meaſure.
            
               Moram facere, to tarye.
            
               Morem facere, to brynge vp a cuſtome.
            
               Multam facere, to forfayte a peyne.
            
               Mutuum facere, to do one for an other.
            
               Facere mecum, to make for my purpoſe.
            
               Facere naufragium, to runne to wrecke.
            
               Facere negotium, to do one dyſpleaſure.
            
               Facere nequiter, to do ſhrewdly.
            
               Facere nomina, to get detters, as by lendyng as they doo nowe by exchaunge, and in ſhyftes, properly callyd vſury, and in bargaynes of corne, cattall, and other lyke, or in lettynge of landes.
            
               Obnoxium ſibi aliquem facere, to bynde one to be at his commaundement.
            
               Facere ocium,
               Plaut. in milite. to gyue to one leyſure.
            
               Facere palam, to tell a thyng abrode.
            
               Facere periculum, to proue, to aſſay.
            
               Facere pluris, to ſet more by.
            
               Facere propitium, to make hym thyne, or his good lorde or mayſter.
            
               Facere quaeſtum, to gayne.
            
               Facere reducem,
               Plautꝰ in capt. to brynge one agayne.
            
               Facere rem, to get profit or gayn by a thing.
            
               Facere reum,
               Terent. in Adelphis Quin til. to accuſe or ſue one in a crymynall cauſe.
            
               Facere riſum, to laugh.
            
               Facere ſcelus, to do a myſcheuous dede.
            
               Facere ſementem,
               Cice de oratore. to ſowe grayne.
            
               Facere ſtipēdia, to be in wagis in the warres.
            
               Facere ſumptum, to beſtowe coſte.
            
               Facere ſuperbum,
               Pli. de uiris illuſtr. to ſlee one.
            
               Facere technam, to play a crafty pageane.
            
               Facere terrorem, to put in feare.
            
               Facere tranſacta omnia, to brynge all thynges to a poynte.
            
               Facere turbas,
               Plaut. in Bacch. to make buſynes.
            
               Facere uadimonium, to lay in gage or ſurety
            Facere uerba aut uerbum, to ſpeake.
            
            
               Facere uindemiam, to gather grapes to make wyne.Plaut. in Epidi.
            
            
               Facere uitium, to falle in decay.
            
               Facere uoluptatem,
               Cic. in To to ſatisfy myne, thyne, or his pleaſure or appetyte.
            
               Faciam ut te plurimum amem, I wolle loue the moche. Feciſſe hoc oportuit, nedes muſte ye haue done it.
            
               Facio plurimi, I make moche of.
            
               Floccifacio, I ſet not a ſtrawe by it.
            
               Factio, a dyuyſion of people in ſundry opiniōs. alſo an acte.
            
               Factionum principes, the heades of rebellyon or ſedytion.
            
               Factitius, a, um, made or counterfayte.
            
               Factito, aui, are, to do oftentymes.
            
               Factor, oris, a maker, a factour.
            
               Factum, a dede.
            
               Factum at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tranſactum, done and broughte to good paſſe.
            
               Factura, the warke.
            
               Facturio, iui, ij, ire, to deſyre to do.
            
               Factus, tus, the deede.
            
               Facula, a lynke, or lyttell torche.
            
               Facularij, torche bearers.
            
               Facultas, tatis, power to do or ſpeake. ſomtyme ryches, alſo facultie.
            
               Facundia, eloquence, or ſwete & pleaſant ſpeche
            
               Facundus, a, um, eloquent, well ſpoken.
            
               Faecatum uinū, wine that drinketh of the lyes.
            
               Faeciniae uuae, grapes, wherof commeth wyne, hauynge moche lyes.
            
               Faeculentum, full of lyes or dregges.
            
               Faecutinus, na, num, pertaynynyng to dragges.
            
               Faex, faecis, lyes or dregges, or groundes of any kynde of lycour.
            
               Faecem ciuitatis, men do call them whiche in a citie do lyue beaſtly and vyciouſely.
            
               Faginus, na, num, of a beeche.
            Fagineus, idem.
            
               Fagus, gi, a beeche tree.
            
               Fagutal, was a chapell in Rome, wherin was a beeche, whiche was conſecrate vnto Iupiter.
            
               Fala, a towre made of tymber.
            
               Falcarius, he that fyghteth with a byll.
            
               Falcarius, ia, um, pertaynyng to a byll.
            
               Falcatus, ta, tum, hoked, alſo any thyng wheron be hookes or other lyke thynge.
            
               Falcè, falſely.
            
               Falcicula, a lyttell hooke or bylle.
            
               Falcidia lex, wherby legacies were defalcate or cut of, where the fourth parte of the goodes were not aſſigned to the heyres.
            
               Falcifer, he that beareth a byll or hooke.
            
               Falcimonia, deceyptes.
            
               Falcito,
               Plaut. in Bacch. 
               aui, are, to cut with a byll or hooke.
            
               Falco, aui, are, to cut of or mowe.
            
               Falco, onis, a hawke.
            
               Falernus, a cuntrey in Cāpania, now in the realme of Naples, wherin grew the beſt wines of Italy, callid Falernum, mountflaſcon.
            
               Faliſci, peple in Italy, alſo a kind of puddinges
            
               Fallaciae, deceyptfull wordes, or generally deceiptes or crafty handlyng.
            
               Fallaciter, deceytfully.
            
               Fallax, acis, a perſon deceytfull.
            
               Fallo, fefelli, fallere, to deceyue, alſo to be hyd.
            
               Fallonia, is a treſpas wherby the tenāt forſayteth to the lord, that which he holdith of him.
            
               Falſarius, a forger of writynges.
            
               Falſidicus, & Falſiloquus, a lyer, or falſe reporter.
            
               Falſifico, aui, are, to forge deedes, wrytynges, or ſeales.
            
                Falſitas, tatis, falſehoode.
            
            Falſo, aui, are, to forge.
            
            Falſus, a, um, falſe.
            
            
               Falſum habere, to deceyue.
            
               Falurica,
               Vergilius were weapons whiche were throwen out of toures.
            
               Falx, falcis, a hooke or bylle.
            
               Fama, fame, or renoume, ſomtyme opinion.
            
               Famam diſipare, to ſowe a brute or noyſe in the people.
            
               Famelicoſus, often hungry.
            Famelicus, ca, cum, hungrye.
            
            Famen, faminis, ſpeche.
            
            
               Fameo, mui, ere, to be hungry.
            
               Fames, hunger.
            
               Famiger, geris, a ſpreader of fame.
            
               Famigerabilis, famouſe.
            
               Famigerator, a teller of newes or tydynges, or a ſpreader of fame.
            Famigerulus, idem.
            Famigeratus, ta, tum, renoumed, famed.
            
            
               Famigero, to publyſhe or dyuulgate a thynge.
            
               Familia, a houſhold, a family, or kynred. It alſo ſignifieth all the ſeruantes of the houſe.
            
               Familiaria, were places of buryall for men and theyr ſeruantes.
            
               Familiaris, are, ꝑtaining to houſhold. alſo familiar.
            
               Familiaritas, cuſtome, familiaritie.
            
               Familiariter, familiarly.
            
               Faminor, the olde writers vſed for Dicito, ſay, ſpeake, telle on.
            
               Famulanter, humbly, ſeruyſably.
            Famularius, a, um, ſeruiſable.
            
            
               Famulatio, houſeholde, or meyny.
            Famulatus, & famulitium, ſeruyce.
            
            
               Famulor, ari, to ſerue.
            
               Famulus, & famula, a houſeholde ſeruant.
            
               Fanaticus, madde. In the olde tyme before that Chriſte expellyd the dyuell, whan that dyuels were honored in ydols, certayn perſons aſwel men as women, were poſſeſſed with diuelles, whiche lad them where they lyſted, agaynſte theyr proper wylles, & cauſed them to ſpeake wonderfull thynges, ſome alſo ſodaynly, and oftentymes dydde tell what ſhoulde happen. wherfore they were thoughte to be inſpired with goddis, thoſe perſons were callyd Fana tici, Sometyme Fanaticus, is taken for the keper of the temple or chappel, where the dyuell gaue anſweres.
            
               Fanenſes, & Faneſtres, people of a town callid Fana, in a cuntrey in Italy callyd Marca Anchonitana, in latyn Picenum.
            
            
               Faneſii, people in the north partes of the world whoſe cares be ſo great, that with them they keuer all theyr bodyes.
            
               Fannia lex, was an honourable and pertuous lawe made by Auguſtus, the noble emperour the conſent of al ſtates of the cite inforcing it all dignities approuinge it, the people gladly receiuyng it: by the which lawe the ſuperfluous charges in feaſtis, wherby the citie aboū
               ded in vices, were prohibited, and ſuch temperance therin prouided, that in the great plays of the Romains, and thoſe which were callyd Saturnales, they ſhulde not excede a hundred braſſe pens, which were .x. Roman grotes callyd Denarij, in our money now currāt, amoū
               tith to .v .s .vi .d .ob. halfe ferthynge, and the fourth part of a farthyng. Tenne other dayes xxx. braſſe pens, which is .xixd .ob .q. and a lytel more. Euery other day .x. braſon pens, whiche was .vi .d .ob. and the .vii. part of an halfe penye. This lawe was made .xxii. yeres after the lawe callyd Lex orchia, wherby was determyned the number of them, whiche ſhulde dyne or ſoupe togither, and that the doores ſhuld be open while they ſat, that mē mought perceyue if any moo came than the lawe had appoynted. But this lawe was not ſoo good as the other, for than moughte none come to theyr frendes, but they whiche were inuyted or boden.
            
               Fanum, a temple, where the dyuell gaue aunſweres out of an ydoll.
            
               Far, farris, ſomtime ſignifieth al maner of corn. albeit amonge auncient phiſitions it is taken for meale, as well of wheate as of barly, properlye where the corne is beaten in a morter. Se Columellam li. 9.
            
               Farcilis, le, any thynge ſtuffed.
            
               Farcimen, minis, a puddyng, or a ſauſage.
            
               Farcio, ciui, cire, to ſtuffe. alſo to franke or fede, to be fat, to cramme.
            Farfara, an herbe callyd alſo Tuſsilago, & Vngula equina, & Bechion.
            
               Farfarus, or Farfar, a ryuer of Syrie.
            Faris, fatus ſum fari, to ſpeake.
            
            
               Farraca, meates made of meale.
            
               Farrago, ginis, a mixture of ſundrye kindes of grayn and corne. It is that whiche in Cambridge ſhyre is callyd Bolymonge, wherin is barly, otes, and peaſyn or vetches. Som
                  •
               tyme it is taken for a mixture of thinges good and bad togyther.
            
               Farratia, amonge the olde Romaynes were the ceremonies of matrimony.Cael. li. 15.
            
            
               Farreatio, a ſacryfice made with cakes.
            
               Farreum, a wheaten cake.
            
               Farrinarium, a place where wheate or meale is kepte.
            Farrinus, na, num, & Farrinaceus, a, um, pertaynyng to wheate.
            
            
               Fartile, ſtuffyng, or that wherwith any foule is franked or crammyd.
            
               Fartim, full ſtuffed or crammyd.
            
               Fartores, & Fartrices, puddyng makers.
            
               Fartum, a puddynge.
            
                
               Fariura, the crafte or maner of ſtuffynge or crammynge.
            
               Fas, leful before god, ſtādīg with the law of god
            
               Faſcelis, a name of Diana.
            
               Faſces, roddes bounden togither, & an axe in the myddell, whiche were borne before the chiefe officers of Rome, in declaring their authorite wherof ſome had ſyx, and ſome mo.
            
               Faſcia, a ſwathell, or ſwathyng bande, or other lyke thyng. ſometyme any gyrdell.
            
               Faſciculus, a grype, or thing boūden togyther, it is alſo a noſegay, or any thing knyt togither, which may be borne in a mans hande.
            
               Faſcino, aui, are, to transforme by enchantmēt, or to bewytche.
            
               Faſcinus, & Faſcinum, & Faſcinatio, an inchātment to transforme or diſfigure any thynge. Which ſo inchanted, is of the cōmon people callyd, taken, or forſpoken, or forloked.
            
               Faſciola, a lyttell bande.
            
               Faſcior, faſciari, to ſwathe a chylde.
            
               Faſcis, is a burdeyne or knytche of wod, or any other thynge.
            
               Faſcis ſagittanī, is takē for a ſheffe of arowes
            
               Faſelus, a bote.
            
               Faſti, were bokes, wherin were contayned certayne ceremonies and cauſes of ſundry thynges amonge the Romayns, concernyng theyr feaſtes and ſolempnities, whiche were longe kept from the knowledge of the comon people, vntyll they at the laſt were deuulgate by one Caius Flauius.
            
               Faſti dies, were certain days, wherin the officer of Rome callid Praetor, mought ſpeke only theſe thre wordes, Do, dico, addico. It may be now vſyd for holy dayes.
            
               Faſtidio, iui, ire, to contemne with dyſdayne, to abhorre, or haue in abhomination.
            
               Faſtidioſus, a, um, full of dyſdayne.
            
               Faſtiditus, ta, tum, hated, abhorrid, abhomined.
            
               Faſtidium, hatred, ꝓperly where one abhorreth the ſight or preſence of any thyng.
            
               Faſtigio, aui, are, to make or raiſe vp in height.
            
               Faſtigiū, an altitude, or the top or height of any thing. ſomtime it ſignifieth the ſtate of a perſon in any dignitie. ſometime the ende of a thyng.
            
               Faſtigium imponere, is ſpoken whan a man wyl ſignify a matter or thyng to be finyſhed & brought to a poynt.
            
               Faſtus, tus, hautenes of mynde, pryde.
            
               Fatalis, le, pertaynyng to deſteny, fatall, ſometyme mortall.
            
               Fateor, faſſus ſum, fateri, to affirme, to confeſſe.
            
               Fathiſco, ſcere, to gape wyde, as the erth doth in a great drythe.
            
               Fatidicus, fatidica, a reeder or teller of deſtenies or a ſotheſayer.
            
               Fatifer, Fatifera, a brynger of doth or peſtilence.
            
               Fatigo, aui, are, to make wery, to trouble moch to ſtrike, to ſtire or prouoke, to reſtrain or let
            
               Fatiloqua, a wytche.
            
               Fatiloquus, fatiloqua, a ſouthſayer.
            
               Fatiſco, fatiſcere, to be wery.
            
               Fator, aris, ari, to ſpeake moche.
            
               Fatua dea, the name of the erth, ſo callid bicauſe chyldern whan they be borne, do not vtter any voyce, vntyll they haue touched the erth.
            Fatuitas, atis, folyſhenes.
            
            
               Fatum, the ordinance & diſpoſition of almighty god, deſteny, goddis prouidēce, ſomtime deth.
            
               Fatuus, an ideot, that lackith natural knowlege
            
               Fatuus,
               Iuuenalis. 
               a, um, vnſauery, without any maner of taſt.
            
               Fauentia, a citie in Italy.
            
               Fauentinus, a man of Fauentia.
            Faueo, ui, fauere, to fauour.
            
            
               Fauere linguis, to kepe ſylence.
            
               Fauilla, a ſparke of fyre.
            
               Fauiſtae, certain cellars in the court of the Capitol at Rome, where were wont to be laide the baners of the Romayns, whyche were borne in warres. Alſo therin was put the treaſure of money, which the priſtes of the temples in the Capitole dyd employe about thynges neceſſary to their ſuperſtytion and ceremonies.
            
               Fauna, the goddeſſe callyd alſo Ops, opis.
            
            
               Fauni, were named of the poetes ruſticall goddis & monſtruous beaſtes lyke vnto men.
            
               Faunus, an auncient kyng of the olde Latynes, ſome of Picus.
            
               Fauonius, one of the wyndes, callyd the ſouthweſt wynde.
            
               Fauoniana, peares whiche are redde.
            
               Fauorabilis,
               Gellius. fauoured of many.
            
               Fauſtè,
               Plautus. proſperouſely.
            Fauſtus, a, um, proſperous.
            
            
               Fauſtulus, a ſhepeherde whiche was the nouryſher of Romulus and Remus.
            
               Fauulus, a lyttell hony combe.
            
               Fauus, a hony combe.
            
               Faux, faucis, a cheke.
            
               Fauces, ſtrayte paſſages.
            
               Fax, facis, a torche, a candel, or other lyke thing, whiche brennyng gyueth lyght.
            
               Faxim, let me doo.
            
               Faxint, lette theym doo.
            
               Faxo, I wyll or ſhall doo.
         
         
            ¶F ANTE E.
            
               FEbricito, aui, are, to be ſycke in a feuer.
            
               Febricula, a lyttell or eaſy feuer.
            
               Febriculoſus, feuerous, or hauynge ofte the feuer.
            
               Febrifuga, an herbe cōmonly callid Feuerfew. ſomme thynke that it is one of the kyndes of the herbe, whyche is callyd of olde wryters Parthenſon.
            
               Febrilis, le, pertaynyng to a feuer.
            
                
               Febrio, iui, ire, to haue a feuer.
            
               Febris, a feuer, whiche is an vnnaturall heate kyndled at the hart, brought frō thens by the veines & arteries, by meane of the ſpirite and veynes into al the body, ſenſibly hurtyng his natural operatiō. Therof be thre kyndes, one is callid Hectica, which is in the ſpiritis and principall humors, and alſo in the firme partes of the body,Hectica. and is eyther by him ſelf proceding of continuall anger, labour, famyn, exceſſe of lechery, inflaming and drieng the mē
               bers, or folowing other ſyckeneſſes. ſomtyme vnyuerſall, ſpecially in a body cholerike or me lancolike, orels particular, as whā it hapneth after the wekenes of the .v. principal mēbers, the hart, the lunges, the lyuer, the ſtomake, or the raynes. An other is named Ephemera, or Diaria,
               Ephemera which is an inflamatiō of the ſpiritis vital, natural, or animal. In the vital ſpirites it hapnith by wrath inflaming, by thought or ſorow reſtraining, by hot aire chaufing, or by cold aire ſtoppyng. In the naturall ſpirites it hapneth by hunger or thirſt inflaming, by hot meates or hot drinkes inflaming, by repletiō oppreſſing, by ſuperfluous laſke or ſtopping, by accuſtomed exerciſe neglectīg or forbering of cuſtomable baines, ſweat or bloud lettyng. In the ſpirites animal it hapneth by to moch being alone, or without recreation, by moche watch or lack ofſlepe, by to moch & oft ſlepīg by a catarre or reume, by vntemperat heate or coldnes of the aire, or by to moch labour & exerciſe. An other feuer is callid Humoralis, & alſo Putrida, which is in the humors, the matter wherof is eyther blud,Putrida. coler, fleume, or melancoly. This feuer hapneth either by feruētnes of the ſon or aire, or by lack of accuſtomid exerciſe, baines, or euacuation, by dayly ſurfets, inordinate walking or meuing after meales, drinking moch wine after meate, hot confectiōs or ſpices after meales. Of ſuperfluite of meates & drinkes cometh repletion, which ſtoppeth the pores of the ſkyn, & the holes of the litle vains callid Capillares, bicauſe they be as ſmal as heares. And that ſtopping or opilation letteth the vēting out of naturall heat, by reaſon wherof the heate of the natural humor, nature not being able to rule it, boileth & ſendeth vp fumes, which which whirling about commeth to the hart, and inflameth it, & paſſynge forthwith by the veines and arteries, into all the bodye, maketh the feuer called Putrida, whiche accordynge to the humour wherin it raigneth, it taketh a ſundry name, as ye ſhall reade in their ſeuerall places.
            
               Februa, ſacrifices & ceremonies for purging of ſoules
            
               Februarius, the month of February.
            
               Februatus, ta, tum, that which was ſo purged.
            
               Februo, aui, are, to purge ſoules by ſacrifyce or prayer.
            
               Februum, in the Sabines tungue is callyd purgyng or clenſyng.
            
               Februus, is alſo Pluto callyd god of Helle.
            
               Fecialis, was a certayne officer of armes, whiche denounced warre or peace, where as was hoſtilitic or cauſe of batayle, whiche may be nowe taken for an ambaſſadour, ſent for ſuche a purpoſe, or for an heralde.
            
               Fel, fellis, the gaule, ſometyme it is taken for griefe of the mynde.
            
               Felicones, men which ar neceſſary for nothing. it hath an other ſignification, whiche for the abominablenes therof I wyl not write, ſens it is more expedient that it remain vnknowē.
            
               Felis, a cat. ſomtime it ſignifieth a weaſyll.
            Fello, aui, are, to ſucke.
            
            
               Felſina, a citie in Italy nowe callyd Bononia.
            
            
               Feltrum, a towne in Italye in the countray callyd Marchia Taruiſina.
            
            
               Femen, minis, plu. femina, the inner part of the thigh. ſomtime the priuy mēber of a woman.
            
               Feminalia, the keuering of the thighes.
            
               Femoralia, breeches.
            
               Femur, oris, the thigh, ſom engliſhe it the hāme
            
               Feneſtella, the ꝓper name of a ſtory writer, which floriſhed in the later days of Tiberiꝰ Ceſar.
            
               Feneſtra, a wīdow. ſomtime an entry into a thīg
            
               Feneſtratus,
               Plautus. 
               ta, tum, open. Nulla eſt feneſtratior domus, No houſe is more open.
            
               Feneſtrenula, a lyttell wyndowe.
            
               Ferabites, wylde.
            Ferae, ferarum, feras, wylde beaſtes.
            
            
               Feralia, & feralis dies, a day dedicat to the īternal goddis, to pacify thē toward the ſoules deꝑtid. They were alſo ſacrifices done for ſoules.
            
               Feralia amicula, wyndyng ſhetes, & ſuche like thinges, wherin deade bodies were lapped.
            
               Feralia officia, ſolemnities about dead bodies
            
               Feralis, le, deadly or mortall. lamentable.
            
               Feralis cultus, mournyng apparayle.
            
               Feralis dies, the day of buryenge.
            
               Ferax, acis, fruitefull, or that bryngeth forthe moche fruite.
            
               Ferbeo, bui, ere, to boyl or ſethe.
            
               Ferculū, a dyſh with meat. alſo a pagent caried or borne to be loked on. ſometime it ſignifieth the ſtage or place, wherin the pagent is ſet.
            
               Ferè, almoſt, nygh, welnygh.
            
               Ferentarij. men armed in lyght harneys, redye to come quyckely to ſuccours, whiche foughte with dartes, ſwordes, or ſlynges.
            
               Ferentinum, a citie, whiche after Pliny ſtādeth in the firſt region of Italy.
            
               Ferentum, a citie in Apulia.
            
               Feretrius, a name of Iupiter, gyuē by Romulꝰ.
            
               Feretrum, a beere wheron dead bodies ar born. ſomtyme a thyng, wheron images, relykes, or iewelles are borne.
            
               Feretrus, a mountayn, of whiche the howſe of
 Pherctre was named.
            
               Feriae, feriarum, ferias, holy dayes, dayes vacant from labour.
            
               Feriae eſuriales, faſtynge dayes.
            
               Ferinus, na, num, wylde as a beaſte, or pertaynynge to wylde beaſtes.
            
               Feriatus, vnoccupied, or ydle.
            
               Ferio, percuſsi, ferire, to ſtryke, to ſtablyſhe. to knocke.
            
               Ferire foedus, to make a league or truſe.
            
               Ferire iugulum, to ſlea, to hyt the marke.
            
               Ferior, aris, ari, to ceaſſe from labour.
            
               Feritas, tatis, a naturall wyldnes, crueltie.
            
               Fermè, almoſte, weluygh.
            
               Fermenteſcere, to increaſe or waxe.
            
               Fermento, aui, are, to meddle or myxe well togyther, as leuen with dowe. alſo to leauen.
            
               Fero, fers, tuli, ferre, to beare, to ſuffer, to leade or bryng, to ſaye, to name, to deſire, to brynge forth, to haue, to boſt, to take away, to receiue to optayne,Cice. ad Q fratrē. to accuſtome. Balbum uero qui eſt iſtius rei, quemadmodū ſcribis adiutor, in oculis fero, Balbus, who as thou wryteſt, is the helper of all this matter, I loue hartily.
            
               Ferre acceptū, to receyue, to write that whiche is receyued, to knowledge to haue receyued a benefyt or profyte.
            
               Ferre ad coelum, to extoll or prayſe a man excedyngly▪ 
               Ferre in aſtra idem.
            
            
               Ferre ad populū, to aſke aduiſe of the people
            
               Aegre ferrè, to take it greuouſely.
            
               Aequo animo ferre, to take paciently.
            
               Ferre annos aut uetuſtatem, to endure long, to beare well his aege. It is proprely ſpoken of wyne or other lyke thynge.
            
               Ferre conditionem, to proffer, to put to the choyſe, to offer a condition.
            
               Ferre expenſum, to ſpend or lay out, to write expenſes, to beſtowe.
            
               Ferre fortunam, to vſe fortune.
            
               Ita fama ferebat, ſo the bruite went.
            
               Fortiter ferre, to abyde or ſuſtayn cōſtantly.
            
               Fructūex aliquo ferre, to take profit by one.
            
               Ferre gradum, to go forth.
            
               Ferre grauiter, to take a thing greuouſely.
            
               Fero tibi iudicem, I am content to be iudged by ſuche one, let hym be iudge betwene vs, or iudge the matter betwene vs.
            
               Fer manum, gyue me thy hande.
            
               Fer me, ſupporte me, helpe me.
            
               Ferre moleſte, to take a thynge diſpleſantly.
            
               Ferre obſcure aliquid, to dyſſemble a thyng.
            
               Odium ferre, to be hated.
            
               Ferre oſculum, to kyſſe.
            
               Ferre palam, to ſpeake it abrode, to publiſhe a thyng ſecret. Partum ferre, to be with chylde.
            
               Pedem ferre, to go forth. poetice.
            
            
               Perſonam alienā ferre, to play an other mās part.
            
               Praemium ferre, to be rewarded.
            Pretium ferre idem.
            
               Primas ferre, to haue the pryce or preemynence,Alc. to be chiefe.
            
               Priuilegium de aliquo ferre,
               Zaſ. whan the prince or magiſtrate requireth the people to inacre a thyng in preiudyce of any particular perſon.
            
               Ferre quaeſtionem, whā the magiſtrates deſyreth the people to ordayne iudges extraordynary in a priuate caſe.
            Si ira res fert, yf nede be.
            
            
               Repulſam ferre, to be refuſed or put backe in a requeſte.
            
               Reſponſum ferre, to haue an anſwere.
            
               Ferre ſententiam, to ſhewe his opinion.
            
               Seſe obuiam ferre, to go and mete with him.
            
               Signa ferre, to marche againſt enmyes with baner dyſplayed.
            
               Ferre ſitim, to ſuffer thyrſte.
            
               Suffragium ferre, to gyue voyce in election, or other conſent.
            
               Ferre ſuppetias, to ſuccour.
            
               Sus
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   de
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fero, I care not, I paſſe not on it.
            
               Ventrem ferre, to be with chylde.
            
               Ferri, to be borne or caryed
            Ferocio, ciui, cij, cire, to be fierſe.
            
            Ferocitas, tatis, fierſeneſſe.
            
            
               Ferociter, fierſely.
            
               Feronia, the goddeſſe of woddes. alſo a citye vnder the hyll Soractes.
            
               Ferox, ferocis, fierſe, hardy.
            
               Ferramentarij, they whiche warke in yron.
            
               Ferramentum, an inſtrument or toole of yron.
            
               Ferraria, an yron myne.
            
               Ferrarius, a, um, ꝑtaynyng to yron, or of yron.
            
               Ferratus, ta, tum, hauing yron on it, or cloſed to yron.
            Ferreus, a, um, of yron.
            
            
               Ferro, aui, are, to ſet yron on.
            Ferrugineus, a, um, grene colour.
            
            
               Ferrûgo, ginis, ruſt of yron, a murray colour, ſome callyth it a ſadde blewe.
            
               Ferrum, yron, ſometyme weapon.
            
               Ferrumen, minis, glewe, ſyſe, ſowder, or ſuche other byndyng or cleauynge matter.
            
               Ferrumino, aui, are, to ioyne or myxe togyther, properly mettals, to ſoulder.
            
               Fertilis, le, fertile or fruitefull.
            
               Fertum, a cake made of ſundry grains & ſpices
            
               Feruefacio, to cauſe to boyle.
            
               Ferueo, es, is, iui, êre, to be chauffed or het.
            Feruidus, a, um, feruent diligent.
            
            
               Ferula, a rod or ſtycke, wherwith childrens hā
               des be ſtriken in ſcholes, callid a palmer. alſo a cane or reede. alſo a pot ſtycke.
            
               Ferularius, a, um, lyke a cane or rede.
            Feruor, oris, heate.
            
            
               Ferus, a, um, wylde, cruell, terrible.
            
               Feſcenini, verſes ſunge at weddynges.
            Feſſus, a, um, weary.
            
            
               Feſtina lente, ſpede the ſlowly, is ſpoken wher a
 man wyll ſignifie a thyng to be done, neyther to haſtely nor to ſlowely, but in a conuenſent temperance. Se my boke of the Gouernour, in the chapiter of maturitie.
            
               Feſtinanter, haſtely, quickely, or ſwyftly.
            
               Feſtinatio, haſte or ſpede.
            
               Feſtinatò, ſpedely, in haſte.
            
               Feſtino, aui, are, to make haſte, to be troubled
            Feſtinus, a, um, haſty, quicke.
            
            Feſtiuitas, tatis, myrthe.
            
            
               Feſtiuo, aui, are, to kepe holy daye.
            
               Feſtiuus, a, um, mery, prouokynge myrth, ioyous. alſo perteynynge to holy dayes.
            
               Feſtra, a lyttell wycket.
            
               Feſtuca, the yonge tender ſprynge of a tree or herbe. alſo a moote.
            
               Feſtus, ta, tum, feaſteful or ſolemne.
            
               Feſulae, an olde citie in Tuſcane not far frome Florence.
         
         
            ¶F ANTE I.
            
               FIBER, a beaſte called a beuer, whiche is alſo called Caſtor, whoſe ſtones are vſed in medicine, and are called Caſtoreum. It is alſo a kynde of waſpes.
            
               Fibrae, are the extreame partes of the lyuer, the harte, or the lungues, or of other thynges, wherin is any diuiſion, they maye be called lappes, brymmes. Alſo ſmalle thynges lyke heares, hangynge at the rootes of herbes and trees.
            
               Fibula, a buckle of a gyrdell, or other thynge lyke therto, a tache, a claſpe.
            
               Fibulo, aui, are, to buckle, to ioyne together tymber, or bourdes, or other lyke thynges.
            
               Ficaria, a fyg tree.
            
               Ficarius, an eater of fygges.
            
               Ficetor, oris, he that loueth or gadereth fygges.
            
               Ficedula, a byrde whiche fedeth on fygges and grapes.
            
               Ficetum, a place where fyg trees do growe.
            
               Ficolea, a ſtaffe or ſtake of fyg tree.
            
               Ficoſus, full of ſores in the heade or berde.
            
               Fictilis, fictile, erthen, or made of erthe.
            
               Fictitius, a, um, fayned, or diſſembled, or counterfayte.
            
               Fictor, oris, a counterfaytor, a fayner.
            
               Fictus, ta, tum, made to the ſimylytude of a thynge.
            
               Ficulnea, a fyg tree.
            Ficulneus, a, um, & Ficulnus, a, um, of a fygge tre.
            
            
               Ficus, in the maſculinè gender is a fyg: in the feminine gender is a fygge tree. It is alſo a ſore or ſcab, growyng in the places of a mannes body, where that heare is.
            
               Fideicommiſſarius, a feoffee of truſt.
            
               Fideicommiſſum, a feoffement of truſte.
            Fideicommitto, miſi, tere, to infeoffe.
            
            
               Fideiuſſor, oris, a ſuerty, or borowe.
            
               Fidelia, an erthen veſſell ſeruynge to dyuers purpoſes.
            
               Fidelis, faythfull, loyall, truſty, or ſure.
            
               Fidelitas, tatis, faythfulnes, loyalty, or ſuerty.
            
               Fidena, a towne in Italy.
            
               Fidenna, confidence.
            
               Fides, fidei, belefe, truſt, promyſe. It is a ſtablenes and truthe in promyſes and couenantes. It is alſo a faythfull execution of thynges committed or promyſed.
            
               Fides labefactata, credence loſte.
            
               Fides publica, the credence or promyſe of all the people and rulars.
            
               Fide bona, without fraude or couyne.
            
               Fide nulla es, thou kepeſt no promyſe.
            Fide ſua, mea, tua, iubere, to vndertake.
            
            
               Fidem accipere, to be beleued.
            
               Fidem aſtringere, to promyſe faythfully.
            
               Fidem deſerere, to breake promyſe.
            Fidem fallere, idem,
            
               Fidem habere, to beleue.
            
               Fidem labefactare, to loſe credence.
            
               Fidem liberare, to kepe promyſe.
            
               Fidem mutare, to be inconſtant of promyſe.
            
               Fides, fidis. the ſtrynge of any inſtrument. ſome tyme a harpe or lute.
            
               Fidîcen, cinis, a harpe: it maye be called a fiddell. It is alſo he that playeth on that inſtrumente.
            
               Fidîcina, a woman harper or luter.
            
               Fidicula, a rebecke or gytterne.
            
               Fidículae, plural. a tourment made with cordes or ſtrynges, wherwith men be tourmented, to make them to cōfeſſe treſon or felony.
            Fido, fiſus ſum, fidere, to truſte.
            
            
               Fidutia, truſte, confidence: ſometyme hope. It is properly that truſte, wherin any thynge is delyuered by one man to an other, to thyntente that he ſhall redelyuer it, whan he is required.
            
               Fiduciaria mancipatio, aut uenditio, a ſrate in landes made vpon confidence of truſte: a mortgage.
            
               Fiduciaria poſſeſsio, a poſſeſſion to an other mannes vſe, or vpon condition.
            Fidus, a, um, truſty.
            
            
               Figlina, ae, a potters warkehouſe, or potters crafte.
            
               Figlina plural. veſſell of erthe.
            
               Figmentum, the warke or warkemanſhyppe. ſome tyme a lye, or a thynge fayned.
            
               Figo,
               Columel. 
               xi, figere, to thruſt in. ſometyme it ſignifieth to dryue or faſten in the erthe.Ver. Geor lib. 4. 
               Palum humi fixit, he droue the ſtake in to the groūd Alſo to plant or ſet.Iuuenal. 
               Ipſe feraces Figat humo plantas. He woll ſet in the grounde the fruit
 full plantes. ſometyme to ſtryke.
            
               Figere ceruos, to hunt dere with bowes.
            
               Figere legem, to ſet an acte of parlyamente or ordinaunce on a wall or poſt, to the intent that all men maye rede it.
            
               Figulus, a potter.
            
               Figura, a fygure.
            
               Figuro, aui, are, to make or fourme.
            
               Filiaſter, a ſon in lawe by an other wyfe, or an other huſbande.
            
               Filictum, a ferny grounde.
            
               Filicula, ferne growynge on trees, ralled in a greke name Polypodion.
            
            
               Filiſtim, a countrey that is nowe called Aſcalō.
            
               Filius, a ſonne.
            
               Filia, a doughter.
            
               Filij, ſome tyme dothe conteyne bothe ſonnes and doughters.
            
               Filins terrae, a newe begunne gentyll man, or a gentyll man of the fyrſte head.
            Filix, licis, ferne.
            
            
               Filo, aui, are, to ſpyn or make threde.
            
               Filum, a threde. ſomtyme the proportion of a thynge.
            
               Fimbria, the ſayrtes or hem of a garment.
            
               Fimetum, a dunge hyll.
            
               Fimum, a boxe, out of the whiche men do caſt dyſe.
            
               Fimus, dunge of cattell.
            
               Finalis, le, fynall or laſte.
            
               Findo, fidi, findere, to cut, to cleaue.
            
               Fingo, xi, gere, to make, to fourme, to fayne, to counterfayt.
            
               Finge animo, ſuppoſe or put the caſe.
            
               Fingere mores alicui, to faſcion oone in maners.
            
               Vultum fingere, to make countenaunce not to be mery or ſorowefull, where in dede he is mery or ſorowefull.
            
               Finio, iui, ire, to fynyſhe or ende.
            
               Finis, the ende, the concluſion. alſo entente or purpoſe, whervnto any other thynge hath relation, or is made or done for.
            
               Fines plural the borders or marches of a cuntraye, boundes.
            Finitimus, ma, mum, nyghe ioynynge.
            
            
               Finitio, a definition.
            
               Finitor, oris, a ſetter of boundes.
            
               Fio, fieri, to be, to be eſtemed. Nulla adeo ex re iſtuc fit, niſi ex nimio otio. This cometh of nothynge but of to moche ydelnes. Ex ea re quid fiat, uide. Take hede what foloweth therof. Fit obuiam caſu ei multitudini. C. Curio. By chaunce C. Curio mette with that rout. Illud fit ſaepe, that oftentimes hapneth.
            
               Firmamentum, a ſuerty or ſtabylitie. alſo that which is called the ground of a cauſe or matter Alſo the fyrmament or heauen viſible.
            
               Firme, aſſuredly, ſtedfaſtly, conſtantely, faſte.
            
               Firmitas, & Firmitudo, ſtablenes, conſtance, ſurenes.
            Firmiter, idem quod firme.
            
               Firmo, aui, are, to aſſure, to make ſtable or ſure, to affyrme.
            
               Aluum firmare, to bynde the bealy, or make one coſtyfe.
            
               Firmare corpora cibo, to ſtrength their bodyes with meate.
            
               Dotem firmare, to be at a poynte what he wyl giue in mariage with his doughter.
            
               Firmare fidem, to performe or make aſſurance of promyſe. Alſo to accorde to a thinge.
            
               Firmatae cibo uires, he is made ſtrong with good meates.
            
               Firmus, ſtable, conſtant, wel fortified, aſſured.
            
               Fiſcalis, le, perteyning to the kynges treaſure.
            
               Fiſcella, cheſe fate. Alſo it is a thynge made with withes and halters, wherwith cattell was ſo moſelled, that they mought not byte any yonge ſyrynges or buddes of trees.
            
               Fiſcellus, a lyttell hyll in Italy, not far from Tiber.
            
               Fiſci, Fiſcinae fiſcellae, great ſachels, wherein were put great ſummes of money.
            
               Fiſcina, a great baſket.
            
               Fiſcum, the kynges Eſcheker.
            
               Fiſcus, reuenewes of the kynges crowne. It ſignifieth ſometime a panyar of wykars. ſome tyme a bag, wherinto money is put.
            
               Fiſsibilis, le, that maye be cut or ſlyt.
            Fiſsilis, le, idem.
            
               Fiſura, a cut or clefte.
            
               Fiſtuca, an inſtrument, wherwith pyles of wood be dryuen into the ground, and ſtones in pauynge, called a rammer.
            
               Fiſtucatio, pylynge or pauynge.
            
               Fiſtula, a pype, as well to conuey water, as an inſtrument of muſick. alſo the weſel or throte boll. Alſo a tappe or faucet. alſo a dyſeaſe or ſore, whiche cometh of a putrified humour, and continually runneth.
            
               Fiſtuloſus, full of holes lyke a ſpunge.
            
               Fiſtuloſa terra, erth barrayne of nature, whiche ſerueth neyther to tyllage nor paſture.
            
               Fit, in happeneth.
            
               Fitiges, be beaſtes of Aethiope, of a brown colour, hauynge two pappes in the breſt as mā
               hath: nor they be ſo wylde, but they maye be tamed: nor ſo tame, but they woll hurt thoſe that greue them.
            Fixus, a, um, fyrme, faſte.
            
         
         
            ¶F ANTE L.
            
               FLABELLVM, an inſtrument, wherwith in the heate of ſommer wynde is fanned, and blowen into mennes vyſages, to coole them.
            
                
               Flabrum, a blowynge or puffe of wynde.
            
               Flacceo, & Flacceſco, ere, to wydder, or wax feeble, or to haue no force.
            
               Flaccidus, a, um, wythered, feeble, weake, hangynge downewarde, lollyng, or flagging.
            
               Flaccum, bruiſed.
            
               Flaces, the ortes of olyues.
            
               Flagella, the ſmalle braunches or twygges of trees or vynes. Somtime ſcourges or flayles, wherwith corne is threſhed.
            
               Flagello, aui, are, to ſcurge, to threſh, to blame or rebuke.
            
               Flagitioſus, an vngratious perſone, full of myſchiefe.
            
               Flagitium, an yll or myſcheuous dede, worthy rebuke and puniſhment.
            
               Flagitium ruum eſt, it is by thyne vngracyouſnes,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                or throughe thy defaulte. Nam id no bis tam flagitium eſt, quàm illa non facere uobis quae modo dixti, For that is in vs as great a faulte, as it is in you that you haue not done it.
            
               Flagitio ardêre, to be conuict of a gret offence.
            
               Flagito, aui, are, to aſke importunately and with clamour.
            
               Flagratores, they whiche for money do ſuffer them ſelues to be beaten.
            
               Flagrio, onis, a ſlaue.
            
               Flagro, aui, are, to burne with a flame of fire. ſometyme to loue or deſyre inordinatly.
            
               Flagrare infamia, to be very yll reported of.
            
               Flagrare inopia, to be in great neceſſitie or pouertie.
            
               Flagrare inuidia, to be excedyngly hated.
            
               Flamatica, a tree burned with lyghtenyuge.
            
               Flamea, clothe or ſylke of yelowe colour.
            
               Flamen, the great prieſt amonge the Gentiles.
            
               Flamen, hoc, the blaſte in an inſtrument.
            
               Flameum, a veyle or typpet of yelowe, whiche womenne dyd weare, whan they were newe maryed.
            
               Flaminea, a countrey in Italy, called alſo Aemilia, and commonlye Romandiola, in the whiche are the cities of Bononia, Fauentia, Imola, Rauenna, & Ariminum.
            
            
               Flaminea uia, an hyghe waye from the citie of Rome vnto the citie of Ariminum.
            
            
               Flaminia, the houſe of the archeprieſte.
            
               Flaminica, the wyfe of the great prieſte called Flamen, whiche moughte not be deuorſed from her huſbande for any cauſe.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Feſt Alſo a weddynge gowne, whiche was of yelowe colour.
            
               Flaminium, was an attyre that wedded women dyd weare on theyr heades.
            
               Flamma, a flame. ſometyme peryll.
            
               Flamefcere, to be inflamed.
            
               Flammeus, a, um, burnynge or flamynge.
            
               Flammigena, comen of fyre.
            
               Flammiuomus, ſendynge out flames.
            
               Flandria, a countrey called Flaunders.
            
               Flaueo, & Flaueſco, aui, are, to be lyke golde, or of yelowe colour.
            
               Flauus, a, um, yelow, or of the colour of gold.
            Flebilis, le, lamentable.
            
            
               Flecto, & Flexo, xi, tere, to bowe, to bende, to leade.
            
               Flegma, fleume.
            
               Flegmen,
               Feſtus. is where with moche goynge the bloude iſſueth out of the tooes.
            Fleo, eui, ere, to wepe.
            
            
               Fletus, wepynge.
            
               Flexanima oratio, an oration or ſpeche, wherby a mannes mynde is ſtyred to pitie, reioyſynge, or other lyke affection.
            
               Flexilis, le, any thynge that maye be eaſely bowed or bente.
            
               Flexipes, pedis, he that hath croked feete.
            
               Flexura, the bowynge.
            
               Fligo, xi, ctum, to tourmente or vexe.
            
               Flo, aui, are, to blowe. alſo to make coyne of mettall.
            
               Flocci, flockes of the ſheryng of wolen clothes.
            
               Floccifacio, & Floccipendo, I ſet nought by.
            
               Flocculi, fyne flockes.
            
               Floces, lyes or draſtes of wyne.
            
               Floralis, florales ludi, playes made in the honour of Flora an harlot, whiche gaue a great treaſure vnto the people of Rome.
            
               Floreo, rui, rure, & Florido, aui, are, to floryſhe or to haue floures. Alſo to excell. ſometyme to proſper.
            
               Floreſco, ſci, ſcere, to burgen, or to brynge forthe floures.
            
               Floreus, a, um, made of floures.
            
               Floridus, da, dum, garnyſhed with floures. ſometyme freſhe or luſty.
            
               Floriger, eris, bearynge floures.
            
               Florulentus, ta, tum, full of floures.
            
               Flos, floris, a floure.
            
               Fluctio, onis, the re
                  •
               me or poſe.
            
               Fluctiuagus, wandrynge in ryuers or waters.
            
               Fluctuatim, troublenſly, doubfully.
            
               Fluctuatio animi, whan a man doubteth what is beſte to do.
            
               Fluctuatio ſtomachi, whan the meate ſwymmeth in the ſtomacke.
            
               Fluctuo, aui, are, to waue vp and downe as the water dothe: by trāſlation it ſignifieth to thynke nowe one thynge now an other.
            
               Fluctuoſus, a, um, troublous, vnquiet, ſtormy.
            
               Fluctus, a floudde, a waue of water ſtyred by tempeſt.
            
               Fluentia, the auntient name of the citie called Florence in Italy.
            
               Fluentum, a ryuer or ſtreame.
            
               Flueſcere, to be reſolued or relented.
            
               Fluidus, da, dum, flowyng, telente
                  •
               , reſolued.
            
               Fluito, aui, are, to flowe continually. ſomtime.
 to flyt or ſwymme.
            
               Flumen, inis, a greate ryuer. ſome tyme the courſe of the water.
            
               Flumineus, a, um, of the ryuer.
            
               Fluminoſus, a, um, full of ryuers.
            
               Fluo, xi, ere, to runne as water dothe, to procede or come of a thynge, or to growe.
            Fluor, Fluxus, & Fluctio, a flyx.
            
            
               Fluſtrum, the full tyde in the ſea, or other water, whiche ebbeth and floweth.
            
               Fluta, a fyſhe, lyke to an eele, called a lamprey.
            
               Fluuialis, le, of the ryuer.
            
               Fluuiatilis, le, that whiche is in the ryuer.
            
               Fluuius, a floud or ryuer.
            
               Fluxura, lechery.
            
               Fluxus, a, um, vnſtable, or that whiche dureth but a whyle, large, or wyde, relented, lecherous and wanton.
         
         
            ¶F ANTE O.
            
               FOCALE, a kerchefe, whiche men and women dyd weare about theyr cheekes.
            
               Focaneus, a braunche of a vyne, whiche groweth out of a twyſt or forked bough.
            
               Focaria, a fyre pan.
            
               Focatius, breade baken on the hot roles.
            
               Focillo, aui, are, to nouryſhe or comforte.
            
               Focula, nouriſhinge meates.
            
               Foculo, aui, are, to nouryſhe or ſuſtayne.
            
               Foculus, a lyttell pan, wherin fyre is borne.
            
               Focus, a pan or herthe, wherin fyer is. ſometyme it ſignifieth fyre. ſomtyme priuate houſes or tenementes.
            
               Fodico, aui, are, to perſe or prycke, or bore.
            
               Fodina, a place where a thynge is dygged.
            Fodio, fodi, fodere, to delue.
            
            
               Foecunditas, plenty.
            
               Foecundo, aui, are, to make fruytefull, or plentuouſe.
            
               Foecundus, a, um, plentuous, or frutfull.
            
               Foede, villaynouſly, ſhamfully.
            
               Foederatus, a confederate.
            
               Foedero, aui, are, to confederate.
            
               Foedifragus, a breaker of leage or truſe, or entercourſe.
            
               Foedo, aui, are, to polute or defyle, to deſtroy, to rent or teare, to conſume.
            
               Foedus, da, dum, foule, defourmed, curſed, or cruell.
            
               Foedus, deris, a treaty of peace, or league betwene pryn
                  ••
               s, 
                  •
               n enter
                  •••
               ſe, a triſſe after battayle: ſomtyme it ſignifieth a lawe made in the tyme of warres.
            
               Foelicitas, tatis, felicitie, proſperitie, abundāce of all thynges.
            
               Foelicito, aui, are, to make proſpe
                  •
               ous.
            
               Foelix, licis, hauynge abundance of al thinges proſperouſe, commodiouſe, or profytable.
            
               Foemina, a woman. Alſo in beaſtes the female.
            
               Foenarius, a, um, perteyninge to hay.
            
               Falces foenariae, hokes or ſythes for to cut hay
                  •
               .
            
               Foenebris, bre, pertayninge to vſury, or vnreſonable gayne.
            Foeneratitius, a, um, the ſame.
            
            
               Foenerator, oris, an vſurer, or lender for vnreaſonable gayne.
            
               Foenero, aui, are, & Foeneror, rari, cum datiuo, to lende for vſurye. Foeneror cum ablatiuo, to borowe, or make a ſhyfte, or to lay to mortegage.
            
               Foeniculum, fenell.
            
               Foenile, an hey houſe.
            
               Foeniſecium, hey harueſte.
            
               Foeniſex, ſecis, a mower of hey.
            
               Foenograecum, fenegreke.
            
               Foenum, hey.
            
               Foenuſculum, a bottell of hey.
            
               Foenus, noris, vſury, alſo vnreaſonable or vnlefull gayne, comynge of that thynge, which is lente. It is ſomtyme fruite, which the erth bryngeth forth without any labour.
            
               Foeteo, tere, to ſtynke.
            Foetidus, a, um, ſtynkynge.
            
            
               Foetifico, aui, are, to brynge forth, moſte commonly as a beaſte or byrde dothe.
            Foeto,Varro. taui, tare, the ſame.
            
            
               Foetor, oris, ſtynche or yll ſauour.
            
               Foetuoſus, a, um, full of bredynge.
            
               Foetura, the tyme from the conception vnto the byrthe. Alſo the increaſe of cattell. ſometyme it ſignifieth the increaſe or commynge forthe of other thynges.
            
               Foetus, tus, all thynge that is broughte forthe by generation. Sometyme the fruite of tres.
            
               Foetus, ta, tum, full, or great with yonge, as a woman with chylde, or a beaſte.
            
               Foliatius, a, um, full of leaues.
            
               Foliatus, ta, tum, leaued, or hauynge leaues.
            
               Folium, a leafe.
            
               Follico, caui, care, to ſnuffe or fetche backe wynde with the noſethrylles.
            
               Folliculus, the huſk wherin the eares of weate or other corne is incloſed, whan it is greene, called the hoſe. Alſo a ſacke wherein corne is put.
            
               Follis, a below, wherwith fyre is blowen. Alſo a ball blowen full of wynde. Semblablye a bed ſtuffed onelye with wynde. It is alſo a bag, wherin money is.
            
               Fomentum, a nouryſhement of naturral heate. It is alſo any thynge layde to the body in the fourme of a playſter, to mittigate the peyne or griefe of any diſeaſe, callyd fomentation.
            
               Fomes, fomitis, any matter, wherewith fyre is kendeled and kepte burnynge. Somtyme it ſignifyeth that, whiche feruentely ſtyrreth
 vs to do any thynge.
            
               Fons, fontis, a fountayne or well.
            
               Fontanus, a, um, of a fountayne.
            
               Aqua fontana, well water.
            
               Fonticulus, a lyttell well or ſprynge.
            
               Forago, a ſkayn of yerne.
            
               Foramen, minis, a hole.
            
               Foras, without.
            
               Foratia, a markette womanne, whiche ſelleth egges, chykens, and other lyke thynges at the market.
            
               Foratus, tus, a hole.
            
               Forbea, a kynde of hot meate.
            
               Forcipes, a payre of tongues, or other lyke inſtrumente.
            
               Forcus, a proper name of a man.
            
               Forda, a mylche cowe that bryngeth forthe calues.
            
               Fore, to be hereafter.
            
               Forem, res, ret, I ſhulde or had be, thou ſhuldeſte or had be, he ſhulde or had ben.
            
               Forenſia, habites or robes, worne onely in plates of iudgement.
            
               Forenſis, ſe, perteyninge to places of iugement or courtes wherin lawes be exerciſed. Alſo a iurrour.
            
               Fores, dores.
            
               Forfices, ſheres.
            
               Forficuli, lyttell ſheres.
            
               Fori, the hatches of a ſhyp, or place where mē beinge in the ſhyp do walke vp and downe. Alſo ſtages or galeries, from whenſe the noble men of Rome behelde the playes called Circenſes.
            
            
               Foria, dunge that is liquide or thyn.
            
               Forica, commune draughtes or Iakes.
            
               Foriculae, lyttell dores.
            
               Forinſecus, without.
            
               Forio, iui, ire, to diſcharge the bealy of ordure
            
               Foriolus, he that hath a laſke.
            
               Forma, fourme or ſhape ſometyme beaulty, faſcion, maner.
            
               Forma ſtata, a meane beaulty or ſtature.
            
               Formiae, a towne in Campania.
            
               Formica, an emote, or ant, or piſmere.
            
               Formicatio, that whiche is communely called a ryngeworme.
            
               Formidabilis, le, that whiche is to be drad.
            
               Formido, dinis, dreade or feare.
            
               Formido, aui, are, to haue great feare.
            
               Formidoloſe, fearefully.
            
               Formidoloſus, he that feareth other: alſo he that is feared of other.
            
               Formo, aui, are, to forme, to make in faſcion.
            Formoſus, a, um, fayre.
            
            
               Formucales, a payre of tongues.
            
               Formula, an inſtrument or deede in wrytynge, a ſtyle in writinge, and a fourme in pleading.
            
               Formula iniuriarum, an action of treſpas.
            
               Formula excidere, to be barred of his actiō.
            
               Formulam intendere, to brynge an action.
            
               Formularius, a practiſer of the lawe.
            
               Fornacaria, dais whan the women did naught els but bake bread.
            
               Fornax, a chymney or ouen.
            
               Fornax calcaria, a lyme kyll.
            
               Fornax lateraria, a brycke kyll.
            
               Fornicarij, they which haue ſtalles or bouthes vnder the vaultes or arches of churches or palayces, where they ſell theyr wares to thē that paſſe by, as they do in weſtminſter hall.
            
               Fornicarius, a, um, perteyninge to lechery.
            
               Fornicator, a lechour.
            
               Fornico, aui, are, to make an arche or a vault.
            
               Fornicor, ari, to commyt fornication.
            
               Fornix, nicis, an arche or a vault.
            
               Foro, aui, are, to perce or bore a hole.
            
               Forpices, cyſfars to clyp heare.
            
               Fors fortune. ſomtyme it is vſed for forſitan, peraduenture.
            
               Fors fortuna,
               Terent. in Hecyra, good fortune or chaunce.
            
               Fors fuat, god ſende the good fortune, god ſpeede the well.
            Forſitan, & Forſan, peraduenture.
            
            Fortaſſe, Fortaſsis, idem.
            
               Fortè, perchance, peraduenture.
            
               Forte fortuna, by good aduenture.
            
               Forteſco,
               Neuius. 
               ſcere, to waxe or be ſtronge.
            
               Forticulus, a lyttell ſtronge.
            
               Fortifico, aui, are, to fortifie or make ſtronge.
            
               Fortis, ſtronge, puiſſant, valiant of courage. Alſo fayre, ſomtyme ryche.
            
               Fortiter, ſtrongly, valiantly, conſtantly.
            
               Fortitudo, dinis, ſtrengthe, valiant courage.
            
               Fortuito, by chaunce, at aduenture.
            
               Fortuitus, ta, tum, that hapneth by chaunce.
            
               Fortuna, fortune.
            
               Fortunae, goodes, good fortune, aduancement.
            
               Fortunatae inſulae, the fortunate yles, whiche are in the great occean ſea, and of Pliny are named to be ſyxe: of Solinus but three: of Ptholome two, whiche he calletth alſo the yles of goddes. ſo called for the holſomnes of the ayre and wyndes blowynge there, alſo the plenty of good fruites and fertilite of the grounde. It is nowe thought of ſome men to be thoſe yles, whiche are nowe called Canaria, diſtant from Spayne towarde the weſte one thouſande and two hundred myles after the counte of Petrus Martyr. Of theſe yles are founden to be ſeuen in number. Fyrſte about the yere of our lord. 1405. a frenchmen called Betanhor, at the commaundemente of Katharine thanne beinge queene of Caſtyle, found two of them, & one called the Launcelote, and the other Forte Ventura. Sone after oone Fernandus Peraria and his wyfe founde other two, and called the one Ferream,
                and the other Gomeram. After that the great Canaria was 
                  •••
               nde by Petrus de Vera, & Michael de Moxica. Laſte of al by the commaundement of Farnando and Elyzabeth late kynge and queene of Spayne, Teneriphe & Palma, were founde by Alphonſus Lugo. So that nowe all the .vii. yles be vnder the dominion of the kynge of Spayne. Not withſtandynge ſome doo ſuppoſe, that theſe be not the yles, whiche were called Fortunatae, but rather thoſe whiche are more in the ſouth, and be called nowe of the Portugalles Inſulae capitis uiridis.
            
            
               Fertunatim, fortunately.
            Fortunatus, ta, tum, fortunate.
            
            
               Fortuno, aui, are, to make proſperous, to augment with good fortune.
            
               Forula, a wykat.
            
               Foruli, huches, wherin bokes were kept: nowe be they taken for keuerynges of bookes.
            
               Forum, a market, where thynges be ſolde. Alſo a place where iudgementes are practiſed, and matters in lawe pleaded. Forum agere, to ſyt in iudgemente, to here and determyne cauſes.
            
               Forum, whan it is taken for a markette, hath commonly an other worde ioyned therewith, as, Forum boarium, the market where cattell is ſolde.
            
               Forum holitorium, the market wher herbes be ſolde.
            
               Forum piſcarium, the fyſhe market.
            
               Forum Cornelij, a towne in Italye called Imola.
            
            
               Forum Iulij, a region or countreye of Italy, whiche ſometyme was called Iapidia, nowe it is called Frioll.
            
               Forum Claudij, Tarentaſia in Italy.
            
               Foſſa, a dyche, or dike, or a mote.
            
               Foſsilis, le, that whiche is dygged, or maye be dygged.
            
               Foſsio, a dyggynge.
            
               Foſsitius, a, um, that is digged.
            
               Foſſor, oris, a dygger or dycher.
            
               Foſſula, a lyttell dyche.
            
               Foſſum Sempronij, a towne in Italy called Foſſemborne. Alſo Fauentia.
            
            
               Foſſura, a digginge.
            Fotus, ta, tum, dygged.
            
            
               Fouea, a den.
            
               Foueo, ui, uere, to nouryſhe, to ſuſtayne, to maynteyne, to wea
                  •
               e or waſhe a thynge, to ordeyne or ſet,Cice. ad Q fratrē. to defende.
            
               Fouere aliquem, to kepe one his frende.
            
               Fouere in pectore, to thynke priuily.
         
         
            F ANTE R.
            
               FRaceo, cui, cere, to putrifie for age.
            Fraceſco, ſci, ſcere, idem.
            
               Fraces, lyes of oyle.
            
               Fracidus, da, dum, more than rype, rotten as fruite is.
            Fractus, ta, tum, broken.
            
            Fractus animo, diſcouraged.
            
            
               Fractae res, thynges ſpent or loſt.
            
               Fractibello, wery of warres.
            
               Fraeno, are, to brydle, to reſtrayne, to ſtop.
            
               Voluptates fraenare, to maiſter the wanton appetites.
            
               Fraenum, a brydle.
            
               Fraenos adlubere, to reſtrayne.
            
               Fraenos inijcere alicui, to let one of his pleaſure, to brydell hym that wolde not be ruled.
            
               Fraenum mordere, to take the bytte in the tethe, ſignifieth to ſet naught by.
            Fraetus, ta, tum, truſtinge, ayded.
            
            
               Fraeti uirtute & uiribus, ayded with ſtrength and puiſſance.
            
               Fraga, ſtraweberies, the herbe is called Fragraria.
            
            Frageo, gêre, & Frageſco, ſci, ſcere, to braſt.
            
            
               Fragilis, le, frayle, broukle, ſone broken.
            
               Fragilitas, frayltie, brouklenes, inconſtancy.
            
               Fragiliter, weakely, inconſtantly.
            
               Fragitides, the two great veynes, whiche do appire on eyther ſyde of the necke.
            
               Fragmen, & Fragmentum, a piece or gobet of a thynge broken.
            
               Fragor, oris, the noyſe, whiche is made at the fallynge of any great thynge, ruſhynge.
            
               Fragoſus, a, um, vneaſy to clyme.
            
               Fragrans, tis, hauynge great or ſote ſauour.
            
               Fragrantia, ae, a great ſauour.
            
               Framea, a ſpeare or iavelin.
            Frango, fregi, frangere, to breake.
            
            
               Frangere animum, to diſcourage.
            
               Audatiam hoſtis frangere, to abate his ennemies courage.
            
               Frangere authoritatem ueteris diſciplinae, to breake or diſtroye the olde rule or laudable cuſtome.
            
               Fidem frangere, to breake promyſe or appoyntment.
            
               Frangere hominem, to cauſe one to relente from his purpoſe, to make hym to agree to his requeſte.
            
               Opes inimicorum frangere, to impoueriſhe his enemies.
            
               Sententiā alicuius frangere, to confute ones opinion, and make it of no value.
            
               Frangi dolore, to be in extreame ſorowe, or almoſte dead for ſorowe or grefe.
            
               Frangi metu, to be almoſte deade for feare.
            
               Frangi pudore, to be excedyngely aſhamed,
 to be out of countenaunce.
            
               Franoſus, a deceyuour.
            
               Frater, tris, a brother.
            
               Frater patruelis, a brothers ſon.
            
               Fraterculus, a lyttell or yonge brother.
            
               Fraternè, brotherly.
            
               Fraternus, na, um, of a brother.
            
               Fratilli, the fringe of tapeſry, that hangeth next the grounde.
            
               Fratrare, properly is ſayd of chylderns breſtes, whan they do growe to waxe imboced.
            
               Fratres Aruales, rede before in Aruales.
            
            
               Fratria, a brothers wyfe.
            
               Fratricida, he that hath ſlayne is brother.
            
               Fratrueles, brothers chylderne, couſyn germaynes.
            
               Fraudator, a deceyuer.
            
               Fraudo, aui, are, to begyle, to diſappoynt.
            
               Fraudare aliquē ſuo teſtimonio, where one holdeth his peace, whan his frende is ſpokē of, and wyll not ſaye well of hym.
            
               Fraudare genium, not to ſatiſfy the neceſſite of nature, or carnall appetite.
            
               Fraudare ſe uictu ſuo, to fare hardly for nygardeſhyp.
            
               Fraudare ſtipendium, to reteyne or kepe awaye wages from men.
            
               Fraudulenter, deceitfully.
            
               Fraudulentus, full of deceite.
            
               Frauduloſus, a begyler.
            
               Fraus, fraudis, deceyt. Alſo peryll, dangier.
            
               Fraxineus, a, um, of aſhe, or aſhen.
            
               Fraxinus, an aſhe.
            
               Fraxo, aui, are, to go in watche.
            
               Fregella, a lyttell towne in Italy.
            
               Fremitus, a rorynge, properly of waters. ſomtyme a murmurynge, rumble, or noyſe of people aſſembled together.
            
               Fremo, mi, mere, to rore or make a noyſe like great waters, or lyke a lyon.
            
               Frendeo, dui, dere, to grynde the teethe together for anger or peyn. Alſo to grunt or grone for peyne.
            
               Frequens, entis, accuſtomed, moche haunted. Alſo aſſemble together, abundant. Omnibus relictis mihi frequentem operam dediſtis, leuynge all other men, ye haue often tymes holpen me.
            
               Frequens auditorium, a great audience.
            
               Frequens adeſt, he cometh often.
            
               Frequens eſt cum eo, he is often tymes with hym.
            
               Frequentes fuimus ad ducentos, we were a great number about two hundred.
            
               Frequens ſenatus, all the ſenatours aſſembled to gether. Venio in ſenatum frequens, I come ordinarily vnto the Senate.
            
               Frequentatio, an hauntynge, an aſſembly.
            
               Frequentia, great haunt, & company of folke.
            
               Frequentiſsimae aedes, 
               
                  •
                houſe moche haunted with people.
            
               Frequento, taui, tare, to haunt, to go together.
            
               Freſta faba, a beane bruiſed or broken.
            
               Fretum, a narrowe ſea betwene two landes, as fretum herculeum, which is in the ſea betweene Spayne and the countrey of Moores, called the ſtraictes of Marrok.
            
               Fretus,
               Cice. fam. epiſt. 12. of fruor, truſtyng. De qua tamen magnam ſpem habemus, freri clementia collegae tui: wherof not withſtandynge we haue good hope, truſtinge on the mercye of your companion.
            
               Friabilis, ſone broken in ſmall pieces.
            
               Fribolus, almoſt worth an halfepeny.
            Frico, caui, cui, care, to rub.
            
            
               Frictilla, a frytue, made with floure & bater.
            Frictus, Fricatio, & Frictio, rubbynge.
            
            Frictus, & Frixus, a, um, fryed.
            
            Frigefacio, feci, facere, to coole.
            
            
               Frigefio, frigefieri, to be colde.
            
               Frigeo, gui, & frixi, gere, to be colde or flowe.
            Frigero, aui, are, to coole.
            
            
               Frigeſco, ſcere, to waxe colde.
            
               Frigidarius, a colde bathe.
            
               Frigide, coldely, vnaptly, vnpleaſantly.
            
               Frigiditas, coldnes.
            
               Frigidulus, a, um, ſomewhat colde.
            
               Frigidus, da, dum, colde, daungerous, or noyfull.
            
               Frigilla, a dyrde, whiche ſyngeth in the colde wether, a ruddocke, or rod in redbreſt.
            Frigo, xi, & frigui, gere, to frye.
            
            Frigorificus, ca, cum, made colde.
            
            
               Frigus, oris, colde. ſometyme feare.
            
               Frigutio, tiui, tire, to quake for colde.
            
               Frio, aui, are, to breake ſmall, ſpecially betwyxte the fyngers.
            
               Friſii, people by Holande, wherof the countrey is called Fryſelande.
            
               Frit, the grayne in the top of the eare, whiche is leſſe than a corne.
            
               Fritilla, a froyſe or pancake.
            
               Fritillus, a boxe, out of the whiche dyfe were caſte on the tables.
            
               Friuiculum, diſcention betwene men and their wyfes, whiche cometh not to ſeparation.
            
               Friuolo, vtenſiles of lyttel value.
            
               Friuolarius, he that ſelleth ſtuffe of lyttell valu.
            
               Friuolus, a, um, vayne, lyght, of none eſtimation or value.
            
               Frixorium, a fryinge pan.
            
               Frondarius, ia, ium, of leaues.
            
               Frondatio, a ſlyppynge of leaues. Alſo brouſynge.
            
               Frondator, oris, a brouſer, a wood lopp
                  •
               r.
            
               Frondeo, & Frondeſco, ſcere, to beare or haue leaues.
            
               Frondeus, ea, eum, that is of leaues.
            
                
               Frondo, daui, are, to brynge forth leaues,
            
               Frondifer, bearynge leaues.
            
               Frons, tis, the forehead, the frunt, ſhamefaſtenes, alſo countenaunce. alſo it ſignifieth the foreparte of an hooſte.
            
               Frons cauſae, the begynnynge of the matter.
            
               Prima fronte, at the fyrſte, at the entry, at the prime face.
            
               Porrecta fronte, with a mery countenance.
            
               Frontem explicare, to loke mirily.
            Frontem exporgere, idem,
            
               Frontem contrahere, to loke ſowerly.
            
               Frontem ferire, is ſpoken where a mā ſignifieth, that one diſdayneth extremely an other Pernijt illi frons, he hath loſte his countenāce.
            
               Frons, frondis, the leafe of a tree with the bra
                  •
               nches.
            
               Frontale, the hedſtall of an horſe.
            
               Fronto, tonis, he that hath a brode forehead.
            
               Frontoſus, hauynge a great forehead, or not abaſhed.
            
               Fructifer, bearynge fruite.
            Fructificus, & Fructuoſus, fruitefull.
            
               Fructuarius, he that taketh the fruite or profyte of a thynge, called of our lawyars Pernour of profyttes.
            
               Fructuarius, a, um, that whiche beareth fruit, or dothe perteyne of fruite.
            
               Fructus, tus, & ti, fruite. Alſo all profyte or reuenues that commeth of the grounde.
            
               Frugalitas, tatis, moderation in lyuinge, ſpecially in apparayle and dyete, ſober rule. alſo ſufficiency.
            
               Frugaliter, temperately, ſoberly, profytably, without reproche, exceſſe, or ryot.
            
               Frugalior, frugaliſsimus, more temperate, moſt temperate.
            
               Fruges, aut Frux, frugis, increaſe of all thoſe thynges, whiche the erthe bryngeth forthe, moſte properly of grayne or corne. Somtyme it ſignifieth rent or reuenues.
            
               Frugi, moderate, profytable, neceſſary.
            
               Frugi aedificium, a houſe not ſumptuous.
            
               Frugi homo, a good man, a thrifty man, an honeſt-man, temperate in expenſes.
            
               Frugi ſeruus, a truſty ſeruaunt, whiche looketh well to his maiſters profyte.
            
               Fruiſcor, ſci, to vſe at libertie.
            
               Frumen, the vppermoſte parte of the throte, the gargyll.
            
               Frumentaceus, of corne.
            
               Frumentarius, ia, ium, perteyninge to corne.
            
               Frumentatio, takynge of corne.
            
               Frumentator, toris, a taker or pourueyour of corne.
            
               Frumentor, aris, to gather or puruey corne.
            
               Frumentum, all corne, that hath berdes or eyies, it is moſte vſed for weate or rye.
            
               Fruniſcor, Cato vſed for fruor.
            
            
               Frunitus, wyſe in vſynge of a thynge.
            
               Fruor, fretus ſum, frui, to vſe with dilectation and profyte.
            
               Frui ingenio ſuo, to do as he wyll.
            
               Fruſtatim, in pieces or gobettes.
            
               Fruſtillatim, piece meale.
            
               Fruſtra, in vayne.
            
               Fruſtraes, thou arte deceyued or abuſed, fruſtra eſſe, to come to none effect.
            
               Fruſtra habere, aliquem, to abuſe or deceyue one.
            
               Ne fruſtra ſis, that thou be not diſappointed
            
               Fruſtra legati diſseſſêre, the ambaſſadours departed without hauynge theyr purpoſe.
            
               Fruſtratio, abuſynge or deceyuynge of one.
            
               Fruſtro, aui, are, & Fruſtror, aris, ari, to deceyue. alſo to do a thynge in vayne, or vaynly to employ.
            
               Fruſtrari expectationem alicuius; to diſapoynte one of that whiche he loked for.
            
               Fruſtrari expenſas, to loſe his coſtes and charges.Columel.
            
            
               Imprudenter facta opera fruſtantur expenſas, warkes made vnaduiſedly maketh one to loſe all that he hath beſtowed.
            
               Fruſtrari laborem, to loſe his peyne.
            
               Satis adhuc tua fruſtrata eſt fides, hytherto the truſte that I haue had in the, hath me
                  •
               ely well abuſed me.
            
               Fruſtulum & Fruſtillum, a lyttell gobet.
            
               Fruſtum, a piece or gobet.
            
               Fruſus, a kynde of brembles, whoſe pryckes be not hooked.
            
               Frutex, that whiche hath a great ſtalke, and yet it is no tree, as fenell, caules, certayne malowes, and other lyke herbes. ſometyme it is taken for the ſtem or ſtalke.
            
               Frutetoſus, a, um, hauynge abundaunce of ſuche great herbes.
            
               Frutetum, ſeu Fruticetum, a place where groweth herbes with great ſtemmes or ſtalkes.
            
               Fruticeſcere, to be a ſtalke.
            
               Frutico, aui, are, & Fruticor, aris, ari, to ſprynge in ſtalke.
         
         
            ¶F ANTE V.
            
               FVAT, for fit.
            
               Fucatus, ta, tum, coloured or paynted, as ſome women be.
            
               Fucilis, le, falſe, coloured.
            
               Fucinus, a lake in Italy.
            
               Fuco, caui, care, to laye on a colour.
            
               Fucus, a dorre or bee without ſtynge, which entreth into hyues, and eateth vppe hony. Alſo payntynge, where one colour is layde on an other. It is alſo vſed for diſceypte or falſehoode.
            
               Fuga, flyght.
            
                
               Fugax, gacis, he that flyeth lyghtly. alſo it ſignifieth ſwyfte.
            
               Fugio, gi, gere, to flee, to runne away, to eſcape to forget. alſo to eſchewe.
            
               Fugit aciem tenuitas, it is ſo ſmalle that one can not ſee it.
            
               Fugit te ratio, thou vnderſtādeſt not the matter. De Caeſare fugerat me ad te ſcribere, Of Ceſar I had forgoten to write vnto the.
            
               Niſi ſi quae me forte fugiunt, Except I haue forgotten ſomewhat.
            
               Fugiens laboris, abhorrynge labour or peyn.
            
               Fugiens uinū, wine that hath loſt his verdur
            
               Fugientes literae, blynde letters.
            
               Fugitiuarius, a, um, ſtartynge away, flyttynge, that gladly and quyckly runneth away.
            
               Fugitiuus, a, um, fugitiue, not abydyng.
            
               Fugitiuae aquae, waters, which be taken out of a commune ryuer by ſtelthe.
            
               Fugitiuus ſeruus, he that rounneth from his maiſter, willing neuer to retourne, or goeth to a place, frome whens he ſuppoſeth that his maiſter can neuer recouer hym.
            
               Eugito, aui, are, to uſe to runne away.
            
               Fugo, aui, are, to dryue away.
            
               Fulcimentum, a botreulx, or that wherwith a thynge is ſuſtayned.
            
               Fulcio, ſi, cire, to ſupport, to fortifie.
            
               Fulcra, bedſteedes.
            Fulgeo, ſi, gere, & Fulgo, gi, ere, to ſhyne.
            
            
               Fulgetrum, a leame of lyghtnynge.
            Fulgidus, da, dum, bryght.
            
            
               Fulgor, brightneſſe.
            Fulgur, uris, uel oris, lyghtnynge.
            
            
               Fulguratio, the lyghtenynge whan it is in the clowdes.
            
               Fulgurator, the ſender of lyghtnynge.
            
               Fulgurio, riui, rire, to caſte lyghtnynge.
            
               Fulguritas, lyghtnes or bryghtnes.
            
               Fulguritaſſunt, ſtryken with lyghtnynge.
            
               Fulguritum, ſtriken or blaſted with lyghtning.
            
               Fulguro, aui, are, to ſende forth lyghtnyng
                  •
               .
            
               Fulica, a ſea byrde, more than a culuer, & blacke.
            
               Fuligo, ginis, the ſoote of a chymney.
            
               Fullo, onis, a fuller of clothe.
            
               Fullonica, fullars crafte.
            Fulmen, minis, lyghtnynge.
            
            Fulmino, aui, are, to lyghten.
            
            
               Fultura, a ſhoore.
            
               Fuluus, a, um, a colour myxt of grene and redde, a darke yelowe.
            
               Fumaria herba, an herbe callyd fumitorye.
            
               Fumarium, a ſmokye place, where wyne was layd, to the intent that it moughte the ſooner waxe old▪ alſo the ſhank or tonel of a chimney.
            
               Fumiſico, aui, are, to make ſmoke, to incenſe.
            Fumigo, aui, are, to parfume.
            
            Fumo, aui, are, to ſmoke.
            
            
               Fumus, ſmoke.
            
               Fumos uendere, is the practyſe of them, whiche being nigh about a prince, or in his fauor do beare men in hande, that they ſpeake for theym to the prince, where they ſpeake neuer a worde: and cauſe menne to lyue thereby in fooles paradyſe.
            
               Funale, a torche.
            
               Funales equi, horſes which coupled with an halter, dyd go before the chariot.
            
               Funambulus, he that walketh on a rope.
            
               Functio, the exercyſe of a weightye matter or offyce.
            
               Funda, a ſlynge. alſo a caſtynge net, a ſachell or purſe lyke a net▪ alſo a cercle of gold, or other mettall, wherin ſtones be ſet.
            Fundamen, & Fundamentum, a foundation.
            
            
               Fundibularij, ſlyngers of ſtones.
            
               Funditores, the ſame.
            
               Fundito, aui, are, to powre out often.
            
               Funditus, from the foundation, vtterly.
            
               Funditus me perdidiſti, thou haſte vtterlye vndone me.
            
               Funditus perij, I am vtterly vndone.
            
               Fundo, aui, are, to founde, to make ſtable.
            
               Fundo, fudi, fundere, to yette or caſte mettal, to poure out, to ſhede, to throw down, to ſcatter, to diſcomfite, to gyue abundantlye, to ſpeake moche, to lay downe.
            
               Fundere exercitum, & Fūdere copias, to diſcomfite or defete an hoſt, to ſlea al the army.
            
               Fundere lachrimas, to wepe excedyngly.
            
               Fundere uerba, to ſpeake more than nedeth.
            
               Fundere uerſus, to make verſes ſodaynly.
            
               Fundere urinam, to pyſſe moche.
            
               Fundum, the bottome of a thynge.
            
               Fundus, that whiche is vſed to be callyd lande or ſoyle. ſomtyme it is taken for a foundation. alſo for the chiefe author of a thynge.
            Funebris bre, funerall.
            
            
               Funepeus, a goer on a corde.
            
               Funerale, pertaynyng to funeralles.
            
               Funereus, rea, reum, ꝑtainyng to the dead body
            Funero, aui, are, to bury.
            
            
               Funeſto, aui, are, to violate a place with a dead bodye.
            
               Funeſtus, ta, tum, violated with dead bodyes. alſo mortall, bluddy. alſo pertaynyng to dead bodyes or deathe.
            
               Funetum, bowed or houped, as ſom vines be.
            
               Fungor, fūctus ſum, fungi, to exerciſe an office.
            
               Fungi officio ſuo, to do his deuour.
            
               Fungi fato, to be deade.
            
               Fungi uita, to lyue.
            
               Fungi uice alicuius, to be in an nother mannes ſteede.
            
               Functus uita, he that hath fynyſhed his lyfe.
            
               Funginus, a, um, of a mouſherom.
            
               Fungoſus, lyke a mouſherom.
            
               Fungus, a tadde ſtools, a muſherom.
            
                
               Funiculus, a ſmall rope.
            
               Funis, a rope.
            
               Funus, funeris, funeral exequies, or ſolemnite of burieng. ſomtime it ſignifieth the dead corps.
            
               Funus facere, to cauſe one to dye.
            Fuo, fui, futum, to be.
            
            
               Fur, furis, a thefe.
            
               Furax, acis, theuyſhe, a great pycker.
            
               Furca, furcula, an hey forke.
            
               Furcifer, ciferis, a ſeruant, which for ſom light offence, was compellid to beare a forke on his necke, hauyng both his handes bounden faſte therto, and ſo to goo through the towne, confeſſynge his defaut, and exhortyng other that they ſhoulde not in lyke caſe offende, whyche was a great reproche.
            
               Furcilis, a dunge forke.
            
               Furcilla, an hey forke. alſo a galowes.
            Furfur, uris, branne.
            
            Furfureus, & Furfuraceus, a, um, of branne.
            
            
               Furiae, the furies of hell, which were thre, Alecto, Tiſiphone, Megera.
            
            Furiatus, a, um, furyous.
            
            
               Furibundus, a, um, wood, or very madde.
            
               Furio, aui, are, to make madde or wood.
            
               Furioſus, a, um, madde, or wood, frantike.
            
               Furnaceus, a, um, baken in an ouen.
            
               Furnaria, bakers craft. alſo a woman baker. alſo a bakehouſe.
            
               Furnus, an o
                  •
               en.
            
               Furo, furi, furere, to be wood for anger.
            
               Furor, oris, madnes. alſo fury, whiche is vehement concitation or ſtyrynge of the mynde.
            Furor, aris, ari, to ſteale.
            
            
               Furtificus, a pycker or priuy ſtealer.
            
               Furtim, by ſtelthe, priuyly.
            
               Furtiuus, a, um, that whiche is done by ſtelthe or very priuyly.
            
               Furtiuae literae, & Furtiua ſcripta, letters whiche no man can rede but onely he, vnto whom they be ſent, as letters in cyfer.
            
               Furtum, theft. It is defined to be a deceytfulle handlynge or vſyng of any thynge, or the poſſeſſion therof, to haue therby gaine or aduantage, which is by the law of nature prohibyted to be ſuffred. It is ſometyme any act that is done pryuily, to thintent it ſhuld be ſecrete.
            
               Furti teneri, aut obſtringi, to be anſwerable to felonye.
            
               Furunculus, a lyttel thefe. alſo a beaſte callyd a ſtote, that kylleth rabettes. It is alſo a ſoore callid a felon. alſo a ſoore callid a cattes hear, whiche breketh out in the fingers with great wheales and moche peyne.
            Furuus, ua, uum, darke.
            
            
               Furuae hoſtiae, ſacrifyce doone to Pluto and Proſerpine.
            
               Fuſcina, a ſpeare with many teethe, wherwith fyſhers do take troutes or yeles, by throwing of it, a troute ſpeare, an yele ſpeare.
            
               Fuſcinula, a fleſſhehoke.
            
               Fuſcus, ca, cum, brown of color, not fully black.
            
               Fuſile, that whiche may be molten.
            
               Fuſè, in lengthe, longe.
            
               Fuſim, abrode, as it were molten.
            
               Fuſores, melters.
            
               Fuſorius, a, um, pertaynyng to meltynge, as, Ars fuſoria, the craft of meltynge. Vas fuſorium, a meltynge potte.
            
               Fuſtigo, are, to beate with a ſtaffe.
            
               Fuſtis, a ſtaffe.
            
               Fuſtuarius, a miniſter, whiche ſerueth to beate men with ſtaues.
            
               Fuſus, ſi or Fuſum, a ſpyndell.
            Fuſus, a, um, molten.
            
            
               Fuſus humi, ſtretched on the grounde.
            
               Fuſi fugati
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , ſlayne and put to flyght.
            
               Futilis, le, that whiche wyll be ſone poured out.
            
               Futilis, he that ſpeaketh all that he knoweth ſhortely or vnaduyſedly.
            
               Futio, tis, tere, to poure out or runne out.
            
               Futis, a veſſell, wherewith water was poured into a lauer, to brynge water into a parler, or ſoupynge chaumber.
            
               Futuo, tui, tuere, to do the acte of generation.
         
         
            ¶G ANTE A.
            
               GABA, A TOVNE in Galilee.
            
            
               Gabalū, a towne in Fraūce nigh to Narbona, where there was made verye good cheeſe.
            
               Gabalus, a galowe tree, or gybet, wheron menne be hanged.
            
               Gabaon, a citie in the holy land nygh to Rama where Salomō doing ſacrifice, ſpake with god.
            
               Gabaonitae, men of that towne.
            
               Gabata, a potage dyſhe.
            
               Gabba, a citie in Siria.
            
               Gabij, orum, a city in Italye, whiche the Romaynes dyſtroyed.
            
               Gabinus, a garment with two lappes, wherof the one caſt backward, did girde him that dyd weare it, whiche garment the conſule ware, whan he denounced warres.
            
               Gabriel, ſignifieth the puiſſāce or might of god
            
               Gades, two iles by the further partis of Spain beyonde Granade.
            
               Gaditanum fretum, is the entree out of the occean ſea, into the ſea callyd Mediterraneam, hauynge Spayne on the northe ſyde, and the Moores on the ſouthe.
            
                
               Gaeon, a great ryuer whyche runneth through Ethiope and Egypt, and is now callid Nilꝰ.
            
               Gaetuli, people in Affrike.
            
               Gaetulia, a countrey in Affrike.
            
               Gagates, a ſtone callyd Ieate.
            
               Galactophagus, a eater of mylke.
            
               Galactopota, a drynker of mylke.
            
               Galanga, a ſpyce callyd galyngale.
            
               Galatae, uel Gallograeci, people of Galatia.
            
               Galataea, a nymph or mayden of the ſea, & was doughter of Nereus and Doris.
            
               Gallatia, uel Gallograetia, a cuntrey in the leſſe Aſia, ioynyng to Phrygiam, & Lydiam.
            
            
               Galbanus, a gumme of a certayne tree, whiche is moche vſyd in playſters.
            Galbinus, a, um, delycate, wanton.
            
            
               Galbuli, thynges whiche doo hange on cypres trees, lyke ſmall heares.
            
               Galea, a helmet or ſalette.
            
               Galeatus, he that hath an helmet of ſalet.
            
               Galenus, a noble phiſition, borne in Pargamo a towne in Aſia, ſonne of Nicon a great geometrician. This man in the arte of phiſike excellyd all other before his tyme and ſens, in ſo moch as in his miniſtration, counſell, or doctryne, he neuer had reproche, as he hym ſelfe writeth. alſo he lyuynge (as ſom do write .Cx. yeres, after that he paſſed the aege of .xviii. yeres, vntyll the tyme of his deathe, he was neuer vexed with any ſyckenes, excepte the grudge of a feuer of one day, as he ſaythe in his warke De ſanitate tuenda, and that hapned onely by to moche labour. He 
                  •
               louryſhed in the tyme of the emperours Marcus Commodus, and Pertinax, and dyed onely for feblenes of age, after the incarnation of Chriſt about .C
                  •
               x. yeres.
            
               Galericulum, an vnder bonet, or rydyng cappe
            
               Galerita, a larke.
            
               Galerus, & Galerum, a hat. alſo a pirwike.
            
               Galetia, a cuntray in Spain, hauing on the eaſt part the ryuer callid Seyn, in latin Sequana, on the ſouth the royalme of Portugal, on the weſt and north the occean ſea.
            
               Galgulus, a byrd, whom if one do beholde that hath the yelowe iaundyſe, forthwith the man becometh hole, and the byrde hath the ſyknes.
            
               Galilea, is a cuntrey, which marcheth on Siria Arabia, and Egypte.
            
               Galiopſis, an herbe callyd Archangell, as ſome do ſuppoſe.
            
               Galla, a fruite callyd gaulles.
            
               Gallaria, a lampurne.
            
               Gallia, a noble region ſet betwene Spayn and Germanye, and on the eaſte bordereth on the mountay
                  •
               es callyd Alpes. That whych ioyned to Germanye was callyd Belgica, and was cōtayned betwene the ryuer callid Scaldes, and the ryuer of Sequana, or Seyne. That parte whyche marched to the mountaynes, was callyd Celtica or Lugdunenſis, and was contayned betweene the ryuers of Seyne and Geronde. That whiche bordered on Spayne callyd Aquitania, was bounded with the mountaynes callyd Pyrenaei. Ceſar boundeth the parte callyd Celtica, with the ryuers callyd Rhone and Gerounde, and Aquitaniam, with the hylles callyd Pyrenaei, & the ryuer of Gerounde. Agrippa deſcribed Galliam betwene the ryuer callyd Rhenus or Rhene, the mountaynes Pyrenaei, the occean ſea, and the moūtayns callid Gebenne & Iura. Moreouer that whiche is nowe callid Lū
               bardy, was callyd Gallia Ciſalpina.
            
            Gallicanus, a, um, of Fraunce.
            
            
               Gallicia, a royalme in Spayne, callyd Galyce.
            
               Gallicinium, the tyme in the nyght whanne the cocke croweth.
            Gallicus, a, um, frenche.
            
            
               Gallina, a henne.
            
               Gallinaceus, a houſe cocke.
            
               Gallinaceus pullus, a chycke.
            
               Gallinarium, a place where pultry is kept.
            
               Gallinarius, & gallinaria, he or ſhe that kepeth pultrye.
            
               Gallium, an herb lyke vnto clote, but it hath no burres nor pryckes, & groweth on ſtone walles.
            
               Gallo, are, to be madde.
            
               Gallograetia, a countreye in Aſia, callyd alſoo Galatia.
            
               Gallus, a cocke, a frencheman, a prieſt of Cybeles, callid the mother of the goddis. alſo a ryuer in Phrigia, the water whereof, if it be drunke, it maketh one madde.
            Gallus, a, um, of Fraunce.
            
            
               Gamale, a towne in Iudea.
            
               Gammarus, a fyſhe callyd a lopſtar, or creuyſe of the ſea.
            
               Ganea, & Ganeum, a brothelhouſe, a houſe of bawdrye and ryotte. Alſo Ganea is taken for gluttonye.
            
               Ganeo, onis, a ruffyan, a haunter of bawdye howſes, a ryotter. alſo a rauener of delycate meates.
            
               Gangaridae, people betwene Aſſyria and India
            
               Ganges, is a great ryuer that dyuideth Inde, and is that whyche in holye ſcrypture is callyd Phiſon, one of the foure ryuers, whyche do come out of Paradyſe. Ioſephus doth interprete it inundation li. 1. cap. 2. The bredth therof as Solinus wryteth, is in the naroweſte place eyghte myles, the brodeſt twenty myles. Arrianus lib. 8. wryteth, that where hit is narroweſte, hit is in breadthe a hunderde furlonge, whyche is eyghte myles, in manye places it ſpreadeth ſoo wyde, that where the grounde is moſte playne, nor any hygh place appereth, noo man maye dyſcerne
 any thyng on the other ſyde. In the ſhaloweſt place it is an hundred foote depe. There runneth into it .xvii. great ryuers, euery of them able to beare a ſhyppe. In this ryuer of Ganges is an yle, and therin is a great citie callid Palybotra, the countraye is namyd Praſia, the kynge wherof, as Pliny writeth li. 6. ca.
19. hath alway in wages, ſyxe hundred thouſande foote men .xxx. thouſande horſemen, and ix .M. Olyphantes.
            
               Gangeticus, ca, cum, of that ryuer.
            Gangetica tellus, Indee.
            
            
               Gangilium, a ſycknes in the head of a beaſte, wherwith the head becommeth full of water.
            
               Gangraena, a ſoore callyd a canker.
            
               Gannio, nire, to barke or houle lyke a dogge.
            
               Gannitus, tus, barkynge or houlynge.
            
               Ganymedes, a Troyan chyld, whiche was fained to be rauyſſhed of Iupyter, and made his butlar.
            
               Ganzae, geeſe.
            
               Garamantes, people in Affrike, in the myddell of Lybia whiche are blacke Moores.
            
               Garganus, a hylle in Apulia.
            
               Gargara, a mountayn, and alſo a citie in Aſia.
            
               Gargarizatio, a waſhynge of the mouth & throte to expell fleume out of the head.
            
               Gargarizo, to gargelle or waſſhe the mouthe and throte.
            
               Gargarum, oone of the toppes of the mountayn callyd Ida.
            
               Garrio, ire, to babble.
            
               Garrulus, a babbler.
            
               Garum, ſauce made with fyſhe ſalted.
            
               Garumna, a ryuer in France callyd Gerond.
            
               Garyophyllata, ſome thynke it to be the herbe, which is callyd herbe Benet. ſome ſuppoſe it to be that, whiche Plinye nameth Geum, the rote of this herbe gathered in Marche, ſmelleth lyke cloues, and Pliny writeth, that Geū
                hath black rotes, which do ſmel very ſwetely.
            
               Garyophylli, the ſpyce callyd cloues.
            
               Garyophyllus, Ruellius callith it Garryophil lea, a gylofer, next to the roſe the faireſt & ſoo teſt flour. it is alſo the tree that bereth cloues
            
               Gaſtrimergia, gluttony.
            
               Gaudeo, gauiſus ſum, gaudere, to reioyce, to be glad. Gaudere in ſinu, to reioyce by hym ſelfe.
            
               Gaudium, ioy, myrth, an affection of the mynd, conceiued of an opynion of a thynge good or pleaſant.
            
               Gaulus, a lyttell rounde bote, or a payle to receyue mylke.
            
               Gauſape, a mantell to caſte on a bed. alſo a carpet to lay on a table, ſome cal it a dagſwayne. Some do expounde it a veluet cloke.
            Gauſapina, idem.
            
               Gaza, the treſure of a kīg. alſo a cite ī Paleſtina.
            
               Gazella, a beaſt in the partes of India, of whō cometh muſke. Antonius Muſa writeth, that there be of them in Affrica, in figure like to a roo. Serapio ſaith, that they haue hornes, alſo long tethe and white, aboute .ix. inches of length, ſtandyng out of theyr mouthes lyke a bore. This beeſt naturally hath a ſuperfluous bloud congelid on his bealy, and growith like an impoſtume, & whan it is ripe, the beaſt goeth to a tree or a ſtone, and rubbith theron his bealy, vntill the humor breakith out like vnto corrupt matter, which at the firſt ſtīketh, but whan it hath ben hanged a while in the ayre, 
                  〈◊〉
                waxeth ripe, & than hath it an odoriferous ſauour, and is callid muſke. Gazella, is not a cyuet as ſom do ſuppoſe, for the cyuet is lyke a great cat, & the 
                  •
               oote humour, whiche cometh from hym is like ſweat, which is founden betwene her flankes. Wherfore vnto it is giuē a newe name, and is callyd Cibeta.
            
            
               Gazophilacium, a place where treſure is kept.
         
         
            ¶G ANTE E.
            
               GEbenna, a city in Sauoy callid Geneuera, where among the women ſpecially, raineth a diſeaſe callid Bronchocoele, which is a bolnyng or ſwellynge vnder theyr chynnes. Alſo Solinus nameth the parte of Alpes ioynyng to Sauoy, Gebennam.
            
               Gebuſeus, the ſonne of Canaan, of whome the olde inhabytauntes of Hieruſalem were callyd Gebuſei.
            
            
               Gedeon, the name of a iudge in Iſraell.
            
               Gedroſia, a countrey in Aſia.
            
               Geenna, is taken in holy ſcripture for hell.
            
               Gela, a ryuer in Sicile.
            
               Gelabilis, le, that may be froſen.
            
               Gelaſco, ſcere, to be froſen.
            
               Gelaſini, the foreteethe, whyche be ſhewed in lawghynge.
            
               Gelaſinus, he that laugheth to make other men laugh.
            
               Gelicidium, a froſt.
            
               Gelidus, a, um, colde as yſe.
            Gelo, aui, are, to freeſe.
            
            
               Geloi, fieldes in Sicile.
            
               Geloni, a people now callyd Tartarians.
            
               Gelothophyllis, lidos, an herbe, which (as P
                  ••
               nius writeth) beinge drunken in wyne with myrre, maketh laughyng without ceſſyng, except the kernelles of pyneappuls myxte with pepper and honye, in the wyne of dates, be drunken after it. This herbe is founde about the ryuer callyd Boryſthenes, in the furtheſt parte of Ruſſia, and alſoo in the countreye callyd Bactrae.
            
            
               Gelu, yſe. ſometyme colde.
            
               Gemellariae, an inſtrument by the whiche oyle runneth out of the preſſe.
            
               Gemellus, lyttell or ſmall twynnes.
            
                
               Gemibundus, full of waylynge.
            Gemino, aui, are, to double.
            
            
               Geminus, a, um, the number of two. Alſo Geminus is a twyn, where many chylderne are borne at one burdeyne, although they be thre or mo. alſo it is the name of a man, which in Hebrue and englyſhe is Thomas.
            
               Gemma, the yonge budde of a vyne. alſo a precyouſe ſtone.
            
               Gemmaſcere, to begyn to budde.
            Gemmatus, a, um, budded.
            
            
               Gemmo, aui, are, to bud or ſpryng, as a yonge graffe or vyne dothe.
            
               Gemmoſus, a, um, that whiche is all of precious ſtones.
            
               Gemo, mui, ere, to grone, or to wa
                  •
               l, or to make a lamentable noyſe.
            
               Gemi
                     •
                   cymba,
               Vergilius the bote cracketh, beynge ouercharged.
            
               Gemoniae ſcalae, a place from whēs the bodies of perſons condemned were throwen downe at Rome.
            
               Gemonidae, women great with chylde.
            
               Gemurſa, a corne, or lyke griefe, vnder the lytell toe.
            
               Gena, the eye lydde. it is ſometyme taken for the cheekes.
            Genauius, a, um, gluttonous.
            
            
               Genealogia, a pedegrewe.
            
               Gener, he that maryeth my doughter.
            Generalis, le, generall.
            
            
               Generatim, generally.
            Genero, aui, are, to ingender.
            
            
               Generoſitas, an aptnes to ingender, to bringe forth.Col
                     ••
                  el. ſometyme it ſignifieth nobilitie.
            
               Generoſus, a, um, of a gentyll or noble kynde.
            
               Generoſus princeps, a puyſſant and couragyous prynce.
            
               Generoſus equus, an horſe of a good raſe.
            
               Arbores generoſae, trees whyche beare plenty of good fruyte.
            
               Geneſis, generation.
            
               Genethliacus, an aſtronomer, or other lyke, whiche by the ſterres ſet at a mans natiuitie, telleth his fortune.
            
               Genezareth, a great meare or ponde in the lād of promyſſion, and it is alſo callyd Mare Tiberiadis.
            
            
               Genialis homo, a man in his houſe very lyberall and freſſhe.
            
               Geniae, olde veckes full of vnhappynes.
            
               Geniculatim, ioynted as a wheate ſtrawe is.
            
               Geniculum, the ioynte of a ſtrawe, or ſtalke of an herbe.
            
               Genij, men whyche do gyue all theyr ſtudye to eatynge and drynkynge.
            
               Geniſta, broume.
            
               Genimen, generation.
            
               Genitalia, the members of generation.
            
               Genitalis, le, pertaynyng to the byrth of a man.
            
               Genitale ſolum, the natural cuntrey or place where a man is borne.
            
               Genitale ſemen, the ſede of generation.
            
               Genitalis dies, the day of natiuitie.
            
               Genitiua, ſometyme generation. ſometyme the ſeede of generation.
            
               Genitiuus, a, um, that hath power to ingender, or that which procedeth with generation.
            
               Genitiuae notae, markes wherewith a man is borne.
            
               Genitor, a father.
            
               Genitrix, a mother.
            
               Genitus, ta, tum, begotten, ingendred.
            
               Genius, an aungell. Among the Paynyms ſom ſuppoſed it to be the ſpirite of man, ſome did put two gouernours of the ſoule, a good and an euylle: Bonus genius, & malus genius, whiche neuer departed frome vs. ſometyme it is taken for nature it ſelfe, or dylcetation moued by nature.
            
               Genio dare operam, to lyue voluptuouſely.
            
               Genium defraudare, to abſteyn from al thinges pleaſaunt.
            
               Ge
                     ••
                  ocha, a beaſte laſſe than a foxe, in colour a darke yelowe, ful of blacke ſpottes, I ſuppoſe it to be a blacke Ienet, the furre wherof is in Englande eſtemed aboue all other furres.
            
               Gens, gentis, a people, ſometyme a kynrede.
            
               Genſelia, whiche is compact of many families or kynredes.
            
               Gentiana, an herbe callyd Gentian.
            
               Gentilis, a kynſman of the ſame name & ſtocke. ſomtyme it ſignifieth a Gentile or Paynym. ſometyme 
                  〈◊〉
                countrey man.
            
               Gentilis, le, proper or familiar to that people, or kynrede.
            
               Gentilitas, tatis, gentilitie, the multitude of the people or family.
            
               Gentilitius, a, um, of the people or nation.
            
               Gentilitium nomen, the ſurname or aunciente name of a mans auncetours.
            
               Gentilitia ſacra, ceremonies of that countrey or people.
            
               Genus, 
                     •
                  idis, & kyng of Illiria, callyd now Slauony, whiche was the fyrſt fynder of the herb callyd Gentian.
            
               Genu, a knee.
            
               Genua, a great citie callyd Geane.
            
               Genuini, the innermoſte cheke teethe.
            
               Genuinus ſermo, the natural ſpeche or mother tungue.
            
               Genus, generis, is the begynning of euery thīg either of the perſonne that ingendred it, or of the place where it was ingendred. Oreſtes a Tantalo ducit genus, Oreſtes hathe his begynnynge of Tantalus, or is of the blode of Tantalus. Plato genere Athenienſis 
               
                  〈◊〉
                Plato is of his bludde or auncetry an Atheniens. Alſo it ſygnyfieth kynde. Genus uitae,
                a kynde of lyfe. Genus mortis, a kynde of deathe. Genus animalium, a kynd of beaſtis. Alſo it ſignifieth that, which conteyneth many ſundrye kyndes, as Animal, comprehendeth a man, a byrd, a fyſhe, and euery of them is genus to that, whyche in them is comprehended. As a brute beaſte is genus to a hors, a lyon, a bulle, a dogge. &c. A byrde is genus to an egle, a crowe, a larke, a ſparowe. &c. A fyſſhe is genus to a whale, a porpeſe, a haddocke, a playce. &c.
            
               Geodeſia, is a ſcience of thynges concernynge ſenſible greatnes and figure.
            
               Geographia, the deſcription of the erthe.
            
               Geomancia, ſuperſtitious warkyng in ſorcery, by cercles and pryckes in the erthe.
            
               Geometer, a geometrician.
            
               Geometria, geometry, meaſuryng and proportionyng of fygures in the erthe.
            
               Georgica, pertaynynge to huſbandry.
            
               Geranium, an herbe callyd herbe Rob
                  •
               rtr.
            
               Gergonia, a towne in Guyen, ſtandynge on an hygh hylle.
            
               Germania, the countray callyd of ſome Duchlande, of ſome Almayn, is deſcribed by Ptholome the .xi. chapiter, to be boūded on the weſt with the ryuer of Rhene, on the northe with the ſea callid Germanicus oceanus, the ſouth weſt part with the ryuer callyd Donow, the eaſt ſyde is bounded with the bendyng of Do now vnto the hylles of Sarmatia. The name of Germania extendeth now further, for ther in is contayned many greate countrayes and cities, whyche ſomtyme were parte of Gallia Belgica, that is to ſay frō the ryuer of Rhene weſtwarde vnto our ſea callyd Mare Britannicum.
            
            
               Germani, people of Germany, or Germayns.
            
               Germané, brotherly.
            
               Germanus, ſubſtant. brother of one father and one mother.
            
               Germanus, na, num, come of the ſame ſtocke.
            
               Germanum nomen, the proper name.
            
               Mea germana patria, my verye or naturalle countray.
            
               Germen, minis, a branche of a tree or herbe.
            
               Germino, a
                     •
                  i, are, to branche out.
            
               Gero, geſsi, gerere, to beate. ſometyme it ſignifyeth to haue.
            
               Gerere aniciriā,
               Cice. fam. epiſt. 3. to practiſe freendſhyp. Quorum ſunt de gerenda amicitia prae clariſsime ſcripti libri, Whoſe bokes we haue howe to practyſe fre
                  •
               dſhyp,Plinius in pane. very well written.
            
               Gerere b
                     •
                  llum, to make warre.
            
               Gerere honores, to be in honor or auctoritie.
            
               Gerere magiſtratum, to exercyſe an offyce.
            
               Gerere morem,
               Terent. in Adelphis. to obey.
            
               Gerere negotium, to do his buſynes.
            
               Paternā ſpeciē gerere, to be lyke his father.
            
               Gerere praeturam, to be in the office of a iuge
            
               Gerere pudorem,
               Cicero de amicitia. to be ſhamefaſt.
            
               Gerere rempub. to miniſter the publik weal.
            
               Simultatem cum aliquo gerere,
               Plaut. in Amph. to be at variance with one.
            
               Gerontocomion, an hoſpitall, wherin old men are kepte, an almeshouſe.
            Gerrae ſiculae, tryfles.
            
            
               Gerres, fyſhe of the kynd of herrynges, it may be callyd pylchardes.
            
               Gerrones, talkers of tryfelynge thynges, or lyght matters.
            
               Gerula, a mayde that kepeth a chylde.
            
               Gerulus, a porter, or a manne hyred to carye bourdeyns.
            
               Geruſia, a place where the Senate dyd aſſemble, a parlyament houſe.
            
               Geryones, nis, a king of Spayn, whom Hercules dyd ſlea, and toke from hym certayn bulles and kyen of notable greatnes.
            
               Geſa, a haulberde.
            
               Geſſoriacum, as ſome men do ſuppoſe, was the towne, whiche is nowe named Calays.
            
               Geſta, thynges whiche haue ben done, actes.
            
               Geſtamen, minis, what ſo euer is borne, a burdeyne or cariage.
            
               Geſtatio, the exerciſe, where a man is borne or caried on any thynge.
            
               Geſtatorium, that wherin any thyng is caryed or borne, a flagon, a horſe lytter.
            
               Geſticularius, a, ū, ꝑtaynyng to ſignes or tokēs of myrthe, with me
                  •
               yng the body or handes.
            
               Geſticulator, he that playeth with puppettes.
            
               Geſticulor, aris, to make ſuche ſignes or tokens of myrth, as in daunſynge.
            
               Geſtio, iui, ire, to ſhewe the affections of the mynd by me
                  •
               ing of the body, or any part ther of▪ ſomtyme it ſygnifieth to delyte.
            
               Geſtito, aui, are, to beare or weare oftentymes.
            
               Geſto, aui, are, to beare longe.
            
               Geſtat uentrem, ſhe is with chylde.
            
               Geſtuoſus, full of tokens of myrthe.
            
               Geſtus, 
                     •
                  us, geſture, or countenaunce with mouyng of the body.
            
               Geſtus, ta, tum, borne, or done.
            
               Getae, people, whiche ſome ſuppoſe to be thoſe, whiche are in Norway and Gothia. ſome ſay that they be more in the northeaſt in Scithia pertaynynge to Europa. Some thynke that it is the people of the countrays Valachia & Tranſyluania.
            
            
               Ge
                     •
                  uli, a people in Affrike.
         
         
            ¶G ANTE I.
            
               GIarus, a lyttel ile in the ſea callid Ioniū, whervnto men condemned were exiled. Gibber, & gibboſus, & gibberoſus, he which hath a croked back, or a great bunche on
 any parte of the body.
            
               Gibbus, & gibba, a great bunche.
            
               Gigantomachia, a bettayle, which gyantes prepared agaynſt the goddis, as poetes fayned.
            
               Gigas, gantis, a gyant, a man or woman farre excedyng the comon ſtature of men, of whom as wel holy ſcrypture, as other credible wryters doo make mention. Plutarchus a noble philoſopher and hyſtorien writeth, that Sertorius a capitayn of Romans being in Mauritania, brake downe the ſepulchre of Antheus, and therin was founde the body of a man of ſuche monſtruous greatnes, that the ſame capytayne me
                  •
               ed with a reuerend feare, cauſyd the monument to be reedifyed Plyny writeth, that in the yle calld Creta, now Candy, an hylle fell downe, and there was found the body of a man, whiche was in lengthe .xivi. cubytes, whiche are .lxix. fete, which was ſuppoſed of ſome to be the body of Orîon, of ſom the body of E
                     •
                  ion. Antonius Sabellicus affirmeth, that it was reported to hym of a credyble perſon, that in the ſouthe parte of Candye, there was founden by men, whych dig
               
                  •
               ed vp a great tree for the makyng of a ſhyp, the head of a man as great as a wyne veſſelle callyd Dolium, howe great that veſſell is at Venice, where Antonius wrate, I canne not telle: with vs it is taken to be the greatteſt veſſelle, whiche was ſometyme a 
                  •
               utine, and yf it were ſoo great, it were wonderfull monſtruouſe, and alſo incredyble, but that he ſayeth one of the teethe of that head remayneth at Venyce, of a wonderfull greatneſſe, by the whyche they that doo ſee it, maye make ſome geſſe to the greatneſſe of the head. Solinus remēbreth, that in the warres, which the Romaynes hadde in Candye, that in a greatte rage of water, the grounde beynge broken vp, there was founde the bodye of a manne, beyng in lengthe .xxxiii. cubytes, whyche is x
                  •
               vi. foote and a halfe, the whyche being ſene of Flaccus and Metellus, than capytaynes of the hooſt of the Romaynes, they in beholdynge it, wondered at that, whyche they before wolde not beleue, whan they onely herde it reported. Aboute thirty yeres paſſed, and ſomewhat more, I my ſelfe beynge with my father ſyr Rycharde Elyote, at a monaſterye of regular chanons, callyd Iuy churche, two myles from the citie of Sarisburye, behelde the bones of a deade man founde depe in the grounde, where they dygged ſtone, which beinge ioyned togyther, was in lengthe .xiiii. foote and tenne ynches, there beynge mette. Whereof one of the teethe my father hadde, whyche was of the quantytie of a greatre walnutte. This haue I wrytten, bycauſe ſomme menne wylle beleue nothynge that is out of the compaſſe of theyr owne knowlegé & yet ſom of them preſume to haue knowlegé aboue any other, contempnynge all men but them ſelfes, or ſuche as they fauour.
            
               Gigeria, a meate made of garbage of pullayne and other thynges.
            
               Gigno, genui, gignere, to ingender or get. ſomtyme to make.
            Giluus, ua, uum, yelowe colour.
            
            
               Gingiuae, the iawes, wherin the teeth be ſette.
            
               Gingiuerim, ſiue gingiberim, gynger.
            
               Gingrio, griui, grire, to chur or make a chirme as byrdes do.
            
               Gion, a great ryuer in Egypte, otherwyſe callyd Nylus.
            
               Girgilhis, a reele, wheron threde is wounden.
            
               Giruli, fyſhes, which I ſuppoſe to be menowes.
            
               Gith, an herbe, whiche is nowe callyd Nigella Romana, the ſeede therof is black lyke to onyon ſede, and is very ſoote, and the ſauour therof exhauſteth reumes of the heade.
            
               Githago, corkle growynge amonge corne, whiche is type.
         
         
            ¶G ANTE L.
            
               GLabella, the ſpare betwene the browes.
            
               Glaber, bra, brum, ſmoth without hear.
            
               Glabre
                     •
                  co, ſcere, to be withoute heare or ſmothe.
            
               Glabreta, a plate hauynge nothynge growynge in it.
            
               Glabriones, they whyche lacke heare.
            
               Glacialrs, le, where yſe is.
            
               Glacies, yſe.
            
               Glacior, aris, ari, to be froſen.
            
               Glacitare, to make a noyſe lyke a gander.
            
               Gladiatores, were men, whiche faughte vnarmed with ſwordes.
            
               Gladiatorius, a, um, pertaynyng to that maner of fyghtynge.
            
               Gladiatura, the acte or feate to fyghte with a ſworde.
            
               Gladiolus, a lyttel ſworde or wodknife. alſo the name of an herb like to ſedge, hauing a yelow flowre lyke in fourme to a floure delyce.
            
               Gladius, a ſword. alſo a kynd of fyſſhe, whiche hath a bone in his forehead lyke to a ſworde.
            
               Glanda
                     •
                  io, feedyng of ſwyne with maſte, callyd paunage.
            
               Glandium, Glandionica, the parte of a boore nexte the necke, the ſhelde or gammonde.
            
               Glandifer, ra, rum, that whiche beareth maſt.
            
               Glanduloſus, he that hath many kernelles.
            
               Glans, glandis, maſt growing on okes, beeche, cheſtens, and other lyke, It is alſo a pellet of lead. alſo a kernel growing betwene the ſkyn and the fleſhe. it is moreouer the forepart or nut of a mans yard. it is alſo a ſuppoſytorie.
            
                
               Glans Iouis, a cheſten.
            
               Glaphirus, a, um, iocunde, pleaſant, iugra
                  •
               ed, polyte, holowe, famous, ſubtyll.
            
               Glarea, properly grauell.
            Glareoſus, a, um, grauelly.
            
            
               Glaſtum, an herbe callyd alſo Iſa
                     •
                  is, in englyſh Woad, wherwith as welle woulle, as wollen clothes are dyed blue, the leaues thereof are lyke to great ſorrell, but that they be greatter and thycker. As Ceſar wryteth in his tyme it was ſo commonly knowen in England, than beyng callyd Brytayne, that the people with the iuyce therof coloured theyr bodyes and viſages to ſeme terrible to theyr ennemies, the women alſo, that goinge naked in certayn ceremonies they mought be like to people of Ethiope. Of this herbe, woad is made in this wyſe: They grynde it with whecles of wood runnyng in a cōpaſſed trough vntyl the iuyce be out of the herbe, and than they make the herbe into balles, and laye them on a bourded floore a certayne ſpace vntylle they be pu
                  •
               ryfied and dryed into poulder. But the makyng hereof hath remayned vnknowen in Englād a thouſande yeres and mo, vntyl nowe late an honeſt marchant of London, zelous of the cō
               mune weale of his countrey, hath eftſoones nouryſhed that herbe in his gardeyn at London, and by the example whiche he founde in the other countrayes beyonde the ſea, he makynge howſes and mylles to his importable charges, hath nowe experienced to make the ſame woad, to the ineſtimable commoditie of this royalme, if it be worthyly imbracid. The marchant at this tyme lyueth, and is named
            Goodman, a name right agreable vnto his qualities. Who deſerueth to be incouraged of all good englyſhemen, whiche ar not touched with dyſdayne or enuye, that by his thanke and reward, other may the rather endeour them ſelfes, eyther to inuent by theyr wyttes, or to attempt by the example of other countrays, to augment the weale and honour of this royalme of Englande.
            
               Glaucinum, oyle whiche doth come from the olyues before they be preſſyd.
            
               Glauciolus, a horſe with a wall eye.
            
               Glaucium, is a iuyce of an herbe, which the potycaries do commonly call Memitha, whiche is vſed in medicine for diſeaſes in the eyes.
            
               Glaucoma, matis, & Glaucomatū, ti, & Glaucoma, mae, an humour in the eyen, lyke chriſtall, whiche letteth the ſyght.
            
               Glaucopis, pidis, a man or woman, with gray eyes.
            Glaucus, ca, cum, gray colour.
            
            
               Glaucus, a god of the ſea. alſo many men were callyd by that name. alſo the name of a fyſhe.
            
               Gleba, a turfe or piece of erthe.
            
               Gleſſaria, an yle in the northe ſea called Mare Germanicum.
            
            
               Gleſſum, cryſtall or beryll.
            
               Glis, iris, a fielde mouſe, whiche ſlepeth al the wynter.
            
               Glis, gliſsis, potters claye.
            
               Glis, glitis, a thyſtell.
            
               Gliſco, ſci, ſcere, to growe, to waxe fat, to coueyte or deſyre feruently.
            
               Globo, aui, are, to gather rounde.
            
               Globuli, lyttell rounde cakes or pellettes.
            
               Globoſus, a, um, rounde as a 
                  •
               oule.
            
               Globus, & Globum, a boule, or other thynge very rounde. Alſo a multitude of men or beaſtes gathered rounde togither.
            
               Glocido, aui, are, to cackle as a hen doth.
            Glocio, cire, idem.
            
               Glomero, aui, are, to wynde in rounde. alſo to gather together in an heape. alſo in an horſe it is to go pleaſantly.
            
               Glomus, mi, & Glomus, meris, a botome of threde.
            
               Gloria, the conſent of good men in the prayſe of a man or woman, called renoume, glory.
            
               Glorior, ari, to auaunt, to the intente to haue prayſes, to extoll with boſtynge.
            
               Glorioſus, a, um, renoumed, ſome tyme in the yll parte, vaynegloriouſely, or boſtynge hym ſelfe.
            
               Glos, glotis, the ſyſtars huſebande, or brothers wyfe.
            
               Gloſſa, a gloſe or expoſition of darke ſpeche.
            
               Gloſſema, wordes not moche vſed.
            
               Gloſſematicus, he that maketh a comment on a boke.
            
               Glubo, bi, bere, to pull of the barke or rynde of a tree.
            
               Glucidatum, ſwete and delectable.
            
               Gluma, the huſke of wheate.
            
               Gluo, glui, ere, to ſtreyne or wrynge harde.
            Gluten, & Glutinum, glewe.
            
            
               Glutinamentum, all glewyſhe matter.
            
               Glutino, aui, are, to glewe or ioyne.
            Glutio, tiui, tire, to ſwalowe.
            
            
               Gluto, tonis, a glutton.
            
               Glyciamerides, a kynde of meate.
            
               Glycyrrhiza, lycoriſe.
         
         
            ¶G ANTE N.
            
               GNAFALIVM, an herbe, whiche is alſo called Chamezelon, whoſe leaues are ſo whyte and ſofte, that it ſemeth to be flox.
            
               Gnafalon, a certayne flox.
            
               Gnafos, a teſyll, whiche tonkars do vſe.
            Gnarauit,Liuius. & gnarauiſſe, for Narrauit & narrauiſſe.
            
               Gnarè, ſkylfully.
            
                Gnari
                  •
               as, tatis, ſkylfulnes.
            
            
               Gnariter, for Gnare; wyteyly.
            Gnarus, a, um, ſkylfull.
            
            
               Gnauiter, diligently, luſtely, valiantly.
            
               Gnauus, quicke, actiue, apte to euery thynge.
            Gnitur, uel Gnixus, olde writars vſed for Gignitur, & Nixus.
            
               Gnomones, the teethe, whereby the age of an horſe is knowen. They be ſome tyme taken for that, which ſheweth the houres in a clock or diall. alſo rules to knowe any thyng by.
            Gnoro, for Noro.
            Gnoſco, for Noſco.
            
               Gnoſos, a citie in C
                  •
               eta or Candy.
            
               Gnoſius, a, um, of that citie.
            
               Gnoſtici, were deteſtable heretikes, when on good friday about the ſon ſet, aſſembled men and yonge womenne together, not ſparynge daughters nor ſuſters. After .ix. monethes paſſed they met againe in the ſame place. and then they plucked the chyldern newely borne from theyr mothers, and cuttynge them in pieces, and receyuynge theyr bloud in pottes and cuppes, they burned the body in to aſhes whiche they dyd myxte with the bloud, and preſerued it, to put in to theyr meates and drynkes. They alſo affirmed that neyther the lawe of nature, nor lawes of men were good and that whiche were called vertues were nothynge.
         
         
            ¶G ANTE O.
            
               GOaetia, a ſpyce of whiche crafte.
            
               Gobio, idem quod Gobius, a gogeon.
            
               Golias, was a puiſſant man of the Philiſtians, whome kynge Dauyd beinge yet a chylde ſlewe, whan the Iewes were aferd to fyghte with hym man for man: his ſtat
                  ••
               te was, as the Byble reherſeth .vi. cubytes and a ſpan, which was ten fete, lackynge thre ynches, accōpting it with the fete of mē liuing at that tyme, which vndoubtedly were more than they be nowe. his habergeon weyed .v.M. Siclos, whiche is .ii.M. and D. ounces. and the yron of his ſpeare weyed. DC. ſtilos, whiche is .CCC. ounces, where by his greatnes and ſtrength maye be coniec
                  •
               ed to excede any man lyuynge in this tyme.
            
               Gomor, is a meſure of the Hebrues, and is the tenthe parte of Ephi, wherfore it conteineth of our ſtandard meaſure nine pintes, an halfe pynte, a quarter, and about halfe an ounce. It is ſometyme taken for as moche corne as one maye receyue betwene his armes.
            
               Gomorrha, & Gomorrlium, a city in Iudea whiche was conſumed for horrible ſynne agaynſte nature.
            
               Gongylium, of Hippocrates and Galen is vſed for a pyll in medicyne, and for the ſimilitude thereof is ſignifieth the rape roote whiche is rounde. It is alſo called of ſome Gongyles, or Gongylis, lidis.
            
            
               Gonorrliea, a dyſeaſe, wherby a mans ſede goeth from hym vnwy
                  •
               ttyngly.
            
               Gordium, was the principall citie of Phrigia.
            
               Gordius, was a poore huſbandeman of Phrigia, hauyng but two yokes of oxē, who in the tyme of a ſedition in the coūtrey, was by anſwere made of an ydoll, choſen kynge there, whan he came with his wayn where the coū
               ſayle was kepts, and beynge made kynge, and cauſynge the ſedytion to ceaſſe, he made his yokes to be hanged vp in the temple of Iupiter, the eord
                  •
               s therof beyng made in ſuche knottes, thbee it ſeemed not poſſible that they mought be vndone. Reade more hereof in Nodus Gor
                     ••
                  ni:
            
            
               Gorgias, a famous rhetortrian in the tyme of Socrates, who inuented the craft to dyſpute 
                  〈◊〉
                ſodaynly to euery queſtion, or matter that was purpoſed, in a continuall oration, and by teachyng rhetorike, 
                  ••
               cam ſo riche, that he was the fyrſt that dyd ſette an ymage of golde in the temple of Apollo at Delphos, he beinge of the age of a hundred and eyghte yeres, ſurmounted almooſte all men of his tyme in bodily ſtrength, perfectnes of fences, quycknes of wytte, and 
                  〈◊〉
                of memory.
            
               Gorgones, monſtruous women, whiche were vanquyſhed by Perſeus.
            
               Gorgonius, a, um, pertaynyng to Gorgones.
            
               Gor
                     •
                  ys, a citie of Candy.
            
               Goſſampinus, after whyche beareth cotton.
            
               Goſsipium, cotton.
            
               Gothia, an yle by Denmarke callyd Gutlande, not farre from Norway.
            
               Gothi, people of whome the fyrſt camme out of Gutlande; vnto whom reſorted a great multitude of other people ouer of the northe partes of the world, as wel out of the countrays now callyd Prutia, Liuonia, Ruſsia, Tartaria, as diuers other partis callid ſomtime Scithia & makyng ſundry kinges did depopulate and brynge in ſubiection the more parte of Europa, and fynally diſtroyed Rome, and inhabyted the parte of Italye nowe callyd Lumbardy, and lykewyſe ſubdewed the royalmes of Caſtile and Aragon.
         
         
            ¶G ANTE R.
            
               GRABATVS, a couche.
            
               Gracchus, the name of a noble family or houſe in Rome.
            
               Gracilè, ſclenderly.
            
               Gracileſco, ſcere, to waxe or become leane.
            
               Gracilis, le, Gracilentus, ta, tum, leaue or ſclender?
 ſometyme ſofte.
            
               Gracilitas, tatis, leannes, ſelēdernes, or ſoftnes.
            
               Gracus, & Graculus, a byrde called a Iay.
            ❀Graculo cum fidibus nihil, the Iaye hath nought to do with the harpe, ſpoken of them whiche lackynge eloquence or good letters, do ſcorne them that haue lernynge.
            
               Gradatim, in order, or by courſe, lyttell and lyttell.
            
               Gradatio, a fourme of ſpeakynge, whan of the fyrſte ſentence ſpryngeth the ſeconde, of the ſeconde the thyrde, and ſo forthe.
            
               Gradarij equi, amblynge horſes.
            
               Gradator, a great goer,
            
               Gradior, to go by ſteppes, or ſteppe.
            
               Gradiuus, one of the names of Mars.
            
               Gradus, a greeſe or ſtep, a degree in conſanguinitie. alſo honour.
            
               De gradudeijci, to be caſte downe from his place: wherby is ſignified to be abaſhed or moued from conſtancy of mynde.
            
               Deturbari gradu, hath the ſame ſignificatiō.
            
               Gradu dimoueri,
               Cic. 
                     •
                  uſ. 2. & offic. 1. to be put out of eſtimation or authoritie.
            
               Gradu mouere,
               Liuius. to cauſe one to ſtep backe.
            
               Graecanicus, ca, cum, come out of Greece.
            
               Graeca ſalix, red wyllowe.
            
               Graecia, the fountayne of prowes and doctrine, and noriſe of eloquence, was a great and famouſe countrey, conteynynge theſe noble regions: Epirus, Acarnania, Aetolia, Phocis, Locris, Achaia, Meſſemia, Laconia, Argos, Megaris, Atrica, Boeotia, Doris Phthiótis, Theſſalia, Magneſia, Macedonia, & Thracia. All the whiche of late yeres were vnder the ſweete yoke of Chryſtes relygyon, And nowe alas to the great diſcomforte of al perfecte chryſten men, are vnder the mooſte cruell ſubiection and ſeruitude of the greate tyrante the Turke, and become barbarous, lyuynge in the beaſtely ſuperſtition of the falſe prophete Mahomete.
            
               Graeciſco, are, to folowe the Grekes.
            
               Graecor, aris, ari, to ryot in bankettynge and rybendry.
            
               Graecoſtaſis, a place where ambaſſadours ſtode, vntyll they were ſente for in to the Senate.
            
               Graecus, a m
                  •
               n borne in Greece, a Greeke.
            Graecus, a, um, of Greece.
            
            
               Graiugenae, Greekes.
            
               Graiae, crouches, ſtyltes, or ſkathes.
            
               Grallatores, they whiche do go on ſtyltes or ſkaches.
            
               Gramen, graſſe▪ ſometyme al herbes together, the ſwarthe.
            
               Graminoſus, a, um, growen with graſſe or herbes.
            
               Gramma, idem quod ſcriptulum, uel ſcrupulum, a ſcruple, the .xxiiii. parte of an ounce.
            
               Grammataeus, a chauncellour.
            
               Grammatica, grammer.
            
               Grammaticus, he that teacheth grammer, or expoundeth aucthors, a profounde grammarian.
            
               Grammaticus, ca, cum, perteynynge to grammer.
            
               Grammatice loqui, to ſpeake congruely.
            
               Grammatiſta, a ſmatterer in grammer, a mean grammaria
                  •
               .
            
               Grammatocyphon, he that wryteth on his knee.
            
               Grammatophylatium, the place where the recordes, or commune writinges be kepte.
            
               Gramme, a lengthe without bredthe.
            
               Grammia, the fleume in the eyen.
            
               Granâtae, a reyalme and citie in Spayne, ioynynge to the ſea called Mare mediterraneum, whiche was vnder the ſubiection of the Moores about .DCCC. yeres: at the laſte, by the great wyſedome, polycie, and prowes of kynge Ferdinando and his queene Elyzabeth, of famouſe memorye late kynge and queene of Spayne, was eftſones reſtored vnto Chriſtendome, and the Mores expelled.
            
               Granarium, a grayenarde, wherin corne is kepte.
            
               Grandebalae, haeres in the arme holes.
            
               Grandaeuus, very olde.
            
               Grandaeuitas, great age.
            
               Grandeſco, ſcere, to waxe great.
            
               Grandiloquentia, a ſtately eloquence.
            
               Grandiloquus, eloquente, he that ſpeaketh as it were with a great magnificence in worde
                  •
               
            
            
               Grandinatus, ta, tum, hurte or wounded with hayle.
            
               Grandinoſus, a, um, full of hayle.
            
               Grandio, iui, ire, to make great.
            
               Grandis, de, auncient, or great.
            
               Granditas, tatis, the abundaunce of yeres, auncienty.
            
               Grandiuſculus, la, lum, ſome what or a lyttell greater, or of good age, wel ſtryken in yeres.
            
               Granum, grayne or corne. Alſo the fiue hundred and .xxvi. parte of an ounce.
            
               Graphiarium, a caſe, wherin penſilles were kepte, it maye be called a pennar.
            
               Graphicè, properly, well, and kunningly.
            
               Graphicus, a, um, kunnyngely or perfectelye wroughte.
            
               Graphicus homo, a proper man.
            
               Graphis, phidis, the arte of portrayture.
            
               Graphium, a penſyll, wherwith men do wryte in tables.
            
               Graſſator, he that by highe wayes, lyeth in a wayte to rob or ſle
                  •
                men, an extortioner.
            
               Graſſor, aris, ari, to rob or ſlee men paſſynge by the high wayes. Alſo to go or come on one
 with a violente rage. Therfore in a ſodayne and violent peſtilence, it is ſayde: Morbus graſſatus, the ſickenes kylleth men ſodaynly.
            
               Grate, kyndely.
            
               Grates, thankes.
            
               Gratia, grace: ſometyme it ſignifieth thanke, ſomtyme a benefite, ſometyme rewarde, alſo peace or loue, ſomtyme cauſe or reſpecte, alſo prayſe, authoritie, fauour.
            
               Mala gratia, ſignifieth diſpleaſure.
            
               Mea, tua, uel eius gratia, for my ſake, thyr ſake, or his ſake.
            
               Gratiam haber, to thanke.
            
               Gratiam inire, to get thanke.
            
               Gratiam referre, uel reddere, to requite one good turne for an other.
            
               Gratificor, ari, to gratifie, or doo a thynge thankefull, or to confer a benefyt, or do a good turne.
            
               Gratioſus, very thankfull. alſo in fauour with the people, or well eſtemed.
            
               Gratis, an aduerbe, betokenynge withoute rewarde: Some tyme without deſerte, for nothynge.
            
               Habitare gratis in alieno, to dwell on an other mannes grounde without paying rente. Seruire gratis, to ſerue without wages.
            Gratitudo, dinis, kyndneſſe.
            
            
               Grator, ari, to gyue thankes to god with offerynges: alſo to reioyſe of good fortune.
            
               Gratuito, an aduerbe, ſignifyenge of good wyll, without benefyte.
            
               Gratuitus, ta, tum, without rewarde or vnhyred.
            
               Gratulatio, ſometyme it ſignifieth a reioycing of ſome good fortune happened to hym ſelfe, or to an other man: ſometyme a giuinge of thankes.
            
               Gratulabundus, he that doth reioyſe, ut ſupra.
            
               Gratulor, ari, with a datiue caſe, to be ioyous for hym ſelfe or an other for any good thynge that hath happened.
            
               Tibi de hac tua felicitate gratulor,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . I am ioyous with the, or as glad as thou art, of this proſperitie that thou art in. Sometyme it ſignifieth to gyue thankes vnto god: but with an accuſatiue caſe it ſignifieth to take thankfully any acte.
            
               Gratus, he that remembreth a good turne. alſo agreable, pleaſant, or dilectable.
            
               Gratus, ta, tum, thankefull, pleaſaunte, acceptable.
            
               Grauaſtellus,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . an auntient father.
            
               Grauate, & Grauatim, greuouſly, or dyſpleaſantly, or peynefully.
            
               Grauatus, greued.
            
               Grauedinoſus, he that hath a heuy heade.
            
               Grauedinoſus, a, um, heuy or vnluſty, diſpoſed to do nothynge.
            
               Grauedo, dinis, heuyneſſe, griefe, diſeaſe. ſometyme the mur or reume of the head.
            
               Graueolentia, ſtenche or ſtynke.
            
               Graueſco, ſcere, to be laded.
            
               Grauicors, cordis, he that hath a great harte.
            
               Grauida mulier, a woman great with chylde.
            
               Grauido, are, to get a woman with chylde.
            
               Grauiloquus, he that ſpeaketh grauely and ſeriouſly.
            
               Grauionarium, a citie in Almayne called Banbergh.
            
               Grau
                     •
                  s, graue, heuy, greuous. ſometyme ſubſtantialle, graue, or hauynge granitie, contrary to lyghtneſſe or wantonnes. alſo greate or puiſſaunte: Somtyme olde or aged, ſometyme ſure or conſtante, ſome tyme plentuous or full.
            
               Terra granis, lande laded with 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            
               Grauis nuntius,
               Vergilius. heuy tidinges.
            
               Graue pretium, an highe pryce.
            
               Grauiter, & Graué, greuouſly, heuyly, ſubſtā
               tially, moche, wyſely, ſadly.
            
               Grauo, aui, are, to greue, to burden, to lade.
            
               Grauor, ari, to be grieued, or to take gryeuouſely.
            
               Gregalis, le, cattell, whiche is in the flocke.
            
               Gregarius canis, a cur dog.
            
               Gregarius miles, a ſouldiour taken at aduenture, not choſen.
            
               Gregarius paſtor, the chiefe ſhepeherde, whiche hath the charge of the hole flocke.
            
               Gregatim, in ſundry flockes.
            
               Gremiale, an apron.
            
               Gremium, is the ſpace betwene the .ii. thighes ſpecially of a woman.
            
               Greſsibile, apt to go.
            Greſſutus, ta, tum, idem.
            
               Greſſus, a ſtep or goynge.
            
               Grex, gregis, a flocke, as well of men, as of cattell.
            
               Groſſapina, cotten.
            
               Groſſi, grene fygges.
            
               Groſsipion, ſeu Groſſapinus, a tree wherof cometh cotton.
            
               Groſſuli, younge fygges.
            Groſſus, a, um, great.
            
            
               Gruina, herbe Roberte.
            
               Grumia, a mydde place, from whenſe goeth foure wayes.
            
               Grumma, a thynge wherewith grounde is meaſured.
            
               Grumus, a barowe or hyllocke.
            
               Grunnio, ire, to grunte lyke aſwyne.
            Grundio, idem.
            
               Gruo, gruere, to crye lyke a crane.
            
               Grus, gruis, a crane.
            
               Gryllus, a beaſte more than a graſhop, whiche deſtroyeth corne.
            
               Gryphus, a grype or gryffon: Alſo a captious,
 an inſoluble or diffuſe argumente, a ryddle.
            
               Grypus, a noſe riſynge in the myddle.
         
         
            ¶G ANTE V.
            
               GVAIACVM, a tree growynge in the yles newe founden, the one called Corterati, the other Hiſpaniola, whiche be not farre frome the equinoctiall lyne & whiche tree is in the top full of branches, the leaues very ſmall and meruaylous greene, it beareth fruite in the quantitie of a fylberde nut, hauynge within it a kernell, and without a thyn ſhale. There is of this tree three kyndes: The wood of the one is harde and heuye, within blacke, without pale coloured hauynge lynes ſomewhat ruſſet. The other is ſomewhat whyter withoute, but blacke within, not in ſo great a tompace The third is white within and without, hauynge very ſmal lynes. This wood boyled in water hath ben founde an excellent remedy agaynſte the frenche porkes, and alſo the goute.
            
               Gubernacula nauis, the inſtrumentes, whereby the ſhyp is ruled.
            
               Gubernator, a mayſter of a ſhyp: alſo a gouernour of a countrey.
            
               Guberno, nare, to gouerne.
            
               Gueſſeli, beaſtes lyke to myſe, whiche haue theyr dunge as ſwete as muſke.
            
               Gula, the throte: ſometyme gluttony.
            
               Guloſus, a glutton.
            
               Guliocae, the grene ſhale of the walnut.
            
               Gummatus, ta, tum, dreſſed with gum, or raſed.
            
               Gummatae arbores, trees that bryngeth forthe gum.
            
               Gummi, gum, whiche droppeth from trees.
            
               Gumminum, oyle made of gum.
            
               Gurges, gitis, a ſwallowe or depe pyt in a water, or a gulfe.
            
               Gargito, aui, are, to ſwalowe or deuoure.
            
               Gurgulio, lionis, the gullye or gargyll of the throte, or throte bol. It is alſo a worme that bredeth in barnes, and eateth vp corne.
            
               Gurguſtium, a darke and vyle habitation, a cabban or cotage.
            Guſtatus, tus, taſte.
            
            Guſto, aui, are, to taſte.
            
            Guſtus, tus, taſte.
            
            
               Gutta, a drop.
            
               Guttatim, by droppes.
            
               Guttur, gutturis, the throte.
            
               Gutturoſus, he that hath a ſwollen throte.
            
               Gutturnium, a lauer or yewer.
            
               Guttus, a cruet, or other lyke thyng, out of the whiche lycour is ponred droppynge.
         
         
            ¶G ANTE Y.
            
               GYGAEVS, a lake of Lydie.
            
               Gygemorus, a lyttell hyll, not far frome Theſſaly.
            
               Gyges, the ſonne of Daſcylus, and one of the ſeruantes of Candaules kynge of Lydia (as Herodotus wryteth) or his companyon, as Trogus reherſeth, was alſo kynge of Lydia by this meanes: Candaules the kynge had a wyfe, whom for the inordinate loue that he bare towarde her, he ſuppoſed to be the fayreſt woman lyuynge. On a tyme he prayſed his wyues beaulty vnto Gyges, addyng ther vnto, to the intente that he moughte the better beleue hym, he wolde cauſe hum to ſe her naked: but Gyges refuſed to doo it, diſſuadynge as moch as he could Candaules from that foly, with ryghte wyſe exhortations. But Candaules obſtinately perſiſting in his folyſhe fantaſy, dydde ſet Gyges in a ſecrete place, where he behelde his wyfe naked goynge to bed, and as Gyges departed, the lady behelde hym. And fynally the matter dyſcloſed by her huſbande vnto her, ſhe kepyng ſilence, determined in her harte to be reuenged on Candaules her huſbande. For in that countrey it was an intollerable reproche to a man or woman to be ſeene naked. wherfore ſone after callynge vnto her ſuche of her ſeruauntes as ſhe ſpecially truſted, ſhe ſente for Gyges. who beinge come vnto her, ſhe purpoſed vnto hym this election, eyther he hym ſelfe to be ſlayne, or els to promyſe her to ſlee Candaules, and take her to his wyfe, and the royalme with her, whiche he abborryng, and a good whyle reſiſtinge, with ſondry perſuaſions, at the laſte fyndynge no remedy, he chaſe rather than hym ſelfe to dye, to ſle Candaules, as he dyd lyinge in his bedde by the meanes of the queene, whome he toke to his wyfe and was kynge of Lydia. Plato. li. 2. de Iuſto, in the perſon of Glaucus telleth vn to Socrates, that Gyges had a rynge, whiche was of a meruaylouſe nature, for whan he tourned the broder parte of the rynge towarde the palme of his hande, he was ſeene of no man, but he mought ſee all thynges: And whan he turned the rynge on the contrary parte, he was hym ſelfe ſeene openlye, by the meanes wherof he ſlewe Candaules, and commytted adultery with his wyfe. There was alſo an other called Gyges, a great gyant, and brother of Briarêus.
            
            
               Gymnaſiarches, the chiefe maſter of the ſchole, or place of exercyſe.
            
               Gymnaſium, a place where is commune exercyſe of the body. Sometyme a ſcholehouſe.
            
               Gymnaſtes, he that teacheth chyldren, to exerciſe
 them in wraſtlynge, or other lyke.
            
               Gymnaſtium, the arte of exerciſe.
            
               Gymnici ludi, playes exerciſed naked.
            
               Gymnoſophiſtae, philoſophers of Inde, which wente alwaye naked.
            
               Gymnus, a beaſte whiche commeth of an horſe an aſſe mare.
            
               Gyneconitis, that parte of the houſe, whiche ſerueth onely to women.
            
               Gynephilus, a great louer of women.
            
               Gynoecium, a nurcery.
            Gypſo, aui, are, to playſter.
            
            
               Gypſus, playſter.
            
               Gyro, aui, are, to compaſſe or go in circute.
            
               Gyrus, a circute or compaſſe.
            
               Gyttheum, a towne, whiche Hercules and Apollo, laynge there aſyde theyr ſtryfe and debate, buylded together, and the inhabitantes of the ſame towne are called Gyttheres.
            
         
         
            ¶H ANTE A.
            
               
                  HABENA, THE rayne of a brydle. ſometyme it ſignifieth power or rule.
            
               Habenas adducere, to holde ſtraight the bridle Habenas remittere, to ſlake the brydell.
            
               Hebeo, bui, bere, to haue, to holde, to poſſede or occupie, to eſteme or ſuppoſe, to call, to dwell.
            
               Habeo audire, I can here.
            
               Habeo polliceri, I can promyſe.
            
               Haberi aliquo numero, to be in ſome eſtimation.
            
               Clodij animum perſpectum habeo, I know what Clodius intendeth.
            
               Habere bene ſeu male, to do or proſper welle or yll. Bene habet, it is wel.
            
               Male me habet, it greueth me.
            
               Habere concionem, to preche, to declare a thynge to the people.
            
               Habet eum arcte, he kepeth hym ſhorte, or from lyberty.
            
               Fortunas ſuas uenales habuit, he hath ſolde all his goodes.
            
               Fruſtra habere, to be deceyued.
            
               Habet fruſtra, he is diſappoynted.
            
               Habere gratiam, to thanke.
            
               In cuſtodijs haberi, to be kepte in priſon.
            
               Habere obuiam, to encounter or meete with one.
            Penſi habere, to take hede. Prorſus ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                facere, ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                dicere, quicquam penſi habebat:
            He cared not what he did, nor what he ſpake
            
               Principatum habere, to be more excellent.
            
               Habere quaeſtui rempublicā, to miniſter the weale publyke for his owne profyt.
            
               Habere rationem, to haue regarde or conſideration.
            Habere rationem cum terra, to labour the erthe.
            
            
               Res ita ſe habet, the thynge is at this poynt.
            
               Habere rem, to medle with a woman,
            Habere rem cum aduerſario, to contende.
            
            
               Se munditer habere, to be clenly.
            
               Sermonem habere, to commune or deuyſe.
            
               Habeo tibi fidem, I put my truſte in the.
            Habilis, le, hable.
            
            
               Habitaculum, & Habitatio, a dwellynge place or habitation.
            
               Habitior, oris, more corporate.
            Habito, aui, are, to dwell.
            
            Habitudo, dinis, idem quod habitus.
            
               Habitus, tus, the fourme or ſtate of the bodye, ſome tyme of other thynges. alſo apparayle. Alſo it ſignifieth a qualitie or propertie, whiche a man hath conceyued by education, long exercyſe or cuſtome.
            Habitus, ta, tum, had.
            
            
               Habraham, is interpreted Father of many dyuerſe people.
            
               Hac, hyther. ſometyme by this place. Ita nunc hac, an illac eam, ſum inſcerta conſilij: Now whether I maye go hyther or thyther I can not tell.
            
               Hac non ſucceſsit, alia aggrediamur uia, this waye it cometh not to paſſe, let vs now aſſay an other faſcion.
            
               Hactenus, hytherto, ſo moche.
            
               Hadria, was a citie of Italy on the ſea ſyde, by the whiche the ſea betwene Italye and Slauony was called Mare Hadriaticum.
            
            
               Hadrianopolis, a citie in Thracia.
            
               Hadrianus, a noble emperour, which in all ſciences was excellentely lerned: He was after Chriſtis incarnation .Cxix. yeres, and raygned
.xxi. yeres.
            
               Hadrobalum, a kynde of ſwete ſmellynge gum that groweth in Media.
            
               Haebudes, are yles beyonde Scotlande .ii. dais ſaylynge, wherof be fyue.
            
               Haec illa eſt miſericordia: Loo the pitie that this man hath. Vna haec ſpes eſt, This is al the comforte that I haue.
            
               Haedera, yuy tree.
            Haederatius, a, um, of yuy.
            
            
               Haedile, a ſtable wherin kyddes be kepte.
            
               Haedina, caro, kyddes fleſhe.
            
               Haedus, a kyd.
            
               Haedui, people in Fraunce, whiche be now called Burgonions, and Burbonoiſes.
            
               Haematices, the ſanguinary or bloud ſtone.
            
                
               Haemonia, the countrey called Theſſaly,
            
               Haemorrhois, Haemorrhoidis, a diſeaſe in the fundemente lyke teates or wartes, out of the whiche iſſueth bloude, called emorroides or pyles. Alſo a ſerpente, of whom if a man be ſtriken, he bledeth to deathe.
            
               Haerba, an herbe.
            
               Haerbaceus, a, um, that is of herbes.
            
               Haerbarius, he that knoweth herbes and theyr vertues.
            Herbarius, a, um, of herbes.
            
            
               Haerbeſco, ſcere, to be an herbe.
            Haerbidus, & Haerboſus, a, um, hauynge many herbes.
            
            
               Haerediolum, a lyttle inheritance.
            
               Haeredipeta, crauers of goodes, flatterynge men to be theyr heyres.
            
               Haereditarius, a, um, perteyning to inheritāce.
            
               Bona haereditaria, goodes whiche do come by inheritaunce.
            
               Haereditas, tatis, inheritaunce or ſucceſſion.
            
               Haereditas caduca, lande fallen by exchete to the lord, of whom it is holden.
            
               Haeredium, lande, wherein a man hath a ſtate of inheritauncè.
            
               Haereo, haeſi, haerere, to cleaue or ſtycke to a thynge. ſomtyme to doubt.
            
               Haeret in te omnis culpa, In the is put al the blame.
            
               Haeres, haeredis, an heyre, or he, which ſuccedeth an other in his landes or goodes.
            
               Haeredem ſcribere, to make one heyre by teſtamente.
            
               Haeredes ſecundi, heyres in remaynder.
            
               Haereſco, ſcere, to ſticke faſte, or be thruſte in.
            
               Haereſiarches, an arche heretike.
            
               Haereſis, ſios, a ſecte, an hereſye, an obſtynate opinion.
            
               Haereticus, an heretike.
            Haeſito, aui, are, idem quod Haereo.
            
               Hagiographa, holy ſcripture.
            
               Hagiographus, a wryter of holy ſcripture.
            
               Hagnus, a lambe.
            
               Hagnellus, a lyttell lambe.
            
               Hagninus, a, um, of a lambe.
            
               Halcyone, was daughter of Neptunus, and wyfe of Caeyces, whom ſhee beholdynge to be drowned, ſhe for ſorowe drowned her ſelfe. wherfore the poetes do wryte, that they were bothe tranſformed in to byrdes, and called
            
               Halcyones, rede before in Alcyones.
            
            
               Halec, lecis, a fyſhe called herrynge. Alſo a ſauce made of fyſhe.
            
               Haleſina regio, a countray wherein is a well, the water wherof beinge alwaye quyet and playne, if one ſtandynge by it doo playe on a ſhalme, or other lyke pype, the water in the well wyll ryſe, as it daunced, in ſo moche as at the laſte it wyll mounte and run ouer the brynmme of the wel: and the pype ceaſynge, the water wyll forthewith falle and become quiete.
            
               Haleſius, a ryuer not far from Aetna.
            
               Halialmon, a ryuer of Macidon.
            
               Halicacabus, an herbe called of the apothecaries Alkekengi.
            
               Halietus, an egle, that haunteth about the ſea.
            
               Halieutica, bokes contayninge the propertyes of fyſhes.
            
               Halimon, a thorne lyke to a whyte thorn, growynge by the ſea ſyde, and hath leaues lyke to an olyue tree, but they be broder.
            
               Halito, aui, are, to vapour out.
            
               Halitus, brethe or vapour.
            
               Halizones, people of Paphlagonie, ſo called bycauſe they are 
                  •
               nuyrroned aboute with the ſea.
            
               Hallucinor, ari, to be in a dreame, to be deceyued, to erre, or to take a matter wronge, to take one thynge for an other.
            
               Hallux, the great toe, whiche lyeth ouer the nexte toe.
            
               Halmades, be olyue beryes condite in bryne, as Ruellius affyrmeth, who ſayth, that Colymbiades be they whiche do ſwym in theyr owne oyle. al be it (as he ſayth) men do confounde the one name with the other.
            
               Halmyris, a kynde of colewortes criſpe and delycate to eate.
            
               Halo, aui, are, to ſende forthe ſauour.
            
               Halo, lonis, a myſte, whiche ſometyme happeneth to be about the moone.
            
               Halophanta, a great lyar.
            
               Haloſis, captiuitie.
            
               Halteres, ris, a plummet or weyghte of leade, whiche daunſers on cordes do holde in theyr hande.
            
               Halycarnaſus, a citie in the leſſe Aſia, in the countrey called Caria, on the ſea ſyde.
            
               Halyetus, a faulcone.
            
               Hamadriades, nymphes or fayries of the woodes.
            
               Hamatilis, le, perteynynge to a hoke.
            
               Piſcatus hamatilis, fyſhynge with a hooke, or anglynge.
            
               Hamatus, ta, tum, to be furnyſhed with hokes
            
               Hamiota, uel Hamota, an angler or fyſher, with an angel or hoke.
            
               Hammon, onis, Iupiter in the Egyptian tunge.
            Hamo, aui, are, to crooke.
            
            
               Hamonus, a, um, a colour ſomwhat red.
            
               Hamus, a hoke, ſomtyme a chayne.
            
               Hannibal, was ſon of Hamylcar, the moſte noble and valyant capitayne of the Carthagynenſis, whoo makynge warre with the Romaynes
.xvi. yeres, contended with them in prowes and polycie, wynnynge frome them
 theyr dominions in Spayne and Italy. Fynally beynge vainquiſhed by Scipio, he fled to Antiochus kynge of Aſia, afterwarde to Pruſias kynge of Bithynia, of whom vnder the colour of amytie he was betrayed, and ſhuld haue ben delyuered to Flaminius that tyme ambaſſadour to Pruſias. But Hannibal perceyuynge it, cheſynge rather to dye than to come into the handes of the Romaynes, toke poyſon, whiche he kepte for that purpoſe, ſayinge: Lette vs delyuer the Romaynes from the care and feare, which they haue of vs, with a fewe mo wordes of indignation, and ſo dyed before that he mought be delyuered ſome do wryte this name without h.
            
               Hanum, or Hanus barbatus, a veſſelle with a great bealy, wherin wyne or water was wōt to be broughte to the table.
            
               Haphe, a colour on the body, lyke to them that be leperous.
            
               Hara, a ſwynes ſtye or cote.
            Harena, uide ante in arena.
            
               Hariolus, a ſouthſayer.
            
               Harmonia, harmony or melody.
            
               Harmonides, a Troian carpentar, whiche made the ſhyppes that brought Paris in to Greece.
            
               Harpa, & Harpax, acis, a grapelynge yron, for to cloſe ſhyppes together. Alſo a poll with a hooke on the ende, that ſhypmen vſe.
            
               Harpago, ginis, a grapull of a ſhyp. alſo a coupers inſtrumente, wherwith he dryueth on houpes, an addyſe.
            
               Harpago, aui, are, to take by violence.
            
               Hapalice, a womans name, the doughter of Harpalus kynge of Thrace.
            
               Harpaſa, a towne of Aſia.
            
               Harpe, a ſworde lyke to a ſythe.
            
               Harpocrates, the god of ſilence.
            
               Harpocratem reddere, to put one to ſilence.
            
               Harpyiae, monſtruous byrdes, hauynge maydens vyſages, and talons of a meruaylous rapacitie. wherfore men that be rauenous, and greate gatherers of goodes, be named ſometyme Harpyiae.
            
            
               Haruſpex, ſpicis, a diuinatour, or tellar of thinges to come by the lokynge in the bowels of beaſtes. Alſo he, whiche obſerueth tymes in doinge of thynges.
            
               Haruſpicina, the arte of hym, whiche is a diuinatour.
            
               Haruſpicium, the diuynation or tellynge of thynges to come, by the lokynge in beaſtes bowelles.
            
               Haſpis, pidis, the bowynge made lyke a cerkle in roufes of houſes, or of a wheele.
            
               Haſta, a ſpeare.
            
               Haſtam abijcere, ſignifieth to leue ſuite, to diſpayre of the matter in variaunce.
            
               Haſtae purae, were without yron, and in the old time were giuen for a price to them that vainquiſhed fyrſte in battayle.
            
               Haſtarium, ſellynge vnder the ſtanderd.
            
               Haſtati, ſpeare men
            
               Haſticus Iudus, runnynge at the tylte with ſpeares.
            
               Haſtile, a ſpeare ſtaffe.
            
               Haud, in no wyſe.
            Haud inuito, wyllyngely.
            
            Haud nihil, ſome thynge.
            
            
               Haurio, hauſi, rij, ire, to drawe or take out, to here, to ſe, to take a thyng gredely, to woūd, to fatigate or make wery, to make empty, to conſume.
            
               Hauſit coelum, he ſawe heauen.
            
               Hauſit corda pauor, feare made theyr courages faynte.
            
               Haurire dolorem, to endure heuyneſſe or ſorrowe.
            
               Haurire ſupplicia, to ſuffer puniſſhemente or peynes.
            
               Hauritorium, any thynge wherby water is drawen out of a well.
            
               Hauſtrum, a bucket to drawe water.
            
               Hauſtus, tus, a draught in drinkinge.
            
               Hauſtum facere, to drynke.
         
         
            ¶H ANTE E.
            
               HEANA, a foundation.
            
               Heautontimorumenon, the name of one of the commedies of Terence, whiche is as moche to ſaye, as tourmentynge hym ſelfe.
            
               Hebdomas madis, & Hebdomada, ae, a weke Alſo the number of ſeuen in dayes, yeres, or other tyme.
            
               Hebe, hebes, the doughter of Iupiter and Iuno, who was buttelar of Iupiter before the raueſhynge of Ganymedes, and ſhe was called of the Paynimes, the goddeſſe of youth.
            
               Hebenus, a tree, whereof the wood is blacke lyke ieate, and it beareth neyther leaues nor fruite. loke in Ebenus.
            
            Hebeo, & Hebeſco, ſcere, to be dull.
            
            Hebes, hebetis, dull.
            
            
               Hebeteſco, ſeu Hebetaſco, ſcere, belongeth properly to the eyes, to be dull in ſighte.
            
               Hebero, aui, are, to be duſke, or made darke.
            
               Hebetudo, dinis, dulnes or duſkyſhenes.
            
               Hebiones, of men in olde tyme, were called poore folkes.
            
               Hebraei, Iewes, whiche came of Abraham,
            
               Hebraicus, Hebrician, or of Hebrew.
            
               Hebron, a village by Hieruſalem.
            
               Hebrus, a ryuer in Thracia.
            
               Hecameda, the daughter of Arſinoi, whiche
 was gyuen to Neſtor for a gyfte.
            
               Hecate, a name of the moone. It was alſo Proſerpina.
            
               Hecatombe, a ſacrifice, wherin were kylled an hundred beaſtes.
            
               Hecatompolis, a countrey hauynge an hundred cities therin.
            
               Hecatompus, he that hath an hundred feete.
            
               Hecatontarchus, the capytayne of an hundred men.
            
               Hecta, the pexynge of a man. alſo a lytel puffe, whiche ryſeth in breade whan it is bake. Somtyme it ſignifieth a tryfle.
            
               Hectica febris, the feuer that conſumeth.
            
               Hector, the ſon of Priamus, the mooſte noble and valiaunt of all the Troianes.
            
               Hecuba, was the wyfe of Priamus kynge of Troye, and doughter of Cyſſeus kynge of Thracia, a woman of noble courage & moſt vnhappy fortune: for hauynge al her ſonnes ſlayn, and alſo her huſband, her fayre daughter Polyxea kylled on the graue of Achylles, her other doughter Caſſandra taken pryſoner, and beholdynge the noble citie of Troye burned, her ſelfe a captyue, her yongeſte ſon Polydotus kylled, ſhe fynally waxed madde, and dyd byte and ſtryke all men, whome ſhe met, wherfore ſhe was called dogge, and at the laſte was her ſelfe kylled with ſtones by the Greekes.
            
               Hecyra, a mother in lawe.
            
               Hedonius, expenſes in voluptuous thynges.
            
               Hedui, people in Fraunce, nowe called Burgonious. looke Haedui.
            
            
               Hegeſias, was a philoſopher of the ſecte called Cirenaica. who ſo moche commended death, that many whiche herde hym, kylled theym ſelues.
            
               Heiulo, aui, are, to wayle, cryenge out.
            
               Helciarij, ſhypmen whiche drawe thynges of greate weyghte in to the ſhyp, with roopes, or do drawe the ſhyppe to the ſhore or frome the ſhore.
            
               Helcium, the harueys of carthorſes, whereby they drawe.
            
               Helena, was doughter of Iupiter and Leda the wyfe of Tyndarus kynge of Lacedemonia: She for her wonderfull beaultie was twyſe rauyſhed. Fyrſte at the age of .ix. yeres by Theſeus, afterwarde by Paris the Troian, ſhe than beinge wyfe vnto Menelaus: The which was the onely occaſion of the ten yeres ſiege of Troye, and finally the deſtruction of the mooſte famouſe Citie, with the deathe and loſſe of moſte noble prynces, and of people innumerable. Loke more in Troia.
            
            
               Helenium, an herbe commonlye called Enulacampana, in englyſhe Helycampane.
            
               Heliades, the doughters of the Sun and Neaera, that is to ſaye, Phaētuſa, Lampetia, and Lampetuſa, whiche lamented ſo moche the deathe of Phaëton theyr brother, that therwith they dyed, and were tranſformed (as the poetes do fayn) in to trees, out of the which cunneth the gumme called Electrum, in englyſhe amber, whereof beades be made.
            
               Helias, the prophete of Theſbis, of the countrey of Arabia, a leuite of the tribe of Aaron, he dwelt in Galaad, for Theſbis was an habitation dedicate to prieſtes. In the tyme of his byrthe his father Sobac dyd ſee in a vyſion, that menne beinge apparayled in white dyd call the chylde, and threwe hym into the fyre, and gaue to hym a flame of fyre to eate, the father ryſynge vp wente to Hieruſalem, & ſhewed his viſyon vnto the priſtes: and he that gaue anſweres, ſayd vnto hym: beware that thou do not diſclo
                  •
               e it. The habitation of this chylde ſhall be lighte, and his worde a demonſtration, and ſhal iudge Iſrael in the ſworde and fyre. This is that Helias that brought fyre thryſe out of heauen, and bare rayne in his tungue, and was taken vp in to heauen in a fyry ſtorme. That which is written more of Helias in the Byble, it maye be there rad, ſens the Bible is nowe commonly rad in englyſhe.
            
               Helicon, a mountayne in Aonia, dedicate to the muſis.
            
               Heliocaminus, is a ſoller ſet in a ſunnye placeo where the heate of the ſun maye be receyued, whiche was vſed in the olde tyme.
            
               Heliochriſos, an herbe hauyng a yelow floure, a marygolde.
            
               Heliogabalus, was ſuppoſed to be the baſtard ſonne of Antonius Caracalla, Emperour of Rome, and (as Lampridius wryteth in his lyfe) of Semiamitra, or (as Egnatius writeth) of Scenides his couſen, he was made emperour after the deathe of Macrinus and Diadumenus, being but a boy of .xvi. yeres olde. He ſo moche exceded in deteſtable lechery and promotynge of vyle perſons and rybauldes, that fynally he was hated of al mē, and at the laſte ſlayne and drawen throughe the citie of Rome, and throwen in to the ryuer of Tiber. Albeit he was warned afore of aſtronomers, that he ſhoulde dye a vyolente deathe, and therfore he had prouyded ropes of ſylke, if nede were, to hange hym ſelfe: alſo ſwordes of golde to kyll hym ſelfe: alſoo ſtronge poyſon in iacinctes and emerauldes to poyſon hym ſelfe, if he were inforſed: more ouer he made a very hyghe toure, hauyng the floore of bourdes keuered with plates of golde, bordered with pretious ſtones, frome the whiche toure he wolde throwe hym ſelfe downe whan he were purſued. But all this
 nothynge auayled, for he was ſlayne by knaues, and throwen into Tiber, as is before wrytten. More of hym maye you reede in the lyfe of Alexander Seuerus, whyche I dydde tranſlate into englyſh, and callid it the ymage of gouernaunce.
            
               Heliopolis, a citie in Grecia callyd alſo Corinthus. An other in Egypte.
            
               Helioſcopium, a lyttell tree lyke to a fygge tree and hath leaues lyke a plane, but greatter and blacker.
            
               Helioſelinum, an herb lyke to ſmallage, which groweth in watry groundes, and hathe but one leafe.
            
               Heliotropium, a floure, whiche in the ſonne riſynge dothe open, and at the ſonne ſet cloſeth. other do thynke it to be cihory. ſom ſuppoſeth it to be marygoldes or ruddes.
            
               Heliſſaeus, was the prophet of Abelmuth, of the lande of Rubim. whan he was borne in Galgalis, the cowe of golde in Selom cryed ſoo lowde, that ſhe was herd at Hieruſalem. And the prieſte ſayde, that it ſignifyed, that a prophete was borne that day, whyche ſhuld diſſolue keruen ymages, and breake in pieces ymages, whyche were caſte of mettalle. Many meruayles almyghty god ſhewed by him, whiche ye may reade in the byble nowe being in englyſhe.
            
               Helix, icis, of ſome men is taken for a kynde of wyllowe tree, of ſome men for yuy.
            
               Helias, ladis, the countray of Grece.
            
               Helleborus, an herbe, the roote wherof pourgeth melancoly. loke in Elleborus.
            
            ❀Helleborum edere, is a prouerbe ſpoken to men, whiche are very melancholy, or be wylde brayned.
            
               Hellenes, the ſonne of Deucalion, of whome the Grekes were named Hellenes.
            
            
               Helleſpontus, is the fyrſt part of the ſea, which diuideth Europā from Aſia, and is in bredth but .vii. ſurlonges, whyche lacketh one furlonge of a myle.
            
               Heloi, in hebrue ſignifieth god almighty.
            
               Helorus, a ryuer in Sicile.
            
               Heluatia, a garment, which was vſyd in Lidia, and was of the colour of a cowes hyde.
            
               Heluati, rauenous eaters.
            
               Heluella, ſmall wortes or herbes.
            
               Heluerij, people called Suicers, or Suiches, by deſyre of warres, ennemies to all mankynd, ſubiectes neyther to god nor to prynce, as redy for money to ſerue as wel Turkes, as chriſten pryncis.
            
               Heluo, onis, he whych in eatyng and drynking ſpendeth al his ſubſtance, a reueller. ſomtyme a glutton onely.
            
               Heluo librorū, an inſaciable reder of bokes.
            
               Heluor, aris, aris, to eate rauenouſely.
            
               Heluolum, a colour betwene redde and whyte lyke the colour of clothe callyd french tawny.
            
               Heluolum unum, claret wyne.
            
               Helxine, an herbe callyd pelytory of the wall.
            
               Hem, an interiection of blamyng, diſdaynyng, meruaylynge or ſhewynge.
            
               Hemeridion, whiche dureth but one day.
            
               Hemerobius, one days ſuſtynance. alſo a worm whiche lyueth but one day.
            
               Hemerodromus, a currour, whiche rounneth many myles in one day.
            
               Hemicadia, veſſelles callyd a tierce, halfe a hoggeſhead.
            
               Hemichorium, halfe a daunce.
            
               Hemicranea, a peyne in halfe the head, callyd the mygrym.
            
               Hemicyclum, a compaſſe chayre.
            
               Hemyclus, an halfe cercle.
            
               Hemina, a meaſure whiche is halfe Sextarius, ten ounces of meaſure, whyche lacketh two ounces of our halfe pynte, and conteyneth in weight of oyle .ix. ounces, of wyne .x. ounces, of hony .xv. ounces.
            
               Hemiola, gayne of all, and halfe as moche, as if of .iiii. s. be gotten .vi.s.
            
               Hemiolus, a proportion in arithmetike, containinge the hole number, and half that number, as one to thre .xv. to .x.
            
               Hemionum, an herbe good againſt all yexis.
            
               Hemionitis, tidos, is the herbe, whiche is communely callyd hartis tungue, as Leonicênus ſuppoſeth.
            
               Hemis, halfe.
            
               Hemiſpherium, halfe the compaſſe of the viſible heauen or firmament.
            
               Hemiſtichium, halfe a verſe.
            
               Hemitogium, halfe a gowne.
            
               Hemitritaeus, an halfe tertian feuer, whoſe courſe is euery .xxxvi. houres, or whiche hath the courſe of a tercian.
            
               Hemodes, certaine iles in the douche ſea.
            
               Hemus, a great mountayne in Thracia, nyghe to the ſea called Propontis, whiche is ſyx miles in height.
            
               Hendecaſyllabus, a verſe of .xi. ſyllables.
            
               Henula, a littell chappell.
            
               Heo, an interiection, how, in callinge one.
            
               Hepatica, an herbe callid Lyuerwort. reade after in Lichen.
            
            
               Hepiolus, a fly like a butterfly, whiche flyeth at night into the leame of a candell.
            
               Hepſema, muſt boiled to the thirde part.
            
               Heptaphillon, an herbe callyd tormentill.
            
               Heptapleuron, an herbe callyd Plantayn.
            
               Heptapolis, was ſomtime the name of Egypt, by reaſon of ſeuen cities, whiche fyrſte were in it.
            
               Hepthemimeris, where a ſyllable naturallye ſhorte is made longe in a verſe, whiche dothe
 hap in the begynnyng of the fyrſt foote.
            
               Hera, the name of Iuno. It is alſo the maiſtres of a bondman or bondewoman. it is alſoo an herbe callyd Clary.
            
               Heraclea, a town in the confines of Europa.
            
               Heraclee, a towne very nere to Naples.
            
               Heracleon, an herbe lyke to Organum, it groweth in watry places, and hath a flowre lyke a lylly: and whan the floure is fallen, it hath a head lyke a popy: It is alſo an other herbe growynge in plaſhes, hauynge a lyttell ſtalke, whiche excedeth not foure fyngers hygh, hauyng a redde floure, and leaues lyke Coriander: this herbe healeth all woundes, yf it be layde vnto theym. It is callyd Heraclion ſyderion.
            
            
               Heracleotica nux, a wall nutte.
            
               Heraclia, a kynde of the water lyly callyd Nemiphar, hauynge a whyte floure.
            
               Heraclides, the name of a philoſopher.
            
               Heraclitus, a philoſopher, which always wept whanne he behelde the people, conſyderynge howe buſye they were to gather treaſure, and howe neglygente in the welle bryngynge vp of theyr chyldern, his warkes of a pourpoſe were obſcur
                  •
                and hard to be vnderſtande.
            
               Heraclius, the name of an emperour. It is alſo a touche ſtone.
            
               Herba, an herbe. Alſo generally all thinge that groweth on the erthe, not being wood ſometyme a wede.
            
               Herbam dare aut porrigere, where a manne yeldeth hym, or confeſſeth hym ſelfe to be vanquyſhed.
            
               Herba paralyſis, the ſmall dayſye.
            
               Herbaceus, a, um, of herbes or graſſe.
            
               Herbare, to brynge forth herbes.
            
               Herbarius, & herbaria, he or ſhe that dothe gather herbes for phiſitions. Alſo he which knoweth the properties of herbes, and maketh medicines of theym.
            
               Herbarius, a, um, pertaynyng to herbes.
            
               Herbeſco, ſcere, to make herbes or wedes.
            Herbidus, a, um, idem quod herbaceus.
            
               Herbilis anſer, a graſed gooſe.
            
               Herboſus, a, um, full of herbes or graſſe.
            
               Herbula, a lyttell herbe.
            
               Herceus, one of the ſurnames of Iupiter.
            
               Hercinia, a great wodde in Germanye, whiche is in breadth .ix. dayes iourney, and in length xl. dayes iourney, as Ceſar wryteth. Pomponius Mela affyrmeth it to be .lx. dayes iourney in length.
            
               Herciſceor, ceris, ſci, or Erciſceor, ſci, to make partition betweene coheyres, and to aſſygne to eche of them theyr portion. Therof cometh Familiae herciſcundae, a title in the digeſtes of the lawe ciuile.
            
               Hercle, a worde vſed to ornate a ſentence in maner of an othe, as God helpe me, truely, in faythe.
            Herculanus, a, um, of Hercules.
            
            
               Herculanus morbus, the fallynge ſyckenes.
            
               Herculanus nodus, was a certayne knot harde to be vndoone, by the whyche a ſubtylle queſtyon or ſyllogyſme maye be ſygnyfied. Feſtus Pompeius wrytethe, that in the olde tyme the cuſtome was, that the newe maryed bryde, whan ſhe went to bedde, ſhoulde be gyrte with a woullen gyrdelle knyt with Hercules knotte, whyche the houſbande for good lucke ſhulde vndoo in the bedde, that he mought be fortunate in gettynge of chyldren. for Hercules is reported to haue .lxxii. ſonnes and one daughter, as Ariſtotle writeth De natura animalium li. 7. cap. 6.
            
               Herculeana pars, It was the cuſtome of men in olde tyme to auowe the tenth part of their goodes vnto Hercules, and that tenthe parte was callyd Herculeana pars.
            
            
               Hercules quaeſtus, ſygnifieth the ſame.
            
               Herculea, an herbe commonlye called Millium ſolis, of Dio corides Lithoſpermon.
            
            
               Herculeius, a Romane, whyche fauoured the parte of Marius.
            
               Hercules, ſemeth to be a generalle name gyuen to men excellyng in ſtrenthe all other men of theyr tyme. for Cicero De natura deorum, wryteth, that amonge auncient writers were founde .vi. Hercules. Varro affyrmeth, that there were .xliiii. Hercules. Fynallye there is noo notable mencyon made but of two, the one called Hercules Aegyp̄tius, or Libicus, whyche is ſuppoſed to be Oſyris, of whom is wryten hereafter. The other, whiche was longe after hym, who was ſonne of Iupyter and Alemena, and was callyd Alcides by his proper name, and for his incomparable ſtrengthe and laboures, whyche he tooke for the commune profytte of mankynde, he was named alſoo Hercules. All be yt Beroſus the Caldey affyrmeth Hercules to be the ſonne of Oſyris, and kynge of Aegypte, and was callyd Hercules Libyus, bycauſe that he conqueryd Libyam. And ſayncte Hierome on the tenthe chapyter of Geneſis wryteth, that this Hercules was he that perfourmed the twelue notable labours, whyche poetes doo wryte of, and not Alcides ſonne of Alemena. The fyrſt of the twelue labours (was as Diodorus Siculus writeth) the ſleing of a lyon in the wod callid Nemea, which far exceded al other lyons in greatnes, whyche mought not be ſlayne neyther with mettall, nor with ſtone. Wherfore he was conſtrayned to ſlea hym with his handes. The ſeconde labour was in the kyllyng of Hydra the monſter in the fennes of Lerna, whyche
 hadde a hundeede neckes with ſerpentyne heades, and whan one head was ſtryken of, there dyd ryſe eftſoones two other heades. The third labour was the takynge of the great wyld bore of Erimanthus, whiche waſted the countreye of Arcadia, and all people drad hym, but fynally Hercules toke hym alyue, and bearynge hym on his ſhulders, broughte hym to kynge Euriſtheus. The fourthe labour was the battayle, whyche he hadde alone with a great number of men callyd Centauri, whyche were of greatte ſtrengthe, and as ſwyfte as horſes: all theym he ſlewe whan they aſſaulted hym. The fyfthe labour was the takynge of a great hart in runnynge, whyche for his ſwyfteneſſe hadde his hornes guylte. The ſyxthe labour was the deſtruction of the byrdes callyd Stymphalides, whyche conſumyd the fruytes and grayn of the countrayes adioynynge. The ſeuenth was the makynge cleane of the halle of Augeus, beinge fulle of dunge, whyche Hercules perfourmed by wyſedome, bryngynge the ryuer callyd Pignio through out the halle, whych by the ſwift courſe of his ſtreame in one day caryed awaye all the dunge, without any reproche vnto Hercules. The eyghte was the bryngynge of a bull from the yle of Creta into Greece, drawynge hym alonge the ſea. The nynthe was the takynge of Diomedes kyng of Thracia, and caſtynge hym to his horſes, whome he fedde with mannes fleſſhe, and was hym ſelfe of theym deuoured, and after Hercules breakynge thoſe wylde horſes, and makynge theym gentylle, broughte theym to Euriſtheus. The tenthe labour was his voyage into Spayne, the ſleynge there of Gerion and his ſonnes, and takynge the greatte kyne, whyche he gaue to a kynge in that countray, who contynually afterwarde of the bulles commynge of that kynde, yerely offered one in ſacrifyce to the honour of Hercules. The leuenth was, his goynge into helle, and fetchynge thenſe Theſeus and Perithous and bryngynge with hym in a cheyne Cerberus the dogge of helle, hauynge thre heades. The twelfthe and laſte laboure was, the takynge of the golden appuls out of the gardens callyd Heſperides, and ſleynge of the terryble dragon, whyche contynually watchynge, kepte thoſe appulles, whyche were callyd goulden, for the beaultie of theym. Somme do ſay, that they were ſheepe, whoſe fleeſes were of the coloure of golde, and the dragon ſygnyfyed the dylygence and ſtrengthe of the ſhepcherdes, whyche kepte theym. Theſe were the twelue laboures of Hercules, whereof grewe this prouerbe:
            
               Herculei labores, where the labours doo ſeme impoſſible to be achieued.
            
               Herculis cothurnos, was vſed for a prouerbe, where in a thyng of lyttell importance was ſette forthe any great cloquence or other thynge ſolemne more apte for a greatter matter, as one ſhulde putte Hercules hoſen on a chyldes legges. Lyke vnto that accorded the ſayenge of the wyſe kynge Igeſllaus, whan one commended to hym a rhetorician, whych by his craftye eloquence made tryfles and ſmalle thynges to ſeeme greatte. The kynge anſwered: That ſowter deſerueth no prayſe, whiche putteth a great ſhowe on a very lytell foote, meaning therby, that the wordes ſhuld as welle accorde with the matter, as the garment with the perſone. This is ſo commune a vyce nowe a dayes amonge ſtudentes of eloquence, that in writynge and ſpeakynge, they ſeeme to prepare the hoſe, or they knowe the meaſure of the legge, wheron they wyl put it.
            
               Hercules Gallus, as Lucianus wryteth, was in the olde tyme in Fraunce an ymage made lyke an olde manne with a balde heade, and vnkempte, his heare very whyte, the ſkynne of his face ryuellyd, and as it were bourned with the ſunne, wearynge on hym a lyons ſkynne, and bearynge in his ryghte hande a great clubbe, in his lefte hande a bowe, a quiuer at his backe, drawynge after hym a multitude of people tyed by their eares with a lytell chayne wrought with ambre and goulde, but they were ſo eaſyly tyed, that laughynge and with good chere, they wyllyngely ſolowed, and as it ſeemyd, they wold not be louſed, and the other ende of the chayn was tyed at Hercules tungue, who looked towarde theym with a lawghynge countenaunce.
            This ymage ſygnyfyed eloquence, whyche for the puyſſaunce thereof, reſemblyd rather Hercules thanne Mercurye. And his age betokenyd that eloquence is for the more parte ſubſtancyall and vehement. That Hercules or rather eloquence draweth men by the eares tyed to his tungue, ſygnyfyeth the affynitie betweene the tungue and the eare, and theyr gladde and voluntary folowynge, ſygnyfieth with what dilectation eloquence draweth menne to her perſwaſyons and exhortations.
            
               Herculeus, a, um, puyſſant or myghty.
            
               Here, for heri, yeſterday.
            
               Herebus, the depeſt place in helle.
            
               Heri, yeſterday.
            
               Hericius, an yrchyn or hedgehogge.
            
               Herilis, le, pertaynynge to the lorde or mayſter.
            
               Herillus, a philoſopher of Calcidony.
            
               Herinatius, an hedgehogge.
            
               Herma, an ymage of Mercurius. It is alſo an ymage, the head wherof may be chaunged.
            
               Hermae, be alſoo ymages ſette or layde on ſepulchres.
            
                
               Hermaphroditus, the ſonne of Mercury and Venus. Alſo he that is bothe man & woman.
            
               Hermathena, was two ymages togyther of Mercury and Minerua.
            
               Hermerotes, ſmall ymages, properly of lyttell chyldren with whynges.
            Hermes, is, & Hermetis, Mercury.
            
            
               Hermeſia, a confection made by the Perſians with honye, myrre, ſaffron, and the wyne or iuyce of dates, with the kernels of pyne appuls, which beyng taken of a man with mylk and alſo of women after that they be conceyued, ſhall bryng forthe chyldren in perſonage and wytte verye excellent. Democritus wryteth of a lyke medycine, by the whiche chylderne fayre, good, and fortunate ſhall be begotten.
            
               Hermione, was doughter of Menclaus and Helene, who being a chylde, was by Tyndarus the father of Menelaus in his abſence affianced to Oreſtes the ſon of Agamemnon: but afterward ſhe was maryed by her father to Pyrrhus ſonne of Achilles, whom Oreſtes dyd afterwarde ſlea, and wedded Hermione and had by her thre ſonnes Theſſamenes, Corynthus, and Oreſtes the yonger. There was an other Hermione daughter of Mars and Venus, and wyfe of Cadmus, whom the poetes fayned to be with her huſbande, tourned into a ſerpent.
            
               Hermodactylus, is ſuppoſed to be that which of Aetius and Paulus is callid Ephemeron. Actuarius maketh mētion of two kyndes callyd Hermodactyli, whiche are as moche to ſaye, as Mercurij digiti, in englyſhe Mercurius fingers, for the ſimilitude that they haue with fyngers. whereof the one is white, the other is redde, whiche Ruellius ſuppoſeth to be that whiche the Arabians do call Been rubeum, & Been album.
            
            
               Hermodôcus, a phyloſopher of Epheſie.
            
               Hermogenes, a proper name of a famous rhetorycian.
            
               Hermoglyphus, a grauer of ymages.
            
               Hermon, a lyttell hyll that ſtandeth on Iordan
            
               Hermopôlis, the name of a citie that Hercules buylded.
            
               Hermupoa, an herbe callyd Mercury.
            
               Hermus, a ryuer whiche in the middes parteth the fieldes of Smirnee, & fallith from the hyl Dorylao, and diuideth Phrigia from Caria, wherin Virgil ſuppoſed to be golden ſande.
            
               Hernia, the diſeaſe, whereof men be callyd broſten, for that theyr bowels or other matter, is fallen into theyr coddes.
            
               Hernici, people in Campania.
            
               Hernioſus, he that is broſten.
            
               Herodes, the ſonne of Antipater, whiche in the v. yere of Auguſtus, was of the Romaynes declared kynge of Iewes, and he reygned .37. yeres. of that name were dyuerſe other kynges, of whom Ioſephus writeth abundantly.
            
               Herodianus, a noble hyſtorian, which in greke wrate moſte eloquentely and truely the lyues of the emperours from Marcus Philoſophus to Gordianus the yonger, which boke is moſt eloquently tranſlated into latyn by Angelus Politianus.
            
            
               Herodius, a byrde named a faulkon.
            
               Herôdotus, was a noble hyſtorian, borne in the cytie of Halycarnaſſus in Aſia, he wrate moſt eloquently a general hyſtory of the actes done in Europa and Aſia by the ſpace of .CC. and xl. yeres, vntyl the warre among the Grekes callyd Peloponeſiacum, whiche Thuridides with an equaile ſtyle wrate and perfourmed. He floryſhed before the incarnation of Chriſt
200. yeres.
            
               Heroicus, a, um, noble or pertaynyge to nobleneſſe.
            
               Heroida, a noble woman.
            
               Heros, herois, an halfe god, or he whyche for the loue of vertue ſuſteyneth greatte labours and peryll.
            
               Heroſtratus, a poore folyſhe man, who to haue a perpetuall fame, burned the moſt famouſe temple of Diana at Epheſum, and after detected hym ſelfe, and was put vnto deathe.
            
               Herpeta, a tetter.
            
               Herſilia, the wife of Romulus king of Romans
            
               Herus, a lorde or mayſter.
            
               Heſione, was doughter of Laomedon kyng of Troy, and ſyſter to Priamus, whom Hercules at the fyrſte deſtruction of Troy gaue in mariage to Thelamon a noble prince of the Grekes.
            
               Heſiodus, an auncient poete of the grekes, whiche fyrſte wrate of huſbandry, whome Vergile folowed in his Georgikes.
            
               Heſperia, Italy.
            Heſperia ultima, Spayne.
            
            
               Heſperides, the thre daughters of Atlas, which kept the gardens, wherin grew the golden appuls, that were taken away by Hercules.
            
               Heſperidum horti, the gardeyns wherin were the golden appuls, nowe callyd orenges.
            
               Heſperus, the weſt ſterre.
            Heſternus, na, num, of yeſterdayes.
            
            
               Heſtiaea, is a part of Theſſalye ſaythe Strabo, and Ptolom. and in Homerus it is a towne in Euboea, Stephanus ſayth it is a cytie in Acarnania.
            
               Heterogenus, a, um, of an nother kynde.
            
               Hetruria, the countreye of Thuſcane, wherein the citie of Florence is.
            
               Hetruſcus, a, um, of the countraye callyd Hetruria.
            
               Hetruſca diſciplina, was a certayne doctrine
 taught in Thuſcane, concernyng the interpretation of lyghtenynges, tokens in the firmament, & thinges that were monſtruous, whiche was of ſuche eſtimation amonge the auncient Romaynes, that it was decreed by an ordinance of the ſenate, that into ſyxe partes of that countrey ſhulde be ſent ſyxe ſonnes of noble men, to lerne that arte.
            
               Heu, alas.
            
               Heus, howe.
            
               Hexaclinum, a parlar, wherin ſyx perſons may ſoupe.
            
               Hexagonum, ſyxe cornerde.
            
               Hexameron, of ſyxe dayes.
            
               Hexametrum, a verſe of ſyxe feete.
            
               Hexapeda, a meaſure called a fathom.
            
               Hexaphorus, a lytter or chayre to be borne by ſyxe men.
            Hexaplum, uel hexapla, an example.
            
            
               Hexaſticum, ſyxe verſes togither.
         
         
            ¶H ANTE I.
            
               HIARBAS, the ſonne of Iupiter, whiche was king of the Getulians, & made war ageinſt Dido quene of Carthage.
            
               Hiaſco, ſcere, to gape, open by him ſelf, or ſprede as floures done.
            
               Hiato, aui, are, to gape often.
            
               Hiatus, tus, a gapynge.
            
               Hibernia, the yle callyd Irelande.
            
               Hibiſcus, an herbe, whiche Galenus doth calle wylde malowe. it is alſo callyd Althea, Ruelli
                  •
               e ſayth, that it is the ſame, whiche the pothecaries do calle Biſmalua, or Maluauiſcus, whiche is the double malowe.
            
               Hibris hibridis, a wylde hogge, engendred betwene a wylde bore, and a tame ſowe.
            
               Hic, this man. alſo here or in this place. ſometyme it is taken for Tum. Hic illi flentes rogare at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   orare coeperunt, Than began they to deſyre and pray.
            
               Tu ſi hic ſis, aliter ſentias, If thou were I, or es I am, thou woldeſt thynke otherwyſe.
            
               Hic amor, hoc ſtudium, that is youre deſyrs, there aboutes ye go.
            
               Hic quis eſt, Who is this?
            
               Hic ſomnus eſt mihi, this is my maner of ſleapynge.
            Hicce, haecce, hocce, for hic, haec, hoc.
            
               Hiccine, haeccine, hoccine, for hic ne? haec ne? hoc ne? Hiccine eſt Simo, Is not this Simon ſomtime it is taken doutfully. Haud nihil ambigam, hiccine fuerit Aſcanius, an maior quam hoc: I doubte ſomwhat, whyther this were Aſcanius, or an other elder thā he.
            
               Hiera, an yle betwene Sicile and Liparis. alſo the name of a way, of a woman the wyfe of Thelaphus kyng of Miſie.
            
               Hieracium, an herbe, whiche ſome do ſuppoſe to be ſowthiſtell.
            
               Hieranthemis, the floure of the herbe camamel.
            
               Hierapicra, a medicine to purge fleume & choler, and ſomtyme it is callyd onely Hiera, it is of ſundry ſpyces confectioned in a poulder.
            
               Hierapolis, a citie in Aſia.
            
               Hierarchia, the holye gouernaunce or pryncipalytie.
            
               Hieratica, fyne paper.
            
               Hieremias, the prophete, was borne (as Epiphanius writeth) at Anathothis, and was ſlayne by his people at Taphnas, in Egypte. But afterwarde the Egyptians had hym in great honour, and buryed hym in the place, where ſtode Pharaos palayce, for he draue thens ſerpentes and crocodiles. This is the prophet, whiche before the alteration of the temple, toke the arke or holye coffer, and that which was in it, & cauſed a ſtone to ſwalowe it vp, ſaying to the prieſtis and auncient men that were preſent: Oure Lorde is departed from Sina to heauen, and ſhall returne with an holy puiſſance, and this ſhall be the ſygne of his commynge, whan al people ſhall honor a tree. he ſayde moreouer vnto theym: Neuer man ſhall open this arke, neyther prieſte nor prophete, except Moyſes the elect of god, the tables with in it, no man ſhall vnfold, excepte Aaron. And at the reſurrection, fyrſt this ark ſhall ryſe, and ſhall come out of the ſtone, and ſhall be ſet in mount Sina. And all ſaynctes ſhall reſorte therevnto, there to receyue the Lorde, and ſhall flee frome the ennemy, whiche wolde haue deſtroyed theym. And he ſealed the ſtone, wrytynge therein the name of oure lorde. And the ſygne was lyke as it were grauen in yron, and a clowde than keuered the ſtoone, but noo manne knowethe that place.
            
               Hieri, people beyonde Sauromatas.
            
               Hiero, ronis, a kynge of Sicile, whyche was lyke a priuate perſon, very rude and homely, and of his nature fierſe and vntractable. but after he became ſycke, and ceaſſed frome buſyneſſe, the feuer nowe and than taking hym, he became a man of good maners and honorable. And in the meane tyme, that he was not vexed with the feuer, he fell to lernynge. Wherfore beinge recouered, he vſed the company of Simonides, Pindarus, and Baccilides, moſt excellēt poetes at that tyme liuing who in their writinges brought his name in an honorable remembrance.
            
               Hierobotane, an herbe callyd Veruen.
            
               Hieroceps, an yle in Cyprus nere to Paphus.
            
               Hierocomion, a laſerhouſe.
            
               Hieroduli, miniſters in temples and churches.
            
               Hierogliphica, myſticall letters or cyphers among
 the Egyptians, whyche were ymages ſygnifyenge hole ſentences.
            Hieron, uel Hiereon, a chapell.
            
            
               Hieronymus, the moſte noble and famous interpreter of holy ſcripture, he was after the incarnacion of Chriſte aboute .CCClxxxvii. yeres, as he hym ſelf writeth. he was borne in a towne callyd Strido, which was in the cō
               fynes of Hūgary and Dalmatia, his fathers name was Euſebius.
            
               Hierophanta. the declarer of myſteries or holy ſcripture.
            
               Hieroſolyma, or Hieruſalem, after the Hebrue the chiefe citie of Iudea (as Euſebius wryteth) was in compas about .vi. myles and a halfe, and as the ſame author ſayth li. 9. Praeparationis euangelicae, ca. ult. was callid Hieron Salomonis, that is to ſaye Salomons houſe: And after by corruption of ſpeche was callyd Hieruſalem & Hieroſolyma. But Lyranus on the .xxviii. chapiter of Geneſis writeth, that it was fyrſt buylt by Melchiſedek, and by hym callyd Salem, that is to ſay peaſyble. foraſmoche as he was kyng of peace & iuſtyce. alſo that it was callid Solyma, Luza, alſo Bethel, Hierus, Hieroſolyma, & Aelia. Albeit Ioſephus de bello Iudaico, li. 7. ca. 26. affirmeth, that the fyrſt buylder therof was Chanam, whiche made there a temple, & callyd it Hieroſolyma, where before it was callyd Solyma. Saynt Hierom De locis actorum apoſtolorum, ſayth, that the citie was callyd Aelia, of Aelius Hadrianus the emperour, whyche eftſones repayred it, after that it was diſtroyed by Titus, and made it larger. It was fyue tymes waſted, and laſt was diſtroyed by Titus, after the incarnation of Chriſte .lxxiii. yeres.
            
               Hierotheus, the proper name of a man.
            
               Hila, a ſmalle gutte or ar
                  •
                gutte.
            
               Hilarè, meryly, ioyouſely.
            
               Hilareſco, ſcere, to be mery.
            
               Hilaria plurali, the .viii. calendes of Apryll, whā the day and nyght haue equall houres, and the day begynneth to increaſe.
            Hilaris, re, & hilarus, mery or ioyous.
            
            Hilaritas, tatis, myrthe.
            
            
               Hilarius, the proper name of a man.
            
               Hilaro, aui, are, to make one mery or ioyouſe.
            
               Hilarodus, a ſynger of a wanton & delycat ſong
            
               Hillus, the ſonne of Hercules by Deianyra.
            
               Hilum, the lyttell blacke, whiche is in the ende of a beane. It is ſometyme taken for nothing or nought.
            
               Hima, a mule whiche is begotten betwene an horſe and aſſe. Himulus, & himula, lytel beaſtes of the ſame kynde.
            
               Himera, a ryuer in Sicile, deuided into two partes, the one freſhe water, the other ſalt.
            
               Hin, is a meaſure of the Hebrues, whiche after the accompte of Senalis, is of our meaſure one galon and a pynte, and receyueth in poyſe of wine .xvi.li. and. dī. and two ounces: of oyle xv.li. of hony .xxv.li.
            
               Hinc, an aduerbe ſignifieng from thenſe. ſome tyme, for that cauſe. Hinc ille lachrimae, For that cauſe were the teares, or that was the matter wherfore he wepte.
            
               Hinc loci mei, frome my countray or towne that I came fro.
            
               Hinc ſcibo iam ubi ſiet, I wylle wete of hym nowe where he is.
            
               Hinc, illinc, here and there.
            Hinc & illinc, on euery ſyde. Hinc inde, idem.
            
               Hinc illinc uenit, he commeth I knowe not from whenſe.
            
               Hinnio, iui, ire, to neye lyke a horse.
            
               Hinnulus, a fawne or hynde calfe.
            ❀Hinnulus leonem, there is to be vnderſtād coepit, uicit, or prouocat, the kydde or fawne toke, vanquyſhed, or prouoked the lyon to batayle. A prouerbe applied to a perſon feble or ignorant, whiche by any meane hath vanquiſhed hym, whiche is more puiſſant than he, or prouoketh him to batayle, or contendeth with hym, whyche is wyſer or better lerned than he hym ſelfe.
            
               Hinnus, hinna, & hinnulus, hinnula, a mule ingendred betwene an aſſe and a mare.
            
               Hio, aui, are, to gape, alſo to wonder or meruail
            
               Hiant flores, the floures do ſpreade.
            
               Hioſciamus, an herbe callyd henbane.
            
               Hippacen, cheſe made of mares mylke.
            
               Hippaco, aui, are, to fetche breath quyckly.
            
               Hippagium, caryage on horſbacke.
            
               Hippago, ginis, a ferybote.
            
               Hippagogius, an inſtrumente wherewith ſtones are polyſhed.
            
               Hipparchus, capitayn of the horſemen.
            
               Hippeas, a kynde of crabfyſhe.
            
               Hippei, cometes or blaſyng ſterres, hauing manes lyke horſes.
            
               Hippiades, ymages of women on horſeback, as the women of Amazon were alway paynted.
            
               Hippiae, ben a kynd of creuyſes in the countrey callyd Phoenicia, which be ſo ſwyfte, that it is impoſſible to ouer take them.
            
               Hippias, a rhetorician (as Apuleiꝰ ſaith Floridor.
2. excelled al men in the multitude of craftes, and was equall to any man in eloquence, but of what countrey or kynred he was, it is vncertayn, he came on a tyme to Piſa, to the great tryumphe callyd Olympicum, and all thynges that he dyd weare vpon him, was of his owne makyng: his ſhoes and patens, his cote wrought of the fyneſt threde, with three threde ſtytches, a bawdrike of baudkyn with chaungeable colours and ſundrye pictures,
 a mantelle of whyte ouer all, and a rynge on his fynger with a ſtone, wherin was a ſygnet moſte perfectly wrought. And all this dyd he worke with his owne handes. Alſo he caryed with hym a lyttell oyle bottell, with a narow mouth, the reſydue rounde and flatte, with a lyttell inſtrument to ſtryke ſweate frome his body hangyng therat. He played excellentely on euery inſtrument, he ſange his owne verſes in all kyndes, whyche no man coulde amende. In all partes of rhetorike, logyk, and philoſophy, he vanquyſhed many and of none was vanquyſhed. He ran, wraſtelyd, and dyd other feares of actiuitie, that all men beholdyng hym, were therwith abaſhed. Finally in nothyng he ſemyd to be ignoraunt, weake, or vnable. Not withſtandyng Plato in two dialogues bringeth in Socrates diſputīg with him: In the one inſerching what beaultie is, in the other what a lye is. he concludeth and proueth Hippias to be an arrogant and ignorant folle, foraſmoche as prayſynge beaultie, he wyſt not what beaultie was, and boſtyng that he before any other man coulde diſcerne a lyar frome a true man, he coulde not make of them a tru diffinition. By this it appereth howe moche the commune iudgement of men varieth, and is inferior to the iugement of a perfect wyſe man, as Socrates was.
            
               Hippiatrus, an horſe leache.
            
               Hippius Tyrius, was he that fyrſt made ſhyppes, whiche ſerue onely for burdeyn, callyd in latyn Naues onerariae.
            
            
               Hippo maſc. gener. the name of two cities.
            
               Hippobotos, a feedor of horſes.
            
               Hippocampus, & hippocampae, fyſſhes lyke horſes on the forepartes.
            
               Hippocentauri, were a people in Theſſalia by the mount of Pelius, whiche were alſo callid Centauri, the which were the fyrſt that were ſene in Grece rydyng on horſes, wherof came the fable that Centauri, were halfe menne, halfe horſes.
            
               Hippocomus, an horſecorſer.
            
               Hippocrates, the name of a phyſition mooſte excellent.
            
               Hippocrene, a fountayne in Boeotia, dedicate to Apollo and the .ix. muſes.
            
               Hippodamia, doughter of Oenomaus, kyng of Arcadia, vnto whom it was tolde by a ſotheſayer, that whan his doughter dyd marye, he ſhulde dye. Therfore whan his doughter cam to the yeres of mariage, he ordeyned a price of runnynge with charyottes, and cauſyd to be proclaymed, that who ſo euer dydde vaynquyſhe hym therin, ſhulde haue his doughter to wyfe, and he that was vaynquyſſhed by hym, ſhulde dye. Many of the wowers were ſlayne. At the laſte Pelops the ſonne of Ta
                  •
               
               talus, deſyryng to hauē the ſaid mayden, promyſed pryuylye to Myrtilus whyche drau
                  •
                the kynges charyotte, that yf he dydde wyn the pryce. Myrtilus ſhulde lye with Hippodamia the fyrſte nyghte. vppon the whyche couenant Myrtilus made the extree of waxe, by occaſion wherof, the chariot fell downe & was broken, & Pelops had the price, Wherfore Oenomaus ſlewe hym ſelfe, and Pelops enioyed the lady and the royalme. Moreouer whan Myrtilus aſked that, which was promyſed hym, Pelops threwe hym into the ſea next adioynyng, which therof was euer after callyd Mare Myrtoum. There was an other lady callyd alſo Hippodamia, whyche was wyfe of Perithous, for whome the battayle was betwene the people callyd Centauri, and them whiche were namyd Lapythae.
            
            
               Hippodamus, a breaker of horſes.
            
               Hippodromus, a brode way, wherin many horſes many runne togither.
            
               Hippolapathum, an herbe callyd pacience.
            
               Hippolytus, the ſonne of Theſcus, who at the complaynte of Phedra his ſtepmother, was purſewed by his father, and he in a charyote fleyng was ouerthrowen amonge the ſharpe ſtones, and rente all to pieces. Afterwarde Aeſculapius reuyued hym, and reſtoryd hym to healthe. Wherfore he wolde be callyd Virbius, that is to ſay, twyſe a man, foraſmoche as he had twyſe lyued.
            
               Hippomachia, tourneyenge on horſebacke and iuſtynge.
            
               Hippomanes, an herbe, wherof if horſes done eate, they forthwith run madde. It is alſo a venomous humour, runnyng out of the ſhap of a mare, whiche if a man hap to receyue inwarde, he ſhall be madde, Plinius ſayth, that it is a lyttell fleſſhe in the forehead of a colte, whan he is newe fooled, blacke, and as moch as a date, whyche the mare plucketh awaye with her teethe, as ſoone as ſhe hath fooled: and if any man do take it awaye before her, ſhe neuer after wyll loue her foole.
            
               Hippomaratrum, wylde fenell.
            
               Hipponax, was a Greke poete, borne in Epheſus, who was defourmed in vyſage, but in ſtyle ſharpe and vehement, in ſo moch as whā a kunnynge payntour named Bubalus, had paynted his ylle fauoured face, to make men laughe at it: Hipponax made agaynſte hym ſuche vengeable verſes, that for anger and ſhame, he cauſed hym to hange hym ſelfe in his howſe.
            
               Hipponomus, a hearde or keper of horſes.
            
               Hippopera, a male or bougette.
            
               Hippophaës, the herbe callyd taſyll. It is alſo callyd Labrum Veneris, & Virga paſtoris.
            
            
               Hippopodes, peple ī the Scithik occeā, which
 haue fete lyke horſes.
            
               Hippopotamus, a beaſt lyuyng in the ryuer of Nyle, hauyng fete lyke an oxe, his backe and mane lyke an horſe, & neygheth lyke an hors, a wyndyng tayle, and tuſked lyke a boore.
            
               Hippoſelinon, ſome ſuppoſe it to be the herbe callache or ſmallache, or marche. Reade after in Olus atrum.
            
            
               Hippotela, a fole of an aſſe.
            
               Hippotoxota, an archer on horſebacke.
            
               Hippuris, an herbe callyd in latyn Equiſetum, or Cauda equina, in englyſh horſetayle, but it is commonly callyd cattes tayle.
            
               Hir, hiris, the palme of the hande.
            
               Hira, the gutte whiche is callyd Ieiunum.
            
            Hircinus, a, um, gotyſhe.
            
            
               Hircipilus, a man that is heary.
            
               Hircoſus, a, um, that ſtynketh lyke a gote.
            
               Hircquus, the corner of the eye. alſo he that is gogle eyed.
            
               Hirculus, a kynde of Spikenarde.
            
               Hircus, a gote bucke. It is alſoo the ranke ſauour, whiche yſſueth out of the arme holes.
            
               Hirquitalus, a chylde, whiche paſſeth the age of xiiii. yeres, and begynneth to be ſtyrred with lechery.
            
               Hirquitallire, to enter into that age, or aptnes to lechery.
            
               Hirrio, iui, ire, to narre lyke a madde dogge.
            Hirſutus, ta, tum, rough.
            
            
               Hirtae, hedges made of thorne.
            Hirtus, ta, tum, idem quod hirſutus.
            
               Hirudo, inis, a horſeleache or blud ſucker.
            
               Hirundo, inis, a ſwalowe.
            
               Hiſciacus, he that gapeth moche.
            
               Hiſco, ſci, ſcere, to gape as one doth for ſluggiſhenes, after ſlepe, or for lacke of ſlepe. Alſo it is to proffer to ſpeake, or open the mouthe to ſpeake.
            
               Hiſmaëlita, a ſaraſyn.
            
               Hiſpalis, uel Hiſpalum, a citie in Spayn nowe callyd Sibilia, or Siuii.
            
               Hiſpania, a countrey in the weſt part of Europa callyd Spayne, and was ſometyme callyd Iberia, and Heſperia, and is enuyronned on the ſouth part with the ſea callyd Mare mediterraneum, which diuideth Europa from Affrica: on the north part with the ſea callyd Mare Cantabricū, on the weſt with the great occean ſea: on the eaſt with the moūtayns callyd Pyrenaei, and the parte of the royalme of Fraunce, callyd Aquitania & Narbonenſis, And this coūtry is diuided by Ptholome into thre regiōs: Bethicā, wherin is Granado, Siuyl, Corduba. &c. Luſytaniam, wherin is Portugal, Galicia &c. Tarraconenſem, wherin is Caſtil, Liōs, & Arragon. At this time it cōteineth fyue royalmes: Granado on the ſouthe part toward Affrik, Portugall on the weſte, Galitia and Biſkay on the northe, Arragon on the eaſte parte, Caſtylle, and Lyone in the myddell. Moche of the weſte parte, by reaſon of rockes, forreſtes, and lacke of water is not fertile nor well inhabyted. The northe parte by reaſon of moche colde is not plentuouſe: the ſouthe part is wonderfull fruitfull. It is in lengthe, as Strabo writeth .vi. thou ſande furlonges, which is .DCCC. and fyfty myles, in bredth fyue thouſand furlong, whiche is .DCxxv. myles. Plinius next vnto Italy extolleth it in fertilitie aboue al other cuntrayes. Solinus compareth it with the beſte countrays in plenty of grayne, wynes, oyle, ſyluer, golde, and yron. Statius and Claudiꝰ famous poetes, do no leſſe commende it.
            
               Hiſpidus, a, um, briſteled or rough heared.
            
               Hiſtoria, a ſtory.
            
               Hiſtoricus, a writer of hyſtories.
            
               Hiſtrio, onis, a player in enterludes and ſtage players.
            
               Hiſtrionicus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to players.
            
               Hiſtrix, icis, a beaſt hauynge ſharpe prickes on his backe, callyd a porkepyne.
            
               Hiulco, aui, are, to make to gape or chynke.
            
               Hiulcus, ca, cum, gapynge, or chynked, as the grounde is in a great drithe.
         
         
            ¶H ANTE O.
            
               HOC, this or that.
            
               Hodie, to daye.
            
               Hodiernus, na, num, of this daye.
            
               Hododocus, a robber by the hygh way.
            
               Hodoeporicum, a boke to cary in iourney, whiche may be callyd a iournall.
            
               Hodoeporus, a trauayler by the way.
            
               Holocauſtum, properly the beeſt, which hauing his bowelles taken out, is layde hole on the aultar and burned.
            
               Holographum, a teſtament al writen with the hande of the teſtatour.
            
               Holor, oris, a ſwanne.
            
               Holoſerica ueſtis, a garment all of ſylke.
            
               Holus, alias Homolus, a hyll of Theſſaly.
            
               Homeromaſtix, ticis, the reprocher of Homer, generally Homeromaſtices, be taken for all reprochers & falſe correcters of lernyd men.
            
               Homêrus, the chiefe of all poetes, and was named Meleſigenes, but bycauſe he was blynds, he was callid Homêrus, which in the tungue callyd Ionica, ſignifieth blind. Cicer. Tuſc. 5. ſaith in cōmendation of Homer: It is writen (ſaith he) that Homere was blynd, yet ſee we his picture & not his poeme. for what cōtrey, what marches, what hoſte, what nauy, what motiōs of mindes, as wel of men, as of beſtis are expreſſed in ſuch wyſe, that he maketh vs to ſe, that he ſaw not. Plutarchus in the boke
 whiche he wrate of hym, ſaythe, that in his two warkes he comprehended both the partes of a manne, for in Iliade he deſcrybed ſtrengthe and valyauntnes of the bodye: In Odyſſea he dothe ſette forthe a perfecte paterne of the mynde. Notwithſtandynge for his vndeſcrete fablynge of goddes and goddeſſes, Plato excluded hym out of his weale publyke, whiche he deuyſed.
            
               Homicida, a murderer, a man kyller.
            
               Homicidium, murder, or manſlaughter.
            
               Homilia, a ſermon.
            
               Homo, a lyuynge creature, hauynge capacity of reaſon, ſubiecte to death, a man, woman. or chylde.
            ❀Homo bulla, a man is but a bubbel. A prouerbe ſignifieng the ſhortnes and vncertaintie of mannes lyfe, reſemblynge it to a bubbell of water, whiche ſhortly ryſeth, and as ſhortly vaniſheth and commeth to nothynge.
            ❀Homo homini deus, man is man is god, applyed to hym whiche with any ſyngular benefite helpeth a man aboue his expectation.
            ❀Homo trium literarum, ſignified ſomtyme in mokage, a man of a noble lynage, bycauſe noble men wrate theyr forenames, theyr names, and ſurnames with three letters, as P. Cor. Scipio. C. I. Caeſar. It is ſometyme taken for a thiefe, bycauſe in Fur, are but thre letters.
            
               Homocapnus, a man whiche ſytteth alwaye in the ſmoke, or by the fyer.
            
               Homoeoſis, a ſimilitude.
            
               Homogalactus, a foſter brother.
            
               Homogenes, of one kynde.
            
               Homogloſſus, of the ſame tungue or language
            
               Homoleum, a cap of the olde faſcion.
            
               Homologia, a confeſſion, conſent, or couenant
            
               Homomeria, lykenes in partes or members.
            
               Homonaea, the proper name of a womā, wherby is ſignified concorde.
            
               Homonymon, where many thynges haue one name, but dyuers in effecte, as a man, whiche is a lyue, or paynted, deuyded by this addition, a very man, a paynted man.
            
               Homoſipyi, they whiche ſlepe together vnder one roufe.
            
               Homouſios, of lyke ſubſtaunce.
            
               Homulus, & Homuncio, a lyttell man, or of 
                  ••
               all reputation. 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               eſtas, tatis honeſtie. 
               
                  〈…〉
               , aui, are, to rewarde with honour. 
                  〈◊〉
                us, ta, tum, honeſt.
            
            
               Honor, oris, Honos, noris, honour, dignity. ſometyme beaulty. alſo reuerence, honeſty.
            
               Honorem praefari, is where one ſhall ſpeke of any thinge that is not honeſt, than to ſay: Sauynge your reuerence.
            
               Honoraria, playes made at Rome, to the honour of Bacchus.
            
               Honorarium, a preſente gyuen to ambaſſadours, greatte offycers, and Iuſtyces at theyr fyrſte commynge, or executyng of their authorities.
            
               Honorarius, a, um, perteynynge to honour.
            
               Honorificēs, honorificentior, honorificentiſſimus, a, um, vſynge or doynge thynges honourably.
            
               Honorificentiſsime, in a very honorable forme or maner, very honorably.
            
               Honorifico, aui, are, to do honour, or to honour.
            
               Honorificus, ca, cum, that bryngeth honour.
            Honoro, aui, are, to honour.
            
            
               Honorus, a, um, that is with honour.
            
               Hopiſtographi, rolles written on bothe ſydes.
            
               Hora, an houre. alſo tyme of an houre, a day, or a yere.
            
               Horaeum, ſomer honey. It is alſo a ſauce made of fyſhe.
            
               Horarium, the ſpace of an houre.
            
               Horatius Flaccus, a famous poete borne at Venuſium a towne in Apulia, a man excellent in ſharpnes of wyt and quickenes of ſentence. He was addict to Epicures sect, & ſomwhat wanton in maners thoughe he do liberallye note vices of other men in his verſes, called Satyri, in balades to ſyng to the harpe, whiche were in .xviii. ſondrye kyndes of verſes. he paſſed all other that wrate in latyne: he was in good fauour with the emperour Auguſtus, by the meanes of Mecoenas the emperours minion, whoo toke in hym for his myrth and wyt moche dilectation, to whom and to Auguſtus he wrate diuerſe epiſtelles in verſe, comprehendynge great wyſedomes in compendious ſentences, and dyed whan he was .lvii. yeres old as Euſebius writeth▪ he was after the incarnation of Chriſt about x. yeres.
            
               Horda, a cowe great with calfe.
            Hordeaceus, a, um, of barley.
            
            
               Hordearij, they whiche do lyue with eatynge barley.
            
               Hordearius, a, um, perteyninge to barley.
            
               Hordeum, barley.
            
               Horeſtes, the ſonne of kyng Agamemnon, whiche ſlewe his mother, bycauſe ſhe conſpyred with Aegiſthus her aduouterer to ſlea his father.
            
               Horia, a fyſhers bote.
            
               Horiola, a lyttell fyſhers bote.
            
               Horizon, tis, a cercle diuidyng the halfe ſphere or ouer parte of the firmamente, from the other halfe, where, to our ſyght, it ſemeth that the heauen toucheth the erthe.
            
               Hormeſion, a pretious ſtone of the colour of fyre.
            
                
               Horminode, a grene ſtone, compaſſed with a cercle of the colour of golde.
            
               Horno, an aduerbe ſignifieng this yere.
            
               Hornotinus, a, um, of one yeres growynge.
            
               Hornus, na, um, of this yeres.
            
               Hagnus hornus, this yeres lambe.
            
               Hornae fruges, this yeres grayne.
            
               Horologium, a dyall or a clocke.
            
               Horomaſdes, amonge the Caldees was named the good god.
            
               Horoſcopo, are, to marke the houre.
            
               Horoſcopos, the diligent markyng of the time of the byrthe of a chylde.
            
               Horoſcopus, that parte of the firmament, whiche euery houre riſeth from the eaſte, aſtronomers do call it the aſcendent.
            
               Horoſcopus, pa, um, eyery thynge, wherein houres be marked.
            
               Horrearius, the keper of the barne.
            
               Horreo, rui, ere, whan a manne thynketh that his heare dothe ryſe alſo to quake for cold or feare. ſometyme to feare moche.
            
               Horrent agri, the fieldes are vnpleaſant and vnfruitefull.
            
               Horreſco, ſcere, whan a man feeleth within hym greate colde or tremblynge to begyn, as in a feuer, or in a greate feare. ſome tyme to quake.
            
               Horreum, a barne, wherin corne is layd. ſome tyme a ſtorehouſe, wherein any other thynge is kepte.
            
               Horribilis le, horrible or terrible.
            Horrificus, idem.
            
               Horride, without any good faſcion or pleſure.
            
               Horridulus, tymorus.
            
               Horridus, da, dum, hydeous, or he that quaketh for colde or feare.
            
               Horrifico, aui, are, to make aferde.
            
               Horripilo, aui, are, to be roughe.
            
               Horriſonus, na, num, hauynge a terrible ſowne or voyce.
            
               Horror, oris, a ſheuerynge or quakynge for colde or feare.
            
               Horſum, hither, or hytherwarde, an aduerbe.
            Hortatus, tus, exhortation.
            
            
               Hortenſia, the doughter of Hortenſius, a woman moſte eloquent.
            
               Hortenſius, an excellent oratour of Rome, of a wonderfull memory.
            
               Hortenſis, ſe, perteyninge to a gardeyne, or of a gardeyne.
            Hortor, aris, ari, to exhorte.
            
            
               Hortus, a knot gardeyne, or a gardeyne for pleaſure, or an orcharde.
            
               Horti penſiles, gardeyn made on the toppes of houſes.
            
               Horula, a lyttell houre,
            
               Horus, was an Egyptian, whiche wrate and declared the ſecrete maner of writyng, which the Egyptians vſed, called Hieroglyphica.
            
            
               Hoſtomaticus, ſyckely.
            
               Hoſpes, hoſpitis, a Geſt, whiche lodgeth in an other mannes houſe. alſo a ſtranger, or a mā, inhabitynge out of the countrey.
            
               Hoſpita terra, a countrey, wherby a man may peaſibly paſſe.
            
               Hoſpitalia, lodgynges in an houſe, which ſerue onely for ſtrangers.
            
               Hoſpitalis, le, vſynge a gentyll entertaynment or gladly receyuynge a ſtraunger.
            
               Hoſpitalis Iupiter, was ſoo called, bycauſe ſtraungers or Geſtes whan they were yll intreated in theyr lodginges, they called hym to witnes, deſyringe hym to reuenge hym.
            
               Hoſpitium, a houſea lway redy to receyue frendes. ſometyme a lodgynge. alſo an hoſpitall. ſomtyme frendſhyp ſhewed in hoſpitalitie.
            
               Hoſpitor, aris, ari, to receyue frendly in to his houſe.
            
               Hoſsimi, they that be borne without noſethriſls
            
               Hoſtia, an hooſt or ſacrifice offered to attayne victory of ennemies.
            
               Hoſticus, ca, cum, hoſtile or ennemy.
            
               Hoſtilis, le, perteyninge to an ennemy.
            
               Hoſtimentum, recompence, one for an other.
            
               Hoſtio, iui, ire, to recompence, to aſſuage, or abate, to offende.
            
               Hoſtis, an ennemie.
            
               Hoſtium, a meaſure of a hundred and forty buſhels. Alſo a dore.
            
               Hoſtorium, the ſtaffe, wherwith all meaſures be made euen, a ſtryke.
         
         
            ¶H ANTE V.
            
               HVber, eris, a pap or vdder.
            
               Huber, ra, rurr, fruitfull or plentuous.
            
               Hubero, aui, are, to make plentuous or fruitfull.
            
               Huberrime, very plentuouſly.
            Hubertas, tatis, plenty.
            
            
               Hubertim, plentuouſly.
            
               Hucertus, ta, tum, abundant or plentuous.
            
               Huc, hyther.
            
               Hui, an interiection of wonderyng. Hui meam ſororem, ho my ſuſtar. Hui tam cito, ho, ho, ſo ſhortly or ſone.
            
               Huic, to that place: alſo to hym or her.
            Huiuſmodi, & Huiuſcemodi, ſuch.
            
            
               Hulula, a ſhriche owle.
            Hululo, aui, are, to houle.
            
            
               Humanitas, humanitie, or nature of m
                  •
                doctrine perteyninge to man.
            
               Humaniter, gentylly.
            
               Humanitus, of men.
            
               Humanus, na, um, gentyll, tractable, courteys mercifull, and frendly.
            
               Humecto, aui, are, to make moyſte.
            
                
               Humeo, mui, ere, to be moyſte or wet.
            Humeſco, ſcere, idem.
            
               Humerus, the ſhulder.
            
               Humidus, moyſte.
            
               Humigatus, wet.
            
               Humilio, aui, are, to make lowe, poore, or abiecte.
            
               Humilis, le, baſe, lowe. alſo ſymple or poore, abiecte, vyle.
            
               Humilitas, tatis, baſeneſſe or lowenes, humylitie, whiche as Speuſippus defyneth, is a gentylnes of the mynde, lackynge wrathe or anger.
            
               Humi, a lowe, or on the gronnde.
            
               Humo, aui, are, to bury or hyde.
            
               Humor, oris, humour or moyſture.
            
               Humus, erthe beinge moyſte.
            
               Hungaria, reade after in Pannonia.
            
            
               Hunni, people whiche came out of Scithia, and inhabited Hungary.
         
         
            H ANTE Y.
            
               HYacinthina, were ſolemne ceremonies done in the night.
            
               Hyaccynthinus, na, um, violet colour.
            
               Hyacinthus, called alſo Vaccinium, hath leaues lyke porret, an hande breade in heyghte, leſſe than a mannes lyttell fynger, greene of colour the toppe lyinge downe full of purple floures, and the rote rounde, the floure ſpringeth out in ſpryng tyme, with the violet, and before the roſe. Of this floure were fayned two ſondry fables, One, that it was a boye, whom Apollo loued, whom by misfortune he ſlewe, wherfore he tourned hym in to this floure. An other fable is, that it ſprange of the bloude of Aiax the valiante Greeke, and that certayne veynes of the floure ſeme to expreſſe the figure of thoſe two letters. AI. It is alſo a pretious ſtone of the colour of golde called a Iacincte, whiche hath a ſoueraygne vertue agaynſt the commune plage ſpecially if it be ſo worne, that it do touche the veyne commynge from the harte.
            
               Hyades, are .vii. ſterres, whoſe names ar Ambroſia, Eudora, Paſithoë, Coronis, Plexaura, Pytho, & Tythe, they be troublous, and rayſeth ſtormes and wyndes, and they goo downe the .xiiii. calendes of Maye. Poetes name them the doughters of Atlas and Aethra. wherfore they ben alſo called Atlandides. But bycauſe that in lamentynge theyr brother Hyas, which was ſlayn by a lyones, they worned away and dyed, and therfore by Iupiter were tranſlated vnto the firmament they were afterwarde called Hyades, by the name of theyr brother. Some ſaye that they were the nouryces of Bacchus, and were called Dodonides Nymphae, of a towne and forreſt called Dodona. The Romaynes called them Succulae, and alſo Paralicium.
            
            
               Hyalargus, a glaſyer.
            
               Hyalinus, glaſy.
            
               Hyalus, glaſſe.
            
               Hyberia, a region in Aſia, ioynynge to Armenie, enuyrronned with the mountayne called Caucaſus. It is alſo the olde name of Spain
            
               Hyberna, places where men of warre do reſte them in wynter.
            
               Hybernacula, places prepared to wynter in, ſpecially in the beſiegynge of townes or fortreſſes.
            
               Hybernia, Yrelande.
            
               Hyberno, aui, are, to make abode in wynter.
            
               Hybernus, na, um, perteyninge to wynter.
            
               Hyberus, a great riuer in Spayne, nyghe to Tarrhacon.
            
               Hyble, uel Hybles, a Citie in Sicile, and a mountayne nyghe to it, wheron groweth plē
               ty of tyme, and therfore the hony whiche is there, is of all other moſte pleaſaunt.
            
               Hybrida, is a dog, ingendred betwyxt a hound and a maſtyue, called a limmar, or mongrel.
            
               Hybrides, halfe wylde.
            
               Hybris, idis, a kynde of haukes, whiche ſeldome is ſene in the daye, but ſeketh his pray in the nyghte.
            
               Hydaſpes, a great ryuer in Indie.
            
               Hyderon, a diſeaſe, whan the ſkyn is fylled with water.
            
               Hydra, a water ſerpente. It was alſo a monſter, with whom Hercules faughte, and as ſone as he had ſtryken of one head of the mō
               ſter, immediately ſprange vp an other.
            3 Hydram ſecare, to meddle with an endles matter, or where after one miſchiefe happeneth an other.
            
               Hydragogus, he that bryngeth water to a place by furrowes or trenches.
            
               Hydrargyrum, a certayne thynge, wherwith ſyluer is gylte in the ſtede of quicke ſyluer.
            
               Hydraulis, an organ player.
            
               Hydraulos, an inſtrument to puſhe out the water by violence.
            
               Hydria, a water pot.
            
               Hydrolapathon, water dockes.
            
               Hydromantia, diuination in callynge of ſpirites to appere in water.
            
               Hydromel, water and hony ſodden to gether.
            
               Hydropiper, ſeemeth to be the herbe whiche the pothecaryes do commonly cal Eupatory.
            
               Hydropota, he that drynketh alway water.
            
               Hycca, a great fyſhe, whiche Hermolaus Barbarus taketh for a ſturgeon.
            
               Hydrops, dropis, the dropeſy. It is a ſicknes (as Trallianus wryteth) whiche commeth of the lyuer made ſoo colde, that it maye not
 ſuffitiently boyle the meate that is receyued, and conuerte it in to the ſubſtaunce of pure bloud, but turneth it into a warry ſubſtance, or into wynde, or elles into fleume. By occaſion wherof (as Galenus and Paulus doo ſaye) the lyuer being feble, the colde matter, whiche aboundeth, is ſente into other members, whereof commeth yll habyte or fygure of the body. It procedeth of three cauſes: of a primatiue cauſe, as by moche colde drynke forthwith after labour, or bayninge, goinge longe in the ſun, or drynkynge moche faſting. Of a procedynge cauſe, as of an yl complexion, hot or colde, or oppilation, wherby good humours are let to be iugendered, and yl humours to be expulſed. Of a ioynte cauſe, as of water or wynde poſſedynge eyther all the members, or onely them which ſerue for nouryſhement of the body. Of this ſickenes be thre kyndes: Tympanites, Aſtites, Hypoſarcha, reade more of them in theyr places.
            
               Hydruntes, a citie in Calabria.
            
               Hydrus, a water ſerpente.
            
               Hyemo, aui, are, to reſt in the wynter tyme.
            
               Hyems, wynter.
            
               Hyena, a beaſte lyke a wulfe, whiche hath a mane ouer all his backe and necke, but the heares be longer and harder.
            
               Hymber, a ſhoure of rayne or hayle.
            
               Hymen, a ſkynne in the ſecrete place of a mayden, which whan ſhe is defloured, is broken.
            
               Hymenaeus, was called the god of maryage.
            
               Hymera, the name of a ryuer.
            
               Hymettus, a hyll by Athenes, where was hony of all other moſte pretious.
            
               Hymnus, a prayſe in a ſonge.
            
               Hyoſcyamos, an herbe called henbane.
            
               Hypaepa, a citie, where were meruaylous fayre women.
            
               Hypaethra, an aley in a gardeyne, or galerye without any couerynge.
            
               Hypagogeus, an inſtrument, wherwith ſtones are polyſhed.
            
               Hypanis, a ryuer in Scithia.
            
               Hypaſis, or as ſome do wryte Hypanis, Arrianus calleth it Hyphaſis, a great ryuer, whiche runneth out of the mountaynes of Scithia into Inde, and cometh into the famous ryuer of Ganges, and is in breade .vii. furlonge, as Diodorus wryteth. lib. 17. The ſtreame therof is ſo ſwyfte, that no man may paſſe ouer it, by the ſpace of fyue dayes ſaylynge, the water is freſhe: after that it commeth within foure dayes ſaylynge of the ſea it is wonderfull bytter, by reaſon of a bytter fountayne, whiche runneth in to it. At this ryuer the great Alexander fyniſhed his iourney, & went no further into Inde, but there dyd ſet vp .xii. great aulters of ſtone, euerye of them fyfty cubites in greatnes.
            
               Hypata, a citie of Theſſaly.
            
               Hypenium ouum, an egge whiche hath neyther whyte nor yelke.
            
               Hyperaſpiſtes, a protectour, a great ſhielde.
            
               Hyperbaton, a longe dependynge, or ſuperfluous ſentence.
            
               Hyperbole, exceſſe in aduaunſynge, or depreſſynge: as hygher than heauen, whiter than ſnowe, ſwifter than lyghtenyng, ſlower than a ſnayle, worſe than the dyuell.
            Hyperbolicus, ca, cum, excedynge credence.
            
            
               Hyperborei, people dwellynge in the furthermoſte parte of the northe, and as ſome haue ſuppoſed, vnder the northe pole called Polus Arcticus. Pomponius Mela writeth, that the countrey is but lyttell, hauynge the ſun ouer them, and beinge fertile of it ſelfe, the people verye iuſte, and lyuynge lenger and more pleaſantly than other men, alway with out buſyneſſe or labour, knowynge neyther warre nor debate: Lyke to this dothe Pliny write. li. 4. cap. 12. Solinus ſaythe, that ſome men do appoynte them rather to Aſia, than to Europa. Other doo ſet them meane betwene the ſun goynge downe with the Antipodes (whiche are people hauynge theyr feete agaynſte oures) and the ſunne ryſynge with vs. Finally he ſaythe, that they be in Europa, where they haue .vi. monthes continually daye, and .vi. other monethes continually nighte, the wyndes there be alwaye holſome, and they knowe neyther ſickeneſſe nor vnquietnes. Wherfore Strabo wryteth li. 15. that ſome men affirmed, that they did lyue a thouſande yeres. Feſtus Pompeius wrate, that they exceded the lyfe of man, lyuynge aboue a hundred yeres, and therfore were they called Hyperborei, as it were excedynge the commune terme of mannes lyfe. and whan they be wery and tedious of their lyfe, as Mela and Solinus doo wryte, makynge good chere with theyr neyghbours, & hauynge garlandes on theyr heades, they throw them ſelfes from a certaine rocke into the depe ſea, eſtemyng that to be the beſt deth and fourme of burienge.
            
               Hypercatalecticum metrū, where aboundeth one ſyllable or two.
            
               Hypericon, an herbe called ſayncte Iohn̄s wurte.
            
               Hyperion, of the poetes called the ſunne of Titan & Terra, father of the ſun, the mone and the morrowe, and ſometyme he is put for the ſunne.
            
               Hyperthyron, is a tranſumpte or haunce.
            
               Hyperthyrum, that whiche is nexte ouer the browe of a man.
            
               Hyphen, where dyuers wordes be pronounced
 vnder one accente, as Quandoquidem, utcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  . &c.
            
            
               Hypnales, adders, whiche ſtynginge a man, he dyeth ſleapynge.
            
               Hypocauſtum, a hote houſe or ſtewe.
            
               Hypochyma, a graye humour keuerynge the eye, called alſo Glaucoma.
            
            
               Hypocondrium, the inwarde parte of the body aboue the nauel, and vnder the ſtomacke.
            
               Hypocriſis, falſe dyſſimulation, fayned holyneſſe.
            
               Hypocrita, an hypocrite.
            
               Hypodidaſcalus, an vſher or ſubſtitute in teachynge.
            
               Hypogeum, a place vnder grounde.
            
               Hypogloſsida, lyttell rounde thynges made by phiſyke to lye vnder ones tungue, whiche is dyſeaſed with reumes or griefe in the throte.
            
               Hypomnema, matis, an expoſition or comment.
            
               Hypopodion, a foote ſtoole.
            
               Hypopyus, where matter runneth out of the eyes.
            
               Hypoſarcha, is one of the kyndes of dropeſy, wherby all the bodye bolneth or ſwelleth. It cometh by the increaſynge of bloude, colde, thyn and watrye, infuſed in to all the members, in the defaulte of the thyrde digeſtion, cauſed by the weakenes of the ſtomake and lyuer, the wayes wherof beinge ſtopped, the power wherby ſuperfluities are ſeparat and expulſed, is made feble, wherby the body doth gather vitious iuyce and wyndes.
            
               Hypoſphagma, where the ſkinne of the eye by ſome ſtroke is ſo hurte, that the bloud ſodenly ſpredeth ouer the eye.
            
               Hypoſtaſis, ſubſtaunce. It is alſo that, which dothe ryſe in vrine, where there is good dygeſtion, if the reſidence be whyte, lyght, and ryſynge in faſcion lyke a peare, the ſmal ende vpwarde.
            
               Hypotheca, a pledge. alſo a doctrine.
            
               Hypotheſis, an argumente, matter, or cauſe, whervpon one ſhuld argue, diſpute, or ſpeke.
            
               Hypothicos, a lynnen rochet.
            
               Hypothyra, ſeu Hypothyrides, the dore, or rather the place open, where the dore is.
            
               Hypothyron, a groundſyll, or threſhold.
            
               Hypozigia, all drawynge cattell.
            
               Hypſicratea, the wyfe of kynge Mythridates, whiche folowed hym in all his warres, beynge armed lyke a knyght.
            
               Hypſiphyle, was doughter of Thoas kyng of Lemnos, whan the women there by a commune conſent, had ſlayne all the men of that countrey in one nyght, ſhe ſaued her father, and dyd let hym departe. After whan Iaſon goynge towarde the conqueſt of the goulden flyſe, came vnto Lemnos, ſhe beinge in loue with hym, conceyued by hym twoo chyldren twynnes, and whan they were borne, the women of that countrey wolde haue put her to death for the ſauyng of her father, but ſhe in fleinge was taken by pyrates, and gyuen to Lycurgus kynge of Nemea, whoſe ſonne ſhe nouriſhed. But whan the Argiues wente to deſtroye Thebes, Hypſiphyle whyle ſhe went to ſhewe to the Argiues a fountayne, left the chylde lyinge on the graſſe, who was ſlayne by a ſerpent. wherfore whan the father of the chylde wold haue put her to deth, the kinges of the Argiues defended and ſaued her. Som other do wryte, that Hypſiphyle, whan ſhee perceyued that Iaſon dyd not returne to her agayne accordynge to his promyſe, ſhe threw her ſelfe into the ſea, and was drowned.
            
               Hyrcania, a countrey in Aſia.
            
               Hyſginum, a coulour lyke ſcarlet.
            
               Hyſopus, & hyſopum, an herbe called hiſope.
            
               Hyſteralgia, peyne of the bealy.
            
               Hyſterologia, & Hyſteron proteron, a maner of ſpeakynge, where the laſte is ſet before the fyrſte, and as it is ſayde: the carte before the horſes.
         
         
            ¶I ANTE A.
            
               
                  I IS THE IMperatiue moode of Eo, and doth ſignifie Go thou. It is alſo a forme of ſpekynge, whan we do correcte, exhorte, or mocke any man.
            
               I nunc, & rebus nimium confide ſecundis, Go to, and put all thy truſte in proſperitie.
            
               I nunc, & dormientem excita, go thy waye and awake hym.
            
               Ia, was the yonger ſonne of Atlas, and ſouneth as moche as a voyce.
            
               Iacchus, one of the names of Bacchus, called god of wynes.
            
               Iacea nigra, is as Brunfelſius ſuppoſeth, the herbe, whiche is called Morſus diaboli.
            
            
               Iaceo, cui, cere, to lye, to extende out or be of length ſometyme to be. In medio campus iacet, In the myddle is a fylde. Alſo to be dead. Ille iacet, he is deade. Somtyme to be contemned or nought ſet by. Maximas uero uirtutes iacere neceſſe eſt, uoluptate dominante, Carnall dilectation rulynge, nedes muſte excellent vertues be nothynge ſet by.
            
                
               Iacent, they are without vertue, courage or eſtimation.
            
               Iacent uirtutes, vertue is naughte ſet by.
            
               Iacent pretia, they are of a lowe pryce.
            
               Iacet grauiter, he lyeth ſycke.
            
               Iacet oratio, the oration is without any grace or ſpirite.
            
               Iacens animus, a deſperate mynde, or out of courage.
            
               Iacente te, thou beinge ſicke.
            
               Iacio, ieci, iacere, to throwe, caſte, or ſhoote, ſomtyme to ſet or laye.
            
               Iacere fundamentum, to ſet or laye a foundation.
            
               Iacob, a patriarch, ſonne of Iſaac.
            
               Iacobus, a proper name, in englyſhe Iames.
            
               Iactanter, boſtyngely.
            
               Iactantia, boſte.
            Iactatio, idem.
            
               Iacito, taui, tare, to boſte often.
            
               Iacto, aui, are, to throwe, to reuolue, or toſſe in the mynde, to vexe, to throwe downe and heate, to auaunt or glory, to ſpeake vaynly, to ſet forthe, to toſſe, to caſte out.
            
               Iactuoſe, braggingly.
            
               Iaculatio, Iaculamen, & Iaculamentum, a ſhot, or caſte with a darte, or iauelyn.
            
               Iaculo, aui, are, to ſhoore or caſt farre.
            Iaculor, aris, idem.
            
               Iaculum, any thynge that maye be ſhot or caſt far, moſte comonly a darte or lyghte iauelyn.
            
               Iaculus, a ſerpente, that lyeth vnder trees, and ſodaynly with a meruaylous vyolence perſeth any beaſte, whiche happeneth to paſſe by hym.
            
               Iam, nowe, alſo incontinent, or forthwith.
            
               Iam ne imus? ſhall we not go nowe?
            
               Iambus, a fote in meter, which hath the fyrſte ſyllable ſhorte, the other longe.
            
               Iam diu, longe agone.
            
               Iam dudum, nowe late, but a whyle ſenſe.
            
               Iamiam, euen nowe.
            
               Iam inde, incontinent after.
            
               Iam olim, nowe late.
            
               Iam pridem, a lyttell whyle paſte, but late. ſomtyme forthwith.
            
               Iam tum, for that tyme.
            
               Ianiculum, a parte of Rome and a mountayne in it. Alſo a gate of the ſame name.
            
               Ianira, the doughter of Ocean and Tethis.
            
               Ianitor, toris, a porter.
            
               Ianthina, violet colour or purple.
            
               Ianua, a dore or yate.
            
               Ianuarius, the moneth of Ianiuer.
            
               Ianus, ſome ſuppoſe to be Saturne, ſome to be Iaphet one of the ſonnes of Noe. Cicero calleth hym the ſuperioure worlde, or heauen. He was made hauynge two viſages, eyther bycauſe the heauen tournynge, the yere retourneth, where it began: or elles bycauſe it knoweth what is paſſed, and foreſeeth what ſhall happen. This god, or rather ydoll, had a temple in Rome, whiche in the tyme of warres was alway open, and in the tyme of peace was ſhut. And therfore whan in ſtories mention is made, that the temple of Ianus was a ſhut, than is it to be vnderſtande, that the Romaynes had peace vnyuerſally.
            
               Ianum claudere, in olde tyme ſygnifyed to make vnyuerſall peace, for in the temple of Ianus at Rome were two dores, which were opened whan the Romaynes made war, and whan warre was finiſhed and all thynges in quiete, than were they ſhut.
            
               Iapetus, the father of Prometheus.
            
               Iapigia, a countrey in the realme of Naples, called Calabria.
            
            
               Iapix, gis, a wynde, which commeth out of the partes of Apulia, and is a weſterne wynde. alſo one of the ſonnes of Dedalus, and was kynge of Calabria, whiche of hym was called Iapigia.
            
            
               Iaſminum, a tree and lyttell floure called Iaſemin.
            
            
               Iaſon, onis, he whiche fyrſte conquered the fleeſe of golde.
            
               Iaſpis, pidis, a ſtone called Iaſper.
            
               Iatraleptes, a phiſition or ſurgion, whiche cureth with oyntmentes.
            
               Iatraleptice, curynge by oyntmentes.
            
               Iatronice, a booke of phiſike.
            
               Iatros, a phiſition.
         
         
            ¶I ANTE B.
            
               IBERIA, the auntient name of Spayne. Alſo an other countrey nyghe to Armeny. it is of ſome wrytten with h.
            
            
               Iberi, & Ibres, Spaniardes, or men of the other Iberia.
            
               Iberis, or Hiberis, an herbe lyke to kreſſes, but moche greatter, the ſtalke is a lyttell cubyte in heyght, in ſomer it beareth a whyte floure, and hath a lyttell ſede, which groweth about all the ſtalke. Hermolaus dothe interprete it wyld kreſſes. Manardus writeth, that ſome menne calleth it Lepidium. Aetius calleth it Cardamine, whiche in latine is Naſturtium in engliſhe kreſſes.
            
               Iberus, a ryuer in Spayne.
            
               Ibi, there.
            
               Ibidem, there, or in the ſame place.
            
               Ibis, a foule or byrde of Aegypt which is high, and hath ſtiffe legges, and a longe byl. They profyt moche to the countrey in kyllyng and eatynge ſerpentes, which out of Libya be caryed into Aegypt with a ſouthern wynd. alſo it is taken for an enuyous perſon.
         
         
            
            ¶I ANTE C.
            
               ICaria, an yle in the ſea Icario, whiche is alſo called Icaros.
            
            
               Icarus, the father of the chaſte Penelope. There was an other Icarus, which was the ſon of Dedalus, who hauing wīges with his father flew out of the yle of Crete: but whan he flewe higher than his father commaunded hym, the waxe, wherwith the fethers of his winges were glewed, beyng molten with the heate of the ſun, and the fethers fallynge of, Icarus was conſtrayned to fall into the ſea, whiche was afterwarde callyd Mare Icarium. Alſo Icarus is a mountayne in the region of Athenes.
            
               Ichneumon, a beaſte in Aegypt, of the greatenes of a cat, and is faſcioned lyke a mouſe, who crepeth in to the bodye of a Cocodryll, whan he gapeth, and eatynge his bowelles, ſleeth hym. It is alſo a kynde of waſpes.
            
               Ichnographia, is a plat concernynge buyldyng wherin is onely contayned the place, wheron the buyldynge ſhall ſtande, hauynge lightely deſcribed with rule and compace the forme and faſcion of euery court quadrāt, and flore therin comprehended. Alſo an inſtrument like a compace, wherwith are made the deſcriptions of the ſun.
            
               Ichnuſa, the yle nowe called Sardinia.
            Ico, ici, icere, ictum; to ſtrike.
            
            Icona, uel Icon, an ymage.
            
            
               Iconicus, ca, cum, ſo paynted or fourmed, that in euery member the very ſimilitude is expreſſed.
            
               Iconiſmus, a deſcription.
            
               Iconium, a towne in the countrey of Capadocia, an other in Aſia the laſſe. It is alſo a mannes owne ymage lyke hym ſelfe.
            
               Ictericus, he that is diſeaſed with the iaundiſe.
            
               Icteros, a ſycknes called the iaundiſe.
            
               Icthybolus, a fyſher.
            
               Icthyocolla, a fyſhe of whoſe ſkynne water glewe is made, and the ſame glue is alſo called Iectyocolla.
            
            
               Icthyophagi, people by ſouthe Indie, whiche do eate onely fyſhe, not onely the people but alſo theyr cattell is fedde therewith, and do weare garmentes of the ſkynnes of fyſhes. Alſo (as Strabo wryteth) they houſes be made with whales bones and oyſter ſhelles, for the rybbes of the fyſhes do make the beames and rafters, of the iowes ar made dores of the backe bones are made morters, in the whiche the fyſſhe is pounded, and dryed at the ſun, and therof do they make theyr bread myngled with a lyttel wheate. Arrianus. li. 8. wryteth, that the rybbes of whales were ſene there by the capitaynes of kynge Alexander, whiche were aboue .xxxvii. fote, and a halfe longe, wherewith theyr houſes were builded
            
               Ictyopola, a fyſhemonger, or ſeller of fyſhe.
            
               Icthyopolion, a fyſhe market.
            
               Icthyotrophia, a ponde or ſtewe, wherin fyſhes be fed.
            
               Ictis, idis, a whyte weſyl, whiche deſtroyeth bee ſtalles and eateth the hony.
         
         
            ¶I ANTE D.
            ID, that. Id, quod res eſt, whiche is trouth
            
            
               Id aetatis, of that age.
            
               Id eurat ſcilicet, he careth moche therfore. whiche is ſpoken as who ſayth, he careth nothynge for it.
            Id locorum, for Id.
            
               Id temporis, at that tyme, or ſuche a tyme.
            
               Id temporis eſt, the tyme is ſuche.
            
               Ida, a mountayne, whiche lyeth nyghe Troye.
            
               Idaei dactili, people called alſo Coribantes.
            
            
               Idaeus, a, um, of the mountayne of Ida.
            
               Idalium, a citie in the yle of Cypres.
            
               Idalius, a mountayne and a wood in Cypres.
            
               Idaſpes, a ryuer runnyng by Parthia and Inde, and at the laſte falleth into the great ryuer called Indus: in this ryuer is founde moche golde and pretious ſtones.
            
               Idcirco, therfore.
            
               Idea, a figure conceyued in imagination, as it were a ſubſtaunce perpetuall, and like as of one ſeale procedeth many pryntes: ſo of one Idea of a man procedeth many thouſandes of men, and ſemblably of other Ideas procedeth thynges innumerable. So that Ideae, be as it were externall examples, wherby all other thynges be created, and this is Idea, wherof Plato ſpeaketh.
            
               Idem, the ſame thynge, or the ſame man. alſo lyke or ſemblable.
            
               Identidem, eftſones, in the ſame wyſe.
            
               Ideo, for that cauſe.
            
               Idicus, ca, cum, of the mountayne of Ida.
            
               Idiographae literae, a priuate letter.
            
               Idiographum, a priuate writinge.
            
               Idioma, matis, a proper fourme of ſpeche.
            
               Idopathia, the proper paſſion of a diſeaſe.
            
               Idiota, Idiotes, a man or woman vnlerned.
            
               Idipſum, the ſame thynge, or one thynge.
            
               Idolium, a lyttell ydoll.
            
               Idololatra, a worſhypper of ydoles.
            
               Idololatria, ydolatry.
            
               Idolothyſa, offerynges to Idolles.
            
               Idolothytum, that whiche is offered to ydols.
            
               Idolum, an ydoll.
            
               Idomenêus, a kynge of Crete or Candy, whiche came with the greekes to Troye. In his retourne beinge troubled with tempeſte, he vowed, that if he returned ſaulfe in to his
 royalme, he wolde offer what ſo euer he met with all fyrſte. wherfore whan he wold haue offered his ſon, who fyrſte met with hym at his landynge, the people dyd aryſe agaynſte hym, and draue hym out of the countrey. And than ſayled he into Apulia, and buylded there a citie, whiche he called Petilſa on the mountayne called Salentinum in Calabre.
            Idoneus, a, um, apte.
            
            
               Idula, a ſheepe that was offered euery Idus to Iupiter.
            
               Idumaea, a region in Syria, ioyninge to Aegypt, and bordereth vpon Paleſtina.
            
               Idume a citie in the countrey called Idumaea, about the whiche are abundance of palme or date trees.
            
               Idus, Ides of monethes, whiche do diuide Nonas from Calendes.
         
         
            ¶I ANTE E.
            
               IEcinoroſi, men ſicke in the lyuer.
            
               Iecoraria, an herbe called lyuerwurt.
            
               Iecur, coris, & Iecinoris, the lyuer of a man or other thynge lyuynge.
            
               Iecuſculum, a lyttell lyuer.
            
               Ieiunium, faſtynge.
            
               Ieiuno, aui, are, to faſte or abſteyne.
            
               Ieiunum, the gut, whiche goeth downe to the foundement.
            
               Ieiunus, he that is faſtynge.
            
               Ientaculum, a breakefaſte.
            
               Iento, aui, are, to eate meate 
                  •
               fore dyner.
            
               Ieſſen, a fowne, where Ioſeph met his father Iacob, and broughte him into Aegypt.
            
               IESVS, the ſonne of god, and of the mooſte pure virgine Mary. Althoughe after the cō
               mune tranſlations of the byble into latine, it ſemeth, that there were dyuers other Iewes ſo named: yet in the Hebrewe tungue, as Reucline wryteth in his boke De uerbo mirifico, There was ſome diuerſitie in the letters of the name of our ſauiour, from them, whiche were in the other called Ieſus. For in his glorious and wonderfull name were the vowelles called Tetragrammaton, with one conſonant called Schin, whiche is one S. of the Hebrewes, wherin was a miſticall or hyd ſygnification of his diuinitie, although the hole name be interpreted Sauiour. who beyng equal in diuinitie with god the father begotten of hym before that the worlde was created and without tyme, wyllyngly for the redemption of man deſcended in to the bodye of the bleſſed virgin Mary, and was conceiued in her by the holy goſte the thyrde perſon in godheade, and of her was borne the. 3962. yere after the creation of the worlde. And beinge god and man lyued here. 32. yeres, in fourme of pouertie, and than beinge betrayed by his owne diſciple, was by the Iewes his owne people moſte cruelly nayled on the Croſſe, the yeare after the creation of the worlde. 3994.
         
         
            I ANTE G.
            
               IGITVR, therfore, from henſe forthe, afterwarde.
            
               Ignarium, any thynge, out of the whiche fyre maye be beaten.
            
               Ignarius lapis, a fyre ſtone, or flynt, out of the whiche fyre is beaten.
            
               Ignarus, ignorant, without knowledge.
            
               Ignatius, was an holy byſhop of Antioche, the thyrde after ſainct Peter, and was dyſciple of ſaynct Ihon̄ the euangeliſte. In the tyme of Traia
                  ••
                he was condemned to be deuo
                  •
               
               red of beaſtes, and as he was led towarde Rome with ten men of war, whom for their crueltie he called tenne leopardes, he by the way confyrmed all chriſten men in the fayth, aſwel by praiers as by letters, ſaying in this wyſe: So that I maye fynde Chriſt and imbrace hym, I wolde there ſhoulde come vnto me, fyre, gybbettes, beaſtes, craſhyng of bones, rentinge of all the body, and all the 
                  •
               urmentes of the dyuell. And whan he herde the corynge of lyons, which ſhuld deuoure hym, he ioyouſly ſayde: I am the wheat of Chriſt let me be grounde with beaſtes tethe, that I may be founde to be pure or fyne manchet. He was martyred after the incarnation of Chriſte about .lxxx. yeres.
            
               Ignauia, cowardnes. alſo lacke of courage.
            
               Ignauit, he made hym a foole.
            
               Ignauiter, with a falſe harte, or cowardly.
            Ignauus, a, um, cowarde.
            
            
               Igneſco, ſcere, to be ſet on fyre, or to made fire.
            
               Ignia, certayne fautes, whiche erthen pottes haue in the inealynge.
            
               Ignicula, are certayne prouocations, naturally gyuen to imbrace vertue.
            
               Igniculus, a ſparke of fyre.
            
               Ignifacio, feci, facere, to ſet on fyre.
            Ignio, iui, ire, to inflame.
            
            
               Ignipotens, one of the ſurnames of Vulcanus.
            
               Ignis, the fyre. Some tyme it is taken for an harlot.
            
               Ignis ſacer, a ſore, wherin is an excedynge inflammation and burnynge.
            
               Ignitabulum, a fyre pan.
            
               Igniuomus, he that ſpytteth fyre: the ſunne is ſome tyme ſo called.
            
               Ignobilis, Ie, vnnoble, vnknowen. folyſhe, of none eſtymation.
            
               Ignominia, reproche, infamie.
            
               Ignominis, without renoume.
            
                Ignorabilis, le, vnknowen.
            
            
               Ignoranria, ignorance, lacke of knowlege, and is referred to the wyt of the perſon.
            
               Ignoratio, lack to be knowen, and pertayneth to the thynge or acte.
            
               Ignoro, aui, are, to knowe not.
            
               Ignoſco, noui, noſcere, to lerne and knowe perfectlye. alſo to forgyue, to haue excuſed, not to knowe, or be ignorant.
            
               Ignotus, vnknowen. alſo ignorant.
         
         
            ¶I ANTE L.
            
               ILA, the leſt portion of a thyng that may be imagined alſo the ſtuffynge of a pudding, or other lyke thynge.
            
               Ila, or Ilua, an ylande in the Tuſcane ſea.
            
               Ile, is that whiche is ſet in the hygheſt parte of a man.
            
               Ileos, the colyke.
            
               Ileoſus, the colyke, and he that hath the colike.
            
               Ilex, licis, a tree callyd holye or holme, whereof one kynd beareth grayne, whiche the Arabians do calle kermes.
            
               Ilia, great guttes.
            
               Iliacus dolor, the frettyng of the guttes.
            
               Ilias, adis, the warke of Homerus, of the ſiege of Troy.
            
               Iliberis, a citie in the prouince of Narbone.
            
               Iliceus, a, um, of holy or holme.
            Iligneus, a, um, idem.
            
               Ilione, the ꝓper name of a doughter of Priamꝰ
            
               Ilioneus, the proper name of a Troiane.
            
               Iliſſus, the name of a ryuer in the prouynce of Athenes.
            
               Ilithya, a name of Diana.
            
               Ilium, the palayce of Priamus.
            
               Illabor, beris, labi, to throw him ſelf into a thīg Mediae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   minans illabitur urbi, & thretninge them, he threwe hym ſelfe into the citie.
            
               Illaboratus, ta, tum, that which is made or done without labour.
            
               Illac, on that ſyde.
            
               Illaetabilis, le, without myrth, or lackyng mirth or pleaſure.
            
               Illatebro, aui, are, to hyde in corners.
            
               Illaudatus, not worthy to be named.
            
               Ille, he.
            
               Illecebrae, thynges dilectable, whiche draweth and allureth the mynde to imbrace them, flykerynge intycementes.
            
               Illecebroſus, a, um, that whiche pleaſantly allureth one to fauour it.
            
               Illecto, aui, are, to drawe pleaſantly.
            
               Illectus, ta, tum, pleaſantly ſtyred or prouoked.
            
               Illepidus, without dilectation or grace.
            
               Illex, illegis, lawleſſe, alſo wanton.
            
               Illex oculus, a wanton eye.
            Illibatus, ta, tum, vntouched, vntaſted.
            
            
               Illiberalis, vngentyl, without kindnes, or cur
                  ••
               
               ſy. Illiberale facinus, an vncurteys pagen
                  ••
               .
            
               Illiberaliter, vngentylly, excedingly yll, myſcheuouſely.
            
               Illiceo, illicui, cere, to prouoke or ſtyre pleſantly
            
               Illicet, nowe go to, incontinent.
            
               Illicium, a prouocation.
            
               Illico, anon, in the ſame place.
            
               Illido, liſi, dere, to dryue or beate to a thynge.
            
               Illinc, from that place.
            
               Illineo, iui, ire, to annoynte on.
            
               Illino, ini, ire, to anoynt harde, to ſpot or ſoylle.
            
               Illiſus, a, um, dryuen or beaten to.
            
               Illiteratus, vnlerned.
            
               Illiuſmodi, of that ſorte.
            
               Illix, licis, a prouocation or ſtyrynge.
            
               Illo, to the place.
            
               Illotis manibus rem aggredi, to go about a great thing without reuerence, or diſhoneſtly to handle a thyng of great eſtimation.
            
               Illotis pedibus fere idē. alſo without ſhame.
            
               Illuc, in that place or there.
            Illuceo, xi, cere, & illuceſco, ſcere, to be lyghte or clere.
            
            
               Illudo, ſi, ere, to mock, to hurt in iaping, or playeng.
            Illuminus, a, um, without lyght.
            
            
               Illunis, dark, whan the moone doth not ſhyne.
            
               Illuſtris, famous, clere, noble inrenoume.
            
               Illuſtro, aui, are, to make lyght or clere, to make famous or wel knowen, to ſet forth that whiche is hydde.
            
               Illutibilis, that which can not be waſhed away
            
               Illuuies, vncleannes, fylthyneſſe in manne or garment.
            
               Illyria, Illyris, or Illyrium, a great countray betwene Italy, Germany, Thraciam, & Mace doniam or Epirum, and hath on the one ſyde the ſea callyd Hadriaticum, on the other ſyde the great riuer of Danubius. That countrey is nowe callyd Slauony.
            
               Illyricus, ca, cum, of Illyria.
            
               Ilus, the king of Troians ſon, that builded Iliū.
            
         
         
            ¶I ANTE M.
            
               IMaginarij, baner b
                  •
               arers, wherein be ymages paynted.
            
               Imaginarius, a, um, done for a fourme or faſcion, and not in effecte.
            
               Imaginatus, ta, tum, fygured or fourmed into an ymage.
            
               Imagino, naui, nare, to make ymages, or to counterfayte.
            Imaginor, aris, ari, to ymagyne.
            
            
               Imaginoſus, a, um, full of ymages.
            
               Imago, imaginis, an ymage, a ſymylitude, a ſhethe or caſe.
            
               Imaguncula, a lyttell ymage.
            
               Imaus, a mountayne in Iudea
            Imbecillis, le, & imbecillus, a, um, feble.
            
            
                Imbecillitas, tatis, feblenes.
            
            
               Imbellia, cowardyſe.
            
               Imbellis, le, vnapt to warres, coward or weak.
            
               Imber, a ſhowre.
            Imberbis, be, beardleſſe.
            
            
               Imb
                     •
                  bo, bibi, bere, to drynke in.
            
               Imbrex, bricis, a ſpowte or gutter, oute of the whiche rayne is conueyed from the houſe. It is ſometyme taken for tyle or ſlate, that lyeth on the houſe.
            
               Imbriciū, the couering or 
                  •
               ueiſing of the hous.
            
               Imbrico, to couer with tile, or other like thyng.
            
               Imbricoſus, a, um, full of gutters.
            
               Imbrifer, bryngyng ſhoures.
            
               Imbrus, an ylande of Thrace, and a towne in the ſame is ſo callyd.
            
               Imbubino, aui, are, to defyle with menſtruous flyxe.
            
               Imbulbito, taui, tare, to defile with chyldrens dyrte.
            
               Imbuo, bui, buere, to dye cloth or ſylke, to teche as one teacheth his apprentyce.
            
               Imitor, aris, ari, to folow the exāmple of an other.
            
               Immanis, ne, cruell, great, horrible.
            
               Immanitas, tatis, crueltie, greatneſſe.
            
               Immemor, forgetful, he that doth not remēber.
            
               Immemorabilis, le, vnworthy remembrance.
            
               Immenſus, a, um, of ſuche greatnes, that it can not be meaſured.
            
               Immerens, he that hath not deſerued.
            
               Immergo, merſi, gere, to drowne or to plunge a thynge in the water.
            
               Immergere ſe in conſuetudinem, to enter in to depe familiaritie or acquayntance.
            
               Immerſit ſe in ganeum, he is gotten into a tauerne or he hath thruſte him ſelfe into a tauerne or alehouſe.
            
               Immeritò an aduerbe, without deſeruynge.
            
               Immerito meo, without my deſerte.
            
               Immigro, to go dwell in a place.
            
               Immigraui in ingeniū meū, I came to myne owne rule, or to be rulyd by myne owne wyt.
            
               Imminens, that whiche is at hande.
            
               Imminens ingenium, a runnyng wyt.
            
               Imminens Dario, wylling to aſſayle Darius
            
               Immineo, nui, nere, to hange or houer ouer a thyng as it wold fal, to take hede or eſpy. alſo to be nigh. Mors propter incertos caſus quo tidie imminet, Death by vncertayne chaunces; is euery day nigh.
            
               Bellum imminet ab. Tarquinis, it is at the poynt to haue warre with Tarquines.
            
               Imminet exitio alterius, he is redy to ſlee one
            
               Imminent in fortunas noſtras, they be at hād and redy to robbe vs of our goodes.
            
               Imminuo, nuere, to cut of.
            
               Imminuere caput alteri, to breake ones heed.
            
               Imminuere ius, to defalcate or miniſh the auctoritie or ſtate of a perſon.
            
               Imminuere maieſtatem, to 
                  •
               ōmyt treaſon.
            
               Imminuere pudicitam uirginis, to defloure a mayden.
            
               Immiſceo, ſcui, ſcere, to myngle togyther.
            
               Immiſericorditer, without pitie.
            
               Immiſſum, layde in to abyde, as a beame of a houſe, or other lyke thynge.
            
               Immitis, te cruell, without pitie.
            
               Immitia poma, appuls which at not yet ripe.
            
               Immitto, miſi, mittere, to ſend in. ſomtyme it ſignifieth to let grow in length. Ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   barbam immiſeris iſ
                     •
                  am, Neither let this berde grow in length. Reſpicimus dira illuuies, immiſta
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   barba, We beheld, O what an horrible filthynes and a beard growen in lengthe. alſo to bryng or ſende on the contrary parte. Hoc futurum eſſe dixerunt, ut poſt breue tempus immitteret deus regem, qui expugnaret Iudaeos, It ſhuld come to paſſe (ſayd they) that god ſhuld ſende to the contrary parte a kyng, which ſhuld vanquiſhe the Iewes. Alij Tarquinium a Cicerone immiſſum a
                     •
                  ebant, ne Craſſus ſuſcepto malorū patrocynio rēpub. turbaret, Some ſayde, that Tarquine was brought in craftily by Cicero, leſt that Craſſus, in taking on him the defence of miſdoers, ſhuld therby bring ſedition into the weale publik. Immittere rudētes, to let go the ropes or cables. In medios hoſtes ſe immiſit, he thraſt hym ſelf into the myddle of his ennemies.
            
               Immo, but rather, yea rather, yes, yea but.
            Immobilis, le, vnmoucable.
            
            
               Immodeſte, out of meaſure, alſo to moche.
            Immodeſtus, ta, tum, without temperance.
            
            
               Immodicè, to moche.
            
               Immodici, many.
            
               Immodicus, ca, cum, great or moche.
            
               Immóla, a citie in Italy, whiche was ſomtyme callyd Forum Cornelij.
            
            
               Immolo, aui, are, to offer in ſacrifice.
            
               Immorior, immori, to dye on a thynge.
            
               Immoro, rari, to abide or continue in a thyng.
            
               Immortalis, le, vnmortall, that, lyueth euer.
            
               Immortalitas, a perpetuali lyfe.
            
               Immunis, exempt, without office or charge.
            
               Immunitas, tatis, fraunches or libertie.
            Immunitus, ta, tum, not defended.
            
            
               Immurgio, gij, gire, to murmure within one
                  •
               
            
            
               Immuſtulus, a litle byrd, I ſuppoſe it be a w
                  •
               en
            Immurabilis, le, vnchaungeable.
            
            
               Immuto, tare, to change one thing for an other
            
               Impago, ginis, a tenon whiche is put into the mortays. alſo a pyn which is driuen into tymber, to make it ioyne and abyde.
            
               Impancro, crare, to inuade or go into a place.
            
               Impar, not equall, not ſufficient.
            
               Imparatus, vnredy, vnpurueyed.
            
               Imparens, diſobedient.
            
               Imparibilis, le, that whyche canne not ſuffer or
 ſuſteyne.
            
               Impauidus, he that feareth not.
            
               Impeccabilis, he that neuer offendeth.
            
               Impedimentum, let, impediment in warres.
            
               Impedimenta, is the cariage and traffike, that gothe with the hoſte.
            
               Impedio, diui, dire, to let, to ſtaye, or ſupporte, to defyle.
            
               Impeditus, is properly he, that hathe his feete ſo bounde, that he can not goo.
            Impedo, aui, are, to vnderſet.
            
            
               Impello, puli, pellere, to perſwade inſtantly, to inforce, to plucke downe, or infeble.
            
               Impendeo, di, dere, to hange ouer.
            
               Impendent mala, myſchiefe is nygh.
            
               Impendiò, very moche or more.
            
               Impendium, expenſe or coſte.
            
               Impendo, di, dere, to ſpende or lay out money, to beſtowe, to employ.
            
               Impenſa, benefyttes.
            Impenſa, ſae, expenſes.
            
            
               Impenſè, proualde. Eſt impenſe improbus, he is a very yll man.
            
               Impenſibilis, without conſyderation.
            
               Impenſius, excedynge, more greuous, or dyſpleaſant.
            
               Imperator, the chief capitayn in warres, Now the emperour.
            
               Imperatum, commaunded.
            
               Imperioſè, ſtately, rygorouſely.
            
               Imperioſus, a maiſterly man, rigorous, or cruel in gouernaunce.
            
               Imperitabundus, ful of rule, or rulyng moche.
            
               Imperitia, lacke of knowledge.
            
               Imperito, aui, are, to rule or gouerne.
            
               Imperitus, not expert, eaſy to be deccyued.
            
               Imperium, a ſolemne cōmandement, a preeminence in gouernance, auctoritie royall.
            
               Imperium exequi, to do that is commanded.
            Impero, aui, are, to commaunde.
            
            
               Imperare cupiditatibus, to rule deſyres or appetytes.
            
               Impertio, tiui, tire, & impertior, tiris, perti, to participate with one, to gyue parte of that whyche he hath.
            
               Impertire ſalute, to ſalute.
            
               Impertitur, part is gyuen.
            
               Impeſco, ſcere, to put a beaſte into a good paſture to feede.
            
               Impetigo, ginis, a rynge worme.
            Impeto, tiui, tere, to inuade.
            
            
               Impetrabilis, le, that may be gotten by deſyre.
            
               Impetraſſo, traſsi, ſere, to get by deſire or inſtāce
            
               Impetritus, infixed, mortayſed, as it were in a ſtoone.
            
               Imperro, aui, are, to optayn by deſyre or requeſt
            
               Impetuoſus, violent or haſty in wrathe.
            Impetus, tus, & impes, petis, violence.
            
            
               Impetus animi, vehemence of the hart.
            
               Impetum dareuel facere, to rounne with a great raundon on any thynge.
            
               Primo impetu, at the firſt aſſaut, at the fyrſt brunt.
            
               Impiatus, not purged of ſyn.
            
               Impiè, wyckedly, cruelly, miſcheuouſely.
            
               Impietas, tatis, hatrede of god, crueltie, wyckednes, impietie.
            
               Impiger, diligent, not ſlowe, valyant.
            
               Impigrè, diligently, without ſlouthe.
            
               Impingo, pêgi, pingere, to hit one in throwing ſom thing at him. Dicam tibi, impingā grā
                  dem. I wyll lay a weighty mattier vnto the. Caput parieti impingere, to knock ones hed agaynſt the walle.
            
               Impingere compedes, to put on gyues.
            
               Impingere culpam in aliquem, to laye the blame on one.
            
               Impingere nauem, to run the ſhip on a rock, or to dryue hym on lande, as is the commune ſayenge.
            
               Impinguo, aui, are, to make fatte.
            
               Impio, are, to defile, to diſtayne hym ſelf with a diſhoneſt or foule deede, ſpecially agaynſte god or his parentes.
            
               Impius, cruel, hatyng god and good menne, he that careth not for god, an vngracious man, a myſcheuouſe man.
            Implano, aui, are, to deceyue.
            
            
               Impleo, eui, ere, to fyll, to accomplyſhe, to put in execution.
            
               Implere uncem alterius, to take in hande an other mans charge, to exercyſe an other mannes offyce.
            
               Implet ulnas hominum quatuor, it ronteyneth fully two fathomes.
            
               Implexus, wounde in.
            
               Implicitus, ta, tum, wrapped or tied faſt togider
            
               Implicitus morbo, attached or detayned with ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Implico, caui, care, to wrap in, to tye faſt, to detayne. Implicat ad ſpeculum caput, ſhe boūd vp her head at a glaſſe.
            
               Imploro, aui, are, to deſyre lamentably.
            
               Impluo, ere, to rayne in.
            
               Implutus, wette in the rayne.
            
               Impluuia, a cloke to weare in the rayne.
            
               Impluuiatus, ta, tum, coloured as it were wette in the rayn.
            
               Impluuium, a place in the houſe, whereby they vſed to receyue rayne water.
            
               Impolitia, negligence about the weale publike.
            
               Impono, ſui, nere, to put one thing on an other alſo to gyue, to inioyne, to lay to ones charge.
            
               Imponere alicui, to abuſe or deceyue one.
            
               Calculum imponere, to caſte accompte.
            
               Imponere claues alias portis, to change the kayes of the gates.
            
               Clauſulam diſputationi imponere, to conclude or make an enoe of the diſputation.
            
                
               Impoſuit exercitum Brunduſii, he layde his hoſte in garryſon at Brunduſium.
            
               Iniuriā alicui imponere, to do wrong to one.
            
               In ſtipendium argentū imponere, to aſſeſſe what men, or townſhips ſhal pay to the ſouldyours wages.
            
               Laborem imponere, to apoynt him buſines.
            
               Imponere ſibi laborem, to charge hym ſelfe with great peyne and trauayle.
            
               Imponere legem, to ſet a lawe on a thynge.
            
               Imponere legem alicui, to appoynt a manne what he ſhall do.
            
               Imponere ſummam manum, to achieue the thynge that a man gothe about.
            
               Modum imponere proſperae pugnae, to hold a meane, or to vſe temperaunce, where the battayle is proſperouſe.
            
               Imponere mulctā, to ſet a peyn, as iuges do.
            
               Neceſsitatem imponere, to conſtrayne.
            
               Onus imponere, to gyue in charge.
            
               Imponere praeſidium ciuitati, to ſet a garriſon in a citie.
            
               Imponere praetium, to ſet a pryce.
            
               Silentium imponere, to commande ſilence.
            
               Imporco, aui, are, to make a balke in caryng of lande.
            
               Importunitas, tatis, whiche hath no commoditie of tyme nor of place.
            
               Importunus, na, nū, out of ſeaſon, importunate.
            
               Importuoſus, a, um, without porte or hauen.
            
               Impos, impo
                     •
                  is, vnable, without power.
            
               Impoſtor, oris, he that deceyueth with promiſes, or ſelleth falſe ware for good.
            
               Impoſturam facere, to deceyue in maner aforeſayde.
            
               Impotens, tentis, he that can not reſyſte his appetite or affections, ſomtyme it is vſurped for puyſſaunt.
            
               Impotentia, debilitie. ſomtyme immoderate power, alſo vnabilitie to reſyſt.
            
               Impraeſentia, & impraeſentiarum, at this time or for this preſent tyme.
            
               Imprecor, aris, ari, to deſyre, to wyſhe.
            
               Impreſsio, onis, a violent aſſaulte.
            
               Imprimo, preſsi, primere, to prynt, to ſeale.
            
               Improbè, yll, naughtily, vnhappyly.
            
               Improbitas, tatis, diſhoneſtye, vnthryftyneſſe, wantonnes, obſtynacye, malapertnes, rauenye, wylyneſſe.
            
               Improbus, an yl man, diſhoneſt, obſtinate, wanton, malapert, wyly, vnſatiable.
            
               Improbus aliae rei, good for none other thing.
            
               Improba facies, an yll fauoured face.
            
               Facinus improbum, a ſhrewde tourne.
            
               Labor improbus, great trauayle.
            
               Improba merx, vnlefull marchandyſe, or of ſmalle profyte.
            
               Improbum os, a leud or myſcheuous tunge.
            
               Improbi poſtes, rotten poſtes, or beinge in any wyſe vnſufficient.
            
               Improbum teſtamentum, a teſtamēt vnſufficient, lackynge the circumſtance or forme.
            
               Improlis, uel improlus, he which is not yet a citiſē.
            
               Improperiū, imbraiding of a defaut.
            
               Impropero, aui, are, to imbrayde a man with ſome defaute.
            
               Improuidus, he that prouideth not for the time commynge.
            
               Improuidus, da, dum, that whyche commeth ſodaynly, and vnloked for.
            
               Improuiſè, & improuiſo, vnthoughte on, or vnlooked for.
            Improuiſus, a, um, idem quod improuidus.
            
               Imprudens, dentis, vnware, alſo not circūſpect
            
               Imprudens harum rerum, not knowynge of thoſe matters.
            
               Imprudenter, vnwyſely, vnaduyſedly.
            
               Imprudentia, lacke of foreſyghte, that it was not thought on.
            
               Impubes & impuber, a man chylde before the age of .xiiii. yeres, a mayden before .xii.
            
               Impudens, ſhameles.
            
               Impudenter, ſhamefully, diſhoneſtly, vnaduyſedly, wantonly.
            
               Impudicitia, vncleannes of lyuynge.
            
               Impudicus, vnchaſt, vncleane in lyuyng.
            
               Impulſo, aui, are, to perſwade often.
            
               Impulſus, perſwaded, prouoked, inforced.
            
               Impune, without damage, without punyſſhement or griefe, in vayne.
            
               Impunitas, tatis, lacke of puniſhment, libertie without puniſhment, pardon of puniſhment.
            
               Impurus, ra, rum, diſhoneſt, vyle, reprochable, ſluttyſhe.
            
               Imputatus, ta, tum, vncutte, or neuer cut.
            
               Imputo, aui, are, to repute or aſcribe, to lay the blame or defaut. alſo to reken one thyng with an other, or to acoōpt one ſum with a nother.
            
               Imus, ma, mum, the loweſt, or moſt lowe.
            
               Imus pes, the ſole of the foote.
            
               Imus ſonus, the baſe in ſonge.
            
               Imo à pectore, from the bottom of the hart.
         
         
            ¶I ANTE N.
            
               IN, ſygnifyeth in.
            
               In aduerſum, on the contrary part.
            
               In annum, for a yere.
            
               In bonis, amonge good men.
            
               In coenam, for ſupper.
            
               In conſpectum aſpice, to loke before the.
            
               In diem addicere, to ſell vpon condition that a thynge be done by a day.
            
               In diem uiuere, to lyue withoute carynge for to morowe.
            
               In dies ſingulos, day by day.
            
               In horam, for one houre.
            
               In horas, from houre to houre.
            
               In lucem, vntyll day.
            
               In magno munere, for a great rewarde.
            
                
               In manu uel manibus eſt, it is in his power, at hande, or caſy, or in hande.
            
               In manum dari, to be giuen apart, or ſeuerally.
            
               In meam partem, on or for my parte.
            
               In medium afferre, to bryng forth to a common vſe or commoditie.
            
               In mentem uenire, to come to mynd or remembrance, to be conſydered.
            
               In nauem ingreditur, he went into the ſhyppe.
            
               In noctem, vnto nyghte.
            
               In numerato habere, redy, or at hande.
            
               In numerum, in order.
            
               In ordinem ducere uel cogere, to bring downe from authoritie, to miniſhe eſtimation or power.
            
               In ore eſt omni populo, all the people ſpeaketh of it. In partem, for thy part. Age ſis, tu in partem nunciā hūc delude, atꝓ amplexare hanc, Go to nowe for thy part, deceyue hym hardyly, and take her vnto the.
            
               In partem dimidiam decoquere, to boyle it to the halfe deale.
            
               In paucos dies, for a lyttell whyle.
            
               In pedem, for euery foote. Is ſe ternis nummis in pedem tecum tranſegiſſe dicebat, He ſayd, that he bargeyned with the for thre pēce a fote, or for euery foote .iii. pence.
            
               In perendinum, after to morow, or .ii. dais hēs.
            
               In portu ſum, I am ſaufe.
            
               In poſterum, fynally, in concluſyon, from hens forthe, hereafter.
            
               In poteſtatem eſſe, vnder the rule, or at the pleſure of one.
            In praeſentia, at this tyme, In praeſens, idem.
            
               In primis, chiefly, ſpecially, aboue al other thinges. In priuato & publico, at home and abrode
            
               In procliui eſt, it is eaſy to do, or to bring to pas.
            
               In promptu eſt, it is eaſy to know, it is aparāt.
            
               In propatulo, before all men.
            
               Iam in propinquo certamen erat, nowe was the battayle at hande, or the day of the battayle was come.
            
               In proximo, at hande.
            
               In publicum redigere, to confiſcate, to take for a forfayte.
            
               In re ipſa, to experience.
            
               In re tua, for thy profyte.
            
               Inre praeſenti, in a playne and euident matter.
            
               In rem noſtram, it is for our profyte.
            
               In rem praeſentem excurrere, to come on the lande whiche is in demaunde.
            
               In rem praeſentē producere, to bring the matter to light, to expreſſe the thyng perfectly.
            
               In rem praeſentem uenire, where the landes in debate, doo come in viewe, by the aſſignement of iudges, vnto them which be callyd viewers, whiche ſhal ſe the boundes and quantitie of the lande in variance.
            
               In ſerum, vntyll nyght.
            
               In ſpeciem, by diſſimulatiō. Ducentes paucos in ſpeciem captiuos, faynyng that they caried a few priſoners with them. Praeclara claſſis in ſpeciem, it ſemed a fayre & great nauy.
            
               In ſpem uenire, to begyn to hope.
            
               In tempore, in ſeaſon, oportunately.
            
               In tutum eduxit legiones, he brought his army out of daunger into a ſure place.
            
               In uiros diuidere, to gyne to euery man.
            In uniuerſum, generally.
            
            
               In utranꝓ partem, of the one ſyde and other.
            
               Inacceſſa, an ylande of Egypt, to the whiche is no commynge.
            
               Inachus, the fyrſt kynge of Argi
                  •
               es.
            
               Inaneſcere, to be vayn, and of none eſtimation.
            
               Inaniloquus, abablar.
            Inanimus, m
                  •
               , mum, without ſoule.
            
            
               Inanio, iui, ire, to make empty.
            
               Inanis, ne, empty, vacant, ydelle, lyght in eſtymation.
            
               Inanis accedit, he cometh without bryngyng any thynge with hym.
            Inanitas, & inanitio, emptynes, voydnes.
            
            
               Inareſco, ſcere, to drye vp.
            
               Inarime, an yle in the Thuſcane ſea. Alſoo a mountayne.
            Inaudio, iui, dire, to here.
            
            
               Inauditus, ta, tum, neuer harde of, ſtraunge to heare.
            
               Inauris, a rynge, or other lyke thynge hangynge at the eare.
            
               Inauro, aui, are, to make ryche.
            
               Inauſpicatò, vnluckely.
            
               Incaeduus, a, um, vnvſed to be cutte.
            
               Incaero, aui, are, to couer with wax.
            
               Incaleſco, lui, ſcere, to be or waxe very hotte.
            
               Incallidus, ſymple, without craft or ſubtiltie.
            
               Incandeſco, dui, deſcere, to be very hot angry.
            Incantatio, & incantamentum, a charme.
            
            Incanto, taui, tare, to charme.
            
            
               Incapiſtro, ſtraui, ſtrare, to halter, or to bynde with an halter.
            
               Incaſſum, in vayne.
            
               Incautus, vnware.
            
               Incedo, ceſsi, cedere, to go or walk, to go ſtately, to enter.
            
               Incēdo, di, dere, to inflame, to ſet fire on a thīg.
            
               Incentio, onis, the ſowning of inſtrumentes.
            
               Incepto, aui, are, to begyn often.
            
               Incerniculum, a rangynge ſyue, wherin corne is clenſed or it be grounde. alſo a ſarce.
            
               Incerno, ni, nere, to ſyfte in.
            
               Incerto, taui, tare, to make doutful or vncertain
            
               Incertus, ta, tum, vncertayne or doubtfull.
            
               Inceſſo, ſsi, ſſere, to make angry, to do diſpleaſure to one, to accuſe.
            
               Inceſſere hoſtes iaculis, to caſte dartes or iauelyns on the ennemies.
            
               Inceſsit ambos inopia, bothe of theym are vexed with pouertie.
            
                
               Cupido eum in ceſsit, there toke him a deſire, there came a fantaſy vnto hym.
            
               Is inceſsit mos, they had taken ſuch a cuſtom.
            Inceſto, aui, are, to ppllute.
            
            
               Inceſtuoſus, he that doth often pollute.
            Inceſtus, ta, tum, polluted.
            
            
               Inceſtus, tus, is lechery cōmytted with one, whiche is nygh of kynne or aliaunce to hym that commytteth it. alſo it ſygnifieth all maner of pollution.
            
               Inchoo, aui, are, to begyn. alſo to performe.
            
               Incîdo, cîdi, ere, to cut, to graue.
            
               Inciſa, loſte. Spe inciſa prius quam praedicta dies adeſſet, Hope being loſt, er euer the ſayd day was commen.
            
               Incido, di, ere, to happen, to falle ſodaynely, to come by chaunce.
            
               Inciens, a woman nigh her tyme, to trauaylle of chylde.
            
               Incile, a gappe or trenche.
            
               Inciles, trenches, to conuey water from a riuer, into a medowe or other lowe grounde.
            
               Incilo, aui, are, to blame or reproue.
            
               Incino, ni, nere, to ſyng, proprely to fayn a ſmall breaſt.
            Incipio, coepi, cipere, to begynne.
            
            
               Inciſim, piece meale, gobet meale.
            
               Inciſio, onis, inciſyon or cuttynge.
            
               Inciſura, a cut or garſe. alſo inciſurae, be the lynes in the palme of the hande.
            Incitabulum, Incitamen, & Incitamentum, a prouocation.
            
            
               Incitas, pouertie, neceſſitie.
            
               Incitéga, a thynge wheron greate veſſelles. of wyne are couched.
            Incito, taui, tare, to prouoke.
            
            
               Inclamo, aui, are, to call for one, to crye out on one, rebukefully to call in.
            
               Inclareo, uel inclareſco, ere, to be knowen of all men.
            
               Inclementer, without mercy, cruelly, ſharply.
            
               Inclementia, crueltie, lacke of mercy.
            
               Inclino, aui, are, to inclyne or bowe downe.
            
               Inclinare acies, whan the hoſte doth recule.
            
               In uitium inclinare, to begyn to be nought.
            
               Inclinari opes ad Sabinos, rege inde ſumpto uidebantur. The chiefe ſubſtance & power turned to the Sabins, after that a king was made of theyr people.
            
               Cum omnem culpam in collegā inclinaret, Whan he had layde the blame to his felowe.
            
               Inclinata reſpublica, the weale publik decaid.
            
               Includo, ſi, ere, to include or ſhut in.
            
               Inclytus, ta, tum, gloryous, famous, of greatte renoume.
            
               Incoctile, a pot wherin meate is ſodden, alſo a braſon or copper veſſell, tyuned within.
            
               Incoctus, ta, tum, vnboyled or rawe.
            
               Incoctae mulieres, women which do trymme their heares to moche.
            
               Incoenatus, not hauynge ſouped.
            
               It incoenatus cubitū, he goth to bed ſupperles.
            
               Incoenis, without ſupper.
            
               Incogitabilis, forgetfull, not conſideryng what he dothe.
            
               Incogitans, vnaduyſed.
            Incognitus, ta, tum, vnknowen.
            
            
               Incola, he that dwelleth in an nother countrey, than where he was borne.
            
               Incolatus, dwellynge in a ſtraunge countrey.
            
               Incolo, ui, ere, to dwell in a place.
            
               Incolumis, holem, without ſycknes, lackynge no reparation or amendement.
            Incolumitas, tatis, helthyneſſe.
            
            
               Incomitatus, beinge without company, alone.
            
               Incommodè, vncommodiouſely, yl fauouredly
            Incommodo, aui, are, to hurte.
            
            
               Incommodus, da, dum, incommodious, daungerous, damageous.
            In commune, equally.
            
            
               Incompactum, vnioyned, or yll ioyned.
            
               Incomprehenſus, not comprehended.
            
               Inconcinnus, a, um, vnmete, yll proportioned.
            
               Inconcuſſus, ſtable, that can not be ſhaken.
            
               Incōditè, aduer. without faciō, or without order
            
               Inconditus, ra, tum, out of order or facion, ru
                  •
               e, alſo weryſhe.
            Inconditus, ta, tum, vnmade, vnbuylded.
            
            
               Incongelabilis, le, that can not be froſen.
            
               In conſiliari, to be callyd before the counſell.
            
               In conſilio adeſſe, to be of counſayl in a mattee of lawe. Me quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Petilius, ut ſibi conſilio ad eſſem rogauit: Petilius alſo deſyred me, that I wold be of his counſayle.
            
               Inconſultè, without counſayle or vnaduyſedly
            
               Inconſultus, lackynge aduiſe or conſyderation, he that wyll not aſke counſayle.
            
               Inconſultu meo, without my counſayle.
            
               Inconſutilis, without any ſeame.
            Inconſutus, ta, tum, vnſowed.
            
            
               Inconſyderatè, vnaduiſedly.
            
               Inconſyderatus, he that nothyng conſidereth.
            
               Incontinens, he that is not chaſt, or kepeth him not to one woman.
            
               Incoquo, xi, quere, to ſeethe or boyle in a thing.
            
               Incordio, aui, are, to putte into a mans harte, to perſwade hym.
            
               Incoxo, aui, are, to fytte as women or taylours done without a ſtoole.
            
               Increatus, neuer created.
            
               Increbreſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe, to be ſpradde or moche knowen.
            
               Incredibilis, le, incredyble, not to be beleued, meruaylouſe.
            
               Incrementum, increaſe.
            
               Increpito, aui, are, to blame or rebuke often.
            
               Increpo, pui, pere, to ſounde or make noyſe, alſo to rebuke, to prouoke.
            
               Increſto, eui, ſcere, to growe moche or more.
            
                
               Incubatio, & Incubitus, lyenge in, ſyttynge to hatche egges.
            
               Incubo, bonis, they that ſet all theyr ſtudye on treaſure.
            
               Incubo, aui, are, to ly in or vpon, to cleaue to, to ſytte ouer a thynge, to ſitte on egges, as a hen doth, to occupy, to poſſede, to imbrace, to noryſhe, to dwell in, to care.
            
               Incubus, a ſpirite, which aſſuming the forme of a man, medleth with women, alſo that which is callid the mare, wherewith men be oppreſſed in theyr ſleape.
            
               Incudo, dônis, he that worketh on an anuyll.
            
               Inculco, aui, are, to porre in.
            
               Incultus, a place vnhuſbanded or vntylled.
            
               Incumbo, bere, to indeuour, to take in hand, to happe, to leane vpon, or fall on a thynge. alſo to be inclyned to ſome thynge.
            
               Incumbo ad ſtudia, I gyue my mynde to a thynge, I applye me.
            
               Ad ſalutem, reipublicae incumbere, to trauel about the commune weale.
            
               In cauſam incūbere, to maintayne that part.
            
               Incumbere gladium, to thruſte hym ſelfe on a ſworde.
            
               Incumbunt tecta centenis columnis, the rofe is borne vp with an hundred pyllours.
            
               Qui in teipſum incubuerunt, whiche are fallen or throwen on thy necke.
            
               Incunabula, all that longeth to the ſwathelinge of a chyld, thynges pertaynyng to infancy.
            
               Incunabulum, a cradell.
            
               Incuria, neglygence, yll huſbandry.
            
               Incurro, rere, to run agaynſt one, to runne in.
            
               Incurſus, & Incurſio, inuaſion of ennemies.
            
               Incurueſco, ſcere, to bowe downe, or be croked.
            
               Incuruo, aui, are, to make crooked.
            Incuruus, a, um, crooked.
            
            
               Incus, ûdis, an anuyll.
            Incuſo, aui, are, to accuſe.
            
            
               Incutio, cuſsi, cutere, to throwe in.
            
               Indago, aui, are, to ſeeke or ſerche, to vente, to ſeke as a hounde dothe.
            Indago, ginis, ſerche.
            
            
               Inde, from thens, there, from thensforth, after warde, of hym or her. Vxorem duxit, nati filij duo, inde ego hūc maiorem adoptaui mihi: He toke a wyfe, and had by her two ſonnes, from him I toke this, which is the elder, and made hym myne heyre.
            
               Inde ab initio, from the fyrſt begynnyng.
            
               Inde eſt, therof it commeth.
            
               Indecens, vnſyttynge, vnconuenient.
            
               Indecor, coris, not regarded.
            
               Indecorè, an aduerbe, ſygnifieng vnhoneſtly, vnconueniently.
            Indecoris, re, idem quod indecor.
            
               Indecorum, vnhoneſt.
            
               Indefenſus, without defence.
            
               Indefinitus, 
                     •
                  a, tū, not determined or diſcuſſed.
            
               Indemnatus, he that is cōdemned without makynge anſwere, or not beynge herde.
            
               Indemnis, without hurt or harme, defended.
            
               Indemnitas, eſchewyng of damage. Exiſtimans indemnitati ſuae conſuli poſſe, Thinking that he mought eſchue damage or daunger.
            
               Indeprecabilis, he that wol not be intreated, or wyll not forgyue.
            
               Poena indeprecabilis, puniſſhement without remyſſyon.
            
               Index, indicis, he that accuſeth or appecheth an other man. alſo he that for to eſcape punyſhement, or for ſome rewarde, diſcloſeth the conſpiracy, whervnto he was made priuy it is alſo the forefynger, and a touche ſtoone to trye gold, alſo the table of a boke, wherby certayn chapiters or notes be founden.
            
               India, a great countray and ryche, callyd in englyſhe Indee, lieng on the ſouth eaſt partis of the world, which as Ptholomeue writeth, is in two partes. The one is callid Indes, with in the ryuer of Ganges, which on the weſt is boūded with Aracoſia & Gedroſia, on the eaſt with the greate ryuer callid Ganges, on the north with the hyll called Imâus, on the ſouth and weſte with parte of the Indian ſea. The other part of Indee, without Ganges, is boū
               ded on the weſt with the ſaide ryuer of Ganges, on the north with part of Scithia & Serica, on the eaſt with the regiō callid Sinarū, on the ſouth with the Indian ſea. Nearchus, whiche was one of great Alexanders admyralles, affirmed (as Arrianus writeth) that it was foure monethes iourney by the playnes of Indee. Megaſthenes ſayd, that the bredth of Indee, whyche was from the weſte to the eaſt, contayneth .xvi. thouſande furlong, whiche is two thouſande and a .C. myles. The length, whiche was frō the north to the ſouth xxii. thouſande furlonge, which is two thouſande DCCCI. myles. Cteſias affirmeth i
                  •
                to be as moche as the reſydue of Aſia. But Oneſicritus, which wrate the actes of Alexā
               dar, demeth it to be the thirde parte of Aſia. There is alway two ſummers, and fruites & grayn is there twyſe gathered, the wyndes to always temperate, & not troublons, the beaſtes & foules moch greater than in other coū
               trays, and of more dyuers kyndes. The names of the countreys and cities there, be now otherwyſe, than they were in the tyme of the auncient writers. They whyche be now knowen, ſhall be declared in theyr places, with alſo the mountaynes and ryuers, whyche are great aboue all other.
            
               Indicatio, eſtymation, or valuation.
            Indicatura, idem. Indicatus idem.
            
               Indicium, is where one, whiche was particypatour
 in an offence dothe dyſcouer the actes and deuyſes of his companyons.
            
               Indicio eſſe, to betoken or declare.
            
               Indico, caui, are, to diſcloſe, to manifeſt, & make openly knowen, to demonſtrate, to accuſe, to ſet or tel the price, to delyuer in poſſeſſion that whiche is bought.
            
               Indico, dixi, dicere, to denounce or declare ſolemnely, and for a great cauſe, as batayle, faſtynges, fun
                  •
               ralles, counſayles, tryumphes, and other great thinges. alſo to ſet a tribute or taxe, and to appoynte or commmaunde.
            
               Indicere conſilium, to calle or commaunde a counſayle.
            
               Indicere iuſtitium, to cōmande a vacation, or as we do ſay, to kepe no terme.
            
               Indicere pecuniam populo, to ſette a taxe or ſubſidy on the people.
            
               Indictio, the ſpace of .xv. yeres. alſo a taxe granted by the people.
            
               Indictiuus, ua, uum, that whiche is declared or appoynted.
            
               Indictus, ta, tū, declared or denounced ſolemnly.
            
               Indicta cauſa, the cauſe or matter not knowē, declared, or defended.
            
               Indidem, from thens, forthwith the ſame.
            
               Indies, dayly, from day to daye. Creſcente indies multitudine, the multitude or mēber dayly increaſynge.
            
               Indigena, of the ſame countrey or towne borne and bredde.
            
               Indigentia, nede or neceſſitie.
            Indigeo, gui, gere, to lacke.
            
            
               Indigeſtè, inordynately.
            
               Indigeſtio, yll digeſtyon.
            
               Indigetes, goddis made of mortall men, ſomme take them for priuate goddis, pertaynynge to particular places.
            
               Indigitamenta, bokes contayning the names of goddis, and the miſtical ſignificatiō of them.
            
               Indigito, taui, tare, to name or call by name.
            Indignor, aris, ari, to diſdayne.
            
            
               Indignus, vnworthy, myſerable.
            
               Indigus, nedy or lackynge.
            Indipiſco, ſci, ſcere, & Indipiſcor, ſceris, ſci, to optayne; to vſurpe.
            
            
               Indiſcriminatim, indifferētly, without diuerſite
            
               Indiſertus, without eloquence.
            
               Indiuidiū, that may not be diuided or ſeparate.
            
               Indo, indidi, indere, to ſet or name alſo to print.
            
               Indocilis, a dullarde, that can not be taught.
            
               Indoctus, vnlerned.
            
               Indolentia, lacke of peyne.
            Indoloria, idem.
            
               Indoles, towardnes and diſpoſition to vertu in chyldren: in men, token of vertue. alſo very nobilitie or honour, aptnes to good or euyll.
            
               Specimen indolis dare, whan in youthe one ſheweth a likelyhode of towardnes to vertue.
            
               Laetae indolis adoleſcens, of a pleaſant or mery nature.
            
               Tania indoles in Lauinia erat, ſo good or vertuous a nature there was in Lauinia.
            
               Equorum indoles, the raſe of horſes.
            
               Fructuum indoles, the terrage, verdure, or ſent of fruytes.
            
               Frugum indoles, the good growthe and fulnes of grayne.
            
               Indomabilis, 
                     •
                  e, that maye not be made tame.
            
               Indomitus, wylde, vnbroken.
            Indubitatus, ta, tum, vndoubted.
            
            
               Induciae, tru
                  •
               e, or peace for a certaine tyme.
            
               Induco, xi, cere, to induce, to brynge in, to perſwade, to illure, to incline, to deceiue, to cancel to defete, to put on, properly hoſen or ſhoen, to infixe or ſtabliſh▪ 
               Ita induxi in animū, I haue infixed or ſtablyſhed in my mynde.
            
               Inductio, a forme of argument, proceding from the particulars vnto the vniuerſalles. alſo an argumente, whiche by gettynge the aſſent in thynges not doubtful, proueth the thyng whiche is intended.
            Indulco, aui, are, & indulcoro, aui, are, to make ſweete.
            
            
               Indulgenter, fauourably, without rygour.
            
               Indulgentia, & Indulgitas, gentylnes in ſufferaunce, alſo mercy.
            
               Indulgeo, dulſi, gére, to graunt lyghtly, to conſent to a requeſt. Alſo to giue reſpite, to be gē
               tyll and mercyfull, to pardon.
            
               Indulge ualetudini ruae, take hede to thy helth
            
               Nimium illi indulges, thou careſt to moch for hym, thou foloweſt him to moche, thou makyſt to moche of hym.
            
               Indumentum, a garment.
            
               Induo, dui, ere, to putte on a garment or other lyke thyng, to transforme or tranſlate, to caſt in, to annoynte.
            
               Induere perſonam alterius, to ſpeake in the name or ſtede of an other man.
            
               Induere perſonam iudicis, to repreſent or do the office of a iudge.
            
               Induere poſtes pice, to laye on pitche on the poſtes. Induere ſibi ingeniū nouū, to change his nature.
            
               Speciem latronis induere, to vſe the faſcion of a thefe.
            
               Vaetuſtatem induere, to become olde.
            
               Indui fructu, to be chargid or laded with fruit
            
               Indui ſua confeſsione, to be takē by his owne confeſſion.
            Induit ſe in florem, it bloſſometh.
            
            
               Induperator, oris, an emperour.
            
               Indus, a noble riuer, whiche commeth from the great mountayne of Taurus, and incloſeth Inde on the weſt, and runneth into the Indian ſea. Into this ryuer runneth .xv. great famouſe ryuers, the leaſte of theym more than
 the great ryuer of Donow, where he is brodeſt. Strabo ſayth that they which do write moſt inoderately of Indus, done affirme that he is in breade fifty furlung, which is twelue myles and a halfe. The water therof cauſeth great ſettilitie whan it ouerfloweth, & therof many ſondry pleaſant and holſome fruites do ſprynge without labour.
            
               Induſiarius, a maker of peticotes.
            
               Induſiatus, clad in a peticote.
            
               Induſium, a peticote.
            
               Induſtria, a vertue comprehendynge bothe ſtudy and diligence, induſtry.
            
               Induſtrie, wyttyly.
            
               Induſtrius, he that is wytty and actiue.
            
               Induuiae, apparayle,
            
               Inebrior, aris, ari, to make drunke, or be drunken.
            
               Inedia, hungar.
            
               Ineffigiatus, ta, tum, vnfaſcioned, without good proportion.
            
               Ineo, iui, ire, to begyn, to go in, to deſerue, to get, to wynne, to optayne, to treate. Inîre is ſometyme where the male leapeth the female, as the horſe keuereth the mare. Alſo to conſider or vnderſtande.
            
               Inire curſum, to begyn his courſe.
            
               Falſam gratiam inire, to get faynt or vnſure frendes.
            
               Inire foedus, to make a leage or treatye of peace.
            
               Inire fugam, to flee as men do in battayle.
            
               Gratiam inire, to get thanke or frendes with ſome pleaſure done vnto them.
            
               Inire magiſtratum, to enter in an offyce.
            
               Inire pacem, to make peace.
            
               Inire bellum, to make warre.
            
               Inire uiam, to finde the waye.
            
               Rationem inire, to ſeke meane, or to conſyder howe a thynge maye be done.
            
               Inire ſocietatem, to fall in feloweſhyp with one.
            
               Inire ſuffragia, to aſſemble people for an election, or to conſent to any matter.
            
               Inita, ſubducta
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ratione, al thynge rekened or well accompted.
            
               Ineunte aetate, in youthe.
            
               Ineunte uere, at the begynning of the ſpring of the yere.
            
               Ineptio, iui, ire, to trifle, to do a thynge vnmete for the purpoſe.
            Ineptus, ta, tum, vnapte.
            
            
               Ineptus, a triflar, vſynge nothynge in order, vnapte to the purpoſe.
            
               Inermis, vnarmed, a man yolden.
            
               Iners, inertis, without any ſcience, or crafte, an ydell perſon. alſo vnprofitable.
            
               Inertia, lacke of crafte, ydelnes.
            
               Inerticula, a vine, wherof the wyne is ſo good, that none yuell procedeth therof.
            
               Ineſco, ſci, ſcere, to cram or fode. alſo to deceiue
            
               Ineuitabilis, le, that can not be eſchewed.
            
               Inexercitus, ta, tum, not exerciſed, vnoccupied.
            Inexhauſtus, a, um, neuer reaſynge.
            
            
               Inexploratò, without ſerche.
            
               Inexputabilis, le, that maye not be numbred.
            
               Inextricabilis, le, that can not be ſhaken of, or diſſolued.
            
               Infabre, vncunningely, vncraftylye, yll fauoured.
            
               Infamia, infamy.
            Infamis, me, infamed.
            
            
               Infamis digitus, the myddle fynger.
            
               Infamo, aui, are, to infame or yll report.
            
               Infandum, that maye not be ſpoken.
            
               Infans, a chylde that can not yet ſpeake. It is alſo euery thynge that is very yonge. Alſo it ſignifieth not eloquent. ſome tyme an ideote that can not ſpeake.
            
               Infantia, chyldehod
                  •
                alſo folyſhenes.
            
               Infantilis, le, pertayninge to chyldhode.
            
               Infarcio, cij, & ciui, cire, to infarſe or ſtuffe, or fyll.
            
               Infatuo, aui, are, to make folyſhe.
            
               Infector, toris, a dyar of colours.
            
               Infectus, tus, dyenge or ſtayni
                  •
               ge.
            
               Infectus, ta, tum, infected, dyed, ſtayned, poyſoned. alſo vndone or not done, not made.
            
               Infecta pace, without any peace made.
            
               Infectum reddere, to vndo that whiche is done.
            
               Infenſus, diſpleaſed, moued with anger or hate toward an other. alſo he that bearith malice.
            
               Inferiae, ſacrifice done to infernall goddes.
            Infernalis, le, infernall.
            
            
               Infernas, atis, the lowe.
            
               Infernè, alowe, or benethe.
            
               Infernus, hell.
            Infernus, na, num, lowe.
            
            
               Infero, intuli, inferre, to brynge in, to throwe in, to adde to, to caſte in, to conclude.
            
               Inferre arma, to make warre.
            
               Inferre crimen alicui, to lay to ones charge.
            
               Inferre ſermonem, to talke.
            
               Stuprum inferre, to commyt adultery or fornication with a kynſwoman.
            
               Inferus, ra, rum, where nothynge is lower.
            
               Infeſtiuus, ua, um, vnmete for diſporte.
            
               Infeſto, aui, are, to do diſpleaſure with ſondry incurſions or rodes.
            
               Infeſtus, a mortall ennemye.
            
               Infeſtus, ta, tum, that ſtandeth agaynſt a man to the intent to indamage him.
            
               Infeſta ſigna, ſtanderdes or bauers diſplayed in battayle on bothe partes.
            
               Infeſtum mare, the ſea occupied with pyrates and robbers.
            
               Infeſtus ager, a daungerous countreye to
 paſſe throughe.
            
               Infeſtus animus, a malitious mynde.
            
               Infibulo, aui, are, to claſpe to gether.
            
               Inficias ire, to doubt or deny.
            
               Inficiator, oris, he that denyeth.
            
               Infici, feci, ficere, to dye clothe, to ſlayne or infecte.
            
               Inficior, aris, ari, to deny or diſaffyrme.
            Infidus, da, dum, vnfaythfull.
            
            
               Infimâtes, the baſe people.
            
               Infimo, aui, are, to brynge lowe.
            
               Infimus, a, um, the loweſt or moſte baſe.
            
               Infirmitas, tatis, vnſtableneſſes, weakenes, ſickenes.
            
               Infirmo, aui, are, to make weake.
            
               Infirmus, ma, um, vnſtable, ſycke, feble.
            
               Infit, he ſayde, he began.
            
               Inflammo, aui, are, to inflame or ſet on fyre.
            
               Inflecto, ctere, to bowe or plye.
            Infligo, xi, gere, poenam aut opprobrium, to punyſhe or rebuke.
            
            
               Influo, xi, ere, to runne in to a thynge, as water or other licour dothe.
            
               Informo, aui, are, to ſhape or fourme, to enfourme or teache good maners.
            
               Inforo, aui, are, to declare at the barre in a place of iudgemente, to pleade. Alſo to perf
                  •
               
               cate or make a hole.
            
               Infortunium, yll chaunce.
            
               Infra, within, benethe: in number it ſignifieth laſſe or fewer.
            
               Infractio, ſlouthfulnes.
            
               Infractus, ta, tum, vnbroken, ſure. Infractus animi, ſtyf of courage. ſometyme it ſignifyeth diſcouraged.
            
               Infrendes, chyldren lackynge teeth.
            
               Infrendo, di, dere, to craſhe the teth for anger
            
               Infringo, fregi, gere, to breake to pieces.
            
               Infrunitus, a foole, that knoweth not howe to vſe a thynge.
            
               Infuco, care, to colour a thynge, intendynge deceypte.
            
               Infulae, be the labelles, whiche do hange on euery ſyde of a mytar. It was in the old tyme the attyre that prieſtes dydde weare on theyr heades. They were alſo tapets of linen, wherwith temples were hanged.
            
               Infumibulum, the ſhanke or tonnel of a chymneye.
            
               Infumo, aui, are, to drye in the ſmoke.
            
               Infund
                     •
                  bulum, a tounnell, wherinto lic
                  •
               ure is poured, whan veſſelles are fylled.
            
               Infundo, fudi, fundere, to poure in.
            
               Infurnibulum, a piele, wherwith breade is put into the ouen.
            
               Infuſcare ui
                     ••
                  m merum, to alay wyne with water.
            
               Ingemo, gemui, ere, to lamente or bewayle moche.
            
               Ingeniculor, aris, ari, to bowe the knee, or make courteſy.
            
               Ingeniculus, a fygure amonge the ſterres, called nowe Hercules.
            
               Ingenioſus, wytty.
            
               Ingenium, the proper name of a thynge. alſoo wytte.
            
               Ingens, tis, wonderfull great.
            
               Ingens animus, a great courage.
            
               Ingenuatus, come of an honeſte ſtocke or kynrede.
            
               Ingenuè, frely, frankly.
            Ingenuitas, tatis, fredome.
            
            
               Ingenuus, a free man borne, or a gentylman.
            Ingenuus, a, um, naturall.
            
            
               Ingenua facta, noble actes.
            
               Ingero, geſsi, gerere, to brynge in, to myxte.
            
               Ingerere cibum, to gyue to one meate.
            
               Ingerere dicta in aliquē, to chyde with one to ſay yll of one.
            
               Ingerere malum, to do diſpleaſure.
            
               Omnia mala ingerebat, he dydde the warſt that he coulde.
            
               Oſculum ingerere, to kyſſe one paſſynge by.
            
               Ingerere pugno, to ſtryke with the fyſte.
            
               Se ingerere, to aduaunce hym ſelfe in company, or to be malapert.
            Ingitas, tatis, pouertie.
            
            
               Inglorius, a, um, of no renoume or fame.
            
               Ingluuies, gluttony. alſo the craye or gorge in byrdes.
            
               Ingrandeſco, ſci, ſcere, to ware great.
            
               Ingratijs, maulgre one.
            
               Ingratis, agaynſte my wyll, or our wyll.
            
               Ingratus, ta, tum vnthankefull, diſpleaſante, conſtrayned, or agaynſte a mannes wyll. alſo vnkynde, and not remembrynge frendeſhyp, or beneuolence.
            Ingraueſco, ſci, ſcere, to ouercharge.
            
            Ingredior, eris, gredi, to enter.
            
            
               Ingruo, ui, ere, to inuade, to be imminent, properly ſpoken of battayle or tempeſt.
            
               Inguina, the priuie members of men and womenne.
            
               Inguinaria, an herbe which cureth the diſeaſes in priuy members.
            
               Inguinium, a citie in Liguria, aunciente and ryche.
            
               Ingurgito, aui, are, to deuoure gluttonouſely.
            Inhabilis, le, vnapte.
            
            
               Inhabito, tare, to dwell in a place.
            
               Inhereo, to cleaue or ſtycke to.
            
               Inhereſco, ſci, ſcere, to ſticke faſte.
            
               Inhalo, aui, are, to drawe in brethe.
            Inhibeo, bui, bere, to forbyd.
            
            
               Inhibere imperium, to haue charge or rule.
            
               Inhibere nauem, to caſte ancre, or to ſ
                  •
               aye a ſhyppe, whiche is vnder ſayle, that ſhe ſayle not a full courſe.
            
                
               Inhibere ſupplicia alicui, to execute tourmentes on one, or to put one to deathe.
            
               Inhio, aui, are, to gape. alſo to couet moche.
            
               Inhoneſtè, diſhoneſtly.
            Inhoneſtus, ta, tum, diſhoneſt.
            
            
               Inhonor, without honour.
            Inhonoratus, ta, tum, lackynge honour.
            
            
               Inhorreo, rui, rere, Inhorreſco, ſcere, to abhorre, to quake for feare.
            
               Inhoſpes, he that wyll lodge no man.
            
               Inhoſpitá tecta, houſes where no man maye lodge.
            
               Inhoſpitalis, le, vnapt for lodgynge.
            
               Inhumanus, cruell, vncourteys.
            
               Inhumo, are, to put into the grounde.
            
               Inibi, euen there, anon, amonge them.
            
               Inijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caſt or throwe in, to caſt at ſome thynge, to throwe with violence, to put on.
            
               Inijcere manum, to ſcaſe or take poſſeſſion of a thynge.
            
               Inijcere manus in aliquem, to apprehend or attache one.
            
               Inijcere ſcrupulum alicui, to put one in a fantaſy.
            
               Inijcere ſtudium alicui, to cauſe one to ſtudy.
            
               Manus iniectio, a ſeaſer of lande.
            
               Inimicitia, hoſtilitie, contrary to amity.
            
               Inimico, caui, care, to make ennemies.
            
               Inimicor, caris, cari, to practiſe hoſtilitie.
            
               Inimicus, an ennemy.
            
               Ininde, from thens.
            
               Iniquè, miſcheuouſly, or vniuſtely.
            
               Iniquitas, tatis, parcialitie, contrary to iuſtice.
            
               Iniquus, a, um, not euen or playne. alſo not indifferente or iuſt. ſometyme great, ſtraighte, or narrowe.
            
               Iniquo animo ferre, to be myſcontented or ſorowefull.
            
               Initiatus, inſtructed or entered in rules concernynge religion.
            
               Initio, aui, are, to inſtructe in thynges concernyng religion. alſo to begyn to do a thynge.
            
               Initior, aris, ari, to begyn. alſo to be weaned as chyldren be.
            
               Initium, a begynninge, a ſacrifice to Ceres.
            
               Inito, aui, are, to walke in.
            
               Initor, toris, a ſtalyon.
            
               Inîtus, the leapynge or keuerynge of a mare by a horſe.
            
               Iniuges, cattell neuer yoked or broken, whiche were ſometyme ſacrifiſed.
            
               Iniungo, xi, gere, to inioyne, to appoynte, to laye on, as a man wyl ad to a gret burdeyne.
            
               Iniuria, wronge, iniury, reproche, damage. taken lyke an aduerbe, it ſignifieth without cauſe, without deſerte.
            
               Iniuria tua, throughe thy default.
            
               Iniurioſus, a wronge doet.
            
               Iniurius, a, um, wrongfull, he that dothe any thynge agaynſte the lawe.
            
               Iniuſſu imperatoris, without the emperours commaundement.
            
               Iniuſtus, ta, tum, vniuſte, alſo excedynge iuſte meaſure.
            
               Iniuſtè, vniuſtely.
            
               Innaſcor, ſci, to be ingendred in one.
            Innatus, ta, tum, ingendered.
            
            
               Innato, aui, are, to ſwym in a place.
            
               Innitor, teris, inniti, to aſſaye, to indeuoure.
            
               Innocens, vnharmfull, innocent.
            
               Innocentia, integritie, true intente.
            
               Innocuus, a, um, vnharmfull, he that dothe none harme.
            
               Innoteſco, ſci, ſcere, to be knowen.
            
               Innoxius, a, um, wherin is no damage, that whiche can do none harme.
            
               Innumerato, in a redynes,
            
               Innuo, nui, ere, to graunt or aſſent with nod
               
                  •
               dynge of the heade,
            
               Ino, was daughter of Cadmus, wife of Athanſas kynge of Thebes, whiche her huſbande bèynge mad, and Learchus her ſonne ſlayne, ſhe threwe her ſelfe into the ſea.
            
               Inocco, aui, are, to harowe in.
            
               Inoculatio, graffynge betwen the rynde and the wood.
            
               Inoculo, aui, are, to graffe betwene the rynde and the wood.
            
               Inodorus, without ſauour.
            
               Inoffenſus, vnhurte.
            
               Inofficioſum teſtamentum, where the father by teſtament gyueth awaye from his ſon his landes or goodes without cauſe.
            
               Inoleſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe great.
            
               Inopia, pouertie, lacke of thynges neceſſary.
            
               Inopinatus, vnthought on, or vnloked for.
            Inopioſus, a, um, needy.
            
            
               Inops, pis, pore, lackyng helpe. alſo vnburied
            
               Inops ab amicis, diſpuruayed of frendes.
            Inops amicorum, idem.
            
               Inora, beaſtes without mouthes.
            
               In poſterum, at the laſte, in concluſion.
            
               Inprimis, ſpecially, pryncipally, chiefely.
            
               In promptu, redy, or in a redines.
            
               In promptu eſſe, to be playne or without any difficulty.
            
               In promptu ponere, to ſet forth in ſight.
            
               In quam, I ſayde.
            
               In quantum, in as moche, or for as moche.
            Inquies, quietis, & Inquietus, ta, tum, vnreſtfull, vnquiete.
            
            
               Inquieto, aui, are, to vnquiete or trouble.
            
               Inquilino, naui, nare, to dwell in a ſtraunge place.
            
               Inquilinus, he that dwelleth in a place, where neyther he nor his auncetours were borne.
            
               Inquino, aui, are, to defyle or polute.
            
                
               Inquio, I ſaye.
            
               Inquiro, ſiui, quirere, to inquire.
            
               Inquiſitius, more intentifely, more inwardely.
            
               Inſania, madnes, peuyſhenes, dotage, frowardenes.
            
               Inſanio, iui, ire, to be mad or peuyſhe, to dote, to do vnaduyſedly.
            
               Inſanitas, madneſſe.
            
               Inſanus, mad, peuyſhe, dotynge, regardyng no counſell, frowarde, vntractable.
            Inſatiabilis, le, vnſatiable.
            
            
               Inſcendo, dere, to go vp, or to clyme.
            
               Inſciens, vnwyttynge: alſo not thynkynge on that he doth.
            
               Inſciencer, ignorantly.
            
               Inſcientia, ignoraunce.
            Inſcitia, idem.
            Inſcius, a, um, ignoraunt.
            
            
               Inſcribo, ſcripſi, ſcribere, to wryte in or vpon, to name or intitle.
            
               Inſcriptus, a, um, vnwrytten, wrytten vpon, named or intitled.
            
               Inſecta, be all flyes and wormes, that be deuided in theyr bodies the heade and breſt from the bealy and tayle: as bees, waſpes, emoces or piſmeres, and ſuche lyke.
            
               Inſequor, eris, ſequi, to folowe or purſue.
            
               Infero, ſerui, rere, inſertum, to ſet in, to ioyne. whan it hath inſeui, inſ
                     •
                  tum, it ſygnyfieth to graffe.
            
               Inſerto, aui, are, to ſet to.
            
               Inſertorium, the bonde or thonge, wherwith a tergate or buckeler is hanged on a mannes arme.
            Inſeruio, uiui, ire, to ſeru
                     •
                  .
            
            
               Inſideo, es, ſedi, fidere, to ſyt on, to ſyt in, or be in, to beſiege, to abyde in a place.
            
               Inſidiae, wyles to intray a man, er he be ware.
            
               Inſidior, aris, ari, to practiſe wiles, to intrap or betray a man.
            
               Inſidioſe, wylily, craftely.
            
               Inſidioſus, a, um, full of wyles.
            
               Inſido, is, ſidi, re, to enter to the intente to abyde.
            
               Inſigne, a notable ſigne or token.
            
               Inſignia, ſignes or tokens of honour, wherby euery aſtate or great aucthoritie is knowen. a robes, maces, ſwordes borne vpeyghte, cappes of mayntenance, and other lyke thinges. Alſo ſome tyme tokens of doctrine and vertue: as ſtaues typped with ſyluer, whiche bedells beare before doctours, hoodes furred, crownes of laurell. it may be alſo taken for the armes or bages of gentylmen.
            
               Inſignio, iui, ire, to note with ſome ſigne. alſo to doube knyghtes.
            
               Inſignis, ne, notable, excellente, marked with ſome ſpeciall token to be knowen.
            Inſignite, & inſigniter, notably.
            
            
               Inſilio, liui, ire, to leape in or vp.
            
               Inſimul, together.
            
               Inſimulatio, an accuſation or appeale.
            
               Inſimulo, aui, are, to accuſe or appeale. alſo to fayne or diſſemble.
            
               Inſinuatio, a colourable and crafty begynning of an oration, diſſemblynge ſomme thynge, where the matter maye not be fauourablye herde.
            
               Inſinuatus, a, um, wounde to gether.
            
               Inſinuo, aui, are, to brynge in to, to conioyne, to put in a mannes mynde couertelye and craftely.
            
               Aliquem alteri inſinuare, to brynge one in fauour with an other.
            
               In cauſam inſinuare ſe, to conſyder the grūde of a matter.
            
               Inſinuare ſe, by lyttell and lyttell to crepe into fauour or credence.
            
               Inſinuare ſe in conſuetudinem, to enter in aquayntaunce, or become familiar with one.
            
               Inſinuare ſe in ſermonem aliquorum, to cterlaſe communication with them, which be alredy talkynge of a matter.
            Inſipidus, a, um, vuſauery.
            
            
               Inſipiens, entis, without diſcretion.
            
               Inſiſto, inſtiti, inſiſtere, to ſet faſt and fyrmely, to indeuour, to prouoke or ſollicite. ſomtime to aſſyſte. Inſiſtebat in manu Cereris dextera ſimulachrum pulcherrime factum victoriae. There was in the ryghte hande of Ceres an ymage of vyctory moſte pleaſauntly wroughte.
            
               Aliquod negotium inſiſtere, to go aboute ſome affayre or buſines.
            
               Haſtae inſiſtere, to leane on a ſpeare.
            
               Mente & animo inſutere in rem aliquam, to employe al wyt and mynde on ſome thing.
            
               Omnes itinera inſiſtant ſua, let euery man go his owne waye.
            
               Quam inſiſtam uiam? what waye ſhall I kepe?
            
               Veſtigijs alienis inſiſtere, to folowe other mennes doinges.
            
               Inſiſtere ueſtigijs laudum ſuarum, to contynue in his well doing.
            
               Vrijs insiſtere aut ingredi, to cary by the way or to go forthe.
            Insitio, onis, graffynge.
            
            
               Insitium, the ſtocke.
            
               Insitium, the graffe. Alſo a iegot or other lyke meate ſtuffed with fleſhe and egges chopped or mynced.
            
               Insitiuus, ua, uum, infarſed or ſtuffed.
            
               Inſolabiliter, without comforte, deſperatelye.
            
               Inſolatio, a ſunnynge.
            Inſolatus, a, um, ſunned.
            
            
               Inſolens, not wont or accuſtomed, haut, arrogant, preſumptuous.
            
                
               Inſolenter, arrogantly.
            
               Inſolentia, ſeld omnes of vſe in any thyng, vnhauntynge of a place. Alſo preſumption, wanton pryde.
            
               Inſolitus, not wonte.
            
               Inſolo, aui, are, to drye in the ſunne, to bleach
            
               Inſomnes noctes, nyghtes without ſlepe.
            
               Inſomnia, ae, lacke of power to ſleape.
            
               Inſomnioſus, ſleapy, or he that ſleapeth moch.
            
               Inſomnium, a vayne dreame.
            
               Inſons, ſo ntis, innocent or not gylty.
            Inſonus, a, um, without noyſe.
            
            
               Inſpectius, more auyſedly.
            
               Inſpecto, taui tare, to beholde attentiuelye, to wayte on.
            
               Inſpectio, a beholdynge, an ouerſyghte, a controllement.
            
               Inſpector, an ouerſeer, a controller.
            
               Inſpicio, ſpexi, cere, to beholde, to ouerſee, to controll, to conſyder a thyng throughly.
            
               Inſpico, aui, are, to make a thynge ſmalle, lyke to a wheate reede.
            
               Inſpiro, aui, are, to inſpire, to blowe in.
            
               Inſtans, tis, an inſtant, the leaſt part of tyme.
            
               Inſtanter, inſtantly.
            
               Inſtantia, thynges that be preſent.
            
               Inſtantia, dilygence.
            
               Inſtar, as it were, or lyke.
            
               Inſtat, it is nigh, it is come, it is at hande. Caeſar ubi ſe diutius duci intellexit, & diem inſtare, qua die frumentum militibus metiri oportebat, Whan Caeſar perceyued, that he was delayed, and the daye was nyghe come, whan he muſt nedes delyuer corne to his men of warre.
            
               Inſtatio, the inſtant tyme.
            
               Inſtauratio, reedifieng, repairyng, renewynge.
            
               Inſtauro, aui, are, to new make, or begyn agayn any thynge ſometyme to renue or reforme, to reedyfye.
            
               Inſtaurare bellum, to make warre eftſones.
            
               Inſterno, ſtraui, ſternere, to couer, to ſpreade.
            
               Inſtigo, aui, are, to ſtyrre or prycke forwarde.
            
               Inſtigo, inxi, gere, to meue inwardly.
            
               Inſtinctus, inwardly moued.
            
               Inſtita, a purfle.
            
               Inſtito, aui, are, to repugne or withſtande.
            
               Inſtitor, oris, a chapman, a mercer, alſo he that ſelleth apparayle and fyne ſtuffe, going about therwith, alſo a marchantes factour.
            
               Inſtitorius, a, um, pertaynyng to chapman.
            
               Actio inſtitoria, an action agaynſt the maiſter for the acte of the factour.
            
               Inſtituo, tui, tuere, to inſtitute, to begyn, to inſtruct, or teche, to ordeyn. Aueo ſcire quarū rerū rationē inſtituat, I wold fain know where about he gothe, or what he intendeth to do.
            
               Senex inſtitui lyra non erubeſcebat, beynge old, he was not aſhamed to be taught to play on the harpe.
            
               Accuſationem inſtituere, to commence an action, or make a complaynt by byll.
            
               Aſtutiam inſtituere, to inuent a crafty mean.
            
               Certamen ſibi inſtituere cum aliquo, to be at varyance with one.
            
               Collegium inſtituere, to founde a college.
            
               Conſuetudinem inſtituere, to enter into famyliaritie.
            
               Delectum militum inſtituere, to raiſe men to the warres.
            
               Quaeſtum ſibi inſtituere, to begyn a waye to haue gayne or profyte by it.
            
               Vitam ſapienter inſtituere, to prepare hym ſelfe to lyue wyſely.
            
               Inſtituta, auncient maners and cuſtomes, alſo ordynances.
            
               Pro meo inſtituto, for my purpoſe.
            
               Inſtitutiones, inſtructions in doctrine.
            
               Inſto, as, inſtiti, ſtare, to require inſtantely, to ſolicite, to ſtyck to, to reſiſt, to perſyſt, to preſe on, to come on, or immediatly folow. alſo to be nygh. Veſtigijs alicuius inſtare, to folow one foote by foote.
            
               Inſtat, it is now. Periculum inſtat, danger is at hande.
            
               Inſtant à me tibi dona, I am at the poynte to doo the good.
            
               Inſtratum, à counterpoynte. Alſo it ſygnifieth all tapiſey, which ſerueth to couer any thing. alſo the trappier or apparayle of an horſe, an horſeclothe.
            
               Inſtrumentum, an inſtrument or toole. alſo ordinance of warre, veſſell, and all neceſſaries of houſeholde and huſbandry. ſomtyme it ſygnifieth a deede or charter concernyng lande, dettes, or couenauntes.
            
               Inſtructus, ta, tum, inſtruct, taught, furniſhed, garnyſſhed.
            
               Inſtructiores peditum copiae, the foote men were in better order and better appoynted.
            
               Vir inſtructiſsimus, a man furniſhed with al thynges neceſſary or conuenient.
            
               Inſtruo, ſtruxi, ſtruere, to ſet in order or aray, to inſtruct, to fourniſhe, to prepare.
            
               Domum inſtruere, to garnyſhe a houſe with all thynges neceſſary.
            
               Epulas inſtruere, to prouyde for a feaſte or banket. Inſidias inſtruere, to prepare thingis to intrappe or deceyue one.
            
               Inſtruendae fraudi aliquanto intentior, ſomewhat buſy in deuyſyng how to deceyue.
            
               Inſubres, Lumbardes, properly men of the duchy of Melayn.
            
               Inſucco, aui, are, to ſoke in lycour.
            
               Inſueſco, ſueui, ſcere, to be wont.
            Inſuetus, ta, tum, not vſed.
            
            
               Inſula, an yle inuyronned with water. it is alſo a houſe in a towne, hauynge none other hous
 ioyned to it, but ſtretes on euery ſyde of it.
            
               Inſularis, re, belongyng to an yle.
            
               Inſularius, a, um, moſt vile, proprely men bauyſhed into yles to dygge mettall.
            
               Inſulatus, ta, tum, made an yle.
            
               Inſulto, taui, tare, to leape vp, to ſcorne or ſpeke in the reproche of a man.
            
               Inſultura, a leapyng vp or into a thynge.
            
               Inſum, ineſſe, to be in ſome thynge.
            
               In ſumma, vniuerſally, alway, fynally.
            
               Inſummo, are, to fynyſhe.
            
               Inſumo, pſi, ere, to ſpend or lay out money.
            
               Inſuper, furthermore, moreouer.
            
               Inſuſurro, aui, are, to whiſper in ones care.
            
               Integer, gra, grum, if it be ſpoken of age, it ſignifieth yong & luſty, if it be ſpokē of a man, it ſignifieth honeſt in all poyntes & qualities: in a thing it ſignifieth entier or hole. alſo ſafe
            
               Integer aeui, luſty of age.
            
               Integraſco, ſci, ſcere, to be renewed.
            
               Integritas, honeſty without corruption, innocency. Corporis integritas, good diſpoſition of the body.
            
               Integro, aui, are, to begyn agayn, to renewe.
            
               Integrè, truely and diligently.
            
               Integrum eſſe, to be at a mans liberte, or in his power. Non eſt integrum Gn. Pompeio cō
                  ſilio iam uti tuo. It is not now in Pompeys power to do after your counſell. Ego, ſi mihi eſſet integrum, ſuſciperem hoc crimen. If I were at my libertie, I wold take that blame vpon me. Conſtituent quid agant quibus integrum, eſt, They whyche yet haue done nothynge, let them take hede what they do.
            
               Si mihi eſſet integrū, if it were in my power, or if it were to do that I haue done.
            
               In integrum reſtituere, to bring it to the fyrſt eſtate, to reſtore it to the point that it was at In integro eſſe, is ſpoken where in any matter or affaire, there is nothyng done, but that euery man may do as it lyketh hym. Sed quoniā hec iā neque in integro eſſe poſſunt, but foraſmoche as there is noo remedye, or that theſe thynges may not be holpen, or may not be in as good poynt as they were.
            
               Intellectualis, of vnderſtandynge.
            
               Intellectus, vnderſtandynge.
            
               Intelligentia, the perceyuyng of the mynde.
            
               Intelligibile, that may be vnderſtande.
            Intelligo, lexi, ligere, to vnderſtande.
            
            
               Intemerata, perfecte ſacrifyces, all thynges obſeruyd.
            
               Intemeratus, ta, tum, vndefyled, vncorrupted.
            
               Intemperans, he that dothe euery thyng without order or meaſure.
            
               Intemperiae, goddeſſes hauīg power to do harm
            Intemperies, & intemperantia, vnteperatnes.
            
            
               Intempeſta nox, mydnyghte, whan all thynge is in ſylence.
            
               Intempeſtas, tatis, the caulme of the water, whan there is no tempeſt.
            
               Intēpeſtiuè, vntimely, out of due tyme or order.
            
               Intempeſtiuus, a, ū, thing out of tyme or ſeaſon.
            
               Intendo, di, dere, to bende or ſtretche alſo to loke diligently on a thynge, to knyt or tye, to inforce with might.
            
               Intendere animum, to ſet or fyxe the mynde.
            
               Intendere formulam, to bringe an action agaynſt one.
            
               In tenebris ſaltare, ſignifieth to do a thing vnaduiſedly, and without any iudgement.
            
               Intentatus, not aſſayed.
            
               Intentio, ſignifieth not intent or pourpoſe, but forthe act that is appoynted or executed.
            Intento, aui, are, to menace.
            
            
               Intentus, ta, tum, ſet or fyxed.
            
               Inter, betwene, amonge.
            Inter coenam, for in coena.
            
               Inter nos amamus, we loue togyther one an other. Inter opus, whyles he was buſy.
            
               Inter paucos dies, in a ſhorte tyme.
            
               Inter poenam, beyng to tourment.
            
               Inter ſacrum & ſaxum, in the poynt to periſh and be vtterly loſte.
            
               Inter uias, on the way rydyng or goyng.
            
               Interamna, a citie in Italy.
            
               Interana, the inwardes of a man or beaſt,
            
               Interaneus, a, um, that whiche is within.
            
               Interareſco, ſci, ſcere, to be dryed vp.
            
               Interbibo, bi, bere, to drynke all out.
            Intercalaris, re, & intercalarius, a, um, put or ſette betwene.
            
            
               Intercalaris dies, the day of the leape yere.
            
               Intercalaris menſis, the moneth in the which certayn dayes were ſet, that lacked to make the yere complete, which moneth is Februarye Reade abundantly hereof in Solino & Macrobio, whiche wold be tedious to write in englyſhe, ſpecially in this Dictionary.
            
               Intercalaris uerſus, a ſyngular verſe often repeted amonge other verſes. Some do call it, in englyſhe balades and ſonges, the foote or refrete of a ditie.
            
               Intercalo, aui, are, to ſet or put betwene.
            
               Intercapedo, dinis, a ſpace or pauſe.
            
               Intercedo, ceſsi, cedere, to make interceſſion, alſo to go betwene, or be betwene. Quadringētorū remigū obſequio cōtra ſe intercedit. He letted that .iiii. hūdred watermen that rowed dyd not obey hym. Vaeteres mihi neceſſitudines cū his omnibus intercedunt, Ther is great amitie of a longe tyme betwene vs. Tribuni inter ceſſerunt, The Tribunes dyd let or prohibyte.
            
               Intercedit mihi tecum amicitia, There is amitie betwene the and me.
            
               Pro alio intercedere, to anſwer for an other man. Interceſsêre pauci dies, in a few days
 after, a lyttell whyle after.
            
               Quae ratio tibi cum illo interceſſerat? What acquayntāce haddeſt thou with him? or what haddeſt thou to do with hym?
            
               Interceſsio Tribunorum, a let or prohibitiō of the Tribunes againſt the auctoritie of other officers.
            
               Interceſſor, he that lettith a matter, that it may not go forwarde.
            
               Intercîdo, cîdi, ere, to cut ſūder in the middes.
            
               Intêcido, cidi, ere, to decay or periſhe betwene this and that.
            
               Intercino, nere, to ſyng betwene or in the middell of a thing, as in comedies or enterludes, whiles newe perſonages be in preparyng.
            
               Intercipio, caepi, ere, to preuent or apprehende one vnware, to take in the myddes, or in the meane while, ſometyme to take all.
            
               Intercipere iter, to kepe or incloſe a way, that men may not paſſe.
            
               Intercipere literas, to take letters on the way from hym that carieth them.
            
               Intercipere ſermonem, to dyſapoynt one of his purpoſe.
            
               Interciſa & porrecta, cut of & made longer.
            
               Interciſi dies, were days diuided, part holyday part warkeday.
            
               Intercludo, si, ere, to ſhut in, to ſtop, to lette.
            
               Intercludere corporibus ſuis aduentum inimicorum, To be them ſelues in the warre, to let their enemyes to enter.
            
               Dolorem intercludi, to be enuyronned with heuyneſſe.
            
               Fugam intercludere, to keepe the paſſages that they eſcape not.
            
               Libertatem intercludere, to lette theym of theyr lybertie.
            
               Spem cōmeatus intercludere, to put theym from hope to haue vitayles.
            
               Intercolumnium, the ſpace betwene pyllars.
            
               Intercus, cutis, a diſeaſe betwene the ſkyn and the fleſhe: Whan it is an adiectiue it ſygnifieth inwarde. Intercutibus uitijs madentes, ouerwet with inwarde vices.
            
               Intercutaneus, a, um, that is within the ſkinne.
            
               Interdico, xi, cere, to prohibite greuouſely. alſo to reſyſt or let.
            
               Interdico alicui aqua & igni, was a condemnation in Rome, whereby one was depriued from the vſage of water and fyre, wherby he was conſtreyned to depart out of the limites of the empire of Rome.
            
               Interdicere de ui hominibus armatis, to ordayne that he by whoſe meanes one ſuppoſeth that he is putte out of poſſeſſion with force, ſhall ſet hym eftſones in poſſeſſion.
            
               Veſtigijs interdicere, to forbidde one that he go not a certayne way.
            
               Nihil interdico, I wyll not lette the, I care not for it.
            
               Interdictum, a prohibytion, a menace, ſomtime a determination of the poſſeſſion of a thynge in debate.
            
               Interdiu, in the day tyme.
            
               Interdum, ſometyme.
            
               Interea, in the meane while▪ alſo neuertheleſſe.
            
               Interealoci, in the meane ſpace.
            
               Intereo, rij, ire, to dye vtterly.
            
               Interequito aui, are, to ryde betwene.
            
               Intereſſe, to be preſent. Publicis conſilijs interfuimus, we were preſent at the comnune coū
               ſayl. alſo to be betwene. Id morari uictoriam rati, quod intereſſet amnis, ſuppoſynge that the cauſe why that they had not 
                  •
               orthewith the vyctory, was foraſmoch as the riuer was betwene them. Magni ſua putabant intereſſe, They thought that it made moch for the purpoſe, or for their profite. Triginta ferme interfuere anni, There were almoſt thyrty yeres betwene them.
            
               Intereſt mea, tua, ſua, noſtra, ueſtra, it behouith me, the, hym. vs, you, or it pertayneth to me, the, hym, &c. Alſo it maketh matter, or is a diuerſitie. Si nihil intereſt regis, peto ut dum dico, uinculis liberer, If it be no mattier to the kynge, I pray you, whyles I do ſpeake, let me be without gyues. Somtyme it ſignifieth to be in the middes. Nihil intereſt tui, It is no matter to the. Nihil intereſt eius, it maketh no matter to him. Intereſt eius, It is his part, or it is for his profyte. Quid ergo inter eſt, proferantur, nec ne? What maketh it matter, where they be brought forth or no? Nec intereſt diſcentium, quibus quidque no minibus appelletur, It maketh no matter to them that do lerne, by what names any thing is callyd. Permagni intereſt, It maketh moche of the matter. Inter hominem & beluam hoc maxime intereſt, This is the moſt diuerſytie betwene a man and a beaſt.
            
               Interficio, feci, to ſlea.
            
               Interfluo, xi, ere, to flowe betwene.
            
               Interfoemineum, a womans priuy token, wherby ſhe is knowen from a man.
            
               Interfundo, fudi, fundere, to poure betwene.
            
               Intergerimus, a wall added to an olde foundation or wall to ſuſtayne it.
            
               Interhaec, in this meane tyme.
            
               Interi, they that be within.
            
               Interiaceo, cui, cere, to putte betwene, to caſte betwene.
            
               Interibi, in the myddle of that place.
            
               Interiectus, ta, tum, put or caſt betwene.
            
               Interiectae collibus ualles, valeys lyenge betwene the hylles.
            
               Interiecti inter philoſophos, & eos qui rem pub. adminiſtrent, Whiche be neyther philoſophers nor yet mynyſters of a cōmon weale,
 but participatours of the one and the other.
            
               Interiectum tempus, the meane tyme.
            
               Interncio, ieci, ijcere, to lay or put betwene.
            
               Interim, in the mean ſpace or tyme, in the mean ſeaſon. alſo ſomtime, ſodeinly, other while.
            Interimo, emi, imere, to kylle.
            
            Interior, & interius, the inner.
            
            
               Interitus, deathe.
            
               Interiungo, ere, to tary.
            
               Interius, more inwarde.
            
               Interlino, nere, to enterlyne.
            
               Interloquor, eris, qui, to ſpeake in a mans tale.
            
               Interluceo, cere, to ſhyne betweene, or in the myddes.
            
               Interluco, care, to make a glade in themyddell of a wood.
            
               Interlunium, the ſpare of tyme, in the whyche neyther the olde moone dothe appere, nor the newe moone is ſene.
            
               Interluo, ere, to flowe betweene, to waſſhe betweene meales, or other actes.
            
               Intermedius, a, um, in the myddell.
            
               Intermeſtris luna, the newe moone at the very chaunge.
            
               Intermeſtrum, the tyme whan the moone is at the poynt to chaunge
            
               Intermico, to ſhyne in the myddes.
            
               Interminor, aris, ari, to thretten ſoore.
            
               Intermitto, tere, to leaue or put of for a tyme.
            
               Conſuetudinem intermittere, to forbeare family ariti
                  •
                or reſorte.
            
               Intermorior, to dye vtterly.
            
               Intermortuus, a, um, dead for a ſeaſon.
            
               Internecio, an vnyuerſall ſlaughter.
            Internitio, idem.
            
               Interneco, are, to ſlea all at ones.
            
               Internectiuum bellum, warre to the vtter dyſtruction and deathe.
            
               Internicinum bellum, warre to the vttrance.
            
               Internodium, a ioynt in a mans fynger. alſo a ioynt in a ſtrawe or reede.
            
               Internoſco, ſcere, to know a thyng amonge other thynges.
            
               Internuncius, a meſſanger or meane betweene two perſons beynge at varyance.
            
               Internus, na, num, that whiche is within, or inwarde.
            
               Inter opus, euen in the doinge.
            
               Interordinium, a ſpace betweene that whiche is in order.
            Interordo, dinis, idem.
            
               Interpellatio, a let in a mans buſynes.
            
               Interpellator, a diſtourber or letter or other, that they may not do theyr buſynes.
            
               Interpello, are, to interrupt or let one that ſpeketh or doth any thynge. alſo to require, to aſke or demaunde.
            
               Interpellare debitorem, to call on a dettour.
            
               Interpenſiua, certayne pieces of tymber, whyche are ſet from the corners of the wal, to the endes of the rafters, to conuey rayne water into the ſpoutes.
            
               Interpenſiui parietes, walles whyche ryſe vppon an other walle, and haue no foundation in the grounde.
            
               Interpola, newe inuentions or deuiſes.
            
               Interpolator, oris, & Interpolatrix, tricis, he or ſhe that refreſheth old thynges, and do make them ſeme newe.
            
               Interpolis, le, Interpolus, la, lum, renewed, refreſſhed.
            
               Interpolio, are, to put or ſet betwene, to rem
                  •
               e, or refreſhe any thynge.
            
               Interpono, ſui, nere, to put betwene, to reſyſte.
            
               Interponere fidem publicam, to promiſe vppon the credence and conſent of al the people.
            
               Interpremo, to ſtoppe or cloſe in.
            
               Interpres, pretis, an interpreter or trāſlater, alſo a ſtikler betwene two, which ar at variāce.
            
               Interpretamentum, & interpretatio, an interpretation or tranſlation.
            
               Interpretor, aris, ari, to interprete, expoune, or tranſlate, alſo to iuge or eſteme.
            
               Virtutem ex conſuetudine uitae interpretêmur, Let vs iuge the vertue of the perſon by his cuſtome of lyuynge.
            
               In bonam partem interpretari, to take it in good parte.
            
               Peruerſe interpretari, to meane ſhrewdly.
            
               Interputo, are, to cut betwene.
            
               Interrafile, that whiche is playne betwyxt two partes, grauen or imboſed.
            
               Interrex, regis, he that ruleth in the mean time betwene the ceaſſyng of the auctoritie of one principall gouernour, by death, or otherwiſe, vntyl an other be elected into the ſame office.
            
               Interregnum, the ſayde meane tyme of gouernaunce or rule.
            
               Interrogo, are, to demaunde a queſtion.
            
               Interrogati legibus, to be tried by examination, that they had offended againſt the lawes.
            
               Interrumpo, rupi, pere, to breke in the middes
            
               Interſcalmia, the ſpaces betwene the oores in a boote or galey.
            
               Interſcapilium, the ſpace betwene the ſhulders vnder the necke.
            
               Interſcindo, di, dere, to cut in the myddes.
            
               Interſepio, ſepſi, pire, to diuide in the myddell with ſome incloſure.
            
               Interſeptae, the griſtell, whiche maketh partition betwene the noſethrylles.
            
               Interſero, ſeui, ſerere, to ſowe or ſet betwene or in the myddes.
            
               Interſono, are, to make noyſe in the myddes, or betwene.
            
               Interſpiro, are, to ſpryng vp in the myddes.
            
               Interſtertio, to ſtrawe betwene, or throw thinges betwene.
            
                
               Interſtitium, a diſtance or ſpare betwene.
            
               Interſum, intereſſe, to be preſent, alſo to differ, to be dyuers. Stulto intelligens quid intereſt? What diuerſitie is there betwene a fole and a wyſe man?
            
               Intertextus, a, um, wouen or wrought betwene or tinſelde, as cloth of tynſell or baudkyn.
            
               Intertrigo, ginis, gallyng, whiche happeneth by the occaſyon of ſweat betwene the legges, the toes, or fyngers.
            
               Intertrimentum, the waſte or loſſe of a thynge by wearyng or occupienge.
            
               Interturbo, are, to trouble excedyngly.
            
               Interuaco, are, to be vacant or voyde betwene.
            
               Interuallum, a ſpace betwene.
            
               Interuello, ere, to plucke vp here and there.
            
               Interuenio, ire, to come in the meane whyle, to be preſent amonge other.
            
               Interuenium, the ſpace betwene the veynes.
            
               Interuerto, ere, to take away craftily or falſly.
            
               Interuiſo, ere, to viſit among, or now and than
            
               Interula, a ſhyrte or ſmocke.
            
               Inteſtabilis, he which by the lawe can make no teſtament, ſomtyme it ſignifieth deteſtable.
            
               Inteſtatus, he that dyeth without makyng any teſtamēt, inteſtate. alſo he that dyeth making none heire by teſtament. alſo a man out of credence, whom no man wyl take for a wytnes.
            
               Inteſtina, the bowels, or inwarde part of man, or other thynge lyuinge.
            
               Inteſtinum bellum, where people do war within theyr owne realme.
            
               Inteſtium odium, hate with hart and mynd mortall hatrede.
            
               Inteſtinum opus, the inwarde buyldynge of tymber and parget.
            
               Intimus, moſte inwarde, mooſt ſecrete. alſo he whom a man moſt ſpecially fauoureth.
            
               Intingo, xi, gere, to depe, as one doth his fyngar into licour.
            
               Intorqueo, ſi, quêre, to thruſte in by throwing of a darte, or other lyke thyng. alſo to turne or wynde in.
            
               Intra, within.
            
               Intra famā, leſſe thā the opiniō the mē haue.
            
               Intra modū, leſſe thā a mean, ſhort of a mean
            Intrarius idem quod intimus.
            
               Intrarius amicus, a ſpeciall frende.
            
               Intrico, care, to wrappe.
            
               Intrinſecus, within.
            
               Intritus, broyed in a morter.
            
               Intrò into a place.
            
               Intro, are, to enter 
                  〈◊〉
                in.
            
               Introcludo, ſi, dere, to ſhutte in.
            
               Introduco, xi, cere, to bryng or leade in.
            
               Introeo, iui, ire, to go in.
            
               Introgredior, eris, gredi, to come in.
            
               Intromitto, miſi, mittere, to lette in.
            
               Introrſus, into, within.
            
               Introrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake in.
            
               Introſpicio, ſpexi, ſpicere, to loke in.
            
               Introuoco, are, to calle in.
            
               Intueor, eris, eri, to beholde, to take hede.
            
               Intus, in a place.
            
               Intuſium, a ſhyrt or ſmocke.
            Intutus, ta, tum, vnſure.
            
            
               Intybum, ſemeth to be the general name of all kyndes of endiue and cykory. yet Dioſcorides diuideth it into .ii. kyndes, the one wyld, the other which is ſowē, & of that alſo he makith two ſortes, the one with a brode leaf, which I take to be endiue, the other with a narow leaf which I take for the cōmon cykory, that whiche is wylde, is callyd Erraticum.
            
            
               Inuado, ſi, re, to inuade, to enter, to apprehend.
            
               Inualeſco, lui, ſcere, to waxe ſtrong, to be cōfirmed or ſtablyſhed.
            Inualetudo, dinis, feblenes.
            
            Inualidus, da, dum, feble, weake.
            
            
               Inuectiuae orationes, orations made agaynſte one, in reprouyng his maners and lyuyng.
            
               Inueho, uexi, uehere, to cary in a thyng, to cary a thynge into a place.
            
               Inuehor, eris, uehi, to rebuke one vehemently, and with violent and foore wordes.
            
               Inuenio, ire, to fynde a thynge whyche a man ſeketh for.
            
               In uerba iurare, to be ſworne as princis counſaylours and ſeruantis be ſworne vnto them. alſo to do fealtie.
            
               In uerſum, in number and order.
            
               Inuerto, tere, to tourne in, to turne vp ſo down, to turne in and out after the vulgar ſpeche, properly to turne euery thing contrary to the ryght fourme and faſcion.
            
               Inueſtes, yōg childrē about wtout hear on their bodies
            
               Inueſtigabilis, le, that may not be foūd wt ſekīg.
            
               Inueſtigo, are, to ſeke out, to fynde in ſekynge, to enquyre.
            
               Inueſtio, iui, ire, to adorne or garnyſhe a thyng.
            
               Inueterati, olde ſhrewes or vnthriftes, men in lykyng vnthriftily waxed olde.
            
               Inuetereſco, raui, ſcere, to wear out for age, to be out of vſe, to be aged or old. alſo worn out, almoſte conſumyd.
            
               Inuicem, togyther, one the other. Inuicē diligūt, they do loue one an other. alſo it ſignifieth for thy yt. Habes res urbanas, inuicē ruſticas ſcribe, Now thou knoweſt thaffaires of the cite, for thy part write what is done in the cuntrey.
            
               Inuidentia, enuy, grief to behold or here that an othre in an proſpereth.
            
               Inuideo, uidi, ere, to haue enuy at an others ꝓſperitie. alſo to ſe inwardly or through a thīg.
            
               Inuideo tibi doctrinam, I haue enuye at thy lernynge.
            
               Inuidia, enuy, hatred, yll wylle.
            
               Inuidia facti ſui, the diſpleaſure of his act, or
 attemptate, or the dede whereof he was enuied and hated.
            
               Inuidiam concitare alicui, to brynge oone in hatred or yll opinyon.
            Facere inuidiam, idem.
            
               Inuidioſa res, a thynge whiche bredeth enuy or hatred.
            
               Inuidioſè, enuyouſely.
            
               Inuidioſus, an enuyouſe perſone. ſometyme he whyche is enuyed.
            
               Inuidus, he that hath enuy.
            
               Inuigilo, are, to haue watche of a thynge, or to lay watche, to care.
            
               Inuinius, he that neuer drynketh wyne.
            
               Inuiſus, a, um, neuer ſene. alſo hated or odious.
            
               Inuitatus, boden, as to a feaſte or banket.
            
               Inuito, tare, to bydde. alſoo to delyre, to fylle the bealye.
            
               Inuitus, ta, tum, vnwyllyng, or agaynſt a mannes wyll.
            In uniuerſum, vniuerſally.
            
            
               Inuius, a, um, lackyng a way, or where nothing can paſſe.
            
               Inumbro, are, to make ſhadowe, ſomtyme it ſignifieth to defende.
            
               Inunco, care, to catch, as it were with an hoke
            
               Inundatio, a floudde.
            
               Inundo, to ouerflowe or ſurrounde.
            
               In unguem, to the poynt, perfectly.
            
               Inuoco, are, to calle in, to calle for helpe. alſoo not to calle.
            
               Inuolo, are, to ſteale, to lay violente handes on one, to flee out.
            
               Inuolucris, a byrde not redy to flee.
            
               Inuolucrum, & inuolucre, euerye thynge whiche ſerueth to keuer or wrappe in it an other thynge.
            
               Inuolucris ſimulationum tegi, to be hyd vnder crafty couerynges of diſſimulation.
            
               Inuoluo, uere, to wrappe.
            
               Inuoluolus, & Inuoluola, a worme lyke a canker, whiche is on vynes, and whanne he is taken of, he wrappeth hym ſelfe rounde togyther.
            Inuolutus, ta, tum, wrapped.
            
            
               Inuro, inuſsi, inurere, to marke a thynge with an hotte yron.
            
               Inurere alicui notam cenſoriam, to brynge to one a notable reproche.
            
               Inurere infamiam alicui, to brynge vppe a ſclaunder of done, whyche wylle neuer be layde.
            
               Leges inurere, to ma
                  •
               e lawes, to the perpetuall dyſhonour of a w
                  •••
               e publyke.
            
               Inutrium, a towne in Almayn callid Inſprngh.
            
               Inuus, is the ruſtical god of the Paynyms callyd alſo Pan.
         
         
            ¶I ANTE O.
            
               IO, an interiection, ſygnifyenge ſommetyme griefe, as in Tibullo, Vror iò, O I burn. ſometyme exceſſiue gladnes, as in Ouidio Dicite iò Paean.
            
            
               Ioannes, a proper name of Hebrue, and ſygnifieth the grace of god. Ioannes Baptiſta, ſonne of Zacharias, and Elyſabeth of the tribe of Leui, was ſanctified before that he was borne, and declared by an aungell that his name ſhuld be Iohn̄. And bycauſe his father dyd not forthwith beleue it, he was ſpecheles vntyll the eyght daye after the byrthe of the chylde, and that he hadde wrytten in tables, his name is Iohn̄, than was his mouth opened, and he ſpake gloryfyenge god, and made than the pſalme: Benedictus dominus deus Iſrael, quia uiſitauit & fecit redemptionem plaebis ſuae. This man was of ſuche perfection and holyneſſe, that oure ſauyour Chriſte teſtified of hym, that he wente in the ſpirite and trouthe of Helias the prophete, but yet was he more thanne a prophete, and was the meſſanger whiche god promiſed by the prophet Malachias, that he wolde ſende, whiche ſhuld prepare the way before hym. Semblably Iohn̄ teſtified of Chriſt, that he was the true lyght that lyghted euerye man that commeth into the worlde, and that he was in the worlde, and the worlde was made by hym, and that he bare recorde, that he was the ſonne of god. Iohn̄ lyued in wylderneſſe, his garment was of camelles heares, and his gyrdell of aſkynne aboute his loynes, and his meate was Locuſtae and honye of the woddes. He baptyſed only in water teachyng repentaunce and the approchyng of the kyngdome of heauen. But bycauſe he ſayd to Herode, that it was not lefulle for hym to haue his brothers wyfe, he was by hym putte in pryſone, and fynallye at the petytion of the doughter of Herodiades, who daunſyd before hym (by the perſwaſyon of Herodiades, who was the wyfe of his brother) the heade of Iohn̄ was ſtryken of, and in a dyſſhe was brought by the mayden vnto her mother in open bankette. Ioſephus antiquitatum li. 18. calleth hym a very good man, who commaunded the Iewes to labour to gette vertue, to obſerue iuſtyce amonge theym ſelues, to kepe trewe relygion towarde god, and by baptyſme to ioyne togyther in oone. Alſoo he ſaythe, that many men thoughte, that in the battayle betwene Herode and Aretha, by the iuſt vengeance of god for puttyng Iohn̄ Baptyſt to death, the hoſte of Herode was vtterlye diſtroyed. He was born before Chriſt carnally moneths
 and was put to death before Chriſte ſuffered his paſſion, one yere.
            
               Ioannes, apoſtle and Euangeliſte, the ſonne of Zebedaeus, and brother of Iames the apoſtle callyd the more, was of Chriſt moſt tenderly beloued, and in the tyme of the emperoure Domitian, was exiled into the ile callid Pathmos, where he wrate the boke of reuelatiōs callyd Apocalypſis. After the death of Domi
                  ••
               an in the tyme of Pertinax he retourned to Epheſum, and there remaynynge vnto the tyme of Traiane, he rayſed many churches, and dyd ſette theym in order, and beynge of great age, dyed .lxviii. yeres after the paſſion of Chriſte, as Sophronius writeth, and was buried at Epheſum. Polycrates an auncient and holy byſhop in Aſia, in his epiſtoll to Victor byſſhop of Rome, wryteth in this wyſe: Alſo Iohn̄, whiche layde his head vpon our lordes breaſt, who was the chiefe prieſte, and ware the pontificalle plate or table, martyr and doctour of the church, ſlept at Epheſum. He wrate his goſpell laſt of all the Euangeliſtes in the laſt ende of his lyfe, wherin he declareth the diuinitie of our ſauiour, more thā any of the other, whiche by the holye ghoſte was reſerued vnto hym.
            
               Iocaſta, was doughter of Creon, and fyrſt wife of Laius kyng of Thebes, after whoſe dethe ſhe being ignorant, maried Oedipus her natural ſonne. After that her ſonnes Polynîces & Etheocles, whyche ſhe had by Oedipus had one ſlayne the other in battayle, ſhe alſoo kylled her ſelfe.
            
               Iochabella, the name of Moyſes mother.
            
               Iocor, aris, ari, to ſpeake meryly or in diſport.
            
               Iocoſus, a, um, & iocularis, re, mery ſportfull, prouokyng myrth.
            
               Ioculus, a lyttell ſporte or myrthe.
            
               Iocus, plurali ioca, a mery worde, diſporte.
            
               Iohel, a prophet born in Bethon in the lande of Rubim, he prophecied moche of Hieruſalem, and fynall concluſion of Gentiles.
            
               Iōlaus, the ſonne of Iphiclus, of whom the people of Sardinia, were named Iolenſes.
            
            
               Iōle, the doughter of Euritus kynge of Aetolia, whom Hercules loued ſoo moche, that he ſerued her in a womans apparayle, and ſpan on a diſtaffe.
            
               Ion, a ſtone of a violet colour.
            
               Ionas, a prophet of the countrey of Cariathamaum, not farre frome Azotus a citie of the Grekes nygh to the ſea in Siria, was in the tyme of Helias, and was the ſon of the pore wydowe, and hym dyd Helias reſtore vnto lyfe for the hoſpitalytie of his mother. And whan he came to ful age, he was by almyghtye god ſente to the greate citie of Niniue in Aſſyria, and as he wolde haue fledde frome our lorde, and haue tourned his iourney vnto Tharſos, he was deuoured of a whale, & beynge at the laſt caſt vp vnto the lande oute of the whales mouthe, whan he had ben thre dayes in the whales bealye, he went forthe and preached in Niniue in ſuche wyſe, that the people by penaunce reſtrayned the ſword of god, whiche was redy to ſtryke them. Afterward Ionas vexed with heuynes of mind retourned to his countrey, nor there longe abydynge, he takynge with hym his mother, went to the lande of Sur, and as he haunted the lande of Saar he there dyed, and was buryed in the graue of Cinezeus the iudge, He propheſied that whan men ſhuld ſe in Hieruſalem moche people come from the weſt partes of the worlde, than ſhulde the citie be diſtroyed vnto the harde erthe. Ionas in hebru ſignifieth a culuer, or a diſtroyer of people.
            
               Ionia, a region of Grece in Aſia, wherein were the cities of Epheſus, Miletus, Priena, and other, and the people therof be callyd Iones, and the tungue Ionica, and the ſea ioynynge to it Mare Ionicum.
            
            Ionicus, ca, cum, & Ionius, a, um, of Ionia.
            
               Ioppe, a citie of the countrey of Paleſtina, not farre from Hieruſalem, ſtandynge by the ſea, ſome men doo ſuppoſe to be the hauen callyd whyche Porte Iaffe.
            
               Iordanis, a fayre riuer in Iudaea, which diuideth Galile from the reſydue of Iudaea, and fallith into the dead ſea.
            
               Ios, an yle where Homerus was buried.
            
               Ioſeph, the ſonne of Iacob the patriark, was through enuye ſolde by his bretherne vnto a marchant, who brought hym into Egypte, & gaue him to Putiphar great maſter of houſholde with kyng Pharao, whoſe wyfe bournynge in concupiſcence, bicauſe that Ioſeph woide not cōmyt adultery with her, ſhe cauſed him to be caſt into priſon. where he declari
                  •
               nge to the kinges cupbearer the ſignification of his dreame, afterward he was by the ſame cupbearer remembred vnto king Pharao, whā he had dreamid a dreame, which he wold haue expouned. And he expounding the kinges dreame, whiche ſignified .vii. plentuous yeres, and .vii. ſcarſe yeres of corne, was made by the kyng high ſtewarde of his royalme. So that by his moſt excellent wyſedom ſuch abundance of grayne was brought into the kinges barnes, and there kept during the vii. plentuous yeres, that the .vii. ſcars yeres next enſuynge it ſuffyſed not onely to relieue all the people of Egypte, but alſo refreſſhed other countrayes, and made the kynge excedīgly rich. Moreouer the brethern of Ioſeph being ſent by Iacob theſe father to bie corne in Egipt, not knowing their brother Ioſeph
 were by hym ſundry tymes apprehended, and compellid to fetche theyr yōger brother Ben-Iamyn, and at the laſt Ioſeph diſcouerynge hym ſelfe vnto them, cauſed them to fetch his and theyr father into Egypt with all his family, where they were honourably entertayned of kynge Pharao and Ioſeph. And Ioſeph had there two ſonnes, Effraim and Manaſſes, and lyued a hundred and tenne yeres. Ioſeph ſignifieth increaſe, or a great officer, he dyed before the incarnation of Chriſte about
.MDClii. yeres.
            
               Ioſephus, the ſonne of Mattathias, a prieſt of Hieruſalem, whiche wrate in greeke the battayle of the Iewes and diſtruction of the citie by Veſpaſian and Titus, wherat he hym ſelfe was preſent. He wrate alſo of the antiquitie of the Iewes, in .ii. ſundry argumētes. He was amonge the Romains had in ſuch reuerence & honour, that his ymage was ſet vp in the cite. He had the ſpirit of prophecye, & beyng priſoner tolde vnto Veſpaſian that he ſhuld be emperour of Rome. Alſo in his boke of antiquities he writeth in this wiſe: At this tyme was Ieſus a wyſe man, if it be leful to call hym a man, he was a doer of wonderful workes, and a teacher of thoſe men, whiche wyllingly do here thinges that be true, he ioyned vnto hym many Iewes and alſo Gentiles, this man was Chriſt. Whan Pylate by the enuy of the chiefe men of our nation had iudged hym to be put on the croſſe, he forſoke not them, whom from the begynnynge he loued, but appered to them the thyrde day, eftſones alyue, accordynge as the prophetes by diuine inſpiration ſpake before of hym, and that innumerable myracles ſhuld be done by hym. Hytherto wrate Ioſephus. wherby appereth his excellente wyſedome, and ſpecyall grace, whyche he had receyued, and it repugneth not moche, that in his harte he imbraced the fayth of Chriſt .He was after the incarnation of Chriſt .lxxvi. yeres.
            
               Iotapata, a citie in Syria.
            
               Iouiniani, were mē of armes, ſo callid of Maximian the emperour, whiche dyd valyantly in the countrey of Illyria.
            
               Iouis, the genitiue caſe of Iupiter.
            
         
         
            ¶I ANTE P.
            
               IPHIANASSA, the wyfe of Melampos, whom for her beaultie Iuno tourned into fury or madneſſe.
            
               Iphiclus, ſonne of Alemena, borne with Hercules at one byrthe, but Hercules was gotten by Iupiter, but Iphiclus was goten by Amphitrio. And whan two ſerpentes came to the cradelle of Iphiclus, and ſlewe hym, after whan they came to Hercules, he toke in euery of his handes one and ſlewe them. There was an other Iphiclus, whiche was the ſon of Philacus and Clymene, who Heſiodus ſayth, was ſo lyght and ſwyft, that he ranne vpon the eares of wheate as they grewe, and did not hurt them, alſo that he ran on the water as well as on the lande. Reade Coelium lectionum antiq. li. 2. ca 5.
            
               Iphigenia, the daughter of king Agamemnon, with whom he offered in ſacrifyce goynge to Trope.
            
               Iphîtus, the ſonne of Praxonidis, which fyrſte ordeined the ſolemne plays callid Olympiada
            
            
               Ips, ipos, a lyttelle wourme bredyng in hornes and vines.
            
               Ipſe, ipſa, ipſum, he, ſhe, that ſame, by demonſtratyng or ſhewynge the perſon or thyng ſpoken of.
            
               Ipſemet, he hym ſelfe.
            
               Ipſippe, to hym and to none other.
            
               Ipſulces, plates emboſed lyke to fygures or ymages of men or women.
         
         
            ¶I ANTE R.
            
               IR, the holownes of the hande. ſometyme it ſygnifieth the hole hande.
            
               Ira, wrathe, an appetite to punyſhe hym, of whom we be offended.
            
               Iracundia, anger, diſpleaſure agaynſt one, a deſyre to be reuenged.
            
               Iracundus, ſhortly or ſone angry, haſty.
            
               Iraſcor, eris, iraſci, to be angry.
            
               Irate, angerly.
            
               Iratus, angry.
            
               Irceus, a kynde of puddynges.
            
               Ircipes, an harowe.
            
               Ire inficias, to deny, to ſay the contrary.
            
               Ire alicui obuiam, to go to mete with one.
            
               Ire in ius, to goo to the lawe, or to here the iugement in his matter.
            
               Ire in nernum aliena cauſa, to goo to pryſon for an other mans ſake.
            
               Ire in ſubſidium, to go to ſuccour one.
            
               Ire pedibus, to go on foote.
            
               Ire pedibus in ſententiam, to conſent to the ſentence or raiſon of an nother, whiche hathe ſpoken, or to be of the ſame opinion.
            
               I prae, go before.
            
               I ſane, ſi quid feſtinas magis, goo before yf thou be in haſte.
            
               Irenarches, & Irenarcha, he whyche is in auctoritie to ſee peace kepte in a countreye or citie, whyche amonge vs maye be callyd a iuſtyce of peace.
            
               Iris, iris, uel iridis, the rayne bowe. it is alſo a floure deluce, the roote wherof is very ſoote, and is commonly callyd Yreos.
            
            
                
               Irinium, oyle of Ireos.
            
               Ironia, is a fygure in ſpeakyng, whan a man ſpeaketh otherwyſe than he thynketh, as in ſcoffyng or bourdyng, calling that fayre whiche is ſoule in dede: that good whiche is yll: that eloquent whiche is barbarous. ſemblably reaſonyng contrarye to that I thynke, to the intent to mocke hym, with whom I do diſpute or reaſon.
            
               Ironicè, mockyſhly, ſcoffyngly.
            
               Ironicus, he that vſeth that faſhion in ſpekyng.
            
               Irpices, rakes with yron tethe, wherwith they drewe vp weedes.
            
               Irraſus, vnſhauen.
            
               Irraucio, raucui, cere, to be hoorſe.
            
               Irremunerabile, that may not be rewarded or recompenſyd.
            
               Irreparabile, that may not be repayred or reſtored to the fyrſt aſtate.
            
               Irrepo, pſi, pere, to crepe in.
            
               Irreprehenſus, a, um, that can not be reproued.
            
               Irretio, iui, ire, to take or holde in, as it were in a nette.
            
               Irretitus, taken, lapte in with crafte, or fayre promyſes.
            
               Irrigo, to water grounde, to bryng water into the fieldes out of a ryuer.
            
               Irriguus, a, um, the grounde or fielde that may be eaſily watered. ſomtyme the water, which may be eaſily diriued into the fieldes.
            
               Irripio, pere, to plucke in.
            
               Irrito, are, to make voyde and of none effect.
            
               Irrito, hauyng the laſt ſillable ſauing one long, to prouoke, to kendle wrath, to ſtyre vp.
            
               Irrettus, ta, tum, voyde of none effecte or force.
            
               Irrogare mulctam, to ſette a peyne.
            
               Irructo, are, to blowe in by belkynge.
            
               Irrugio, gere, to bray out.
            
               Irrumo, are, to ſucke in.
            
               Irrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake in, or enter with force. ſometyme to breake a ſunder.
            
               Irruo, to rounne haſtily or furiouſely into battayle, or vpon any thyng. ſomtyme to falle in or caſt in.
            
               Irus, a beggar of whome Homere maketh mention, who was great and feble, and beyng in Ithaca the countrey of Vlyſſes, he being abſent, conſumed his vittayles with the woars of Penelope. Wherefore Vlyſſes at his retourne home ſlewe hym with his fyſt.
         
         
            ¶I ANTE S.
            
               IS, a pronowne, whyche ſygnifieth he.
            
               Iſaeus, a famous rhetorician, whiche inuented to make euery matter compendious.
            
               Iſagoge, an introduction
            
               Iſagogicō, a way to introduce, or begin to tech
            
               Iſapis, a ryuer nigh to Caecenna.
            
            
               Iſara, a ryuer comyng out of the ryuer of Rone where the hyll callyd Cemenus is ioyned to the Rone, and ſo runneth by Druentia into the goulfe of Venyce.
            
               Iſatia, an ile againſt Velia, callid alſo Oenotris
            
               Iſatis, woad, reade before in Glaſtum.
            
            
               Iſauria, a region of Aſia, ioyning to Cilicia, ſom do take it to be part of Cilicia.
            
               Iſaurum, a citie in the countrey of Pamphilia.
            
               Iſca, a citie in Deuonſhyre, callid Exceter.
            
               Iſchalis, a town in Som̄ſ. ſhire callid Ilcheſter
            
               Iſchia, the huckle bone. it is ſomtyme taken for the ache in the ſayd bone, which vulgar phiſitions do call Sciatica.
            
            
               Iſchiadicus, uel Iſchiacus, he that hath the ache in the hyppe commonly callyd Sciatica.
            Iſchiros, idem quod fortis, ſtronge.
            
            
               Iſiaci, the prieſtes of the goddeſſe Iſis.
            
            
               Iſis, callyd alſo Iō, one of the harlottes of Iupiter, whom he turnyd into a cowe for feare of Iuno his wyfe.
            
               Iſitium, a certayn pudding, ſom call it an yſyng.
            
               Iſmaēl, was the ſon of Abraham by Agar his wyues mayden, of whom the ſarazins be callyd Iſmaelitae as they be alſo callyd Agarêni.
            
            
               Iſmarus, a mountayne in Thracia.
            
               Iſmenias, the name of an excellent mynſtrelle, whyche played on the ſhaulmes.
            
               Iſmenides, the women of Thebes.
            
               Iſmenus, a ryuer in the countrey of Boeotia.
            
               Iſocolon, where two ſentēces ar in lyke length.
            
               Iſocrates, the name of a famous orator, of wonderfull eloquence, out of whoſe ſchoole proceded the moſt excellent oratours of Grece.
            
               Iſodomon, a fourme of buylding, where euery thynge is equally ſtraight.
            
               Iſonomia, equalitie of lawes, as where they be indifferent to all maner of perſons.
            
               Iſopleurus, thre edged.
            
               Iſpalis, a citie in Spayne callyd nowe Syuile.
            
               Iſrael, ſygnyfyeth a manne ſeyng god. It was alſo the name of Iacob the patryarke. And the people of the Iewes were alſo callyd by that name, howe be it ſommetyme it was attrybuted onely to tenne trybes, the trybes of Iuda and Beniamyn beyng ſeuered from theym.
            
               Iſſa, an yle in the Venycian ſea, ioynynge to Slauony.
            
               Iſſus, a rytie in Sicile, and a ryuer of Siria.
            
               Iſter, a greate ryuer callyd alſo Danubius, in duche Donawe, it commeth out of an hyll in Germany, callyd of Pliny Arnoba, of Ptholome
                  •
                Abnoba, of Tacitus Arbôna. It receyueth into it thre ſcore ryuers, whereof the more parte be nauygable, and rounneth by Swaue, Bauyer, Owſtryke, Hungarye, Valachia, and ſo through Europa, and falleth in to the ſea callid Pontus. in ſeuen ſundry
 dry places as Solinus and Mela doo write. But Plinius and Tacitus affirme but ſyxe. Herodotus, Arrianus, & other but fiue. while it is in Germany it is callyd Danubius, and when it cometh into a part of Thracia called Iſtria, wher it is brodeſt, it is thā callid Iſter.
            
               Iſthmus, a narrow part of the countrey, where ii. ſeas are but a ſmal diſtance a ſunder, incloſyng the lande on bothe ſydes. In ſuch a place is ſet the citie of Corinthus in Grece. There be dyuers ſuch places in Grecia, and of them were certayne playes callyd Iſthmia.
            
            
               Iſtic, there, where thou arte.
            
               Iſtria, a part of Italy, marching on Illiria, callyd nowe Slauony.
         
         
            ¶I ANTE T.
            
               ITA, an aduerbe of anſweryng or affirming and ſomtyme ſignifieth yea. ſomtyme ſo.
            
               Ita eſt, euen ſo it is.
            
               Ita loquor, yea ſo I ſay.
            
               Ita aiunt, ſo men ſay.
            
               Ita me deus amet, ſo god loue or helpe me.
            
               Ita ne? but is it ſoo? or is it as thou ſayeſt? alſo it ſignifieth a note of diſdayne. Ita ne cō
                  temnor abs te? Setteſt thou ſo lyttell by me?
            
               Ita ne beatus quidem eſt? is he therfore than happye?
            
               Ita negotium eſt, ſo the caſe requyreth.
            
               Ita opus eſt facto, ſo muſt it be done.
            
               Ita ſane, yea truely.
            
               Ita ut erat, as it was in dede.
            
               Ita ut fit, as it hapeneth. Dum rus eo, coepi egomet mecum inter uias, ita ut fit, ubi quid in animo eſt moleſtiae, aliam rem ex alia cogitare, Whan I went downe into the countrey, by the way riding, as it hapneth oftentymes, whan any diſpleaſure commeth to my mynd, I bethought me of one thyng & other.
            
               Ita
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                wherfore than, and therfore.
            
               Itaque, and ſo.
            
               Italia, a noble countrey callyd Italy, whyche is enuyronned on the weſt with the mountayns callyd Alpes, on the north with the ſea callid Mare Adriaticum, on the 
                  •
               aſt and the ſouth with the ſea callyd Mediterraneum, & Fretū Siculum. It alſo conteyneth theſe regyons: Liguriam, Ethruriam, Vmb
                     •••
                  m, Flamineā, 
                     •
                  atium, Aprutium, Campaniam, Apuliam, Venetiam, Picênum, Galliam Giſalpinā, callyd Lumbardy. The length therof after Pliny is a thouſande and .xx. myles, the breadthe in ſom place betwene the two ſeas .CCCCx. myles, in ſome place it paſſeth not .Cxxxvi. myles. it was ſomtyme named Magna Graetia, bycauſe it was inhabyted with Grekes, as Myrſilius dothe write. Solinus doth reſemble the fygure therof to a
                  •
               ok
                  ••
                leafe, extendynge more in lengthe than in breadthe, towarde the ende beynge diuided, as it were into two hornes, whereof the one lyeth towarde the ſea callyd Ionium, the other loketh to the narowe ſea of Sicile callyd Fretum Siculum, in the naroweſt place it paſſeth not in bredth twenty myles.
            
               Italica, a citie in Italia, which by an other name is callyd Confinium. There is an nother in Spayne, where Silius Italicus was borne.
            
               Italicenſis, a citiſen of Italica.
            
            Italicus, ca, cum, of Italy.
            
            
               Italus, an Italyan.
            
               Item, in lyke maner, ſo, alſo, euen as, afterward
            
               Iter, eris, Itiner, neris, a iourney, alſo a way. Iter habeo ad Caeſarem, I take my iourneye to the Emperour.
            
               Iter conficere, to performe a iourney, to go or ryde a iourney.
            
               Iter facere, to go a iourney.
            
               Itero, are, to doo a thynge efteſoones, to goo backe agayne.
            
               Iterum, eftſones or agayne.
            
               Ithaca, an yle lyenge before Athaſis, and was the countraye of Vlyſſes, who therfore was callyd Ithacus.
            
            
               Ithome, a towne in Peloponeſo, an nother in Theſſaly.
            
               Ithonia, a countrey in Grece.
            
               Ithyphallus, the name of Priapus the moſte diſhoneſt and abhomynable ydoll. Alſo Ithyphalli were diſhoneſt perſones, whiche in honourynge theyr ydoll Bacchus, daunſed hauyng betwene theyr legges coūterfayt members of horryble greatnes.
            
               Ithyra, a towne on the mountayne of Taurus.
            
               Itidem, ſemblably, alſo.
            
               Itinerarium, a commentary or boke of remembraunce, contaynyng thynges commytted in iourneyes. Alſo it is a kalender of myles in the diſtaunce of places, with the tyme of abode in euery place, lyke to geſtes of princis.
            
               Itineror, aris, ari, to go in iourney.
            
               Ito, taui, tare, to goo moche.
            
               Ituria, a region in Arabia or Siria, of whyche the people are callyd Ituraei.
            
            Itus, & Itio, a going. Quid noſter itus & reditus, What our goyng and commyng.
            
            
               Itys, the ſonne of Tercus▪ and Prognes, who as poetes doo fayne, was tourned into a feſaunte.
         
         
            ¶I ANTE V.
            
               IVBA, the name of a beaſte. alſo the name of a kynge of Mauritania.
            
               Iubar, a ſterre, whych is alſo callyd Heſperꝰ & Lucyfer. It is ſomtyme takē for brightnes.
            
               Iubeo, iuſsi, iubêre, to cōmād, to deſyre, to wiſh,
 to exhort, to decree.
            
               Iubeo te ſaluêre, god ſaue you. Dionyſium iube ſaluêre, commende me to Denyſe.
            
               Iubero habere animū bonum, byd hym haue a good harte, or byd hym be of good chere.
            
               Iubilo, are, to declare in the voyce, the ioye and gladnes of the harte, whiche maye not be expreſſed with wordes.
            
               Iubilium, ioy
                  •
               nd gladnes in voyce, not expreſſyd in wordes, or with a ſhoute.
            
               Iucundè, merily, gladly, pleaſantly, dilectably, ſwetely.
            
               Iucunditas, dilectation, pleaſure, reioyſynge.
            
               Iucundor, aris, ari, to be ioyous and mery.
            
               Iucundus, a, um, he or that whiche is the cauſe that an other reioiſeth, dilectable, pleaſant to ſee or here. alſo louynge.
            
               Iudaea, acountrey in Aſia, whiche hath on the weſte the ſea callyd Mare Cyprium, on the north Phoeniciam & Siriam, on the eaſt Arabiā, on the ſouth the land of Egypt. It receiued the name of Iudas the ſon of Iacob the patriarke, where before it was callid Chananaea, of Chananaeus, the fourth ſon of Cham.
            
               Iudaei, not onely the people of Iudea, but alſo they be ſo called which do obſerue their ſuperſtition. They were expellid out of this realme of Englande in the tyme of kynge Rycharde the firſt, for their crueltie in ſleyng of chriſten chyldren, like as they haue ben out of France and Spaine, & nowe of late out of Portugal. Which now be ſuffred eftſones to repaire hither, & here to inhabite vnder a counterfaite colour of faith, wherby no lyttell corruption is happened in our religyon, by their ſecrete workynge, many of theym beinge phiſitions of the body, but priuy murderers of chryſten mens ſowles, as it wyll ones more playnely appere, to our no lyttell peryl, ſhame, and diſhonour, except god wyll ſhortly put into the hartes of gouernors, to remembre what mortall and naturall hatred the kyllers of our ſauiour and his obſtinate ennemies and blaſphemours hath born alway toward vs, praying in their ſinagoges for our diſtructiō, and after credence ones gotten, vnder the cloke of phiſyke, wylfully and ioyouſely kylleth vs.
            
               Iudaicus lapis, callyd alſo Tecolithos, a ſtone founde in Iudea, whyche is of the quantitie and figure of an akecorne, or of an olyue (as Solinus writeth) white & fayre with an order of lynes ſo correſpondent, that they ſeme to be wrought with the hand and turne. Albertus mineraliū li. i. calleth it Cegolites.
            
            
               Iudex, iudicis, a iudge.
            
               Iudex ordinarius, he that hath auctoritie of his proper iurisdictiō, to ſit in iugemēt with out cōmiſſion, as the chief iuſtice of Englād, the maire of a city incorporat, and a coroner.
            
               Iudex delegatus, he that ſitteth by cōmiſſiō, as all other iudges and iuſtyces.
            
               Iudicatio, the queſtion come in iudgement.
            
               Iudicatò, an aduerbe, whyche ſignifieth with a iudgement or conſyderation.
            
               Iudicatum, the thyng iudged or determined.
            
               Iudicatū facere, to obey the ſētēce or iugemēt.
            Iudicatus, tus, tui, iudgement.
            
            
               Iudicialis, le, of a iudge.
            
               Iudiciarius, a, um, pertayning to a iuge, or that whiche is to be iudged.
            
               Iudiciaria controuerſia, where the iudges do not agree in one opinion.
            
               Iudico, are, to iuge or deme, to ſuppoſe, to giue ſentence, to condemne.
            
               Iuditium, iudgement.
            
               Iuditia legittima, iudgementes gyuen according to the determined law written, or by ancient cuſtome approued.
            
               Iuditia publica, iugementes gyuen by them, which be callid iuges, & haue places certain, and do not renue their cōmiſſiō, as the iuges of the kynges benche and commune place.
            
               Iuditiū capitis, iugement in cauſes criminall.
            
               Iuditium dare, to grant a commiſſion, to here and determyne a matter.
            
               Iuditium reſcindere, to reuerſe a iugement.
            
               Iuditium habere, to gyue iudgement.
            
               Iuditio perfundere, to bring one to the poynt to be condemned.
            
               Iuga, the benches in a ſhyppe or bote.
            
               Iugale uinculum, the bonde of matrimony.
            
               Iugalis, he that is yoked.
            
               Iugantinus deus, was amonge Paynims the god, whom they ſuppoſed to haue auctoritie ouer the rydges of hylles.
            
               Iugarius, he that dryueth a plough with oxen, or a wayn. Alſo a ſtrete in Rome, where was an altar of Iuno, at the whiche if any were wedded, they ſuppoſed that matrimony to be moſt ſurely ioyned.
            
               Iugatorius, a draught oxe.
            
               Iugeratim, by ſundry furlonges.
            
               Iugere, to crye lyke a kyte.
            
               Iugerum, & Iugus, geris, as moche ground as one yoke of oxen wyll eare in a day. ſom ſuppoſe it to contein in lēgth. 240. fete, in bredth halfe ſo moche. ſome ſay that it is more.
            Leonardus Portius ſayth, by the auctoritie of Columella, that Iugerū
                conteyneth .xxviii. M. and .viii.C. feete.
            
               Iuges, oxen lyke in greatneſſe, callyd, yokes or payres.
            
               Iugis, continuyng in one thynge.
            
               Iugiter, contynually.
            
               Iuglans, andis, a wall nutte.
            
               Iugo, are, to yoke or couple togither.
            
               Iugoſus, rydged.
            
               Iugula, a celeſtyall ſygne, contaynynge three
 ſterres, callyd alſo Orion.
            
            
               Iugulo, are, to ſlea, not onely with wepon, but alſo with ſyckenes. Quartana neminem iugulat, The feuer quartayn ſleeth no man.
            ❀ Iugulare mortuos, to kylle deade men. A prouerbe applyed to them, whyche do ſpeake or write to the rebuke of them that are dead, or as Eraſmus dothe thynke it more apte, it may be ſayd by them that impougne a boke, whiche is of all men condemned, or reſoneth agaynſt a ſentence of all men reiected, or dyſprayſeth a thynge, whyche is of all men abhorryd.
            
               Iugulus, the forepart of the necke which is diuided into two great ſynewes, Dexter & ſiniſter.
            
            
               Iugulum ferire, to ſlea properly in the necke.
            
               Iugulum petere, whan an oratour or man of lawe towcheth vehementely the poynt of the matter, and with manyfeſt and ſoore argumentes and reaſons, ſemeth to aſſaut and oppreſſe the cōtrary part, as it were with ſharp weapons.
            
               Iugum, a yoke▪ alſo the ridge of an hyl or bank. alſo the beame whereon weauers doo tourne theyr webbe, alſo a thyng lyke to a galowes, vnder the whiche in ſygne of reproche, they that were vanquyſſhed were conſtrayned to creepe, whiche was made with two ſpeares ſtandynge, and one ſpeare ouerthwart. alſo a frame wheron vi
                  •
               es are ioyned. alſo a beame wheron balances do hange. alſo the ſyde beames in a ſhyp, in the which the tranſomes ar faſtened. It is alſo a rolle of timber, wheron the imbrouderer or worker of carpettes doo rolle vp the thynge that they worke on.
            
               Iuli, are the moſynes or ſoft heares, whiche do growe on the beardes and vyſages of yonge men, before that they be ſhauen, and ſomtyme it ſignifieth the ſame yonge men.
            
               Iulia, a kynred, which proceded from Aſcanius, ſonne of Aeneas callid Iulus. Alſo a towne in Cales in the countray of Spayne.
            
               Iuliobona, Hounflete in Fraunce.
            
               Iuliobriga, a towne in Spayn callid Logroino.
            
               Iulio magus, Angiers in Fraunce.
            
               Iulis, a city in the yle of Caea, the countreye of Simonides the poete.
            
               Iulius, the moneth of Iulye, whyche toke his name of Iulius Ceſar.
            
               Iulum, as Ruellius writeth, is that which cleaueth faſt to a haſyll nutte or fylberte cluſterwyſe in a compact hardnes, and as it were a very longe ſynew hangeth by one ſtalke.
            
               Iulus, otherwyſe named Aſcanius, the ſonne of Aeneas. Iulus, is alſo a lyttell wourme with many feete, bredyng in vynes and okes, whiche is alſo callyd Conuoluolus, Inuoluolus, & Voluola. It is alſo the moſynes of the outward part of fruites, alſo the yonge fruit immediately after that the floures be fallen. Iulus is alſo a fyſhe, which is guyde vnto whales, which alſo is callyd Hege
                     •
                  er. It is more ouer a ſonge dedicate to Diana.
            
               Iumentum, euery beaſt that draweth or bereth burdeynes, alſo a lyttell carre.
            
               Iunctim, ioyntly.
            
               Iunculi, meates callyd iunkettes. alſo a freſſhe cheſe made on ruſhes called a iacke man.
            
               Iuncus, a bulle ruſſhe.
            
               Iuncus odoratus, is of two ſortis, one is of Pliny callyd Triangularis, of Dioſcorides Anguloſus, of Theophraſtus, Cyperus. The ſtalke is lyttel and redde, and if it be bruiſed, it ſmelleth lyke to a roſe, the beſt groweth in Arabia and Nabathea, the warſt growith in Affrica. An other ſort is round, and hath floures, which be medicinable, and it is of the apothecaries callyd Squinantum. Reade in Schoeno.
            
            
               Iungami, people in the countrey of Liguria.
            Iungo, xi, gere, to ioyne.
            
            ❀ Iungere uulpes, to yoke or couple wolfes. Aprouerbe ſignifyeng to do a thynge whiche is impertinent, or without any reaſon.
            
               Iuniculi, the longe twygges of the vine whych do ſhote out of lengthe, and wolde be layde on a frame.
            
               Iuniperus, a ſwete buſhe, callyd Iunyper.
            
               Iunis, ne, yonge, wherof cometh Iunior, yōger.
            
               Iunix, icis, a yonge cowe or heffar.
            
               Iunius, a propre name of the Romans, as Iunius Brutus, Iunius Columella. it is alſo a moneth callyd Iune: for whan Romulus hadde fyrſte diuided the people into olde men and yonge men, callid in latyn Maiores & Minores, he honoured them with two monethes. callynge the one Maius, or Maye, the other Iunius, of yonge men callid in latyn Iuuenes.
            
            
               Iuno, was doughter of Saturne and Opis, ſiſter and wyfe of Iupiter callyd alſo Hera.
            
            
               Iuno moneta. Sone after that kinges were expellyd out of Rome, there was a great erthquake, at which tyme there was herde in the Capitol out of the chapelle of Iuno, a voyce warnyng them that they ſhuld make a ful pacification of her wrath, and ſo doing the erth quake ceaſſed. Of that warnyng, whiche in latyne is Monitio, ſhe was callyd Iuno moneta. And to the honor of her was made one chapell in the capitoll by Camillus, an other on the hyll callyd Auentinus, wherin was ſet her ydoll brought from the citie callyd Veiae deſtroyed by the Romaynes, bothe theſe chapelles were callyd Aedes Iunonis Monetae.
            
            
               Iunonia, one of the yles that are callyd Inſulae fortunatae.
            
            
               Iupiter, Iouis, the ſon of Saturnus and Opis
 kynge of Creta, who draue his father out of his royalme, and was a man valiant & wiſe, but excedingly giuen to lechery, in deflouring as welle maydens as wyfes. Not withſtandynge for his proweſſe and wytte, after his deathe he was of all the Greekes honoured for a God, and callyd father & kyng of goddis. His name was in ſuche eſtimation amōg the Gentiles or Paynyms, that they gaue to hym ſouerayntie in al thinges. In ſo moch as they alſo named hym god of hoſpitalitie. And therfore whā any thyng was violate either by the good man of the houſe or by his gueſt, they callid on Iupiter Xenius: whan truſt in frēdſhyp was broken, they callid to vengeāce to Iupiter Philius, whan cōpanions betrayd one another Iupiter Heterius, whan kynſmē, Iupiter Homoginus, whan they which were in league togither de
                  •
               eyued eche other, than cryed they Iupiter Enhorcius.
            
            
               Iura, a mountayn of Fraunce whiche diuideth high Burgoyn from Swizerlande.
            
               Iuramentum, an othe.
            
               Iuratus, ſworne.
            
               Iurgioſus, a, um, braulynge, full of contention.
            
               Iurgium, a braulyng or a ſmall contention.
            
               Iurgo, are, to brawle or chyde.
            
               Iuridicus, ca, cum, accordyng to the law, or belongyng to the lawe.
            
               Iurisdictio, iurisdiction, power, or auctoritie to miniſter and execute lawes, as dyuers citis and countrayes haue by the grauntes of emperours and kynges.
            
               Iuro, rare, to ſweare.
            
               Iurare in lege alterius, to ſweare to kepe the lawes or ordinances of an other.
            
               Iurare in uerba alterius, to do fecaltie, or to be ſworne a ſubicete.
            
               Iurulentus, ta, tum, full of iuyce or lycour.
            
               Ius, iuris, law auctoritie, liberte, power, right, ſometyme the place where the lawe is myniſtred. alſo lycour or iuyce.
            
               Ius annulorum donare, was amonge the old Romayns the ſame almoſte, that is nowe to make a knyght.
            
               Ius municipale, a priuat law or cuſtom, whiche a citie or towne hathe within it ſelfe, for the good order of theyr commune weale.
            
               Ius moribus conſtitutum, ryght made of cuſtome. Ius dicere, to gyue iudgement.
            
               Ius dicis, thou ſpeakeſt reaſon.
            
               Ius bonum dicis, your requeſt is reaſonable.
            
               Iure, with good cauſe.
            
               Iure uel iniuria, by right or wronge.
            
               De iure meo, tuo, ſuo decedere, to omyt ſom part of the rigour or extremitie of the lawe.
            
               Pro ſuo iure agere, & ſummo iure agere, to take the extremitie of the lawe.
            
               Summum ius, the rygour of the lawe.
            
               Iuſcum, & Iuſculum, brothe, wherin meat hath ben ſodden.
            
               Iuiſiurandum, a ſolemne othe or promyſe made to God.
            
               Iuſſa, commaundementes.
            Iuſſus, a, um, commaunded.
            
            
               Iuſta, ſacrifyces doone for deade men: nowe it may be vſed for funerall exequies.
            
               Iuſta ſoluere, is ꝓprely in funeral obſequies, to do and perfourme all thynges therevnto neceſſarye.
            
               Iuſtinianus, an emperour comen of a poore kynred, his mothers brother Iuſtinus emperour before hym being but a ſwnie herde, ſucceded his vncle at the age of .xliiii. yeres in▪ the empyre, and gouernid it nobly by the ſpace of .xl. yeres, augmentynge it honourably. And cauſed the lawes ciuile, diſperſed in infinite volumes, to be reduced into fyftye bokes called the Digeſtes, and cauſed to be made .iiii. bokes of inſtitutes, and likewiſe the Code, contaynyng the decrees of emperours, although he hym ſelfe knewe noo letters. An excellente prince, if he had not ben corrupted with auaryce, and the hereſy of Eutichianus. he was after the incarnation of Chriſt .517. yeres.
            
               Iuſtitia, Iuſtice, is a per
                  •
               eet vertue (as Ariſtotle ſayth) referred to a ſeconde perſon, and therfore chiefe of all vertues, more wonderfulle than the bright ſterres Heſperus and Lucyfer, comprehending in it al the partes of vertue, this is callid iuſtice vniuerſal. But there is a more particular iuſtice, which in the law ciuile is defined to be a conſtaunt and perpetuall wyll, gyuyng vnto euery body that whiche belongeth vnto hym, whiche is callid his right. More abundantly hereof ſhall ye fynd in my warke callyd the Gouernour.
            
               Iuſtitium, a ceaſſyng for a tyme from miniſtration of lawes in places iuditiall.
            
               Iuſtus, a iuſt or rightuous man, an vpright and true meanyng man It is taken oft tymes in holy ſcripture for a vertuous mā or good mā.
            
               Iuſtus, ta, tū, equall, meane betwene two extremities. ſomtyme it ſignifieth greatnes. Iuſta pars, the great parte. ſometyme it ſignifieth amonge lawyers, true or verye. Iuſtus filius, his very ſon Iuſta magnitudo, neyther more nor leſſe, the iuſt quantitie.
            
               Iuſta ſeruitus, ſeruyce without rigour.
            
               Iuſtas inimicitias, great hoſtilitie.
            
               Iuſti honores, honours due.
            
               Iuſto labore, with great labour.
            
               Iuturna, the ſyſter of Turnus.
            Iuuamen, Iuuatio, & Iuuamentum, helpe.
            
            
               Iuuenalia, playes vowed for the healthe of yonge men.
            
               Iuuenalis, le, pertaynyng to youth.
            
               Iuuenalis dies, a day celebrate to youthe.
            
                
               Iuuenalis, is alſo the name of a poete, whyche wrate Satyres.
            
               Iuuencus, & iuuenca, yonge, not only men, but alſo beaſtes.
            Iuuenculus, idem.
            
               Iuueneſco, ſcere, to waxe or be yonge.
            Iuuenilis, le, yonge.
            
            
               Iuueniliter, yongly.
            
               Iuuenis, a yonge man.
            
               Iuuentus, tutis, youthe. ſometyme a multytude of yonge men.
            
               Iuuerna, the olde name of Irelande, callyd of ſome Iuernia, & Hibernia.
            
            
               Iuuo, uas, iuui, are, to helpe, to delyte.
            
               Iuuat mihi, It doth me good, it is a pleaſure to me.
            
               Iuxta, nygh, ioyntly, or togither, euen lyke, accordynge. Nunc uero quo in loco res noſtrae ſint, iuxta mecum omnes intelligitis, Nowe howe the matter ſtandeth, ye al know as wel as I: orels in what caſe our buſines is, ye vnderſtande all as moche as I do.
            
               Iuxtim, nygh to.
         
         
            ¶I ANTE X.
            
               IXION, was king of Theſſalia, who falſly brake the promyſe that he made to his wyues father, and threwe hym into a pyt of fyre. He alſo callid by Iupiter vnto a feaſt, ſtyred Iuno to commyt auoutry, whiche Iupyter perceyuynge, he made a cloude lyke vnto Iuno, and delyuered her to hym, on whome he gatte the people callyd Centauri, but whan he aduaunted that he hadde companyed with Iuno, he was dryuen downe in to helle, and there was bounde to a wheele, alway tournynge and fulle of ſerpentes, as poetes fayned.
            
               Ixon, a greatte whyte byrde of the kynde of rauens.
         
         
            ¶L ANTE A.
            
               LABASCO, labaſcere. & Labaſcor, ſceris, to fayle or decay.
            
            
               Labda cus, a king of Thebes, father of Laiꝰ, who was father of Oedipus, or Edippus.
            
               Labecula, a lyttle ſpotte or blemyſſhe.
            
               Labefacio, facere, to breake or diſtroy.
            
               Labefacto, tare, to make feeble, to appayre, to ſubuerte, to corrupte.
            
               Labellum, a lyppe.
            
               Labeo, onis, a man or woman hauyng greate lyppes. Alſo a nettle callyd blynd nettle.
            
               Labes, a ſpotte, whiche ſodeynly happeneth to thinges that are ſmothe.
            Labia, & Labra, lyppes.
            
            
               Labicanum, a towne in Italy.
            
               Labici, the inhabitantes of that towne.
            
               Labicus, was the name of the ſonne of Minos, who was named alſo Glaucus.
            
               Labilis, le, vuſtable, which wyl ſone fall, ſlypꝑ.
            
               Labina, ſlyppernes.
            
               Labio, is a fyſhe, whiche I ſuppoſe to be in englyſhe callyd Codde, with the greate lyppes, it was alſo the ſurname of a Romayne.
            
               Labo, are, to falle downe ſodaynly.
            
               Labor, eris, lapſus ſum labi, to ſlyde, to dye, to fayle, to fall downe by lyttell and lyttell.
            
               Labor, labour, trauayle.
            
               Laboriae, the name of a countrey in Italy, vulgarly callid Terra laboris, the land of labor▪
            
            
               Laborinus, a fielde in Cāpania, where the ſtubble of corne is ſoo great, that the people doo burne it in ſtede of wodde.
            
               Laborioſus homo, a peynefull man.
            
               Laboro, are, to labor, to be in heuynes or grefe.
            
               Animo laborare, to be carefull.
            
               Ex renibus laborare, to haue peyn in the raines. Fame laborare, to dye for hunger.
            
               Foenore laborare, to be in dette by reaſone of vſurye.
            
               Laborare frigore, to be almoſt dead for cold.
            
               Ingenio laborare, to be troublyd in wyt.
            
               Laborare iniuria, to ſuffer wronge.
            
               Laborare morbo, to be ſycke.
            
               Nihil laboro, I care not, I paſſe not on it.
            Non laboro, idem.
            
               Odio apud hoſtes laborare, & contempt
                     •
                   inter ſocios, to be hated of his enemies, and not regarded of his frendes.
            
               Laborare podagra, to haue the goute.
            
               Vi
                     •
                  s laborare, to be vitious.
            
               Laboratur uehementer, they ſtudied diligētly to brynge a matter to paſſe.
            
               Labrum, a lyppe. alſo the brymme or brynk of a
 ryuer or fountayne. alſo a vat or lyke veſſelle neceſſarye to be bayned in. Sometyme a vat for wyne after that it is preſſyd. It maye be vſyd for a keele vate, whereinto ale or biere is putte.
            
               Labrum Veneris, is taken for taſyll, although Dioſcorides dothe not remember, that it ſerueth to the vſe of toukars, but aſſigneth that rather to other two herbes, the oone callyd Hippophaes, or Hyppophyes, and the other Hippophaeſtos.
            
            
               Labr
                     •
                  ſca, wylde vyne.
            
               Laburnum, a tree growyng on the mountayns callyd Alpes, the woode therof is white and harde, and hath a floure a cubyte in lengthe, whyche no bee wylle touche, he groweth not but in drye places, and hateth water.
            
               Labyrinthus, a place conteynynge many romes in ſuche wiſe prepared, that who ſo euer was brought into it, moughte not iſſue out of it, withoute a guyde very perfect in it, or without a threde leading hym, wherof the botome or klewe ſhoulde be left at the entre. Of this name were thre principall places, oone in Egypte, by the paterne wherof the other were made. And that is deſcribed by Herodotus (who writeth that he ſawe it) ſaying that it was aboue the gr
                  ••
               te poole callyd Myrios, towarde the cytie of Crocodiles. Strabo in his .xvii. boke callyth the ſayd poole or meare Muris. Herodotus in Euterpe ſaith, that firſt there were .xii. halles keueryd .vi. toward the north, and .vi. towarde the ſouth, all incloſyd with one wall. within the walle were houſes in two dyuers ſortes, one ſort vnder ground, an other aboue ground ouer them, euery ſort being in numbre thre thouſand and fyue hū
               dred. The ouermoſt, whiche (as he ſayth) he beheld, the nethermoſt he mought not be ſuffred to ſe, but as he herde by report of theym which ſawe it, he wrate: The ouermoſt whiche he did behold, exceded al workes of mens handes, for he went from a hall into parlers, from parlers into chambers, from chambers into other ſolars, and frome parlours into other halles. The beame which bare the floures was of ſtone, wrought with ymagery, euery hal inuyroned with pyllers of white ſtone. In the ende of that Labyrinthus, ſtandeth a ſtone large benethe, and ſmalle on the toppe callyd Pyramis, which is of length .xl. paces, in the whiche ar wrought great ymages, and therat is the encry vnder ground to the other Labyrinthus. An other Labyrinthus was in Creta, made by Dedalus by the commandement of Minos for a priſon, but it was moch laſſe than the other. But by dyuers doores, entrynges, & iſſuinges out, it deceyued them, whiche came into it. The thirde was in Italy by a towne callid Cluſiū, which was made by kynge Porſena, & as Plinius and Varro do write, was of ſquare ſtone, the ſydes .xxx. foote brode, in height fyftye feete. Into the whyche who ſo euer went without a clew or bottome of threde, coulde neuer returne. On this place ſtode .v. Pyramides or ſteples one at euery corner, & one in the myddell, eueriche of them .CI. fote hygh, on the toppes of them great bolles of braſſe, and thervppon horſes with wynges, from the whiche dydde hange chaynes, hauyng belles at them, which being meued with wynde, rendred a ſharpe ſownd. alſo vpon the foure bolles of braſſe ſtode four other Pyramides or ſharpe pyllers of a hundred foote high, and on that whiche was on the myddle ſtode oone ſharpe pyllour, whoſe heyght Varro durſt not reherſe, bicauſe it ſemed a thing incredible. Al theſe thinges were made by great kynges, whych hauyng abundance of treaſure, and lackyng lernynge, dyd ſet theyr delite in ſuche vayne oſtentation.
            Lac, lactis, mylke.
            
            ❀ Lac gallinaceus, The milke of an henne. A prouerbe applyed to theym, whiche lacke nothynge, or to thinges whiche for the ſcarſitie of them be very pretious.
            
               Lacaena, a kynde of apparaylle. alſo a woman of Lacedemonia.
            
               Laccia, a fyſhe callyd a cheuyn.
            
               Lacedaemon, a noble citie in Grece, callyd alſo Sparta, in the region of Achaia, the countrey is callyd Laconia.
            
            Lacer, & Lacerus, a, um, torne or rent.
            
            
               Lacerna, a ſhort cloke, whiche men of warre be wont to weare.
            
               Lacernatus, cloked, or clad in a cloke.
            
               Lacero, are, to rent in pieces, or to gyue many woundes.
            
               Lacerare diem, to loſe the day, to ſpende the tyme about nought.
            
               Lacertoſus, hauing great brawnes and ſynues.
            
               Lacertus, & Lacerta, a lyzerde, an euet. alſo the part of a mans arme, from the elbowe to the wreſt of the hande, properly the brawne and ſynewes of the arme.
            
               Laceſſo, ſiui, & ceſsi, ſſere, to rent or go aboute to rent the good renome of a man alſo to prouoke a man to wrath or dyſpleſure with wordes, writyng or act: to rayl on a mā, to pryck a man with ſom yll language or act.
            
               Lachana, all kynde of herbes, whiche ſerue for the porte callyd wortes.
            
               Lachanopoles, a ſellar of herbes.
            
               Lachanopolium, the herbe market.
            
               Lacheſis, one of the three ladies callyd Parcae, whiche poetes dyd fayn, to haue the rule and continuance of mans lyfe.
            
               Lachrima, a teare in wepynge.
            
                
               Lachrimo, are, to wepe.
            
               Lachrimula, a lyttell teare.
            
               Lacides, garmentes that be rent.
            
               Lacinia, is a redde muſheron, whych ſpryngeth at the roote of a cheſten tree.
            
               Laciniae, gardynges of a garmente, properlye where the ſkyrtes be cut in ſundry faſcion.
            
               In lacinias, in pieces, in iagges.
            
               Lacinioſus, a, um, cut in ſundry faſhions, windyng and turnyng dyuers ways, 
                  •
               agged.
            
               Lacinium, an elbowe of lande, lyenge betwene the ſea, callyd Hadriaticum, and the ſea callyd Ionium.
            
            
               Lacio, lacui, & lexi, lacere, to bring into a ſnare or to wynde one in, to deceyue hym.
            
               Lacon, ónis, a man of Lacedemonia.
            
               Laconia, the countreye where Lacedemonia ſtandeth.
            
               Laconicus, ca, cum, of the countrey of Laconia
            
               Laconicum, a hote houſe or drye bayne.
            
               Laconiſmus, a ſhorte fourme of ſpeaking, contaynyng moche ſentence in a fewe wordes.
            
               Lactarius, a, um, meate made of mylke, all herbes whiche haue iuyce lyke mylke.
            
               Lactarius, rij, he that maketh ſundrye meates of mylke. alſo they whiche do ſell mylke.
            
               Lacteo, ere, to ſucke mylke.
            
               Lactes, places within the rybbes of a man, benethe the nauel, ſo tender, that it may not ſuffer any wounde or ſtroke. as Probus ſaythe. ſom ſay that they be caules, wherin the ſmall bowelles do lye.
            
               Lacteſco, ſcere, to be tourned into mylke, or to be fylled with mylke.
            
               Lacteus, a, um, of mylke or like mylk alſo that whiche is nouryſhed lyke mylke.
            
               Lacticinia, whyte meates made of mylke.
            
               Lactidiaci, ſtryken about the nauell.
            
               Lacto, are, to fede with mylke. alſo to deceyue with fayre wordes.
            
               Lactuca, an herbe callyd letuſe.
            
               Lacuna, a dyche, wherin water ſtandeth. alſo a trenche, wherby fieldes are drayned. Some englyſhe it, a ſynke.
            
               Lacunar, a beame. alſo ſuche a thynge as dothe yet hange in marchantes houſes, ouerthwart theyr halles, wheron be ſet a greate number of candelles.
            
               Lacus, cus, a depe place alwaye full of water, whiche is diriued into brokes and ryuers. alſo the veſſell which receyueth wyne, whan the grapes ar preſſed. alſo the principal beam that goth ouerthwart the houſe.
            
               Lacus Lemanus, Loſane in Peemountayne.
            
               Lacut
                     •
                  rres, great cabages.
            
               Ladaes, was a man, who ran ſo ſwiftly, that on the ſande he left no print of his foote.
            
               Ladanum, a gumme whiche runneth frome an herbe callyd Lada or Ledum, whiche is commonly callyd Labdanum, and is moſt vſed in pomaunders.
            
               Ladon, a ryuer in Arcadia.
            
               Laeander, a yonge man, which for the feruent loue that he bare to a fayre mayden callid Eros, vſed to ſwym frome Abidus, to Seſtos, ouer the ſea callyd Helleſpontus, at the laſte was drowned, whiche Eros beholding to be dead, threwe her ſelfe alſo into the ſea from a high towre, of whom Muſaeus, & Ouidius, in his epiſtoles do write.
            
               Laedo, laeſi, dere, to hurt or do diſpleaſure.
            
               Laedere maieſtatem, to derogate any thynge of the kynges auctoritie or prerogatiue.
            
               Laeſae religionis culpa, hereſy or lollardy, contempt of religion or ceremonies.
            
               Laemargia, gluttony.
            
               Laemargus, a glutton.
            
               Laemuſchaton, the rewarde gyuen to him that vanquiſſhed at playinge or fyghtynge with weapons.
            
               Laena, a garment lyned, whiche the diuinours called Augures, dyd weare.
            
               Laerte, a citie in Cilicia.
            
               Laertes, the father of Vlyſſes.
            
               Laertius, the name of oone, whiche wrate the lyues of phyloſophers.
            
               Laeſtrigones, were people in the confynes of Campania, whiche eate mans fleſhe.
            
               Laetabilis, glad, or reioyſefull.
            
               Laetamen, compaſſe or mucke layde in the fieldes, to make corne and graſſe to growe plentuouſely.
            
               Laete, ioyouſely, gladly.
            
               Laetiſico, care, to make glad.
            
               Laetifco, ſcere, to be glad.
            
               Laetitia, gladnes, reioyſyng of the mynd, which dothe appere alſo outwardly.
            Laetitudo, dinis, idem.
            
               Laetor, aris, ari, to be gladde, or to reioyſe with outwarde ſygnes.
            
               Laeto, are, to make gladde.
            
               Laetus, a, um, ioyous and glad.
            
               Laetus homo, a glad man.
            
               Laeta ouis, a good ſheepe. Laeta ſeges, & laetum legumen, plentyfull corne and grayn. all other thynges not hauyng lyfe, beinge callyd Laeta, do ſignify dilectable to beholde, or that do pleaſe the eye of the beholder.
            
               Laeuigo, are, to plane or make playne, or to polyſſhe.
            
               Laeuis, leue, ſmothe or playne.
            
               Laeuitas, tatis, playnneſſe or ſmotheneſſe.
            
               Laeuo, are, to make ſmothe.
            Laeuor, oris, ſmotheneſſe.
            
            
               Lagana, be thyn cakes made with floure and water, wherto was put fatte broth, pepper, ſaffron, and cynamome, frytuſe.
            
               Lagari uerſus, verſes, whiche doo halte in the
 myddes of the foote.
            
               Lagaron, is the part of the body from the ſtomake to the nauel, callyd alſo Hypocondriū.
            
            
               Lagena, a pytcher potte.
            
               Lageos, a kynde of grapes.
            
               Lagia, one of the names of the yle of Delos.
            
               Lagois, a kynd of fyſhe, whiche may be callyd the hare fyſhe.
            
               Lagonon, the frettyng of the guttes.
            
               Lagophthalmos, he that hath eyen like a hare, or in whom the ouerlyddes of the eyen do not meue downewarde.
            
               Lagopus, an herbe of the kynd of trefoyles callid trinitie graſſe. ſome call it hare cummyn. ſome ſuppoſe it to be Dentdelyon, other Garyophyllacium, amonge the Germans it is callyd Harefoote.
            
               Lagorrophia, a warren or parke of hares.
            
               Laguncula, a lyttell pytcher.
            
               Lagygies, people in Sarmatia.
            
               Laicus, a lay man.
            
               Lais, was a cōmon harlot in Grece, who was of ſuche excellent beaultie, and therwith ſoo pleaſant, that vnto her out of all Grece there came to Corinthus where ſhe dwellyd, men noble and ryche in great numbers, to company with her. On a tyme came to her Demoſthenes the greatteſt oratour of Greece, and deſyred to lye with her, of whome ſhe aſked for one nyght a thouſande Dragmas, whiche amounted to the rate of our money at this preſent tyme to xxiii .li .xix .s .x .d. The which Demoſthenes heryng, he departed, ſayinge in this wyſe: I wyl not repent me at that price. Some write that ſhe demaunded .x. thouſand Dragmas, whiche was a talent.
            
               Laius, was king of Thebes, and father of Oedipus, whome Oedipus vnwares ſlewe in battayle, and wedded his wyfe whiche was alſo Oedipus mother callyd Iocaſta. Reade after in Oedipus.
            
            
               Laletania, a countray in Spayne.
            
               Laliſiones, 
               
                  •
               oltes of wylde aſſes.
            
               Lallare, to ſpeake lyke a babye: in the whiche worde the greke dothe approche nerer to the englyſhe than to the latin, as Babazin, which made a latyn worde, is Babare. It maye be tranſferred to the noryce, that babeleth with her chylde whan ſhe gyueth to it the dugge.
            
               Lamae, the raggydnes of rockes▪
            
            
               Lambo, bere, to lycke with the tungue. alſo to touche, to flowe or runne ſoftely.
            
               Lambrus, a riuer in Italy, which meteth with the ryuer of Po, callyd Padus.
            
               Lambrani, people dwellinge about the ſayd riuer of Lambrus.
            Lamentabilis, le, lamentable.
            
            
               Lamentarius, a, um, that cauſeth lamentation.
            
               Lamentatio, onis, lamentyng or waylyng.
            
               Lamentor, aris, ari, to lament or bewayle.
            
               Lamia, is a beaſt, whiche hath a womans face, and the feete of a horſe. It was alſo the ſurname of a noble Romayne, and alſo of a famous harlot. it is alſo a blynd nettle.
            
               Lamiae, be women, which beholdyng children, or gyuyng to them gyftes, do alter the 
                  •
               ourm of them, whiche children be afterward callid elfes, or taken with the fayry. And ſome ſuch women wyll ſucke the bloud from chyldren. They be alſo thoſe, whiche be callid ladies of the fayry, whiche do allure yong men to company carnally with them, and after that they be conſumyd in the acte of lecherye, they coueyt to deuoure them.
            
               Lamina, a plate of mettall.
            
               Lamirus, one of the ſonnes of Hercules.
            
               Lampas, a leame of fyre, or bryghtenes of the ſonne, moſte vſed for a lampe.
            
               Lamperia, the doughter of the ſonne by Neaera whiche with her ſyſter Phaetuſa, kept ſhepe in Sycile.
            
               Lampetra, a fyſhe callyd a lamprey.
            
               Lampſacus, a towne on the ſea ſyde callid Helleſpontus in the ſide of Aſia, where Priapus was honoured.
            Lampſacenus, a, um, of Lampſacus.
            
            
               Lampyris, a gloo worme, or a wourme callyd a gloo berde.
            
               Lana, woulle.
            
               Lanaria, an herbe whiche fullers do vſe, whan they ſcoure clothes. Some do ſaye it is that whiche apothecaries do call Condiſi.
            
            
               Lanaris, re, that beareth or hath wolle.
            
               Lanare paecus, beaſtes hauyng woulle.
            
               Lanarius, a woulle man, or he that occupieth or ſelleth woulle.
            
               Lanatus, a, um, clad or wrapped in wolle.
            
               Lanatus lupus, fyſhe ſo callyd for his whytenes and ſoftenes.
            
               Lancearius, he that beareth a iauelyn.
            
               Lanceatus, armyd with a iauelyn. alſo woundyd with a iauelyn.
            
               Lancia, a ſpanyſhe iauelyn with a brode heade.
            
               Lancino, are, to ſtrike, to rent with the tethe.
            
               Lanerum, a garment made of vndyed woull.
            Laneus, a, um, woullen.
            
            
               Laneus, a fyſhe.
            
               Langa, a beaſt whiche is founde about the ryuer of Po.
            
               Langia, a fountayne in Nemea a countreye of Arcadia, where the hoſt of Argiues was refreſhed, whan they went agaynſt Thebes.
            
               Langueo, & langueſco, ere, to languyſhe, to be ſycke, to be faynt, to be aferde, to be ydell.
            
               Languidus, da, dum, faynt, ſycke, aferde, ydle.
            
               Languor, oris, languour, faylyng of ſtrengthe and naturall moyſture.
            
               Langurium, languettes of aumber, like to long
 beadſtones.
            
               Laruena, the fleſh ſhambles, or ſhop where fleſh is ſolde, ſomtyme it ſignifieth diſmembryng.
            Lanifex, idem qui lanificus.
            
               Lanificium, cardyng and spynnyng of woull.
            
               Lanificus, he that dothe worke woll, to make it mete for the clothyer. it may be callyd alſo a wolle wynder.
            
               Lanio, are, to cut lyke a boucher.
            
               Lanionius, a, um, pertainyng to bouchers craft
            
               Laniſta, he that had the rule ouer ſworde players, and cauſed them to be taught, and after ſolde them. alſo that ordeyned byrdes to fight
            
               Lanitium, clothynge, or the crafte of makynge woullen clothe.
            
               Lanitius, a, um, woullen, or of woulle.
            
               Lanium carnarium, a ſlaughter houſe.
            Lanius, & Lanio, onis, a boucher.
            
            
               Lano, are, to put in woll, or to dreſſe with wull.
            
               Lanugo, the ſoft heares or moſynes in the viſages of chyldren and women. alſo on fruytes callyd peaches, and ſom herbes as long wort, clary, and ſuche other. Alſo the down fethers in byrdes. it is alſoo the ſawe duſte or other poulder whiche commeth of wodde whan it is percyd.
            
               Lanx, cis, a dyſhe, whiche of ſomme is callyd a potenger. alſo a balance.
            
               Laodicea, a citie in Aſia.
            
               Laodomia, the wyfe of Protheſileus.
            
               Laomedon, ontis, the father of Priamus.
            
               Lapathum, uel Lapathus, callid alſo Rumex, is the generall name of all ſorrell, as Oxylapathum, or Lapathum acutum, ſorrell as welle wylde as of the gardeyn. Hippolapathon, a great ſorrell lyke a docke, but hauing the taſt of ſorrell, and is callyd pacience.
            
               Lapicida, a maſon.
            
               Lapidarius, a, um, pertaynyng to ſtones.
            
               Lapideſco, ſcere, to be made or tourned into a ſtoone.
            
               Lapidicina, a quarye of ſtones.
            
               Lapido, are, to ſtryke with ſtones. alſo to ſtrike ſometyme without ſtones.
            
               Lapillus, a lyttell ſtone, alſo a pretious ſtone.
            
               Lapio, iui, ire, to make harde as a ſtone.
            
               Lapis, idis, a ſtone, but leſſe than that, whiche is callyd Saxum. Sometyme it is taken for a myle. Ad tertium aut quartum lapidem, at the thyrde or the fourth myle.
            
               De lapide empti, were ſlaues or bōdmē ſold.
            
               Lapithe, people of Theſſaly, of whom Perithous was kynge.
            
               Lappa, the general name of al burres growing on herbes, which wyll ſtycke to any thyng.
            
               Lapſana, after Dioſcorides is a kynd of wylde nauewes hauynge but thre leaues. Plinius and Theophraſtus doo write, that they were callyd of the Arcadians wyld colewortes, & of the phiſitiōs, as Theophraſtus ſayth, Cera. With the rootes hereof boyled in mylke, all the hoſte of Iulius Ceſar lyued at Dyrrachiū a long tyme. wherof came the prouerbe,
            ❀Lapſana uiuere, where men do lyue nygardly and wretchydly.
            
               Lapſio, a fall.
            
               Lapſo, are, to fall often.
            
               Lapſus, us, a falle. alſo a ſmalle offence done by neglygence, an ouerſyght.
            
               Lapythos, a citie in the yle of Cypres.
            
               Laqueare, Laquear, & Laquearium, the roufe of a chaumber, which is imbowid or fretted. alſo a playne beame in a roufe.
            
               Laqueatus, a, um, haltered ſnarled, tyed, or bounde faſt. ſomtyme it ſignifyeth holowe or bowynge.
            
               Laqueus, an halter.
            
               Lara, uel Larunda, was a mayden whiche ſhewed to Iuno the wanton paſtymes of Iupyter with women. For the whyche Iupyter dyd cutte of her tungue, and cōmanded Mercurius to brynge her to helle. Who begat on her two ſonnes, whiche were callyd Lares.
            
            
               Laranda, a citie Lycaonia.
            
               Lararium, a priuate chapell or cloſet in a mans howſe.
            
               Larcus, a panne wherin coles be caryed.
            
               Larentia, a famous harlot, whiche bycauſe ſhe made the people of Rome her heyre, they named her a goddeſſe, and callyd her Flora.
            
            
               Lares, goddis, whiche the paynymes dyd ſuppoſe euery perſon had belongynge vnto hym: they were alſo callyd Penates, both the whiche wordes be alſo taken for pryuate dwellynges or houſes. Mei lares, mei penates. My houſe or dwellynge place.
            
               Large, abundantly.
            
               Largior, iris, iri, to gyue liberally. alſo to graūt.
            
               Largitas, tatis, largenes, or lyberalitie.
            
               Largitio, lyberall expenſes, to wynne a mans purpoſe.
            
               Largus, a, um, large or free of expenſes.
            
               Laridum, uel Lardum, larde, or the fatte of an hogge. ſomtyme ſwynes fleſhe ſalted.
            
               Larine, a fountayne in Attica.
            
               Lariſſa, the name of one citie in Theſſalia, an other in Aſia, the thyrde in Italy.
            
               Larius, a brooke by the citie of Comum.
            
               Larix, laricis, a great tree, whiche hath leaues lyke a pyneappull, the wodde longe and apte for buyldyng of inwarde warkes, it hath in it a thyn roſen of the colour of hony of Athenes. it peryſheth not neyther by rottyng, nor by eatyng of wormes, nor wylle bourne in a flame, nor be brought vnto coles, but by a lōg ſpace of tyme be conſumyd. alſo it wylle not ſwym on the water as other trees doo. And therfore be they eyther caryed in ſhyppes, or
 els layde on fyrre trees pynned togither. The gumme which cometh from this tree, is callyd Laricearheſina, which is vſed in the ſtede of Terebinthine, ne that is diſcommended of Aetius.
            
               Larodij, people in Scithia.
            
               Larua, a ſpirite, whych appereth in the nyght tyme. ſome do call it a hegge, ſome a goblyn. alſo a maſker, or he that weareth a vyſour it is ſometyme taken for the ſame vyſour.
            
               Laruale, an ymage defourmed, pale, leane, and horrible to beholde.
            
               Laruatus, he that is feared with a ſpirite, and is become madde. it ſommetyme ſygnifyeth a maſker.
            
               Larus, callyd in greke Cepphus, a lyttel byrde hauing many fethers, which at the time that ſhe bryngeth forth yonge, ſhe crieth out. She lyueth by eatynge the ſome of ſalt water: of her came the prouerbe: ❀Larus parturit, Larus dothe lay: applyed to theym, whiche promyſe moche, and great thynges, and fynally do gyue or brynge forthe nothynge, in regarde vnto that whiche they promyſed.
            
               Laſanum, a chaumber potte or vrinall.
            
               Laſciuia, wantonneſſe.
            
               Laſciuio, ire, to be wanton.
            Laſciuus, a, um, wanton.
            
            
               Laſer, or Laſeris, is a gumme or iuyce rnnyng out of a tree, whiche is taken of the beſt writers to be that which is callid of the apothecaries Aſa foetida. Rede more in Sylphium.
            
            
               Laſerpitium, is of Antonius Muſa ſuppoſed to be the ſweete roſen callyd Belſewine or B
                  •
               ugewin. ſome ſuppoſe it to be the tree, of the whiche commeth that roſen or gumme.
            
               Laſibus, olde writers vſed for Laribus.
            
            Laſſeo, & laſſeſco, laſſus, 
                  •
               um, ſcere, to be wery.
            
            
               Laſsi
                     •
                  , an yle in the ſea calllyd Egeum, it was alſo callyd Andros.
            
            
               Laſsitudo, wearyneſſe.
            
               Laſſo, are, to be wery.
            Laſſus, a, um, wery.
            
            
               La
                     ••
                  aurus, a great leechour.
            
               Latace, an herbe whiche the kynges of Perſia were wont to gyue to ambaſſadours, wherin they had this ſuperſtitious beleue, that bering aboute them that herbe, where ſoo euer they were, they ſhulde haue plenty of all thynges, and ſhuld not periſh for hunger or thirſt The fygure of this herbe I coulde neuer fynde in any authour.
            
               Late, abrode in many places.
            
               Latebra, & 
                     〈◊〉
                  , arum, a priuy place where men do hyde them. ſometyme it ſignifieth an excuſe.
            
               Latebro, are, to hyde.
            
               Latebroſus Iocus, where as be many priuy places.
            
               Lateo, tui, tere, to be hydde.
            
               Later, a tyle.
            ❀Laterem lauas, thou waſhiſt a ſlate or a tile A prouerb ſignifieng thou laboureſt in vayn▪
            
            ❀Laterem elixas, A prouerbe hauynge the ſame ſignification.
            
               Laterani, yomen of the garde.
            
               Lateranus, the name of a conſule of Rome, of whoſe houſe was made a churche in the citie of Rome of ſaynt Iohn̄, whiche is nowe callyd Lateranenſis.
            
            
               Laterculus, a lyttell tyle.
            
               Lateritius, a, um, made of tyles.
            
               Laterna, a lanterne.
            
               Latex, ticis, all maner of lycour: but it is moſte commonly taken for water.
            
               Latheris, an herbe callyd ſpurge.
            
               Latialis, le, & Latiaris, re, of latyn, of that part of Italy, which was callyd Latium.
            
               Latibulo, are, to be hydde.
            
               Latibulum, a denne or bury, where beaſtes doo hyde theym. ſometyme it is vſed for a ſecrete place or caue, wherin men be hyd.
            
               Laticlauium, the garment of a ſenatour. ſometyme it ſygnifieth the dignitie of a ſenatour.
            
               Latico, care, to lurke.
            
               Latifolium, that whyche hath brode leaues.
            
               Latifundium, a great or large fielde, great and large poſſeſſions.
            
               Latinae, narum, ſacrifices to Iupiter, namyd of the latines; who fyrſt dyd ordayne them.
            
               Latine, in the fourme of latyne.
            
               Latinitas, atis, latyne speche.
            
               Latinus, na, um, latyne, or of the people callyd latynes.
            
               Latinus, the proper name of the father in lawe to Aeneas.
            Latitudo, dinis, breadthe.
            
            
               Latium, a part of Italy betweene the ryuer of Tibris and Liris, wherein ſtandeth the citie of Rome.
            
               Latius, a, um, of that countrey.
            
               Latinius, a mountayne in Ionia, where poete
                  •
                ſay the moone kyſſed Endymion.
            
               Lato, lateſcare, to be 
                  •
               rode.
            
               Latomia, at dungeon in the pryſon at Rome.
            
               Latomiae, was a ſtrayght priſon in the cytie of Siracuſis in Sicilia: an other in Spartha. It is alſo a quarry, out of the whiche ſtones are dygged.
            
               Latomus, a maſon.
            
               Latona, was mother of Apollo and Diana.
            
               Latonia, callyd alſo Diana, and is alſoo taken for the moone.
            
               Latres, a ſeruaunt.
            
               Latria, the honour and ſeruyce, wherewith god onely is worſhypped.
            
               Latrina, a ſiege or ſakes.
            
               Latro, are, to barke as a dogge dothe.
            
               Latrocinium, thefte, robbery.
            
                
               Latrocinor, nari, to rob. alſo to ſerue in warres
            
               Latrones, robbers by the high waye. alſo ſouldyours retayned. Amonge the Romaynes it were thoſe, which were alway about the kinges or emperours perſon, as the garde is about the kynge. alſo Latrones ſeu latrunculi, be cheſſemen, with the whyche men do playe at the cheſſe.
            
               Latrunculator, a iuſtyce of gayle delyuerye, or any Iuſtyce, whiche dothe gyue ſentence on theues.
            
               Latuniae, quarries where ſtones are dygged.
            Latus, ta, tum, brode.
            
            
               Lata culpa, a groſſe neglygence, whan a man perceyueth not that thynge that euerye man vnderſtandeth.
            
               Latus, lateris, a ſyde.
            
               Latus clauus, a ſenatours robe or garment. It is put ſometyme for the dignitie of a ſenator. ſemblably Laticlauium.
            
            
               Lauacrum, a bathe or bayne.
            
               Lauatrina, a ſynk, wherinto ſoule water is caſt or ſwept, wherby pauementes ar made clean.
            
               Lauce, an yle in the ſea callyd Pontus.
            
               Laudabilis, le, laudable, commendable.
            
               Laudatio, a prayſe or commendation.
            
               Laudo, are, to prayſe.
            
               Laudo 
                     •
                  eſ
                     •
                  em, I take to wytneſſe.
            
               Lauer, an herbe growyng in the water, lyke to Alyſaunder, but hauyng leſſe leaues. ſome do call it bylders.
            
               Lauerna, a goddeſſe, vnder whoſe protection theues were in Rome.
            
               Lauinia, was doughter of kynge Latinus▪ for whom Aeneas and Turnus faught togither.
            
               Lauinium, a cytie in Italy callyd alſo Lauretū.
            Lauo, uaui, are, & lauo, ui, ere, to waſhe.
            
            
               Laurea, a leafe of laurell or bay tree. ſomtyme a garlande made of laurell.
            
               Laurens, tis, a mā of the town callid Laurentū.
            
               Laurentum, a citie in Italy callid alſo Lauiniū.
            
            
               Laureo, are, to put on a garlande of laurell.
            
               Laureola, a crowne or garlande that vyctours ware in theyr tryumph.
            
               Lauretum, a place wherein do growe laurelles or bay trees.
            Laureus, a, um, of laurell.
            
            
               Laurifer, & lauriger, is he that weareth a garlande of laurell.
            
               Laurinum, oyle of laurell or 
                  •
               ayes.
            
               Laurion, a place in Attica, where ſyluer was dygged.
            
               Laurus, a laurell or bay tree.
            Laus, laudis, prayſe.
            
            
               Lautia, were preſentes, whyche the Romaynes dyd ſend to ambaſſadours of other realmes.
            
               Lautitia, magnyficence and netenes in dyuers and bankettes.
            
               Lautrices, the wyues of two bretherne.
            
               Lautulae, weat baynes.
            
               Lautus, & lotus, ta, tum, waſſhed, alſo nete or cleane, or elegant, ryche.
            
               Laxitas, tatis, & laxamentum, releaſe, pardon, louſenes, lybertie.
            
               Laxo, are, to louſe or ſet at lybertie, to releaſe.
            
               Laxare manipulos, was in battaylle, whan the ſundry bendes or cumpanies of footemen were ſet in araye, one man a conuenient diſtance from an other, that they mough
                  •
                fight the more at theyr lybertie.
            
               Laxum, an aduerbe, ſignifieth wyde.
            
               Laxus, a, um, louſe, large, wyde, ſoft, weake.
         
         
            L ANTE E.
            
               LAEA, laeae, a lyoneſſe.
            
            
               Leae, an ylande by Cyrenaica, a regyon of Affryke.
            
               Leaena, a lyoneſſe it was alſo the name of a cō
               mon woman at Athenes, who after that Harmodius and Ariſtogiton had ſlayne Hypparchum the tyrant, ſhe being turmented in ſundry faſcio
                  •
               s, to the intent that ſhe ſhuld dyſcouer the confederates of that murder, ſhe ſpake not one worde, but bytynge in ſunder her tungue, ſhe ſpyt it in the face of Hyppias the tyrant, who cauſed her to be tourmented.
            
               Leander, the name of a man.
            
               Learchus, ſonne of Athamas and Ino, whome the father beyng madde ſlewe in the ſtede of an harte.
            
               Lebadia, a citie in Boeotia.
            
               Lebes, lebetis, a caudron to boyle in.
            
               Lechia, a fyſſhe, whiche ſome haue taken to be Tuny, for the ſimilitude of them.
            
               Leconomantia, was a kynde of diuination by water in a baſyn, whiche the ruſticall people in the olde tyme vſed amonge the Aſſyrians. They fylled a baſyn ſulle of water, into the whyche after certayne wordes ſpoken, ſpirites entred into the water, wherby was herd a lyttell ſowne or whyſperyng, by the whiche the inchantours perceyued thynges to come, and made anſweres accordyng. Ioannes Zeſes in his comment on the Iliados of Homere maketh mention of two kyndes of Leca
                     •
                  omantia, one olde was, whyche Vlyſſes vſyd, an other newe founde, whych is by water in a depe baſyn, into the whych was put gold, ſyluer, ambre, copꝑ, & ſtones, wherat mought be no women, or they whyche hadde oftended with women. But this vayne ſcience is forboden amonge chryſten men, lyke as Necromancy and Geomancy is.
            
               Lectica, a thynge lyke to a bed, wherein ryche men and noble men were borne by ſyx ſeruā
               tes, it may be taken for a lyghter.
            
               Lecticarij, they whiche bare Lecticam.
            
            
                Lectio, onis, readynge.
            
            
               Lectipes, an herbe.
            
               Lectiſterniator, oris, a chamberlayn, or he that maketh the beddes.
            
               Lectiſterniū, a ſolemnitie amonge the paynims whan in the honour of their goddis Iupiter, Iuno, and Minerua, beddes were ſpradde in the temples, in the whyche fyrſte the ydolles were laid, in the reſidue as many as mought lye and eate.
            
               Lectito, are, to reade often.
            
               Lecton, one of the toppes of the mountayn callyd Ida.
            
               Lectrum, a part of Aſia, lyenge into the ſea.
            
               Lecturio, ire, to deſyre to reade.
            
               Lectus, a bedde.
            
               Lectulus, a lyttell bedde.
            
               Lecythus, a potte of erthe, whiche ſerued only for oyle.
            
               Leda, was wyfe of Tindarus kynge of Laconia, with whom (as poetes do fable) Iupiter in the fourme of a ſwanne dyd company, and ſhe brought forthe two egges, of the one came Pollux & Helena, whyche was rauyſhed by Paris: of the other came Caſtor & Clytemneſtra. Pollux and Caſtor be callyd Ledaei.
            
            
               Lagatarius, ia, to whō any thing is bequethed.
            
               Legatio, an ambaſſade, or office of an ābaſſador
            
               Legatitius, pertaynyng to legacies.
            
               Legator, oris, he that bequetheth any thynge, the teſtatour.
            
               Legatum, a legacy or bequeſte.
            
               Legatus, an ambaſſadour, that hath cōmiſſion to treate of matters. He that is ſent onely to ſalute or congratulate, is callyd Orator. it is alſo a lieutenaunt or generalle capytayne of an army.
            
               Legerda, a citie in great Armeny.
            
               Legio, onis, a company of men of warre, contaynyng commonly ſyx thouſande foote men, ſeuen hūdred thyrty & two horſmen▪ it is alſo a town in Cornwall nowe callyd Leſkarde.
            
               Legionarius, a, um, pertaynyng to a legion.
            
               Legirupa, a breaker of lawes.
            Legirupio, idem.
            
               Legiſlator, a maker or gyuer of lawes.
            Legifer, idem.
            
               Legi
                     •
                  imus, a, um, accordyng to the lawe.
            
               Legitimi dies, dayes in banke before ordinarye iudges, whan the partie ſhulde appere or pleade, or elles it may be dayes of returne in the kynges benche or chauncery.
            
               Legitima iuditia, iudgementes confirmed by lawes written, or auncient cuſtome.
            
               Legiuncula, a ſmall legion.
            
               Lego, are, to ſende as an ambaſſadour, or as a legate, or deputy, to commytte or appoynte, to bequeath.
            
               Lego, gi, gere, to gather, to reede, to paſſe by, to chouſe, to ſtryke.
            
               Legula, a fyllette.
            
               Leguleius, a lawyer.
            
               Legulus, a gatherer of ſmall thynges.
            
               Legumen, minis, all maner of pulſe, as beanes, peaſon, vetches, tares. &c.
            Legumentum, & Legarium, the ſame.
            
            
               Leleges, ſeu Lelegae, people, whyche were alway wandrynge.
            
               Lema, a teare.
            
               Lemanus, a ryuer whiche runneth into the ryuer of Rone, callyd in frenche Lauſane.
            
               Lembus, a ſwyfte lyttel ſhyppe, whiche may be callyd a barke.
            
               Lemnia terra, that whiche is now callyd Terra ſigillata.
            
            
               Lemniſci, labelles hangynge downe from garlandes. alſo ieſſes belongyng to an hauke
            
               Lemnos, one of the yles callyd Cyclades, in this yle Vulcane was nouryſſhed. The womenne thereof beynge in a furye, that theyr huſbandes were longe abſente in warres. Whan they came home, the women conſpyrynge togyther, ſlewe them all in one nyght, ſauyng that Hypſiphile the kinges daughter ſaued her father, and conueyed hym. Reade in Hypſiphile.
            
            
               Lemoſi, they that wepe lyghtly.
            
               Lemouices, Lymoſyn in Fraunce.
            
               Lemures, ſpirites whiche do walke by nyght, with horrible fygures.
            
               Lenaeus, one of the names of Bacchus.
            
               Lenas, a bawde.
            
               Lendigino
                     ••
                  s, a, um, full of nyttes.
            
               Lenio, iui, ire, to pacyfye, to appeaſe, to treate gentyllye, to make playne, or ſmothe, to comforte.
            
               Lenis, ne, that whiche hath no roughnes, meke tractable, ſoft of conditions.
            
               Lenitas, & Lenitudo, mekenes, gentylnes, eaſyneſſe to pleaſe, ſoftnes, ſmotheneſſe.
            
               Leniter, ſoftely, ſwetely, moderately.
            
               Leno, a baude, a marchant of hoores.
            
               Lenobates, a treader of grapes.
            
               Lenocinium, the practyſe of baudry. ſomtyme immoderate and exquiſite klenlyneſſe or elegancy, to ſtyre a man to vyce, a vitious pleaſauntneſſe.
            
               Lenocinor, ari, to practiſe baudry. alſo to ſpeke fayre, or allure oone with wordes, and other pleaſant thynges.
            
               Lenonius, a, um, pertaynyng to bawdes.
            
               Lens, lendis, a nytte.
            
               Lens, lentis, a kynde of pulſe callyd lyntelles.
            
               Lens paluſtris, duckes meate, whiche in ſtandyng waters lyeth houerynge.
            
               Lente, eaſyly, ſoftely.
            
               Lenteſco, ſcere, to be ſmothe or tender.
            
                
               Lenticula, a pulſe callyd chyttes.
            
               Lenticula, a maner of veſſell, out of the whiche kynges and princis were annoynted, a chryſmatory, a rounde redde thynge lyke a lyntell in mens vyſages.
            
               Lenticularis, re, lyke a chyt or fatche.
            
               Lentiginoſus, he that hath in his face or body many lyttell red markes, lyke lyntelles.
            
               Lentigo, ginis, a thynge lyke a lyttell warte in the face redde or blacke.
            
               Lentiſcus, a lyttell tree, out of the which commeth a ſwete gumme callyd Maſtix.
            
            
               Lento, tare, to do a thyng ſoftly or eaſily, ſlowly
            
               Lentus, ta, tum, ſoft, gentyll, eaſy, ſlow, remiſſe, ydell, cleauyng, or clammy.
            
               Lenulus, a lyttell or yonge bawde.
            
               Lenunculus, idem. alſo a lytel fyſhers bote. alſo the whelpe of a lyon.
            
               Leo, onis, a lyon. alſo a ſhel fyſh callid a lopſter
            ❀Leonem ex unguibus aeſtimare, to eſteme the lyon by his talons. A prouerbe ſignifieng to perceyue by a lyttell what the hole matter meaneth, or by a piece of a thynge what the holle is.
            ❀Leonē radere, ſpoken where one attēpteth a thyng dangerous and almoſt impoſſible.
            ❀Leo riſit, a prouerbe touching them, which be ſoure of coūtenance, fierce, and vncurteys.
            
               Leocrates, the name of an excellent grauer.
            
               Leodamas, the proper name of a philoſopher.
            
               Leon, a phyloſopher.
            
               Leonides, was king of the Lacedemoniās, whiche did feates of warre againſt Xerxes kyng of Perſia incredible, & finally was ſlayne in defendyng Grece, with foure thouſande and eyght hundred Grekes onely, agaynſte .xvii. hundred thouſande of the hooſte of Xerxes.
            There was alſo an nother Leonides, whiche was tutour to kyng Alexander, whan he was a chylde.
            
               Leonina, an herbe, whiche groweth on hylles, whoſe floures ar like to a lyons mouth whan he gapeth.
            
               Leontopetalon, an herbe, hauyng leaues lyke to colewortes, the ſtalke halfe a fote high, the ſeede in huſkes as great as ſmalle peaſon, the roote like a rape roote, great and black, whiche helpeth agaynſt the ſtyngyng and bitynge of all maner of ſerpentes.
            
               Leontophon, a lytell worme, which if the lyon do byte, the lyon dieth incontinent.
            
               Leontophona, a lytel beaſt, whoſe head is turned into aſhes, wherwith men do myxt fleſh, & caſt it in the wayes wherby lyons do paſſe, wherof if they do eate, they dye incontinent.
            
               Leontopodion, an herbe callyd Pee de lyon, whiche hath floures lyke roſes vnſprad.
            
               Leontopodium, an herbe, which ſome do ſay is lyke to that whiche is callyd marygouldes, ſome do ſuppoſe it to be the herbe whyche is callyd Dent de lyon.
            
               Leopardus, a lybarde.
            
               Lepaduſa, the yle of Sicile.
            
               Lepidè, pleaſantly, pratily.
            
               Lepidium, is an herbe whiche Vergilius Marcellus ſuppoſeth to be that which the apothecaries do cal Setrac. Ruellius deſcribeth it to haue leaues whan they be yonge lyke to laurelle, but they be ſofter. Finallye it is lyke a ſworde blade rebated, the ſtalke ryſeth in heyght a cubite, and hath a great roote with a thyck rynde, and a pythe lyke to wood.
            
               Lepidus, a, um, nete, polyte, and pleſant, aſwell in ſpeche as in geſture.
            
               Lepiſta, a lyttell potte or viole.
            
               Lepor, ôris, & lepos, 
                     ••
                  is, purenes or netenes in ſpeche. alſo the good grace and dilectablenes in ſpeche and geſture.
            
               Leporarium, an incloſure, or place incloſed, wherin are kepte any beaſtes for pleaſure or huntynge.
            Leporinus, na, num, of an hare.
            
            
               Leporis palatium, an herbe callid Southiſtell, in greke Sonchus.
            
            
               Lepra, lepry.
            
               Leprium, a citie in Achaia.
            
               Leptoludiae, blacke fygges.
            
               Leptus, the weight of a karat and an half. Andreas Alciatus in tres poſteriores libros, A karate is the thyrde part of Obolus, whiche is halfe a ſerupyll.
            
               Lepus, poris, an hare.
            
               Lepuſculus, a leuret or yonge hare.
            
               Lerna, a lake in Achaia aboute Argos, and a fenne in the whiche was the ſerpente Hydra with many heedes. In to this lake the people of the cyties of Argus and Mycene dyd throwe all the ordure and ſweapynges of theyr ſtretes and houſes. Thereof came the prouerbe:
            ❀Lerna malorum, whereby was ſygnified an heape of myſchiefes, or any perſon in whō is all vyce and abhomination.
            Lernaeus, a, um, of Lerna.
            
            
               Leros, an ylande in ſhe ſea Icarie.
            
               Leſbos, an yle in the ſea callid Egeum, wherein was the citie callad Mytilene.
            
            
               Leſbius, a, um, of the yle of Leſbos.
            
               Leſbia regula, is ſpoken, where as rayſon is applyed to the acte, and not the act to reaſon: and where the lawe is accommodate to maners, and not maners to the lawe. Hereof ſpeaketh Ariſtotle Moralium li .5. Of that whiche is infynite, the rule is infynite, lyke the leaden rule of Leſbos, whiche ſerueth for buyldyng, and is chaunged to the faſcyon of the ſtone.
            
               Leſſus, us, a lamentable voyce vſed in the buryeng
 of men, as we do ſay, alas.
            
               Leſtorum, a region of Indie.
            
               Leſtrygones, a people in the extreme part of Italy, whiche dyd eate the companyons of Vlyſſes, roſtyng them on broches.
            Letalis, le, mortall.
            
            
               Letania, uel Litania, a ſupplication or common prayer.
            
               Letatus, ſlayne.
            
               Lethargus, or Letargia, whiche of ſom is callyd Veternus (is as Paulus Egineta writeth) a diſeaſe in that part of the head, in the whiche the power of reaſon is contayned, poſſedyng the ſame place that phreneſy dothe, that is to ſaye the brayne, but the cauſe and matter be contrary, for in this is continual neceſſitie of ſlepe, harde to be awaked, the matter beynge a moyſt and very colde humour, waſhyng the brayne, and compellyng one to ſlepe. Alexander Trallianus addeth therto, that therin is ſuche a forgetfulneſſe, that he whiche is ſyrk can not remember what he wold ſpeake. Cō
                  ſtantinus ſaythe, that where ſometyme they do gape, they do forgette to cloſe theyr mouthes. It is ſometyme callyd Vera, and than is it of a pure cold matter, and ſomtyme it is callyd Non uera, and than is it of a cold matter myxt with a lytell bloud or choler, ſeldom it happeth of melancholy. Sometyme it foloweth an other ſycknes, as a fleumaticke feuer, or the ſycknes of the lungues callyd Peripneumoniîa, in theſe dyſeaſes, by heate the fleume is made ſubtyll, and is plucked vp to the brayne, where a cotidiane feuer and that be togyther, ſometyme the feuer departeth in the ſpace of .vii. dayes, and leaueth behynde that ſyckenes.
            
               Lethargicus, he that hath the ſlepyng or forgetfull ſyckenes.
            
               Lethe, a ryuer of hel, the water wherof as ſone as it is drunk, cauſeth a mā to forget al thing that is paſſed. it is alſo a ryuer in Affrica.
            
               Letifer, ra, rum, deadly, bryngyng or cauſynge deathe.
            Letificus, ca, cum, cauſyng deathe.
            
            
               Leto, are, to ſlea.
            
               Letum, or Lethum, deathe.
            
               Leua manus, the lefte hande.
            
               Leuca, a promontory or elbowe of lande, nyghe to Corinthus.
            
               Leucacantha, is (as Ioannes Agricola affyrmeth) a thorny buſhe commyng vp in hedges and diches, hauyng white floures, whiche ar ſoote: orels (ſayth he) a kynde of thyſtelles, whyche be ſquare and full of pryckes. Albeit Manardus ſuppoſed it to be that which the Arabians do calle Bedeguar. Ruellius affyrmeth it to be that whiche Dioſcorides dothe cal Rhamnus, the Romaynes Albam ſpinā, white thorne, growynge in hedges, hauynge ſtraight vp braunches full of pryckes, lyttell leaues ſomwhat longe, fatty, & ſoft. Som is whiter than other, the darker coloured hath broder leaues, & ſomewhat ruddy, the twigges be in length almoſt fiue cubites, the fruit therof is whyte, brode, thynne, and faſcioned lyke a codde. Nowe haue ye the ſundrye deſcriptions of the great lerned mē, of this time, diuine you what Leucacantha is, for to ſo dyuerſe opinyons I can not fynde one englyſhe, except I ſhulde call it white bryer.
            
               Leucanthemis, an herbe, whiche phyſitions of late dayes call camomyll.
            
               Leucates, a mountayne in Epiro. alſo an yle.
            
               Leuce, a lyttel towne not farre from Smirnia. Alſo an herbe lyke Mercury hauyng a whyte lyne in the myddle of the leafe.
            
               Leu
                     •
                  bia, is the generall name to all kyndes of vyolettes, not withſtandynge it is proprelye taken for the yelowe violettes, whiche ſome doo calle hartes eaſe, the Arabians doo calle it Cheni.
            
            
               Leucola, an yle by Cypres.
            
               Leucoma, the webbe in the eie whan it is roted
            
               Leucomum, whyte cotton.
            
               Leucophaeus, a browne or a ruſſet colour.
            
               Leucophaeatus, he that dothe weare a ruſſette garment.
            
               Leucophlegmantia, a whyte dropſy.
            
               Leucophlegmatia, or Leucophlegmatias hyderos, one kynde of dropſy, wherin al the bodye ſwelleth vnequally.
            
               Leucopū, & Leucopus, white of naturall color.
            
               Leucoſia, an yle againſte Peſtanum, in the ſea Thyrrenum.
            
            
               Leucoſyria, a countrey, whyche is nowe callyd Cappadocia.
            
               Leucothaea, the goddeſſe which was callyd Matuta & Aurora.
            
            
               Leucothea, was doughter of Orcamus of Babylonia, whom beyng gotten with chylde by Phebus, her father dyd bury her alyue, but Phebus (as poetes fayne) dyd tranſfourme her vnto a tree, out of the whiche rounneth frankyncenſe.
            
               Leucrocuta, a beaſt in Inde, of the greatnes of an aſſe, hauing legges like an hart, the head, necke, tayle, & breaſt of a gray or badger, the feete clouen, a wide mouth vnto the eares, in the ſtede of tethe one hole bone, in his voyce he wyll reſemble the ſpeeche of a man. Note here, that Pliny ſayth, that this beaſt in his heed is of the faſcion of Meles, and Meles is the beaſt callyd Taxo, whiche is a graye or a badger And Solinus ſayth, that he hath the head of a camell, which perchaunce was the faute of the wryter or prynter, whiche vnto Meli, added Ca, and made it Cameli.
            
            
                
               Leuctra, a towne in Laconia in Grece.
            
               Leuctrum, a towne in Boeotia.
            
            
               Leui, one of the ſonnes of Iacob the patriark.
            
               Leuiathan, a dragon of the ſea: it is taken in holy ſcripture for the dyuell.
            
               Leuiculus, a, um, ſomwhat light. alſo wanton.
            
               Leuidenſis, ſe, thynne wrought, and of ſmalle ſubſtaunce.
            
               Leuifidus, da, dum, of light credence or truſte.
            
               Leuir, ri, the huſbandes brother.
            Leuis, leue, lyght.
            
            
               Leuia uina, ſmall wynes.
            
               Leuita, amonge the Iewes was a mynyſter in their ceremonies vnder theyr prieſtes.
            Leuitas, tatis, lyghtnes.
            
            
               Leuiter, lyghtly.
            
               Leuo, are, to lyft vp. ſomtyme to take away, to abate or mynyſhe, to mitigate, to make eaſy or lyght.
            
               Leuare aliquem onere, to dyſcharge one of his bourdeyn.
            
               Leuare animum, to recreate the ſpirite.
            
               Leuare annonā, to miniſh the p
                  •
               ce of vitailes
            
               Leuare facinus alicuius, to excuſe oone of a miſcheuous dede.
            
               Leuare ictum ſerpentis, to heale one ſtunge with an adder.
            
               Leuare laborem alicui, to eaſe hym of his labour, or to put hym out of peyne.
            
               Leuare metum alicui, to put one out of feare
            
               Leuare morbum alicui, to make his ſycknes more eaſy.
            
               Leuare populum frumento, to helpe the people with corne in tyme of ſcarſitie.
            
               Leuare ſuam authoritatem, to minyſſhe his authoritie.
            
               Leuus, a, um, lyght. alſoo whan it is ſpoken of worldly thynges, it ſygnifieth left, vnhappy, contrary. whan it is referred to celeſtial thinges, it betokeneth ryght, fortunate, proſperous. For that whiche to vs is the left hand, to them whiche are aboue vs, and doo loke towarde vs, is the ryght hande.
            
               Lex, legis, lawe, alſo a ſtatute or decree.
            
               Lex municipalis, the peculyar lawe, whiche euery citie hath.
            
               Lex orchia, a lawe, whyche aſſygned howe many perſons ſhulde be boden to ſouper, and that men ſhuld ſoupe at theyr doores, to 
                  •
               hintent that it mought appere, howe the lawe was obeyed.
            
               Lex plagiaria, wherby men were whipped.
            
               Leges Centuriatae, lawes made by the aſſemblies callyd Comitia Centuriata, Rede Comitia.
            
            
               Leges Curiatae, lawes made in the aſſemblis callyd Curiata comitia, whiche were callyd by tribes.
            
               Leges Tribunitiae, lawes made by al the cō
               mon peple, which were alſo callid Plebiſcita.
            
            
               Lege agere, to ſue in the law. alſo to do execution.
            
               Legibus ſoluere, to diſpence or graūnt a placarde to one to do any thynge contrarye to a lawe made.
            
               Lexipyreti, medicines, whiche doo heale men of feuers.
            
               Lexouij, people in high France about Burbon
         
         
            ¶L ANTE I.
            
               LIA, one of the wyues of Iacob the patryarche.
            
               Liae, be holes in the top of a maſt, whiche do receyue the cabuls or ropes.
            
               Liba, an yle in the Indian ſea.
            
               Libadion, an herbe callyd the leſſe centory.
            
               Libamen, minis, Libamentum, & libatio, a taſt or ſay taken, proprely in ſacrifice.
            
               Libanius, the name of a great rhetorician.
            
               Libanos, a tree growinge in Arabia, out of the whiche runneth frankyncenſe, which of Euripides is callid Libanos, and the tree Libanotos, contrary wiſe of Sophocles and Galenus, the tree is callid Libanos, and the gum Liban
                     •
                  tos.
            
            
               Liban
                     •
                  tis, tidis, an herbe callyd roſemary.
            
               Libanotus, a wynde, whiche doth blowe out of the northweſt.
            
               Libanus, a mountayn betwene Araby and Phenicia. it is alſo a tree, whiche bryngeth forth incenſe.
            
               Libella, the diminutiue of Libra. it was alſo a ſmall coyn, and of them were two ſortes, one was worthe the tenthe parte of Seſtertius, the other the tenthe parte of Denarius: it is alſoo the lyne and plummette of a maſon or carpentar.
            
               Libellio, a writer of bokes.
            
               Libelliones, caryers of letters.
            
               Libellorum praefecti, mayſters of the requeſtes whiche do receyue bylles of ſupplication, being put in, to the kyng or prince.
            
               Libellulus, a very lyttell boke.
            
               Libellus, a lyttell boke. alſo ſomtyme an epiſtle, a ſupplication, a libelle or declaration in the lawe, of dette, treſpas, couenaunt, and other lyke.
            
               Libens, wyllynge.
            Libenti animo, gladly.
            
            
               Libenter, willingly, gladly.
            
               Libentiae, dilectations, pleaſures.
            
               Libentina, one of the names of Venus.
            
               Liber, liberi, the fynder of wyne, callid alſoo Bacchus & Dionyſius.
            
            
               Liber, libri, a boke or warke writen, the inner rynde of a tree.
            
               Liber, ra, rum, free, at lybertie, not bounden,
 large or great.
            
               Liberalia, orum, the feſtyual days of Bacchus.
            Liberalis, le, lyberall.
            
            
               Liberales artes, the lyberal ſciences, or ſciences belongyng to a free man.
            
               Liberalis forma, a good fauour.
            
               Liberale ingenium, a free courage.
            
               Liberale iuditium, & liberalis cauſa, where a man contendeth for his lybertie.
            Liberalitas, tatis, lyberalitie.
            
            
               Liberalis cauſa, where a man contendeth for his libertie.
            
               Liberaliter, liberally. Exercitum quem in Aſia ductauerat, luxurioſe, nimis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   liberaliter habuerat, The armye whiche he had with hym in Aſia, he lette theym haue to moche theyr pleaſure.
            
               Liberaliter eruditus, well taught.
            
               Liberaliter uiuere, to lyue withoute vyle occupation.
            
               Libere, frankly, lyberally, without conſtraynt.
            
               Libere uiuere, to lyue at pleaſure.
            
               Liberi, chyldren, as welle women as men.
            
               Liberides, conyes.
            
               Libero, are, to delyuer, to ſet at lybertie.
            
               Liberare creditorem, to contente, or ſatisfye hym, of whome moneye is borowed, to pay dettis.
            
               Libertas, tatis, libertie taken alway in the good parte.
            
               Libertinus, & Libertus, he that of a bondman is manumyſed or infranchiſed.
            
               Liberum arbitrium, free wyll.
            
               Libet, it lyketh or contenteth.
            
               Libethra, a caue, wherin was a welle, callid Libethros, where the Muſis being conuerſant, were therfore callyd Libethrides.
            
            
               Libethrides, the Muſes, or ladyes of ſciences.
            
               Libethrus, a mountayne in Macedonia, where the Muſes dyd dwell.
            
               Libidinarius, a haunter of lechery.
            
               Libidinoſus, lecherous, wylfull, pleaſant.
            
               Libido, dinis, ſenſualite, vnleful apetite or luſt. ſometyme it ſignifieth only appetite or wyll.
            
               Libitina, a goddeſſe in whoſe temple were ſold all thynges pertaynynge to ſepulture or funeralles. ſommetyme for buryenge. Alſo for deathe, or the biere whereon deade bodyes are caryed.
            
               Libitinarius, he that hathe the ſurueyinge and charge about burienges.
            
               Libo, are, to taſt any thyng, ſomtyme to touch. ſometyme to ſacrifyce, ſometyme to take.
            
               Libra, a pounde, amonge the Romayns conteinyng
.xii. ounces, whiche is callyd a pounde troyweyght. Somtyme a payre of balances. it is alſo one of the .xii. ſygnes.
            
               Libra Attica, reade in Mina.
            
               Libralis, le, a pounde weyght.
            
               Libramentum, poyſe or weyght.
            
               Libraria, a lybrary.
            
               Librarius, a ſeriuener, a bokebynder.
            
               Librarius, a, um, pertaynynge to bokes or of a pounde weyght.
            
               Librile, the hangynge equally of the balance.
            
               Librilla, a cougell or ſtone to throwe at one.
            
               Libripens, dis, a weyer. it was alſo amonge the Romans he, which bought a bōdmā or ſlaue, taking a pound weight of braſſe in his hand, and ſaying: This man, which with this money and braſon poūd is bought to my vſe, by the lawes of the Romans, I ſay is min own.
            
               Libro, are, to wey, to poyſe, to make weyghty, to houer.
            
               Libs, a wynde, the whiche bloweth out of the ſouthe.
            
               Libum, a cheſe cake.
            
               Liburni, people of the countrey callid Liburnia alſo common meſſangers.
            
               Liburnia, a part of Dalmatia or Slauony, now callyd Croatia.
            
               Liburnū, liburna, liburnas, & liburnica, a light ſhyp or foyſt.
            
               Libya, was amonge the Greekes the generall name of all Aphrica: Not withſtandyng it is of the Romayns taken onely for that part of Aphrica, whiche is from Egypt, to the weſte occean, contaynyng Cyrenaicam, Aphricam minorem, Numidiam, & Mauritaniam. The Spaniardes do call them al cōmonly Mores
            
               Libycis, cidis, a town in Iudea, on the eaſt part of the ryuer of Iordan.
            
               Libycontes, ſtones, which are not very clere.
            Libycus, ca, cum, of Libia.
            
            
               Libyophoenices, people in Affrica.
            
               Libys, & Libyſſa, a man and woman of Libya
            
               Licenter, raſhely.
            
               Licentia, licence, vnleful or immoderat libertie.
            
               Licentioſus, raſhe, vſyng vnlefull libertie.
            
               Liceo, cere, to cheapen.
            
               Liceor, ceris, ceri, to ſet the pryce.
            
               Licet, it is lefull. ſometyme it is vſed for maye. Mihi licet, I may. Tibi licet, thou mayſt. ſomtyme be it ſoo, admytte it. Licuit eſſe ocioſo Themiſtocli, Themiſtocles mought haue bē without trauayle.
            
               Nobis non licet eſſe tam diſertis, We canne not be ſo well ſpoken.
            
               Per me uel ſtertas licet, thou mayſt ſlepe for me vntyll thou routeſt, or I wylle gyue the leaue to route.
            
               Lichas, a meaſure, whiche excedeth not foure fyngers.
            
               Lichen, an herbe callyd Lyuerwort.
            
               Lichenes, ryngwormes or tetters.
            
               Lichenis, a foule breakyng out, whiche begynneth about the chyn. Some do take it for the frenche pockes.
            
                
               Lichnis agreſtis, callyd alſo Tragonaton, and Anthirrhinos, an herbe lyke to lynſeede, hauynge almoſt no rote, and a blue floure with ſeedes lyke a caulfes ſnoute. It groweth amonge corne in ſome countrays.
            
               Licia, be thredes, whych ſylk women do weaue in lyncelles or ſtooles.
            
               Liciatorium, a weauers ſhyttell, or a ſylke womans tauell, whereon ſylke or threde beynge wounden, is ſhot throught the webbe or lome.
            
               Licinia, a kynde of olyue trees.
            
               Licitator, toris, a cheapener, a chapman. ſometyme it ſignifieth a broker.
            
               Licitè, lefully.
            
               Licitor, aris, ari, to bye and ſelle for gaynes, or to bargayne by exchaunge or cheuyſaunce, to fyght, to deceyue a man by a crafty bargayn.
            
               Lictor, a ſergeant, or other lyke miniſter to execute corporall punyſſhement. A Conſule of Rome had .xii. Other head officers had ſyxe, whiche bare euery one in theyr handes roddes and axes bounden togyther, to doo with them execution, as they were commaunded.
            
               Lictorius, a, um, pertaynyng to ſergeantes and other lyke officers.
            Lictus, ta, tum, lycked.
            
            
               Lidoron a tyle in length one foote and an half, in bredthe one foote.
            
               Lien, enis, the ſplene.
            
               Lienicus, & Lienoſus, he that is ſycke in the ſplene.
            Ligamen, minis, Ligamentum, a bonde.
            
            
               Ligellum, a cotage.
            
               Liger, eris, a ryuer in Fraunce callyd Loire.
            
               Lignarius faber, a carpentar.
            
               Lignator, a caryer of wood.
            
               Lignile, fuell, or a wood ſtacke.
            
               Lignor, aris, ari, to go to cary wood.
            
               Lignoſus, a, um, as harde as wood.
            
               Lignum, wood.
            
               Ligo, are, to bynde.
            
               Ligo, onis, a ſpade.
            
               Ligula, a lyttell tungue. it is alſo a ſpoone callyd alſo Cochlear, which in meaſure containeth
.iii. dragmas, and one ſcruple.
            
               Ligur, a man or woman of Liguria.
            
               Liguria, a part of Italy from the hyl callyd Apeninus, vnto the ſea callyd Thuſcum, alſo frome the ryuer of Varus vnto the ryuer callyd Macra. In it be the cities, Genua, Sauona, Naulum, Albigena.
            
            
               Ligurio, ire, to eate lykorouſely, or to deuoure ſwete or daynty meates. alſo to eate dayntily or curiouſely.
            
               Liguritor, toris, a dayntye feeder, an eater of delycate meates.
            
               Ligus, gûris, of the countrey of Liguria, a Ianuens of Ianeway.
            
               Liguſticum mare, the ſea that is by Ieane.
            Liguſticus, ca, cum, of Liguria.
            
            
               Liguſtrum, a tree hauyng leaues lyke an olyue tree, but they be broder and ſofter, and more grene of colour, whyche dothe beare whyte floures and ſote, wherof is made an oyle callyd oleum Cyprinum. And this tree dothe growe in watry places, as wyllowes and ſalowes do, and bearith a blacke fruite lyke to an elder tree, they whiche doo take it for the buſhe callyd Priuet, be moche deceyued. it is alſo an herbe, whiche ſome men do calle Maior, and groweth by hedges.
            
               Ligyes. are people of Aſia, which with Xerxes warred agaynſt the Grekes.
            
               Lilietum, a place where do grow many lylies.
            
               Lilinum, oyle of lylyes.
            
               Lilium, a lylye.
            
               Lilybeum, a towne in Sicile where one of the Sibilles lyeth buryed.
            
               Lima, a fyle.
            
               Limaria, the fyſhe callyd Tuny, whan it dothe not excede one foote in length.
            
               Limatulus, a lyttell fyled.
            
               Limatura, pouder, whiche commeth of fylyng.
            
               Limax, cis, a ſnayle. alſo a man, whyche prieth or ſeketh for ſome thynge to conſume.
            
               Limborarius, a maker of gardes or purfles.
            
               Limbus, a purfle of a womans garment, or a garde of a mans garment.
            
               Limen, minis, ſignifieth not only the thraſhold of a doore, but alſo the haunſe. ſomtyme it ſygnifieth the entree of the dore ſomtime frendſhyp after the expoſition of Seruius.
            
               Limenarcha, the wardeyn of the portes.
            
               Limes, mitis, ſygnyfyeth a bounde or buttynge in fyeldes.
            
               Limetanei agri, fieldes lyenge in the extreme marches of a countrey.
            
               Limetanei milites, ſoudiors which were apointed to kepe & defēd the marches of thempire.
            Limitatus, ta, tum, bounded lymytted.
            
            
               Limito, are, to bounde or lymytte howe farre a thyng dothe extende.
            
               Limo, are, to fyle, to polyſhe.
            
               Limones, fruite callyd lymons, wherof no mention is made of ancient authors, except it be amonge them, whiche are callyd Citra.
            
            
               Limonium, an herbe growyng in medowes or mooryſſhe groundes, hauynge leaues lyke to beetes, but leſſe and more weake, and hath a ſtalke lyke a lylye full of leaues, and hath a redde ſeede.
            
               Limuici, or Limouices, Lymoſyn in Poyters.
            
               Limus, a veſture from the bealy downewarde. alſo mud or ſlyme, whiche is in the water.
            
               Limus, a, um, croked, awry, a ſkewe.
            
               Limis oculis ſpectare, to loke wātōly on the one ſyde, to caſt a wanton eye, to loke a ſkew.
            
               Linamentum, lynnen.
            
                
               Linarius, a warker of lynnen.
            
               Lindum, a citie in Englande, whiche ſome doo ſuppoſe to be Lyncolne, ſome Lynne.
            
               Linea, a carpentars lyne or corde. it ſignifyeth alſo euery line generally, either made or imagyned to be.
            
               Lineamentum, the faſcion of a body.
            
               Linearis, re, pertaynynge to a lyne.
            
               Lingo, xi, gere, to lycke with the tunge. alſo to ſucke downe by lyttell and lyttell.
            
               Linctus, tus, lycking or ſuckynge downe.
            
               Lingones, people of Fraunce in the countreye callyd Langres.
            
               Lingua, a tunge. alſo a language. alſo an inſtrument, wherwith men doo take medicines or ſalues out of a boxe.
            
               Lingua bula, an herbe callyd Langdebeofe.
            
               Linguax, acis, a great ſpeaker, full of wordes.
            
               Lingula, a lytell tungue. alſo a lachet or lingell. alſo Lingua & lingula, doo ſometyme ſygnifye a ſpoone.
            
               Lingulaca, a woman ful of wordes. alſo a fiſhe callyd a ſoole.
            Linio, iui, ire, to annoynte.
            
            
               Lino, ni, ere, to annoynt or laye on ſome thynge that is ſycke. alſo to lyne.
            
               Linoſtrophron, an herbe, whiche is alſo called Marubium, horehounde.
            
               Linozoſtis, an herbe callyd Mercury.
            Linquo, liqui, linquere, to leaue.
            
            
               Lintearius, a mercer of lynnen.
            
               Linteo, onis, a lynnen weauer.
            
               Linteolum, a piece of lynnen clothe.
            
               Linternum, a towne in Campania, where Scipio Aphricanus dyed, and is buryed.
            
               Linternus, a ryuer in Campania.
            
               Linteum, a ſheete. it is alſo taken for all lynnen clothes. ſometyme for ſayles.
            
               Lintres, lyttell botes made of holow trees.
            
               Linum, lynnen.
            
               Linus, the moſt ancient poet, a Theban, whom Vergilius callith the ſonne 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               pollo and Vtania one of the .ix. Muſes.
            
               Linx, a beaſt, which hath the face 
                  〈◊〉
                a lyon, the bodye ſpotted lyke a Panther, 
                  〈◊〉
                is of the greatnes of a doo, whoſe vryne i
                  •
                ſodaynely tourned into a ſtone.
            
               Lipara, an yle by Gre
                  •
               ce. It is alſoo a ſofte playſter.
            
               Liparis, a ryuer in Cilicia.
            
               Lipopſichia, a ſowndynge, where one ſeemeth to be deade.
            
               Lipopthymia, a traunſe.
            
               Lippio, iui, ire, to be porreblynde, or ſandblynd, or dymmeof ſyght.
            
               Lippitudo, the blearenes of the eyen.
            
               Lippus, bleare eyed, hauynge droppyng eyes.
            
               Lipſana, ſcrappes, or leauynge of vytayles, or other thynges.
            
               Liquamen, & liquatum, greace or talowe molten, ſewet.
            
               Liquefacio, cere, to melte.
            
               Liquentia, a ryuer in Lumbardy.
            
               Liqueo, iui, ire, to be liquide or ſoft, as oyle.
            
               Liqueſco, ſcere, to relente.
            
               Liquet, it appereth, it is ſure.
            
               Liquidó, playnly, apparantly, purely.
            
               Liquido, are, to dyſcouer, or make to appere.
            
               Liquidus, da, dum, lyquide, runnyng, and ſofte, ſomtyme pure, alſo proſperous.
            
               Liquo, are, to melt.
            
               Liquo, ere, to runne out, as lykour dothe.
            
               Lira, a rydge of lande, whiche is ouer the furrowe. ſometyme it ſignifieth an harpe:
            
               Lirae, be tryfles or iapes.
            
               Liratim, in rydges.
            
               Liris, a ryuer in Italye, by the towne callyd Minturnae.
            
            
               Liro, are, to make rydges.
            
               Lis, litis, debate, variance, controuerſy.
            
               Litem aeſtimare, to aſſeſſe damages and coſtes for the playntyfe in an action.
            
               Litem conteſtari, I ſuppoſe doth ſygnify as moche as that whiche our lawyers doo ſaye, to enterpleade, whan one whyche is not party to the action, commeth in, or is callyd in, to pleade with the other, to the intent to ſaue his title or intereſt, whiche is ſuppoſed that he hath with them.
            
               Litem perdere, to loſe his action.
            
               Litem ſuam facere, where one medleth in an other mans matter, as it were his owne.
            
               Liſus, a ryuer in Thracia, whyche Herodotus writeth was drunk vp by the army that Xetxes kyng of Perſia ledde into Grece.
            
               Litera, a letter. Literae, a letter or letters that he ſent. ſometyme it ſignifieth ſciences.
            
               Litera ſalutaris, was in the olde tyme, A, as betokenynge abſoluynge. Litera triſtis, B, as ſignifyenge condemnyng.
            
               Literae fugientes, blynde letters, whiche eyther in defaut of the ynke, or of the parchement, or for ancienty, may not be radde.
            
               Literarius, a, um, pertaynynge to letters or ſcyences.
            
               Literate, lyke a lerned man.
            
               Literator, oris, a grammaryan, or a mayſter of grammer.
            
               Literatus, lernyd.
            
               Literatura, grammer, writyng, lernynge.
            
               Literoſus, lettered.
            
               Lithargyrium, lytarge or whyte leade.
            
               Lithargyrus, a ſtone of ſyluer.
            
               Lithiaſis, the griefe of the ſtone.
            
               Lithocolla, a cement, wherwith ſtones are ioyned togither.
            
               Lithoglyphus, a grauer in ſtones.
            
               Lithologema, a heape of ſtones.
            
                
               Lithoſpermon, an herbe which hath ſedes like ſtones, and groweth amonge corne, whyche herbe cureth the ſtone of the bladder. ſome do ſuppoſe it to be grummell.
            
               Lithoſtratus, a place paued with ſquare ſtones.
            
               Lithotomia, a maſons warkehouſe or quary.
            
               Liticen, a blower of a ſmall trumpet.
            
               Litigator, oris, a ſtryuer.
            
               Liugioſus, a, um, full of ſtryfe.
            
               Litigium, a debate or varyance.
            
               Litigo, are, to varye, to ſtryue, to ſue oone an nother.
            
               Lito, tare, to pleaſe god with ſacrifyce, and to optayne my deſyre.
            
               Littoreus, a, um, & littoralis, le, of the ſea ſyde.
            
               Littus, toris, the bankes as welle of the ſea, as of a great ryuer. ſomtyme lande buttynge on the ſea callyd the ſea ſyde.
            
               Lituania, a countrey, which is part of Sarmatia callyd Luten, and ioyneth to Polonia on the northe, and is vnder the kyng of Poole.
            
               Litura, a blottyng or ſtryke through that, whiche is written, cancellynge.
            
               Lituro, are, to blot or ſtrike through, or cancell.
            Litus, ta, tum, enoynted.
            
            
               Lituus, a croked ſtaffe, which the diuinours callyd Augures, helde in theyr handes, whanne they appoynted places in theyr diuination. alſo a ſcepter and a trumpet.
            
               Liueo, ere, to be blacke, to enuy.
            
               Liueſco, ſcere, to enuy.
            
               Liuidus, a, um, he that hathe his ſkynne blacke with beatyng alſo enuious.
            
               Liuius, the prince of latine hyſtoriens.
            
               Liuius Andronicus, was the fyrſte latyn poete whiche wrate comedies or tragedies in latin about the ſeconde warres of Carthage. alſoo he wrate xxii. bookes of the yerely actes of the Romaynes, whiche bookes were callyd Annales.
            
            
               Liuonia, is alſo a parte of Sarmatia beyonde Luten northe, hauynge on the weſte the ſea callyd Germanicum.
            
            
               Liuor, the colour whiche is left on the ſkynne, after beatynge or whyppyng, callyd comonly blacke and blue, ſometyme it is taken for enuy. Liuor edax tibi cuncta negat. The gnawynge enuye denyeth the all thynges. Rabiem liuoris acerbi, Nulla poteſt placare quies, No quyete can contente the ragynge of bytter enuy.
            
               Lix, aſhes.
            
               Lixa, a ſkullyon, whyche caryeth wod or water in an hoſte, or to the kytchen.
            
               Lixabundus, he that for a ſmall rewarde dothe moſte vile ſcruice.
            
               Lixinium, lye made of aſſhes to waſſhe clothes cleane.
            
               Lixo, are, to whette.
            
               Lixos, a towne in Affrica.
         
         
            ¶L ANTE O.
            
               LOBA, a kynde of the grayn callyd Millium, whyche hathe greate ſtalkes ſyxe foote hyght. it is alſoo the leafe whiche groweth nexte the grounde in euery kynde of grayne.
            
               Lobus, the lappe of the eare.
            
               Locarium, the hyre of a houſe or lodging.
            
               Locatarius, he that letteth a howſe or lande, a leſſour.
            Locator, oris, idem.
            
               Locellus, a lyttell place.
            
               Locito, are, to let.
            
               Loco, are, to ſet or laye, as a houſe is ſette in a place, a foundation is layd, alſo to lay vp, as a thynge is to be kepte. alſo to let a thinge to hire, or to rent, to make a leaſe. ſometime to giue in mariage.
            
               Locarefiliam, to beſtowe his doughter in mariage.
            
               Locrenſes, & Locri, people of Locrus. There were alſo people ſo named in Greece.
            
               Locrus, a citie in the vttermoſt parte of Italy, whiche was named Magna Graecia.
            
            
               Loculamēta, places made with bourdes, wherin tame culuers, and other birdes or conies are kept to brede.
            
               Loculatus, ta, tum, diuided into ſundry places.
            
               Loculus, a littell place. alſo a pourſe, an almorye, a littel coffer, a biere whereon deade bodies are borne to be buried.
            
               Locûples, pletis, ryche, abundant, ſufficient.
            
               Locuples fideiuſſor, a ſufficient ſuretie.
            
               Locupleto, are, to make rich of yerely reuenues
            
               Locus, a place, ſomtime a familie or kinred. alſo ſtede, as Loco patris te habeo, I take the in ſtede of my father.
            
               Locus obiurgandi, occaſion to chyde.
            
               Loci, plural. numer. the ſecrete partes of a woman.
            
               Locuſta, a fly with longe hinder legges, which bourneth corne with touchinge of it, and deuoureth the reſidewe. In India be of them thre fote of length, whiche the people of that countrey do eate. it is alſo a ſea fiſhe, like to a creuis, callid a lopſter.
            
               Locutor, & Loculeius, he that ſpeaketh moche, a prater or a 
                  •
               angler.
            Lodex, uel lodix, icis a ſhete.
            
            
               Loedoria, a taunt or reproche in ſcoffynge.
            
               Loelaps, a blaſt of wind tourned from the erth vpwarde.
            
               Log, is the ſame meaſure of the hebrues, that Sextarius atticus, is among the Grekes rede more in Sextarius.
            
            
               Logica, logike one of the liberall ſciences, the
 crafte of reaſonyng or arguyng.
            
               Logion, a place where iuges gyue ſentence, alſo a gatherynge of rente, or other reuenues.
            
               Logodaedalus, a vayne talker, whyche vſeth eloquent wordes without quyckenes of ſentence, or dothe more ſtudy for the aptenes of an oretion, than for the grauite of the ſentēce
            
               Logographi, they whyche doo wryte bokes of accompt.
            
               Logomachia, a contention with wordes, or an vndyſcrete altercation.
            
               Logos, vſed for a latyn word, is taken for tryflynge wordes or vayne language.
            
               Loligo, ginis, a fyſhe whiche hath his head betwene his feete and his bealy, and hath alſo two bones, oone lyke a knyfe, the other lyke apenne.
            
               Lolium, a vitious grayne, callid ray or darnel, whiche commonly groweth amonge wheate, and if it be eaten in hot bread, it maketh the head gyddy, as yf a man were drunke.
            
               Lombricus, a lamprey.
            
               Lomentum, beane meale.
            
               Longa Alba, a citie in Italy.
            
               Longaeuus, longe lyued.
            
               Longanimis, he that ſuffreth longe.
            
               Longanon, a gutte, out of the whyche ordure yſſeweth.
            
               Longe, an aduerbe, ſygnifyeth longe, farre, excedynge.
            
               Longinquus, a, um, farre of, farre, ſtraunge.
            
               Longiſco, ſcere, to be longe.
            Longitudo, dinis, length.
            
            
               Longobardi, Lumbardes.
            
               Longobardia, a regyon of Italy, callyd Lumbardy.
            
               Longum, a longe tyme.
            
               Longurius, a longe polle.
            Longus, a, um, longe.
            
            
               Lopades, a ſhell fyſhe.
            Loquacitas, tatis, babblynge.
            
            
               Loquacito, are, to babble or ſpeake moche.
            
               Loquax, acis, a babblar.
            
               Loquela, ſpeeche.
            
               Loquitor, tari, to ſpeake moche.
            
               Lora, ſiue Lorea, a drynke made of grapes after that they be preſſed, callyd Seconde.
            
               Lorarij, ſeruantes whiche ſerued to bynd men, or to beate theym, whan they were by theyr mayſters commaunded.
            
               Lorica, an haberion, a place made vpon walles lyke an open galery, with grates of tymber or hurdelles, to kepe men from fallyng▪ it is alſo the wall plate, before that morter is layde on it.
            
               Loricatio, wallyng with morter.
            
               Loricatus, armyd with an haberion.
            
               Loricion, a mantell.
            
               Lorico, care, to put on a habergeon.
            
               Loricula, inwarfare is a muniment or fortification, that the beſyegers of cities do make.
            
               Loripes, edis, whoſe feete are as yf they were bounden or gyrte.
            
               Lorum, a thonge of lether, or a colar, or other lyke thyng, wherwith beaſtis are bounden or tyed. ſometyme a whyp wherewith a man or beaſt is whypped.
            
               Lotaringia, a countrey beyonde Pycardy and Normandy.
            
               Lothoringia, a countrey called Lorayn.
            
               Lotium, vryne or pyſſe.
            
               Lotophagi, people in Affrike, whiche do lyue by eatyng onely of a fruite callyd Lotos.
            
               Lotos, & Lotis, tidis, is a notable trec in Affrike, or herbe, of whoſe fruite yf a ſtraunger do eate, he doth incontinently forget his own countrey.
            
               Loxias, one of the names of Apollo.
         
         
            ¶L ANTE V.
            
               LVBENS, lubenter, lubenti animo, with a good wyll, gladly.
            
               Lubentia, & libentia, myrth, pleaſantnes, moſt proprely in wordes.
            
               Lubido pro libido, ſenſualle appetite. Lubido eſt obſeruare quid agat, I haue a deſyre to eſpy what he dothe.
            
               Lubrico, care, to make ſlypper.
            
               Lubricus, ca, cum, ſlypper, waueryng, ſomtyme redy to ſlyppe or ſlyde.
            
               Luca, a citie in Italye, of whiche the inhabytauntes are callyd Lucenſes.
            
            
               Lucae boues, were taken of the olde latyns for elephantes.
            
               Lucani, people of the countrey of Lucania.
            
               Lucania, a countrey belongyng to the royalme of Naples, betwene Poyle and Calaber.
            
               Lucanica, a puddyng made of porke, a ſauſage.
            
               Lucanus, a famous poete, whiche wrate the batayle betwene Ceſar and Pompey.
            
               Lucar, money beſtowed in woodes, dedicate to goddis callyd Luci.
            
            
               Lucaria feſta, feaſtes whyche the Romaynes made in holy woodes.
            
               Lucellum, a lyttell gayne, a ſmall market.
            
               Lucens, that whiche hathe his lyght of an nother thynge.
            Luceo, luxi, lucere, to ſhyne.
            
            
               Luceres, the thyrde part of the people of Rome diſtributed by Tatius and Romulus.
            
               Luceria, a citie of Apulia.
            
               Lucerius, a kynge of Ardea, whiche holpe Romulus agaynſt Tatius.
            
               Lucerna, a lanterne.
            
               Lucernarius, the lanterne bearer.
            
               Lucernula, a ſconſe.
            
               Luceſco, cere, to be bryght or clere as day.
            
                
               Lucetia, one of the names of Iuno.
            
               Lucetius, a name of Iupiter.
            
               Luci, by day.
            
               Lucibile, that whiche is lyght of it ſelfe.
            
               Lucido, are, to make clere or to gyue lyght.
            Lucidus, da, dum, clere.
            
            
               Lucifer, the day ſterre.
            Lucifico, care, idem quod lucido.
            
               Lucifigus, ga, whyche fleeth frome lyghte, and delyteth in darkenes.
            
               Lucigena, ingendred of lyght.
            
               Lucilius, the name of an olde poete.
            
               Lucina, one of the names of the moone, callyd alſo the goddeſſe of byrthe.
            
               Lucini, they whyche haue lyttell eyen, and ſmal ſyght.
            
               Lucius, a mans name.
            
               Lucretilis, an hyl in the cuntrey of the Sabines
            
               Lucrifuga, he that fleeth from lucre or gaynes.
            
               Lucrinus, a mere or great water in Campania.
            
               Lucrio, onis, a couetous manne, an inordinate gayner.
            
               Lucror, aris, ari, to gayne or to wynne.
            
               Lucrum, lucre or gayne.
            
               Lucta, wraſtlynge.
            
               Luctatius Catulus, a citeſen of Rome.
            
               Luctiferum, cauſe of waylynge.
            Luctifieus, ca, cum, idem.
            
               Luctitor, tari, to wraſtle ofte.
            Lucto, idem, quod Luctor.
            Luctor, aris, ari to wraſtle.
            
            Luctuoſus, a, um, lamentable.
            
            
               Luctus, tus, wepyng and waylynge, the habite of mournynge.
            
               Lucubro, are, to make any thīg by candel light.
            
               Luculentè, clerely.
            
               Luculente uendere, to ſell at a high price.
            
               Luculenter, gentylly, proprely.
            
               Luculenter ſcribere, to write honeſtely and gentylly.
            
               Luculentus, ta, tum, full of lyght, clere.
            
               Luculenta foemina, a very fayre woman.
            
               Luculenta plaga, a great wounde.
            
               Luculentae diuitiae, abundant ryches.
            
               Luculentus author, he that writeth in a gentyll ſtyls.
            
               Luculentus homo, a famous man.
            
               Lucullus, the name of a noble Romayne.
            
               Lucus, a hygh and thycke woode. ſometyme it ſygnifieth lyght, whan it is of the fourth declination. it is alſo a citie by Spayn by Co
                  •
               
               poſtella, whiche is nowe callyd Lucenſis.
            
            
               Ludia, a daunſynge or mery wench full of ſport.
            
               Ludibriū, a mock, or any thyng that is mocked.
            
               Ludibundus, a, um, playeng, or full of play.
            
               Ludicrum, any play or paſtyme, or an enterlude
            
               Ludicrus, cra, crū, pertaynyng to play or myrth.
            
               Ludifico, care, to mocke.
            
               Ludij, & Ludiones, players in enterludes or ſtage playes.
            Ludius, & ludio, onis, a player.
            
            
               Ludo, ſi, dere, to playe, to mocke or deceyue in game.
            
               Ludere in numerum, to daunſe meaſure.
            
               Ludere operam, to loſe his labour.
            
               Ludere otium, to paſſe the tyme.
            
               Ludus, play in actes, myrth in wordes, alſoo a ſchole or place of exercyſe.
            
               Ludos aliquem facere, to mocke one.
            
               Ludi, in the plurell noumber be taken for thoſe thynges whiche we call ſyghtes, as the pageantes at London on Mydſomer nyght. ſometyme for ſuche triumphes as be made by kinges with iuſtynge and turnayenge.
            
               Ludi Circenſes, was runnynge with charyottes in the great compaſſed place at Rome callyd Circus.
            
            
               Ludi compitālitij, callid alſo Ludi Liberales, were playes made in hyghe wayes to the honour of Bacchus callyd alſo Liber.
            
            
               Ludi Florales, were abhominable playes vſed at Rome in the preſence of all the people, in the whiche played onely common women al naked in wanton wordes and motions, ſatisfienge the peoples deteſtable appetites.
            
               Ludi gladiatorij, were farre from all humanitie, and a ſpectakle of crueltie, for in them men without quarell and harneys faughte in great numbers with weapon, eche couetyng to kyll other, and to ſhew al poyntes of beaſtly crueltie dyuerſe of theym hauynge nettes made of cordes to drawe vnto them theyr aduerſaries.
            
               Ludi gymnici, were exerciſes in rounnyng, leapyng, throwyng of the darte or ſtone, and wraſtelynge.
            
               Ludi Lupercales, wherin gentylmens ſonnes beyng naked, and hauynge lytle whyppes in theyr handes, ranne about beatynge euerye man that they met laughynge vpon them.
            
               Ludi Megalenſes, were playes made to the honour of her whyche was callyd mother of goddis.
            
               Luentinum, Powes lande in wales.
            
               Lues, peſtilence in men, murtayn in beaſtes.
            
               Lugdunum a citie iu Fraunce callyd Lyons.
            
               Lugeo, luxi, lugêre, to mourne, to lament.
            
               Lugodinum, a citie in Holland callyd Vtricht, in latyn alſo Traiectum.
            
            
               Lugûbris, bre, pertainyng to mourning.
            
               Veſtis lugubris, a mourning garment.
            
               Luma, a bremble.
            
               Lumbago, ginis, feblenes of the loynes.
            
               Lumbare, breches of hoſen.
            
               Lumbi, the loynes.
            
               Lumbrici, littell fyſſhes taken in ſmalle ryuers which ar like to lampurnes, but they be moche leſſe, and ſomewhat yelowe, and are callyd
 in wyltſhire, prides.
            Lumen, luminis, lyght.
            
            
               Lumina praeferre, to inſpire.
            
               Luminibus obſtruere, to ſtop vp the lyghte, to let that the lyght may not com into a hous
            
               Luminare, that whyche gyueth lyght.
            
               Luminoſus, a, um, full of lyght.
            
               Luna, the moone.
            
               Lunaris, re, pertaynyng to the moone.
            
               Lunaticus, he that is made or ſyck at a certayn tyme of the moone.
            
               Lunatus, ta, tum, lyke the moone.
            
               Luo, ere, to ſuffer punyſhement or deathe.
            
               Luere capite, to haue the head ſtriken of.
            
               Lupa, a female wolfe. alſo an harlot.
            
               Lupanar, a brothell houſe.
            
               Lupanaris, re, pertayning to a brothell houſe.
            
               Lupanarium, a brothelhouſe.
            
               Lupari, to meddle with common harlottes.
            
               Luparius, a hunter of wolfes.
            
               Lupatum, a harde bytte.
            
               Lupercal, a place dedicate to Pan, the god of ſhepeherdes.
            
               Lupercalia, ſacriſices and plays made to Pan.
            
               Luperci, miniſters of that ſolemnitie.
            
               Lupinus, a kynde of poulſe corne hauynge one ſtalke, the leafe in fyue diuiſions, the coddes creueſed about, hauyng in it fyue or ſyx graines harde brode and redde. They be cōmune in France and Italy, but here vneth knowē.
            
               Lupinus, na, num, of a wolfe.
            
               Lupulus, & Lupus ſalictarius, an herbe callyd hoppes, wherwith biere is brued.
            
               Lupus, a wolfe. alſo a bytte for a horſe. alſoo a hoke to drawe vp thynges out of a pytte. alſo a kynde of ſpyders. alſo a fyſhe whiche ſome men take to be a pyke.
            
               Lupus eſt in fabula, a prouerbe, whan he cōmeth whiche is ſpoken of.
            
               Lupum auribus tenere, a prouerbe in thinges that be daungerouſe, eyther to retayne or to lette go.
            
               Lura, the mouth of a bottell.
            
               Lurco, care, to eate rauenouſely.
            
               Lurco, onis, a deuourer of his owne ſubſtance.
            
               Luridus, da, dum, pale of colour.
            
               Luſcinia, a nyghtyngale.
            
               Luſcioſus, porreblynde. Luſcio, is the diſeaſe.
            
               Luſcitus, he that ſeeth playnly by nyght.
            
               Luſcus, porreblynde. ſometyme a man hauynge but one eye.
            
               Luſitania, the realme callyd Portugall.
            
               Luſito, tare, to play often.
            
               Luſorius, a, um, pertaynyng to play.
            
               Luſtralis, le, pertayning to ryotte and lecherye. ſometyme a thynge done euery fyfth yere.
            
               Luſtrici dies, the day whan a chylde is fyrſt named, whiche in men chyldren was the nynthe day, in women chyldren it was the .viii. day, It may nowe be vſed for the daye of chriſtenyng of chyldren.
            
               Luſtro, are, to go about in circuite. It was alſo amonge the olde Romayns, to leade about an army, a ſhepe, a ſow, and thre bulles, thin kyng that therby the hoſt was purged of ſuche greuous offence as had ben committed agaynſte their goddis. alſo to conſyder in the mynde, to ſhadowe, to beholde about.
            
               Luſtror, aris, ari, to ſerche out.
            
               Luſtrum, a denne or caue of wylde beaſtes in woodes, an hyd place and vile, a hous where gluttony and lechery is haunted. alſo the hantyng of the ſame vices. ſomtyme it ſignifieth the ſpace of fyue yeres. alſo the generall purgation of the cite by ſacrifyce euery fift yere.
            
               Luter, eris, a cup wherin wyne is delayde with water.
            
               Luteola, a lyttell floure of the colour of yelowe in greatnes and ſauoure not moche vnlyke a violette.
            
               Luteſco, ſcere, to be clay.
            
               Lutetia, the citie of Parys in Fraunce.
            
               Luteum oui, the yolke of an egge.
            
               Luteus color, the colour of yelowe, approching toward red, of the colour of the yolke of an egge, or of waxe newe made.
            
               Luto, are, to clay.
            
               Lutra, ſiue Lytra, a beuar, or a beaſt moche lyke to it, whiche gnaweth trees aſunder, and dothe haunte greate waters, and lyueth like an otter.
            
               Lutum, clay.
            Lux, lucis, light.
            
            
               Luxatus, whoſe bones are out of ioynt.
            
               Luxo, are, to louſe or make louſe.
            
               Luxurio, ire, to excede, to abounde more than is neceſſary in the body or perſonage.
            
               Luxurior, aris, ari, to abunde exceſſiuely in thinges concernyng the mynde or goodes. alſo to be wanton with to moch welth or proſperitie
            
               Luxurioſus, to proſperous, or lyuyng in to moche pleaſure.
            
               Luxurioſus, a, um, excedyng in abundance.
            
               Luxus, Luxuria, & Luxuries, all ſuperfluitie or exceſſe, as well in carnal pleſure, as in ſumptuous fare, apparell, or buyldyng.
         
         
            ¶L ANTE Y.
            
               LYAEVS, one of the names of Bacchꝰ, callyd god of wynes.
            
               Lycaeus, a mountayne in the countrey of Archadia.
            
               Lycaeum, was the ſchole of Ariſtotle in Athens
            
               Lycaon, the kyng of Archadia, whom Iupiter tourned into a wolfe.
            
               Lycaones, people in Aſia the leſſe, nere to Lycia as wryteth Ptholome.
            
                
               Lycaonia, a countrey in Aſia: after ſome wryters it is a part of Archadia.
            
               Lycaſtus, a citie of Candy.
            
               Lychnis, or Lychnitis, an herbe whoſe flowre ſhyneth by nyght, and fyrſt ſpringeth, and longeſt dureth: which in drynke helpeth theym that are ſtungen with the Scorpyon.
            
               Lychnites, whyte marble.
            
               Lychnobij, they whiche do tourne the day into nyght, and the nyght into day.
            
               Lychnus, a matche of a candell. ſometyme the ſelfe candell.
            
               Lycia, a countreye in Aſia the laſſe, betweene Pamphiliam and Cariam, in the whiche ar greate cities Patara and Myra. ſometyme there were .lxx. cities.
            
               Lycidas, the name of a Centaure, and of a ſheparde in Virgile.
            
               Lycion, a thynge made with the iuyce of an herbe, wherwith ſoore eyes be cured.
            
               Lyciſca, a dogge comen of a wolfe and a dogge.
            
               Lycius, one of the names of Apollo.
            
               Lycoctones, a venemous herbe called alſoo Aſconitum.
            
            
               Lycurgus, a kyng of the Lacedemonians, whiche gaue to them theyr fyrſt lawes.
            
               Lycus, a ryuer in the countrey of Ceſaria.
            
               Lydia, a countrey in Aſia, on the eaſt ioynynge to Phrigia, on the northe to Myſia, on the ſouth vpon part of Caria. In this region is the hyl callyd Emolus, out of the which commeth the ryche ryuer callyd Pactolus▪
                Reade of them in theyr owne places.
            
               Lydi mali poſt hos Aegyptij, A prouerbe applyed where two yll perſons be comparyd togyther, and the one beynge founde verye vngracyouſe, the other deſerueth the leſſe dyſprayſe.
            
               Lydius lapis, a touche ſtone wherewith the fynenes and courſenes of golde is tryed. it is alſoo vſed ſometyme for a prouerbe, applyed to theym whyche haue a quycke and exacte iugement.
            
               Lydus, a, 3
                     •
                  m, of the countrey of Lydia.
            
               Lyenteria, or Lienteria, for I fynde it wrytten ſometyme with Y, ſomtyme with I, is a fl
                  ••
               e of meat vndigeſted ſent forth in the ſame qualities that they were receyued, without alteration in coloure, lykour, or ſauour. Of this ſyckenes be two kyndes, The one (as Paulꝰ writeth) commeth of the exulceration of the bowels, that is to ſaye woundes or ſoores in them, or of other dyſtillations or reumes. The other kynde commeth of debilytie of the powers which ſhuld tetayn
                  •
                in the ſtomak that whyche ſhulde ſerue for nouryſſhement. Cauſes of this ſickenes be twelue. The qualitie of the meate receyued, the quantitie of that which annoyeth oppreſſyng the ſtomak, and infeblinge his vertue retentiue, moch effuſyon of melancoly to the mouth of the ſtomacke, moche and laborious ſterynge immediately after meales, the ſtomake being full, moche drynke with meate or after, cauſynge the meate to runne downe to haſtily, lacke of order in catynge: reume deſcendyng into the ſtomacke, moche fleume gathered in the ſtomake and bowels, feblenes in digeſtion, and the vertue retentiue in the ſtomake, debylitie in the vertue attractiue in the lyuer by reaſon of opylations, an inward ſore by the touchyng wherof, the meate ſlyppeth awaye, by cloſenes of the poores and paſſages of the body, wherby al ſuperfluites be turned inward
            
               Lygdamus, a Sicilian of the citie of Syracuſis, a puiſſaunt wraſtlar, whoſe bones after his death were founde to haue no marrowe.
            
               Lympha, water.
            
               Lymphaticus, a madde man, whiche lyke to a wood dogge, runneth hyther and thyther.
            
               Lympidus, a, um, clere, ſmothe.
            
               Lynceus, was a man, who (as Varro writeth) coulde ſee ſhyppes on the ſea .Cxxx. myles frō hym, and dyd number them. And ſom wrate that he coulde ſee through a wall, and therefore they whiche haue verye ſharpe ſyghtes, be ſayde to haue Lynceos oculos, the eyen of Lynceus.
            
            
               Lyndus, a citie at the Rhodes, where they dyd ſacrifice to Hercules with reprochis & curſis
            
               Lynter, eris, a cockbote.
            
               Lynx, cis, a beaſt lyke to a wolfe, hauing many ſpottes, whoſe ſyght dothe perce all thinges. it is alſo a byrde whyche hath a tungue lyke a ſerpent.
            
               Lyra, a harpe.
            
               Lyricen, cinis, an harper.
            
               Lyſander, kynge of Lacedemonia. Whan it was layde to hym for a reproche, that he dyd more by ſubtiltie than by prowes, He anſwered in this wyſe, where the lyons ſkyn dothe not profyte, a man muſte ſowe or tye a foxes ſkynne to it. Not withſtandynge in any noble man that practiſe is ſeldom cōmended.
            
               Lyſanias, an oratour of Grece.
            
               Lyſias, an oratour moſte pleaſaunt, of whome Quint▪ ſpeaketh.
            
               Lyſimachia, a citie in Ponto, whiche fel down with an erthquake.
            
               Lyſimachium, is thought of Mainardus to be the herbe whiche we call marygouldes. Leonicenus taketh it to be that whyche dyers do occupy, and is callyd alſo Lutea & Corneola. Whervnto Ruellius accordeth and ſayth, it is that wherwith clothes are dyed greene. By his deſcription it is the wede callyd wod waxen growynge in paſtures ſomewhat lyke vnto brome with ſmall yelow floures, which
 is ſo bytter that no beaſt wyll eate of it.
            
               Lyſimachus, a noble man of Macedonye, the ſcholer of Caliſthenes, and one of the moſte valyant capitaynes of Alexander.
            
               Lyſippus, an excellent karuer.
            
               Lyſius, a ryuer of Archady.
            
               Lytra, a wourme in a doggues tungue.
         
         
            ¶M ANTE A.
            
               
                  MACARIVS, THE name of a man. In latyn it ſygnifieth bleſſed.
            
               Macedo, onis, a manne or woman of Macedony.
            
               Macedonia, a royalme in Grece, fyrſt callyd Emathia. On the north it boū
               deth (as Ptholomeus writeth) vpon the ſydes of Dalmatia, Meſia ſuperior, & Thracia, on the weſt it ſtretcheth to the ſea callyd Ionium. Pius deſcribeth it to be ioyned on the ſouth and weſte to Thracia, and that the ſouth ſyde lyeth on the backes of Theſſalia and Magneſia: the north on Paeonia & Paphlagonia, that it hath alſo on the ſouth Epirus, on the northe Illiria, whiche varyeth not moche from Solinus, Who ſayth moreouer, that it is diuided from Thracia with the ryuer callyd Strimon.
            Macedonicus, ca, cum, of Macedony.
            
            
               Macellarius, a vyttaylour or ſellar of al maner of vyttayle.
            
               Mecellum, a place where all maner of vitayle to ſolde.
            
               Macellus, is ſometyme taken for a leane man.
            Maceo, & Maceſco, ſcere, to be leane.
            
            Macer, cra, crum, leane.
            
            
               Macer Aemilius, an olde poete whiche was in the time whā Ouidius was, who as he ſaith wrate of byrdes in verſes, alſo of the vertues of herbes, but it was not that Macer, whoſe warkes we nowe haue of the vertues of herbes, but rather he, vnto whome the yonger Pliny prouoked to write ſome thyng lyke to his vnkle. Fynally that lytell boke of herbes is right profitable in diuers places to be kū
               ned by harte of a yonge ſcholer whiche delyteth in that matter, not withſtāding the fyrſt Macer wrate more eloquētly, & is comended therfore of Quintilianus. He wrate alſo of the batayl of Troy, & of venemous beaſtes.
            
               Macer, uel Macis, is nowe in doubte whither it be the ſpice commonly callyd macis, whiche is a rynde about the nutmyg, foraſmoche as Dioſcorides writeth of Macer, where he neuer made mention of nutmyg. And Plinye ſayth, that Macer is the rynde of a certayne rote of a tree of the ſame name. And alſo Dioſcorides ſayth that it is a thycke rynd, and moche ſtraynyng the tungue, whiche taſte is not perceyued in our macis, and they are alſo very thyn. And Galene calleth them dry in the thyrde degree, and equall in heate & cold, but we fynde them hot in taſte. And Auicene affirmeth them to be hot and dry in the ſecō
               
                  •
                degree, which is confirmed by Conſtantine, who ſaith, that they be rīdes of the boughes of the trees that beare nutmygges.
            
               Macereſco, ſcere, to make ſoft with lyeng long in lycour.
            
               Maceries, & maceria, a wall of ſtone without morter, made in the ſteede of an hedge. alſoo leanneſſe.
            
               Macero, are, ſpoken of the bodye, ſygnifieth to make leane or thynne, or ſoft by ſtepyng in licour, referred to the mynde, it ſignifyeth to vexe or inquiete.
            
               Machabaeus, the fyrſte of that name, was Iudas the thyrde ſonne of Mathathias the Iewe, he was a valyant man in his faythe and of an inuincible courage. In ſo moch as with thre thouſand men only he vanquyſhed Lyſias the lieutenāt of kyng Antiochus end his ſonne, & with them forty thouſand foote men, and .vii. thouſande horſemen, and ſlewe of them fyue thouſande. Afterwarde in Galilea he ſlewe of the hoſt of Timotheus an other of the kynges capytayns fyrſt thre thouſande, and afterward eyght thouſand. After warde by a vyllage callyd Adaſſis, he with one thouſande faught with Nycanor a capitayn of kyng Demetrius and nyne thouſand with hym, at the whyche battayle Nicanor was ſlayne, and of the nyne thouſand almoſt none eſcaped. Fynally where to moche truſtyng to his proſperytie in warres, in going agaynſt Bacchis a capitayn of kyng Demetriꝰ hauyng a great hoſt, & takyng with him but two thouſande, of the whiche at the laſt remayned only with him but eight hundred, he faught vntyl it was night, & made a wonderfull ſlaughter of enemies. But whyles he enforced hymſelf to come to Bacchis, which was on the right corner of the battayle, and there faughte ſo nobly, that he ſcattered that corner, ſleinge many about hym. Fynally being enuyronned with theym that were in the left corner, he being ſtryken with many woū
               des, was ſlayne with moche difficultie, Afore thincarnation of Chriſt about .CCCv. yeres
            
               Machaera, a ſworde.
            
               Macherophorus, a ſworde bearer.
            
               Machaeropios, a cutlar, or a bladeſmyth.
            
               Machaon, the ſonne of Eſculapius, an excellēt
 
               Machina, a thyng craftily inuented, or a crafty inuention, an engyne.
            
               Machinor, aris, ari, to inuent craftyly, to diuiſe to imagyne.
            Macidatus, ta, tum, wette.
            
            Macies, & Macritudo, leanneſſe.
            
            
               Macilentus, leane.
            
               Macio, aui, are, to make leane.
            
               Macra, a ryuer whiche rounneth betwene the mountaynes of Liguria.
            
               Macreo, ere, to be leane.
            
               Macreſco, ſcere, to waxe leane.
            
               Macrobii, people in Affrike, which of Pomponius be alſo callyd Meroeni, whoſe countrey is inuyronned with the ryuer of Nilus lyke an yle. They lyue halfe as moche lenga
                  •
                as men do here, and be fayre and goodly perſonages, reuerend and louers of vertue. There is more golde than in Perſia, & therfore that whiche is leſſe precious they do more eſteme, decking them ſelfes with ornamentes of copper and braſſe, and makyng gyues of golde. They lyue commonly .Cxx. yeres, & do waſhe theym ſelues in a fountayne, whyche cauſeth theyr bodyes to ſmelle lyke vnto violettes.
            
               Macrobius, the name of a great lerned man.
            
               Macrochera, a garment with longe ſleues.
            
               Macrochie, he that hath longe handes.
            
               Macteae, precyous meates.
            
               Macticus, he whiche hath great chekes, and a gapynge mouthe.
            
               Macto, are, to ſlea or kylle alſo to beate. ſometyme to honour. alſo to increaſe. Ferunt laudibus, mactant honoribus, They extol with prayſyng, they increaſe in honour.
            Mactare deos, for Mactare dijs.
            
               Macte animi, be of good courage.
            
               Macte uirtutis & uirtute, procede in vertue, goo forthe and doo well.
            
               Macti ingenio, men of excellent wyttes.
            
               Mactra, an hutche wherin breade is put, ſome do call it a brake wherwith dow is wrought.
            
               Macula, a ſpotte, a blemyſh, alſo infamy or reproche. Sometyme the maſſhe of a nette or hole betwene the thredes. alſo a net, ymages wrought in marble.
            
               Maculo, are, to ſpotte or make fowle.
            
               Maculoſus, ſpotty, vncleane or foule.
            
               Madagaſtar, an yle beyonde the furtheſt parte of Ethiope ſouthe, and was founden by the Portugalles in the tyme of Emanuel kynge of Portugall. This yle is in circuite foure thouſande myles, and is very ryche. Therin be great olyfantes, lyons, panthers, and ſuch other beaſtes, the inhabitantes be of Macho metes ſecte.
            
               Madaura, a citie ſet in the boundes of Getulia and Numidia.
            
               Madefacio, cere, to weate, to waſhe, to bayne.
            
               Madefio, fieri, to be waſhed.
            
               Madeo, dere, to be wette or waſhed.
            
               Madeſco, ſcere, to ſweat or be through wette.
            
               Madian, a citie beyonde Arabia on the ſouthe part in the deſert of the Saraſins, agaynſte the eaſte part of the redde ſea.
            
               Madido, dare, to make wette.
            
               Madidus, da, dum, wete or waſhed with licour
            
               Madifico, facere, to make wette.
            
               Mador, oris, moyſture, ſomtyme ſweatte.
            
               Mados, a certayne kynde of whyte vynes.
            
               Madulſa, drunken.
            
               Maeander, a ryuer of the countrey of Phrigia, whiche hath many tournynges and wyndinges, and of that all croked and ſubtylle tournyng wayes, meanes, and diuyſes, be callyd
            
               Maeandri. There is alſo of that name a moū
               tayne in India.
            
               Maedia, a citie in the realme of Thracia.
            
               Maee, a kynde of great crabbes of the ſea.
            
               Maemacreticon, the moneth of September.
            
               Maenala uel Maenalus, a hyghe mountayne in Archadia.
            
               Maenalius, for Archadicus, therfore Maenaliū carmen is taken for an inchauntment. Maenalius aper, for a bore of Archadia.
            
               Maenapij, Gellars, or people of Gellarlande.
            
               Maenas, adis, a fyſhe. Loke after in Mena.
            
            
               Maenades, women whiche dyd alwaye folowe Bacchus, runnyng aboute with theyr heare ſcattered lyke madde women.
            
               Maenoles, one of the names of Bacchus.
            
               Maeonia, is a countrey in Aſia the leſſe, callyd alſo Lidia.
            
               Maeonius, a, um, of Maeonia. Homere the excellent poete was named Maeonius, eyther bycauſe that he was borne in that countrey, or els that his fathers name was Maeon.
            
            
               Maeotis, a greate mere in the countrey of Scithia, whiche is alway froſen.
            
               Maeotidis paludes, fennes whervnto the ſayd ryuer runneth.
            Maereo, es, loke after in Mereo & Mereor.
            
               Maero, are, to make heuy.
            
               Maeror, heuynes with wepynge.
            Maeſtitia, & Maeſtitudo, heuyneſſe.
            
            Maeſto, & Maeſtifico, care, to make heuy.
            
            Maeſtus, ta, tum, ſorowfull.
            
            
               Magalia, vyllages.
            
               Magi, among the Caldeys and Perſians were men of excellent knowlege in philoſophy naturall and Mathematicall, and knewe the hyd vertues and operations of thynges, and the ſonnes of the kynges of Perſia, were taught by them to gouern and minyſter their publike weale, accordynge to the fourme of the vnyuerſall order and gouernaunce of the celeſtiall worlde. Suche were Magi, or the thre kynges, which came and ſought Chriſt,
 and offred to hym golde, myrre, and frankincenſe, adaptyng their preſent vnto the double nature of him, vnto whom they gaue it, who was bothe god and man, kynge, and prieſte. Nowe is that name improperlye vſed for a wytche, an inchaunter, a worker with yl ſpirites, whiche may be better callyd Venefica, Necromanticus, Incantatores, or other names, as before and after be reherſed.
            
               Magia, magike, whiche is in two ſortes: one is the ſecrete knowledge of the naturall qualities and hyd operations and cauſes of thinges, and that is callyd Magia naturalis, naturall magike. An other is ſuperſtitious and dyuelliſhe, callyd wytchcraft, ſorcery, or other lyke deteſtable names, whiche is vnlefull by the lawes of god and man.
            
               Magicus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to magike.
            
               Magida, a kynde of breade.
            
               Magidae, kytchen bourdes, or inſtrumentes pertaynyng to the kytchen.
            Maginor, aris, ari, to tryfle.
            
            
               Magis, more.
            
               Magiſter, ſtri, a mayſter or teacher of ſciences.
            
               Magiſter populi, the chiefe ruler of the people, by the whyche name the Dictatour amonge the Romanes was callyd.
            
               Magiſter ſcriniorum, an officer lyke to the maſter of the rolles.
            
               Magiſter ſcripturae, ſemeth to be a general ſurueyour.
            
               Magiſterium, the dignitie or office of a maiſter
            
               Magiſtratus, tus, a great officer, a man hauing auctoritie in gouernaunce of people. all be it that ſome haue more authoritie by the lawes and ſome haue leſſe.
            
               Magiſtro, are, to rule.
            
               Magmata, confections made of dyuers ſwete ſpices in paſte onely for the ſauour, as pomanders and waſhyng balles. ſometyme it is taken for the dregges of ſwete oyles.
            
               Magna Graecia, that part of Italy from Laurentum to Cumas.
            
               Magnalia, great thynges to be wondered at.
            
               Magnanimitas, tatis, valiantnes of courage or harte, magnanimitie.
            
               Magnarius, a great marchant.
            
               Magnas, atis, & Magnatus, a noble man, a mā of great eſtimation.
            
               Magnes, etis, the lode ſtone that hath the vertue to drawe to hym yron, whiche vnproprely we vſe to call Adamant, where Adamas is the dyamonde, as before is declared.
            
               Magneſia, a part of Macedonia.
            
               Magna, at a great price.
            
               Magnificentia, a dyſpoſition and adminiſtration in doinge or makyng of greate thynges and ſumptuous.
            
               Magnifico, are, to extolle.
            
               Magnificus, he that dothe great thynges.
            Magnus, a, um, great.
            
            
               Magog, the ſonne of Iapheth.
            
               Maguderis, a kynde of colewortes.
            
               Mahumethes, or Mahumetha, was borne in Arabia (as the more part do write) of a poore houſe or family, and fyrſt was a byer and ſellar of camelles, afterwarde felle in acquayntance with a munke named Sergius, which was an heretike, by whoſe meanes he declared him ſelf to be a prophete, and toke on him to refourme as well the old lawe as the new lawe, and makynge other lawes, whyche for the pleaſantnes of them allured to them moche people, ſo that gatherynge to hym a great hoſte, fyrſte waſted Syria, and wan Damaſcum the chief citie therof. And hauing in his ayde the Arabians callyd Scenitae, a valiant people (who had diſpleaſure agaynſte themperour Heraclius, bycauſe he payde not to them theyr wages) he wan other great royalmes. And at the age of .xl. yeres dyed, as ſome do ſuppoſe in the falling ſyckenes, whiche he longe tyme dydde dyſſemble, faynynge that the angell Gabriell was than ſent vnto hym in meſſage, whoſe bryghtnes he mought not ſuſtayne. He was buried at Medina, thre dayes iourneye from the redde ſea, an .C. miles from Mecha, wher as is the chief temple of his lawe. He was after the incarnation of Chriſt. Dv. yeres.
            
               Maia, the mother of Mercurius.
            
               Maialis, a barowe hogge.
            
               Maieſtas, tatis, maieſtie, the greatnes, dignitie, or excellent eſtimation or honour of a kynge. Amonge the olde Romans it was the power and authoritie of the people of Rome, vnto whom Appellation (callyd Prouocatio) was from all other dignities. The dignitie of the Senate was callyd the authoritie of the Senate. Tantus autem conſenſus municipiorum, coloniarum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   prouinciae Galliae, ut omnes ad authoritatem huius ordinis maieſtatem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Pop. Ro. defendendā conſpiraſſe uideantur. There is nowe ſuch agrement of wylles of the townes confederat and ſubiect vnto vs in the partes of Fraunce gouerned by vs, that all menne there ſeme to conſpyre, howe they may defend the authoritie of this Senate, and alſo the maieſtie of the people of Rome.
            
               Maieſtas imminuta, where any man goth about to derogate any thing of the kinges authoritie royal, as alſo of the empire and high power of the people of Rome. It may be taken for treaſon. Si maieſtas eſt amplitudo ac dignitas ciuitatis, is eam minuit, qui exercitum hoſtibus Pop. Ro. tradidit, If maieſty be the honour and authoritie of this citie, he
 goeth about to appayre it, whiche hath deliuered the hoſte to the ennemies of the people of Rome. Alſo de partitione oratoria. Maieſtas eſt in imperij at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Pop. Ro. dignitate, quam minuit is qui per uim multitudinē ad ſeditionem uocauit, Maieſtye is in the authoritie of the empyre and people of Rome, agaynſt whom he plainly committeth treaſon, who ſo euer he be that violentely prouoketh people to a ſedition. For the worde Minuere maieſtatem, the later writers vſyd Laedere maieſtatem.
            
            
               Maieſtatis crimen, is treaſon againſt a king, it was amonge the Romaynes conſpiracy agaynſt the ſenate and people, whiche was alſo callyd Perduellio, and of hyſtorians is named Coniuratio, and it is more than Maieſtas imminuta, for therin onely they do derogate or take away ſome part of the royal authoritie or honour due to the perſone or citie, in the other they endeuour theym to diſtroye them vtterly, or to brynge them in ſubiection. Maieſtatem conſeruare, to haue or retein ſtyl the dignite of an emperour or kyng, or people in one lyke honour and reuerence.
            
               Maieſtatem conſtituere, to preſerue authoritie that it decay not, but to retayne ſtylle the eſtimation therof.
            Maieſtatem ſoluere, idem quod imminuere.
            Maior, oris, greatter.
            
            
               Maiorana, an herbe callyd Maioram.
            
               Maiores, auncetours, progenitours.
            
               Maiorina, a kynd of olyues whiche be not ripe before the ſyxt Idus of February.
            
               Maius, the moneth of May.
            Mala aurea, orenges.
            
            
               Malaca, a citie in Spayne an other in Inde.
            
               Malache, malaches, a kynde of malowes, the ſtalke wherof doth growe into the greatnes of a tree.
            
               Malachites, a ſtone of a darke grene colour.
            
               Malaciſſo, are, to knede or make ſofte.
            
               Malacia, caulme of the ſea. alſoo the griefe of the ſtomacke, not ſuſtaynynge meate, abhorrynge all thynges, as a woman with chylde. Somme doo call it the abhomination of the ſtomacke.
            
               Malacoſtracha, ſofte as fyſſhe without ſhelles.
            Malacus, ca, cum, ſofte.
            
            
               Malagma, tis, a mollifienge playſter, wherby harde impoſtumes be made ſoft or rype.
            
               Malaſſo, are, to make ſofte or rype. alſoo to exercyſe.
            
               Male, yll, vnhappyly, vncommodiouſely, miſcheuouſely.
            
               Male acceptus, ylle intreated, yll handeled, ſhrewdely welcome.
            
               Male accipere, to intreate one yll.
            
               Male accipere uerbis, to gyue ylle language to one.
            
               Male audire, to be yll reported of, to haue an yll name.
            
               Male cadere, to chaunce yll.
            
               Male cogitare de aliquo, to haue yll opinyon of one.
            
               Male conciliatus, he on whome a man hathe loſte all that he hath beſtowed. Fugitiue pro di, male conciliate, Come forthe my ther, on whom I haue loſte all that thou coſteſt me.
            
               Male formido, I am yll or ſore aferde.
            
               Male maceror, I am yl vexid, I am yl at eſe.
            
               Male me habeo, I am ſycke.
            
               Male me haber haec res, I am ſory or ylle apayde for that matter, or that matter greueth me ſoore.
            
               Male mereri, to dodiſpleaſure to one, to deſerue diſpleaſure.
            
               Male meritus eſt de me, he hath yll intreated me, or hath done me diſpleaſure.
            
               Male metuo, I am yll aferde.
            
               Male moratus, yll manerde.
            
               Male morigerus, diſobedient, or frowarde
            
               Male odi, I hate deadly.
            
               Male optare, to curſe.
            
               Male precare, to aſke a vengeance.
            
               Male 
                     •
                  uada, ſhe that gyueth ſhrewd counſell.
            
               Male uertar illi, god ſende hym yuell lucke therof, yll may he broke it.
            
               Malea, a promontorye or hylle lyenge into the ſea by Laconia, whyche is daungerouſe for ſhyppes to paſſe by.
            
               Maledicentia, detraction, yll reporte.
            Maledico, xi, cere, to curſe.
            
            
               Maledicus, yll tunged, or he that ſpeaketh ylle of euery man.
            
               Malefica, a wytche, whiche with ſorcery dothe hurte to men or beaſtes.
            
               Maleficus, a harme doer.
            
               Malefice, myſcheuouſly, harmefully.
            
               Maleficium, & Maleficentia, damage, wrong, diſpleaſure, hurt, a myſcheuous dede.
            Maleloqui, & maledicere, to curſe.
            
            
               Maleuolentia, walyce, yll wylle.
            
               Maleuolus, malycious.
            
               Maliacum mare, the ſea about Theſſalia.
            
               Malicorium, the rynde of a pomegranade.
            
               Malignè, enuiouſly, diſdaynfully, maliciouſely.
            
               Malignitas, tatis, wyckednes, malignitie, enuy, malyce, vnprofitablenes, the vice contrary to liberalitie.
            
               Malignor, & maligno, to beare malyce, to be hatefull.
            
               Malignus, a, um, wycked, cruell, enuyous, and couetouſe.
            
               Maligna uia, an yll way.
            
               Maligna lux, a dymme lyght.
            
               Malignus ager, grounde that is ylle to be brought to tylthe.
            
                
               Malitia, contrary to vertue and goodnes. ſome tyme it ſignifyeth ſubtiltie with deceyte.
            
               Malitioſè, malitiouſely.
            
               Malitio
                     •
                  us, malitiouſe.
            Malleatus, a, um, hammered.
            
            
               Malleo, are, to warke with an hammer.
            
               Malleolus, a lyttell hammer. it is alſo a ſmalle bough or twygge of a vyne. Alſo Malleoli, be ſomtyme takē generally for ſmal ſtyckes, they be ſomtime taken for the bones of the ancle.
            
               Malleus, an hammer.
            
               Malluuium, & Malluuiae, arū, a baſyn, wherin men do waſhe theyr handes.
            
               Malo, I had leauer, or rather, mauis, mauult.
            
            
               Malobathron, whiche in latyn is callyd Foliū, is a ſwete herbe growing in India, vpon waters without any roote.
            
               Malobathrum, a ſwete oyntment, wherewith men were wonte to waſhe theyr heare.
            
               Malta, a clay, whiche touching any other matter or ſubſtance, ſetteth it on fyre. reade in Aſphaltum, & Bitumen.
            
            
               Malna, an herbe callyd malowes.
            
               Maluauiſcus, reade in Althea.
            
            
               Malum, being an aduerb, ſignifieth with a miſchiefe or lyke thynge. Quid uos malum ergo me ſic ludificamini? Than wherfore with a miſchief do you thus mock me? Quid tua (malum) id refert? What with a miſchief reckeſt thou therfore, or haſt thou therwith to do?
            
               Malus, a, um, yll, contrary to good. ſomtyme labour, vexation, ſycknes, griefe, malyce.
            
               Malae fidei poſſeſſor, he that wetīgly poſſedeth an other mans landes or goodes wrongfully.
            
               Malus, in the maſculine gēder, a maſt of a ſhip.
            
               Malus, an appull tree, the feminyne gender.
            Malus Aſsyria uel Medica, an orenge tree.
            
            
               Malum punicum, a pomegranate.
            
               Malum terrae, reade Ariſtolochia.
            
            
               Mamertini, people in Campania.
            
               Mamilla, a lyttell dugge or 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            
               Mamma, a dugge or pappe.
            
               Mammare, to gyue the dug or breſt to a chylde.
            
               Māmeata, a womā with gret duggis or breſtis.
            
               Mammillare, a kerchiefe, wherwith women do couer theyr pappes.
            
               Mammona, in the language of Syria, worldly ſubſtance, rycheſſe.
            Mammoſus, ſa, & mammeatus, ta, tū, hauyng great dugges.
            
            
               Mammothreptus, the chyld that ſouketh long, ſo is it interpreted by ſaynt Auguſtine in his expoſition of the pſalmes. Not withſtandyng Eraſmus in ratione concionādi interpreteth it a chylde wantonly brought vp.
            
               Mamphula, a certain bread vſed in Syria, whiche ere it be through baken, fallith into coles.
            
               Mana, in the old time was takē for Bona, good
            
               Manapia, a towne in Irelād callyd waterford.
            
               Manceps, cipis, he that byeth or hyreth any thing of the people.
            
               Mancinati, perſones condemned.
            
               Manciolae, lyttell handes.
            
               Mancipi, the intereſt or ryght of a thyng.
            
               Mancipatio, the aſſurāce by lyuery & poſſeſſiō.
            
               Mancipium, that which is ſolemnly bought before witneſſes. alſo a mans proper goodes or cattall. ſomtyme a bondman.
            
               Mancipij ſui eſſe, to be his own man, & none other mans ſubiect or ſeruant.
            
               Mancipio accipere, to take poſſeſſion or lyuery and ſaiſon.
            
               Mancipio dare, to deliuer poſſeſſiō, reſeruing a rent.
            
               Mancipo, are, to delyuer in bondage, to deliuer poſſeſſion, to make lyuery and ſeaſon.
            
               Mancupi, the ſolemne forme or maner of bieng any thyng before wytnes, by liuery & ſeaſon, or poſſeſſion takyng, with other thynges executed, requiſite for the aſſurance of any bargayne and ſale.
            
               Mancupio accipere, to take a thynge with warāty of him, the which giueth or ſelleth it.
            
               Mancupio dare, to gyue or ſell a thinge with warranty.
            
               Mancupes, the principall takers of lande, or other thyng, wherof groweth yerely reuenues. Alſo they, whiche do take on them to perform any worke in great.
            
               Mancus, lackyng one hand. alſo generally that whiche lacketh any thyng neceſſary.
            
               Mandatarius, he to whome commaundemente is gyuen.
            
               Mandatum, a commiſſyon. alſo a commandement, a charge.
            
               Mandatus, ta, tum, gyuen in charge.
            
               Mandibula, a iawbone, wherin the teeth be ſet.
            
               Mando, onis, a great eater, or he that is alway eatynge.
            
               Mando, di, dere, to chewe meate, or grynde it with the teethe.
            
               Mando, are, to cōmyt. Memoriae mandare, to remember, to put in remembrance, to leaue in memory, or for a memoriall.
            
               Mandare aeternitari, to write a thing, to thin tent to be in perpetuall remembrance.
            
               Mandare curam, to leue the charge vnto one
            
               Mandare fidei alicuius, to put a man in truſt with a thynge.
            
               Mandare literis, to put in writīg or memory.
            
               Mandare memoriae, to kunne by harte.
            
               Mandare monumentis, to put in perpetuall remembrance the act of any man.
            
               Mandare ſe fugae, to runne away.
            
               Mandare terrae ſemina, to put ſede into the grounde, to ſowe grayne.
            
               Mandra, an houell or other lyke place, wherin cattell doo ſaue theym ſelues from the heate
 of the ſonne or tempeſt.
            
               Mandragora, an herb whi
                  •
               h Dioſcoride ſaith was of ſomme callyd Circea, bycauſe that it was fayned, that Circe the greate ſorcereſſe vſed the rote therof in her amorous drynkes. The iuyce of the roote, or wyne, wherein the roote is boyled, wyll cauſe one to ſlepe a dead ſlepe, wherfore ſurgions do gyue it to theym whom they wyll cut. It is alſo vſed for other purpoſes in phiſyke.
            
               Manduces, images caried about in pageantes with great chekes and wyde monthes.
            
               Manduco, are, to chewe meate.
            
               Manduco, onis, a great eater.
            Manducus, idem.
            
               Manè, carely, alſo the mornynge.
            
               Maneo, manſi, manere, to abyde, to tarye, to perſyſt, to happen hereafter.
            
               Manere promiſsis, to kepe promys.
            
               Mane dum, tarye a whyle.
            
               Manes, the good and bad angel. ſomtyme they be taken for deuylles, ſomtyme for ſpirites or ſoules not purged of ſynne. ſometyme for the peynes whiche ſoules do ſuffer.
            
               Mango, onis, was taken for a ſeller of chyldren to abhomynable vſes. It is alſo taken for ſuche one as poliſheth or paynteth a thing with a fals colour, to ſell it the derer. it is ſomtime taken for ſellers of horſes.
            
               Mangonicus, ca, cū, pertayning to that crafte.
            
               Mangoniū, the craft to make thynges ſalable.
            
               Mangonizo, zare, to polyſhe, paynt, or teymme a thynge, to make it more vendible, or to be better ſolde.
            
               Mania, madneſſe. reade in Phrenitis.
            
            
               Mania, was alſo amonge Gentiles a goddeſſe, callyd the mother of theym, whiche were named Lares or Larui, vnto the which goddeſſe they vſed a whyle to offer mens heades in ſacrifyce. But afterwarde, by the meanes of Iunius Brutus whyche was conſulle, they dyd chaunge that ſacryfyce into garlike heades and the knoppes of poppy. It was alſo that wherwith nouryces dyd put chyldren in feare whan they cried, whiche women vſe to call the bugge, or the goblyn.
            
               Maniacus, a madde man.
            
               Maniae, arum, defourmed perſonages.
            
               Manicae, ſleues of a garment. alſo manakles to tye the handes togyther. alſo gauntlettes and ſplyntes, and mittaynes or longe gloues.
            
               Manicata ueſtis, a garment with ſleues.
            
               Manichaei, a ſette of heretykes, ſoo callyd of an archcheretyke callyd Maniches.
            
               Manicula, a lyttell hande.
            
               Manifeſtarius, a, um, clere, euydent, openly knowen, notorious.
            
               Manifeſtè, clerely, manyfeſtly.
            
               Manifeſtò, an aduerb, ſignifieth clerely, plainly
            
               Manifeſto, tare, to manifeſt or make apparant.
            
               Manifeſtum, manyfeſt or clere.
            
               Manifeſtum habere, to knowe ſurely.
            
               Manifeſtus mendatii, proued a lyer.
            
               Manimoria, thynges whiche doo abyde in remembraunce.
            
               Maniolae, yles agaynſt India, beyond the ryuer of Ganges, where as be rockes of Adamant ſtones, which do drawe to them ſhyppes that haue yron noyles. Maniolae, were alſo lyttell popettes made of dowe, gyuen to chyldren.
            
               Manipularis, & maniplaris, captayn of a bend of men.
            
               Manipulatim, by bendes.
            
               Manipulus, an handefull, a grype, a bende of men, proprely of .x. ſouldiours.
            
               Manliana imperia, cruell gouernaunce or rule, without any mercy.
            
               Manlius, a noble Romayne.
            
               Manna, in holy ſcripture was a certayne delycate thyng, whych god rayned to the Iewes beynge in the wyldernes, whyche laye on the ground white, and lyke to the ſede of colyander, which was wonderful pleſant in eatyng and by lykelyhode holſome as ingendryng no putrifaction. We nowe name it cōmonly angelles foode.
            
               Manna, vſed in phiſyke, is in two ſortes, one is a dewe congeled on trees in certayne places, and falleth as meldewe doth here in England, & is gathered and ſolde very dere for a medicyne to pourge choler eaſyly. Some ſuppoſed it to be that whiche Dioſcorides callyth Eleaeomeli, ſome that whiche he calleth Saccharum. But Manardus and Muſa do affyrme the contrary. Not withſtādyng that whyche Galene in his warke De alimentorum facultatibus calleth Mel roris, ſeemeth to be this Manna. But Auerroys putteth it amonge thoſe thynges whyche were founde after Galenes tyme. An other Manna called Manna Turis, whyche is the crummes or fragmentes of frankincenſe, which with the rynde of the tree falleth in gatheryng of frankincenſe. The fyrſt is temperate betwene hot and colde without any degree: this other is of the temperature of incenſe, but that it is more byndyng.
            Mannor, aris, ari, to ſteale.
            
            
               Mannus, an amblyng hackeney.
            
               Mannulus, a nagge, a lyttell horſe.
            
               Mano, are, to runne out as lycour doth alſo to drop out, to appere out, as ſweate out of the pores. Alſoo to deſcende, to procede.
            
               Manat tota urbe rumor, the bruite thereof was ſowen or ſprad throughout the citie.
            
               Manantia ulcera, ſoores whych do wax more and more.
            
               Manobarbuli, were dartes wrought with lead.
 alſo they whyche vſed to beare them.
            
               Manſio, ſometyme ſygnifieth a dayes iourney. but amonge ancient writers it ſygnifyed the place where an hoſt dyd reſt in iourney. alſoo the places where currours or men rydynge in poſte doth chaunge theyr horſes or waggens were callyd Manſiones. The ſpace of the firſt after the accompt of old capitayns was a hū
               dred and fyfty furlong, which is .xviii. myles a halfe myle and a quarter of a myle.
            
               Manſiſterna, a pytcher potte.
            
               Manſito, tare, to abyde longe.
            
               Manſtus, ſtollen.
            
               Manſuefacio, facere, to make gētyl or tractable
            
               Manſuefactus, made gentyll or tame.
            Manſues, for manſuetus.
            
               Manſueſco, ſcere, to waxe tame or gentyll.
            
               Manſuetarius, he that breaketh a horſe, or maketh any other beaſt tame.
            
               Manſuetudo, dinis, mekenes, gentylnes, a moderate temperance betwixt pride & ſimplicite.
            
               Manſuetè, mekely, gentylly.
            
               Manſuetus, ta, tum, meke, gentyll, tame.
            
               Manſum, meate, whiche the nourices do chew, and after gyue it to the chylde, puttynge it into his mouthe.
            Manius, a, um, chewed.
            
            
               Manſutius, a gourmandour, or great eater.
            
               Mantaelum, & mantelium, & mantile, a towel wherwith men do wype theyr handes, whan they haue waſhed. alſo a cloke.
            
               Mantes, tis, a diuinour or coniecter of thinges to come.
            
               Manteum, a place where dyuelles in ydolles gaue anſweres.
            
               Mantice, tices, the arte of diuination.
            
               Mantica, a bagge. ſometyme a cloke, a wallet.
            
               Manticora, a beaſt whiche is in India, in body lyke to a lyon, but more rough, hauyng a face lyke to a man, and in his mouth .ii. rewes or ſette of teethe, the tayle of a ſcorpion, & the voyce of a ſmall trumpette, and is of colour redde, and wyll neuer be made tame.
            
               Manticula, a pourſe.
            
               Manticularia, towelles or other lyke thynges, wherwith men do wype their handes.
            
               Manticularius, a ſtealer of napry. alſo a pyckepourſe or cut purſe.
            
               Manticulatio, ſlyneſſe, deceyte.
            
               Manticulor, aris ari, to do a thynge ſlyly, as to pycke a purſe.
            
               Mantinea, a citie in Grece.
            
               Mantiſcinor, aris, ari, to ſteale or pyke craftily.
            
               Mantiſſa, the addition in weyght.
            
               Manto, the ſonne of Tireſias the Theban prophet, who led his father, which was blynde.
            
               Manto, tare, the moſte ancient writers vſyd for frequenter manere, to tary oftentymes.
            
               Mantua, a noble citie in Lumbardy, where Vergyle the excellent poete was borne.
            Mantuanus, a, um, of Mantua.
            
            
               Mantuariae tunicae, ſleued iackettes.
            Manuarius, a, um, manuall.
            
            
               Manubiae, the pray taken of ennemies. alſo money for the whiche the pray was ſolde.
            
               Manubinarius, the partners of a pray.
            
               Manubrium, the hylte or handle of a weapon or inſtrument.
            
               Manui, among the olde Romayns in theyr ſonges callid Saliares, ſignified good or honeſt mē.
            
               Manuleatus, ta, tum, hauyng longe ſleues.
            
               Manumiſsio, an infrāchiſement of a bondman.
            
               Manumiſſus, infraunchiſed, manumiſed.
            
               Manumitto, to manumiſe or infranchiſe a bond man.
            Manuor, idem quod furor.
            
               Manuria, acote with ſleues.
            
               Manus, a hande, a grapul to faſten ſhippes togither. ſomtyme it ſignifieth a multitude of men in the ayde of one. ſomtime power. ſometime writing. alſo the noſe or ſnoute of an olyfant. Manus iniectio, attachment. alſo ſeaſon or ſeiſure of a thing, whervnto we make title
            
               Manum ini
                     •
                  cere, to ſeaſe or take poſſeſſion.
            
               Manuconſertum ex iure uocare, to challenge right or property in a thing, and offer to trye it by the law. Rede Gell. li. ix. Cicero pro Murena, & De oratore lib. i.
            
            
               Manum conſerere, to fyght hande to hande.
            
               Manum ferulae ſubducere, to ſuffer to be corrected in lernyng, to be content to be taught.
            
               Manum non uerterim, I wil neuer go about it, I wyll not turne my hande for it.
            Manum habere ſub pallio, to be ydell.
            
            
               Manibus pedibus
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , with all might & mayne.
            
               Manibus pedibuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ire in ſententiam, is in a parliament, great counſayle, or other greatte aſſembly, to haue the conſent of many men, the greatter part conſentynge to one mans opinion or ſentence, do go towarde hym, holdyng vp theyr handes, in token that they be thervnto agreed.
            
               Manum de tabula, a prouerbe, ſignifyeng, Leaue whyles it is wel.
            
               Manum & mentum, was an old prouerbe, wherby men were warned of chances whiche hapned ſodaynly, and in ſo ſhort a tyme as a man mought bryng his hande to his chynne. Lyke to the ſame is an other prouerbe of the grekes. Multa quidem cadunt inter calicem ſuprema
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   labra. Rede that in M ante V.
            
            
               Mapalia, cotages buylded rounde lyke ouens.
            
               Mappa, a table clothe.
            
               Maraſmus, is a kynd of the feuer callyd Hectica, in the which the moyſture of the ſubſtancial partes of the body is exhauſte or dryed vp, and the fleſſhe reſolued. wherefore Galenus exhorteth the phyſition not to go aboute to cure hym, whome this ſyckeneſſe hath attached.
 For although hew extinguſhe the heat, yet wyl the dryneſſe that is left, like vnto age conſume the pacient. The cauſes thereof be the ſame whiche are of Hectica, the one and the other is callyd in englyſhe a conſumption feuer. but this maye be callyd a mortall conſumption, bycauſe it is incurable.
            
               Marathon, a towne in the countrey of Athenes diſtant from thens .x. myles, where Theſeus ſlewe a terrible bull, and Milciades vanquiſhed the Perſians.
            
               Marathuſa, an yle wherin is abundance of fenell, and it is alſo callyd Clazomenia.
            
            
               Maratrum, idem quod feniculus, fenell, which is hotte and dry in the ſeconde degree.
            
               Marceo, cui, cere, to be corrupte.
            
               Marcere uino, to be conſumed with drunkennes. Marcet animus, his courage faileth him
            Marceſco, idem quod Marceo.
            
               Marceſcere otio uel deſidia, to be loſte with ydelneſſe and ſlouthe.
            
               Marceſcente adhuc ſtomacho pridiani cibi onere, The ſtomak being yet oppreſſed with the meate of yeſterday.
            
               Marcellus, a proper name.
            
               Marchia, a countrey in baſe Germany.
            Marcidus, da, dum, rotten.
            
            
               Marcidae aures, hangynge cares.
            
               Marcidus ſomno, vnluſty with to moche ſlepe
            
               Marcipor, oris, the ſeruant of Marcus.
            
               Marconiani, people in Germanye, whiche are nowe ſuppoſed to be either of Boheme, or of Morauia.
            
               Marcor, oris, corruption or putrifaction, ſluggardy.
            
               Mardi, people adioynyng to Perſia.
            
               Mare, the ſea.
            
               Mare coelo miſcere, to trouble al the worlde.
            
               Mare mediterraneum, is the ſea which commeth from the weſt occean and entreth by the ſtra
                  •
               tes of Marrocke, and paſſeth betweene Spayn and Barbary, diuidyng Europā frō Affrica, & entreth into Aſia, takyng not withſtandynge diuers particular names: as Balearicum, Llgusticum, Tyrrhenum, Carpathium, Aegêum▪ &c.
            
            
               Mareotis, otidis, a ryuer in Egypt. alſo a parte of Libia, a parte of Epi
                  •
               us.
            
               Mariotides, grapes of that countrey.
            
               Marga, a kynde of erth callyd marle, which is a fat clay and chalke myngled.
            
               Margaridae, ſmall dates rounde and white.
            
               Margarita, margaritum, margarites, Margaris, ridis, a perle, a margarite. ſomtyme generally all precious ſtones ar callyd Margaritae.
            
            
               Margaritarius, a ſeller of perles.
            
               Margariteferus, ra, rum, that whiche bringeth forth or hath plenty of perles.
            
               Margina, a region in Aſia.
            
               Margo, ginis, the brym or edge of euery thing, the margent.
            
               Margus, a ryuer in Aſia.
            
               Maria, a proper name.
            
               Mariaba, the chiefe citie in Saba.
            
               Marituis, Luneburgh in Almayne.
            
               Marinus, na, num, of the ſea.
            
               Mariſcae, vnſauery fygges, wild figges, fygges whiche do open that the ſedes do appere. alſo great piles or hemorroides in the fundement.
            
               Mariſcus, a bull ruſhe.
            
               Marita, a wedded woman, a wyfe.
            
               Maritigenus, a, um, come of the kind of Mars.
            
               Maritimus, of the ſea ſyde, or of the ſea.
            
               Marito, are, to wedde.
            
               Maritus, a wedded man, huſbande.
            
               Marius, a proper name of a man.
            
               Marmarica, a countrey in Affrike.
            
               Marmaritis, an herbe ſuppoſed of Dioſcorides to be fumitory, of Pliny bearefoote.
            
               Marmor, oris, marble ſtone.
            
               Marmoratio, buyldynge with marble.
            
               Marmoratus, ta, tum, wrought with marble.
            Marmoreus, a, um, of marble.
            
            
               Marodunum, Caermerden in wales.
            
               Marpeſus, an hyll in the yle callid Parus.
            
               Marpeſius, of the ſame hylle.
            
               Marplacidae, ſhippes orb arges vſed in Media.
            
               Marra, a mattocke to pare away weedes.
            
               Marrubium, an herbe callyd horehounde, it is hotte and dry in the ſeconde degree.
            
               Marrucini, people in Italy.
            
               Mars, martis, callyd god of battayle. ſomtyme it is taken for battayle.
            
               Marte ſuo, of his owne proper wyt, without any counſayle.
            
               Marſi, a countrey in Italy callyd Aprutium.
            
            
               Marſpiter, the father of Mars.
            
               Martia, a countrey in Italy.
            
               Marſupium, a pouche or a pourſe.
            
               Martiaca, wages gyuen to ſouldiours.
            
               Martiacus, ca, cum, belongyng to warres.
            
               Martialis, borne vnder the planet of Mars.
            
               Martius, a, um, pertaynyng to Mars.
            
               Martius campus, a fielde at Rome dedicate to Mars, where the yonge men of Rome dydde exercyſe them ſelfe. alſo there were their aſſemblies for the electiō of their great officers
            
               Martius, menſis, the moneth callyd Marche.
            
               Martyr, in greke, a wytneſſe.
            
               Martyrium, martyrdome.
            
               Mas, maris, a man, or mankynde.
            
               Maſculeſco, ſci, ſcere, to be manly, greatte, or wyſe, to be comen of the male kynde.
            
               Maſculo, are, to make manly or ſtronge.
            
               Maſculus, a, um, manly, great, wyſe.
            
               Maſdoranus, a mountayne, whyche diuydeth Parthia from Armenia.
            
               Maſpetum, the leafe of an herbe, of the whyche
 commeth Beniowyne.
            
               Maſſa, paaſte a lumpe of any thynge.
            
               Maſſa auri, a wedge of goulde.
            
               Maſſagetae, a people in Aſia, whiche runnyng on horſebacke through deſertes, doo drynke their horſes bloud myxt with mylke, they alſo do eate theyr parentes, if they dye for age, but if they be ſycke, they caſte them to wylde beaſtes to be deuoured.
            
               Maſsica, a countrey in the ſouth part of Spain
            
               Maſsicus, a mountayne in Campania.
            
               Maſsilia, a cite in high France, callid Marſiles
            
               Maſsilienſis, ſe, of Marſiles.
            
               Maſimiſſa, kyng of Numidia, and great frende to the Romaynes.
            
               Maſsylia, cum y, a countrey in Affrike, among the weſterne Moores.
            
               Maſticeos, reuerende, honourable.
            
               Maſtiche, a ſoote gumme, callyd Maſtix.
            
               Maſtigia, & Maſtigeus, a knaue worthy to be beaten.
            
               Maſtigophorus, a felowe worthy to be whypped alſo certain miniſters, which with whippes, remoued the people, where there was moche preaſe.
            
               Maſtix, cis, a whyppe.
            
               Maſtos, a treate of a ceſtern wherby water doth runne out by a cocke or ſpoute.
            
               Maſtruca, a garment, whiche men of Sardina vſed to weare.
            
               Maſtrupari, to touche diſhoneſtely the priuye membres of a man.
            
               Maſurius, the name of a famous lawyer, whiche wrate on the lawes ciuile
            
               Matella, an vrynall or other veſſell, ſeruyng to that purpoſe.
            Matula, idem.
            Matellio, onis, idem.
            
               Mateaeotechina, the vanitie whiche is in a ſcience or crafte.
            
               Mater, matris, a mother.
            
               Materfamilias, ae, an houſewyfe, goodwyfe of the houſe, ſhe that hath gouernance of other women, be ſhe maryed or vnmaryed.
            
               Mater matrima, ſhe that is a mother, and hath mother lyuynge.
            
               Materia, & materies, matter wherof any thing is made, be it mettall, wood, ſtone, erthe, or any thyng els.
            
               Materialis, le, that whiche is of ſome matter.
            
               Materiarius, a carpentar.
            Materiatus, ta, tum, tymbred.
            
            
               Materior, arîs, ari, to warke in tymber.
            
               Materis, a frenche ſpeare, or a iauelyn.
            
               Matertera, an aunte or mothers ſyſter.
            
               Mathematicus, he that is kūnyng in aulgrym, muſyke, geometry, and aſtronomy.
            
               Matheſis, & Mathema, lernynge by a demonſtration.
            
               Matralia, the ſolemne feaſtes of Maruta, callyd the mother of goddis.
            
               Matreſco, ſcere, to be lyke a mother.
            
               Matricida, he that kylleth his mother.
            
               Matrimonium, wedlocke, matrimony.
            
               Matrinuis, whoſe mother yet lyueth.
            
               Matrix, cis, the mother or mattice in a woman, in the whyche the chylde is conceyued. alſoo matrix is any female kynde that conceyueth and beareth. alſo the city in a cuntrey, where as is the archebyſſhops ſea, is callyd Matrix uibs, whiche in greke is callyd Metropolis. It is alſo the pythe of a tree.
            
               Matrona, a wyfe, alſo the name of a ryuer in Burbon.
            
               Matronalis, pertaynynge to a wyfe.
            
               Matruells, the ſonne or doughter of my mothers ſyſter.
            
               Matta, a matte.
            
               Mattiacae pilae, ſope balles.
            
               Mattiacum, a towne in Germany.
            
               Maturate, haſtily, quyckely, Iube maturate Illā exire huc, Byd her coine forth quyckly.
            
               Mature, tymely, nor to ſoone, nor to late.
            
               Matureſco, ſcere, to be rype.
            
               Maturitas, tatis, rypenes in all thyng, and as it were perfection.
            
               Maturo, are, to make rype or perfecte, to doo a thyng perfectly in due tyme and meſure. ſom tyme to do a thing ſpedily or quyckely.
            
               Maturus, a, um, rype, perfect. ſomtyme it ſygnyfieth aged.
            
               Matura aetas, full or perfect age.
            
               Maturus, liomo, an aged man.
            
               Matuta, the mornyng, or morowe.
            
               Matutinus, a, um, of the morowe.
            Mauors, ortis, Mars.
            
            
               Mauortius, a, um, pertaynyng to Mars.
            
               Mauri, people callyd Moores.
            
               Mauritania, the cuntrey now callid Moriſco, or of Mores, lyeng on the weſt part of Affrica, betwene the ſea callyd Mare Mediterraneū
                on the northe, and Libya on the ſouth. Martianus ſayth, that in length it is tenne tymes xxxviii. myles, whyche is .CCClxxx. myles, and in breadth towarde the ſouth .CCCC. lxvii. myles.
            
               Mauſoleum, a ſepulchre or tombe, whiche Arthemiſia made for her huſbande Mauſolus, whiche for the excellent workemanſhyp was accompted to be one of the meruayles of the worlde, and for the famouſnes therof, euerye greate and notable ſepulchre is callyd Mauſoleum.
            
            
               Mauſolus, the kynge of a realem callyd Caria.
            
               Maxilla, the cheke done.
            
               Maximates, the greatteſt men in authoritie.
            
               Maximitas, tatis, auncient wryters vſed for greatneſſe.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
                
               Maximus, a, um, greateſt or moſt in eſtimation.
            
               Maza, a take made of floure and mylke.
            
               Mazaca, a citie in Cappadocia vnder the hylle callyd Argeus, nowe callyd Ceſarea.
            
               Mazeras, a ryuer in the mouthe of the ſea, callid Mare Hircanum.
            
            
               Mazonomiū, a platter wherin meate is caried.
         
         
            ¶M ANTE E.
            
               MEANDER, a riuer in Phrigia, whiche by ſundry wyndynges, at the laſte falleth into a creeke, whiche diuideth Miletum and Priena in Grece.
            
               Meapte, myne owne.
            
               Meatus, tus, a paſſage or waye. alſo the pores of the body, out of the whiche do come ſweat and vapours.
            
               Mecaſtor, a fourme of ſweryng, as who ſaith, ſo Caſtor helpe me.
            
               Mechanicus, a craftes man.
            
               Mechanica ars, a handy crafte.
            
               Mecoenas, atis, mynyon to Auguſtus the emperoure, and bycauſe he was the ſupporter of great lerned men, all fauourers and ſuccourers of lernyd men be ſo callyd.
            
               Mecon, in greke is popy in englyſhe.
            
               Meconium, is the iuyce of the leaues & heddes of popy preſſed out, whiche ſomme do vſe in the ſtede of Opium.
            
            
               Mecum, with me.
            
               Mecum facit, it maketh for my purpoſe.
            
               Mecum ſentit, he is of myne opinyon.
            
               Medea, wyfe vnto Iaſon, a wytche and cruelle woman, ſhe was doughter of Oētes kynge of Colchos and Hipſea his wyfe, whoſe hyſtory is ſufficiently knowen in all tungues.
            
               Medela, remedy by medicine.
            
               Mederga, for erga, toward me.
            
               Medeor, eris, eri, to heale or cure.
            
               Media, a countrey in Aſia, hauyng on the north the ſea callyd Hyrcanum, on the weſt Armeny the more and Aſſyria, on the ſouth Perſia on the eaſt Hircania and Parthia.
            
               Media uocabula, wordes whiche may be taken in a good or yll parte. as Tempeſtas whiche ſygnifyeth tempeſt & tyme. Facinus, a notable dede good or yll. Valitudo, helth or ſyckenes, and other lyke.
            
               Medianus, na, um, that whiche is in the mydle.
            Mediaſtinus, a, um, the myddelmoſte.
            
            
               Mediaſtimus, a drudge or lubber, which dothe in the houſe al maner of vile ſeruice, as ſwepe or clenſe the houſe, cary wood to the kytchen and other lyke drudgery.
            
               Mediaſtrinus, the ſeruant, whiche hath the rule of the houſe vnder his maiſter.
            
               Medica, an herbe, whiche I ſuppoſe to be clouer graſſe, with purple rounde floures.
            Medica mala, orenges.
            
            
               Medica malus, an orenge tree.
            
               Medibile, in ſtate to be healyd, curable.
            Medicabilis, le, curable.
            
            
               Medicamentarius, a phiſition.
            
               Medicamentarius, a, um, ꝑtaining to medicine
            
               Medicina, medicamen, medicamentum, a medicine. ſometyme it ſignifieth poyſon.
            Medicinalis, le, medicynable.
            
            Medico, & Medicor, aris, ari, to heale or cure.
            
            
               Medicus a phiſitian.
            
               Medicus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to phiſyke.
            
               Medimnus, was a meſure of the grekes, wherof were two ſortes, one was callyd Atticus, and contaynyd of oure meaſure .vi. gallons, one pottell, and one quart. An other was callyd Georgicus, whiche was of our meaſure one buſhell, a pecke, and one pynte, it receyueth
.xlviii. Choenices.
            
            
               Mediocris, diocre, meaſurable, in a mean, moderate.
            
               Mediocritas, tatis, a meane.
            
               Mediolanium, the citie of Orleance in France. it was alſo a citie in Weſtphalia in Almayn callid Munſter, which foraſmoch as the people therof were infected with the hereſye of Anabaptiſtes, and other deteſtable errours. It was deſtroyed by the princis of Almayn, about the yere of our lorde god a thouſande fyue hundred thirty and nyne.
            
               Mediolanum, the chief citie of Lumbardy, callyd Myllane. alſo a town in Lankaſhyre, callyd Mancheſter.
            
               Mediouratrices, Maſtright in Brabant.
            
               Medioximus, a, um, meane, or in the myddes.
            
               Medipontus, an inſtrumente wherwith ropes are made.
            
               Meditabundus, carefull, ſtudiouſe.
            
               Meditate, ſtudyouſly, perfectly on the fyngers endes.
            
               Meditatio, a thynkyng or diuiſyng in thought. alſoo an exercyſe as welle of mynde as of bodye.
            
               Meditatorius, a, um, whyche belongeth to medytation.
            
               Mediterraneus, in the myddle of the lande, and furtheſt from the ſea.
            
               Meditor, aris, ari, to thynke depely, and in thinkynge to fynde out, to purpoſe, to lay ſnares, to ſynge or play ſwetely.
            
               Meditari ſe, to exercyſe hym ſelfe.
            
               Meditrina, the goddeſſe of phyſike.
            
               Meditrinalia, ceremonies vſed by them, which dranke muſte or newe wyne.
            
               Meditullium, the myddell.
            
               Medius, a, um, the middes equally diſtant from the extremities. ſometyme meane.
            
               Medium commune, amonge all.
            Medio, uel de medio tollere, to kyll.
            
            
                
               Medius, a meane or mediatour betwene .ii. mē.
            
               Mediusfidius, an othe, whyche although ſome tyme it had an other ſignifycation, yet maye it nowe in a commune fourme of ſpeakynge be vſed in this wyſe, by the faythe of my bodye. Sens Dius for Iupiter, and Fidius for filius, be nowe out of vſe.
            
               Meduacus, a ryuer about Venyce, callyd nowe Brente.
            
               Medulla, marrowe, whiche is in bones.
            
               Medullitus, innerly into the marrowe.
            
               Medullo, are, to take out marrowe ſometyme to expreſſe vtterly. Narra iam rem nobis omnem, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   emedulla, Telle and expreſſe vtterly to vs all the hole matter.
            
               Meduſa, a lady, of whome fables do reporte, that her heares by Minerua were tournyd into adders, and they whyche behelde her were tourned into ſtoones, whome Perſeus afterwarde ſlewe. She is ſomtyme taken for one of the furies of helle.
            
               Mefanſilium, a certayne weapon to throwe.
            
               Megabizi, prieſtes of Diana, whiche alwaye were gelded.
            
               Megaera, a fury or turmentour of hell, whyche Paynyms ſuppoſed dydde prouoke and ſtyre men to woodneſſe.
            
               Megalenſes, & megaleſia, playes to the honor of Cybele.
            
               Megaleſia, the feſtiuall day dedicate to Cybele, callid the mother of goddis amōg Pyanims.
            
               Megalium, a ſwete oyntment.
            
               Megaloprepeia, an honourable facion in gyuynge or imployenge of great thynges, whyche beſemeth a man of great courage.
            
               Megaloprepes, he that dothe greate thynges, accordyng to his dignitie.
            
               Megara, a cytie belongyng to Athenes. it was alſo the name of one of Hercules wyues.
            
               Megaris, idis, a countrey in Achaia.
            
               Megiſtanes, whom we do call nobles or pieres of the realme.
            
               Me herclè, an othe ſworne by Hercules.
            
               Meio, iere, to pyſſe.
            Mel, mellis, hony.
            
            
               Melamphyllon, an herbe.
            
               Melampus, a mans name.
            
               Melamirus, a fyſhe hauyng a blacke tayle.
            
               Melancholia, melancholy. ſometyme madnes.
            
               Melancoryphus, a byrde callyd a fynche.
            
               Melandria, the leane partes of the fyſſhe callyd Tunny.
            
               Melanthia, an herbe callyd alſo Nigella.
            
            
               Melanurus, a kynde of perches callyd ruffes.
            
               Melculum, a wanton worde ſpoken by louers vnto theyr paramours, my lyttell hony.
            
               Meleagrides, byrdes, whyche we do call hennes of Genny.
            
               Melegina, an yle in the Venecian ſea.
            
               Melenetus, a kynde of fawkons very lyttell of body, blacke and puyſſaunt, whyche haunteth mountaynes, and feedeth her byrdes alone, a merlyon as I ſuppoſe.
            
               Melibeus, a ſhepardes name.
            
               Meliboea, a citie in Theſſaly.
            
               Meliceris, ridis, a ſoore or ſkale in the head like a hony combe, out of the which commeth an humour lyke hony.
            
               Melicerta, whome the gentyles dydde honour for one of the goddis of the ſea, callyd alſoo Palaemon.
            
            
               Melicraton, wyne and hony ſodden togither.
            
               Melicus, a muſytion.
            
               Melilotos, an herbe callyd Melylote.
            
               Melimela, ſweete appuls.
            
               Melina, a ſwete ſhaulme.
            
               Melinus, na, num, whyte ruſſette, or a gynger colour.
            
               Melioreſco, ſcere, to be better.
            
               Melipecta, meates made with hony.
            
               Melis, ſeu melius, a beaſt callid a gray, abrock or a badger.
            
               Meliſigenes, was the fyrſt name of Homerus the poete.
            
               Meliſphillon, ſmallache.
            
               Meliſſa, a woman, who with her ſyſter Amalthea nouryſhed Iupyter. it is alſoo an herbe commonly callyd baulme.
            
               Meliſſus, the name of hym, whyche dyd fyrſte ſacrifice vnto ydols. alſo the name of an ancient phyloſopher.
            
               Melita, ſiue Melite, an yle lyenge betwene Sycile and Affryke, wherin is plenty of hony, and is now callyd Malta, where at this time the company of the knyghtes hoſpytilers do inhabyte, as they dyd at the Rhodes.
            
               Melitaei canes, & melitenſes, were praty lytell houndes, in the whyche ladyes toke pleaſure and delyte, whyche were brought out of the ſayde yle of Melite.
            
               Melites, a precyous ſtoone of the colour of an orenge.
            
               Melitites, a drynke made of hony and muſt, or newe wyne.
            
               Mellarius, a hony man, or ſellar of hony.
            Mellarius, a, um, of honye.
            
            
               Mellatio, the tyme of dryuyng of hyues, whan hony is taken out.
            
               Mellatium, newe muſt, wherin hony is ſodden
            
               Mellene, a citie in Arcadia.
            
               Melleus, a, um, of hony. alſo ſwete. Vox mellea, a ſwete voyce.
            
               Mellica, a kynd of pulſe, of the colour of redde, of the fourme of Myll.
            
               Mellificatio, makynge of hony.
            
               Mellifico, care, to make hony.
            Mellificum, idem.
            
               Mellifluus, a, um, ſwete as hony.
            
                
               Melligo, ginis, a meile dewe, whyche falleth on leaues of trees, and ſomtyme on corne.
            
               Melilla, my hony, my ſwetyng, a word of wanton dalyers.
            
               Melliloquus, a ſwete ſpeaker.
            
               Melliſones, they whiche do practyſe dreſſynge of hony.
            
               Mellitones, places where bees be nouriſhed.
            
               Melliturgus, a warker or maker of hony.
            
               Mellitus, a, um, myxt with hony.
            
               Mellium, a dogges colar.
            
               Melitus, the name of hym whyche accuſed Socrates.
            
               Melizonum, a confection made with honye claryfyed.
            
               Melo, a ryuer callyd alſo Geon.
            
               Melodes, he that ſyngeth kūnyngly & ſwetely.
            
               Melodia, melody.
            
               Meloeſſa, an yle by Sicile, in the whiche was great plenty of ſhepe.
            
               Melomeli, whan appuls verye ripe and fayre be conſerued in hony.
            
               Melonia, uel Melona, callyd the goddeſſe of honye.
            
               Melos, odis, melody, armony.
            
               Melota, uel melote, a ſhepes fell or ſkynne.
            
               Melpomene, one of the nyne Muſes.
            
               Membrana, parchement, or velume, wherein men do write. alſo the ouermooſte ſkynne of any thynge.
            
               Membraneus, a, um, of parchement or velume.
            
               Membranulum, a ſmalle member.
            
               Membrare, to fourme membres.
            
               Membratim, by euery member.
            
               Membratura, the ſetting or order of membres.
            
               Membroſus, a, um, hauing a great membre.
            
               Membrum, a membre.
            
               Memerylus, a lyttell tree lyke a citron tree.
            
               Memet, my ſelfe.
            
               Memini, I remember.
            
               Memnon, the ſonne of Thiton, whyche came to the ayde of the Troyans.
            
               Memnoniae aues, byrdes whiche were ſuppoſed to growe of the aſhes of Memnon.
            
               Memor, oris, he that remembreth.
            
               Memorabilis, le, worthy remembraunce.
            Memoratus, tus, & Memoratio, a remēbryng.
            
            
               Memoria, memory, remembraunce.
            
               Memoriale, a thyng which ſhuld be remēbred.
            
               Memorioſus, he that hath a good memory.
            
               Memoriter, perfectly by hart, or with good remembraunce.
            
               Memoro, are, to remembre, ſomtyme to tell, or expounde, to recyte, or reherſe.
            
               Memphis, a great and famous citie in Egypt.
            
               Memphiticus, of that citie.
            Memphe, idem.
            
               Mena, a lyttell fyſhe blacke or blue in ſommer, and whyte in wynter, whiche I ſuppoſe may be well callyd a menowe. all be it Theodorus Gaza, dothe tranſlate Maenides, callynge theym ſometyme Aleces, whych we call herrynges, and Maenidia, he tranſlateth paruas Aleculas, lytel hearynges, callyd pylchardes.
            
               Menaechmi, the name of a comedy of Plautus.
            
               Menalippa, quene of Amazon, whome Hercules vanquyſhed.
            
               Menapij, people of the countrey callyd Gellarlande, or Gylderlande and Cleue.
            
               Menander, a famous poete, a wryter of commedyes.
            
               Menaria, an yle in the ſea betwene Carthage and Sicile.
            
               Menceps, he or ſhe that is out of theyr wytte.
            
               Menda, & mendum, a faut or vice in writyng.
            
               Mendaculum, a lyttell faute or lye.
            
               Mendatium, a lye.
            
               Mendax, acis, a lyar.
            
               Mendaciloquus, a tellar of lyes.
            
               Mendicabulum, beggynge.
            Mendicitas, tatis, & Mendicimoniū, beggery.
            
            
               Mendico, care, to begge.
            
               Mendicula, a certayne veſture.
            
               Mendicus, a beggar.
            
               Mendix, an offyce amonge the olde Italyans callyd Oſci.
            
            Mendoſus, a, um, faulty.
            
            
               Menecrates, was an arrogant and proude phiſition, who bycauſe he chanced to heale ſundry perſons, of whoſe helth mē dyd diſpaire, and therfore in commendyng hym callyd him Iupyter. He afterwarde named hym ſelf Menecrates Iupiter.
            
            
               Menelaus, was kyng of Lacedemonia brother to Agamemnon, & huſbande to the fayre Helene, for whom Troy was deſtroyed.
            
               Meneletus, a byrde lyke to a ſmalle egle.
            
               Meneſtheus, was duke of Athenes, ſonne of Theſcus and Phedra.
            
               Meniana aedificia, buyldyng outwarde in proſpectes or galleryes.
            
               Meninges, the ryſine wherin the brayne is incloſyd.
            
               Menix, an yle agaynſt the leſſe Affrica.
            
               Mens, tis, the higheſt & chiefe part of the ſoule. ſomtyme it ſignifieth the mynde, wyl, intent, or memory. ſomtyme aduyſe or counſayle.
            
               Mente captus, a madde man.
            
               Mentis compos, of hole mynde or perfecte remembraunce.
            
               Menſa, a table or bourde to eate on. ſometyme dyner or ſupper.
            
               Menſarius, the banker or exchanger, of whom men do borowe money vpon gayne, callyd exchaunge.
            
               Menſio, a meaſure.
            
               Menſis, a moneth.
            
               Menſôres, they whiche do lay out the boundes
 of lande betweene man and man, or towne and towne.
            
               Menſtrualis, pertaynyng to a moneth, or of the ſpace of a monethe, or durynge the tyme of a moneth.
            
               Menſtruatus, ta, tum, that which hath flowres lyke to women.
            
               Menſtruum, a womans naturall pourgation, callyd floures.
            
               Menſtruus, a, um, that whiche hapneth euerye moneth, or is done monethly.
            
               Menſura, a meaſure.
            Menſurnus, a, um, monethly.
            
            
               Menta, & Mentula, the priuy membres of a mā
            
            
               Mentagra, a diſeaſe, whiche couereth the face with a fowle ſcabbe, and it was callid of the grekes Lichen. Some do ſuppoſe, that it is the ſame diſeaſe, whyche is nowe callyd the frenche pockes.
            
               Mentaſtrum, wylde mynte.
            
               Mentha, an herbe callyd mynte.
            
               Mentibor, for mentiar, I ſhall make a lye.
            
               Mentigo, ginis, the ſcabbe whiche is amonge ſhepe callid the poxe.
            Mentior, iris, iri, to lye.
            
            
               Mentiri ſe eſſe aliquem, to fayne to be an other perſone.
            
               Mentiri ſexum muliebri motu, to fayne hym ſelfe to be a woman.
            
               Mentoas, the famous ryuer, whiche is nowe callyd Danubius.
            
               Mentor, an excellent grauer of veſſell.
            
               Mentum, a chynne.
            
               Menus, a ryuer in Germany.
            
               Meo, are, to goo, to flowe.
            
               Meopte ingenio, by myne owne witte, of myn owne nature.
            Mephiticus, ca, cum, ſtynkynge.
            
            
               Mephitis, a ſtenche or yll ſauour, which procedeth of corupt water or likor, mixt with erth.
            Meracus, ca, cum, & Merax, racis, pure with out any myxture.
            
            
               Vinum meracum, wyne without any water.
            
               Meraculum uinū, wyne but a lyttel alayde.
            
               Mercalis, le, vendyble, or that whiche may be bought.
            
               Mercator, oris, euery byer, a marchaunt.
            
               Mercatura, the feate of marchandyſe.
            
               Mercatus tus, the acte of byenge.
            
               Mercatus, ti, a market or fayre.
            Mercatus, ta, tum, bought.
            
            
               Merceditius, an hyred ſeruant.
            Mercenarius, idem.
            
               Mercenarius, a, um, that whiche may be hired.
            
               Merces, cis, marchandiſe, ware, chaffare.
            
               Merces, cedis, wages, the rewarde of laboure or ſeruyce.
            
               Praediorum merces, reuenues of lande.
            
               Mercimonium, that whiche is tournyd in byenge and ſellynge.
            
               Mercor, aris, ari, to bye for to ſelle for gaynes▪ ſometyme to bye generally.
            
               Mercurialis, an herbe callyd Mercury.
            
               Mercurius, was of the paynyms callyd god of eloquēce, and meſſanger of Iupiter, it is the name of one of the .vii. planettes.
            Mercurij dies, wenyſday.
            
            
               Merda, the excrement or ordure of a mā or beaſt
            
               Merdo, are, to expell ordure, to ſhite.
            
               Merenda, meate eaten at after noone, a collation, a noone meale.
            
               Mereo, ere, & Mereor, eri, to take wages, to deſerue, to exerciſe a vile occupation alſo Merere, to ſerue in warres.
            
               Merere ſtipendia, to take wages as a ſowldyour, or to be a ſowldyour.
            
               Merêre alicui, to do seruyce to one.
            
               Merêre equo, to be a manne of armes, or to ſerue on horſebacke in warres.
            
               Merêre pedibus, to be a fote man in warres
            
               Mereor bene de te, I do ſomewhat for the, I deſerue to haue the my frende, or to haue thy fauour.
            
               Male mereor de te, I do the diſpleaſure, I do yll deſerue thy fauour.
            
               Merè, purely.
            
               Meretriciè, hooryſhely.
            
               Meretricium, hooredome, or brothelry.
            
               Meretricius, a, um, pertayngng to brothelry.
            
               Meretricor, aris, ari, to lyue in brothelrye, to playe the harlotte.
            
               Meretrix, icis, an harlot, or brothell.
            
               Mergae, pytcheforkes for to take vp ſheues.
            
               Mergites, gripes of corne.
            
               Mergi, vynes or other ſmalle trees, whiche are bowed, and haue the toppes bowe wyſe, turned and ſet in the erthe.
            
               Mergo, ſi, gere, to drowne in the water.
            
               Mergulus, an inſtrument where the matche of a lampe is conteyned.
            
               Mergus, goris, a bucket to drawe vp water.
            
               Mergus, gi, a foule of the ſea lyke to a gul, whiche diueth vnder the water to take fyſhe, and by often dyuynge perceyueth ſygnes of tempeſt comyng, and than ſodainly with a great crye he fleeth out of the myddle of the water vnto the lande.
            
               Meribibulus, he that drinketh moch wyne with out water.
            
               Meridianus, a, um, pertayning to none.
            
               Meridiatio, noone reſte.
            
               Meridies, noone tyde.
            
               Meridio, are, & meridior, ari, to dyne, to eate meate at noone, to ſlepe at noone.
            
               Meridionalis, le, of the ſouthe.
            
               Meriſmos a fygure callyd alſoo Diſtributio, whereby the oration is diſtributed into ſundry ſentences.
            
                
               Meritò, worthily, with good cauſe.
            
               Merito, are, to be worthy. alſo to ſerue in wartes, ſometyme to gayne.
            
               Meritoria, houſes or ſhoppes let to hyre.
            
               Meritorius, a, um, that whiche is let or ſet for aduauntage.
            
               Meritoria taberna, a houſe wherinto a man is receyued for his money.
            
               Meritum, a benefytte or pleaſure, a deſerte good or ylle.
            
               Meritum eſt meum, it is in my defaute.
            
               Meritus, ta, tum, deſerued, conuenient.
            
               Meritus, a mountayne in the thyrd part of Europa, beyonde Grece.
            
               Mero, was in ſkorne the name of Nero, bycauſe he was ſo great a drynker of wyne.
            
               Meroe, an yle on the greate ryuer of Nilus in Egypte.
            
               Merobiba, ſhe that drynketh wyne withoute water.
            
               Meroctes, a lyttell ſtone of the colour of lekes, whiche ſweateth a lykour lyke to mylke.
            
               Meropes, men of dyuers languages.
            
               Merops, a byrde whiche dothe eate bees.
            
               Meropus, a mountayne in Grece by Theſſaly.
            
               Meros, a hyll of Inde, at the foote whereof is the citie callyd Niſa.
            
               Merſo, are, to drowne often.
            Merto, idem.
            
               Merula, a byrde callyd a blacke macke or owſyli, with a yelowe beke. alſo a fyſſhe callyd merlynge or whitynge.
            
               Merum, wyne vnlayde, without water.
            
               Merus, a, um, ſoole, mere, pure.
            
               Merx, cis, one kynde of marchandyſe.
            
               Mes, in the Arabian tungue is a peaſe of the Grekes, as Manardus writeth li. 1. epiſt. 3. Serapio ſayth, that it is a grayne hauyng in it a fygure of an eye with the appull thereof very blacke.
            
               Meſa, a ryuer whiche runneth by Brabande, and the lande of Luke and Gellar, callyd the Maſe.
            
               Meſapia, a countrey callyd alſo Apulia.
            
               Meſauli, entrees betwene the halle & the pariar.
            
               Meſentericae uenae, are vaynes whiche lyke to rootes of trees, doo receyue nouryſſhement, from the ſtomake and bowelles, dyſpoſyng it into all the body.
            
               Meſenterion, is a bowel ioyned with the midreſſe, and vnto the backe, whyche letteth that the iuyce of meates be not ſucked to haſtylye or vnprofytablye by the other bowels. Alex. Benedictus. Iulius Pollux writith, that Meſenterion is a ſkynne compact of vaines and ſynewes, ioynyng to the raynes and ſtomak, ſendyng nouryſhement vnto the lyuer. Galenus in Anato. ſayth, that it is ſet in the myddell of the bowelles, and is alſo callyd Meſarchon, bycauſe he wrappeth and incloſeth all the veynes, whiche do come from the lyuer vnto hym, with alſo the arteries adioynynge vnto hym. It is alſoo callyd in latyne Medianum.
            
            
               Meſia, a countrey ioynyng to Hungry, Myſe.
            
               Meſochorus, he that plaieth on a flute or other pype in the myddes of the daunſers.
            
               Meſoleucos, a precyous ſtone, blacke, hauyng a white ſtrake in the niddes.
            
               Meſomelas, a kynd of that precious ſtone, whiche is callid Achates, whiche being white is diuided with a blacke lyne.
            
               Meſon, was one which fyrſt inuented to bring into comedies ſeruantes and cookes. wherof it is ſuppoſed, that the cookes of cities and townes were of old tyme callyd Meſones, as ſtraunge cookes were callyd Tettiges. Coelius antiq. lec. li. 3.
            
               Meſonauta, a drudge in a ſhyppe, or a ſhyppe page, which doth all vyle ſeruyce in the ſhyp
            
               Meſonyxion, mydnyght.
            
               Meſopotamia, a countrey in the orient, lienge betweene the two noble ryuers Tigris, and Euphrates, and hath on the ſouthe Babyloniam, and on the north the great mountayne callyd Caucaſus.
            
               Meſpilus, a medlar tree.
            
               Meſpilum, a fruite callyd a medlar.
            
               Meſsâla Coruinus, a noble ſenatour of Rome, of whom Tully in his boke of oratours callyd Brutus, writeth in this wyſe, I may not omytte to ſpeke of the excellency of Meſſala. Beware do not thynke that any is lyke vnto hym in conſtance care and ſtudye aboute the weale publyke, alſo in eloquence, wherein he wonderfully dothe excell. And not withſtandyng beinge ſuche a manne, two yeres before that he dyed, he ſo loſt his remembrance, that he forgate his owne name. Which hath hapned to dyuerſe other men of great wyſedome and lernyng. He lyued in the tyme of Iulius Ceſar and Auguſtus emperours.
            
               Meſſalina, wyfe to the emperour Claudius, a woman of vnſaciable lechery.
            
               Meſſana, a citie in Sicile.
            
               Meſſapia, a part of the countrey of Apulia.
            
               Meſſene, a citie in Grece.
            
               Meſſenij, the people of that citie.
            
               Meſſenia, a region in Achaia, hauynge .xviii. mountaynes, in the whiche was a citie callid lyd Meſſenae.
            
            
               Meſsias, Chriſte.
            
               Meſsis, harueſt, ſomtyme it ſignifieth the corns or the grapes newe mowen or gathered.
            
               Meſſio, onis, a reapynge.
            
               Meſſor, oris, a reaper.
            
               Meſſorius, ria, rium, pertaynyng to reapyng.
            
               Meta, a butte or prycke to ſhoote at, ſometyme
 a marke or gowle in the field, whervnto men or horſes do runne. ſomtyme a bounde in landes. alſo a reyke of corne or heye. alſo the lower ſtone of a mylle.
            
               Meta lactis, a cheeſe.
            
               Metabaſis, a paſſage.
            
               Metabole, chaunge.
            
               Metagonium, a promontory or mountayne lyenge into the ſea, whyche diuydeth Affrica from Numidia.
            
               Metalepſis, a fygure, whereby a worde is put from his commune ſignification.
            
               Mettalli, hyred ſowldyours.
            
               Metallici, they whiche do dygge & warke mettal out of the mynes, wherin mettal is found.
            
               Metallum, mettall.
            
               Metamorphoſis, eos, a trāſformation or changynge of fygure.
            
               Metaphora, a tranſlation of wordes frō theyr proper ſignification.
            
               Metaphraenum, that part of the backe whiche is agaynſt the hart, the ſplene, the lungues, and the lyuer.
            
               Metaplaſmus, a fygure callyd tranſformation. it is a tranſlatyng of wordes being in proſe, into a fourme of meter, eyther for neceſſitie, or for to augment the elegancy.
            
               Metapontum, a citie in the realme of Naples.
            
               Metapontini, people of that citie.
            
               Metempſichoſis, the tranſpoſyng of ſoules after the opinyon of the Pythagoriens, out of one body, into an other body.
            
               Metatheſis, where one letter is tranſpoſed frō one place in a word into an nother, as Tymber Tymbre.
            
            
               Metaurus, & metaurum, a ryuer of Vmbria, whiche runneth into Flaminia.
            
            
               Metellus, the proper name of diuers noble Romaynes.
            
               Meteora, ar bokes of Ariſtotle, wherin he treteth of ſterres, & ſuch other celeſtiall thinges.
            
               Meteoria, ſpeculation in hygh thynges.
            
               Meteorologus, he that is ſtudyous in ſuche ſpeculation.
            
               Meteoroſcopus, a beholder of high thynges.
            
               Methodus, a compendious or redy waye, or a rule certayne to lerne by any ſcience.
            
               Methymna, a citie in the yle of Leſbos.
            
               Meticuloſus, rymerouſe or fearefull.
            
               Metior, tiris, tiri, to meete or meaſure, to gyue by meaſure, to paſſe ouer.
            
               Metius Sufferius, was capitayne of the people callyd Albani, in the tyme of Tullus Hoſtilius kynge of Romaynes. Who callynge hym to battayle agaynſt the people callid Fidenates. He came, but abydyng whiche hoſt ſhuld haue the victory, he abſtayned to fight. Wherfore Tullus after that he had vanquiſhed his enemies, cauſed Metius to be ryed to ſundry horſes, & to be drawen in pieces.
            Meto, meſſui, metere, to reape.
            
            
               Metoecus, was he which came out of one coū
               trey or citie, and dwellyd in an nother. ſuche were wont to pay certayn head ſyluer, which was named Metoecium, and was the value of .xii. Dragmas.
            
               Metona, a towne in Grece callyd Modon.
            
               Metonymia, a fygure callyd denomination, as Bacchus for wyne, Venus for lecherye, Cupido for loue.
            
               Metor, aris, ari, to ſet boundes, to meſure land, to dyſpoſe.
            
               Metopion, oyle of almondes. alſo a tree in Affrica, whyche dyſtylleth downe gumme lyke to roſeyn.
            
               Metopoſcopus, he that conſydereth a mannes face, and thereby iudgeth his conditions or affectes.
            
               Metrêta, or Metrêtes, is a certayne meaſure, wherof be two ſortes: the one is callyd Attica, and contayneth of wyne a hundred poū
               des, of oyle .xc. pounde, of hony a hundred & fyfty poundes, and is of our meaſure .vi. galons, one pottell, and one quarte. And ſoo it receyueth .xii. Choas atticas. The other is callyd Georgica, but it is of equall meaſure with Attica.
            
            
               Metropolis, the chiefe citie.
            
               Metropolitanus, a man of that citie.
            
               Metropolites, the byſhop of the chiefe citie.
            
               Metrum, a verſe.
            
               Metuo, tui, tuere, to fear or dread with trēbling
            
               Metus, rus, feare, dreade.
            
               Metys, the refuſe of waxe.
            
               Meu, an herbe.
            
               Meuania, a citie in the parte of Italye, callyd Vmbria, wherin Propertius the poete was borne.
            
               Meneuſa, a citie in Wales callid ſaint Dauid.
            Meus, a, um, myne.
            
            
               Mea quidem ſententia, in myne opinyon.
            
               Meo nomine, for my cauſe, on my behalfe.
            
               Meum eſt, it is my duetie or my part, or myn inuention.
            
               Meus ſum, I am myne owne man, or ſubiect to no man, or in no mans daunger.
         
         
            ¶M ANTE I.
            
               MI, to me. ſommetyme it is the vocatiue caſe of meus.
            
            
               Mica, a very ſmall portion of any thing as a crumme of breade, or of glaſſe, ſande, or mettall beynge fyled.
            
               Mico, care, to glyſten or ſhyne.
            
               Micant gladij, the ſwordes do brandyſhe.
            
               Micant uenae, the veynes do beate.
            
               Dignus qui cum in tenebris mices, is apapplyed
 to one, which is reputed to be an honeſt man and a truſty, whych wyll kepe touche and deceyue no manne. It may be in this wyſe tranſlated in a commune forme of ſpeakyng. He is one, with whome thou mayſt aſſuredly bargayne. alſo to holde vp nowe one fynger, nowe two, as men do whā they treat or bargayn togither by ſignes.
            
               Miconium, an herbe callyd popy.
            
               Microcoſmus, a lyttel world.
            
               Micrologia, curioſitie aboute thynges of noo valour.
            
               Micrologus, a lyttell communication.
            
               Micropſichia, feble courage, faynt harted.
            
               Micropſichi, they whiche haue faynt hartis.
            
               Micturio, ire, to pyſſe, or to haue wyll to pyſſe.
            
               Mictyris, poore folkes potage.
            
               Mida, a worme bredyng in beanes.
            
               Midas, a kynge of Phrigie, who excellyd all other in rycheſſe.
            
               Miaeſia, a towne in Macedonia.
            
               Migratio, a remouyng in iourney.
            
               Migro, are, to remoue from one place, to dwell in an nother.
            
               Migrare in mucronem, to be poynted.
            Migraſsit for migrauerit.
            
               Mihi, ſometyme it ſygnifieth to me, ſometyme againſt me. Si quid peccat Demea mihi peccat, What ſo euer it is that Demea hath donamys, it is agaynſt me, it is my harme, and none others. ſometyme it ſignifieth of me, or by me. Syrus eſt praehendendus, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adhortandus mihi. Syrus muſt be gotten and coū
               ſayled by me.
            
               Mihipte, Cato vſed for mihi ipſi.
            
            
               Milciades, a noble capitayn of the Athenienſes, who with a xi. thouſand Grekes vanquiſhed vi. hundred thouſand Perſians in the fieldes of Marathon. Afterwarde by the people of Athenes he was cōdemned and caſt into priſon where he died, and mought not be ſuffred to be buried vntyll his ſonne hadde taken on hym the gyues whiche his father did weare.
            
               Miles, militis, a man of warre, a ſouldiour.
            
               Miletus, a citie in Ionia, an other in Creta, an other in the yle of Leſbus.
            
               Mileſius, a, um, of that citie.
            
               Miletum, a citie in the countrey of Athenes.
            
               Militaris uia, the hygh way.
            
               Militariter, warrely.
            
               Militia, warre, ſometyme the exerciſe of warre.
            
               Milito, are, to go on warfare, or to be in warres
            
               Milium, a ſmall grayn callyd myll.
            Mille, & millia, a thouſand.
            
            
               Millearium, a myle alſo a cawdron. alſo a pyller in Rome, wherin was grauen al the ways of Italye.
            
               Millefolium, or Millefolia, an herbe callyd milfoyle or yarowe, or noſeblede.
            
               Millepeda, a worme hauynge a great numine of feete.
            
               Milleſies, a thouſande tymes.
            
               Milleſima pars, the thouſande part.
            
               Milliarius, a, um, of a thouſande weight.
            
               Millies, a thouſande tymes.
            
               Millus, a maſtyues colar, made of lether with n
                  •
               yles.
            
               Milo, onis, the name of one which at the game of Olympus, with his bare hand ſlew a bul, and after caried hym a furlong, and the ſame day eate hym euery morſel. It was alſo a noble Romayn, for whom Tully made an oration contaynynge incomparable eloquence.
            
               Meluina 
                     •
                  ibia, a corner or ſmalle ſhaulme.
            
               Miluus & miluius, a kyte. there is alſo a fyſhe and a ſterre of the ſame name.
            
               Miluinus, na, num, of a kyte, or lyke a kyte.
            
               Mimallones, women dedicate to the foolyſſhe ceremonies of Bacchus.
            
               Mimas, a mountayne of Thracia.
            
               Mimus, a bourder or a rayler, whiche in mockynge other men in geſture and countenance, dothe folowe them, faynynge to be the ſame perſons whom they do reproue. Mimi be verſes counterfaytinge moche wantonnes without any reuerence, hauyng not withſtandyng ſome wyſe ſentences myngled therwith.
            
               Mimicus, ca, cum, of ſuche wanton faſcion.
            
               Mimographus, a writer of ſuch wātē matters
            
               Mina, among the Greekes ſomtyme ſygnifyed a poyſe or weight. ſomtyme a coyn. The poiſe was of thre ſortes, one was callyd Mina attica, whiche wayed .xii. ounces and an halfe. Mina medica, wayed .xii. ounces. Mina Alexandrina, weyed .xx. ounces. Whan it ſignifyed coyne, there was of it alſoo two ſortes: one callyd Mina or mna attica Solonis, whithe contayned a hundred Dragmas, of oure money nowe curraunt .xivii. s. xi. d. An nother was Mina or Mna uaetus, whiche was lxxv. Dragmas .xxxv. s. xi. d. q.
            
               Mina italica, as Diodorus ſayth, was a poūde weyght, and .iiii drammes.
            
               Decem minae or mnae, be of our money .xxiii. pound xix. s. ii. d.
            
               Centum minae, or mnae, be .CCxxxix. pounde xi. s. viii. d.
            
               Minae, arum, thretenynges. alſo battylmentes of walles.
            
               Minax, acis, full of thretnynges.
            
               Minaciter, thretnyngly.
            
               Mincius, a ryuer of Italy whiche compaſſeth the citie of Mantua, and rounneth in to the great ryuer of Po callyd Padus.
            
               Minei, people of Arabia, nigh to the redde ſea.
            
               Minera, & mineralia, ar of ſom uſid for mines, out of the whiche mettall is dygged.
            
               Minerua, callyd goddeſſe of doctrine and wyſdome,
 whiche was alſo named Pallas. ſome tyme Minerua is vſed for nature, wytte, or crafte, Craſſa Minerua, uel pingui minerua, groſly, rudely. Inuita minerua, agaynſte nature.
            
               Minerual, & Mineruale, a reward gyuen ſomtyme by ſcholers vnto theyr maſters, in meat or drynke.
            
               Mingo, gere, to make water, to pyſſe.
            
               Miniacius, a, um, red, of ſynople colour.
            
               Miniatula, red waxe.
            
               Miniati libri, lymned bokes, hauyng letters of dyuers colours.
            
               Minime, & Minimum, leſt. Minime gentium, leaſt in all mennes opinions. ſomtyme minime ſignifieth no, in noo wyſe. Minime doctus, vnlerned. Minime ſapiens, vnwyſe.
            
               Minime mirum, lyttell meruayle.
            
               Minio, are, to dye red.
            
               Miniſter, ſtri, a ſeruaunt.
            
               Miniſterium, ſeruice. ſometyme generallye all warke. ſometyme miniſteria be ſeruauntes.
            
               Miniſtro, are, to ſerue, to gyue a thynge in doinge ſeruice.
            
               Minitabundus, thretenynge ſoore.
            
               Minitans, thretnynge.
            
               Minitor, aris, ari, to thret ſore.
            
               Minitari ferrum & flammam, to thretten to ſlea and to burne.
            
               Minium, ſynople or red leade,
            
               Minius, a riuer in Spayne.
            
               Minoa, the name of a citie in Sicyle, of an other in the yle called Amorgos by Sicile.
            Minor, aris, ari, to thretten.
            
            
               Minor natu, the yonger.
            
               Minoris dimidio, leſſe by halfe.
            
               Minos, was the kynge of Crete, and gaue to them lawes, whome paynyms for his excellente iuſtice, ſuppoſed to be chyefe iudge of Hell.
            
               Minotaurus, was a monſter in Creta whome the poetes do fayne to be borne of Paſyphae the wyfe of kynge Minos, beynge parte lyke a man, parte lyke a bull, whiche beynge incloſed in the place called Labyrinthus was fed with the fleſhe of men. But after he was ſlayne by Theſeus, with the helpe of Ariadna doughter of Minos.
            
               Minthos, dunge or ordure.
            
               Minturnae, a citie in Campania.
            
               Minuo, ere, to minyſhe.
            
               Minuere aes alienum, to paye dettes.
            
               Minurizo, are, to ſynge ſmall, or to feyne in ſyngynge.
            
               Minus, leſſe.
            
               Minutal, a meate made with chopped herbes, a iuſſell.
            
               Minutarius, a ſeller of trifles or ſmall haberdaſhe ware.
            
               Minutatim, piece meale, in gobbettes.
            Minutim, idem.
            
               Minutia, the ſmalleſt thynge that maye be ſene.
            Minutum, idem quod Lepta.
            Minutus, a, um, minyſhed
            
            
               Minutus animus, a feble courage.
            
               Minyae, a towne in Theſſalia.
            
               Miniariae, mynes, they be alſo veynes of mettal, out of the whiche is taken ſinope.
            
               Mira, wonders or meruayles.
            
               Mirabilis, le, meruaylous, wonderfull.
            
               Miraculum, a myracle, a thynge excedynge nature or common reaſon.
            
               Mirifico, care, to make wonderfull.
            
               Mirificus, ca, cum, wonderfully done, meruaylous.
            
               Miriones, men hauynge wry mouthes.
            
               Mirmeciae, wertes in the priuie partes.
            
               Mirmillones, chalengers at fyghtynge with ſwordes.
            
               Miror, aris, ari, to meruayle, to lyke a thynge.
            
               Mirum in modum, in a meruaylous faſcion.
            
               Miſanthropos, he that hateth the company of men.
            
               Miſcellanea, a mixture of dyuerſe thynges.
            
               Miſceo, cui, ſcere, to myxe or meddle together, to confounde together, to trouble or to doo a thynge out of order or reaſon, ſometyme it ſignifieth to ſerue one with drynke.
            
               Miſcere tumultum, to ſet men in a rore, to make a commotion.
            
               Miſellus, a lyttell wretche.
            
               Miſer, eri, a wretche. ſometyme innocent.
            
               Miſerabilis, le, miſerable, wretched, lamentable.
            
               Miſerabiliter, miſerably, lamentably.
            
               Miſerandus, to be pitied.
            
               Miſerator, he that dothe an acte of charitie on hym whom he pitieth.
            Miſericors, dis, mercifull.
            
            
               Miſerè, miſerably.
            
               Miſere amat, he loueth excedyngly.
            
               Miſereſco, ſcere, to be moued with pitie.
            
               Miſeret me, I haue pitie.
            
               Miſeretur, I am moued with pitie.
            
               Miſertum eſt, men haue compaſſion or pitie.
            
               Miſeria, miſery, infelicitie.
            Miſeritudo, idem.
            
               Miſericordia, pitie.
            Miſeratio, idem.
            
               Miſericorditer, pitifully.
            
               Miſerior, eris, miſereri, to haue pitie.
            
               Miſeriter, miſarably.
            
               Miſeror, aris, ari, to haue pitie.
            
               Miſogynia, an hater of women.
            
               Miſſenus, an hyll in Campania.
            
               Miſſiculo, are, to ſende often.
            
               Miſsile, all thynges that are throwen.
            
               Miſsilia, thynges whiche the aunciente empetours
 were wonte to caſte among the people as bread, cakes, ſwete oyntmente and ſuche lyke thynges whiche was done in the Theatre, in the feaſtes called Saturnalia.
            
            
               Miſsio, a meſſage. alſo leaue to departe.
            
               Miſsito, tare, to ſende often.
            Miſsus, a, um, ſent.
            
            
               Miſsus, us, a courſe, whan oone thynge cummeth in a diſtaunce after an other, a turne.
            
               Miſſum facere, to omit or paſſe ouer a thing. alſo to gyue leaue to departe.
            
               Miſy, is that whiche the apothecaries do call vitriole.
            
               Mitellum, a lyttell miter.
            
               Miteſco, ſcere, to waxe tame or quiete. ſometyme to waxe ripe.
            
               Mithra, the Perſians do call the ſunne, and alſo the chiefe prieſte of the ſunne.
            
               Mithrax, a ſtone of the colour of a roſe, but agaynſt the ſunne he is chaungeable,
            
               Mithriaca ſacra, ceremonies of the ſunne.
            
               Mithridates, a puiſſant kynge of Ponthus in Aſia.
            
               Mithridaticum, a medicine lyke to triacle, called Mitridate.
            
            
               Mithylenae, arum, a citie in the yle of Leſbos.
            
               Mitigo, are, to mitigate, to ſwage.
            
               Mitifico, to pacifie or make quiete.
            
               Mitis, re, meke, ſymple, quiete.
            
               Mitra, a myter. It was alſo a tyre of men and womens heades, amonge the Egiptians.
            
               Mitterin, an yle ſyxe dayes ſaylinge out of Englande, wherein is great plenty of tynne.
            
               Mitte ſanguis, a bloud lettyng or a bloud ſhed.
            
               Mitto, miſi, mittere, to ſende, to leaue or lay a parte, to gyue.
            
               Mittere ſanguinem, to let bloud.
            
               Mittere in conſiliū, to let the iudes departe to gyue ſentence, after that the oratour hath fyniſhed his oration, or the lawier his plea.
            
               Mitte hanc noxiam, forgyue me that faute.
            
               Mitte hunc ire, let hym go.
            
               Mittas frenum affectibus, brydle thyne affections.
            
               Miua, is an Arabike worde, and ſygnyfyeth the iuyce of fruites boyled vntyll it be as thycke as hony. It is now onely taken for a ſyrupe made with the iuyce of quinces, wine and ſugar or hony, as in olde tyme it was made.
            
               Mixtarius, a cup, wherin wyne is alayed with water.
         
         
            ¶M ANTE N.
            MNA, idem quod mina.
            
               Mnemoſyne, memory.
            
               Mneſterae, woars.
            
               Mneſtheus, the name of a Troyan.
         
         
            ¶M ANTE O.
            
               MOAB, a citie of Araby. alſo the name of one of the ſonnes of Loth, of whō the people are called Moabitae.
            
            
               Mobilis, le, moueable, ſone moued.
            
               Mocontiacum, or Moguntia, the citie of Mētz in Almayne.
            
               Moderatio, moderation, temperaunce.
            
               Moderator, oris, a gouernour.
            
               Moderatus, ta, tum, moderate, temperate.
            
               Moderor, aris, ari, & Modero, are, to gouerne, to rule, to ſet a meaſure in thynges, to moderate.
            
               Modeſtia, modeſtie, temperaunce.
            
               Modeſtè, temperately, ſoberly, aduiſedly.
            
               Modeſtus, temperate, well aduyſed.
            
               Modialis, le, that whiche conteyneth a buſhel.
            
               Modicus, ca, cum, whiche excedeth not, meaſurable, ſometyme lyttell or fewe.
            
               Modicus cultu, meanely apparayled.
            
               Modico graduire, to go a ſofte pace.
            
               Modice, meanely, meaſurably.
            
               Modificor, caris, cari, to take the meaſure of a thynge.
            
               Modiolus, a buckette, where with water is drawen out of a well: or a potte faſtned to a whele, whiche bryngeth vp water, and poureth it out.
            
               Modiparatores, men ordeyned to ſee meaſure kepte.
            
               Modius, a buſhell: it was properlye a meaſure of drye thynges, whiche conteyned .xvi. Sextarios, and conteyned of our meaſure one galon. one pottel and one quarte ſauynge foure ounce meaſures. uide poſtea in ſextario.
            
            
               Modius agri, grounde conteyninge euery waye .C. feete.
            
               Modo, nowe, nowe late, ſometyme it ſignifyeth ſo that. Non refert, modo id faciat, It maketh no matter, ſo that he do it. alſo only. Modo ne. G. Declinandū eſt de uia, modo ne ſumma turpitudo ſequatur. A man maye leaue the highe waye, ſo that there folowe no diſhoneſtie.
            
               Modô ne id demum ſenſiſti Pamphile, Perceyuedſt thou it not vntyll nowe Pamphilus
            
               Modulor, aris, ari, to make or do a thynge by numbre and meaſure. alſo to ſynge.
            
               Modulus, & Modulamen, a ſonge, a modulation, the tyme in ſyngynge.
            
               Modus, maner, meaſure, furme faſcion, way, quantitie, ende. Etſi nihil ſcripſit, niſi de modo agri, although he wrote nothynge but of the quantitie of the felde.
            
               Modo noſtro, after our faſcion.
            
               Modum habere, to kepe a rule or order in any thynge.
            
               Modum ſtatuere, to gyue a rule.
            
                Modum conſtituere, idem.
            
               Modum adhibere alicui rei. to ſet a thinge in a reſonable order. Saltare ad tibicinis modos, to daunce after the minſtrelles playinge or tunes.
            
               Modus agri, meaſure of lande.
            
               Moechor, aris, ari, to committe auoutry.
            
               Moechus, an auoutrer or lechour.
            
               Moechiſſo, are, to commit auoutry
            
               Moenia, walles of a towne or caſtell.
            Moenitus, ta, tum, walled.
            
            
               Moereo, ere, to be ſorowfull.
            
               Moero, are, to make one ſad and heuy.
            Moeror, oris, ſorowe.
            
            Moeſtitia, idem.
            
               Moeſia, a prouynce in Aſia nygh to Pontus.
            
               Moeſtiter, heuyly, ſorowfully.
            
               Moeſtus, a, um, ſory or ſorowfull.
            Moeſto, are, Moeſitifico, care, to make ſorowfull.
            
            
               Moga, a countrey in Aſia, called nowe Ceſaria.
            
               Moguntia, a noble Citie in Germany, called Menſe.
            
               Mola, a mylle, it is alſo a great pece of fleſſhe without ſhape, growen in a woman, whiche cauſeth theym ſometyme to thynke that they be with chylde, it is alſo a cake made of mele and ſalte.
            
               Molaris, a cheke tothe.
            Molaris, re, & Molarius, ia, um, perteyninge to a myll.
            
            Molendinarius, ia, um, idem.
            
               Molarius equus, an horſe, whiche dryueth aboute a malte myll.
            
               Molendinarius, a myllar.
            
               Moles, a thynge that is very great and weighty: ſomtyme it is taken for difficultie.
            
               Moleſtia, griefe.
            
               Moleſtè. greuouſely.
            
               Moleſto, are, to greue, to offende, to do dyſpleaſure to one.
            
               Moleſtus, a, um, that whiche greueth, offendeth, or diſcontenteth.
            
               Moleſta tunica, a garment which was myxt with ſome matter, whiche gathered fyre, put on ſome perſons that ſhulde ſuffre deathe.
            
               Moletrina, a morter or querne, wherin any thynge may be ground with the hande.
            
               Molimen, the force or indeuour in doinge a thynge.
            Molitio, & Molimentum, idem.
            
               Molior, iris, iri, to moue, to be moued, or ſtirred to doo a thynge. Moliri claſſem, to prepare a nauye. Moliri iter, to perfourme a iourneye. Moliri habenas, to rule. Moliri inſidias, to laye ſnares, to laye in awayte Moliri arcem, to buylde a fortreſſe. Moliri bellum, to make warre. Moliri is ſometyme to deuyſe or inuent, alſo to go aboute to doo a thynge, to make, to be taried or let.
            
               Moliri moram, to tary.
            
               Molitor, oris, a myllar.
            
               Molleſco, ſcere, to waxe ſofte, to be pacyfyed from wrathe.
            
               Moleſtra, a ſhepes fell.
            
               Mollicies, & mollicia, ſoftneſſe, tenderneſſe. delicateneſſe, womanlyneſſe.
            
               Mollicina, fyne clothe or ſylke.
            
               Molliculus, la, tender, delycate.
            
               Mollifico, to make ſofte or tender.
            
               Mollio, ire, to make ſofte or tender, to pacifie or appeaſe, to make wanton or tender.
            
               Mollis, ſofte, tender. molle ingenium, a wyt whiche lyghtelye taketh. Mollis homo, a man effemynate, or womanlye, not hardye or conſtante of wytte, inuolued in wanton pleaſures and ſenſuall appetite. ſometyme mollis ſygnifieth rype, alſo remyſſe, ſomtyme pleaſaunte, alſo eaſy to be pleaſed.
            
               Molliter, gentylly, with good wyll, eaſely, delycately, paciently.
            
               Mollitudo, inis, ſoftnes and gentylnes.
            
               Molluſca, a nutte with a ſofte ſhale, a fylberd.
            
               Molluſcum, the wenne of a tree.
            Molo, molui, lire, to grynde.
            
            
               Moloch, was an ydoll of the Ammonites, ſygnifienge in hebrew a gouernour or counſailour. It was alſo called Molchom, ſomtyme Milchom.
            
            
               Molochinus color, a colour lyke to the floures of mallowes.
            
               Molochinarius, he that dyeth the ſayde colour
            
               Molorthus, a plumrule, ſuche as maſons and carpenters do occupye in ſquarynge of ſtone and tymber.
            
               Moloſſa gens, people in the parte of Grece called Epirus, they were alſo called Moloſsi.
            
            
               Moloſſus, a maſtiue dogge. it is alſo a foote in meter.
            
               Molothros, a kynde of whyte vynes.
            
               Molucrum, a ſquare piece of tymber, wheron the paynyms dydde ſacrifyce. It is alſo the trendyll of a myll. Alſo the ſwellynge of a womans bealy, whiche doth hap as well to maidens, as to wyues.
            
               Molybdena, alſo Plumbago, is the oore of leade or ſyluer, it is alſo one of the kyndes of the herbe called Perſicaria.
            
            
               Molybditis, the ſpume or fome of leade.
            
               Momentaneus, a, um, that whiche dureth but a lyttell whyles, or ſhortely altereth.
            
               Momentatius, a, um, that whiche is done in a lyttell ſpace.
            
               Momentum, the leaſte parte of tyme, whiche can not be aſſigned, a momente, it is alſo a portion more or leſſe, of any thynge or matter alſo the eſtimation or value of a thynge.
            
                
               Nullius eſt momenti, it is of no value.
            
               Pari momento ſors, it is one chaunce, of lyke value of effecte.
            
               Momordi, the preterperfect tenſe of mordeo.
            
            
               Momus, called the god of reprehencion.
            
               Momo ſatisfacere, to contente hym, whom almoſte nothynge maye pleaſe.
            
               Momo iudice decertare, to contende afore a rigorous and extreme iudge.
            
               Mona, whiche the grekes do cal Monna, is an yle nyghe to Britannia, puiſſaunt of people in the tyme of Cornelius Tacitus, wher they that fled from the Romayns were ſocoured, I ſuppoſe it to be the yle nowe called Man, and not Angleſey, for as moche as that is ioyned to Britayne. there is alſo an other yle of that name in the ryuer of Reene, nyghe to Friſelande and not onely nyghe to Britayne:
            
               Monachus, a ſolytarie perſon, all be it that it is vſed for a monke.
            
               Monachris, a mountayne in Archadia.
            
               Monarcha, a prynce, whiche ruleth alone without piere or companion, monarche.
            
               Monarchia, the rule of one monarchie.
            
               Monas, monadis, the number of one, vnitie.
            
               Monaſterium, a place ſolytarie.
            
               Monedula, a byrde called a Choughe or Cadeſſe.
            
               Moneo, monere, to warne, to put in remembraunce. to beade one to dynner or ſupper.
            
               Monitor, toris, he that warneth a man, or putteth hym in remembraunce.
            
               Moneta, money. alſo the name of Iuno.
            
               Monetalis, le, perteynynge to money.
            
               Monetarius, a maker of money, a coyner.
            
               Monile, a colar or bee, whiche women vſe to weare about theyr neckes. It is alſo a poytrell of a horſe.
            
               Monimentum, reade after Monumentum.
            
            
               Monitio, warnynge.
            Monitus, tus, idem.
            
               Monitorius, a, um, that whiche dothe warne or exhorte.
            
               Monobeli, they whiche haue a longe thynge lyke to ſpyttes. Alſo they that be very hyghe in perſonage and aboue other. Lampridius in uita Alex.
            
            
               Monochordium, an inſtrumente, hauyng many ſtrynges of one ſowne, ſauynge that with ſmalle pieces of cloth, the ſounes be diſtinct, as Clauycordes be.
            
               Monochromatos, a protrayture of one colour.
            
               Monoechus, a hauen of Liguria.
            
               Monoceros, otis, an Vnycorne.
            
               Monoculus, a man hauynge but one eye.
            
               Monodia, a lamentable or mournynge ſonge, ſuche as is ſongen in funeralles.
            
               Monodos, was a manne, whiche in ſtede of tethe, had but one bone, lyke as kynge Pirrhus had.
            
               Monogamus, he that neuer hadde but one wyfe.
            
               Monogammi, men leane and yuell coloured.
            
               Monogrammus, a picture onely drawen with a lyne.
            
               Monologium, a longe tale of one matter.
            
               Monomachia, a battayle, wherin onely two men do fyghte.
            
               Monomachus, he that fyghteth alone, without helpe of any other man.
            
               Monomeri, people in the eaſte parte of the worlde which haue but one legge, wherwith they go by leapes more ſwyftlye thanne any beaſte.
            
               Monophagia, a meale of one onely meate or dyſhe.
            Monophthalmus, idem quod monocidus.
            
               Monopodium, a table ſette on one foote or treſtyll.
            
               Monopolium, where oone manne ingroſſeth thynges, to haue all in his owne hande, that no manne maye gayne, but he onely. It maye be alſo one countreye or market, that taketh awaye the gaynes from other countreyes or markettes.
            
               Monoptaton, a worde hauynge but one caſe.
            
               Monoſceli, men in India, whiche haue but one legge, ſo great, that therwith they couer them ſelfes from the ſonne.
            
               Monoſtelon, where as is but one pyller.
            
               Monotropos, ſolitarie, of one facion alwaye.
            
               Monoxylon, a bote made in oone piece of tymber.
            
               Mons, tis, a mountayne or hyll. alſo an hepe of thynges or any other thinge in the fourme of an hyll.
            
               Mons feratus, a countrey in Italye.
            Monſtrificus, a, um, monſtruous.
            
            
               Monſtro, are, to ſhewe.
            
               Monſtrum, a monſter, that which excedeth or lacketh in naturall fourme or order.
            Monſtroſus, monſtroſa, ſtroſum, monſtruous
            
            
               Montanus, a, um, of a mountayne.
            
               Monticulus, a lyttell hylle.
            
               Montigena, borne on a hylle.
            
               Montiuagus, wandrynge by hylles.
            
               Montoſus, a, um, full of hylles.
            
               Monumentum, a remembraunce of ſome notable acte, as ſepulchres, images, pylars, gret ſtones, inſcriptions, bokes, and other lyke: wherby any thynge excellente, concernynge great wyttes, kunnyng, enterpriſe in armes, puyſſaunce, or rycheſſe is remembred.
            
               Monycha, chae, the name of ſayncte Auſtens mother.
            
               Monychus, a gyant, one of the Centaures.
            
               Monyma, the wyfe of kynge Mithrydate, whiche after that her huſbande was vaynquyſhed,
 kylled her ſelfe.
            
               Mopſopia, the countrey of Athenes.
            
               Mopſus, the name of a poete.
            
               Mora, taryenge, leyſure.
            
               Moram creare, to prolonge the tyme, to delay. Moram facere, idem.
            
            
               Per hunc nulla eſt mora, He letteth it not.
            
               Nec mora ulla eſt quin eam uxorem ducā, There is no let but that I may wedde her.
            
               Faxo haud quicquam ſit morae, Loke that thou tary not, ſee that we tary not for the.
            
               Inijcere moram & relligionem iudicandi iudicibus, to make the iudges aferde or ſcrupulouſe, and to deferre iudgement.
            
               Quid ergo erat morae & tergiuerſationis? Than what was the let, and that he went no farther in the matter?
            
               Moralis, le, pertaynynge to maners.
            
               Moramentum, taryenge, or abode.
            
               Moratus, inſtructed in good maners.
            
               Moratoria cautio, gage to pay at a daye certayne whyche he hath in reſpyte.
            
               Morata oratio, an oration, whyche repreſenteth the maners and faſſhyon of hym that ſpeaketh.
            
               Morbidus, a, um, ſycke or ſkabbed.
            
               Morbificus, ca, cum, that whiche cauſeth dyſeaſe or ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Morboſus, a, um, full of ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Morbus, ſyckeneſſe, dyſeaſe, a ſore.
            
               Morbo affici, to be ſycke.
            In morbo eſſe, idem.
            
               In morbum delabi, to falle ſycke.
            
               Morbo laborare, to be ſycke.
            
               Ex morbo conualeſcere, to be recouered frō ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Morbus arcuatus, the iaundyſe.
            
               Morbus animae, a vyce inueterate and harde to be cured, as ambition, auaryce.
            
               Morbus animi, trouble or vexation of ſpyryte.
            
               Morbus regius, the yelowe iaundyſe.
            
               Mordacitas, a bytynge.
            
               Mordax, acis, he that dothe byte, be it with the tethe, or with language.
            
               Mordeo, momordi, dere, to byte, to detracte, or rebuke vehemently.
            
               Mordêre frenum, to gnawe on the brydelle, whyche is ſpoken where it ſygnifyeth one to repugne agaynſte ſeruitude or bondage.
            
               Mordicibus, with bytynges.
            
               Mordico, care, to hurte with bytynge.
            
               Mordicus, bytynge harde and faſte, as a man holdeth a thynge faſte with his teethe.
            
               Mordicus tenere, to holde faſte, to perſyſte obſtynately in an opynyon or ſentence.
            
               Moria, in Greeke, is in englyſhe foolyſſheneſſe or folye.
            
               Moriar, a maner of an othe, ſygnyfyenge I wolde I ſhoulde dye, or I pray god I dye.
            
               Moribundus, dyenge.
            
               Moribus, accordyng to the maner and cuſtome.
            Moriger, geri, obedient.
            
            Morigeratus, idem.
            
               Morigeror, aris, ari, to obeye, to do as a man byddeth, to confourme one mans maners to an others.
            
               Morini, people in Fraunce, dwellynge aboute Turwan.
            
               Morio, onis, a foole.
            Morior, iris, & eri, moriri, & mori, to dye.
            
            
               Morologus, ſygnifyeh hym, that ſpeaketh folyſhely, or vnſenſybly.
            
               Moror, aris, ari, to tary, or abyde, to let, or cauſe to tary, to be madde.
            
               Non moror, I wyll not lette.
            
               Moros, a foole.
            
               Moroſi, waywardly.
            
               Moroſitas, waywardnes.
            
               Moroſus, waywarde, dyuerſe in condytions, whome noo manne can pleaſe, more curyouſe than nedeth.
            
               Morotis, & moroſis, a madneſſe or freneſye, where a man loſeth his memorye.
            Mors, tis, deathe.
            
            
               Morſicatim, bytynge one an other.
            
               Morſiuncula, a lyttell bytte or ſnacke.
            
               Morſus, us, a bytte with the tethe, a taunte in ſpeakynge.
            Morſus, a, um, bytten.
            
            Mortalis, le, mortall.
            
            
               Mortarium, a mortar, wherein thynges are brayed or grounden.Victruuiꝰ. it is alſo the place where lyme and ſande be mynglyd to make morter.
            
               Morticina caro, moreyne fleſſhe, whiche dyeth by it ſelfe, carayne.
            
               Morticini, cornes whych be on mens fete.
            
               Morticinum, corrupt.
            
               Mortiferus, a, um, whyche cauſeth any thynge to dye.
            
               Mortuale, pertaynynge to deade men.
            
               Mortuum mare, a great mere in Syria, wherin no heuy thynge may ſynke.
            
               Morula, a lyttell taryenge.
            
               Morum, a mulbery, or blacke beary.
            
               Morus, a mulbery tree, and a bremble that beareth blacke bearyes.
            
               Mos, moris, a maner, a condicion, alſo cuſtome.
            
               Mos bonus, a good faſhyon.
            
               Moſa fluuius, a ryuer whyche is callyd the Maze, and rounneth betwene the duchye of Brabant, and the lande of Luke.
            
               Morem gerere, to obey.
            
               Moſcatulae, peaeis which do ſauour lyke muſke.
            
               Moſcouia, a greatte countraye in the northe parte of the worlde, beyonde Polonia, whiche conteyneth in lengthe foure hundred myles, and aboue. The people therof be callyd
 
               Moſcouitae, in englyſſhe Moſcouytes, they haue a greatte duke, who nameth hym ſelfe Emperoure of Ruſſye: they be Chryſtened, and doo obſerue the ryghtes of the Greekes. And theyr language is the tungue of Slauonye, whyche is alſoo vſyd in Boheme and Polle.
            
               Moſca, a ryuer in Moſcouia.
            
               Moſcna, is the chiefe citie of that countreye, through the whyche the ſayde ryuer of Moſca doth runne.
            
               Moſculus, a calfe, alſo an herbe.
            
               Moſchum, muſke.
            
               Moſcus, a Regyon in Aſia nygh to the ryuer of Phaſis, deuyded into thre partes, in the one do dwell people callyd Colchi, in the ſeconde Hiberes, in the thyrde Armenij.
            
            
               Moſillus, a dyminutiue of Mos.
            
            
               Moſini, people in Aſia towarde the northe.
            
               Motabilis, alwaye mouynge.
            
               Motacilla, a byrde callyd a wagtayle.
            
               Motiuus, a, um, mouynge, not abydynge.
            
               Moto, are, to moue often.
            Motus, ta, tum moued.
            
            Motus, tus, mouynge.
            
            
               Moueo, ere, to moue, to remoue or put away, to departe from a place, to ſtere or prouoke.
            
               Mouere calculos in utra
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   parte, to make dyffycultie on the one part or the other.
            
               Mouere animum, to ſtyre or allure the mynd.
            
               Mouere tragoedias, to doo thynges to be lamented.
            
               Mouere camerinam, to ſtyre thynges, whiche ſhall be to his owne dyſpleaſure, that begynneth it.
            
               Mouere haeredes, to put the heyres oute of poſſeſſion.
            
               Mouere nuptias, to trouble the weddynge.
            
               Mouere ſtomachum, 
               
                  〈◊〉
                cauſe one to be very angrye.
            
               Ego iſtaec moueo, I care moche therefore, or doo paſſe moche therevppon. ſpoken in mockage.
            
               Mouere aliquem à ſententia, to make oone to chaunge his opinyon.
            
               Mouere Senatu, uel de Senatu, to put one out of the Senate, or to depryue hym of that authorytie.
            
               Mouere aluum, to make one to be ſoluble or dyſpoſed to the ſtoole.
            
               Mox, anon, forthwith.
            
               Moyſes, or Moſes, ſygnyfyeth drawen vp or taken vp from the water. It was the name of a noble prophete ſonne of Amram, of the trybe of Leui, who brought the Iſrahelites frome the bondage of Pharao kynge of Egypte, with moſte wonderfull myracles, and gouerned theym by an excedynge wyſedome and pacyence. He dyed afore the incarnation of Chriſte .MCCCCLXII. beyng of the age of .Cxx yeres, his eyen being neuer dymmed nor his tethe louſe.
         
         
            M ANTE V.
            
               MVceo, cui, to be fylthy or vynewed, pallyd, or deade, as wyne, whyche hathe loſte his verdure.
            Muceſco, ſcere, idem quod Muceo.
            Mucidus, da, dum, fylthy, vynewed.
            
            
               Mucor, oris, fylth, vinue, ſuche as is on breade or meate longe kepte.
            
               Mucro, onis, the poynte of a ſworde or knyfe. ſometyme it is taken for a ſworde.
            Mucronatus, ta, tum, poynted.
            
            
               Mucus, the fylthe, whiche commeth out of the noſe.
            
               Mugil, uel Mugilis, a fyſſhe of the ſea, hauntynge the cooſtes amonge the ſkalyd fyſſhes mooſte ſwyfte: Of colour whyte, they be of the Greekes callyd Ceſtrei & Plotae, and communely they be named Cephali Of theym be dyuerſe and ſundrye kyndes, dyuyded by the Greekes, as it ſhall appere in theyr places: It is an vnſacyable fyſſhe, and therfore hath a greatte bealye, and therfore excepte he be emptye, he abydeth ſtylle in a place, and beyng aferde, he hydeth his head, weenynge that all his bodye is alſoo hydde, they be ſoo deſyrouſe eche of the kyndes of the other, that whan fyſhers haue taken the males, and tyed theym by a lyne, and lette theym downe into the ſea, all the females whan they haue perceyued the males, doo gather togyther, and commynge to theym are taken in the nettes. Lykewyſe the male kynde dothe gather togyther, and do folowe the female kynde.
            
               Muginor, ari, to murmure.
            
               Mugio, gire, to bellowe lyke a cowe or bulle: ſometyme it ſygnyfieth the noyſe of thunder, or great wyndes.
            
               Mugonia, a gate at Rome, wherby cattell dyd enter into the citie.
            
               Mugitus, tus, bellowynge of kyne, or other noyſe lyke.
            
               Mula, a Mule, whyche beaſte ſommetyme is gotten of an aſſe ſtalyon and a mare ſometyme of a horſe ſtalyon, and a female mare, as Columella wryteth. In Syria (as Ariſtoteles wryteth) Mules doo bothe gette foles, and brynge forthe foles. There hath ben founden of theym at Athenes, whyche were foure ſcore yeeres olde, as that author wryteth. It is alſo the name of an herbe lyke to Scolopendriū, ſo tranſlated by Theodorus Gaza.
            
            
                
               Mularis, re, pertaynynge to a mule.
            
               Mulcedo, dinis, a gentyll and ſwete handlynge or intreatynge.
            
               Mulceo, ſi, cere, to pacifye, to appeaſe, to mytygate, to make ſweete, to annoynte, to polyſſhe.
            
               Mulciber, eris, one of the names of Vulcane, callyd god of fyre.
            
               Mulctor, ctaris, ctari, to punyſſhe, or be punyſſhed.
            
               Mulcta, a penaltie, a condempnation, a fyne ſeſſed.
            
               Mulctam dicere, to gyue an iniunction, to ſette a peyne.
            Mulctam irrogare, idem.
            
               Mulctam committere, to forfayte, to runne in the peyne.
            
               Mulctam remittere, to pardone.
            
               Mulctra, the mylkynge, the payle, wherinto it is mylked, whiche is alſo callyd Mulctrale.
            
            
               Mulctrum, the acte of mylkynge.
            
               Mulei, certayne ſhowes of purple colour, whyche the kynges of Alba ware, and afterward the noble men of Rome.
            
               Mulgeo, mulſi, mulgere, to mylke or ſtroke.
            
               Mulgo, are, to publyſhe.
            
               Muli mariani, forkes, whereon fardelles were truſſed and borne by men.
            ❀Muli mariani, a prouerbe referred vnto them, whyche be obedient to euery commandement, be it neuer ſo greuouſe. It may alſo be applyed vnto theym, whyche be inuolued in perpetuall and intollerable laboures and buſyneſſe.
            ❀Muli mutuum ſcabunt, mules doo gnappe one an other, A prouerbe applyed to perſons yll and defamed, whan one of them commendeth the other.
            
               Mulier, eris, a womanne, proprely ſhe that is no vyrgyne.
            
               Muliebria, naturall euacuations, whiche women haue, callyd theyr floures.
            Muliebre folliculum, dicebant uuluam.
            
               Muliebris, bre, pertaynyng to women.
            
               Muliebritas, delicatenes, tenderneſſe.
            
               Muliebriter, womanly, delycately, tenderly.
            
               Mulierarius, a folower, or dotar on women. alſo that which is done or prepared by women.
            
               Mulieraria manus, womans helpe.
            
               Muliero, rare, to eſſemynate or make lyke a woman.
            
               Mulieroſitas, tatis, the vyce of louynge many women.
            
               Mulieroſus, a great louer of women.
            
               Mulio, onis, & mulius, a dryuer of Mules. a Mulettour. It is alſoo a certayne kynde of gnattes.
            
               Mullus, a fyſhe of a meane quantitie, hauynge two barbes or wartes on the nether lyp, the colour towarde grene, with ſome yelowe lynes, whyche I ſuppoſe is callyd a mullet, in greke it is callyd Triglē, amonge the ancient Romayns, it was in ſuche eſtimation, that in the tyme of Claudius the emperour. Aſinius Celer one that had ben conſule payde for one of the ſayde fyſhes .viii. thouſande Seſtertia, whiche after the rate of this preſent tyme, is of our money.
            
               Mulſeus, a, um, ſwete as hony.
            
               Mulſum, wyne and hony ſodden to gyther.
            
               Mulſus, a, um, any lycour myxt with hony.
            Multa, idem quod mulcta
            
               Multatitius, pertaynynge to a forſayt, or payne aſſeſſyd.
            
               Multeſima, a parte repreſentynge an infynite quantitie. Quam parunla pars, quam multeſima conſtat, ſo lyttell a porcion, ſe of howe wonderfull greatneſſe it is.
            
               Multibaibus, he that hath moche heare on his bearde.
            
               Multibibus, he that drynketh moche.
            
               Multicauatus, a, um, full of holes.
            
               Multicaulis, le, hauynge many ſtalkes.
            
               Multicolor, of dyuers colours.
            
               Multicolorius, a, um, of many colours.
            
               Multifacio, ere, to make moche of, to eſteeme moche.
            
               Multifariam, many wayes, in many facions.
            
               Multifarius, dyuers maners or conditions.
            
               Mulifer, bearynge abundantly.
            
               Multifidus, da, dum, hauynge many ſlyttes, kleftes, or creuyſes.
            
               Multiforatilis, le, with many holes.
            
               Multiformis, me, of many facions or fygures.
            
               Multiformiter, in dyuers facions.
            
               Multigeneris, re, of dyuers kyndes.
            
               Multi iugus, a, um, dyuerſe, many dyuerſe, manyfolde.
            
               Multiloquus, full of ſpeche.
            
               Multimodus, da, dum, of dyuers ſortes or maners.
            
               Multinummus, a, um, hauyng moche money.
            
               Multipartitus, ta, tum, beynge dyuyded into many partes.
            
               Multipes, hauynge many feete.
            
               Multiplex, plicis, manyfolde, dyuers.
            
               Multipliciter, dyuerſely or manyfoldly.
            
               Multiplico, care, to multiplye, or to make moche more.
            
               Multiplicatio, multiplyenge or augmentynge.
            
               Multipotens, puyſſant.
            
               Multiſcius, a, um, knowynge moche.
            
               Multiſonus, hauyng a great ſounde.
            
               Multitia, garmentes made of fyne threedes or ſylke.
            
               Multiuagus, a great wanderer.
            
               Multitudo, tudinis, a multytude or greatte number.
            
                
               Multiuidus, he that ſeeth moche.
            
               Multiuolus, deſyrynge diuers thynges.
            
               Multo, & mulcto, are, to puniſhe, to condemne, to put fro, to intreate yll, or diſorder.
            
               Multare matrimonio, to deuorce, or dyſſolue matrymonye.
            Multopere, for magnopere.
            Multus, ta, tum, moche, many.
            
            
               Multus in opere, oftentymes in buſyneſſe or very moche occupyed.
            
               Multus ſermo ad multum diem, moche communication all the day longe.
            
               Multa nocte, late in the nyght.
            
               Multo mane, in the mornynge betyme.
            
               Multum, an aduerbe ſygnyfieth moche. ſometyme a longe ſeaſon.
            
               Multo, ioyned to aduerbes and prepoſitions do augment the vertue or vehemency of theym.
            
               Mulus, a mule.
            
               Mundanus, of the worlde.
            Mundanus, a, um, worldly.
            
            
               Munditer, klenly.
            Mundities, & Munditia, klenlyneſſe.
            
            
               Mundifico, are, to klenſe.
            
               Mundo, are, to wype, to make cleane.
            
               Mundus, the worlde, a womans attyre.
            Mundus, da, dum, cleane, nete.
            
            
               Muneralis, le, pertaynynge to gyftes.
            
               Munerarius, he that at his owne charge maketh paſtyme vnto the people, with menne taught of pourpoſe, to fyght hande to hande vnto the vtterance.
            Muneror, aris, ari, & Munero, are, to rewarde.
            
            
               Mungo, xi, gere, to make cleane, properly ones noſe.
            
               Municipalis, le, priuately or particularly, belongynge to one citie.
            
               Municipale ius, the priuate law of euery particular citie.
            
               Municipalia magiſteria, ciuile offyces in euery citie or towne.
            
               Municipatim, towne by towne.
            
               Municipium, a citie or towne incorporate, hauy
                  •
               ge their proper officers and lawes.
            
               Municeps, a citizen, or burgeyſe, enioyeng the lyberties of the towne.
            
               Munificentia, liberalite in gyuing of rewardes.
            
               Munificus, lyberall. Munificentior, more lyberall. Munificentiſsimus, moſt lyberall. In the olde tyme Munifici, were taken for theym, whyche conſented to that, whyche theyr frendes dyd or ſpake.
            
               Munimen, & munimentum, a fortyfication of a towne or caſtell.
            
               Munia, commune dueties, offyces.
            
               Munio, iui, & ij, nire, to fortyfye, to prepare, to repayre.
            
               Munire à frigore, to arme hym, or make defence agaynſt the colde.
            
               Munire uiam, to make the way of ſuch ſorte, that no man may paſſe. ſometyme to make a way that one may paſſe eaſyly.
            
               Munis, he that beareth the charges, whiche the people ſhulde do.
            
               Munitio, onis, a fortreſſe or ſtronge holde for the warres.
            
               Munito, tare, the frequentatiue of Munio.
            
            
               Munitor, toris, he that dothe fortify.
            
               Munitus, ta, tum, made ſtronge to defende, fortyfyed.
            
               Munus, neris, a gyfte, a charge, a duetye or offyce. Muner
                     ••
                  
                
               
                  ••
               mmune playes and gaye ſyghtes for 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               ople to beholde, to reioyce theym, preparyd by offycers of cyties. As in Rome, ſundrye playes, ſworde players, callyd Gladiatores, huntynge of wylde beaſtes. Alſoo nowe in the cytie of London, the watches and ſyghtes on mydſommer nyghtes.
            
               Munus uitae. Cicero. Omni in munere uitae, In all affayres wherewith a man in his lyfe dothe meddle.
            
               Munuſculum, a ſmall gyfte.
            
               Munychia, orum, the ſolemnities of Pallas.
            
               Muraena, a lampraye.
            
               Muraenulae, ſmalle chaynes, whyche womenne do weare.
            
               Muralis, le, pertaynyge to a walle or boulwarke.
            
               Muralis corona, a garlande gyuen to hym, whiche in the ſyege of a citie fyrſt ſkalyd the walles, and entred.
            
               Muralis herba, an herbe callyd perytorye, or pelytorye.
            
               Murani, were the kynges of Alba.
            Muratus, ta, tum, walled.
            
            
               Murcia, goddeſſe of ſlouthe.
            
               Murcidus, a man without aduyſement.
            
               Murciolum, the ſeede of that whyche is called Lenticula.
            
            
               Murcus, a ſlouthfull or luſkyſhe perſon.
            
               Murex, icis, a ſhelle fyſhe, of whome commeth the lykour, whyche maketh purple colour. ſometyme it ſygnyfieth the ſame colour. Alſo an herbe, whyche groweth in a pytte, where no ſonne ſhyneth.
            
               Murginor, ari, to tarye, to be ſlouthfull.
            
               Murgitana regio, a countrey in the ſouth partes of Spayne.
            
               Murgizo, murgizonis, an ydell or ſlowthfulle perſone.
            
               Muria, water, wherin ſalt is ſodden, bryne.
            
               Muriaticus, ca, cum, beynge longe in bryne.
            
               Muricatus, ſalted in bryne.
            
               Murices, caltrappes, lyke three yron pryckes, ſoo ioyned, that beynge throwen, oone ſtandethe vpryghte, vſyd in battayle for horſemen.
            
                
               Muricati greſſus, where one gothe fearefully, as if he went on caltrappes or thornes.
            
               Muricidus, a mouſekyller, a foole, a rat kyller.
            
               Muries, a bryne made with ſalte ſodden in water.
            
               Murina, a wyne mixt with ſpyces.
            
               Murinus, a, um, belongynge to a mouſe.
            
               Murmilonica ſcuta, targettes, wherewith men faught vppon walles.
            
               Murmur, the noyſe of rounnynge water.
            Murmurillum, idem.
            
               Murmurabundus, & murmurator, he that murmureth.
            
               Murmuratio, a grutchynge or bruylynge in the mynde with noyſe.
            
               Murmuro, to murmoure, or make noyſe lyke to water.
            Murmurillo, idem.
            
               Murmurillum, a murmurynge.
            
               Murrha, a ſtone of dyuers colours, cleere as cryſtall, hauyng ſpottes purple and whyte.
            
               Murrheus, & murrhinus, a, um, of that ſtone callyd murrha, wherof cuppes, pottes, tables, and other veſſelles were made: there be of them dyuers ſent from Venyce.
            
               Murrhina, ſeu murrhynia, was wyne made with dyuers ſpyces, as that whyche is callyd ypocras.
            
               Murtia, one of the names of Venus.
            
               Murtius, a hylle at Rome, callyd alſoo Auentinus.
            
               Murus, a walle, a bulwarke.
            
               Mus, muris, a mouſe or ratte.
            
               Mus Arancus, a kynde of myſe called a ſhrew, whyche yf it goo ouer a beaſtes backe, he ſhall be lame in the chyne, yf he doo byte any thynge, it ſwelleth vp to the hart, and the beaſte dyeth.
            
               Muſa, a ſwete ſonge.
            
               Muſae, Muſes, were maydens, whome Poetes fayned to be the doughters of Iupyter, and Memorye, and that they were ladyes and gouernours of poetry and muſyke, whiche were in numbre nyne. Some calle theym gyuers of eloquence, and doo name theym goddeſſes. It is ſometyme taken for poetry, or ſtudye of humanytie.
            
               Muſae manſuetiores, ſtudyes more gentylle or dylectable.
            
               Muſis auerſus, he that hath forſaken the ſtudyes of eloquence.
            
               Muſaea, Muſaica, & Muſiua, be warkes kunnyngly paynted, that they ſeme to be in ſome place imbocyd out, in ſome place grauen, although it be all playne.
            
               Muſeus, an auncient poete, whyche was in the tyme of Orpheus, and was one of them whiche went with Iaſon to the wynnyng of the fle
                  •
               e of golde.
            
               Muſaeum, a howſe, whervnto lerned menne in all ſcyences vſed to repayre and dyſpute: it is alſo a howſe dedycate to the Muſes. Suche oone was fyrſte made by the kynges of Aegypte, callyd Ptholomei in Alexandria.
            
               Muſca, a flye.
            
               Muſcula, a ſmalle flye.
            
               Muſcari, to be couered with moſſe.
            
               Muſcarium, & muſcaria, a flappe to dryue awaye flyes. It is alſoo the toppe of fenelle, dylle, and ſuche other lyke herbes, wherin be the ſeedes.
            
               Muſcarius, a, um, pertaynynge to flyes.
            
               Muſcenton, a certayn Roſe, that ſpryngeth of a ſtalke with many ſmall branches, and hath leaues lyke to an olyue tree.
            
               Muſcerda, mouſe dunge.
            
               Muſchus, a beaſte, whyche beareth muſke, a muſke catte.
            
               Muſcinus, a, um, of a flye.
            
               Muſcio, onis, a catte.
            
               Muſcipula, a trappe, wherwith myſe or rattes are taken.
            
               Muſculus, a lyttelle mouſe. Sommetyme an engyne of warre, whereby they are defended, whyche doo approche the walles of a place beſyeged, to fylle the dyches. It is alſo a lyttell fyſſhe, whyche guydeth the whale that he do not run
                  •
               e on rockes.
            
               Muſculi, be certayne pieces of harde fleſhe compacte with ſynewes in the body, whyche doo incloſe the ſpirituall membres.
            
               Muſcus, moſſe, whyche groweth in welles and moyſte places, ſometyme on trees, ſpecyally in colde countreyes.
            Muſica, & muſicè, muſyke.
            
            
               Muſicè, dylectably or in an armony.
            
               Muſicus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to muſyke.
            
               Muſicus, a muſytian.
            
               Muſicum ſtudium, the ſtudye in makynge of commedyes.
            
               Muſimon, a lyttell nagge.
            
               Muſmones, ſhepe with heary wolle.
            
               Muſsitabundus, a manne ſpeakynge to hym ſelfe pryuyly.
            
               Muſsito, tare, to ſpeake or talke alone.
            
               Muſſo, are, to talke ſoftely and ſecretelye, to kepe ſylence.
            
               Muſtace, a tree, hayng leaues lyke to laurell, but greatter and weaker.
            
               Muſtacula, a lyttell inſtrument made with two rules, betwene whiche the ſhowe is put, whiles the ſole is in ſowynge.
            
               Muſtaceus, & muſtaceum, a cake or paſte made to comfort the ſtomacke.
            
               Muſtela, a beaſte callyd a weſell, alſo a fyſſhe, lyke a lamprey.
            
               Muſtelinus, a, um, of a weſyll.
            
                
               Muſteus, a, um, ſwete as muſte, or muſty.
            Muſtulentus, ta, tum, idem.
            
               Muſtricola, a cordwayners laſt, wherby he ſhapeth a ſhowe.
            
               Muſtum, newe wyne, newe al
                  •
               , newe beere.
            
               Muſtus, ta, tum, newe, yonge, late made.
            
               Mutabilis, le, chaungeable, mutable.
            
               Mutatio, a chaunge.
            Mutatus, ta, tum, chaunged, altered.
            
            
               Mutae artes, pyctures or ymages.
            Muteo, mutui, tere, & muteſco, ſcere, to be muete or dumme.
            
            
               Mutica ſpica, a corne without a berde.
            
               Mutilatus, ta, tum, myniſhed in ſome thynge, or where any thynge is cut of.
            
               Mutili, horned beaſtes, of nature lackynge hornes, as oxen, gotes. &c.
            
               Mutilus, la, lum, lackynge ſomme pryncypalle parte, mutilate.
            
               Mutilo, are, to cutte of, to mynyſſhe, to take awaye.
            
               Mutina, a cytie in Italye, callyd in the vulgare tungue Modona, whyche is nowe vnder the ſubiection of the Duke of Ferare, where as was the great bataile betwene Auguſtus and Brutus.
            
               Mutinenſis color, a naturall colour, as woulle or clothe neuer dyed.
            
               Mutio, tiui, tire, to ſpeake ſoftly, or with an vnperfyte voyce, to muttre.
            
               Mutito, tare, to feaſte one an other.
            
               Mutius, was a noble familye of the aunciente Romaynes. In the whyche one was callyd Mutius Sceuola, who at the tyme that Porſena kyng of Thuſcanes layd ſyege to Rome came in a beggers apparayle into the campe of Porſena, and intendynge to haue ſlayne the kynge, he ſlewe his Secretarye. Wherfore he was taken and broughte to a greatte fyre to be bourned, into the whyche wyllyngly he thraſte his hande, that hadde fayled to ſlea the kynge, and ſuffered it to be bourned to aſſhes, affyrmyng that beſydes hym there were thre hundred whyche hadde auowed to make lyke attemptate, wherwith the kynge abaſſhed, and fearing the inuincible courage of them, he made peace with the Romaynes takynge pledges of theym, and rayſynge his ſiege, departed without moleſtynge of them euer after.
            
               Mutuatio, a borowynge.
            
               Muto, tare, to chaunge, to tranſlate, to barter one thynge for an other.
            
               Haud muto factum, I do not repent me.
            
               Muto, tonis, the pryuie member of a man.
            Mutuatitius, a, um, borowed.
            
            
               Mutuli, ſcaffolde holes, or places made on the walles for culuers to brede in.
            
               Mutunus, who was alſo callyd Priapus.
            
               Mutuò, togyther, or one an other. Mutuò diligebant, They loued one an other.
            
               Mutuare, ſygnifieth bothe to borowe & to lend.
            Mutuor, aris, ari, to borowe.
            
            
               Mutus, he that can not ſpeake.
            
               Mutè, dumme.
            
               Mutuum, a lone, that whiche is borowed.
            
               Argētum nuſquam inuenio mutuum, I can borowe money no where.
            
               Mutuo appendere, to lende.
            
               Mutuum rogare, to aſke agayne that whyche was lent.
            
               Mutuus, a, um, one for an other, mutuall.
            
               Mutuus amor, mutual loue, where one loueth an other equally.
         
         
            ¶M ANTE Y.
            
               MYA, a ſhell fyſhe in the ſea callyd Boſphorus, whiche bryngeth forth lyttell redde ſtones, and rounde.
            
               Myagrus, the god of flyes.
            
               Mycaene, & Mycaena, a cytie in the parte of Grecia, called Peloponeſus, and a lyttell region, where Agamemnon reygned, the chiefe capytayne of the grekes ageynſt Troy, called nowe Morea.
            
               Mycon, the name of a famous paynter.
            
               Mycone, nes, a lyttell yle.
            
               Mydia, an yle, named alſo Delos.
            
               Mydriaſis, a ſyckenes of the eyes, where no colour of the eyes are chaunged, but maketh them moche broder, albeit it taketh away the ſight, or makith a mā to ſe the leſſe, & the thinges, whych be ſene, to ſeme leſſe thā they are.
            
               Mygala, a fielde mouſe with a longe ſnowte, callyd a ſhrewe.
            
               Mygale, a ratte.
            
               Mygdonia, a parte of Macedonia on the ſea ſyde, where Niobe was turned into a ſtone. Ariſtotle ſayth, that it is a parte of Phrigia, ioynyng to Lidia. Solinus ſayth, that it was called Bebrycia, and after Bythinia.
            
            
               Myloechos, a butterfly, whiche is in mylles.
            
               Myoparo, onis, a kynde of ſhyppes vſed in the ſea called Mare Tirrhenum.
            
            
               Myophnos, a kyller of myſe.
            
               Mymphur, a tourners pynne or ſpyndel, wheron he tourneth or warketh any thyng.
            
               Myra, a citie in Licia, wherof ſaynt Nycolas was byſhoppe.
            
               Myriarches, a capitayne of ten thouſand men.
            
               Myriades, many tymes ten thouſande.
            
               Myrias, adis, the number of ten thouſande.
            
               Myrica, a lytel buſhe callid in Italy Tamarico.
            
               Myrinus, the male kynde of a lamprey, whiche hath a tothe out of his mouthe.
            
               Myrmus, the proper name of Apollo.
            
               Myriophillum, an herbe callyd mylfoyle.
            
                
               Myriſtica nux, a nutmygge.
            
               Myrlea, a towne in Bythinia.
            
               Myrmecia, a lyttell warte.
            
               Myrmecites, a ſtone, wherin is the fygure of an emotte.
            
               Myrmetium, a kynd of ſpiders lyke an emote, hauyng a blacke bealy with white ſpottes.
            
               Mirmillones, were ſworde players, where the one prouoked the other to battayle.
            
               Myrſenium, a kynde of fenell, hauyng greatter leaues and a ſharper taſte.
            
               Myrſum, a towne in the parte of Grece callyd Peloponeſus.
            
            
               Myrmicoleo, a lyttell beaſte, which deuoureth emotes.
            
               Myrobalanum, a fruite growynge in India, lyke vnto plummes or damſyns, whereof be dyuers kyndes, whyche eaſylye doo pourge all ſuperfluouſe humours, and alſo comforteth nature, in ſoo moche as a manne, whyche eateth theym, beynge condyte, ſhall not loke oldely.
            
               Myrobrecharij, they whyche do make ſweete oyntmentes.
            
               Myron, onis, the name of an excellent karuer. alſo olde oyle.
            
               Myropola, a ſellar of oyntmentes.
            
               Myropolium, a place where oyntmentes were ſolde.
            
               Myrothetium, a boxe of ſwete oyntmentes.
            
               Myrrha, a ſwete gumme callyd myrre.
            Myrrheus, & myrrhinus, a, um, of myrre.
            
            
               Myrtetum, a place, where Myrtelle trees be ſette.
            Myrteus, & myrtinus, a, um, of myrtelles.
            
            
               Myrtopetalum, an herbe callyd bludwort.
            
               Myrtoum, a portion of the ſea, whyche is betwene the ſeas callyd Aegeum & Ionium.
            
               Myrtus, a lyttelle tree, bearynge bearyes of ſwete odour.
            
               Mys, mios, the name of a kunnynge grauer: alſo a ſhelle fyſhe of the ſea.
            
               Myſia, a countrey beyonde Hungary, towarde Greece. Ptholomeus wryteth of two countreyes callyd Myſia, the more and the laſſe, and bothe in Aſia, beyonde Bythinia, not farre from Ida.
            
               Myſteria, myſteries, thynges ſecrete or hydde in wordes or ceremonies.
            Myſticus, ca, cum, myſtycall.
            
            
               Myſtris, a fyſſhe callyd a ſea mouſe.
            
               Mythologia, a declaration or expoſytion of fables.
            
               Mythos, a fable.
            
               Myxa, the fylthe whyche commeth oute of a mannes noſe.
            
               Myxus, a ſnuffe of a candell. ☞ ❀ ❀ ☞ ❀ ❀
         
         
            ☞ N ANTE A.
            
               
                  NABATHEI, ARE people inhabytauntes of the countraye callyd Arabia felix, whyche are verye contynent, and in preparynge and kepyng theyr commodities, alſo ryght prudent, as Strabo wryteth, in whome ye maye reade more abundantly of theyr maners, not moche expedyent to be declared in this place.
            
               Nabathaea, a parte of Arabia callyd felix, lyeng betwene the Perſian ſea, and the red ſea.
            
               Nabis, a beaſte in Ethiope hauyng a head lyke a camell, a necke lyke an horſe and feete lyke an oxe.
            
               Nablum, or Nablium, an Inſtrument callyd alſo Pſalterium, reade there mor
                  •
                of the deſcription therof.
            
               Nabuchodonoſor, the nynth kyng of Babylon or the thyrde kyng of Caldeys, whiche is named of Beroſus, Nabogodroſus, of the hebrues, Nabucadnaſar. He by the occaſyon of his great dominions and wonderfull, felle to ſuche pryde, that he wolde haue his ymage honoured for god. Wherfore he fynally was of almyghty god ſodaynly tranſſourmed into an horrible monſter, hauynge the heade of an oxe, the feete of a beare, and the tayle of a lyon, and dyd eate heye as a beaſte, and after that he had in that forme done penaunce, by the continual praiers of Daniel the prophet, god beinge meued with mercy, reſtored hym to his pryſtinate forme: and afterward he lyued well, and commanded, that the very god of heauen ſhoulde be onely honoured. he was before the incarnation of Chriſte, ſyxe hundreth thyrty and thre yeres, he raigned .xliiii. yeres.
            
               Nacae, fullars of clothe.
            
               Nactus, the participle of Nanciſcor, ſygnifyeth gotten or optayned. Inde nactus eſt laudem incomparabilem, wherby he hath gotten prayſe incomparable.
            
               Nae, truely, or nowe in good fayth. Nae illi uehementer errant, Truely they be out of the way, or in a wronge opinion. Nae ego multo libentius emerim diuorſorium Tarracinae, Now in good feith, I had leuer haue bought at Tarracina an houſe to lodge in.
            
               Naeera, a womans name.
            
               Naeuia, ſommetyme ſygnyfyeth a lamentable ſonge. ſometyme the ſonge whyche the noutyce dothe wantonlye ſynge in dandelynge her chylde.
            
               Naides, elfes or fayryes hauntyng ryuers and fountayns.
            
                
               Nain, a citie of Galile.
            
               Nais, a ryuer in the eaſte whiche runneth oute of the mountayne of Taurus into the ſea called Pontus.
            
               Nam, a coniunction cauſall, ſet moſt commonly in the fyrſte parte of a ſentence. Nam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                in the ſeconde or other place, it ſignifieth therefore. ſometyme it is put for Autem. fyllyng onelye the ſentence without any other ſygnifycation.
            
               Nanciſcor, nactus ſum, nanciſci, to get, to opteyne, to fynde.
            Nancitor, for Nactus erit.
            
               Nan
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , ſet afore other wordes ſignifieth truly, put after betokeneth for.
            
               Nanum, a lyttell veſſell and brode, called alſo Scitulus barbatus.
            
            
               Nanium, a lyttell woman.
            
               Nanus, a dwarfe or a very lyttell perſon.
            
               Nannetes, a towne in lyttel Britayne, called Nauntes.
            
               Napataei, people in Ethiope.
            
               Napeae, Goddeſſes of floures and woodes or rather elfes, hauntynge woodes.
            
               Napaei, people of the yle of Leſbos.
            
               Naptha, a certayne kynde of maunde or chalky klay, ſomewhat liquide (as Strabo wryteth) whervnto if fyre be put it kyndleth in ſuche wyſe, that if lyttell water be caſt theron it bourneth more feruentely. and maye be onely extincte with greatte aboundaunce of water, or with vynegre, alume, and byrdelyme, there is wonderful plenty therof found by Babylon in the countrey called Ecbatanis, as Plutarchus wryteth in the lyfe of great Alexander.
            
               Napina, a garden of Nauewes.
            
               Napitae, people of Scithia.
            
               Napus, a Nauew whiche is a kynde of rapes. it is ſone boyled but it nouriſheth leſſe, the grekes do call it Bunias.
            
            
               Nar, a ryuer whiche runneth into Tiber. there is a nother ryuer of that name in Germany, whiche commeth out of the great ryuer of Danubius or Donowe.
            
               Narane, a ryuer in Dalmatia, about a hundred myles from Epidaurus.
            
               Narbaſis, a towne in Spayne.
            
               Narbonenſis Prouincia, a parte of Gallia hauynge on the eaſte the mountaynes, on the ſouthe the ſea called Mare gallicum, on the weſte the mountaynes called Pirenei▪
                on the northe the mountayne called Iura, it conteyneth the countreys called Sauoy, Dophyny, Prouaunce and Languedock, it was in the olde tyme Gallica Brachata.
            
               Narciſſus, an herbe and floure hauynge the leaues nexte the grounde lyke to daffadyll or broder lyke to a lylly, a bare ſtalke and grene in the toppe therof a floure, white or purple, the ſede in a thynne ſkyn, blacke greatte and longe, the rote beynge rounde.
            
               Narcoticus, ca, cum, ſtupefactife or makynge a member inſenſible.
            
               Nardus, a plante wherof Plyny remembreth .ix. kyndes, but that whiche is called Spicanardi, is of Galen and Plinye ſuppoſed to come out of Inde, whiche ſome men do think that we do lacke, that whiche we haue commeth out of Siria, that whiche is Nardus gallica, ſome doo ſuppoſe it to be Lauander or that whiche is called Spike.
            Nardinus, na, um, of Nardus.
            
               Nares, Noſethrylles.
            
               Narica, a certayne lyttell fyſhe whiche ſwymmeth very ſwyfte.
            
               Narius, a ryuer in Vmbria.
            
               Naritia, an yle in the ſea called Aegeum.
            
            
               Naruia, a towne in Italy.
            
               Naruiae, & Naruienſes, people of Naruia.
            
               Narratio, a narration or reporte of a thynge.
            
               Narratiuncula, a lyttell narration.
            
               Narrare ſtomachum, to ſpeake what he thinketh, to vtter his ſtomake.
            
               Narthecium, a place apte and conuenient to kepe ſpices or medicines in.
            
               Naſamonae, people dwellynge in the myddell of the ſandes of Lybia, amonge whom is the preciouſe ſtone founden called a Carbuncle.
            
               Naſamonites, a ſtone of colour ſanguine with lyttell blacke veynes.
            
               Naſcor, ſci, to be borne, in herbes and trees it ſygnifieth to ſprynge or growe.
            
               Naſcitus uentus, the wynde ryſeth.
            
               Naſci in pedes, to be borne the fete forward.
            
               Naſica, the ſurname of a noble Romayne callyd Scipio.
            
               Naſiterna, a veſſell with handelles and a wyde mouthe.
            
               Naſſa, a weele or bownette wherwith fyſſhe is taken.
            
               Naſturtium, an herbe callyd Creſſes, whyche was amonge the Perſyans in ſuche eſtymation, that the yonge men whan they wente in huntynge dydde eate none other meate, ſuppoſyng that therby theyr ſpyrites were made more quycke and lyuely.
            
               Naſus, a noſe. ſometyme it is put for ſharpneſſe or quyckneſſe in ſpeche, wherefore we vſe to ſay of hym, whiche can pratily taunt or mocke one. ſo that vneth it may be perceyued. Hic naſum habet.
            
            
               Naſo ſuſpendere, to mocke couertly.
            
               Naſutus, he that can taunte or mocke wyttylye. ſomtyme it ſygnifieth hym, that hath a great inſtrument.
            
               Naſute, wyttyly, mockyngly.
            
               Naſutila, a ſhrewde wenche.
            
                
               Natalis, le, & Natalitius, a, um, pertaynyng to byrthe, as Natalis dies, the day of the byrth or natiuitie.
            
               Natales, the ſtocke or family wherof one commeth. Natalibus clarus noble of bloode.
            
               Obſcuri natales, baſe bloudde.
            
               Natalibus reſtitui, to make a gentylman and to gyue to hym armes.
            
               Natalitia dare, to make a feaſt at the day of ones byrthe.
            
               Natatilis, le, that whiche can ſwymme.
            
               Natatitius, a, um, that whiche doth ſwymme.
            
               Natator, toris, he that ſwymmeth.
            
               Natatorium, a place made to ſwymme in.
            Natabulum, idem.
            Natatio, ſwymmyng. Natatus, idem.
            
               Nates, the buttockes.
            
               Natex, naticis, of Plinius callyd Nerita, is a fyſhe, hauyng a ſhell, great rounde & ſmothe, ſauyng that there be on it lyke to redde ſedes of popye.
            
               Natinatores, trauaylers aboute many thinges.
            
               Natio, the people of a countray (as Feſtus writeth) which had theyr begynnyng in the ſame place, where they dwell, and came not out of other countrayes. it ſometyme ſignifyeth a felowſhyp or company beynge in an order.
            
               Natio candidatorum, the ordynarye felowſhyp of them, whyche do ſue for great offices.
            Natiuitas, tatis, byrth.
            
            
               Natiuus color, naturall colour.
            
               Natiuus ſal, ſalt growen in the place where it is founden.
            
               Natiuum malum, naturall myſchiefe.
            
               Natiua uerba, wordes not deryued from other.
            
               Nato, tare, to ſwymme often. ſometyme it ſygnifieth to go, to ſayl, to be rowed in a barge or galey.
            
               Natrix, tricis, a water ſnake. alſo an herbe, the roote wherof ſmelleth lyke a goote.
            
               Natura, Nature. it was of ſome Gentyles taken for god creatour of all thynges. Of Seneca lib. 4. de Beneficijs. what other thinge is Natura than god or reaſon dyuine ſowen in all the worlde, and the partes therof. Ariſtoteles Phiſic. 1. Nature is the begynnynge and cauſe of mouyng and reſt in that thynge where it is by it ſelfe, and not by any other thynge hapnynge. ſometyme it ſygnifieth maner and facion ſometyme the priuy member of mankynde or beaſte.
            
               Naturae ſatisfacere, to dye.
            Naturae cedere, idem.
            
               Naturae ſuae rationem habere, to haue regarde vnto his conditions.
            Naturalis, le, naturall.
            
            
               Naturalia, priuy members.
            
               Natus, ta, tum, borne, growen, brought forth.
            
               Natus animo leni, he that is of a ſofte and gentyll nature.
            
               Natus annos ſedecim, ſyxtene yeres olde.
            
               Natus, & nata, ſubſtantyues, a ſonne and a doughter.
            
               Natu maior, the elder.
            
               Natu maiores, the moſte auncient.
            
               Natu grandis, olde or ancient.
            
               Naualis, le, pertaynyng to ſhyppes.
            
               Nauale, the docke where ſhyppes are layde vp or made, at Venyce the Arceuale.
            
               Nauarchus, the patron or maiſter of ſhyppes.
            
               Nauarchis, nauarchidis, the patrons ſhyppe.
            
               Nauci, a ſhale of a nutte, a thyng of naught.
            
               Nauci eſſe, to be worth nothynge.
            
               Nauci facere, to ſet nought by.
            
               Naucleriacus, & nauclerius, a, um, pertaynyng to the mayſter of a ſhyppe.
            
               Nauclerus, & nauiclarius, a maſter of ſhyppis.
            
               Naucrates, a citie in Egypte.
            
               Naufragium, wrecke on the ſee, ſomtyme it ſygnifieth loſſe or detryment.
            
               Naufragium facere, to loſe a ſhyp by tempeſt.
            
               Naufragus, ga, gum, pertaynyng to ſhyp wrek.
            
               Naufragus, he that eſcapeth on lyue after that the ſhyppe is loſte. it is ſometyme taken for one fallen in pouertie.
            
               Nauia, a holowe tree lyke a ſhyppe, occupyed whan grapes be gathered.
            
               Nauicularius, he that letteth ſhyppes to hyre. ſometyme a pylote.
            Nauiculator, toris, idem.
            
               Nauiculor, lari, to gouerne a ſhyp. ſometyme to go on the water in a ſhyppe or bote.
            
               Nauicularia, the arte of gouernynge a ſhyp or rowynge.
            
               Nauiculariam facere, to frayte a ſhyp, to ſet ſhyppes to hyre for carieng of marchandyſe.
            
               Nauigabilis, le, where a ſhyp maye paſſe.
            
               Nauigatio, exerciſe in going on the water.
            
               Nauiger, gera, gerū, which wyl beare a veſſel.
            
               Mare nauigerum, the ſea that wyll beare a veſſell.
            
               Nauigium, al ſortes of veſſel to ſayle or row in.
            
               Nauigia ſpeculatoria, brigantines or ſhyppes of eſpiall.
            
               Nauigo, gare, to go or be caryed on the water in any veſſell.
            
               Nauigare in portu, to be in ſuertie.
            
               Nauigiolum, a lyttell barke.
            
               Nauis, a ſhyppe.
            
               Nauem deprimere, to droune a ſhyppe.
            
               Nauis pompatica, a ſhippe made with chambers and bankettynge parlours onely to ſolace with, it is alſo called Nauithalmus.
            
            
               Nauiter, for gnauiter, diligently with dexteritie, valyantly.
            
               Naulium, a towne in Lumbardy.
            
               Naulum, the frayte or fare payed for paſſage ouer the water.
            
                
               Naumachia, battayle on water or the place where the battayle is.
            
               Naumachiarij, they whiche do battayle on the water.
            
               Naumachiarius, a, um, perteynynge to that fourme of battayle.
            
               Nauo, are, to employ with all his power.
            
               Nauare operam, to do all his endeuour.
            
               Nauare beneuolentiam, to declare or vſe all the beneuolence that a man maye.
            
               Naupegus, a ſhyp wryght or carpenter.
            Nauplium, a fyſhe lyke a Cuttell. Plin. li. 9.
            
               Naupontus, a ryuer in Slauony.
            
               Nauſea, diſpoſicion or wyll to vomyte, ſometyme abhorynge of thynges.
            
               Nauſeam diſcutere, to put awaye the diſpoſition of vomitynge.
            
               Nauſeam facere, to vomyte.
            
               Nauſeoſus, a, um, that whiche prouoketh one to vomyte.
            
               Nauſeo, are, to haue an appetite to vomyte. ſometyme to reiecte or abhorre a thynge.
            
               Nauſeabundus, diſpoſed to vomyte.
            
               Nauſicaa, doughter of Alcinous kynge of Pheaces, who fyndynge Vlyſſes after that he eſcaped drownynge, broughte hym to her fathers palayce.
            
               Nauſio, ire, to open as a beane doth whan he ſpryngeth.
            
               Nauſithous, ſunne of Neptunus and father of Alcinous.
            
               Nauſtibulum, a hyue lyke a ſhyp.
            
               Nauta, or Nauita, a ſhyp man.
            
               Nautea, the ordure whiche iſſueth out of the pumpe of a ſhyp. alſo Curriours bleche.
            
               Nauticus, a ſhyppe mayſter.
            
               Nautilus, a certayne ſhell fyſhe of the fourme of a bote, and doth ſwym the bealy vpward.
            
               Nautilia, the crafte of ſhypmen.
            
               Nauus, quicke, actiue, valiant, he that doth a thynge ſodenly without moche ſtudy.
            
               Naxos, an yle in the ſea called Aegeum.
            
            
               Nazareus, a man dedicate onely to the ſeruice of god, or that hadde a ſpeciall vowe for a tyme.
            
               Nazareth, a lyttle towne in Galilea.
            
               Nazara, a citie in Cappadocia, called alſo Caeſaria.
            
         
         
            ¶N ANTE E.
            
               NE, an aduerbe ſignifienge forbedynge or dyſſuadynge. Tu ne cede malis, giue thou no place to aduerſitie. ſometyme it is a coniunction copulatiue, and ſygnifyeth no, or neyther. ſomtyme it is cauſall. as Vide ne pereas, take hede that thou do not loſe thy ſelfe.
            
               Ne multa, to make ſhorte, without many wordes, or in fewe wordes.
            
               Ne plura, it ſuffiſeth, or it is inoughe.
            
               Ne longum faciam, to make ſhorte.
            
               Ne ſim ſaluus ſi aliter ſcribo ac ſentio, I pray god I be dead, if I wryte otherwiſe thā I thynke.
            Ne uiuam, idem.
            
               Eſt ne hic Crito ſobrinus Chriſidis? Is not this Crito couſen germayne to Chriſis? Honeſtum ne factu ſit an turpe dubitant, They doubte whether it be honeſtie to do it or diſhoneſtie.
            
               Ne ue hoc ne ue illud, neyther this nor that.
            
               Ne dicam, I wyll not ſay, or I dare not ſay. This clauſe Ne dicam, if it folowe a ſubſtantyue, the adiectiue is put in the accuſatyue caſe, but if it be putte betwene a ſubſtantyue and an adiectiue, the one and the other ſhall be the nominatiue caſe.
            
               Homo imprudens, ne dicam ſtultum, not ſtultus, bycauſe the ſubſtantyue homo goeth before Crudelis, ne dicam impius & ſceleratus Caſtor, not ſceleratum Caſtorē, for as moch as the ſubſtantiue Caſtor foloweth. in other caſes is none ambiguitas, for alway the adiectiue and the ſubſtantiue muſt accorde, as, Non faceres haec magiſtro conſcio, ne dicam praeſente, not praeſentem.
            
            
               Ne, an aduerbe rational for Ergo, Verg. Me ne incepto deſiſtere uictam? bycauſe I am vaynquiſhed, ſhall I therfore ceaſe of myne enterpryſe?
            
               Ne amicis nihil tribuamus epulamur, To thyntente that our frendes ſhall not thynke that we wyll do nothynge for theyr ſake, we do eate and banket.
            
               Ne, ſometyme ſignyfyeth demaundynge, as, Datur ne illa hodie Pamphilo nuptum? but ſhall ſhe be maryed to day vnto Panphilus? Ego ne, who? I.
            
               Nea, an yle betwene Lemnos and Helleſpontus.
            
               Neapolis, a noble citie of Campania, ſette on the borders of the ſea called Mare mediterraneum, and was fyrſte called Parthenope. Of this citie the countreys of Campania, Apulia, and Calabria, be nowe called Regnum Neapolitanum, the realme of Naples.
            
               Nebula, a lyttell whyte clowde.
            
               Nebulo, lonis, a knaue.
            
               Nebuloſus, clowdy,
            
               Nebuloſus ager, a countrey hauynge often tymes clowdes ouer it, where by it is temperate.
            
               Nebrides, the ſkynnes of red dere and falowe.
            
               Nebrundes, the genitours of beaſtes.
            
               Nec, nor.
            
               Nec opinato, by aduenture.
            
               Necnon, alſo.
            
                
               Neceſſe, & Neceſſum, of force, it muſte nedes be, neceſſaryly.
            
               Neceſſe habere, to haue nede.
            
               Neceſſarius, a kynſeman.
            Neceſſarius, a, um, neceſſary.
            
            
               Neceſsitas, tatis, nede, neceſſytie, an alyaunce or bonde of amitie.
            Neceſsitudo, dinis, idem.
            
               Neceſſario, neceſſaryly, of neceſſitie, nedefully.
            
               Necim, auncient wryters vſed for Nec cum.
            
            
               Nec ne, or not.
            
               Neco, care, to ſlea.
            Necatus, ta, tum, ſlayne.
            
            
               Neci datus, ſlayne without weapon.
            
               Necromantes, a Necromancer, he that calleth vp damned ſpirites.
            Necromanticus, idem.
            
               Necromantia, necromancy.
            
               Nectar, a pleaſaunt lycour whiche the poetes fayned to be the drynke of goddes. ſometyme it ſignifyeth immortalytie.
            Nectareus, a, um, immortall, dyuine.
            
            
               Nectarea herba, an herbe called alſo Inula cā
                  pana, Elicampane.
            
               Nectarites, a drynke made with the ſame herbe.
            
               Necto, nexui, nectere, to knytte, to wynde or brayde laſes or other lyke thynges.
            
               Nectere cauſas, to make excuſes.
            
               Nectere aliud ex alio, to hange one thynge by an other.
            
               Nectere dolum alicui, to inuente a meane to deceyue or mocke one.
            
               Necti, whan the dettour was delyuered to his creditour in bondage.
            
               Necubi, in no place.
            
               Necunde, if from any place.
            
               Nedum, not onely, where the thynge of leaſte eſtimation is put laſte, as Funderem pro te ſanguinem, ne dum pecuniam, I wolde ſpende for the not onely my moneye, but alſo my bloude. but where the thynge of moſte eſtimation is put laſte, it ſignyfieth, nor yet, as. Ne crederem tibi obolum, ne dum uitam meam. I wyll not commytte my lyfe vnto thy credence nor yet lende the one halfe-peny.
            
               Nefandus, da, dum, horrible, not to be named
            
               Nefarius, a, um, curſed, vnworthy to lyue.
            
               Nefas, a thynge deteſtable.
            
               Nefaſci dies, dayes in the whiche it was not lefull to ſpeake thre wordes.
            
               Nefrendes, pygges weyned, called ſhootes.
            
               Negabundus, he that denieth.
            
               Negatio, a denyenge, a naye.
            
               Negatiuus, a denyar.
            
               Negito, tare, to deny.
            
               Negligo, glexi, gligere, to neglecte or haue lyttell regarde to a thynge.
            
               Neglectus, tus, ſmall regarde.
            Neglectus, ta, tum, not regarded.
            
            
               Negligentia, negligence.
            Negligens, tis, negligent.
            
            
               Negligenter, negligently.
            
               Nego, gare, to deny, to refuſe, to ſay nay.
            
               Negato eſſe ituram, ſay ſhe wyll not go.
            
               Negaris ſaepe eſſe domi, They ſaye that oftentymes thou arte not at home.
            
               Negotialis, le, perteynynge to marchaundyſe, or occupation.
            
               Negotiator, a marchaunt man.
            
               Negotior, ari, to exerciſe marchaundyſe in ſtraunge countreys. alſo to be in buſyneſſe.
            
               Negotioſus, hauynge moche buſyneſſe, in body or mynde.
            
               Negotium, buſines, affayre, charge, care.
            
               Dare negotium, gyue in charge.
            
               Sui negotij bene gerens, he dothe well his buſynes, or he exployteth well his affayres.
            
               Plurimum in eo negotij habui, I trauayled moche in it, I had moche a do with it.
            
               Negotium magnū eſt nauigare at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   id mē
                  ſe Quintili, it is moche a doo to ſayle there, ſpecially in the moneth of Iuly.
            
               Negotium faceſſere, to trouble or vexe one.
            
               Eſt mihi negotium, I haue ſomewhat to do
            
               Ita negotium eſt, The matter ſo requireth.
            
               Nullo negotio, without peyne, eaſyly,
            
               Nil eſt negotij it is lyghtly done.
            
               Sed quid negotij quamobrem ſuccenſes mihi? what is the matter whye thou arte angry with me?
            
               Obiectum eſt mihi negotium, I am in trouble.
            
               Negotiolum, a lyttell buſineſſe, or matter.
            
               Negotiorum curator, a Solycitour, or a factour.
            
               Neleides patronimicum, of Neleius, as i
                  •
                where of the progeny of Neleus.
            
               Neleus, father of duke Neſtor.
            
               Nem, ſometyme, alſo excepte.
            
               Nemea, a woode in Greece, where Hercules ſlewe .iii. horrible lyons.
            
               Nemeaeus, a, um, of Nemea.
            
            
               Nemeſis, the name of a goddeſſe, whome the paynyms ſuppoſed to be the punyſher of greuouſe offendours, ſome called her Fortune. Suidas ſayth that Nemeſis, is Iuſtice, complaynt, reproche, enuy, fortune.
            
               Nemartes, fayryes of the ſea.
            
               Ne my quidem, applyed to hym that dare not ſpeake one worde.
            
               Nemeti, people of a citie in Germanye called Spyres.
            
               Nemo, no man, none.
            
               Nemo non, ſome man.
            
               Nemo homo, for nemo omnino, none at al.
            
                
               Nemo unus, not one man.
            
               Nemoroſus, a, um, full of woodes.
            
               Nempe, an aduerb of confyrming, for bycauſe truely, ſomtyme it ſignifieth for.
            
               Nemus, nemoris, a woode ſeruynge for pleaſure.
            
               Nemoralis, le, perteinynge to a woode.
            Nemorenſis, ſe, idem.
            
               Neemias, a iewe, and cupberar to Artaxarxes kynge of Perſia, a manne of great lernynge and holyneſſe, whoo beinge in great fauour with the ſayde kynge, opteyned bothe licence and ayde to reedifye the citie of Hieruſalem, afore the incarnation of Chryſte. CCCC. xlvii. yeres.
            
               Nemrod, is interpreted rebell, or gouernour ſleapynge, he was the ſonne of Chus, ſonne of Cham, the ſecond ſonne of Noe. He is of ſome written Nimrod, of ſome Nembroth. He was alſo called Saturnus babylonicus. and was the fyrſte that toke on hym to raign ouer men, and attempted to buylde the great toure of Babylon, intendynge to haue rayſed it aboue the clowdes, thinkynge thereby to haue eſcaped if any floude ſhulde eftſones haue hapned. He was before the incarnatyon of Chryſte .MM.Clxx. yeres. after the creation of the worlde .M.DCClxxxviii.
            
               Nenum, was of olde tyme vſed for Non.
            
            Neo, neui, nere, to ſpynne.
            
            
               Neogamus, newely wedded.
            
               Neomagus, a towne in Fraunce called Nemure. it was alſo a citie in Britannia, whiche ſome men do ſuppoſe to be Cheſter.
            
               Neomenia, the moone while ſhe is in chaungynge and lackynge lyght.
            
               Neophitus, a man newely entred into any profeſſion, a newe man, alſo a tree or herbe new ſprongen vp.
            
               Neoptholemus, ſygnyfieth a knyghte newe made, it was the ſurname of Pirrhus, whiche was ſonne of Achilles.
            
               Neotericus, one of late tyme.
            Nepa, & Nepes, a ſcorpion.
            
            
               Nepenthe, a drynke co
                  ••
               ectioned or made by Helene wyfe of Menelaus, whiche cauſed them that dranke therof to forget all ſorowe. ſome do ſuppoſe it to be made with the herbe called Borage, in latyne Bugloſſa. wherfore that herbe is of ſome men ſo called.
            
               Nepeta, a citie in Tuſcane, it is alſo an herbe called Calamynt, but thereof be two ſortes, the oone more with leaues ſome what hore. which I ſuppoſe to be Nep. the other is leſſe hauynge leaues lyke penye royall, but ſomewhat greatter, whiche of ſome men is called wylde peny royalle and groweth in plaſſhy groundes, Dioſcorides ſeemeth to make thre kyndes of Nepeta.
            
            
               Nephalia, 
               
                  〈…〉
                feaſtes of ſober men wher no wyne is vſed, but onely meathe.
            
               Nephele, a greeke worde ſignifieth a clowde. it was alſo the name of a woman, mother of Helles, whiche gaue the name to the ſea called Helleſpontus.
            
            
               Nephritis, a ſyckeneſſe and griefe in the raines
            
               Nepos, nepotis, the ſonnes ſonne, or doughters ſonne. it ſometyme ſygnifieth a ryotous perſon.
            
               Nepotes, ſygnifieth al the ſucceſſion folowing ſonnes and daughters.
            
               Nepotor, tari, to lyue or ſpende riottouſly.
            
               Nepotulus, diminutiue of Nepos.
            
            
               Nepotatus, rus, ryote or ſuperfluouſe dyſpences.
            
               Neptis, the ſonnes daughter, or daughters daughter.
            
               Neptunus, called god of the ſea.
            
               Nepus, ſluttyſhe.
            
               Nequa, no where.
            
               Nequalia, detrimentes.
            
               Nequam, an yll man.
            
               Nequando, at no tyme.
            
               Nequaquam, in no wyſe.
            
               Nequior, warſe.
            
               Nequiſsimus, warſte of all.
            
               Nequiquam, in vayne.
            
               Ne quic
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                  , not.
            
               Ne quid nimis, no thynge excedynge, or nothynge, to to.
            
               Nerquino, are, to denye. alſo to be wanton.
            
               Nequinum, a citie in Italy nowe called Naeruia..
            
            
               Nequinant, olde wryters vſed for Nequeunt, they maye not.
            
               Ne quis, leſte that any man or that no man.
            
               Nequitia, vnthryftyneſſe, where one is gyuen to all voluptuouſeneſſe.
            
               Nequiter, vnthryftyly.
            Nequitus, idem.
            
               Nereides, fayries of the ſea.
            
               Nereus, a god of the ſea, and ſomtyme it is put for the ſea.
            
               Nerium, a tree whiche hath leaues lyke an almonde, whiche ſome do call oleander, ſome Roſagine. it is alſo promuntorye, or elbowe of lande in Galitia, lyinge into the weſt ſea, not far from Compoſtella.
            
               Nero, called alſo Domitius an emperor ſon of Gn. Domitius Nero, adopted into thempyre by Claudius, who maried his mother Agrippina. this man although he were brought vp by the reuerend and wyſe Senera, yet by the ineuitable corruption of his nature he became horrible viciouſe, in ſo moche as he cauſed hym ſelfe to be gelded & cut in the fourme of a woman, and ſo to be abuſed, and by his crueltie made his owne mother to be ſlayne,
 and the citie of Rome to be burned, he in the meane tyme playing on a harpe, and ſynging the deſtruction of Troye. Fynally he beinge hated of all men, was ſlayne in a caue wherinto he fledde, whan he was but .xxxii. yeres olde, and had rained .xiiii. yeres, in the .lvii. yere after the incarnation of Chryſte.
            
               Nerio, the wyfe of Mars.
            
               Nerites, is tranſlated by Theodorus, Natix, reade before.
            
               Neruiae, harpe ſtrynges, or lute ſtrynges.
            Neruiceus, a, um, of ſynewes.
            
            
               Neruicus, he that hath griefe of the ſynewes.
            
               Neruij, people inhabytynge in Tournay and the countreye adioynynge.
            
               Nerulani, people nyghe to Rome.
            
               Nerulonenſes, people in Campania.
            
               Nerulum, a towne in Lucania.
            
               Neruoſus, a, um, hauynge great ſynewes, or many ſynewes. it alſo ſignifyeth ſtrongely made in body.
            
               Neruus, a ſynewe, alſo a fetter or gyue, wherwith the legges are tyed, alſo force or ſtrēgth alſo the ſtrynge of an inſtrument.
            
               Neruos intendere, to employ ſtrength.
            
               Nerui reipublicae, prouiſion for defence of the countrey, that is to ſaye, ſtronge men, treaſure, ſhyppes. &c.
            
               Nerui belli, money and men of armes.
            
               Neruulus, a diminutiue of Neruus.
            
            
               Nerua, called alſo Cocceius, a good and noble emperour, who being a Gentile, in the beginnyng of his raigne dyd ſet at lybertie al chriſten men which were accuſed or banyſhed. he ſo moche exceded in lyberalitie towarde pore men, that he therby lackynge treaſure, cauſed his apparayle, plate and ryche ſtuffe to be ſold, for his neceſſitie, and ordeyned that the chylderne of poore men ſhoulde be kept with the common treaſure, and determyned nothinge by hym ſelfe, but onely by the conſent of excellent wyſe men. yet not withſtandinge his ſynceritie & vertuouſe lyfe, he lacked not traytours, whom he dyd tollerate wonderfully, and at the laſte dyed, whan he was of the age of .lxxi. yeres, whan he had raygned one yere and .iiii. monthes after the incarnation of Chryſte .lxxxxix. yeres.
            
               Neſa, a countrey in the yle of Sicile ioynynge to Aethna.
            
               Neſcio, neſcire, not to knowe, to be ignorant.
            
               Neſcitur, it is not knowen.
            
               Neſcius, he that is not knowen, or dothe not knowe.
            
               Neſium, or Neſis, an yle by Campania.
            
               Neſia, a nymphe of the ſea.
            
               Neſſotrophion, a place where duckes be kept to be made fat.
            
               Neſtor, a duke of Greece, whiche came to the ſiege of Troye, who in gyuynge counſayle was reputed moſt excellent, and lyued (as he hym ſelfe ſayde) thre mennes ages.
            
               Neſus, a ryuer in Thracia.
            
               Neſſus, a Centaure whiche rauiſhed Deianira the wyfe of Hercules, who beinge wounded to deathe gaue to Deianira a poyſon, wherwith the ſhyrte of Hercules beynge waſſhed and put on hym, his body dyd rot with moſt horrible peynes, whiche he not ſuſteynynge, dyd enter into a great fyre and let hym ſelf be burned.
            
               Neſtorius, a greatte heretyke, byſhop of Conſtantinople, the yeare of our lorde. CCCC. xix. whoo denyed Chryſte to be god, of hym the heretikes holdynge that opynion were called Neſtoriani.
            
            
               Neu, for ne ue, or not. Neu lachrima ſoror, wepe not ſuſter. ſome tyme it ſignifyeth nor, whan it is doubled. Neu ſe, neu Pompeium abſentem imperatorem aduerſariis ad ſupplicium tradant, obſecrat. He deſyred them that they wolde not betraye neyther hym nor Pompey theyr capitayn vnto theyr ennemies to be put vnto cruell deathe.
            
               Neuceria, a citie in Vmbrya, a parte of Italy.
            
               Neue, or not, nor yet.
            
               Ne unguam, in no wyſe.
            
               Neuolo, I wyll not.
            
               Neuri, people in Scithia, of whom it is wrytten, that in Sommer they were turned to wulfes.
            
               Neurobatae, walkers on cordes or ropes.
            
               Neuſtria, Normandy.
            
               Neuter, tra, trum, none of them. neyther the one nor the other.
            
               Neuterutri inuidet, the one dothe not enuy the other.
            
               Neutro aduerbium, neyther in the one parte nor in the other. Ti. Liuius.
            
            Neutrobi, idem.
            
               Neutiquam, in no wyſe, in no condition.
            
               Neuus, a mole, or other lyke marke, in the body or vyſage.
            
               Nex, necis, violent deathe.
            
               Nexilis, le, any thynge that maye be knytte.
            
               Nexo, ui, nexere, to knyt often.
            
               Nexus, a, um, knyt or bounden.
            
               Nexus, us, a bonde, an oblygation.
            
               Nexi, were free men whiche bounde theym ſelfes to ſerue, to be therfore acquited of theyr dettes.
            
               Nexus inire, to be wrapped in bondes.
            
               Nexu ſolutus, diſcharged of bonde.
         
         
            
            ¶N ANTE I.
            
               NI, but if, excepte, leſte that.
            
               Nicander, a famouſe poete which wrate of poyſons.
            
               Nicator, a vaynquiſhour.
            
               Nicea, a citie in Bithinia, where as was holden the holy counſayle agaynſte Arrius, in the which was preſente the noble Emperour Conſtantinus magnus.
            
               Niceteria, rewardes for victory, as rynges colars of golde, or garlandes, ſome do wryt it, Niceretia,
            
            
               Nicopolis, a citie in Egypte where Octauian vainguiſhed Antony and Cleopatra.
            
               Nicepſus, a greeke phiſition and a greate magiciane, about the yere of our lorde .DC.l.
            
               Nicomedia, a noble citie in Bithinia, where dyed Conſtantine the Emperour, called Magnus.
            
            
               Nicolaitae, were heretykes whiche tooke that name of one Nicholas which was one of the vii. deacons in the time of the apoſtoles who being blamed of them for his ialoſy, brought his wyfe that was fayre amonge all the dyſciples, ſayinge that who ſo wolde ſhulde vſe her. thynkynge therby to purge hym ſelfe of ialoſy whiche was layde vnto hym, whereof other yll men takynge occaſion belieued that euery man mought lefully vſe euery woman that he luſted, which hereſy (as reaſon wold) was condemned immediately, but it is to be feared that it is not klerely extincte.
            
               Nicoſtrata, called alſo Carmētis, was mother to Euander kyng of latines and a prophetis.
            
               Nicromantia, or more rather Necromantia, is arte magike in callynge vp damned ſpirytes, with ſuperſticiouſe ceremonyes.
            
               Nicto, tere, to vent as a hounde or ſpaynell.
            
               Nicto, tare, to wynke.
            Nictor, idem.
            
               Nidifico, care, to buylde a neſte.
            
               Nidere, to ſhyne, to gyue a ſauour.
            
               Nidor, doris, a ſauour of a thynge burned or roſted. ſometyme grynnynge or ſhewynge of the teethe. ſomtyme brightneſſe.
            
               Nidus, a neſte, ſometyme the byrde whiche bredeth, alſo a veſſell lyke a neſte, alſo boxes or cheſtes wherin grocers, or mercers, doo put theyr wares be called Nidi.
            
            
               Nigella, an herbe which beareth a blacke ſede of good ſauour, whiche profyteth agaynſte rewnes.
            
               Nigellus, a, um, broune of colour.
            
               Niger, gra, grum, blacke, ſometyme it ſygnyfyeth purple.
            
               Nigidius figulus, an auncient Romayne whiche was a greatte philoſopher of the ſecte of Pythagoras, and wrate wonderful ſubtylly. aboute the yere of our lorde .xlviii. he dyed in exyle.
            Nigredo, dinis, blackeneſſe.
            
            Nigrities, idem.
            
               Nigri facio, to make blacke.
            Nigreo, & Nigrico, care, to be blacke.
            
            
               Nigrifio, fieri, to become blacke.
            
               Nigris, a fountayne in Ethiope, whiche ſome do ſuppoſe to be the heade of the famouſe ryuer Nilus.
            
               Nigro, are, to make blacke or to be blacke,
            Nigror, groris, blackeneſſe.
            
            
               Nihil, & Nihilum, no thynge, or nought.
            
               Nihil cum fidibus graculo, nihil cum amaracino ſui. The daw hath naught to do with a lute, nor the ſowe with oyle of maioram. A prouerbe applyed to hym whiche preſumynge of his wytte, medleth with thynges wherof he can not ſkyll.
            
               Nil, no thynge.
            
               Nilion, a ſtone lyke a topace but that it is more duſkyſhe.
            
               Nilus, a great and famouſe Ryuer, runnynge throughe Aethiopia and Egypt, and is ſuppoſed to be one of the three ryuers of Paradiſe, called in holy ſcripture Gehon, all be it to me it ſemeth vnlykely. for as moche as in Geneſ. it is wrytten that Gehon is he that enuyroneth all the lande of Ethyopia, and maketh no mention that it paſſeth throughe Egypt, all be it that Egypt and the ryuer of Nilus were more nyghe to Moſes whan he wrate Geneſim than Aethyopia was, and alſo Nilus was famouſe, for the vertue of the water therof whiche ſurroundynge or ouer flowynge the countrey of Egypte made the grounde wonderfull fertile many yeres after in ſo moche as without labourynge the erth, it broughte forthe abundance of ſundry gratnes and plantes, dilectable and profytable to be eaten, alſo beaſtes of ſundry kyndes with out other fourme of generation: ſpecyallye whan the ryuer came to the depeneſſe of .xl. cubites, lyke wyſe whan it exceded not .viii. cubittes, there ſucceded moche fa
                  •
               yne or ſcarſitie. Strabo.
            
               Niliacus, & Niloticus, ca, cum, pertey
                  ••
               nge to the ryuer of Nilus.
            
               Nimbifer, feri, the brynger of ſtormes.
            
               Nimblis, an yle in the ſea called Ionium.
            
            
               Nimbus, a great ſhowre of rayne, a ſtorme of rayne or hayle, a great blaſte of wynde, a tempeſt of wether, a certayne veſſell out of the whiche wyne is drawen.
            Nimboſus, a, um, ſtormy.
            
            
               Nimirum, vndoubtedly, ſometyme it ſignifyeth Scilcet, ſometyme At, ſometyme it is added to an aunſwere Quintil, Vter melior dicetur Orator? nimirum qui homo quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                   melior, whiche ſhal be ſayde to be the better oratour, euen he that is alſo the better man.
            
               Nimis, & Nimium, do ſignifie exceſſe in moch or lyttell. Nimis magnus, to great. Nimis paruus, to lyttell. Nimis bonus, to good. Nimis malus, to yll.
            
               Nimietas, that exceſſe.
            
               Nimie, & Nimio, aduerbes ſygnyfyenge to moche.
            Nimius, a, um, to moche.
            
            
               Nimius animi, he that hath to great a courage In dando nimius, to liberall, prodigall.
            
               Nimiopere, an aduerbe ſignifyenge excedyngely.
            
               Ningo, ningere, to ſnowe.
            
               Ninguidus, a, um, where there is moch ſnowe
            
               Ninus, kynge of Aſſyria, and ſonne of Belus, who was the fyrſte that made warre and ſubdued countreyes, he conquered vnto Inde, and vaynquiſhed Zoroaſtes kynge of Bactria, whiche fyrſte inuented arte magike: and alſo cauſed fyrſt money to be currant: he had to his wyfe Semiramis, of whome ye ſhall reade in the letter S. He rayned lii. yeres and was before the incarnation of Chryſt .MM.lv. yeres.
            
               Niniue, ſeu Niſibis, a cytie in Aſſyria buylded by Ninus, whiche in compace conteyned thre dayes iourneye, there was an nother citie of that name in the corner of Iudea towarde Arabia.
            
               Ningulum, of old writers was vſed for nullū.
            
            
               Niobe, bes, daughter of Tamalus kynge of Phrigia & wyfe to Amphion, a womanne of moche wyſedome, who brought furthe .vii. ſonnes and as many daughters of excellente beautie, wherof ſhe auauntynge and preferrynge her ſelfe aboue Latona, mother of Apollo and Diana. Latona beinge therewith angrye, commaunded Apollo to ſlea all the ſonnes, and Diana to ſlea all the daughters which being done, Niobe the mother of them vaynquiſhed with diſcomforte and heuynes, loſte her ſpeche, and remayned without meuynge, wherfore the poetes fayned that ſhe vpon the ſepulchre of her chyldren was tranſfourmed into a ſtone.
            
               Niphantes, a ryuer in Scithia.
            
               Niptrum, a lauer.
            
               Nis, of olde tyme was vſed for nobis.
            
            
               Niſaee, was a Nymphe or fayry.
            
               Niſeus, a place in the countrey of Media, wher was a good brede of fayre horſes.
            
               Niſſa, a citie in Lydia.
            
               Niſi, excrepte, or but if.
            
               Niſus, a kynge of whome it is wrytten that he hadde one golden heare, whyche cauſed hym to be alway victoriouſe: but his daughter called Myrrha at the requeſte of oone with whoſe loue ſhe was taken, ſtale awaye the ſayd heare, wherby her father was vainquyſſhed and ſlayne. it is alſo a kynde of hawkes.
            Niſus, a, um, the participle of Nitor.
            
               Niſus, us, endeuour, inforcement.
            
               Niſyros, an yle nyghe to Grece.
            
               Nitedula, a glowe worme that ſhyneth in the nyght.
            
               Nitella, a tothe pykar. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth elegancy in ſpeche.
            
               Niteo, tere, to be neate or cleane in body, garmentes or other thynge. alſo to ſhyne.
            Niteico, ſcere, idem.
            
               Nitide, clenly gorgeouſely.
            
               Nitido, dare, to make bryght or kleane.
            Nitidus, a, um, cleane, bryght.
            
            
               Nitere, ſomtyme ſygnifieth to lyue pleaſantly.
            
               Nitor, teris, nui, to indeuour, to inforce or labour to do a thynge.
            
               Nititur haſta, he leaned to his ſpeare.
            
               Niti alis, to flea.
            
               Conſilio niti, to leaue to counſayle.
            
               Nititur in coniectura, it reſteth in coniecture
            
               Niti pari iugo, to take as moche peyne the one as the other.
            
               Niti pro aliquo, to take ones part.
            
               Nitor, toris, clenneſſe, bryghtneſſe, gayneſſe.
            
               Nitrea, a countrey in Egypt, and the name of ii. cities aboue Memphis.
            
               Nitrum, ſome do ſuppoſe it to be that whiche is called ſalte peter, but I doubte thereof bycauſe Dioſcorydes wryteth that Nitrum is lyghte of a ruddy colour or whyte, hauynge holes lyke vnto a ſponge, and was put in to the pot with herbes wherby they were made more tend
                  ••
                and apte to be eaten, and I had ſome gyuen to me which was of a carnation colour and not gliſtenyng lyke our ſalt peter.
            
               Niualis, le, perteynynge to ſnowe.
            
               Niuatus, ta, tum, made colde as ſnowe.
            Niueus, a, um, lyke ſnowe.
            
            
               Niuoſus, a, um, full of ſnowe.
            Nix, niuis, ſnowe.
            
            
               Nixurio, ire, to attempte to do a thynge
            
               Nixus, borne or brought forthe into the world.
            
               Nixus, us, the byrthe of a chylde.
         
         
            ¶N ANTE O.
            
               NO, nare, to ſwymme.
            
               Nobilis, le, noble, famouſe.
            
               Nobilitas, nobilitie, eſtimation.
            
               Nobilito, tare, to make noble, to promote to dignitie, to brynge into renoume.
            
               Nobiliter, nobly.
            Noceo, cui, cere, to hurte.
            
            
               Nocteſco, ſcere, to waxe nyght or be darke.
            
               Noctes attice, the tytle of a boke whiche Aulus
 Gelius made, ſoo called bycauſe it was wrytten at Athenes in the wynter tyme.
            
               Nocticorax, a crowe whiche cryeth by nyght.
            
               Noctifuga, the thynge whiche maye not ſuſteine nighte.
            
               Noctiluca, a name wherby the mone is called. alſo a lyttell beaſte whiche ſhyneth by nyght.
            
               Noctiuagus, a wanderer by nyght.
            
               Noctu, in the nyghte, or by nyght.
            
               Noctua, an oule.
            
               Noctuae Athenis, oules to Athenes. a prouerbe, where one ſendeth to a man any thyng wherof he that receyueth it hath plenty.
            
               Nocturnus, na, um, perteynynge to nyght.
            
               Nocuus, a, um, that whiche dothe hurte.
            
               Nodo, dare, to knytte.
            
               Nodus, a knot, a thronge of men in battayle.
            Nodoſus, a, um, knotty.
            
            
               Nodus Herculis, Hercules knotte. A prouerbe applyed to a thyng which by no menes maye be louſed.
            
               Nodum in ſcirpo quaerere, to ſeke a knot in a ruſhe. a prouerbe where oone maketh a thynge difficult or doubtfull, whiche is very playne to be vnderſtande or is ſcrupulouſe in a thynge without cauſe.
            
               Noe,
               Beroſus. ſignifieth reſt, or ceaſynge from laboure, it was the name of a holy patriarke, whiche was the ſonne of Lamech, whom onelye god elected with his wyfe and .iii. ſonnes to be preſerued from the vniuerall floude, whiche for the horrible ſynnes of men than lyuynge, almyghty god ſente ouer the worlde, whanne Noe was of the age of .DC. yeres, who by the commaundement of god made a greatte veſſell, called in holy ſcripture an Arch; whiche conteyned in lengthe .CCC. cubites (as ſayncte Auguſtine ſaythe) geometricall, euery cubite conteynynge vi. commune cubites whiche is .ix. feete, ſo it was in lengthe two thouſande ſeuen hundred feete, in breade fifty cubites whiche was .CCCC.l. feete in depeneſſe .xxx. cubites, whiche was .CClxx feete, wherin were alſo ſaued of al kyndes of beaſtes and foules male and female, and after that the floude ceaſed, the Arche remayned on an hil in Armenia called Cordiei. and Noe lyued after the floud CCCl. yeres, and ſo he was .DCCCCL. yeres old whan he died, which was after the creatiō of the world MM.vii. yeres. and before the incarnation of Chryſte. M.DCCC. lv. yeres, he was of the gentiles called Ianus. and ſomme tyme Vortumnus.
            
            
               Noegeum, a whyte napkyn.
            
               Noema, a ſentence.
            
               Noenon, of olde tyme vſed for Non.
            
            
               Noelae, wertes whiche be in the chekes of ſwyne or gotes.
            
               Noes, a ryuer in Thracia, whiche runneth into the ryuer called Danubius or Iſter.
            
            
               Nolo, a towne in Italy.
            
               Nolani, people of that towne.
            
               Nolito, for Noli, do not.
            
               Nolo, I wyll not.
            
               Nomarcha, he that hath preemynence in the miniſtration of lawes, a mayre or other like.
            
               Nomades, people in Scithia which is in Europa, whiche feedyng onely cattal haue none other habitation but where the cattel do tarye. I ſuppoſe that they be the Tartarians nexte to Polonia and Ruſſy.
            
               Nomae, paynefull ſores.
            
               Nomen, inis, a name gyuen vnto chyldren, as Iohn or Thomas, Marcus or Lucius, ſometyme it ſignifieth honour, authoritie or great bloude, ſometyme bruyte or renoume. ſomtyme cauſe, as eo nomine, for that cauſe Multis nominibus, for manye cauſes. Hoc uno nomine, for that onely cauſe.
            
               Nomen ſoluere, to paye dettes.
            
               Nomen tranſferre, to borowe of one man for to paye an other.
            
               Nominibus honeſtis, for an honeſt conſideration.
            
               Nomenclatio, the numbrynge of names and ſurnames.
            Nomenclatura, idem.
            
               Nomendator, or Nomenculator, one whiche knowynge the name of euery perſone ſerued amonge the Romayues, to inſtructe them of ſuche as they ſhulde ſolicite to graunt theyre voyces in election of officers.
            
               Nomina, dettes and dettours, alſo articles of accompte or ſummes.
            
               Nomina facere, to lende to many men.
            
               Nomina exigere, to aſke dettes or ſue dettours.
            
               Nomina idonea, ſure dettours.
            
               Nomina expedire, to paye dette struely.
            
               Nomina explicare, to diſcharge dettes.
            Nomina expungere, idem.
            
               Nominare, to name or appoynte.
            
               Nominatim, by name.
            
               Nominatio, a namynge or appoyntment.
            
               Nomiſma, coyne of money.
            
               Nomiſsis, nyne pounde weyght.
            
               Nomophylax, philacos, he whiche hath the cuſtody of bookes wherin lawes are written.
            
               Nomus, a iuriſdiction or mayraltie.
            
               Non, no nor not.
            
               Nonaginta, foureſcore and ten.
            
               Nongenti, nyne hundred.
            
               Nonageſimus, a, um, the fourſcore and tenth.
            
               Nonagecuplus, foureſcore and tenne tymes more.
            
               Nonagecuplex, foureſcore and ten double.
            
               Nonagenarius, he that is foureſcore and ten
 yeres olde.
            
               Nonagies, foureſcore and ten tymes.
            
               Nonae, nonarum, in the myddes of Marche, May, Iune, and October, be the .vi. dayes, whiche do folowe the fyrſte day. in other monethes, it be the .iiii. dayes whyche do folowe the fyrſte day of the moneth.
            
               Nonacris, a place in the countray of Archadia.
            Nonus, ua, num, the nynthe.
            
            
               Non ita pridem, not longe agone.
            
               Non modo, not onely.
            
               Nonnullus, ſome man.
            
               Nonnunquam, ſometyme.
            Non ſobrius, drunke.
            
            
               Non tacenda, prayſe worthy.
            
               Noricum, a countraye in Germania ioynynge to Bauiere.
            
               Norma, a rule or ſquyre.
            
               Normalis, ryght to the rule.
            
               Normatus, ta, tum, ſette in rule.
            
               Normula, a lyttell rule.
            
               Noruegia, a countrey beyonde Denmarke.
            
               Noſcito, tare, to knowe moche.
            Noſco, noui, noſcere, to knowe.
            
            
               Noſcomion, an hoſpytall for ſycke men.
            
               Noſter, ſtra, ſtrum, our, or of our familye or houſe.
            
               Noſtras, of our countrey or houſeholde.
            
               Notae, notes, cyphers, markes, ſygnes.
            
               Notae eximere, to acquite or dyſcharge of reproche or dyſhonour.
            
               Nota, defamation.
            
               Notam inurere, to defame.
            
               Ad coenam non ad notam te inuito, I bad the to ſouper, & not to reproue or defame me.
            Notabilis, le, notable.
            
            
               Notabiliter, notably, euydently.
            
               Notarius, a clerke whiche wryteth inſtrumentes or plees.
            
               Notare, to note or marke, to reproue. ſomtyme to accuſe. alſo to perceyue.
            
               Notare uitium, to reproue vyce.
            
               Notatio, conſyderation, aduyſement.
            Notatus, ta, tum, marked.
            
            
               Noteſco, ſcere, to be knowen, or made knowen.
            
               Nothia, gyuen to baſtardes.
            
               Nothus, a baſtarde.
            
               Notificare, to notify or make to be knowen.
            Notio, & notitia, knowledge.
            
            Notus, ta, tum, knowen.
            
            
               Notus, ti, the ſoutherne wynde.
            
               Nouacula, a barbours raſour.
            
               Noualis ager, lande ſowen euery other yere.
            Noualia plur. idem. Verg.
            
               Nouantum Cherſoneſum, a place in the weſte place in Scotlande, callyd Cokermouth.
            
               Nouatianus, a prieſte of Rome, and ſometyme chaplayne to ſaint Cyprian began an hereſy, callyd Catharon. which was that they whyche had renounced the faythe, ſhoulde not be receyued to penaunce.
            
               Nouelletum, a late growen vyne.
            
               Nouello, are, to tylle newe grounde, or ſet new vynes.
            
               Nouellus, a, um, very newe or yonge growen.
            
               Nouem, nyne.
            Nouenus, a, um, the nynthe.
            
            
               Nouenarius numerus, the number of nyne.
            
               Nouendium, the ſpace of nyne dayes.
            
               Nouendiale ſacrum, the terrement the nynthe day after the buryenge.
            
               Nouenniae plur. a citie in Thracia.
            
               Nouerca, a ſtepmother.
            
               Nouercale odium, the accuſtomed hate whiche ſtepmothers are wonte to beare to theyr huſbandes chylderne.
            
               Nouercari, to do lyke a ſtepmother.
            Nouitius, a, um, newe begunne.
            
            
               Nouo, are, to make newe.
            
               Nouocomenſis, a citeſyn of Nouum comum.
            
            
               Nouum Comum, a cytie in Lumbardy.
            
               Nouuncium, a wayghte of nyne ounces, or a meaſure of nyne ynches.
            
               Nouus, a, um, newe, freſhe commen.
            
               Noui homines, men late come to wourſhyp or honour.
            
               Nouiſsime, at the laſte.
            Nouiſsimus, a, um, the laſte.
            
            
               Nouiter, newely, or lately.
            Nox, noctis, nyght.
            
            
               Noxa, peyne, ſometyme offence or hurte.
            
               Noxae eximere, to acquyte one of treſpaſſe.
            
               Noxis, uel noxijs ſolutus, acquyted of felony or treſpaſſe.
            
               Penes te eſt noxa, the offence is in the.
            
               Noxam auertere ab aliquo, to diſcharge one of treſpaſſe.
            
               Noxae dedere, to render a vyllayne or beaſt, whyche haue doone harme, in recompence thereof.
            
               Noxam contrahere, to falle into ſyckeneſſe, or to take harme.
            Noxam concipere, idem.
            
               Noxam facere, to do harme.
            Noxam nocere, idem.
            
               Noxia careo, I am not in the faulte.
            
               Noxalis actio, was an action agaynſte the lorde for an offence done by his vyllayne: in the whiche if the playntyfe dydde recouer it, ſhuld be a ſufficient diſcharge and recompēce of the lorde, yf he dyd delyuer his vyllayne to the playntyfe.
            
               Nocteſcit, it is nyght.
            
               Nox intempeſta, the depe of the nyght, whan all thynge is in ſylence.
            
               Nox concubia, the tyme of nyght whan euery man is layde to ſleape.
            
                
               Noxiae eſſe, to be blamed or reproued for any thynge. In noxia, idem.
            
            
               Noxijs uacuum eſſe, to be in no faulte.
            
               Noxius, a, um, harmefull, doynge dyſpleaſure.
            
               Noxitudo, amonge olde writers was vſed for Noxa.
            
         
         
            ¶N ANTE V.
            
               NVBES, a whyte clowde.
            
               Nubecula, a lyttell clowde. it ſygnifieth alſo an heuy countenaunce.
            
               Nubilarium, an howſe wherinto corne is caryed for feare of rayne.
            
               Nubilare, to make clowdye.
            
               Nubilis, maryable.
            
               Nubiloſus, a, um, full of clowdes.
            Nubilus, a, um, clowdy.
            
            
               Nubo, pſi, bere, to be wedded. alſoo to be ioyned vnto.
            
               Nucamenta, are hangynge downe of nut trees lyke rattes tayles.
            
               Nuceria, a towne in Campania.
            
               Nuceus, a, um, of a nutte.
            
               Nucifrangibula, a nutknacker.
            
               Nucleus, the kernell.
            
               Nucula, & Nucella, a lyttell nutte.
            
               Nudipedalia, ceremonyes done barefooted.
            
               Nuditas, nakydneſſe, want of any thyng. ſometyme playnneſſe, without obſcuritie or dyſſimulation.
            
               Nudius tertius, the day before yeſterday.
            
               Nudius quartus, foure dayes agone.
            
               Nudata caſtra, the campe was lefte without men.
            
               Nudatus defenſoribus murus, The walle was abandoned, and without men to defende it.
            
               Nugae plur fables, tryfles.
            
               Nugalis, le, pertaynynge to tryfles.
            
               Nugamenta, tryfles.
            
               Nugator, a tryfler.
            Nugatorius, a, um, tryflynge.
            
            
               Nugax, a tryfler.
            
               Nugigerulus, a bearer out of fables.
            
               Nugiuendus, a fellar of tryfles and fables.
            
               Nugor, gari, to tryfle.
            
               Nullatenus, in no wyſe.
            Nulli conſilij, for Nullius conſilij.
            
               Nullibi, no where.
            Nullo negotio, eaſyly.
            
            
               Nullorum hominum homo, lyke no man.
            
               Nullus, a, um, none▪ ſomtyme it ſygnifieth non. Terent. Si non quaerit, nullus dixerit, If he do not inquyre, tell not.
            
               Nullus ſum, I am vndone.
            
               Nullus dū, no man vntyll this day, neuer mā.
            Num, for An.
            
               Num ego te ſpoliaui? Dyd I robbe the?
            Num nam, for Num, or Vtrum.
            
               Numnam tu hic relictus cuſtos? Art thou left here to watche vs.
            
               Numa, was kyng of Romayns next after Romulus, that is to ſay, the ſeconde kynge, and was choſen by the people & ſenate of Rome, of a poore gentylman, dwellynge in a towne of the Sabines callid Cures, for his excellēt vertues and lernynge, being of the diſcipline of Pythagoras, he beynge kynge by his polycye and ceremonyes by hym inuented, he brought the Romaynes, whyche duryng the tyme of Romulus were continually occupyed in warres, in ſuche a wonderfulle quyetnes and honeſte fourme of lyuynge, that the countrayes enuyronnynge them by the ſpace or xl. yeres, had them in ſuche reuerence, that they dyd neuer duryng that tyme, moue war agaynſt them.
            
               Numa
                     •
                  o, the hauynge of money.
            
               Numella, or Numellae, a tumbrelle, whereinto men be ſette, hauynge therein theyr handes and legges.
            
               Numen, the power or wylle of god. ſometyme it ſygnifieth god. ſometyme apparayle.
            
               Numerabilis, le, that whiche may be numbred.
            
               Numeralis, le, pertaynyng to number.
            
               Numerarius, & numerator, he that reckeneth by numbre.
            Numeratus, ta, tum, numbred.
            
            
               Numerato, promptly, at hande.
            
               In numerato habere ingenium, to haue a wytte apte vnto euery thynge.
            
               In numerato, in redye money. Plin. li.xxxi. Claudius Iſidorus teſtamento ſuo dixit, quā
                  uis multa ciuili bello perdidiſſet, tamen relinquere 
                     •
                  eruorum quatuor millia, iuga boū
                  tria millia ſexcenta, reliqui poecoris ducenta quinquaginta millia in numerato pōdo ſexcenta millia, Claude Iſidore reherſed in his teſtament, that not withſtandyng that he had loſt moche in the cyuile warres, yet dydde he leaue foure thouſande bondemen, thre thouſande and ſyxe hundred yokes of oxen, of other cattel .CC. and fyfty thouſande, and in redy money ſyxe hundred thouſande pounde.
            
               Numerare, to numbre or tell, or accompt.
            
               Numeroſus, a, um, great in numbre.
            
               Numerus, numbre. ſometyme quantitie, ſpecially in grayne or thynges meaſuryd. it is alſo harmony, or an order in ſyllables. ſometyme company aſſemblyd, ſpecyally of the warſte ſorte of people.
            
               Numeris omnibus abſolutus, perfytte at all poyntes.
            
               Numeri, be ſometyme taken for verſes.
            
               Numida, a man or woman of Numidia.
            
               Numidia, a countreye betwene Carthago and Mauritania in Aphryke, and nowe is callyd Barbaria, where ſommetyme raygned Maſiniſſa. In that countraye is founden mooſte
 excellente marble. The chiefe citie there was named Cirta, whiche was very ſtronge, and ſo puiſſant of men, that in the tyme of Strabo it mought arme ten thouſande horſemen, and twenty thouſande footemen.
            
               Numantia, a citie in Spayne aboute Biſkaye, whyche was of ſuche valyantneſſe, that beynge beſieged of the Romaynes .xiiii. yeres contynually, it not onely dyd reſyſt, hauynge but .iiii.M. men to defende it, but alſo vanquyſhed
.xl. thouſande Romaynes, at the laſt it was deſtroyed by the laſte Scipio, whan he hadde beſyeged it a longe tyme. for whan they had long ſuſtayned famyne, and mought not iſſue forthe to fyght in batayle, they burned theym ſelfes and all theyr goodes.
            
               Numicus, a ryuer in Italye, by the Cytie Lauinium, in the whyche Aeneas was drowned.
            
               Nummarius, a, um, pertaynynge to money.
            
               Nummarius, a keper of money.
            
               Nummatus, ryche of money.
            Numiſma, matis, money.
            
            
               Numitor, father vnto Rhea, whiche was the mother of Romulus.
            
               Nummularius, he that keepeth a banke of money.
            
               Nummulus, a lyttell piece of coyne.
            
               Numus, & numiſma, money or coyne. ſome do write it with double m.
            
               Nummus argenteus, as Leonardus Portius writeth, was alſo that, whyche alſo was callyd Denarius Romanus, and weyed a dram and the thyrde parte of a dramme, whyche was .iiii. ſcriples.
            
               Nummus aureus, althoughe it were altered ſundrye tymes, yet the ſame Portius dothe gather of the fyrſte chapyter of the .xviii. boke of Pliny, and of Suetomus in the lyfe of Otho, and Plutarchus in the lyfe of Galba, that at that tyme Nummus aureus, was in valewe .xii. Nūmi argentei, and in that wyſe it agreed with the Venetiane ducate, whyche was worth .xii. of our grotes, whan eyght of our grotes made one ounce.
            
               Nummus adulterinus, counterfayte or forged money.
            
               Nunc, nowe, at the laſte.
            
               Nunc temporis, nowe adayes.
            
               Nunc iam, euen nowe.
            Nunc primum, idem.
            Nuncubi pro nunquid & alicubi.
            
               Nuncupo, pare, to name or to calle a thynge by ſome name, to pronounce, to recyte.
            
               Nun cupare uotum, to make a ſolemne vow.
            
               Nundinae, fayres, martes, they were amonge the olde Romaynes kept euery nynthe daye, whervnto all people reſorted. and than all lawes, whyche were newe made, were proclaymed.
            
               Nundinalis, pertaynynge to fayres.
            
               Nundinatio, byenge and ſellynge.
            
               Nundinari, to bye or ſelle, as they doo in fayres openly.
            Nunquando, for num aliquando.
            
               Nuntiatio, a reporte.
            
               Nuncio, are, to ſhewe, to report, to telle.
            
               Nuntium, a meſſage.
            
               Nuntius, a meſſager, or meſſage.
            
               Nunquam, neuer, or it is impoſſible.
            
               Nunquā hoc uno die efficiatur opus, it is impoſſyble that this enterpriſe may be broughte to paſſe in one day.
            Nunquam non, alway.
            
            
               Nunquid, vſed in a queſtyon.
            
               Nunquid ego ſum? Is it I?
            
               Nunquis, Nunque, Nunquid, is there any?
            
               Nunquid uis? Wyll ye any thynge with me? Wyll ye any thyng commande me?
            
               Nunquid praeterea, Is there any thing els?
            
               Nunquidnam amplius tibi cum illa fuit Charine? Haddeſt thou any thynge elles to do with her?
            
               Nuper, late, not longe agone.
            
               Nuper admodum, but a whyle agoo.
            
               Nuperrimus, he that was or came laſte.
            
               Nuperus, a, um, late done or hapned.
            
               Nuptiae, plur. a weddynge.
            
               Nuptialis le, pertaynynge to weddynge.
            
               Nupturire, to coueyte mariage.
            Nuptus, ta, tum, wedded.
            
            Nuptus, Nupta, ſubſtan. huſbande, wyfe.
            
            Nuptus, tus, maryage.
            
            
               Nurſina, a citie of the Sabynes not farre from Rome, ſet on the hylles of Vmbria.
            
               Nurſini, people of that citie.
            
               Nurus, the ſonnes wyfe.
            
               Nuſquam, an Aduerbe, in a place, and to a place. Teren. Ille autem bonus uir nuſquam apparet, He is in no place an honeſte man. Plaut. Te nuſquam mittam, I wyll ſend the noo whyther.
            
               Nuſquam pedem, he ſhall not goo one foote further.
            
               Nuſquam gentium, no where.
            
               Nuſquam non, euery where.
            
               Nuto, tare, to becken or ſhake the heade, or to make a ſygne with the heade. ſommetyme to leane and be readye to falle in dekay. ſometyme to doubte, whyche parte to take or to leane vnto.
            Nutricatus, tus, nourture.
            
            
               Nutritius, the nourſes huſbande.
            
               Nutritius, tia, tium, pertaynynge to nouryſſhynge.
            
               Nutricula, a nouryce.
            
               Nutrimentum, nouryſhement.
            
               Nutrix, tricis, a nouryce. alſoo a place where
 men doo ſowe trees or herbes, to the intente that whan they haue taken roote, they wylle remeue theym, and ſette theym in a gardeyne or orcharde.
            
               Nutus, tus, the ſygne that oone maketh with his eyes or heade, declaryng his intent ſome tyme it ſygnifyeth the wyll or pleaſure of one.
            
               Nutu, & renutu, with a becke towarde & from warde.
            
               Nux, nucis, a nutte.
            
               Nux auelana, a fylbert.
            
               Nux iuglans, a wall nutte.
            
               Nux muſcata, uel Myriſtica, a nutmygge hotte and drye in the ſeconde degree.
            
               Nux pinea, a pyneapp
                  •
               ll.
         
         
            ¶N ANTE Y.
            
               NYCTERIS, a reremouſe or backe.
            
               Nycticorax, a nyght crowe.
            
               Nyctileia, ſacrifyces by nyght.
            
               Nyctilopes, they that do ſee nothynge toward nyghte.
            
               Nyctimene, the doughter of Nyctes, who after that ſhe had lyen with her father, ſhe was tournyd into an oule.
            
               Nymphae, maydens of the ſea, elfes, ſomtyme the muſes. alſoo yonge bees before that they do flye.
            
               Nympha, dothe ſygnifye the ſpowſe or bryde newe maryed.
            
               Nymphea, callyd alſo Nenuphar, an herbe and flowre callyd the water lyly, in the plurel nū
               ber it ſygnyfieth baynes naturally warme.
            
               Nymphus, the bryde groome.
            
               Nyſia, a certayne kynde of yuy.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE A.
            
               
                  OAN INTERIECtion vſed in wondrynge. ſometyme with a vocatyue caſe. ſomtyme a nominatiue caſe. ſomtyme a vocatyue caſe. ſommetyme in exclamation ſomtime in lamenting. O me perditum, Alas I am vndone. ſometyme in ſkorninge. O praeclarā ſapientiā, O the goodly wyſedom. ſomtime of reioycyng. O factum bene▪
                O that is well done. ſometyme it is the voyce of hym that is ſodainly ſtryken, or ſpeketh to one that he ſawe not before. Quis hic loquitur? Miſis ſalue. O ſalue Pamphile. Who talketh here? Miſis god ſaue you. O Pamphilus welcome.
            
               O, for utinam. Vergil. O tantum libeat mecū tbi ſodida rura, I wolde to god the homely fieldes as well dyd lyke the as they do me.
            
               Oatarica, the ſpaume of fyſhe ſalted.
            
               Oaxis, a ryuer in the yle of Crete or Candy.
            
            
               Oaxus, a cytie in Crete or Candy.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE B.
            
               OB for at, Ob rem, for my profytte. Oboculos, before myne eyes.
            
               Ob tacendum, for ut taceat, that he ſhoulde not telle.
            
               Obaeratus, bounden by erneſt money.
            
               Obacero, are, to lette a man that he can not tel out his tale.
            
               Obambulo, are, to walke agaynſt an other, alſo to walke togyther, or with an nother.
            
               Obacerbo, are, to make one angry.
            
               Obareſco, ſcere, to drye all aboute.
            
               Obaro, are, to ea
                  •
               e aboute.
            
               Obaudio, ire, to here hardly, or vnwyllyngely. ſometyme to obey.
            
               Obba, a bottell.
            
               Obbibo, bere, to drynke all out.
            
               Obcaeco, care, to blynde.
            
               Obcaecare foſſas, to couer dyches.
            
               Obdo, dere, to thruſte agayne, or put to.
            
               Obdormio, ire, to ſlepe faſte or ſoundly.
            
               Obdormire crapulam, to ſlepe vntylle he be eftſones ſobre.
            
               Obduco, xi, cere, to lay ouer, or couer a thing, ſometyme to vncouer or open alſo to brynge agaynſt or ouerthwart a place.
            
               Obducere cicatricem, to couer a wounde with ſkynne.
            
               Obducere callum dolori, to cauſe one to ſuſteyne or ſuffre peyne or griefe
            
               Obdulceſco, ſcere, to be ſwete about.
            Obdureo, rui, ere, & obdureſco, ſcere, to be harde.
            
            
               Obduro, are, to make harde.
            
               Obedio, dire, to obey.
            
               Obediens dicto, he whyche dothe that he is commaunded to doo.
            
               Obedientia, obedyence.
            
               Obedienter, obedyently.
            
               Obedo, obedere, to conſume or eate al about.
            
               Obeliſcus, a great ſtoone, ſquare lyke a butte. waxynge ſmaller and ſmaller, vntylle the toppe, of a great heyghte, made playne by a warkeman. There were of theym dyuerſe in Rome.
            
               Obelus, a ſpytte or brooche, alſoo a longe ſtryke in wrytynge lyke a ſpytte, for a note or dyuerſytie.
            
               Obeo, iui, ire, to go to, to goo aboute, to be at hande, to mete with one, to dye, to do.
            Obire mortem, obire diem, to dye.
            
            
               Obire uadimonium, to go to be ſuretie.
            
                
               Obire le gationem, to go in ambaſſade.
            
               Obire prouinciam, to exercyſe auctoritie.
            
               Obire bellū, to go to battayl, to make warre.
            
               Obire haereditatē, to take poſſeſſion of landes, wherin a mā hath a ſtate of inheritāce.
            
               Obire coenam cum aliquo, to go to bankettes with one hyther and thyther.
            
               Obire oculis, to loke here and therabout.
            
               Obire pedibus regiones, to go into dyuerſe countrayes on foote.
            
               Obedibo, was in the olde tyme vſed for obediam, I ſhall obey.
            
               Obequito, tare, to ryde aboute.
            
               Oberro, are, to wander aboute.
            
               Obeſco, care, to feede fatte.
            
               Obeſitas, fatneſſe.
            
               Obeſus, a, um, in Virgile is fatte, in Neuio it ſygnifyeth leane or lyttell, it is mooſte commonly taken for fatte in the bodye.
            
               Obex, bicis, an obiecte or lette.
            
               Obfirmare animum, to be ſtubborne or obſtynate.
            
               Obfirmatus, ſtubborne or obſtinate.
            
               Obfirmatè, obſtinately.
            
               Obgannio, & oggannio, ire, to whyſter in one eare. Alſo to tell a thynge often.
            
               Obherbeſco, ſcere, to growe vppe as herbes doone.
            
               Obiaceo, cui, cere, to lye aboute.
            
               Obiectaculum, that whych is ſette or throwen before one to make hym afrayde, or to let him that he ſhall not paſſe.
            
               Obiecto, rare, to obiect or often impute, or lay to ones charge. alſo to caſte out.
            
               Corpora bello obiectant, They putte theyr bodyes in the daunger of warre.
            
               Obiectum, any thynge that is before a mans eyen, and may be ſene.
            
               Obiectus, ta, tum, throwen or layde agaynſt.
            
               Obiectus, tus, the layeng or ſettynge of a thing before ones eyes.
            
               Obijcio, ieci, ijcere, to lay or throwe agaynſte, or to lay before one, to lay to ones charge.
            
               Obijcere mentē alicuius, to put into a mans head, or to brynge one in a fantaſy.
            
               Obijcere moram, to make one to tary.
            
               Obijcere praeuaricationem, to laye a mattier to ones charge.
            
               Obijcere relligionem, to make one to be ſeru pulouſe.
            
               Obijcere ſolicitudinem, to make one careful or penſyfe.
            
               Obijcere ſpem, to put one in hope.
            
               Obijcere terrorem, to make one aferde.
            
               Obigitare, to ſtere or moue before.
            
               Obinunt, they dye.
            Obiratus, ta, tum, very angry.
            
            
               Obiter, by the way, incidently, beſyde the purpoſe, in the meane tyme, preciſely.
            
               Obitus, ta, tum, the acte or concluſyon.
            
               Obitus, tus, the dyeng or deceſſe of a man▪ ſomtyme the commynge of one. The ancient writers toke obitum for the acceſſe of one.
            
               Obiurgo, are, to chyde or rebuke.
            
               Obiurgatoriae literae, letters of rebuke.
            
               Obiurgatio, chydynge, rebukynge.
            
               Obiuro, rare, to bynde by an othe.
            
               Obiurgator, & obiurgatrix, he or ſhe that chideth or rebuketh.
            
               Oblaedo, laeſi, dere, to hurt ſoore.
            
               Oblatio, offrynge. alſo an ayde or ſubſidy.
            Oblatus, ta, tum, offred.
            
            
               Oblatro, trare, to barke agaynſt one.
            
               Oblatrator, he that barketh or maketh exclamation agaynſt one.
            
               Oblecto, are, & oblector, ari, to delyte. to take pleaſure in a thynge.
            Oblectatio, oblectamen, & oblectam entum, recreation.
            
            
               Oblicio, to take recreation or pleaſure.
            
               Oblido, dere, to hurte.
            
               Obligo, are, to bynde.
            
               Obligare ſe furti, to commyt felony, ſomtime to confeſſe felony.
            
               Obligare aliquem ſceleri, to charge oones conſcience.
            
               Obligare ſcelere. Cicero pro domo ſua. Populum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſcelere obligaſſes, Thou haddeſt made the Romayns partners of thy myſcheuouſe acte.
            
               Obligare nexu. Cicero pro Murena. Is periculum iudicij praeſtare debet qui ſe nexu obligauerit, He that ioyneth hym ſelfe with an other in any bonde, muſte abyde the ieoperdy of the iudgement or condemnation.
            
               Obligare ſacramento, to charge oone with an othe.
            
               Obligari periculo iusiurandi, to be charged with an othe.
            
               Obligari ſponſione, to be tyed by his promyſe or couenant.
            
               Obligatio, an obligation or bonde.
            
               Obligurio, ire, to eate delycate meates gredyly or rauenouſelye, and to conſume goodes in feaſtynge and bankettynge.
            
               Obliquitas, crokydneſſe.
            
               Obliquus, a, um, contrary to ſtraight, croked.
            
               Oblique perſtringere, to taunte or checke.
            
               Oblimo, are, to couer with mudde or ſoft clay, ſometyme to ſtoppe or daube.
            
               Oblimare rem, to ſpende his goodes.
            
               Oblino, ere, to imbrue or make foule.
            
               Obliteratus, ta, tum, ſcraped out, or blotted.
            
               Oblitero, are, to ſcrape out or putte out of remembraunce.
            
               Obliteratio, a ſcraping or blottīg out of a word
            
               Obliteſcere, to be hydde.
            Oblitus, ta, tum, forgotten.
            
            
                
               Oblitus, imbrued, defyled.
            Obliuioſus, a, um, forgetfull.
            
            Obliuiſcor, ſceri, ſci, to forgette.
            
            Obliuioni dare, idem.
            
               Obliuium, forgetfulneſſe.
            Obliuio, onis, idem.
            Oblocare, for locare.
            
               Oblocutio, yil reporte.
            
               Oblocuuio, are, olde wryters vſed for Mente errare, to be in an yll opinion, to erre.
            
               Oblongum, longe.
            
               Obloquor, eris, qui, to ſpeake agaynſte or contrarye, to reporte ylle, to curſe.
            
               Obloquutor, an yll reporter or detracter.
            
               Oblucinaſſ
                     •
                  , to haue erred.
            
               Oblucinior, are, to erre.
            
               Obluctari, to wraſtle or ſtryue agaynſte.
            
               Obludere, to play with one.
            
               Obmanens, abydynge longe.
            
               Obmoliri, to ſette ſome thynge with great labour, agaynſt the place wherby one muſte nedes paſſe.
            
               Obmordeo, ere, to byte.
            
               Obmoueto, moue or put to.
            
               Obmuteſco, as we commonly ſaye, I hold my peace, I ſpeake not, I holde my tunge.
            
               Obnato, tare, to ſwymme agaynſte.
            
               Obnecto, to knytte faſte.
            
               Obnexio, a faſte knyttynge.
            Obnexus, a, um, faſte knytte.
            
            
               Obniger, gri, very blacke.
            
               Obnitor, teris, ti, to reſyſte.
            
               Obnixè, an aduerbe ſygnifyenge with all his myght or power, or fyrmely.
            
               Obnixus opibus, he that kepeth hym ſelfe ſtrongly for his rycheſſe.
            
               Obnoxius, a, um, bounden, ſubiecte, apte, in daunger. ſomtyme it ſygnifieth gylty or fautye. Sum tibi obnoxius, I am bounden vnto the. Obnoxius morbis, ſubiecte to ſyckenes. Periculis obnoxius, ſubiecte to perylles. &c. Minari interdum ferro, niſi ſibi obnoxia foret, And thretened her ſommetyme with his weapon; yf ſhe wolde not be obedyent to his requeſtes. Obnoxium feris, Caſte oute to wylde beaſtes.
            
               Obnoxiè, fearefully, lyke a ſubiect or ſlaue.
            
               Obnoxium ingenium, a dyſhoneſt wytte.
            
               Obnoxia curae arua, fyeldes neceſſary to be thought on, or to be prouyded for.
            
               Obnoxia munera & officia, amonge the ancient wryters were taken for theym for offyces, the myniſtration of the whiche was vile and dyſhoneſt, whyche alſo mynyſhed lyberty or nobylitie of byrthe.
            
               Obnoxius gratiae iudex, the iuge whych regardeth fauour or pleaſyng of the one parte.
            
               Obnoxia corpora, bodyes dyſeaſyd or not in helthe.
            
               Obnubo, bere, to hyde.
            
               Obnubilo, are, to make darke.
            
               Obnubilus, a, um, clowdy or darke.
            
               Obnuere, to couer the head or body.
            
               Obnuntiare, to deny, to reſyſt agaynſt a thing purpoſed.
            
               Obnuntiatio, was a declaration of the dyuynours callyd Augures, to the chiefe officers of Rome that any thynge ſhulde not be enter pryſed or done that was purpoſed, by reaſon of certayne ſygnes or tokens, whych the ſaid dyuynours perceyued by the flyght or voyce of byrdes, whyche was contrarye vnto the purpoſe that they went aboute.
            
               Oboleo, lêre, to ſtynke.
            
               Obolus, a wayght contaynynge thre Siliquas, or c
                  •
               rettes, and is halfe a ſcruple. It was alſoo a coyne of ſyluer, but that varyed accordynge to the countraye where they were curraun
                  •
                as Obolus, Atticus, Romanus, Hebrai
                     ••
                  .
            
            
               Obori
                     •
                   oboriri, to begynne to ſpryng or come forth
                  •
               
            
            
               Obrad
                     •
                  raſi, dere, to ſhaue agaynſt the heare.
            
               Obortus, a, um, begunne or ſprong. as Rumor obortus, tydynges ſpronge.
            
               Ob rem, for the purpoſe.
            
               Obrepo, pere, to come priuylye or ſteale in, to come vnwares or vnloked for▪ ſometyme to deceyue one.
            
               Obrepere ad honores, to comme or attayne to honour by crafty diſſimulation.
            
               Obreptio, the gettyng or obteynyng of a thing in fourme aforeſayde.
            
               Obreptitiae literae, letters obteyned by the ſaid meanes.
            Obreptare for frequenter obripere.
            
               Obrideo, dere, to laugh agaynſt one.
            
               Obrideo, ſi, dere, to laughe at one, or to mocke one.
            
               Obrigeo, gui, gere, & obrigeſco, ſcere, to be or waxe ſtyffe for colde.
            
               Obrion, one of the yles callyd fortunate.
            
               Obryzum, pure or fyne golde.
            
               Obripio, ripui, ripere, is in hydyng ſom thinge whiche ſhulde be ſpoken, to atteyn the thyng that we deſyre.
            
               Obriſio, a mocks.
            
               Obrodo, roſi, dere, to gnawe aboute.
            
               Obrogo, are, to checke or interrupte a manne in his ſpeche.
            
               Obrogare legem, to derogate one lawe by an nother.
            Obrumpere for rumpere.
            
               Obruo, ere, to ouerthrowe, to couer a thynge in caſtynge an other thynge ouer it.
            
               Obruere ſale, to keuer with ſalte, or to poulder.
            
               Obruere uoluptatibus dolorē, to put awaye
 ſorowe with hauntynge moche pleaſure and paſtyme.
            
               Obrui aere alieno, to owe very moche or be in great dette.
            
               Obruere memoriam alicuius, to putte one cleane out of remembraunce.
            
               Obrui magnitudine negotij, to be ouercharged with the importaunce of the aſſayre or buſyneſſe.
            
               Obruit eum obliuione uaetuſtas, ye it is ſoo longe time paſſed that it was, that it is clene out of his remembrance.
            
               Obliuione obruere facta ſua, to cauſe his actes to be forgotten.
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   riſu teſtem, to make the wytneſſe to be ſo laughed at, that he darſte not ſpeake any more.
            
               Obruitur uulgi ſermo hominum interitus, The ſpeeche 
                  〈◊〉
                people is loſte whan menne be deade.
            
               Obrutus, ta, tum, ouerthrowen, couered, periſhed.
            
               Obrutum ſitu uaetuſtatis, it is loſt or periſhed for age, or it is ſo longe agoone that it was, that it is now out of remembraunce.
            
               Obrutus niuibus, keuered with ſnowe.
            
               Obruta itinera ſtrage, the wayes were ful of menſlayne or kylled.
            
               Obrutania fulmina, lyghtnynges, which ſodaynly happen, throwy
                  •••
                downe, and burnynge thynges, before they be procured or loked for.
            
               Obſaeuio, ire, to be wode angry agaynſt one.
            
               Obſaturo, rare, to be fylled to moche with a thynge.
            
               Obſaluto, are, to offre my ſelfe to ſalute one.
            
               Obſatum, olde writers vſed for halowed.
            
               Obſcoene, lyke a rybaulde without ſhame.
            
               Obſcoenitas, villany in actes, rybauldrye.
            
               Obſcoeno, are, to brynge or cauſe yll lucke.
            
               Obſcoenus, na, num, abhomynable, all thynge which is to be eſchewed, diſhoneſt, vncleane, pernicious, alſo bryngyng yll lucke.
            
               Obſcuritas, darkeneſſe, difficultie, vngentylnes of bloudde.
            
               Obſcurè, darkely.
            Non obſcure, playnly.
            
            
               Obſcuro, are, to make darke, to ſhadowe, to hyde, to kepe in ſilence or from the knowlege of other, to make of no reputation.
            
               Obſcurus, a, um, darke, hydde, dyffuſe, vnknowen, of no gentyll bloudde.
            
               Obſecratio, a ſpeciall deſyre.
            
               Obſecro, are, to beſeche or hartily pray, Obſecrare ab aliquo, to deſyre of one.
            
               Obſecr
                     •
                  , is ſometyme an aduerbe. Hem, obſecro an is eſt? Howe I pray the, is that he?
            
               Obſecundo, are, to make proſperouſe, alſoo to obey or do all thing at an other mans wylle, to make a thynge better than it ſemeth to be.
            
               Obſecundanter, obediently.
            
               Obſepio, iui, ire, to incloſe about with an hedge
            
               Obſequela, dylygence, indeuour.
            
               Obſequia, thynges done to the pleaſure or appetite of hym that they be done for.
            
               Obſequens, obedyent.
            
               Obſequenter, obedyently.
            
               Obſequentiſsime, with great obedience.
            
               Obſequere animo, Take thy pleaſure, make good chere.
            
               Obſequibilis, dylygent, redye to do that, whyche is commaunded.
            Obſequioſus, idem.
            
               Obſequium, redynes to do al that is commanded. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth flattery.
            
               Obſequor, eris, qui, to folowe an other mans pleaſure.
            
               Obſequi animo, to make good chere.
            
               Obſero, ſeri, ſerere, to ſowe, or ſette aboute, to plante.
            
               Obſero, are, to locke or ſhutte a doore.
            
               Obſeruabilis, le, mete to be obſerued, worthye to be had in reuerence.
            
               Obſeruantia, reuerence, obſeruaunce.
            
               Obſeruatio, idem. wayte as of eſpyall.
            
               Obſeruo, are, to awayte dilygentely with the eyes, and alſo the mynde, to honoure, to take good hede, to haue in reuerence.
            
               Obſeruare ianuam, to kepe the doore.
            
               Obſes, idis, an hoſtage, or pledge in warres.
            
               Obſeſsi, they whyche are beſyeged, that they may not iſſue out of the place where they ar.
            
               Obſeſſor, oris, he that layeth ſiege.
            
               Obſidiae, arum, lyenge in awayte, to take away any thynge craftily.
            
               Obſidianum nitrum, a glaſſe whyche is pure blacke.
            
               Obſidionalis corona, a garlande gyuen to theym, whyche delyuered a towne or fortreſſe beſyeged with ennemyes, whyche was of graſſe.
            
               Obſidior, aris, ari, to lye in awayt to take one.
            
               Obſidium, obſidio, obſeſsio, a ſyege aboute a towne or fortreſſe.
            Obſidio, onis, idem.
            Obſido, & obſideo, ſeſsi, dere, to lay ſiege.
            
            
               Obſidere ſtuprum, to eſpy a tyme to defloure a woman.
            
               Obſigno, are, to cloſe letters and ſeale theym, alſo to ſygne theym.
            
               Obſignator, toris, he that putteth to his ſeale or ſygne to a dede or inſtrument.
            
               Obſipo, are, to throwe or caſte, as whan men of the countrey do ſay,
            
               Obſipa pullis eſcam, Caſte meate to the chyckens.
            Obſiſto, ſtiti, ſiſtere, to reſyſte.
            
            
               Obſiſtere obuiam, to mete with one.
            
                
               Obſitus, ta, tum, wrapped, ſette aboute with herbes or trees.
            
               Obſitus annis & pannis, very olde & yll clad.
            
               Obſitus ſqualore ueſtis, yll & ſluttyſhly clad.
            
               Obſitus aeuo, very aged.
            
               Obſita tenebris loca, very darke pla
                  •
               es.
            
               Obſoleſco, ſcere, to decay, to waxe olde, to be out of vſe. Obſolere, idem.
            
            
               Obſoletus, ta, tum, decayd, old, out of vſe, worn as a garment whan it is bare.
            
               Obſolote, porely apparayled.
            
               Obſonium, all meates except bread and potage.
            
               Obſonus, na, nū, that which hath an yll ſowne.
            
               Obſono, & obſonor, ari, to feaſt or banket.
            Obſonito, tare, idem.
            
               Obſonatio, feaſtynge or bankettyng.
            
               Obſonator, & obſonatrix, he or ſhe that maketh feaſtes or bankettes.
            
               Obſono, are, to ſowne yll.
            Obſorbeo, bui, bere, & obſorbo, pſi, bere, to ſuppe vp all. Obſorbo, idem.
            
               Obſordeo, dui, ſordére, to be fylthy, or vnclene, or ſluttiſhe. Nonius declareth it to wax olde.
            
               Obſtaculum, an obſtacle or impedyment.
            
               Obſtetrico, care, to do the office of a mydwife.
            
               Obſtetrix, tricis, a mydwyfe.
            
               Obſtinat
                     •
                  , obſtinately, or fyrmely.
            
               Obſtinatus, ta, tum, obſtinate, fyrme, or ſtable.
            
               Obſtinatio, obſtinacy, ſtyffenes in opynion.
            
               Obſtino, are, to be obſtinate, or perſyſte, fyrme in one ſentence or purpoſe.
            
               Obſtipo, pare, to ſtoppe.
            
               Obſtipus, crouped ſhouldred.
            
               Obſtitum, croked, ſometyme vyolated.
            
               Obſtro, ſtiti, ſtare, to withſtande, to lette.
            
               Obſtragulum, a keuerynge of a bedde.
            
               Obſtrepo, pere, to crye out on one, or make a noyſe.
            
               Obſtrictus, bounded, tied.
            
               Obſtrigillo, are, to reſyſt or repugne agaynſte. to ſpeake in detraction of one.
            
               Obſtringo, xi, gere, to bynd or tye.
            
               Obſtringere fidē, to make a faithful promys
            
               Obſtringere ſe ſcelere, to confeſſe the offēce.
            
               Obſtrudo, ſi, dere, to hyde, to ſtop a mannes throte, that he can not eate meate.
            
               Obſtrudulentum, a ſtoppynge.
            
               Obſtruo, xi, ſtruere, to ſhut, to ſtop.
            
               Obſtruere luminibus, to lette that a man can not loke out of his wyndowes, or to ſtoppe his lyghtes.
            
               Obſtructio, a ſtoppynge.
            
               Obſtructus, ſtopped or ſhutte.
            Obſtupidus, da, dum, aſtonyed.
            
            
               Obſtupefacio, facere, to abaſſhe, or make abaſhed.
            
               Obſtupeſco, ſcere, to be abaſhed.
            Obſtupeo, idem.
            
               Obſum, obfui, obeſſe, to hurte or hynder, or indamage.
            
               Obſurdeſco, obſurdeſcere, to be or wax deffe.
            Obtego, idem quod Tego.
            
               Obtempero, perare, to obeye, or be at commaundement.
            
               Obtendo, to laye an excuſe, to keuer ouer.
            
               Obtendiculum, a coulourable aunſwere.
            
               Obtentus, tus, a pretence.
            
               Obtero, triui, obterere, to treade or thruſte downe, to ſuffocate, to bruyſe.
            
               Obteſtatio, an humble deſyre. properly not to do a thynge. alſo to take god or ſome other thynge to wytneſſe.
            
               Obteſtor, aris, ari, humbly to beſeche, to deſire for goddes ſake, or for the remembraunce of ſome thynge, whiche to hym that is deſyred, is thankfully herde.
            
               Obtexo, ere, to wayue about.
            
               Obticeo, cui, cere, to kepe ſylence, not to ſpeake.
            Obtritus, ta, tum, worne out.
            
            
               Obtritus, tus, wearynge, foulynge.
            
               Obturamentum, the heade of a ponde.
            
               Obturo, are, to ſhutte.
            
               Obturatio, ſhuttynge.
            
               Obtineo, nere, to opteyne, to hold, to reteyne ſtyll, to gete, ſometyme to haue. Si iſtam animi firmitudinem obtines, ſalui ſumus. If thou haſte that fyrmeneſſe of courage, we be ſaulfe.
            
               Obtinere litem, to get the thing that he ſued for, to recouer his ſuite by iudgement.
            
               Obtinere primum locum, to be chiefe or pryncipall.
            
               Obtinere ordinem, to kepe the order.
            
               Obtingere, to happe.
            
               Obtigit, it happened.
            
               Obtorpeſco, obtorpui, peſcere, to be verye ſlowe or dull.
            Obtorpere, idem.
            
               Obtorpet manus, my hande is on ſleape.
            
               Obtorqueo, obtorſi, obtorquere, to wrynge or wrythe about.
            
               Obtrecto, tare, to yll reporte, to depraue, to haue in deſpite.
            
               Obtrectator, toris, an yll reporter, or backebyter.
            
               Obtrectatio, yll reporte, diſprayſynge.
            
               Obtrigo, are, to bynde by an othe.
            
               Obtrudo, ſi, dere, to thruſte downe, to put to with force. Obtrudit fores, he pulled to the doore. Alſo to ſet forthe. Aliquid prius, obtruclamus, Let vs fyrſte ſet forthe ſomwhat.
            
               Obtrudere uxorem, to gyue to a man a wyfe agaynſt his wylle or appetite.
            
               Obtrunco, uncare, to ſlea, alſo to ſtryke of a mannes heade.
            
               Obtueor, eri, to beholde ſtedfaſtly.
            Obtuor, idem.
            
                
               Obtundo, dere, to ſtryke, to breake, to make dulle, to hurt a man with ſpeakyng, to make wearye.
            
               Obturare, to ſtoppe.
            
               Obturbo, bare, to trouble all.
            Obtuſus, a, um, dulle.
            
            
               Obtuſe, dully.
            
               Obtutus, tus, & obtuitus, a looke or regarde.
            
               Obuagio, gire, to crye out, as a chylde.
            
               Obuallo, are to enuyronne of compaſſe aboute with a dyche or walle.
            
               Obuaricator, toris, he that tourneth one oute of the ryght way, or letteth hym that he may not paſſe.
            
               Obuaro, are, to peruerte.
            
               Obuaricio, care, to ſtop or let one of his paſſage
            
               Obuenio, nire, to come agaynſte, to mete with. alſo to happen.
            Obuenſio, onis, reuenues.
            
            
               Obuerſor, aris, ari, to be preſente, or before the eyes, to come in remembrance.
            
               Obuerto, & obuerſo, tere, to tourne agayne, or backe. Sed mihi ante oculos obuerſabatur reipub. dignitas, quae me ad ſe rapit, But before myne eyes came the eſtate of the publyke weale, whyche plucketh me vnto her.
            
               Obuiam, an aduerbe, whych ſygnifyeth before in the way, agaynſt one. Obuiam ire, to goo agaynſt one, to preuent.
            
               Obuia urbs inimicis, the citie eaſy to be taken with ennemies.
            
               Obuiam mittere, to ſende men to mete with one in the waye.
            
               Obuiam fit, he mette with me.
            
               Obuiam ire periculis, to preuent daunger.
            
               Si nihil obuiam eſt, If there be nothynge in the way to lette.
            
               Obuio, are, to mete with one.
            
               Obuius, a, um, that whiche meteth with one.
            
               Obumbro, brare, to make darke with a ſhadowe. ſometyme to defende.
            Obuncus, a, um, very crooked.
            
            
               Obuolo, are, to flee agaynſte.
            
               Obuoluo, uere, to wrappe togyther.
            
               Obuos ſacro, the auncient Romaynes vſed for obſecro, I beſeche you.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE C.
            
               OCca, an harowe or dragge, whych hath yron teethe, wherewith cloddes are broken.
            
               Occatio, a breakyng of cloddes, or harrowing.
            
               Occator, he that harroweth.
            
               Occaeco, care, to make blynde.
            
               Occalleo, ere, to waxe or be harde fleſſhed, or brawned, lyke as a bore is. Occalleſco, Idem.
            
            Occano, & occino, occanui, & occini, occanere, & occinere, to ſynge agaynſte one, to lay in rebuke.
            
            
               Occaſo, ſere, to be loſte or vndone.
            
               Occaſio, occaſyon.
            
               Rara occaſio, not redy at hande.
            
               Occaſiuncula, a ſmalle occaſyon.
            
               Occaſus, us, deathe of man or beaſte. alſo the goynge downe of the ſonne, or ſonneglade.
            
               Occatorium, an harrowynge.
            Occedo pro accedo.
            
               Occentaſsint for conuitia fecerint, They ſhall gyue rebukes or wordes of reproche.
            
               Occento, tare, to crye out agaynſt one with rebukefull wordes.
            
               Occentus, tus, where one ſyngeth agaynſte an nother, It maye be alſoo taken for a countertenour.
            
               Occepſo, pro incepero, I ſhall begynne.
            
               Occidens, tis, the weſte, or ponent.
            
               Occidens ſol, the ſunne goynge downe.
            
               Occidentalis, le, of the weſte.
            
               Occidi, is a ſygnifycation of ſorowfulnes as it were, I am vndone, or vtterly loſte.
            
               Occidi, I am deade, I am loue.
            
               Occidit memoria, the memorye or remembraunce is loſte.
            
               Occido, di, dere, to ſlee or wounde to deathe, to fall greuouſely, to torment or moleſt one.
            
               Occido, dere, to fall downe, to peryſhe vtterly, to dye, to go downe, as the ſonne dothe, and other ſterres.
            
               Occidit ſpes noſtra, our hope is loſte.
            
               Occiduum, the plac
                  •
                where the ſonne gothe downe.
            Occiduus, a, um, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               downe.
            
            
               Occilare, to beate 
                  ••
               uffet.
            
               Occino, nere, to 
                  〈◊〉
                to an other.
            
               Occiſsimus, of all 
                  〈◊〉
                moſte loſt or deſperate
            
               Occiſio, onis, a ſl
                  •••
               hter or deathe of men or cattell.
            Occidio, onis, idem.
            
               Occipio, pere, to begynne.
            
               Occiput, & occipitium, the hynder parte of the heade.
            Occiſus, a, um, kylled.
            
            
               Occiſa res eſt, the matter is daſſhed or marred.
            
               Occitantur, for frequenter occiduntur, they be ſlayne here and there, or in dyuerſe places.
            
               Occlamito, tare, to crye out.
            
               Occludo, dere, to ſhytte faſte.
            
               Occludere linguam, to ſtoppe a man frome ſpeakynge.
            Occluſus, occluſior, occluſiſsimus, faſt ſhutte.
            
            
               Occo, occare, to harrowe and breake cloddes and balkes in the corne fieldes. Alſo to couer with erthe.
            
               Occulo, lere, to hyde.
            
               Occultatio, an hydynge.
            Occulto, tare, idem.
            
                
               Occultus, ta, tum, hyd, which is not knowen.
            
               Occulte, priuilie, vnknowen.
            
               Occumbo, cubui, cumbere, to be ſlayne, to be deadly wounded.
            
               Occupatitius ager, the fyelde whiche is neglected of the owner, and laboured by other.
            
               Occupo, are, to occupie, to get or take before an other man, to vſe in commune, to take or holde a thynge with force, to let or empeche, to poſſede, ſometyme to lende for auauntage, to preuente, to let.
            
               Occupans, tis, he that dothe occupie or vſe a thynge, the occupier.
            
               Occupatus, let, in buſyneſſe, occupyed.
            
               Occupatio, a colour in rhetorike, where the playntyfe in preuentynge the wordes of the defendaunt, reherſeth that whiche he wyll laye for excuſe, and diſproueth it.
            
               Occupare conſilium, to fynde aduyſe or counſayle.
            
               Occupare locum to take or kepe a place with force.
            
               Occurro, ſi, rére, to meete with, to come to remembraunce, to offre hym ſelfe. Alſo to reſyſte, to runne, to come to mynde, or remembraunce, alſo to be proffered.
            
               Occurrit peruionibus herba haec, this herbe healeth kybes on the heeles.
            
               Occurſo, are, the frequentatiue of occurro, to come often to remembraunce, to mete oft, or runne agaynſte one.
            
               Occurſus, us, a runnynge agaynſte one.
            
               Oceanius, a, um, of the occean ſea.
            
               Oceanus, the brode ſea called the Occeane ſea, whiche compaceth the worlde and addeth to his name the name of the countreys by whiche it paſſeth. as Oceanus Britannicus, the ſea nexte to Englande and Scotlande. Oceanus Indicus, the Indiane ſea.
            
               Ocellatus, ta, tum, that whiche hath eyen, or holes lyke to eyen.
            
               Ocellus, a lyttell eye.
            
               Ocha, a gooſe.
            
               Ochus, a ryuer whiche paſſeth throughe Acarnania, a countrey in Grece.
            
               Ocquiniſco, ſcere, to humble hym ſelfe or diſable hym ſelfe.
            
               Ochra, oker, whiche paynters do vſe.
            
               Ocris, olde wryters called a broken hyll, harde to go vp to.
            
               Ocreae, legge harnes, botes.
            
               Ocreatus, booted or harneſſed on the legges.
            
               Ocrinum promontorium, ſayncte Michaelles mounte in Cornewall.
            
               Orior, aris, ari, to be vnoccupyed, or without buſyneſſe.
            
               Otioſus, ydell, vnoccupyed, quyete.
            
               Otium, vacation from labour, leyſer, quyetnes ydelnes, lacke of buſynes.
            
               Octapitarum promontorium, a place in wales, called ſayncte Dauyds.
            
               Octauia, the ſyſter of Auguſtus, and wyfe of Antonius, whome he afterwarde forſoke. A nother was daughter of Claudius the emperour, and wyfe to Nero who cauſed her to be ſlayne.
            
               Octauius, the father of the noble Emperour Auguſtus.
            
               Octauianus, the name of Auguſtus before that he toke on hym the monarchy.
            Octangulus, a, um, eyght cornered.
            
            Octauus, the eyght. Octauum, idem.
            
               Octies, eyght tymes.
            
               Octingenteſimus, a, um, the eyght hundred.
            
               Octingenties, eyght hundred tymes.
            
               Octingenarius, eyght hundred yeres olde.
            
               Octingenti, eyght hundred.
            Octingeni, & Octingenteni, idem.
            
               Octingentuplus, eyght hundred folde.
            
               Octo, eyght.
            
               October, the monthe of October.
            
               Octoduri, Seyne and Valeif in Fraunce.
            
               Octogenarius, of foure ſcore in number, or foure ſcore yeres olde.
            
               Octogeni, foure ſcore.
            
               Octogeſimus, the laſte of foure ſcore.
            
               Octogies, foure ſcore tymes.
            
               Octoginta, foure ſcore.
            
               Octonus, a, um, the number of eyght, in ſondry partes.
            
               Octopes, hauynge eyght fete.
            
               Octophorum, a lyghter borne with eyght mē.
            
               Octoplus, four tymes as moche.
            
               Octuplicatus, eyght tymes doubled.
            
               Oculatus, full of eyen, alſo quicke ſighted circumſpecte, eſpyenge a thynge ſhortely.
            
               Oculatus teſtis, a wytneſſe whiche ſawe the thynge.
            
               Oculeus, full of eyen, wyly.
            
               Oculus, an eye, alſo a yonge budde of a tree.
            Oculis captus, blynde.
            
            
               In oculis geſtare, & In oculis eſſe & ferre, to loue one ſo moche that he can not be ſatiſfyed with beholdynge of hym.
            
               In oculis habere, to attend vppon one, or to beholde intentifely or ſtedfaſtly.
            
               Vin hodie facere quo tuo uiro, oculi doleant▪
                wylt thou nowe do that whiche ſhall make thy huſbande lothe to ſee the?
            
               Oculi eruditi, whan one knoweth whether a Oculitus eam amat, he loueth her as well as his owne eyen.
            
               Oculum exculpere, to crache out ones eyes.
            
               Oculos tollere, to begynne to be mery. thynge be well done or no.
            
               Intendere oculos, to ſet the eyes to beholde ſtedfaſtly.
            
               Oculos tenere, to make mē to wonder at the
 excellent warkemanſhyp of a thynge.
            
               Oculi, the blewe ſpottes in the fethers of a pecockes tayle.
            
               Oculiſsimus, he that ſeethe moſte clerely.
            
               Oculatio, the takynge awaye of ſuperfluouſe buddes from a tree or vyne.
            
               Oculus Chriſti,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . an herbe whiche is alſo called filius ante patrem.
            
               Oculum adijcere, to be in loue with a thyng whiche is ſeene.
            
               Ocymum, an herbe called baſyle.
            Ocyor, ſwyfter, ocyus, idem.
            Ocyſsimus, a, um, moſte ſwyfte.
            
            
               Ocyus, ſooner, quicklyer.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE D.
            ODaea, places, wherin ſyngynge is exercyſed.
            
               Ode, a ſonge.
            
               Odfacio, for olfacio, cere, to ſmelle.
            
               Odi, I hate, or haue hated: Odiſſe, to hate or haue hated.
            
               Odinoliontes, a fyſhe whiche cleueth to a ſhyp and maketh her to abyde as If ſhe laye at anker. uide Remora.
            
            
               Odioſus, he that is hated, diſpleſant, troublous, tediouſe.
            
               Odioſe, with hate, diſpleaſantly.
            
               Odit eum cane peius, & angue, He hateth him wars thanne a dogge or a ſerpente: as who ſaythe, mortally without hope of reconcylynge.
            
               Odites, one of the ſons of Ixion the Centaure.
            
               Odium, hate, diſpleaſure, tediouſenes, rācour.
            
               Odio eſſe, to be hated.
            
               Odium capere alicuius rei, to be offended or diſcontent with any thynge.
            
               Odium concitare, to procure hate or dyſpleaſure.
            
               Odoeporicon, an Itenerary, wherin is wrytten the diſtaunce of one place from an other, or a lyke thynge, as the ieſtes of prynces are, aſſignynge theyr iourneys.
            Odoramen ſeu Odoramentum, a perfume.
            
            
               Odores, plur. is taken of Columella for ſwete gummes and ſpyces.
            Odor, oris, & odos, ſauour, ſente.
            
            
               Odoramentum, euery thynge that ſauoureth well alſo ſauour.
            
               Odorarius, a maker or ſeller of thynges that ſmell ſwete.
            
               Odora canum uis, the qualite or power whiche dogges haue, to take a ſente.
            
               Odoratus, tus, the ſmellynge or ſente.
            
               Odoratus, ta, tum, that which is perfourmed ſometyme that whiche doth ſauour, odoryferous, or ſmellynge ſwete.
            
               Odorator, a hounde made to the ſuite.
            Odoriferus, a, um, idem.
            
               Odorifer, ra, rum, odoryferouſe or ſweete in ſauour.
            
               Odoriſecus, a hounde or ſpanell, whiche hunteth by ſente.
            
               Odorariueſtigijs, to drawe as a hounde dothe.
            
               Odoro, & odoror, ari, to ſmell, to perceyue.
            
               Odorus, a, um, that whiche ſendeth forthe ſauour, or hath a good ſauour.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE E.
            
               OEAGRVS, a ryuer in the countrey of Thracia.
            
               Oeanthe, a Citie, alſo the floure of a vyne.
            
               Oebades, kynge Darius horſekepar, by whoſe polycy he atteyned to the kyngdome of Perſya.
            
               Oebalia, the countrey in Greece, called alſo Laconia.
            
               Oebalus, a mannes name.
            
               Oechalia, a citie in Laconia.
            
               Oeconomia, the orderynge and prouydyng of thynges concernynge houſhold, alſo an order in wrytynge, wherby euery thynge is ſette in his proper place.
            
               Oeconomica, perteynynge to houſehold.
            
               Oeconomicus, he that can order and gouerne a houſe.
            
               Oeconomus, a ſtewarde of houſholde.
            
               Oeci, places, where women do ſyt and worke with woull or ſylke.
            
               Oecumenicus, vniuerſall, perteynynge to al the worlde.
            
               Oecumenicum conſilium, a generall counſayle, wherin thinges are vniuerſally treated concernynge all countreys.
            
               Oedema, an impoſtume or botche commen of a fleumatike matter, in the which is no grief
            
               Oedipus, the ſonne of Laius kyng of Thebes, whom his father delyuered to his ſhepherde to kyll, but he pityenge the chyld made holes in his feete and dyd hange hym on a boughe but he beynge ſo founde of the ſhepeherde of Phorbas kynge of Corinthe was broughte to the queene, who lackyng chyldren, brought hym vp for her ſonne, afterwarde in a ſkyrmyſhe, vnwetynge he ſlewe his owne father, and aſſoylynge the ſubtylle ryddle or queſtions of Sphinx the monſter, he opteyned the kyngedome of Thebes and the queene called Iocaſta whiche was his mother, by whome he had two ſonnes Polynices and Etheocles but whan he knewe that he had ſlayne his father, and wedded his owne mother, for ſorowe he cratched out his owne eyes.
            
               Odipodioniua, nia, um, belongynge to Oedipus.
            
                
               Oenanthe, the flour of a wylde vyne growing in hedges called Labruſca, but Dioſcorides. li. 3. ſayth that it is an herbe whiche hathe a leafe lyke perſenepes, a whyte floure, a big ſtalke, an hand breade highe, ſede lyke orage, a great rote with many rounde heades li. 5. he ſayeth that it is the floure of a wyld vine, ſone after he ſayth that it is the grape of the wylde vyne. Theodorus Gaza dothe tranſlate hym. Vitiflora.
            
            
               Oenanthinum, an oyntmente made of the ſayde beary.
            
               Oeneus, the father of Deianira, the laſte wife of Hercules.
            
               Oenōne, the concubine of Paris before that he rauiſhed Helene.
            
               Oeneus, kynge of Archadia, father of Meleager, wherof he is called Oenides.
            
            
               Oenomaus, the ſonne of Mars, father of Hippodamia.
            
               Oeniſteria, was a certayne ſacrifice at Athenes made by yonge men newely berded, whiche was done before that they dyd cut theyr heare that was longe, whiche ſacrifyce was in this wyſe, a certayn meaſure of wyne was brought into the temple of Hercules wherof the yonge men dranke a lyttell, and gaue the reſydue to all other that were preſent.
            
               Oenophorus, a ſeruaunte, whiche bryngeth wyne to the table.
            
               Oenophorum, a pot wherin wyne is caryed,
            
               Oenopola, a vyntenar, or tauernar,
            
               Oenopolium, a wyne tauerne.
            
               Oenotria, Italy.
            
               Oenotrides, two yles nyghe to Calabria.
            
               Oeſipum, the fylthy oyle, whiche is in wulle, that is in the flankes of a ſhepe, or about his necke, whiche oyle is ſodden out, and vſed for medicyne.
            
               Oeſtrum, woodneſſe, or madde fury: alſo a fly which maketh a great noyſe, whan he flyeth ſome do ſuppoſe it to be a dor, lyke to a bee, but that he is blacke and greater.
            
               Oeta, a mountayne betwene Theſſalia, and Macedonia.
            
               Oēta, the father of Medea, wyfe of Iaſon.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE F.
            
               OFFA, a puddynge, alſo a dyſhe made with fatte brothe, harde cheeſe, pepper, and cynamom, or other lyke iunkat. ſomtyme it is taken for a morſel.
            
               Offa penita, a piece of fleſhe cut of with the tayle.
            
               Offarius, & offaria, a maker of ſuche iunkettes.
            
               Offatim, in morſelles.
            
               Offector, toris, a dyer.
            
               Offella, a lyttell morſell, as of fleſhe mynced, al ſo a pottage made with pieces of fleſſhe, as ſtued brothe or forced gruell.
            
               Offendo, dere, to meete with, to fall into, to fynde by chaunce, to ſtryke or hyt any thyng vnware, to offende. Offendere apud aliquē, to do a thynge, whiche lyketh not them that do ſee it done. alſo to diſpleaſe.
            
               Offendiculum, an impedimente or let, an obſtacle.
            
               Offendimentum, & offendix, the knotte of a rybon or laſe, wherwith a bonet or hatte is knyt faſte to the heade.
            
               Offenſa, an offence or diſpleaſure.
            
               Offenſam ſubire, to be in diſpleaſure of one.
            
               Offenſatio, a metynge.
            
               Offenſaculum, that whiche is layd in a mans way, wherat he ſtumbleth.
            
               Offenſator, ſatoris, he that ſtackereth in readynge, as if he were not perfect in readynge, or readeth otherwyſe than it is wrytten.
            
               Offenſans, tis, that whiche hurteth or letteth.
            
               Offenſio, onis, hurte or harme. ſomtyme dyſpleaſure or hatred.
            
               Offenſiones belli, faultes in battayle.
            
               Offenſiones, incumbraunces.
            
               Offenſioni eſſe, to do diſpleaſure or harme, betwene offenſio and offenſa, ſemeth to be this diuerſitie, that Offenſa is in hym that offendeth or greueth. Offenſio, in hym that is greued or offended, Nam quod negas te dubitare quin magna in offenſa ſim apud Pompeium hoc tempore, non uideo cauſam cur ita ſit hoc quidem tempore, where ye do not doubt but that nowe at this tyme I am in Pompeys great diſpleaſure, I ſe no cauſe why it ſhuld be ſo at this preſente tyme. Nec tantum intelligebam ei eſſe offenſionis, quā tum literae tuae declarant Nor I vnderſtand that he was ſo moche diſpleaſed as your letters make mention.
            
               Offenſionem ſubleuare, Cice. de Amicitia. Vna illa, ſubleuandum offenſio eſt, that one offence or griefe is to be eaſed or holpen.
            
               Offenſionem obliterare, to pardon or forget an offence or diſpleaſure.
            
               Offenſiones lenire. Cice. O multas, & graues offenſiones, quas quidem tu das operā ut lenias. O howe manye and greuouſe diſpleaſures are done, whiche ye go about to mittigate or excuſe.
            
               Offenſionem deponere. Cice. fam. epiſt. li.
13. Cum tantum literae meae potuerunt ut his lectis, omnem offenſionem ſuſpitionis quam habueras de Liſone deponeres. Sens my letters mought do ſo moche, than whan ye had rad them, ye dyd laye aparte al diſpleſures whiche ye had agaynſte Liſo, ingendred of ſuſpition.
            
                
               Offenſum, idem quod offenſio. Cic. ad Att. 2. Scito nihil unquam fuiſſe tam infame, tam turpe, tam deni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   omnibus generibus, ordinibus, aetatibus offenſum, quam hunc ſtatum qui nunc eſt. Knowe this for a ſuertye, that there was neuer thynge ſo reprochefull, ſo diſhoneſt, fynally ſo diſpleaſaunt to all ſortes, degrees and men of euerye age, as this preſent ſtate that nowe is.
            
               Offenſo, are, to hyt ofte, or to let, to thraſte agaynſte a thynge.
            
               Offenſiuncula, a ſmall offence or diſpleſure.
            
               Offercio, cire, to ſtuffe or fyll.
            
               Offero, obtuli, obferre, to offer, or preſente, to gyue wyllyngly, to promyſe.
            
               Offerre auxilium, to promyſe ayde.
            
               Offerre crimen, to put a complaynt againſt one.
            
               Offerre incendium, Cice. ad Pont. Domus ardebat in Palatio non fortuito, ſed oblato incēdio, My houſe in the Palaice did burne not by any chaunce, but by fyre thraſte in by ſome man.
            
               Offerre mendicitatem, to brynge one vnto pouertie.
            
               Offerre relligionem, to make a ſcrupule or doubt in conſcience.
            
               Si ſe in uia obtulerit, occiſum iri iam ab ipſo Milone uideo, Cice. If he mete with Milo in the waye, I perceyue he wyll ſle hym.
            
               Si nihil offeret ſe quod ſit probabilitati illi contrarium, If he fynde no thynge contrary to that whiche maye appere to be trewe.
            
               Offerre ſe alicui, to preſent hym ſelfe to one or before one.
            
               Offerre ſpem, to put one in hope.
            
               Offerre ſtuprum, to aſſaye by meanes to defyle a woman maryed or vnmaryed.
            
               Offerre moram, to let.
            
               Offerre ſe obuiam, to mete with one.
            
               Offerre ſtuprum, to commyt aduoutry.
            
               Offerre uitium uirgini, to defloure a virgin.
            
               Offerumentae, ſtrypes. Ne offerumentas habebis plureis in tergo tuo, 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   vlla nauis longa clauos, tum ego ero mendaciſsimus, and if thou haue not mo ſtrypes on the ſkyn of thy backe, than a galy hath nayles, I ſhall be the falſyſt lyar that euer was.
            
               Offerumēta, offrynges, thynges offred to god.
            
               Officina, a werkehouſe, a ſhop.
            
               Ex eadem officina uenit, it was of one mannes doinge.
            
               Officialis, ale, perteynyng to offices or duties.
            
               Officialis, an offycer.
            
               Officio, ficere, to hurte, ſometyme to do, alſo to dye clothe.
            
               Officere luminibus, to ſtop the lyghtes.
            
               Officioſus, a frendly or ſeruiſable manne, or he that is glad to pleaſe, or dothe wel his duty.
            
               Officioſus dolor, a griefe whiche procedeth of a good cauſe or reaſon.
            
               Officioſe, diligently, ſeruiſably.
            
               Officium, offyce, duetie, or a thynge, whiche ought to be done. It is ſomtyme taken fo honour done to one, and it may be vſed for that whiche we do call homage, doone in ſuche fourme as our lawe doth appoynt it, it is alſo taken for benefyte, properly it is that that ought to be done, and is mete & conuenyent.
            
               Officium uſurpare, to do his duetie.
            
               In officio eſſe, to do his duetie, to do his indeuour.
            
               Officia intercedere. Cic. fam. epiſt. 13. Multa
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   & magna inter nos officia paria & mutua intercedunt, Betwene vs hath ben ſundry and great pleaſures of lyke importance done one to an other.
            
               Officium promereri, to do pleaſure.
            
               Cic. in oratione ante exiluim. Non conuenit enim cum ego ad promerendum officium tam fuerim expedius, uos ad referendam gratiam eſſe tardiores. It is not reaſon that ſens I was ſo ready to do you pleaſure ye ſhulde be ſo ſlacke to do lyke wyſe for me.
            
               Officio fungi, to do his indeuour or duetie.
            Officium praeſtare, officium conferre, idem In officio continere, to kepe hym his frend.
            
            
               Officij cauſa proſequi aliquem, to kepe company with one to do hym honour or worſhip.
            
               Officia mutua, pleaſures doone one to an other.
            
               Offirmo, are, to abyde in one purpoſe or opynion, to be obſtinate.
            
               Offlecto, xi, tere, to tourne a thynge contrary or about.
            
               Offoca, are, to powre water into the mouthe of a man or beaſte.
            
               Offritiae, crafty or deceytfull taches.
            
               Offringo, ere, to breake with a ploughe, lande cared before.
            
               Offuciae, cawtelles, crafty wayes to deceyue.
            
               Offula, a lyttell morſell
            
               Offundo, fuſi, dere, to powre about, to make darke or blynde, to ſtayne, to caſte in, or brynge in.
            
               Offundere errorem alicui, to abuſe or deceyue one.
            
               Offuſus terror oculis, auribus
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , feare was bothe at his eyes and cares.
            
               Offuſa animis caligo, theyr myndes were made blynde.
            
               Offuco, care, to put water or other lycour into a mannes mouth, to ſowke done, as they vſe to do to ſycke men, which for febleneſſe canne not by them ſelfes take any ſuſtenaunce.
            
               Offuſco, care, to make blacke, or darke.
         
         
            
            ¶O ANTE G.
            
               OGD OVS, a kynge of Egypt, which fyrſte buylded the citie of Memphis.
            
               Ogdo, adis, the numbre of eyght.
            
               Ogdolapis, a ryuer whiche commeth oute of the hyls called Alpes, and runneth to Rome.
            
               Oggannio, ire, to prate, to braule, to ſpeake with chydynge.
            
               Oggero, 
                     •
                  si, gerere, to caſte in or ſet.
            
               Oculos oggerere, to caſte or ſette the eyes on one.
            
               Oggraſſari, to go.
            
               Ogyges, he whiche fyrſte buylded the citie of Thebes.
            
               Ogygeus, a, um, made or founde by Ogyges.
            
               Ogygea, an yle betwene Phenicea and Syria where Calypſo dwelled, which deteined with her Vlyſſes.
            
               Ogigidae, The banes.
            
               Ogyris, an yle in Siria.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE H.
            
               OHE, an exclamation, ſygnyfyeng that he, whiche ſpeaketh that worde, is ſaciate or wery of that, whiche he ſeeth or hereth.
            
               Oh, an interiection ſignifienge a crye whanne one meteth with his frende, whom of a long tyme he hath not ſeene, ſomtyme it is vſed in meruaylynge with a contempte. ſometyme in affyrmynge. ſometyme in ſorowynge. ſometyme reioyeynge.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE I.
            ¶Oinomeli, wyne and hony ſodden together.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE L.
            
               OLEA, is moſt properly the fruite of an olyue: yet ſometyme it is vſed for an olyue tree.
            Oleaceus, a, um, oyly.
            
            
               Oleacum, a colour, whiche is myxt with grene blacke, yelowe, and whyte.
            
               Oleaginus, a, um, of an olyue tree.
            Oleagineus, idem.
            Olearis, re, & olearius, a, um, perteynynge to oyle.
            
               Olearia cella, a cellour for oyle.
            
               Olearius, a maker of oyle.
            
               Olearus, one of the yles called Ciclades,
            
               Oleaſter, a wylde olyue.
            
               Oleaſtellus, uel Oleago, is that whiche Serapio calleth Mezereon.
            
            
               Oleaſtrinum, oyle of wylde olyues,
            Oleatus, a, um, of oyle.
            
            
               Oleitas, the tyme of gatherynge of olyues.
            
               Olenus, a Citie of Archadia, where the goote with whoſe mylke Iupiter was nouryſhed, was brought vppe, and therfore the ſigne of ſterres whiche was ſuppoſed to be the ſame gote, is named Olenia.
            
            
               Oletare, to corrupt or make ſtynkynge. leg .xii. tabu. Ne quis aquam oletato dolo malo, ubi publice ſalit. Si quis oletarit, ſeſtertiorum de cem millium mulcta 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                No man by crafte corrupte water where it pryngeth to a commune vſe, he that doth corrupt it ſhal forfait ten thouſande ſeſtertius, whiche do amount of our money .xxv. li. xiii. s. iiii. d.
            
               Olentica, thynges whiche haue an yll ſauour.
            
               Oleo, eui, & olui, olere, to ſauour, to haue ſauour.
            
               Olent illa ſuper cilia maliciam, that ſturdye lookes do ſygnifye that thou art maliciouſe. Aurum huic olet, this felowe ſmelleth that I haue money.
            
               Iucunde olére, to haue a ſwete ſauour.
            
               Bene olére, to haue a good ſauour.
            
               Male olere, to ſtynke.
            
               Roſa recens a longinquo olet, a roſe newely gathered is ſmelled ferre of.
            
               Oleoſus, a, um, full of oyle.
            
               Oleſco, leſcere, to growe.
            
               Oletum, a place where olyues doo growe, alſo the dunge or ordure of a man, properlye it is a draught or iakes.
            
               Oleum & operam perdere, to loſe laboure and coſte.
            
               Oleum, oyle.
            Olfacio, feci, facere, to ſmell.
            
            
               Olfacto, are, to ſmell moche or often.
            
               Olfactus, tus, the ſence of ſmellynge.
            
               Olibantum, a meaſure of wyne.
            
               Olidus, da, dum, that whiche hath greatte ſauour, eyther good or badde, moſte communly ſtynkynge.
            
               Oligarchia, the ſtate of a common weale wher a fewe perſons be in aucthoritie.
            
               Olim, ſometyme, as wel in the tyme paſſed as in the tyme to come, nowe late, longe tyme paſſed, ones.
            
               Olitor, a gardynar, or ſeller of herbes and rootes.
            
               Olitorius, a, um, perteyninge to a pot garden.
            
               Oliua, an olyue tree.
            
               Oliueta, the tyme of gatheryng of olyue beries
            
               Oliuetum, a place where do growe oliue trees.
            
               Oliuina, plenty of olyues, alſo reuenues, whiche do come of olyues.
            
               Oliuitas, & oleitas, the qualitie of olyues, the gatherynge tyme of olyues.
            
               Oliuo, are, to gather olyues.
            
               Oliuum, oyle olyue.
            
               Olla, a pot.
            
                
               Ollares, grapes conſerued in pottes.
            Olli, for illi.
            
               Ollula, a lyttell potte.
            
               Olophernes, chiefe conſtable to the great Nabugodonozer kynge of Aſſyrians, a valyaunt capitayne: not withſtandynge beynge ouercharged with wyne and to moche truſtynge in the beaulty and pleſaunt ſpeche of the Hebrewe ladye Iudith, he was by her ſlayne in his bedde, an
                  •
                
               
                  •
               ad his headde ſtryken of and brought to his ennemies, before the incarnation of Chryſte. yeres.
            
               Ololygones, crokynge frogges.
            
               Olor, oris, a wylde ſwanne
            
               Olôrinus, na, um, of a ſwanne, as, Cantus olorinus, the ſyngynge of a ſwanne.
            
               Olus, leris, herbes whiche ſerue for pottage, pot herbes.
            
               Oluſcula, ſmall herbes.
            
               Olus atrum, an herbe called Alyſander.
            
               Olympia, a citie betwene the hylles of Oſſa and Olympus.
            
               Olympiacus, ca, cum, perteynynge to that playes or hyll.
            
               Olympias, piadis, the ſpace of fyne yeres, whereby the olde Greekes dyd accompte, as we do nowe, by the yeres of our lorde, as the fyrſte Olympias, the ſeconde, the thyrd, and ſo forthe.
            Olympicus, ca, cum, of Olympus.
            
            
               Olympicum certamen, was a game or pryce kepte on the hyll of Olympus by all the princes and cities of Greece euerye fyfth yere in the honour of Hercules, who fyrſte began it. In the whiche were all theſe mayſtries proued. Runnynge on foote to a goll, alſo runnynge furthe and backe agayne two furlong alſo wraſtlynge, fyghtynge with fyſtes, runnynge with horſes, wraſtlynge with handes and legges, runnynge and wraſtlynge of children, fyghtynge in harneyſe, runnynge with ii. horſes, and leapynge from the one to the other, courſynge with charyottes, runnynge with mares, but ſo as in the myddell of the courſe, he that dyd ryde ſhulde leape downe and holdynge faſte the brydell ſhoulde make an end of his courſe. There was alſo contention and vyctory of poetes rhetoritiās muſicians and ſubtyle diſputars. in the place did growe a wylde olyue tree wherof garlandes were made and gyuen to the victours, hereto aſſembled out of all the Cities and countreys of Greece, in the whiche tyme, was eyther warre appoynted or leages concluded, theſe gret games were alſo called Olympia.
            
            
               Olympionices, he that hath had victory in the games at Olympus.
            Olympius, a, um, heuenly.
            
            
               Olympus, a mountayne or hyll in Grece, betwene Theſſalia and Macedonia, aboue the whiche appereth no clowde: and therfore amonge the poetes it is vſurped for heauen.
            
               Plutarchus in uita Aemilij, ſayth, that it is ten furfonge in heyght.
            
               Olynthus, a citie in Thracia.
            
               Olyras, a ryuer in Greece by the place called Thermopylas.
            
               Olyſippum, a citie in portugall, nowe called Vlyſbona, in englyſhe Luſſeborn.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE M.
            
               OMASVM, a fat gut or chitterlynge.
            
               Omen, minis, lucke, alſo a worde or ſentence ſodaynelye ſpoken, after the whiche ſome thynge hapneth to folowe accordynge thervnto, aboue the expectation of thē whiche herde it.
            
               Omentum, the calle or ſewet, wherein all the bowelles are lapped, alſo the thynne ſkynne in the head, wherin the brayne is conteyned: of ſome called the ryme of the brayne, and of ſurgeons Pia mater.
            
            
               Omentatus, ta, tum, myxte with ſewet.
            
               Ominor, aris, ari, & omino, aui, are, to geſſe what ſhall happen or folowe.
            
               Ominator, òris, he that telleth a mannes lucke or fortune.
            Ominoſus, a, um, lucky.
            
            
               Omiſſus, a, um, lefte, not medled with. Omîſſo animo.) Vbi te uidi animo eſſe omiſſo, whan I ſawe that thou caryddeſt for nothynge.
            
               Omitto, omiſi, omittere, to forbeare, to leaue, to neglecte.
            
               Omitte hunc, let hym alone, pardon hym.
            
               Omitte me, let be, let me alone.
            
               Omitte iracundiam, be angry no more.
            
               Omitte ſolicitudinem, care not for it.
            
               Omitte timorem, be not aferde.
            
               Omitte de ea re dicere, ſpeake no more of the matter.
            
               Id omitto, I wyll not ſpeake therof.
            
               Vt omittam de eo plus loqui, I wyll paſſe ouer to ſpeake any more of hym.
            
               Omiſsis iocis credo, in erneſt I doo beleue.
            ❀Omne tulit punctum, he touched euerye pointe, A prouerbe applyed to hym, whiche omytteth nothyng expedient or neceſary, and is therfore of all men commended.
            
               Omnibus numeris, in al poyntes Res eſt ō
                  nibus numeris abſoluta, it is a thynge perfyte in all poyntes.
            
               Omnifariam, all maner of wayes, of euerye kynde.
            Omnifarius, a, um, ſundry, dyuerſe.
            
            
               Omnigenus, a, um, of euery kynde.
            Omnimodus, da, dum, all maner.
            
            
                
               Omnino, holly, throughely, alwaye, fynallye, onely.
            
               Omnino in familia non erat, he in no maner of wyſe was in the houſe.
            
               Miſerrima eſt omnino ambitio, ambition in euery thynge is moſte miſerable.
            
               Omnibus partibus, al maner of wayes, to al intentes.
            Omni ratione, idem.
            Omnipotens, tis, almyghty.
            
            Omnis, ne, all.
            
            
               Omniparens terrae, the erthe bryngeth forth all thynges.
            
               Omophagi, they whiche do eate rawe fleſhe.
            
               Omphax, acis, a grape not fully rype.
            
               Omphacium, lycour made of fruite that is not rype, as of grapes, and than it is called ver iuyce, it is alſo of other fruites and floures.
            
               Omphacium uinum, a grene wyne not pleaſaunte or ſwete.
            
               Omphacinum oleum, oyle made of olyues, not beinge rype.
            
               Omphacomêli, a ſyrupe made with the iuyce of grene grapes and hony,Paul. Egi. Meuſe, Auicen. Anto. Muſa. Io. Agric. they make it now a dayes with the ſayde iuyce and ſugar, and do call it Syrupus de agreſta.
            
            
               Omphale, a mayden whiche was Queene of Lidia, whom Hercules dydde ſerue, and ſhe cauſed hym to ſpynne in a rocke.
            
               Omuteſco, teſcere, to be dome, and canne not ſpeake.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE N.
            
               ONae, ſwete fygges.
            
               Onager, onagri, a wylde aſſe.
            
               Onerarius, a, um, that whiche ſerueth for bourden.
            
               Onero, are, to charge, bourden, or lade.
            
               Onerare populum, to put impoſitions or taxes on the people.
            Oneratus, ta, tum, bourdayned, laded.
            
            
               Onerarius, raria, rarium, that wheron bourdayne is layde.
            
               Onerariae naues, ſhyppes whiche ſerue for bourdeyn, they maye be taken for hulkes.
            
               Oneroſus, a, um, bourdeynous, chargeable.
            
               Onixes, a kynde of marble.
            
               Onyſcus, a worme, whiche bendeth hym ſelfe lyke a bowe whan he goeth, whiche is red, and founde vnder trees, whiche haue lyen longe on the grounde.
            
               Onoba, a citie.
            
               Onocentaurus, a beaſte halfe a man, halfe an aſſe.
            
               Onocrotalus, a byrde lyke to a ſwanne, which puttynge his heade in to the water, brayeth lyke an aſſe.
            
               Onomatopeia, a worde made of ſowne or pronouncynge, as bletynge of a ſhepe, lowynge of cowe, hiſſynge of an adder.
            
               Ononium, a blynde nettell.
            
               Onus, oneris, a bourden, a lode, a charge.
            
               Oneri eſſe, to be chargeouſe to one.
            
               Onus deponere, to diſcharge one.
            
               Onus imponere, to gyue to one in charge.
            
               Oneri premi, to be to moche charged.
            
               Onere opprimi, to be ouer charged.
            
               Onus ſuſcipere, to take charge.
            
               Onus tollere, to beare charge.
            Onus ſuſtinere, idem.
            Onuſtus, ta, tum, loded, charged.
            
            
               Onyx, ychis, a whyte ſtone, lyke to a mannes nayle, alſo ſome be founde in Inde, whiche are of dyuerſe colours, hauynge whyte ſpottes lyke vnto eyen. it is ſuppoſed of ſome men to be alſo that whiche is called Conchula Indiae.
            
            
               Onychinus, na, um, made of the ſtone called Onyx.
            
               Oonae, yles in the northe occean where the inhabitantes do lyue with egges of foules.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE P.
            
               OPACO, care, to ſhadowe.
            
               Opacus, ca, cum, ſhadowed, or in the ſhadowe.
            
               Opacitas, ſhadowe of trees or vmbrage.
            
               Opera, rae, warke, labour.
            
               Operae, plurali tantum, warkemen, labourers, factours.
            
               Opera, warkes, buyldynges, pryuate or commune.
            
               Operae eſt, it nedeth.
            
               Opera mea, by my meanes.
            
               Operam perdere, to labour in vayne.
            Operam Iudere, idem.
            
               Operam ponere, to take labour and peyne about a thynge.
            
               Operas reddere alicui, to paye to oone his hyre.
            
               Oreſtes, & Lycurgus, una opera mihi ſunt ſodales qua iſte, Oreſtes and Lycurgus be as well my companyons as he.
            
               Haud cenſebam iſtarum eſſe operarum patrem. I dyd not thynke that my father medled with theſe matters.
            
               Spero alicunde hodie me bona opera aut mala tibi inuenturum eſſe auxilium argentarium. I truſte that ones to daye I ſhall by good meanes or bad fynde ſome moneye to helpe the with.
            
               Operam do, operam impendo, operam nauo, I do mine indeuour, I put to my diligēce I ſpende my labour.
            
               Operam impendere & dependere, to take peyne about a thynge.
            
                
               Operam Iudimus, we loſe our labour.
            
               Operarius, a labourer.
            
               Operarius, a, um, that whiche is done with labour, or pertayneth to labour or warke.
            
               Eadem opera, after one way.
            Operatus, ta, tum, wrought.
            
            
               Operatus. Liuius. Eo tempore quo corpus addictum at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   operatum Reipu. eſſet, Duryng the tyme that the body ſhalbe employed about ſeruyng the commune weale.
            
               Operculo, are, to keuer a veſſell.
            
               Operculum, a keuerynge or lydde.
            
               Opere praecium, profytable, neceſſarye, a ioyfull thynge, moche to be eſtemed.
            
               Operimentum, any thynge that keuereth.
            
               Operio, rui, to keuer, or hyde.
            
               Operior, riris, riri, to tary, to abyde.
            Operor, aris, ari, to warke.
            
            
               Operatio, the warke, or that whereaboute a man laboureth.
            Operoſitas, tatis, trauaylynge.
            
            
               Operoſus, a, um, buſy, dyligent in labourynge, laboryouſe, peynefull.
            
               Opertorium, a couerynge.
            Opertus, ta, tum, keuered.
            
            
               Opheſtes, the ſonne of Lycurgus ſlayne by a ſerpente.
            
               Ophiaca, pertaynynge to ſerpentes, they were bokes, whyche Nicander, and Petridius wrate, of the nature of ſerpentes.
            
               Ophiophagi, people in Ethiope, whiche doo eate ſerpentes.
            
               Ophiucus, the name of Eſculapius, bycauſe that he is ymagyned to holde a ſerpent in his hand. ſome wryte that it is a ſygne in heuen, which ſom do cal Hercules, other Eſculapius
            
               Ophites, a ſtone hauyng ſpottes lyke a ſerpent.
            
               Opthalmia, is a ſycknes of the eyes, whych inflameth the bones of the heade, the knyttynges of the eyes, the thyn ſkynnes therof and ſynewes, and all the holowe part of the eye, with the forhead and balles of the chekes, it cometh eyther of ſmoke or heate of the ſonne, or duſte, or by a fall, or a ſtroke, or ſomtyme of an humour, ſanguyne, choleryke, fleumatyk, or melancholy.
            
               Opici, they whych vſed abhominable ribaldry.
            
               Opicus, ca, cum, vncleane, dyſhoneſt, ſhameles.
            
               Opifex, ficis, a warkman, a craftes man.
            Opificium, the warke. Opificina, idem.
            
               Opigena, Iuno. Iuno was ſoo callyd of women, bycauſe they ſuppoſed, that ſhe holpe them whan they trauayled.
            
               Opilio, onis, a ſheparde.
            
               Opima ſpolia, the ſpoyle, whiche by one chiefe Capitayne is taken from an other in batayle as his cote armure or harneys.
            
               Opima praedia, manours profitable of greate reuenues.
            
               Opimè, aboundantly, rychely.
            
               Opimo, are, to make fatte.
            
               Opimus, ma, mum, fatte. alſo ryche.
            
               Opimium, ſeu opimianum uinum, wine which mought endure good, two hundred yeres.
            
               Opinabilis, le, that may be cōceyued in opiniō.
            
               Opinio, onis, opinyon, ſometyme hope, alſoo fame, eſtimation, iudgement.
            
               Opino, for opinor, I ſuppoſe.
            
               Opinor, aris, ari, to ſuppoſe, to haue opinion.
            Opinatus, ta, tum, ſuppoſed.
            
            
               Opinator, toris, a ſuppoſer.
            
               Opiparè, plentuouſely.
            
               Opiparus, a, um, aboundant, freſhe, or gaye.
            
               Coena opipara, a delycate ſouper.
            
               Opis, opem, ayde, Terent. Niſi eum quantum dij dant tibi opis ſeruas. Excepte thou kepe hym yf god be thy good lorde.
            
               Nihil opus eſt in ipſis, They can not helpe or ſuccour the. Omni ope, with all his myght.
            
               Opis, opis, a ladye, companyon to Diana, ſhe was alſoo wyfe to Saturnus, and by her is ſignified the erthe amonge the Poetes.
            
               Opiſtographus, a boke writen on the back ſide.
            
               Opiſthotonicus, he that can not turne his neck
            
               Opiſthotonos, the crycke or dyſeaſe, whyche letteth a man to tourne his necke.
            
               Opiter, itris, he whoſe father dyed before his graundfather.
            Opitulor, aris, ari, to helpe.
            
            
               Opitulator, toris, a helper.
            
               Opitulus Iupiter, Iupiter the helper at nede.
            
               Opium, the iuyce of an herbe callyd blacke popy, alſo Opius, is he that fighteth in armure.
            
               Opobalſamum, balme naturall, whyche in a parte of Iudea, callyd Hieraconthe, ſtylleth out of a lytell thorne.
            
               Opoponax, acis, the iuyce of an herbe callyd Panax.
            
            
               Oporice, a medicine made of fruites.
            
               Oporae, all fruites whiche do grow in the haſt ende of ſommer.
            
               Oporotheca, a place wherin fruite is kept.
            
               Oportet, it behoueth, it is expediēt or neceſſary
            
               Oppedo, dere, to fart againſt one.
            
               Oppeto, tere, to dye, alſo to be ſlayne.
            
               Oppedere febrem, to fall into the feuer.
            
               Oppidanꝰ, a citiſē or towns mā, Opidicus, idē.
            
            
               Oppidatim, towne by towne.
            
               Oppidò, an aduerbe, ſygnifienge very moche, ſometyme it ſygnifieth forthwith, verily.
            
               Oppidulum, a lyttell towne.
            
               Oppidum, a wallyd towne or citie.
            
               Oppignero, are, to lay in pledge.
            
               Oppilo, are, to ſtoppe or ſhutte.
            
               Oppelo, ere, to fylle full.
            
               Opploro, are, to lament.
            
               Oppono, ere, to lay or put agaynſt, to oppoſe.
            
               Opponere, to prepare a garyſon to make defence
            
                agayne a ſiege.
            
               Opponere corpus pro patria, to put hym ſelfe in daunger for his countrey.
            
               Opponere, to lay in gage.
            
               Opponere cauſam, to lay an excuſe.
            
               Opponere nomen alicuius, to thretten with one, or in ones name.
            
               Opportunus, na, num, that whyche is in dewe tyme, & as it ought to be, inclyned to a thing.
            
               Oportunus iniuriae, feete or apte to take wronge.
            
               Opportunè, opportunately, conueniently, as it ought to be, in due tyme and meaſure.
            
               Oppoſitus, ta, tum, the participle to Oppono.
            
            
               Oppoſitus, tus. Laterum noſtrorū oppoſitus & corporum pollicemur, We promyſe that we wyl put our bodies and lyues in ieoperdy for the defence therof.
            
               Oppoſitio, contrary ſettyng or puttyng.
            
               Oppreſsio, onis, an oppreſſyon or violatyng.
            Per oppreſsionē eripere, to take by violēce.
            
               Oppreſſor, oris, an oppreſſour, or he that dothe grieue or harme one.
            
               Oppreſſus, the participle of opprimo.
            
            
               Oppreſſus a praedonibus captus eſt, Being ouerlayde with theues, he was taken.
            
               Opprimo, ere, to oppreſſe, to kepe or ſhutte in, to take ſodaynly, to rauyſſhe a womanne, to greue, to thruſte harde.
            
               Opprimi aere alieno, to be moche in dette.
            
               Opprimere animos formidine, to make theym aferde.
            
               Opprimere mentionem, to putte a thynge to ſylence.
            
               Opprimi inuidia, to be hated.
            
               Opprimere iuditio, to vndo one by ſuite.
            
               Opprimere orationem alicuius, to ſtoppe one in his tale.
            
               Oppreſſus graui ſomno, He was in a deade ſleape.
            
               Nox certamina coepta oppreſsit, The nyght came on, and dyd let the contentions whiche were begunne.
            
               Opprimere occaſionem, to cauſe the occaſion to be loſte.
            
               Opprimere pede, to treade vnder foote.
            
               Opprimi ruina, to be ſlayne with the fallyng downe of ſome thynge.
            
               Opprimere bellum exortum, to ceaſſe the warre that is begunne.
            
               Os opprime, ſtoppe his mouthe.
            
               Opprimere aliquem, to take one vnwares.
            
               Opprimere aliquem conſilio, to ouercome one by wyſedome.
            Opprobrium, & opprobramentū, a reproche.
            
            
               Opprobro, are, to obiecte agaynſte one, to reproche.
            
               Opprobratio, rebukefull ſpeakynge.
            
               Oppugno, are, to aſſaulte.
            
               Oppugnare bona alicuius, to aſſay meanes to make one to loſe his goodes.
            
               Oppugnare aliquem capite & fortunis, to cauſe one to loſe his lyfe and goodes.
            
               Oppugnare uerbis commoda patriae, To ſpeake agaynſt the profyte of his countrey.
            
               Oppugnatio, an aſſiege or aſſaulte agaynſte a fortreſſe.
            
               Oppugnator, toris, he that letteth the profyte of an other man, or gothe aboute to doo hym dyſpleaſure.
            
               Ops, opis, the ſyſter and wyfe of Saturne: alſo it ſygnifyeth ayde or helpe.
            
               Opes, rycheſſe, puiſſance or power.
            
               Opſonator, atoris, a purueyour of vytayles, or Catar.
            
               Opſonatus, tus, & opſonatio, preparation for dyner or ſupper.
            
               Opſonito, tare, to prepare often for dyner or ſouper.
            
               Opſonium, all thynge belongynge to a meale, excepte breade and drynke.
            
               Opſono, nare, & obſonor, onari, to prepare thīges neceſſary for dyner, ſouper, or banket.
            
               Optabilis, le, that whiche is deſyred.
            
               Optabiliter, pleaſantly, dylectably.
            
               Optato, with deſyre.
            
               Optato aduenis, ye be welcome.
            
               Optatum loquere, ſpeake courteyſly, ſpeake not ſo rygorouſely.
            
               Optice, the ſcience wherby the reaſon of ſyght is knowen.
            
               Opticus, ca, cum, perſpectife, pertaynynge to ſyghte.
            
               Optimates, the head men of a citie, alſoo they whyche defende the parte of nobylitie and ryche men.
            
               Optima fide, without fraude.
            
               Optimatus, tus, the ſtate or condition of heade men of a towne or countray.
            
               Optime, very well.
            
               Optimo iure, with good ayd, or with good reaſon.
            
               Optimus, beſte or very good.
            
               Optio, the choyce, the requeſt or deſyre. it was alſo to a capytayne in warres, a mynyſter to doo his commaundemente, and he aſſyſtent vnto hym.
            
               Optionem facere, to gyue the choyſe to one.
            Optionem dare, idem.
            
               Si optio eſſet, if I, thou, or he mought choſe.
            
               Optio, in the maſculine gender, preaſte money whyche ſouldyours doo receyue to prouyde theyr neceſſaries.
            Opto, tare, to deſyre, to chouſe, to require. Adopto, coopto, exopto, uide ſuis locis.
            
               Opulento, tare, to make ryche or plentuouſe.
            
               Opulentus, ta, tum, ryche, abundant.
            Opulentia, & opulentitas, rycheſſe, abundance
            
            
               Opulenter, rychely, plentuouſely.
            
                
               Opuleſco, ſcere, to be ryche.
            
               Opulus, a wyche haſyll tree.
            
               Opuncalo, he that ſyngethe lyke to a ſhepeherde.
            
               Opus, opuntis, a cytie in Locris.
            
               Opus, operis, a warke, a labour. Eius opere, by his meane or dylygence.
            
               Opus eſt, it is neceſſary, or nede. Si opus ſit, if nede be.
            
               Opus inteſtinum, that which moſt commonly is callyd implementes of houſeholde, properly of tymber, as fourmes, ſtooles, cupbourdes and other lyke thynges.
            
               Opus eſt conuento. Ita res ſubita eſt, celeriter mihi hoc homine opus eſt, The chaunce is ſoo ſodayne, or the matter requyreth ſuche haſte, that I muſt nedes ſpeke with the man ſhortly or quyckely.
            
               Opus eſt facto, it muſte nedes be done, or executed.
            
               Opus eſt remiſſam. Voſmet uidete iam Laches & tu Pamphile, remiſſam opus ſit nobis an reductam domum, Nowe Laches and Pamphile aduyſe your ſelues well, whither it be neceſſary, that ſhe be ſente home, or fetched home.
            
               Opus ſunt tibi, thou haſte nede of theym. Vt cum deſponderim, des qui aurum ac ueſtem, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   alia quae opus ſunt, That whan I haue affyaunced her, thou delyuer money and apparayl, and al other thinges nedefull. Opere maxumo, with all meanes poſſyble, in moſt harty wyſe. Rex Seleucus me opere orauit maxumo, ut ſibi latrones cogerem, Kynge Seleucus deſyred me, as moche as he poſſyblye moughte, that I wolde geate hym ſouldyours to be aboute his perſone.
            
               Thais maximo te orabat, opere ut cras redires, Thais deſyred the as hartyly as ſhe canne, that thou woldeſte comme agayne to morowe.
            
               Opuſculum, a lyttell warke.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE R.
            
               ORA, the extreme parte of euery thyng, as the edge, the brym, the ſkyrtes, the hemme, the border, the cabull that tyeth the ſhyppe. It is alſo a clyme or particion of the fyrmament.
            
               Ora uulneris, the ouer partes of the wound.
            
               Ora marittima, the ſea ſyde.
            
               Oraculum, where aunſweres were gyuen by ydolles: ſomtyme the aunſwere, ſometyme the ſayenge of ſome wyſe man.
            Oraculum edidit Deus, god ſayde.
            
            
               Orarium, the veſtement, wherein the prieſte dothe ſaye maſſe.
            
               Orata, a fyſhe callyd a gylte head.
            
               Oratio, an oration, a prayer.
            
               Orator, toris, an oratour.
            
               Oratoria, Rhetorike.
            
               Oratoriae, lyke an oratour, or in fourme of Rhetorike.
            
               Oratorius, a, um, pertaynynge to an oratour.
            Oratus, tus, prayer.
            
            
               Orbelon, a place in Thracia where Orpheus dyd dwelle.
            
               Orbes, dyſhes, the holes of the eyen. ſommetyme the eyen.
            
               Orbem facere, where people do gather them rounde togyther in battayle.
            
               Orbi, they whyche haue loſte theyr chylderne, alſo orphanes.
            Orbiculatus, ta, tum, made rounde.
            
            
               Orbiculus, a lyttell cerkle, alſo a pully.
            Orbicus, ca, cum, rounde.
            
            
               Orbile, lis, the circuite of a roufe.
            
               Orbis, a cerkle, alſo the worlde.
            
               Orbita, a wheele. ſommetyme the tracke that wheles do make in the grounde.
            
               Orbitas, the lacke of chylderne: ſometyme the lacke of a father. alſo any lacke.
            
               Orbitus, ta, tum, rounde as a cerkle.
            
               Orbo, are, to depryue.
            
               Orbus, proprely blynde. ſometyme lackynge any thynge.
            
               Orca, a great monſter of the ſea, alſo a greatte veſſelle, as a butte or vate, wherein R
                  •
               nnyſhe wyne is putte. Alſoo a boxe, wherein dyce be ſhaken, and after throwen on the tables, ſometyme a coffer, wherein womennes payntynge is kepte.
            
               Orcas promontorium, the northe ende of Scotlande.
            
               Orchades, thyrtye Iles in the ſea by Scotlande.
            
               Orcheſtra, a place, wherein the Senatours and honourable perſons ſat to beholde playes.
            
               Orchis, an herbe callyd alſo Satyrion, it is alſo a certayne kynde of fyſhe.
            
               Orchomenus, a mountayne in Theſſaly. alſoo a citie in Euboea.
            
            
               Orcomana, a beere, whereon deade corſes doo lye.
            
               Orcula, a rundelet.
            
               Orcus, a ryuer of helle. alſoo an nother in Theſſaly. it is ſometyme taken for helle.
            Ordeaceus, a, um, of barly.
            
            
               Ordinarius, a, um, wherein order is obſerued ordinary, ſometyme a ſkoffer or geſter.
            
               Ordinare, to order or diſpoſe.
            
               Ordior, iris, orſus, iri, to begynne to ſpeake.
            
               Ordo, dinis, order, the dewe place, the aſtate of menne.
            
               In ordinem redigere, to kepe one within his boundes, that he do not excede his degree.
            
               Ordines, is in battayle that, whyche is callyd
 the raye.
            
               Ordines ſeruare, to kepe the raye.
            
               Ordine ponere, to ſette in a raye.
            
               Ordo longus, a great multitude.
            
               Ordines ducere, to be a capitayne.
            
               In ordinem cogere, to brynge vnder obeyſaunce, to correcte theym, whyche be oute of order.
            
               Ordines conturbare, to breake or ſkatter the raye.
            
               Ordinatim, in order.
            
               Ordinatio, ordynaunce.
            
               Ordoluci, hylles whiche do diuyde Scotlande and Englande, callyd nowe Cheuiet.
            
               Orea, the bytte for a horſe.
            
               Oreus, a name of Bacchus.
            
               Oreſtes, the ſonne of Agamemnon.
            
               Ore tenus, to the mouthe.
            
               Oreto, or Oria, A towne in Spayne callyd Calatraua.
            
               Orexis, is mooſte taken for vomyte, all be it it ſygnifieth appetite to eate.
            
               Organa, all inſtrumentes of muſyke.
            
               Organum, an inſtrument pertaynyng to buyldynge, alſo an ordynaunce of warres.
            
               Organarij, makers of inſtrumentes.
            
               Orgia, ceremonyes or ſonges, pertaynynge to infernall goddis, or to Bacchus.
            
               Orgyia, a meaſure contaynynge ſyxe foote, Suidas dothe write that it is the ſpace, whiche is conteyned betweene the handes ſtretched abrode, whyche I ſuppoſe is a ſpanne.
            
               Oria, a fyſſhers boote.
            
               Orichalcum, a mettalle, whyche as I ſuppoſe is lattyn.
            
               Oriculum, for auricula, a lyttell care.
            
               Oricos, a citie of Epire.
            
               Oriens, orientis, the Eaſte.
            
               Orificium, the mouthe of any thynge.
            
               Origanum, an herbe callyd organny.
            
               Origines, callyd alſo Adamantius borne at Alexandria in Egypte was ſonne of one Leonides the martyr, a man of mooſte excellente kounnynge and vertue frome his chyldhode, wherein he ſoo wonderfully proſperyd, that beynge an infaunt he lyenge on ſleape, his father camme into the chaumber, and takynge awaye ſoftely the clothes, he kyſſed the chyldes breaſte, as a Temple hauynge within it the holye gooſte, gyuynge thankes to God, that hadde ſente to hym ſuche a ſonne. At the tyme that his father was martred. Origene beynge alſoo deſyrouſe of martyrdome, yet a yonge chylde, ranne in amonge other, whyche were led to be ſlayne, and by all meanes proffered hym ſelfe to dye with theym. Whiche his mother perceyuyng, who moſte entierly loued him, ſhe fyrſt lamentably intreted hym to withdrawe hym, but he therwith was more inflamed towarde martyrdome than withdrawen. wherefore his mother vſed this crafte, at nyghte whan he was in his bedde, ſhe ſtale awaye his clothes, ſo that in the mornyng whā he wold haue gone forth, he mought not come by theym, wherfore he was conſtrayned to tary at home. Which deceipt of his mother he complayned to his father than being in pryſon, deſyrnge hym to perſyſt conſtantely in his good purpoſe. After the martyrdome of his father, he contynually gaue him ſelfe to the ſtudye of holy Scripture, whyche he hadde taſted before, in readynge Gentyles warkes by his fathers inſtruction. All be it in Phyloſophye and all other ſcyences, he dydde excelle all other menne of his tyme, before that he was twentye yeres olde. At eyghtene yeres olde, he expoundynge openly Gentile Authours, he ſoo interlaced holye doctrine, that he conuerted to the faythe of Chriſte many great lernyd menne whiche were his hearers. His lyuynge was alſoo ſo ſtrayght and vertuouſe, that he drewe many vntylle hym, and was amonge all menne hadde in a wonderfull reuerence. yet he neuer ceaſſed in all perſecutions, to comforte and confyrme men in the imbracynge of martyrdome, and dydde contynually reade openly, and alſoo wryte innumerable bokes in the expoundynge of holy ſcrypture. Not withſtandynge that he alſoo lernyd the Hebrue toungue perfytely, he went into dyuerſe countrayes preachynge. And for the greatte fame that was of hym, Mammea, the mother of the Emperoure Alexander Seuerus ſent for hym to Rome, and herd him, and as ſomme do ſuppoſe was by hym conuerted. Whereof ye may reade in the boke whiche I tranſlated out of Eucolpius, and called it the Image of Gouernance. He moſt ſtraightly obſerued all the preceptes of the Goſpell, in contynuall faſtynges and watchynges, hauyng but oone garment, and goynge alwaye bare foted, and counſayllynge all his hearers to renounce all that they hadde, and to gyue it in almeſſe. He alſo gelded hym ſelfe, not onely to be the more chaſte, but alſoo for bycauſe that in the tyme of perſecution he taught the worde of God, as well pryuilye as openly to menne and womenne, he mought lette that the Paynyms ſhoulde not ſpeake dyſſhoneſtye of hym, and of thoſe, whyche repayred to his Sermones and leſſons, whyche although he dydde ſecretelye, yet God wolde not haue it hydde, ſo that it camme to the eare of Demetrius the byſſhoppe of Alexandria, who fyrſte wonderynge a
                  •
               te the ſtomacke and vertue of the manne, prayſyng the feruentnes of his faythe, he ſayde vnto hym, Nowe ſtycke to thy doctryne and preachynge, ſens thou haſte not left vnto thyne
 aduerſaries any occaſyon of ſuſpycion: but afterwarde the ſame Demetrius ſtyred with enuy agaynſte Origene, layde it in reproche agaynſte hym openly, fyndynge nothynge els wherwith to dyſprayſe hym. He that wylle knowe more of Origene, let hym rede the .vi. boke of Euſebius in hiſtoria eccleſiaſtica, and ſaynct Hierome De ſcriptoribus eccleſiaſtic. he was after the incarnation of Chriſte. 204. yeres.
            
               Originalis, le, that whyche one hath from his byrthe.
            
               Origo, ginis, a begynnynge, kynde.
            
               Orion, the ſonne of Neptunus. ſomme fayned that he came of the vryne of Iupyter, Mercury, and Neptune in this wyſe. One Enopius whan he had lodged thoſe goddis, and had killed for them an oxe, he deſired of them to graunt to hym a ſonne, than thoſe thre pyſſed in the hyde of the oxe, which being layde in the ground, therof came Orion, as it were Vrion, For Ouros in greke, is vryne. Orîon beinge an hunter, whan he wold haue defloured Diana, he was ſlayne with a ſcorpyon, and tranſlated amonge the ſterres, and there is the ſygne callyd in latyne Iugula.
            
            
               Orior, eris, & oriris, riri, to be borne, to ryſe, to appere.
            
               Oriundus, commen by auncetours out of ſome countrey or citie. ſometyme borne. Nati Carthagine, ſed oriundi à Syracuſis, Borne at Carthage, but by ancetours deſcended from Syracuſe in Sicile.
            
               Oriza, a grayne callyd Ryce, whyche is moſte commonly eaten in Lent, with almond mylke.
            
               Orizon, is the furthermoſt parte of the fyrmament, that mans eye can determyne.
            
               Orminium, an herbe lyke to horehounde.
            
               Ornamenta, ſommetyme dothe ſygnifye thoſe whiche are worthy prayſe.
            
               Ornamentum, apparayle, alſo honour, prayſe or commendation.
            
               Ornithoboſcion, a howſe where poultrye is fedde, a cowpe.
            
               Ornithon, thonis, a place wherein byrdes are kepte.
            
               Orno, nare, to garnyſſhe, to decke or trymme, to make fayre, to prepare, to make meete, to honour with ſome auctoritie or dygnitie, alſo to prayſe.
            
               Ornare ſuffragio, to help one with his voyce or good report.
            
               Ornare fugam, to runne away.
            
               Ornate, trymly, gorgeouſely.
            
               Ornatus, he that is in greate dygnytie or authorytie.
            
               Ornatiſsimam de me ſententiam dixit, He gaue me a very honorable reporte.
            
               Ornatus, ta, tum, apparayled, trymmed, garniſhed, inſtructed, fournyſhed.
            
               Ornatus, tus, apparayle, trymmyng, deckyng.
            
               Ornus, a wylde aſhe with great leaues.
            
               Oro, orare, to praye, to demaunde, to ſpeake openly and eloquentely, as Oratours doo, to pleade.
            
               Orobanche, an herbe growynge amonge beanes or peaſyn and deſtroyeth them.
            
               Orobia, a kynde of Frankyncenſe in lyttelle graynes.
            
               Orobitis, a greene colour lyke to the blaades of corne.
            
               Orobum, a kynde of poulſe corne I ſuppoſe it is Tares, looke before in Eruum.
            
               Orontes, a ryuer by the citie of Antioche.
            
               Orphanus, he whyche lacketh his father and fatherly ſuccour.
            
               Orpheus, borne in Thracia ſonne of Oeagrius, or as ſome doo write of Apollo and Calliope, and aunciente poete and moſte excellente harper, who as the poetes ſurmyſed, dyd delyte beaſtes and infernalle ſpyrytes, and me
               
                  •
               yd ſtones with the ſweteneſſe of his armonye. whereby he recouered his wyfe Eury dices out of helle, at the laſt he was ſlayn with lyghtnynge, or as ſome do wryte, was torne into pieces with women.
            
               Orrea, a towne in Englande callyd newe Caſtell.
            
               Oroſius, a wourſhypful prieſt borne in Spayn ryght eloquente and experte in hyſtoryes, he wrate ſeuen bokes agaynſte theym, whyche ſayde that the decaye of the commune weale of Rome, hapned by the doctrine of Chriſte. he was ſent by ſaynte Auguſtyue vnto ſayte Hierome, who was than in Iudea, to lerne of hym the raiſon of the ſtate of the ſoule.
            
               Orſus, he beganne.
            
               Orſus, he that begynneth to do a thynge.
            Orſus, a, um, begunne.
            
            
               Orthodoxia, the ryght opynion or faythe.
            
               Orthodoxus, a man of the ryghte oppynyon or faythe.
            
               Orthogonus, a ryght corner.
            
               Orthographia, the ryght forme of writynge. it is alſo a platte for buyldynge, wherein is paynted or ſette oute the fygure of the holle warke with the reaſons of the ſame.
            
               Orthopnoea, a dyſeaſe, whanne a man ran not fetche his breathe, but holdynge his neck
                  •
                vpryght.
            
               Orthopnoeci, they whyche haue that ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Orthoſtadios, a garment, whyche was alway worne vngyrte.
            
               Orto luce, as ſoone as it was day.
            Ortus, ti, uide Hortus.
            
               Orti penſiles, gardeynes made on howſes, or
 pyllours.
            
               Ortus, ta, tum, borne, ſprunge, begunne.
            
               Ortus, tus, the byrthe or natiuitie. Alſo the ryſynge of the ſonne.
            
               Ortygia, the name of an yle.
            
               Ortyx, tygis, a byrde callyd a quayle.
            
               Oryx, gis, a beaſte of the kynde of gotes.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE S.
            
               OS, oris, the mouth, alſo the viſage, ſome tyme the proporcion of all the bodye. ſometyme countenance, alſo preſence, and language.
            
               In ore eſt omni populo, all the people ſpeaketh of hym.
            
               Omnes uno ore authores fuêre, They were all of one accorde.
            
               Os ad male audiendum prebêre, to ſuffre hym to rebuke hym to his face.
            
               Per ora hominum ferri, to be publyſſhed or ſpoken abrode.
            
               Os diſtorquêre, to ſette his mouthe a wrye, to mocke with the mouthe.
            Os ducere, idem.
            
               Os durum, a ſhameleſſe perſone.
            Os impudens, idem.
            
               Os alicui laedere, to ſaye ylle of oone to his face.
            
               Os hominis inſignem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   impudentiam cognoſcite, Conſyder you the boldnes and preſumption of this felowe.
            Duarum & uiginti gentium ore loquebatur, He ſpake xxii. languages.
            
               Os portus, the entrye of an hauen.
            
               Os ſublinire, to mock or deceyue craftyly, with fayre promyſes.
            
               Oſsiculum, the diminutiue of Os.
            
            Os, oſsis, a bone Oſſum, idem.
            
               Oſae, lawes concernynge deuotion.
            
               Oſanna, I pray the ſaue vs.
            
               Oſaſum, for Odi, I hate.
            
               Oſcedo, dinis, yanynge or gapynge. ſommetyme ſtenche.
            
               Oſci, people in Italy.
            
               Oſcillo, are to bowe downe.
            
               Oſcilla, lyttell ymages of waxe to be offred.
            
               Oſcillum, a lyttell mouthe. ſometyme a lyttell ymage or poppette.
            
               Oſcines, byrdes, whyche by theyr voyces doo ſygnyfie ſomewhat to come or happen.
            
               Oſcinum, a general name of byrdes, whiche do ſynge, a ſyngynge byrde.
            
               Oſcis, the abhomynable vſe of carnall ſynne.
            
               Oſcito, tare, to gape, as menne doo for lacke of ſleape.
            Oſcitor, tari, idem.
            
               Oſcitatio, gapynge. Alſoo quyeteneſſe frome laboure.
            
               Oſcitans, he that gapeth as it were for lacke of ſlepe. alſo he that careth for nothyng, ſure, fearynge nothynge, neglygent.
            
               Oſcitanter, ſoftely, withoute any courage, as yf one were almooſte on ſleape. Alſoo neglygentely.
            Oſcitabunde, idem.
            
               Oſculana pugna, battayle, wherin they, whyche were before vaynquyſſhed, haue the vyctorye.
            
               Oſculatio, kyſſynge.
            
               Oſculum, a lyttell mouthe. alſo a kyſſe.
            
               Oſiris, the ſonne of Iupyter and Niobe, the fyrſte kynge of Argyues, and after leauyng that royalme to his brother, he went into Egypte, and there he raygned and maryed Iſis, fynally he was ſlayne by Typho his brother, and was longe ſoughte for by Iſis his wyfe, who at the laſte fyndyng his body, ſhe buryed it in an yle called Abatos, where the Egyptians afterwarde fyndyng an oxe, they ſuppoſed that Oſiris was become a god, and takynge that oxe with theym to the cytie of Memphis, they honoured him for a god, and callyng hym Apis, they ordeyned to hym certayne ceremonyes, a lyttell whyle after, they drownynge hym in the ryuer, they ſought for an nother lyke oxe with waylynge and weepynge, whyche beynge founden, they cryed with moch gladneſſe, and brought him to the citie, He was before the incarnatiō of Chriſt
2012. yeres.
            
               Oſyris, is alſo an herbe, whiche ſome doo ſuppoſe to be wylde lynne or wylde flaxe.
            
               Oſſa, a hygh mountayne in Theſſaly.
            
               Oſſeus, a, um, bony, or of a bone, as harde as a bone.
            
               Oſsiculatim, oone boone frome an nother in pieces.
            
               Oſsifragus, ga, gum, that whyche breakethe boones.
            
               Oſsilegium, a gatherynge of boones.
            
               Oſsiculum, a lyttell bone.
            
               Oſſuaria, a ſhryne or lyke thynge, where the bones of dead men are put.
            Oftendo, di, dere, to ſhewe.
            
            
               Oſtendere ſe, ſiue animum ſuum, to declare his courage, or what he intendeth to do.
            
               Oſtendere ſe uirum, to proue him ſelf a man, to do valiantly.
            
               Oſtentatio, booſtynge.
            
               Oſtentare periculum capitis, to menace one to kyll hym, or to cauſe hym to dye as a tranſgreſſour.
            
               Oſtentare iugulum pro capite alterius, to offer to dye, to ſaue the lyfe of an other man.
            
               Oſtentata occaſio, the occaſyon preſent.
            
               Oſtentare ſpem, to put in hope.
            
               Oſtento, oſtentare to ſhewe often. alſo to boſt,
 or aduaunt.
            
               Oſtentui eſſe, to be poynted at.
            
               Oſtentum, a thynge whyche hapneth ſeldome, and betokeneth, that ſome ſtraunge thynge ſhall happen. As a blaſyng ſterre, thunder on a fayre day. Sometyme it ſygnifieth a thing monſtruouſe.
            Oſten tus, tus, a ſkorne.
            
            
               Oſtia, oſtiorum, the entrees of greate ryuers, ſometyme hauens.
            
               Oſtia, a towne nyght to Rome.
            
               Oſtiarius, a porter.
            
               Oſtiatim, from doore to doore.
            
               Oſtienſis, a lyttell hauen at Rome.
            
               Oſtigo, the ſkabbe whiche hapneth to ſhepe.
            
               Oſtium, a doore or gate.
            
               Oſtraciſmus, a maner of exylynge of menne at Athenes, whyche excellyd other in power or authorytie: whyche exyle was doone by delyuerynge of oyſter ſhelles, wherein the name of hym, whyche ſhulde be exyled, was wrytten.
            
               Oſtracum, a ſhelle.
            
               Oſtrea, an oyſter.
            Oſtreum, idem.
            
               Oſtrearius panis, Browne breade, the whyche men are wont to eate with oyſters.
            
               Oſtreatus, ta, tum, harde as an oyſter.
            
               Oſtrifer, the place in the ſea, whyche is apte to ingender oyſters.
            
               Oſtrinae ueſtes, garmentes of purple colour.
            
               Oſtrum, purple, or other lyke colour.
            Oſus, oſurus, participles of Odi.
            
               Oſus ſum, oſus es, oſus eſt, I hate, thou hateſt, he hateth.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE T.
            
               OTHRIS, a mountayne of Theſſalye, where dwellyd the peple callyd Lapithae.
            
            
               Otior, ſwyfter.
            
               Otior, ari, to be ydell or at reſte.
            
               Otioſè, ydelly, at leyſure, ſurely, without care.
            
               Otioſus, a, um, ydell, ſure, without care.
            
               Otioſus dies, holy day, a playenge day.
            Otioſus animus. Terent. Animo iam nunc otioſo eſſe impero, Nowe I charge the care for nothynge.
            
            
               Otioſa res, a thynge that requyreth noo care or ſtudye.
            
               Otioſae ſententiae, ſentences whyche haue no vertue or power to moue the audience.
            
               Otioſus ſtudiorum, he that ſtudyeth nothing
            
               Otioſe dormire, to ſlepe without care, or to ſlepe ſoundly.
            
               Otioſe negotium gerere, to go neglygently about his buſynes.
            
               Otioſè, care thou not.
            
               Otium, ydelneſſe, vacation from labour. alſoo leyſure, reſte, quyetneſſe, contrary to labour and buſyneſſe.
            
               Tenêre otium, to maynteyne quyetnes.
            
               Suppeditare otium ſtudio, to paſſe the tyme in ſtudy.
            
               In otio eſſe, to ſytte at home and do nothing.
            
               Abundare otio, to haue moche leyſure.
            Affluere otio, idem.
            
               Otium operis, whan they labour no more.
            
               Otij plurimi res, the matter requyreth leyſer.
            
               Othryades, a mans name of Lacedemonia.
            
               Othrys, a hylle in Theſſaly.
            
               Otides, byrdes lyke to partryches.
            
               Otus, a ſhryche oule.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE V.
            
               OValis corona, a garlande of myrtelles, gyuen vnto hym, whiche had victorye without effuſion of bloudde.
            
               Ouatio, a ſmall triumph of a prynce or capytayne, whyche had vyctorye of his enemies without ſlaughter of men, or where batayle was not denounced: in the whyche triumph the capitayne wente on foote, or 
                  〈…〉
                ryde on a horſe, with a garlande of 
                  〈…〉
                on his head, and his ſouldyours 
                  〈◊〉
                aboute hym.
            
               Ouatus, ta, tum, whyche is in 
                  〈…〉
                of an egge.
            
               Ouans, ouantis, reioyſynge, being ioyfull.
            
               Ouidius, ſurnamyd Naſo, borne in a towne callyd Sulmo, and brought vp in Rome, and diligently inſtructed in latin letters, from his tender age, he gaue moſt diligent ſtudy to the makynge of verſes, from the whiche he was withdrawen by his father, and put to lern retorike, wher in a whyle he moche profited and was in the noumbre of the beſte oratours of that tyme, and was aduanced to ſundry authorities & made a ſenator. Not withſtāding he chiefely dyd dedicate hym ſelfe vnto poetry, wherein by nature he was made excellent in facylitie and abundaunce of ſentences, he was in good fauour with the emperour Auguſtus. of whome at the laſte he was exyled into Pontus, where he ſpent the reſte of his lyfe in a towne callyd Tomos, amonge people moſte barbarouſe, who not withſtanding lamented his deathe, for his courtayſye and gentylneſſe of maners. The cauſe of his exyle is vncertayne, ſauynge that ſome do ſuppoſe that it was for abuſynge Iulia doughter of the emperour Auguſtus, although the pretence of the emperour was, for the makynge of the boke of the craft of loue, wherby yonge myndes mought be ſtyrred to wantonneſſe. He was before the Incarnation of Chriſte. yeres.
            
                
               Ouicula, a lyttell ſheepe.
            
               Ouifera gallina, a broude henne.
            
               Ouile, a folde or ſhepe houſe.
            
               Ouillus, a, um, of a ſheepe.
            Ouinus, a, um, idem.
            
               Ouis, a ſheepe.
            
               Ouo, are, to reioyce with noyſe or voyce in a multitude.
            
               Ouum, an egge.
            
               Ouum ouo ſimile, one egge lyke an nother, applyed vnto them, whyche be lyke of condicions or perſone.
            
               Ouo prognatus eodem, of one father & mother, or brought vp vnder one mayſter, or in one ſchoole.
         
         
            ¶O ANTE X.
            
               OXacantha, a barbery tree, callid of ſome Berberis.
            
            
               Oxellū, a citie in Englād callid Cheſter.
            
               Oxycratum, water and vyneger ſodden togyther, callyd alſo Poſca.
            
            
               Oxygala, ſower mylke.
            
               Oxygarum, ſharpe ſawce.
            Oxylâpathon, ſorrell. Oxalis, idem.
            
               Oxylla, greate ſorrell.
            
               Oxymeli, hony and vynegre ſodden togyther.
            
               Oxyphoenix, nicis, the tree whiche beareth the fruite callyd of the apothecaries Tamarindi.
            
            
               Oxypora, oyntementes and emplayſters myxt with vyneger, to the intent that the vertue of the other ingredic̄ce may the better penetrate
            
               Oxyporon, ſharpe ſawce.
            
               Oxyporopola, he that ſelleth meate in ſharpe ſawce or ſowce.
            
               Oxyrinchus, a cytie in Aegypte, ſo named of a fyſhe callyd Oxyrinchus, for as moch as the Egyptians worſhypped two fyſſhes for goddis, that is to ſay, Lepidorū & Oxyrinchū, alſo two byrdes, a hawke, and the byrde callyd Ibis. alſo two beaſtes, an oxe, a dogge and a catte, and ſome honoured a crocodyle, and ſome Ichneumon, a lyttel beaſt, whiche kylleth the crocodyle. in the ſayde citie was the fyſh callyd Oxyrinchus ſpecially worſhipped.
            
               Oxyſaccharum, ſugre and vynegre ſodden togyther, of ſome men callyd Syrupus acetoſus ſymplex.
            
            
               Oxytoca, medicines to make a womā to bryng forthe her byrthe quyckely.
            
               d Oxytriphillon, an herbe callyd Sorrel de boys or Alleluya. Oxys, idem.
            
         
         
            ¶O ANTE Z.
            
               OZE, ſtynkynge of the noſe.
            
               Ozena, ſoores in the noſe, whyche cauſeth a ſtynkyng ſauour in the noſe.
            
               Ozinum, an herbe callyd baſyll.
         
         
            ¶P ANTE A.
            
               
                  PABVLARIS, pabulare, perteynynge to forrage or meate for beaſtes.
            
               Pabulatio, forragynge.
            
               Pabulator, a forragiour.
            
               Pabulor, aris, ari, to go in forragynge. ſometyme to fede, as a beaſte dothe.
            
               Pabulum, forrage or meate for beaſtes.
            
               Pacatè, peaſybly.
            
               Pace tua, pace ueſtra, by thy lycence, by your leaue, or lycence.
            
               Pachiri, hylles in the leſſe Aſia.
            
               Pachiſos, a ryuer of Sicile.
            
               Pachynus, a mountayne in Sicile, on the ſea ſyde, or an elbowe of the lande there, whiche nowe is called Cauo paſcinio.
            
            
               Pacifer, feri, a brynger of peace.
            
               Pacificatorius, a, um, that whiche doth pacifye.
            
               Pacifico, care, to pacifye.
            
               Paciſcor, ſceris, ſci, to make couenaunte, to bargayne.
            
               Paciſci uitam ab hoſte, to render hym to his ennemy his lyfe onely ſaued.
            
               Cum Xerxe nuptias, filiae eius paciſcitur, I agreed to mary the doughter of Xerxes.
            
               Pactus eſt duo millia, he couenanted to giue two thouſande.
            
               Paco, are, to mittigate, to apeaſe, to accorde.
            
               Pactilis, le, platted. Pactilis corona, a platted garlande.
            
               Pactio, an accorde, agrement, a treatiſe.
            
               Pactitius, a, um, done vpon condition.
            
               Pactoliopes, excedynge rycheſſe.
            
               Pactolus, a ryuer in Lydia, hauynge golden grauell.
            
               Pactum, ſometyme a participle ſygnifyeng couenaunted, promyſed, ſometyme a nowne, ſignifyenge a couenaunte.
            
               Pactum tranſitionis, a ſaulfe conduit, to paſſe from one countrey to an other, a paſporte. Has tibi nos pactus legibus dare iuſsit. He commaunded vs to gyue this money vpon a condition.
            
               Pactae induciae, truce accorded.
            Alio pacto, otherwyſe
            
            
               Nullo pacto, in no wyſe.
            
               Eo pacto, in this maner of wyſe.
            
               Pacuuius, a famouſe writer of Tragedies born at Brunduſium in Calabria, was ſuſters ſonne of Ennius the poete, he is commended of Quintiliane for the grauitie of his ſentences, the ponderouſeneſſe of his wordes, and the authoritie of the perſonages, which are in
 whiche are in his tragedies and commedies that ſomewhere his ſtile ſemeth very rude, is to be aſcribed to the tyme and not to his faut He lyued vntyll the age of lxxxx yeres before the commynge of Chryſte yeres.
            
               Padus, a famouſe ryuer in Italy whiche there is named Po. Cato in originibus, ſayth that the Tuſcanes called it Botigon, the Liguryans. Botigum, Plinius calleth it Bodincum that is to ſaye hauynge no bottom, the Grekes dyd call it Eridanus, it commeth oute of the hyll called Veſulus, whiche is the higheſt parte of the mountaynes called Alpes, and runneth by the marches of Liguria, and ſoo paſſeth vnder the grounde and ryſeth efteſones in the countrey callyd Vibonenſis, & caryeth with hym .xxx. other ryuers in to the Veneciane ſe, named Adriaticum.
            
            
               Paduſa, a ryuer which ſome ſaye is an arme of the Po.
            
               Paean, an hymne in the prayſe of Apollo, ſometyme the ſame Apollo. It is nowe taken for any hymne, made to the laude of God, or our Lady.
            
               Paegdaium, lodgynge for ſeruauntes and chyldren.
            
               Paedagogium, a bonde ſeruaunte.
            
               Paedagogus, he that is appointed to awayt on chyldren to ſe them well ordered.
            
               Paedaretus, a mannes name.
            
               Paederaſtes, a louer of chyldren in vnhoneſte wyſe.
            
               Paederaſtia, a viciouſe loue of chyldren.
            
               Paederotes, a preciouſe ſtone called alſo Opalion, there appereth in it the fyry bryghtnes of the Carbuncle, the ſhynynge pourple coulour of the Amatiſt, the grene ſea of the emeraulde, all ſhynynge to gether with an incredible mixture. Pli. li. 37. ca. 6. There is alſo a bremble and herbe, whereof Plinius maketh mention. li. 19. ca. 8. and Dioſcorides. li. 3. et 4. called Paedaeros, ſome ſuppoſe it to be a kynde of berefore.
            
               Paedia, erudition and inſtitution in good artes as Gellius teacheth.
            
               Paedico, paedicaui, paedicare, to commytte buggery.
            
               Paedor, paedoris, ſluttyſhneſſe, vncleanneſſe, fylthe.
            
               Paedotribes, & pedotriba, a ſcholemayſter.
            
               Paeon, a fote in meter, whiche is of one longe ſyllable and thre ſhorte.
            
               Paeonia, an herbe called Pyonie. alſo a countrey in Europa, and is a part of Macedony.
            
               Paeſtum, a citie in Lucania, where there is abundaunce of roſes.
            
               Paeſtanus, na, num, of that citie.
            
               Paetus, he that loketh as if his eyes were halfe cloſed.
            
               Paganalia, ploughmens holy day, as wakes be nowe adayes.
            
               Paganus, a man of the countrey, or of the vyllage. it is alſo he that deſyreth to be in the nū
               bre of ſouldiours, and is not yet admitted.
            
               Pagaſa, a towne of Theſſaly, whiche after was callyd Demetrias.
            
               Pagatim, vyllage by vyllage.
            
               Pagina, the ſyde of a leafe in a boke. it is alſo the place in the trayle of a vyne where euery braunche is faſtnyd.
            
               Paginula, a lyttell ſyde of a leafe in a boke.
            
               Pago, gis, pepigi, gere, pactus, to make couenant, or contracte.
            
               Pagus, a vyllage.
            
               Pagyris, the name of a ryuer and of a citie, of whiche the people are callyd Pagyritae.
            
            
               Pala, a ſpade. alſo a piele to putte in breadde in to the ouen. alſo a ſanne to make wynde. alſo the brodeſt part of a rynge.
            
               Palae, wedges or pieces, or gaddes of mettalle whan it is fyned.
            
               Palaca, pieces of fyne golde.
            
               Palaemon, onis, was callyd a god of the ſea.
            
               Palaeſtina, a countreye in Syrie, ioynynge to Araby, callyd in holy ſcripture Philiſtum.
            
            
               Palaeſtra, a wraſtlynge place. alſo the exercyſe of wraſtlyng. It is alſo the comelynes of mouynge and geſture, accordynge to the ſtate or degree of the perſon, whyche ſheweth it.
            Palaeſtricum, idem.
            
               Palaeſtricus, a wraſtler.
            
               Palaeſtricus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to wraſtlyng
            
               Palaeſtrita, he that vſeth wraſtlynge.
            
               Palam, openly before men, that al mē mayſe it.
            
               Palam facere, to reuele or brynge to open knowledge.
            
               Res palam eſt, the matter is openly knowen. or the thynge is manifeſt.
            
               Palamêdes, the ſonne of Nauplus kyng of the yle callyd Euboia, a valyant capytayn of the grekes, at the ſiege of Troye, where by the falſe ſurmyſe of Vlyſſes, he was ſlayne of his people it is wryten of hym that he found certayne letters of greke by the order of a flyght of cranes.
            
               Palangae, leauers or porters, wherewith they lyft and beare tymber, and ſuch lyke thynges of great weyght.
            
               Palango, are, to beare on leauers or porters.
            
               Palangari, men whyche do beare on leyuers or porters, thynges of great poyſe or weyght.
            
               Palatiar, & Palatual, a ſacrifyce done at Rome on the hyll callyd Palatinum.
            
            
               Palatio, onis, a foundation made in a maryſe grounde with pyles of tymber.
            
               Palantes, they that wander aboute, and wote not whyther to go.
            
               Palanteum, a citie buylded on the hylle callyd
 Palatinus.
            
               Palantia, the doughter of Euander.
            
               Palantia, a citie in Arragonia.
            
               Palatha, a tarte of fygges.
            
               Palatim, an aduerbe ſygnifienge ſcattered and wandrynge here and there.
            
               Palatina officia, offices within a prynces palayce or courte.
            
               Palatinus mons, an hyll at Rome.
            
               Palatium, a palaiſe of an Emperour or great kynge.
            
               Palatus, ſeu palatum, the roufe of the mouthe.
            
               Palea, chaffe of corne, alſo a gryſtell, whyche falleth downe frome the necke of a cocke or capon.
            
               Palearium, the Dewelappe of a rudder beaſte, alſo a place, wherin chaffe is kepte.
            
               Paleatus, made or myxte with chaffe.
            
               Pales, called goddeſſe of ſhepeherdes and of paſture.
            
               Palene, a cytie, ſo called of Pallena, the daughter of Sython, and wyfe of Cletus.
            
               Palepaphos, a citie of Cypres.
            
               Paleſcamander, a ryuer in Troye.
            
               Palicenus, a fountayne in Sicilia.
            
               Palilia, ſhepeherdes holydayes kepte in the honour of Pales.
            
               Palimpſeſtus, parchemente raſed.
            
               Palingeneſia, a regeneration or ſeconde natiuytie.
            
               Palinodia, a contrarye ſonge, or retractynge of that, whiche one hath ſpoken or wrytten: Nowe of ſome men called a recantynge.
            
               Palinodiam canere, to retracte that, whiche one hath ſpoken or wrytten.
            
               Palinurus, was the Mayſter of the ſhyppe wherein Aeneas camme in to Italye. Alſo an elbowe of the lande of Sycile in to the ſea.
            
               Paliurus, a bryer, whiche beareth a cod, wherin are thre or foure blacke ſeedes, I ſuppoſe by the deſcription bothe of Theophraſtus and Dioſcorides, that is the fyrſe or gorſſ, althoughe in ſome place it may be greater than in an other place.
            
               Palla, a womannes gowne.
            
               Pallace, a concubine.
            
               Palladium, the ymage of Pallas.
            
               Palladius, a mannes name, whiche wrote of houſbandry.
            
               Pallancana, a ſharpe oynion, whiche cauſeth the eyen to water.
            
               Palladius, a, um, that longeth to Pallas.
            
               Pallas, antis, the ſonne of Euander, ſometyme kynge of Latynes, alſo a gyant,
            
               Pallas, adis, called goddeſſe of battayle, and alſo of wyſedome.
            
               Pallax, acis, a concubine, ſuche as one kepeth in ſtede of his wyfe.
            
               Palleo, lui, lere, to be pale.
            Palleſcere, idem.
            
               Palliaſtrium, a courſe mantell.
            
               Palliate fabulae, comedies or enterludes made in Grecia, and the perſonages therein were Grekes, as Togatae fabulae, were enterludes in Rome, and the perſonages Romaynes, ſo called bycauſe the ouermoſte habyte of Grekes was called Pallium, of the Romaynes Toga.
            
            
               Palliatus, cladde in a mantell.
            
               Pallio, are, to concele or hyde.
            
               Palliolatim amictus, cladde in a palle.
            Palliolatus, idem.
            
               Palliolum, a ſhorte mantelle.
            
               Pallium, a mantell, ſuche as knyghtes of the garter do were.
            
               Pallor, oris, a paleneſſe of colour.
            Paluſter, ſtris, tre, & tra, trum, of the fenne.
            
            
               Palma, the palme of the hande. alſo a meaſure called a handebrede, ſometyme an ore to row with. Alſo a palme tree or date tree. ſomtyme it ſygnifyeth vyctorye.
            
               Palma chriſti, called alſo Buchaides, an herbe of the kynde of Satyrion, but hauyng rotes lyke the palme of ones hande.
            
               Palmam praeripere, to take the prayſe or honour from an other.
            
               Palmare facinus, an acte worthy the palma or ſygne of vyctorie.
            
               Palmarium, worthy the ſygne or token of vyctorye.
            
               Palmaria ſpacia, a handbrede ſpace.
            
               Palmata, & palmaris ueſtis, a garmente of bawdekyn, whiche the conſule dydde weare in tyme of peace, and the vyctour in tyme of warre.
            
               Palmes, itis, the ſmalle and tender braunches, moſte properly of a vyne.
            
               Palmetum, the place, wherin date trees doo growe.
            
               Palmeus, a, um, of a palme tree.
            
               Palmifer, & palmiger, that beareth palme, or date trees.
            
               Palmipedalis, a meaſure of a foote and handebrede.
            
               Palmipedes aues, all byrdes, which haue hole fete, as commonly al water foules haue.
            
               Palmipes, ſplay footed.
            
               Palmyra, a great caſtell or fortreſſe in the myddell of Syria.
            
               Palmyrena, a countrey in Syrie.
            
               Palmo, are, to bynde to gether: Alſo to do any thynge with the palme of the hande.
            
               Palmoſus, full of palme trees.
            
               Palmula, a lyttell oore or ſculle. alſo a date.
            
               Palmus, & palmeum, a meaſure. If it be palmus maior, it is of fyue fyngers, or a hande dredth. if it be minor, it is but foure fingers
            
               Palo, are, to hedge or pale in: alſo to wander.
            
                
               Palor, palaris, to go a ſunder here and there ſcattered.
            
               Palpebrae, the heares whiche do growe on the cheekes.
            
               Palpitatio, quakynge of the fleſhe.
            
               Palpito, tare, to quake or tremble.
            Palpator, toris, & palpo, ponis, a flatterer.
            
            
               Palpatio, flattery.
            
               Palpo, & palpor, ari, to fele, alſo to flatter.
            
               Paludamentum, a cote armure, it was alſo a womannes garment.
            
               Paludatus, clad in a cote armure.
            
               Palumbarius, a certayne hawke, whiche is longe and blacke, and flyeth the moſte parte by nyghte.
            
               Palumbes palumbis, a wood culuer.
            
               Palumbina caro, the fleſhe of a woode culuer
            
               Paluſter, tris, tre, perteynynge to fenne or maryſe.
            
               Palus, li, a ſtake or poſte.
            
               Palûs, palûdis, a fenne or mariſe.
            
               Pamiſus, one of the fyue pryncipall ryuers of Theſſalia.
            
               Pamphylia, a region in the leſſe Aſia, lienge on the ſouth ſyde of the mountayn Taurus and marcheth on the realmes of Phrigia and Caria.
            
               Pamphagi, people in Ethiopia, which do eate of all maner of thynges.
            
               Pampillum, a chariotte.
            
               Pampilona, a citie in the realme of Nauer.
            
               Pampinarium, a heape of grene braunches, it is alſo the tender braunche, whiche groweth out of the harde tree.
            Pampinarius, a, um, & pampineus, a, um, of grene braunches.
            
            
               Pampino, are, to cutte of the ſmall braunches of a vyne, or to pull away the leaues that the ſonne maye come to the rote.
            
               Pampinula, an herbe called alſo Pimpinella.
            
            
               Pampinus, a vyne leafe, or grene braunche.
            
               Panagron, a great ſwepe nette, which taketh all maner of fyſhe.
            
               Pan, panis, called the god of ſhepeherds.
            
               Panagyris, a commune aſſembly of people, be it a fayre, marte, markette, hyghe feaſte, or ceaſſions: alſo the place where thoſe aſſemblyes be.
            
               Panagyrica oratio, & Panagyricum carmē
                that whiche was recited in proſe or verſe at ſuche an aſſembly.
            
               Panaria ebrietas, Coelius wryteth that he hath rad for Arrogantia, & licentia.
            
            
               Panax, acis, an herbe whiche hath a leafe lyke to the leaues of a fygge tree. Alſo a long ſtalk moſye, and on the top a knappe, wherin are ſwete ſedes, with a ſharpe ſente, and hath a yelowe floure, and growith in diuers parties of Grecia.
            
               Panarium, a pantry, where breade is kepte.
            
               Panathenea, were among the Athenienſes certayne ſolemne ceremonies, wherof ſome were great and kepte euery fyfth yere, ſome were leſſe, & they were yerely celebrate, they were ſometyme called Athenaea.
            
            
               Panchaia, a region in Arabie, called alſo Sabaea.
            
            
               Pancarpia, a garland made of dyuerſe floures, or of all floures that may be founde.
            
               Pancraciaſtes, a man experte and excellente in all feaſtes of actiuitie.
            
               Pancratium, exerciſe in al feates, as wraſtling, runnynge, leapynge, caſtynge of the bar, and other lyke exercyſes of ſtrengthe.
            
               Pancratius, he that dothe exercyſe the ſayde feates.
            
               Panchreſtum, a ſaulue for euerye ſore.
            
               Pancreum, is betwene fleſhe and kernel lienge betwene the ſtomake and the lyuer.
            
               Panda, a citie in Inde, where the great Alexander buylded the thyrde citie of his name, the vttermoſte ende of his iournaye. Alſo in the ſame place were aulters builded by Bacchus, and after by Hercules, thanne by the queene Semiramis, laſte by Cyrus.
            
               Pandana porta, a gate of the citie of Rome, whiche was fyrſte and laſte opened, for all thynges to be brought into the citie.
            
               Pandecta, comprehendynge all thynges: it is alſo the volume of the lawe ciuile, called the digeſtes.
            
               Pandiculatio, gapynge.
            
               Pandiculor, aris, to gape as they doo, whiche come from ſlepe.
            Pando, didi, dere, paſſum, & panſum, to opē
               
            
            
               Pando, aui, are, to bowe downe.
            
               Pandocheus, an inholder.
            
               Pandochium, an in, or commune lodginge.
            Pandus, a, um, open.
            
            
               Pandôra, the mother of Deucalion vnto whō ſundry goddes gaue ſundrye gyftes. Pallas gaue to her wyſedom, Venus beaulty, Apollo muſike, Mercurius eloquence, and therefore ſhe was called Pandora, whiche ſignyfyeth hauynge al gyftes. Heſyodus the poete wryteth that Iupiter ſent her into the world to deceyue mankynde.
            
               Pangaeus, an elbowe of Thracia.
            
               Pango, pepegi, & panxi, pangere, to ſet, to plante, to ioyne one thynge to an other, to faſten, to dryue in, to wryte, to ſynge, to tell, to make.
            
               Panhormus, a citie in Sicile.
            
               Panicum, a ſodayne feare, whereby ſome tyme men be diſtraughte, or out of theyr wyttes.
            
               Panicula, that whiche on ſome herbes or trees doo hange downe, longe and rounde, as on great okes, alſo peache trees, and pyneaple
 trees, roſiars, and reedes.
            
               Panicum, a grayne which groweth lyke to mi
                  •
               t and hath at the leaſte ten leaues, the ſtalke ſmall with a red pendaunt full of corne, ſome purple, ſome red, ſome blacke or whyte, the Italyans do call it Melica.
            
            Panis porcinus, an herbe called alſo cyclaminus, rapum terrae, umbelicus terrae, & Artamita.
            
               Panifex, ficis, a baker.
            
               Panificium, the crafte of bakynge.
            
               Panis, breadde.
            Panis nauticus, byſkette.
            
            
               Panis ſecundarius, raunged breade, or chete breade, or crybell breade.
            
               Paniſcus, a god of the woodes.
            
               Pantacratiaſta, he that fyghteth with handes and feete.
            
               Pantathlus, he that contendeth in all maner of games.
            Panneus, a, um, woullen.
            
            
               Pannicularia, thynges of ſmall valure.
            
               Pannicularius, a draper that ſelleth cloth.
            
               Panniculus, a piece of clothe.
            
               Pannonia, the countreye nowe called Hungaria whiche toke that name of an other Hungaria nowe named Iulira, a countreye in the northe parte of the world not fre from the riuer called Tanais, and is trybutarye to the Moſcouites. The boūdes of Hungry is now moche larger than it was of olde tyme, and hath on the weſte Owſtryke and Beme, on the ſouthe the part of Slauony that lyeth on the ſea called Adriaticum, on the caſt Seruia on the northe Polonia, and Moſcouia. The countrey is ryghte fertile of grayne, and rich of golde and ſyluer, and as the inhabytauntes there do reporte, there is in that countrey a ryuer, in the whiche if iron be oftentymes deped, it wyll be tourned in to coper. That this noble realme is nowe deſtroyed and vnder captiuitie of Turkes, it is to be feared that all chriſtendome ſhall ſore repente, that beinge ſometyme reputed the puiſſaunt bulwarke to all Chriſten realmes, agaynſte the intollerable violence of ſaryzons and turkes.
            
               Pannonia ſuperior, the countraye nowe called Auſtria.
            
            
               Pannones, Hungarians called alſo Paeones.
            
            
               Panormum, a citie in Sicile, nowe called in Italion Palermo.
            
            
               Pannoſus, he that weareth poore apparell.
            
               Pannuelium, a handkercher.
            
               Pannus, clothe.
            
               Panomphaeus, a name of Iupiter, ſignyfyeng that he hereth all mennes voyces.
            
               Panſa, playne foted.
            
               Panielmos, the full mone.
            
               Pantagia, a ryuer in Sicile.
            
               Pantaſilea, a queene of Amazon.
            
               Pantheon, a temple of all the goddes.
            
               Panthera, a beaſte hauyng on his ſkynne lyttel rounde ſpottes, ſome blewe and ſome whyte, it is ſayde that herdes of cattell do meruaylouſly delyte in the ſwete ſauour that cometh from them, and in beholdynge of them, and therfore felynge by the ſwete ayre where they haue theyr reſorte, thyther wyll all beaſtes come, not beinge aferde but onelye of theyr fyerſe looke, and therfore the Panthers hydynge theyr heades do ſuffer the reſt of theyr bodyes to be looked on, that they maye the more eaſylye take theyr proye of the cattaylle beinge diſmayed. The people of Hircania, doth more often kyll them with a poyſon called Aconitum, than with weapon, but the Panthers feelynge them ſelues poyſoned, do ſeeke for the dunge of a man, whiche if they do fynde and eate, they be forthwith delyuered, they be ſo lyuely that they do lyue a gret while after that theyr bowelles be cleane out of theyr bodyes: it is alſo wrytten that he which is waſſhed or euoynted with the broth wherin a cocke is boyled, the Panthere wyl not touche hym. In the weſt parte of Aethyopia towarde the ſea, there is people called Agriophagi, whoſe kynge hath but one eye, whiche is in his forehed, that people do lyue with eatynge the fleſhe of Pantheres and Lyons.
            
               Pantheron, a nette, wherwith all maner of foule is taken
            
               Pantices, a greatte bealy, alſo the fluxe.
            
               Pantomimus, a dyſſard, which can fayne and counterfayte euery mannes geſture.
            
               Panurgia, ſubtyltie.
            
               Panus, panula, & panulla, a kernel in the ſhare or gryne of a manne, or behynde the care. It is alſo a weuers roll, whereon the webbe of clothe is rolled or wounden.
            
               Papare, to call dad as a chylde dothe.
            
               Papas, a father, as chylderne do call dadde.
            
               Papaueralida, wylde popy.
            
               Papauerata ueſtis, a garment not pure white but of the colour of popye.
            
               Papauer, eris, an herbe called popy.
            
               Papè, an interiection of wonderynge, wyll y
                  •
                ſee, a wonderfull thynge.
            
               Papaeus, in the tongue of Scithia, ſygnyfyeth Iupiter.
            
               Paphlagonia, a countrey in the leſſe Aſia, and it ioyneth to Galatia, where as dwelled the people called Heneti, of whom came the Venetians. It is bounded on the caſte with the ryuer called Halys, runnyng out of the ſouth betwene Siria and Paphlagonia.
            
               Paphos, & Paphia, a citie in the ylande of Cypres, whiche was dedicate to Venus, wherof
 ſhe was called Paphia.
            
            
               Papia, a citie in Lumbardy, called Pauia.
            
            
               Papilio, onis, a butterflye.
            
               Papylio, a pauillion for the warres.
            
               Papilla, a lyttel wheale or pouſhe in the ſkynne of a man. Alſo a cocke in a coundyte, whereout water commeth. More ouer the nyppell or teate of a womanns breſte.
            
               Pappa, pap made with milke and floure.
            
               Pappo, pappare, to eate.
            
               Pappus, a grandeſyre or graundefather. It is alſo an herb called groundſwel, alſo the flour of thyſtelles whiche lyke to fethers do flye awaye with the wynde.
            
               Papula, a whelke.
            
               Papyrus, ſeu papyrum, is a great ruſhe, whiche groweth in the fennes and marys groundes in Aegypt and Syria, ten cubites hyghe: wherof the fyrſte paper was made, whereon men dydde wryte. we haue growynge in our fenny groundes lyke ruſhes with black knoppes, longe and rounde, whiche are called
            Nowe Papyrus is called paper, wherin men do vſe to wryte or prynte bokes.
            
               Papyratius, of paper, or of the ſayde ruſhe.
            
               Papyrius, the ſurname of a noble Romayne.
            
               Par, ris, lyke, equall, meete, euen, reaſonable, a payre.
            
               Par eſt, it is lyke.
            
               Par aetate, of one age.
            
               Paribus animis, of lyke affection.
            
               Par ingenium nactus, he hath founde one of his owne faſcion.
            
               Par ſapientia ad formam, as wyſe, as he is fayre or tall.
            
               Par praetium tanti laboris, the recompence or rewarde was ſuche, as was equiualent to ſo greate a laboure.
            
               Par, idem. all one.
            
               Pares eſſe noſtro exercitui non potuerunt. they moughte not be ſo ſtronge as our hoſte.
            
               Paradelos, the greatte dayſy with the yelowe knoppe in the myddell. it is called of the apothecaries Conſolida media.
            
            
               Pares, two lyke one to the other in fourme or degree.
            
               Parem eſſe, to be ſufficient, to do or ſuſteyne a thynge.
            
               Paria, payres, two together of any thynge.
            
               Paria facere, to requite, to do one thynge for an other, lyke for lyke.
            Par referre, idem,
            
               Par, pari, to recompence one thynge with an other, of equall eſtimation.
            
               Par impar, a game that chyldren vſed, called euen or odde.
            
               Parabilis, le, that whiche maye be ſone gotten, or wyll be ſone redy.
            
               Parabola, a compariſon, or reſemblaunce.
            
               Paraclêtus, an exhortar, a comfortar, an aduocate.
            
               Paraclytus, a man infamed, yll reported of.
            
               Paradiaſtole, a dilatinge of a matter by an interpretation.
            
               Paradigma, an example.
            
               Paradiſus, Paradiſe. it ſignifyeth a gardeyne.
            
               Paradoxa, a ſentence, contrary to the opynion of the more parte.
            
               Paradromis, a galary, or walke.
            
               Paraeneſis, a precepte conteynynge an exhortation.
            
               Paraeneticus, ca, cum, conteynynge ſuche precepte or inſtruction.
            
               Paragoge, is a fygure, whan a letter or ſyllable is added to a worde, as Dicier for dici.
            
            
               Paragraphe, a thynge wryten before a ſentence
            Paragraphus & paragraphum, a paragrafe.
            
            
               Paralipomenon, lefte oute, vnſpoken, or vnwrytten, whiche ought to haue ben ſpoken or wrytten.
            
               Paralleli, lynes in the ſphere of the worlde equallye diſtaunte whereby the ſonne, whan he paſſeth, cauſeth varyation in houres of the daye.
            
               Paralion, an herbe called alſo Eſula.
            
            
               Paralyſis, is a ſyckeneſſe called the palſy wher in eyther all the body or one member, or many members be mollyfyed, and be depryued of felynge and meuynge. it hapneth eyther of an impoſtume ſo ſtoppynge the rootes of the ſynewes, that they being depryued of the ſpirites annimall whiche ſerueth for them, they become loſte, or elles of a flumatike humour groſſe and vndygeſted whiche ſtoppeth the ſayde places. Sometyme of a ſtroke or falle, whereby the ioyntes of the backe boone, are louſed, and the ſynewes whiche come frome the nuke or nape of the heade are ſtopped, otherwhyle the ſynewes and the rotes of them be hurte with a bruſe, and induceth the palſy, ſpecially in an olde man.
            
               Herba paralyſis, the lyttel whyte daiſy with red toppes.
            
               Paralyticus, he that is taken with the palſey.
            
               Paranymphus, he that is the mediatour in matrymony betwene the man and the woman: ſhe whiche is on the womannes parte is called Pronuba.
            
            
               Parapechium, a lyght cloke.
            
               Parapherna, that which is added vnto the womannes dower, called the ioynture.
            
               Paraphraſis, an imitation of wordes, ſettynge out the ſence or meanynge of the autour more playnely.
            
               Paraphraſtes, he that dothe not tranſlate word by worde, but expreſſeth the ſentence of the autour more openly.
            
               Pararium aes, was double wayges, gyuen to
 horſemen for hauynge two horſes.
            
               Paraſanga, a myle in Perſia, conteininge fifty furlonges, Herodotus ſayth .xxx.
            
               Paraſceue, a preparation, alſo good frydaye.
            
               Paraſiopeſis, a figure in ſpeakynge, whan we fayne that we wyll not ſpeake, and yet couertly it is declared what we do meane.
            
               Paratus, a haunter of other mennes tables vn called for, alſoo he whiche to fylle his bealye with meate and drynke, ſpeaketh alwaye to the appetite of hym, with whome he dyneth or ſoupeth.
            
               Paraſitari, to holde vp a nother mannes tale for a diner or ſouper.
            
               Paraſitaſter, he that counterfayteth hym that is called Paraſitus.
            
            
               Paraſtatae, certayne ſtones in pylars. Paraſtata, alſo one of the bones in the ſhanke of the legge.
            
               Paraſtates, ſtones, whiche do ſuſteyne both ſydes of a dore, called Iambes.
            
               Paratragoedio, are, to brag or crake, to ſpeke great or hyghe wordes.
            
               Parcae, ladies of deſteny, alſo it ſignifyeth the ſelfe deſtiny, or diſpoſition in prolongynge or ſhortnynge lyfe, the names of the ladyes be Clotho, Lacheſis, Atropos.
            
            
               Parco, peperci, parcere, to ſpare, to forgyue, or pardon, to let or prohibite, to leaue, to for beare or abſteyne.
            
               Parcere pretio, to ſpare for coſte.
            
               Sumptui ne parcas, Spare for no coſte.
            
               Parcere ualetudini, take hede to thyn helth.
            
               Parcere uoci, not to ſpeake loude.
            
               Parcitur, imper ſonale, Ci Neque parcetur labori, they wyll ſtycke for no labour.
            
               Parcere metu, to put awaye feare.
            
               Parcé, ſcarcely, nyggardly, nyghely, fayre and ſoftly.
            Parciter, idem.
            
               Parcitas, frugalitie, or moderation in liuynge.
            
               Parcimonia, nygardſhyp, or ſcarſitie.
            
               Parcus, a nygarde.
            
               Parcus, ca, cum, nyghe, or nygarde, ſcarce in expences, ſometyme it ſignifieth ſeelde.
            
               Parcus comitatu, he that hath a ſmall trayne.
            
               Parcus opera, an eaſy warkeman, he that is more ydell than occupyed.
            
               Pardus, a lybarde.
            
               Pardalianches, the venoumouſe herbe called alſo Aconîtum.
            
            
               Pardalus, a birde of dunne colour, whiche fleeth in flockes.
            
               Parectata, & parectatus, he that is newely iſſued out of a chyldes yeres, and beginneth to haue the tokens of a man.
            
               Parectonia, the mother of Plato, the moſt noble philoſopher.
            
               Parens, father, mother, or any other auncetour, ſometyme it is vſed for hym whiche careth moche for a nothers welthe and defendeth it.
            
               Parentela, auncetry.
            
               Parentalia, feaſtes made at the burienge of auncetours.
            
               Parentheſis, is a ſentence comprehended with in an other ſentence, without any detrimente thervnto, beinge marked with one halfe circle at the begynnynge, and an other at the ende, as in this wyſe. Nihil adeo principem decet, (quod omnes quidem fatentur) quā tum iuſtitia, prudentiae, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   liberalitati aequaliter coniuncta, Nothyng ſo well becommeth a prynce (whiche al men do confeſſe) as Iuſtyce equally ioyned with wyſedome and bounteouſnes.
            
               Parento, rare, to celebrate the funeralles of auncetours or frendes.
            
               Paranomaſia, a figure in ſpeakyng, where one worde is lyke to an other, but of dyuerſe ſygnyfycations. Nam inceptio eſt amentium, non amantium, this begynnynge is of mad men, not of louers.
            Paratus, ta, tum, redy.
            
            
               Paratè, redily.
            
               Pareo, rui, rêre, to appere, to be ſene, to obey.
            
               Parergon, ſome thynge added to, beynge non parte of the matter, as whanne a payntour dothe make an image, he dothe adde to trees or townes.
            
               Parethonium, a whyte colour that peynters do laye, whiche is founde in Egypte.
            
               Paribit, for pariet, ſhe ſhall brynge forthe a chylde.
            
               Parici, iuges aſſigned for capitall cauſe, as murder or felony that requireth dethe.
            
               Paries, etis, a wall of a houſe.
            
               Parieti loqueris, thou ſpeakeſt to the wal, which may be ſ
                  ••
               d of him that wil not eftſones reherce that, whiche he hereth ſpoken.
            
               Parietaria, an herbe called Pelitory of the wal.
            
               Parietinae, olde watles.
            
               Parilia, feſtiuall dayes, whiche the Romaynes kept for preſeruation of theyr cattell.
            Parilis, le, equall.
            
            
               Parilitas, equalitie, ſimilitude in quantitie or qualitie.
            
               Pario, peperi, parere, to brynge forth children the lyke thinge in beaſtes, ſometyme to bring forthe generally, or to geate.
            
               Parere ſibi gratiam, to get fauour.
            
               Tibi mille paſſus peperit morae. He hathe cauſed the to tary whyles thou moughteſte haue rydden or gone a myle.
            
               Pàrere perfugium pedibus, to ſaulfe hymſelfe by runnynge away.
            
               Párere uerba, to ſpeake wordes ot ſpoken before.
            
                
               Paretonium, a citie with a greate hauen in Egypte.
            
               Paris, ridis, the ſonne of Pryamus kynge of Troyanes, whoſe hiſtorye is ſoo commonlye knowen that I nede not to write it.
            
               Parrhaſius, An excellent payntour who contendinge with Zeuſis, whiche of them had moſt kunnyng, Zeuſis broughte forthe a table in the which he had ſo craftely paynted grapes that byrdes flewe to them and pecked on thē 
               Parrhaſiꝰ brought forth a nother table, in the whiche was paynted onely a ſheete ſo fynelye wrought that all men iuged it to be a verye ſhete, thā 
               Zeuſis required Parrhaſius, that he ſhuld take away the ſheete and ſhew forth his wark, wherat Parrhaſius laughed, and ieſted on Zeuſis meryly, than Zeuſis perceyuyng it, knowleged his errour, and granted to Parrhaſius the victory, ſayinge to hym: yeſterday I deceyued birdes, but to day thou haſte deceyued me beinge a craftes man.
            
               Parithmia, be kernelles in the innermoſte partes of the rotes of the toungue, called alſo Tonſillae.
            
            
               Parius, a, um, of the yle called Parus, frome whens is brought marble ſtone caled Pariū marmor.
            
            
               Parito, tare, to prepare.
            
               Pariter, in lykewyſe, equally, ſemblably.
            
               Parma, a targat, whiche foote men dyd vſe.
            
               Parmula, a buckelar, it is alſo a citie in Italy.
            
               Parnaſides, the nyne muſes, or ladyes of ſcyences.
            
               Parnaſsidae ueſtes, apparayle belongynge to maydens.
            
               Parnaſſus, a mountayne in Greece, hauynge two toppes, vnder the whiche the nyne muſes dyd inhabyte or dwell.
            
               Paro, are, to prepare, to get, to apparell.
            
               Paro, onis, a lyttell ſhyp or brigantine.
            
               Parochus, an offycer, whiche prouyded for wood and ſalte for ambaſſadours, alſo it is nowe vſed for a prieſte, which is a curate, or paryſhe prieſte.
            
               Paroecia, a paryſhe,
            
               Parodus, a paſſage.
            
               Paroemia, a prouerbe accommodate to the matter and tyme.
            
               Paroeci, paryſhoners, or they whiche do dwell within one paryſhe.
            
               Paropſis, idis, a potage dyſhe, or potyngar.
            
               Paros, an yle in the ſea called Aegeum.
            
            
               Parôtis, tidis, is an apoſtume behynde the care whiche commeth of a matter diſtillyng from the heade into the burres or kernelles of the eares ingendred of an inflammation of the body and bloude.
            
               Paropamiſus, a mountayne ioynynge to Inde and the countrey called Bactrae, it is alſo the name of a great ryuer that runneth throughe Scithia not far from the northe Ocean, and ſome do name it the deade ſea or froſen ſea.
            
               Paroxiſmus, the fytte in a feuer.
            
               Parrhaſia, a countrey in Grecia, called alſo Archadia.
            
            
               Parrhaſius, an excellent payntour.
            
               Parricida, murderars of theyr parentes, betraiours of theyr countraye, ſumetyme murder generally.
            
               Parricidium, murder of kynſfolke, or treſon to the proper countrey.
            
               Parricidium, Matricidium, murder of father and mother.
            Pars, partis, parte.
            
            
               Partes facere, to deuyde in porcions.
            
               Partes primas agere, to be the chyefe perſonage, properly in an enterlude.
            
               In parte aliqua haerêre, to be in ſom fauour.
            
               Priores partes habere apud aliquem, to be in great credence or fauour with one.
            
               Priores partes tribuere alicui, to gyue one the moſte prayſe, or prayſe hym moſte.
            
               Partes alicuius agere, to do an other mannes offyce.
            
               Partes meae ſunt, it is myne offyce or charge
            
               Partes defendas tuas, defende thyne owne matter or cauſe.
            
               Non ſunt meae partes id facere, it belongeth not to me to do it.
            
               Pars bona, the more parte.
            
               Magna ex parte, for the mnore parte.
            Ex parte, partely.
            
            In parte idem.
            
               In omnes partes, holy, in what maner ſo euer it be.
            
               In optimam partē accipere, to take a thinge in worthe or in good parte.
            Pars, for Partim, partely. Milites pars uictoriae fidutia, pars ignominiae dolore, ad omnem laetitiam, audatiam
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                proceſſeruut.
            The men of warre partely vpon truſte of victorye, partely for ſorowe of the reproche that they had taken, became at the laſte to be full of courage and mery.
            
               Pars, is taken of Plautus, for the wyfe. Satur de me loquitur et de parte mea, Nowe that his bealy is full, he talketh of me and of my wyfe.
            
               Partes prime, the chiefe parte.
            
               Parſimonia, moderate expenſes.
            
               Parſi, the pretertence of parco, I haue ſpared
            
               Parthenium, an herbe whiche by Dioſcorides deſcription hath lyttell leaues lyke to Coryander, a floure with whyte leaues, and is in the myddell ſomewhat yelowe hauyng a gret and yll ſauour, alſo he gyueth the ſame name to the herbe called Helcine, whiche is Peritory of the wall, the fyrſte is of ſome apothecaries
 called Matricaria. Ruellius reproueth them whiche do ſuppoſe that Parthenium is the herbe called Cotula fetida, whiche is rather Buththalmos, for Cotula hath leaues lyke to fenel, and ſo hath Buphthalmos, and not lyke to Coriander. Some do affyrme that one kynde of Parthenium is feuerfu, called alſo Matricaria, the ſecond is tanſy, the third camomyll, the fourth Cotula fetida, the fifth Bupthalmos, that is to ſaye oxeyes, whiche is lyke to Cotula, and ſtynketh not, the ſixte mercury, the ſeuenth peritory, the eyght motherworte, ſomme do put maioram for oone kynde.
            
               Partes, ſomtyme ſygnifieth duetie.
            
               Parthenope, the olde name of the Cytie of Naples.
            
               Parthia, a countrey in Aſia, which hath on the ſouthe the redde ſea, on the northe the ſea called Hircanum, on the eaſte the people called Arij, on the weſt the realme called Media.
            
            
               Parthi, people of that countrey.
            
               Parthicus, a, um, of the countrey of Parthia.
            
               Partiarius, a partynge felowe, or copartner.
            
               Particeps, cipis, he that taketh parte.
            
               Participo, are, to gyue parte, or take parte, to make an other man partner, or of counſayle.
            
               Particula, a portion.
            Particularis, re, particular.
            
            
               Particulariter, particularly.
            Particulatim, idem.
            
               Particulones, coheyres, or comperceners, whiche haue inheritaunce to gether.
            
               Partim, partly, in parte, ſome tyme part. Partim hominum uenerunt, parte of the menne dyd come.
            
               Partio, onis, a byrthe.
            Partior, iris, iri, partitum, & partio, ire, to parte to deuyde.
            
            
               Parthiſſus, a Riuer on the Northe parte of Germania.
            
               Partite aduerbium, diuided in pieces or partes
            
               Partitio, a particion, or diuiſion.
            
               Partitudo, for partus, the byrthe of a chylde.
            
               Partus, ta, tum, gotten with labour.
            
               Parturio, iui, & iri, to labour as women do in trauayle with chylde.
            
               Partus, tus, & parti, & partuis, the byrth of a chylde, ſometyme the chylde ſelfe.
            
               Parulis, a ſwellynge of the gummes.
            
               Paruifacio, cere, to ſet lyttell by.
            Parui aeſtimo, idem.
            Parui duco, idem.
            Paruipendo, idem.
            
               Paruitas, the lyttelneſſe.
            
               Parum, lyttell.
            
               Parum eſt, it is a ſmall matter.
            
               Parumper, a lyttell whyle, or tyme, alſo 
                  ••
               erye lyttell: ſometyme quickely.
            
               Paruus, a, um, lyttell or ſmall.
            
               Parua ſunt foris arma niſi eſt conſiliū domi, Armour is a ſmall matter abrode, if there be not good councell at home.
            
               Paruulus, a lyttell one.
            Paruulus, a, um, very lyttell.
            
            
               Parum habere, to ſet lyttell by.
            
               Paruulum aduerbium, paruulum differt, It is but a ſmall diuerſitie.
            
               Paſalli, pomanders.
            
               Paſcales, ſhepe or pultrye, whiche doo fede at large.
            
               Paſca, Eaſter.
            
               Paſcalis, le, perteynynge to Eaſter.
            
               Paſceolus, a lether bagge.
            
               Paſcito, tare, to fede.
            
               Paſco, paui, paſcere, & Paſcito, are, to feede to gyue meate to a nother, to nouryſhe or brynge vp, to augment.
            
               Paſcere oculos, to contente or pleaſe the eien with the beholdynge of a thynge.
            
               Paſcito, tare, to fede often.
            
               Paſcor, ſceris, paſci, to feede as beaſtes done.
            Paſcua, & paſcuum, paſture.
            
            
               Paſcuus, a, um, that whiche ſerueth to feede cattell.
            
               Paſiphac̄, the wyfe of Minos the kynge of Crete, who hauynge companye with a bull, brought forthe the monſter called Minotaurus, which was halfe a man and halfe a bul.
            
               Paſſales, be as well ſhepe as pultrye, whiche fede abrode.
            
               Paſſer, eris, a ſparrowe, alſo a fyſſhe called a playce.
            
               Paſſerculus, a lyttell ſparowe.
            
               Paſsili, a lyttel grayn called vatches or fitches.
            
               Paſsim, here and there, ſometyme it ſignifyeth from all places, ſome tyme indyfferently, alſo ouer all.
            
               Paſsio, a paſſion, griefe.
            
               Paſsiuus, a, um, that whiche ſygnifieth paſſion or cauſeth paſſion or griefe.
            
               Paſsiui amatores, they whiche do lo
                  •
               e all women indifferently.
            
               Paſſum, a wyne made of grapes moche withered in the ſunne, it is alſo a licour made with great reaſons ſteped long in very good wine vntyll they ſwelle, and than to be bruſed and the licoure preſſed out, and ſometyme they do put therto ſome water, and than isit called fecundarium.
            
            
               Paſſus, a, um, ſpred abrode, or open.
            
               Paſſus, us, a pace, whiche dothe conteyne fiue feete.
            Paſtillus, uel paſtillum, a paſty.
            
            
               Paſtinaca, an herbe called parſnyppes, alſo a fiſhe.
            Paſtino, are, to de
                     •
                  ue in a gardeyne: repaſtino, uide in R.
            
                Paſtinatus, tus, deluynge.
            
            Paſtinatio, idem.
            
               Paſtinum, a debyll, or ſettynge ſtycke.
            
               Paſtio, onis, paſturynge or feedynge of cattell.
            
               Paſtomis, an inſtrument, which is ſette on the noſethryls of horſes, that wylle not be ruled, and is callyd of horſebreakers, barnakles.
            
               Paſtophori, certayne prieſtis in Egypt pertaynynge to Iſis.
            
               Paſtophorium, the chaumber of the Sexten, or hym whiche kepeth the temple.
            
               Paſtor, oris, a ſheparde or herdman.
            
               Paſtoralis, le, pertaynynge to the ſhepeherde or herdeman.
            Paſtorius, a, um, idem.
            
               Paſtoricius, a, um, of fedyng or graſing of catel.
            
               Paſtus, a, um, he that hath eaten.
            
               Paſtus, tus, meate, feedynge, paſture.
            
               Patagium, a cloke of cloth of golde, vſed to be worne on ryche garmentes.
            
               Patagiati, they whiche do weare ryche clokes.
            
               Patagiarij, the crafteſmenne that maketh ſuche clokes.
            
               Patara, a citie in the countrey of Licia, where Apollo was chiefly honoured.
            
               Patauium, a citie in Italy callyd Padua, nygh vnto Venyce.
            
               Patauini, men of that citie.
            
               Patefacio, cere, to make open, to declare, to diſcloſe.
            
               Patefio, fieri, to be diſcloſed or diſcouered.
            
               Patella, a lyttell panne or aſkyllet.
            
               Pateo, tui, tere, to be open.
            
               Patet locus tria ſtadia, the place is foure furlonge in breadth or length.
            
               Patent omnibus, al men may perceyue them.
            
               Acutis morbis adoleſcentia magis patet, youthe is more ſubiecte to ſharpe or daungerouſe ſyckeneſſes.
            
               Patens, open.
            
               Patens uulneri, in daunger to be hurt.
            
               Pater, tris, a father.
            
               Patera, a brode pece or bolle of gold or ſyluer.
            
               Paterfamilias, the good man of the houſe.
            
               Paterpatratus, to whome it pertaynyd, whan trues ſhuld be taken, to receiue the othes and appoyntment of both partes, and was therin chiefe and principalle ambaſſadour.
            
               Pater patrimus, he that is a father and hathe his father lyuyng.
            
               Paternus, a, um, pertaynyng to a father.
            
               Pateſco, ſcere, to be open.
            
               Pathe, troubles or vexations of mynd, paſſiōs.
            
               Pathetica oratio, an oration mouynge the heater to indignation or pitie.
            
               Pathmos, an yle in theſe callyd Aegeum.
            
               Patibulum, a woden locke of a doore, or a barre wherwith the doore is made faſt, alſo a place of tourment, a gybbet, galowes, or croſſe.
            
               Patillum, a payre of tongues or other lyke inſtrument, wherwith coles are taken vp.
            
               Patina, a dyſhe wherin meate is caryed.
            
               Patinarium, meate whiche is ſtewed vppon a chaffynge dyſhe.
            
               Patior, pateris, pati, to ſuffer, to endure.
            
               Pati a uita, to ſuſtayne hunger.
            
               Pati aegre, to be yll content.
            
               Pati aequo animo, to be well content.
            
               Pati fortiter, to ſuffer pacyently.
            
               Pati iniquo animo, to be angry for a thynge.
            
               Indigne pati, to be diſcontent.
            
               Pati facile, not to be diſcontent.
            
               Patior non moleſte, I am not dyſcontent.
            
               Nullum patior eſſe diem quin in foro dicam I do lette noo daye paſſe, but that I pleade ſome matter.
            
               Pati aeuum, to haue duryd well.
            
               Grauius accuſas 
                     •
                   patiturtua conſuetudo, ys do accuſe more greuouſely than ye be wont.
            
               Nec ulla ſegetū minus dilationem patitur, There is no corne that typeth more haſtyly, or wolde ſooner be reaped.
            
               Pati febrem, to haue the feuer.
            
               Pati iactiuras, to haue had loſſes.
            
               Pati impedimentum, to be lette.
            
               Pati imperium, to be vnder ſubiection.
            
               Pati ſupplicium, to be put to deathe.
            
               Pati ſolicitudinē pro aliquo, to take thought for one.
            
               Pati poterunt oculi me cum Gabino ſententiam dicere? May I indure to ſyt with Gabinius in iudgement.
            
               Patiens, tis, a participle ſygnifyeth pacient, indurynge.
            
               Patiens, a nowne ioyned with a genitine caſe.
            
               Patiens nauium Tyberis, Tyber may beare a ſhyppe.
            
               Patiens operum, he that can indure to labor.
            
               Patiens uaetuſtatis, that whiche dureth long.
            
               Patienter, paciently, meaſurably.
            
               Patientia, pacyence.
            
               Patienter praeſtare, to ſuffer and let paſſe.
            Patibilis, le, ſufferable.
            
            
               Patitor, ſuffer thou.
            
               Patrae, trarum, a citie in Achaia.
            
               Patrator, oris, he that dothe a thynge.
            Patres conſcripti, ſenatours.
            
            
               Patria, a countrey.
            
               Patriarcha, a prynce or chiefe manne of the fathers, It was alſo the name of dygnitie, of fyue chyefe Archebyſſhoppes, as of Rome, Antyoche, Alexandry, Ieruſalem, and Conſtantinople.
            
               Patriarchatus, the dygnitie of a patriarche.
            
               Patricida, he that kylleth his father.
            
               Patricidium, the murder of a mans father.
            
               Patricè, nobly, or lyke a noble man.
            
                
               Patricius, a ſenatours ſonne, or commen of ſenatours.
            
               Patrimonium, goodes commen by inheritance, patrymonye.
            
               Patrinus, & Patrimis, he whiche hath his father lyuynge.
            
               Patrinus, a, um, of the father, or pertaynynge to the father.
            
               Patritus, ta, tum, that whiche happeneth to one by his father.
            
               Patrius, a, um, of the countrey alſo pertaynyng to a father.
            
               Patrizo, & patriſſo, are, to be lyke a father.
            
               Patro, are, to perſourme.
            
               Patrare facinus, to commytte a myſcheuouſe dede.
            
               Patrocynor, aris, ari, to defende them, whiche be poore, or be falſely accuſed.
            
               Patroclus, a noble greke, companiō to Achilles.
            
               Patrocinium, defence of menne beinge in trouble or ſuyte.
            
               Patronymicū nomen, a name taken of an ancetor, as Priamides the childrē of Priamus.
            
               Patronus, he that is aduocate on the defendantes parte.
            
               Patrueles, couſyn germayns, or ryght couſyns on the fathers ſyde.
            
               Patruus, the fathers brother.
            
               Patruus magnus, my fathers vncle.
            
               Patruus maximus, my grandfathers vncle.
            
               Pattagia, a ryuer in Sicile.
            
               Patulico, care, to be open.
            Parulus, a, um, wyde open.
            
            
               Patulus bos, an oxe or cowe, whoſe hornes do ſtande wyde open.
            
               Paucis, in fewe wordes.
            Paucus, ca, cum, fewe.
            
            Paucitas, tatis, fewneſſe.
            
            Pauculus, a, um, very fewe.
            
            
               Paucies, ſeldome.
            Pauciens, idem.
            
               Paucitas, fewe in numbre.
            
               Pauens, tis, he that feareth for a tyme.
            
               Paueo, ere, to feare.
            
               Pauera, wheate whiche ſpryngeth not well out of the hoſe, whan it groweth ineare.
            
               Paueſco, ſcere, to be aferde.
            
               Pauicula, a pauynge bytell, wherwith ſtoones be dryuen into the grounde, in the makyng of a pauement.
            
               Pauidus, he that alway feareth.
            
               Pauide, fearefully.
            
               Pauimento, are, to make a pauement.
            
               Pauimentū, a pauement, or place paued, a flore
            
               Pauio, ire, to ſtryke.
            
               Pauito, are, to be ſoore aferde.
            
               Paulatim, lyttell and lyttell.
            
               Pauliſper, a very lyttell whyle.
            Paulum, & paulo, a lyttell.
            
            
               Paulo, a lyttell.
            
               Paulominus, lyttell laſſe.
            
               Paulo mox, by and by.
            
               Paulo prius, a lyttell erſt.
            
               Paululum, very lyttell.
            
               Paululum modo, neuer ſo lyttell.
            
               Paululo tum erat contenta, ſhe was than content with a very lyttell.
            
               Paulum, lyttell.
            
               Paulus, was a name mooſte commonly of the Romaynes, of the whiche one was moſte excellente, named Paulus Aemilius, ſonne of Lucius Paulus. This man aſcendyng by all dignities vnto Conſul, was capitayne of the warres in Spayn, where he faught two battayles, wherein were ſlayne .xxx. thouſande Spanyardes, and wan .CCl. wallyd townes and not withſtandyng returned to Rome not one grote the rycher, for he was lyberall and ſumptuouſe, and not very ryche. Afterwarde he made warre againſt the Ligurians, which were about Ieane, where hauyng with hym but onely .viii. thouſand, he put to flyght .xxx. thouſande, and brought theym to ſubiection. Finally he faught agaynſt Perſeus kynge of Macedonia, and vanquiſhed him, & brought hym and his chyldren pryſoners to Rome in triumph, which was in this forme▪ The ſenatours apparailed in white ſylke, ſat in ſtages made about the market place to beholde the triumph, all the temples were ſette open, and fylled with floures and ſoote perfumes, the triumph was diuided into thre dais, the firſt day vneth ſuffyſed to the beholdynge of images, as wel paynted as wrought in ſtone and mettall, by moſte excellent warkemen, whyche were caried in .CCl. chariotes, the ſecond day was brought forth the harneyſe and artyllery of the Macedones, and the apparayle of horſes, whyche was in ſuche ſorte, that it was in a maner terryble to the vanquyſhers to beholde it. After folowed three thouſande menne, whyche dydde beare ſyluer coyne in CCCl. veſſelles, of ſyluer euery veſſelle being in weighte three talentes, whyche was CCxl .li .after .ixxx. li. to euery talente, euery veſſelle was borne of foure men. Other dyd beare greatte cuppes and pottes of ſyluer.
            The thyrde daye the trompettes came before blowynge the blouddy ſoundes. After theym came an hundred and twenty oxen their hornes gylt, and thervpon were ſet fyllettes and garlandes, and were led with yong men gyrt and prepared to ſacryfyce theym, and chylderne bare cuppes of goulde and ſyluer, to ſerue to the ſacryfyce. After theym folowed they, whyche bare money of gould in golden veſſels, euery of them waying thre talentes. alſo the number of the veſſelles were .CCxl.
 Than folowed they, whyche caryed the potte whyche Aemilius hadde lette make all of precyouſe ſtoones, wayenge tenne talentes, whyche was .DCCC. pounde▪ alſoo they that bare all the plate of the kynges Antigonus, Seleucus, Thericius, and Perſeus, whych was innumerable. After came the charyotte, wherein was Perſeus harneyſe, with his dyademe ſet thervppon. Soone after his two ſonnes and oone doughter ledde, and with theym a greatte numbre of theyr nourices mayſters and gouernours, wepynge and holdynge vp theyr handes vnto the people. Wherof many were meuyd to teares, ſoo that the tryumphe ſemed to be myngled with gladneſſe for the vyctorye, and with heuyneſſe for compaſſyon. After his chylderne and ſeruauntes folowed forthwith Perſeus in a blacke garment, tremblynge and troubled in ſpyryte, whome enſewed a greatte companye of his Counſayllours and offycers, beholdynge hym ſorowfullye with teares, whyche moore conſtrayned dyuerſe of the Romaynes to wepe for pytie that they hadde of theyr myſerye. After hym were borne foure hundred crownes of goulde, whyche were gyuen to Aemillus by the cyties of Greece for his vertue and proweſſe. Thanne folowed Aemilius hym ſelfe ſyttynge in a charyotte verye rychely apparayled, hauynge a robe of pourple tynſette, and bearynge in his hande a braunche of lawrelle, as a manne beſyde that honour worthye to be looked on. Than after came the men of warre, whyche hadde bene with hym, in order of ſuche bendes and companyes as do belonge vnto batayle, euery of theym bearynge in his hande a braunche of lawrell, and ſyngynge verſis myxt with mery tauntes. ſome ſyngynge the prayſes of Aemilius, whome they behelde and wondered at for his excellente qualyties. But nowe beholde Aemilius beinge in that ſtate and condytion, that nothynge lacked in hym that man coulde wyſſhe for, yet his lyfe was not vnmixt with aduerſyties. He hauynge foure ſonnes, of the whyche two he hadde gyuen in adoption to Scipio Aphricanus, and Fabius Maximus, the other two he kept at home with him, the oone of theym dyed fyue dayes before the tryumphe, beynge ſyxtene yeres olde: The other beynge twelue yeres olde, dyed the thyrde daye after the tryumphe. Whyche crueltie of Fortune, all men lamented, that had broughte ſoo greatte heuyneſſe into the howſe, repleate with gladneſſe, reioycynge, and noble renoume and hadde meddlyd teares, ſorowes, and lamentation with vyctorye ioye and tryumphe. But therfore Aemilius neuer abated his courage, but callynge the people togyther, made to theym a noble oration, declarynge to theym that he was nothyng deceyued by Fortune, for as moche as whan ſhe ſeemyd to hym moſte fauourable, he thanne more fearyd her than anye thynge elles, and althoughe ſhe hadde taken frome hym good ſonnes, whome he appoynted to ſuccede hym, yet ſens ſhe hadde ſhewed her extreme malyce to hym and his bloudde, he hadde good truſte nowe, that the people of Rome ſhoulde remayne proſperouſe withoute any perylle. O noble harte, O valyaunt courage wourthy to be lefte in remembraunce, he broughte ſoo moche goulde and ſyluer into the treaſourye of the Romaynes, that there neded noo taſke to be ſette on the people, vntylle the fyrſte battayle betwene Octauyane and Antonye, whyche was foure ſcore yeres and aboue. yet he lefte in patrymony vneth fyue hundred foure ſcore and twelue pounde, and in treaſour lyttell or nothynge. This hyſtory haue I bene meued to wryte for the dyuerſe pleaſaunt and notable thynges, whyche be therin conteyned, with the vnſuretie of proſperytie, wherein all men are blynded whiche doo deſyre to haue it. One thynge wolde be remembred, althoughe Aemilius was a fauourer of the nobilitie. yet was he of the people better beloued than Scipio who onely ſtudied to ſerue theyr pourpoſes, for his humanytie equally myxte with grauitie and ſeueritie, he was brought to erth, not with ſumptuouſe preparation, but with loue and fauour not onely of his countreye menne, but alſoo of his ennemyes, for as many of Liguria, Spayne, and Macedonia as than were at Rome. They that were yonge and ſtronge dydde beare the corps, the olde menne folowed callynge hym benefactour and conſeruatoure of theyr Cyties and countrayes. Plutarchus in Vitis.
            
            
               Paulus, the Apoſtelle of Chriſte was borne in Iudea, in a towne callyd Giſcalis, and was of the Trybe of Beniamyn. And the towne beyng taken by the Romayns, he went with his parentes to Tharſum a cytie in Cilicia and dwellyd there. But afterwarde he was ſent by theym to Hieruſalem to lerne the lawes, and there was taught of one Gamaliel, a great lerned man, he beinge with other at the martyrdome of ſaynt Steuyn, receyued letters of the byſhoppe, wyllynge hym to go to Damaſcum, there to perſecute theym that beleued in Chriſte, and in the waye he was by reuelation chaunged frome a perſecutour to a veſſelle of election. And afterward whanne he hadde conuerted Sergius Paulus, than beynge Proconſule at Cypres to the faythe of Chryſte, by hym he was callyd Paulus, where before he was named Saulus. Fynally he ſufferyd martyrdome by beheadyng, after the paſſyon of Chriſte .xxxvii. yeres, and the fourtenth yere of the raigne of
 Nero. Haec Hieronymus & Sophoronius. the reſydue of his lyfe appereth in the Actes of the Apoſtles, his lernynge and myſtycall wyſedome is well ſhewed in his epiſtles, in the whyche as ſaynt Peter ſaythe, be ſomme thynges harde to be vnderſtande, and that men vnlerned and inconſtant do depraue, like as they do the other partes of ſcripture to their owne pardicion. Theſe wordes I wold to god men wold conſider in theſe dayes, and reade the ſayd epiſtles with a reuerend feare and deuotion, not preſumyng on theyr ſpirite onely, but conferryng it eyther with the coū
               ſell of men very well ſtudyed and catholyke, or els with the approuyd expoſitions of moſt holy doctours, or yf he may not come by the one or the other, rather to leaue of vntylle he maye be diſcretely ſatisfied, than to addicte hym ſelfe to any newe opinyon, that is to ſay contrary to that whych the catholyke church hath vertuouſely vſyd.
            
               Paulus Samoſaténus, an horryble herityke, byſhop of Antioche a man of exceding pride and intollerable vanite, about the yere of our lord
267. his hereſy was, that Chriſte beganne of our Lady, and toke his fyrſt begynnynge of the erthe, and was a man onely of our commune nature, which herifye was condemned by a generall counſayle holden at Antioche, and Paulus excommunicate by all the counſayle, and an other byſhop put into his place, and he by the commandement of the emperor Aurelianus was of the people pullyd out of the Churche.
            Pauo, onis, & pauus, a pecocke.
            
            
               Pauor, oris, extreme feare.
            
               Pauper, pauperis, a poore man.
            
               Pauper, peris, an adiectiue poore.
            Pauperies, & paupertas, tatis, pouertie.
            
            Pauper, ra, rum, poore.
            
            
               Pauperculus, & paupercula, a poore manne or poore woman.
            
               Paupero, are, to make poore.
            Paupertinus, na, num, poore.
            
            
               Pauſa, a pawſe, leyſure.
            
               Pauſanias, was the generall captayn of the Lacedemons in the great batayl agaynſt Xerxes and yet afterwarde was he condempned of treaſon.
            
               Pauſias, a noble payntour.
            
               Pauſo, are, to pawſe.
            
               Pauxillatim, by lyttell and lyttell.
            Pauxilliſper, idem.
            Pauxillus, a, um, very lyttell.
            
            
               Pax, pacis, peace, a quyete lybertie.
            
               Paxillus, a lyttell ſtake.
            
               Pax ſequeſtra, a truce betwene two hoſtes.
         
         
            ¶P ANTE E.
            
               PECCATVM, a ſynne, an offence.
            
               Pecco, care, to offende or ſynne, to fayle in any thynge.
            
               Peccatur, there is a fault.
            
               Pecorarius, a herdemanne, alſo he that dothe hyre cattell.
            
               Pecorarius, a, um, pertaynynge to cattell.
            
               Pecorinus, na, num, of rother beaſtes.
            
               Pecten, inis, a weauers lowme. alſoo a combe. it is alſo the place about the priuy membres, where heare dothe growe. it is alſo the ſtyckes, wherewith a man ſtryketh doulcemers whanne he dothe play on theym, alſo a fyſhe callyd Scaloppe. alſoo the longe grayne of a tree, by the whyche the wodde cleaueth.
            
               Pectinatim, in the facyon of a combe.
            
               Pectino, to kembe, alſo to harowe corne whyles it is in graſſe.
            
               Pectitus, ta, tum, kembed, or harowed.
            
               Pecto, x
                     •
                  i, tere, to kembe or trymme heare, to carde woulle, to ſette a harpe or other lyke inſtrument.
            
               Pectoralis, le, pertaynynge to the breaſt. Faſcia pectoralis, a breaſt kerchiefe.
            
               Pectorium, a certayne carte ſommetyme vſyd in Fraunce.
            Pectoroſus, a, um, great breaſted.
            
            
               Pectunculus, a lyttell Scalop.
            
               Pectus, pectoris, the breaſte, ſommetyme hart or courage.
            
               Pectuſculum, a lyttell breaſte.
            
               Pecuaria, ſtore of cattelle. alſoo places where they be kept, alſo a multitude of cattell. alſo reuenues that commeth of cattell.
            
               Pecuariam rem facere, to brede cattell.
            
               Pecuarius, a breder of cattell.
            
               Pecuarius, a, um, belongynge to cattell.
            
               Pecu, indeclinabile. Pecua, in the plurell number, cattell, beaſtes.
            
               Peculator, & peculatrix, he and ſhe that ſtealeth a commune treaſour.
            
               Peculatus, robberye of the commune treaſure, or of a prince.
            
               Peculiaris, re, proper or ſpeciall.
            
               Peculiariter, properly, ſpecyally.
            
               Peculio, are, to punyſhe by the pourſe.
            
               Peculioſus, ryche, of great ſubſtance.
            
               Peculium, ſubſtaunce, that rycheſſe, whyche is onely in money and cattall, a mannes proper goodes.
            
               Peculor, aris, ari, to ſteale a commune treaſour or any thynge from a prynce.
            
               Pecunia, money, it is taken of the olde Ciuillions, for all thynges whyche we calle cattell.
            
               Pecunio
                     •
                  us, ryche.
            
               Pecus, pecudis, ſeu pecus pecoris, all maner of cattell, ſometyme the multitude or flock of
 cattelle, ſometyme it is taken onely for ſheepe or gotes.
            
               Peda, & pedatura, the ſteppe or token of a mannes foote.
            
               Pedalis, of a foote.
            
               Pedamen, & pedamentum, a ſtake or forke, wherby a vyne, hoppes, or other lyke thynge is ſuſtayned or borne vp.
            Pedaneum, idem.
            
               Pedaneus, a, um, of the quantitie of a foote, in length, or dyſtaunce.
            
               Pedanei iudices, interyour iuges, which went on foote.
            
               Pedare, to ſet proppes, or to proppe vp a vyne or tree, that it ſhall not fall or bowe downe.
            
               Pedarij, were Senatours, whyche dydde not ſhewe theyr opynions in wordes, but onely meuynge theym ſelues towardes thoſe perſones, whiche had rayſoned, whoſe ſentences they dyd approue, lyke as they do in the parlyament houſe.
            
               Pedatim, where one foote goth with the other, foote by foote.
            
               Pedatio, the ſettynge vp of vynes.
            
               Pedatò, ſodaynly.
            
               Pedatus, footed.
            
               Pedecoſus, louſy, or full of lyce.
            
               Pedepreſsim, a foote pace, ſoftly.
            
               Pedes, fecte in metre, ſometyme lyſe.
            
               Pedem ſtruere, to take hym to his feete, to runne away.
            
               Pedem referre, to retreate or go backe.
            
               Pedem conferre, to come to a poynte of a matter in controuerſy.
            
               Pedem ponere, to begynne a matter.
            
               Pedem reuocare, to retreate or re
                  ••
               le back.
            
               Pedes, an aduerbe, ſignifieth on foote, ſee more herof in Pes.
            
            
               Pedes, ditis, a foote man in battayle.
            
               Pedeſter, he that gothe on foote, or is on foote.
            
               Pedeſtris oratio, a numerouſe ſpekyng or writynge in the fourme of a verſe, or metre, although it be not a verſe.
            
               Pedetentim, ſoftly and fayre, by lytel and litel.
            
               Pedica, any thyng, wherwith the fote is tyed, as a fetter, a payre of gyues, or ſtockes.
            
               Pedicillus, a lyttell worme whiche bredeth betwene the ſkynne and the fleſhe
            
               Pediculatus, ta, tum, any thynge whiche hath a ſtalke, as the mooſte part of fruite.
            
               Pedicularis morbus, the louſy ſyckenes.
            Pedicoſus, & pediculoſus, louſy.
            
            
               Pediculus, a fyſſhe, the ſtalke of an apple or peare, or other fruite. alſo a louſe.
            
               Pedio, dire, to ſtampe with the foote.
            
               Pediolus, a lyttell foote.
            
               Pediſſequus, & pediſſequa, a ſeruant, who foloweth alway the mayſter or mayſtreſſe.
            
               Peditatus, an hooſte of footemen.
            Pedo, pepedi, pedere, to fart.
            
            
               Pedum, a ſhepecroke.
            
               Peganon, the herbe called Rue, or herbe grace.
            
               Pegaſides, the Muſes.
            
               Pegaſus, a horſe, whiche was fayned to haue wynges: it is alſo a ſygne or numbre of ſterres in heauen.
            
               Pegma, matis, a ſtage, wheron pageantes be ſette, or whereon plate and iewelles do ſtande to be loked on.
            
               Peieratio, periury, a forſwearynge.
            
               Peiero, are, to ſweare falſely.
            Peior, peius, warſe.
            
            
               Pelagus, the ſea.
            
               Pelagicus, ca, cum, of the ſea.
            
               Pelamis, midis, fyſhe callyd Tuny.
            
               Pelargos, a byrde callyd a ſtorke.
            
               Pelaſgis, a countrey in Grece callid Archadia.
            
               Pelaſgi, people whiche came out of Grece, and inhabyted Italy, they be alſo Arcadiens.
            Pelaſgicus, ca, cum, of Arcadia.
            
            
               Pelias, a kynge of Theſſalia, vncle to Iaſon.
            
               Pelicus, a prynce, of whome the people callyd Peligni, toke theyr name.
            
               Pelides, the ſurname of Achilles.
            
               Peligni, people in Italy, which cam out of Illiria.
            
               Pelion, a hyll in Theſſalia.
            
               Pella, a citie in Macedonia. alſo a payle, wherinto kyne are mylked.
            
               Pellax, acis, he that deceiueth with fair wordis
            
               Pellacia, fayre ſpeche to deceyue.
            
               Pellex, ſhe that is a wedded mans harlot.
            
               Pellicator, a deceyuer with fayre wordes.
            
               Pellicatus, the yll companye whiche a wedded man leadeth with an other woman.
            
               Pellicio, pellexi, cere, to deceyue with fayre wordes, to moue a mā pleſantly to do a thing.
            
               Pellectus, meuyd, tempted.
            
               Pelliceus, cea, ceum, of a ſkynne or hyde.
            
               Pellicula, the ſkynne.
            
               Pelliculo, are, to couer with a ſkynne.
            
               Pellio, onis, a ſkynner.
            
               Pellis, a ſkynne.
            
               Pellitus, cladde in ſkynnes.
            
               Pello, pepuli, pellere, pulſum, to put out, or expell. ſometyme to brynge. Scipionis animum non mediocri cura pepulit, It brought Scipio not in a lyttell care.
            
               Pelluceo, cere, to ſhine bright, to ſhine through
            Pellucidus, da, dum, very clere.
            
            
               Pellucidè, clerely.
            
               Pelluo, luere, to waſhe cleane.
            
               Pelluuiū, a baſon, wherin mens fete ar waſhed.
            
               Peloponneſus, a countrey in Grece, callyd now Morea, and lyeth betwene the ſea callyd Ionium, and the ſea callyd Aegeum.
            
               Pelops, pelopidis, whyche vanquyſſhed on horſebacke in rounnynge Oenomaus, father of Hippodamia, and wedded her.
            
                
               Peloris, a kynde of ſhell fyſſhe.
            
               Pelorus, a hyll in Sicile on the ſea ſyde.
            
               Pelta, a tergat or bucklar, lyke an halfe moone.
            
               Peltati, they which do weare ſuche bucklars.
            
               Peluis, a baſon.
            
               Peluſium, a cytie in Egypt.
            Peminoſus, a, um, ſtynkynge.
            
            
               Penates, the gentyles callyd goddis of mannes lyfe: they be ſometyme taken for the moſte ſecrete partes of the howſe.
            
               Penarius, & penarium, a cellar or ſtorehowſe.
            
               Pendeo, es, pependi, pendere, penſum, to hange, or be hanged, to depende, ſometyme to be in peyne.
            
               Pendere promiſsis, to truſt to promyſes.
            
               Pendêre, ſygnifyeth alſo to be in doubt.
            
               Pendêre animi, to be in doubt or feare. ſome tyme to longe or deſyre to know. Plancus Ciceroni. Ego animi pendeo quid illud ſit negotij, I longe to knowe what the matter is.
            
               Pendere poenas, to be punyſhed.
            
               Pendet dragmas decem, it wayeth tenne drammes.
            
               Pendet ab eius ore, he harkeneth dyligently what he ſaythe.
            
               Pendent opera interrupta, the wark remayneth imperfect for a whyle.
            
               Pendere rei, is ſayde of theym that be ſuyd, and do tary a long time or they be diſpached.
            
               Pendens, he that is hanged.
            
               Pendens uinum, wyne yet in the grape.
            
               Pendo, is, pependi, dere, to ponder or waye, to conſyder, to eſteme or value, to pay, to ſuſteyn or ſuffer, loke for dependo, ſuſpendo, expenin theyr fyrſt letters.
            
               I endere poenas magiſtro, to be 
                  •
               eten of the mayſter.
            
               Pendere ſupplicia, to recompence an offence by deathe.
            Pendulus, la, lum, that hangeth.
            
            
               Pene, almooſte.
            
               Penelope, the daughter of Iearus and wyfe of Vlyſſes, moſte chaſte wyſe and conſtante aboue all the women of her tyme, who in the xx yeres in the whyche her huſbond was abſent, ſhe beynge aſſaulted with dyuerſe wowers whyche wolde ſhe or noo abode in her houſe, ſhe mought neuer with fayre meanes nor menaces be inducyd to marye, or to conſent to commytte any foly.
            
               Penelopes, byrdes callyd alſo Meliagrides.
            
            
               Penelopes telam retexere, ſygnifyeth to do and vndo, to take moche labour in vayne.
            
               Penes, with or at.
            
               Penes hunc, with hym, or in hym.
            
               Penes te, it is in the.
            
               Penetrabilis, trabile, that may yerce or be perced.
            
               Penetrale, the inner part of the howſe.
            
               Penetro, are, to perce or entre.
            
               Peneus, a ryuer in Grecia whyche dyuydeth the countrays of Elis and Achaia.
            
               Penicella, a paynters pencelle, wherewith he paynteth.
            Penicillus, peniculum, & penicillum, a paynters penſell.
            
               Peniculamentum, the hemme of a garmente, the ſkyrtes.
            
               Peniculus, ſiue peniculum, any thynge whyche ſerueth to bruſhe or wype cleane any thyng.
            
               Peninſula, a place almooſte enuyronned aboute with water.
            
               Penis, a tayl, alſo the ſecrete member of a man.
            
               Penitus, ta, tum, tayled, hauynge a tayle, alſoo penitus inwarde.
            
               Penitus, an aduerbe, vtterly, to the vttermoſt, farre of.
            
               Penna, a penne or quylle.
            
               Pennarium, a pennar.
            
               Penniculum, a fether.
            
               Penniger, pennigera, gerum, that which beareth fethers.
            
               Pennula, a lyttell fether.
            
               Penſa, that whiche is payd for a thyng brought. the payement Penſa, in the plurell number, thredes of flaxe or woull, whan it is ſpunne, whyche may be callyd yarne.
            
               Penſator, a wayer.
            
               Penſiculatè, wayghtyly.
            
               Penſiculo, are, to ponder a thynge.
            
               Penſilis, le, that whyche hangeth or ſtondeth on hygh.
            
               Penſile horreū, a garnard wher corn is kept.
            
               Penſilis homo, a man hanged.
            
               Penſi nihil habere, to ponder or conſyder nothynge, not to ponder or conſyder any thyng, to care for nothynge, or not to care.
            
               Penſio, a penſyon or yerely rent.
            
               Penſito, tare, to way and conſyder a thynge dilygently.
            
               Penſitare, to paye.
            
               Penſitatio, recompence.
            Penſitatus, ta, tum, thought on.
            
            Penſiculo, are, idem quod penſito.
            
               Penſitor, a ponderer or wayer Verborum penſitatores ſubtiliſsimi, The moſte ſubtyl ponderers of wordes.
            
               Penſo, are, to way or ponder, alſoo to eſteme a thynge, ſometyme to bye.
            
               Penſare uicem alterius, to be in the ſteede of an other.
            
               Vaeteribus benefactis noua penſantes maleficia, to recompence new diſpleaſures with olde venefytes or pleaſures.
            
               Penſare ſingula, to conſyder euerye thynge dylygently.
            
               Penſare aliquid ex alio, to chaunge oone for an nother.
            
                
               Penſior, & hoc penſius. Plaut. Altera utra ſit conditio penſior, uirginem an uiduam hab ere? Whiche thynke you the better bargayne to haue the mayde or the wydowe?
            
               Penſiuncula, a lyttell pencyon.
            
               Penſor, oris, a wayer.
            
               Penſus, a, um, wayed, examyned. ſometyme it ſygnifieth good and wyſe.
            
               Penſum, the flaxe, whyche is bounden on the diſtaffe, out of the whyche the threde is drawen. ſometyme it ſygnyfyeth the threde that is ſpunne. It is alſoo the execution or mynyſtration of an offyce. alſo regarde that oone hath to a thynge.
            
               Penſilis hortus, a gardeyne made vppon the roufe of a houſe, or vpon pyllers.
            
               Penſilis urbs, a citie ſtandyng on vaultes.
            
               Pentaphillon, ſeu Pentepatalon, an herbe callyd cynke foyle, whiche hath fyue leaues. The phiſitions of late tyme doo ſuppoſe it to be Tormentyl, wherwith I am not ſatisfied.
            
               Pentacontarchus, a captayn of fyfty men.
            
               Pentadactilus, a broche or ſpyt in fyue partes with one handell. it is alſoo the herbe callyd Pentaphillon, cynquefoyle.
            
               Pentapharmacum conuiuium, a dyner or ſupper, wherin are fyue ſundry dyſhes of meate, reade Spartianum in uita Hadriani.
            
            
               Pentapolis, a countrey betwene Paleſtina and Arabia, wherin were the cities of Sodome and Gomor, burned by the vengeance of god for ſynne agaynſt nature.
            
               Pentarchus, he that is captayne of fyue men.
            
               Pentateuchus, the volume of the fyue bokes of Moyſes, that is to ſay, Geneſis, Exodi, Numeri, Leuiticum, Deuteronomium.
            
            
               Pentathlus, he that exercyſeth any of theſe fiue games, caſtynge of the balle, or tryndell, runnynge, leapynge, wraſtlynge, and throwynge the darte.
            
               Pentecoſte, Whytſontyde.
            
               Pentelici hermae, were lyttell images of Mercurius made of marble callyd Pendelicus, whiche was one of the moſt fayre ſtones that ymages mought be wrought of.
            
               Penteſilèa, a queene of Amazon, whiche was ſlayne at the ſyege of Troy.
            
               Pentimimeris, is a parte of a verſe, where a ſentence is fynyſhed in the fyrſt ſyllable of the thyrde foote.
            
               Pentorobon, an herbe callyd alſo peony.
            
               Penula, a cloke, worne whan it rayneth.
            
               Penularium, a cloke bagge.
            
               Penulatus, cloked.
            
               Penuria, extreme neceſſitie, penury.
            
               Penus, penoris, & penum, & penu, & penuarium, a ſtorehouſe, ſometyme ſtore or prouyſion of vytayles.
            
               Penuſsime, vtterly.
            
               Peonia, an herbe callyd Pyonye, whyche beareth a redde floure, and great rounde ſeede wherin is meruaylous vertue agaynſte the fallynge euyll.
            
               Peplis, an herbe lyke to pourſelane, and is of ſome men callyd wylde Purſlane.
            
               Peplos, an herbe, hauynge ſmalle leaues lyke rewe ſommewhat broder, the toppe rounde, ſpredde, on the grounde, the lengthe of ones hande, the ſeede beynge vnder the leaues, lytell and rounde, leſſe than white popy, ſome apothecaries do name it Eſaia rotunda.
            
            
               Peplus, uel peplum, a kerchiefe or other lyke couerynge of the heade.
            
               Peperci, I haue ſpared, or forborne, or pardoned.
            
               Pepigi, & pupugi, the pretertence of pungo. Alſo pepigi, is the pretertence of pango. Pepigit foedus, He made a league or alyance.
            
               Pepo, onis, a kynde of Melones, callyd Pompones.
            
               Peptica, medycynes, whyche doo make good concoction in a manne, that the meate eaten, maye dygeſte welle. Alſoo ſaluts and oyntementes, whyche doo make impoſtumes rype.
            
               Per, ſygnyfyeth by, ioyned with an nother worde, it ſygnyfyethe perfection. Perpulchrum, Verye fayre. Pergraue, Veray greuouſe. Per aetatem, for or by reſon of his age. Per fidem, per fortunas, per dexteram te oro, I praye the for the loue of god.
            
               Caeſar mihi ignoſcit per literas, Ceſar writeth to me that he hath pardoned me.
            
               Per maturitatem dehiſcens, It is clouen by to moche rypeneſſe, or by reaſon that it was to rype.
            
               Per me licet, I am content.
            
               Per multas aetates, of a longe tyme.
            
               Per metum, for feare.
            
               Per nebulam ſcire, to knowe the one halfe or not certaynly.
            
               Per noctem, at nyght.
            
               Per omneis dies, euery daye, or day by day.
            
               Per otium, at leyſure.
            
               Per poteſtatem, vnder colour of authoritie. Obſecro ut per pacem licet te alloqui, I praye you lette me talke with you, without dyſpleaſure, or I praye you heare me pacientely,
            
               Per ſe ſibi quiſque charus eſt, Euery man of his nature loueth beſt hym ſelfe.
            
               Per ſilentium adeſſe aeque animo, to heare without ſpeakynge one worde.
            
               Per ſilentium, without noyſe.
            
               Per ſtadia duo, the ſpace of two furlonge.
            
               Per ſpeciem uenādi urbē egreſsi, They wēt out of the towne, by makynge ſemblance to go on huntynge.
            
                
               Per ſummum dedecus, with great ſhame.
            
               Per te ſtetit, it lay in the.
            
               Per tempus, all at a tyme, or in tyme.
            
               Pera, a ſcryppe or bagge.
            
               Peractio, accomplyſhement or performance.
            
               Perago, egi, agere, to perform, to make perfit to cōſider, to draw or cauſe to be drawen with force. Peragere reum, to accuſe one, and do ſue him to a condemnation.
            
               Peragere oīa ſecū animo, to conſyder euery thyng, or to dygeſt euery thyng in his mynd.
            
               Peragere cibum, to dygeſte meate.
            
               Peragere mortem, to dye.
            
               Peragere res geſtas, to wryte al that is done.
            
               Vbi ſententiam meam uobis peregero, After that I haue ſhewed you myne opinyon.
            
               Peragro, are, to walke or go about a place.
            
               Peragrare per animos hominum, to paſſe by mens hartes, or as the people do fauour.
            
               Peragrare latebras ſuſpitionum, to ſeeke all coniectures, wherof ſuſpition may happen.
            Peragratus, ta, tum, gone about.
            
            
               Peragratio, a goynge about.
            
               Perambulo, are, to go throughe, ſometyme to ryde through or about a countrey or fielde.
            
               Peramo, are, to loue well.
            
               Peranno, annare, to continue or lyue ouer yere.
            
               Perardeo, dere, to bourne out or through.
            
               Perareo, ere, to drye vp, to be very dry.
            Perareſco, idem.
            
               Peraro, are, to tylle all through.
            
               Perbacchor, ari, to be oftentymes drunke.
            
               Perbellè, very well, ryght well.
            
               Perbibo, bibere, to quafte or drynke all out.
            
               Perbitere, for praeire, to go before.
            
               Per cauſam, for a cauſe.
            
               Perca, a fyſhe callyd a perche.
            
               Percalleo, lêe, to be waxen harde.
            
               Percallere uſum alicuius rei, to knowe perfytely the vſe of any thynge.
            
               Percautus, ta, tum, very ſubtyll or wytty.
            
               Percelebro, are, to publyſhe in all places.
            
               Perculit eum illud, that abateth his courage, or ſtrake hym to the harte.
            
               Percellere pectus pauore, it troubled his ſpirite with feare.
            
               Perculſus animus et abiectus, his ſpirite was troubled, and his courage abated.
            
               Percenſeo, ſére, to recounte or reken.
            
               Percingo, gere, to gyrde about.
            
               Percedere, to departe.
            
               Percello, li, lere to ſtryke and ouerthrowe.
            
               Percino, nere, to ſynge ſtyll, to continewe ſyngynge.
            
               Percipio, caepi, cipere, to perceyue, to take or receyue, to comprehende, to lerne.
            
               Neque agri, neque urbis odiū me unquam percipit. I am neuer wery to be eyther in the countrey or in the citie.
            
               Percipere uſum alicuius rei, to vſe a thinge.
            
               Percipere opinione, to doubt of a thynge.
            
               Perclam, very priuilie.
            
               Perduaxo, for perdo.
            
               Peredia, a meale, where men eate hungerly.
            Perceptio uerbale.
            
               Perceptio fructuum, the takynge of the profyte or reuenues.
            
               Perceptio animi, vnderſtandynge.
            
               Percitus, ſtyrred.
            Percitus inſania, madde.
            
            
               Percoarcto, are, to brynge into a lyttell roume.
            
               Percolo, ui, ere, to worſhyp moche.
            
               Percrebreſco, bui, beſcere, to be publyſhed or ſowen abrode in all places.
            
               Percrebuit, the bruyte or voyce of people was.
            
               Percolo, ui, ere, to worſhyp moche.
            
               Percontor, aris, ari, to ſerche to enquire buſily
            
               Percoquere, to boyle throughly.
            
               Percoctus, well boyled.
            Percudo, di, dere, to breake.
            
            Perculſus, & percuſſus, ſtryken.
            
            
               Percunctor, aris, ari, to enquire, to demande.
            
               Percuro, are, to heale perfytely.
            
               Percurſum animo, playnly knowen.
            
               Percurro, rere, to runne apace, to runne by, to tell or reade a thynge quickely.
            
               Percurſo, are, to ouerrunne.
            
               Percutio, cuſsi, tere, to ſtryke or ſmyte.
            
               Percutere fores, to knocke at the doore.
            
               Percutit animum, it brake his hart, it ſtrake hym to the harte.
            
               Percuti ſydere, to be taken, or haue the vſe of his members taken from hym.
            
               Percuſſae de coelo turres, The towres were beaten downe with thunder.
            
               Percutere foedus, to make a league or alyaunce, one prynce with an other, or one coū
               trey or citie with an nother.
            
               Percutere foſſam, to dyg a dyche or trenche.
            
               Percuſſor, a murderar.
            
               Perditè, extremely.
            
               Perditus, ta, tum, loſte, peryſhed, without recouery, out of hope.
            
               Perdius, abydynge all the day, or watchyng al the daye, or he whyche dothe any thynge in the day tyme.
            
               Perditium, the herbe callyd pelytory of the wal, reade Helxine & Parietaria.
            
            
               Perdix, dicis, a partryche.
            
               Perdo, didi, dere, to loſe, to ſlea.
            
               Perduco, duxi, ducere, to brynge to an ende, to brynge or leade by force or other meanes.
            
               Perduellio, onis, treaſon agaynſt the kynge, or the countrey. alſo a traytour.
            
               Perduellis, an ennemy.
            
               Peredo, edi, edere, to eate all.
            
               Peregre, out of a mans proper countrey.
            
               Peregre uado, I go out of the countrey, or on
 pylgremage. Peregre uenio, I come oute of ſtraunge countreys, or from pylgremage.
            
               Peregrinor, aris, ari, to go into ſtraunge countreyes or on pylgremage.
            
               Peregrinus, a ſtraunger or alyen.
            
               Peremptalia, amonge Augures, were thoſe lightnynges, whiche dyd vtterly dyſtroy and put awaye the ſignifications of other lyghtnynges and tokens precedynge.
            
               Perendie, the day next after to morowe.
            Perendinus dies, idem.
            
               Perennis fluuius, a courſe of water, that commeth with rayne, or a brooke that is onely made with rayne.
            
               Perenniter, continually.
            
               Perennis, ne, perpetuall, euer durynge.
            
               Perennitas, tatis, continuance, long abydynge.
            
               Perenno, are, to dure or contynue.
            
               Per exiguum tempus, a very ſhort while.
            
               Pereo, iui, uel ij, ire, to be loſte or conſumed. alſo to dye.
            
               Perire ab aliquo, to be ſlayne by one.
            
               Perierunt aedes, the howſes be downe, or in ruyne.
            
               Perijt illi pudor, he is not aſhamed.
            
               Nullus otio perit dies, no day is loſte with ydelneſſe.
            
               Tua arte uiginti minae pro pſaltria periêre, By thy craft I haue caſte awaye twenty nobles on the ſyngynge wenche.
            
               Ne pueri pereant fame, that the chylderne dye nat for hunger.
            
               Quod ſi fit pereo funditus, yf it be ſo, I am vtterly vndone.
            
               Perire morbo, to dye in a ſyckenes.
            
               Peream, I wolde I ſhulde dye than.
            
               Perit ab animo, his courage fayleth hym.
            
               Perire mulierem, to dye for the loue of a woman.
            
               Pererro, are, to go or ryde all about.
            
               Perfacul, the auncient writers vſed for facile, lyghtly.
            
               Per fas & nefas, by ryght or wronge, by oone way and other.
            
               Perfectè, perfytely.
            
               Perfectus, a, um, perfytte, accomplyſſhed, opteyned.
            
               Perfector, oris, he that bryngeth a thynge to paſſe, or to a poynt.
            
               Perfero, ruli, ferre, to brynge in concluſyon. alſo to brynge or telle tydynges ſommetyme to ſuffer or indure.
            
               Perficio, cere, to accomplyſſhe, to brynge to a poynt, to opteyne.
            
               Perfidioſus, a, um, full of dyſloyaltie.
            
               Perfidioſé, diſloyally, trayterouſly.
            
               Perfido, dere, to truſte moche.
            
               Perfidus, falſe of promyſe, he that dothe any thynge agaynſte the truſte that is put in him dyſloyall.
            
               Perfidia, falſehode againſte promyſe or truſte, diſloyaltie.
            
               Perfidus, very truſty.
            
               Perfines, for perſtringas, ſtrayne thou harde.
            
               Perflatus, a great blaſte of wynde.
            
               Perflo, are, to blowe vehemently or ſtrongly.
            
               Perfluo, xi, fluere, to runne out as water doth out of a broken veſſell.
            
               Perfodio, dere, to bore or perce throughe, to ſtryke throughe, to dygge through, or to the bottome or depeſt of any thynge.
            
               Perfore, to come wel to paſſe.
            
               Perforare, to perce, or to make an hoole throughe.
            
               Perfortiter, myghtily.
            
               Perfoſſus, a, um, perced throughe, ſtryken or dygged throughe.
            
               Perfracté, obſtinately.
            
               Perfrigefacio, perfrigefacere, to make verye colde.
            
               Perfrico, care, to rubbe moche.
            
               Perfricuit faciem, aut frontem, aut os, Is in a prouerbe as moche to ſaye, as he hathe layd apart ſhame, or he is ſhameleſſe or without abaſhement.
            
               Perfrictae frontis, without ſhame or honeſty.
            
               Perfringere, to breake in pieces.
            
               Perfructus eſt, he hath taken the fruite or pleſure of a thynge, he hath vſed or exercyſed a thynge, or hath left the vſe or exerciſe therof.
            
               Perfruor, perfructus, perfretus, aut perfruitus, perfrui, to take all the profyte or commoditie, to take pleaſure or recreation in any thynge.
            
               Perfuga, he that fleeth to the contrary part in battayle, or forſaketh his capitayne.
            
               Perfugio, gere, to run vnto one for ſuccour.
            
               Perfugium, a place wherevnto a man runneth to haue ſuccour, or to be kept from daunger. It is alſo taken for any thyng, wherby a mā maye be ſuccoured.
            
               Perfunctoriè, paſſynge ouer lyghtly.
            
               Perfunctorius, a, um, that whiche paſſeth lyghtly away, or taryeth not longe.
            
               Perfunctus, he that hath done diligentlye his duetie or offyce.
            
               Perfundo, perfudi, fundere, to poure out or droppe out, or ſtyll out, Perfundit
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   genas lachrimis, The teares dropped downe on his cheekes.
            
               Perfundere animum relligione, to be ſcrupulouſe.
            
               Perga, a towne in Pamphilia, wherof Diana was called Pergaea.
            
            
               Pergama, orum, the towres of Troye.
            
               Pergamena charta, parchement.
            
               Pergama ſiue pergamus, a citie in Aſia, whiche Silenus the ryuer paſſeth through, that
 ſame citie is called Troy.
            
               Perge, go to, paſſe forthe.
            
               Perge in uirum, playe the man, go to lyke a man, go to hardely.
            
               Pergin? wylt thou not leaue? wylt thou not be gone.
            
               Pergrandis, de, very great.
            
               Pergo, perrexi, pergere, to go, to procede, to endeuour to do a thyng, to continue, to make haſt, to aſſaye. Ire perrexi. I endeuoured to go. Suſpenſo gradu placide ire perrexi, I aſſayed with a lyght pace to go ſoftly.
            
               Pergunt domos eorum, they went to theyr howſes. &c.
            
               Pergo praeterita, I wyll not ſpeake of that whiche is paſſed.
            
               Domum ire pergam, I wyll make haſte to go home.
            
               Pergraecor, aris, ari, to be ryotouſe, in eating, drynkynge, and hauntynge harlottes.
            
               Pergrauè, very greuouſly.
            
               Pergula, a galery, properly where it is open on bothe ſydes. It is alſo the place in a ſhyppe, wherin men do walke, alſo a vyne rayſed in the fourme of an herber. ſometyme the company of warkemen, obeyinge to the chiefe warkeman.
            
               Pergulana uitis, a vyne runnyng on a frame.
            
               Perhibeo, êre, to ſay, to gyue, to affyrme.
            
               Praetium perhibere, to ſette a pryce.
            
               Perhibere teſtimonium, to beare wytneſſe.
            
               Perhibere uerba, to ſaye.
            
               Perhorreo, rere, to be ſore aferde.
            Perhorreſco, idem.
            
               Perhumane, & perhumaniter, ryght gentilly.
            
               Perhyemo, are, to indure all the wynter.
            
               Periander. one of the ſeuen wiſe men of Greece
            
               Periclimenon, an herbe called wodbynde whiche beareth the honyſucle.
            
               Pericles, a noble and valyaunte capytayne of the Athenienſis, excellent in wytte and naturall eloquence, and was inſtructed in philoſophy by Anaxagoras, ſo that therby he atteyned to meruaylouſe great knowledge, and noble courage and pacience, in ſo moch as whā a lewde perſon folowed hym to his houſe reuylynge hym by all the waye, whan he was come to his dore, than beinge nyghte, Perycles commaunded one of his ſeruauntes to take a torche and bryng hym which had rebuked hym home to his houſe: Alſo he being in great eſtimation and auctoritie amonge the people of Athenes, wolde neuer be at any feaſtes or bankettynges, nor receyue of any man anypreſentes or gyftes, nor dyd go to euerye aſſembly or counſayle, or beinge there dydde ſpeke or reaſon in euery matter, but reſerued him ſelf to thynges of very gret importance, & yet than ſemed he to be very tymerouſe, but yet was his eloquence ſo excellent, his voyce and pronunciation ſoo pleaſante, his ſentences ſo ponderouſe and vehement, that he neuer ſpake, but that therto all men conſented, and therefore it is wrytten of him that he did fulminate his wordes, that is to ſaye, that they proceded from him as thūder and lightnynge. He was of ſuche temperance, that althoughe he ſemed to haue al the Athenyenſis at his commaundement, yet he neuer increaſed his owne reuenewes the worthe of oone ferthynge, but augmented the commune treſure excedyngelye, and ſuche ſpoyle as came to his parte in the warres, he dydde imploye vpon grayne and vittayle diuiding it among the people, in the tyme of neceſſitie, onely he was infortunate in his owne children, his eldeſt ſone Xantippus, perſecutinge hym with ſondry diſpleſures and openly mockyng him, Not withſtandynge as it was reaſon, he dyed miſerably before his father▪ Fynally Pericles beinge ſycke vnto death, the noble men commen vnto him to comforte hym, ſpeking ſoftly they communed of his proweſſe, where he had victorie in nyne greate battayles, he herynge what they ſpake, ſayde vnto theym, that he moche maruayled that they extolled ſo moche that thynge, wherof the more parte perteyned to fortune, and had hapned to dyuerſe other capitaines as well as to him, and that whiche was mooſte to be prayſed, they ſpake nothynge of it, for neuer man (ſaid he) by mine occaſion had cauſe to put murnynge garmentes vpon hym. Plutarchus in uitis. He was afore the incarnation of Chriſt. 441. yeres.
            
               Periclitor, aris, ari, to be in peryll, alſo to experience or proue a thinge.
            
               Periclitatio, experience or aſſaye.
            
               Periculoſe, daungerouſly.
            Periculoſus, a, um, daungerouſe.
            
            
               Pericuium, peryll or daunger, ſometyme experience or profe.
            
               Periculum facere, to proue.
            
               Perhiodus, a clauſe, a circuite in wordes, or continuaunce in ſpeakynge.
            
               Perhiodice febris, feuers, whiche come by courſe or fyttes.
            
               Perillus, was an artifycer, whiche made a bul of braſſe wherinto (beinge glowynge hotte) men ſhulde be put, that in tourmentynge of them, by theyr ceienge, and noyſe ſhoulde iſſue out lyke the mowynge or belowynge of a bulle, the whiche engyne whanne Perillus had giuen to Phalaris, the cruell tyraunt, he cauſed the craftes man to be firſt put into it, to proue his owne experience.
            Perimo, emi, imere, to kyll.
            
            
               Perimere reditum alicui, to lette or ſtoppe one
 of his waye.
            
               Perimere conſilium alicuius, to breake or diſappoynt ones enterpriſe.
            Peremptus, ta, tum, kylled.
            
            Peridoneus, a, um, very mete.
            
            
               Periegeſis, a compaſſe or cyrcuite.
            
               Perij, I am loſte or diſtroyed.
            
               Perij animo, my harte or courage is gone.
            
               Perire mulierem, to loue a womā feruently.
            
               Periclymenum, an herbe called wodbynde or honyſuckle.
            
               Perinde, ſo, inlyke wyſe, euen lyke, very moch uen as, in this faſcion.
            
               Perinde at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   capta urbe, like as if the citie had ben wonne.
            
               Nulla re perinde motus quam reſponſo, He was not ſo moche moued with any thinge as with the aunſwere.
            
               Sed perinde erit ut accoeperis, but it ſhallbe euen as thou wylte take it.
            
               Aduentus non perinde gratus fuit, his commynge was not verye pleaſaunte, or acceptable.
            
               Perinêphra, the grekes called thoſe beſtes whiche were fat about the kydneys.
            
               Perinthus, a citie of Thrace, whiche nowe is called Heraclia.
            
            
               Periodicus, ca, cum, that goeth and commeth by courſes.
            
               Periodica febris, a feuer whiche cometh by courſes, as tertians and quartanes.
            
               Perioeci, companions or dwellers to gether in one houſe.
            
               Peripataſma, the hangynge of a houſe, with tapeſrye or other lyke thynge.
            
               Peripateticus, a philoſopher of Ariſtotles ſeete or opinion.
            
               Peripheria, a circumference.
            
               Periphraſis, circumlocution, one worde expreſſed by many.
            
               Periplorema, a fygure, whanne a parte of a ſentence nothynge neceſſary, is added vnto a verſe.
            
               Peripneumonia, an apoſtome in the lunges, procedynge of thycke humours, and commonly foloweth pleureſy.
            
               Peripneumonicus, he whiche hath that diſeſe.
            
               Perîpſema, matis, the powder or duſt that cō
               meth of fylynge or ſhauynge of mettall or wodde.
            
               Periſcelis, idis, ſloppes whiche women were wonte to weare.
            
               Periſſologia, a ſuperfluous ſpeakynge.
            
               Periſterae, houſe culuers or doues.
            
               Periſtereon, a culuer houſe.
            Periſterotrophium, idem.
            
               Periſtrôma, tapeſ
                  •
               y, or couerlyddes of Aras or Verdure.
            
               Periſtylium, a place ſet about with pyllers.
            
               Perite, aduer, wyſely kunnyngly.
            
               Perito, rare, to peryſhe or be loſte.
            
               Perithous, the companyon of Theſeus.
            
               Peritia, cunnynge in any ſcience.
            
               Peritus, cunninge, perfite in a ſcience.
            
               Periuro, rare, to ſweare vntrewelye to be periured.
            
               Periurioſus, a man whiche is often forſworne.
            
               Periurus, forſworne, periured.
            
               Periurior, more forſworne.
            
               Periurium, periurie.
            
               Perizoma, matis, a breche.
            
               Perizonium, a corſe or brode gyrthe, wherwith maydens were wonte to be gyrte vnder theyr pappes.
            
               Perlego, legere, to rede ouer all.
            
               Perlecebra, a thynge whiche pleaſantly draweth a man to fauour it.
            Perlepidus, perlepida, perlepidum, veraye fayre.
            
            
               Perlibenter, with a very good will.
            
               Perliberalis, very lyberall.
            
               Perlibro, to way diligently.
            
               Perligo, gare, to bynde harde or faſte.
            
               Perlitus, ta, tum, anoynted harde.
            
               Perloquor, qui, to ſpeake out all to an ende, to ſpeake perfitely.
            
               Perlucidum, & pellucidum, cleere that a man may ſe throughe, as water, glaſſe, horne.
            
               Perluo, luere, to waſhe ouer or all.
            
               Perluſtro, ſt
                     •
                  are, to beholde all about.
            
               Permadeſco, to be moche wette, or to be made very moyſte.
            
               Permadefacio, cere, to make verye moyſte or to wete moche.
            Permadeo, idem.
            Permagnus, a, um, very greate.
            
            
               Permano, & permaneſco, are, & neſcere, to be diſcloſed, knowen, or diuulgate.
            Permaneo, manſi, nere, to abyde.
            
            
               Permano, are, to runne all ouer, or to fall into to be declared openly.
            
               Per manus traditum, that, whiche is lefte frome one to an other, or is taught by one to an other. As the father telleth or leaueth to his ſonne, and he to his ſonne, and ſo contynually by lyne.
            
               Permatureſco, ſcere, to be throughe rype.
            
               Permerdo, to defyle ouer all.
            
               Per me, aut te, aut illum, aut aliquid aliud ſtare, Whanne we, or any other thynge is the cauſe, that a thynge is not done. Omnia iam parata erant, niſi per eum ſtetiſſet. Nowe al thynges were redy, if by his occaſion it had not be lette.
            
               Permeſſus, aut permeſsis, ſsidos, a ryuer in Greece, dedicate to the Muſes.
            
               Permiſceo, permiſcui, miſcere, to myxte all together.
            
                
               Permiſsio, a ſufferaunce.
            
               Permitto, miſi, mittere, to ſuffer, to yelde or delyuer, to thraſte in, to throwe downe, to commytte, to ſende forthe, to lette downe, as to lette downe one by a rope, or other lyke thynge.
            
               Permittere equum, to gyue to the horſe the brydell, or to let go at his pleaſure.
            
               Permittere ſeſe, to yelde hym ſelfe.
            
               Permittere, to gyue leaue.
            
               Permittere iracundiae alicuius, to gyue place to one whan he is angry.
            
               Permittere omnia iuditio alterius, to ſubmit him ſelfe to the iudgement of one.
            
               Permiſſus, us, licence or leaue.
            
               Permulceo, cère, to appeaſe, addoulce, or mittigate a mans diſpleaſure.
            
               Permulti, very many.
            
               Permuto, mutare, to chaunge one thynge for an other.
            
               Permutatio, an exchaunge.
            
               Permutator, he that exchaungeth.
            
               Perna, the peſtyll and alſo the gammonde of bacon.
            
               Pernêgo, are, to deny ſtifly.
            Perniciabilis, pernicialis, & pernicioſus, cauſynge deathe mortall.
            
            
               Pernicies, death, great damage, deſtruction.
            
               Pernicitas, ſwyfteneſſe.
            
               Pernitior, tius, warſe, more daungerous, more full of myſchiefe.
            
               Perniciſsimus, ciſsima, mum, warſte, moſte daungerouſe.
            
               Perniciter, dangerouſly, miſcheuouſly.
            
               Pernio, onis, a kybe on the heele.
            
               Perniunculus, a lyttell kybe.
            
               Pernix, cis, ſwyfte, flyghtye, ſometime ſtubborne, alſo deedly.
            
               Pernocto, noctare, to tary all the nyghte, to watche, to praye, to reſt, to walke, to ſtand, to dwell, to ſleape, to lye oute of his owne houſe.
            
               Pernoſco, ſcere, to knowe perfectely.
            
               Pernumero, are, to tell out money.
            
               Pernox, all night, durynge all the nyght.
            
               Pero, onis, a ſhoe of rawe lether, alſo a ſacke.
            
               Per opus est, it is very neceſſary.
            
               Perogiganus, perogita, he that putteth a ſtalyon to the mare, to ſeaſon her.
            
               Peroleo, to ſauour or ſtnke moche.
            
               Peronatus, he that weareth rawe lether ſhoen boteux or cokars lyke a ploughman.
            
               Perorior, iris, re, to begyn, ſprynge, or growe by the occaſion of ſome thynge.
            
               Peroro, are, to ſpeake or reaſon to an ende, to reaſon perfectly, ſometyme to moue the herers to indignation.
            
               Perorare in aliquem, to pleade agaynſt one.
            
               Perorati o, the laſte parte of an oration, wherin the affectes of the hearers are chyefelye ſtyrred.
            
               Peroriga, he that helpeth one to horſebacke.
            
               Perrori, a people of Aethiopia.
            Peroſus, ſa, ſum, extremely hated.
            
            
               Perpaco, care, to ſet all thynge in peace.
            
               Perparum, very lyttell.
            
               Perparce, very ſcarſely, very nyghely, or nygardely.
            
               Perpaſco, perpaui, perpaſcere, to fede to the vttermoſte.
            
               Perparuus, a, um, a very littell one.
            Parpaucus, ca, cum, very fewe.
            
            Perpauxillus, a, um, idem.
            
               Perpauefacio, pauefeci, facere, to make ſoore afrayde.
            
               Perpello, perpuli, perpellere, to conſtrayne, to moue or induce one to do a thynge.
            
               Perpendicularis, are, that is dyrectely downe ryghte.
            
               Perpendiculum, a plumlyne, ſuche as maſons and carpenters haue, with leadde at the ende whereby they do proue the euenneſſe of theyr ſquares.
            
               Perpendo, dere, to examine, alſo to conſyder.
            
               Perpenſé, aduiſedly, with a conſideration.
            
               Perperam, amiſſe, ouerthwartely, vnhappyly wrongfully.
            
               Perperi, fooles, ideotes, ſhrewes, lycrs.
            
               Perperitudo, ſhrewdenes, foolyſhenes.
            
               Perpero, are, to marre a thynge.
            Perpes, perpetis, perpetual.
            
            
               Noctem perpetem dormire, to ſleape all nyght longe.
            
               Perpeſſus, he that ſuffereth with moche peyne.
            
               Perpetim, perpetually, without ceaſynge.
            
               Perpetro, trare, properly to do or to commytte an acte good or yll.
            
               Perpetuo, are, to continue without ceaſſynge.
            
               Perpetuus, petua, petuum, perpetual, euerlaſtynge, continuall, holl, not in portions or diuyded.
            
               Perpetior, perpeti, to ſuffer pacientelye, to endure.
            
               Perpeſsio, endurynge.
            
               Perpeto, perpetere, to aſke importunatelye, without ceſſynge, to perfourme.
            
               Perpetratio, an acte good or bad.
            
               Pepetuitas, eternitie, an euerlaſtynge contynuaunce.
            
               Perpetuum, & perpetuô, aduerbes ſignifieng continually, alway, for euer.
            
               Perplaceo, perplacui, perplacere, to contente very moche.
            
               Perplector, perplecteris, plecti, to bynde or twyſte harde or faſte, to meddle ſo to gether, that a man can not knowe what the thynge meaneth.
            
               Perplexe loqui, to ſpeake nowe one thyng,
 nowe an other, that a man wotteth not what he meaneth.
            Perplexim, idem.
            
               Perplexor, aris, ari, to ſpeake doubtfullye, as wordes, wherin are two intendementes. At ſcio, quo uos pacto ſoleatis, perplexarier, pactum, non pactum eſt. Non pactum, pactum est, quod uobis lubet. Well, I knowe well inoughe, in what faſcion you are wonte to ſpeake, that a manne can not tell howe to take you: it was promyſed, it was not promyſed, it was not promyſed, it was promyſed, euen as it liſteth you.
            
               Perplexabile, a worde ſpoken, whiche hathe two dyuerſe vnderſtandynges, or that which is one thynge in herynge, an other in vnderſtandynge.
            
               Perplexabiliter, doubtfully.
            
               Perplexus, plexa, plexum, perplexed, twyſted to gether, or harde to be louſed, intrycate, doubtefull.
            
               Perpluit, perpluere, to rayne in the myddel of a houſe.
            
               Perplus, moche more.
            
               Perpol, an othe, ſygnifyenge by Pollux. ſometyme the word Per, doth perteyne to the wordes folowynge. Perpol quam paucos reperias meretricibus fideles euenire amatores. By God thou fyndeſte verye fewe trewe louers happen to commune womenne. Where per belongethe to quam paucos, and not to Pol.
            
            
               Perpoto, perpotare, to drynke all daye, or to drynke ſtyll, or continually, or vntyll one be drunke.
            
               Perpotatio, a contynuaunce in drynkynge, drunkerye.
            Perpulcher, perpulchra, perpulchrum, verye fayre.
            
            
               Perpulchre, very well done.
            
               Perpruriſco, perpruriſcere, to haue a greatte ytche, or deſyre to clawe or ſcratche.
            
               Perpurgo, gare, to make all thynge cleane or neatte.
            
               Perputo, perputare, to declare all. Nunc operam date, ut ego argumentum hoc uobis plane perputem, Nowe take ye hede, that I maye playnely declare all this matter vnto you.
            
               Perquam, added to any nowne adiectiue, augmenteth his power. Perquàm doctus, Verye well lerned. Perquàm ſtolidus, verye folyſhe.
            
               Perquiro, quiſiui, quirere, to make dyligente ſerche, to examyne.
            
               Perraro, very ſelde.
            
               Perrepto, tare, to go ſoftelye, or with moche peyne.
            
               Perrideo, perriſi, perridere, to laugh hartily.
            
               Perriſio, ſere, to ſcorne, to laughe at one, or to make an other to laughe.
            
               Perrogo, gare, to deſyre hartely.
            
               Perrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake on ſunder, or in the myddes.
            
               Perſa, a man or womanne of the countreye of Perſia.
            
               Perſaepe, very often.
            
               Perſanctè, very deuoutly, or ſolempnely.
            
               Perſcribo, perſcribere, to wryte a thynge throughe, or to an ende, to regyſter or inroll a thynge.
            
               Perſcriptio, a deede of a mannes owne wrytynge.
            
               Perſcrutor, ſcrutari, to ſerche or inquire dyligentlye.
            
               Perſefacul, the olde and auncient wryters vſed for perfacile, very lightly, or very caſily.
            
               Perſenex, perſenis, very olde.
            
               Perſentiſco, ſcere, to perceyue well.
            
               Perſephone, the ſurname of Proſerpina, and ſignifieth the vertue of ſedes in ſpringinge.
            
               Perſepolis, a citie in the countrey of Perſia.
            
               Perſequor, eris, qui, to purſue, to contynue in that, whiche is begonne, to perſecute, to be auenged.
            
               Perſequi aliquem bello, to warre agaynſte one.
            
               Perſequi aliquem ueſtigijs, to folowe ones ſteppes.
            
               Perſequi numeris curſus ſyderum, to calculate the courſe of the ſterres.
            
               Perſequi iniurias, to aduenge.
            
               Perſequi factis quod dicimus, to do as we ſpeake.
            
               Perſequi imperium patris, to do the fathers commaundement.
            
               Perſequi ius ſuum, to defende his right.
            
               Perſequi poenas alicuius, to reuenge ones deathe.
            
               Perſequi promiſſa alicuius, to ſolicite one to kepe his prommyſe.
            
               Perſequi uita diſciplinam recte uiuendi, To lyue accordynge to the doctryne of lyuynge honeſtely.
            
               Perſequi uoluptates, to addicte or giue hym ſelfe to lyue pleaſauntly.
            
               Perſea, a tree whiche groweth very highe, the wood is blacke, the leaf and floure lyke to a peare the leafe neuer falleth, & beareth alway fruite, whiche is of the quantitie of a peare, in fourme long, and incloſed in an huſke like an almonde, grene in coloure, and hath with in hym a nut like a damſyn but that it is leſſe and ſofter, the fruite is ſwete and dilectable, lyghte of digeſtion, and althoughe it be excedyngely eaten it hurteth not, and the rote is very great.
            
               Perſero, perſeui, perſerere, To ſowe aboute
 or abrode.
            
               Perſeuerantia, a ſtable abydynge in any thinge reaſonable.
            
               Perſeueranter, conſtantly.
            
               Perſeuêro, rare, to continue with a ſtedfaſte mynde.
            
               Perſeus, a noble knyghte, whiche delyuered a fayre lady called Andromeda from a whale, and alſo ſlewe Meduſa, which tourned men in to ſtones. Alſo it is a ſygne amonge the ſterres.
            
               Perſia, a countrey in the eaſte part of the world which hath on the north Mediā, on the weſt Suſianam, on the eſte Carmaniam, on the ſouthe the perſian ſea called Sinus perſicus. where nowe Sophy reigneth.
            
               Perſica poma, a fruite called peaches.
            Perſicus, ca, cum, of Perſia.
            
            
               Perſideo, dère, to ſytte by,
            
               Perſiſto, ſtere, to abyde, alſo to tary.
            
               Perſido, to perſe vnto the botome.
            
               Perſolata, an herbe called Clote leaues, which beareth great burtes.
            
               Perſoluo, uere, to paye truely, to paye all, to accomplyſhe.
            
               Perſoluere grates, to gyue thankes.
            
               Perſolus, alone, without company.
            
               Perſona, a viſour, lyke to a mannnes face, alſo perſon or perſonage, amonge diuynes and late philoſophers: ſometyme the qualitie of a man.
            
               Perſonatus, a maſker, or he that wearethe a vyſour.
            
               Perſonata felicitas, a counterfayte felicitie.
            
               Perſonata uulnera, hydden woundes.
            
               Perſonata, an herbe, whiche growethe by the water ſyde, hauynge great brode leaues like gourdes, but that they be greatter and harder: I ſuppoſe it to be the herbe, whiche in ſome countrey is called Donye.
            
               Perſonatus, tus, a maſke.
            
               Perſono, perſonare, to ſowne out, or ſowne perfectly.
            
               Perſpecto, tare, to loke well about.
            
               Perſpectus, ta, tum, playnely perceyued or knowen.
            
               Perſpicacitas, tatis, quickeneſſe of ſyghte conſyderation.
            
               Perſpicacè, aduiſedly, with good conſideratiō
            
            Perſpicaciter, idem.
            
               Perſpicientia, perfecte knowledge.
            
               Perſpicuè, clerely, openly, euidently.
            
               Perſpicax, acis, he that ſeeth quickely, & dothe all thynges with conſideration.
            
               Perſpiceo, ſpexi, ſpicere, to ſee or vnderſtand playnely.
            
               Perſpicuitas, ratis, clereneſſe, properly in wordes or ſentences, caſynes.
            
               Perſpicuus, a, um, clere, playne, eaſye.
            
               Perſpiſſò, an aduerbe, very late.
            
               Perſtino, are, to ſet a pryce on a thynge.
            Perſto, as, ſtiti, ſtare, to abide firmely.
            
            
               Perſtrepo, pui, ere, to make a great noyſe.
            
               Perſtrictores, iuglers.
            
               Perſtringo, perſtringere, to wringe harde, to towche a thynge ſhortely in ſpeakynge or writynge, to dull or darke with to moche lighte.
            
               Perſtringere aures, to fyll the eares with noyſe. Perſtringre nomen aut famā, to giue a man an yll name.
            
               Perſuadeo, perſuaſi, perſuadere, to induce one to beleue or truſte, to aduyſe, to ſtyrre vehementely.
            
               Perſuaſibile, & perſuaſibiliter, in ſuch wyſe as it maye perſwade.
            
               Perſuaſor, oris, a perſwader or inducer to do
                  •
                a thynge.
            
               Perſuaſtrix, a woman, whiche induceth or moueth one to do an acte.
            
               Perſuo, ere, to ſowe vp all.
            
               Pertaedeo, dère & pertaedeſcere, to be verye werye.
            
               Pertego, tegere, to couer all.
            
               Per tempus, in tyme conuenient, in ſeaſon.
            
               Pertendo, dere, to extende.
            
               Pertento, tare, to tempte, to aſſaye or proue moche.
            
               Pertero, triui, terere, to rub or frot a thynge.
            
               Perterreo, rui, perterrere, to make aferde.
            Perterrefacio, cere, idem.
            
               Perteſus, diſpleaſed, annoyed Sermonis perteſus, wery of the communcation.
            
               Perteſus ignauiam ſuam diſpleaſed for his ſlouthfulnes.
            
               Pertexo, texi, texere, to make an ende, to conclude, properly to wayue out, or to weaue perfectly.
            
               Pertica, a ſtaffe, a rogel, a perche or poll, wherwith grounde is met.
            Pertimeo, & pertimeſco, pertimeſcere, to feare moche.
            
            
               Pertinatia, obſtinacle, perſeuerance, conſtance.
            
               Pertinaciter, obſtinately.
            
               Pertinatius, more obſtynately.
            
               Pertinas, acis, obſtinate, he that holdeth faſt.
            
               Pertinatior, pertinaciſsimus, more and mooſte obſtinate, ſometyme conſtant.
            
               Pertineo, pertinêre, to extende to a thynge, to touche a thynge.
            
               In tuas pertinet aedes, ti commeth home to thy houſe, or toucheth thy houſe.
            
               Gratius mihi futurum, 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   ſi ea tua liberalitas pertinuiſſet ad rem familiarem meam. It ſhall be to me more pleaſure, than if ye hadde extended that your liberalitie towarde mine owne proper commoditie.
            
               Pertinet, a verbe imperſonall.
            
               Pertinet ad te, it belongeth to the, it concerneth
 the.
            
               Pertinet ad rē, it apperteyneth or belongeth to the matter.
            
               Pertinet ſomnium ad hoc, it is euen as I dreamed.
            
               Eadem bonitas etiam ad multitudinem per tinet, it beſemeth as well the people to haue that goodneſſe as other men.
            
               Pertineo, pertinêre, to perteyne or belonge, to be ioyned to,
            
               Pertinax certamen. a ſoore batttayle where neyther parte wyll giue ouer.
            
               Pertinax fama, a fame or bruite whiche dureth euer.
            
               Pertingo, tingere, to touche moche, to ioyne harde vnto a thynge.
            
               Pertiſum, olde wryters vſed for perteſum.
            
               Pertolero, are, to indure to the ende, to ſuſteyne valiauntly.
            
               Pertondeo, dere, to clyppe or ſhere all.
            
               Pertractare, to touche or handell.
            
               Pertraho, xi, here, to drawe to with force.
            Pertranſeo, ſiui, & ſii, ire, to paſſe through.
            
            
               Per tranſennam inſpicere, to loke on a thynge fer of, or on parte, and not on all.
            
               Pertranſlucidus, ſo clere that one maye loke throughe it.
            
               Pertundo, tudi, tundere, to ſtryke harde, or breake a thynge in ſtrykynge.
            
               Pertundo, tuſi, tūdere, to beate with hammers
            
               Perturbo, are, to trouble moche, or vexe.
            
               Perturbatio, a trouble of minde.
            
               Pertubaté, with trouble of mynde, vnquietly.
            
               Pertuſa uaſa, veſſelles cracked or broken in ſome parte.
            Peruadè,
            
               Peruado, peruaſi, uadere, to go ouer all.
            
               Peruagor, ari, to wander about, to be publyſhed.
            
               Peruello, elli, eliere, to plucke, ſometyme to prycke.
            
               Peruellere aliquem, to plucke or pul at one.
            
               Peruellere ius, to diſpraiſe the lawe.
            
               Peruelim ſcire, I wolde fayne knowe.
            
               Peruenor, ari, to hunt ouer all.
            
               Peruenio, nire, to come to a place or to an ende Peruenire ad nummos, to come by the money that is owed.
            
               Si ad herū haecres peruenit periſti pulchre, If this thyng come to thy maſters eare, thou haſt ſpun a fayre threde.
            
               Sine me peruenire quo uolo, let me ſpeake that whiche I intende to ſpeake.
            
               Peruenire ad manus, to come to handſtrokes
            
               Peruenire ad primos, to be ſet amonge the beſte.
            
               Peruenire in poteſtatem, to be in ſubiection.
            
               Peruenire in tu
                     •
                  elam, to be in warde.
            Peruerſus, a, um, frowarde.
            
            
               Peruerſé, malyciouſely, myſcheuouſely, ouerthwattly.
            
               Peruerſe uides, thou ſeeſt naughtily.
            
               Peruerto, to make yll, to peruerte, or depraue.
            
               Peruertere officium, to do contrary to his duetie.
            
               Peruertere aliquem, to deſtroye one.
            
               Perueſtigo, gare, to fynde in ſekynge.
            
               Perueſtigator, oris, he that ſeketh or loketh for a thynge.
            
               Peruicax, acis, harde ouerthwarte, yll to intreate, ſtubburne, obſtinate, ſomtime cōſtant
            
               Peruicatia, obſtinacy: but ſumetyme it is vſed in a good part, and taken for a perſeuerance and conſtancie in a good acte. Pertinacia, all waye in an yll parte.
            
               Peruicatior, oris, more obſtinate, more ſtubbourne, ſometyme more conſtaunt.
            
               Peruicaciter, obſtynatly, ſtubburnly, conſtantly.
            Peruico, for peruicaci.
            
               Peruigil, lis, he that watcheth, alſo diligent and induſtriouſe.
            
               Peruigilium, moche watche: alſo watchinges or vigiles before ſolemne dayes.
            
               Peruigilo, are, to watche all nyght.
            Peruinco, uici, uincere, to ſurmounte.
            
            
               Peruitere, the olde wrytars vſed, for perire, to be loſte, to peryſhe.
            
               Peruiuo, uixi, uiuere, to lyue longe, or vntylle the vttermoſte. Et ſi peruiuo vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad ſummā aetatem, tamen breue ſpacium eſt perferundi, quae minitas mihi. Althoughe I lyue yet to the vttermoſte age, yet is the tyme lyttelle to ſuffer all: wherwith thou thretneſt me.
            
               Pêruius, uia, uium, that maye be gone in, penetrable.
            
               Aedes fient peruiae, ye may come in to the houſe whan ye lyſte.
            
               Peruia uentis domus, open to all wyndes or a wyndy houſe.
            
               Peruolo, are, to flee out, or to the ende.
            
               Peruoco, care, to call them all.
            
               Peruro, uſsi, urere, to bourne all, or euerye where.
            
               Peruolo, peruelle, to deſyre.
            
               Perula, a lyttell bagge or ſcrippe.
            
               Peruſia, a citie in Italy.
            
               Peruulgatus, ta, tum, comonly vſed or knowen
            
               Pes, pedis, a foote, whiche nowe conteynethe xii. ynches, the olde foote conteyned .xvi. fingers bredthe.
            
               Pedes aduerbium, on foote.
            Pedibus, idem.
            
               Pedibus ſtipendia facere, to be a foteman in warre.
            
               Pedem nus
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                  , I remoued not one fote.
            
               Pedem efferre, to go forthe.
            
               Per me pedibus iſta trahantur, do what they wyll I care not.
            
                
               Pedem referre, to retrayte.
            
               Pedibus ire in ſententiam, to be of the opinion that other are. It was the faſcion among the Romaynes, that the ſenate whan diuers had ſhewed theyr opinion, the reſidue looke whiche parte they leaned vnto, they wente from theyr places to thoſe whiche had rayſoned accordyng to theyr myndes and opyniōs, and theſe were called Pedanij Senatores. Pede preſſo, fayre and ſoft, a ſoft pace.
            Pes corninus, reade in Batrachion, & Ranunculus.
            
               Pes gallinaceus, is oone of the kyndes of fumitorie, growynge in walles, and hedges, and hathe leaues not vnlyke in faſcion, but grener, and hath a purple floure.
            
               Peſtanae, certayne vallayes in Campania, where floures do ſprynge twyſe in the yere, wherof the moſte perfyte roſes be called Peſtanae roſae.
            
            
               Peſsinus, nuntis, a towne in Phrigia.
            
               Pedes, & pedibus, put for an aduerbe, ſignyfieth on foote. Pedes agmen circuibat, the hoſte wente about on foote. In agmine non nunquam equo, ſaepius pedibus, anteibat, In the hooſte, he wente alwaye afore, ſometyme on horſebacke, but more often on foote.
            
               Pes, a louſe: alſo a corde, wherewith the ſayle in a ſhyp 
                  •••
               ente.
            
               Peſnas, olde wrytars vſed for pennas.
            
            
               Peſeſtas, in olde tyme vſed for peſtis Peſtiēce
            
               Peſsimus, the ſuperlatiue degree of Malus.
            
            
               Peſsime, very yll.
            
               Peſtifer, Peſtiferus, a, um, that whiche bryngeth in peſtilence.
            
               Peſtilens, tis, peſtilent, vnholſome.
            
               Peſſulus, a barre or bolt, wherwith doores or gates be made faſte.
            
               Peſſum, an aduerbe, whiche ſignifieth backewarde, downewarde, vnder fote.
            
               Peſſum, ire, to come to naught.
            
               Peſſum premere, to treade downe or vnderfoote.
            
               Peſſundo, didi, dare, to caſte vnder foote, to put to the warſe.
            
               Peſſundare aliquē, to ſet at nought, to bring to naught.
            
               Peſtis, Peſtilentia, & Peſtilitas, a peſtilence, a mortalitie of men.
            
               Petaliſmus, a puniſhment in the citieof Syra cuſis in Sicile, whiche was that the names of the rulars there beinge written in the leaues of olyues, they diuidinge them ſelfe, the citizens whiche had offended were exiled for fyue yeres.
            
               Petalitis, an herbe called hartes tungue.
            
               Petalum, a leafe.
            
               Petaſatus, he that weareth a hatte.
            
               Petaſati, were the ſurnames of Caſtor and Pollux.
            
               Petaſo onis, a flyche of bacon.
            
               Petaſus a hatte, a rounde couerynge of a houſe.
            
               Petauriſta, a iuglar, a tumbler.
            
               Petaurum, a corde, or a ſtaffe, or a bourde, or other lyke thynge, wheron lyght perſonages do daunce and proue mayſtries, it is alſo a rouſte, where pultry doth ſyt in the nyghte.
            
               Peteſſo, ſere, to aſke or require.
            
               Petigo, tiginis, a tettar that runneth ouer all a mannes face.
            
               Petilanſura, the houfe of a whyte horſe.
            
               Petilara, thynges that are dry.
            Petilus, la, lum, ſmall.
            
            
               Petilius, a floure which groweth among brem billes, in the later ende of ſomer, and is lyke a wylde roſe in colour, and hath fyue ſmalle leaues, the budde of diuerſe colours, hauyng within it yelowe ſedes.
            
               Petilia, a citie in Lucania.
            
               Petimen, a ſore in the ſhulders of beaſtes, whiche I ſuppoſe is a faſſion.
            
               Petitia, a certayne kynde of appulles.
            
               Petiſſo, ſere, old wrytars vſed for Peto, to aſke or demaunde.
            
               Peritor, toris, he that aſketh or demaundethe: amonge lawyers he is called the demaundaunt, alſo it is a beggar, whiche aſketh almes from doore to doore.
            
               Petoritum, a chariot or wagon.
            
               Petiolus, a lyttell foote: alſo a perche wheron fruites or oynious be hanged.
            
               Petitio, onis, a petition.
            
               Peto, petij, perere, to aſke, gette or atteyne. to deſyre, to laye awayte, to abyde, to ſtrike, to goo to a place, to ſeke. with a ſworde. Petere gladio, to ſtryke with aſworde. Petere ueneno, to poyſon. Petere blandicijs, to flatter. Petere tactu, to feele. Petere mutuum, to borowe: alſo to remember. Petere iugulum, to kyll, to folowe, Petere auribus, to here. Petere naribus, to ſmell. Petere oculis, to beholde. Petere oſculis, to kyſſe. Petere ui, to inforce. Petere, is alſo to aſſayle or make aſſault on one.
            
               Petra, a great rocke growynge on the lande.
            
               Petrones, Carles of the countreye, alſo a wether ſhepe.
            
               Petroſelinum, an herbe called Perſely.
            
               Petulans, tis, wanton, diſhoneſt, reprochefull, proude, viciouſe, redy to do wronge.
            
               Petulantia, wantonneſſe, viciouſneſſe, pryde.
            
               Petreus, a, um, of a ſtone.
            
               Petreleon, an oyle, whiche naturally runneth out of a ſtone.
            
               Petroſus, a, um, ſtony or full of ſtones.
            
               Petulenter, wantonly, proudely, diſhoneſtly.
            
               Petus, he that hath one eye leſſe than the other.
            
               Petulcus, wanton.
            
               Peuxedarum, an herbe whiche hath a lyttelle ſtalke lyke to fenell, buſſhye by the grounde,
 and hath a yelowe flowre, a black roote, and is full of iuyce, and hath a greate ſauour, he that dothe gather it, feleth peyne and whyrlynge in his heade, excepte that his head and noſethrylles be annoynted with oyle of roſes. Dioſcorid. Ioan. Agricola ſuppoſeth it to be that, whych is callyd Foeniculum Porcinū, whyche I ſuppoſe we do calle dogge fenelle.
            
               Pexo, are, to kembe.
            
               Pexae ueſtes, ſome menne in expoundynge Plinye, doo ſuppoſe Pexas ueſtes to be of ſuche thynge, as is ſhorne, as fyne woullen clothe, or veluette.
            
               Pexati, they whiche doo weare ſuche maner of clothe, or ſylke.
            
               Pezitae, mouſſherons growynge at the rootes of trees.
         
         
            ¶P ANTE H.
            
               PHaeaces, people of the Ile of Corcira.
            
               Phaecaſius, a ſhowe.
            
               Phaedra, the wyfe of Theſeus, and ſtepmother to Hyppolytus doughter of Minois kynge of Creta.
            
               Phaēton, Phaētontis, a worde of three ſyllables, the ſonne of Phoebus and Clymenes, who with longe deſyre optayned atte the laſte of his father, that he moughte oone daye gouerne or leade the charyotte of the ſonne, but he being vnable to that offyce, the horſes ouerthrewe the charyotte, and burned all the worlde. Whereof Iupyter beynge aferde leſte that he alſo ſhoulde be bourned, therefore ſtrykynge Phaëton with lyghtenynge threwe hym into the ryuer callyd Padus and Erydanus.
            
            
               Phaētontides, the ſyſters of Phaēton, looke Heliades.
            
            
               Phaētuſa, doughter of the ſonne, reade Heliades.
            
            
               Phagedaena, a runnyng canker or pocke, whyche ſhortly eateth the fleſhe vnto the bones.
            
               Phagones, great eaters.
            
               Phalacron, bolde.
            
               Phalacrocorax, acis, a water crowe, it may ſygnyfye a coote.
            
               Phalango, gare, to moue or dryue a thyng vppon rollers.
            
               Phalaris, a cruell tyraunt, whiche raygned in the citie of Agrigentum.
            
               Phagus, a beche tree.
            Phagineus, a, um, of beeche.
            
            
               Phalangae, ſtaues, whereon men do carye packes, playne ſtaues, alſo leauers, to lyft thynges that be heuy.
            
               Phalangarij, porters, whiche do cary packes.
            
               Phalangium, a ſpyder, whych ſtyngyng one, he dyeth ſoone after.
            
               Phalanx, angis, an hooſ
                  •
               e of footemenne, ſette in ſuche order, that they maye incountre with theyr ennemyes, foote to foote, man to man, ſhylde to ſhylde. it is alſo the beame of a balance.
            
               Phalanges, are the ioyntes or ſpaces in the fyngars: They be alſoo rollers, whereon ſhyps or great pieces of tymber be remoued.
            
               Phalarica, an inſtrumente of warre, wherein wylde fyre is incloſed, that whanne it is by ſhotte faſtened to tymber, it bournethe all ſhortely.
            
               Phalerae, a trapper or bardes for a horſe.
            
               Phaleratus, trapped or bardyd.
            
               Phalerata dicta, gay wordes, pleſant ſpeche.
            
               Phalerij, a cytie in Tuſcane.
            
               Phalernus, rede before in Falernus.
            
            
               Phaliſci, a certain people in Italy on the higher part of Tuſcana.
            
               Phanaticus, frenetycke, he that hathe vayne vyſyons.
            
               Phaneta, one of the names of Bacchus.
            
               Phanni, fantaſyes, whyche happen to men in dreames.
            
               Phanias, is taken of Hyperides and Lyſias for an vſurer.
            
               Phanio, ſaynct Auguſtine in his epyſtles ſayth, was taken for oone, whiche broughte good lucke with his commynge.
            
               Phantaſia, is dyuerſely taken of phyloſophers and phyſitions. Galenus interiorum. 3. The affection callyd Phantaſia, is none other thīg but the corruption of vnderſtandynge. Ariſtoteles de animal. 2. Phantaſia is an operation of the power phantaſtical, that is to ſay a meuynge from the actuall ſence. Alſo Phantaſia is of the treaſoure of power anymall, keper of the fourmes or fygures fyrſte conceyued in the commune ſenſe or perceyuyng.
            
               Phantaſma, matis, a vyſyon.
            
               Phanum, a temple.
            
               Pharāo, was the name of all kynges of Egypte, vntylle the tyme of Salomon. In the Egyptiane toungue Pharao ſygnyfyethe kynge. Ioſephus.
            
            
               Pharetra, a quyuer for arrowes.
            
               Pharetratus, he that beareth a quyuer.
            
               Pharias, phariae, a ſerpente, whyche maketh a furrowe in the grounde with his tayle, as he crepeth, and ſo lyfteth hym ſelfe vp.
            
               Phariſaei, were amonge the Iewes certayne menne, whyche profeſſed a fourme of lyuynge more ſtrayghte and deuoute thanne other of that people, and therfore they were callyd by that name, for as moche as Phares in the hebrewe tungue ſygnyfyeth dyuyded, they profeſſed contynence, vyrgynytie, faſte or abſtynence from meate twyſe in the Sabbate dayes. They ſlepte only vppon
 bourdes, ſomme vppon ſtoones, or elles on thornes, to kepe theym frome ſtyrrynge of fleſſhely appetyte. They ware on theyr forehead ſcrowes of parchemynte, wherein were wrytten the tenne commaundementes gyuen by God vnto Moyſes, whyche they callyd Philaterias. They hadde in great reuerence theyr elders,, in ſoo moche as they wold not with a worde dyſpleaſe them, not withſtandynge they beleuyd that all thyng happened by conſtellation, and yet toke they not away free wyll from man They affyrmed that ſoules were immortall, and that god ſhuld come in iugement. Hereby they came in a wonderfull credence with people, wherby they drewe to them great multitudes, and of them were dyuerſe good men, amonge whom was ſaynt Paule, as he hym ſelfe confeſſeth, Nicodemus and other which were afterward Chriſtis dyſciples, althoughe the multitude, takyng that profeſſion only for vaynglory, peruerted that honeſt forme of lyuynge into hypocryſie, deceyuyng the people, whom Chriſt ſharpely rebuked, and declared theyr folye, and yet with ſome of theym whiche by lykelyhode were good men, he dyned, and other wyſe vſed theym familyarlye. Euangeliſtae, Paulus, Ioſephus, Hieronymus, Chryſoſtomus &c.
            
            
               Phariſeus, a Phariſey, whych was of a ſecte of Iewes, which lyued in a more ſtrayter forme than the commune people dyd.
            Pharius, a, um, is put for Aegyptius.
            
               Pharmacentice, that parte of phiſyke, whyche healeth with medycines.
            
               Pharmacopola, a potycary.
            
               Pharmacum, a medycine, ſometyme it ſygnyfieth poyſon.
            
               Pharos, a lyttelle yle in Egypte agaynſte the mouthe of the ryuer of Nilus by the citie of Alexandria. In this yle was ſette a verye hyghe towre, wherein were greatte lyghtes all the nyghte longe, for the comforte and ſuretie of theym, whyche were in vyage eyther on the ſea, or on the lande. Whereof all other towres made for that pourpoſe be callyd Phari.
            
            
               Pharuſij, people of Lybia, whyche nowe are excedynge poore.
            
               Pharſalia, a countrey in Theſſalia, where the battaylle was betweene Iulius Caeſar and Pompey.
            
               Pharſâlos, a cytie in Theſſalia, nyghe to the whiche was the great and ſharp battayle betwene Iulius Ceſar and Pompeius, where Pompeius was vanquyſhed and fledde. it is alſo callyd of Lucanus, Pharſalia.
            
            
               Phaſae, a worde of hebrewe, whyche ſygnyfieth a departynge. it is commonlye callyd Paſcha.
            
            
               Phaſellus, a lyttell ſhyp called a galyon.
            
               Phaſeoli, are a ſorte of poulſe corne, whereof be dyuerſe kyndes, one is named Dolichus, whiche groweth in gardeynes, with a longe ſtemme, and is ſuccouryd with ſtyckes ſette about it, they be ſhortly corruptid with wete. Aetius ſaythe, that onely they amonge all other poulſe were eaten with theyr huſkes, But Ruellius affyrmeth, that it was not the commune Dolichi, but they whyche were of dyuerſe colours, and facyoned lyke to lyttell kydneys. Looke of theym in Smilax. An nother kynde is callyd alſo Phaſillus, whyche is very ſmalle, ſome beinge whyte, and ſomme redde, with lyttell ſtalkes rounnynge on the grounde, and lyenge holow, hauynge leaues lyke in faſcyon to yuy, but ſofter and full of veynes, coddes lyke to fengreke, the brothe of theym nouryſſheth, and maketh indyfferent iuyce. An nother is that whyche is alſo callyd Smilax, of whome reade in his place. An nother is callyd Iſopyron, whoſe leafe is lyke to anyſe, and hath on the toppe lyttelle heddes, full of ſedes lyke to Nigella. I haue no certayne englyſſhe for this poulſe, and I dare not coniecte what it is for feare of dyſdayne. But by theſe deſcriptions menne of meane wyttes maye fynde what it is, in beholdynge at theyr eyes dyuers ſortes of poulſe.
            
               Phaſianus, a feſaunt.
            
               Phaſis, a great ryuer in the countreye of Colchos, it is alſo a citie there.
            
               Phaſma, Phaſmatis, an horryble vyſyon or ſight.
            
               Phauorinus, a famouſe and eloquente phyloſopher borne at Orlyaunce in Fraunce, In hym were three thynges principallye to be meruayled at. The fyrſte that beyng a frenche manne, he not withſtandynge was ſo excellente in the Greeke tungue, that beſydes his greatte lernynge, he lefte behynde hym a noble remembraunce of the greke eloquence. The ſeconde, that beynge Eunuchus, or an imperfecte manne, he was accuſed of adulterye. The laſte was, that hauynge the emperour Adriane excedyngly dyſpleaſed with hym, he not withſtandynge ouerlyued hym, neuer hauynge any dammage by hym, whyche was to the mooſte hyghe commendation of that noble Emperour, hauynge this ſentence oftentymes in his mouth, but in greke. The kynge is thanne to be eſtemed mooſte excellente whanne he beinge diſpleaſed with his inferioure, refraynethe his anger.
            On a tyme whanne the Emperoure dyſputed with hym, and in the ende he ſemed to
 ſuffer the Emperour to haue the vyctory. Afterwarde his frendes aſked of hym, howe it happened that he whyche onely applyed him to ſtudye of letters, and was reputed to be the greatteſt philoſopher in Athenes, mought be vanquyſhed of ſo great a prynce, who was occupyed in the great affayres of the empire, he anſwered that it was no ſhame to be vanquyſhed of hym, which hadde .xxx. legyons of men at his commaundement.
            
               Pherecydes, a famouſe Phyloſopher and writer of Tragoedies, whyche dyed of the louſy ſyckneſſe.
            
               Pheretra, thynges borne at great feaſtes or triumphes, as pageauntes or iewels of golde or ſyluer, ymages and ſuch lyke thynges.
            
               Pheretrius, Iupyter.
            
               Pheretrum, a thynge, whereon pageantes are borne, alſo dead corpſis.
            
               Phiala, the generall name to all plate, whych ſerueth for wyne.
            
               Phiala, a potte or cuppe of golde or ſyluer, whiche ſerueth for wyne.
            
               Phidias, an excellent warkeman, in makynge great ymages of golde or yuory.
            Phidiacus, ca, cum, of Phidias.
            
               Phiditia, the ſoupers, whyche the Lacedemonyans vſyd, whyche were openly kepte with a meruaylous temperance, euery man bryngynge his meaſurable porcyon of meate and wyne.
            
               Philadelphia, a cytie in Myſia, ioynynge to Lydia.
            
               Philadelphus, callyd Ptolomeus kynge of Egypte, who made a lybrarye in the whyche were fyfty thouſande bookes. He alſo cauſed the .v. bookes of Moyſes to be tranſlated into greke by .lxxii. interpretours doctors of the Iewes.
            
               Philagathus, he that loueth goodnes.
            
               Philanthropos, a louer of mankynde alſo gentyll and kynde.
            
               Philargyria, couetouſnes, auaryce.
            
               Philargyrus, couetouſe.
            
               Philema, a kyſſe.
            
               Phlieni, were two bretherne Carthaginenſes, of whome it is wrytten, that where they of Carthage, and they of Cyrene, dydde ſtryue for theyr boundes, it was agreed, that of ech cytie two men ſhoulde iſſue, and where that they mette ſhulde be the boundes. Than the ſayde bretherne being ſent, they went a great waye into the boundes of the other, er they mought retourne. And whan they of Cyrene dyd ſe that they were preuented, they toke it diſpleaſantly, and menacyd the two brethern that yf they wolde not go backe, they ſhoulde be put quyck into the erth, but they not with ſtandyng wolde not departe. Wherfore they being buryed on lyue, theyr cuntrey mē made ouer them two aulters, whiche at this daye be callyd Arae Philenorum, whiche are nowe within the royalme of Tunyſe.
            
               Philenus, he that loueth wyne.
            
               Philetes, a kyſſer.
            
               Phileteria, an herbe callyd wylde ſauge, it was alſo a ſcrowe whiche the phariſeys dyd were on theyr forheades, wherein were wryten the tenne commaundementes. Hieron. Io. Chriſoſt. In the decrees of Gregory they be taken for charmes or inchantmentes writen. alſo in Conſilio Laodicenſi, we do rede Phileteria facere.
            
            
               Philippus, kyng of Macedonia, ſon of Amyntas, and father of the greatte Alexander, a prynce from his chyldhode of excellent wytte and prowes, of whom theſe notable thynges be remembred. After that he had vanquyſhed the Athenienſes at Cheroneam, he began to reioyce of his felicitie, but to the intente that he therfore ſhuld not be the more prone to iniuries towarde his ſubiectes, nor to haue indignation at them whom he vanquyſhed, he than and euer after cauſyd a chylde to come to his chamber doore in the mornyng and to ſaye alowde, Phylip thou art a man mortall, whiche he obſerued ſo conſtantly, that he neuer went out of his chamber, or receyued any counſaylours or ſuiters, vntyll the chyld had thryſe ſpoken thoſe wordes, notwithſtādynge that he was a paynyme. On a tyme the Athenienfes ſente an ambaſſade vnto hym, whyche after that he had paciently herde, he ſayde to the ambaſſadours whan they ſhulde depart, Know you (ſayd he) any thyng whiche may be pleaſure vnto your citie, amonge them was Democrates, for yll tungue callyd Therſites, he forthwith anſwered the kyng, If thou ſayde he, wylte hange vp thy ſelfe. Which anſwere troubled the reſydue of the ambaſſadours, and dyd ſet all the other hearers in an indignation with a great charme. But Philyp moſte gentylly and coldely aunſwered. Say you to the Atheniēſes, that they whyche for anger can not abſteyne frome ſuche wordes, be moche prowder of courage, than they that doo ſuffer it ſpoken withoute any punyſſhement, and do eaſyly dygeſte ſoo prowde an iniurye. Alſoo where one namyd Machetas hadde a matter in varyaunce before hym. Phylyppe takynge lyttelle heed
                  •
                what was ſpoken, and ſometyme ſleapynge, at the laſte he gaue iudgement agaynſt Machetas, who cryenge out with a lowde voyce appealed, wherewith Phylyppe beynge fore moued, with a grieuouſe looke, to whome I praye the (ſayde he) doſte thou appeale?
 I appeale ſayde Machaetas vnto your ſelfe, but beynge better awaked, and takyng hede what is ſpoken. Philyp being through waked, and herynge eftſones the matter, whan he perceyued that Machaetas had wronge, he wold not reuerſe the iugement, but the ſūme of money wherin Machaetas was condemned he hym ſelfe payde it of his owne treaſure of his pacyence, ſubtiltie of wytte, and valyant courage, many haue written aboundauntly, whiche in the readynge are bothe pleaſaunte and profytable. He was afore the incarnatiō of Chriſte. 358. yeres.
            
               Philippeus, pei, a certayne coyne of golde ſomtyme vſyd in Grecia.
            
               Philippi, a citie in Thracia.
            
               Philippenſes, men of that citie.
            
               Phillyra, a nymph, on whom Saturnus begat Chiron, who therfore is ſommetyme callyd Phillyrides.
            
            
               Phillitis, an herbe callyd hartis tungue.
            
               Philocalus, a good man, a kleanely manne, or elegant.
            
               Philocares, an herbe callyd horehounde.
            
               Philoctêtes, the ſonne of Paean, was Hercules companyon, and buryed hym, and hadde his arrowes.
            
               Philodolus, he that loueth his ſeruantes.
            
               Philoginos, he that doteth on women.
            
               Philologus, a louer of letters. alſo a greatte ſpeaker.
            
               Philomela, a nyghtyngale. alſo a fayre mayden, whiche was defloured by Thereus huſbande to her ſyſter, whome poetes doo fayne was tranſfourmed to a nyghtyngale.
            
               Philomuſus, amorous of the Muſis.
            
               Philonicus, a brawler: ſommetyme a louer of vyctorye.
            
               Philopaes, he that loueth chyldren.
            
               Philoponus, laboriouſe, peynefull.
            
               Philoſophaſter, he that wolde be lyke a phyloſopher.
            
               Philoſophia, phyloſophye, the loue or fauourynge of wyſedome.
            
               Philoſophice, lyke a philoſopher.
            Philoſophicus, ca, cum, philoſophicall.
            
            
               Philoſophor, aris, ari, to ſtudy wyſedome.
            
               Philoſophus, a philoſopher.
            
               Philotheſia, a ſolemne feaſt among the Grekes
            
               Philoxenia, hoſpytalitie.
            
               Philoxenus, he that kepeth good hoſpitalitie.
            
               Philtrum, a drynke charmed, whyche cauſeth a man to be madde for loue.
            
               Philura, ſeu philyra, ſmalle thynges hangynge downe of trees or herbes lyke vnto heares.
            
               Phyma, matis, a ſore on the fynger, whych may be callyd a whytblowe.
            
               Phineus, king of Arcadia who by the inticemēt of his ſecōd wyfe dyd put out the eyes of his ſonnes which he had by his fyrſt wyfe, but by the iuſt vengeaunce of god he was alſo made blynde, and the foule rauenouſe byrdes callid Harpyiae, defyled & deuoured the meate that was preparid for him. but thoſe byrdes at the laſt were dryuen away by Zetus and Calois, whom he had courtayſly intertayned.
            
               Phlebes, veynes.
            
               Phlebotomia, bloudlettynge.
            
               Phlebotomum, the inſtrumente, wherewith bloude is letten, a fleume.
            
               Phlegethon, ontis, a ryuer of helle, whiche alway bourneth.
            
               Phlegias, the ſonne of Mars, a kyng in Theſſaly, and father of Ixion.
            
               Phlegrei campi, be in Thracia where Iupyter had battayle with gyantes.
            
               Phlius, a place in Grecia.
            
               Phlox, a yelowe flowre lyke a vyolet.
            Phlegma, matis, fleume.
            
            
               Phlegmon, onis, & phlegmone, nes, an inflamation of bloud, which groweth into an impoſtume in ſome part of the body or member.
            
               Phoca, a ſea calfe, it maye be ſuppoſed to be a ſeale, which is fyſhe, and bredeth on the land.
            
               Phocis, cidis, a lytel cuntrey in Grecia betwene Atticam & Boeotiā. in Phocide is the towne of Delphos.
            
               Phocenſes, people of Phocis.
            
               Phoceus, & phocaicus, pertayning to Phocis.
            
               Phoebus, the ſonne.
            
               Phoenices, people in Syria.
            Phoeniceus, a, um, ryght krymſon.
            
            
               Phoenicia, a regyon in Syria, next to Iudea.
            
               Phoenicopterus, a great byrde, hauyng fethers of krymſon colour.
            
               Phoeniſſa, a woman of Phenicia.
            
               Phoenix, nicis, a byrde, whyche lyueth aboue ſyx hundred yeres, and fynally caryeng ſwete ſpyces vp to a hygh mountayne, by the heate of the ſunne, and labour of her wynges, kend leth fyre, wherby ſhe beynge all bourned, of her axen ryſeth an other lyke byrde. it is alſo a date tree, or paulme, alſo a lyttell ryuer in Grecia. it was alſo the brother of Cadmus, whyche raigned in Phenicia. alſo one which was tutour to Achilles.
            
               Pholoe, a mountayne in Archadia, ful of wod.
            
               Phonaſcus, he that teacheth one to pronounce and moderate his voyce.
            
               Phorbas, a ſheparde that founde Oedippum, after that he was hanged vp by the feete.
            
               Phorcus, one of the ſonnes of Neptunus, whiche was taken for a god of the ſea.
            
               Phoroneus, the moſt ancient kyng of Grecia.
            
               Phoſphorus, the day ſterre.
            
               Photion, a noble Athenienſe, which had ben diſciple to Plato & Xenocrates, afterward one of the chief gouernors of the citie of Athenes
 was a man of ſuche wonderfulle grauitie and conſtāce, that he was not lyghtly ſene to change his countenaunce, eyther to laugh or to morne, nor to haue his handes oute of his habyte, excepte in warre, and whan he was in the countrey, he went alway bare footed, except it were in the colde wynter, wherof there was noo better token than to ſee Phocion go ſhodde. His ſpeche was ſhort, graue, vehement, and full of quycke ſentences, and therefore the moſte eloquente oratour Demoſthenes, callyd hym the hatchette that dyd cut of his wordes. He was of ſuche a conſtaunce, that where Apollo at Delphos made aunſwere that one man in Athenes was of a contrary opinyon to all the citie. Whan that was reported, Phocion roſe vp and ſayde, Leaue (ſayde he) countrey men, to ſearche whome poure god meaneth, for I am that oone manne, whome nothynge lyketh whyche is nowe doone in the commune weale of this citie, whan he hadde made an oration vnto the people, and they prayſynge hym conſented vnto hym, he tourned hym to them that were nexte hym, and ſayde, Alas what haue I doone, I feare me leaſte ſomme foolyſhe worde hath eſcaped vnwetynge me, ſygnyfyeng that the people ſeldomme allowed any thynge that was good, or not foolyſhe. On a tyme whan he rayſoned contrarye to the mynde of the people. Wherfore they murmured and wolde haue let hym, It is at youre pleaſure countrey menne ſayde he, to compelle me to do that that I wold not, but to ſpeake otherwyſe than I thynke, that no man lyuyng can cauſe me, he was ſo reuerende a perſonage, that the great kynge Alexander in the begynnynge of his letters after that he hadde vanquiſſhed Darius, he ſaluted no man but hym and Antipater. He refuſed infinite treaſour ſent vnto him by Alexander, and although he hadde bene the generall capytayne of the Athenienſes in ſundrye warres, and honourably achieuyd his enterpryſes, yet was he beſt content to lyue poorely. Fynally he was of his vnkynde countreye menne condempned to deathe, whereto he wente with the ſame countenaunce, that he hadde in authorytie, whan oone whyche was condempned with hym, lamented and fearyd to dye. Phocion tournyng vnto hym ſayde: Why arte thou not gladde, that thou ſhalte dye with Phocyon? And whan one of his frendes aſked hym, yf he wolde any thynge to his ſonne, I wolde ſayde he, that ſuche wronge as the Athenienſes doo to me, he ſhall not remember. What a wonderfulle worde of a Paynyme was this, who folowed Chriſtis doctrine, er Chryſte was borne. 333. yeres.
            
               Phraſis, The propre fourme, or maner of ſpeche, whyche in one countraye is oftentymes dyuerſe, as Southerne, Northerne, Deuenyſſhe, Kentyſhe, Frenche, Pycarde, Gacoygne, Walon. ſome do ſet the negatiue before the affyrmatiue, ſome contrarye, ſomme ſpeache is quycke, ſome graue, ſome flouryſhynge, ſome temperate.
            
               Phrene, the myddreffe, whyche dyuydeth the vmbles of a man or beaſt, from the bowelles.
            
               Phreneticus, he that is vexed with a freneſy.
            
               Phrenitis, ſeu Phreniſis, a ſyckeneſſe callyd freneſye.
            
               Phrine, a famouſe harlotte at Athenes.
            
               Phrygia, a royalme in Aſia the leſſe, hauynge on the eaſte Cappadociam, on the ſouthe Lycaoniam, on the weſt Troadem, on the north Galatiam.
            
            
               Phrygium melos, was a melody or tune in inſtrumentes, wherein ſemyd to be (as Lucianus ſayth) a maner of a dyuyne fury, allbeit Porphyrius callyth it barbarouſe. Caſſiodorus ſayth, that the melody callyd Dorius giueth wyſedome, and gyueth chaſtitie. Phrygius ſtyreth to battayle, and inflameth the deſyre of furye. Aeolius appeaſeth the tempeſtes of the mynde, and bryngeth in ſlepe. Lydius quyckeneth vnderſtandynge in them that be dulle, and induceth appetite of celeſtiall thynges.
            
               Phrygio, onis, a browderer.
            
               Phrynos, a lyſarde.
            
               Phryx, gis, a man of Phrigia.
            
               Phthia, a cytie in Theſſalia.
            
               Phthiriaſis, a ſyckeneſſe in the whyche lyſe doo growe in ſuche multitudes, that they deuoure the bodye.
            
               Phthirophagi, people dwellynge nyghe to the greke ſea, whyche lyued onely by fyſhe.
            
               Phthiſicos, he that hathe the conſumption of the lunges.
            
               Phyſeter, a greate fiſſhe in the Frenche occean ſea, which ryſeth lyke to a pyllar aboue ſhyppes, and ſpouteth out water.
            
               Phthiſis, is a ſore in the lunges with a conſumption of all the body commyng of a feuerouſe heate conſumyng or of a heate artificial and humors in the ſtomake. The cauſe is a reume ſharpe and long contynuyng of choler or ſalte fleume, it hapnith of a ſquince or apoſtume in the vuula whan by the rupture of theym the putryfied matter deſcendeth to the lunges, or of a pleuriſy or Peripneumonia, whan they being healyd, the putrified matter is not purged within the ſpace of .xl. dayes, or by longe ſtoppyng of hemoroides or floures, or by the coldenes of the ayre receyued, ſtraynynge the ſpiritual members, or by the heate of the aire dryeng & ſcorchynge the lunges, or by a great and longe cough, or by other inforcement, in ſyngynghygh, or bearyng a heuy burdeyn.
            
                
               Phu, a plante or herbe, whiche ſome calle Valeriane.
            
               Phygeton, a lyttell ſwellynge or botche, harde and redde, burnynge and pryckynge.
            
               Phylira, a tree callyd alſo Tylia.
            
               Phyllis, a womanne, doughter of Lycurgus, kynge of Thrace, whyche hynge her ſelfe, deſpayrynge of the comynge of Demophon, whome poetes fayne to be turned into an almonde tree.
            
               Phyllitis, an herbe callyd hartis tungue.
            
               Phyſica, naturall cauſes.
            
               Phyſicus, a phyſitian.
            
               Phyſiologus, he that dyſputethe of naturalle cauſes.
            
               Phyſionomia, ſeu phyſiognomia, a rule to knowe a mans naturall affections by his viſage or fourme of his membres.
            
               Phyton, one of the names of Apollo.
            
               Phytonicus, & phytonica, he or ſhe which hath a ſpirite within theym, that gyueth anſwere of thynges to come.
         
         
            ¶P ANTE I.
            
               PIabile, for the whyche ſatiſfaction may be made and god pleaſed.
            
               Piacularis, are, that whyche is gyuen or offred to god for ſatisfaction.
            
               Piabilis, that whyche maye be pourged or ſatysfyed.
            
               Piacularia auſpicia, tokens in ſacrifyce of ſome heuy chaunce to come.
            
               Piaculum, any thynge done for ſatisfaction of ſome greuouſe ſynne, ſometyme a greate and haynouſe offence.
            
               Piamen, ſeu piamentum, that whyche was gyuen or occupyed about ſatisfaction.
            
               Pica, a byrde callyd a pye.
            
               Picatus, picata, picatum, pytched or raſyd with pytche.
            
               Picea, a pytche tree.
            
               Picenum, a countraye in Italye callyd Marca Anconitana.
            
            
               Picens, tis, a man of that countray.
            
               Picentus, ta, tum, of the countrey of Picenum.
            Piceus, a, um, of pytche.
            
            
               Pico, care, to dreſſe with pytche.
            
               Picris, wylde lettuſe.
            
               Pictarium, a table pertaynynge to Iudges or byſhoppes. it is ſometyme a playſter for the ſtomake or heade.
            
               Pictes, a wraſtler.
            
               Pictones, a cuntray in France callid Poyters.
            
               Pictor, toris, a peyntour.
            
               Pictura, an ymage peynted.
            
               Picturatae ueſtes, imbroudred apparayle, or rather of bawdekyn.
            
               Picturo, are, to make ſundry pyctures.
            
               Picus, a lyttell byrde, whyche maketh a hole in trees, wherein he breedeth: it was alſoo the name of an olde kynge of Latynes.
            
               Picunnus, a pye.
            
               Pie, & pienter, mercyfully, deuoutely, louingly.
            
               Pieria, a mountayne in Grece, dedycate to the Muſis.
            
               Pieria, was a mayden borne at Myos a cytie of Ionia, doughter of an honourable man, callyd Pythes, of whom is this hyſtory worthy of remembrance. There happened to be warre betwene the inhabitantes of Miletū, and them of Myos, but in ſuche gentyll facion, that the women of Myos were alwaye ſuffered on the ſolempne feaſte of Diana, to come to Miletum, and doo ſacrifyce to Diana, whiche there was chiefly honoured. Pieria commyng thyther in the company of her mother, one Phrigius the eldeſt ſon of Nebeus duke of Miletum, beholdyng her beautie, beganne to loue her excedyngly, and after the maner of louers, deſyrynge to do ſome thynge thankefull vnto the mayden, demanded of her what he mought do, which mought be to her mooſte pleaſaunt and acceptable. The mayden being wytty, and alſo louynge to her countrey and frendes, anſwered hym, that to her it ſhoulde be the greatteſt pleaſure, yf he wold endeuour hym ſelfe to bring to paſſe, that ſhe moughte oftentymes with a greatte ſorte of her compaynyons repayre to Miletum, without any dammage. Phrigius perceyuynge, that nothynge moughte ſoo moche contente the mayden as peace. He callynge the people togyther exhortyd theym to conclude a peace with theym of Myos to be with theym in alyaunce, whervnto they accordyd, and the name of Pieria was euer after in ſoo honourable a remembraunce, that all honeſte womenne vſyd for a prouerbe, to wyſſhe ſo to be louyd, as Phrigius louyd Pieria.
            
               Pierides, were doughters of one Pierus, whiche dyd compare in ſyngynge with the Muſis, but they beinge vanquyſhed, and giuyng to the Muſes reprochefull wordes, they were by theym tourned into pyes. Ouidius Metamorph.
5. they be ſometyme taken for the muſis of an hylle in Theſſalia callyd Piēris or Piērius.
            
            
               Pierides, the Muſes.
            
               Piens, tis, mercyfull. &c.
            
               Pientior, pientiſsimus, more and mooſte mercyfull, mooſte louynge towarde his parentes or countrey.
            
               Pietas, tatis, the reuerende loue towarde a mannes propre countreye and parentes, of dyuynes it is taken for the loue and honoure dewe vnto god. Lactantius calleth it iuſtyce,
 and deuoute wourſhyppyng and knowledge of god.
            
               Pigeo, gui, gêre, ſometyme it is a verbe imperſonalle. Piget, to be ſoorye to haue doone a thynge.
            
               Obſecro ne quid plus minus ue faxit quod nos poſtea pigeat, I requyre you lette hym not do any thynge more or laſſe, whereof we may after repent vs.
            
               Id non piget, he repēteth not of that he hath doone.
            Piger, gri, ſlowe.
            
            Pigritia, pigrities, pigredo, pigritas, pigritudo, ſlowneſſe, ydelneſſe.
            
            
               Pigmentum, payntynge, alſo falſe coloure in ſpeakynge, dyſceytefull wordes, pleſant lyes.
            
               Pigmentarius, a maker or ſeller of payntynge.
            
               Pigne, ſlouthe.
            
               Pigneratio, a pledgynge or gagynge.
            
               Pigneratitius, a, um, that whyche is layde in pledge.
            
               Pignora, is ſometyme taken for chyldren.
            
               Pignora capere, to take a dyſtreſſe.
            
               Pignero, pignerare, & pigneror, pignerari, to laye to pledge or guage, ſommetyme to take pledge.
            
               Pignus, pignoris, a gage or pledge.
            
               Dare pignus cum aliquo, to laye gauge agaynſt one.
            
               Ponere pignori, to lay in gage or pledge.
            
               Pignori opponere, to be bounde for rente or any other payment.
            
               Pignora auferre, to take a dyſtreſſe.
            
               Pignus amoris, a token of loue.
            
               Beneuolentiae pignus, a token of fauour.
            
               Pignora, chyldren.
            Pignora capere, idem quod pignora auferre.
            
               Pignoris capio, a nowne ſygnyfyeth a diſtreſſe. Mars ipſe ex acie fortiſsimum quenque pignerari ſolebat, The mooſte valyant men be they, whiche in battayle be ſoneſt diſpached, or Mars vſeth to ſeaſe for him ſelfe the valyanteſt men.
            
               Pignerator, he that taketh a gage.
            
               Pigreſco, ſcere, to be or waxeſlowe.
            
               Pigrè, ſlowly.
            
               Pigredo, ſlouthfulneſſe.
            
               Pigrefio, fieri, to be madeſlowe.
            
               Pigritia, ſlowneſſe.
            Pigritudo, idem.
            Pigror, idem.
            
               Pigro, are, to holde backe, or tary one.
            
               Pila, a morter, wherein any thynge is beaten with a peſtylle. alſo a pyllar, a balle, or any thynge rounde as a balle.
            
               Pila ludere, to play at tenyſe.
            
               Pilades, a gentylman of Phocea, whyche was ſo faythfull a frende to Oreſtes (with whom he kepte companye whyles he was madde) that he wolde neuer forſake hym, but folowed hym into the countreye callyd Taurica, where ſtraungers were ſacrifiſed vnto Diana. Where Oreſtes being apprehended, whā he ſhulde be ſlayne, Pylades wold nedes dye for hym that he myght eſcape.
            
               Pilani, they whyche fyght with dartes.
            
               Pilates, a certayne ſtone that is white.
            
               Pilatim, one pylar by an other.
            
               Pilatus, armed with dartes.
            
               Pileatus ſeruus, a ſlaue that is ſolde with his cappe on his heed.
            
               Pilentum, a wagan.
            
               Pileolus, a lyttell bonette.
            
               Pileus, a cappe. ſometyme lybertie, foraſmoche as bondmen, whan they were infranchyſed, ware copped cappes.
            
               Pilo, are, to begynne to be hearye, or growe in heare.
            
               Piloſella, an herbe callyd cōmonly mouſe eare.
            Piloſus, a, um, heary.
            
            
               Pilula, a lyttell balle. alſo a pylle made for purgations.
            
               Pilum, a barbours knyfe or raſour, alſo a dart of fyue foote longe and a halfe.
            
               Pilumnus, a man whiche founde the maner to dunge lande, and to grynde corne.
            
               Pilus, a heare.
            
               Pilus, idem quod pilum, it is alſo a peſtell to bray or breake any thyng withal in a morter
            
               Pimpinella, an herbe callyd Pympernell.
            
               Pimpla, a place by the mountayne callyd Pernaſus, of the whyche the Muſis be callyd Pimpleides.
            
            
               Pinaſter, a wylde pyne tree.
            
               Pina, a fyſhe that hath two great ſhelles.
            
               Pinachidia, tables made in bookes.
            
               Pinachothêca, a caſe or place wherin tables at put or ſette.
            
               Pinarij, an auncient houſe or family in Italye, of the whiche were the prieſtes that ſacrifyſed to Hercules.
            
               Pindarus, a Thebane poete, and chief of them which were callyd Lyrici. Wherfore Alexander whan he diſtroyed the citie of Thebes, he cauſed the houſe of Pindarus to be preſerued with all his family.
            
               Pindo, dis, ſi, ſere, to bray or grynde.
            
               Pindus, a mountayne in Theſſalia, alſoo a citie there.
            
               Pinea nux, a pyne appull.
            
               Pinetum, a wodde of pyne trees.
            
               Pineus, a, um, of a pyne tree.
            
               Pingo, xi, pingere, to paynt, to deuyſe and ſet in order.
            Pinguedo, & pinguitudo, tudinis, fatte or fatteneſſe.
            
            
               Pingue, inconuenyent, ſommetyme fruitefull, commodyouſe.
            
                
               Pingues horti, gardeynes that brynge forthe good herbes.
            
               Pingui Minerua, groſſely, rudely.
            
               Pinguefacio, cere, to make fatte.
            
               Pingueſco, ſcere, to be fatte.
            
               Pinguiarius, he that loueth that thyng whyche is fatte.
            
               Pinguitudo, fatneſſe.
            
               Pinguiter, greacyly.
            
               Pinguis, gue, fatte, he that is fatte, corſye, vnweldye.
            
               Pingue, greaſe.
            
               Pingue otium, moche eaſe or reſte.
            
               Pinguis toga, a gowne of courſe clothe.
            
               Pinna, a quyll or penne, the harder parte of a fether.
            
               Pinnae, imbatylmentes of a walle, a muſkle, whiche is founden in muddy waters.
            
               Pinnae, the fynnes of a fyſhe.
            
               Pinnaculum, a pynnakle of a towre.
            
               Pinnula, the ouer part of the eare, a lytell quyl.
            
               Pinſito, tare, to bray in a mortar.
            
               Pinſo, ſui, ſere, to braye or grynde.
            Pinſo, are, idem.
            
               Pinſor, he that grindeth in a quern, alſo a baker
            
               Pintia, a towne in Spayne callyd Valladolite.
            
               Pinus, pinus, a pyneappull.
            
               Pio, ij, ere, to honour god.
            
               Pipatio, a clockynge of a henne.
            
               Pinetum, a place where pynes do growe.
            
               Pinus, ſeu pinea, a pyne tree.
            
               Pipare, to clocke lyke a henne.
            Piper, eris, pepper.
            
            
               Piperitis, an herbe whiche by his deſcription, ſemeth to me to be that whyche we do name coſtemary.
            
               Pipio, iui, ire, to peepe lyke a chycke.
            
               Pipio, onis, a pygeon.
            
               Pipilo, are, to chyrpe lyke a ſparowe.
            
               Pipulum, a rebuke.
            
               Pirum, a peare.
            
               Pirata, a rouer or robber on the ſea, a pyrate.
            
               Piratica, the practyſe of pyrates or robbers on the ſea.
            
               Pirrhica, a daunſynge in harneys.
            
               Piſa, a citie in Grece betweene the two mountaynes of Olympus and Oſſa: alſoo a cytie in Arcadia.
            
               Piſae, arum, a citie in Italy callyd Piſe.
            
               Piſani, people of the citie of Piſe.
            
               Piſarurus, a ryuer in Italy.
            
               Piſaurum, a citie in Italy callyd Peſero.
            
            Piſcor, aris, ari, to fyſhe.
            
            
               Piſcaria, the fyſhe market.
            
               Piſcarius, a, um, pertaynynge to fyſhyng.
            
               Piſcarius, a fyſhemonger.
            
               Piſcatorius, a, um, pertaynynge to a fyſher.
            
               Piſcator, oris, a fyſher.
            
               Piſcatus, tus, & piſcatio, the acte of fyſhyng.
            
               Piſcina, a fyſhe ponde, it is alſo generally euery ponde, although therin be no fyſhe.
            
               Piſcinalis, le, pertaynyng to fyſhe.
            
               Piſcinarius, he that nouryſheth fyſhe.
            
               Piſcis, a fyſhe.
            
               Piſces, alſo one of the twelue ſygnes.
            
               Piſcoſus, a, um, that may be fyſſhed, or is fulle of fyſhe.
            Piſculentus, idem.
            
               Piſciculus, a lyttell fyſhe.
            
               Piſei, people of the citie Piſa in Grecia.
            
               Piſidae, people in Aſia.
            
               Piſtacia, a certayne kynde of nuttes.
            
               Piſiſtratus, a noble manne of Athenes, whyche changed the cōmune weale of that citie from the rule of the people, to the rule of one gouernour: and therfore he was callyd a tyraunt, not withſtandynge that (as he wrate vnto Solon, whyche maynteyned the popular aſtate) he rulyd by theyr owne lawes, and was ryghtwyſe and gentyll vnto the people.
            
               Piſo, ſere, is proprely to braye, for in the olde tyme men vſed to bray or breake corne in morters, but after that they had querns to grynd with the hande, they vſed Piſere to grynde, and Piſor for a grynder.
            
               Piſo, ſonis, the name of a noble famyly or houſe in Rome.
            
               Piſtillum, a peſtyll.
            
               Piſtor, oris, a baker.
            
               Piſtoria, a citie in Italy.
            Piſtoricus, ca, cum, & piſtorius, a, am, pertaynynge to bakynge.
            
            
               Piſtrilla, a mylle.
            
               Piſtrinum, & piſtrina, a bakehouſe, or grinding houſe, ſometyme it ſygnifieth for peynefulle ſeruyce.
            
               Piſtris, a ſhyppe.
            
               Piſtrix, cis, a woman baker, alſo a monſtruouſe fyſhe in the Indiane ſea.
            
               Piſtura, the crafte of bakynge.
            
               Piſtus, ta, tum, grounden or brayed.
            
               Piſum, a peaſe.
            
               Pithacuſae, yles in the ſea agaynſte Campania.
            
               Pithacua, a certayne tyle, ſommetyme made in Spayne, whyche beinge caſt into the water, wolde not ſynke.
            
               Pitheta, a comette or impreſſion in the fyrmament, whiche is lyke a tunne, and dothe appiere as it were through a myſte.
            
               Pithecium, a deformed or yl fauoured woman.
            
               Pithonoſcomes, a place in Aſia, where after the Idus of Auguſt, great flockes of ſtorkes do aſſemble togyther.
            
               Pitpit, in the olde tungue of Oſkes, ſygnifyed quicquid, what ſo euer.
            
               Pittacus, one of the ſeuen ſages of Grecia, and was of the citie of Mytelene.
            
               Pityocampe, a wourme which is in a pyneappull
 tree, whoſe bytynge is venymouſe.
            
               Pityſma, ſpetryll.
            
               Pitho, the lady and preſydent of eloquence, to perſwade.
            
               Pitiſſo, are, to ſyppe or drynke lyttell.
            
               Pituita, fleume or rewme deſcendyng from the head, alſo the pyppe whyche chyckens haue.
            
               Pituitoſus, fleumatyke.
            
               Pityliſma, matis, an exerciſe, where a man goth faſte on his toes, and moueth his armes forwarde and backewarde.
            
               Pityliſſo, are, to exercyſe in that fourme.
            
               Pityides, the innermoſt kernel of the pineapple.
            
               Pityuſa, an yle by Grecia callyd alſo Myletus, It is alſo an herbe of the kynde of ſpourge, whiche the Apothecaries do calle Eſula. Actuarius wryteth, that the barbarouſe people do call the roote of Pityuſa, Turbit. but it is the turbit whiche is white and thycke, and cometh from the hyl of Garganus, which is of the .ii .kynde of ſpurge, and is not that turbit which apothecaries now haue, rede more in Turbit.
            
               Pius, a, um, religiouſe, deuout, piteouſe, gentyl, chaſt, he that loueth his parentes or countrey.
            Pix, picis, pytche.
            
            Pix liquida, tarre.
            
         
         
            ¶P ANTE L.
            
               PLacabilis, eaſy to be pleaſed.
            
               Placabilitas, the vertue therof.
            
               Placabiliter, thankfully, contentfully.
            
               Placator, toris, a pacyfier of debate.
            
               Placae, plates of golde or ſyluer.
            
               Placendus, a, um, that which ought to content.
            
               Placenta, any pleaſant thynge made in paſ
                  •
               ry.
            
               Placentia, a cytie in Liguria.
            
               Placentini, people of the citie of Placentia.
            
               Placeo, cui, cere, to pleaſe, to lyke, to glory.
            
               Placet, it lyketh me or hym, or it is his pleſure or aduyſe.
            
               Senatui placet, the ſenate hath ordeyned.
            
               Placet ſibi, he ſtandeth well in his owne conceypte.
            
               Placide, quyetly, paciently, peaſybly.
            
               Placidus, da, dum, gentyll, meke, pacient.
            
               Placidus dies, a pleaſant day.
            
               Placita, ſtudies or exercyſes. Ipſe placita maiorum colebat habitu ſeuaero, He in a ſage garment, haunted the ſtudyes of the auncient fathers.
            
               Placitum, a fyrme conſent in an opynion, an ordynance.
            
               Placitus, ta, tum, that whyche lyketh or contenteth.
            
               Placo, care, to pacyfie, to appeaſe.
            
               Pladatores, a dyſeaſe, whereby the eye lyddes waxe feble, and wyll vneth be plucked vp.
            
               Plâga, the fyrſte ſyllable beynge longe, ſygnyfieth a wounde, the fyrſte ſyllable beinge ſhort, it ſygnifieth the armynge corde of a nette, alſo a great ſpace of heauen and earthe callyd alſo Clima.
            
            
               Plagae, the ſhetes of a bedde, or blankettes.
            
               Plagiaria lex, a lawe made agaynſte them whiche were called Plagiarij, whiche for theyr offence were whypped.
            
               Plagiarius, he that whyppeth men. Alſo he that byeth a man for a ſlaue, knowynge hym to be free. Alſo he that intyſeth a mans ſeruant to go from his maſter, alſo a ſtealer of bokes
            
               Plagiger, he that is borne to be whypped.
            
               Plagioſus, a ſchoole mayſter, whiche is a gret beater.
            
               Plagium, the offence, for the whiche one is whypped.
            
               Plagoſus, full of ſtrypes, or he that beateth moche.
            
               Planaratrum, the culter of a ploughe.
            
               Plancae, plankes.
            
               Planci, they whiche be ſplaye footed.
            
               Planctus, tus, waylynge, ſorowynge.
            
               Plancus, a noble man of Rome.
            
               Plane, truely, clerely, throughly.
            
               Planeta, a planette.
            
               Plango, xi, gere, to wepe or wayle, to ſtryke or hytte.
            
               Plangor, plangoris, a noyſe made with the mouthe, as in laughinge, or wepynge.
            
               Planidus, plaine.
            
               Planidior, more playne.
            
               Planities, a playne or leuell grounde.
            
               Planior, playner, euenner.
            
               Planipes, he that goeth without ſhowes. alſo a player in an enterlude.
            
               Planta, the foote with the toes. Sometyme only the ſole of the foote. alſo a plante or tree newely ſette: ſometyme an herbe that growweth lowe.
            
               Plantago, ginis, an herbe callyd Plantayne.
            
               Plantaria, ſettes or plantes, or the places where plantes be ſette.
            
               Plantaris, re, pertaynynge to the foote.
            
               Plantarius, a, um, mete or redy to ſette.
            
               Plantigerae arbores, trees whyche bryngeth forth ſettes.
            
               Planto, tare, to ſette or plante.
            
               Planula, a playne, a ioyners inſtrument.
            
               Planus, na, num, playne, euen, clere, apparant.
            
               Planum facere, to declare or expounde.
            
               Planus, ni, a deceyuour or mocker. alſo a iuglar, whiche maketh thinges to ſeme in apparance, where in dede noo ſuche thynge is, as water to comme into the howſe, or trees to growe, or money of leaues or ſtones.
            
               Plani piſces, fiſhes which be flat and not roūd.
            
               Plaſma, plaſmatis, the warke of a potter, or of
 hym, whyche worketh in erthe, alſo a plaiſter
            
               Plaſmo, are, to make pottes, or any other thynge of erthe.
            
               Plaſtes, a warker of ymages or other like thing in erthe.
            
               Plaſtice, the crafte of warkynge in erthe.
            
               Platanus, a plane tree.
            
               Platanetum, a place where plane trees doo growe.
            
               Platanodes, a promontory or hyll in Italy.
            
               Platanonis, ne, of plane tree.
            
               Platêa, a hyghe waye or ſtrete, alſo a courte in great places more ouer a ſee gull.
            
               Platalea, a byrde whiche foloweth water foules that do take fyſhes, and do pecke them ſo on the heade, that they let go theyr proy, whiche Platalea taketh and lyueth therwith.
            
               Plateae, a citie in Boeotia, not far frō Thebes
            
               Plateenſes, people of the Citie of Platee in Greece.
            
               Plato, the prynce of all philoſophers, in wiſedome, knowlege, vertue and eloqence fer excedynge all other gentyles, was borne in Athenes, whoſe father was named Ariſton of an auncient and honourable houſe, his mother was called Perictiona, deſcended frome Solon the maker of lawes to the Athenyenfis and one of the ſeuen wyſe men of Greece: lyenge in his cradelle, bees were founden to brynge hony into his mouth without hurting the chylde, whiche diuinours dyd interprete, was a ſignification that frome hym ſhoulde flowe eloquence moſte ſweete and dylectable. The nyghte before that he was brought vnto Socrates to be inſtructed, Socrates dremed that he helde betwene his knees a white ſignet, who hauynge fethers quickelye growen, flewe vp toward heuen, and fylled the ayre with moſte ſwete tunes, the daye after Plato beinge broughte by his father to Socrates, he beholdyng the chylde: this is, ſaid he, the byrde whoſe ymage I behelde the laſte nyghte. His name fyrſte was Ariſtocles, but after he was called Plato (as ſome do ſuppoſe) bycauſe that he was brode in the ſhulders, other do write, for as moch as he had a brode viſage. In his youth he exercyſed his body in wraſtlynge and other feates of actyuitie: and vntyll he was .xx. yeres olde he gaue him ſelfe to make amerouſe verſes whiche after that he came to here Socrates, he threwe in to the fyre and bourned, and than moſte ardently and attentifely he herde Socrates doctrine durynge the tyme that he lyued. And after that, he dyd not only here the moſte famouſe philoſophers and Geometrytians in Grecia, but alſo he wente into Italy into Affrica and Egypt, to here the miſticall ſciences. and it is thought that he herd ſome of the prophetes, whiche at that tyme liued, ſenſe there be founden in his warkes ſentences not aborrynge from our catholike faythe. he was not ignoraunte of marciall affayres, for he had fought in three great batayles, he chaſe a place by Athenes called Academia, wherin he taught, and therfore his diſciples were called Academici, there was in hym a meruaylouſe ſharpeneſſe of wytte with an in comparable dexteritie in diſputinge and makynge of aunſweres, his conſtaunce temperaunce and grauitie, with courtayſye in language were of al other incōparable, he was ſo deſyrouſe of knowlege that he was no leſſe ſtudiouſe to lern, than he was to teche other. wherfore he beinge ſkorned of one, which aſked of hym howe longe he wold be a ſcholer, ſo longe (ſayde he) as I ſhal not repent to be wyſer and better. He is called Diuinus Plato for his excellent doctrine, whiche conteyneth manye thynges (as ſayncte Auguſtine ſayth) whiche dothe accorde with holy ſcripture, in ſo moche as therein is perceyued the fyrſt parte of Geneſis vnto Spiritus domini ferebatur ſuper aquas, and the miſtery of thre perſonnes in diuinitie is therin expreſſed. he dyed as he was wrytynge beinge of the age of foure ſcore and one yeres, afore the incarnation of Chryſte .CCC. xlii .yeres, reade more of hym in Dioniſius.
            
               Plaudi, they which haue great hangyng eares
            
               Plaudo, plauſi, plaudere, to reioyce with coū
               tenaunce, to clap the handes to gether.
            
               Plauſibilis, plauſibile, that whiche the people doth receiue with ioye, and clapping of their handes, acceptable.
            
               Plauſus uel Applauſus, the conſente of people with voyce, or other noyſe.
            
               Plautus, a poete of Comedies borne in Vmbria, whā he had ſpent all his ſubſtance on plaiers garmentes, and therby was brought vnto extreme pouertie, he was fayne for his lyuynge to ſerue a baker in tourninge a querne or handemyll, and whan he was vacant ſeō that labour, he wrate moſt eloquent and pleſaunte comedies, wherin he was reputed ſo excellent, that Epius Stolo ſayde of hym, he doubted not but that the muſes wold ſpeake as Plautus dyd wryte, if they ſhulde ſpeake latine. He was in the tyme of Cato called Cenſorius.
            
            Plauſtrum, ſeu ploſtrum, a carte.
            
            
               Plauſus, ſus, a reioycynge with voyce and geſture, clappynge of handes together for ioy.
            
               Plebecula, the poore people.
            
               Plebeius, a, um, of the people.
            
               Plebeius, plebeius, one of the comminalte, not beinge a gentilman.
            Plebeus, idem.
            
                
               Plebicola, a fauourer of the comminaltie.
            
               Plebiſcitum, a lawe which ſometime was made by the onelye conſente of the common people of Rome, without the auctoritie of the ſenat.
            Plebs, bis, ſeu plebes, plebei, the commune people.
            
            
               Plecto, plexi, plectere, to puniſſhe, to ſtrike.
            
               Plecti capite, to be beheded.
            
               Plectrum, an inſtrumente, wherewith menne played on the harpe or dulcymers, for hurtynge of theyr fyngers. Alſo a ſpurre ſette on a fyghtynge cocke, whan he lacketh natural ſpurres.
            
               Pleiades, the ſeuen ſterres, whiche maryners do vſe in trienge of coſtes.
            
               Plemmyrium, a citie in Sicilia.
            
               Plenè, largely, abundantly.
            
               Plenilunium, full mone.
            Plenitudo, dinis, fulneſſe.
            
            Plenus, na, num, full.
            
            
               Plena manu, abundantly, liberally.
            
               Illum ingreſſum pleno gradu cohortari, nō intermittemus, we will not ceaſſe to exhorte hym with all our power, whan he is ones entred.
            
               Graue & plenum carmen, a verſe which filleth well the eares.
            
               Pleniore ore laudare, to gyue more aboundaunce of prayſes.
            
               Pleniſsimum teſtimonium, a very large teſtimonie or witneſſe.
            Plenus animi, couragiouſe.
            
            
               Plenus officij, redye to do pleaſure to euerye man.
            Plenus uini, drunken.
            
            
               Plenus ſanguinis, a great murder.
            Plenus ſomni, ſleapy.
            
            
               Adoleſcentia plena ſpei maximae, youthe wherin men haue a ſpeciall hope.
            
               In plenum dicere, to ſpeake generallye or of all.
            
               Plerus, plera, plerum, of olde tyme was vſed for more, Plera pars, the more parte.
            
               Plaeri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , plerae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , plera
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , many, a great ſorte.
            
               Pleruſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , plera
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , plerun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , the more parte of any thynge.
            
               Pleri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , ſignifieth ſome.
            
               Pleri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   omnes, for the more parte.
            
               Plerun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , oftentimes, ſomtimes.
            
               Pleonaſmos, a figure, wherin is ſuperfluitie of wordes.
            
               Plethrum, a meaſure of lande, conteynynge a hundred feete.
            
               Pleuritis, tidis, & pleureſis, a ſickeneſſe in the ſyde, called the Pleuriſie.
            
               Pleuriticus, pleuritica, he or ſhe, whiche hath the Pleureſy.
            
               Pleuitas, vnnobilitie, baſeneſſe of bloudde.
            
               Plexus, a, um, wounden or bounden.
            Plico, caui, uel plicui, care, to folde.
            
            
               Plicatilis, le, that whiche maye be folden.
            
               Plinius, the name of two noble lerned men, the one wrate the moſte excellente warke, called the hiſtorie of Nature, the other wrate eloquent Epiſtles, and an oration to Traiane in his commendation, whiche oration is called Panegyricus. There is alſo a warke of the practiſe of phiſyke in the name of Plinius, but whether it were of the fyrſt Plinie or no, it is not very certayne. ſome calleth hym Valerianus.
            
               Plocum, a ſmall reede.
            
               Plodo, ſi, dere, to make noyſe with handes or feete.
            
               Ploro, are, to weepe.
            Ploratus, tus, wepynge.
            
            
               Plorabundus, he that wepeth moche.
            
               Ploſtrum, for plauſtrum, a wayne or carte.
            
               Ploſtrarius, a, um, that whiche belongeth to a wayne or carte.
            
               Ploſtellum, a lyttel wayne.
            
               Plota, a lampraye.
            
               Ploti, they whiche haue playne feete withoute holownes in the ſoles of the feete.
            
               Ploxinum, a coffer or cheſte.
            
               Plumo, mare, to be in fethers. Alſo to enbrowder.
            
               Pluma, a fether.
            
               Plumula, a lyttell fether.
            
               Plumarius, ria, rium, of fethers, a warker with fethers.
            
               Plumatilis, le, made of fethers.
            
               Plumbago, aginis, a vayne of mettall or oore, wherin is both ſyluer and leade, it is alſo an herbe, whiche hath leaues lyke ſorrell, and a great rote and roughe.
            
               Plumbea ira, wrathe whiche longe continueth.
            
               Plumbatura, ſoulder of leade.
            
               Plumbata, a pellet of leade.
            
               Plumbatio, ſowlderynge.
            
               Plumbarius, a plummer or worker in leade.
            
               Plumbatae, balles or clubbes of leade, wherwith men faught.
            
               Plumbeus, bea, beum, of the colour of leadde leady, or heuy as leade.
            
               Plumbeus homo, a lumpyſhe man without courage or ſpirite.
            
               Plumbo, are, to leadde, to ſowlder or ioyne mettalle.
            
               Plumbum, leadde.
            
               Plumeſco ſcere, to be or waxe penned.
            Plumare, idem.
            Plumeus, a, um, of fethers.
            
            
               Plumiger, that beareth fethers.
            
               Plumo, are, to be fethered, or haue fethers.
            
               Plumula, a lyttell fether or plume.
            Pluo, plui, ere, to rayne.
            
            Plura, many. Pluria, idem.
            
                
               Plurifarius, a, um, of diuerſe faſcions.
            
               Plurifariam, many wayes, in many places.
            
               Plurimifacio, cere, to ſet moche by.
            
               Plurimum, very moche.
            
               Plurimus, very moche, many, longe.
            
               Plurisfacio, cere, to make more of.
            
               Plus, more. Pluris uendo, I ſelle for more or deerer.
            
               Plus decem millia capta, there were taken mo than ten thouſande.
            
               Vt cum matre plus eſſet, that he moughte be the lenger with his mother.
            Plures, for multi.
            
               Plus ue minus ue, more or leſſe, or about that number.
            
               Pluris authoritas, more auctoritie.
            
               Pluris aeſtimare, to ſet more by.
            
               Pluris aedificare, to buyld derar.
            
               Plurima ſtragula, good ſtore of tapeſrye.
            
               Hoc ego utor uno omnium plurimum, that do I vſe more than any other man.
            
               Ibi plurimum eſt, he is moſte often there.
            
               Plurimum aetatis, the more parte of my life.
            
               Pluſculus, a, um, a lyttell more.
            
               Plutealis, le, that whiche is ſette in a table or caſe.
            
               Plutealia ſigilla, ſmalle Images in tables or caſes.
            
               Plutus, called god of richeſſe who was paynted blynde.
            
               Pluteum, a ſpace or diſtaunce, whereby the lower pyllers were dyuided from the higher in the front or foreparte.
            
               Pluteus, an engyne of warre, made of hurdels keuered with lether or ſacke clothe, whiche kept in the warre, men whyles they wrought out of daunger of ordynance, vnder the whiche men do approche to the walles of a town alſo hutches or greatte coffers, or other lyke places, wherin bokes, tables, or ſuche thynges ar kepte.
            
               Pluto, tonis, called god of hell, the ſonne of Saturnus.
            
               Pluuia, rayne.
            Pluuialis, pluuiatilis, & pluuius, a, um, rayny or of rayne.
            
            
               Pluuia aqua, rayne water.
            
               Pluuioſus, full of rayne.
            
               Plyſsima, auncient writers vſed for plurima, very many.
         
         
            ¶P ANTE N.
            
               PNEVMA, atis, ſpiryte or wynde or brethe.
            
               Pneumaticus, ca, cum, wherein wynde or brethe is vſed.
            
               Pneumonici, they whyche be ſycke of the lounges.
         
         
            ¶P ANTE O.
            
               POCILLATOR, pocillatoris, He that bryngeth cuppes to the table, or a cuppe bearer.
            
               Pocillum, a lyttell cuppe.
            
               Poculum, a cuppe, ſometyme a draught.
            
               Pocillum, a diminutiue of Poculum.
            
            
               Poculentus, ta, tum, all thynge good to be drunke.
            Podagricus, & podagroſus, ſa, ſum, fulle of goute.
            
            
               Podagra, a peynefull dyſeaſe in the legges or feete called the gowte, whiche commeth of a ſuperfluouſe humour, ſpecially fleume rawe & viſcouſe, myxt with choler or ſharpe blude, runnynge by the vaynes called Venae capilla res, and the fleſhy partes of the membres, vntyll he be commen betwene the bones of the ioyntes if the humoure be hote, the place is red and excedynge hotte, the peyne very greuouſe, with moche ſwellynge, the vrine red, if the matter be ſanguine, if the humoure be colde, the redneſſe of the place is lyttell: but more extendynge to whyte, moche ſwellynge and bleweneſſe of matter melancholye: Alſo more hardneſſe, and the vrine more cleere.
            
               Podalyrius, one of the ſonnes of Aeſculapius and a great ſurgeon, he came to the ſiege of Troye with his brother Machaon.
            
               Padaris, a longe gowne to the fete.
            
               Poderis, a ſtraite garmente of lynnen clothe, it maye nowe be called the Albe, whiche prieſtes do weare whan they ſaye maſſe.
            
               Podex, dicis, the arſe hole.
            
               Podia, the corde, wherwith the ſayle is ſpred.
            
               Podium, a place made without a walle, for mē to ſtande and beholde thynges, alſo a ſtage, wheron is ſet candelles or bokes.
            Poëma, matis, & poëſis, a poetes warke.
            
            
               Poenalis, le, penall, peynfull.
            
               Poena, peyne, tourment, execution.
            
               Poenam pendere, to ſuffer puniſhement.
            
               Poenas petere, to be aduenged, to puniſhe.
            
               Poenas reddere, to be puniſhed.
            Poenas luere, idem.
            
               Afficere poena, to puniſhe.
            
               Committere poenam, to runne in the daunger of a peyne, for doinge or not doynge a thynge.
            
               Conſurgere in poenam, to aryſe to punyſſhe one, or to ſe one tourmented.
            
               Dare poenas, to be punyſhed.
            
               Exigere poenas, to cauſe one to be puniſhed.
            
               Expendere poenas, to be puniſhed.
            Perſoluere poenas, idem.
            
               Perſequi poenas, to be reuenged.
            
               Repetere poenas homicidij, to brynge an appele agaynſte one for murder.
            
                
               Sumere poenas, to puniſhe.
            
               Poenio, auncient writers vſed for punio.
            
            
               Poenitens, tis; penitent, repentaunt.
            
               Poenitendus, da, dum, to be aſſhamed of, to be lyttell eſtemed.
            
               Poenitentia, repentance, penaunce.
            
               Poeniteor, I am in peyne, I am greurd.
            
               Penitudo, repentaunce.
            Poenitet, têbat, têre, to repente.
            
            
               Me haud poenitet, I care not, I am not ſory therfore.
            
               Poenitet ambarum ornatae ut ſumus, I am aſhamed of vs bothe, that we be this apparayled.
            
               Eum poenitet deformem eſſe natū, he is aſhamed that he is ſo deformed.
            
               Noſmet noſtri poenitet, we be not contente with our ſelfes, we be aſhamed of our ſelfes.
            
               Senectutis eum ſuae poenitet, he taketh his age vnpaciently.
            
               Tam diu autē uelle debebis, quo ad te quantum proficias non poenitebit. Thou ſhuldeſt haue wyll to tary ſo longe, vntyll thou ſhalte be well content and pleaſed with the profite that is in that ſtudy.
            
               Malo me fortunae poeniteat quam uictoriae, I had leuer be ſory for my fortune, than aſhamed of the victory.
            
               Poenitet me uerbi tui, thy ſpeakynge dothe not content me.
            
               Poenitet me hominis, I am aſhamed of the man.
            
               Me quantum hic operis fiat, poenitet, I am not well content with that that is done.
            
               Poenitens, tis, he that repenteth hym
            
               Poenitendus, da, dum, that whereof a manne ought to be aſhamed, or miſlyketh.
            
               Poenitendum, a gerundife. Non eſt eius praeceptoris, poenitendum. He nedeth not to be aſhamed of that maiſter, or maye be content with ſuche a maſter.
            
               Poeniturus, he that ſhall repente.
            
               Poenitentia, repentaunce, it is alſo nowe called penaunce.
            
               Poenula, a cloke.
            
               Poeon, a man whom Homer calleth excellently lerned in phiſike.
            
               Poeonia, an herbe called Pyonie. alſo a region or countrey in Macedonia.
            
               Poenicus, ca, cum, of Affrike, reade Punica.
            
            
               Poeninſula, a place, whiche for the more parte is incloſed with water.
            
               Poenus, a man of the citie of Carthage, or an Affricane.
            
               Poëſis, the arte of poetes.
            
               Poëta, a poete.
            Poētice, ces, poetrye.
            
            
               Poēticè, after the maner of poetes.
            Poeticus, ca, cum, poeticall.
            
            
               Poetor, aris, ari, to exercyſe poetrie.
            Poetria, & poetris, idis, a woman poete.
            
            
               Pogonia, a blaſynge ſterre, with a longe beam afore lyke a berde.
            
               Pol, an aduerbe of ſwearynge, as it were by Pollux.
            
               Polemonium, an herbe Leonicenus and Manardus do ſuppoſe it to be that which is called Ruta agreſtis, wylde rue: ſome do call it woode ſage, it hath a ſquare ſtalke, on euery ſyde leaues lyke ſaulge hore and ſomewhat roughe, and a tufte on the toppe wherin is a blacke ſede, a rote of the lengthe of a cubite, and ſomewhat whyte, ſome haue ſuppoſed it to be the gilofloure called the ſtok gilofloure. Ruellius ſayth that it groweth on hyghe groundes and barayne.
            
               Polenta, was barleye ordered in this fourme. They ſteped barley in water one nyght, and dried it, and the nexte daye they fried it, and than grounde it, and ſo kepte it longe, which theyr ſlaues and pultry dyd eate.
            
               Polentarius, a, um, perteinyng to barley groūd as is afore ſayde.
            
               Politè; freſhely, gayly, klenly.
            
               Politia, ciuilitie, politike gouernaunce.
            
               Politicus, politica, liticum, ciuile or perteining to a citie.
            
               Politiones, they whiche are diligente in huſbandrye.
            
               Politius, more cleane or trimme.
            
               Polium, an herbe called poley.
            
               Pollen, linis, wheate floure, ſomtime poulder.
            
               Polleo, lêre, to maye.
            
               Plurimum mari pollent, they be very ſtrong on the ſea.
            
               Pollens medicina Hippocrates, Hippocrates was excellently lerned in phiſike.
            
               Pollêre moderatione & conſtantia, to be very moderate and conſtante.
            
               Pollere queſtu, to yelde moche gayne or aduauntage.
            
               Plus pollet, it is of more force or puiſſance, or vertue.
            
               Pollet eius authoritas, he is of great authoritie, or great eſtimation.
            
               Pollent, they are very good.
            
               Pollens uini, he that drinketh moche wyne.
            
               Pollentia, puiſſance.
            Polliceor, polliceri, & polliceo, pollicere, to promyſe.
            
            
               Pollicitatio, a promeſſe.
            
               Pollinaria cribra, a rangynge ſiue, wherewith the floure is ſifted from the branne, it maye be called alſo a boulter.
            
               Pollinarius, a, um, perteynynge to flowre.
            Pollit, for pila ludit.
            
               Polimenta, the ſtones of boore pigges.
            
               Polio, poliui, polire, to polyſſhe, to garnyſſhe.
            
                or decke.
            
               Politus, ta, tum, polyſhed, decked, trimmed.
            
               Polities, cleanlyneſſe.
            
               Pollentia, power, alſo a citie.
            
               Polleo, êre, to may, to haue power, to ſhine.
            
               Pollex, licis, a thumbe of the hande, it is alſo an inche, whiche is a fynger bredthe and a halfe.
            
               Roſa metitur quae pollice primo, the roſe cutte whiche is of the fyrſte gatheryng.
            
               Pollicaris, re, of a thumbe.
            
               Pollincio, linxi, lincere, to dreſſe a dead body with ſwete oyntmentes, it maye be nowe taken for the cheſtynge of men, and dreſſynge them with ſwete gummes, that the dead bodyes maye be the lengar without yll ſauour.
            
               Pollinctor, he that dothe that maner of buſyneſſe.
            
               Pollinctura, the miniſtration in baulmynge or cheſtinge deade bodyes.
            
               Pollintor, toris, a baker thatſyfteth meale.
            Pollis, linis, & pollen, inis, meale.
            
            
               Pollubrum, a baſon, wherin men do waſhe theyr handes.
            
               Pollûceo, cêre, to miniſter ſacrifice, ſpeciallye to Hercules.
            
               Pollucêre, to ſhyne bryght.
            Polluctum, idem.
            
               Pollucibiliter, coſtely, gorgiouſly.
            
               Pollucibilis coena, a coſtely ſupper.
            
               Polluo, luere, to polute or defyle.
            Pollutus, ta, tum, poluted, defyled.
            
            
               Polus, the pole, There be imagined to be two certayn poyntes in heuen, as it were the endes of an extree, wherabout heuen is meuyd, the one is in the northe, and is called Polus arcticus, The other in the Southe, called Polus antarcticus.
            
            
               Pollux, lucis, was brother to Caſtor, bothe beinge borne at one bourden, which Poetes do fayne to come of one egge, layde or broughte forthe by a woman, called Leda, with whom Iupiter companied in lykenes of a ſwanne.
            
               Polyarna, he that hath many lambes.
            
               Polybotes, a giant, whom Neptunus ſlewe.
            
               Polycarpus, he that hath many floures.
            
               Polycnemon, an herbe called wylde organum.
            
               Polycrates, a tyraunt, which was ſo fortunate that he neuer ſuffered any aduerſite, or grief, wherfore he at the laſte dredyng the chaunge of the fauour of Fortune, hauynge a rynge with a ſtone of an excellent valewe, dyd caſte the ſame ringe into the ſea, to the intent that he wolde ſuffer ſome diſpleaſure, and ſo ſatisfye fortune: but a fyſhe deuouringe the ring was the ſame daye taken of a fyſher, and giuen to the kynge, for the greatteneſſe of the fyſhe, whiche beinge opened, there was the ſayde ringe founde and brought to the king, wherat as well he, as all other aboute hym meruayled. Sone after the ſame kynge was oppreſſed by his people, and hanged.
            
               Polydamas, a Troyane, one of theym whiche betrayed the citie with Eneas and Anthenor
            
               Polydôrus, the ſonne of kynge Priamus and Hecuba, who was by his father in the tyme of the warres at Troy ſente to Polymneſtor kyng of Thracia with a gret ſumme of gold, to be kepte out of the peryll of warres. But the citie of Troye beynge taken, Polymneſtor to enioye the treaſure ſlewe the chylde, wherfore afterwarde quene Hecuba crached out the eyes of Polymneſtor.
            
               Polygonum, an herbe, whiche is alſo called Sanguinaria, and hath leaues lyke to Rewe, but it runneth on the grounde as graſſe, the iuyce therof put into the noſe, ſtoppeth bledynge. It is ſuppoſed to be ſwynes graſſe, or knote graſſe.
            
               Polygonaton, an herbe which Ruellius ſaith is that whiche is called commonly Sigillum Salomonis. Manardus affirmeth it to be that whiche of the Arabians is called Secacul, of ſome Genicula, or Sigillum ſanctae Mariae, of Io. Agricola, it is ſuppoſed to be that whiche Italions do call Fraxinella.
            
            
               Polyhiſtor, oris, he that knoweth moche, or of many thynges done.
            
               Polilogus, he that hath many wordes.
            
               Polymitus, mita, mitum, of twyne or twiſted thredes.
            
               Polymita, a garmente made of twyſted threde or ſylke.
            
               Polyhymnia, one of the Muſes, whiche worde ſignifieth moche memory.
            
               Polymorphus, of many formes or faſcions.
            
               Polymyxos, a candelſtycke, whiche bearethe many lyghtes.
            
               Polyphagus, a great eater.
            
               Polyphemus, was a gyaunte that hadde one eye in his forehede, whiche was put oute by Vlyxes.
            
               Polypodium, an herbe lyke to ferne, growing on trees.
            
               Polypoſus, he that hath a ſore in the noſe.
            
               Polypus, a fyſhe hauynge many feete, whiche chaungeth his colour often: Alſo a piece of fleſh, growynge in the ouermoſte part of the noſe, whiche cauſeth a ſtinkynge ayre out of the noſe.
            
               Polyrizon, that whiche hath many rootes.
            
               Polyſyntheton, a figure, where many articles come into a ſentence, as Ille trahebat, Hic uo ciferabatur, He drewe, and he cried out.
            
               Polytes, one of kynge Priamus ſonnes.
            
               Polytrichon, an herbe called maydenheare.
            
               Polyxena, the daughter of kynge Pryamus whom cruell Pirrhus ſlewe on the tombe
 of Achylles.
            
               Pomarium, an orcharde, ſometyme a place wherin fruites be kepte.
            
               Pomeridianus, & poſtmeridianus, a, um, any thynge done after none.
            
               Pomiferus, a, um, bearynge appuls, hauynge plenty of appulles.
            
               Pomilius, & pomilio, onis, a lyttel perſonage a dwarfe.
            
               Pomoerium, the grounde without the walles of the citie, whiche mought neyther be plowed nor inhabyted, the territorie.
            
               Pompa, a pompe, or ſolemne ſighte.
            
               Pompeius, called Magnus, for his ſundry and incomparable victories, whoſe father was called Pōpeius Strabo, had ſo good a grace in his viſage, that frome his chyldehode, he meued the people of Rome moſte entierlye to fauour hym. for his ſingular beneuolence, cō
               tinence of lyuynge, marciall experyence and knowlege, pleaſantneſſe of ſpeche, fidelytie of maners, and eaſineſſe in ſpeakynge to. He neuer required any thyng without ſhamefaſtneſſe nor granted any thyng but with a glad countenaunce. In his viſage appiered alway bothe nobilitie and gentilneſſe ſo that whan he was in his flouriſhinge youthe, there ſhyned in hym maners bothe princely and reuerende. Scilla the cruel and proude tirant had him in ſuche eſtimation, that where he wold not ariſe to any other man, were he neuer in ſo highe a dignitie, He met with Pompeius commynge towarde hym, and putting of his bonet ſaluted hym by the name of great capitayne, called at that tyme in latine Imperator. He triumphed for his victories in Affrik beinge almoſte a chyld nor yet admitted into the ſenate, contrary to the auncient order of Rome. He vaynquiſhed the valiaunt Capytayne Sertorius, a man at that time mooſte famous in proweſſe, being an exile in Spain and before was inuincible. He alſo vainquyſhed Mithridates the greate kynge of Pontus, and where a great number of the concubines of Mithridates, women of excellente beaultie were taken and brought vnto hym, he wolde not company with any of them, but ſente theym vnto theyr frendes. He ſubdued theſe realmes: Armeniam, Cappadociam, Paphlagoniam, Mediam, Cholcidem, Iberiam, Albaniam, Syriam, Ciliciam, Meſopotamiam, Iudeam, and Arabiam, for the which he triumphed, after that he had twiſe before triumphed, for the winning of Spain and Affrike. In this triumphe he brought in to the commune treaſure of golde and ſyluer in moneye and plate .xx. thouſande talentes, whiche if they were commune talentes, it amounted to .xx. hundred thouſande poundes. if they were the great talentes .xxvii. hundred and .xxvi. thouſande .DC.li.xli.xiii.s.iiii.d. in our money, beſides that whiche was gyuen to the men of warre whiche had ſerued hym, & that was to euerye one, a thouſande and fyue hundred braſon pence, of our money .vi.li.v.s. whiche in ſo great an hoſte as perteyned to the conqueſt of ſo many countrayes extended to a wonderfull ſum of money, wherby may appere the ryches of the Romayns. Afterward by the mediation of the frendes of bothe partes, Pompeye toke to wife Iulia the doughter of Iulius Caeſar, whiche liued not longe, and the amitie betwene Pompey and Caeſar decreſed, & at the laſt the inſaciable ambition of them bothe braſt out, the one not ſuſteynynge the others honour, wherof came the warre ciuile betwene theym, wherin Caeſar with a fewer number vainquiſhed Pompey, who priuily fled by ſea into Egypt, where vnder the ſaulfe conducte of the kynge Ptholomeus, he was ſlayne in a bote, his heade ſtriken of and his bodye caſte on the ſtronde, where it was poorely buried, whan he had liued .lx. yeres and aboue, and frome his youth in moſte highe honour welthe and proſperitie, on whom it ſemed that fortune hadde moſte prodigally powred all her treaſure.
            
               Pomponius Atticus, an honourable Romayn of a gentill and auncient houſe, from his child hode amiable of viſage with a ſwete voice and pronunciation, and therwith hauynge a ſharpe witte and apte vnto lernynge, for the diuyſion and partes taken at Rome, he went and dwelled at Athenes where he was of the peple moſt tenderlye beloued, as well for his honourable vertues, as for his benefites toward them, for beinge lefte riche by his fathers ſubſtance and great reuenues. He often tymes reliued the neceſſitie of the comune people, wherfore he was there had in a ſynguler reuerence, and for his abode in Athenes and excellencie in theyr eloquence he was called Atticus. He dyd not only with his treaſure kepe the people out of vſery: but alſo in a time of ſcarſitie he gaue to euerye citezen ſeuen meaſures of wheate called Medimui, whiche was of our meaſure .v. buſhelles and dī, one pecke, one galon, and one quarte to euery one, he was loued of euerye man, and he was charitable to all men. Whan Cicero went in exile he gaue vnto hym CCl. thouſande Seſtertios, whiche amounteth of oure moneye to M.xli.li.xiii.s.iiii.d. Sylla not withſtandynge his great pryde, had hym in reuerence. He mooſte loued Hortenſium and Ciceronem, prynces of eloquence, and although he hym ſelf were as wel in the latine tunge as in the greke as perfecte as any man, yet wolde he neuer practiſe in matters, nor wolde aſke or ſue for auctorie, he relyeued with his moneye contrarye
 
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                partes as Antonium and Brutum. one to the other mortall ennemies. He lente great ſummes of money without takynge of vſery, and holpe ladies whoſe huſebandes were banyſhed, as well with money as with his counſayle and ſolicitation. Of Pompey and Caeſar he was equally loued whan they were ennemies together. Finally his quiete lyuynge was to no man anoyaunce, but to euery man thankefull: his houſe was pleaſaunt and not magnifike, nete and not very ſumptuouſe, al his ſeruauntes, were verye well lerned, and redde well & wrate very fayre, nor there was ſo ſimple a boy in the houſe but that he could do bothe, the reſidue were artificers, ſuche as made thynges neceſſarye and conueniente for his houſe. Caeſar Auguſtus whan he moſt flouriſhed made alyaunce with him for his excellent temperance and honeſtie in liuing, for the which all noble men fauored him, alſo he maried his wifes ſonne Tiberius, who was afterwarde emperour, to the doughter of Atticus doughter, and no day eſcaped that the emperour wrate not vnto him, ſemblably did Antonius the emperours enemy. Such grace had he to be fauoured of all men, to liue out of the danger of enuiouſe authoritie, to paſſe his time in the mooſte dilectable paradiſe of knowlege, and to haue as well therof abundauntely, as alſo lyuynge ſufficiente for the mayntenaunce of his eſtate beinge a knyght, and to ayde his frendes and countreymen in theyr neceſſite. Whan he hadde lyued .lxxvii. yeres, he died of a fiſtula with a wonderfull pacience and voluntary abſtinence, and was buried at Rome, all good men folowyng the corps, and the people and al other lamenting He wrate dyuerſe excellent warkes in Greke and latine, whiche are periſhed to the ineſtimable detriment of them that be ſtudiouſe.
            
               Pompholix, is an herbe whiche (as Manardus writeth, is that which the Apothecaries do call Nill.
            
               Pompeiopolis, a citie in Nauer called Pampilona.
            
            
               Pompeianus, of Pompeius parte, or a fauourer of Pompeius.
            
               Pomum, the generall name of all fruites, it is moſte vſed for an appull.
            
               Ponderitas, hefte, poyſe.
            
               Pondero, raui, rare, to way, to ponder, to conſyder, to eſteme.
            
               Pondo, indeclinabile, ſometyme it ſignifiethe a pounde weyghte, Olei pondo octaginta, foure ſcore pounde weyght of oyle. ſometyme weyghte onely. Corona aurea librae pondo, A crowne of golde of a pounde weight. Somtime it ſignifieth a value of moneye, whiche like as Mina amonge the Greekes conteined a hundred Dragmas ſo pondo amonge the Romaines conteined an hundred Denarios of ſiluer.
            
               Pondus, deris, poiſe or weight.
            
               Magna auri pondus, a great waighte or ſumme of golde. it dothe alſo ſignifie charge or bourden.
            
               Habere pōdus apud aliquem, to haue auctoritie aboute ſome man, or to be in great eſtimation with one.
            
               Eius filius eodem eſt apud me pondere quo fuit ille. His ſonne is with me in the ſame, or as moche eſtimation as euer was he.
            
               Ponduſculum, a littell or ſmall waight.
            Ponderoſus, a, um, waighty.
            
            
               Ponè, after, or behinde.
            
               Pone eum eſſe uictum, put the caſe that he be vainquiſhed.
            
               Pono, poſui, ponere, to put, to ſet, to ceſſe, to buylde, to laye aparte.
            
               Ponere ſpem, to hope.
            
               Accuſatorem ponere, to ſuborne or hier one to accuſe a man.
            
               Ponere ante oculos rem aliquam, to ſet before his eies, to cauſe hym to remember to make a thynge to appere clere.
            
               De rebus ante oculos poſitis diſputare, to diſpute of thynges clere and out of queſtion.
            
               Quod erat ante oculos poſitū, that no man had any doubt in.
            
               Bene ponere beneficium apud aliquem, to do pleaſure to one that will require it.
            
               Caſtra ponere, to pitche or ſette a campe in warres.
            
               Poſituū conſilium in fortuna, Fortune hath therof the diſpoſition, or it is at the wyl and pleaſure of fortune.
            
               Ponere curam, to ſet a ſyde care.
            
               Ponere curam in re aliqua, to take care for a thinge.
            
               Cuſtos in frumento publico eſt poſitus, He had the charge gyuen to hym of the common graynardes.
            
               Ponere dies multos in rem aliquam, to employe or ſpende moche tyme about a thynge.
            
               Eſt. n. poſitum in te totum, it is in the wheit ſhall be done or not.
            
               Ponere exemplum, to allege an exaumple.
            
               Ponere ſe extra culpam, to diſcharge hym ſelfe of that whiche is layde vnto hym.
            
               Ponere fundamenta, to laye the fundation.
            
               Po
                     •
                  ere in admirādis, to tel it for a meruaile.
            
               Ponere aliquid in admiratione, to meruayle at a thynge.
            
               Ponere aliquem in aequo duobus ſummis, to eſteme one equallye as moche as two the greatteſt.
            
               Ponere in aequalitate, to eſteme the oone as moche as the other.
            
                
               Neque ego hoc in tua laude pono, alia ſunt tua facta at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   conſilia ſumma laude digna, Nor I accoumpte this amonge thy prayſes, there be other of thyn actes and procedynges that doo deſerue as moche prayſe as maye be gyuyn.
            
               Ponere in promptu, to dyſcloſe to all men.
            
               Ponere in ſolem, to ſette agaynſt the ſunne.
            
               In optima ſpe ſibi ponere aliquid, to haue good hope in a thynge.
            
               Ponere in uitio, to take it in an ylle parte, to interprete is to the warſte.
            
               Ponere mala initia, to begynne yll.
            
               Ponere loco contumeliae, to reproche one of any thynge.
            
               Ponere in beneficij loco, to take it for a frēdly tourne or pleaſure.
            
               Tantum in ea arte ponitis, ye ſet ſo moche by that arte.
            
               Munus bene poſitum, a gyft well beſtowed.
            
               Ponere nomina rebus, to gyue names to thynges.
            
               Ponere omnia in uoluptate, to eſteme noothynge ſoo moche as voluptye or carnall apperyte.
            
               Ponere operam, to beſtowe labour.
            
               Bene opera poſita, peynes well beſtowed.
            
               Ponere operam alicui, to attend about ones buſyneſſe.
            
               Ponere oua, to lay as a henne dothe.
            
               Ponere pro certo ſum ueritus, I dare not affyrme it for trouthe, I dare not aſſure you that it is ſo.
            
               Bene ponere officiū apud aliquem, I haue not loſte my labour in doynge hym pleaſure.
            
               Sumptus nuſquam melius poteſt poni, A man coulde neuer haue better beſtowed his money.
            
               Ponere multum temporis in aliquo loco, to tary a great whyle in a place.
            
               Vbi cun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   poſuit ueſtigia, by all the way that he paſſyd, where ſo euer he went.
            
               Ponere iubebam de quo quis audire uellet, I bad hym purpoſe what ſoo euer they lyſted to heare.
            
               Tum uenti poſuere, than the wynde ceaſſed.
            
               Ponere conſilium, to leaue his enterpryſe.
            
               Ponere de manibus, to laye oute of his handes.
            
               Ponere dolorem, to ceaſſe to be ſorowfull.
            
               Ponere feroces animos, to leaue his fierſeneſſe and crueltie.
            
               Ponere arma, to lay aſyde theyr weapon, or harneyſe.
            
               Ponere metum, to take a good harte.
            
               Ponere pudorem, to be ſhameleſſe.
            
               Ponis mihi porcum, thou ſerueſt me at the table with porke.
            
               Ponere pallium, to laye his garmente in pledge.
            
               Pone eum eſſe uictum, put the caſe that he is vaynquyſhed.
            
               Ponunt philoſophi, the phyloſophers doo wryte. &c.
            
               Ponere in gratia uel gratiam, to brynge into fauour. Cic. ad At.
            
            
               Pons, pontis, a brydge.
            
               Pontia, an yle in the ſea callyd Liguſticum, on the ſouthe parte of Italy, wherein Pylatus was borne, and thereof was callyd Pontius Pylatus.
            
            
               Pontica nux, a kynde of fylberdes, whych camme frome the countreye callyd Pontus in Aſia.
            
               Ponticum, is a taſte, whyche hath noo ſente to be dyſcerned.
            
               Ponticulus, a lyttell brydge.
            
               Pontifex, ficis, an archebyſſhoppe.
            
               Pontificatus, tus, the dygnitie of a byſhop.
            
               Pontificius, a, um, of a byſſhoppe.
            
               Pontones, whyry bootes.
            
               Pontus, is the ſea, whyche is betwene the fenne callyd Maeotis, and the yle callyd Tenedos. It is alſo a great cuntray ioyning to that ſea, whyche conteyneth the royalmes of Colchū, Cappadociam, Armeniam, and other dyuerſe countrays. it is ſometyme put generally for the ſea.
            
               Popa, fatte, greace.
            
               Popana, fatte oyntementes.
            
               Popanum, a cake of breadde.
            
               Popellus, the lyttell or poore people.
            
               Popina, a tauerne or vyttaylynge houſe, where meate is eaten out of dewe tyme, a Cookes ſhoppe.
            
               Popinatio, ryotte.
            
               Popinalis, le, pertaynynge to ryotte, or places of ryotte.
            
               Popino, nonis, a commune hauntoure of vyttaylynge houſes.
            
               Popinor, aris, ari, to eate out of dewe tyme, to be ryottouſe.
            
               Poples, poplitis, the hamme of a mans legge behynde the knee.
            
               Poppiſma, matis, the noyſe made with the mouth and the hande, in rydynge, or wanton dalyaunce.
            
               Populabundus, waſtynge the countreye, or he that gothe in fourragynge or robbynge of countrayes.
            
               Popularis, re, pertaynynge to the people, accepted or fauoured of the people. Alſoo it ſygnyfyeth a famylyar frende, or as we vſe to call countrey man.
            
               Nihil tam populare quam bonitas, Nothing more pleaſeth the people than goodneſſe or vertue.
            Praeſtat diuitem eſſe ac popularem, quàm
 
               nobilem ac mendicum, It were better to be of the commynaltie, and ryche, than of the nobylitie, and a beggar.
            
               Popularia loca, places where the comminaltie dothe aſſemble.
            
               Populari nomine a nobis appellantur, In the commune fourme of ſpeakynge, they be callyd. &c.
            
               Populare ingenium, holdynge with the lyberty of the people.
            
               Popularitas, frendeſhyp by occaſyon that they be countreymen. alſo the fauour that one beareth to the commune people.
            
               Populariter, & populare, homely, lyke the people, accordynge to the maners of the people.
            Populatus, ta, tum, waſted, diſtroyed.
            
            
               Populatia, boyes playes.
            
               Populatim, of all the people, alſo euerychone.
            
               Populatio, a waſtynge of the countrey, a forragynge.
            
               Populare, to gette the fauour of the people.
            
               Populator, a fourrageour or waſter of countrayes.
            
               Populeus, a, um, of a poplar tree.
            Populinus, idem.
            Populnus, & populneus, idem.
            
               Populetum, the place where poplar trees doo growe.
            
               Populifugia, was a day in the moneth of Iune at the whyche day by reaſon of a rumour, the people fledde.
            
               Populor, popularis, to waſte or dyſtroye a countrey.
            
               Populoſus, a, um, full of people, populouſe.
            
               Populus, people, properlye it is all the ſtates of the people beſydes the ſoueraigne Gouernour. All be it the Romaynes made a dyſtynction betweene the Senate and the people, wrytynge in theyr ſtanderdes and coyne. Senatus populus
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Romanus, The Senate and people of Rome.
            
               Populus, a tree callyd a popular, wherof one is callyd whyte poplar, whoſe ſtemme is long and playne, and the leaues alway ſhakynge, grene within and whyte on the backe, the other is callyd blacke poplar, whyche hathe the barke rough, and fewer leaues than the whyte.
            
               Porca, a ſowe, a rydge of lande, a balke.
            
               Porcarius, a, um, of a ſwyne.
            
               Porcarius, a ſwyneherde.
            
               Porceo, cere, to prohybyte.
            
               Porcetra, a yonge ſowe or yelte.
            
               Porcinus, na, num, of a hogge.
            
               Porcellus, a pygge.
            Porculus, idem.
            
               Porculatio, bryngynge vp of ſwyne.
            
               Porculator, a fatter of ſwyne.
            Porculetum, idem quod porca.
            
               Porculus, a ſhoote, a porcatte.
            
               Porcus, a hogge.
            
               Porcus troianus, a hogge roſted with manye other beaſtes and fowles within his bealye.
            
               Porgam, vſed of the auncient wryters for porrigam, I wyll delyuer or take to one.
            
               Pori, poores in the body, out of the whyche iſſueth ſweate.
            
               Porphyretes, a redde marble.
            
               Porphyreticus, ca, cum, of redde marble.
            
               Porphyriacus, ca, cum, of purple colour.
            
               Porphyrio, a byrde whyche drynketh as yf he dydde byte the water, he hathe longe redde legges and bylle.
            
               Porraceus, cea, ceum, of the coloure of leeke blades.
            
               Porrectè, ſtreyght out.
            
               Porrectus, ta, tū, extended in length or bredthe, ſtretched.
            
               Porriginoſus, a, um, lyke to leekes.
            
               Porrigo, porrexi, rigere, to ſpreade out, to offer, to ouerthrowe.
            
               Herbam porrigere, to confeſſe to be vaynquyſhed.
            
               Porrigere manum, to gyue aide or ſuccours.
            
               Porraceus, a, um, of a leke.
            
               Porrò, ſurely, alſo longe before, farre of, after, in tyme commynge, beyonde, forſothe.
            
               Porrò. Si ire porro pergas, yf ye go further.
            
               Vt quieſcant porro moneo, Fynally I aduyſe them to leaue or ſytte ſtylle.
            
               Quid reſtat niſi, ut fiam miſer? What remayneth, but that in the ende I am vndoone.
            
               Etiam ne eſt quid porro? Is there any thynge elles?
            
               Quid deinde porro, What more folowed after.
            
               Porro, is ſommetyme a coniunction, and is as moche as Sed. ſometyme it is a coniunction expletyue, to fylle vp onely the number of the ſentence.
            
               Porro autem, and that more is.
            Ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                porro, for ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                etiam.
            
               Se porro pueros à ſenibus audiſſe dicebant, That they beynge verye yonge, herde olde men ſay. &c.
            Porrus, & porrum, leekes.
            
            
               Porſena, the name of a kynge, that beſyeged Rome, to haue brought in Tarquinus.
            
               Porta, a yate.
            
               Portendo, dere, to ſygnyfye before a thynge happeneth.
            
               Portentiferus, tifera, tiferum, that whyche ſygnyfyeth ſtraunge or monſtruouſe thynges commynge.
            Portentificus, ca, cum, idem.
            
                
               Portentoſus, a, um, monſtruouſe, ſygnyfyenge yll lucke or aduenture.
            
               Portentum, a thynge monſtruouſe, or very ſeldome ſene, whyche maye ſygnifye ſomewhat to come.
            
               Porticus, cus, a porche.
            
               Portio, a portion.
            
               Portiuncula, a lyttell portion.
            
               Portiuſculus, the pylate of a ſhyppe, whyche ruleth the maryners.
            
               Portitor, oris, the cuſtomer of a hauen▪ alſoo a porter, that dothe beare thynges that be bought, whyther as the byer wyll haue hym. Alſo he that beareth men fro the hauen to the ſhyppe.
            
               Porto, tare, to beare, to brynge.
            
               Portorium, the frayte payde for paſſage or caryage of marchaundyſe. alſo cuſtome or tallage.
            
               Portulaca, an herbe callyd Purſelan.
            
               Portuoſus, full of hauens.
            
               Portus, tus, an hauen.
            
               Res eſt in portu, the matter or thyng is ſafe. In portu nauigare, to be out of daunger.
            
               Poſca, a ſawce made with vyneger and water.
            
               Poſcinumius, mia, um, that whych requyreth money.
            
               Poſco, popoſci, poſcere, to aſke, to requyre, to prouoke, to aſſayle.
            
               Poſcunt pugnam, they offer to fyght, or doo battayle.
            
               Poſcere maioribus poculis, to quaft or drink depe one to an other.
            
               Poſcere aliquem clamore, to crye after one.
            
               Vbi res poſcit, where it is requiſite.
            
               Cum uſus poſcit, whan nede is.
            
               Pos, a brydge.
            
               Poſitio, a ſettynge of a thynge.
            Poſitura, idem.
            
               Poſitus, ta, tum, put or ſette.
            
               Poſitura, & poſitus, tus, a ſettyng or puttynge.
            Poſſeſsio, onis, poſſeſſion.
            
            
               Poſſeſsio fidutiaria, a poſſeſſion whyche oone gyueth to an other vppon condytion that he ſhall redelyuer poſſeſſion vpon certayn thinges perfourmed, or whan he were therto requyred by hym, whyche gaue poſſeſſyon, it mought haue bene callyd a poſſeſſyon in vſe, whanne feoffementes of truſte were vſyd in Englande.
            
               Poſſeſſor, oris, he that hath the poſſeſſion, the owner.
            Poſsideo, ſedi, ſidêre, to poſſede.
            
            
               Bona ex edicto poſsidêre, whan one hathe goodes gyuen hym by iudgement or decree.
            
               Bona publice poſsidêre, to haue goodes forfayted or confyſcate.
            
               Poſsidêre palmam, to get the price.
            
               Breui tempore totum hominem, totam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eius praeturam poſſederat, In a lyttel while he had gotten into his handes both the man and his offyce holly.
            Poſſum, potui, poſſe, to maye.
            
            
               Non potuit quin ſuo ſemone aliquem familiarium participauerit, He could not forbeare but with his talkynge he made ſome of his companyons priuy, or of his counſayle.
            
               Huc fac ad me ut uenias ſi quid poteris, Do what ye canne to come hyther to me, yf it be poſſyble.
            
               Poteſt plurimum ad Caeſarem, he maye doo moche, or is in good credence with Ceſar.
            
               Potin es ut deſinas, Canſte thou not lette aloone.
            
               Incende hominem amabo te quoad poteſt, On good felowſhyp prycke forward the man as moche as is poſſyble.
            
               Poſt, after, afterwarde, behynde.
            
               Poſtea, afterwarde.
            
               Poſtergo, are, to leaue behynde, to caſte backe.
            
               Poſteri, they whyche do ſuccede vs in bloode, as ſonnes, theyr children, and their ſucceſſion.
            
               Poſterior, he that commeth after.
            
               Non poſteriores feram ſubauditur partes, I wyll not be the laſte.
            
               Paulo aetate poſterior, a lyttell yonger.
            
               Omnia libertate poſteriora ducere, To regarde nothynge or paſſe vppon nothynge but lybertie.
            
               Poſteritas, taris, the worlde to come.
            
               Poſterius, later, ſlower, vyler.
            
               Poſterus, ra, rum, that whyche commeth after.
            
               Poſtera dies, the daye after. Poſteri pedes, the hynder fete.
            
               Poſtfero, to ſette after or behynde, to ſette leſſe by.
            
               Poſthabeo, bêre, to put backe or ſet leſſe by.
            
               Poſthac, from hensforthe.
            
               Poſthamus, ma, a chylde borne after that the father is deade.
            
               Poſthumus, ma, mum, folowyng, or to come.
            Poſtîcum, & poſticus, a backedoore,
            
            
               Poſtica, all that is behynde vs, lyke as Antica is all that is before vs, It is alſoo a lyne whych dyuydeth the fieldes from the Eaſt to the weſte.
            
               Poſtilena, a crouper.
            
               Poſtis, a poſte.
            
               Poſtliminium redire, is whan any manne happeth to go from vs to our ennemyes, and after retourneth home.
            
               Poſtmitto, poſtmittere, to leaue behynde, to forgette.
            
               Poſtmodum, afterwarde.
            
               Poſtquam, after.
            
               Poſtremo, fynally.
            
               Poſtridie, the day after to morowe, the day folowynge the day before expreſſed.
            
                
               Poſtomis, a brake, wherwith a horſes mouthe is broken, and is made to beare his heade eaſyly.
            
               Poſtremus, a, um, the laſte of all.
            
               Poſtremi homines, vngraciouſe men.
            
               Poſtremum me uides, it is the laſt tyme that thou ſhalt ſee me.
            
               Poſtulo, are, to require, to demaunde a thynge whyche is dewe to the aſker. alſo to accuſe or ſewe one in the lawe, or to complayne on one, ſometyme to deſyre.
            
               Poſtulare quaeſtionem, to deſyre that the parties mought be ſtraytely examyned, properly by tortures or tourmentes.
            
               Poſtulare ius, to make a reaſonable requeſt.
            Budaeusin annot.
            
               Poſtulatio, a ſupplyeation made to a prynce.
            
               Poſtulationibus uacare, to dyſpache ſuyters, to here complayntes.
            
               Poſtulationes, ſupplycations or bylles of complaynte.
            
               Potens, tis, myghty, puiſſaunt, hable.
            
               Potentia, power, puiſſance, habilite, great rule. it is alſo a place in Italy callyd Sancta Maria de Loretto.
            
            
               Potenter, myghtyly, puiſſantly.
            Potentatus, tus, power.
            
            Pote, for potis.
            
               Poteſtas, tatis, power, auctoritie, counſaylle, and reaſon.
            
               Poteſtatem ſui facere, to ſuffremen to come to hym, or to ſpeake with hym.
            
               Poteſtatem gerere, to exerciſe an authoritie or offyce.
            
               An erit haec optio & poteſtas tua? Shall it be at thy choyſe. &c.
            
               Praeſertim cum tota poteſtas huius rei tua ſit, Specyally ſens all the matter reſteth in the, or is in thy power to brynge to paſſe.
            
               Quae tum erat poteſtas, accordynge as it was lefull at that tyme.
            
               Vix adipiſcendi poteſtas modo fuit, Vneth or with great peyne I mought come by it.
            
               Poteſtas mittendi non fuit citius, I coulde no ſooner ſende.
            
               Quoties mihi certorum hominum poteſtas erit quibus recte dem, non praetermittā &c. Whan or as often as I may haue ſure men, to whome I may delyuer my letters, I wyll not forgette to wryte vnto you.
            
               Cum poteſtate proficiſci in prouinciam, to go into the countray appoynted hym, hauing authoritie to rule there.
            
               Poteſtatem dare, to lette or ſuffre, to gyue leaue.
            Poteſtatem facere, idem.
            
               Poteſtatem ſui facere, to lette or ſuffer men to ſpeake with hym.
            
               In poteſtate alicuius eſſe, to be vnder an nother mans rule or obedyence, or to be at his commaundement.
            
               Peruenire in poteſtatē alicuiꝰ, to be brought in ſubiection.
            
               Ponere in poteſtate alicuius, to put hym vnto his mercy.
            
               Poteſtur, for poteſt, he may.
            
               Potio, onis, a drynke.
            
               Potiono, are, to gyue a medycine.
            
               Potior, potitus ſum, potiri, to haue in poſſeſſion, to optayne, to take pleaſure of.
            
               Potiri urbis, to wynne the cytie.
            
               Potiri uoluptatum, to lyue in pleaſure.
            
               Potiri rerum, to be kynge or maiſter of all the worlde.
            
               Potiri regni, to wynne the countrey.
            
               Potiri laborem, to endure peyne.
            
               Qui bello potiti ſunt, whyche haue wonne it at the ſwordes poyne.
            Potior, for Fruor.
            Potior, potius, & potiſsimus, for Melior, Optimus.
            
               Potior ſit qui prior ad dandum eſt, Let hym be in better condytion, or haue more aduauntage, that fyrſte gyueth.
            
               Iudicabit nulla ad legendum his eſſe potiora, He ſhal iudge none more worthy to be rad than they.
            
               Nihil mihi potius fuit, quàm ut Maſiniſſam conuenirem, There was noo thynge that I more longed than to mete with Maſiniſſa. The fyrſte thynge that I dydde I wente to Maſiniſſa, I deſyred nothynge more than to ſee Maſiniſſam.
            
               Potiſsimus, a, um, the beſt of all other, or the chiefe or the pryncipall.
            
               Potius, rather.
            
               Potiſsimum, or potiſsime, moſte rather, chiefly, pryncipally.
            
               Potitij, was an auncyent famylye or kynrede amonge the olde Latynes, whome Hercules callyd to his bankette, after that he had ſlayne Cacus, And afterwarde they were conſtytute the prieſtes of Hercules, rede Feneſtellam.
            
            
               Potis ſum, I may, potis eſt, it is poſſible.
            
               Potitius, Hercules prieſte.
            
               Potito, tare, to vſe to drynke.
            
               Poto, tare, to drynke: Alſoo to gyue drynke to oone.
            
               Potare totos dies, to ſytte all day drynking, to be drunken.
            
               Potatum dare, to gyue drynke to one.
            
               Potator, & potor, a drunken knaue.
            
               Potorium, a cuppe.
            
               Potus, ta, tum, that whiche hathe drunke, and that whyche is drunken.
            Potus, tus, drynke.
            
         
         
            
            ¶P ANTE R.
            
               PRAE, before, in regarde, or in comparyſon, for. Prae amore, for loue. Alſo of. Prae ſtudio, of ſtudye. Praeur ſygnifieth than. Modeſtior nunc quidem eſt de ue
                     •
                  bis praeut dudum fuit, He is more ſofte or gentyll of wordes, than he was wonte to be, or than he was late.
            
               Prae ſe ferre, to ſhewe ſemblaunt or by countenaunce.
            
               Sanus ſi ſim, prae te medicum mihi experam, If I be wel aduiſed I wyl loke to haue a better phiſition than thou art.
            
               Nihil hercle hoc quidem, prae ut alia dicam, This is nothynge in regarde of that that I wyll telle the.
            
               Prae formidine, for great feare that he had.
            
               Prae gaudio, for ioye.
            Prae manu, & prae manibus, before hande.
            
            
               Praeacutus, very ſharpe.
            
               Praealtus, very depe.
            
               Praebitere, to paſſe by, or paſſe forthe in iourney. ſomtyme perire, toleſe, to caſte away.
            
               Praebeo, bui, bere, to gyue, to ſhewe.
            
               Praebêre aurem, to harken.
            
               Praebêre aures conuitijs, to ſuffre paciently rebukes.
            
               Ceruices praebere, to offer his head to be ſtriken of.
            
               Praebet errorem, it gyueth occaſion of error.
            
               Praebêre indignationem, to be cauſe of indygnation.
            
               Iuſta praebere, to kepe tacke, to do that, that he hath taken vpon hym.
            
               Non poſſum ſatis narrare quos Iudos praebueris intus, I can not well telle howe many mockes thou haſte gotten amonge theym, or howe they laugh at the within in the houſe.
            
               Os praebêre, to take blowes or ſuffre to be bobbyd.
            
               Os praebêre ad male audiendum, to ſuffre one to ſpeake yll to his face.
            
               Strenuum hominem praebuit, He played the man, he ſhewed hym ſelfe valyaunt, or dydde valyantely.
            
               Se aequum praebere, to be indifferent, to do iuſtyce without rygour.
            
               Se aequabilē praebere, to be alway of one ſort
            
               Se attentum auditorem praebere, to be a dilygent hearer.
            
               Quo quomodo ſe in ea quaeſtione praebebat &c. Howe ſoo euer he behauyd hym ſelfe in that matter.
            
               Se credulum praebere, to giue haſty credence
            
               Se docilem praebere, to be eaſyly taught.
            
               Se alicui facilem praebere, to graunt gentylly to ones deſyre.
            
               Se facilem praebere in hominibus audiendis admittendis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , to be wyllyng and gentyll to here men, and to be ſpoken with all.
            
               Gladij ſpeciem praebet, it is lyke in faſcyon to a ſworde.
            
               Erroris ſpeciem praebêre, to gyue occaſyon of errour.
            
               Speciem triumpho praebêre, to ſet forth the tryumph to the beſt ſhewe.
            
               Tyrannum praebêre, to behaue hym lyke a tyraunt.
            
               Vim glutini praebet, it is as good as glewe, or it is of the ſame force that glewe is.
            
               Baculorum uſum ſenectuti praebet, It ſerueth olde men in the ſtede of a ſtaffe.
            
               Praebia, orum, thynges gyuen to ſy
                  •
               ke men.
            
               Praecaluus, balde before.
            Praecarus, ra, rum, very dere.
            
            
               Praecaueo, uêre, to prouyde that a thynge happen not.
            
               Praecedo, ceſsi, dere, to go before.
            Praecello, lui, lere, to excelle.
            
            
               Praecentio, that whiche is ſongen or playde at the begynnyng of a ſonge or balade.
            
               Praecentor, toris, he that fyrſt ſyngeth, it may be taken for the chaunter in a quyre.
            
               Praeceps, cipitis, a hygh place ſtepe downe.
            
               Praeceps, headlynge, ſodaynly, haſtily.
            
               Praeceps homo, he that is to haſty in his buſyneſſe, and dothe thynges vnaduyſedly.
            
               Praeceps ingenio in iram, hotte or haſtye in wrathe.
            
               Praeceps in auaritiam & crudelitatem animus, The mynde inclyned to couetouſneſſe and crueltie.
            
               Quo iure qua
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   iniuria praecipitem me in piſtrinam dabit, Be it ryght, be it wronge, he wyll thruſte me into the myll houſe.
            
               Praecipitem abire, to come to myſery.
            
               Praecipitem dare, to thruſt one out hedlynge.
            
               Agunt eum praecipitem poenae ciuium Romanorum quos ſecuri percuſsit, The cruelle punyſhement of the Romayns whom he had byheaded, cauſed hym to falle ſoo haſtily.
            
               Praecipitem ferri, to rounne downe or falla downe from a hygh place.
            
               Praeceps in occaſum ſol, the ſun was downe
            
               In praecipite eſſe, to be in great daunger.
            
               Praecipitem trahere, to pull hym downe from a hygh place, or aſtat
                  •
               .
            
               In praeceps, ſodaynly, haſtily.
            
               Bis patet in praeceps tantum, it is twyſe or two tymes ſoo depe.
            
               Praeceps animi, ſtourdye or haſtye in all his actes.
            
               Praeceps ſenectus, at the pyts brynk for age.
            
               Praeceptum, a precepte, a rule gyuen, a commaundement.
            
               Praecingo, ere, to gyrde about.
            
               Praecidanea porca, a ſwyne, whiche the paynyms
 dyd ſacryfice before they dyd cut down theyr corne.
            
               Praecidaneus, a, um, that which is fyrſt kylled.
            
               Praecido, dere, to ſpeake or tell preciſely, or certaynly, to ſtryke, to cutte of, to beate, to denye ſtyffely. Plane ſine uila exceptione praecidit, Trewely he ſtyffely denyed it withoute exception.
            
               Praecidere ſpem, to put out of all hope.
            
               Praecino, nui, nere, to ſynge before or fyrſt, alſo to tell a thynge before it hapneth.
            
               Praecipio, coepi, cipere, to preuent or take firſt, to forſee, alſo to commaunde.
            
               Praecipitium, a downe ryghte place or ſteppe, daungerous to be gone on.
            
               Paercipito, tare, to throwe downe headlynge.
            
               Praecipitanter, headlynge, vnaduyſedly.
            
               Praecipuus, a, um, chiefe, ſpecyall, pryncipall, ſoueraygne.
            
               Praecipuè, chiefly, ſpecially, principally.
            
               Praeciſè, preciſely, determynately.
            
               Praeciſum, harde, intractable, cutted, verye ſhorte. Qui praeciſis concluſionibus obſcuri, Saluſtium at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Thucydidem ſuperant, The whiche being harde to be vnderſtand in their cutted ſentences do excede bothe Saluſte and Thucydides.
            
               Praeclamo, are, to crye before.
            
               Praeclarè, very excellently, very nobly, very wel
            
               Praeclarus, very noble. ſometyme it ſygnifieth good.
            Praecognitus, ta, tum, knowen before.
            
            
               Praeco, conis, a crier, a publiſher of thynges.
            
               Praeco feralis, the belle man whiche in ſome town goth about declaring who is late dead.
            
               Praeconium, a ſolemne cry, ſometyme it ſygnifieth prayſe or glory.
            
               Praecoquor, queris, qui, to be ſoone rype.
            
               Praecordia, the ſkynne, which dyuideth the ouer part of the body from the nether, it is alſo taken for the place vnder the rybbes, ſome tyme all the numbles, as the hart, the ſplene, the lunges, and lyuer.
            Praecox, cocis, & praecoquus, a, um, ſone rype, or tymely rype.
            
            
               Praeda, a proy, a thing goten or takē in warres.
            
               Praedabundus, goynge on forragynge in the tyme of warre.
            Praedaceus, a, um, of a proy. Praedatiuus, idem.
            
               Praedator, a ſeker for a proye.
            
               Praedator ex ſocijs, a robber of his company.
            Praedenſus, a, um, very thycke.
            
            
               Praedeſtino, are, to purpoſe before.
            Praedes, uide praes.
            
               Praediator, oris, a man of lawe expert in actions reall, or matters concernynge landes.
            
               Praediatorius, a, um, pertaynyng to landes.
            
               Praedicatio, a publyſhyng or open declaration.
            
               Praedico, care, to publyſhe, to tel a thyng openly, to prayſe.
            
               Praedico, xi, cere, to tell before.
            
               Praediolum, a lyttell manour.
            
               Praediſco, didici, diſcere, to vnderſtand before.
            
               Praeditus, ta, tum, adourned alſo Praeditus moerore, replenyſhed with heuynes. Praeditus lachrymis, waſhed with teares, or ful of teares
            
               Praeditus authoritate, in authoritie.
            
               Praeditus ſpe optima, to haue good hope.
            
               Praedium, a manour.
            
               Praedonulus, a lyttell robber.
            
               Praedo, donis, a robber of countreys.
            
               Praedor, aris, ari, to robbe a countrey, or to take prayes.
            
               Praedotiunt, they chiefly deſyre.
            
               Praeduro, are, to be harder than it was wonte.
            
               Praeeo, iui, ire, to go before.
            
               Praefacio, feci, facere, to ſet more by.
            
               Praefanda, not honeſt to be ſpoken or reherſed.
            
               Praefari, to ſpeake or ſay before.
            
               Praefari honorem, is where one ſayth to his better. Sauyng your reuerence or honour.
            
               Praefari Diuos, to praye to god, before that one enterpryſeth any thynge.
            
               Praefatio, onis, a preface.
            
               Praefecturae, may be called Sheryffewykes, amonge the Romayns it ſygnified the prouynces, where the ſayd offycers had iurisdictiō.
            
               Praefectus Praetorij, was with the emperours the principall officer in his court, as nowe in Fraunce the great mayſter.
            
               Praefectus urbis, was a great offycer in Rome, to whome it belonged to ſee that the hyghe wayes to the citie were welle maynteyned, that the waters were kepte cleane, that the chanell of the ryuer of Tyberis, were ſkoured & kept from ſhelues▪ alſo to deliuer grayn out of the commune garners, and dyuyde it amonge the people. He was alſo callyd Praefectus Latinarum, as Gellius wryteth.
            
               Praefecti prouinciarum, may be taken amōg vs for ſheriffes, but more properly for ſuche as haue lyke iurisdiction as the chaumber-layne of Northwales, and the hygh ſtuarde of ſouthewales were wonte to haue, that is to ſay peculiar authorite to determe matters within the compaſſe of theyr offyce.
            
               Praefecti aerarij, were they whyche hadde the charge of kepynge the commune treaſure.
            
               Praefectus fiſci, was he whyche kept themperours treaſour.
            
               Praefectus ſcriniorum, was a lyke officer as now is the maſter of the rolles, and was alſo callyd Praefectus libellorum, in the whyche offyce was Papinianus the greatte lawyer in the tyme of Seuerus the emperour.
            Praefero, tuli, ferre, to preferre.
            
            
               Praefericulum, a great baſon, whiche was caryed before hym that dyd ſacrifyce.
            
                
               Praefeſtino, are, to make to moche haſt.
            
               Praefica, a woman, whiche is deſyred to lament at the buryeng of men or women.
            
               Praeficio, faeci, ficere, to put in auctorytie, or to gyue rule.
            
               Praefectura, an auctoritie or rule.
            
               Praefectus, a rular.
            
               Praefigo, xi, gere, to ſhutte afore.
            
               Praefinio, mui, ire, to determyne before, to aſſygne or appoynt.
            Praefinitus, ta, tum, prefyxed.
            
            
               Praefluere, to runne before a place.
            
               Praefoco, care, to ſtrangle or choke.
            
               Praeformido, are, to be aferd er the ſtroke come.
            
               Praefractus, cta, ctum, harde & vnflexible, whiche wyll rather breake than bowe: alſo that whiche was before broken.
            
               Praefractè, obſtinately.
            Praefrigidus, da, dum, very colde.
            
            
               Praefulcio, cire, to fortifye.
            
               Praefulgeo, fulſi, gere, to ſhyne moche.
            
               Praefurnium, the mouth of an ouen or furneys.
            Praegelidus, da, dum, excedynge colde.
            
            
               Praegeſtire, to leape for ioye.
            
               Praegigno, nere, to begynne, to bryng in fyrſt.
            
               Nolebam ex me morem praegigni malum, I wolde not that an yll cuſtome ſhoulde be brought vp by me.
            
               Praegeſtio, ire, to reioyce moche.
            
               Praegnans, antis, a woman with chylde. it is the ſame of any beaſt.
            
               Praegnans ſus, a ſowe with farrowe.
            
               Praegrandis, de, very great.
            
               Praegrauatio, a great grefe.
            
               Praegredio, gredi, to go before.
            
               Praegrauo, are, to greue moche.
            
               Praeguſtare, to take aſſay.
            
               Praehendo, di, dere, to take. Manum praehendere, to take by the hande.
            
               Praehenſatio, a ſollycityng or labouryng for the attaynynge of ſome great offyce.
            
               Praehenſo, are, to imbrace or ſette hande on one to ſolycite.
            
               Praeiacio, ieci, iacere, to caſte before a thynge.
            
               Praeiacio, cui, cere, to lye before.
            
               Praeire iuramentū, to miniſter or gyue an othe.
            
               Praeiuditium, a thynge whiche beinge ones decyded and determyned, maketh a rule or example to men that do folowe, to dyſcuſſe ſemblably in a lyke mattier. As thoſe whiche we do call ruled caſes or matters in the law, whiche be as examples to iuges.
            
               Praeiudico, to iuge before, ſommetyme to iudge by example of an nother lyke mattier before iudged or diſcided.
            
               Praeiuro, are, to ſweare before other.
            
               Praeiuratio, the othe that is taken by hym that fyrſte ſweareth.
            
               Praeiurator, toris, he which fyrſt taketh an othe as the fore man of a Iurye, or the fyrſt wytneſſe, or any other, after whom other men do ſwere, accordyng to the othe gyuen vnto him.
            
               Praelabor, beris, bi, to falle fyrſt, to ſlyde.
            
               Praeliaris, are, pertaynynge to battayle.
            
               Praeliator, toris, a warryour.
            
               Praelicenter, very wantonly.
            
               Praelior, aris, ari, to fyght in battayle.
            
               Praeliganeum uinum, à praeligando, whyche I ſuppoſe to be ſoo callyd, eyther bycauſe it is fyrſte tounned or putte into veſſelles, or elles bycauſe it is put into a ſacke, whyche is faſte knytte afore.
            
               Praeligo, gare, to bynde afore.
            
               Praelium, battayle, alſo the fyght in battaylle. ſometyme the acte of generation.
            Praelongus, a, um, very longe.
            
            
               Praeloquium, the begynnyng of a communication, or thynge ſpoken, as that whych in the toryke is namyd exordium.
            
            
               Praeloquor, queris, qui. to ſpeake or tell before.
            
               Praeluceo, cere, to beare lyght before one, as a torche or candel, alſo to gyue more lyght than an nother.
            
               Praelucere alijs uirtute, to ſhyne in vertues before other.
            
               Praeludium, a proheme, or that whyche muſytians and mynſtrelles do playe at the begynnynge, er they come to the ſonge, whiche they purpoſe to playe.
            
               Praeludo, ſi, dere, to play before.
            
               Praelum, a preſſe.
            
               Praelumbo, are, to breake ones loynes.
            
               Praeluo, luere, to purge or waſhe cleane afore.
            
               Praemando, daui, to ſende before.
            
               Praemanibus, redy at hande.
            
               Praemature, to ſoone, or before the iuſte tyme.
            
               Praemature uita careo. I dye afore my tyme.
            
               Praemeditor, taris, tari, to aduyſe before a man do a thynge.
            Prae me fero, prae me tuli, prae me ferre, to declare by dede, worde, or geſture.
            
            
               Prae te fers iracundiam, Thou ſheweſte thy ſelfe to be angry, alſo to confeſſe, alſo to haue before hym a thynge (as it were) in remembraunce.
            
               Praemercor, caris, cari, to bye afore hande.
            
               Praemeſſum, a ſacrifyce or offerynge to Ceres, of the eares of corne that was fyrſt reapyd.
            
               Praemetium, the fyrſte croppe.
            
               Praemiatores, theues which ſteale by nyght, as we mought ſay, whyche commytte burglary.
            
               Praemiator, is a rewarder.
            
               Praemineo, nui, ere, to be better than another or excell aboue an other in aſtate or vertue.
            
               Praemior, aris, ari, to gyue rewardes.
            
               Praemioſus, ryche of money.
            
               Praemiſsio, a ſendynge afore.
            
               Praemitto, miſi, tere, to ſende afore.
            
                
               Praemium, a rewarde gyuen to hym, whyche hath done any notable and laudable thyng.
            
               Premoderor, aris, ari, to playe before on an inſtrument.
            
               Praemodum, aboue meaſure.
            
               Praemoleſtia, feare of a thynge to come.
            
               Praemollis, le, very tender or delycate.
            Praemoneo, nui, nere, to forewarne.
            
            
               Praemonſtrator, toris, he that tellethe or ſheweth a thynge before that it hapneth.
            
               Praemonſtro, ſtrare, to ſhewe before.
            
               Praemordeo, dere, to byte or rebuke before.
            
               Praemorior, riris, riri, to dye er the tyme come.
            
               Praemunio, iui, ire, to prepare, to fortify a place before that the ennemyes do come.
            
               Praenarro, rare, to telle before.
            
               Praenato, tare, to ſwymme afore.
            
               Praeneſtè, a citie in Italy.
            
               Praeneſtini, people of the cytie of Preneſte in Italy.
            Praeneſtinus, a, um, of Preneſte.
            
            
               Praenomen, the fyrſt name, as Marcus, Quintus, Lucius, and as we nowe haue the name at baptyſme.
            
               Praenimis, too, too, farre to moche.
            
               Praenoſco, noui, noſcere, to knowe afore.
            
               Praenoto, tare, to make annotations or inſcryptions.
            
               Praenuncio, are, to ſhewe afore.
            
               Praenuncius, the fyrſt meſſanger, he that fyrſte bryngeth tydynges.
            
               Praeoccupatio, a fygure in Rhetoricke, whan we wyll ſay that we wylle not telle a thynge, and yet therby couertely we wyll declare the matter, or make it ſuſpected.
            
               Praeoccupo, pare, to take or poſſeede a thynge by preuencyon.
            
               Praeopto, tare, rather to deſyre.
            
               Praeordinatio, the fyrſte ordynaunce.
            
               Praeordinator, he that made the fyrſt ordināce.
            
               Praeordino, are, to ordeyne afore.
            
               Praeparcus, ca, cum, very ſcarce or nygarde.
            
               Praeparo, are, to prepare, to make redy.
            
               Praepedimentum, a let before.
            
               Praepedio, diui, to lette moche.
            
               Praependo, dere, to hange afore.
            
               Praepes, praepetis, ſwyft, lyght in flyght.
            
               Praepetes aues, were the byrdes, whyche ſhewed them ſelues fyrſt to the dyuinours called Augures, whereby they ſuppoſed to knowe what ſhulde enſue.
            
               Praepeto, tere, to begynne fyrſte.
            
               Praepilatus, ta, tum, headded with yron, as a Iauelyn or darte, alſo ſharpe afore lyke the head of a dart, though it hath none yron, as the hornes of a lopſter, wherwith he ſwymmeth.
            
               Praepinguis, very fatte.
            
               Praepondero, rare, to waye more, to be more worthe.
            
               Praepolleo, lere, to excede other.
            
               Praepono, ſui, ponere, to put or ſet before.
            
               Praepoſitus, ta, tum, ſet or aduaunced aboue other, ſet in auctoritie.
            
               Praepoſitus, ti, he that is in auctoritie, or chiefe in any offyce.
            
               Praepotens, very puiſſaunt or mighty.
            
               Praepoto, tare, to drynke afore to drynge good lucke in drynkynge.
            
               Praepoſterus, ra, rum, ouerthwart, out of order.
            
               Praepoſteri homines, they that do that thing laſt, whyche they ſhulde haue done fyrſt.
            
               Praepoſteré fieri, to be done agaynſte all good order. As whan the ſeruaunt commaundeth his mayſter, the people their rulers, or a fole a wyſe man.
            
               Praeproperus, ra, rum, very quycke or haſty.
            
               Praeputium, the ſkynne whyche couereth the head of a mans priuy member.
            
               Praerancidus, a, um, very vnſauery.
            
               Praeripio, pui, pere, to preuent, to catche.
            
               Praerideo, dere, to laughe before.
            
               Praeriſor, oris, he that laugheth afore one.
            
               Praerodo, ſi, dere, to gnawe or eate very moch.
            
               Praerogo, gare, to employ or gyue afore.
            
               Praerogata beneficia, benefyttes afore employed.
            
               Praerogatiua, & praerogatiuum, a prerogatiue where one is preferred afore an other.
            
               Praerumpo, pere, to breake a ſunder.
            
               Praeruptus, ta, tum, all to broken, it is ſometyme taken, where a hyll is broken by the ſides, and harde to go on.
            
               Praerupta loca, places broken here and there, that no man maye paſſe.
            
               Praes, praedis, he that vndertaketh for an other whiche hath bounden hym ſelfe for any thynge touchynge the comminaltie.
            
               Praeſagium, & praeſagatio, amonge the auncient writers, a perceyuinge of a thynge before that it hapneth, ſomtyme a coniecture.
            
               Praeſagio ire, to diuine or tell what ſhall happen.
            
               Praeſagibat animus, fruſtra me ire cum exiré domo, whan I went out of my houſe my harte gaue me that I ſhulde go in vayne.
            
               Neſcio quid profecto mihi, animus praeſagit mali, In good faythe my harte giueth me, that ſome yll ſhall happen I wote not what.
            
               Praeſagus, a pronoſticatour, or perceyuer of thynges er they happe.
            
               Praeſcientia, an vnderſtandynge and perfytte knowlege of all that ſhall happen.
            
               Praeſcius, he that knoweth perfectly thynges er they happen.
            
               Praeſcio, ſcire, to knowe afore.
            
               Praeſcribo, pſi, bere, to aſſigne, to note or intitle, to put, to laye before, to tell before, to appoynte
 or determyne.
            
               Praeſcriptio, & praeſcriptum, a rule, a lawe, an order, a fourme.
            
               Praeſcriptum, a precepte, a fourme, a rule.
            
               Praeſeco, care, to cutte before, ſometyme to cut on ſonder.
            
               Praeſegmina, the paringes of a mans nayles.
            
               Praeſens, tis, preſent. In praeſentia, & in praeſentiarum, at this preſent tyme.
            
               Praeſens animus, a ſtronge or good courage, alſo fauourable. Deum praeſentem habet, he hath god fauourable vnto hym.
            
               Mihi tua domus te praeſente abſente pateat, let thy dores be open to me whether thou be at home or no, or lette me be welcome to thye houſe whether thou be there or abrode.
            
               Praeſens Deus God gyueth to vs incontinēt that that we demaunde.
            
               Praeſens medicina, the medicine that cureth forthewith.
            
               Praeſentius, better.
            
               Praeſentiſsimus, a, um, the beſt, the ſureſt.
            
               Praeſentiſsimum uenenum, the greateſt and mooſte feruent poyſon: alſo ſtronge.
            
               Praeſentiſsimum remedium the moſte ſpedy or ſure remedy.
            
               Praſentaneum argentum, money to be payed in hande.
            
               Praeſentaneum remedium, a ſhorte or ſodeyn remedye.
            
               Praeſentia, preſence.
            
               Praeſentio, & praeſentiſco, cere, to fele or perceyue before, to doubte of a thynge.
            
               Praeſento, tare, to haue redy.
            
               Praeſepe, & praeſepium, & preſepes, a ſtable, a ſtall, a ſhepehouſe.
            
               Praeſepio, pire, to hedge afore a thynge.
            
               Praeſertim, ſpecially.
            
               Praeſeruatio, a preſeruation.
            
               Praeſeruare, to preſerue.
            
               Praeſes ſidis, he that hath auctoritie in a prouince nexte vnder the prynce, a lieuetenaunt or viceroy, ſomtyme it ſignifieth a defendour alſo ſure. Locum praeſidem, a ſure place.
            
               Praeſideo, dere, to be in more auctoritie, or of a more dignitie: alſo to haue auctoritie or rule.
            
               Praeſideratio, tempeſt, whiche commeth at the begynnynge of wynter, ſoner than it is loked for, or is accuſtomed to happen.
            
               Praeſidero, are, where tempeſte commeth very ſone, and before the tyme accuſtomed.
            
               Praeſicco, care, to drye afore.
            
               Praeſidiarius, a, um, that whiche is ordeyned to be ayde to an other thynge.
            
               Praeſidium, a garriſon of men with a capitayne ſet by the chiefe capitayne, to defende a fortreſſe. ſome tyme it is taken generally for all maner of ayde or defence: alſo for a fortification of a thynge.
            
               Praeſilio, ſilire, to lepe before, to ſterte out.
            
               Praeſiſto, tere, to ſtande or be ſet afore.
            
               Praeſpeculor, ari, to loke afore.
            
               Praeſpicio, ſpexi, ſpicere, to ſee afore.
            Praeſtabilis, le, excellent.
            
            
               Praeſtabilius, better.
            
               Praeſtantia, excellency.
            
               Praeſtat, it is better.
            Praeſtans, tis, excellent.
            
            
               Praeſtanter, excellently.
            
               Praeſtega, a place open afore and couered behynde lyke a porche, where men do ſytte for recreation after theyr buſyneſſe.
            
               Praeſter, a venymous ſerpente, of whome he that is ſtryken, dyeth for thyrſte.
            
               Praeſtes, ſtitis, of the auncient wryters callyd a prelate.
            
               Praeſtigiator, toris, a iugglar.
            
               Praeſtigiae, thynges whyche do ſeme to be that, that they are not.
            
               Praeſtigium, a iugglynge caſte, an inchauntement, a deluſyon.
            
               Praeſtino, are, to prepare in byenge a thyng.
            
               Praeſtituo, ere, to determyn before, to preſcribe or appoynt before, what ſhalbe done.
            
               Iſtam enim culpam, quam uereris, ego praeſtabo, for the blame, whyche thou feareſt, I wyll take vppon me.
            
               Praeſto, ſtiti, ſtare, to be better than an nother thynge, wherwith it is comparyd, to excelle, alſo to vndertake, to warrante, ſommetyme to graunt, alſo to do, to be benifyciall, to beware, to eſchewe, to feare, to do or perform, to gyue, to exhybyte, to repreſent or ſhewe, to lende, to aſſigne or appoynt, to do a thynge.
            
               Non modo facta ſed etiam dicta omnia praeſtanda nobis ſunt, we oughte to make aunſwere not onely for our dedes, but alſo for all that we ſpeke.
            
               Emptori damnum praeſtare, to recompence the byar for all his loſſes or damage.
            
               Praeſtare culpam, to take the charge of damage vpon hym.
            
               Nihil eſt ſapientis praeſtare niſi culpam, A wyſe man ſhoulde take nothynge vppon hym but that whiche ſhall happen throughe his defaulte.
            
               Praeſtare fidem, to be faythfull
            
               Praeſtare fidem publicam, whan the conſul or other great officer perfourmeth that whiche he promyſed.
            
               Praeſtare nihil debeo, No man ought to laye that vnto me.
            
               Muſſâlam Caeſari praeſtabo, I wyll vndertake that Meſſala ſhall be Ceſars frende.
            
               Praeſtat officium, to do his deuoyre.
            
               Praeſtare iuſiurandum, to take an othe.
            
               Praeſtat, it were better, Preſtat furi hic ſuſpendi
            
            
                
               
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , apud inferos ardere. It were better for a thefe to be hanged here, thanne to lye in the fyre of hell.
            
               Praeſto, an aduerbe, redy, at hand. Praeſto ſis, helpe me. Praeſto eſſe, to appiere, as men do in places of iudgementes, alſo to be redy to helpe.
            
               Praeſtolor, aris, ari, to tary, to be at hande, or redy to do ſeruice.
            
               Praeſtringo, xi, gere, to bynde faſte, to ſhutte to daſell the eien, to touche quickely, or ſhortly, to ſhaue, to greue ſomewhat.
            
               Praeſtruo, ſtruxi, ſtruere, to ordeyne fyrſte, to buylde.
            
               Praeſul, lis, a prelate.
            
               Praeſulatus, tus, the dignitie of a prelate.
            
               Praeſulto, are, to leape or daunce afore.
            
               Praeſultor, praeſultoris, He that leadethe a daunce.
            
               Praeſum, fui, praeeſſe, to be afore or aboue an other, to be of more dignitie, to be in auctorytie.
            
               Praeeſſe negotio, to be chiefe in the buſines.
            
               Praeſumo, ſumpſi, ſumere, to take fyrſte, to preuente.
            
               Praeſumere animo, to coniecte.
            
               Praeſumptio, a takynge or receyuynge before: it is alſo that, whiche is called preoccupation, whan we declare firſte what our aduerſarye wyll ſaye, or what is the iudges opynion: and agaynſte that we do argue, to dyſſolue it with reaſon.
            
               Praeſuo, ere, to ſowe afore.
            
               Praeſurgo gere, to ryſe afore or fyrſte.
            
               Praetego, gere, to hyde or couer chiefly.
            
               Praetendo, ere, to laye for a thynge er it come: alſo to carye or beare afore, alſo to ſhewe or pretende, to allege, to ſet a thynge about for an incloſure.
            
               Praetendere auribus, to ſtop the eares.
            
               Praetendere retia, to lay nettes.
            
               Praetendere ſepem, to make an hedge about
            
               Praetento, tare, to tempte or aſſaye afore.
            
               Praetenuis, e, very ſmall.
            
               Praetenué, very ſklenderly.
            
               Praeterduco, cere, to leade afore, to leade forth
            
               Praetergredior, di, to paſſe by, to go beyonde.
            Praeteritus, ta, tum, paſſed.
            
            
               Praeteriti, deade, departed, deceſſed, alſo they whiche in ſuynge for an offyce, dyd ſuffer repulſe, or were put backe.
            
               Praeter propter, for an other cauſe than that whiche is reherſed
            
               Praeter, excepte, alſo beſyde, ouer and aboue, before. Praeter oculos, before the eyen, againſt or contrary. Praeter morem, agaynſte the cuſtome or faſcion. Praeter ſpem, vnloked for.
            
               Praeter opinionem, other wiſe thā I thought
            
               Praeter caetera, more than the other. Praeter aequum, againſte reaſon.
            
               Praeterbito, tare, to go by.
            
               Praeterea, moreouer, beſyde, none els Mihi credis praeterea nemini, Thou beleueſt me, and none els. alſo it ſignifieth afterwarde.
            
               Praetereo, iui, ire, to go ouer or paſſe, to leue out a thynge, whiche ſhoulde be ſpoken of, to paſſe ouer.
            
               Praeterire non potui quin & ſcriberem ad te I coulde not forbeare but that I muſt nedes write vnto you.
            
               Praeterijt me haec res, I had forgotten that matter.
            
               Et hoc te praeterit, non id ſolum ſpectare ſo lere. And doeſt not thou knowe, that not only the thynge is to be conſidered.
            
               Non me praeterit, I knowe well inoughe.
            
               Nos nobilitate Mago praeterijt. Mago was the beſte borne of them all, or was of a greatter bloud than any of them
            
               Praeterfluere, is of a water to rūne by a place.
            
               Praetermitto, miſi, mittere, to leaue vntouched to forget, to leaue out, to paſſe ouer a thyng, leauynge a thynge vndone or vnſpoken.
            
               Praetermiſsio, forgettynge or leauynge oute of a thynge.
            
               Praeter quam, but onely, otherwyſe than, more ouer, beſyde.
            Praeter
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                quod, but.
            
            
               Praeterueho, here, to cary throughe.
            
               Praeteruehere aliquid ſilentio, to leaue a thing vnſpoken of.
            
               Praeteruerto, tere, to put one thynge, before an other, Cice. Si habes aliquid quod huic ſermoni praeteruertendum putes, If ye haue any thynge, whiche ye thynke oughte to be ſpokē before that ye will ſpeke of this matter
            
               Praeteruolo, are, to paſſe throughe quickely.
            
               Praetexo, ui, ere, to make or ordeyne firſte, to couer or hyde, to ſpeake colourably.
            
               
                  
                     •
                  raetexta, a longe garment mixte with purple ſilke, whiche was the veſture of noble mens ſonnes, vntyll they came vnto .xvii. yeres of age, and therfore ſuche chyldren were called
            
               Praetextati, but they hadde alſo aboute theyr neckes, a lyttell rounde iewell of golde, facioned lyke a harte, wherin was incloſed ſome thynge of great vertue. Praetexta, was alſo the robe of aſtate, whiche the kynge of Romayns, or the other chiefe officers did weare whan they ſate in theyr maieſtie.
            
               Praetexta comoedia, an enterlude, wherin at perſonages of highe dignitie.
            
               Praetextatus, ta, tum, dyſhoneſte, or vncleane in ſpeche or actes. Feſtus taketh it in the contrary ſence.
            Praetextati anni, youthe.
            
            Praetextata aetas, idem.
            
               Praetextati mores, honeſt conditions.
            
                
               Praetextatus ſermo, communication without ribauldry.
            
               Praetextatus, he that dyd weare Praetextam.
            
            
               Praetextum, a pretence or colour.
            
               Praetiamitatores, officers whiche wente before the prelates called Flamines, proclayminge openlye, that all men ſhoulde ceaſſe of theyr warke, bycauſe it was not leful to thoſe prelates to beholde any man warkynge.
            
               Praetimeo, ere, to be ſore aferde.
            
               Praetingo, gere, to touche afore.
            
               Praetondeo, to ſheere or klyp, or rounde before
            Praetoritius, a, um, for Praetorius.
            
               Praetorium ius, lawe made by the Pretor.
            
               Praetor, tôris, in the olde tyme was euery officer whiche had the rule of any army. Aſconius. Afterwarde he had iuridicall auctoritie, beinge as it were the chiefe iudge, and had as it were other iudges ſittinge vnder hym, wherof the full number in the citie of Rome was .lxxv. Cic. in Piſonem. But Aſconius vpon the oration Pro Milone, ſayth that the iudges appoynted were .lxxi. and after that as well the plaintife as the defendaunte had eche of them drawen out .v. there remayned but .li.
            
               Praetorianus, he that is attendant to him that is Pretor.
            
               Praetorium, the houſe or pauilion of hym that is Praetor. it is alſo a princes palaice or manour: it is ſometyme the place, where iudgementes are gyuen, ſometyme the counſayle, whervnto Pretores are aſſembled.
            
               Praetorius, he that hath ben Praetor.
            
            
               Praetorius, a, um, belongynge to the office of Praetor.
            
            
               Praetura, the dignitie and miniſtration, of him that is Praetor.
            
            
               Praeualeo, lere, to preuayle, to be better or of more value.
            
               Praeualidus, da, dum, very ſtronge or mighty, ſometime very great.
            
               Praeuaricatio, is a colluſion: alſo it is where one toucheth a thynge lyghtely, whiche ought to be inculked with a more playne declaration, or elles repeted, as makynge moche to the purpoſe.
            
               Praeuaricor, aris, ari, to ſwarue frome truthe to go out of the right waye, to leaue vnſaide that, whiche ſhulde be ſpoken, to touche a thynge ſhortely in ſpeakyng, to warke by colluſion, in ſuffringe his aduerſary to opteyne, to hurte an other perſon.
            
               Praeuaricator, toris, he that leaueth the righte waye, or ſpeake not that whiche ought to be ſpoken: alſo he that in ſpeakyng for him ſelf aydeth the cauſe of his aduerſary, or doth any thynge by colluſion.
            
               Praeueho, here, to brynge fyrſte.
            
               Praeuelo, are, to couer or hyde afore.
            
               Praeuello, lere, to pull or plucke afore.
            
               Praeuenio, nire, to come before or preuente.
            
               Praeuentio, a preuention.
            
               Praeuideo, dere, to foreſee, to beware.
            
               Praeuerſus, a, um, that whiche is done or ſped firſt, or before any other.
            
               Praeuerto, uertere, to ſette more by, or to care more for. Nec me uxorē praeuortiſſe dicant, prae repub. Nor let them not ſay, that I ſet more by my wyfe, than by the weale publike Alſo to tourne or ſette aſyde. Ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   praeripio pulbamentum, ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   praeuorto poculum, Nor I take away thy meate, nor ſet or turne aſyde thy drynke.
            
               Praeuertor, deponens, idem quod praeuerto, alſo to goo afore. Inde illico praeuertor domum, from thens I wente home afore. alſo to be tourned forthe. Foreis enim clauſit, ne praeuorteretur foras, he hath ſhytte faſte the doore, leſte he ſhulde be tourned forthe. Alſo to doo any thynge fyrſte or before any other thynge. Praeuorti hoc certum eſt rebus alijs omnibus, Surely this ſhal be done before any other thynge.
            
               Praeuertere ſerio, to tourne it to erneſt. Si quid dictum eſt per iocum, non aequum eſt id te ſerio praeuortier. If any thynge be ſpoken in iape, it is not reaſon to tourne it to erneſte.
            
               Praeuerti pigritiae, to be takē with ſlouth. Caue pigritiae praeuortier, beware that thou be not taken with ſlouthe.
            
               Praeuertere aliquem prae republica, to ſette more by one than by the weale publyke.
            
               Praeuerti rebus omnibus, to be more ſette by than any other thynge, or to be fyrſte done.
            
               Mandatis rebus praeuerti uolo, I wyll fyrſt do that whiche I am commaunded.
            
               Nec aliam rem praeuerti cenſebat, Nor he wolde that any thynge ſhulde be done before that.
            
               Praeuertere animum alicuius, to opteyn ones fauour before any other man.
            
               Praeuertere ſerio, quod dictum eſt ioco, To take a thing erneſtly that was ſpoken in iape Illud praeuertamur, let vs fyrſte ſpeake therof or we come to the matter.
            Iuſiurandi relligionem amori praeuertere.
            To eſteme the othe more than the loue.
            
               Praeuerſum fulgur, lyghtnyng whiche is not knowen, whether it be by daye or by nyghte.
            
               Praeuius, he that goeth before, or leadeth the waye.
            
               Praeuſtus, ta, tum, burned at the ſore ende.
            
               Praeuolo, are, to flee before.
            
               Pragmaticus, a practiſer in the lawe.
            
               Pragma, in Greke, is in latine negociatio, an acte or buſyneſſe: alſo an exerciſe of marchaundiſe.
            
                
               Pragmatica ſanctio, a determination of practiſians of the lawe.
            Prandeo, prandi, & pranſus ſum, prandere, to dine.
            
            
               Prandiculum, a brekefaſte.
            
               Prandiolum, a lyttell dyner.
            
               Prandium, a dinar.
            
               Pranſito, tare, to dine or eate often.
            
               Pranſor, oris, he that is at diner, or he that is boden to dyner.
            
               Praſinus, na, num, greene like leekes.
            
               Praſius, a grene ſtone.
            
               Praſoides, a ſtone of the coloure of leekes.
            
               Praſſium, an herbe called horehounde, Rede Marrubium.
            
            
               Pratenſis, ſe, of the medowes.
            
               Pratenſe foenum, medowe haye.
            
               Pratulum, a lyttell medowe.
            
               Pratum, medowe.
            
               Praué, ſhrewedly, naughtly, vnhappely, ouerthwartly.
            
               Prauitas, ſhrewdeneſſe, vnhappyneſſe, ouerthwartneſſe.
            Prauus, a, um, croked, ſhrewde.
            
            
               Praxiteles, an excellent caruar in ſtone.
            
               Precarius, a, um, that whiche is borowed, at the wyll of the lender, that whiche is occupied, at an other mannes pleaſure.
            
               Precario, by deſyre at another wans wyll.
            
               Preces, prayer.
            
               Precium, pryce, value.
            Precioſus, a, um, deere, preciouſe.
            
            Precor, aris, ari, to praye.
            
            
               Prehendo, prehendi, dere, to take. Et manum prehendi, & oſculum detuli tibi, I toke you by the hande, and alſo gaue you a kyſſe.
            
               Praehenſo, uel prenſo, are, to ſolicite or labour men to giue theyr voyces, to ſome man.
            
               Prelum, a preſſe, ſuche as printours haue.
            
               Premo, preſsi, premere, to preſſe: ſometyme to vexe, to dygge, to preſe on, to thruſte, to deſtroye, to thruſte downe, to conſtrayne, to reſtrayne.
            
               Premere dolorem, to hyde heuyneſſe or ſorowe. Premit alto corde dolorem, he hidde his ſorowe in the ſecrete parte of his harte.
            
               Premere, to driue or put out.
            
               Premere, to ſhyt or cloſe. Preſi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   oculos, ac vulnera laui, I cloſed his eyes, and waſſhed his woundes.
            
               Premere, to cut awaye. Et ruris opaci, falſe premes umbram, and with a ſyth thou ſhalt cut away the ſhadowe of the darke fieldes.
            
               Premere, to treade downe. Veluti qui ſentibus anguem, preſsit humi nitens, lyke as he, whiche thraſting his fote to the grund, treadeth down the ſnake, that lieth in the brembles.
            
               Premere teſtimonio, to connicte a manne by witneſſe.
            Prendo, loke Praehendo,
            
               Preſa porca, a ſwyne whiche was offered in ſacrifice to Ceres, in ſatisfaction for a hoole houſeholde, for as moche as a parte of that ſacrifice was made in the preſēce of the corps whiche than was to be buried.
            
               Preſſatus, ta, tum, oppreſſed, charged troden downe.
            
               Presbiter, biteri, an auncient, or father in yeres or dignitie. it is vſed for a prieſte.
            
               Preſso, are, to preſſe or thruſte together.
            
               Preſſus, ſſa, ſſum, ſubtylle, compacte, heuye, preſſed.
            
               Preſſura, oppreſſion.
            Preſſus, ſſus, & preſſura, preſſynge, alſo oppreſſion.
            
            
               Preſſe, in a fewe wordes, briefly.
            
               Preſter, a venemouſe worme called alſo Dipſas
            
            
               Pretioſus, a, um, preciouſe, deere, of greatte eſtimation.
            
               Pretioſior, pretioſius, more preciouſe or deere.
            
               Pretium, the pryce or value, alſo the rewarde: ſometyme peryll or daunger. Pretio emptas meo, bought with my peryll or daunger.
            
               Pri, of olde tyme was vſed for Prae.
            
            
               Priamus, the noble kynge of Troye, whoſe hiſtory is to no man vnknowen.
            
               Priapiſmus, a ſickeneſſe, wherin the priuy member of a man alwaye ſtandeth, withoute hauynge any appetite to lechery.
            
               Priapus, an ydole, vnto whom the Painimes, committed theyr gardeynes to kepe.
            
               Pridem, late, ſometime longe agone.
            
               Pridianus, a, um, that whiche is done the daye before.
            
               Pridiani cibi, meates dreſſed the daye before.
            
               Pridie, the daye before.
            Primaeuus, a, um, the elder.
            
            Primarius, a, um, chiefe.
            
            
               Primas, atis, in chiefe auctoritie, amonge the people.
            
               Primanus Tribunus, he that aſſigned trybute to the fyrſte legion.
            
               Prima lux, the ſprynge of daye.
            
               Prima ueſpera, the euenynge.
            
               Primae, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                chiefe prayſes. Cui primae ſine cō
                  trouerſia deferebantur, to whome the chiefe prayſes were giuen without any controu
                  •
               rſy.
            
               Primas tenere, to haue the preeminence, to be chiefe, to holde the better parte.
            
               Primas dare, to eſteme aboue other.
            
               Primâtus, the chiefe auctoritie.
            
               Primitus, fyrſte.
            
               Primetium, ſacrifice of the eares of corne, whiche were firſt gathered after that they were reped.
            
               Primores, the toppes of any thynge.
            
               Digitulis primoribus, with the fyngar toppes.
            
                
               Labris primoribus, with the fore parte of the lyppes.
            
               Primoribus labris guſtare, to touche a thing ſcantely, to ſmatter of a thynge, and not to knowe it ſubſtanciallye or perfitely.
            
               Primicerius, chiefe ruler.
            
               Primigenus, gena, genum, fyrſte borne or growen.
            
               Primigenius, a, um, that commeth naturallye of it ſelfe, and is vnmyxte.
            
               Primigenia, the title of the eldeſt chylde in inheritaunce.
            
               Primipara, ſhe that hath her fyrſte chylde.
            
               Primipes, he that in battayle fyghteth fyrſte with a ſworde, and after chaungynge his fourme of fyghtyng, vſeth a Iauelin or dart.
            
               Primipilaris, is he that fighteth next to the ſtā
               darde. it is moſte properly the capitayne of a company in the fowewarde.
            
               Primitium, the principall or chiefe.
            
               Primipilus, a Capitayne of a companye in the forewarde or vauntgarde, whiche had vnder hym foure hundred ſouldiours.
            Primiter, & primitus, fyrſte.
            
            
               Primitiae, the firſte fruites.
            
               Primitius, a, um, the fyrſte or ſoremoſte.
            
               Primitiuus, a, um, that whiche hath none other begynnynge.
            
               Primeſius, a ſtake, wherto a cabell or rope of a ſhyppe is tyed.
            
               Primò, an aduerbe ſygnifieth fyrſte.
            Primodum, for Primo.
            
               Primogenia uerba, wordes whiche be not diriued from any other.
            Primogentius, ta, tum, fyrſte begotten.
            
            
               Primordium, the fyrſte begynnynge.
            
               Primores, the fyrſte, the chiefe. Primores uiri aut foeminae, Noble men or women, or gentil men and gentyll women.
            
               Primulus, the diminutiue of primus.
            
            
               Primulum, forthwith.
            
               Primum, an aduerbe, whiche ſignifyeth fyrſte er euer, at the begynninge.
            
               Primus, a, um, fyrſte, beſte, the chiefe. Primo quoque tempore, at the fyrſte tyme.
            
               Prima qua
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   occaſione, at the fyrſte occaſyon that ſhall happen.
            
               Primula uaeris, ſome do ſuppoſe it to be dayſyes. Ruellius ſuppoſeth it to be a kynde of Verbaſcum.
            
            
               Princeps, cipis, a prynce, the fyrſte or chyefe.
            
               Principalis, le, principall, alſo perteyninge to a prince.
            
               Principaliter, principally.
            
               Principatus, the ſoueraignetie.
            
               Principiò an aduerbe, fyrſte, or at the beginninge,
            
               Principia, the place in a Campe, where as are pighte the pauilions of the head capitaynes, but the more proper ſignifycation therof is, that it is the ſecond ward in battayle, where in olde tyme were the prynces and noble men Alſo it was taken for the order of raye of noble men.
            
               Principior, piari, to begynne.
            
               Principor, pari, to rule.
            
               Principium, the begynnynge.
            
               Prior, the firſte, prius.
            
            
               Priora tempora, the olde tyme.
            
               Priſcus, a, um, aunciente, or of the olde time.
            
               Priſtinus, na, num, that whiche was many yeres paſſed. Sometyme it ſignifieth the firſt, aunciente.
            
               Priſtis, a fyſhe, of wonderfull length, and ſclender, whiche cutteth the wawes, as he ſwymmeth.
            
               Priuatus, he that is in none auctorite or dignite
            
               Priuatus, ta, tum, that is properlye a mannes owne, that whiche perteyneth to one man or fewe, alſo particular. Sometyme it ſignifyeth depriued.
            Priuatim, & priuatè, priuyly, aparte.
            
            
               Priuernum, a towne in Campania.
            
               Priuignus, na, the chylde by an other huſband, or other wyfe, whiche is dead, ſon or doughter in lawe to the huſbande or wife.
            
               Priuilegium, a lawe concernynge priuate perſonnes, alſo a priuate or ſpeciall lawe.
            
               Priuo, are, to take awaye, to depriue.
            
               Prius, an aduerbe, ſignifieth before.
            
               Priuſquam, before that.
            
               Priuus, ua, uum, priuate, ſingular, euery mans owne or proper.
            
               Pro, for before. Pro roſtris, at the bar or place of pleadynge. Pro tribunali, in the place of iudgement. alſo after or accordynge. Pro Pla
                  
                     •
                  onis ſententia, accordynge to the ſentence of Plato. Pro opere, in the warke, Pro merito, accordynge to his deſeruynge. Pro curia, before the courte. Pro uirili, to my power.
            
               Pro comperto, for a ſuertie.
            Pro explorato. idem.
            
               Pro indiuiſo, without diuiſion.
            
               Pro nihilo ducere, to ſet naught by.
            
               Pro ridiculo putare aliquem, to laugh at one and make hym a foole.
            
               Nemo ſatis pro merito gratiam Regi refert No man dothe thanke the kynge, accordyng to his merites.
            
               Pro opibus noſtris, according to our power.
            
               Pro mea conſuetudine, accordynge to my cuſtome.
            
               Pro ſpe nihil contigit, no thynge hapned accordynge as men hoped.
            
               Pro uirili parte, to my power or his power.
            
               Pro rata parte, accordinge to his rate or portion.
            
               Conſilium pro tempore et pro re capere.
                to take counſayle accordyng as the tyme and matter required.
            
               Pro horum temporum perturbatione, conſiderynge this troublouſe tyme.
            
               Pro mea authoritate uideor poſſe, men think that I maye do it hauynge regarde to myne auctoritie.
            
               Pro re nata, accordynge to the affayres that do happen.
            
               Pro meo iure dico, I tell you franckely.
            
               Pro meo iure, by myne auctoritie.
            
               Pro ſuo iure agere omnia, to do all thynges at his own pleaſure or by his owne auctorite
            
               Pro caetera diligentia, accordynge to the diligence wherto he hath ben accuſtomed.
            
               Excubare pro templis, to watche in the temple or churche.
            
               Laudati pro contione, prayſed before all the people, or at a great aſſembly.
            
               Pro ſuggeſtu, in the pulpyt.
            
               Pro aede Iouis, before the temple of Iupiter.
            
               Pro ſe quiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , euery man to his pòwer.
            
               Pro teſtimonio dicere, to beare witneſſe.
            
               Maior 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   pro numero hominum editur pugna, the battayle was greater than one wold haue thought ſhuld haue ben of that number of perſonnes.
            
               Pro eo ac debui grauiter moleſte
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tuli. I toke it greuouſely, euen as I had cauſe.
            
               Prô ſancte Iupiter, O bleſſed Iupiter.
            
               Prô deum at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   hominum fidē, O the faithe of god and man.
            
               Proauus, my great graundfather.
            
               Proauia, my great grandame.
            
               Probabile, that whiche maye be proued.
            
               Probatica piſcina, a ponde, where ſheepe are waſhed.
            
               Probatio, a proufe.
            Probatus, ta, tum, proued.
            
            
               Probé, honeſtly, well, wyſely, ioyned with an nowne adiectine, it ſinifieth Valde.
            
            Probiter, idem.
            
               Probus, a vertuouſe man, a good man.
            
               Probitas, goodnes.
            
               Problema, tis, a ſentence purpoſed, hauyng a demaunde therto annexed.
            
               Probo, are, to proue, to prayſe, to approue, to aſſaye, to ſhewe by reaſon, or example that a thynge is good.
            
               Probare ſe, to declare hym ſelfe an honeſt mā
            
            
               Tuo ex ingenio alienos mores probas. thou eſtemeſte other men to be like the, or to be accordynge to thy condicions.
            
               Probabiliter. Illa cur e ueniant quis probabiliter dixerit. Howe that mought be who can tell by any reaſon.
            
               Probalitas, an apparaunce of trouthe.
            
               Proboisis, dis, a longe ſnowte, as an Olyphant or ſwyne hath.
            
               Probro, are, to reproche or rebuke.
            Probroſus, a, um, reprochefull.
            
            
               Probrum, a reprochefull acte. alſo a reproche or rebuke, an infamie.
            
               Procax, procacis, malaperte in aſkynge, or deſyringe, ſhameleſſe, wanton in crauynge, yll tounged.
            
               Procacitas, malapertnes, or wantonnes in aſkynge or crauynge.
            
               Procare, to wowe, to craue, to be importunate
            
               Procapis, a progenie, whiche commeth of one heade.
            
               Procaciter, malapertely, wantonlye, without ſhame.
            
               Procalo, are, to call one to.
            
               Procatum, & procitum, voyde, or of none effecte.
            
               Procedo, ceſsi, cedere, to go forthe, to precede, to proſper.
            Procede tu huc, come forthe.
            
            
               Procedere, to go from his houſe with great pompe.
            
               Procedere obuiam, to go to met with one.
            Procedite in medium, go forthe.
            
            
               Procedere in philoſophia, to profyte in philoſophy.
            
               Proceſsit aetate, he is nowe olde.
            
               Proceſsit eo inſolentiae, he is woxen ſo wanton.
            
               Eo ira proceſsit, the anger ſo inereaced.
            
               Totidem dies procedent emptori, the byar ſhall haue ſo many dayes profyte.
            
               Nihil procedit, the thing came not forward.
            
               Proceſſus. Scripſit ſe in graecis literis magnū proceſſum habere. He wrate that he had moche profyted in greeke.
            
               Proci Penelopes, was a name gyuen to them whiche in wanton paſtimes do conſume both their owne goodes and alſo other mennes.
            
               Procella, a ſtorme.
            
               Proceleumaticus, a fote in meter of foure fete ſhorte.
            
               Procello, ere, to ſtreke, to tourne vp ſo down.
            Procelloſus, a, um, ſtormye.
            
            
               Procenſu, the company or felowſhyp of yonge men in the citie, as we behold in London the Bachelers together, whan the Mayre taketh his othe.
            
               Proceres, the heade men of a towne.
            Procêrus, a, um, longe, talle.
            
            
               Proceritas, lengthe, talneſſe.
            
               Proceriter, an aduerbe, which ſignifieth long, or of lengthe.
            
               Proceritus, rita, tum, incenſed or prouoked with an yll ſpirite, madde or woode.
            Proceriti lapides, vengeable.
            
            Pro certó, ſurely.
            
            
               Procet, for prouocet, lette hym prouoke, lette hym appeale.
            
                
               Proceſſus, us, proceſſe or ſucceſſe.
            
               Proceſtrium, a galerye to go from one chaumber to an other. alſo the ouermoſte parte of the walles within the imbattilmentes, wher men may go: ſome do call it a trenche before the campe, in defence therof from artillery.
            
               Prochyta, an Ile in the ſea, in the gulfe or rode of Puteolis, a citie in Campania.
            
               Procidentia, whan any thynge falleth oute of his place.
            
               Procidentia ani, whan the bone of the foundement appereth out.
            
               Procido, dere, to fall downe proſtrate.
            
               Procieo, ere, to prouoke or call from far of
            
               Procinctus, tus, the prouiſion before that any thynge is done alſo the ſtate of an army whā they be redy to gyue battayle.
            
               Procingo, xi, gere, to prepare, to make redy.
            Procinctus, ta, tum, redy, prepared.
            
            
               Procincta claſsis, a nauye prepared redye to fyghte.
            
               Procino, cinui, nere, to pronounce in ſinginge to ſinge out.
            Procio, ciui, ire, to aſke.
            
            
               Procito, rare, to prouoke.
            
               Proclamo, are, to crie out, to proclayme.
            
               Procliuè, redily, eaſily in doinge.
            
               Procliuis, ne, redy to fall, inclyned. Alſo redye or eaſy to be done.
            
               Procliuitas, tatis, inclynation to euyll, facilite.
            
               Procliuiter, eaſely.
            
               Proclus, a noble philoſopher of the ſecte of Plato.
            
               Proco, & procor, ari, to aſke malapertly. alſo to dalye with wanton language, to eye or beholde a woman wantonly.
            
               Proconſul, lis, he that was ſent with an extra ordinarie power of Conſull in to a prouynce of the Romaynes.
            
               Proconſularis, re, perteyning to the Procōſul.
            
            
               Procraſtinatio, a delaye.
            
               Procraſtino, nare, to prolonge the tyme, to deferre.
            
               Procreo, are, to begette chylderne.
            Procreatus, ta, tum, begotten.
            
            
               Procubitor, toris, he that kepeth watche and warde without the campe.
            
               Procubo, bare, to watche.
            
               Procudo, dere, to ſtrike or beate a thynge, to make it leſſe or thynner.
            
               Procul, farre of, from farre.
            
               Procul urbem, far from the citie.
            
               Procul muros, far from the walles.
            
               Proculco, care, to treade downe.
            
               Proculdubio, out of doubte, doubtleſſe.
            
               Proculeio, ere, to extende, to promyſe.
            
               Proculiunt, olde wryters vſed for promittunt, they promyſe.
            
               Proculus, he that is borne whan his father is farre out of the countrey.
            
               Procumbo, cubui, cumbere, to lye flat or proſtrate, to come narowe together.
            
               Procuro, rare, to do or ſolicite an other mans buſineſſe, to increaſe diligentely, to helpe or ſuſteyne, or ſuccour.
            
               Procurare Prouinciam, to gouerne and rule the countrey.
            
               Procuratorius, ia, um, perteyninge to a proctour or factour.
            
               Procurare prodigia, to vſe certayne ceremonies and ſacrifice, to the intent that thynges monſtruouſe ſhulde not take any yll effecte.
            
               Procurator, toris, a proctour or factour.
            
               Procuratio, miniſtration of thynges concerninge an other man.
            
               Procurro, rere, to runne farre, or beyonde.
            Procuruus, ua, um, very croked.
            
            
               Procurſatores, fore ridars in battayle.
            
               Procus, a wower, to haue a woman in maryage, but moſte properly where there be two, whiche woweth euery one for him ſelfe.
            
               Procyon, a ſterre called the dogſterre, whiche appereth in the canicular dayes.
            
               Prodeambulo, are, to walke forthe.
            
               Prodeo, diui, uel dii, to goo forthe or oute of a houſe, to come before one.
            
               Prodire in aciem, to fyghte in the vaugarde of an hoſte.
            
               Prodire obuiam, to go againſt one, or to go to mete with one, whiche is commynge.
            
               Prodire in publicum, to go abrode, to go in the ſtretes.
            
               Prodigium, a thynge ſeldome ſeene, whiche ſignifieth, that ſome thynge ſhall happen very good or very yll, as blaſynge ſterres, fyres, or figures in the fyrmamente, thynges monſtruouſe or agaynſte nature.
            
               Prodigioſa precia, vnreaſonable pryces.
            
               Prodigo, digere, to laſhe out money in vayne, or in thynges not neceſſary, ſometyme to ſygnifie ſome ſtrange thynge to happen.
            
               Prodico, dixi, dicere, to ſpeake more or prate.
            
               Quamobrem excutiemus omnes iſtorum delitias, omnes ineptias, ſi prodixerint. Wherfore we wyll ſet forthe al theſe mennes pleaſures and fantaſyes, if they wyll prate any more.
            
               Prodigalitas, prodigalitye, or outragiouſe expenſes.
            
               Prodige, exceſſiuelye, outragiouſely, prodygally, waſtefully.
            
               Prodigialis, digiale, that whiche perteynethe to the procuryng of ſtrange tokens or ſignes
            
               Prodigiator, he that by ſtraunge tokens or ſignes, telleth before what ſhall afterwarde happen.
            
               Prodigioſus, ſa, ſum, that whiche make the ſtraunge ſignes or tokens.
            
                
               Prodigitas, prodigalitie.
            
               Prodigus, prodigall, waſtefull, an outragious expender.
            
               Prodimentum, a treaſon or betrayenge.
            
               Prodinunt, for prodiunt, vſed of Ennius, to iſſue or come forthe.
            
               Prodius, further in.
            
               Proditio, treaſon.
            
               Proditor, toris, a traytour.
            
               Prodo, didi, dere, to put of.
            
               Tibi nos prodimus ac confitemur te ciſtellam habere. Thus we ſay and confeſſe vnto the, that thou haſt the caſket.
            
               Prodere conſcios, to appeche his felowes.
            
               Prodere dogma, to diſcloſe the ſecretes.
            
               Prodidiſti et te, et illam miſeram, et gnatū, Thou haſte deceyued thy ſelfe, and alſo the poore woman and thy ſonne.
            
               Antequam arcem proderent hoſtibus, before that they had rendred vp the caſtelle to theyr ennemies.
            
               Prodere poſteris, to leaue to them that come after vs.
            
               Prodere patriam, to betraye his owne countreye.
            
               Prodere exemplum, to puniſhe men to the example of other.
            
               Prodere fidem, to falſefy his faythe, to doo contrary to his allegiaunce, or his ſolempne promyſe.
            
               Prodere legem, to fruſtrate the intente of the lawe.
            
               Prodere officiū, to do contrary to his duete.
            
               Prodere gloriam et laudem poſteris, to leue after hym example of prayſe and renoume.
            
               Prodere uitam, to put his lyfe in ieoperdy.
            
               Prodere interregem, to name hym that ſhall be in that rome.
            
               Prodere, to put in writynge.
            
               Prodere uitam, to put his life in daunger.
            
               Prodidit memoria, it is written.
            
               Vt quidam poetae prodiderunt, as ſome poetes haue written.
            
               Prodi
                     •
                  us, betrayed or deceyued.
            
               Prodromus, he that runneth before, as a lackey, or he that bryngeth ridinges of ones comynge. Prodromi, be alſo ſterres in heauen, the whiche do riſe in the Northe eaſte .viii. dayes afore the canicular dayes.
            
               Produco, duxi, ducere, to prolonge, to brynge forthe, to conſume or ſpende. Producere aliquem falſa ſpe, to hold or kepe one in a fooles paradyſe, to put forwarde: alſo to folow
            
               Productilis, le, that whiche is made out at length with beatynge.
            
               Producere, to ſet forthe to hyre. Audientem dicto mater produxiſti filiam. Thou being hir mother, and ſhe beinge obediente vnto the, thou haſt ſet her to hire.
            
               Producere filios, to beget chyldren.
            
               Productio, the makynge of a thynge longe.
            
               Productè, an aduerbe, ſignifieth longe.
            
               Productus, ta, tum, made longe or ſet out at lengthe, alſo brought or put out.
            
               Proaedifico, care, to buylde.
            
               Proaedificatum, that whiche beinge a priuate place, is made commune or publyke.
            
               Profanatum templum, the churche ſuſpended, where any horrible cryme is therin commytted.
            
               Profano, are, to conuerte thynges beinge halowed to a temporall vſe.
            Profanum facere, idem.
            
               Profanus, na, num, that whiche is not halowed, temporall, men vnlerned, and that doo hate lerned men. Alſo that whiche is ioyned or annexed vnto the temple.
            
               Profari, to pronounce, to ſpeake abrode.
            
               Profectio, a paſſage or ſettynge forth toward a viage, a departinge from the place, where a man is.
            
               Profectò, in very dede, for ſothe.
            
               Profectus ſum, the pretertence of proficiſcor, I wente.
            Profectus, tus profyte.
            
            
               Profectum facere, to profyte or goo forthe, properly in ſtudy and lernynge.
            
               Profero, tuli, ferre, to brynge forthe, to ſhowe forthe, to pronounce, to inlarge, or dilate, or make greatter, to prolonge.
            
               Proferre dolum, to put a diſceyt in experience.
            
               Proferre gradum, to aduaunce him ſelfe forwarde.
            
               Profeſsio, an open confeſſion, an open redinge or lecture.
            
               Profeſſor, oris, a reder in open ſcholes.
            Profeſti dies, warkedayes.
            
            
               Proficio, ficere, to profyte, to procede.
            
               Proficiſcor, ciſci, to go and to come, to depart from a place.
            
               Profiteor, to promyſe openly, to tell frankelye or boldly. Alſo to tell or declare, how moch a man hath of money, cattell, corne, or any other thynge. Alſo to ſpeake or auaunte. Alſo to diſcouer or confeſſe a thynge. alſo to rede openly a leſſon.
            
               Proflare, to dryue downe with a blaſte.
            
               Profligo, gare, to ouerthrowe, to dryue away to bringe to deſtruction, to put to flyght.
            
               Profligatus, ta, tū, ouerthrowen, driuen away put to flyghte, dyſtroyed. ſometyme it ſignifyeth finiſhed, brought to a poynte.
            
               Profligati homines, men that haue in folye waſted theyr ſubſtaunce.
            
               Profligo, gis, gere, to ſtriue moche.
            
               Proflubeo, ui, ere, to runne out.
            
               Profluens, tis, a riuer, beinge a participle, it ſignifieth flowynge.
            
                
               Profluo, xi, ere, to rounne oute of a thynge, to runne from farre.
            
               Profluuium, a flyxe or laſke.
            
               Profluus, a, um, that whyche floweth.
            
               Profore, to profyte. Quae noc
                     •
                  ere ſequar, fugiam quae profore credam, That whyche hath done harme wyll I folowe, and eſchewe wyll I thoſe thynges whyche I beleue ſhulde profyte me.
            
               Profugio, gere, to flye farre.
            
               Profugium, a place wherto a manne flyeth for ſuccour, alſo a thynge, wherevnto one reſorteth for ſuccour.
            
               Profugus, he that goth farre out of his owne countreye.
            
               Profunditas, depeneſſe.
            
               Profundo, fudi, fundere, to poore out largely, to ſpende excedyngly.
            
               Profundere palmites, is of a vyne, whanne ſhe ſendethe forthe a greatte noumber of braunches.
            
               Profundere clamorem, to crye out as loude as one may.
            
               Profundere in aliquem, to doo to one all the pleaſure that lyeth in his power.
            
               Profundere uires animi at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ingenij, to employ all his power and wytte in bryngynge a thynge to paſſe.
            
               Profundere uitam pro patria, to ſpende his lyfe in defence of his countrey.
            
               Profunda auaritia, inſaciable auaryce. Profunda cupido, inſaciable couetyſe. Profunda libido, inſacyable lechery.
            
               Profundus, da, dum, depe, ſometyme hygh.
            
               Profuſus, excedynge lyberall.
            
               Profuſae epulae, exceſſiue bankettynges.
            
               Progener, ri, the houſbande of my doughters doughter, or ſonnes doughter.
            
               Progemmare, to bourgen.
            
               Progenies, progeny, ſucceſſion in bloudde.
            
               Progigno, nere, to get a chylde.
            
               Prognare, openly.
            
               Prognariter, hardyly.
            Prognatus, ta, tum, borne.
            
            
               Prognoſis, preſcience, or knowlege afore that a thynge happeneth.
            
               Prognoſticon, a pronoſtycation.
            
               Progredior, greſſus ſum, gredi, to goo forthe or before.
            Progreſſus, ſa, ſum, paſſed ouer.
            
            
               Progreſſus, us, a marchynge forthe, or paſſyng forthe.
            Progreſsio, idem.
            
               Progymnaſma, an aſſay or profe in exercyſe.
            
               Prohibeo, b
                     •
                  i, bêre, to prohibyte, to forbyd, to tourne away.
            
               Prohibête a uobis uim meam, take hede that I do you not dyſpleaſure.
            
               Prohibête aditum matris à filij ſanguine, tourne or lette ye the mother that ſhe ſlea not her ſonne.
            
               Prohibere potione, to kepe one from drynk.
            
               Prohibere itinere, to ſtoppe hym of his way.
            
               Proiecta, the ouer partes of a houſe, whiche do leaue outwarde from the nether part, as they be nowe in ſome townes towarde the ſtretes: ſome men do call them garrettes.
            
               Proiectare aliquem probris, to rebuke one.
            
               Proiectitius, a, um, a chylde caſt forth and nouryſhed of a ſtraunger.
            
               Proiectura, a penthowſe to conuey rayne from the walles.
            
               Proiectus, ta, tum, throwen or caſte ont afarre.
            
               Proiecta audatia, foole hardyneſſe.
            
               Proiectus puer, a chylde whiche is layde abrode in the ſtrete, no man knowyng who is the father or mother.
            Proiectus ad audendum, foolehardy.
            
            
               Proijcio, ieci, ijcere, to throwe or caſte, to ſette forth, to leaue, to extend or holde out a thing at length.
            
               Proin, therfore.
            
               Proinde, therfore, wherfore, lyke as.
            
               Prolabor, beris, bi, to ſlyde or ſlyppe forth.
            
               Prolabi timore, to fall downe for feare.
            
               Prolabi longius, to wander farre of.
            
               Prolabi in miſericordiam, to becom merciful
            
               Prolabi cupiditate, to be abuſed by his couetouſneſſe.
            
               Prolapſa huc libido, his wylfulneſſe is come to this.
            
               Prolambo, bere, to lycke.
            
               Prolatio, an extendynge forthe. alſo pronouncynge, or pronunciation, ſomtyme bryngyng forthe or ſhewynge of a thynge.
            
               Prolatare, to deferre or put of, vntylle a longer tyme.
            
               Prolatus, ta, tum, ſet forthe, brought forthe.
            
               Prolectare, to prouoke pleaſantly.
            
               Prolectibilis, le, that whiche tyckleth or pleaſantly mouyth one.
            
               Prolepſis, a fygure in ſpeakyng, where we doo preuente, to diſſolue by reaſon that, which we thynke to be in the opinion of our aduerſary, or of the iudge.
            
               Proles, iſſue or fruite of a mannes body. alſo of a beaſte.
            
               Proletarij, amonge the Romaynes were they, which for pouertie were not able to go to the warres, and therfore they were lefte at home to get chylderne.
            
               Prolibo, are, to taſt, or to ſacrifice afore.
            
               Prolicio, prolixi, prolicere, to induce or drawe. Eius amor cupidam huc me per tenebras prolicit, The loue of hym hathe drawen me hyther in the darke, beynge deſyrous of his companye.
            
               Prolixè, lyberally, abundantly, at length.
            
                
               Prolixo, prolixare, to make a thynge ſharpe in lengthe. Quare magnopere mouendus purator eſt, ut prolixet aciē ferramenti, & quan tum poſsit, nouaculae ſimilem reddat, wherfore the cutter of the vyne oughte to be warned, that he make ſharpe in lengthe the poynt of the inſtrument, and as moche as he maye, that he make it lyke to a raſer.
            
               Prolixus, a, um, longe, large, ſommetyme ſuperfluouſe.
            
               Prolixitas, & prolixitudo, length, largenes.
            
               Prolocutio, the fyrſte ſpeche or fyrſt entree into communication.
            Prologium, idem.
            
               Prologus, a prologue.
            
               Prolongo, are, to prolonge, to deferre.
            
               Proloquium, the begynnynge of an oration or ſentence.
            
               Proloquor, queris, qui, to ſpeake at lengthe, to tell a longe tale. Alſo to ſpeake before, to ſpeke that whyche we thynke, to declare our opynyon.
            
               Proludo, dere, to flouryſſhe, as muſytians do, before they come to the principal matter, and as fence men doo with the ſworde, or the two handſtaffe.
            
               Prolugeo, xi, gêre, to mourne longer than hath ben accuſtomed.
            
               Proluo, ere, to waſſhe moche, to drowne or ſurrounde.
            
               Proluuies, the fylthe or ordur, whyche is waſhed of any thynge.
            
               Proluuium, idem. Alſo prodygalitie.
            
               Promellere, to promote or ſette forthe ſuyte in the lawe.
            
               Promercalia, thynges ſet forthe to be ſold, ſpecially that whyche is ſolde by retayle.
            
               Promercale aurum, golde ſolde in ſuche wyſe, that beſydes the iuſte value, ſoo moche golde remayneth to the ſellar, as may ſerue to his proper vſe, as oure nobles and royalles ſolde beyonde the ſea, at a greatter price than they be valued at here in this realme.
            
               Promercor, caris, cari, to bye thynges good cheape, to the intent to ſell them dere, to bye at the fyrſte hande, to ſell them at retayle.
            
               Promereo, rui, rere, to deſerue, to do pleaſure or ſeruyce to one.
            
               Promereor, reri, idem. Alſo to bynd one by his actes to do for hym▪ alſo to helpe, to profyte.
            
               Promereri de aliquo, to do a mā a good turn.
            
               Promerens, tis, he that dothe pleaſure or ſeruyce. Promerenti optime, hoccine praetij redditur, He that hath done verye good ſeruyce, ſhall he haue this rewarde for his labour?
            
               Promeritum, deſert, pleaſure or ſeruyce done.
            
               Promeneruat, olde wryters vſed for monet, he exhorteth or warneth.
            
               Prometheus, the ſonne of Iapetus, he fyrſt inuented the makyng of ymages, wherfore the paynymes ſuppoſed that he made men. And fayned, that he wente vp into heuen, & there dyd ſteale fyre to make his ymage haue lyfe, wherwith Iupiter being wroth, cauſed him to be bounden on the hylle callyd Caucaſus, and an egle ſtandynge by hym, eatynge his harte, by the whych is ſygnified that he was ſtudyous and a great aſtronomer.
            
               Promico, are, to extende or ſet out at length.
            
               Prominenter, at length.
            
               Prominentia, the extendynge or ſettynge oute at length.
            
               Promineo, nui, nere, to appere farre of.
            
               Promiſcā, olde wryters dyd vſe for promiſcuè.
            
               Promiſceo, cui, cére, to myngle togyther.
            
               Promiſcuè, one with an other, myxte.
            
               Promiſcuus, ſcua, ſcuum, confuſed, myngled one with an nother.
            
               Promiſcuam operam dare, one to do for an nother.
            
               Promiſſa barba, a longe bearde.
            
               Promiſſè, longe, in length.
            
               Promiſsio, a promyſe.
            
               Promiſſor, he that promyſeth.
            
               Promiſſum, a promyſe.
            
               Promitto, miſi, mittere, to promyſe, to let grow in length, alſo to threten.
            
               Promo, prompſi, mere, to ſpeake out, to tel, to take out of a coffer, or other lyke thyng.
            
               Promontorium, a mountayne or high place of a lande or countrey, whyche lyeth as it were an elbowe into the ſea warde.
            
               Promoueo, uêre, to aduaunce or profyte, to inlarge, ſometyme to go backe or deferre.
            
               Promptarius, a, um, that frō whens any thing is brought or taken.
            
               Promptaria cella, a pryſon from whens men be brought to be whypped or hanged.
            Promptarium, & promptuarium, a ſtorchous.
            
            
               Promptè, promptly, redyly.
            
               Promptior, more prompte or redy.
            
               Promptitudo, promptneſſe.
            
               Prompto, tare, to brynge often forth.
            
               Promptus, ta, tum, prompte, redy to do a thing without taryenge. alſo redy. Promptum ingenium, a redy wytte. Res eſt in promptu, The thynge is redy alſo manyfeſt. In promptu res eſt, The thynge is manyfeſt.
            
               Manu promptus, redy to ſtryke.
            
               Promptus ingenio, quycke ſpyrited or hauynge a lyuely wytte.
            
               Nec promptū eſt dicere, it is not eaſy to tel.
            
               Promulco nauis agitur, the ſhyppe is drawen with a bote.
            
               Promulgator, & promulgatrix, he or ſhe that dothe publyſhe a thynge.
            
               Promulgo, are, to publyſhe.
            
                
               Promulgatio, a publycation.
            
               Promulſis, idis, Mede, made with water and hony.
            
               Promurale, a countermure, one wall withoute an nother.
            
               Promus, he that hath the kepynge of the ſtore houſe or drye larder.
            
               Pronepos, potis, & proneptis, my ſonnes or daughters ſonne or daughter.
            
               Pronè, redyly.
            
               Pronis, olde wryters vſed for prona, proſteate or on the grounde.
            
               Pronomen, a pronowne.
            
               Pronuba, ſhe that attendeth on the bryde, and is houſewyfe durynge the feaſt.
            
               Pronubo, pſi, bere, to haue a rule in weddynges or ioynynge of couples.
            
               Pronubus, he that leadeth the bryde hoome to her huſbandes houſe, and hath the ſurueyeng of the howſe, durynge the tyme of the ſolemnyſation.
            
               Pronubus, he that dothe celebrate the ſolemnitie in mariage, it maye be nowe taken for the prieſt, whiche dothe mynyſter the ſolempne wordes of matrymonye.
            
               Pronunciatio, a pronunciation or vtteraunce of ſpeeche
            
               Pronuntiatum, a ſtatute.
            
               Pronuntio, are, to pronounce, to declare openly, to gyue ſentence, to ſay.
            
               Pronuper, longe agoone.
            
               Pronurus, the wyfe of my ſonnes ſonne, or daughters ſonne.
            
               Pronus, redye, inclyned, ſtowpynge downe, nygh hande.
            
               Pronus ad meridiem locus, the place lyeth towarde the ſouthe.
            
               Prooemium, a proheme or begynnynge of a mattier.
            
               Propago, gare, to ſpreade as a tree doth on the toppe, to make to ſpreade, to ſende farre of.
            
               Propagatio, a ſpreadynge.
            
               Propages, a longe rewe.
            
               Propago, ginis, an olde vyne ſpredde in many braunches. Sometyme it ſygnyfyeth kynde or generation.
            
               Propalam, openly, clerely in the ſyghte of all menne.
            
               Propalo, lare, to tell abrode, to grow in length
            
               Propatruus, my great grandfathers brother.
            
               Propatulum, wyde open.
            
               Propè, nygh, almoſte.
            
               Propè diem, nowe euery day, ſhortly.
            
               Propello, propuli, pellere, to dryue or putte away, farre of.
            
               Propemodum, almoſte.
            
               Propendêre, to hange vp. Alſo to examyne or conſyder farre of.
            
               Propenſus, inclyned.
            
               Propenſo aīo facere, to do it with a good wyll.
            Propenſior in neutram partem, indyfferent.
            
            
               Properê, quyckely, haſtily.
            
               Properatim, quyckely.
            Properanter, & properiter, idem.
            Properantia, & properatio, an approchyng.
            
            
               Properitas, the ſame amonge olde writers.
            
               Properus, a, um, quycke, ſodayne.
            
               Propero, rare; to go quyckely or haſtily, to ſaye or do any thynge quyckely or haſtily.
            
               Propertro, trare, to commaunde that a thynge be doone.
            
               Próphaſis, an excuſe.
            
               Prophetis, & prophetiſſa, a woman prophet.
            
               Propheto, tare, to propheſye, to ſynge prayſes to god: ſometyme it ſygnifieth to preache or interprete.
            
               Propheta, a prophete, he that telleth thynges, whiche ſhall happen.
            
               Prophetia, a prophecye.
            
               Propilo, are, to make ſharpe before.
            
               Propina, a place by the cōmune baynes, where after baynynge men toke theyr refection.
            
               Propino, nare, to drynke to an nother man, to quafte, to brynge to, ſometyme to gyue.
            
               Propino tibi ſalutem, I ſalutethe.
            
               Propinator, a cupbearer.
            
               Propinquus, a neyghbour. Alſoo a kynſman, of alyaunce.
            
               Propinquitas, aſſynitie, alyaunce.
            
               Propinque, nygh.
            Propinquior, quius, nerer.
            
            
               Propitiabilis, le, that whiche is ſoone bowed or inclyned to deſyres.
            Propitialis, idem.
            
               Propitiatio, ſacrifyce to appeaſe or pacyfy goddis diſpleaſure.
            
               Propitium, ſometyme ſygnifieth very deuoute or louynge.
            
               Propitius, content, not dyſpleaſed or angry.
            
               Propitij, peaſyble men, or men ſoone appeaſed or ſatisfied.
            
               Propius, nerrer, or nerre.
            
               Proplaſtice, ces, the craft to make mouldes, in the which any thynge is caſt or fourmed.
            
               Propingeon, the place in a bain or hot hous, in the which fire incloſed, ſendeth forth heate.
            
               Propitiatorium, a table ſette on the arke of the olde teſtament.
            
               Propitio, & propitior, ari, to appeaſe, or to make mercyfull, or fauourable.
            
               Propitius, a, ū, appeaſed, fauorable, mercyfull.
            
               Propior, nerer.
            
               Propoma, a drynk made with hony and wyne.
            
               Propola, he that ſelleth any thynge at retayle, ſpecially vyttayle, a hukſter.
            
               Propolis, a ſubburbes of a towne. It is alſoo that whiche bees do make at the entrie of the hyue, whereby colde and other annoyaunce
 is defended.
            
               Propono, propoſui, ponere, to purpoſe, to be aduyſed, to promyſe a pryce or rewarde for any notable acte, to ſette out to the ſhewe.
            
               Propontis, a ſea betwene Grece and Aſie.
            
               Proportio, a proporcyon.
            
               Propoſitio, a matter pourpoſed to be dyſputed or reaſoned. It is alſo that, wherby we ſhew generally, whereof we wyll ſpeake.
            
               Propoſitum, a purpoſe.
            
               Propraetor, toris, he that was in the ſteede of
            
               Praetor, or mayre.
            
               Popriè, proprely, partycularly.
            Propritim, idem.
            
               Proprietarius, a, um, whervnto the propertye of a thynge belongeth.
            
               Proprietas, propertie.
            
               Proprius, propria, prium, propre, or particuler.
            
               Culpa mea propria, in myne owne defaut. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth perpetuall.
            
               Voluptates deorum propriae ſunt, The pleſures of the goddes be perpetuall.
            
               Propter, for. Sometyme nygh alſo at or in.
            
               Propterea, therfore.
            
               Proptoſis, a dyſeſe where the eyen meued with inflamation, do fall out of theyr places
            
               Propudium, ſhame, diſhoneſtie. Alſo the moſte abhomynable vſe of lecherye, in an inconuenyent fourme.
            
               Propugnaculum, a fortreſſe, a ſtronge holde.
            
               Propugnator, toris, a defendour.
            
               Propugno, are, to fyght farre of, to fyghte valyantly, to defende.
            
               Propulſator, he that reſyſteth a thynge, or dryueth any thynge away.
            
               Propulſo, are, to put of, to dryue away.
            
               Propylaeum, a porche.
            
               Proquaeſtor, toris, he that exercyſeth the office of Quaeſtor in his abſence.
            
               Prora, the forepart of a ſhyppe.
            
               Prorepo, prorepſi, prorepere, to crepe further.
            
               Prorêta, he that hath the rule of the forſhyppe or decke.
            
               Prorideo, ridere, to laughe afarre of.
            
               Proripio, pui, pere, to withdrawe or departe, ioyned with me or ſe, Domum ſe ex curia proripuit, He departed or withdrewe hym homewarde from the court.
            
               Prorito, tare, to prouoke.
            
               Prorogatio, a prolongynge or delayenge.
            
               Prorogo, gare, to proſonge.
            
               Prorſus, & prorſum, vtterly, alway, ī any wiſe, ſtreyght towarde a place, ſurely.
            
               Prorſi, lymyttes in boundynge of landes dyrected into the eaſt.
            
               Prorumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake forthe, to ſende forthe with vyolence, to leape or go out of a place with vyolence, to braſt out.
            
               Proruo, ruere, to dryue downe, or beat downe.
            
               Proſa, proſe, that whiche is not meter.
            
               Proſapia, a progenye, a dyſcente of bloudde, a petygree.
            
               Proſcenia, the place wherein enterludes were played by the perſonages.
            
               Proſcindo, ſcidi, ſcindere, to cut out or vnder, to infame, to rebuke ſhamefully.
            
               Proſcribo, ſcripſi, ſcribere, to ſell openly, to proclayme any thynge to be ſolde, to banyſſhe, to condemne.
            
               Proſcribere, is properly to cauſe by ordinance to be proclaymed, that who ſoo euer fyndeth one, he may lefully ſlea hym, and haue a rewarde for his labour.
            
               Proſcriptus, he that is ſo proclaymed.
            
               Proſcriptio, that maner of condemnation, alſo an attaynder.
            
               Proſcripturio, ire, to ymagyne a proſcription.
            
               Proſeco, are, to cut a ſunder.
            
               Proſecta, bowels cut in ſacrifice.
            
               Proſeda, a ſtrumpet or common harlot.
            
               Proſedanum, a dyſeaſe, whyche happeneth to rammes at blyſomynge tyme.
            
               Proſelytus, a ſtranger borne, conuerted to our fourme of lyuynge.
            
               Proſemino, are, to ſowe forthe.
            
               Proſequium, an affection.
            
               Proſequor, qui, to folowe after, to purſue.
            
               Proſequor amore, I loue. Proſequor odio. I hate. Proſequor honore, I honoure. Proſequor uerbis, I chafe hym with wordes.
            
               Proſequor officijs, I ſhewe to hym greatte kyndeneſſe, I do hym many pleaſures. Proſequi praemio, to rewarde.
            
               Proſequi dicto improbum uerbum alicuius, to rebuke ſharpelye one for ſpeakynge dyſhoneſtly.
            
               Proſerpere, to creape of ſlyde forthe lyke a ſerpente.
            
               Proſerpi na the wyfe of Pluto, doughter to Iupyter and Ceres, ſhe is taken ſommetyme for the moone.
            
               Proſerpinaca, an herbe callid alſo Polygonon. reade there.
            
               Proſeuche, a prayer to god, alſo a beggyng.
            
               Proſeucha, a beggar.
            
               Proſferari, to be opteyned.
            
               Proſicium, that whyche is cutte of frome any thynge, and caſte away.
            
               Proſilio, lij, to leape forthe.
            
               Proſocer, ceri, the father of my wyues father.
            
               Proſitum, olde wryters vſed for propoſitum, purpoſed.
            
               Proſodia, the crafte of accentyng.
            
               Proſonomaſia, the lykeneſſe of oone worde or name to an nother: as locus and lucus, orator, and arator.
            
            
               Proſopis, the clote leafe or great burre.
            
               Proſopopoeia, where as perſonnages are ſuppoſed
 or fayned to ſpeake, as one manne to an nother, a manne to a beaſt, one beaſt to an other &c.
            
               Proſpectus, tus, a ſyght farre of, a proſpecte.
            
               Proſpectè, aduyſedly.
            
               Proſpecto, ſpectare, to beholde, properlye farre of.
            Proſperè, proſperouſely. Proſperiter, idem.
            
               Proſperitas, proſperitie.
            
               Proſpica, & Proſpicus, he that beholdethea thynge farre of.
            
               Proſpices, for proſpice, beholde.
            
               Proſpiro, are, to fetche breath or wynde.
            
               Proſper, & proſperus, proſperi, proſpero, that whiche gyueth felicitie. Felix, he that receyueth it.
            
               Proſpicientia, prouidence, circumſpection.
            
               Proſpitio, ſpexi, ſpicere, to ſe farre, to foreſee to prouide, to beware.
            
               Proſpicuus, circumſpecte.
            
               Proſtaſis, preemynence.
            
               Proſtheſis, an addition of a letter, as gnatus, for natus.
            
            
               Proſterno, ſtraui, ſternere, to ouerthrowe, or to vanquyſhe in battayle.
            
               Proſtibulum, a commune brothelhouſe, alſo a commune harlotte. Proſtibula, idem.
            
            
               Proſtituo, tuere, to be a commune harlot.
            
               Suam pudicitiam proſtituere, to abandone her chaſtitie to any man that wyll companye with her.
            
               Proſtituere pudicitiam, to be commune to all men or women in the acte of lechery.
            
               Proſto, ſtare, to ſtande farre of, or afore, alſo to ſtande to be ſolde or hyred.
            
               Proſubigo, gere, to dygge deepe.
            
               Proſum, fui, deſſe, to be profytable.
            
               Proſumia, a lyttell barke.
            
               Proſumirium, a place withoute the walles of Rome, where the byſhoppes of the gentyles made their diuinations, or toke their ſignifications of thynges to come.
            
               Proſupero, are, to exceede, or haue more than ynough.
            
               Protaſis, a propoſition.
            Protego, texi, tegere, to defende.
            
            
               Protectio, a defence.
            
               Protector, toris, a defendour.
            Protentus, ta, tum, ſtretched out.
            
            
               Protelo, lare, to deferre or tracte the tyme, to put out, to dryue away, to vexe.
            
               Protendo, dere, to ſette forth, or put forthe, to ſtretche forthe.
            
               Protenus, a great way hens.
            
               Protero, triui, te
                     •
                  ere, to treade downe.
            
               Protermino, to incroche.
            
               Proterreo, rere, to make aferde farre of.
            
               Proteruia, wantonneſſe, it was alſo a ſacrifice, wherin the maner was, that as moch as was left vneaten, ſhoulde be conſumed with fyre, wherof came the prouerbe next folowynge.
            ❀Proteruiam fecit, he hath conſumed al that is lefte.
            
               Proteruio, ire, to play the wanton.
            
               Proteruè, proudely, immoderately, ſhamefully. Quis eſt, qui tam proteruè, foribus facit iniuriam, Who is he, that ſo proudely rappeth at the doore? Ecce autem tu quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   proterue iracundus es, Lo and thou alſo art ſhamefully angry.
            Proteruiter, idem.
            
               Proteruitas, tatis, pryde, foly.
            
               Proteruus, he that is ſo proude and fierſe, that nowe he ſtryketh and beateth down an other and treadeth hym vnder his feete. alſo lewde or knauyſhe and malapert.
            
               Proteſilâus, duke of the citie called Phylax in Theſſalia, who went with other to the ſiege of Troy. And whan there was anſwere gyuen to the Troyanes, that who fyrſte toke lande in the countray of Troy ſhuld be ſlayn. Proteſilaus with a valiaunt courage, arriued before any other, and was ſlayne by Hector, whoſe wyfe wepte ſoo moche for hym, that ſhe alſoo dyed, and wold neuer be comforted.
            
               Proteus, the ſonne of Oceanus and Tethys callyd of the Paynymes a god of the ſea, whome Homerus nameth to be the herdman of the fyſſhes callyd Phocae, and alſo a prophete, not withſtandynge he wolde not giue aunſwere, but beynge conſtrayned by Vlyſſes, he alſoo tourned hym ſelfe into ſundrye fygures, ſommetyme beynge lyke a flame of fyre, ſometyme lyke a bulle, an nother tyme lyke to a terryble ſerpente. Homerus Odyſſ. Vergilius Georg. 4. In veray deede he was kynge of Egipt in the tyme of Priamus kynge of Troy. Of hym camme this prouerbe. Proteo mutabilior, More chaungeable than Proteus, applyed to hym, whiche in his actes or wordes is vnſtable.
            
               Proteſtor, ſtaris, ſtari, to declare manifeſtely, what ſhulde be exchued and not done.
            
               Proteſtator, he that manifeſtly declareth what is to be exchued and not done.
            
               Proteſtatio, a proteſtation.
            
               Protina, for protinus, forthwith.
            
               Protinus, a farre of. alſo forthwith, without taryenge.
            
               Prothymia, promptitude, alſo gentyl entertainmente. Proh Di immortales quot ego 
                     •
                  oluptates fero, quot riſiones, quot iocos, quot ſuauia, ſaltationes, blanditias, prothymias? O lorde god, howe manye pleaſures haue I, what lawghinges, what paſtymes, what baſſinges, daunſynges, dalyaunces, & ſweete entertaynementes.
            
                
               Prothyrum, a porch at the vtter dore of a hous
            
               Protipon opus, an ymage or fourme, whereof mouldes are made, in the whyche thynges be caſt of mettall or erthe.
            
               Protocollum, that whyche is fyrſte made or wryten, whych requyreth correction.
            
               Protogenes, of the fyrſt kynred or famylye, it was alſo the name of an excellent paynter.
            
               Protogenia, the daughter of Deucalyon and Pirrha.
            
               Protogenus, the fyrſt chylde.
            
               Protologia, a preface.
            
               Protollo, lere, to prolonge.
            
               Protomartyr, the fyrſt martyr.
            
               Protomedicus, the chyefe phyſytion aboute a prince.
            
               Protomyſta, the chiefe prieſt or deane.
            
               Protonatorius, a protonotary, or chiefe ſccrybe or Secretary.
            
               Protopages▪ & protopagus, fyrſte made or wrought, or late made.
            
               Protoplaſtes, & protoplaſtus, fyrſte fourmed, ſo was Adam callyd.
            Protos, proton, fyrſte.
            
            
               Prototocos, a woman late bryngynge forthe her fyrſt chylde.
            
               Prototomus, the ſtalke whyche is fyrſt cutte.
            
               Prototypus, & prototypon, the fyrſt example, or paterne.
            
               Protraho, traxi, trahere, to differre or prolong.
            
               Protrepticus, a boke to inſtruct one, a doctrinal
            
               Protrimenta, meate mynced ſmalle.
            Prouectus, ta, tum, promoted.
            
            
               Prouectus ad dignitatem, promoted or aduaunced to honour.
            
               Prouectum ingenium, a long proued wytte.
            
               Prouectus, aged.
            
               Prouectus aetate, aged, runne farre in yeres.
            
               Proueho, uexi, uehere, to bring or cary further. alſo to promote, aduaunce.
            
               Prouenio, ire, to come forthe, alſo to growe, or increaſe, to happen or chaunce. Nimis prouē
                  tū eſt nequiter, It is vngraciouſly chaunced.
            
               Prouentus, tus, reuenues, yerely profytes.
            
               Prouerbè, dylygently.
            
               Prouerbium, a prouerbe.
            
               Prouidè, cyrcumſpectly.
            
               Prouidens, dentis, foreſeinge, prouident.
            
               Prouidentia, prouydence, foreſyght, ſometyme it is vſed for god.
            
               Prouidentior, prouidentiſsimus, more prouydent, moſte prouident or circumſpect.
            
               Prouideo, dere, to prouyde, to foreſee, to beware.
            
               Prouidus, prouydent, cyrcumſpect.
            
               Prouinciae, were countrayes, whyche the Romayns gatte farre from Rome, where onely theyr offycers dydde rule. Prouincia, is ſome tyme taken for the rule or auctoritie of an offycer, alſo an offyce, alſo for a countray or realme. alſo charge.
            
               Prouinciam ſuſcipere, to take charge of a thynge.
            
               Prouinciam coepiſti duram, thou haſte taken a matter vppon the harde to bryng about.
            
               Prouincialis, he that dwelleth in a prouynce.
            
               Prouinciatim, from countray to countraye, or one countray with an other.
            
               Prouiſo, ſere, to ſee or beholde, to go to ſee.
            
               Prouocator, he that prouoketh one, or he that appealeth, the appellant.
            
               Prouocatio, an appeale to an hygher courte.
            
               Prouoco, care, to calle from a farre, to ſtere, to inuite, to prouoke, to exhorte alſo to appeale to an hygher iudge, to defye one in battayle. De Caeſare tranſactum eſt ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   iam prouocari in integrum poteſt, As touchynge Ceſar that is at a poynte, nor it can in any wyſe be callyd agayne, or that whiche is doone, can not be vndone.
            
               Prouolo, are, to flye awaye, or beyonde, alſo to runne from aferre.
            
               Prouoluo, uere, to rolle or tumble a great ſtone or other lyke thynge. ſometyme to lye downe proſtrate.
            
               Prout, for Sicut, as.
            
               Prox, of old writers was taken for proba uox, a good voyce or noyſe.
            
               Proxeneta, a brokar.
            
               Proxime, next.
            
               Proximi, for proximo, Die proximi, the next day.
            
               Proximitas, nygheneſſe, neyghbourhead.
            
               Proximior, more nere.
            
               Proximo, are, to approche or drawe nygh.
            
               Proximurium, a place without the walles, ioynyng to the citie, where biſhops dyd aſſemble in their conuocation.
            Proximus, a, um, nexte.
            
            
               Prouulgo, aui, are, to publiſhe, or declare openly to the people.
            
               Prudens, prudentis, wyſe, prudent, knowyng, experte.
            
               Prudenter, wyſely.
            
               Prudentia, wyſedome in deſyrynge and eſchewynge of thynges.
            
               Prugnum, old wryters vſed for pronum, prone or apte.
            
               Pruina, froſte.
            Pruinoſus, a, um, froſtye.
            
            
               Pruna, a bournynge cole.
            
               Prunella, an herbe callyd commonly Brunella, burnette.
            
               Prunellus, the tree whyche bearythe wylde ſloes.
            
               Prunetum, an orchyarde ſette with damſyn
                  •
                trees, or plumme trees.
            
               Prunioli, ſmalle muſherons.
            
                
               Prunus, a damſyn tree or plumme tree.
            
               Prunum, a damſyn, prune, plum, ſlo, or bullaſe.
            Prurio, rij, rire, to ytche.
            
            Pruritus, tus, ytchynge.
            
            
               Prurigo, ginis, ytchynge with a delectation, as in the ſterynge of lechery.
            
               Pruſias, a kyng of Bythinia, vnto whom Hannyball fled, after that he was banyſhed from Carthage.
            
               Prymneſius, a poſte or ſtake, whervnto the cabull of a ſhyppe is tyed.
            
               Prymnos, a nymph or mayden of the ſea, one of the doughters of Oceanus.
            
               Prytaneia, a counſayle aſſemblyd of great officers and iudges.
            
               Prytaneium, a counſayle howſe.
            
               Prytanis, the preſident or chief of the counſell.
         
         
            ¶P ANTE S.
            PSallo, li, lere, to ſynge.
            
            
               Pſalmodia, a dyuerſe or myxt ſonge.
            
               Pſalmus, a ſonge proprelye to god, or of God.
            
               Pſalterium, an inſtrument lyke to a harpe, alſo the Pſalmes callyd the Pſalter.
            
               Pſaltes, a ſyngynge man.
            
               Pſaltrix, tricis, & pſaltria, a ſyngynge woman.
            
               Pſecas, adis, a droppe.
            
               Pſegma, the poulder or duſte, whych commeth of the fylynge of braſſe.
            
               Pſellus, the name of an olde wryter, whyche wrote of dyete.
            
               Pſephiſma, atis, a decree.
            
               Pſephopecta, an auditour or caſter of accōpte.
            
               Pſeudoadelphus, a counterfayte brother.
            
               Pſeudoangelus, a falſe meſſager.
            
               Pſeudolus, a falſe ſeruant.
            
               Pſeudomartyr, a falſe wytneſſe.
            
               Pſeudopropheta, a falſe prophete.
            
               Pſeudothyrum, a falſe poſterne.
            
               Pſeudo, faulſe or counterfayt, and euery other nowne ioyned therwith, is therby made falſe or counterfayte, as Pſeudopropheta, a falſe or counterfayte prophete.
            
               Pſilotrum, an oyntment to take away heares.
            
               Pſimmithium, that whyche we do calle Ceruſe or whyte leade.
            
               Pſitta, a fyſhe whyche we call a playce.
            
               Pſittacus, a popyniay.
            
               Pſycolutres, he that delyteth to bathe in colde water.
            
               Pſycomantium, a place where Nigromancers do calle vp ſpirytes.
            
               Pſora, ſcab bydneſſe.
            
               Pſora, an herbe, whyche Ruellius doubteth whyther it be that whyche we cōmonly calle Scabioſe, but that hath a long leafe, and beynge broken on ſunder hath in the breakynge lyttell thredes lyke to a copwebbe, and hath a fayre blewe flowre. it groweth commonlye in drye medowes.
            
               Pſylli, people in Lybia, whoſe bodyes are venym to ſerpentes, and they alſo doo cure the ſtyngynge and poyſonnynge of ſerpentes by ſuckynge the place whyche is venymed.
            
               Pſyllium, an herbe callyd alſo Pulicaris herba.
            
         
         
            ¶P ANTE T.
            
               PTE, a ſyllable ioyned oftentymes to the ablatiue caſe, as meapte, tuapte, ſuapte, myne own, thyne owne, his owne.
            
               Pterigium, a lyttelle ſkynne, whyche groweth frome the corner of the eye, and keuereth the ſyght: it is alſo a griefe vnder the foreparte of the nayle, whan the fleſhe gothe from the nayle with peyne.
            
               Pteris, ferne.
            
               Pteromata, great arches ouer the roofes made lyke wynges.
            
               Pterna, the lower part of a ſayle.
            
               Plithia, a parte of Theſſalia where Achylles raygned.
            
               Priſana, the water, wherin barly is ſodden, alſo barley huſked, or excorticate, alſo frumenty made of barley.
            
               Ptiſanarium, a morter, wherin barley is brayd.
            
               Ptocotrophia, an hoſpytal for beggars, a ſpittell howſe.
            
               Ptolomeus, the name of dyuers kynges of Egypte.
            
               Ptoſis, ruyne, alſo the caſe of a nowne.
            
               Ptolemais, maidis, the name of a citie in Phoenicia, fyrſt callyd Acha.
            
            
               Ptyas, adis, an adder hauyng the colour grene, drawyng towarde the colour of golde.
            
               Ptynge, a rauenous byrde, whiche taketh his pray by nyght, and ſometyme fyghteth with the Egle ſoo valyantly, that in crabbyng togyther, they fall bothe downe to the ground, and are taken by ſhepardes.
            
               Ptyſis; is ſpettyll, it is alſoo an exulceration or ſoore in the lungues, with a conſumption of all the body, and ſpettyng of bloudde.
         
         
            ¶P ANTE V.
            
               PVbens, he that is betweene a yonge man and a boye, of the age of .xiiii. yeres.
            
               Pubeſco, ſcere, to growe as a chyld dothe toward mans ſtate. it is alſo of herbis & trees
            
               Pubeo, es, & pubeſco, ere, to begynne to haue a bearde benethe, ſometyme to ſprynge, as herbes done.
            
               Puber, beris, & Pubes, beris, a yonge moſye boarde, whiche ſpryngeth in the nether partes of a man at fourtene yeres of aege, of a womanne at yonger yeres. Wherfore a man or womanne at thoſe yeeres is callyd Pubes.
                ſometyme youthe, or a multytude of yonge men: alſo the priuy partes of the body. alſo beyng an adiectiue, it ſignifieth yong or tender.
            
               Pubertas, the yonge aege of men and women, whan they begyn to be apte vnto generation. it is alſo the fyrſt commynge forthe of heares about the priuy members.
            
               Publicani, were they, whyche toke in ferme of the people of Rome the rentes and reuenues due to the citie at a rent certayne.
            
               Publicanus, a fermour.
            
               Publice, & publicitus, openly in the face of the worlde Sumptus publice dati, his expences borne of the citie or towne.
            
               Publice redimere, to bye it of the commune treaſoure.
            
               Publice bona poſsidêre, to haue goodes confyſcate or forfayted.
            
               Publice uenire, to come before al the worlde.
            
               Publice dicere, to make an oration before the people.
            
               Publice propter duas cauſas nihil ſcripſi, for two cauſes I wrate neyther to the ſenate, nor to the people.
            
               Quae prohiberi publicitus intereſt, The whiche it ſhall be expedient for the people that it be forbodē, or it is the peples part to forbede.
            
               Publicola, a fauourer of the people, the which name was gyuen to Valerius, whyche was one of the fyrſte conſules of Rome.
            
               Publico, care, to publyſhe, to manyfeſt, to make openly knowen. alſo idem quod edere, to abandon in commune as harlottes done, ſome tyme to confyſcate.
            
               Publicus, ca, cum, commune, but more proprely, publyke, that is to ſay, pertaynynge to euery ſtate of the people ioyntely and ſeuerally. See the true definition thereof in my booke callyd the Gouernour.
            
               Publicum conſilium, the commune counſayl.
            
               Carêre publico, not to come abrode, or amōg people.
            
               Publica ſacra, ſacrifyce done for the people.
            
               Publica fides, a ſaulfe conducte, a generall lycence.
            
               Publipor, poris, Publius boye, or ſeruant.
            
               Publius, the name of a Roman, as Marcus is.
            
               Pucinum uinum, wyne growynge nyghe to the gulfe of Venyce.
            
               Pudefio, fis, fieri, to be aſhamed.
            
               Pudenda, the pryuy membres.
            
               Pudendus, a, um, a thynge to be aſhamed of.
            Pudens, tis, ſhamefaſte.
            
            
               Pudenter, with ſhamefaſtnes, baſhefully.
            
               Pudeo, dui, dere, to be aſhamed.
            Pudet, pudebat, puduit, puditum eſt, to be aſſhamed.
            
            
               Pudibundè, ſhamefaſtly.
            Pudibundus, da, dum, ſhamefaſt.
            
            
               Pudicè, chaſtely, honeſtly.
            
               Pudicitia, chaſtitie, cleanneſſe of lyuynge.
            
               Pudicitiam habere, to be vyolated in the acte of lechery.
            
               Puditum, aſhamed. Nonne eſſet puditū, ſi hanc cauſam agerent ſeuere? Hadde it not bene a ſhame yf that they had purſewed that matter rigorouſely?
            Pudicus, ca, cum, chaſte.
            
            
               Pudor, doris, a moderatiō that lettith the mind that it do not any thyng wātonly, or diſhoneſtly, ſhamefaſtneſſe, to ſaye or doo any thynge dyſhoneſt.
            
               Puella, a wenche.
            Puellaris, re, chyldyſhe.
            
            
               Puellaſcere, to wax yong ageyn, to be maidēly.
            
               Puellus, a lytell chylde, a babe.
            
               Puer, a chylde, a boy. alſo a ſeruant.
            
               Puera, a woman chylde, callyd in Cambrydge ſhyre, a modder.
            
               Puerilis, puerile, of a chylde, chyldyſſhe, or boyiſſhe.
            
               Puerilitas, a chyldes act, childyſhnes, boyiſhnes
            
               Pueritia, chyldehode.
            
               Puerulus, an infant.
            
               Puerpera, a woman that lyeth in of chylde.
            
               Puerperium, the tyme of a woman to trauayle of chyld, ſomtyme the chyld, alſo the byrthe.
            
               Pugil, a champyon.
            
               Pugillaris, & pugillare, phiraliter Pugillares, a payre of tables to wryte in.
            
               Pugillatorius follis, a balle fylled onely with wynde, whyche is ſtryken with a mans fyſte, and not with the palme.
            
               Pugiunculus, a ſhort dagger.
            
               Pugillatus, wraſtlynge with colars.
            
               Pugillus, a handfull, in gatheryng of herbes or other lyke thynge.
            
               Pugio, onis, a dagger.
            
               Pugna, battayle, the acte of lecherye. alſoo an aſſaulte, a dyſceyte.
            
               Pugnaciter, valyantly in battayle.
            
               Pugnator, toris, a fyghter.
            
               Pugnax, acis, a great fyghter.
            
               Pugnatior, & pugnaciſsimus, more or mooſte fyghtynge.
            
               Pugnicula, a ſkyrmyſhe.
            Pugnitariola, idem.
            
               Pugnitus, in battayle.
            
               Pugno, are, to fyghte, ſometyme to repougne, to ſtryue.
            
               Pugnus, a fyſte.
            
               Pulcher, chra, chrum, fayre, ſtronge, good, tall.
            
               Pulcherrime, moſte beautyfully.
            Pucherrimus, a, um, fayreſt.
            
            Pulchralis, le, fayre.
            
            
               Pulchrè, an aduerbe, ſygnifyeth fayre, beautyfully, welle fauouredly, ſometyme valyantly. alſoo wyſely. ſometyme it is put for ualde.
 
               Ac dum accubabam, quam uidebar mihi eſſe pulchrè ſobrius, and whanne I layde me downe, I thought my ſelfe to be very ſober.
            
               Pulchellus, a fayre lyttell one.
            
               Pulchellus puer, a fayre lyttell boye.
            Pulchrior, oris, & Pulchrius, fayrer.
            
            
               Pulchritas, beautie.
            
               Pulchreſco, ſcere, to be fayre.
            
               Pulchritudo, dinis, beaultie, talneſſe of perſonage.
            
               Pulegium, an herbe wherof there is male and female, the male hathe purple floures: the female whyte, it is taken for commune penyroyall but Hermolaus Barbarus doubtethe whether Pulegium be penyroyall or a kynde of Calamint. Manardus writeth that there is no diuerſite betwene our Pulegium, from the other hauynge in it the ſame qualities. Theophraſtus and Pliniꝰ do write that the braunches therof hanged vp in the larder, in the depe of wynter, do brynge forthe floures whiche alſo nowe mought be eaſely proued. alſo beinge drounke with mellicrate, that is to ſaye honye and water boyled to gether, it purgeth melancoly excedyngely.
            
               Pulex, licis, a flea.
            
               Pulicinus, a, um, of a flea.
            
               Pulicoſus, a, um, full of fleas.
            
               Pullarius, the keper of chykens.
            
               Pullarus, a weſyll or Stote, whiche kyllethe chyckens.
            
               Pullaſter, a yonge chycken.
            
               Pullatio, hatchynge of chyckens.
            
               Pullatus, a mourner. Somtyme a man in pore apparayle, ſomtyme rude, vnlerned.
            
               Pulleſco, ſcere, to ſprynge or burgen.
            
               Pullicenus, a newe hatched chycken.
            
               Pullicies, a bryngynge forthe or hatchynge of chyckens, alſo the folynge of coltes.
            Pulligo, ginis, blackeneſſe
            
            
               Pullinus, na, num, of a colte. Pullini dentes, coltes tethe, whiche be fyrſte caſte.
            
               Pullulatio, a ſpryngynge forthe of a thynge in growynge.
            
               Pullulaſco, ſcere, to bourgen.
            
               Pullulo, lare, to ſprynge, to come vp yonge.
            
               Pullus, yonge, tender, in all kynde liuinge, alſo a colte or fole, alſo a chycken.
            
               Pullus, a, um, ruſſet, ſometyme blacke, but rather puke color, betwene ruſſet and blacke.
            
               Pulmentarium, potage made with fleſhe or fyſhe, as forced gruell, or coleyſe.
            
               Pulmentum, gruell.
            
               Pulmo, the lunges or lyghtes.
            
               Pulmonarius, he that is diſeſed in the lunges.
            
               Pulmonaria, an herbe called Lung worte.
            
               Pulmonia, be certayne apples, which be called in ſome place a hundred ſhyllinges.
            
               Pulpa, the woode of all trees whiche maye be diuided by ſtringes, it is alſo taken for carnoſitie or fleſhy partes ſomtyme for the ſofte matter whiche is incloſed in an harde ſhell, as pulpa caſsiae fiſtulae, for the inner parte therof whiche is called alſo Medulla.
            
            
               Pulpamentum, a delycate dyſhe or meate.
            
               Pulpitum, a hault place or pulpyte.
            
               Puls, a meate made of meale, water, honye, cheeſe and egges. It maye be taken for potage.
            
               Puliatiles uenae, the poulſes of a man or womanne.
            
               Pulſatus, ta, tum, ſtryken as a harpe or other inſtrument is, whiche hath ſtringes.
            
               Pulſim, as a thynge were ſtriken.
            
               Pulſo, are, to beate, to ſtryke, to hurt, to play on a harpe, or other lyke inſtrument.
            
               Pulſare hoſtium, to knocke at the dore.
            
               Pulſus, the wreſt of the arme, wherto the hand is ioyned: but it is more properly the poulſe or ſtroke that the arteryes or beating veynes do make, wherby the ſtrength or debilitie of the ſickenes is knowen in touchynge them.
            
               Pultarius, a potage dyſhe.
            
               Pulto, rare, to beate at a dore.
            
               Pulticula, a lyttell potage.
            
               Pultiphagi, & pultiphagonides, great eaters of potage.
            
               Puluero, rare, to laye with douſte, to de duſty.
            
               Puluereſco, ſcere, to be tourned in to poulder or duſte.
            
               Puluerius, a, um, of poulder or duſte.
            
               Puluerulentus, ta, tum, full of duſte.
            
               Pulueratio, a layenge of fyne erth about vines.
            
               Puluinar, a bolſtar of a bedde. alſo a bed whiche was wonte to be made in temples, as it were for the goddes. It is taken ſometyme for a temple, alſo a tabernacle, wherin an ymage ſtandeth.
            
               Puluinatus, ta, tum, ſofte as a pyllowe.
            
               Puluinus, a pyllowe, ſometyme a fetherbed, alſo a cuſhyn, alſo a bedde of herbes in a gardeyne, alſo grauel, alſo an engyne, wherwith ſhyppes are brought into the docke.
            
               Puluis, ueris, powlder, duſte.
            
               Puluiſculus, fyne pouder or duſte.
            
               Pumex, micis, a pomeyſe to make parchement ſmothe, alſo to take cleane oute ſpottes or letters.
            
               Pumico, care, to pomeyſe.
            
               Pumicoſus, a, um, lyke a pomeyſe.
            
               Pumigatio, pomeyſynge or polyſhynge.
            
               Pumigatus, ta, tum, pomayſed, or polyſhed.
            
               Pumilis, lyttell in ſtature.
            
               Pumilio, onis, & pumillus, a dwarfe, or any thynge lyttell in ſtature.
            
               Punctim, foynynge.
            
               Punctus, ſeu punctum, a poynte or title.
            
               Punctus temporis, a moment, the leaſt part
 of tyme,
            Pungo, pupugi, pungere, to prycke.
            
            Punicus, a, um, of Affrica.
            
            
               Bellum punicum, the warre that Romaynes had with Carthaginenſis.
            
               Punicum malum, a pomegranate.
            Punicus, aut puniceus color, redde.
            
            Punio, iui, ire, to puniſhe.
            
            
               Punitio, puniſhement.
            
               Pupa, a yonge wenche, a gyrle, a modder, it is alſo a poppette, lyke a gyrle.
            
               Pupilla, the ball or apple of the eie.
            
               Pupillaris aetas, the noneage of hym that is in warde.
            
               Pupillus, he that is in warde, or within age, not able in yeres to occupie his proper lande. alſo he that hath no father alyue.
            
               Puppes, & puppis, the foreparte or decke of the ſhyppe.
            
               Pupus, a yonge chylde, a baby, alſo a poppet, or ymage like a chylde.
            
               Pupugi, the pretertence of pungo, I haue prieked or punched.
            Pure, purely. Puriter, idem.
            
               Purgamen, ſeu purgamentum, filthe whiche commeth of any thynge that is clenſed.
            
               Purgatio, a purgation or purgynge.
            
               Purgo, gare, to make cleane, to purge. alſo to excuſe.
            
               Purifico, to purifie, or make pure.
            
               Purificatio, a purifyenge.
            
               Purime, olde writers vſed for puriſsime, moſt purely.
            
               Puritas, tatis, pureneſſe, cleanneſſe.
            
               Puro, rare, to make pure.
            
               Purpura, a purple, whiche is a ſhel fiſhe, wherof purple colour commeth. ſomtyme it ſignyfyeth a garment of purple.
            
               Purpurarius, a, um, perteyuynge to purple coloure.
            
               Purpuraſco, ſcere, to be of purple colour.
            Purpuriſſum, idem quod purpuriſſa.
            
               Purpureus, a, um, of purple colour.
            
               Purpuratus, apparayled in purple.
            
               Purpurati, be the noble men of a realme called Peeres.
            
               Purpuriſſa, red payntyng, wherwith harlottes do paynte theyr viſages.
            
               Purpuriſſo, are, to paynte the viſage ruddy.
            
               Purulentus, ta, tū, full of matter or corruption
            
               Purus, ra, rum, cleane, pure, fyne.
            
               Pus, puris, matter, whiche commeth out of a ſoore.
            
               Puſillanimis, faynt harted, feble couraged.
            
               Puſillanimitas, faynt courage, cowardyſe.
            
               Puſillanimiter, cowardely.
            Puſillus, a, um, lyttell.
            
            
               Puſio, a boye.
            
               Puſtula, a puſhe or lyttell wheale.
            
               Puſulae, blyſtars, which do ryſe on bread whan it is baken.
            
               Puſum, & puſam, olde wrytars vſed for Puerum & Puellam. a boye and a gyrle.
            
               Puſtulatum argentum, roughe ſyluer whan it is newe molten.
            
               Putamen, minis, the ſhall of a nutte, or paring of an apple or peare.
            
               Puteal, the ſeate of a gret officer, alſo the cou
                  •
               
               rynge of a well.
            
               Putealis, & puteanus, a, um, of a pyt or well.
            
               Puteana aqua, well water.
            
               Putearius, he that diggeth a pytte or well.
            Puteo, tui, têre, to ſtynke.
            
            
               Puteoli, a citie in Capania.
            
               Puteus, a well.
            
               Puticuli, places where the commune people was buryed.
            
               Putidus, da, dum, ſtynkynge, vnſauerye, vnpleaſaunte.
            
               Putilatum aurum, pure or fyne golde.
            
               Putiſco, ſcere, to ſtinke.
            
               Putitius, a foole.
            
               Puto, taui, tare, to cut of or plucke away, that whiche is ſuperfluouſe, properly from trees. alſo to ſuppoſe, to conſider, to diſcuſſe, to gather, or conferre, to eſteme, to iuge. Putare rationem, to make accompte, or to take accompte.
            
               Rem ipſam putaſti, thou haſt ſaide trouthe.
            
               Rationem ſecum putare, to conſyder & way the matter.
            Putor, toris, ſtenche.
            
            
               Putrefacio, to make to ſtynke.
            
               Putreo, triui, trere, to waxe leaue, to be reſolued into ſtinkinge matter.
            
               Putreſco, ſcere, to putrifie.
            
               Putris, tre, corrupte, rotten.
            Putridus, da, dum, idem.
            Putredo, dinis, corruption.
            
            
               Putulentum, ſtynkynge.
            
               Putus, ta, tum, pure, tried, fyne.
            Pur
                  •
               m putum, fyned.
            
         
         
            ¶P ANTE Y.
            
               PYCNOSTYLON, a houſe or place buylded, where pyllars ſtande thycke together.
            
               Pycta, & Pyctes, a wraſtler with a coler.
            
               Pyctatium, a table, wherin the names of Iuges were wrytten.
            
               Pygargus, a beaſte lyke to a falowe dere: it is alſo a byrde lyke to a hauke, hauyng a white tayle, I ſuppoſe hym to be that, whiche we call a ringetayle.
            
               Pygmachia, wraſtlynge with colars.
            
               Pygmachus, a wraſtler.
            
               Pygmaei, people betwene Iude and Cathay.
 whiche are but one cubyte longe.
            
               Pympleides, the muſis.
            
               Pyr, fyre.
            
               Pyra, a bonfyre, wherin deade bodies were burned.
            
               Pyralis, a flye, whiche commethe of the fyre, and as longe as he is therin, he lyueth: and whan he is farre from it, he dieth incōtinent.
            
               Pyragmon, one of the names of Vulcanus. it was alſo one of the gyauntes called Cyclopes, who is alſo called Acmonides.
            
            
               Pyrama a certayne roſen.
            
               Pyramus, a yonge man, whiche ſlewe him ſelf for the loue of a mayden called Thiſbe: it is alſo a riuer in Cilicia.
            
               Pyramis, midis, a great thynge of ſtone or other matter, whiche is brode beneth, and vpwarde is ſmall and ſharpe on the top.
            
               Pyratium, a kynde of ſider, called Pery.
            
               Pyrauſta, a worme lyuinge in the fyre, It is alſo a kynde of ſpyders, whiche hurteth hony combes.
            
               Pyrenei montes, mountaynes, whiche do dyuyde Fraunce from Spayne.
            
               Pyretrū, & pyretra, an herbe called Pelitory.
            
               Pyrethi, certayne inchantours in Cappadot
                  ••
               a.
            
               Pyrethia ſepta, places incloſed whiche had in the myddell of them an aultar on the whiche was kepte fyre continually bournynge.
            
               Pyretus, a burnynge feuer.
            
               Pyraeus, an hauen at Athenes.
            
               Pyrgitis, the herbe called hartes tunge.
            
               Pyrgobaris, a houſe buylded lyke a tower.
            
               Pyrgoteles, was a cunninge grauer in ſtones.
            
               Pyrgus, in latyne a tower: alſo a boxe, out of the whiche men doo caſte dyſe, whanne they playe: it is alſo a certayne company of horſe men in battayle.
            
               Pyriaſis, a certayne playſter to aſſwage the burnynge of a feuer.
            
               Pyrim, a littell kernell.
            
               Pyrites, euery ſtone, out of the whiche fyre maye be ſtryken.
            
               Pyrobola, a ſmythes hammer, wherewith he beateth on hot yron.
            
               Pyroboli, arrowes or dartes whiche ſende forthe fyre, whan they be ſhotte or caſte, and do burne the thynge that they do touche.
            
               Pyrobolarij, they whiche do ſhote ſuch dartes.
            
               Pyrocorax, a crowe with a redde byll. I ſuppoſe it to be of the kynde, wherof cornyſhe chowghes are.
            
               Pyrodes, he that fyrſt ſtrake fyre out of a flint alſo a ſtone of fyry colour.
            
               Pyromantia, a dyuination by fyre.
            
               Pyrrhica, uel Pyrrhiches, was a certain furme of daunſyng and was the fyrſt exerciſe to the warres of the Lacedemonians, whiche they beganne whan they were but fyue yeres olde
            
               Pyrrhiadae, was the auncient name of the people called Moloſſi.
            
               Pyrrhichiſtae, uel Pyrrhicharij, they that do exercyſe the ſayde daunce called Pyrrhica.
            
            
               Pyrrhichius, a foote in meter of two ſhorte ſyllables.
            
               Pyrrhus, in latine Flauius, ſiue Rufus, he that hath a ruddye or fyry viſage, by the whiche name the ſonne of Achylles was called, and a kynge of Epyre was ſo called, whiche dydde make warre to the Romaynes.
            
               Pyrum, a peare.
            
               Pyrus, a peare tree.
            
               Pythagoras, a man of excellente wytte, borne in an yle called Samos, whiche beinge ſubdued by Polycrates the tyraunt. Pythagoras forſoke his countrey and wente in to Egypt and Babilonia, to lerne miſticall ſciences, and afterwarde came into Italy, where he continued the reſidue of his lyfe. He was the fyrſte that named hym ſelfe a philoſopher where before men of great lernynge were called wyſe men: and bycauſe he wolde exchue the note of arrogance, whan one demanded of hym what he was, he ſayde Philoſophus whiche ſignifyeth a louer of wyſedome. He was in ſharpneſſe of wytte paſſynge al other and founde the ſubtyll concluſions and miſteries of Arthemetike Muſike and geometrye. Plato wondereth at his wyſedome: his doctrine was dyuine, and commodyouſe, the whiche he teachynge to other, inioyned them to kepe ſilence fyue yeres and here hym dilygentely, er they demaunded of hym any queſtion. He neuer wolde do ſacrifice with any bloude, he wolde eate nothynge that had life and lyued in a meruaylouſe abſtinence, and continence, and was in ſuch auctorite among his diſciples, that whan in diſpucions they maynteyned theyr opinion, if one demāded of thē why it ſhuld be as they ſpake, they wold aunſwere onely Ipſe dixit, He ſayde ſo, meanynge Pythagoras, whiche aunſwere was reputed as ſufficient as if it had ben proued with an ineuitable reaſon, ſo moche in eſtymation was he for his approued trouth and incomparable lernynge. He was noted to be experte in magike, and therfore it is written of hym, that nyghe to the citie of Tarentum he behelde an oxe bytynge the toppes of beanes there growynge and treadynge it downe with his feete, wherfore he bade the herde man to aduyſe his oxe that he ſhulde abſteyn from grayne: the herde laughynge at hym, ſayde, that he neuer lerned to ſpeake as an oxe, but thou (ſayde he) that ſemeſte to haue had experience therin take myne offyce vpon the Forthwith Pythagoras went to the oxe and layinge his mouthe to his eare, whiſtred
 ſome thynge of his arte, a meruaylous thing the ox as if he had ben taughte, lefte eatinge of the corne, nor euer after touched any, but many yeres after myldely walked in the citie & toke his meate only of them that wold giue it hym. Many lyke wonderfull thynges is written of hym. fynally his diſciples, for their wyſedome and temperaunce were alwayes had in great eſtimation. he was before the incarnation of Chriſte. 522. yeres.
            
               Pythagoricus, he that was of the ſecte of Pythagoras.
            Pythagoriſta, idem.
            
               Pytheum, was the place in the whiche Apollo gaue aunſweres.
            
               Pythius, one of the names of Apollo.
            
               Pythia, thiorum, playes made in the honour of Apollo.
            
               Pythius, a Lydian dwellyng at a town in Phrigia called Celaenae, who hadde ſuche aboundance of gold, that he receyued Xerxes hinge of Perſia with al his hole army which was innumerable, and that with great magnifycence, and offered moreouer to gyue treſoure as well for prouyſion as alſo for wages, to haue had his ſonne diſcharged of the warres whiche Xerxes takynge diſpleaſauntly, cauſed the yonge man in his fathers ſyght to be cut in ſunder. This man gaue alſo to Darius, father to Xerxes, a plane tree of gold and a vyne of the ſame mettall. yet he takynge thought for his ſonne incloſed hym ſelfe in a ſepulchre whiche he lette make, and there fynyſhed his lyfe myſerably, and in extreme ſorowe.
            
               Pytho, a citie in the countrey called Phocis, the people wher of were named Delphi.
            
               Python, a dragon, whiche was ſlayne by Apollo.
            
               Pythopolis, a citie in Aſye, in that parte, whi-whyche is called Myſia.
            
            
               Pytiſma matis, a ſpyrtyng out of ſmal ſpyttell.
            
               Pyxacantha, & Pyxacanthos, a barberye tree.
            
               Pyxis, idis, a boxe.
            
               Pyxidicula, a lyttell boxe, properly wherin medicines are put.
            
               Pyxidatus, ta, tum, made lyke a boxe.
         
         
            Q ante V.
            
               
                  QVA, whiche waye, by what place.
            
               Qua, ſometime is put for Tum, Qua dominus qua aduocati ſibilis cō
                  ſciſsi, now the mayſter and than the aduocates were hyſſed at.
            
               Qua iteneris, qua de Bruto, what for the vyage, what for the affayres of Brutus.
            
            Non qua filius alicuius, ſed qua homo aeſtimatur.
            Men haue not regarde whoſe ſon he is, but that he is a man.
            
               Quadantenus, vnto what parte.
            
               Quadi, people of Boeme, or Boemia, whiche dyd eate the fleſhe of horſes and wuifes.
            
               Quadra, a trencher, wheron meate is cut. ſomtyme a lof of breade, cutte ſquare.
            
               Quadragenarius, naria, narium, of forty yeres olde.
            
               Quadragenus, a, um, forty. Quadragena ſcuta, forty crownes.
            
               Quadrageſima, Lente.
            Quadrageſimus, a, um, the fortieth.
            
            
               Quadragies, ſometyme ſignifieth forty times, but in computation, ſometyme it ſignifyethe but his owne number, and that being added to an other number to multiply it, as quadragies centena .xl. hundred, quadragies millena
.xl. thouſande, but beinge ſet by it ſelfe to ſignifye the quantitie of a thynge, it was multiplied by an hundred thouſande. as quadragies ſeſtertium, forty hundred thouſande pence. Like wyſe all other aduerbes of that ſorte, as Decies, duodecies, uicies, trities, centies, ten hundred thouſande, twelue hundred thouſand. &c. L. Portius, ſuppoſeth that in the olde tyme was ſome dyfference as an N, or a titel added to the word whan it was multiplyed by an hundred thouſand, as Deciens, whiche moughte be commytted in the defaulte of the wrytar or pryntour, and he putteth an example of Varro de Analogia, & an other of Pedianus in. 2. Act. in Verrem. This ſhulde I haue wrytten before in the declaration of Decies, whiche maye be done at the nexte edition of this warke.
            
               Quadrans, the fourthe part of As, alſo a quarterne of a pound. ſometyme it ſignifyeth the accorde in reckenynge, where the receypt and allowaunce be equall.
            
               Quadrans operae, the fourth parte of the iourney or taſke in labour, or warke.
            
               Quadrans pedis, a quarter of a fote.
            Quadrantalis, le, Plini. Craſſitudine quadrā
               tali, foure fingers thicke.
            
            
               Quadrantal, a ineaſure called alſo Amphora,
                and is in fourme a fote ſquare, as a dye, and cōteyneth in hym .xlviii. meaſures called Sextarij, and .viii. of the meaſures called Congij
            
            
               Quadraginta, fortye.
            
               Quadrangulum, a fygure hauynge foure corners.
            Quadrangulus, a, um, foure cornered.
            
            
               Quadrantaria, a harlot that wil company with a man for a farthynge.
            
               Quadratura, a ſquare.
            Quadratus, ta, tum, foure ſquare.
            
            
               Quadrata ſtatura, a meane or competente ſtature.
            
               Quadratiboues, great and ſtronge oxen.
            
               Quadratum corpus, a body well compacte and of a good ſtature.
            
               Quadricornium, hauynge foure hornes.
            
               Quadriduanus, a, um, of foure dayes contynuaunce.
            
               Quadriennis, foure yeres olde.
            
               Quadriformiter, in a ſquare.
            
               Quadringati, certayne coyne, hauynge in them the printe of a chariotte.
            
               Quadrilibris, foure pounde weyght.
            
               Quadrilinguis, he that ſpeaketh foure ſondry languages.
            Quadrimus & quadrimulus idem.
            
               Quadrilibris, bre, that whiche dothe waye foure poundes.
            
               Quadringentenus, a, um, the foure hundreth.
            Quadringenteſimus, idem.
            
               Quadringenti, tae, ta, foure hundred tymes.
            
               Quadringenties, foure hundred tymes.
            
               Qudringentuplus, a, um, foure hundred tymes ſo moche.
            
               Quadrigenus, idem, Liuius Vectigal iuſſus pendere denarios quadringenos quinquagenos, He was commaunded to paye for tribute or pention .CCCCl. grotes.
            
               Quadripartito, in foure partes.
            
               Quadriennium, foure yeres.
            
               Quadrifariam, on foure partes.
            
               Quadrifidus, da, dum, that whiche maye be ſlytte in foure partes.
            
               Quadriformis, me, that is of foure dyuerſe fourmes or facions.
            
               Quadriga, a carte drawen with foure horſes. ſommetyme a carte horſe.
            
               Quadrigarius, a carter.
            
               Quadriiugi, foure beaſtes yoked to gether.
            
               Quadrilaterus, ra, rum, with foure ſydes.
            
               Quadrimembris, of foure partes.
            Quadringenta, & Quadringenti, foure hundred.
            
            
               Quadrinoctium, foure nightes.
            Quadrinus, a, um, for quatuor.
            
               Quadripartitor, tiri, to diuide in foure.
            
               Quadriremis, a ſhyppe with foure rowes of oores, or with foure toppes.
            
               Quadriſyllabum, of foure ſyllables.
            
               Quadriuium, where as foure wayes do mete.
            
               Quadro, are, to brynge in ſquare, to conſente or agree.
            
               Quadrum, a fygure of foure ſquare.
            
               Quadrupedantia, & quadrupedia, foure footed beaſtes.
            
               Quadrupedo, dare, to go on foure feete.
            
               Quadrupliciter, foure maner of wayes.
            
               Quadruplico, care, 
               
                  •
               o double four tymes, or to make a thynge foure tymes as moche as it was.
            
               Quadrurbs, a citie, vnto the whiche do come, or are broughte all the people, beinge lefte in foure cities, by the whiche name the citie of Athenes was called of Actius the poete.
            Quadrus, a, um, ſquare.
            
            
               Quadrupes, quadrupedis, a beaſte hauynge foure feete.
            
               Quadruplatores, were they, whiche for accuſynge of other, had the fourthe parte of the goodes of them, that were condempned.
            
               Quadruplex, foure double.
            
               Quadruplo maior, foure times greatter.
            
               Quadruplo, & quadruplor, ari, to appeache a man for to haue parte of his goodes.
            
               Quadruplum, foure tymes as moche.
            
               Quae, the whiche, womā or other female kynd.
            
               Quae malum, what a myſchiefe.
            
               Quaecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , all that, what ſo euer.
            Quaerceus, a, um, of oke.
            
            Quaercicus, ca, cum idem.
            
               Quaercus, cus, an oke.
            
               Quaercerus, ra, rum, colde, with a ſhakynge, as in a feuer.
            
               Quaeritabundus, ſtudyouſe or dyligente in ſekynge.
            Querneus, & quernus, querna, quernum of an oke.
            
            
               Quaero, quaeſiui, quaerere, to demaunde, to aſke, to get, to ſerche, to examine.
            
               Quaerere liberos, to gette chylderne. Plaut. Liberorum quaerendorum cauſa ei credo ux or data eſt. I ſuppoſe he had a wyfe gyuen hym to the intente to get or haue chyldren.
            
               Quaerere locum iniuriq, to go about to doo harme.
            
               Quaerere ſitim, to prouoke thirſte.
            
               De pecunijs repetundis, quaerere, to gyue in formation againſt one of extortion or bribery
            
               Quaerere rem tormentis, uel per torme
                     ••
                  ta to examine a man by manacles or other lyke tourmentes to make hym to cōfeſſe the acte.
            
               Facile uictum quaerere, to gette his lyuynge eaſely.
            
               Quaeritur inter medicos, phiſitions doo diſpute. &c.
            
               Quaerquetum, & quaercetum, a groue of okes.
            
               Quaerito, ritare, to ſeeke, ſerche, or inquyre
 diligentely.
            
               Quaeſitor, a iuſtice or commiſſioner to inquyre of crymes, defaultes, or abuſes agaynſte the lawe.
            
               Quaeſuio, an inquirie, an examination, a ſerch.
            Quaeſo, ſiui, ſere, to beſeche.
            
            
               Quaeſticulus, a lyttell gayne.
            
               Quaeſtio, a queſtion.
            
               Tibi ne quaeſtioni eſſemus, to thintente that thou ſhuldeſt not ſeke for vs.
            
               Quaeſtionem afferre, to moue a queſtion.
            
               Polliceri in quaeſtionem ſeruos, to offer his ſeruauntes for to be examined of the trouthe.
            
               Decernere quaeſtionem, to awarde proceſſe in criminall cauſes.
            
               Poſtulare quaeſtionem, to require that information maye be gyuen agaynſte one.
            
               Quaeſtionem adhibere, to miniſter turmētes
            
               Exercere quaeſtionem inter ſicarios, to ſyt in commiſſion vpon murdrers.
            
               Quaeſtiuncula, a ſmalle or lyght queſtion.
            
               Quaeſtionarius, an examynour.
            
               Quaeſtor, toris, the treſorer of the cōmon treſory, a treſorer of the warres, a Lieuetenant to the chiefe capytayne in warres alſo a iuſtice by commyſſion of Oyer and Determiner.
            
               Quaeſtores paricidij, iuſtices to inquyer of treſon, or murder. we maye calle the coroners by that name.
            
               Quaeſtores urbani, were as the chamberlayns of London be nowe.
            
               Quaeſtores aerarii, offycers of the receypte, as the chaumberlaynes and tellers be nowe.
            
               Quaeſtorius, quaeſtoria, ſtorium, perteynynge to the receypte.
            
               Quaeſtorium, was ſuche a place as the eſchequer is.
            
               Quaeſtor aerarii, a generall receyuour, but it ſemeth to be ſuche an offycer, as the eſchecoure is nowe in Englade.
            
               Quaeſtorius, torij, he that hadde ben in the of fyce of Queſtor.
            
               Quaeſtorius, a, um, that perteyneth to the office of Queſtor. Vir quaeſtorius, a man whiche hath ben in that office.
            
               Queſtuariae artes, craftes whereby men doo gayne money.
            
               Quaeſtuoſus, a, um, of moche gayne, ſtudious of great lucre.
            
               Quaeſtura, the office of Queſtor.
            
               Quaeſtus, tus, gayne, wynninge.
            
               Qualibet, where it lyketh the.
            
               Qualiſqualis, what ſo euer.
            
               Qualiſcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , ſuche as it was.
            
               Qualiter, in the faſcion or fourme.
            
               Qualis, le, what, of what qualitie.
            
               Qualitates, qualities, as fowle, fayre, wyſe, foolyſſhe, ſtronge, weake, dylygent ſlow. &c.
            
               Qualius, a baſket, out of the which wine runneth, whan it is preſſed: alſo a baſket or hā
               per, in the whiche women do put theyr ſpyndels, theyr bottomes of threde, and ſuche like thynges. ſome do wryte it with a ſingle .l.
            
            
               Quam, than, ſometyme after that, ſometyme before that. Pridiè quam occideretur, The daye before that he was ſlayne. Quam bene, howe well. Quam fortiter, howe valaintly. alſo it is often ioyned with the ſuperlatyue degree, to make it more vehemente: as,
            
               Quampaticiſsimi, as fewe as may be. Quam doctiſsimus, excellently lerned. ſometyme it importeth as moche as veray. Cum quo quā familiariſsime uixerat, with whom he lyued very familiarly. Alſo it ſignifyeth as moche. Duplo accepit quam perdiderat, He receyued double as moche as he loſte.
            
               Quam uellem Menedêmum inuitatum, O I wolde fayne that Menedemꝰ were boden.
            
               Quinto die quam ſuſtuleris, condire oportebit, the fyfthe daye after that ye haue taken them awaye. &c.
            
               Quampridem non ediſti, Howe longe is it ſens thou eateſt any meate.
            
               Huc euaſit, quampridem pater nihi & mater mortui eſſent. &c. To this it came, how longe it was agone that my father and mother dyed. &c.
            
               Quamlibet, quantumuis, quantumlibet, what ſo euer.
            
               Quammox, as ſone, ſodenly.
            
               Quamobrem? wherfore? for what cauſe? what to doo.
            
               Quam pené, almoſte, it lacked but a lyttell.
            
               Quāplures, how many, very many, a great ſort
            Quamplurimus, quamplurima, quamplurimum, very moche.
            
            
               Quampridem, longe before.
            
               Quamprimum, very ſhortely or ſone.
            Quamuis, & quanquam, althoughe. ſomtime for Quantumuis.
            
               Quandiu, as longe, duringe the tyme.
            
               Quando, whan, alſo ſens that.
            
               Quandogentium, whan.
            
               Quandudum, Howe late ſens? howe longe agoo?
            
               Quanquam, all be it, althoughe.
            
               Quandoque, ſometyme.
            
               Quandoquidem, for as moche as.
            
               Quanti, for howe moche, of what pryce or valewe.
            Quantillus, & quantulus, a, um, Howe lyttel or ſmalle.
            
               Quantillum, howe lyttell.
            
               Quantitas, quantitie.
            
               Quanto, howe moche.
            
               Quantiſper, howe longe.
            
               Quantus, ta, tum, howe moche, whiche is referred to number, weight, and meaſure.
            
                
               Quantus homo in dicendo, O that he is a man that can ſpeake well.
            
               Quanta mea ſapientia eſt, as fer as my wyt can perceyue.
            
               Quantum, howe moche, as to, as concerning.
            
               Quantum intelligo, as farre as I vnderſtād
            
               Quantum ſuſpicor, as farre as I ſuppoſe. Alſo accordynge as Id de imperatore Romano, quantum euentus, poſtea praedictum paruit Iudaei ad ſe trahentes, rebellarunt, The iewes gatherynge that of the Emperour, accordynge as the thynge, whiche was afore ſhewed of that whiche ſhulde happen, appered afterwarde, made rebellion.
            
               Quantum potes, in al ſpede that thou maiſt
            
               Quantuſcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , howe moche, or howe many ſo euer it be.
            Quantuſlibet, idem.
            Quantuſquantus, idem.
            
               Quantulum, as lyttell.
            
               Quantuluſcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , howe lyttell ſo euer it be.
            
               Quanuis, all be it, all thoughe.
            Quanuis, for ualdé.
            
               Quapropter, wherfore.
            Quaquauerſus, & quaquauerſum, on euerye ſyde. Quaqua, idem.
            
               Quare, wherfore.
            
               Quarto, & quartum the fourth tyme. all be it properlye Quarto ſignifieth the fourth in order, as Quarto Conſul, he that had three in the offyce afore hym. Quartum Conſul, He that hath ben the fourth tyme Conſul.
            
               Quartana, a feuer quartayne.
            
               Quartanarius, he that hath a quartayn feuer.
            
               Quartarius, a Mulettour or keper of mules, whiche taketh but the fourth part of the wages or gayne.
            
               Quartuſdecimus, the fouretenthe.
            Quartus, ta, tum, the fourthe.
            
            
               Quaſi, Lyke as. Amas me quaſi filium, thou loueſte me, as if I were thy ſonne. alſo, as who ſaythe, as thoughe. Tu obijcis, quod uxorem repudiauerim, quaſi tuidem non feceris. Thou imbraideſte me, that I haue forſaken my wyfe, as who ſaythe, thou haſt not done ſo to.
            
               Quaſillum, a lyttell hamper.
            
               Quaſſabundus, he that ſhaketh or moueth his heade.
            
               Quaſſo, are, to ſhake moche or often, alſo to breake.
            Quaſſus, & quaſſatus, quaſſata, ſatum, ſhaken, braſte.
            
            
               Quatefacio, cere, to make or cauſe to ſhake or moue.
            
               Quatenus, how moch, to the intent. alſo for as moche, alſo howe, howe moch, or as moche▪
            
            
               Quater, foure tymes.
            
               Quaterdecies, foureten 
                  ••
               imes.
            
               Quatergemini, foure childerne at one burden. Quaternarius numerus, the nuber of foure.
            
               Quaternio, quaternionis, a quayre, as in a boke, a leafe beyng folded into foure partes.
            
               Quaterni, foure.
            Quaternus, a, um, the fourthe.
            
            
               Quaternum denum, the foure tenth.
            
               Quatinus, a coniunction, whiche ſignifyeth for for as moche.
            
               Quatio, quaſsi, quatere, to ſhake a thynge, alſo to vexe, to caſte out.
            
               Quatriduum, foure dayes, the ſpace of foure dayes.
            
               Quatuor, foure.
            Quartus, ta, tum, the fourthe.
            
            Quadruplus, pla, plum, foure double.
            
            
               Quae, for &, ſygnifieth and. Alſo that is to ſay
            
               Quearah, a meaſure of the iewes, conteyninge two ounces and .ii. drammes.
            
               Quentia, olde wryters vſed for potentia, puiſſaunce, power.
            Queis, for quibus.
            
               Queiſcum, for cum quibus, with whome.
            
               Quemadmodum, lyke as.
            Queo, quis, quiui quire, I maye.
            
            Quercus, cus, uel ci, an oke.
            
            
               Querceus, a, um, of an oke.
            Quercicus, ca, cum, idem quod quernus.
            
               Quercerus, 
                     •
                  a, rum, quyuerynge or ſhakynge for colde. ſomtyme it was taken for greatte and greuouſe, as Feſtus ſayth.
            
               Quercerum, a groue of okes.
            Querela, & querimonia, a complaynte.
            
            Queribundus, a, um, lamentable.
            
            
               Quaerimoniarius, a complaynant.
            
               Quernus, na, num, of an oke.
            
               Querna folia, oken leaues.
            
               Quaeror, quaeſtus ſum, quaeri, to lamente or complayne.
            
               Querqued
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  , a waterfoule called a teale.
            
               Quaerulus, la, lum, that whiche complayneth, or is full of complayntes. It is put ſometime of the Poetes for ſhrylle or lowde in ſynging. Cicadae querulae, graſſehoppers, whiche do ſynge lowde, or with a ſhrill voyce.
            
               Quaeſitah, amonge the iewes dydde ſygnifye a coyne, ſometyme a lambe, ſomtime a ſhepe.
            
               Quaeſtus, tus, a complaynte, a lamentation.
            
               Quari, people in Gallia Narbonenſie.
            
               Qui, the whiche. Alſo ſometyme it ſignyfieth howe. Efficite, qui detur tibi, Doo what ye can, howe or by what meanes thou mayſte haue her. Qui uocâre▪
                Howe arte thou called? Alſo it ſignifieth why. Dauo iſtuc dedam negoti. S. Non poteſt. P. Qui? S. Quia habet aliud magis ex ſeſe. I wyll commytte this matter to Dauy. S. That may not be. P. why? S. For he hath an other greatter matter to do for hym ſelfe. Alſo it ſignyfyeth
 
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                from whens. Qui iſtaec tibi incidit ſuſpectio From whens is this ſuſpition happened vnto the? Alſo it ſignifieth wolde to God. Quî illum Di omnes perdiunt, I praye god that a vengeaunce lyght on hym. alſo it ſignifieth bycauſe. Nam in prologis ſcribundis, operam abu
                     •
                  itur, non qui argumentum narrer, 
                     •
                  ed qui malenoli uaeteris Poetae maledictis reſpondeat, For he ſpendeth his laboure in writinge of Prologues, not bycauſe he wyll tell the argumente, but for as moche as he wolde make aunſwere to the yuel reportes of the olde enuiouſe Poete. Alſo it ſygnifiethe wherfore. Qui enim beatior Epicurus, quod in patria uiuebat, quam Metrodorus, quod Athenis? Wherfore was Epycure more happy that he did dye in his countrey, than Metrodorus that he died at Athenes.
            
               Quia, for, alſoo it ſignifieth that. Sed tamen recordatione noſtrae amicitiae ſic fruor, ut be atae uixiſſe uidear, quia cum Scipione uixerim, All be it I take this pleaſure in remembrynge our frendeſhyp, that I maye ſ
                  •
               me to haue lyued moſte fortunately, that I liued in Scipiones company. alſo it ſignifieth for as moche. Sed quia multis & magnis tempeſtatibus uos cognoui fortes, fidosque mihi, eo animus auſus eſt maximū atque pulcherrimum facinus incipere, But for as moche as in many gret ſtormes or dangiers I haue proued you to be valyaun
                  •
               e, and faythefull vnto me, therfore my harte is bolde to begin an excellent and commendable enterpryſe.
            
               Quia nam, wherfore.
            
               Quia ne, in dede.
            Quias, quiatis, for cuius, cuiatis.
            Quias, a, um, for cuius, a, um.
            
               Quibus in extremis, for quorum in extremo. Literae dantur mihi a te, quibus in extremis ſcriptum eſt? I receyued letters from you, in the laſte ende of the whiche it is wrytten.
            
               Quicquid eſt, all that is, what ſo euer it be, what ſo euer.
            
               Quicquid pauxillum, neuer ſo lyttell.
            
               Qui cum, for cum quo. Qui cum loquitur filius? with whom dothe my ſonne talke?
            
               Qui
                     •
                  unque, who ſo euer.
            
               Quicquam, any thynge.
            
               Quid, What. Quid cauſae eſt? What is the cauſe? Quid aetatis? Howe old? of what age? Quid animi? What mynde? Quid animi eſt? What mynde is he of? Quid captiuorum? Howe many pryſoners? Tum Captiuorum quid ducunt ſecum? Than howe many pryſoners do they brynge with them? Quid id ſit hominis, cui Lyco nomen ſiet? What man is he, whoſe name maye be Lyco? Quid mulieris uxorem habes, What maner of woman haſte thou to thy wyfe? Quid rei eſt?
            
            What is the matter. Ibo intro ut quid huus ſit rei ſciam: I wyll goo in, that I maye knowe what the matter is. Quid rei eſt tibi cum illa? What haſt thou to do with her?
            
               Quid ſententiae? What is his or thyne opynion? Quid iſtuc uerbi eſt? What meaneſte thou therby? alſo quid is taken for Aliquid, ſomewhat. Alſo ob quid, for what, or wherfore. Quid? ſenem quoad expectas ueſtrum But nowe? howe longe wyll ye tary for your maſter? Note here that after the dayly forme of ſpeaking, quid is reherſed, whan we paſſe from one matter to an other. Quid mecum eſt tibi? what haue I to do with the? Quid faceret aliud? what ſhulde he do elles? Quid eo? what to do? Propere curre ad Pamphilum. P. quid eo? D. Dic me orare ut ueniat. Runne quickely to Pamphi
                  •
               us. P. what to do? D. Say that I prayd hym to com. Quid uerbis opus eſt? what nede many wordes?
            
               Quid multa uerba, idem. Quid multis moror? what ſhall I longe tary? Quid mea refert? what care I? alſo quid ſignifieth wherin. Quid enim indigens Affricanus mei? wherin had Scipio any nede of me? Quid iſtic? Si certum eſt facere, facias: uerum ne poſt conferas culpam in me? what woldeſt thou I ſhuld do? if thou be determined to do it, go to on goddes name: but afterward put not the faulte in me.
            
               Quidnam, what is it, or wherfore is it?
            
               Quidnam ille commotus uenit? what is it that he commeth ſo chaufed? Alſo it ſignifyeth what. Reuiſo quidnam Chaerea hic rerum gerat, I come to ſe what Cherea dothe here.
            
               Quid ni, why not? Quo ore appellabo patrem tenes, quid dicam? S. quidni, With what countenaunce ſhall I ſpeake to my father? Woteſt thou what I wyll ſay? S. wherfore ſhuldeſt thou not do ſo? Alſo it ſignifyeth ye. Archimedem noſti? P. quidni? Knoweſte thou Archimedes? P. ye mary do I.
            
               Quidam, one, any man, in the plurell number it ſignifyeth ſame.
            
               Quid agimus, What ſhall we do?
            
               Quidem, an aduerbe, affyrmynge that, which to ſpoken. Sometyme it ſignifieth verylye. ſometyme it hath no ſygnification, but is only a diſtinction of thynges: as Ego quidem ſcribo, tu uero legis, Ille autem dormit. I do write, thou redeſt, he alſo ſlepeth.
            Quid ita, for Cur, wherfore.
            
            
               Quidpiam, any thynge, or any wyſe.
            
               Quid quaeris, What wylte thou more? what nedeth any more wordes?
            Quid tum deni
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , Quid ergo, quid tū poſtea,
            
               Quid ita
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , quid interea, quid demum, All theſe do ſignifie, wherto ſpeakeſt thou this?
 what than, or what meaneſt thou hereby?
            
               Quieſcas, uel quieſce, holde thy peace, leaue.
            
               Quieſcas caetera, care not for the reſte.
            
               Quies, & quietudo, reſte, eaſe, ſlepe.
            
               Quieſco, eui, eſcere, to take reſte, to ceaſſe.
            
               Quietalis, was a name of Pluto, callyd God of Helle.
            
               Quietus, ta, tum, quyete, peaſyble, in reſte.
            
               Quietus eſto, care not.
            
               Quilibet, cuius libet, cuilibet, who thou wylt. alſo it ſometyme ſygnifyeth vyle or baſe in eſtimation.
            
               Quidliber, what I, thou, or he wyll.
            
               Quin, but, why not? Quin uenis, why comeſt thou not?
            
               Quin pergis, why goeſt thou not?
            
               Quin dic quid eſt, go to telle me, what it is.
            
               Quin for etiam. allſoo. Pudet me. S. Credo, neque id iniuria: quin mihi moleſtum, I am aſſhamed. S. I beleue, and not without a cauſe: And I am alſo ſoory therefore. Quin taces? Wylt not thou holde thy peace. Alſo it ſygnyfieth but yet, or but for all that. C. Perij, S. Quin tu animo bono es. C. I am vndoone. S. But for all that be thou of good chere. Alſoo therfore. Quin ru uno uerbo dic, quid eſt quod me uelis, Therfore telle me at oone worde, what thou woldeſt haue me do. Alſo more ouer, or that more is. Quin, ipſi pridem tonſor ungues dempſerat, collegit, omnia abſtulit praeſegmina, And that more is, the other day, the barbour paryd his nayles, he gathered the parynges togyther, and caryed theym al away with hym.
            
               Quin taces, holde thy peace, or care not for it.
            
               Qunarius, a, um, the numbre of fyue. Quinarius lapis, a ſtone of fyue pounde weyghte.
            
               Quinarius, narij, was amonge the olde Romaynes theyr halfe peny, whyche was fyue pounde weyghte of braſſe callyd As, It is two ſoulces of frenche moneye, whiche is of our money.
            
               Quincentum, of olde wryters was vſed for quingentum, fyue hundred.
            
               Quincunx, quincuncis, of fyue ounces. Alſo the gayne of fyue in oone hundrede by exchaunge amongeſte Marchauntes. It was alſoo an order of ſettynge of trees in a gardeyne or orchyarde verye exactely, that whyche waye ſoo euer that a man dyd looke, the trees ſtode dyrectely one agaynſte an nother, as in this fourme folowynge.
            
            
               Quincuntialis, le, of fyue ynches.
            
               Quincuplex, plicis, fyue double, or fyue folde.
            
               Quincuplus, a, um, fyue tymes ſo moche.
            
               Quindecies, fyftene tymes.
            
               Quindecim, fyftene.
            
               Quindeceremis, a barge with fyftene ores.
            
               Quinde cuplex, fyftene double or folde.
            
               Quinde cuplus, pla, plum, fyuetene tymes ſoo moche.
            Quindenus, a, um, the fyuetenthe.
            
            
               Quin ergo, wherfore than. Quin ergo quod iuuat, quod charum aeſtimant, id ſemper faciant, Wherfore than, what ſoo euer lyketh theym, that whyche ſeemeth pleaſaunt vnto theym, let them doo it as longe as it pleaſeth theym.
            
               Quingenarius, adiect. wayenge fyue hundred poundes.
            Quingeni, & quingenti, fyue hundred.
            
            
               Quingentarius numerus, the noumbre of fyue hundrede.
            
               Quingentenus, & quingenteſimus, the fyue hundrethe.
            
               Quingenties, fyue hundred tymes.
            
               Quingentuplus, a, um, fyue hundred tymes ſo moche.
            
               Quinimo, but rather, but that more is.
            
               Quinquagenarius, a, um, of fyfty yeres olde.
            
               Quinquaginta, fyfty.
            Quinquagenus, a, um, of fyfty.
            
            Quinquageſimus, a, um, the fyftieth.
            
            
               Quinquagies, fyfty tymes.
            Quinquageſies, idem.
            Quinquangulus, a, um, fyue cornerde.
            
            
               Quinquatria, triorum, a feaſt dedicate to Pallas, whyche duryd fyue dayes.
            
               Quinquatrus dies, a feaſt ſo callyd, bycauſe it was after the fyfthe Idus of Marche.
            
               Quinque folium, an herbe callyd cynkfoyle, or fyue leaued graſſe.
            
               Quinque, fyue.
            
               Quinquies, fyue tymes.
            
               Quinquemeſtris, tre, of fyue monethes.
            
               Quinquenalis, le, that whiche happeneth or is done euery fyfth yere.
            
               Quinquennis, ne, of fyue yeres.
            
               Quinquennium, the ſpace of fyue yeeres.
            
               Quinquepartior, tiris, tiri, to diuide in .v ꝑtes.
            
               Quincupertitus, in fyue partes dyuided.
            
               Quinquertium, the exercyſe of fyue ſundrye craftes.
            
               Quinquertiones, they whyche exercyſed fyue ſundry craftes.
            
               Quinqueremis, a galeye with fyue rewes of oores, it may be nowe taken for a ſhyp with fyue toppes.
            
               Quinqueuiratus, an offyce or auctorite, wherin fyue men were aſſociate.
            
               Quinqueuir, one which is in the ſaid authorite.
            
               Quintana porta, was a gaate in the Campe, where the armye was lodged, whyche was
 the chyefe gate nexte to that whiche was callyd Praetoria, where the markette was wont to be kept.
            Quintus, ta, tum, the fyfthe.
            
            
               Quintia porta, & quintia prata, was a gaate and medowes at Rome, whych toke their names of one Quintius, a noble cōſul of Rome.
            
               Quintilis menſis, the moneth of Iuly.
            
               Quintipor, oris, the boy or ſeruant of Quintus.
            
               Quintius, & Quintus, the names of dyuerſe Romaynes.
            
               Quintius, a, um, pertaynyng to Quintius.
            Quinus, a, um, fyue, Quini denarij, fyue pens.
            
            
               Quipotè, howe is it poſſible.
            
               Quippe, ſurely, for as moche, ſommetyme ye trewely.
            
               Sol Democrito magnus uidetur, quippe homini erudito, in geometria
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   perfecto, The ſunne ſemed greatte to Democritus, no mer
               
                  ••
               tayle for he was a great lerned man, and perfite in geometry.
            
               Quippe quas. Plaut. Argenti minas ſe habere quinquagita quippe ego quas nudius terrius meis manibus numeraui, I ſaye that he had fifty poundes in money, that is to ſaye, that which I my ſelfe payde hym.
            
               Quippini, why not.
            
               Quire, for poſſe, to maye.
            
               Quirinalis collis, an hylle at Rome where the temple of Romulus was ſette.
            
               Quirinalis porta, the gate next to that hyll.
            
               Quirinalia, orum, dayes, in the whych men did ſacrifyce to Romulus, callyd Quirinus.
            
               Quirinus, a, um, the ſurname of Romulus.
            
               Quiris, quiritis, a Romayne.
            
               Quirîtes, was a name wherby the Romaynes were callyd of theyr fyrſte kynge Romulus, callyd Quirinus, as it were Quirinus people.
            
               Quiritatus, tus, a crye of Romayne chylderne.
            
               Quirinus, was the name of Romulus, after that he was taken for a god.
            
               Quiritare, to crye out, to ſtyre vp the Romaynes with a crye.
            
               Quiſnam homo eſt, What man is that?
            Quiſputas, idem.
            
               Quiſquam, any man. it is ſommetyme vſyd in the femynyne gender for any woman.
            Quiſquam gentium, idem.
            
               Quiſque, euery manne. Doctiſsimus quiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , Euerye well
                  •
                lernyd man. Decimus quiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , Euery tenthe.
            
               Suo quiſque tempore, euery man in his tyme Tertio quoque uerbo, at euery thyrde worde.
            
               Quiſquiliae, arum, pluraliter, be thoſe thynges whyche in makynge cleane of a gardeyne or orcharde, be caryed out, as ſtyckes, leaues, and weedes, it is vſyd of Cicero for noughty men, the refuſe of all other.
            
               Quiſquilium, a lyttell braunche of a kynde of holy, whiche beareth grayne, wherwith ſcarlet and krymſyn colours be made.
            
               Quiuis, in the genitiue caſe cuius cuius, who ſo euer.
            
               Quiuis, in the genitiue caſe cuiuſuis, any man: one of them.
            Quis, quae, quod, uel quid, who or what.
            
            
               Quis, is ſometyme taken for ſome man.
            
               Quiſpiam, ſome man.
            
               Quiſquis, who ſo euer.
            
               Quo, whyther. Quo abis, whither goſte thou?
            
               Quo non. Perreptaui uſque omne oppidum, ad portam, ad locum, quo non? I wente all the towne aboute, to the gate, to the laake, there is noo place but that I was in it. Alſoo it ſygnifyeth frome whenſe and where. Illuc quaeſo redi, quo coepiſti, I beſeeche the tourne backe agayne, where thou beganneſt. Alſo, bycauſe. Non pol quo quenquàm plus amem, aut plus diligam, eo feci, In good faythe I dyd it not bycauſe I more loued or fauoured any man. alſo, wherefore. Forma bona memini uidere, quo aequior ſum Pamphilo, I remembre ſhe is wel fauored, wherfore I am the leſſe dyſpleaſed with Pamphilus.
            
               Quo gentium, whyther. alſo Quo, ſygnifieth, that. Neque enim id feci, quo tibi moleſtus eſſem, Nor I dyd it not, that I wolde dyſpleaſe you. alſo, to what purpoſe or vſe. Quo mihi fortunam, ſi non conceditur uti, For what pourpoſe ſhall fortune ſerue, yf I maye not haue commoditie by it?
            
               Quoaxo, are, to cry lyke a frogge.
            
               Quoad, vntyll, as longe.
            
               Quoad eius, as moche as he may.
            
               Quoad quenque peruenit, aut peruenerit ex praeda, ex manubijs, ex auro coronario? Howe moch of the pray or ſpoyle, garlandes or crownis of victours is comen, or ſhal come to any of your handes?
            
               Quoad eius facere poſſum, as moche as I may do.
            
               Quoaduſque, vntyll.
            
               Quocirca, wherfore.
            
               Quod, that, wherin. Sed ſi quid ſit, quod mea opera opus ſit, aut tu plus uides, quàm ego, manebo, But yf there be any thyng, wherein ye ſhall haue nede of my ſeruyce, or that ye perceyue more than I doo, I wylle tarye. alſoo it is putte for Quem. Alienum hominem intromittat neminem, quod illa aut amicum, aut patronum nominet, She maye let in no man, whome ſhe wyll calle derlynge, or mayſter. Nube grauida candicante, quod uocant tempeſtatem albam, grando imminebit, Whan there dothe appiere a greatte clowde, that waxeth whyte, whyche they
 calle a whyte tempeſte, ye ſhall haue hayle ſhortly after: alſo it ſygnifieth for as moche or bycauſe. Senatuſconſulta duo facta ſunt odioſa, quod inconſulem facta putantur, Catone & Domitio poſtulante, Two actes of counſayle were made very diſpleaſant, for as moche as they were ſuppoſed to be made, at the deſyre of Domitius and Cato: alſo it ſignifieth but. Quod ſi quieſcem nihil eueniſſet mali, But if I had let it alone, there had none yll happened, or it hadde bene welle ynough. Alſo as moche. Tu uelim, quod cum commodo ualetudinis tuae fiat quam longiſsime poteris, obuiam nobis properes, I wolde that ye, as moche as may be with the health of your perſone, make ſpede to meete with vs, as farre from home as ye can. Alſo it ſygnyfieth why. Si ad uitulam ſpectes, nihil eſt quod pocula laudes, If thou conſydereſt the caulf wel, there is no cauſe why thou ſhuldeſt prayſe ſo thy pottes. In uiam quod 
                     •
                  edes hoc tempore, nihil eſt, There is noo cauſe why thou ſhuldeſt take thy iourney at this tyme. Alſo it ſignifieth wherfore. Quod te per genium, dextram
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , Deos
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   penates oſecro & obteſtor, uitae me redde priori, Wherfore I beſeche & praye the for thy good aungelles ſake, and for the loue betwene the and me, and for the ſayntes whyche be thyne auouryes, reſtoore me eftſoones to my fyrſte lyfe, or to the ſtate that I was in erſte. Alſoo it ſygnyfieth, as to that. Sane quod tibi uir uideatur eſſe, hic nebulo magnus eſt, As to that, that thou thynkeſt him a man, ſurely he is a ſtourdy vacabounde.
            
               Quod abſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   moleſtia fiat, ſo that it be no dyſpleaſure vnto you. Quare pergratum mihi feceris, ſi eum in amicitiam receperis, atque eum (quod abſque moleſtia fiat) ſi qua in re opus ei fuerit, Wherfore ye ſhall do me ſyngular pleaſure, yf ye take hym into your fauour, and (ſo that it be no dyſpleaſure vnto you) whan nede requyreth, be good lorde or mayſter vnto hym.
            
               Quod quidem, no that. Non nouiſti me? P. quod quidem ueniat in mentem. Doſt thou not knowe me? P. No that I remembre me.
            
               Quodammodo, ſomewhat. Quamobrem ut hi, qui ſuperiores ſunt, ſummittere ſe debent in amicitia, ſic quodammodo inferiores extollere, Wherfore lykewyſe as they, whiche are ſuperior in ſtate or degree, ſhulde humble them ſelues in frendſhyp, ſo they whyche are inferyour ſhoulde aduaunce and ſette theym ſelues forewarde.
            
               Quodcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , what ſo euer.
            
               Quodcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   militum, for quotcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   milites, Vos hortor, ut quodcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   militum contrahere poteritis, contrahatis, I aduyſe you, that as many ſouldyours as ye can gette, ye gather vnto you.
            
               Quominus, for Vt non. Si poterit fieri, ut ne pater per me ſtetiſſe credat, quo minus haefierent nuptiae, uolo, If it may be brought to paſſe, that my father maye beleue, that it is not in my fault, that this maryage is not concluded, I am content.
            
               Quomodo, howe, by what reaſone, in what maner, by what meane? Quomodo tibi res ſe habet? Howe is the matter with the? Sed quomodo diſsimulabat? But in what maner dyd he dyſſemble? Primulo diluculo abijſti ad legiones, By tyme in the mornynge thou wenteſt to the armye. Amph. Quomodo? In what maner or faſhyon? Alſoo it ſygnyfyeth wherefore. Illa quidem nullum ſacrificabit. G. Quomodo? quid igitur me uolt? She wyll doo noo ſacryfyce. G. Wherfore? what thynge wolde ſhe than with me?
            
               Quomodocunque, howe ſoo euer it be. Sed tamen quomodocunque, quanquam ſumus pauperculi, eſt domi quod edimus, yet how ſoo euer it be, though we be poore folkes, we haue at home ſomewhat to eate.
            Quomodolibet, idem.
            
               Quondam, ſommetyme, ones, ſygnifyeng the tyme paſte, or tyme to come. Quondam tua dicere facta Tempus erit, The tyme ſhalbe ones, whan thyne actes ſhall be declared. Alſoo it is putte in the tyme preſent.
            
               Quondam etiam uictis redit in praecordia uirtus, Ye, and in theym that are vanquyſſhed, ſommetyme good courage efteſoones imbraceth theyr ſtomackes. Sometyme it ſignyfyeth alwaye. Vt quondam in ſtipulis magnus ſine uiribus ignis, Lyke as in ſtubbyll or holme fyre is alway great without any puyſſaunce.
            
               Quonam, whyther. Eamus intrò, ſequere. S. Quo tute agis? C. quonam niſi domum. Let vs go in, folowe me. S. whyther wylt
                  •
                thou go? C Whyther ſhulde I go but home to my howſe?
            
               Quoniam, for as moche as.
            
               Quo officio es? what is thyne offyce?
            
               Quopiam, any whyther. Ituràne Thais quopiam es? Thais, wylte thou goo any whyther?
            
               Quoquam, any whyther.
            
               Quoque, alſo.
            
               Quoquo, where ſo euer.
            
               Quoquopacto, In any maner of wyſe. Tum ſi maxime fateatur, cum amet aliam, non eſt utile hanc illi dari, qua propter quoquo pacto caelato eſt opus, Than if he vtterly confeſſe it, for as moche as he loueth an nother,
 it were not conuenyent, that he were maried to this woman, therfore in any maner of wiſe this thynge muſt be kept ſecrete.
            Quoquomodo, idem.
            
               Quo quouerſum, ſeu quoquouerſum, euerye waye, on euery parte. Eius imperio claſſem quo quouerſum dimittunt, By his commandement they dyſpatched the nauye in euerye part. Rates duplices quoquouerſum pedibus triginta è regione ſolis collocabat, He ſette ſhyppes double againſt the ſonne, thirty feete euery way.
            
               Quorſum, ſeu quorſus apud Plinium, whither, to what place, or thynge.
            
               Quorſum iſtuc? to what purpoſe? or place.
            
               Quot, howe many.
            
               Quota pars, howe ſmalle a porcion?
            
               Quotannis, yere by yere, euery yere.
            
               Quotennis? of what age? howe olde?
            Quot annos natus, idem.
            Quotenus, a, um, howe many.
            
            
               Quotidiani ſumptus, dayly expences.
            
               Quotidianus, Quotidiana, Quotidianum, a thynge that is or happeneth dayely, or daye by day.
            
               Quotidiana forma, a cōmune beautie or facion euery day ſene.
            
               Quotidiè, dayly, euery day.
            
               Quoties, howe oftentymes.
            
               Quotieſcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , as often.
            
               Quotquot, as many.
            
               Quotuplex, howe many ſortes.
            
               Quotuplus, howe moche in meaſure or weyght?
            
               Quotus, ta, tum, of what number, howe many, Hora quota eſt, What is it a clocke?
            
               Dic quotus es? Telle howe many be of you?
            
               Quotas aedes dixerit, id ego admodum incerto ſcio, Howe many howſes he ſpake of, I am not welle aſſertayned, or I remember not well.
            
               Quotuſquiſque, howe many.
            
               Quouis, whyther, or to what place ye wyll.
            Quouis gentium, idem.
            
               Quouſque, howe longe, howe farre.
            
               Quouſque tandem, howe longe yet.
            Qur, & Quor, wherfore.
            
            
               Quum, ſeu qum, whan, in the whyche.
            
               Quum primum, as ſoone.
            ☞ ❀❀ ☞ ❀❀
         
         
            R ANTE A.
            
               
                  RABIA, old wryters vſed for Rabies.
            
            
               Rabidus, da, dum, madde or wodde, as a mad dog.
            
               Rabidus dens, an akyng tothe.
            
               Rabies, madnes of a dogge
            
               Rabioſus, ſa, ſum, madde or very angry, woode angry.
            
               Rabio, ire, to be mad or woode as a dogge.
            Rabioſulus, a, um, ſomewhat madde.
            
            
               Rabula, one whiche is haſty or wylfull, in any cauſe, ianglynge, or full of wordes.
            
               Racemarius, a twygge of a vyne, oute of the whyche the grapes do ſprynge.
            
               Racematio, the gatherynge of grapes after that the greate cluſters be gathered to make wyne, the glenyng of grapes.
            
               Racematus, ta, tum, that hath grapes.
            
               Racemoſus, full of grapes.
            
               Racemus, a grape or a cluſter of grapes.
            
               Racha, a reprochefull worde of Hebrewe, whiche ſygnyfieth thryftleſſe, braynleſſe. fynally it is a rebukefull worde, ſygnyfyenge the extreme yre of the perſon that ſpeaketh it.
            
               Radicitus, from the roote, or vp by the roote,
            
               Radicitus euellere, to plucke vppe by the roote.
            
               Radico, care, to roote or take roote.
            
               Radicula, an herbe, the iuyce wherof is good to waſhe woulle, alſo a lyttell roote. Ruellius ſayth, that the apothecaries do call it Saponariā, and ſome calle it Herbam fullonum, the Moores do name it Condiſum.
            
            
               Radio, are, to ſende forthe beames lyke the ſunne.
            
               Radius, a beame of the ſunne, or other bryghte ſterre, ſometyme of the eyes: alſo a rodde or yarde, that Geometricians haue to deſcribe lynes, alſo a weauers ſhyttell, wherewith he throweth yarn into the webbe. alſo the ſpoke of a wheele, alſo an inſtrument, wherewith meaſures be ſhauen: alſoo longe olyues or oyle bearyes.
            
               Radix, dicis, a roote.
            
               Radices montis, the foote of an hyll.
            
               Rado, ſi, dere, to ſhaue, or make ſmothe, to cut or pull vp, to hurt, to rent, to offende, to fatigate. Aures delicatas radere, to offende or fatigate delycate cares.
            
               Radula, an inſtrument to ſhaue with.
            
               Radulanus, a, um, that which is ſhauē of from any thynge.
            
               Rage, a towne and caſtelle in Englande called Notyngham.
            
               Raia, a ſea fyſhe called Raye or ſkeate.
            
               Ralla, a thynne garment.
            
               Rallum, the ſtaffe, wherwith ploughmen in tyllynge do put the erthe from theyr ſhare.
            
                
               Ramalis, le, a bowghe.
            
               Ramale, a ſearyd or dead bough.
            
               Ramentum, a lyttell piece of any thyng.
            
               Rameus, a, um, that whiche is of a bough.
            
               Ramex, micis, a kynde of rupture, whan the bowels do fal downe into a mans coddes▪ alſo a rayle or barre, whiche gothe ouerthwart a pale or a gate.
            
               Ramicoſus, he that is broken.
            
               Ramnus, a whyte thorne.
            
               Ramulus, & ramuſculus, a lyttell bough.
            
               Ramus, a bowghe.
            ❀Rana, a frogge. alſo a ſyckeneſſe whiche dothe anoye cattelle.
            
               Rana Seriphia, is a prouerbe applyed to them that can not ſpeke in tyme conuenyent.
            
               Ranceo, cere, to be mouldy or putrified.
            
               Rancidè, aduerbe, ſtynkyngly.
            
               Rancidus, da, dum, ranklyd, mouldy, or putryfyed. alſo vnſauery, or vnpleaſant.
            
               Rancidulus, la, lum, a litle mouldy or putrified.
            
               Rancor, ôris, rankour, fylthe.
            
               Randus, in old tyme was taken for aes, braſſe.
            
               Randuſcula porta, the braſon gate.
            
               Rantum, in the olde tyme was a quarterne of a pounde.
            
               Ranunculus, a lyttell frogge or froſhe.
            
               Rapa, a plant and rote callid rape. Rapū idem.
            
            
               Rapacia, rape leaues.
            
               Rapatior, more rauenous or catchyng.
            Rapaciſsimus, a, um, moſte rauenouſe.
            
            
               Rapacitas, raueny.
            
               Rapaciter, rauenouſely.
            Rapax, acis, rauenouſe.
            
            
               Raphanus, a plante and roote callyd radyſhe.
            
               Rapidè, quyckely.
            
               Rapidus, a, ū, very ſwift, as a ſtreme of water.
            
               Rapina, robbery.
            
               Rapinator, a robber.
            
               Rapio, pui, pere, to take by vyolence, haſte, or furye alſo to rauyſhe a woman, to bryng one by violence before a iudge, or to pryſon.
            
               Rapere aliquem in ius, to arreſte one, or cauſe hym to be arreſted to appere before iudges.
            Rapo, Raponis, for rapax.
            
               Raptim, haſtily.
            
               Raptio, violent takynge of a perſone.
            
               Raptus, rauyſſhynge or deflourynge of a woman, or the violent takyng of a thynge.
            
               Raptito, tare, to take often violently.
            
               Rapto, to take or drawe violently.
            
               Raptor, toris, a rauyſher or violent taker.
            
               Rapulum, a lyttell rape roote.
            
               Rapunculus, a lyttell roote whyche is eaten in ſalates.
            
               Rara auis, a byrde ſeldome ſene, wherby is ſygnifyed any thynge that ſeldome hapneth.
            
               Rare, ſeldome, or not often.
            
               Rarefacio, cere, to make thynne or ſlender.
            
               Rarefio, fieri, to be thynne or ſlender.
            
               Rarenter, ſeldome.
            
               Rareſco, ſcere, to waxe thynne or not thyck
                  •
                growen, to be or happen ſeldome.
            
               Rari, a ſunder, here and there one, or a fewe.
            Raripilus, la, lum, thynne heared.
            
            
               Rarior, rarius, more ſelde.
            Rariſsimus, a, um, ſeldeſt.
            
            
               Rariſsimè, moſte ſelde.
            Raritas, ſeldomneſſe. Raritudo, idem.
            Raro, ſelde, rare. Rarenter, idem.
            
               Raro, aui, are, to make ſcant or ſelde.
            
               Rarus, ra, rum, ſelde or not ofte, thynne, not thycke growen or ſette.
            
               Raſamentum, ſhauynge or ſhreddes.
            
               Raſilis, ſile, that may be ſhauen or made ſmoth.
            
               Raſito, tare, to ſhaue ofte.
            
               Raſor, ſoris, a barber or ſhauer, alſo a fydlar.
            
               Raſorius, a, um, pertaynyng to ſhauyng.
            
               Raſta, a douche myle.
            
               Raſtellus, a lyttell rake.
            Raſtrum, & raſter, a rake.
            
            
               Raſura, the ſhauynge.
            
               Ratariae naues, 
               
                  •
               yghters or woode barges.
            
               Ratare, olde wryters vſed for ratificare, to ratifye, to confyrme.
            Ratum habere, idem.
            
               Rates, ratis, are pieces of tymber pynned togither, wheron haye or other lyke thynge being layde, they are drawen on ryuers, as on the great ſtreames of Germany and Fraunce is nowe ſene, but they be commonly vſed and taken for ſhyppes, or the ſyde beames of a ſhyppe.
            
               Ratiaſtum, Limogois in Peyto.
            
               Ratiarius, the mayſter of a ſhyppe.
            
               Ratifico, care, to ratifye or confyrme.
            
               Ratificatio, a ratification or confyrmation.
            
               Ratio, reaſon, counſayle, pourpoſe, care, reſpecte, cauſe, the maner, the waye, the forme, proportion.
            
               Habenda eſt ratio rei familiaris, The affayres concernyng our houſeholde muſte be conſydered.
            
               Rationem habere cum aliquo, to haue to do with one.
            
               Neque illud rationis habuiſti, Thou haddeſt therof no conſyderation.
            
               Sine ratione officij, withoute hauynge regarde to his duetie.
            
               A quo mea longiſsime ratio, uoluntas
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   abhorrebat, The whyche was contrarye to my fantaſy or mynde.
            
               Veſtram nequeo mirari ſatis rationē, I can not meruayle ynough at your doynges.
            
               Mea eſt ſic ratio, ſo is my fantaſy.
            
               Cum ratione aliquid inire, to go abou
                  •
               e a thynge aduyſedly, and foreſeynge what may folowe.
            
                
               Nun
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                  ita quiſquā bene ſubducta ratione ad uitam fuit quin. &c. Neuer man was ſo welle aduyſed in his lyfe but &c.
            
               Vt ego oculis rationem capio, as farre as I can decerne or ſee.
            
               Pro ratione fructuum, according to the fruit or profyte therof.
            
               Rationibus inferre, to put into his reckning.
            
               Rationes Galliae procurare, to minyſter the affayres pertaynyng to Galliam.
            
               Multis rationibus prouiſum, it is many maner of ways prouyded for.
            
               Rationem inire, to fynde the meanes.
            Vt rationem te dictare intelligo, at thyne accompte.
            
            
               Ratio, is alſo accompt.
            
               Ratio conſtat, the mattier apperethe, or is ſhewed.
            
               Rationes referre, to yelde accompt.
            Rationem dare, idem.
            
               Rationem dictare, to accompte.
            
               Ratio de integro ineunda eſt mihi, I muſte fynde an other meane.
            
               Rationes putare, to ſumme ouer a booke of accompte.
            
               Rationes conferre, to trye an accompt.
            
               Ratiocinatio, reaſonynge.
            
               Ratiocinator, oris, a caſter of accompt.
            
               Ratiocinor, aris, to reaſone, to gather in argument, to accompt.
            Rationabilis, le, reaſonable.
            
            
               Rationale, that whiche hath the vſe of reaſon, allſoo that whyche a prieſte weareth at maſſe on his heade, and after putteth it backe lyke ahoode.
            
               Rationarius, a boke of accompt. alſo a booke belongynge to the counſaile of princis, wherin actes done and to be done are wrytten, alſo an auditour.
            
               Ratiuncula, a lyttell accompt or reckenynge.
            
               Ratiſpona, a cite in Almain callid Rentzpurgh
            
               Ratus, ta, tum, ſtablyſhed, confirmed, ſuppoſed.
            
               Pro rata, accordyng to his porcion.
            
               Ratus, a participle, ſygnifieng ſuppoſynge.
            
               Ratus ſum, I ſuppoſed.
            
               Raua uox, a voyce that may not be wel harde.
            
               Raucae, wourmes beinge in the rootes of trees and eateth them.
            
               Raucè, hoorſely.
            
               Rauceo, raucio, cere, to be hoorſe.
            Rauceſco, ſcere, idem.
            Raucus, ca, cum, hoorſe.
            
            Niſi ipſe iam rumor raucus erit factus, Except that tumour do ceaſſe.
            
            Raucedo, & raucitas, hoorſeneſſe.
            
            
               Raudus, a thynge vnwrought and vnpoliſhed, it was alſo taken for aes, braſſe.
            
               Rauenna, a cytie in Italy.
            
               Rauilia, purblynde or dull ſyghted.
            
               Rauio, are, to be hoorſe.
            
               Rauis, hoorſeneſſe.
            
               Rauiſcellus, a, um, lyttell browne of colour.
            
               Rauus, a, um, hoorſe. alſo Rauus color, a dulle or ſadde colour, a dunne.
         
         
            ¶R ANTE E.
            
               REalis actio, an action concernynge the goodes.
            
               Reapſe, in the ſelfe or very thyng.
            
               Reate, a cytie in Italy.
            
               Reatus, a faute or offence.
            
               Rebellare, to rebelle.
            
               Rebellio, rebellyon.
            
               Rebellis, a rebelle.
            
               Rebito, tare, to returne. At unum hoc te quaeſo, ſi huc rebitet è Philocrate, ut eius mihi facis conueniendi copiam, But oone thynge I pray the, if he retourne from Philocrates, fynd the menes, that I may ſpeke with him.
            
               Reboo, are, to ſowne agayn.
            
               Recalcitro, are, to ſtryke with the hele, to kyck.
            
               Recaleſco, ſcere, to waxe warme.
            
               Recaluaſter, tri, he that is balde before.
            Recaluus, idem.
            
               Recalueo, ere, to be balde agayne.
            
               Recanto, tare, to charme away or charme out a thynge, whiche was brought in by inchantment, as the wytches called wyſe women are wont to do.
            
               Recapitulatio, a reher
                  •
               ynge of thynges in chapyters.
            
               Recedo, ceſsi, dere, to depart or go away.
            
               Recedere à conditione, à perſona, à ſtatu, is to chaunge or alter the condytion, perſon, or ſtate. Quanquam id nomen durius efficit iāuetuſtas, à peregrino enim iam receſsit, All thowghe auncyentye maketh that name dyffuſe, yet is it nowe altered from beynge a ſtraunge worde.
            
               Recello, lere, to plucke backe or withdrawe.
            
               Recens, tis, newe, late, ſoone after.
            Recens aduerbium, newely.
            
            Recentior, newer.
            
            
               Recentiſsimus, neweſt or lateſt.
            
               Recenti pede recurrere, to runne eftſoones after that he hath reſted him, to make a freſh courſe. Poſtquam thermopotaſti gutturem, recipe te, & recurre pede recenti, After that thou haſt warmid thy throte with good drink take thy hart to the, & make a freſhe courſe.
            
               Recenter, newely, freſhely.
            
               Recentius, more newely.
            
               Recento, tare, to renewe.
            
               Recentor, taris, tari, to be renewed.
            
               Recenſeo, ere, to number or tell, to recken.
            
               Recenſus, us, & recenſio, a tale or recknyng.
            
               Recenſitus, ta, tum, tolde or reckned.
            
                
               Receptaculum, the place, whyche receyuethe thynges, alſo a place of ſuretie or comfort.
            
               Recepti in ciuitatem, they whyche of ſtraungers be made citiſens.
            
               Recepto, tare, to receyue often.
            
               Receptitius, a, um, that which is reſeruid from other.
            Receptus, ta, tum, receyued.
            
            
               Receptio, a retourne backe, drawyng or bryngynge agayne. Quid tibi huc receptio ad te eſt meum uirum? Why draweſt thou my houſbande eftſones backe vnto thy howſe?
            
               Receptum, taken in cuſtome.
            
               Receptus, tus, a place of ſuccour, a retreate in battayle.
            
               Receptui canere, to blowe the retrayte. alſo it is a prouerbe, whiche ſignifieth to fynyſhe or ende the contention.
            
               Receſsim, an aduerbe, whiche ſygnyfieth goynge backe.
            
               Receſſus, us, a goyng away or backe.
            
               Recido, dere, to fal eftſones, or to fal bakward
            
               Recident in te hae contumeliae, thoſe rebukes ſhall lyght on the.
            
               Recidit ad paucos, it is com to a few ꝑſons.
            
               Recidit in caſſum, it is come to nothynge.
            
               Recidipna, a garment to ſuppe in.
            
               Recidiuus, a, um, efteſones reſtored, ſometyme eftſones decayde or fallen.
            
               Recîdo, di, dere, to cut agayne, to cut behynd.
            
               Recinium, a ſquare garment, whiche they that dyd weare them, dyd caſt the one part therof ouer theyr ſhulders at their back, lyke to frenche clokes.
            
               Reciniati, they that dyd weare ſuche clokes.
            
               Recino, ere, to ſynge agayne, to ſowne.
            
               Recipie, Cato vſeth for recipiam.
            
            
               Recipio, coepi, cipere, to receyue or take, to admytte, to call agayne, to brynge in ſaulfgard, to delyuer, to vndertake, to promyſe. alſo recipere, is to reſerue to hym ſelfe, or to except a thyng in gyuyng or bargaynyng.
            
               Recipere ſe, to retourne or come agayne.
            
               Percunctatum ibo ad portum, quoad ſe recipiat frater, I wyl go ſeke at the hauen, vntyll my brother come agayne.
            
               Recipere ſe ad coenam, to come to ſuppar.
            
               Hic homo ad coenam recipit ſe ad me, This man wyll come to me to ſuppar.
            
               Recipe te ad me, come hyther to me.
            
               Recipere ſe ex opere, to retourne from his buſyneſſe.
            
               Recipere ſe domum, to go home.
            
               Recipere in aures, to here Non aedepol iſtaec tua dicta nūc in aures recipio, In good ſothe I do not here now what thou ſayeſt.
            
               Recipere ſe in portū, to arriue at an hauen.
            
               Recipere ſe in principem, to take on him as a Prynce.
            
               Recipere anhelitum, to fetch breth or wynd.
            
               Priuſquam recipias anhelitū, uno uerbo eloquere, ubi ego ſum, Or euer thou fetcheſte breth, tel me at a word, in what caſe I do ſtād
            
               Recipe animum, take breathe.
            
               Recipere, to recouer. Cum quidem me audiēte Salinatori, qui amiſſo oppido fugerat in arcem, glorianti at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   dicenti, mea opera Quin. Fab. Tarētum recepiſti: Certe, inquit ridens, nam niſi tu amiſiſſes, nunquam recepiſſem: For in my hearynge to Salinator, whiche (the towne of Tarentum beyng loſt) fled into the caſtell, ſayeng vnto hym, Thou haſt recouered Tarentū Q. Fab. by my meanes: That is true ſayd he, laughynge, for yf thou haddeſt not loſt it, I had not recouered it. alſo to reſerue to a mans owne vſe.
            
               Reciprocatio, a goinge backe, or retournynge to the place that he came fro.
            
               Reciproco, care, to tourne backe, to repete, to goo backe.
            
               Reciprocus, ca, cum, that whiche is repeted or eftſones reherſed.
            
               Reciſamentum, a lyttell piece, a gobet.
            Raciſus, a, um, newe cutte.
            
            
               Recito, tare, to reade that other may heare and vnderſtande, to recite or tell eftſones.
            
               Reclamo, mare, to denye with a lowde voyce or crye.
            
               Recliuia, & recliuium, is whan the ſkynne of the fynger is looſe from the nayle.
            
               Recludo, ſi, dere, to open. Infernas reſerat ſedes & regna recludat pallida, Vndoo he the lockes of places infernall, and lette hym ſette wyde open the pale regions of deathe. Iuſtinus putteth Recluſus for clauſus, ſhutte.
            Recluſus, a, um, opened.
            
            
               Recocta, ſeconde or courſe cheſe.
            
               Recogito, tare, to remembre.
            
               Recognitio, a knowlege.
            
               Recognoſco, noui, noſcere, to recognyſe, to knowe perfectly, to ouerloke, to remember.
            
               Recolligo, legi, ligere, to aſſemble or gather togyther. alſo to reconcyle. Quod ſcribis, etiā ſi cuius animus eſſet in te offenſior, a me recolligi oportere, quid dicas? Where thou wryteſte, that more ouer yf any man be dyſpleaſed with the, that he ſhulde be reconciled by my meanes, What ſayſte thou?
            
               Recolo, lere, to repute, to repete, to calle to remembraunce.
            
               Recomminiſcor, ſceris, recomminiſci, to remember, or calle to remembraunce.
            
               Reconcilio, liare, to reconcyle, to reſtore vnto fauoure.
            
               Reconcilior, reconciliaris, reconciliari, to be reconcyled.
            
               Reconciliare in libertatem, to ſet at libertie.
            
               Reconciliatio, a reconcylynge.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
                
               Reconcinno, nare, to newe make, to make mete, properly a garmente.
            
               Recondo, dere, to hyde, to laye vp.
            Recordor, aris, ari, to remember.
            
            
               Recoquo, coxi, coquere, to boyle or ſethe eftſones, to amende with ſtudy.
            
               Recordatio, remembraunce.
            
               Recreatio, a recreation, a reſtorynge.
            
               Recreo, aui, are, to recreate, to refreſhe, to reſtore.
            
               Recreſco, ſcere, to growe agayne.
            
               Recrudeſco, ſcere, to renewe a fault made by princes to theyr familiars.
            
               Recta, a ſupper, where they ſat al in a rewe.
            
               Rectangulus, is where lynes are ſoo ioyned, that no part is longer or ſhorter thā an other.
            
               Recta, an aduerbe ſignifienge ſtrayghte. Cur non recta introibas? why wenteſte thou not ſtrayghte, or the ſtrayghte waye in.
            
               Recté, wel ynough. Quid tu igitur lachrymas aut quid es tam triſtis? Pamp. Recté mater. S. Quid fuit tumulti? Than wherfore doeſte thou mourne? or why arte thou ſo heuy? P. It is well ynoughe mother. S. what was al this noyſe?
            
               Recté parere, to brynge forthe a chylde of a right ſhape.
            
               Recté, of good right, with good reaſon. Recté dicis, thou ſayeſt truely. Recté eſt, it is inoughe, or I haue inoughe. Tum quod idem ei, recté eſt, I haue alſo ynoughe to gyue hym. Recté facere alicui, to do good to a man. Stultus & ſine gratia es, tibi recté facere, quando quod facias perit. Thou arte a ſole and without thanke, to doo him any good, whan all is loſte that thou doeſt. Recté ferre, to take paciently, Si ſapis, ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   praeterquam quas ipſe amor moleſtias habet, addas: illas quas habet, rectè fearas. If thou be wyſe, adde to no more griefe thanne loue bringeth with hym, and theym that he bringeth, ſuffer paciently.
            
               Recte, ſignifyeth ſometyme nothynge, as Donate ſaythe. Rogo num quid uelit, recte, inquit: abeo. I aſked if he wolde any thynge. Nothynge, he ſayde, I went than my waye. alſo ye, ſtrayght waye. S. Tu rus hinc abis? D. rectè, Goeſt thou nowe into the cuntrey? D. ye ſtrayght waye.
            
               Rectè ualet, he or ſhe is in good helthe.
            
               Rectius, better.
            
               Rectitas, & Rectitudo, iuſtice or rightwiſenes
            
               Rector, toris, a ruler.
            
               Rectus, the nominatiue caſe.
            
               Rectum inteſtinum, the gutte from whenſe the ordure paſſeth.
            
               Rectus, ta, tum, ſtrayght, whiche is not croked, vpright, iuſte.
            
               Recubitus, p
                  •
               lyinge at reſte.
            
               Recubo, are, to lye and reſte.
            
               Recudo, cudi, dere, to newe hamer, or newe worke, as it were on an anduelde: alſo it is taken for, to make newe, or newe prynte.
            
               Recuperatores, iudges aſſigned, or commiſſioners, for a priuate matter.
            
               Recumbo, to ſyt at a table, or at meales: ſome tyme to leane on one. Recumbebat, mecumuir egregius Fidius Rufinus, ſuper eum municeps ipſius, There ſatte with me that worſhypfull manne Fidius Rufinus, and aboue hym his neyghbour.
            
               Recuperatio, & reciperatio, & reciperantia, was of olde wryters ſayde, where there was a lawe made betwene the people of Rome, & other nations and cities, wherin they accorded, that priuate thynges taken, ſhulde be redelyuered, whiche is now vſed in our leages and entercourſe with ſtraunge countres and prynces.
            
               Recupero, rare, to recouer.
            
               Recupio, cupiui, cupere, to deſyre moche.
            
               Quin ira faciam, ut recupias facere ſumptū, & ſi ego uetem: And yet wyll I ſo handle it, that thou ſhalte moche deſyre to ſpende, although I wolde forbyd the.
            
               Recurro, rere, to runne agayne, to go or come agayne quickely.
            
               Recurſus, us, a runninge backe, a recourſe.
            
               Recurſo, are, to runne often backe or agayne.
            
               Recurué, an aduerbe ſignifienge downward, bowed backwarde, crokedly.
            
               Recuruitas, taris, a bowynge backe.
            
               Recuruo, are, to bowe backe.
            
               Recuruor, ari, to be bowed backe.
            
               Recuruus, a, um, bowed backe, or croked.
            
               Recuſabile, that which is worthy to be refuſed
            
               Recuſatio, a refuſall.
            
               Recuſator, a refuſer.
            
               Recuſo, are, to refuſe, alſo to defende.
            
               Recutitus, he that is circumciſed. ſometyme exulcerate.
            
               Redabſoluo, uere, to dyſcharge or dyſpeche. Sequere hac, te redabſoluam, qua adueniſti gratia, Folowe me thyther, I wyl diſpatche thy matter, for the whiche thou camſt hither
            Redactus, ta, tum, brought.
            
            
               In id redactus ſum loci, I am in that caſe.
            
               Redambulo, are, to returne. Cura 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   optime potes. Er. bene ambula, & redambula, Do the beſte that thou canſte. Er. well gette the henſe, and come agayne quickely.
            Redandruo, are, idem.
            
               Redamo, aui, are, to loue mutually.
            
               Redarguo, guere, to reproue.
            
               Reddo, di, dere, to render or yelde, to delyuer to reſtore, to gyue, to make.
            
               Reddere certiorem, to aſſertayne.
            
                
               Reddere▪ rationem, to make accompte, or reckenynge.
            
               Reddere, to put in other. Tempeſtas uenit, confringit regulas imbrices
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , ibi dominus indiligens reddere alias ne uult, The tempeſte came, and brake the tyles, and the eueſes, where as the neglygent owner wold not put in other in theyr places.
            
               Reddere commorum, to cauſe one to make haſte, to haſte hym forwarde.
            
               Reddere dictum ac factum. Videre egiſſe iā neſcio quid cū ſene. S. De. illo quod dudū? dictum ac factum reddidi, It ſemeth thou haſte done late I wote not what with the old man. S. Meaneſt thou that, the other daye? thou haddeſt not ſoo ſoone ſpoken, but it was done.
            
               Reddidi impetratum, I brought it to paſſe.
            
               Reddere operam, to requyte a good tourne or an ylle.
            
               Reddere aliquē, to reſemble or be like to one.
            
               Redemptio, redemption.
            
               Redemptito, demptitare, to redeeme or bye agayne often.
            
               Redempto, tare, to redeme.
            
               Redemptor, toris, a redemer, a warkmā whiche taketh any warke in greate. ſometyme it ſygnifieth hym which taketh rentes to ferme▪
            
            Redeo, diui, dij, redire, to retourne.
            
            
               Redhibeo, hibui, bere, to cauſe the ſellar to haue agayne that whiche he ſolde.
            
               Redhibitio, reſtitution.
            
               Redigo, degi, digere, to bryng by force or cunnynge. ſometyme to reſtore.
            
               Redigere in ordinem, to compell men to liue accordyng to their eſtate or profeſſion.
            
               Redis ad ingenium, thou doſte after thyne olde facyon, or as thou art wont to do.
            
               Redire ad ſe. Sed paululum ſine ad me ut redeam, But let me take breathe a lytell. Tandem reprime iracundiam, atque ad te redi: Nowe leaue thy fume, & remember thy ſelfe. Redeam ad pauca, Vt ad pauca redeam, ac mittam illius ineptias To the intent that I wyll be ſhorte, and paſſe ouer his foly.
            
               Redi ad rem, goo to the pourpoſe, or to the matter.
            
               Redijt ad reſtim res, Opera tua ad reſtim mihi quidem res redijt, By thy meanes I am brought to the poynt to hange my ſelfe.
            
               Rediit ad raſtros. Nam ſi illi pergam ſuppe ditare ſumptibus Menedeme, mihi illae cuere ad raſtros res rediit. Surely if I ſhoulde maynteyn his expenſes Menedemus, it wold brynge me to rake corne or graſſe for my lyuynge.
            
               Redit res in eum locum, the thynge is come ſo to paſſe. In cum iam res rediit locum, ut ſit neceſſe, The matter is come ſoo to paſſe, that there is no remedy.
            
               Redit mihi animus, my courage is come vnto me.
            
               Redit animo, it commeth to my mynde.
            
               Redire in concordiam, to be agreed.
            
               Redire in gratiam, idem. alſo to be eftſoones in fauour.
            
               Redimicula, the ornamentes or apparaylle of a womannes heade: as a veluette bonette or frenche hoode.
            
               Redimio, iui, ire, to adourne or apparayle or trymme.
            
               Reditur, is retourned.
            
               Redhibitum, reſtored.
            
               Redico, cere, to tell or ſay agayne.
            
               Rediculi, a temple at Rome withoute the gate callyd Capena, where Hannyball beynge aferde, retyred backe.
            
               Redimîtus, ta, apparayled on the head.
            
               Redimere, to take in charge.
            
               Redinunt, for redeunt, they retourne or come agayne.
            
               Redintegro, to begynne eftſoones, to renewe or refreſhe.
            
               Redintegratio, a renewyng.
            
               Redipiſcor, ſceris, ſci, to recouer or get agayne.
            
               Redimo,, dêmi, dimere, to redeme, to bye, to recouer, to recompence, to take in bargayne.
            
               Redemptores, they that hyre lande, or taketh any thynge in great or taſke.
            
               Redintegrare, to begynne a freſhe.
            
               Redintegrato animo, with courage reuyued, with a freſhe courage.
            
               Redito, tare, to retourne by and by.
            
               Reditus, tus, a retourne.
            
               Reduuia, whan the ſkynne commeth from the nayles of the fyngers. alſo an adders ſkyn.
            
               Rediuiuum, that whiche retourneth efteſones to lyfe. Alſo that whyche of an olde thyng is made newe or yonge.
            
               Rediuius, a wourme called a tyke, whyche ſucketh bloude from man or beaſt.
            
               Redoleo, ere, to ſmelle or ſauour.
            
               Redonatio, a gyuynge agayne of the thynge that is taken.
            
               Redono, are, to gyue agayne.
            
               Redorior, redordior, iri, to begyn ageyne.
            
               Redormio, to awake.
            
               Redormitio, an awakynge out of ſlepe.
            
               Redoſtio, tire, of olde wryters was taken for to gyue thanke.
            
               Reducem, & reduces, they do call ſuche which are brought out of exyle or captiuitie.
            
               Reducere, to brynge ſaufe. Méque oppido in arcem reduco, And I conueyd my ſelf quickly into the caſtell. alſo to pacifye or appeaſe. Numen
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   reducant, Let theym appeaſe the wrathe or diſpleaſure of god.
            
               Reduco, duxi, ducere, to bryng back, or pluck
                  •
               
                backe, to delyuer or ſet out of peryll, to reconcyle.
            
               Reducere ad planum cicatrices, to make that woundes maye not be perceyued or to make them withoute a ſeame.
            
               Reductus, a, um, broughte backe or ſafe.
            
               Redundo, are, to ouerflowe, to reflowe or retourne backe, to redounde.
            
               Reduro, are, to ſtop or cloſe.
            
               Reduplico, care, to double eftſones.
            
               Redulcero, rare, to impoſtume or make an impoſtume in ſome parte of the body.
            
               Refello, to proue fals, to repreue of falſehode, to deny that whiche is obiected.
            
               Referio, rire, to ſtryke agayne.
            
               Refercio, cire, to fyl.
            
               Refero, tuli, ferre, to brynge agayne, to reſemble, to reporte, to referre, to reuoke, to tell.
            
               Referebam me, I retourned. To adde, to or aſcribe, to turne, to renewe, to brynge, to declare or expreſſe.
            
               Refero impenſum, I make accompt of that whiche is beſtowed.
            
               Referre rationem, to yeld or make accompt
            
               Referre ad aliquem, to aſke one counſayle in any matter.
            
               Referre de re aliqua ad Senatum, was whā the Comſuls purpoſed a matter in the ſenate deſyringe the Senatours to reaſon and conſulte therof.
            
               Referre pedem, to ſet forthe a fote, or goo.
            
               Eutyche hanc uolo rem prius agi, quā meum intro refero pedē, I wyl that this thing Eutyche be done, or I go one fote in.
            
               Retulit ad me pedem, he came towarde me.
            
               Referunt haec ad rem, theſe thynges pertein to the matter.
            
               Refero acceptum, Omnia quae uidimus, ſi recte rationabimus, uni accepta referemus Antonio. All that we ſee, if we recken well, we maye impute it onely to Antonie.
            
               Quod uiuit, mihi acceptum refert, He confeſſeth to be longe of me, that he now lyueth.
            
               Verum omnem tranquillitatem & quietem ſenectutis refert acceptam clementiae tuae. But all the tranquillite and quietneſſe of his age, he confeſſeth to procede or haue receiued of your mercy and goodneſſe.
            
               Referre gratiam, to gyue thanke. Nunquā ego illi poſſum gratiam referre, ut meritus eſt de me, I can neuer gyue hym thanke ſufficient for that he hath done for me. Spero
                     •
                  e go mihi quoque tempus tale euenturum, ut tibi gratiam referam parē. I truſte the time ſhall come, that I ſhall do you as moche pleſure. Non enim ſperaſti mutuam tibi gratiam relaturum, ut uiciſsim tuos compellarē. Thou dyddeſte not thynke, that I wolde in this wyſe haue requited the, in remembring thine auncetours, as thou haſte done myne.
            
               Referri in acceptum, to be brought in a reck
                  •
               nynge. Poſteaquam reus factus eſt, primo negabat opus in acceptum referri poſſe, after that he was accuſed, fyrſt he denyed that the warke moughte be broughte vnto a reckenynge.
            
               Referre in melius, to turne it to a better vſe
            
               Referre mores, to expreſſe the conditions or maners of an other.
            
               Referre oculos, to caſte the loke vpon one.
            
               Referre par, to requyte. Ille quem beneficio adiungas, ex animo facit, ſtudet par referre, whom thou getteſt with benefyt, he doth all thynges with a good harte, and ſtudiethe to requite the.
            
               Referre pedem, uel gradum, to ſtep backe to retreate.
            
               At illa retulit, quaeſiuit
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , quidnam mihi uideretur, ſhe tolde me all, and aſked what I thought therin.
            
               Refert, Cuius conſilij magni referebat 
                     •
                  e in 
                     •
                  ereſſe, At the whiche counſayle, it had ben very neceſſary▪ that ye ſhulde haue ben. Parui retulit non ſuſcepiſſe, it made lyttell matter, that he tooke it not. Mea quid refert? What care I? Mea nihil refert? I haue naught to do with it. Tua refert, it is for thy profytte. Quid refert me feciſſe regibus, ut mihi obedirent, ſi me hodie hic umbraticus deriſerit? What auaylethe it, that I haue made kynges to obeye me, if nowe this lewd knaue ſhall laughe me to ſcorne. Refert, It is expediente or neceſſary. Neque enim numero comprehendere refert: it is not neceſſary, to reherſe them in number.
            
               Refectus, ta, tum, reſtored, renewed, amended, made eftſones.
            
               Reficio, ficere, to recreate, or reſtore, to amend to make agayne.
            
               Reficior, ceris, ci, to be reſtored, recouered from ſickenes, Alſo renewed or newe made.
            
               Refigo, xi, gere, to make faſt or ſure, to thruſt in harde. Sometyme it ſignifieth the contrary, to drawe out that whiche is faſtened.
            
               Refigere tabulas, & leges, to vndo or deſtroy lawes. Acta Antonij reſcidiſtis, leges refix iſtis: ye haue cancelled the actis of Antony, & vndone or diſſolued his lawes. Fixit leges, pretioque refixit, He ſtablyſhed lawes, and for money efteſones diſſolued them.
            
               Refirmo, are to faſten or ſtablyſhe agayne.
            
               Reflatio, a contrary wynde.
            Reflatus, tus, idem,
            
               Reflecto, xi, tere, to bowe backe, to tourne backe or agayne. Quem neque fides, ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   iuſiurandum, ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   illum miſericordia repreſsit, ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   reflexit, whom neyther promyſe, nor othe, nor yet pite withdrewe or pulled backe.
            
                
               Reflo, are, to blowe agayne or contrarye.
            Refluo, xi, fluere, to flowe.
            
            
               Refluxus, us, the tyde, whan the water floweth
            
               Refocillatio, a comfortynge or refreſhynge, or recreation.
            
               Refocillo, are, to recomforte, to refreſhe, to recreate, to fortifie.
            
               Reformo, mare, to refourme.
            
               Reformator, a refourmatour.
            
               Refoueo, foui, fotum, fouere, to nouriſſhe or comforte efteſones, to reſtore or ſet in his fyrſte ſtate.
            
               Refractarius, obſtinate, in a wilfull oppinion.
            
               Refragor, aris, ari, to reſiſte with wordes, or clamour.
            Refrango, fregi, refrangere, aut refringere, to braſte open.
            
            
               Refreno, nare, to pull backe one from a purpoſe.
            
               Refrico, care, to renewe a ſore or griefe, whiche was out of remembraunce.
            
               Animum memoria refricare, to touche one to the hart with the remembrance of a thing
            
               Refrigeratorius, a, um, that whiche coleth, or maketh colde.
            
               Refrigeratio, a coolynge.
            
               Refrigeratus, ta, tum, kooled: alſo refreſſhed or comforted.
            
               Refrigerium, a recreation or aduauncynge of the mynde.
            
               Refrigeſco, ſcere, to make colde, to coole.
            
               Refrixit, it is ceſed, or is more cooled.
            
               Refrigero, are, to coole, or make colde, to refreſhe or recomforte.
            
               Refrina, a beane, whiche the olde Romaynes were wonte to brynge home out of the fielde to doo ſacryfyce for the good lucke of theyr corne.
            
               Refuga, an vnrulie perſonne, whiche wyll not be ordered.
            
               Refugio, gere, to flee or runne away or backe. alſo to refuſe.
            
               Refugiunt memoria noſtra iſta. Theſe thynges ben out of remembraunce.
            
               Refugere ab admonendo, to leaue counſaylynge of one.
            
               Refugere a dicendo, to forbeare to ſpeake, for diſpleaſure.
            
               A conſuetudine refugere, to leaue ones company, or to become ſtraunge where one hath ben familiar.
            
               Refugium, refuge, ſuccour, or place where one maye be ſuccoured.
            
               Refugus, a, um, that whiche gothe awaye, or is layde aparte.
            
               Refulgeo, gêre, to ſhyne.
            
               Refundo, fudi, fundere, to reſtore that which lacketh. Quicquid de erit, ex meo refundam What ſo euer doth lacke, I wyll make it vp of myne owne. Alſo to paye home agayne, or to yelde. Id erat non tam accipere beneficium, quàm refundere, That was not ſo moche, to receyue a good turne, as to do a good tourne. Alſo to caſte vppe by vomyte.
            
               Quod heſterna crapula ingurgitauerat, palam refudit, That whiche in his yeſterdayes ryotte he ingourged or deuoured, he openlye dyd parbrake or vomyte it vp.
            
               Refutatio, a denyenge, a replycation, an argument to the contrary.
            
               Refuto, tare, to denye, to replye.
            
               Regaliolus, a byrde, betwene whome and the Egle is contynuall hoſtilitie, and is yelowe of colour.
            
               Regaliter, royally.
            Regalis, le, royall.
            
            
               Regelo, are, to thawe, or reſolue that, which is froſen.
            
               Regenero, rare, to regenerate or efteſones ingender.
            
               Regero, geſsi, gerere, to put in wrytynge, to brynge backe, to vomite vp.
            
               Regeſtum, erthe caſte vp.
            
               Regia, a kynges houſe.
            
               Regi
                     •
                  ſco, ſcere, olde wryters vſed for creſcere, 
               
                  〈◊〉
                growe.
            
               Regificus, ca, cum, that whereby a kynge is made.
            
               Regilla, a kynges robe.
            
               Regillus, a lyttell kynge. Alſo the name of a riuer in Italy.
            
               Regimen, minis, a rule or gouernaunce.
            
               Regina, a queene.
            
               Regionatim, place by place, by euery region or coſte.
            
               Regio, a region or countrey, alſo a coſte, as eaſte, weſte, northe, and ſouthe.
            
               A recta regione deflectere, to go out of the ſtrayte or right waye.
            
               Regium, a cytie beyonde the mountaynes towarde Italy, called Rezo.
            
            
               Regius, a, um, of a kynge.
            
               Regius morbus, the iaundyſe.
            
               Regno, are, to reigne.
            
               Regnum, a realme, and the gouernaunce.
            
               Rego, xi, regere, to rule, to gouerne.
            
               Regor, geris, to be ruled or gouerned.
            
               Regrador, deri, di, to go backe.
            Regredior, regredi, idem.
            
               Regredo, dere, to reuoke, or call agayne.
            
               Regreſsio, & regreſſus, us, a returne backe, a reſorte backe.
            
               Regula, a rule.
            
               Regularis, regulare, that whiche is vnder a rule.
            
               Regulo, are, to rule or directe.
            
               Regulus, a Prynce or lord of a lyttell countrey properly Reguli, be the chylderne of kynges.
 alſo Regulus, is a lyttel byrd, called a Wren and a ſerpente called a Cockatryce, whiche ſleeth a man with his ſyght. It was alſo the name of a Conſule, whiche for kepyng of his promyſe, was put to cruell death by the Carthaginenſis. Alſo a great Rhetorician in the tyme of Plynie.
            
               Reieculae, uel reijculae oues, ſheepe drawen out of the folde for age or ſickeneſſe, kebbers, crones, or cullyars.
            
               Reiectanea, of philoſophers be taken for thinges to be abhorred, as ſyckenes, pouertie, and ſorowe.
            
               Reiectio, parbrakynge.
            
               Reiectio ſanguinis, the iſſuing out of bloud at the mouthe, the noſe, or the vaynes.
            
               Reiectus, ta, tum, caſte out, caſte awaye, or put forthe.
            
               Reijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caſte awaye, to dryue backe, Tityre paſcentes a flumine reijce capellas, Tityre dryue thy gootes that do fede awaye from the riuer. alſo to refuſe, to put awaye. Me uero tanquam inutilem reiecerunt, As for me they refuſed, as a perſon vnprofitable. Si altera illa magis inſtabit, forſitan nos reiiciat: If the other wyl be importunate, perchance they wyll put me awaye.
            
               Reiicere iudices aut teſtes, to refuſe iudges or witneſſes.
            
               Reiicere, to parbrake or vomyte. Senos ſextantes non exceſsit: aut ſi exceſsiſſet, reiiciebantur, He exceded not twelue ounces, if he paſſed that, they were caſte vp agayne.
            
               Relatio, a reporte, a reſpecte: Amonge Logicians, it is the effecte of the relatiue, as the father, the ſonne, the maiſter, the ſeruaunt, the huſbande, the wyfe. For without the oone, the other can not reteyne his name, for a ſon maye not be withoute a father: nor a wyfe without a huſebande, nor a ſeruant without a mayſter.
            
               Relati in aerarios, were they, which for ſome defaute were by the mayſters of maners called Cenſores, put out of the number of Citeſens, and dyd onely paye tribute, or heedſyluer, as ſtraungers.
            
               Relatiue, hauynge relation to a thynge.
            
               Relatiuum, a relatife, whiche hath relation to ſome thynge.
            
               Relaxo, are, to lowſe.
            
               Relegatus, banyſhed.
            
               Relegatio, a banyſhement out of his countrey.
            
               Relego, relegare, to banyſhe, to remoue, to ſeuer one from an other, to ſende awaye.
            Religatus, ta, tum, faſte bounde.
            
            
               Relego, legi, legere, to rede agayne.
            
               Relicinus, he that hath a good buſhe of heare, well trymmed behynde.
            
               Relicina frons, a fayre large and hyghe forhede, without heare.
            
               Relictus, ta, tum, forſaken or lefte.
            
               Relictus ſum mihi, I am lefte alone, or I am at my lybertie.
            
               Religio, onis, religion, a reuerend drede, doubt leſt he ſhall offende, alſo conſcience, or as a man mought ſaye, a ſcruple of conſcience.
            
               In religionem uertere, to feare leaſte god were diſpleaſed, to make conſcience of a thynge.
            
               Religionem inducere, to brynge in feare of goddes diſpleaſe.
            
               Religio eſt, it is not leful. Huc introiere, niſi neceſſario, & caſte, religio eſt, To enter in there, but for neceſſitie and chaſtlie, it is not lefull.
            
               Religiōe obſtrīgere, uel obligare, to charge ones conſcience with a matter.
            
               Exoluere relligione▪
                to diſcharge ones conſcience, or to remoue one from ſcrupuloſitie.
            
               Relligio eſt mihi, I haue conſcience therof.
            
               Relligio mihi non eſt quo minus hoc faciā. I haue no conſcience therof but that I maye doo it.
            
               Religionem alicui afferre, to cauſe one to be ſcrupulouſe.
            
               Eximere religionem, to put hym oute of doubte in his conſcience.
            
               Exemplarantique religionis, an exaumple of a good or ſtrayte conſcience.
            
               Teſtimoniorum religionem & fidem nunquam iſta natio coluit, This people had neuer regarde to theyr othe.
            
               Religioſe, fearefully, doubtfully, daungerouſly, ſcrupulouſly, aduyſedly, curiouſely.
            
               Religioſus, deuout towarde god, and fearing to offende hym.
            Religioſus, a, um, timerouſe.
            
            
               Dies relligioſi, dayes of heuyneſſe for ſome miſaduenture whiche hath happened on thoſe dayes.
            
               Delubrum religioſum, a deuoute place, or a churche or chapell whervnto men haue great deuotion to come.
            
               Religioſum eſt id facere, there is a conſciēce in the doinge therof.
            
               In teſtimonio religioſi, ſcrupulouſe in bearynge wytneſſe.
            
               Religo, are, to bynde faſte.
            
               Religare relligionibus bona alicuiꝰ, to giue goodes to the honour and ſeruice of god.
            
               Relino, releui, relin
                     •
                  re, to open that whiche is ſtopped. Releui omnia dolia, I haue broched all the veſſelles. Nolo ego nos pro ſummo bibere: nulli relerimus poſtea, I wolde not that we dranke all out: for I wyl for no man ſet any a broche afterwarde.
            
               Relimino, to gyue lyghte.
            Relinquo, liqui, relinquere, to leaue. Relinquere
 animam, to dye. Relinquit eum animus, His harte fayleth hym.
            
            
               Relinquere aes alienum, to dye in det.
            
               Arrabôni relinquere, to leaue a thynge vppon a pledge.
            
               In medio relinquere, to leaue in doubte.
            
               Locum admonitionibus relinquere, to receyue the monitions whiche is giuen vs.
            
               Locum ſubtilitati nullum relinquere, to do a thyng ſo ſubtilly, that it can not be amended
            
               Locum uituperādi alicui relinquere, to giue occaſion to one to ſaye yll.
            
               Memoriam alicuius rei relinquere, To do a thynge wherof ſhall be lefte a perpetuall remembraunce.
            
               Pecuniam in queſtu relinquere, to delyuer money to haue gayne therby.
            
               Scriptum relinquere, to leaue it in writyng.
            
               Spein relinquere, to hope or truſte noo more on a thynge.
            
               Studium alicuius rei relinquere, to care noo more for a thynge.
            
               Suſpitionem relinquere, to cauſe ſuſpition.
            
               Relinquitur, it foloweth.
            
               Reliqua, that whiche remayneth vpon a reckenynge.
            
               Reliqua contrahere, to be in arrerage of a terme.
            
               Reliquatores, they whiche ben in arrerage on theyr accompte. Alſo any other, whiche haue in theyr handes ſome parte of that, whiche they ought to haue payde.
            
               Spes nulla reliqua in te eſt, I haue no more hope of the.
            
               Reliquiae, that whiche is lefte.
            
               Reliquium facere, to leaue, to omytte.
            
               Reliquos facere, to leaue them.
            
               Reliquias perſequi, to purſue that whiche is begun.
            
               Reliquor, ari, to be behynde in paymente of a certayne ſumme.
            
               Reliquus, a, um, the remenaunte, that which remaynethe.
            
               Reliquum eſt, the reſte is.
            
               Reluceo, luxi, cere, to ſhyne or be bryght.
            
               Reluctor, tari, to contende or ſtryue agayne.
            
               Reluo, luere, to paye agayn that whiche is borowed, to fetche home a gage or pledge. Alſo to waſhe efteſones.
            
               Remancipo, are, to ſell agayne a thynge to him whiche firſte ſolde it.
            
               Remandere, to chewe the cudde.
            
               Remaneo, ſi, nêre, to abyde ſtylle.
            
               Remano, are, to tourne backe to a place.
            
               Remanſio, an abydynge.
            
               Remeculi, lyttell ſhyppes, whiche men of Lemnos vſed.
            
               Remedium, remedy.
            
               Remeligo, a fyſhe whiche cleauynge to the keale of a ſhyppe, cauſeth hym to tary.
            
               Remendo, are, to amende or correcte a faute.
            
               Remeo, are, to returne or go backe agayne.
            
               Remigatio, a rowynge or ſaylynge.
            
               Remex, remigis, whiche do rowe in a galeye or bote.
            
               Remigium, the rowynge of a ſhyp or bote.
            
               Remigo, are, to rowe.
            
               Remigro, are, to go backe, to returne.
            
               Remillum, a thynge croked and brode.
            
               Reminiſcor, ſceris, ſci, to call agayne to remembraunce.
            
               Reminiſcentia, a remembraunce of that, whiche was ones in the mynde.
            
               Remiſſe, fayntly, without courage, humblye: Sometyme merily.
            
               Remiſsio, remiſſion, forgyueneſſe, a recreating of mynd after ſtudy or labour, lacke or faintneſſe of courage.
            
               Remitto, miſi, mittere, to ſend to ſende agayn, to ſende backe, to releaſe or forgiue, to grant, to lette downe, to commytte, or remytte, to relinquiſhe or leaue, to ceaſſe.
            
               Remittere animum, to put away care, to vnbende or louſe.
            
               Annum remittere, to pardone hym for one yere.
            
               Ardorem remittere, not to be fierſe as he was.
            
               Remittere aliquid adoleſcentiae, Pardone hym ſomewhat for his youth.
            
               Remittere nuntium, Gratiam habeo tibi, quum copiam iſtam mihi & poteſtatem facis, ut ego ad parentes remittam nuntium, I thanke the, that thou gyueſt me this leaue and alſo authoritie, that I maye ſende to thy frendes, to prouyde for the els where.
            
               Contentionem remittere. to leaue contētiō.
            
               De ſupplicio remittere, to pardon him part of his execution.
            
               De cuſtodia remittere, not to be ſo carefull as he was.
            
               Frenos dolori remittere, to abandone hym to all ſorow, or to let hym ſelfe to be poſſeded with heuyneſſe.
            
               Ius alicui remittere, to releaſe all his title or righte vnto one.
            
               Librum remittere, whan the barke is louſe or fallen from the tree.
            
               Memoriam remittere, to let paſſe out of remembraunce.
            
               Numeros in cantu remittere, to reſte in ſyngynge, as is the vſe in prickeſonge.
            
               Nuntium uxori remittere, to be deuorced.
            Repudium remittere idem.
            
               Officium remittere, to renounce his duetie.
            
               Remiſſus, a, um, dull, remitted, ſente agayne, ceaſed, or deferred.
            
               Remiſſus animus, whiche hath no courage.
            
                
               Remiſſum corpus, an vnluſty body.
            
               Remiſsius frigus, not very colde.
            
               Remiſsio, a releaſe, a loſynge, a withdraweynge. Oculorum remiſsio, a withdrawyng of the loke.
            
               Remiſsio morbi, whan the ſickenes is abated or goynge away.
            
               Remollio, ire, to make very ſofte, or eaſy.
            
               Remolleſcere, to pacifie or mittigate.
            
               Rêmora, a lyttell fyſhe, whiche reteyneth a great ſhip vnder ſayle. alſo tarienge.
            
               Remorbeſco, to fall efteſones into ſickenes.
            
               Remordeo, dêre, to tourment the mynde, or make one heuy.
            
               Remores, byrdes, whiche by theyr flyghte or voyce ſignified, that the thynge purpoſed was not to be folowed.
            
               Remoria, a place on the toppe of the Hyll called Auentinus, where Remus ſtode, and by the flyghte of byrdes, aduyſed the buyldyng of Rome.
            
               Remona, the dwellynge houſe of Remus.
            
               Remoror, aris, ari, to tary or make to abyde.
            
               Remorari gradum, to reſt hym ſelf in a place.
            
               Remotus, ta, tum, fer from, remeued.
            
               Remôtus homo à dialecicis, he that paſſeth nothynge on logike.
            
               Remota res à memoria a thing not thought vpon.
            
               Remotus à culpa, he that is in no faute.
            
               Remoto ioco, in erneſte.
            
               Remoto delectu, without hauynge regarde more to one than to an other.
            
               Remotus ab inani laude, he loueth no vaine glory.
            
               Remoueo, ere, to remoue, to take awaye.
            
               Remouete moram, make ye haſt, ſpede you.
            
               Remouêre ſe à negotijs publicis, to meddel no more with commune affayres.
            
               Remouere aliquem à Republica, to put one out of the offyce whiche he hath in the weale publyke.
            Remouere ab oculis, to hyde.
            
            
               Remouere ſe arte ſua, to leaue or forſake his crafte.
            
               Remouere de medio, to put a thynge cleane awaye.
            
               Remouere metum, to put awaye feare.
            
               Remouere moram, to make haſte.
            
               Remouere operam ſuā à populari coetu, to take no more peyn about other mēs buſynes.
            
               Repandiroſtrum pecus, a beaſte hauyng his noſe tourned vpwarde, a worde vſed of Pacuuius and Lucilius auncient poetes.
            
               Reciprocicornes, was taken of Laberius for Rammes, for the tournynge backeward and eftſones forwarde of theyre hornes.
            
               Remugio, giui, gire, to belowe or lowe again, to render a great ſowne.
            
               Remulco, care, & remulculo, is properlye to drawe a gret ſhyppe or barge with a laſſe veſſell, by tranſlation it ſignifyeth to drawe a thynge caſely.
            
               Remulcus, a lyttell bote or barke.
            
               Remulinus ager, Remus fielde.
            
               Remuncopae, inſtrumentes, wherwith ſhyppes be dryuen on lande.
            
               Remunero, are, & remuneror, ari, to reward to recompence a good tourne.
            
               Remuneratio, recompenſe.
            
               Remus, the brother of Romulus, whiche builded Rome.
            
               Renanciſcor, ſceris, ſci, to get agayne.
            
               Ren, renis, a kydney.
            Renaſcor, ſci, for denuo naſci.
            
               Renaſcens annus, the ſprynge tyme.
            
               Renarro, are, to tell, to repete.
            
               Renato, tare, to ſwym backe, or ſwym agayn.
            
               Renes, the kydneys, or the reynes of the back.
            
               Renideo, dere, to ſhyne, to ſauour or ſmell.
            
               Renitor, ti, to reſiſte.
            Renixus, us, reſiſtence.
            
            
               Renodo, dare, to vnknytte, or vndo a knotte.
            
               Renoues, garmentes made of ſkynnes of wulfes or other beaſtes, wherin the auncient Almaynes were wonte to lye in the warres.
            
               Renouo, are, to renewe or make efteſones.
            
               Renouello, lare, to make newe agayne.
            
               Rentifolia, a kynd of wyld roſes, whiche haue neyther good ſauour nor faſcion.
            
               Renumero, rare, to paye agayne moneye, whiche is receyued.
            
               Renuntiata, an Ile by Ethyope, ſo riche, that the inhabitauntes do giue for a horſe by exchaunge a talent of golde.
            
               Renuntio, are, to reporte, to ſignify, to ſhewe openly, to renounce, to refuſe, to reſigne, ſomtyme to reſtore.
            
               Renuntiare uitae, to refuſe to lyue.
            
               Renuntiatur Conſul, he is declared conſule.
            
               Renuntiatio, a report, alſo a reſignation of an office, alſo a ſummons by an officer.
            
               Renuntij, they whiche do cary tydynges from one to an other.
            
               Renno, nuere, to refuſe, to deſpyſe.
            
               Renutus, nutus, a refuſal or denyar with countenaunce.
            Reor, reris, ratus ſum, I ſuppoſe.
            
            
               Repagulum, a dore or wyndowe or other thing that ſhutteth or cloſeth.
            Repages, idem.
            
               Repandus, a, um, bente or bowed, and brode backewarde, as ores were in the olde time.
            
               Repando, dere, to bende backe.
            
               Reparo, rare, to repayre, to reſtore to the firſt aſtate, to renewe.
            
               Reparamen, & reparatio, a repayrynge or reparation.
            
                Reparco, parſi, ſere, to ſpare.
            
            
               Repaſtinatio, a newe dyggynge about vynes. Alſo a bryngynge of grounde to temper with moche labour and dyggynge.
            
               Repaſtinatus, ta, tum, newe digged or brought in temper.
            
               Repaſtino, are, to dygge agayne about vines, to alter lande or grounde, with ofte dygging or labourynge.
            
               Repaſtinor, nari, to be eftſones dygged, or brought into temper.
            
               Repauſo, are, to take reſte.
            
               Rèpedo, are, to go awaye, to go backe.
            
               Repello, puli, pellere, to put backe, to repel.
            
               Repellere ſanguinem, to let one bloude.
            
               Repellere uim ui, to reſyſte force with force.
            Rependo, di, dere, to recompence.
            
            
               Rependebatur duplo argento, one paied for it the double wayte of ſyluer.
            
               Repens, tis, ſodayne vnloked for.
            
               Repenſo, are, to ponder, to ouerſee, to iudge.
            
               Repentè, ſodaynely.
            Repentim, idem.
            Repentinus, a, um, ſodayne.
            
            
               Reperibitur, it ſhall be founde.
            
               Repertor, he that fyndeth.
            
               Repercutio, cuſsi, cutere, to ſtryke agayn, to reuerberate.
            
               Repercutere dicta, to take aduauntage of one in his wordes.
            
               Repercuſſus, ſus, a reuerberation or ſtrykyng often.
            
               Reperio, peri, rire, to fynde by auenture. ſomtyme otherwiſe. to perceyue.
            
               Reperire cauſam, to fynde an excuſe.
            
               Reperire negotium in hac re, to haue moch to do with that matter.
            
               Reperire gloriam, to gette an honourable renoume.
            
               Reperit ſuos parentes, hath ſhe founde that they be her father and mother.
            
               Reperies hoc non ſecus, they ſhal fynde it to be none other wiſe.
            
               Reperitur non ullo ueſtigio, there is no mention made of hym.
            
               Repertitius, he that is founden.
            
               Repertorium, an inuentory.
            
               Repeto, tij, tere, to aſke agayne, to aſke often or efteſones, to reherſe agayne, or repete, to reuolue, to begynne agayne, to reſorte eftſones to a thynge, to call agayne.
            
               Hem repudiatus repetor, Howe nowe, beinge ones refuſed, I am called agayne.
            
               Alta repetita, reherſed from the begynnyng, farre ſought, or farre fette.
            
               Repetere poenas, ab aliquo, to be auenged on one.
            
               Repeto, I remember. Me quidem adoleſcen tulo, repeto quendam principem nomine alternis diebus declamare, alternis diſputare, I remember me, whan I was a boy, that one whiche was a Prynce of name, dyd one daye declame, an other daye diſpute.
            
               Repetere reum, to accuſe efteſones.
            
               Repetenti memoria, to call to remembrance
            
               Repetundarum accuſari, is properly where a man ſometime beinge in greatte auctoritie and hauynge the rule of a countrey, is accuſed and called to a reckenynge, for all that he hath receyued, being in his office, aboue that whiche is his ordynary allowaunce, alſo for all thynge that he toke wrongefully from any perſon or towne: whiche was the moſt neceſſary action for a publik wele, that mought be deuyſed.
            
               Repignerator, he that redemeth or quiteth his gage or pledge.
            
               Repignero, are, to quite or redeme a pledge or gage. It maye be taken ſomtyme with vs, that whiche in our lawe is called to repleuy: and repignoratio, a repleuy: and repignoratitia actio for the replegiare.
            
               Replaudo, dere, to make noyſe with the handes beaten to gether.
            
               Repleo, plêre, to fyll.
            
               Replicatio, a replycation or vnfoldynge of a thynge.
            
               Replico, care, to vnfolde, alſo to replye, to diſplaye.
            
               Replumbo, are, to vnſoulder.
            
               Repo, repſi, pere, to crepe, to runne as rotes do in the grounde.
            
               Repleo, liui, lire, to polyſhe agayne.
            
               Repolleo, lere, to be moche able, to be of power to do.
            
               Repolleſco, ſcere, to be efteſones ſtronge or in force.
            
               Repono, ſui, nere, to put or ſet agayne in his place, to laye vp, to recite agayne, to hyde, to redelyuer or reſtore, to reuoke, to repreſſe, to laye to more, to exaggerate, to heape one on an other, to make to grow agayn, to bring agayne. alſo to put in by wrytynge.
            Et quantum longis carpent armenta diebus
            Exigua tantum gelidus ros nocte reponet:
            Loke howe moche the ſheepe in the longe dayes ſhall byte.
            The colde dewe in one nyghte with growinge ſhall requite.
            
               Reponere ceruicem, to wry ones necke now on one ſide and nowe in an other.
            
               Reponere aliquem in deos, to do honour to one as it were vnto god.
            
               Reponere in numero eloquentium, To eſteme him eloquente.
            
               Reponere in optima ſpe, to haue good hope of a thynge.
            
               Reponere in ſuis, to take hym for his frende
            
                
               Reponere fidem, to truſte.
            
               Scriptor honoratum ſi forte reponis A chillem, Thou that writeſt, if peraduēture thou putteſt in Athilles.
            
               Reponere nummos, to paye agayne money whiche is lent vs.
            
               Reponere aliquid in uaetuſtatem, to laye vp a thynge for the tyme to come.
            
               Reponere remum, to rowe no more.
            
               Peto à re ne id à me quaeras, ne tibi idem reponā cum ueneris. I praye the aſke not that of me, leſte I aſke lykewiſe of the whanne thou commeſt.
            
               Semper ego auditor tantum, nun
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   ne reponam? ſhall I be alway an hearer and neuer a wryter.
            
               Reporto, are, to brynge backe or agayne.
            
               Reportare laudem ex hoſtibus, to be prayſed for his victory.
            
               Reportare victoriam, to haue the victory.
            
               Repoſco, ſci, ſcere, to aſke agayne that which is myne owne, or is as it were due to me.
            
               Repoſcere uicem, to aſke one good tourne for an other.
            
               Repoſitorium, a ſtore houſe.
            
               Repoſitus, & repoſtus, ta, tum, layde vp, to hyde. Manet alta mente repoſtum, Iudicium Paridis, Depe in his mynde remayned the iudgemente, that Paris gaue betwene the goddeſſes, of the whiche ſprange the occaſyon of the deſtruction of Troye.
            
               Repotium, whan the daye after the maryage frendes do come and drynke with the bryde.
            
               Reprehendo, dere, to plucke back, to reproue
            
               Reprehenſio, caughte.
            
               Reprehenſio, a rebuke, a, pullinge backe.
            
               Reprehenſo, are, to rebuke ſharpely.
            
               Repehendere manu, to take by the hande.
            
               Repraeſento, tare, to repreſente, to render, to brynge in preſence, or preſente a thynge, to laye before one, to ſhewe or declare.
            
               Repraeſentare ſe, to be preſente.
            
               Si repraeſentari morte in ea libertas ciuitatis poteſt. If the citie by my deathe moughte be reſtored to lybertie.
            
               Repraeſentare ſupplicia, to punyſhe ſodaynely or haſtely.
            
               Repraeſentare iuditia, to preuent iudgement.
            
               Repraeſentare praetium, to paye the moneye in hande.
            
               Repraeſentare diém promiſſorum, to perfourme that that he promyſed.
            
               Reprimo, mere, to refrayne, to let, to appeſe.
            
               Reprimere ſermones ſeu famam, to cauſe a great fame or reporte to ceaſe.
            
               Impetum populi reprimere, to appeaſe the fury of the people, or to ceaſe.
            
               Reprimere itinera, to abbreuiate or make the waye ſhorter.
            
               Reprobo, are, to reproue.
            
               Reprobus, a man reproued.
            
               Reproces, ſharpe.
            
               Reptile, all thynge that crepeth.
            
               Repto, tare, to crepe moche: alſo to go ſoftely lyke a ſnayle.
            
               Repubeſcere, to waxe yonge agayne.
            
               Repudio, are, to forſake, as a man forſaketh his wyfe, alſo to refuſe, to abandone, or leaue
            
               Repudio conſilium, quod primum intenderam, I wyll now leaue the counſayle that I fyrſte intended to folowe.
            
               Repudium, a deuorce.
            
               Repudium remittere, to be deuorced.
            
               Repudium renuntiare, to declare a deuorce.
            
               Is me nunc repudium renuntiare iuſsit tibi, He wylled me to declare to the, that he hath forſaken the.
            
               Repudioſae nuptiae, mariage, after the which foloweth ſoone after a deuorce, Neceſsitate me mala ut fiam facis, uerum uideto, me ubi uoles nuptum dare, ne hac fama faciat, repudoſas nuptias, Thou compelleſt me to be naught, but take hede, that where thou wilt mary me, by that reporte he ſhall make ſuche a weddynge as ſhall ſone after be diſſolued or broken.
            
               Repueraſco, ſcere, to be eftſones a chylde, or to waxe a chylde agayne.
            
               Repugno, are, to repugne or ſaye contrarye, to reſiſte.
            
               Repugnare inter ſe, to be contrary one to an other.
            
               Repugnanter, an aduerbe, whiche ſignyfiethe contrariouſly, diſpleaſauntly. Vt igitur monere & moneri, proprium eſt uerae amicitiae, & alterum libere facere, non aſperé: alterū pacienter accipere non repugnanter ſic habendum eſt nullam in amicitijs peſtem eſſe maiorem, quam adulationem, blanditias, aſſentationem, Lyke therfore as to gyue coū
               ſayle, and to be counſayled, properlye belongeth to very frendeſhyp, alſo the tone to doo euery thynge frankely, the tother to take all thynge patiently, not diſpleaſauntly. Soo it is to be conſydered, that in frendeſhyp there is no more peſtilence, thanne flatterye, fayre wordes, and conſentynge to al thynges.
            
               Repugnantia, repugnancy, where one thynge agreeth not with an other.
            
               Repugnax, nacis, he that is in euerye thynge contrariouſe.
            
               Repungo, gere, to prycke agayne, or mutually diſpleaſe or offende.
            
               Repulſa, a puttyng back of hym, which eyther demandeth or loketh for authorite or offyce.
            
               Repullulo, & Repullulaſco, ſcere, to bourgen eftſones or ſprynge.
            
               Repulſor, oris, he that putteth an other man backe.
            
                
               Repulſus, he that is put backe.
            
               Repumicare, to rayſe with a pomayſe.
            
               Reputo, tare, to thynke often, to conſyder moche, to reuolue in the mynde, to compte. Alſo to cut of eftſones.
            
               Requies, reſte.
            
               Requieſco, ſcere, to reſte or take reſte.
            
               Requieſcere in ſpe alicuius adoleſcentis, to be content with the hope whiche one hath in a yonge man.
            
               Requieſcere in ſermone alicuius, to be content with one communication.
            
               Requieſcere in lectione poetarum, to take pleaſure in the readynge of poetes.
            
               Non requieſcere conſilio cuiuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                  , not to ceſſe for any mans counſayle.
            Et mutata ſuos requierunt flumina curſus.
            
               Verg. the riuers being altered ceſſed to rūne.
            
               Requiro, ſiui, rere, to ſeke efteſones or often, to requyre, to inquyre or demaunde.
            
               In quo maiorum noſtrorum ſaepe requiro prudentiam, I fynde that our auncetours or elders haue therein lacked oftentymes diſcretion.
            
               Vereor ne literarum officiū à me requiras, I feare that ye wyl blame me for writing no oftener vnto you.
            
               Requiſitum eſt, one demaunded.
            
               Requiſita naturae, natures neceſſitie.
            
               Res, a thynge, the thynge, the matter. ſommetyme aſtate, condicion, buſyneſſe, contention, cauſe, rycheſſe, ſubſtaunce, profytte, weale, experyence, occaſyon.
            
               Res eſt, it is matter in dede.
            
               Res ad manticam redijt, it is all come to a bagge and a ſtaffe, or a ſtaffe and a walette.
            
               Res comperendinata, a mattier adiourned or deferred vntyll the thyrde day.
            
               Res iudicata, the matter or cauſe fynally determined and adiudged.
            
               Res controuerſa, the matter in ſuite.
            
               Res familiaris, a mans propre goodes.
            
               Res forenſis, a matter in lawe.
            
               Respublica, a publyke weale.
            
               Ere nata melius fieri haud potuit quàm factum eſt, Of the occaſyon begunne it coulde not better haue ben doone, than it is. Alſoo it ſygnifieth meane. I am repperi rem, quo pacto, nec fur, nec ſocius ſies, I haue now founde the meane, howe thou ſhalte be neyther a thefe, nor a companyon with hym.
            
               Rem facere, to gayne or wynne. Nunquàm rem facies: abi, neſcis ineſcare homines, Thou ſhalt neuer gayne peny, Get the hens, thou canſt no ſkylle to angle men.
            
               Rem habere cum aliquo, to haue to do with one, to meddell with one.
            
               Res gerere, to haue or make warres. Scipione Aemiliano res in Affrica gerente, Polybius annaliū conditor, ab eo accepta claſſe ſcrutādi orbis illius gratia circumuectus eſt, Scipio Aemilianus makynge warres in Affryke, Polybius the wryter of hiſtories with a certayne numbre of ſhyppes was conueyed about that coſte, to inſerche that parte of the worlde.
            
               Res ſemper aliquid apportat noui, experyence bryngeth alway ſome newes.
            
               Ad rem redi, to the matter or purpoſe.
            
               Salua res eſt, the matter gothe well.
            
               Amicos res inuenit, rycheſſe fyndeth frēdes.
            
               Nun
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   rem facies, thou ſhalt neuer wynne by it, or neuer thryue with it.
            
               Re iuuare, to help with dedes and not with wordes onely. Is amicus, qui in re dubia re iuuat, ubi re eſt opus, He is a frende, whiche in a caſe that is doutful, helpeth me with his dedes, where dedes are requyred.
            
               Quid iſti credam? res ipſi indicat, what ſhal I truſte hym, the dede ſelfe declareth.
            
               Verba ad rem conferre, to doo as he ſaythe.
            
               Vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adeo ego illius ferre poſſum ineptias, & magnifica uerba, uerba dum ſint, uerum enim, ſi ad rē conferentur, uapulabit, Hither to I can ſuffre his lewdeneſſe, and bragges, as longe as they are but wordes, but if he do as he ſayth, he ſhall ſmart therfore.
            
               Rem augere, to waxe thryfty.
            
               Re uera, in deede, in very trouthe, matter in dede. Re ipſa, idem.
            
            
               Ere nata non melius fieri potuit 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   factum eſt, conſyderynge the chaunce or occaſion, it coulde not be better done than it is.
            
               Pro re nata, the matter cōſydered, to the purpoſe that happened.
            
               Res tua agitur, thy matter is on hande, or the matter toucheth the.
            
               Si in rem utri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eſt, yf it be for bothe their profyttes.
            
               Verba ad rem conferre, to do as he ſayth.
            
               Res ipſa indicat, the dede ſhoweth.
            
               Reſalutatio, a courtayſe ſpeakyng to him that ſpeaketh to you, a reſalutynge.
            
               Reſaluto, reſalutare, to ſalute hym that ſaluteth you.
            
               Reſarcio, ſi cire, to amende, to refourme.
            
               Reſarcire damna, to recompence damages.
            
               Reſarrio, iui, ire, to wede eftſones corne.
            
               Reſcindo, ſcidi, ſcindere, to cutte or breake in ſunder, to take awaye, to deſtroye, to make voyde or repell an acte or lawe, to breake vp.
            
               Coelum reſcindere fratres, Ter ſunt conati. Thryſe the bretherne aſſayed to breake vp heuen for to enter.
            
               Reſcio, ſciui, ſcire, to knowe a thynge whyche is hydde and kepte ſecrete. alſoo to knowe a thynge after that it is done, whiche was not knowen before.
            
                Reſciſco, ſcere, idem quod Reſcio.
            
               Reſcribo, pſi, bere, to wryte agayne, to redelyuer, to repay money.
            
               Reſcriptum, the letters of a prynce, makynge aunſwere to other letters.
            
               Reſeco, are, to cut away that which is ſuꝑfluoꝰ
            
               Reſecare ad uinum, to pare to the quycke, to touche the quycke in a matter.
            
               Reſecro, crare, to pray or deſyre eftſones. alſo to aſſoyle one of his auowe.
            
               Reſedo, dare, to appeaſe.
            
               Reſegmen, the parynge of a mans nayles.
            
               Reſero, are, to open a thynge that is cloſed.
            
               Reſero, rere, to ſowe or ſet agayne.
            
               Reſeruatio, a reſeruatō, a keping of ſom thing
            
               Reſeruo, uare, to kepe a part from other thynges, to reſerue.
            
               Reſes, idis, ydel from accuſtomed labour or occupation.
            
               Reſex, ſecis, that whiche is cut and ſpryngeth agayne, and beareth more fruite than it dyd before.
            
               Reſideo, reſedi, reſidêre, to reſte, to ſytte, to ſtande faſt.
            
               Reſidet eius rei in te culpa, the faulte therof is in the.
            
               Reſido, ſedi, ſidere, to ſytte downe. alſo to abyde. Nam Viennenſium uitia inter ipſos reſidunt, noſtra late uagantur, For the fautes of men of Vienne, do abyde with them, ours runne abrode, and be euery where knowen.
            
               Reſidet in uultu, there dothe reſte or appiere in the vyſage. Quorum non in ſententia ſolum, ſed etiam in nutu reſidebat autoritas, In whoſe ſentence not onely, but alſo countenance, auctoritie reſted.
            
               Reſiduus, a, um, the reſte or remnaunt.
            
               Reſigno, are, to open that whiche is ſealed: ſomtyme to ſeale faſt, alſo to ſhyt, ſomtyme to reſtore agayne, alſo to reſygne or ſurrendre.
            
               Reſignatum aes, wages ſtopped for negligēt ſeruyce in warres.
            
               Reſilio, lij, ire, to lepe back, or ſtep away quikly Ab hoc crimen reſilit, There is no blame to be layde to hym.
            
               Reſimus, he that hath a camoyſe noſe, that is to ſay, tourned vpwarde.
            
               Reſina, roſyn, all lyke gumme whyche runneth out of trees.
            Reſinatius, a, um, lyke roſeyn.
            
            
               Reſinatus, ta, tum, raſed or dreſſed with roſeyn.
            
               Reſinoſus, full of roſeyn.
            Reſipio, pui, pere, idem quod Reſipiſco.
            
               Reſipiſco, reſipui, reſipiſcere, to retourne to perfecte vnderſtandynge, to be eftſones wiſe where before he erred.
            
               Reſiſto, reſiſti, reſiſtere, to reſiſt or withſtande.
            
               Reſiſtitur, the remedy is.
            
               Reſoluo, uere, to reſolue, to deſtroye, to paye dettes, to remoue, to vndo or vnlouſe.
            
               Humū reſoluere, to labour the erthe.
            
               In puluerem reſoluere, to make in pouder.
            
               Reſolutio neruorum, the palſey.
            
               Reſono, are, to ſown agayn, to make an eccho.
            
               Reſorbeo, bui, & pſi, bere, to poure out or dyſgorge the lycour that was receyued.
            
               Reſpecto, are, to ſee often, to loue, to helpe.
            
               Reſpectus, ctus, a loke or ſyght, alſo reſpect or regard. Ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eo reſpectu commotus diſceſſerat, Hauynge no regarde therevnto he departed.
            
               Reſpergo, ſi, gere, to caſte water or other lykour about, to ſprynkle.
            
               Reſpergimen, a ſprynklynge or caſtyng about of lycour.
            
               Reſpicio, exi, ſpicere, to loke backe, to haue regarde, to prouyde, to remedy, to kepe, to reſrue, to loue.
            
               Reſpicere, to helpe or ſuccour. Age, me intuis ſecundis rebus reſpice, Let ſe, now in thy proſperitie ſuccour me.
            
               Reſpicit nos deus, God hath pitie on vs.
            
               Tace modo, deus reſpiciet nos aliquis, peace nowe, ſome god wyll haue pytie on vs.
            
               Reſpicere ſe, to take hede or haue regarde of hym ſelfe. Non ſoles reſpicere te, cum dicas iniuſte alteri? Art thou not wont to take hede of thy ſelfe, whan thou ſayſte wrong of an other man? Non tu te cohibes? non te reſpicis? non tibi exempli ſatis ſum? Wylt thou not beware? wylt thou not take hede of thy ſelfe? Am not I a good example vnto the?
            
               Reſpiratio, a breathe or vapour.
            
               Reſpiro, are, to take breathe. alſo to take comforte, to retourne to the fyrſte ſtate. Si armis aut conditione poſitis, aut fatigatione abiectis, aut uictoria detractis, ciuitas reſpirauerit: & dignitate tua tibi, & fortuna, uti licebit, If that harneyſe, eyther by condytions of peace beinge layde away, or by wearyneſſe of bothe partes being throwen away, or pullyd away by vyctorye, the citie ſhall recouer her fyrſte eſtimation, thou than ſhalte enioye thy poſſeſſyons and dygnitie.
            
               Reſplendeo, dere, to ſhyne.
            
               Reſpondeo, di, dere, to aunſwere, to appeere whan one is called, to agree, to conſente or be lyke or equall, to be agaynſt, as one thyng ſet or lyenge agaynſt an other.
            
               Reſpondere criminibus, to purge vs of that that is layde to our charge. Reſpondere ad nomina, to appere whan he is callyd.
            
               Non reſpondere, to make defaute.
            
               Reſpondere ad diem, to pay at the day.
            
               Reſpondere ſuperiori, to accorde to that whiche was afore.
            
               Reſpondere patri, to folowe his fathers condytions.
            
                
               Reſpondere, ſometyme doth ſignify ſatisfacere. Hocproprium tuum munus eſt ut ita erudiatur, ut & patri, & Scipioni noſtro & tibi tam propinquo reſpondeat, It is your part ſpecially, that he be ſo brought vp in lernynge, that he maye ſatisfye his father, and our frende Scipio, and you, that are ſo nygh kynneſman vnto hym.
            
               Reſponſio, an aunſwere.
            
               Reſponſito, tare, to make or gyue aunſwere, it pertayned proprely to lawyers, and theym which had the interpretation of ceremonies.
            
               Reſponſo, are, to aunſwere.
            
               Reſponſum, an aunſwere.
            
               Reſponſus, ſus, ſui, where one thing doth agree with an other, a conſent, a conueniency.
            
               Reſpuo, ere, to refuſe, or reiecte.
            
               Reſpuit hoc ſapiētiſsimi cuius
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fides, there is no wyſe man wyll beleue hym.
            
               Reſpuere imperiū, not wyllyng to obey him.
            
               Reſpuit hoc ferri ictum, one coulde not enter into it with yron.
            
               Auribus hominem reſpuere, not wyllyng to here hym ſpeake.
            
               Reſtagno, nare, to contayne or holde water.
            
               Reſtat, reſtare, to be or remayne of that thing, that is left, to ſtande backe, to reſyſte.
            
               Hoc me reſtat, that remayneth or abydethe for me.
            
               Reſtauro, rare, to reſtore, or make agayne.
            
               Reſtibilis, that whyche is renewed, or ſowen agayne. Reſtibilis foecunditas, whan the female beareth euery yere.
            
               Reſtibilis ager, a fielde which is ſowen two yeres togyther.
            
               Reſticula, a ſmalle corde.
            
               Reſtinguo, xi, guere, to ſtynt or put out, or ceſſe, as fyre, lyght, and thyrſte.
            
               Reſtio, onis, a roper. alſoo he that hangeth hym ſelfe.
            
               Reſtipulatio, a puttynge in of pledges, put ingage or pledge, for to make anſwer to an action
            
               Reſtipulor, aris, ari, to make anſwer in the law
            
               Reſtire, to be redye to be ſowen, ploughed, or dygged.
            
               Reſtis, a halter or corde, a rope or bounche of garlyke or oynyons.
            
               Reſtem ducere, whan maydens and chyldren daunſe togither hande in hand, or with napkyns, leadyng one an other. Ad reſtim res re dijt, The matter is in deſpayre, or deſperate.
            
               Reſtito, tare, to abyde or tarye.
            
               Reſtituo, ere, to reſtore, to yelde agayne, to repayre or make agayn. In integrum reſtituere, to reſtore hym vnto his fyrſt aſtate.
            
               Pugnā reſtituere, to begin the batayl eftſones Reipub. reſtitui, to be remitted to the ſame aſtate that he was in before his banyſhment:
            
               Reſtitutio, reſtitution.
            
               Reſto, ſtare, to remayne, to tary. Hic nunc me credit aliquam ſibi fallaciā portare, & ea me hic reſtitiſſe gratia, He wenetij that I worke hym ſome falſhede, and that I tary ſtyl therfore. Nullā quaerentes uoluptatem Stoici reſtant, The Stoike philoſophers do reſyſte or ſticke to their opinion, ſeking for no pleſure.
            
               Reſtat mihi, it taryeth for me, it ſhal happen vnto me.
            
               Reſtrictè, & reſtrictim, ſtraytly, or ſtrayte.
            
               Reſtrictus, nygarde.
            
               Reſtringo, xi, gere, to bynd or ſtrayn bakward to bynde agayne, to reſtrayne. ſomtyme it ſignifieth to louſe. Apulei. Iumentū reſtrinxit, abire
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſtabulo liberum ſinit, He lowſed his horſe, and let hym out at lybertie.
            
               Reſtringit nauſeam, it putteth away the deſyre to vomyte.
            
               Reſulto, tare, to leape agaynſt a thynge, to rebounde, to rebell, to leape or ſteppe backe.
            
               Reſumo, pſi, ere, to take agayn, to reſume.
            
               Reſuo, ere, to ſow agayn, or make a double ſtyche, alſo to ryp or vndo that which is ſowen, to vnſtitche. Sumēti uirilem togā, tunica lati claui reſuta ex utra
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ꝑte, ad pedes decidit: Whan he came firſte to mans aege, his Senatours cote beynge rypte on boothe ſydes, felle downe to his fete.
            
               Reſupino, are, to tourne vpwarde, or vpryght. to reuoke or call backe, to differ, to peruerte.
            
               Reſupinus, a, um, vpryght, the bely vpwarde.
            
               Reſurgo, rexi, gere, to aryſe vp.
            
               Reſurrectio, reſurrection.
            
               Retae, trees growyng on the bankes of riuers, or in the ryuers.
            
               Retardatio, a taryenge.
            
               Retardo, dare, to make to tary.
            
               Rete, tis, a n
                  •
               tte.
            
               Retego, xi, gere, to dyſcouer or dyſcloſe.
            
               Retento, are, to retayn often, to empt eftſones.
            
               Retexo, ere, to vntwiſt or vntwine, or vnwind. ſomtime to twiſt or wind eftſones, to diſſolue Penelopes telam retexere, to do and vndoo. Non poteſt niſi retexueris illa, he may not except thou chaunge his purpoſe therin.
            
               Retiaculum, a lyttell nette.
            
               Retiarius, he that caſteth a nette, proprely in fyghtynge to apprehende his aduerſary.
            
               Retia, nettes, ſometyme it ſygnifieth one nette
            
               Reticeo, cui, cêre, to holde ones peace, to ſpeake no worde, to kepe ſecrete, to ſay nothynge.
            
               Reticentia, ſilence, whan one holdeth his peace.
            
               Reticula, a lyttell net, wherin a mans heare or womens is truſſed.
            
               Reticulatus, ta, tum, made lyke a nette.
            
               Reticulum, a caule or coyfe, alſo a bagge, when in meate is caryed.
            
               Retinaculum, what ſo euer holdeth any other thynge, a ſtaye.
            
                
               Retineo, nui, nere, to holde againe, to retayne, to kepe in remembraunce.
            
               Retinere, to holde vp, that a man falle not. Ah retine me obſecro. B. Obſecro quid tibi eſt? An. Diſperij. B. Perij miſera, quid ſtupes Antiphila? O holde me vp I pray the B. Alak what ayleth the? A. I am vndone. B. Alas that euer I was borne, why dothe thy harte fayle the Antiphila?
            
               Retinere, to reſtrayne or let one from doinge that, that he wolde. Pudore & liberalitate liberos retinere ſatius eſſe credo, quam metu, I thynke it better to reſtrayne chylderne from their wanton wylles, by ſhame and lyberalitie, than with feare.
            
               Si ius ſuum retinet, yf he maynteyne his title.
            
               In officio retinere, to entertayne men to be euer redy to do theyr dueties.
            
               Inuidiam ſuam apud improbos retinere, to be alwayes hated of vnthrifty perſons.
            
               Iudicem retinêre aliquem, to receyue one for a iudge.
            
               Iuditum ſuum retinêre, to perſeuer in his opinyon.
            
               Iuſtitiam retinere, to maynteyne iuſtyce.
            
               Memoria retinêre, to remembre.
            
               Modum retinere, to kepe a meaſure.
            
               Morbo retineri, to be ſycke.
            
               Morem retinere, to kepe alway one cuſtome.
            
               Nummos retinere, to kepe backe moneye. whiche ought to be payde.
            
               Officium retinere, to do well his duety.
            
               Retinens, he that kepeth ſtyll.
            
               Retiolum, a cawle, or coyfe.
            
               Retondeo, dere, to klyppe all ouer.
            
               Retorqueo, torſi, quere, to caſt backeward, to throwe or ſhutte agayne.
            
               Retorreſco, retorreſcere, to be bourned with the ſunne.
            
               Retorridus, da, dū, burned or ſered, or parched.
            
               Retracto, ctare, to call back, or reuoke a thing that is done, to drawe backe, to excuſe, to lay to an nother man, to drawe vp.
            
               Retractare largitiones, to ceaſſe from lyberall gyuynge.
            
               Retractare aliquid, to repete that whiche is ſpoken.
            
               Retractare actionem, to begyn his action of newe.
            
               Retraho, traxi, trahere, to pull or drawe backe, or to drawe to.
            
               Retribuo, buere, to recompence.
            
               Retrica, olde wryters callyd the water, wherewith gardeynes are watered.
            
               Retrimentum, the dragges of a thynge, ſometyme ordure or dunge.
            
               Retro, behynde.
            
               Retrocedo, ceſsi, cedere, to go backe.
            
               Retrorſum, backewarde.
            Retrorſus, a, um, tourned backewarde.
            
            
               Retroſpicere, to loke backe.
            
               Retrudo, ſi, dere, to put backe.
            
               Retundo, dere, to make blunt or dul, that whiche is ſharpe. alſo to beate often on a thyng.
            
               Retuſus, a, um, dull, blunt, contrary to ſharpe. Aliae agrorum partes, quae acuta ingenia gignant, aliae quae retuſa, Some partes of countrays there be, whyche do brynge forthe ſharpe wyttes, ſome brynge forth dulle.
            
               Reualeſco, ſcere, to be recouered from ſyknes.
            
               Reueho, uexi, uehere, to brynge or cary backe, or agayne.
            
               Reuelatio, a reuelyng or a diſcloſing of a thing
            
               Reuello, reuellere, to pluck back, to pull again.
            
               Reuelo, are, to dyſcouer.
            
               Reuenio, nire, to come agayne.
            
               Reuera, matter in dede, or for a trouthe.
            
               Reuerendus, worthy reuerence.
            
               Reuerens, rentior, rentiſsimus, he that dothe reuerence.
            
               Reuerenter, reuerently.
            
               Reuerentia, reuerence or honour done to one.
            
               Reuereor, reris, reri, to haue in reuerence.
            
               Reuerſio, a retourne.
            Reuertor, teris, ti, to retourne. Reuerto, idem.
            
               Reuincio, uinxi, uincere, to bynde backe, or behynde, as to bynd ones handes behynd hym.
            
               Reuincere paratus eſt, whiche the lawyers do ſaye, Paratus eſt uerificare, He is redye to auerre.
            
               Reuireſco, ſcere, to become efteſones grene.
            
               Reuiſo, ſere, to retourne to ſee.
            
               Reuiuiſco, ſcere, to be reuyued.
            
               Reuoco, uocare, to calle backe, to reuoke, to brynge agayne, to drawe backe, to rayle from deathe, to tourne from an enterpryſe.
            
               Reuocare pedem, to tourne back, to recule.
            
               Ad quae exempla reuocas? What examples putteſt thou me for thy defence.
            
               Ad manus rem reuocare, to bryng the matter to that poynte that it comme to ioynynge of battayie.
            
               Reuocare, to reſtore or renewe. Item circa omnium ordinum ſtatum domi foris
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , aut correxit, aut exoleta reuocauit, aut etiam no ua inſtituit, Moreouer concernynge the ſtate of all degrees, as well within his howſe as without, eyther he dyd amende them, or renewed thoſe thinges that were out of vſe, or els ordayned newe.
            
               Reuocare teſtes, to reherſe the depoſitions of wytneſſes.
            
               Reuocare ad curam, to doo a thynge with moche dylygence.
            
               Rem ad ſortem reuocare, to caſte lottes for a thynge.
            
               In lucem reuocare, to bryng agayn in vſe.
            
               Reuocatio, a reuocation or callyng backe.
            
                
               Reuolo, are, to flee backe.
            
               Reuoluo, ui, uere, to tourne vp and downe, to reuolue, to tourne backe, to remoue.
            
               Reuolutus, ta, tum, to be tourned backe, to be remoued.
            
               Reuolutio, a tourninge backe to the fyrſt place or poynte, a reuolution or tournynge of celeſtiall bodyes or ſpheres.
            
               Reuorto, tere, olde wryters vſed for reuertor, to retourne.
            
               Reus, he that is ſued or accuſed, ſometyme he that is gylty.
            
               Reus facti, gyltie of an offence.
            
               Reus agitur, he is ſued or accuſed.
            
               Reus peragitur, he is condemned.
            
               Reus ſtipulando, he that bargayneth.
            
               Reus uoti, he that hath auowed.
            
               Reus de ui, accuſed of breakyng the peace.
            
               Reum ſubdere, to accuſe one of a great offēce
            
               Rex, regis, a kynge.
            
               Rex ſacrificulus, was a chiefe minyſter of ſacrifices amonge the Romayns onely.
         
         
            ¶R ANTE H.
            
               RHabarbarum, Rubarbe, a preciouſe rote medicinable to purge coler alſo to corroborate the ſtomake and lyuer.
            
               Rhachinon, a ſpyder, hauynge a lyttell blacke heade, and is ſomewhat whyte, and hathe ſhorte fete, whoſe bytynge is as venymouſe as the ſtyngynge of a ſcorpyon.
            
               Rhadamanthus, was kynge of Lycia, whyche was a ſtraight executour of Iuſtice, and therfore was ſuppoſed of the Paynyms to be afterwarde one of the iudges in helle.
            
               Rhaguſium, a citie in Dalmatia.
            
               Rhagardes, & Rhagadiae, certayne cleftes in ſome partes of the body.
            
               Rhamnus, a kynde of brembles, whyche is whyte, and beareth more fruite thanne other do, and alſo hath floures, and ſendeth forthe braunches with ſtraight prickes, not croked as other are, and hath brode leaues.
            
               Rhamnuſia, was callyd goddeſſe of vengeaunce.
            
               Rhamnuſius, a man of a towne callyd Rhamnus, by Athenes.
            
               Rhamponticum, the herbe and roote callid the more and greate Centory, it is named of Plinius (as Ruellius wryteth) Rhacoma.
            
            
               Rhampſinithus, the proper name of a kynge of Egypt.
            
               Rhaphanus, an herbe callyd radyſhe.
            
               Rhebanus, a ryuer in the mouthe of Boſphotus, a countray in Thracia.
            
               Rhea, was callyd the mother of goddes, callyd alſo Cybele.
            
               Rhea ſyluia, the mother of Romulus & Remus
            
               Rheda, a charyotte.
            
               Rhedarius, a charyot man.
            
               Rhedones, the cytie of Reynes in Fraunce.
            
               Rhegium, a cytie on the bordure of Italye towarde Sycile. alſo an nother cytie not farre from Parima.
            
               Rheginus, a man of the cytie of Rhegium in Calaber.
            
               Rhemi, people in Fraunce callyd alſoo Rhemenſes.
            
               Rhenones, cotes made of the ſkynnes of beſtis.
            
               Rhenus, a noble ryuer in Germania, callyd the Rheyne.
            
               Rhenenſe uinum, Rheynyſhe wyne.
            
               Rhenenſes, people dwellynge on the ryuer of Rheyne.
            
               Rheon, Reubarbe.
            
               Rheſus, kynge of Thracia, whiche camme to the ayde of the Troianes, and was ſlayne of Diomedes: of whome a ryuer about Troye was callyd Rheſus.
            
            
               Rheti, a people in Italy.
            
               Rhetia, a countray in Germanye, hauynge on the weſte the hylle called Adula, on the north it marcheth vppon Danubium, on the eaſte vpon the ryuer callyd Aenus, on the ſouthe it lyeth vppon the mountaynes called Alpes.
            
               Rhetor, oris, he that teacheth rhetoryke.
            
               Rhetorica, rhetorycke, or the crafte of eloquence.
            
               Rhetoricor, cari, to ſpeake rhetorike.
            
               Rhetorice, lyke a rhetoritian.
            
               Rhetus, a gyant, whome Dionyſe, being tourned into a lyon ſlewe.
            
               Rhetoricus, an oratour, or a man cunnynge in the crafte of eloquence,
            
               Rhetoriſſo, are, to ſpeake in the fourme of rhetoryke.
            
               Rheuma, a rewme or diſtillation of humours.
            
               Rheumatiſmus, the dyſeaſe of rewme.
            
               Rhibis, a bremble callyd Raſpis.
            
            
               Rhinoceron, ontis, a beaſt that hath an horne in his noſe, whyche naturally is ennemye to the Olyphaunt, it is alſo an oyle veſſell, oute of the whyche oyle is dropped.
            
               Rhinocerotis naſum habere, is ſayd of them that be wyttye. Iuuenes
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , ſenes
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , Et pueri naſum, Rhinocerotis habent, Yong men, old men, and chyldern, and all be wytty.
            
               Riphaei montes, mountaynes in the north part of the worlde, where as is contynually wynter, and ſnow with huge windes, and ioyneth vpon Scithia in Aſia.
            
               Rhodanus, a ryuer in France, callid the Rone.
            
               Rhodia, a kynde of vynes.
            
               Rhodites, a certayne precyouſe ſtoone, of the colour of a roſe.
            
               Rhodius, of the Rhodes.
            
                
               Rhodope, a mountayne in Thracia.
            
               Rhododaphne, & Rhododendros, a tree, hauyng leaues lyke to an almond tree, but greatter and fatte ſeedes, open lyke a horne, whiche hath in theym woulle lyke purple ſylke, a longe roote, ſalte in taſte, it groweth in watrye places.
            
               Rhodomêli, hony and the iuyce of roſes boiled togyther, called cōmunely Mel roſatum.
            
            
               Rhodonia, a gardeyne of roſes.
            
               Rhodophone, that parte of Syria that gothe ouer the mountayne of Taurus.
            
               Rhodopeius, a, um, pertaynyng to the mountayne of Rhodope.
            
               Rhodos, a famouſe yle in the ſea callyd Capatthium, lyenge beyonde Candy, hauyng on the north, the countray callyd Lycia, on the ſouth Egypte. In this yle were borne many excellent philoſophers and Rhetoricians, it was ſometyme puyſſant and ryche.
            
               Rhodoſtacti, idem quod rhodomeli, all be it ſome do put a dyfference betwene them, ſaying that rhodomeli, hath thre partes of the iuyce of roſes, and one parte of hony, & that rhodoſtacti hathe two partes of the iuyce, and one of hony.
            
               Rhombus, a fygure foure ſquare, hauynge the ſydes equall the corners crooked. it is alſoo a fyſhe callyd a Byrt, alſo a ſpynnynge whele or tourne.
            
               Rhoeas, whan the corners of the eien are open, ſoo that there doo ſtylle from theym continuall droppes.
            Rhoeteus, & Rhoeteius, for Troianus.
            
               Rhoetus, a mountayne of Troye, where Aiax Thelamonius was buryed.
            
               Rhoeton, wyne made of pomegranates.
            
               Rhomphea, a ſworde.
            
               Rhoncus, a rowtynge whan one doth ſlepe.
            
               Rhonchiſ
                     •
                  o, are, to rowte.
            
               Rhopalon, a water lylye, callyd communely Nenuphar.
            
               Rhoxia, a countray by Polonia.
            
               Rhoxalani, people on the north parte of the ryuer of Danubius or Donowe.
            
               Rhus, is that whiche apothecaries do call Sumach. Manardus lib 1. epiſt iiii ſayth that it is alſo callyd Ros ſyriacus.
            
            
               Rhuteni, a people in Fraunce callyd Rhodes.
            
               Rhymnus, a ryuer.
            
               Rhyndacus, a ryuer, whyche runneth into the ſea callyd Pontus.
            
               Rhyparographus, a paynter of tryfles, a ſtayner.
            
               Rhytion, a veſſelle lyke to a moone.
            
               Rhythmus, numbre or armony in ſpeakyng, it is alſo callyd a ryme.
         
         
            ¶R ANTE I.
            
               RICA, a garment of purple, hemmed or purfled alſo a kerchief, which women do weare.
            
               Ricinus, & ricinum, euery garmente that is foure ſquare.
            
               Ricinium, & ricinum, a cloke, whereof parte was caſte ouer a mans ſhoulders.
            
               Ricinus, a dogge tyke, it is alſoo that whyche the apothecaries do calle Cherua, wherof is made an oyle that ſerueth to dyuerſe vſes, Io. Agricola. but Ruellius maketh no mencion of Cherua, but ſayth, that the grekes dydde call it Cici, and ſome apothecaries do name it Cataputia maior, & that the apothecaries of Fraunce do call it Palma Chriſti.
            
            
               Ricula, a handkerchiefe.
            
               Rictus, & rictum, a grynnynge or ſkornefulle openynge of the mouthe: alſo the fourme of the vyſage, whan a man grenneth, or a dogge brawleth.
            
               Rid
                     •
                  o, riſi, ridère, to lawghe. alſoo to ſkorne or mocke,
            
               Ridibundus, da, dum, that laugheth moche.
            
               Ridica, a proppe, wherwith a vyne, or other lyke thynge is holden vp.
            
               Ridiculare, a thynge to laugh at.
            
               Ridiculum, idem, alſo a mocke.
            
               Ridiculus, a manne whome men doo mocke or laugh at.
            Ridicularius, a, um, idem quod ridiculum.
            
               Ridiculè, foolyſhely, in mockage.
            Ridiculoſus, a, um, idem quod ridiculus.
            
               Ridiculoſè, foolyſhely, to be laughed at.
            
               Rigatio, a watrynge.
            
               Rigeo, gui, gere, to be feruently colde, alſoo to be harde or ſtyffe.
            
               Rigentes oculi, eyes whyche do neuer moue.
            Rigeſco, ſcere, idem quod rigeo.
            
               Rigide, ſtyffely, ſharpely, cruelly.
            
               Rigidus, da, dum, colde, harde, ſtyffe, ſharpe, or cruell.
            
               Rigo, are, to make weate, or to water a gardeyne or fielde.
            
               Rigor, rigoris, colde, hardnes, ſtyffenes.
            
               Riguus, a, um, that maye be eaſylye weate or watered.
            
               Rima, a chynke or clefte in wod or ſtone, where it is not cloſe ioyned.
            
               Rimas agere, to be clouyn or chynked, as tymber or bourdes, are with lyenge in the wynde.
            
               Rimam inueuire, to fynde an excuſe, or meane to eſcape.
            
               Rimor, aris, ari, to ſerche dylygently, alſoo to cleaue as tymber dothe.
            
               Rimula, a lyttell chynke or clefte.
            
                
               Rimoſus, a, um, full of kleftes or chynkes.
            
               Ringo, xi, gere, to grynne or ſhew the teth, as a dogge dothe whan he wyll barke or byte. alſo to be angry, to braule, to barke.
            
               Ripa, a water banke.
            
               Riparia, a birde which bredeth in water bākes
            
               Riparius, a, um, that abydeth on the water bankes.
            
               Ripae, ſeu Ripei, mountaynes in Archadia.
            
               Riphaer, mountaynes in Scithia.
            
               Riſcus, a cofer couered with lether: alſo a lyttel wyndowe.
            
               Riſibilis, le, that whiche can laughe.
            
               Riſum concitare, to make one to laughe.
            
               Riſum captare, to do a thynge whiche cauſeth men to laughe.
            
               Riſum aedere, to laughe.
            
               Riſus, laughter.
            
               Riſus ſardonius, a laughter without myrthe as of them that be madde or cruell. ſuche as Iriſhe men vſe whan they be angry.
            
               Ritè, directly, truely, euen as it ſhulde be.
            
               Rituales, bookes, wherin the fourme of ceremonies, and olde maners and cuſtomes are wrytten.
            
               Ritus, tus, an approued cuſtome.
            
               Riuales, they whiche equally do loue one woman, or be woars together, alſo they, whoſe landes be deuided by a ryuer or broke, alſo they whiche dwell vpon ryuers.
            
               Riualitas, tatis, enuy or obſeruaunce betwyxte the louers of one woman.
            Riuinus, a wower, idem quod riualis.
            
               Riuus, a ryuer or borke.
            
               Riuulus, a littell broke.
            
               Riuo, are, is to go to watrynge, as beaſtes do.
            
               Rixa, a braulynge contention.
            
               Rixoſè, brawlynge.
            
               Rixoſus, a ſtriuer or brawler.
            
               Rixor, aris, ari, & rixo, to contend with brawlynge.
         
         
            ¶R ANTE O.
            
               ROB & Robub, names barbarouſe ſignifyenge iuyce of herbes or fruites defecate, rede more in Sapa.
            
            
               Robigalia, the Ceremonyes pertaynynge to Robigus, the preſeruatour of corne.
            Robigmoſus, a, um, moche blaſted.
            
            
               Robigo, was honored of the Romains for a goddeſſe, whom they ſuppoſed mought preſerue their corne from blaſting. it is alſo that vice in corne called blaſtinge.
            
               Robigus, whom the olde Romaynes named the god, that preſerued corne from blaſtyng.
            
               Roboraria, places, whiche are paled aboute.
            
               Roboreus, ea, eum, of oken tymber.
            
               Roboro, are, to fortifie.
            
               Roboſes, the olde writers vſed for robur an ok
                  •
               
            
            
               Robur, oris, harde oke. It is alſo ſtrength and hardeneſſe of the body. ſomtyme the ſtrength or hardenes of any thynge generallye. alſo a ſtockes in priſon.
            
               Robus, olde writers called red of colour. Alſo all maner of matter, whiche had many redde vaynes, was called Robus. It is alſo a kynd of wheate, that yeldeth fayre meale, whiche we nowe call red wheate.
            
               Roburneus, a, um, of an oke.
            Robuſteus, a, um, idem.
            
               Robuſtus, ta, tum, ſtronge and harde.
            
               Rodo, ſi, dere, to gnawe as a mouſe or other lyke beaſte dothe. ſometyme to detracte or backebite.
            
               Rodus, da, dum, a thynge vnperfecte or rude, vnpolyſhed, vnwrought.
            
               Rogamen, minis, a deſyre.
            
               Rogatarij, Notaries, which requyred the parties, that eche of them ſhulde promyſe.
            
               Rogator, rogatoris, a begger from dore to doore.
            
               Rogito, tare, to intreate or demaunde, to inquire often, to aſke for a thynge.
            
               Rogo, are, to require, to praye, to inquyre, to aſke of one, to inacte.
            
               Rogare plebem, to inquire of the commons if they be contente that a lawe ſhall paſſe, or as in our parliament, to go to the queſtion.
            
               Rogare aliquem ſententiam, to demaunde of one what his opinion is.
            
               Rogare ſacramento, to ſweare one, or to gyue to hym an othe.
            
               Rogatio, was amonge the Romaynes, whan the Tribunes, whiche were the heade offycers of the people, were content that any act ſhulde paſſe, which was made by the ſenate, or by the ſame Tribunes deuyſed.
            
               Rogatus, tus, a deſyre.
            
               Rogus, a great fyre, wherin deade bodyes were bourned.
            
               Roma, the citie of Rome.
            
               Romanenſis, he that commeth from an other countrey, and dwelleth at Rome.
            
               Romania, is a countrey called Thracia.
            
               Romanus, a Romayne.
            Romanus, na, num, of Rome.
            
            
               Romandui, Normandes.
            
               Romula, a tree, vnder the whiche Romulus and Remus were founde.
            Romuleus, a, um, & Romulidus, da, dum, of Romulus.
            
            
               Romulus, the fyrſt kynge of Romaynes.
            
               Ronchiſſo, are, to route or ſnorte.
            
               Ronchus, a routynge, ſometyme a ſcorne.
            
               Ronchiſonus, he that routeth or ſnorteth.
            
               Rorarij milites, men whiche beinge lyghte armed made the fyrſt ſkyrmyſhe in battayle.
            
                
               Roratio, is a dyſeaſe in vynes, by the occaſion wherof, the chiefe grapes do falle away.
            
               Roreſco, ſcere, to be waſhed with dewe.
            
               Rores, dewes.
            
               Rorifacio, cere, to ſprynkle.
            
               Roro, are, to dewe or drop downe lyke dewe.
            
               Rorulentus, ta, tum, full of dewe.
            Ros, roris, dewe.
            
            
               Ros ſyriacus, that whiche is callyd of the apothecaries Sunach.
            
            
               Roſa, a roſe.
            Roſaceus, a, um, of roſes.
            
            Aqua roſacea, roſewater.
            
            
               Roſalia, garlandes of Roſes.
            
               Roſarium, a gardeyne or bedde of Roſes.
            
               Roſcius, a Romayn, and a player in comedies, whome for his excellencye in pronunciation and geſture, the noble Cicero callyd his iewell, and ſo moch delited in him, that he contended with hym, whither Roſcius could ſet forthe one ſentence in mo faſcyons of geſture and countenaunce, or he expreſſe the ſame ſentence in a more diuerſite of eloquent wordes. The excellency of this man in his arte, howe it was eſtemed and fauoured of all the Romayns, it appered well in that they gaue to hym for a contynuall ſtipende; one thouſande of their grotes for euery day, whyche dydde amount of our money xvi. pound: xiii. s. iiii. d. And Lucius Sylla beinge dictatour gaue to hym a rynge of goulde, whyche was the token of a knyghte at that tyme, as a colar or chayne of golde is at this tyme.
            
               Roſetum, a gardeyne of roſes.
            
               Roſeus, a, um, of a roſe, or of the coloure of a roſe.
            
               Roſidus, da, dum, wette with dewe.
            
               Roſio, gnawynge.
            
               Roſmarinum, Roſemary, or a lyttell ſnowte.
            
               Roſtellum, a lyttell beake or bylle of a byrde.
            
               Roſtra, ſtrorum, roſtris, was a place in Rome afore the court callyd Hoſtilia, wherein was a pulpyte, in whyche the oratours of Rome were wont to ſtande, whan they preached to the people, or declared any matter, of the whiche proceded this worde, Pro roſtris, in the pulpyt, or at the barre.
            
               Roſtrati naues, ſhyppes hauing pikes of yron without the ſtemme.
            
               Roſtrum, a beake of a byrde, a ſnoute of a beaſt or fyſhe, alſo the ſtemme of a ſhyppe or bote.
            
               Rota, a whele, alſo a kynde of fyſhe.
            
               Rothomagus, the cite of Roan in Normandy.
            
               Roto, tare, to tourne a thynge lyke a whele.
            
               Rotula, a lyttell whele. Rotella, idem.
            
            
               Rotundè, roundly, aptly, elegantly, handſomly, proprely in wordes.
            
               Rotunditas, roundneſſe.
            
               Rotundo, dare, to make rounde.
            
               Rotundus, da, dum, round. ſomtyme well compact or facyoned.
            
               Ore rotundo loqui, to expreſſe moch in fewe wordes.
         
         
            ¶R ANTE V.
            
               RVBEA tinctorum, Mader.
            
               Rubefacio, cere, to make redde.
            
               Rubefio, fieri, to be made redde.
            
               Rubellae, redde grapes.
            
               Rubellio, a fyſhe callyd a rochette.
            
               Rubellum uinum, clarette wyne.
            
               Rubeo, bere, to be redde.
            Ruber, bra, brum, redde.
            
            
               Rubeta, a tode.
            
               Rubetum, a buſſhy cloſe.
            Rubeus, bea, beum, redde.
            
            Rubens, idem.
            
               Rueba minor, goſelynge wede or clyuers.
            
               Rubeſco, ſcere, to waxe redde.
            
               Rubi, borum, a towne in Campania.
            
               Rubicon, conis, a ryuer in Italy, whiche diuideth Galliam from the part of Italy, nowe callyd Romandiola, in olde tyme Flaminea.
            
            Rubicundus, da, dum, ruddy.
            
            
               Rubidus, da, dum, a ſwart redde. alſo rough or courſe, as bread hauynge moche branne.
            
               Rubigino, are, to ruſte.
            Rubiginoſus, a, um, ruſtye.
            
            Rubigo, ginis, ruſte.
            
            Rubor, oris, redneſſe.
            
            
               Rubrica, redde chalke, or ruddell, wherewith ſhepe are marked.
            
               Rubriceta, roſette colour.
            Rubrus, a, um, redde.
            
            
               Rubricatus, ta, tum, coloured with redde, or ruddelyd, as ſhepe are.
            
               Rubus, a bremble.
            
               Rubus caninus, the wylde Eglantyne bryar.
            
               Ructo, are, to belke or breake wynd vpwarde.
            Ructor, tari, idem.
            
               Ructare crapulam, to ſauoure of to moche drynke.
            
               Ructiro, tare, to breake wynde often.
            Ructuatio, idem quod ructus.
            
               Ructus, belkynge or breakyng wynd vpward.
            
               Rudens, tis, a cabell of a ſhyppe.
            
               Ruderarium, a raungynge ſyue.
            
               Rudero, rare, to lay on olde ſtones and rubbel. alſo to daube or lay on morter.
            
               Ruderatus, ta, tum, where moch rubbiſh lyeth.
            
               Rudetum, a place where lyeth moche rubbyſhe or rubbell. alſo lande, whyche hath lyen leye, and is newely put in tylthe.
            
               Rudiae, diarum, an old towne in Apulia, where the poete Ennius was borne.
            
               Rudiarij, they whyche are dyſcharged of ſightynge with ſwordes, as they whyche were
 callyd Gladiatores, that openly faught, one with an nother, to anymate the Romaynes with ſheddyng of theyr bloude. They be alſo bodgers or amenders of olde garmentes, and ſeuiars, or makers of ſyues.
            
               Rudicula, a potte ſtycke.
            
               Rudimentum, the fyrſte teachyng of chyldern.
            
               Rudio, dire, to teache one, whiche is vnlerned.
            
               Rudis, a rodde or yarde whyche was gyuen to ſworde players, whan they came to .lx. yeres olde, in token that they were ſet at lybertie. ſometyme lybertie from labour.
            
               Rude donari, to be diſcharged of attendance, properly in warres.
            
               Rudem accipere, hath the ſame ſygnification.
            
               Rudis, de, rude, vnperfect, newe, vnwrought, taught of late.
            
               Rudis, ruderis, ſhardes or pieces of ſtones broken and ſhattered, tubbell or rubbyſhe of old houſes.
            
               Ruditas, rudeneſſe, lacke of lernynge or wytte.
            
               Rudo, rudi, rudere, to braye lyke an aſſe. It is ſometyme ſpoken of a man. ſometyme of a woman.
            
               Rufeo, & rufeſco, ſcere, to be ſomewhat redde.
            
               Rufo, fare, to make redde.
            
               Rufuli, certayne captayns made by the conſule, who afterwarde were callyd Rutuli.
            
            
               Rufus, a, um, ſomewhat redde.
            
               Ruga, a wrynkle or playte.
            Rugio, giui, gire, to roore.
            
            
               Rugitus, a roorynge.
            
               Rugo, gare, to be playted or wrynkled.
            Rugo, xi, gere, to belke.
            
            
               Rugoſus, a, um, full of playtes or wrynkles.
            
               Ruina, ruyne, extreme decay.
            
               Ruinoſus, a, um, ruynouſe, in decay.
            
               Rulla, the ſtaffe, wherwith the plowghmanne clenſeth his culter.
            
               Ruma, was of the olde wryters callyd a teate, alſo it is the throte bolle.
            
               Ruma, a goddeſſe, whome the paynyms dydde ſuppoſe to be beneficiall to womens breſtes, and to ſuckynge chylderne.
            
               Rumen, the dew clap of a breaſte, alſo a place in the bely, a panche.
            
               Rumentum, a braſtynge out, an apoſteme that braſteth out of the fleſhe.
            
               Rumigare, to chewe the cudde.
            
               Rumigero, rare, to cary tydynges.
            
               Ruminatio, a chewyng of the cudde, as a beaſt dothe. alſo delyberation or aduyſement.
            
               Ruminalis ficus, a fygge tree, vnder the which it is ſuppoſed that a wolfe gaue ſucke to Romulus and Remus.
            
               Rumino, are, & Ruminor, ari, to chewe the cud. Alſo to call efteſones to remembraunce.
            
               Rumex, icis, ſorrelle, alſo a weapon lyke to a ſpeare.
            
               Rumifero, are, & rumigero, rare, to beare or brynge tydynges.
            
               Rumigerulus, a tellar of tydynges.
            
               Rumis, a teate.
            
               Rumito, to beare tydynges.
            
               Rumo, are, to gyue the teate to a chylde.
            
               Rumor, oris, tydynges, a rumour, a bruyte.
            Rumpi, porum, tranſomes.
            
            
               Rumpo, rupi, pere, to breake, to make weary.
            
               Rumpere moras, to make haſte.
            
               Rumpere ſilentium, to kepe no longer ſilēce.
            
               Rumpotinus, a bouſſhe whyche growethe in Fraunce, of whom Columella wryteth, that no corne ſhulde be ſowen within twenty fote thereof.
            
               Rumpotinetum, the place where ſuche buſhes do growe.
            
               Rumuſculus, a lyttell rumour or bruite.
            
               Rumula, a lyttell teate.
            
               Runa, a weapon, ſomtyme vſyd in Fraunce.
            
               Runca, a ſawe wherwith tymber is ſawen.
            
               Runcatio, weedynge.
            
               Runcina, a whypſawe, wherewith tymber is ſawen, it is alſo a buſheſythe or bylle, to cutte buſſhes.
            
               Runcino, are, to ſawe tymber.
            
               Runco, care, to weede or pull vp.
            
               Runſor, oris, one of the names of Pluto called god of Helle.
            
               Ruo, rui, ruere, to falle, to powre out, to be deceyued, to ſubuerte, to make playn, to pluck vp, to breake a ſonder, to throwe downe.
            
               Ruere, is to ouerthrowe, to runne forth hedlynge. Quo moriture ruis maiora
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   uiribus audes? Whyther runneſt thou headlynge to be ſlayne, and attempteſt thynges aboue thy puyſſaunce? Alſo to lyfte vp. Et ruit atram, ad coelum picea craſſus caligine nubem, And beynge thycke, it lyfted vp to heauen a cloude, as blacke as pytche. ſometyme it ſygnyfieth to make a great noyſe. Ruit arduus aether, The hyght ſyrmamente rumbled, or made a great noyſe.
            
               Ruit imbribus, it rayned ſoore.
            
               Rupes, be hylles, bankes or rockes, ſoo ſteepe downe, as no man may clymme them.
            
               Rupicapra, a wylde goote.
            
               Rupicias, for damnum dederis, thou ſhalt pay or yelde damages.
            
               Ruptus, ta, tum, broken or braſt, weryed, torne, or rente.
            
               Ruralis, le, ruſticall, or of the vyllage.
            
               Rureſtris, ſtre, of the countrey, not of the cytie or towne.
            
               Ruricola, a huſbande man.
            
               Rurigena, borne in the countrey, out of a cytie or great towne.
            
               Ruro, rare, to do after the countrey facion.
            
               Ruro, raris, rari, to dwelle in the countreye, or
 out of the citie.
            
               Rurſus, & Rurſum, eftſones or backewarde, on the other parte.
            
               Rus, ruris, the countrey, out of the citie, where as huſebandry is vſed and exercyſed.
            Ruſcum, reade Bruſcum.
            
               Ruſcinū, Ruſſilion or Perpignian in Fraūce.
            
               Ruſpor, ari, to ſerche diligently. it is properly to ſhrape, as an henne dothe, whan ſhe ſekith for meate.
            Ruſſus, & Ruſſeus, a, um, redde.
            
            
               Ruſtica, a byrde lyke a partriche, but he hath a longer byll.
            
               Ruſticanus, na, num, rruſticall, of the countrey or vyllage.
            
               Ruſticè, ruſtically, vncourteyſly, rudely.
            Ruſticane, idem.
            
               Ruſticarius, a, um, perteynynge to huſbandry.
            
               Ruſticatim, for ruſtice, an aduerbe, churlyſhly.
            
               Ruſticitas, tatis, carlyſhenes, ſometyme fearefulneſſe. Et ſi ruſticitas non uetat, ipſa rogat, And if that folyſhe baſhefulnes lette her not, ſhe maketh requeſte.
            
               Ruſticor, caris, cari, to dwell in the countreye or exerciſe huſbandry.
            
               Ruſticus, ca, cum, ruſticall, vplandyſhe, homely, without curteſy.
            
               Ruſticus, is alſo the proper name of a man.
            
               Rutheni, people beyonde Liuonia of whom the countrey is nowe called Ruſsia, there be alſo people in Fraunce about Toures ſo called.
            
               Ruta, Rewe, called alſo herbe grace. It is amonge the lawyers all that is dygged out of the grounde, as ſtone, cole, leade and other mettall.
            
               Ruta & caeſa, Albeit Mutius doth ſay, that in Rutis & caeſis, are thoſe thynges, that be not faſte in the grounde, nor are any parte of the buyldynge or the couerynge of a houſe. Perchaunce we mought name them moueables.
            
               Rutabulum, a coole rake, to make cleane an ouen.
            Rutaceus, a, um, of rewe.
            
            
               Rutatus, ta, tum, made of Rewe.
            Rutatio, & rutus, for ructatio, belkynge.
            
            
               Rutellum, a lyttell mattocke.
            
               Rutilo, lare, to ſhyne.
            
               Ruto, tare, for ructo, to be
                  •
               ke or breake winde vpwarde.
            Rutor, idem.
            
               Rutrum, a mattocke.
            Rutum, idem.
            
               Rutuba, trouble. Id poſtea uiderimus, nunc ſumus in rutuba, We wyll afterward ſe, nowe we be in trouble.
            
               Rutuba, a riuer in Liguria, runnynge from the mountaygne callyd Apenninus.
            
               Rutubatri, men that dygge with mattockes.
            
               Rutuli, an auncient people in Italy, of whome Turnus was kynge, whome Aeneas vaynquyſſhed.
            
               Rutulus, la, lum, a bryghte redde lyke to coles that be kyndled.
            
               Rutupe, or Rutupiae, an hauen in Kente callyd Sandwyche.
            
               Rutupinum promontorium, a goore or elbow of lande in Englande, lyenge into the ſea about Sandwyche.
         
         
            ¶S ANTE A.
            
               SABA a countrey in the myddell of Arabia towarde the eaſte, enuironed aboute with greatte rockes, wherin is a gret woode of preciouſe trees ſome of ſinamom and caſia, ſome bringing forthe frankinſence and myrre. The lengthe of that woode is .xx. of theyr myles called Schoeni, which comprehendeth of Italyon myles one hundred and fyfty. Plin. li. 12. Theophraſtꝰ li. 9. de hiſt. plant. Solinus wryteth that the region brynging forthe frankenſence is from a towne there named Atramitae, viii. manſions whiche in dede conteyneth .CC
                  •
               iiii. myles. Manſio or Stathmos beinge of .xxviii Italyon myles. The chiefe citie of that Realme is called Sabota.
            
            
               Sabaei, people of the realme of Saba.
            
               Sabaoth, in the plurell number, in the Hebrew tongue, ſignifieth god of hoſtes, or armyes, or powers.
            
               Sabbatarius, & Sabbataria, he or ſhee that kepeth the Sabboth daye.
            
               Sabath, a propre name, wherof commeth Sabatheni, the name of a people.
            
               Sabbatiſmus, a vacation after labours.
            
               Sabbatizare, to kepe ſabbat day.
            
               Sabbatum, was among the Iewes accompted the ſeuenth daye, in the whyche they faſted in remembraunce of the ſeauen dayes, in the whyche they were fatigate, goynge faſtynge in the deſerte of Arabia, or they came to the mount of Sinai. Saynt Auguſtine vpon the pſalmes wryteth, ſayeng, that Sabbatū
                is takē thre maner of ways, for the ſeuenth day is called by that name, in the whiche almyghty god reſted after his warke of ſyx dayes. Sabbatum is alſo eternall quietneſſe. Moreouer Sabbatum is the conſcience of a quiete mynd aduaunced by hope of the tyme to come, not beinge ſhaken or vexed with ſtormes of thinges preſent.
            
               Sabe, in the tungue of Siria, is the moneth of February.
            
                
               Sabelli, people, whiche dwelle in the mountaynes betwene the Sabines and Marſi, in Italy.
            
               Sabim, among the Arrabians doth ſignify god
            
               Sabina, a weapon lyke a bore ſpeare, it is alſo the herbe called Sauyne.
            
               Sabini, people in Italy, betwene Latini and Vmbry.
            
               Sabiuſa a gate at Rome, out of the which men wente to the Sabines.
            
               Sabora, a citie of Araby.
            
               Sabrina, a great ryuer in Englande called Seuerne Ptholomeus calleth it Sabriana aeſtuarium.
            
            
               Sabucus, an elder tree rede after Sambucus.
            
            
               Sabuletum, a grauell pytte.
            
               Sabulum, great grauell.
            Sabuloſus, a, um, grauelly.
            
            
               Saburra, laſtage, or baleſe, wherwith ſhyppes are euen poyſed, to go vpryghte, whiche is commonly of grauell.
            
               Saburij, a kynde of ſacrifice.
            
               Saburratus, loded with grauell or other lyke erthe.
            
               Saburro, rare, to baleſe a ſhyppe.
            
               Sacal, a kynde of amber founde in Egypte.
            
               Saccarius, he that beareth a ſacke.
            
               Saccarum, or Saccharum, ſugar.
            
               Saccaria, marchaundiſe of ſackes or bagges.
            
               Saccellare, to apparayle or amende wynes put into ſackes.
            
               Sacciperium, a powche.
            
               Sacconia, a clothe to wype a thynge with, a napkyn, alſo a territorie.
            
               Sacculus, & Saccellus, a lyttell ſacke.
            
               Sacer mons, an hyl by Rome, an other by Gallatia, wherin golde is founde.
            
               Sacerdotalis, le, perteynynge to a prieſte.
            
               Sacon, amonge the Indians, ſignifieth a bryghte purple coloure.
            
               Sacondion, a precious ſtone of a bryghte purple colour.
            
               Saccularius, a crafty deceyuour, whiche in ſellynge of grayne out of ſackes, wyll conueye awaye parte. it is alſo a purſe cutter.
            
               Saccus a ſacke. Sacculus, a bagge.
            
               Sacellium, a purſe.
            
               Sacellum, a chapelle.
            
               Sacer, cra, crum, holye: ſommetyme curſed deteſtable.
            
               Sacer ignis, a ſickeneſſe, wherin is vehemente inflammation and bournynge of the body. ſome do ſuppoſe it to be ſaynet Antonies ſixe.
            
               Sacer locus, a place conſecrate or dedicate.
            
               Sacer morbus, the fallynge ſyckenes.
            
               Sacer mons, an hyll dedycate to Iupiter iii myles from Rome beyonde the ryuer called Anienis.
            
            
               Sacerdos, dotis, a prieſte.
            
               Sacerdotium, prieſthode, ſometyme a benefice or ſpirituall promotion.
            
               Sacra uia, a ſtrete in Rome, where peace was made betwene Romulus and Tacius, and throughe the whiche the vanquiſhers paſſed with their triumph vnto the capitoll.
            
               Sacrare caput cum bonis, Amonge the Romaynes were olde lawes, that for a certaine offence it was lefull for any man whiche dyd mete with the offendour, to ſlea hym as a ſacrifyce vnto the infernall Iupyter, and his goodes were dedicate to the diuelles of hell, and this was called Sacrare caput cum bonis.
            
            
               Sacramenta, is taken for men of warre.
            
               Sacramentum, an oth, among vs chryſten men it ſignifyeth a holy ſygne, or a ſygne of an holy thynge, wherin is conteyned a diuyne myſtery, and is called a ſacrament
            
               Sacramentum, as Varro wryteth. li. 2. De lingua latina, was a gage in money layde by the parties which contented together, ſo that he which recouered in iudgement ſhuld take agayne his gage. he that was condemned ſhulde loſe his gage, whiche was broughte to the commune treaſour, and this was named Sacramentum.
            
            
               Sacramento iuſto contendere, to gage ſuite as is before wrytten.
            
               Sacramento rogati, Souldiours ſworne not to departe vntyl the warres were al finiſhed Sacro ſancta poteſtas, was properly attrybuted to the aucthoritie of the Tribunes, called Tribuni Plabis, it is nowe moſte conuenient for the aucthoritie of the Catholyke churche.
            
               Sacamento teneri, to be ſworne.
            
               Sacrarium, a ſextrie or veſtrie, wherin are kept thynges halowed, and relikes.
            
               Sacratae leges, lawes, in the whiche it is enacted, that whoo ſo dothe offende agaynſte them, is accurſed.
            
               Sacratio, a conſecration.
            
               Sacratius, more holy.
            
               Sacrator, he that dothe conſecrate.
            
               Sacrificium, ſacrifyce.
            
               Sacrifico, care, to do ſacrifyce, to conſecrate, to aſke forgyueneſſe of god.
            
               Sacrificulus, a prieſte.
            
               Sacrilegium, thefte, or takynge away of thynges halowed, called Sacrilege.
            
               Sacrilegiſsimus, an errant thefe in ſtelynge of thynges halowed.
            
               Sacrilegus, he that violently taketh awaye or ſtealeth thynges halowed, or thynges vnhalowed out of a holy place.
            
               Sacrimum, muſte or newe wyne.
            
               Sacriſcrinius, he that kepeth the kynges letters or Recordes, concernynge the Crowne,
 or bokes of great affayres.
            
               Sacrium, a kynde of aumber, whiche commeth out of Scithia.
            
               Sacro, crare, to dedicate or halowe.
            
               Sacroſanctus, ta, tum, conſecrate or halowed, that whiche moughte not be touched but reuerently, or was ſure from all iniurie.
            
               Sacrum, any thynge dedicate to god. Alſo ſacrifice. ſomtyme a temple or churche.
            Paulus Iureconſultus. Sunt autem ſacrilegi, qui publica ſacra compilarint. alſo ſacra do ſignifie holy wordes, alſo charmes.
            
            
               Sacrum promontorium, a great mountayne or rocke in the ſouthweſte parte of Spayne, lyenge on the ſea, called nowe, Capeſaynet Vincent.
            
               Saducaei, were men of a certayne ſecte amonge the Iewes. who helde opinion that the ſoule was mortall and that it dyed with the body, they were dyuerſe in maners and cruell to ſtraungers.
            
               Saeculum, is properlye the ſpace of a hundred yeres: it is commonlye taken for a ſpace of tyme, wherin one faſcion of the worlde hath continued.
            Saepe, oftentymes. Saepenumero, ſaepiuſcule, ſaepicule, idem.
            
               Saepius, more often. Saepiſsime, very often.
            
               Saeuio, uiui, ire, to be very angrye, to doo valyauntly, to be cruell, or exercyſe tyranny.
            
               Saeué, cruelly.
            
               Seuiuer, rudely. Magis cogito, ſaeuiter, blanditer ue alloquar, I thynke more, where I maye ſpeake to hym rudely, or gentylly.
            Saeuitia, & ſaeuitudo, crueltie.
            
            
               Saeuns, a, um, cruell, horrible. ſometyme angry valyant, myghty.
            
               Saeuiſsima, hyems, a meruayllous cold winter
            
               Saga, a wyſe or ſubtyll woman, alſo a witche.
            
               Sagaperium, a gumme or roſyn, whiche runneth out of a kyxe or tree, called ferula.
            
            
               Sagaris, a riuer.
            
               Sagaria, the crafte to make clokes to weare vpon harneyſe
            
               Sagarius, a ſeller of ſuche clokes.
            
               Sagatus, apparayled in a ſouldiours cloke.
            
               Sagax, acis, wytty, hauynge the ſences ſharpe
            
               Sagaces canes, houndes or ſpaynelles.
            
               Sagacitas, wyttynes or ſharpneſſe of wyt.
            
               Sagaciter, wyttyly.
            
               Sagda, a grene ſtone, whiche the Caldes haue made faſte to theyr handes.
            
               Sagena, a great net to take fyſhe.
            Sagimen, & Saginatio, nouriſhynge.
            
            
               Saginarius, a, um, that whiche is franked or mad fatte.
            
               Sagina, meate, wherewith al thynge is fatted ſometyme ſuperfluous fat or greace.
            
               Saginarium, a place wherin any thyng is franked or made fatte.
            
               Sagino, are, to make fatte.
            
               Sagio, ui, ire, to perceyue quickely or ſharply.
            
               Sagitta, an arowe. alſo the toppe of a twygge or rodde.
            
               Sagittarius, an archer. it is alſo one of the .xii. ſignes amonge the ſterres.
            
               Sagitto, tare, to ſhoote.
            
               Sagma, n packe ſaddell, or ſumpter ſaddell. alſo an heape.
            
               Sagmen, minis, graſſe, plucked vp with the erthe, whiche in the olde tyme the ambaſſadours of the Romaynes dyd, whan they denounced warres to other people.
            
               Sagona, A ryuer in Fraunce called the Sone.
            
               Sagum, a ſouldiours cloke.
            
               Sagulum, a lyttell cloke.
            
               Sagacuculla, the hode of a cloke.
            
               Saguntus, uel Saguntum, a Citie in Spayne beyonde the ryuer of Iberus, about one mile from the ſea, the people therof beinge in amitie with the Romaynes were of ſuche faythfulneſſe, that whan Hanniball had longe beſieged them, and brought them at the poynte to be famyſhed, the chiefe of the Citie made great fyres, and let caſt into it theyr treaſure and many of theym entred in to the fyre and were wylfully burned. all the reſydue fought and were ſlayn, ſo that none eſcaped. wherof came this prouerbe. Sagundina fames, applyed to a great and horrible famyne.
            
               Sais, a citie of Egypte, where is one of the entres into the riuer of Nilus, the entrye or porte is called Saiticum.
            
            
               Sal, ſalis, ſalt, ſomtyme it is put for wiſedome myrthe. Sales, quicke or ſharpe ſentences, ieſtinges. ſometyme it ſignifyeth the ſea.
            
               Salindus, in Dioſcorides is of ſome men taken for ſugar.
            
               Sala, a riuer in Germany.
            
               Salaces, water that ryſeth out of a quycke ſprynge.
            
               Salacia, was called goddeſſe of water.
            
               Salacones, men that do lyue alway in exceding pleaſures and do thynke that all men do delyte in that whiche lyketh theyr appetires.
            
               Salamandra, a beaſt in fygure lyke to a lyſard full of ſpottes, whiche being in the fyre, doth extinete it, and is not burned.
            
               Salamis, Salamis, mina, an Ilyeby Athenes.
            
               Salaminius, a, um, of that yle.
            
               Sal amoniacus, a kynde of ſalte founde vnder ſande, which is lyke to alume, and is medicynable, in dyſſlouynge and pourgynge of fleume.
            
               Salanga, a verye hyghe Hyll betwene greatte Brytayne and Irelande, nowe called our ladyes Hyll.
            
               Salapia, a towne in Apulia.
            
                
               Salapuſius, may be called a mery ieſtynge boye It was a name gyuen to Caluus an oratour whiche beinge of a chyldes perſonage, vſed moche ieſtynge and tauntynge meryly.
            
               Salarium, wages gyuen to ſeruauntes.
            
               Salarius, a ſalter, whiche ſelleth all thinge that is ſalte.
            
               Salarius, a, um, perteynynge to ſalte.
            
               Salaria um, an hygh waye, by the which ſalt was caryed to Rome.
            Salax, acis, lecherouſe.
            
            
               Salebrae, places whiche are not playne.
            
               Salebroſus, a, um, vnplayne, where a man can not go, excepte he do leape.
            
               Salentinum, a countrey in Italy.
            
               Salentini, a people in Italy.
            
               Salgama, thynges condite or conſerued, as peares, figges, grapes, and other lyke.
            
               Sali, a kynde of byrdes, whiche be greatte breders: as partriches or hennes, I ſuppoſe them to be hethecockes.
            
               Saliaris, re, perteynyng to the prieſtes of Mars
            
               Saliares coena, a banket or ſupper made by the prieſtes of Mars.
            
               Saliares uirgines, maydens whiche were with the prieſtes of Mars, and dyd ſacrifyce with the byſſhoppes, wearynge on theym cote armures, and byſhops myters on theyr heades
            
               Salicaſtrum, a kynde of wylde vyne, rounnyng vpon wyllowe trees.
            
               Salicetum, & ſalictum, a place where wyllowes growe.
            
               Salientes, the cockes or pipes of cundytes, out of the whiche water ſpouteth.
            
               Salignus, na, num, of wyllowe or wythy.
            
               Salij, the prieſtes of Mars in Rome, whiche daunced about the citie bearynge targettes called Ancilia.
            
            
               Salillum, a lyttell ſalte ſeller.
            
               Salina, a place where ſalte is made.
            Salinum, idem.
            
               Salinae, narum, a citie in Sicile.
            
               Salinator, the name of a noble man of Rome.
            
               Salinacidus & ſalnacidus, a, um, that whiche is ſalte in taſte.
            
               Salio, iui, ire, to ſalte or powder.
            Salio, iui, ij, ire, to leape.
            
            
               Salitura, powdringe or ſaltynge.
            Salitus, ta, tum, ſalted.
            
            
               Saliuo, are, to laye ſalue.
            Saliua, & ſaliuum, ſpettell.
            
            
               Saliua, is alſo taken for iuyce, alſo for the wine called Chium.
            
            
               Saliunca, an herb lyke to lauander called ſpike
            
               Saliſi, people in the mountaynes of Alpes, confynes, to the Swycers, and the people called Boij.
            
            
               Saliuarius, he that layeth ſalue.
            
               Salix, icis, a wyllowe or wythy.
            
               Salix amerina, in Dioſcoride, is the tre called alſo Vitex and Agnus caſtus, a kynde of wyllowe, of ſome named parkleaues.
            Salinaris herba, reade Pyrerrum.
            
               Salinacis, a fountayn in Caria, where a nimph fyndynge Helmophroditus the ſonne of Mercurius and Venus naked, ſhe imbracyng him deſyred of the goddes that of theym two mought be made one body and ſo it hapned. Alſo the people of Caria be ſometyme called Salmatij.
            
            Salmaris, idem.
            
               Salmacia, a praye gotten without labour.
            
               Salmacidus, da, dum, that whiche ſauoureth of ſalte.
            
               Salmo, onis, a fyſhe called Samonde.
            
               Salmonius, the kynge of Elides, whiche takynge foolyſhely vpon hym, to haue diuine honours done vnto hym, and wolde ſeme to caſte lyghtenynges, lyke vnto Iupyter, beynge ouerthrowen with lyghtnynge was caſt into helle.
            
               Sal nitrum, ſalte peter, whiche is put in to gunne powder.
            
               Sallo, lere, to powder with ſalte.
            
               Salo, a ryuer called alſo Bibilis, wherwith yron is tempred, and made ſtronger.
            
               Salomon, & Solomon, monis, is interpreted peaſyble, the name of a kynge of Iewes, the ſonne of kynge Dauid, whoo exceded all men in wyſedome and knowelege, and neuer the leſſe was by dotage on women broughte to ydolatrie.
            Salomonius, a, um, of Salomon.
            
            
               Salon, a countrey of Bithinia, very commodiouſe for the fedynge of cattell.
            
               Salone, a citie in Liburnia betwene Dalmatiam and Illiriam.
            
               Salopia, a towne and countrey in Englande called Shreweſbery.
            
               Salpa, a fyſſhe whiche wyll not be ſodden, excepte it be beaten as ſtockefyſhe is.
            
               Salpiga, a kynde of emotes or pyſmeres.
            
               Salſamentarius, he that ſelleth ſawee.
            
               Salſamentarius, a, um, perteyninge to ſauce.
            
               Vas ſalſamentarium, a veſſelle, wherinto ſawce is put.
            
               Salſamentum, ſawce.
            
               Salſedo, ſalteneſſe.
            
               Salſicortex, a tree, that beareth maſte, which nothynge wyll eate, except only ſwyne.
            Salſilago, & ſalſugo, ginis, a ſalte lycour.
            
            
               Salſura, mereſauce or bryne.
            
               Salſus, a, um, ſalte in taſte.
            
               Saltabundus, da, dum, that whiche leapeth or daunſeth.
            
               Saltatio, daunſynge.
            Saltator, & ſaltatrix, a daunſer.
            
            
               Saltatorius, a, um, perteynynge to daunſynge.
            
                
               Ludus ſaltatorius, a ſchoole of daunſynge.
            
               Saltatrix, & ſaltatricula, a daunſynge wenche.
            Saltatus, tus, daunſynge.
            
            
               Saltem, at the leaſte waye.
            
               Saltiae, people ioynynge to the ſea called Pontus Euxinus.
            
            Saltim, uel ſaltuatim, by leapes.
            
            
               Saltito, tare, to daunſe, to leape often.
            
               Salto, tare, to daunſe.
            
               Saltuarius, a keper of a wod, a wodwarde.
            
               Saltuoſus, a, um, full of woodes.
            
               Saltus, a thycke wodde, alſo a leape.
            
               Saluator, toris, a ſauiour, he that kepeth or ſaueth a thynge from diſtruction or loſſe.
            Saluber, bris, bre, holſome, hole.
            
            Salubrior, ius, Saluberrimus, a, um, more holſome, moſte holſome.
            
            
               Salubriter, holſomely.
            
               Salubritas, helthe.
            
               Salue, & Salueto, & ſaluete, god ſpede you, ye be welcome, ſometyme contrary, farewel, God be with you.
            
               Salueo, ère, to be ſaufe, or ſpede well, to be well at eaſe.
            
               Salue. S. ſatis eſt mihi tuae ſalutis, nihil moror non ſalueo, God ſpede. S. It ſuffyſeth me that thou arte in helthe: but in fewe wordes I am not well at eaſe.
            
               Saluia, an herbe called ſauge.
            
               Saluiatum, a drenche for a horſe or other beaſt.
            
               Saluifico, care, to make ſafe, or to ſaue.
            
               Saluo, are, to ſaue.
            
               Saluebis à meo Cicerone, my ſonne Cicero commendeth hym vnto you.
            
               Satin ſalue? is not all thynge well?
            
               Salum, the ſea.
            
               Salus, lutis, helthe, ſometyme remedy.
            
               Salutarius, the forefynger.
            
               Salutatio, a ſalutation.
            
               Salutator, toris, a ſaluter.
            
               Salutatorium cubiculum, a chamber, where men do ſtand and abyde to ſalute a prynce or noble man in auctoritie, called nowe a chamber of preſence.
            
               Salutem, in the olde tyme was vſed for ſaltem. Salutem dicere, to ſalute or to haue recommendation to any man.
            Salutifer, ra, rum, holſome.
            
            Salutaris, re, idem.
            
               Salutaris digitus, the forefynger.
            
               Salutariter, in helthe.
            
               Salutiger, he that bryngeth recommendations from an other perſon.
            
               Saluto, tare, to ſalute, as well at commyng as at departynge, alſo to honour.
            
               Saluus, a, um, ſaulfe, hole, ſounde, withoute damage or harme.
            
               Salua res eſt, the matter is come wel to paſſe
            
               Saluo capite, without daunger of lyfe.
            
               Sam, for Eam, her.
            
               Samara, an Hyll in the eaſte Oceane ſe, at the further ende of the mountayne called Caucaſus.
            
               Samarobrinae, people in Fraunce, aboute Cambry.
            
               Samaria, a countrey and citie of Siria ioyning to Iudea, whiche was the chiefe Citie of the x tribes of Iſraell. who beinge taken priſoners by the kyng of Syria and led away pryſoners. thyther were ſente for them paynims to inhabite that countrey, whiche were after called Samaritani, and they myxte the lawe of Moyſes with ydolatry. The citie was afterwarde called Sebaſten.
            
            
               Sambuca, an inſtrument of myſyke, nowe called doulcymers, an engyne of warre, wherewith fortreſſes were aſſaulted.
            
               Sambucina, a womanne whiche playeth on doulcimers.
            
               Sambuceus, a, um, of Elder or alder tree.
            
               Sambucus, an elder or alder tree.
            Sambuciſtria, idem quod Sambucina.
            
               Samia, veſſels made in the Iyle of Samos,
            
               Samius, a, um, of the yle of Samos: the olde wryters dyd vſe it for ſharpe, and Samiare, to whet or make ſharpe.
            
               Samnîtes, people of Samnium a countrey in Italy called nowe Aprutium.
            
               Samium, a ſhell.
            
               Samiolum, a lyttell ſhell.
            
               Samos, the name of two yles in the ſea called Aegeum, one by Thraciam, and therfore it is alſo called Samothracia, the other lyeth agaynſte Epheſus.
            
            Sampſuchinus, na, um, of maioram.
            
            
               Sampſuchus, & Sampſucum, an herbe called Maioram.
            
               Samſa, the ſtone of an olyue.
            Samſychon, idem quod Sampſuchus.
            
               Sanates, people dwellynge about Rome.
            
               Sancio, xi, cire, to conſecrate, to make firme.
            
               Sancire leges, is to conſtitute lawes.
            
               Sancus, one of the names of Hercules.
            
               Sancté, firmely, holyly, deuoutly.
            
               Sanctificatio, halowynge.
            
               Sanctifico, care, to halowe.
            
               Sanctitas, holyneſſe.
            Sanctitudo, idem.
            
               Sanctio, a lawe, a thynge decreed and ſtablyſſhed.
            
               Sanctus, ta, tum, holy, inuiolable by a lawe, pure and cleane, vncorrupted. Vir ſanctus, a bleſſed man.
            
               Sanctimoniales, Nunnes.
            
               Sanctimonium, the profeſſion of relygious perſonnes.
            
               Sanctimonia, & Sanctitas, holynes, perfectiō.
            
               Sanctuarium, a pla
                  •
               e conſecrate or halowyd.
            
                
               Sandalium, a ſlypper.
            
               Sandalus, a ſpyce called ſaunders.
            
               Sandaraca, a colour founde in mynes of ſyluer, or golde, yelowe ocker.
            
               Sandaliotis, an Iyle called nowe Sardinia.
            
               Sandaracinus, colour made with yelowe ocker
            
               Sandaſtros, & Sandaphorion, & Sandariſon & Sandaſsites, a preciouſe ſtone, hauynge in a bryghte colour yelowe ſpeckes, and is called alſo Garamandita.
            
            
               Sandyx, is a poulder made of Ceruſſa burned tyll it waxe red, as Dioſcor. Galen, and Aetius do wryte. Other do ſaye that it is made with Ceruſe and red chalke called Rubrica, myxte to gether, it was alſo called Siricon, or Syricon.
            
            Sandicinus color, idem.
            
               Sanè, an aduerbe, whiche ſignifieth ye, or certaynely, on goddes name. Bellum ſanè difficile geſsit, he faught a verye daungerouſe battayle.
            
               Sanè ut uis, be it as thou wylte.
            
               Sanè quam utile, ſurely very profytable.
            
               Sanè quidem, ye hardely Nempe ergo aper te uis, quae reſtant me loqui? D. Sanè quidem. But wylte thou than that I ſhall telle playnely all the reſte? D. ye hardely.
            
               Saneſco, ſcere, to be or waxe hole.
            
               Sanga, a ryuer in Portugall.
            
               Sangaris, a ryuer of Galatia, whiche running throughe Phrygia, falleth into Propontis, the ſea.
            
               Sanguen, guinis, & Sanguis, guinis, bloude. alſo a tree, the barke wherof is of the colour of bloudde.
            
               Sanguineus, a, um, full of bloude, alſo cruell. ſometyme of ſanguine or blouddy colour.
            Sanguinolentus, idem.
            
               Sanguiculum, the bloude of a kyd or ſwyne. wherwith pouddynges are made.
            
               Sanguino, are, to blede.
            
               Sanguinaria, & Sanguinalis, an herbe that ſtoppeth bloudde. called alſo Polygonon, knot graſſe.
            
               Sanguinarius, cruell, bluddy.
            Sanguinolentus, idem.
            Sanguis, guinis, bloude.
            
            
               Sanguiſuga, a worme, whiche is in ſtandynge waters, & doth ſucke the bloud of men or beaſtes that come into it: it is alſo called Hirudo
            
               Sanies, mater, corrupted bloude.
            
               Sanna, a ſcorne or mocke.
            
               Sannio, onis, a dyſarde in a playe or dyſguyſynge: alſo he whiche in countenaunce, geſture, and maners is a fole.
            Sanitas, tatis, helthe.
            
            
               Saniter, lyke a hole man.
            
               Sannaus, a ryuer in Aſia.
            
               Sano, are, to heale.
            
               Sanſa, the ſtone of an olyue.
            
               Sanſucus, Maioram.
            
               Sancſucinus, a, um, of maioram.
            
               Santerna, ſoulder, wherwith golde is ſoudred
            
               Santones, people of a countrey in Fraunce called Xantongue.
            
            
               Santonicum, an herbe called Lauander cotton
            
               Santonum, Rochell in Fraunce.
            Sanus, na, num, hole holſome.
            
            Sanitas, tatis, helthe.
            
            
               Sapa, is new wyne boyled to the thyrde parte of the meaſure, if it be to the halfe deale it is named Defrutum, as Plinie writeth. li. 14. And if there be but one parte conſumed it is than called Caloenum, as Anto. Muſa affirmeth. Sapa is alſo called ſometyme Syreon, ſometyme Hepſema, and Hepſeton, of Galenus in Meth. and of Nonius Mellacum.
            
            
               Saperda, a dunge hyll.
            
               Sapidè, ſauourely.
            
               Sapidius, more ſauourely.
            
               Sapidus, da, dum, ſauourly, wel ſeaſoned.
            Sapiens, tis, wyſe.
            
            
               Sapientia, the kunnyng of thynges diuine and humayne, wyſedome.
            
               Sapio, pui, pere, to taſte or ſauour, to fele, to be wyſe, to haue a ryght opinion.
            
               Sapio rem, I knowe what I haue to do.
            
               Sapiunt malè, they be yll aduyſed.
            
               Sapit hic pleno pectore, he is meruaylouſe wyſe.
            
               Sapit plus, he hath more wytte.
            
               Sapit ſatis, he is wyſe inoughe.
            
               Sapis multum ad genium, thou knoweſte howe to make good chere.
            Sapo, ponis, Sope.
            
            Saponaria, reade Struthio.
            
               Sapor, ôris, a ſauour, a taſte.
            
               Sapphiratus, a Saphyr full of ſpottes.
            
               Sapphirinus, na, um, of a Saphire.
            
               Sapphirus, a ſtone called a Saphyre.
            
               Sappho, a woman of the yle of Leſbos, a great poetreſſe, who made verſis called Lyrica, at the laſt ſhe was taken with the loue of a yōg man called Phao, who runnynge away from her, ſhe not ſuſteynynge the anguiſhe of loue threwe her ſelue downe from an Hyll in to the ſea.
            
               Sappinus, the lower parte of a fyrre tre, which is without knottes.
            
               Saprum, a drynke made with ſalte & the fruite called Sorba, whiche helpeth men that haue the colyke.
            
               Sapros, vynewed.
            
               Sapſa, of olde writers was vſed for ipſa.
            
            
               Sarcaſmos, a maner of ieſtynge or ſcoffynge bytyngely.
            
               Sarcimen, a ſeame.
            
               Sarcina, a truſſe or packe, or fardell. ſometime
 it is taken for an vnprofytable burden.
            
               Sarcinas colligere, is properly of menne of warre, whan they remoue or departe from theyr campe.
            
               Sarcinas, atis, for ſarcina.
            Sarcinaria iumenta, pachorſes.
            
            
               Sarcinatrix, tricis, a ſhepſter, or ſeameſter.
            
               Sarcinae, all ſtuffe that is cloſed or ſhutte vp in coffers.
            
               Sarcino, are, to lade. ſometyme to ſowe.
            
               Sarcinator, a botcher of garmentes.
            
               Sarcio, ciui, cire, to make hole agayne, to amende a thyng decayed or appayred, to make amendes.
            
               Sarcion, a ſtone of carnation colour.
            
               Sarcito, pay the damages or coſtes.
            
               Sarctè, hole.
            Sartum tectum. idem.
            
               Sarcocilla, a gumme of a tree in Perſia, lyke to the poulder of incenſe, ſomewhat red and bytter, ſomme is whyte of colour whiche is moche better than red.
            
               Sarcophagus, a ſepulchre.
            
               Sarculo, are, to rake.
            
               Sarculum, a rake.
            
               Sarda, a red ſtone, wherin ſeales ar grauen.
            
               Sardanapalus, a kynge of Aſſiria, monſtruous in all kyndes of lecherye, and therfore was ſlayne of one of his lordes as he ſatte ſpynnynge amonge harlottes.
            
               Sardinia, an yle in the ſea called Liguſticum, by Geane, not paſſynge .vii. myles frome Corſica.
            
               Sardis, a citie in Lidia.
            
               Sardo, for intelligo, I vnderſtande.
            
               Sardoa, an herbe lyke to ſmallage, which groweth in Sardinia, wherof if a man eate, he ſhal grenne and make countenance of laughynge, and ſo dye.
            
               Sardonius riſus, a grennyng or laughyng with out cauſe, a longe laughter.
            
               Sardonycharus, hauynge apparayle garniſhed with the ſtone called Sardonix.
            
            Sardonychus, idem quod Sardonyx.
            Sardus, & Sardinenſis, & Sardous, a, um, of Sardinia.
            
            
               Sardonyx, onychis, a ſtone of the colour of a mannes nayle.
            
               Sarepta, a towne in Siria, where Hely the prophete was borne.
            
               Sargacae, people in the Northe parte of the worlde, ioynyng to the great mere of Meotis
            
               Sargus, a fyſhe beinge in the ſea of Egypte.
            
               Sari, an herbe, growynge in waters hauinge an harde rote, and wounden, neceſſarye for ſmythes.
            
               Sariſſa, a longe ſpeare.
            
               Saronicus, a booſome of the ſea agaynſte Iſthmus.
            
               Sarmatia, all that great countrey, wherein is conteyned Ruſſia, Liuonia, and Tartaria, and the Northe and caſte parte of Polonia.
            
               Sarmata, a man of that countrey.
            
               Sarmenta, twygges or ſhroude of trees cut of.
            
               Sarmentitius, tia, um, made of twygges or ſmall boughes.
            
               Sarnus, a ryuer in Campania.
            
               Sarpa, a vyne cut of, ſhradde.
            
               Sarpedon, the kynge of Liſia, which came to the ayd of the Troyans agaynſt the Grekes.
            
               Sarpo, pere, to clenſe or make cleane.
            
               Sarra, an Ile called ſometyme Tyrus: alſo the wyfe of Abraham.
            
               Sarra, a Citie in Phoenicia called alſo Tyrus,
            
            
               Sarranus, na, num, of that citie.
            
               Sarraballa, plurali numero, a worde of Caldey, ſignifienge breches.
            
               Sarraca, the name of two cities, whereof the one is in Media, the other in Felici Arabia, or the riche Arrabie.
            
               Sarracum, a certayne carre, wherin woode or ſtones be caryed.
            
               Sarranae ueſtes, garmentes of purple.
            
               Sarraſtes, people in Campania.
            
               Sarrio, rire, to wede corne.
            
               Sarritor, & ſartor, toris, a weder of corne.
            Sarritio, Sarritura, & ſartura, wedynge of corne.
            
            
               Sarſina, an olde citie in Italy, where Plautus the wryter of comedies was borne.
            
               Sarta tecta, houſes letten to certayne perſons to kepe them alway repayred ſufficiently, for a certayne ſomme of money.
            
               Sarta tecta locare, to ſette oute houſes at a price certayne to be repayred.
            
               Sarta tecta exigere, to charge a man with reparations.
            
               Sartago, ginis, a fryenge panne.
            
               Sarte, hole.
            
               Sarticum, an entrie into the ryuer of Nilus.
            
               Sartor, & ſarritor, an harower or weder of corne.
            
               Sartum tectum habere, to kepe hole & ſound or vncorrupted or hurte.
            
               Sartutillus, the bealye of a ſwyne ſtuffed with meale.
            
               Sas, olde writers vſed for ſuas.
            
            
               Saſo, an yle fyue myles from the citie of Brunduſium in the realme of Naples.
            
               Saſon, a ryuer.
            
               Sat, for ſatis, inough. Quantum ſat eſt, as moche as is ſufficient. Sat habet, it is ſufficient Sat ſcio, I knowe well ynoughe.
            
               Satagitae, people in the countrey nowe called Tartarye.
            
               Satago, gi, gere, to be dilygent, to do with ſpede, to be buſy about a thynge.
            
               Satanas, is interpreted an aduerſarye, by the
 whiche name the dyuell was callyd, bycauſe that he was aduerſary to Chriſte. alſo what ſo euer is cōtrary to peace, is called Satanas
            
               Satarchae, people in Scithia, whiche excluded from them the vſe of golde and ſyluer.
            
               Satellis, litis, one retayned to garde a mannes perſone. alſo a catchepoll or bayliff, that doth attache men.
            
               Satellitium, a garde, the offyce of ſuche a perſon or offycer.
            
               Saterona, a beaſte, which dothe lyue, ſomtyme in water, ſometyme on lande.
            
               Satias, ſacierie, fulneſſe or wearyneſſe in moche vſynge of a thynge. ſommetyme it ſygnifieth aboundance. Hi ſaltibus occupatis, externorum agros inuaſêre, frumenti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ex inopia graui, ſatias facta, After that they had gotten the woodes or forreſtes, they inuaded the landes of them that were borderers, and from ſcarſitie of corne, they hapned to haue their fylle or abundance.
            
               Satiabilis, le, that whyche maye be eaſylye ſatisfied.
            Saties, for ſatietas.
            
               Satietas, tatis, a ſacietie or fulneſſe.
            
               Rerum omnium ſatietas, tedyouſeneſſe of all thynges.
            
               Satin, for ſatiſne, Satin ſana
                     •
                  es? Arte thou not well at eaſe?
            
               Satin ſaluae? Be all thynges well?
            
               Satio, tionis, the acte of ſowyng of corne.
            
               Satio, tiare, to ſaciate or fylle, whiche hath relation not onely to the bodye and ſences, but alſo to the mynde.
            
               Satis, ynough, as moch as doth nede, ſufficient
            
               Satis acceptio, a couenaunt, wherby a man is bounden, and ſureties with hym.
            
               Satiſaccipere, to take ioynt ſureties.
            
               Satis iam uerborū eſt, thou haſt ſayd inough.
            
               Satis habere, to be content. Satis habeas, nihil me etiam tecum de tui fratris iniuria conqueri, Be content, that I haue not alſo layd to your charge, the wronge that your brother hath done me.
            
               Satiſdatio, & ſatiſdatum, dati, the ſuretie or bonde, wherby men are bounden for an other, for perfourmance of couenaunt, or the couenaunter, and ſureties with hym.
            
               Satiſdator, he that is bounden for performance of couenant.
            
               Satiſdo, dare, to putte in ſureties for perfourmance of couenātes. alſo to be bounden with ſureties for perfourming of couenantes.
            
               Satisfacio, cere, to ſatiſfy, to excuſe, to content.
            
               Satisfactio, ſatisfaction.
            Satiſpraeſtatio, idem.
            Satispraeſto, tare, idem quod ſatis dare, to fynde ſuretie.
            
            
               Satis ſuper
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , ynough and to moche.
            
               Satius, the comparatiue degree of ſatis, it ſignyfieth better.
            
               Satiuus, a, um, that may be ſowen, or is ſowen.
            
               Satnois, a ryuer of Phrigia.
            
               Sator, toris, he that ſoweth corne.
            
               Satrapa, amonge the Perſians were as dukes and erles be here.
            
               Satrapia, a prouynce, Duchy, or countie.
            
               Satullo, are, idem quod ſaturare, to ſaciate or fylle ſuperfluouſely.
            
               Satum, is a meaſure of the hebrues whiche receyueth of wyne .xxxiii.li. and .iiii. ounces. of oyle xxx.li. of hony .l. li. it is of our meaſure ſtanderde .ii. galons and a quarte, and beyng a meaſure of dry thinges, it is our pecke, and the .iiii. part of a pecke.
            
               Satur, turis, full fedde, ſometyme aboundaunt or plentuouſe.
            
               Satureia, an herbe callyd Sauery.
            
               Saturio, onis, he that hath eaten ynoughe and to moche.
            
               Saturitas, fertilitie or plentuouſnes, alſo abundance in exceſſe.
            
               Saturnalia, fyue dayes aſſigned to Saturne in December, wherin menne vſed to feaſte one an other, and to ſende mutuall preſentes.
            
               Saturnalitium, pertaynynge to the ceremonyes of Saturnus.
            
               Saturnia, was the name of a towne. alſo hyghe places were called Saturnia.
            Saturnius, a, um, of Saturnus.
            
            
               Saturninian, were ſheritykes, which affyrmed, that only .vii. angels made the world agaynſt the conſcience of god the father.
            
               Saturninus, a mountayne at Rome, which was afterward callyd Tarpeius.
            
               Saturnus, one of the ſeuen planettes. alſo a god of the paynyms, ſonne of Coelus and Veſta, and father of Iupyter.
            
               Saturo, are, to ſaturate or fyll with any thynge ſuperfluouſely, moche commonly in eatyng.
            
               Saturum, & Satyrum, a citie of Calabria, not farre from Tarentum.
            
               Satus, ta, tum, ſowen or begotten.
            
               Satus, tus, the ſowynge, alſo ſede.
            
               Satyra, a poeſy rebukynge vyces ſharpely, not regardynge the perſons.
            
               Satyricus, & ſatyrus, a maker of ſuche matters
            
               Satyria, a crowe.
            
               Satyriacum, an ymage of Priapus.
            
               Satyriaſis, a ſyckneſſe, wherby the member of a man ſtandeth alwaye without appetite or dilectation.
            
               Satyrica, was a comedye, wherein Satyres were brought in.
            
               Satyricè, an aduerbe, whiche ſignifieth ſharpely and with reproche.
            
               Satyrus, a beaſt hauyng the heed of a man and the bodye of a gote.
            
                
               Satyrion, an herbe, hauyng leaues lyke a lyly, but ſmaller, a knappe with many ſmalle purple flowres, and a roote lyke the genytoures of a man.
            
               Saucio, are, to wounde.
            
               Saucius, a, um, wounded, ſometyme wery.
            
               Sauior, aris, ari, to kyſſe ſwetely.
            
               Saura, a lyſarde, whyche lyeth in hedges.
            
               Saurites, a ſtoone, whyche is found in the bealye of a grene lyſarde.
            
               Sauromatae, people called alſo Sarmatae, Ruſſes, Tartariens, Moſcouites. &c.
            
               Saxatilis, le, ſtonye. Piſces ſaxatili, fyſhes bred amonge ſtones.
            
               Saxetum, a rocky place.
            
               Saxeus, a, um, ſtony, or of a ſtone.
            
               Saxiphagon, or Saxiphages, in greke, or Saxifraga, in latyn, Dioſcorides and Plinius do call it alſo Empetron, whyche in dede is the herbe callyd Sampiere, vſed for a ſawce, and in ſalades, and therfore is boyled and kept in bryne. Anton. Muſa denyeth, that Saxifraga and Empetron be oone. Ruellius deſcribeth Saxifragon with lytel branches growing on ſtones, hauynge ſmalle ſtalkes, not vnlyke to Epithymus, but that they are blacke and ſhort, and hath leaues lyke to maydenheare, but that they be greatter, or to Polypodi, on the toppe buſſhy, but out of order, hauynge neyther floure nor ſeede, and a ſuperfluouſe roote, he alſo ſaythe, that it is founde in olde buyldynges, in the ioyntes of the ſtones. In an other place he nameth that kynde of maydenheare, whiche is callyd Adiantum Saxifragon. Our Saxifrage I neede not to deſcriue, it is ſo cōmonly knowen, and groweth in ſuche abundance, which is not lyke to any of the other, nor yet to that which in France (as Ruellius writeth) is called Saxifragia maior, which he affyrmeth to be Sefeli maſſilienſe, nor to that which he ſuppoſeth to be a kynde of Napi.
            
            
               Saxonia, Saxony.
            
               Saxones, the people.
            
               Saxoſus, a, um, full of great ſtones or rockes.
            
               Saxulum, a lyttell rocke.
            
               Saxum, a rocke. ſometyme a ſtone.
            ❀Saxum uoluere, to tourne the ſtone, A prouerbe applied to them that be fatigate or weried with contynuall & vnprofitable labours.
            
               Saxumferratum, a citie in Italy.
         
         
            ¶S ANTE C.
            
               SCabellū, or ſcabile, a fote ſtole, or low ſettle.
            
               Scaber, bra, brum, ruſtye, roughe, ſometyme fylthy.
            
               Scabies, ſcabiei, a ſcabbe.
            
               Scabioſa, an herbe. rede Pſora.
            
            Scabioſus, a, um, ſcabbed.
            
            
               Scabo, bi, bere, to rubbe or ſcratche.
            
               Scabredo, dinis, a roughneſſe of the ſkynne, as whan it dothe wrynkle.
            
               Scabrae, roughly, not playne, or ſmothe.
            
               Scabrities, & ſcabritia, ruſtynes, fylthyneſſe, roughneſſe.
            
               Scabro, onis, a wourme, whyche is ingendred of the carrayne of a deade horſe.
            
               Scaea, an hauen at Troy.
            
               Scaei, people in Thracia.
            
               Scaena, a place, whiche ſerueth only for enterludes or comedyes to be playde in, whyche was in the fourme of halfe a cerkle. it is alſo where trees or buſhes, are cut and layd ouer the heade, in ſuche fourme as men maye vnder theym walke or ſytte in the ſhadowe. It is alſo where a vyce or offence is openly detected, in ſuche wyſe as menne doo crye out, or wonder at it.
            
               Scaenaticus, uel ſcaenatilis, for a player in comedies or enterludes.
            
               Scaenicula, a diminutiue of ſcaena.
            
            
               Scaenicus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to Enterludes.
            
               Scaenicus, a player in enterludes.
            
               Scaenitae, people of Arabye, whyche dwelle alwaye in tentes, couered with the heares of gootes, amonge whome if a ſwyne or hogge be brought, it dyeth.
            
               Scaenoma, a tente alſo a bagge.
            
               Scaenopegia, the feaſt of the tabernacles, wher in the Iewes dyd ſet vp tabernacles or tentes in ſimilitude of theym, wherein they dwellyd whan they came out of Egypte.
            
               Scaeua, the lefte hande. alſo he that vſeth the lefte hande for the ryght.
            
               Scaeuus, a, um, yll. ſomtyme it ſignifieth good. as Scaeuum omen, good lucke or chaunce.
            
               Scala, & ſcalae, ſcalarum, a ladder. alſo a payre of ſtayres.
            
               Scalmus, a lyttell piece of woode, wherevnto ſhypmen doo bynde their oores, to rowe the more eaſyly.
            
               Scalpellum, a penknyfe.
            
               Scalpo, pſi, pere, to ſcratche. alſoo to graue in mettall.
            
               Scalptura, & ſcalpellum, an inſtrument, wherwith any thynge is ſcraped or rubbed, alſoo a ſurgeons inſtrument, wherewith he taketh corrupte fleſhe from the bones. It is alſoo a grauynge yron.
            
               Scalptor, tôris, a grauer.
            
               Scalptura, grauynge in mettall.
            
               Scalpturatum, pauement made with ſtones, of dyuers colours, ioyned togyther.
            
               Scalpturio, riui, rire, to ſcrape as a cocke doth, or other fowles.
            
               Scalpurio, rire, to ſcrape as a henne doth.
            
                
               Scamander, dr
                     •
                  , a ryuer whiche diuydeth Europa from Aſia. it was alſo the name of one of the ſonnes of Hector, callid alſo Aſtyanax.
            
            
               Scamandria, a towne by the hauen of Ilium, not farre from Troy.
            
               Scamnum, a benche or fourme. alſoo a ſteppe or grice, wherby a manne gothe vppe into a 
                  •
               yg
                  •
                
               
                  •
               edde. Alſo a balke vutylled betweene two forowes.
            
               Scamonea, an herbe, the iuyce wherof is vſed in medicine to purge choler vehemently. Albe it that it is venemous, and leueth wars matter behynde, than it dothe expell.
            
               Scandalides, a kynde of dates.
            
               Scandalum, occaſyon to ſynne, gyuen by an nother to hym that ſynneth.
            
               Scandinauia, an yle in the north occean ſea, the quantitie wherof was neuer founde.
            
               Scandix, dicis, an herbe lyke to cheruyll, but it is ſweeter, and hath a whyte floure, and a lyttell roote.
            Scando, di, dere, to clymme.
            
            
               Scandulaca, an herbe, whiche rounneth vppon corne, as yuye dothe on trees.
            
               Scandulae, ſhyngle, whiche be tyles of wodde, wherwith dyuers churches be couered.
            
               Scandulum contectum, a houſe couered with ſhyngle or wodden tyles.
            
               Scanſile, that whiche may be clymmed or gone vppon.
            
               Scanſio, a clymmynge vp.
            
               Scapha, a bote made of a hole tree, or a ſhyppe boote.
            
               Scaphiarius, a boteman.
            
               Scaphium, a baſyn or veſſell to receyue vryne or ordure.
            
               Scapilium, the ſpace betwene the ſhoulders.
            
               Scaprum, a knyfe, wherewith vynes and other lyke thynges are cutte.
            
               Scaptenſula, a place in Macedonia, where ſyluer was dygged.
            
               Scaptia, an olde citie in Italy, wherof came.
            Scaptia tribus.
            
               Scapulae, the hynder part of the ſhulders.
            
               Scapularis, a boye or wenche, which is oft beaten about the ſhulders.
            
               Scapularis ueſtis, a garmente, whyche couereth onely the ſhulders.
            
               Scapus, after Ruellius is a ſtalke, whyche ryſeth bolte vpryght. ſome do adde to, hauynge a knoppe, wherin ſeedes are conteyned, as a popy, ſome do ſo name the huſke of a grape.
            
               Scarabaeus, a flye with a blacke ſhelle or huſke called a bytell, whiche bredeth in cowe ſhardes, and is black alſo there is a kynd of them whiche hath hornes lyke to an hart.
            ❀Scarabaeus aquilam, a prouerbe applyed to ſuche as endeuour them ſelfe to do diſpleſure to thoſe that be more puyſſant than they are.
            
               Scarificatio, launcynge.
            
               Scarifico, caré, to launce or open a ſoore, that the matter corrupted may iſſue.
            
               Scarus, a fyſhe, which doth chewe lyke a beaſt, ſome men do ſuppoſe it to be a gylte head, or Goldenye.
            
               Scatebrae, the bollynge or ryſynge vp of water out of a ſprynge or ſourges of water.
            
               Scateo, tere, to run or braſt out, as water doth out of a narowe or ſtrayte place.
            
               Scaturigo, ginis, & ſcaturies, braſtynge out of water of other thynge in lyke maner.
            
               Scaturio, ire, to rounne out or abrode, alſoo to ſprynge or growe abroode, as ſomme herbes doone.
            
               Scaturitio, a runnynge as water dothe.
            
               Scauri, they whyche haue their toes ſwollen, or their ankley croked, that they may not go faſte, it was alſo an honourable houſe of the Romaynes.
            
               Scazon, tis, is a kynde of meter.
            
               Sceleratè, myſcheuouſely.
            
               Scelerator, oris, he that polluteth or defyleth.
            
               Sceleratus, he vnto whom a myſcheuous dede is done. ſomtyme it ſygnifieth him that doth an yll dede.
            
               Sceleratus campus, a fielde at Rome, where the nunnes of Veſta were buryed quycke, yf they were founde to lyue incontynently.
            
               Sceleroſè, vngracyouſely, myſcheuouſely.
            Sceleſte, idem.
            
               Scelero, rare, to pollute.
            
               Sceleroſus, a, um, he that hath done an vngraciouſe or myſcheuouſe dede.
            
               Sceleroſus, full of vngraciouſnes.
            
               Sceleſtus, ta, tum, vngracious, ful of vnhappyneſſe, myſcheuous, vengeable.
            
               Scelus, ſceleris, a myſcheuous dede. alſo an vngracious perſon.
            
               Scena, a pauyllion or haule. alſo a ſcaffolde.
            
               Scenographia, is an adumbration or lyght deſcription of the front and ſydes of a howſe, where the lynes dothe aunſwere to the compaſſe and centre of euery parte.
            
               Scenoma, a pauyllion, a ſacke.
            
               Sceparnon, a couerynge.
            
               Scepſis, a citie in Phrigia.
            
               Sceptici, were a ſecte of phyloſophers, whyche affyrmed nothyng, the chief of that ſect was Pirrhus and Herillus.
            
               Sceptrum, a pryncis ſcepter.
            
               Scheda, a leafe of paper, a ſcrowe.
            
               Schedia, a thynge lyke to a brydge with trees pynned to gyther, whereon thynges are caryed in the water, in the ſteede of a barge, as it may be ſene on dyuers great riuers in high Germany.
            
               Schedion, any thynge ſodaynly made, & without moche labour.
            
                
               Schedula, a lyttell ſcrowe or leafe of paper.
            
               Schema, atîs, & ſchematum, a fygure, alſo an ornament, ſpecially in ſpeache. ſommetyme a garment.
            
               Scheſis, where a multytude of wordes are broughte in together vnioyned, as, Nubila, nix, grando, procellae, flumina, uēti, Cloudes, ſnowe, hayle, ſhoures, flouddes, wyndes.
            
               Schilſchi, amonge the Iewes, was a weight of foure ounces.
            
               Schinos, the tree out of the whyche rounneth Maſtyx, rede Lentiſcus.
            
            
               Schiſma, atis, a diuiſion, ſpecially in the church
            
               Schiſton, the mylke that remayneth after that the mylke is ſodden, whyche is callyd welle courdes.
            
               Schoenobates, he that gothe on a corde.
            
               Scoeniculae, harlottes, whiche dreſſe theym ſelues with ſlynkynge oyntmentes.
            
               Schoenitae, people, whyche doo dwelle in pauyllyons.
            
               Schoenoplocos, a roper.
            
               Schoenos, is that whiche is callid Iuncus odoratus, Celſus calleth it Iuncus rotundus, the apothecaries calleth it Squinantum.
            
            
               Schoenus, nuntis, a riuer by Athenes, alſo an other in Arcadia, & alſo a tree called Lentiſcus
            
               Schoenus, a ſpace of grounde, contaynyng thre ſcore furlonges, whyche is ſeuen myles, and a halfe.
            
               Schola, a ſchoole. Alſo a place in a bayn, where men dyd abyde, whyles other were bayned, lyke wyſe in a porche, wherin men taryed for aunſweres. Scholae, are taken for dyſputations betwene the mayſter and his ſcholers.
            
               Scholaris, are, pertaynyng to ſchooles.
            
               Scholaſticus, a ſcholar.
            Scholaſticus, ca, cum, ſcholaſticall.
            
            
               Scholium, a ſhort or compendyouſe expoſition.
            
               Scibilis, le, that whyche may be eaſily knowen.
            
               Scibo, for ſciam, I ſhall knowe.
            
               Sciens feci, I dyd it wetyngly.
            Scienter, idem.
            
               Scienter feci, I dyd it counnyngly.
            
               Scientia, counnynge.
            
               Scilicet, as who ſaythe. It is moche, ſurely, moreouer. Sommetyme it implyeth a negatyue.
            
               Id populus curat ſcilicet, Ye the people careth moche therfore, as who ſayth, they care nothynge for it.
            
               Scilicet equidem iſtuc factum ignoſcam, That is welle ſayde, ye I wylle pardon the anon.
            
               Scilicet expectemus illud quin quennium, Ye, it is beſt that we tary yet vntyll the fiue yeres be paſſed, as who moughte ſay, I wyll not tary ſo longe.
            
               Scilicet grauiorem dolorem tibi patrui tui mors attulit, quàm C. Graccho frattis, May that be trewe, that the deathe of thyne vncle greued the more, than greued Graccho
                  •
                the deathe of his brother.
            
               Scilicet ita res eſt, Trewelye it is as I tell you.
            
               Non uides? Videam obſecro, quem? hunc ſcilicet, Seeſt thou not? See I praye the, whome? hym I tel the.
            Scilliticus, a, um, & Scillites, of Scilla.
            
            
               Scincus, a kynde of ſmall cockodryls in the ryuer of Nilus.
            Scindo, ſcidi, ſcindere, to cutte.
            
            
               Scindere ſententiam, to diuyde his opynion.
            
               Scinpodium, a lytell couche or benche.
            
               Scintilla, a ſparke,
            
               Scintillo, are to ſparkle.
            Scio, ſciui, ſcire, to knowe.
            
            
               Scire fidibus, to be perfyte in playenge on inſtrumentes.
            
               Scire ſciſcere
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , to ordeyne and inacte, as it is in our parlyament.
            
               Scire omnes linguas, to ſpeke all languages
            
               Scit fidibus, he can playe on the harpe.
            
               Latine uel graece ſcire, he vnderſtādeth greke or latyne.
            
               Sciens non faciam, I wylle not doo it wyttyngly.
            
               Scio uti foro, I knowe what I haue to doo. alſo I can accomodate my ſelf to other mens maners, and to the condytions of the tyme and place preſent.
            
               Sciolus, he that knoweth ſomewhat.
            
               Sciomantia, a part of nygromancye wrought by ſhadowes.
            
               Sciopodes, people, whiche lyenge vpryght, do ſhadowe them ſelues with theyr feete, al be it euery one manne hath but one legge, and yet be they wonderfull ſwyfte.
            
               Sciotericon, a dyalle ſette vppon a walle, to knowe by the ſonne what is a clocke.
            
               Scipiadae, & Scipionidae, they whyche were of the progenye of Scypions, the noble captaynes of Romaynes.
            
               Scipio, the ſurname of dyuerſe noble Romaynes, of the whyche three were the mooſte excellente perſonnages of their tyme, as welle in marciall proweſſe, as alſo in other mooſte notable vertues. The one callyd Scipio Naſica, ſonne of Gneius Scipio, who had bene bothe Conſule and tryumphed, and beynge a verye yonge manne, was deemed of all the people of Rome to be the beſt manne in that Cytie. The other two were bretherne ſonnes of Publius Scipio. The one of theym for ſubdewynge Aſia, was callid Scipio Aſiaticus, the other for vaynquyſſhynge Hannyballe, and the people of Aphryca was named Scypio Aphricanus. This Publius
 Cornelius Scipio, frome his chyldehoode was of a wonderful towardneſſe, for beinge but .xvii. yeres olde in a great batayle by Pauia in Lumbardy, he reſkued his father being enuironned with ennemyes, and in danger to be ſlayne. Alſo after the dyſcomfyture at Cannas, where the more part of the floure of chyualry was ſlayn. Wherfore the reſydue of the yong men concluded to haue forſaken Italy. This Scipio drewe out his ſworde, & compelled them to ſweare, that they ſhoulde not leaue the citie but defende it. After that his father and vncle were ſlayn, all men fearynge to be captayns in ſo daungerous warres, he ſtepte forth with a noble courage, proferynge hym ſelf to take that charge in hand, whervnto the ſenate and people conſented, he beinge than but .xxii. yeres olde, they beholdyng in his perſonage and vyſage a beaultye incomparable, his countenaunce merye and gentylle, and to be in his geſture and paſe a wonderfull maieſty, whiche was had in ſuch admiration, throughout all the worlde, that after he had dryuen Hanniball out of Affrik, ſubdued the citie of Carthage, and conſtrained the great kyng Antiochus to deſyre peace of the Romans, the warres being ceſſed. mē came out of al countreys to Rome only to ſee him & honour hym, as one excedyng the ſtate of mortalytie, wherby he ſtyred ſuch enuy towarde hym, that he was accuſed for detaynyng of certayne treaſure, whiche ſhuld haue ben brought into the commune treaſorye, but he with a noble and valiant courage, cam before the people, & remembrynge what he had done for the weale publyke, requyred them to go with hym vnto the capytole, to gyue thankes to god for his vyctorye, and ſo departed all the people folowyng him, and leauyng the Iudges alone. But not withſtandyng he ſoo greuouſely toke the ingratitude of the ſenate and people, that he abandoned all commune affayres, and went out of the citie of Rome to a manour place, whiche he hadde at Linternum, and there ended his lyfe, whan he had lyued .liiii. yeres, a notable remembraunce to theym that doo truſt on fortune or fauour of people.
            
               Scipio, onis, is alſo a ſtaffe to walke with.
            
               Scironia ſaxa, rockes in the ſea by Athenes.
            
               Scirpea, a dounge potte or colne made with roddes.
            
               Scirpicula, a lyttell hooke, wherewith rouſſhes, or any thynge is cut of in byndynge of thynges.
            
               Scirpita, houped veſſelles.
            
               Scirpo, are, to bynde
            
               Scirpus, a ruſſhe, or an oſyar.
            ❀Nodum in ſcirpo quaerere, To ſeeke for a knotte in a ruſhe, is a prouerbe, wherby is ſignyfied, to ſeke to dilygently for a thyng that may not be found, or to make dout of a thing whyche is playne.
            Scirpeus, a, um, of ruſſhes.
            
            
               Scirpiculum, a baſkette.
            
               Scirrus, or ſcirron, is an hardneſſe growen in in the fleſhe within the ſkynne, or in ſome other parte within the body.
            
               Scirophorion, the moneth of May.
            
               Scirrhoſis, a dyſeaſe in the eyes commynge of a longe inflamation, fleſhe growynge in them ſomwhat blewe.
            
               Scirta, is a kynd of oynyons, growyng in wynter, callyd ſcalyons.
            
               Sciſcitor, taris, tari, & Sciſco, ſciſcere, to demaunde. Alſo ſciſcere, is to ordeyn or inact, to inquyre.
            
               Sciſcito, gyue thou ſentence or iudgement, giue thy voyce or conſent in election.
            
               Sciſco, ſciui, ſciſcere, to knowe. Alſo to decerne or gyue ſentence.
            
               Sciſsilis, le, that whyche may be cutte.
            Sciſsio, ſciſſura, & ſciſſus, us, a cutte.
            
            
               Scita, ordynaunces made by the people.
            
               Scitamenta, pleaſant meates.
            
               Scite, cunnyngly, craftily.
            
               Scitor, aris, ari, to demaunde or inquyre.
            
               Scitum, a decree, or ſtatute.
            
               Scitus, ta, tum, wyſe or wyttye, alſoo proper or feate.
            
               Scytae, people in the northe parte of Aſia, whiche were cruell and harde to be vanquyſhed, they be nowe callyd Ruſſyans, Moſcouytes, and Tartaryens.
            
               Sciurus, a ſquyrrell.
            
               Scius, he that knoweth a thynge.
            
               Scleriaſis, a ſwellynge of the eye lyddes, with peyne and redneſſe.
            
               Sclerophthalmia, where the eye lyddes bene harde, and waxe heuy with ache.
            
               Sclopus, a ſowne, whiche is made with pouffyng of the chekes.
            
               Scobina, an inſtrument, wherwith any thynge is ſhauen ſomtyme the ſhauyng ſelfe.
            
               Scobino, are, to wounde, to ſhaue of.
            
               Scobs, ſcobis, that whyche commeth of the ſhauynge or boorynge of woode or metralle: alſoo gryt of ſtoones, wherwith mettalle is ſcoured.
            
               Scoletia, a kynde of ruſte or canker.
            
               Scolopendria, an herbe callyd alſo Aſplenon, it groweth on flynt walles, where the ſunne commeth neuer or ſeldome, and hath leaues lyke Polypodium, ſomewhat yelowe by the grounde and roughe, and aboue greene, hauynge neyther ſtaulke, flowre, nor ſeede. It is not Hartis toungue, whyche is communely callyd Scolopendria, but it is that,
 whyche the apothecaries do call Cetrac, rede before in Hemionîtis, & Phillitis.
            
            
               Scolopendria, or Scolopendra, is alſo a lytell worme with many legges, wherwith he goth lyke to a barge with many ores.
            
               Scolymos, the floure of a thyſtell.
            
               Scolymus, a thyſtell nowe callyd Arkechoke, of ſome men is taken for the thyſtell, whiche beaſtes do eate, callyd cowethyſtell.
            
               Scombrus, a fyſſhe, a certayn kynde of Tuny.
            
               Scomma, matis, a ſkoffe, or ſentence ſpoken in myrthe, whiche ſowneth otherwyſe than is ment of hym that ſpeaketh.
            
               Scopa, a broume or beſome to ſwepe houſes.
            
               Scopa regia, an herbe callyd Mylfoyle.
            
               Scopae, the croppes of herbes or trees.
            
               Scoparius, & ſcoparia, he or ſhe that doothe ſweepe.
            
               Scopei, men of lyttell ſtature.
            
               Scopae, dyſſolute men without wytte or counſayle.
            
               Scopas diſsipare, to ſay or do a thyng without any purpoſe or reaſon.
            
               Scopo, pare, to ſwepe.
            
               Scopelon, an hygh place, where men ſtande to beholde or eſpy.
            
               Scopi, be grapes, after that the wyne is preſſed out.
            
               Scopula, a bruſhe, ſuche as payntours and pargettours do vſe.
            
               Scopuloſus, a, um, rocky, or full of rockes.
            
               Scopus, & ſcopulus, an hygh rocke, alſo it is a marke, wherat men do ſhote. ſometyme it ſygnifieth any thynge, whervnto that which is ſpoken, hath a principall reſpect.
            
               Scordion, hath leaues lyke to germander, but moche larger, and the ſtalke foure ſquare, & hath ſome part of the ſauour of garlike, whiche forme declareth it to be neyther ranſoms nor yet ſaulce alone. Scordotis, idem.
            
            
               Scoria, the refuſe of mettall tried out by fyre. ſometyme it ſygnifieth care or grefe.
            
               Scorodon, garlyke.
            
               Scorpena, a fyſſhe whyche keepeth her ſelfe to one make.
            
               Scorpiones, croſſebowes as well to ſhoote arrowes as ſtones.
            
               Scorpionarij, they whyche doo ſhote in croſſebowes.
            
               Scorpites, a ſtone of the colour of a ſcorpyon.
            
               Scorpiuros, an herbe, whyche hath ben ſuppoſed to be the herbe callyd ruddes or marygoldes, but the curioſitie of late phiſytions wyl not ſuffre marigoldes to be ſo named, bicauſe ſome part of the colour of the floure agreeth not with the old deſcription, not withſtāding the reſydue of the forme, propreties, and vertues do not repugne, (as it hath ben proued) but that Scorpiuros, may be marygouldes. For the colours of floures in ſundry cuntreis haue ben founde ſomewhat to vary, and likewyſe the quantitie and faſcion of the leafe, wherin there is no doubt, but many be deceiued with their ſuperfluous curioſitie in the iudgyng of herbes.
            
               Scrofularia, ſome thynketh it to be the blynde nettyll, other the herbe called of Dioſcorides Chelidonium minus.
            
            
               Scorpius, & ſcorpio, onis, a venymous worme callyd a ſcorpyon, whyche ſtryketh with his tayle, and neuer ceaſſeth to ſearche, where he may haue occaſion to ſtryke. Alſo a ſygne in the fyrmament. It is alſo a croſſebow. ſome men take it to be an arke buſhe. Alſo a whyp, hauyng plummettes of leade at the endes of the cordes. It is alſo an herbe, whiche hath ſedes lyke to ſcorpyons tayle.
            
               Scortea, that whyche is of lether, as Scortei nummi, lether money.
            
               Scortes, the codde of a man or beaſt.
            
               Scorteus, tea, teum, that whiche is made of ſkynnes.
            
               Scortor, aris, ari, to haunte or companye with harlottes.
            
               Scortum, an harlotte or ſtrumpette, it is alſoo the hyde of a beaſte.
            
               Scotia, Scotlande, the parte of Britania from the ryuer of Twede to Catanes.
            
               Scoti, Scottes, or Scottyſhemen, of whome ſayncte Hierome writeth in this wyſe. Quid loquar de caeteris nationibus, quū ipſe aduleſcentulus, in Gallia uiderim Scotos, gentem Britannicam, humanis ueſci carnibus: & quum per ſyluas porcorum greges & armentorum, pecudum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   reperiant, paſtorum nates, & foeminarum papillas ſolere abſcindere, & has ſolas ciborum delitias arbitrari? What ſhall I ſpeake of other nations, ſens that whan I was a boy, I ſawe in Fraunce, Scottes, a people of Brytayne, eate mennes fleſhe, and whan they founde in the foreſtes herdes of ſwyne, beaſtes, and cattalle, they wolde cutte of the buttockes of the boyes, whyche kept them, and alſo the womens pappes, and toke that to be the moſt deyntie and delycate meate.
            
               Scotos, in Greke, darkenes: it is more aptely callyd in the northerne tungue, myrke.
            
               Scotoma, & ſcotomia, dymneſſe of ſyght.
            
               Scranteum, a ſkynne, wherin arowes are put: it may be called a ſheafe.
            
               Scraptia, a worme, whiche is founden in leaues. Alſo a vyle and ſtynkyng harlotte, a driuelyng queane.
            
               Screabile, that whiche may be ſpette or retched out of the lungues or ſtomakes.
            
               Screator, he that reacheth or ſpytteth.
            
               Screatus, tus, ſpettynge or retching to ſpitte.
            
                
               Screo, are, to reache in ſpettynge.
            
               Scriba, a Secretary, a notary, a ſcribe, a clerke of an offycer.
            
               Scribello, lare, the old wryters vſed for Scribo.
            
            
               Scriblita, a delycate meate made of paſte ſtuffed and wounden lyke a rope, I thynke it to be ſuche as fertes of Portyngal are.
            
               Scribligo, ginis, an vntrue fourme of ſpeaking or writinge callyd alſo Soloeciſmus.
            
            
               Scribo, ſcripſi, ſcribere, to write, alſo to make, ſometyme to paynte.
            
               Scribere nummos alicui, to deliuer money by exchaunge, or out of the banke.
            
               Supplimentum legionibus ſcribere, to performe or make vp the legions in the number of ſouldiours.
            
               Scrinarius, the keper of ſecrete letters.
            
               Scriniolum, a caſket or forſar.
            
               Scrinium, a coffer or other lyke place, wherin iewelles or ſecrete thynges are kepte, as euidences and recordes of iudgementes or inrollementes.
            
               Scriptio, an inſcription or any other wryting.
            
               Scriptor, toris, a wryter.
            
               Scriptorius, a, um, apt for wrytyng.
            
               Scriptum, that whiche is wrytten.
            
               Scriptura, wrytyng. ſomtyme ſtyle. alſo a recknynge of a baylyffe, whyche byeth and ſelleth cattell, or of hym whyche ought to paye certayne reuenewes, for that whyche he hathe hyred.
            
               Scripturarius, he that writeth thynges whyche be commonly done, or bokes of recknynge for baylyffes and reues, a clerke.
            
               Scrobs, ſcrobis, a dyche or furrowe.
            
               Scrobulus, a lytell dyche or furrowe.
            
               Scropha, a ſowe that hath pygges.
            
               Scrotum, the codde or ſkynne, wherein be the ſtones of a man. Scrota, be alſo lytell ymages made of paſte, whyche are wonte to be giuen to chyldren.
            
               Scrupuloſus, a, um, ſcrupulouſe or doubtfull in lyghte thynges. ſometyme it ſygnyfieth dyffuſe or dyfficulte.
            
               Scrupuloſa res, a thyng wherin there ſemeth to be ſome dyfficultie.
            
               Scrupulatim, by ſmalle pieces.
            
               Scrupulus, a lyttell ſharpe ſtone, whiche ſometyme hapneth to falle into a mannes ſhowe, and hurte his hele. It is alſo taken for moch ſollicitude, alſo for dyffycultie, or ſpyced conſcience. alſo a poyſe, whyche is the thyrde parte of a dramme: and than is it alſo written with y, as Scrypulus.
            
            
               Scrupulum inijcere, to bryng into a mannes mynde, doubte, carefulnes, or thought.
            
               Scrupulū eximere, to put away dout or care.
            
               Scrupus, a lyttell ſtone or piece of a ſtone.
            Scrupeus, a, um, ſtonye.
            
            
               Scruta, olde garmentes, horſeſhoen, and ſuche other baggage ſolde for neceſſitie. alſo lyttell ymages made in paſte, ſolde to the people.
            
               Scrutarius, he that ſelleth old ſtuffe, or maketh ſuche ymages.
            
               Scrutinium, a ſerche.
            Scrutor, aris, ari, to ſerche.
            
            
               Scrutellus, the bely of a ſwyne farced or ſtuffed.
            
               Sculna, olde wryters vſed for ſequeſter, an arbytrour.
            
               Sculpo, pſi, pere, to carue ymages in ſtone. ſom tyme to graue in mettall.
            
               Sculponeae, wollen ſockes.
            
               Sculponeatus, he that dothe weare woullen ſockes.
            
               Sculptile, that whiche is carued or grauen.
            
               Sculptor, a grauer, a caruer.
            
               Sculptrix, a woman of that occupation.
            
               Sculptura, ingrauynge or karuyng.
            
               Scurra, a rayler, a ſcoffer. Scurrilitas, rallynge.
            
               Scurrilis, le, pertaynyng to raylyng.
            
               Scurriliter, in raylynge or ſkoffynge facion.
            
               Scutarius, a bucklar maker, or a maker of tergates.
            
               Scutarius, ria, rium, pertaynynge to ſhieldes or tergates.
            
               Scutatus, armed with a ſhielde or tergate.
            
               Scutella, a ſaweer.
            
               Scutigerulus, a cuſtrell or page, which beareth his mayſters ſhielde or bucklar.
            
               Scutriſcum, a diminutiue of ſcutra, or ſcuttula.
            
            
               Scutuca, a ſkourge.
            
               Scutula, a rounde fygure, ſuche as ſpynners or ſpyders do warke, alſo a veſſell, whyche contayneth
.viii. ounces. alſo a ſtaffe, wherwith flaxe is beaten.
            
               Scutulatus, ta, tum, rounde and wrought in the fourme of a copwebbe.
            
               Scutulata ueſtis, a garment of ſylk, wherin be wrought figures like to round copwebbes.
            
               Scutulatus, is a colour, I ſuppoſe wachet.
            
               Scutulum, a lyttell ſhielde.
            
               Scutum, a tergat or ſhielde, a bucklar.
            
               Scylace, a citie in Grecia.
            
               Scylla, a dangerouſe rock in the ſea by Sicile. Alſo a lady, daughter of Niſus, kyng of Megarenſis, whiche for loue of Minois, hir fathers ennemy, ſtale a pourple heare from her fathers head, whiche cauſed hym to be vanquyſhed. But ſhe beyng forſaken of Minois, threwe her ſelfe into the ſea, and was transfourmed 
                  •
               nto a byrde of her name. It is alſo a kynde of fyſhe in the ryuer of Liris in Campania. It is alſo an herbe which hathe a rote lyke to an oynyon, and is of the apothecaries callyd Squilla.
            
            
               Scylliticus, a, um, of that herbe.
            
               Scyllaceum, a towne in the furthermooſte parte of Italy, fyrſte buylded and inhabyted
 by men of Athenes.
            
               Scylleta, places wherin is taken the fyſhe called Scilla.
            
               Scylleum, a promontorie or hyll in the parte of Grecia, nowe called Morea.
            
               Scyllis, the name of a Greke, whiche ſwymmynge vnder water, dyd cut in ſunder the cables of the ſhyppes of the Perſians.
            
               Scyllus, Iuntis, a towne in Achaia.
            
               Scylutus, the name of a man, whiche hauynge foure ſcore ſonnes, whan he dyed, he called them afore hym, and delyuered to eueriche of them a ſhefe of arrowes, comaundyng them to breake the ſheafes incontinente: whiche whan they mought not do, he toke out of the ſheafes one arrowe after an other, and brake them all lyghtely, declaryng therby vnto his ſons, that if they continued and agreed well together, they ſhulde be puyſſaunte: and if they varied and were diſſeuered, they ſhulde be feble and ſhortely diſtroyed.
            
               Scymnus, the whelpe of a lyon.
            
               Scynifes, bytynge gnattes.
            
               Scyphus, a great cruſe or iugge.
            
               Scyricum, a blonket colour or lyght wachet.
            
               Scytala, a lyttell fielde mouſe. ſome do ſuppoſe it to be an ermyne.
            
               Scyrus, an yle in the ſea called Aegeum, where Achilles was hid by his mother in a womans apparayle, to the intent that he ſhoulde not go with the Greks agaynſt Troy.
            
               Scyron, a thefe in the countrey of Attica, who wolde ſyt on a hyghe rocke, and compel them that came by to waſhe his fete, or elles to honour hym. and whan they hadde ſoo done, he threwe them downe into the ſea. Fynally he was ſlayne by Theſeus, and it was ſurmyſed, that his boones were tourned into rockes, whiche of hym were named Scyronia, and they be betwene Atticam and Megarim, where by the paſſage is harde.
            
               Scyritae, people in India, whiche haue no noſes, but in the ſtede of a noſe they haue two holes in theyr viſage.
            
               Scythia, is a great countrey, whiche ſtretcheth in to the Eaſt from the ryuer of Tanais, and hath on the ſouth parte Sacos, and Sogdianos, people vnder the kynge of Perſia, and on the northe parte be countreyes vnknowen and deſerte, and is nowe vnder the dominion of the great Cane of Cataye.
            
               Scitha, a man or woman of Scithia.
            Scythicus, ca, cum, of Scithia.
            
            
               Scython, a countreye nowe called Thracia in Greece.
         
         
            ¶S ANTE E.
            
               SE is a pronowne, and ſignifieth hym or her.
            
               Sebaſta, uel Sebaſtapolis, a citie in Siria called before Samaria.
            
               Sebemytum, a citie in Egypte.
            
               Sebeſten, is that fruite whiche Dioſcorides calleth Myxa.
            
            
               Sebethos, a fountayne at Naples, whiche ſerueth the citie, runnynge throughout the cite.
            
               Sebra, or Sebre minor, is as Antonius Muſa ſaythe, our Eſula, or Spourge.
            
               Secale, a certayne grayne, whiche ſerueth onely to put awaye hunger.
            
               Scedo, ſeceſsi, ſecedere, to go backe, or to go out of company, to go awaye, to go to playe or ſporte from labour.
            
               Secucul, is the herbe called Eringion.
            
            
               Secaniabin amonge the Arabianes is our Oxymell, amonge the Latines it is called Acetum mulſum.
            
            
               Secra, a kynde of Ambregryſe.
            
               Secerno, ſecreui, ſecernere, to diuide, or laye oone from an other, to laye or put by it ſelfe.
            
               Seceſpita, a cuttynge knyfe, wherwith the paynyms diuided theyr ſacrifice.
            
               Sceſſus, us, & ſeceſsio, a departynge, a vacation from buſyneſſe, a ſecrete place.
            
               Secinium, a cake of breade cut in ſacrifyce.
            
               Secius, later. Nec eo ſecius, neuer the later.
            
               Secludo, ſi, dere, to ſhut out.
            
               Seclum, for ſeculum, the ſpace of one hundred yeres.
            
               Secluſa ſacra, ceremonies, that be ſecretely vſed, to be had in the more reuerence.
            
               Seco, cas, cui, care, to cutte. Viam ſecare, to leade the waye.
            
               Secarius, a panyer to cary that whiche is cut.
            
               Secare, is alſo to folowe.
            
               Secors, & ſocors, dis, hartleſſe, apte to noo purpoſe, profytable neyther to hym ſelfe nor to any other.
            
               Secordes agni, lambes late ened or fallen.
            
               Secordia, & ſocordia, ſluggardnes, vnaptnes, 
                  •
               uſkyſhenes.
            
               Secreta, thynges ſecrete. A ſecretis, of the priuye counſayle.
            Secretè, & ſecretò, priuyly.
            
            
               Secta, a dyuerſe conſent in ſundry wylfull opynions, a ſecte of phyloſophers, a ſecte of heretykes.
            
               Sectacula, the ſequele.
            
               Sectarius ueruex, the belle wether, that gothe before the flocke.
            
               Sectilis, le, that whiche may be cutte.
            
               Sectio, onis, a cuttynge, a dyuyſyon, the partyng of a pray in takyng of a towne.
            
               Sectio, al that is taken in pray at the wynnyng
 and ſackynge of a towne.
            
               Sectiuus, ua, uum, that is often cutte.
            
               Sectiuum porrum, vnſette lekes.
            
               Sector, aris, ari, to folowe, to runne after one. Alſo to folowe in maners or fourme of ſpeakynge or lyuynge. Alſoo to hunte or chaſe a beaſte.
            
               Sectores, byers of forfayted goodes Alſo they that doo take profyte by the condempnation of other.
            
               Sectura, a cuttyng, caues vnder erth, or mines.
            Sectus, ta, tum, dyuyded.
            
            
               Secubo, bare, to lye aparte.
            
               Secula, a ſythe, wherwith hey is mowen.
            
               Seculum, ſome do ſuppoſe it to be the ſpace of one hundred yeres, ſome of one thouſand yeres, other of thyrtye yere. ſometyme it is taken for tyme. Seculum ſterile, a barayn tyme.
            
               Secunda menſa, the laſte courſe, wherin commeth fruite and conſerues.
            
               Secundae darum, the after byrthe.
            
               Secundarius, a, um, of the ſeconde ſorte.
            
               Secundo, the ſeconde tyme or place, alſoo efteſoones.
            
               Secundo, are, to proſper or make proſperous.
            
               Secundo lumine, the next day. Caeſaris interdicta, ſi te ſecundo lumine hic offendero, reſpuentur, If I fynde the here the next day, I wyll ſet lyttell by Ceſars commandementes.
            
               Secundus panis, browne breadde. Paſti ſiliquis, & pane ſecundo, Fedde with beane huſkes, and browne breadde.
            
               Secundum, an aduerbe, ſygnifieth nye, or by.
            
               Secundum aurem, by the eare. Alſo next after. Secundum patrem, next after my father. ſometyme for. Secundum te litem do, I iuge the matter for the. alſoo in. Secundum quietem, in reſte. alſo vpon. Secundum ea, thervpon. Secundum Platonem, After the ſayenge of Plato. Secundum Pythagoram uiuo, I lyue lyke to Pythagoras Secundum flumen, A longe by the ryuers ſyde.
            
               Secundus, da, dum, ſeconde or next to the fyrſt. Alſo proſperous. Secunda fortuna, Good or proſperous fortune. Res ſecundae, that whiche dothe folowe our deſyre or appetite, good fortune. Secundo flumine nauigat, He goth, or ſayleth, or roweth with the ſtreame. Secundus uentus, a good wynde. Secundum praeſentem, as yf he were preſent. Et poſt edictum ſecundum praeſentem iudicabitur, And after the decree, iudgement ſhall be gyuen, as yf he were preſent.
            
               Secundo populo, with the peoples good will
            
               Secundum eum fieri, to be done for his profit
            
               Securis, an axe. ſometyme it is taken for an offycer, whyche hath auctoritie to commyt men to the execution of deathe.
            
               Securè, quyetely, ſurely, in ſaufegarde.
            
               Securus, ra, rum, ſure, quyete, without care, aſſured.
            
               Securum reddere, to aſſure.
            
               Securitas, quyetneſſe, lacke of care, ſuretie.
            
               Secus, by, or nygh to.
            
               Secus flumen, ſeruntur ſalices, nygh to the ryuer, wyllowes are ſette. Alſo it ſygnifyeth otherwyſe, or other. Non dixi ſecus, ac ſentiebam, I ſaid none otherwiſe thā I thought Quid diximus tibi ſecus 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   uelles? What ſaid we vnto the, other than thou woldeſt haue vs to ſaye?
            
               Sed, but. Sed autem, ye but.
            
               Sedate, without trouble.
            
               Sedatio, a mytigation.
            
               Sedenim, all be it.
            
               Sedentarius, a, um, that which is done ſitting.
            
               Sedeo, ſedi, ſedêre, to ſyt, to be ydel, to content, to tary or abyde, to take councell.
            
               Si ſedet hoc animo, yf it pleaſe you ſo to do.
            
               Sedent niues, the ſnowe abydeth.
            
               Sedes, a ſeate or place to ſytte on. alſo a manſion houſe. ſometyme a ſepulchre.
            Sedicula, a ſettle. Sedile, idem.
            
               Seditio, a ſedition or diſcord among the people.
            
               Seditionarius, a ſeditious perſon.
            
               Sedo, are, to mitigate, to pacyfy, to aſſuage, to reſtrayne, to extincte.
            
               Seduc
                     •
                  , xi, cere, to leade aſyde, or leade away. ſometyme to deceyue:
            
               Seducere arrogantiam, to lay apart pryde.
            
               Seductilis, he whiche may be deceyued.
            
               Sedulò, in dede, diligently, without faynynge.
            
               Sedulitas, diligence, with moche care.
            
               Sedulus, diligente, he that playnely withoute crafte dothe a thynge dilygently.
            
               Sedum, an herbe callyd ſyngrene or houſeleke.
            
               Seges, ſegetis, corne whan it ſtandeth. ſomme tyme the grounde falowed, and redye to receyue corne.
            
               Segeſta, a towne in Italy.
            
               Segeſtria, was the ſtrawe that was layde in a lyghter, wherin greate menne were borne by their ſeruantes.
            
               Segmenta, be certayn lynes ymagyned, by the whiche Coſmographers do deuide the world into porcions, whiche be called alſo Paralleli, wherby the diſtance of places are founden.
            
               Segmenta, the cuttynges of, of any thyng. ſom tyme the partes of the worlde diuided by the ſonne. alſo gardes, or other lyke thynges ſowed to garmentes.
            
               Segmentarius, he that maketh clothe of golde
            
               Segmentum, a piece cut of from any thynge, be it mettall or ſtone. It is alſo a bee or colar whiche is about womennes neckes. Some do take it for the purfyll of a womans gown It maye as well be taken for a garde or border about any garment. Segmen, idem.
            
            
                
               Segmentatus, ta, tum, maye be ſayde of anye thynge, whiche hath borders or trayles fynely wroughte, with ſmaule peces faſtned theron, be it of mettall or tymber.
            
               Segmentatae ueſtes, garded or pourfled garmentes.
            
               Segnis, ſlowe and dull wytted, barayne.
            Segnitas pro ſegnitia, ſlouthfulnes.
            
            
               Segniter, ſlowely.
            
               Segnities, ſlowneſſe, dulneſſe, baraynneſſe.
            
               Segodunum, Rodes in Fraunce.
            
               Segodunum, is alſo a noble citie in Almayne, nowe called Nurenberg.
            
               Segobriga, a towne in the parte of Spayne, whiche is nowe called Byſkay.
            
               Segrego, are, to ſeuer or ſeparate.
            
               Segregare ſuſpitiones, to put away ſuſpition.
            
               Segregare ſermonem to ſpeake no wordes.
            
               Si quis ibi eſt odioſus abeo domum, ſermonem ſegrego, If any man be there, whome I loue not, I gette me home, and ſpeake neuer a worde. Segrega ſermonem, taedet, Holde thy peace, I am wery, or it irketh me to here the.
            
               Segullum, is a vayne of erthe in mynes, whiche declareth, that therein golde maye be founde.
            
               Segor, a citie, which was preſerued by the praier of Lothe, whan Sodoma was dyſtroyed by the vengeaunce of god.
            
               Seguſiani or Segutiati, Breſſe in Fraunce.
            
               Seguſium, the parte of the Alpes called mount Sion.
            
               Seir, a mountayne in the countreye of Edon, where Eſau the brother of Iacob the patriarche dwelled.
            
               Seiugi & ſeiuges, a t
                  •
               me of ſyxe horſes.
            Seiungo, xi, gere, to ſeparate.
            
            
               Selectio, a cheſynge oute.
            
               Selectus, ta, tum, choſen amonge other, alſo chiefe amonge other.
            
               Selecti Iudices, amonge the Romaynes were iudges appoynted of the ſtate of gentylmen, called ordo equeſtris.
            
            
               Selenetes, a ſtone, wherin is a whyte, whiche decreaſeth and increaſethe, as the moone dothe.
            
               Seleucia, the principall citie of Siria, which is xxx. furlonges from Babylonia.
            
               Seleucus, kynge of Siria, nexte after Alexander the great.
            
               Selibra, halfe a pounde.
            
               Seligo, legi, ſeligere, to gather a parte, or the chiefe thynges amonge many.
            
               Selinus, a ryuer.
            
               Selinon, an herbe called alſo Apium, whereof be diuers kyndes, as Hippoſelinon, Petroſelinon, Seke for them in theyr places.
            
               Seliquaſtra, a ſtole to ſytte on.
            
               Sella curulis, a chayre, wheron the chiefe officers of Rome ſate in a chariote, and were ſo caryed, whan they came from theyr houſes. ſome do ſuppoſe that it was called curulis, bycauſe the fete were croked, the iudgement therof, I remit to the reders.
            
               Sellaria, places, wherin were fourmes and ſtoles for men to ſytte on.
            
               Sellularij, artificers, whiche wrought ſittyng.
            
               Semel, ones, alſo at one tyme, ſhortely, briefely, ſummarily.
            
               Semele, the daughter of Cadmus, and mother to Bacchus.
            
               Semen, ſeminis, ſede, ſomtyme ſettes of yong trees, or nurſegardeynes, ſometyme the kind
            
               Sementicus, ca, cum, that maye be ſowen.
            
               Sementis, the acte of ſowynge, ſomtyme ſede, ſedetyme.
            
               Sementa facere, to ſowe corne.
            
               Sementinae feriae, holye dayes ordeyned to praye, that corne beinge ſowen, mought come forthe and increace.
            
               Semento, tare, to bryng forth ſede.
            
               Semeſtris, tre, of ſyxe monethes.
            Semeſus, a, um, halfe eaten.
            
            
               Semet, him ſelfe.
            
               Semetra, halfe a meaſure.
            
               Semianimis, halfe deade.
            
               Semianimus, halfe quicke.
            
               Semicadium, halfe a barell.
            
               Semicaecus, halfe blynde.
            
               Semicinctum, a ierkyn or ſhorte iackette.
            
               Semicirculus, halfe a cirkle.
            Semicoctus, ta, tum, halfe ſodden.
            
            Semicommeſtus, ta, tum, halfe eaten.
            
            
               Semiconſumptus, ta, tum, halfe conſumed or waſted.
            
               Semideus, halfe a god.
            
               Semidoctus, meanely lerned.
            
               Semifera animalia, beaſtes ingendred betwene a wylde beaſt and a tame, as betwene a wulfe and a dogge, or betwene a wyld bore and a tame ſwyne.
            
               Semiferus, ſomewhat wylde.
            
               Semigro grare, to go to dwelle in an other place.
            
               Semihomo, halfe a man.
            
               Semihora, an halfe howre.
            
               Semiliſſula, & ſemilixula, a lyttell cake made with meale, cheſe, and water.
            Semimadidus, da, dum, halfe wete.
            
            
               Semimares, they whiche are not perfyte men, as thoſe, whiche are gelded.
            Semimortuus, a, um, halfe deade.
            
            
               Seminatio, ſowynge.
            
               Seminarium, a place from whenſe ſettes & plā
               tes be tranſlated or remoued. alſo a tree of the whiche ſettes are taken.
            
               Seminex, necis, halfe ſlayne.
            
                
               Seminium, ſede, alſo the gayne of ſede.
            
               Semino, are, to ſowe.
            Seminudus, da, dum, halfe naked.
            
            
               Semiobolus, the xii. parte of a greke dramme
            
               Semipes, pedis, halfe a foote.
            
               Semipaganus, halfe an huſbandeman, halfe a carle of the countrey.
            
               Semipedalis, le, halfe a foote in quantitie or heyghte.
            Semipedaneus, a, um, idem.
            
               Semiplageum, a lyttell nette.
            
               Semiplenus, not full.
            
               Semiplotia, were ſhowes, whiche couered but halfe the fote, whiche the Romaynes dydde weare on, whan they went in huntyngge.
            
               Semiquinarius, a, um, that whiche is halfe fyue in number.
            
               Semiramis, midis, the wyfe of kynge Ninus, whiche made the citie of Babylon, and conquered many Countreys.
            
               Semirutus, partly decayed.
            
               Semi, halfe.
            Semiſenex, uel ſemiſeneus, halfe olde.
            
            
               Semiſomnis, & ſemiſomnus, halfe a ſlepe.
            
               Semiſopitus, he that is halfe ſleapynge, halfe wakynge.
            Semiſoporatus, idem.
            
               Semiſpathium, a ſhorte ſworde.
            
               Semiſsis, halfe a cubite. It is alſo the halfe pounde weyghte, or .vi. ounces.
            
               Semiſsis homo, a vile perſon.
            
               Semiſsis uſura, the gayne of ſixe in a hūdred.
            
               Semita, a pathe, alſo a fote waye.
            
               Semitatus, ta, tum, diuided in pathes.
            
               Semitogium, a ſhorte gowne
            
               Semitogatus, & ſemitogatulus, he that weareth a ſhorte gowne.
            
               Semitritaeon, uel hemitritaeon, a feuer which is a tercian and a halfe, and of .xlviii. houres and vexeth one .xxxvi. houres.
            
               Semiuir, an vnperfecte man.
            
               Semiuiuus, halfe a lyue.
            
               Semiuncia, halfe an ounce.
            
               Semuntialis, le, of halfe an ounce.
            Semiuſtus, a, um, halfe burned.
            
            
               Semimodius, halfe a buſſhell.
            
               Semoueo, uere, to moue or go awaye.
            
               Semper, euer, alwaye.
            
               Semperlenitas, the accuſtomed gentylneſſe or myldneſſe.
            
               Semperuiuum, an herbe called Singrene.
            
               Sempiterné, euerlaſtyngely.
            
               Sempiternitas, the tyme euerlaſtynge.
            Sempiternus, a, um, euerlaſtynge.
            
            
               Sena, a citie in Tuſkane called Senes whiche is a hundred myles from Rome. ſometyme it is written Senae, in the plurell number.
            
               Senaculum, a councyll houſe. Alſo a lyttell Senate.
            
               Senarius, a, um, that whiche is of the number of ſyxe. Senarij uerſus, & ſenarioli, verſes hauynge ſyxe fete, properlye Iambici, or Trochaici.
            
            
               Senator, toris, a Senatour.
            
               Senatorius, a, um, perteynynge to Senatours
            
               Senatus, us, a ſenate or councyll.
            
               Senatuſconſultum, an acte of councel, or an ordynaunce made by the ſenate.
            
               Senecio, onis, an herbe, which groweth on walles, and tiles, and is hore in ſommer, and hath redde ſtalkes, called grounſwell.
            Senectus, ſenecta, ſenium, age.
            
            Seneo, & ſeneſco, ſcere, to be olde.
            
            
               Senex, ſenis, an olde man or woman.
            
               Senio, onis, a ſyce, or number of ſyxe marked in the dyſe.
            Seni, nae, na, ſyxe.
            
            
               Sennaar, the fielde, where the towre of Babylon was buylded.
            
               Senogallia, a citie in Italy.
            
               Senones, people in Fraunce.
            
               Senſa, the ſenſes, or thoſe thynges whiche we do meane.
            
               Senſibilis, le, that whiche maye be felte.
            
               Senſiculi, the diminutiue of ſenſa.
            
            
               Senſificus, ca, cum, that whiche cauſeth feelynge.
            
               Senſilis, le, that maye be felte.
            
               Senſim, lyttell and lyttell.
            
               Senſus, us, ſenſe, or felynge, or perceyuynge.
            
               Senta, was called Fauna, or Bona dea, the good goddeſſe.
            
               Sententia, ſentence, iudgemente, opinion, or councell ſpoken or wrytten concernynge the lyfe of man.
            
               Sententiam dicere, to ſhewe his opinion.
            
               Sententiam facere, to gyue ſentence or iugemente.
            
               Sententiola, a lyttell or ſhorte ſentence.
            
               Senticetum, a place full of bryers.
            
               Sentina, the pumpe of a ſhyp, a place where al fylthe is receyued.
            
               Sentinatia, a countrey in Italy.
            
               Sentino, are, to auoyde peryll: alſo to pumpe vp water out of a ſhyppe.
            
               Sentinum, a towne in Italy called nowe Saxoferratum.
            
            
               Sentio, ſenſi, ſentire, to perceyue, to vnderſtād to fele, to iuge, to ſuppoſe, to knowe.
            
               Sentio tecum, I am of thyne opinion.
            
               Sentis, a bryar or bremble.
            
               Senticoſus, a, um, ſharpe as a bryer.
            
               Sentus, heary, roughe.
            
               Senum, the ſyxte.
            
               Senumdenum, the ſyxtenth.
            
               Seorſum, a parte, alſo namely, or ſpecially.
            
               Omnibus gratiam habeo, & ſeorſum tibi praeterea Demea, I thanke you all, but
 namely thē Demea.
            
               Seorſum a te ſentio, I am of an nother opinion than thou arte.
            Seoiſus, idem.
            
               Separatio, ſeparation.
            
               Separatus, ta, tum, ſeparate or diuided frome an other thynge.
            
               Separo rare, to put apart, or departe one frō an nother.
            
               Separatim, aparte.
            
               Sepedes, emotes.
            Sepelio, ſepeliui, lire, to bury.
            
            
               Sepes, ſepis an hedge
            
               Sepia, a fyſhe called a Cuttell.
            
               Sepimentum, an incloſure
            
               Sepio, ſepiui, ſepire, to hedge or incloſe.
            
               Sepius, piuntis, & Sipus, puntis, & Sipontum, a citie in the realme of Naples.
            
               Seplaſiarius, a maker of ſoote oyntmentes.
            
               Seplaſium, uel ſeplaſia, a ſhop, where ſweete oyntmentes are ſolde. It was a ſtrete in the citie of Capua, wherin were dyuers delicate oyntmentes.
            
               Sepono, poſui, ponere, to put or laye aparte.
            
               Seps, a venemous worme, of whoſe ſtroke or bytynge the fleſhe rotteth.
            
               Septa, the generall name of all places incloſed.
            
               Septangulus, a figure, hauynge foure corners
            
               Septem, the number of ſeuen.
            
               September, bris, the viii. moneth.
            
               Septemdecim, ſeuentene.
            
               Septempedalis, le, of ſeuen feete.
            Septimus, ma, mum, the ſeuenthe.
            
            Septenus, na, num, idem.
            
               Septemuir, an officer, hauynge equall auctoritie with ſeuen other.
            
               Septempeda, a place in Italy called Sayncte Seuerine.
            
               Septennis, of ſeuen yeres.
            
               Septentrio, the northe coſte.
            
               Septentriones, the ſeuen ſterres, whiche are ſene by Charles wayne, or Vrſa maior.
            
            
               Septemuiratus, the offyce, wherin be ſeuen ioyntely.
            
               Septennium, the ſpace of ſeuen yeres.
            
               Septicollis, by that name Rome was called. by cauſe of the ſeuen hylles, whiche were in it, Palatinus, Quirinalis, Auentinus, Coelius, Viminalis, Exquilium, & Ianiculum.
            
            
               Septicus, ca, cum, putrifactife or corroſife.
            
               Septies, ſeuen tymes.
            
               Septifariam, ſeu
                  •
               n maner of facions or wayes
            Septifarius, a, um, ſeuen dyuers.
            
            
               Septima
                     •
                  rus, was a holyday kept the day folowynge the ſyxt Idus of euery monthe.
            
               Septimana, a wicke.
            
               Septimontium, a place hauynge ſeuen hylles.
            Sepringeni, & ſeptingenti, ſeuen hundred.
            
            
               Septingenties, ſeuen hundred tymes.
            
               Septingentenus, & ſeptingenteſimus, the ſeuenth hundred.
            
               Septingentuplus, ſeuen hundred folde.
            
               Septuagenarius, thre ſcore and ten yeres olde.
            
               Septuagies, thre ſcore and ten tymes.
            
               Septuaginta, thre ſcore and ten.
            
               Septuoſè, darkely.
            
               Septum tranſuerſum, the maydrefe, whiche deuydeth the ſtomacke frome the lower bowelles.
            
               Septunx, uncis, a poyſe of ſeuen ounces.
            Septus, ta, tum, incloſed.
            
            
               Sepulchrum, a ſepulchre or tombe.
            
               Sepultura, ſepulture or burienge.
            
               Sepultus, ta, tum, buried or hyd. alſo lyke as it were deade.
            
               Sepum, talowe.
            
               Sepatius, a, um, as it were of talowe.
            
               Sequana, a ryuer in Fraunce called Sein.
            
               Sequani, Burgonions of highe Burgoyne.
            
               Sequā
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , for ſeorſū quan
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , euery womā apart.
            
               Sequax, acis, that whiche foloweth.
            
               Sequela, the acte of folowynge, ſequele.
            
               Sequeſter, tris, tre, indifferent to both partes.
            
               Sequeſter, he, with whom moneye is left. alſo a ſolicitour in a matter.
            
               Sequeſtres, were they which at the election of officers receiued money to make frendes and ſolicite the people to gyue theyr voyces.
            
               Sequeſtro, are, to laye or ſet a thynge indifferentely, or in the kepynge of an indyfferente perſonne.
            
               Sequi lites, to ſue at the lawe.
            
               Sequor, eris, ſequi, to folowe to go after.
            
               Sera, a locke.
            
               Serapis, idis, a god of the Egiptians.
            
               Serenitas, fayreneſſe of wether drythe.
            
               Sereniſsimus, is a terme appropried nowe adayes to kynges onely, and is vſurped for moſte famous, or moſte renoumed.
            
               Sereno, are, to make fayre and clere.
            
               Serenus, a, um, fayre, clere, without cloudes.
            
               Seres, a people in Aſia, hauynge great plentye of ſylke.
            
               Sericae ueſtes, ſylken garmentes.
            
               Sereſco, ſcere, to be fayre and drie. alſo to be tourned into whay.
            
               Seria, erneſte wordes, and graue or ſad.
            
               Seria, an erthen veſſell, whiche is longe.
            
               Sericarius, a weauer of ſylke.
            
               Sericatus, apparayled in ſylke, or he that weareth a garment of ſylke.
            Sericeus, a, um, of ſylke.
            
            
               Sericum, ſylke.
            Sericus, ca, cum, of ſylke.
            
            
               Series, order.
            
               Serilla, botes or ſhippes calked with towe.
            
               Seriola, a diminutiue of ſeria.
            
               Seriò, in erneſte.
            
                
               Seris, is the generall name of all Cichory and endiue. rede Intybus.
            
            
               Seriphus, an yle by Grecia in the ſea called Aegeum.
            
            
               Serius, a, um, erneſt, graue of importaunce.
            
               Sermo, monis, a ſpeche, a fourme of ſpeking: ſometyme an oration, alſo communication.
            
               Sermocinor, aris, ari, to talke, to commune.
            
               Sero, are, to ſhutte or locke.
            
               Sero, ſeui, ſerere, ſatum, to ſowe, to plante, to ingender.
            
               Serò, an aduerbe, ſignifieth late, to late, after the tyme that it oughte to be, Alſo in the euenynge.
            
               Seropta, a citie in Phoenicia.
            
               Serotinus, a, um, that whiche is in the euennynge. ſometyme late, or latewarde. Serotini fructus, lateward fruites.
            
               Serpentaria, an herbe called dragons.
            
               Serpens, pentis, a ſerpente.
            
               Serperaſta, a ſwathynge or ſwadlynge bonde.
            
               Serpillum, an herbe whiche groweth on olde walles, about welles or pondes, and in ſome places it ſmelleth lyke tyme, and in ſome places lyke to ſauery, ſome do take it for the cō
               mon ſauery.
            Serpo, pſi, pere, to crepe.
            
            
               Serpula, of olde wryters was vſed for ſerpens a ſerpent.
            
               Serra, a ſawe.
            
               Serra praeliari, is to fyghte in battayle, ſome tyme marchynge forwarde, ſometyme reculynge, as a ſawe gothe, whan it is drawen.
            
               Serrata, an herbe whiche is called Germander
            
               Serratula, Betayne.
            
               Serratus, ta, tum, lyke a ſawe, alſo ſawed.
            
               Serro, are, to ſawe.
            
               Serrula, a lyttell ſawe.
            
               Sertor, he that ſoweth ſedes, or ſetteth herbes.
            
               Sertum, a garlande of floures.
            
               Sertus, ta, tum, ſet with flowres, as in a garlande.
            
               Sertula compana, an herbe called Melylote.
            
               Seruo, are, to kepe, to preſerus, to poſſede, or dwelle in a place.
            
               Seruare fidem, to kepe towche, to be faythfulle.
            
               Seruare de caelo, to awayte what wether ſhall come. to obſerue tokens or ſygnes in the heauen or fyrmament.
            
               Omnia integra principi ſeruare, to reſerue the hole matter vnto the prynce.
            
               Modum ſeruare, to kepe a meane.
            
               Seruator, toris, he that preſerueth or delyuereth one from harme.
            
               Seruaueris, take good hede what thou doſte.
            
               Seruilis, le, perteynynge to ſeruice.
            
               Bellum ſeruile, warre, whiche the ſeruantes of the Romaynes made agayne theyr lordes.
            
               Seruiliter, lyke a bondman or ſlaue.
            Seruio, uiui, uire, to ſerue.
            
            
               Seruire auribus, to flatter.
            
               Seruire alicui rei, to intende vpon one thyng.
            
               Aetati ſeruire, to accommodare hym ſelfe to the age of one.
            
               Petitioni ſeruire, to do nothynge elles but to attende to ſatiſfie his deſyre.
            
               Scoenae ſeruire, to do accordyng as the tyme requireth.
            
               Romori ſeruire, to go about to gette a great name.
            
               Valitudini ſeruire, to prouyde for his helthe.
            
               Seruitium, ſeruyce.
            
               Seruitia, bondemen.
            
               Seruitus, bondage.
            
               Serum, the laſte parte of the day, the euenlide. It is alſo whay of mylke.
            
               Serus, a, um, late, ſometyme great.
            
               Sera arbor, a tree whiche bryngeth forth leaues very late.
            
               Serum lumen, almoſte nyghte.
            
               Serae frondes, leaues whiche doo fall verye late.
            
               Sera omnia, all full of ſorowe or heuyneſſe.
            
               Serum bellum, great warre.
            
               Seruus, a ſeruant, properly whiche is compelled to ſerue, as bondmen or apprentyſes done
            ❀Seruum poecus, is a prouerbe applyed to hym whiche in ſpeakynge or wrytynge, dare not digreſſe from an other mannes ſteppes or fourme of wrytynge.
            
               Seſama, & ſeſamum, a whyte grayne, whiche groweth in Inde, wherof oyle is made whiche is called oleum Seſaminum.
            
            
               Seſcuntialis, le, of an ounce and a halfe.
            
               Seſcunx, cuncis, an ounce and a halfe.
            
               Seſcuplum, the hole and the halfe parte.
            
               Seſelis, an herbe called alſo Siler.
            
            
               Seſqui, as moche and halfe as moche, ioyned to an other worde, ſignifyeth halfe as moche more.
            
               Seſquialtera, ſo moche and halfe ſoo moche, a proportion in muſyke.
            
               Seſquihora, an houre and an halfe.
            
               Seſquilibra, a pounde and a halfe.
            
               Seſquimenſis, a moneth and halfe.
            
               Seſquimodus, a buſſhell and a halfe.
            
               Seſquiopera, one iourney in tyllage and a half.
            
               Seſquipes, a fote and a halfe.
            
               Seſquipedalia uerba, great & ſtoute wordes, as ſome noble men do ſpeake to theyr inferiours whan they are diſpleaſed.
            Seſquiplex, idem quod Seſquialia.
            
               Seſsio, a ſyttynge.
            
               Seſtans, & ſexſtans, that whiche is alſo called obolus, the ſyxte parte of a dramme.
            
               Seſtertius, ſeu ſeſtertius nummus, was a ſyluer coyne of the Romayns, wherof Denarius contayned
 foure ſoo that whan .vii. grotes englyſhe made an ounce, than was Seſtertius our englyſhe peny, and it was called Seſtertius, as it were Semitertius, for it conteyned ii. and a halfe of the braſon coyne called As, and therfore it is wrytten with this fygure US. whiche ſignifieth .ii. li. and di. Seſtertium in the neu
                  •
               re gender, ſignifieth a thouſande Seſtertij.
            
            
               Seta, amonge the auntient wryters was taken for ſylke.
            
               Setae, bryſtell heares.
            
               Setia, a citie in Campania.
            
               Setigerum, a beaſte whiche hath briſtels.
            
               Setinum uinum, wyne made aboute the Citie of Setia.
            
               Setim, a tre, lyke to whyte thorne, which doth neuer rotte: wherof was moche of the tymber in the temple of Salomon.
            
               Setoſus, ſa, ſum, full of bryſtelles.
            
               Setuoſus, a, um, olde wryters vſed for obſcurus, darke.
            
               Setuoſe, darkely.
            
               Seu, for ſiue, eyther, or.
            
               Seuere, ſharpely, cruelly.
            Seueriter, idem.
            
               Seueritas, tatis, grauitie, conſtantneſſe, properly in miniſtringe iuſtice.
            Seueritudo, idem.
            
               Seuerus, ra, rum, greue, conſtant, cruel, ſharpe daungerous to meddel with.
            
               Seuoco, care, to call aparte or awaye, to cal aſyde from other.
            
               Seuoſus, a, um, lyke to talowe.
            
               Seuo, are, to make candels of talowe.
            
               Seuum, talowe of beaſtes.
            
               Sex, ſyxe in number.
            
               Sexageni dies, thre ſcore dayes.
            
               Sexagies, thre ſcore tymes.
            
               Sexangulus, hauynge ſyxe corners.
            
               Sexcenus, ſyxe hundred.
            Sexcenti, idem.
            
               Sexcentoplagus, he that receyueth a hundred ſtrypes.
            
               Sexcuplus, a, um, ſyxe double, or ſyxe tymes ſo moche.
            
               Sexennis, of ſyxe yeres olde.
            
               Sexies, ſyxe tymes.
            
               Sextans, tis, the ſyxe parte of a pounde.
            
               Sextarius, is a meaſure wherby all other meaſures may be made for it conteyneth two meaſures callyd Heminie, and vi. Sextarij, do make one Congium, and .viii. Congij do make Amphoram. xx. Amphorae, oone Culeum. Notwithſtandynge there is Sextarius Romanus, and Sextarius atticus. Romanus conteyneth the weyght of oyle .xviii. ounces: of wyne .xx ounces. of hony .xxx. ounces. Atticus receyueth the wayght of oyle . xv ounces, of wyne a pounde .iii. ounces .v. dra
                  •
               
               mas and one ſcruple, of hony two pound and one ounce.
            
               Sextilis, is the monthe nowe called Auguſte.
            
               Sextula, the ſyxte part of an ounce, whiche is a dramme and a ſcruple.
            Sextus, ta, tum, the ſyxte.
            
            
               Sextum Conſul, the ſyxte tyme Conſull.
            
               Sexus, us, a kynd. ſexus uirilis, the male kind, ſexus muliebris, the woman kynde.
         
         
            ¶S ANTE I.
            
               SI, if although, I wolde god.
            
               Si dijs placet, If god wyl, or on goddis name: a word ſpoken eyther in dyſdaine or in mockage, for any thynge not well done.
            
               Etiam latini, ſi dijs placet, hoc biennio, magiſtri dicendi extiterunt▪
                yea and alſo the latines, on goddis name, haue ben theſe two yeres mayſters of eloquence.
            
               Quinetiam, ſi dijs placet, nephas aiunt, conſulem plebeium fie
                     ••
                  , They ſaye alſo, on goddes name, that it is vnlefull for a communes to be made conſul.
            
               Si ſapis, if thou be wyſe.
            
               Siambis, an yle in the Brytyſhe occean ſea, on the northe parte.
            
               Sibatis, an olde towne .xii. miles from Rome. alſo a citie in Calabria. ſometyme it is taken for delycate and wanton lyuynge.
            
               Sibariticus, ca, cum, wanton or delycate.
            
               Sibi, to hym.
            
               Sibilo, are, to whyſtell.
            
               Sibilus, a whiſtelynge.
            
               Sibylla, was a general name to all women whiche had the ſpirite of prophecy. of theym as Varro and Lactantius do wryte were tenne, the fyrſte called Perſica, the ſeconde Libyca, the thyrde Delphica, the fourthe Cumaea, the fyfthe, Erythrea, the ſyxt Samia, the ſeuenth Cumana, the eyght Helleſpontia, the nynth Phrigia, the tenthe Tyburtina, euery one of theſe (as Lactantius ſaythe) wrate of the incarnation of Chryſte.
            
               Sibus, a ſharpe wytted felowe.
            
               Sic, ſo, in lykewyſe, accordyngely, ſo lyghtlye. Mirabar hoc, ſi ſic, abiret, I wolde haue meruayled, if that it ſhuld haue paſſed to lightly Sic ago, ſo am I wonte to do. Sic ſum, ſuche a one am I.
            
               Sica, a ſhorte ſworde,
            
               Sicambri, the people of Naſſaw, and Heſſen in Germany.
            
               Sicani, people of Sicile.
            
               Sicania, the yle of Sicile.
            
               Sicarius, a murderer.
            
               Sicaneus, a, um, drye of nature.
            
               Sicceſco, ſcere, to drye.
            
                
               Siccine, of that faſcion, in ſuche facion.
            
               Siccine tu illam? Siccine nos habes Iudibrio omnes? Wylte thou handell her of that faſcion? Wylte thou in ſuche faſcion moche vs all.
            Siccitas, & Siccitudo, drythe.
            
            
               Sicco, care, to drye or be dryed.
            Siccus, ca, cum, drye, wythered.
            
            
               Sicera, all maner of drynke made of corne or fruites.
            
               Sicileo, cilui, cilire, to cut agayn that whiche was not well cutte afore, properly graſſe in a medowe.
            
               Sicilia, a noble Ile, fyrſte called Trinacria, afterwarde Sicania, and at the laſte Sicilia, It is in fourme thre cornerd, and therof had the name of Trinacria, the one corner called Pachynus, extēdeth toward that part of Grece whiche was called Peloponêſus, nowe Morêa. the ſeconde corner called Pelórus, lyeth towarde Italy, the thyrde called Lilybaeus, is extended towarde Affricam, of the whiche Pelorus excedeth in the temperaunce of the erthe, for with no weate there maye be anye myre, nor by any drythe duſte. This yle conteyneth in circuite as Solinus wryteth three thouſande furlonge, whiche is of Italion miles. CCC.lxxv. as Diodorus Siculus wryteth foure thouſand thre hundred and .lx. miles. But Plinius ſayth that the ſaid thre corners be diſtant from Pelorus to Pachinū by lande .Clxvi. myles. from thenſe to Lilybaeū
.CC. myles. from thenſe to Pelorum .Clxx. myles, and ſayth alſo that Agrippa affirmed it to be in circute .DCxviii. myles. which do not agre with Solinus nor Diodorus, whiche may happen to be by the diuerſitie of furlonges. rede therof in Stadiū. The fertilitie of this yle in al grayn, beaultie of medowes, delicateneſſe of waters colde and hot, mountaynes and caues myraculouſe, and other thynges there excedynge notable, manye autours haue wrytten and woundred at dothe Grekes and Latines.
            
               Siciliences, people dwellynge in Sicile, which were borne elles where.
            
               Sicilis, lidis, of Sicile.
            
               Sicilides Muſae, the Muſis of Sicile.
            
               Siciliſſo, are, to ſpeake the language of Sicile.
            
               Siciliqua, uel Sicilicus, a poyſe or weyght waiinge two drammes: and is the fourthe parte of an ounce.
            
               Sicilites, the heade of a iauelyn.
            
               Siclus, called alſo Tetradragmum, and Stater argenteus, is as well a coyne as a weyghte, beinge halfe an ounce in poyſe.
            
               Sicinnium, a kynde of daunſynge, wherin they that daunced dyd ſyng, as they do in Chriſtmas, whan they ſynge carolles: and as maidens do nowe vſe to do in the ſtretes.
            
               Sicubi, whereſoeuer.
            
               Siculi, men of Sicile.
            
               Siculum mare, the ſea by Sicile.
            
               Sicunde, of any place.
            
               Sicut & Sicuti, as, lyke as.
            
               Sicyonia, an yle in the ſea of Aegeum.
            
               Sideratio, a ſickeneſſe, which in ſuche wyſe taketh ſome parte of a mannes body, that it ſo daynely becommeth drye, ſo that he feleth it not, women do call it takynge, or benūming.
            
               Sideratus, he that is taken in any member or parte of his body, that he canne not fele it or ſtere it, the homely people calleth benummed
            
               Siderites, an herbe, whiche groweth on tyles and olde walles.
            
               Sidereus, a, um, of the ſterres.
            
               Sideror, ari, to be blaſted, or taken, that a man maye not ſtere or moue his membres.
            Sido, dis, ſedi, ſidere, to ſettyll.
            
            
               Sidon, a citie in Phoenicia, vpon the ſea ſyde, ſo called for the plenty of fyſhe there beinge taken. There was glaſſe fyrſte made.
            
               Sidonius, a, um, of that citie.
            
               Sidus, a number of ſterres gathered, which do make a ſygne or celeſtiall figure: ſometyme it is taken for one ſterre.
            
               Sifilare, to whyſtell.
            
               Sifilator, oris, a whyſtler.
            
               Sigaeum, a gret mountayn in the ſea by Troy.
            
               Sigillaria opera, warkes wherin were ſette ſmall ymages.
            
               Sigillatim, one after an other.
            
               Sigillo, are, to ſeale, ſometyme to cloſe or ſhut.
            
               Sigillum, a lyttell ymage.
            
               Sigillum Salomonis, an herbe. Reade Corrigiola.
            
            
               Sigma, tis, a lyttell table.
            
               Signaculum, a ſeale.
            
               Signatorius anulus, a ſignet.
            Signatus, ta, tum, notable.
            
            
               Signa infeſta, Standardes and baners aduaunced in battayle, in marchynge agaynſte ennemies.
            
               Signa coeleſtia, the twelue ſygnes, by the whiche the ſonne and other planets do paſſe.
            
               Signia, a citie in Campania.
            
               Signifer, he that beareth ſtandarde or baner in a fielde. it is ſomtyme taken for the cerkle in the firmament called alſo Zodiacus, wherin ben the .xii. ſignes.
            
               Significo, care, to ſygnifye or gyue knowlege. Signinum opus, a warke made with ſhelles and morter, or tyles and morter.
            
               Signo, are, to make a ſigne, to ſigne or ſeale, to ſignifie or ſhewe by a ſigne or token, to write
            
               Signum, a ſigne, token, or marke, a miracle.
            
               Signa dare militibus, to cauſe the trumpets to blowe, that the ſouldiours maye prepare
 them to battayle or to aſſemble them ſelues to gether.
            
               Signa, be alſo ymages of mettal, ſtone, or wod ſtandardes in warre or baners.
            
               Silanius, an hyghe hyll in Irelande.
            
               Sil, ſilis, certayne erthe yelowe of colour found in the mynes of golde or ſyluer.
            
               Sillago, an herbe whiche Brunfelſius ſuppopoſeth to be the common crowe fote.
            
               Silatum, brekefaſte.
            
               Sila, an helmet.
            
               Silenta loca, quiete places, wherein is noo noyſe.
            
               Silentium, ſylence, quietneſſe.
            
               Silenus, the foſter father of Bacchus.
            
               Sileo, lui, lere, to kepe ſylence, to ſpeake nothynge.
            
               Siler, a kynde of wythy growynge in water: it is alſo a ryuer in the realme of Naples.
            
               Sileſco, ſcere, to be in ſilence, or quiete.
            
               Silex, ſilicis, a flynte ſtone.
            
               Silicatus, ta, tum, made with flynte ſtones.
            
               Silicernius, & Silicernium, a certayn pudding eaten only at the tyme of funeralles, ſome do take it for a feaſte or dyner made at the funeralles or termente of a man or woman.
            
               Senex ſilicernius, is named of Terence for an olde Cryppell, redy to haue ſuche a dyuer made for hym.
            
               Siliceus, a, um, of a flynte ſtone.
            
               Silitia, ſiue Silicula, an herbe called Fengreke.
            
               Silugo, liginis, a kynde of wheate hauynge an vpryghte ſtalke, and the corne verye whyte, and therof is made the fyneſt breade & moſte pryncipall, as Galenus wryteth, De alimentis. li. 26. It was alſo called Olyra, of ſome Typha.
            
            
               Siliqua, the huſke or codde of any thynge. alſo a certayne fruite in Italy, which is in length of a mans fynger, and brode, and ſomewhat hoked, the wayte of ſyxe of theym made the poyſe called Scrupulus, a ſcruple, whereof three do make a dramme. It is now called a Characte, and is vſed among fyners of gold and ſyluer, and alſo coyners in the fynynge and alayinge therof.
            
               Siliqua, is ſometyme taken for foenugraecum.
            
            Siliqua aegiptia, is Caſsia fiſtula.
            
               Siliquaſtrum, an herbe.
            
               Siliquor, quaris, quari, to growe in huſke or rodde.
            
               Silura, a countrey in the more Britayne.
            
               Silo, onis, he whiche hath great browes.
            ❀Siloſontis chlamis, is ſpoken in a prouerb of hym, whiche boſteth hym ſelfe of ryche garmentes.
            
               Silus, a camoiſed noſe, or a noſe whiche is tourned vpwarde.
            
               Silphion, an herbe, wherof commeth the gum called Beuicyn.
            
               Silurus, a fyſhe called a ſturgeon.
            
               Simiolus. a lyttell ape.
            Simia, & Simius, an ape.
            
            
               Simila, fyne meale of corne.
            Similago, ginis, idem.
            Simillimus, a, um, moſte lyke.
            
            
               Similitas, lykeneſſe.
            
               Similiter, lykewyſe, alſo.
            Similis, le, lyke.
            
            ❀Simileis habent labra lactucas, a prouerb applyed to them, which being of lyke yll conditions, be matched together, as a lewde ſeruant with an yll mayſter, an vnruly people to a neglygent gouernour, a ſhrewde wyfe to a frowarde huſband. &c. Like maſter like man Lyke wyll to lyke.
            Similitudo, dinis, lykeneſſe.
            
            
               Similo, are, to be lyke.
            Simitu, pro ſimul, together.
            
            
               Simois, oentos, a ryuer by Troye.
            
               Simonia, Symony.
            
               Simonides, a Poete of Greece, borne in the ile called Coea, who was the fyrſte that inuented the verſes called Lyrici, and was excellent in prouoking of teares, and in that kind of wrytynge there was in hym a wonderfull grace. It is written that Pauſanias kynge of Lacedemonians, at a banket deſyred inſtantly of hym, that he wolde thanne ſpeake ſome thynge notable, and that ſauoured of wyſedome▪ Simonides therat ſmylinge, Remembre ſayde he, that thou arte a man. Pauſani as tooke that ſcornefullye, and eſtemed it nothynge. Afterwarde Pauſanias beinge put in priſon in Chalcioeco, and there being famiſhed er that he dyed. He remembred the ſayinge of Simonides, and with a lowd and lamentable voyce ſayde. O my frende of Coeus, thy wordes were of a great importance, but I for mad pryde eſtemed theym nothing. This lyttell hiſtorye is not vnworthye to be had in remembraunce.
            
               Simplariae, ſymple thynges or of lyttell value.
            
               Simplares, they whiche doo weare hoſtynge harneyſe.
            
               Simplex, plicis, that is not double, ſyncere or playne, withoute deceypte, of one ſorte, vnmyxte.
            
               Simplicitas, playneneſſe.
            
               Simpliciter, playnely.
            Simplicitus, for ſimpliciter.
            
               Simplus, a, um, ſengle in number, one onely.
            
               Simpulum, a chalyce or cuppe of erthe, wherwith they ſacrifyced in the olde tyme before that golde and ſyluer were in great eſtimation. It is of Varro taken for a cruete with a pype, out of the which wyne came dropping by lyttell and lyttel.
            
                
               Simpuuium, a veſſell of tree.
            
               Simul, togyther with other, moreouer, alſo.
            
               Simul ac, ſimul at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , as ſone as, incontinent as.
            
               Simulachrum, an ymage of a man or woman.
            
               Simulo, are, to indeuour, to be lyke to one, alſo to fayne.
            
               Simultas, atis, priuy dyſpleſure or hatred with dyſſemblynge countenaunce.
            
               Simulatio, fantaſy, alſo dyſſimulation.
            
               Simulator, he that dyſſembleth.
            Simulter, for ſimiliter.
            
               Simulto, tare, to be at varyance with one, to hate one priuyly.
            Simus, a, um, flatte.
            
            
               Sin, or els, yf not, but yf.
            
               Sina, or Sinai, a mountayne in the deſerte of Araby, called alſo Oreb. it is of Solinus callid Caſius. Iuſtinus callyth it Synaeus, on that hylle god appered to Moſes, and delyuered to hym the tables of the lawe, reade hereof abundantly in the olde teſtament.
            
               Sinapi, & ſinapis, ſenuye ſeede, whereof muſtarde is made.
            
               Sinapium, muſtarde.
            
               Sinapodes, people in Affrike, whiche do go as they crepte.
            
               Sinarum Regio, a countraye beyonde the lyne equinoctiall.
            
               Sinciput, the foreparte of the heade.
            
               Sindo, donis, a fyne lynnen clothe.
            
               Sine, without.
            
               Sine ut ueniat, let hym come.
            
               Sine fraude mea, my ryght ſaued.
            
               Singillatim, to euery one, or of euery one, one after an nother.
            
               Singularis, re, ſyngular, excellente, one without any mo.
            
               Singulariter, ſyngularly, onely.
            
               Singulatim, euery thynge by it ſelfe.
            
               Singultio, tire, to yexe.
            
               Singultiens, he that hath the yexe.
            
               Singultiens gallina, a clockynge henne.
            Singultus, tus, yexynge.
            
            Singulus, a, um, eueryche.
            
            
               Siniſtra, the lefthande.
            
               Siniſter, ſtra, ſtrum, pertayning to the left hand. ſometyme it ſygnifieth contrarye, vnproſperous, or vnhappy.
            Sino, ſini, ſinere, to ſuffre.
            
            
               Sinope, pes, a citie in the countray of Pontus.
            
               Sinopis, pidis, a redde ſtone, commonly callyd Sinoper.
            
               Siniſtre, vnhappily, vnfortunately.
            
               Siniſtrorſum, on the left hande.
            
               Sinueſſa, a citie in Campania.
            
               Sinuo, are, to tourne or wynde in the fourme of a ſerpent, makynge holowe boſomes or forowes. it is alſo applyed to garmentes that ar pleyghted or gathered vp. alſo to ſtreames of ryuers, whyche do in rounnynge make diuers tournynges. alſo to bankes, which haue holowe crekes or boſomes.
            
               Sinuoſus, a, um, that whiche hathe many tournynges and wyndynges.
            
               Sinus, us, a boſome. alſo the tournynges or holowneſſe of water bankes. ſometyme the holowneſſe of eyen. ſometyme a ſayle. alſo a cup for wyne, alſo nettes, ſometyme a ſayle, whan the wynde fylleth it.
            
               Sinus urbis, the myddell of a citie.
            
               In ſinu habere, to haue ſecretely in his hart.
            
               In ſinu gaudere, to be mery or gladde, without ſhewyng it openly.
            
               Soluto ſinu, with all lyberalitie.
            
               Sion, an herbe growynge in the water, hauing leaues lyke Alyſanders, but ſomewhat leſſe and ſoote in ſmellynge.
            
               Siparium, a courtayne.
            
               Siphones, the pypes of a cundyte.
            
               Siphnus, an yle in the ſea of Aegeum, wherin was found ſomtyme plenty of golde & ſiluer.
            
               Sipus, ſipuntis, or Sipontum, a citie in Apulia, by the mountayne callyd Garganus.
            
               Sipontinus, of that citie.
            
               Siqua, for ſi aliqua, yf any.
            
               Siquide, for bycauſe, alſo yf.
            Siquis, quae, quod, yf any.
            
            
               Sir, a citie in Illiria, or Slauony.
            Siremps, for ſimilis res ipſa.
            Siren, & Sirena, a mermayden.
            
            
               Sirenes, were thre doughters of Acheloꝰ & Calli
                  •
               pe, which dwellyd in an yle betwene Italy & Sicile, who with theyr ſwete ſynging drew ſuche vnto them, as paſſed that ſea, and than they ſlewe theym. As it happened to Vlyſſes to ſayle that way, he ſtopped the eares of all his company, to the intente they ſhoulde not heare the ſonges of Sirenes, and cauſed him ſelfe to be bounde to the maſt of a ſhippe, and ſo eſcaped. Syrenes, ſorowed ſo moche, that they were dyſapoynted, that they threw them ſelfe into the ſea, whome poetes fayned to be meremaydens.
            
               Sireus, a ſterre in the myddel of the fyrmament vnto the which whan the ſonne commeth, the ferue
                  •
               tnes of heate is doubled, whereby the bodyes of me become ſyck with heates. this ſterre is alſo callyd Canicula, and the dayes wherein it appereth be callyd Caniculares, whiche do begyn the .vi. day of Iuly.
            
               Siri, pyttes, wherein corne was layde to be preſerued.
            
               Siriaſis, a ſyckeneſſe of trees, where about the tyme of the Canycular days by the excedyng heate of the Sunne, the trees be brente, and doo ſterue. it is alſoo a ſyckeneſſe in the heades of chylderne, procedyng of the inflamations of the brayne.
            
                
               Sirius, a ſterre, whyche ryſeth the .viii. Calendes of Iune
            
               Sirpea, mattes, or other thynges made of ruſſhes.
            
               Sirpices, were inſtrumentes made with teethe lyke to a ſawe, whyche beynge drawen with oxen, plucked vp by the rootes flagges and great wedes, whyche grewe in medowes.
            
               Sirpiculae falces, hookes, wherewith vynes are cutte.
            
               Sirpiculum, a lyttell baſkette.
            
               Sirpo, are, to bynde or wynde with ruſſhes or oſyars, or other lyke thynge.
            
               Sirpus, a ruſſhe. Nodum in ſirpo quaeris, thou fyndeſt dyfficultie or doubte, where there is none. Sirpi, be alſo warkes or verſes, whiche be very harde to be vnderſtande.
            
               Sirrus, a caue vnder grounde, in the whyche men kept wheate.
            
               Siſacthea, ae, a rayenge ſyue.
            
               Siſachthea, a lawe of the Athenienſes made by Solon, for the mitigation of dettes or money owed.
            
               Siſamum, a maner of pulſe or corne. alſoo it is that whyche the apothecaryes doo calle Seſamum.
            
            
               Siſara, after Varro is a tree, whereof the bees doo gather lyquyde honye. Plinius callyth it Siſarum, it is ſuppoſed to be that, whyche Dioſcorides callyth Ericem, not moche vnlyke to Tamarix, the Athenienſes (as Plyny writeth) calleth it Tetradicem.
            
            
               Siſer, a delycate to be eaten, whiche ſome men do ſuppoſe to be yelowe carettes.
            
               Siſymbrium, an herbe, wherof be two kyndes, the one is callyd Siſymbrium alone, whyche is alſo callyd Thymbrea, in englyſſhe water mynte, the other is callyd Siſymbrium Cardamine, whyche in englyſhe is watercreſſes.
            
               Siſto, ſiſtere, to make to tary or ſtande ſtylle, to retayne or kepe backe, to appere, as a manne dothe beinge ſued in the lawe.
            
               Siſtas te, appere thou.
            
               Ore ſiſtere. Eminor, interminor
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , ne quis mihi obſtiterit obuiam, nam qui obſtiterit ore ſiſtet, I thretten, and I menace, that no man let me of my way, for who ſo euer letteth me, ſhall kyſſe the grounde.
            
               Siſtere nadimonium, to brynge in ſurctie.
            
               Siſtrum, an Inſtrumente lyke a horne, whyche was vſed in battaylle, in the ſtede of a trumpette.
            
               Siſyphus, was a greatte theefe, whyche was ſlayne by Theſeus, of whome it is fayned, that in helle he tourneth a ſtoone vppe to a greatte hylle, but whan it is at the toppe, it fallethe downe agayne, and renewethe his laboure.
            
               Sitanius panis, breade of newe wheate.
            
               Sitarchia, a bagge, or gardeuyandes, wherein meate is putte.
            
               Sithonia, a countrey in Macedonia vppon the ſea ſyde.
            
               Siticen, he that dyd blowe in a trumpet whan men were buryed.
            
               Sitio, tire, to thyrſt or be a thyrſte.
            
               Sitiens, he that is a thyrſte.
            
               Situlus barbatus, a lyttell ſkyllette.
            
               Sitella, a lytell potte, wherinto lottes were put.
            Sitibundus, a, um, very thyrſty.
            
            
               Siticuloſus, he that is alway a thyrſt.
            
               Sitis, thyrſt, or deſyre to drynke.
            
               Situla, & ſitella, a lyttell coffer, wherein lottes were put, at the choſynge of offycers, alſo a bucket to drawe water.
            
               Situs, ta, tum, put or ſette.
            
               Situs, tus, fylthyneſſe gathered of moyſture, by lacke of klenſynge. alſo of ſluttyſhenes, alſo the ſettynge or ſtandynge of a place, whyche is nowe callyd the ſyte or ſytuation of a maner or countray.
         
         
            ¶S ANTE M.
            
               SMaragdus, a precyous ſtone callyd an Emeraude.
            
               Smegma, ſope, and all other thynge that dothe put away ſpottes or vncleannes.
            
               Smigticus, ca, cum, the ef
                  •
               icacy of clenſyng,
            
               Smilax, acis, a tree, whyche hathe leaues lyke an yuye, with bearyes, and a whyte flowre, and ſmelleth lyke a lylly, and runneth vp vppon trees. Ouidius fayneth to be a wenche, whyche dyenge for the loue of a yonge manne called Crocus, was transfourmed into the ſayde herbe.
            
               Smyntheus, one of the names of Apollo.
            
               Smyrna, a citie of Ionia in the leſſe Aſia, whiche was ſuppoſed of ſome to be the countrey of Homerus.
            
               Smyrnium, an herbe whiche Eritius Cordus ſuppoſeth to be the commune Angelica. Manardus epiſt . li. xii. epiſt iiii. interpreteth it to be Olus atrum, in englyſhe Alyſander. Ruellius affirmeth it to be that herbe, whiche in Fraunce is called Leneche, I ſuppoſe in englyſhe Louage. which ſayth mooſte truely, I referre to the reader.
         
         
            ¶S ANTE O.
            
               SOANA, a ryuer of Aſia.
            
               Soanes, people of Aſia, dwellynge aboute the extreme parte of the mountayne callyd Cauca
                     •
                  us.
            
            
               Soboles, iſſue or ſucceſſion of chyldren.
            
               Soboleſcere, to increace people.
            
               Sobriè, ſobrely, aduyſedly, prudently.
            
               Sobrini, ſyſters chyldren.
            
                
               Sobrius, a, um, ſobre, well aduyſed.
            
               Soccus, & ſocculus, a ſocke, whiche womenne and players in comedies onely ware.
            
               Socer, cri, the wyues father.
            
               Sociale bellum, that warre whyche is made with confederates or alies.
            
               Socienus, a companyon or felowe.
            Societas, tatis, felowſhyppe.
            
            
               Socio, are, to ioyne or confederate.
            
               Sociare ſermonem, to haue familyar cōmunication with one.
            
               Socius, a felowe or companyon. alſo Socij, be confederates, they whiche in all counſayles and actes do particypate one with an other. Looke for Comites, and Sodales, in theyr places.
            
               Socors, for ſecors, luſkyſhe, apt to no goodnes.
            
               Socordia, for ſecordia, luſkyſhenes, ſometyme it ſignifieth ydelneſſe.
            
               Socrates, an excellente phyloſopher ſonne of Sophroniſcus the maſon, and Phaneretae a mydwyfe, who beyng fyrſt ſtudyouſe in naturalle philoſophye, fynallye gaue hym ſelfe to morall phyloſophy, teachynge openly veatue, and ſoo dylygently enſewed it in his lyuynge, and in dyſputynge was ſo ſharpe and aſſured agaynſte theym that were callyd Sophiſtae, that Apollo, the queſtyon beyng demaunded who was the wyſeſt man lyuynge, he aunſwered Socrates, he was mayſter to Plato, Xenophon, Xenocrates, and other the greatteſt phyloſophers at that tyme lyuynge. beſydes his excellencye in vertue and knowledge, he was of a rare and meruaylous nature. For he moughte ſuſtayne heate, colde, labour, hunger, and thyrſte, aboue any man of that tyme, as Alcibiades declareth in Plato. He affyrmed, that there was alwaye with hym a ſpyryte or ſpirytuall power callyd Daemonium, the whyche as often as he was meuyd to doo any thynge not conuenyent or neceſſarye, that ſpyryte towched hym and dydde prohybyte hym to doo it. Vnder ſharpe and mery tauntes, in the fourme of argument called induction, he cauſed menne to perceyue theyr ignoraunce, where before they thoughte theym ſelues to be wyſe. Fynallye beynge enuyed of theym, whyche than dydde beare chyefe rule in Athenes, he was accuſed of Anytus Melyſſus the poete and Lycon the oratour, that he ſpake agaynſt theyr goddis, and corrupted their chylderne with peruerſe doctryne, but he contemnyng deth, wolde ſuffer no man to ſpeake for hym, and ſoo drynkynge poyſon with a ioyouſe countenaunce, and ſay
                  •
               nge to Anytus, I brynge the good lucke, dyed incontynent. But ſoone after the people were ſo ſoory for his death, that of his accuſers ſomme they ſlewe, and ſome exyled, and dydde ſette vp openly the ymage of Socrates made of copper. He was before the Incarnation of Chriſt .CCClxvii. yeres.
            
               Socraticus, he that foloweth the doctryne of Socrates.
            
               Socrus, my wyues mother.
            
               Sodales, they that keepe companye togyther at meales or paſſetyme. They be alſoo they, whyrhe be of oone fraternytie or company
                  •
                or guylde.
            
               Sodalitas, tatis, a fraternytie or brotherhoode. Alſoo a company incorporate of any myſterye or crafte, generally all felowſhyppes priuately aſſemblyng amonge the people.
            Sodalitium, idem.
            
               Sodes, yf thou dare.
            
               Sodoma, orum, & Sodomum, a cytie in Iudea, whyche for ſynne doone agaynſte nature, was by almyghtye god conſumed by celeſtyall fyre.
            
               Sodomito, tare, to commyt or vſe the ſynne of Sodoma, agaynſt nature.
            
               Sogdiana, a countrey in Aſia, extendyng to the northe parte of Scithia.
            
               Sol, ſolis, the ſonne.
            
               Soles, ſygnifieth ſometyme the day, ſometyme the beames of the ſonne.
            
               Soles longi, longe dayes.
            
               Sole nouo, at the ſonne ryſyng.
            Solamen, minis, ſolace.
            
            
               Solanum, an herbe callyd myghtſhade.
            
               Solanum ſoporiferum, an herb callyd dwale.
            
               Solaris, re, of the ſunne.
            
               Solarium, a place where by the ſunne, houres are knowen. Alſo a ſolar of a houſe. alſo a pencyon payde to the prynce, to lyue out of commune buſyneſſe.
            
               Solati, they whiche be diſeaſed or ſycke by the heate of the ſunne.
            
               Solatium, ſolace or comforte.
            Soldum, for ſolidum.
            
               Solea, a ſhoe, callyd a galage or paten, whiche hathe nothynge on the fete, but onely lachettes. Alſo a fyſhe callyd a ſoole. alſo a groundſoyle, wheron ſtandeth the walle of a houſe. It is alſo a ſhoe, wherewith horſes and oxen be ſhodde.
            
               Solearius, a paten maker.
            Soleatus, ta, tum, ſhodde.
            
            
               Solemne, accuſtomyd.
            
               Solemnia, feaſtes or holy dayes.
            
               Solemni
                     •
                  er, ſolemnely.
            
               Solennis, ne, annuall or yerely, that whych is done euery yere.
            Soleo, ſolitus ſum, uel ſolui, ſolêre, to be wonte.
            
            
               Solere, to kepe company.
            
               Soliferū, a weapon al of yron to caſt in batayle.
            
                
               Solet, it was wont, or the vſe hath ben.
            
               Solens, for ut ſoleo, Ego abſceſsi ſolens paulum ab illis, I went a lyttell from theym, as I was wont.
            Solers, tis, wytty.
            
            
               Solerter, wyttyly, cunnyngly, craftily.
            
               Solertia, ſharpeneſſe or quyckeneſſe of wytte, craftyneſſe or ſubtylitie in practyſynge, or wyttyneſſe.
            
               Solicito, tare, to ſhewe bothe hope and feare. alſoo to inquiete or make ſoory, to ſolycite or procure by meanes. ſommetyme to labour the earthe.
            Solicitudo, dinis, care.
            
            Solicitus, ta, tum, carefull.
            
            
               Solidago maior, wall wort.
            
               Solidarij, they whyche do ſelle in groſſe.
            
               Solidè, holle, perfytely.
            
               Solideſco, ſcere, to cloſe togyther, as a wounde dothe, whan it healeth.
            
               Solidipes, that hath fete hole without toes.
            
               Soliditas, maſſiuenes.
            
               Solido, dare, to make fyrme, to conſolydate.
            
               Solidurij, were menne of warre in Fraunce, in the tyme of Iulius Ceſar, which being ones retayned with any people or capitayne, were ſo addicted vnto them, that in theyr quarels they wolde dye, or yf vyctory inclyned on the other part, they wolde ſlea them ſelues.
            
               Solidus, da, dum, holle, contynuall, not holow, not broken or cutte, maſſy.
            
               Solidus, was amonge the Romaynes dyuerſly taken ſometyme for a coygne of braſſe, contaynyng
.xii. ſmall coygnes. ſometyme it was taken for dragma in ſyluer, as primo Eſdrae, cap. 8. & ſecundo eiuſdem cap. vii. in Paralypo. cap. 29. Somme were of the valour of dragma, as in the tyme of Alexander the emperour.
            
               Solidus aureus, was in the tyme of the ſame emperour two dragmas of goulde, after in the tyme of Iuſtinianus .vi. of theym made one ounce, they beinge the weyghte of ours olde nobles.
            
               Solifuga, he that kepeth hym out of the ſonne, or fleeth from the heate of the ſonne.
            
               Solipunga, a flye, whyche in the heate of the ſonne prycketh moſte ſharply.
            
               Soliloquus, he that talketh beinge alone.
            
               Soliloquium, communication, which a man beinge alone, hath with god in contemplation.
            
               Solinunt, for ſolent, they are wont.
            
               Solitarius, ſolytary, alone, without company.
            
               Solitas, ſolytaryneſſe.
            
               Solitaurilia, an offryng of thre thynges of ſundry kyndes, as a bulle, a ramme, and a boore.
            
               Solito, tare, to be wont often.
            
               Solitudo, deſert, where no man dwelleth.
            
               Solitudo puerorum, whan they haue neither father nor mother.
            
               Solitus ſum, I was wonte.
            
               Soliuagus, he that wandreth alone.
            
               Solium, a place of aſtate, where a kyng ſitteth, it is alſo a great veſſell, whiche ſerueth to diuers vſes, as to tranſlate lykour from one to an other, to waſhe lynnen clothes, & for men and women to be bathed in. It ſygnifieth alſo a coffyn, where dcade bodies are put.
            
               Soloeciſmns, a vyce in ſpeakynge, wherein the true congruitie & ryght ſpeche is peruerted.
            
               Solo, all, in the oſke tungue.
            
               Solon, a noble man of Athenes, whyche by his mother lynially deſcended from Codrus the laſte kynge of Athenes, he was a man of excellent wytte, and callyd one of the ſeuen wiſe men of Grece And was in ſuche auctoritie in that cytie, that he made and gaue to theym lawes, whyche were neuer repelled, not with ſtandynge whan Piſiſtratus his kynneſman went about to chaunge the fourme of that commune weale, whiche was popular into a monarchy, he wyllyngly wente in exyle, and ſo dyed. rede of hym in Croeſus. whā he was wrytynge of his lawes. Anacharſis the phyloſopher ſayd, that Solons lawes ſhoulde be lyke to copwebbes, that lyttel flyes ſhuld be faſt tyed with theym, but great flyes ſhould make holes and breake through them.
            
               Solor, aris, ari, to recreate, to comfort, to ſolace to make paſtyme.
            
               Solox, courſe wolle, or lockes.
            
               Solſequium, an herbe, whiche hath bene longe taken for marygouldes. But Ruellius nowe dothe deny it, not withſtandyng I am not ſo ſcrupulous, but that I am contente with the olde opynion. The deſcription of Heliotropium, not moch abhorryng it, as me ſemeth.
            
               Solſtitialis herba, an herbe, whych doth beare floures onely at the tyme, whan the ſonne is at the hygheſt, or as ſome menne ſuppoſe but one day.
            
               Solſtitialis uita, a lyfe whyche dureth but a lyttell ſpace.
            
               Solſti alis morbus, a ſyckeneſſe whyche kylleth men ſhortly.
            
               Solſtitialis aegritudo, is of ſome men taken for the burnynge feuer, whyche happeneth about the canycular dayes, of excedynge heate of the ayre.
            
               Solſtitium, the ſtay of the ſonne, whan he can not be eyther hygher or lower, whyche is twyſe in the yere, that is in wynter, the eight calendes of Ianuarye, and is callyd Solſtitium hyemale, and in Sommer the eyghte Calendes of Iulye, and is callyd Solſtitium aeſtiuale.
            
            
               Soluendo non eſt, he is not able to pay.
            
               Solum, the ſoyle or grounde, generally it ſygnifeth
 all thynge which dothe ſuſteyn or beare any other thyng on it. it is alſo the ſole of the fote. alſo the ſoole of a ſhoe.
            
               Natale ſolum, a mans naturall countrey.
            
               Solum uertere, to make bankroute, to forſake his owne countrey.
            
               Soluo, ui, uere, to louſe, to pay, to recompence, to put awaye, to delyuer, to reſolue or melte.
            
               Soluere fidem, to breake promyſe.
            
               Soluere uenas, to open the veynes.
            
               Soluere uotum, to perfourme an auowe.
            
               Aluum ſoluere, to make one laſke.
            
               Soluere uita, to ſlea one.
            
               Soluere ebritatem, to make one ſobre.
            
               Soluere legibus, to dyſpence with oone, to gyue hym a placarde.
            
               Obſidione ſoluere, to rayſe the ſiege.
            
               Fidem ſoluere, to breake promyſe or ſaythe.
            
               Soluere morem, to breake a cuſtome.
            
               Morbo ſolutus, deade.
            
               Soluere, to make ſatisfaction.
            
               Solummodo, onely.
            
               Solutè, wantonly, incontinently.
            
               Solutilis, le, that whyche wyll be ſoone louſed or vndone.
            
               Solus, alone, one onely, ſolytary.
            
               Solutus, ta, tum, louſed or louſe, alſo payde.
            
               Solutus riſus, a great laughter.
            
               Solymae, plur. the citie of Hieruſalem, an other citie in Cilicia.
            
               Somniator, a dreamer.
            
               Somnorinum, a dreame.
            
               Somniculoſè, dreamyngly.
            
               Somniculoſus, ſleapy, a ſluggarde.
            
               Somniculous, a, um, that whiche cauſeth one to ſleape.
            
               Somnifer, feri, that whyche induceth or bryngeth ſleape.
            Somnificus, idem.
            
               Somnio, ſomniare, to dreame.
            
               Somnolentus, diſpoſed to ſleape.
            
               Somnus, ſleape.
            
               Sonchos, an herbe, whiche Cordus taketh for Cicerbita, which is our ſowthyſtel. But Hieronymus Tragus taketh it to be the iaggyd letuſe, whiche commeth vp in the begynnyng of the yere.
            
               Sonere, to ſounde or make a ſounde.
            
               Sonito, to ſounde often.
            
               Sonipes, pedis, a lyght or ſwyft horſe.
            
               Sonitus, tus, a ſounde.
            Soniuit, for ſonuit.
            
               Sono, are, to ſounde or make a noyſe.
            
               Sonor, oris, a great ſounde or noyſe.
            
               Sonorè, ſhyll or loude.
            
               Sonoritas, a ſhylleneſſe or loudeneſſe.
            
               Sonorus, nora, norum, lowde, or makynge a great ſownde.
            Sons, tis, gylty.
            
            Sonticus, ca, cum, noyfull.
            
            
               Sonticus morbus, in the Pandectes of the cyuyle lawe, is taken of Caſſius and Venuleiꝰ for any contynuall ſyckeneſſe, wherby one is lette to doo his neceſſarye buſyneſſe▪ and ther ffore in the tyme of warre, they whyche were in that maner ſyck, were dyſcharged of their othes. Sextus and other Interpretoures of the twelue Tables, toke it for a vehemente and very great ſyckeneſſe.
            
               Sontica cauſa, was expowned in Neuio, for a iuſte and laufull cauſe.
            
               Sonus, all that may be herde.
            
               Sophaci, people of Affrica.
            
               Sophia, wyſedome.
            
               Sophiſtice, ces, the parte of logyke, whiche is captious and ſubtyll.
            
               Sophiſma, Sophiſmatis, a craftye and dyſceytefulle ſentence, an Oracyon or inuencyon, whyche ſeemeth to be trewe, whanne it is falſe.
            
               Sophiſta, & ſophiſtes, a dyſſembler of wyſedome, a deceyuer vnder an eloquent or crafty ſpeakynge, he that profeſſeth phyloſophye for lucre or vaynglory.
            
               Sophocles, a wryter of Tragedies.
            
               Sophron, in Greeke, is Temperaunce in Englyſhe, whereby carnall appetites and luſtes be refrayned.
            
               Sophos, aut ſophus, a wyſe man.
            
               Sopio, piui, pire, & ſopior, to ſette at reſte, to brynge aſleape.
            
               Sopitus, brought aſleape, or to reſte, or into a ſowne with a ſodayne ſtroke.
            
               Ignis ſopitus, fyre couered with aſſhes, or other thynge that it ſhewe not.
            
               Sopor, oris, deade ſleape.
            
               Soporifer, ſoporiferi, & ſoporiferū, that bringeth ſleape.
            
               Soporo, rare, to brynge or induce ſleape.
            
               Soporatus, faſte aſleape.
            
               Sora, an hylle in Italy.
            
               Soracte, an hylle twenty myles from Rome.
            Sorbeo, bui, bêre, & Sorbo, pſi, bere, to ſuppe as one ſuppeth potage.
            
            
               Sorbêre animo, to put away care or ſorowe.
            
               Odia ſorbere, to ſuſtayne diſpleaſure pacientlye.
            
               Sorbiciuncula, a thynne brothe.
            Sorbitio, onis, ſuppynge.
            
            Sorbities, idem.
            
               Sorbillo, lare, to ſyppe.
            
               Sorbillum, potage or other lyquyde meates ordeyned to ſuppe, whyche women be wont to calle a lyttell ſouppynge, whanne they do exhorte a ſycke manne to eate, whan ſometyme it were better, that he ſhoulde eate nothynge.
            
               Sorbum, an harryſhe peare.
            
                
               Sorbus, a tree whiche is long, and hath a ſtrait ſtemme, and a thyn bark, ſomwhat fatty, and fyrſt yelow, afterward whytiſh, a leaf like to a laurell, but that it is thynner and leſſe, and creuid by the edges, which hangeth by a long ſtalke▪ alſo white floures in a cluſter, and beteth fruite, whiche is in the forme of an egge, and in a cluſter. I ſuppoſe that there be none of theym in Englande, and therefore to my knowledge it lacketh an englyſſhe name, In frenche it is callyd Cormier.
            
               Sorbum, the fruite of Sorbus, whiche hath no ſtones, and they which do growe in woddes, haue a more ſauoure than thoſe whiche be in gardeynes. in Fraunce it is callyd Corme.
            
               Sordeo, & ſordeſco, dui, dêre, to be fowle or vnkleanly.
            
               Sordes, fylthe or vncleannes, the ſwepynges of houſes and canelles. ſometyme vylenes.
            
               Sordeſco, ſcere, to be vncleane or ſluttyſhe.
            
               Sordidatus, vyly apparaylled for heuyneſſe of mynde.
            
               Sordidè, vnkleanly, ſluttyſhly.
            Sordidior, dius, vncleanlyer.
            
            
               Sordidiſsimè, moſte vncleanly.
            Sordidiſsimus, ma, mum, vncleanlyeſt.
            
            
               Sordido, dare, to make fowle.
            
               Sordidus, da, dum, fylthy, vncleane, ſluttyſhe.
            
               Sorditudo, fylthynes, ſluttyſhnes.
            
               Sorex, ricis, a ratte, or a fielde mouſe.
            
               Sorech, the Iewes do call vynes, whiche contynually do brynge forthe moſte pleaſant and dylectable fruite.
            
               Soriantes, ſworne bretherne.
            
               Soriceus, a, um, of a ratte.
            
               Soricinus, a, um, of a mouſe.
            
               Soriculata ueſtis, a garmēt of changeable ſylke▪
            
            
               Sorita, a ſubtyll & captious forme of arguyng.
            
               Soritae, people whiche are diuyded from Inde by the ryuer called Arabis.
            
               Sorilla, ſhyppes whyche are calked or ſtopped with hempe or flaxe.
            
               Sororiari, is properlye of maydens breaſtes, whan they begyn to be imboſed.
            
               Soror, ris, a ſyſter.
            
               Sororiae, maydens pappes.
            
               Sororiantes māmulae, maydens pappes round and harde, ſet out to the ſhewe.
            
               Sororius, my ſyſters huſbande.
            
               Sorracus, a coffer or baſket, wherin are caried the inſtrumentes or apparaile ſeruyng for comedies or enterludes.
            
               Sors, ſortis, chaunce, lotte, portion in inherytaunce, the holle ſumme in a commune banke or ſto ke, wherein many haue parte. it is alſo the princypall ſumme of money borowed. it is alſo deſtiny, iudgement.
            
               Sortes, were alſo the aunſweres of ydols.
            
               Sorticula, the ſcrowe, wherein the lotte is wryten.
            
               Sortilegi, be they whiche doo telle mennes deſtenies by takyng of lottes or verſes of holy ſcrypture.
            
               Sortilegium, dyuination by lottes.
            
               Sortior, tiris, tiri, & ſortio, tire, to make lottes, to take or haue any thynge by lotte or chance Alſo to diſpoſe or order.
            
               Sortire prouinciam, to receyue the rule of a countray by lottes. It is vſurped to haue auctoritie by election.
            
               Sortitò, an Aduerbe, ſygnyfyenge by lotte or chaunce.
            
               Sortitus, ta, tum, taken by lotte. alſo changyng to haue a thynge.
            
               Soſpes, hole or ſaufe. alſo he that gyueth helth.
            
               Soſpitalis, le, cauſe of helthe.
            
               Soſpito, tare, to kepe in healthe.
            
               Sos, olde writers vſed for eos.
            
               Soſia, a mannes name.
            
               Soſtratus, a mannes name.
            
               Sotadicum carmen, meter hauyng .vii. feete.
            
               Soticena, one of the names of Iuno.
            
               Soter, a ſaluyour.
         
         
            ¶S ANTE P.
            
               SPadicus, ca, cum, of ſkarlet colour.
            
               Spadix, dicis, a date with the braunche plucked frome the palme tree. it is alſoo ſkarlet coloure. it is ſometyme, taken for the colour of an horſe, callyd a bryght bay.
            
               Spado, donis, a geldynge be it man or beaſte.
            
               Spadonia, a kynde of laurell.
            
               Sparganon, the roote of an herbe callyd Cynquefoyle.
            
               Spargapiſes, the ſonne of Chomiris, the quene of Maſſagetes.
            
               Spargo, ſi, gere, to ſcatter or caſte abrode.
            
               Spargere bellum, to make warre in ſundrye partes of a countrey.
            
               Sparta, the chief citie of Lacedemonia, it was alſo callyd Lacedaemon & Theramne.
            
            
               Spartacus, was a famouſe ſworde player, whiche gathered an hoſt of ſlaues, and made batayle agaynſte the Romaynes, and was vanquyſhed by Craſſus.
            
               Spartam nactus, es, hanc orna, a prouerb, ſygnifyenge the aſtate or offyce, whyche thou haſte, order or applye it well.
            
               Spartarium, a place where brome groweth.
            
               Sparteum, a money bagge.
            Sparteus, a, um, of broume.
            
            Spartiata, & Spartanus, na, num, of Sparta.
            
            
               Spartum, & ſpartus, a buſhe callyd brome.
            
               Spara, be callyd caltroppes, ſowen in tyme of battayle, to wounde the fete of men & horſes.
            
               Sparum, a lyttell darte.
            
               Sparus, a clubbe.
            
                
               Spaſmus, a ſyknes of the ſynewes and muſkles callid alſo Conuulſio, it hapneth ſomtyme of 
                  •
               epletion, ſometyme of inanicion or lacke of nouriſhment. ſomtyme of grief, as in the prickyng of a ſynewe: otherwhile of colde, as by very colde ayre or colde water. it is namyd in englyſhe the crampe.
            
               Spaſtici, out of the which any thyng is pluckid▪
            
            
               Spatha, a two handed or baſtarde ſworde it is alſo an inſtrument of the kytchen, to tourne meate that is fryed.
            
               Spathalion, an ornament pertaynynge to women. it is alſo a branche of palme with dates hangynge on it.
            
               Spaticus, vexed with an yll ſpirite.
            
               Spatiator, a wanderer.
            Spatioſus, a, um, large, ſpacious.
            
            
               Spatioſè, & ſpatioſius, largely, more large.
            Spatior, aris, ari, to walke.
            
            
               Spatium, a ſpace as well in tyme, as in place.
            
               Specere, amonge olde wryters was taken for Inſpicere, to loke in.
            
               Specialis, le, ſpeciall, peculyar, propre.
            
               Speciatim, ſpecially, peculyarly, proprely.
            
               Species, ei, a fygure, or image▪ a forme, kynde, beautie, fauour. It is defyned by Logyciens, to be that, whiche is ſayde of many thynges varienge in nombre: as Homo, which is ſpoken of Plato, Socrates, Cicero, whyche doo not vary in fygure, but in noumbre. ſome tyme ſpecies, do ſygnyfye ſpyces alſo it is apparance▪ alſo a ſyght or thynge ſene.
            
               Per ſpeciem legationis in Aſiam ablegatus eſt, Vnder the colour of ambaſſade, he was banyſhed into Aſia▪
            
            
               In ſpeciem eſſe, to be to the honour.
            
               Specificè, partycularly.
            Specificus, ca, cum, partycular.
            
            
               Specillum, a ſmalle Inſtrumente, wherewith ſurgeons do ſerche the depeneſſe of woundes and ſoores. Alſoo to annoynte ſoore eyes. It is alſo a ſpectakle to looke with. alſo an eare pycker.
            
               Specimen, ſpeciminis, an example, a profe, alſo beaultie.
            
               Specimen aedere, to ſhewe a profe of a mans counnynge.
            Specioſus, a, um, beautyfull.
            
            
               Spectabilis, le, worthy to be ſene.
            
               Spectaculum, a thynge to be ſene or looked on. Sommetyme the ſelfe beholdynge. alſoo the place, frome whenſe menne doo beholde thynges.
            
               Spectamen, a ſigne or token. Spectamen bono ſeruo, id eſt qui rem herilem procurat, uidet, collocat, It is a token of a good ſeruant that is to ſay, which attendeth about his maſters buſyneſſe, and dothe ſuruey all thynge, and ſette it in order.
            
               Spectatores, beholders, triers of money.
            Spectatus, ta, tum, approued.
            
            
               Specto, tare, to beholde, to approue, to tend to ſome concluſion, to compare.
            
               Qua ſpectat Affricā, on the ſide toward Affrik
            
               Spectatio, a triall or profe of money.
            
               Spectrum, an ymage or fygure in a mannes ymagynation.
            
               Specula, an hygh hyll or towre, wheron thynges be eſpied farre of. alſo lyttell hope, a dymynutiue of ſpes.
            
            
               Specularia, ſpectakles.
            
               Specularis, re, any thynge, wherby a man may ſee the better.
            
               Speculatio, a beholdynge.
            
               Speculator, an eſpyall in warres.
            
               Speculor, aris, ari, to ſee farre, to conſyder, to eſpye, to ſerche out.
            
               Speculum, a lookynge glaſſe.
            Specus, cus, & ſpecoris, a denne.
            
            Spelta, rede Zea.
            Speluncha, idem. Spelaeum, idem.
            
               Spepondi, for ſpopondi, I haue promyſed.
            
               Sperchius, a ryuer of Theſſalia.
            
               Speres, olde wryters vſed for ſpes, hope.
            
               Sperma, ſpermatis, ſede, moſt commonly vſed for the naturall humour, whereof all lyuynge thynges be ingendred and fourmed.
            Sperno, ſpreui, ſpernere, to deſpyſe.
            
            
               Spero, rare, to hope.
            
               Sperata uirgo, a mayden aſked in mariage.
            Spes, ſpei, hope.
            
            
               Spem abijcere, to deſpayre.
            
               Spem alere, to contynue in hope.
            
               Spem fallere, to dyſapoynt one.
            
               Speutici panes, loues of breade made in haſte.
            
               Speuſippus, a noble phyloſopher couſyne to Plato.
            
               Sphaeca, a waſpe.
            
               Sphaera, a fygure in all partes equally rounde, a ſpeare.
            
               Sphaericus, ca, cum, in the forme of a ſphere.
            
               Sphaeriſterium, a rounde place in a bayn, where men are exercyſed, a tenyſe play.
            
               Sphaeromachia, playenge at tennyſe.
            
               Sphennida, a ball made of lether or cloth, greater than a tennyſe balle.
            
               Sphragide, a ſtone whiche printeth perfitly.
            
               Sphinx, gis, a monſter, whiche had the heade and handes of a maiden, the body of a dogge, wynges lyke a byrde, naylles lyke a lyon, a tayle lyke a dragon, the voyce of a man, whiche purpoſed to men ſubtyl queſtions. it is alſo a beaſte lyke an ape, but more roughe, and with a longer tayle, I ſuppoſe it to be a monkay or babyon.
            
               Sphondilium, a ioint or knotte of the bakbone, xii. of them do make the chyne, and the fyue reſydue do make the loynes.
            
                
               Spîca, & ſpicus, the eare of corne. alſo a ſpyce callyd Spikenarde.
            
               Spica mantica, an eare of corne, hauyng noo bearde.
            
               Spica Nardi, a ſpyce callyd ſpykenarde.
            
               Spica celtica, an herbe callyd Spyke, lyke to Lauander.
            
               Spicatus, ta, tum, 
               
                  •
               ared, or in care as corne is.
            
               Spiceus, cea, ceum, that whiche hathe eares lyke to corne.
            
               Spicifera, the ſurname of Ceres callyd goddeſſe of corne.
            
               Spicilegium, glemynge of corne.
            
               Spicilegium facere, to gleme.
            
               Spicio, cire, to ſhote out in eare.
            
               Spiculatores, they whyche be callyd of the kynges garde▪ Some menne doo take Spiculator, to be a hangeman, or other perſone, whiche putteth men to deathe by execution of the lawes.
            
               Spiculo, culare, to make any thynge ſharpe at the poynte.
            
               Spiculum, a 
                  •
               arte. alſoo an arrowe, it is more properly an arrowhead.
            
               Spilumenes, a ſluttyſhe drabbe.
            
               Spina, a thorne. alſo the backbone.
            
               Spina Aegyptia, is of Ioan. Agricola ſuppoſed to be that, which of ſome apothecaries, is called Sucalia, or Bedegnar. alſoo that it is the tree whereof commeth the fruite callyd Acacia.
            
            Spineus, a, um, of thorne.
            
            
               Spineoli, a wylde fruite, callyd Sloes.
            
               Spinoſus, a, um, full of thornes.
            
               Spinther, a pynne. alſo a tache, ſommetyme a bracelette.
            
               Spinturnix, a byrde, which was wont to come to the aulters, and cary away a burnyng cole whiche was taken for an vnlucky byrde.
            
               Spinus, a plumme tree, or damſyn tree.
            Spio, onis, idem quod Nimpha.
            
               Spirabilis, le, lyuely, or that wherby we lyue.
            Spiritabile, idem.
            
               Spiraculum, & ſpiramentum, out of the whiche the ayre or breth paſſeth.
            
               Spirarchus, a captayn in the forewarde.
            
               Spirae, thynges whyche doo tourne and wynde in dyuers cerkles lyke a trendell, or an adder lyenge rounde. Alſoo ſpira is an ornament of a womans heade, alſoo the tournynge of cables or ropes, whan they be wounde vp. alſo the bande or lace wherwith a cappe or hat is made faſt vnder a mans chynne. alſo the baſe of a pyllar. alſo a cake made lyke a trendell. alſo a multitude of people.
            
               Spirillum, a gotes berde.
            Spirituale, & ſpiritale, idem quod ſpiritus.
            
               Spiritus, ſpirite, brethe, wynde.
            
               Anguſtus ſpiritus, a ſhorte brethe.
            
               Ducere ſpiritum, to fetche breth, alſo to liue.
            Communi ſpiritu frui, to lyue.
            
            
               Extremū ſpiritum alicuius excipere, to kiſſe one whan he is dyinge.
            
               Patriae reddere ſpiritum, to dy for his cūtrey.
            
               Spiritum trahere, to lyue.
            
               Vno ſpiritu, at one brethe.
            
               Spiritus, is ſometyme courage or commforte.
            
               Spiro, ſpirare, to blowe as wynde dothe, to ſende forthe odoure.
            
               Spiſſe, an aduerbe ſignifyenge thycke, ſomtime ſlowe.
            
               Spiſsigradior, gradi, to go thycke, or make many feete.
            
               Spiſsigradus, he that goeth thycke.
            
               Spiſsitas, thickeneſſe.
            
               Spiſſo, are, to make thycke.
            Splſſus, a, um, thicke, ſlowe.
            
            
               Spiſſum uerbum, a longe worde.
            
               Spiſsum opus, a warke longe in doinge, or whiche requireth longe tyme.
            
               Spiſſus tactus, whan one feeleth a thynge maſſiue.
            
               Spiſsitudo, thyckeneſſe.
            
               Spithame, called alſo Dodrans, is the meaſure betwene the thumb and the lyttel fynger they bothe beinge ſtretched forthe, and conteyneth ix. ynches, or .xii. fingers brede.
            
               Splen, ſplenis, the ſplene.
            Splendeo, dui, dere, to ſhyne.
            
            
               Splendeſco, ſcere, to ſhyne ofte.
            
               Splendide, an aduerb ſignifieng clere or bright alſo rychely, honourably.
            
               Splendidus, da, dum, bryghte, clere. Alſo he whiche vſeth to haue his houſe rychelye decked with abundance of all thynges, is called Splendidus contrary to Sordidus & auarus.
            
            
               Splendor, oris, lyght, brightneſſe, ſometyme honour or nobleneſſe in lyuynge.
            
               Spleneticus, he that is ſycke in the ſplene.
            
               Splenium, a playſter of cloth or lether made to laye to the body of hym whiche is ſicke.
            
               Spoletum, a citie in Italy.
            
               Spolerini, people of the citie Spoletum.
            
               Spolio, are, to robbe or dyſpoyle.
            
               Spolior, ari, to be robbed.
            
               Spoliarius, ria, um, that which receyueth spoile or thynges taken by robbery.
            
               Sponda, the ſyde of a bedde.
            Spondeo, ſpopondi, ſpondere, to promyſe.
            
            
               Spondêus, a fote in meter of .ii. long ſyllables
            
               Spondylus, a wherue, which is a round thing of ſtone or wodde, or leade, put on a ſpyndel, to make it runne rounde. It is alſo a whyte harde thynge in an oyſter, whiche is couered with the fyſhe.
            
               Spondium, that whiche cometh of leade lyke to ſoute, whiche is aboue veſſelles of braſſe, that do hange ouer the fyer.
            
                
               Spongia, a ſponge, or that wherwith any thing is wyped.
            
               Spongiare, to wype cleane a ſponge.
            
               Spongioli, mouſherons.
            
               Spongioſus, a, um, lyghte, and full of holes lyke a ſponge.
            
               Spongites, a ſtone lyke a ſponge.
            
               Sponſa, a woman deſpouſed or affyaunced.
            
               Sponſalis, le, perteynynge to ſpouſage.
            
               Sponſalia, the ſpouſage, or betrothynge of a man and womā, before that they be wedded.
            
               Sponſio, onis, a promyſe, a bargayne.
            Sponſus, us, idem.
            
               Sponſo, ſare, to affyaunce or betrothe.
            
               Sponſor, oris, he that promyſeth or bargayneth Sometyme a ſuertie, whiche vndertaketh an other mannes acte.
            Sponius, ſa, ſum, promyſed.
            
            
               Sponté, naturally, willingely, of his fre wyll.
            Spontalis, le, voluntarily.
            
            
               Spontaneus, ea, eum, that whiche dothe, or is done wyllyngly, naturally, without cōſtraint or helpe.
            
               Spopondi, I haue promyſed.
            
               Sporades, yles in the ſea called Aegeum.
            
            
               Sporta, & ſportula, a baſket or maunde, ſometyme money or meate diſtributed by prynces vnto the people.
            
               Sportula, & ſportella, a lyttell gyfte or almes, alſo lyuery of courte, called bowge of courte was called Sportule.
            
            
               Spretus, refuſed.
            
               Spuma, the fome or froth of any thyng liquide.
            
               Spumeus, a, um, fomy or frothy.
            
               Spumo, are, to fome or gather vnto fome.
            
               Spumoſus, a, um, that wherof cometh a fome.
            Spuo, ſpui, ſpuere, to ſpytte.
            
            
               Spurce, vncleanly, fylthyly.
            
               Spurcidicus, ca, cum, that which ſpeaketh diſhoneſtly, or vncleanely.
            
               Spurcificus, ca, cum, that maketh thynges vn cleane or fylthy.
            Spurcitia, & ſpurcities, vncleanneſſe.
            
            
               Spurco, care, to defyle or make vncleane.
            
               Spurcus, ca, cum, vncleane, fylthye, vnpure, ſtynkinge, blouddy.
            
               Spurcum uinum, wyne myngled with water.
            
               Spurij uerſus, verſes fayned, the authore being falſe named or vnknowen.
            
               Spurius, a baſtard, alſo it was the ſurname of dyuerſe Romaynes.
            
               Sputo, tare, to ſpytte.
            
               Sputor, tari, to be ſpytte on.
            
               Sputum, ſpyttell.
         
         
            ¶S ANTE Q.
            
               SQualla, olde wryters vſed for ſqualida.
            
            
               Squalleo, lui, lêre, to be fylthye, ſluttiſſhe, ſoyled or ſtayned with ſom vnclene thing▪
            
            
               Squallent arua, the fieldes are full of wedes.
            
               Squallide, yll fauouredly.
            
               Squallidae res, thynges vnpleaſaunt.
            
               Squallidus, da, dum, ſluttyſhe, fylthy, cauſyng one to abhorre the ſyght therof ſometyme it ſygnifieth ſpotted alſo carrayn leane.
            
               Squallidus ager, grounde out of tylthe. alſo ſhynynge.
            
               Squallor, loris, ſluttyſhnes, fylthynes.
            Squalido, dinis, & ſqualliditas, the ſame.
            
            
               Squalus, a fyſſhe.
            
               Squama, the ſkale of a fyſhe.
            
               Squamatim, in the facion of ſhales.
            
               Squammoſus, ſkaly.
            
               Squatina, a ſoole fyſſhe with a roughe ſkynne, wherwith fletchers doo make theyr arrowes ſmoothe.
            
               Squaroſus, a, um, rough and ſharpe, lyke to a thynge whiche is ſkaly.
            
               Squilla, a fyſhe callyd a ſhrympe. alſo an herbe, rede Scylla.
            
            
               Squinitij, people in Italye callyd Sabelli and Samnites.
         
         
            ¶S ANTE T.
            
               ST, a voyce of hym that commaundeth ſylence, as we ſay in englyſhe, huſht, whan we wolde haue one to holde his peace.
            
               Stabilimentum, that whyche kepeth a thynge ſtedfaſte.
            
               Stabilio, liui, lire, to make ſtedfaſt or ſtable.
            
               Stabilis, le, ſtable or ſtedfaſt.
            
               Stabulariae mulieres, women, whyche keepe vyttaylynge howſes, for to refreſſhe wayfarynge men.
            
               Stabularius, an inholder. Alſo he that hath the charge of the houſe, where cattall is kept.
            
               Stabulari damas aut ceruos, falowe deere or redde dere to be lodged or harborowed.
            
               Stabulo, bulare, to ſtande as cattalle dothe in a ſtable.
            
               Stabulatio, ſtandynge or lyenge of cattell, alſoo harbourynge or lodgynge of dere.
            
               Stabulum, an ynne, where men do lodge or bait. alſo it is the general name of the place, where cattell doo abyde, whan they come from their paſture. alſo a ſtable wherin horſes or mules are kepte.
            
               Stactis, & ſtacte, is that whiche is called commonly Storax liquida.
            
            Stacteus, a, um, gummy.
            
            
               Stadiodromos, the place ordeyned to runne in.
            
               Stadiodromus, he that rounneth in a courſe of runnynge.
            
               Stadium, a place, wherin runnyng is exercyſed, as well of men as of horſes.
            
               Stadium, is alſoo a quantytie or meaſure of grounde, whereof (as Cenſorinus writeth)
 were three ſortes, the one was of Italye and that conteyned .DCxxv. fete which is .Cxxv paſis. The ſeconde was called Olympicum. and that was of .DC. fete, that is Cxx. paſis. the thyrde was called Pythicum, whiche conteyned a thouſande feete, whiche is two hundred paſis, which peraduenture was for gotten of Plinius and Solinus, whan they wrate the deſcription of Sicilia, which maketh the variaunce betwene them and Diodorus Siculus. Of the Stadia called Italica or of Italy .viii. doo make an Italion myle, conteynynge a thouſande paſe, euery paſe beinge fyue fete, we haue none other name to gyue it but a furlonge.
            
               Stagma, an oyntemente.
            
               Stagno, are, properly of water is to ſtande and not to flowe.
            
               Stagnum, a ſtandynge water, a poole, alſo a certayne mettall called tynne.
            
               Staloginum, a thyng to hange at ones eare, as Egyptians haue.
            
               Sta men, cloth, whan it is in the lome or frame, alſo it is a threde.
            Stanneus, a, um, of tynne.
            
            
               Stannum, mettall called tynne.
            
               Stapedes, ſtyroppes.
            
               Staphyle, a vyne.
            
               Staphylus, he that dyd fyrſte myngle water with wyne.
            
               Staphis, a kynde of vynes, which hath a black ſtemme and ſtraight, and hath a fruite more lyke to a lyttel bladder, than to a grape, whiche be grene, within the whiche is a kernell thre cornered.
            
               Staphilinus, wylde parſenepe.
            Staphis agria, Stafſagre.
            
            
               Stata ſacrificia, ſacrifyce cuſtomably done at certayne dayes of an olde ordinance.
            
               Statae matris ſimulachrum, an ymage, whiche was ſette vp by the people in euery ſtrete at Rome.
            
               Status, ta, tum, fyrme or ſtable. alſo ordeyned or decreed.
            Statarius, a, um, ordinarie.
            
            
               Stater, teris, a certayne coygne whiche was in value foure drammes, or foure grotes .viii. to an ounce.
            
               Statera, a beame to way without the balances.
            
               Staticulum, a certayn wanton meuyng in danſynge, ſometyme a lyttell carte.
            
               Stati dies, dayes ordinarie, dayes in banke, for apparaunce, or for the parties to plede.
            
               Statilinus, was called a priuate god, whiche men ſuppoſed to be alwaye with them.
            
               Statina, an yle.
            
               Staticulum, a lyttell ymage.
            
               Statiuncula, idem, or a lyttell reſtynge place.
            
               Statius, a noble poete.
            
               Statim, anon, conſtantly, continually.
            
               Statio, onis, a place, where eyther menne of warre or ſhyppes do abyde or reſte for a certayne tyme.
            
               Stationalis, le, that whiche ſtandeth faſte or abydeth.
            
               Stationarii milites, ſouldyours, whiche are aſſygned to abyde ſtyl in one place, or to kepe a towne or fortreſſe, or the marches of a countreye.
            
               Statiua, & ſtatiuum, a certayne place fortyfyed, where men of warre laye at the ſiege of a fortreſſe.
            
               Stator, toris, a ſeruaunte, whiche is alwayes redye attendynge aboute an officer, to be at commaundement. wherfore in that worde be included purſeuauntes, poſtes, ſergeauntes, baylyffes, and catchepols. alſo Iupiter was called Iupiter ſtator of Romulus, bycauſe he ſuppoſed that he made the Romayns to tary whan they fledde, the Samnites purſuynge theym.
            
               Statua, an ymage of mettall, yuorye, ſtone, or tymber.
            
               Statuaria, the crafte of grauynge or yettyng of ymages.
            
               Statuarius, he that carueth or yetteth images.
            
               Statuarius, a, um, perteynynge to ymages.
            
               Statuere ex aequo & bono, to iudge or determyne, accordynge to equitie, leſſe than the rigour of the lawe wolde require.
            
               Statuere pretium, to ſette a pryce on thinges vendible.
            
               Statumen, minis, that whiche is ſet vp to ſuſteyne, or beare a thynge, a proppe.
            
               Statumino, are, to proppe vp, to vnderſet, to make ſure.
            
               Statuo, tui, tuere, to ordeyne, to determyne, to iudge or eſteme to ſet faſte, to ſtable a thynge to dedicate, to beate one thynge to an other.
            
               Sublimen illum, arriperem, & caput primū in terram ſtatuerem, ut cerebro diſpergam uiam, I wolde lyfte hym on hyghe, and beat his heade to the ground, that I mought ſcatter his brayne abrode in the hyghe waye.
            
               Apud animum ſtatuere, to determine in his mynde.
            
               Exemplum ſtatuere in aliquo, to puniſhe one in ſuche wyſe that other may take enſaumple therby.
            Statuere in aliquem exemplum, idem.
            
               Statuere in aliquem, to make an ordynaunce agaynſte one.
            
               Mercedem ſtatuere, to aſſigne to one what wages he ſhall haue.
            
               Modum ſtatuere, to appoynte a rule.
            
               Statuere quanti hoc putetis, & quam multo redemiſſe. Thynke you, what it is worthe, and howe moche it coſte.
            
                
               Statuam ſtatuere alicui, to ſet vp ones ymage
            
               Statura, the ſtature of a man.
            
               Staturus, a, um, the participle future of ſto, ſtas, ſtare, to ſtande.
            
               Status, tus, ſtate, it is among oratours and lawyers the caſe, whiche riſeth in contention, wherin the matter reſteth, whiche muſte be replyed vnto, and eyther be denyed, confeſſed, or trauerſed: of Tullie it is called Conſtitutio cauſae.
            
            Status, ſtata, ſtatum, fyrme. Stati dies, dayes appoynted.
            
            
               Stati redditus, rentes certayne.
            
               Steatoma, a gatherynge of greace or fatte in ſome place agaynſte nature.
            
               Stechades, thre lyttell yle by Marſiles.
            
               Stega, a cabyn of a ſhip. alſo a cote or cotage.
            
               Stegnae febres, feuers in the whiche a manne may haue neyther ſiege, nor vrine, nor ſweat nor none other euacuation.
            
               Stelae, lyttell pyllars.
            
               Stella, a ſterre, alſo a ſterrcfyſhe, alſo the name of a poete.
            
               Stella crinita, a blaſynge ſterre.
            
               Stellatus, ta, tum, full of ſterres.
            
               Stellatura, was an extortion of Capitaynes in takynge from the ſouldiours the portions of vyttayle apoynted vnto thē by the emperour
            
               Stellio, a beaſte lyke a lyſarde, hauynge on his backe ſpottes lyke ſterres.
            
               Stellionatus crimen, a dyſceypte in dyſſemblynge a thynge, to take profytte of an other iniuſtely.
            
               Stellis, a kynde of byrdlyme made in Euboea.
            
               Stello, are, to ſhyne or glyſten lyke ſterres, or be made lyke ſterres.
            
               Stemma, matis, a garland of floures, alſo the ſtocke or bloudde of a gentyll houſe. ſomtime the degrees in kynrede. alſo an inſcription grauen in a ſtone.
            
               Stemo, was ſyſter to Meduſa.
            
               Stenoboea, the wyfe of Pretus kynge of Ephyry, whiche loued Bellorophon, that vanquiſhed the monſter called Chimaera.
            
            
               Sentor, toris, was a man, whiche had a voice as loude as .xx. men.
            
               Stephanoma, euery herbe that ſerueth for garlandes.
            
               Stephanoplocus, a maker of garlandes.
            
               Stephanus, in greke is a crowne.
            
               Stercoratio, dungynge.
            
               Stercorarius, ria, um, perteynynge to dounge or mucke.
            
               Stercoratus, ta, tum, dounged or mucked, or compaſſed.
            
               Stercoro, are, to dunge or compaſſe.
            
               Stercus, ſtercoris, dunge, mucke, compaſſe.
            
               Stercutius, the ſurname of Saturnus, bycauſe he fyrſt founde and vſed dunging of ground.
            
               Stereſis, priuation.
            
               Sterila, olde wryters vſed for ſterilis.
            
            
               Sterileſco, rileſcere, to be barrayne or waxe barrayne.
            Sterilia, for ſterilitas.
            Sterilis, le, barrayne.
            
            
               Sterilis amator, a louer which lacketh money.
            
               Sterilitas, barraynes, ſterilitie.
            
               Steriliter, barraynely.
            
               Sternax, nacis, a ſtering or ploungynge horſe.
            
               Sterno, ſtraui, ſternere, to throwe downe, to ſpreade, to couer, to laye the table, to make playne or ſmothe, to lye downe to reſte.
            
               Sternere lectum, to make a bead redy.
            
               Sternunt ſe ſomno, They layde them downe to ſleape.
            
               Sternuto, tare, to ſneſe often.
            
               Sternuo, nuere, to ſneſe.
            
               Sternutamentum, ſneſynge.
            Sternutatio, idem.
            
               Sterquilinium, a dungehyll or myxen.
            
               Sterogonia, a kynde of Frankyncenſe called communely Olibanum, or in latyne, Thus maſculus.
            
            
               Sterto, tui, tere, to route whan one ſleapeth.
            
               Steſichorites, is the noumber of eyght in dyſe. ſo called of the ſepulchre of Steſichorus the poete, whiche was made in fygure lyke to eyghte dyſe.
            
               Steſichorus, a famouſe poete, of whome it is wrytten, that whan he was an infaunt in his cradell, a Nyghtyngale ſatte on his mouthe, and dyd ſinge, ſignifienge that he ſhoulde be the ſweteſte poete, that euer was afore hym. Alſo he 
                  •
               ounde fyrſte ſinginge of ſounges in a daunſe.
            
               Stibadium, a chayre or couche made of herbes wounde together: ſome do calle it an herber or ſommer parler.
            
               Stibium, a whyte ſtone founde in ſyluer mines whiche ſtoppeth the runnynge of eies, and dothe make them ſeme very fayre.
            Stibon, idem quod Antimonium.
            
               Stichos, a verſe or an order in a thynge.
            
               Stigo, are, to pricke forthe.
            
               Stigma, matis, a marke made with fyre, or with a hotte yron. Somtyme it ſignifieth infamy and reproche obiected openly.
            
               Stigmatici, perſones infamed.
            
               Stilla, a droppe.
            
               Stilbo was a philoſopher. Vide ſtilpo.
            
            
               Stilbon, the ſterre of Mercuri.
            
               Stillicidium, the droppynge of a houſe.
            
               Stillo, are, to droppe.
            
               Stilpo, a philoſopher borne in the citie of Megara in Greece, whiche his counireye beinge bourned, and his wyfe and chyldren loſte in the fyre, eſcaped, and departing alone, whan the kynge Demetrius aſked of him, if he had
 loſte any thynge, he aunſwered, I haue loſte nothyng, for al that is myne I carie with me meanynge therby, that vertue, which is only the proper goodes of a wyſe man, and may not be taken from hym, he toke a waye with hym.
            
               Stilpones, dwarfes.
            
               Stimulo, are, to pricke.
            
               Stimulatio, a prickinge or feruente mouinge to do a thynge.
            
               Stimulator, he that pricketh.
            
               Stimuleus, a, um, that whiche is done with pryckynge.
            
               Stimulus, a gode, wherwith oxen are dryuen.
            
               Stingo, & ſtinguo, guere, to put out lyghte.
            
               Stipa, for ſtupa, towe.
            
               Stiparius, a, um, perteynynge to ſtoppynge or beatynge harde together.
            
               Stipatores, they whiche doo frayte a ſhyp, or laye in ſuch fardelles or burdeynes as are to be caryed. Alſo they whiche be of the kynges garde, alwaye about his perſon.
            
               Stipatus, enuyroned with men, to be defended as princes are with theyr garde.
            
               Stipendialis, le, perteyninge to wages.
            
               Stipendiarius, a, um, whiche payeth tribute, of ſome called contributary, to the fyndynge of an army, or defence of a countrey.
            
               Stipendiatus, he that taketh wages.
            
               Stipendioſus, he that hath ben oftentymes hyred or retayned in warres.
            
               Confectis ſtipendijs, whan the tyme of their ſeruiſe was out.
            
               Stipendior, diari, to be hyred or retayned in warres.
            
               Stipendijs duobus, two the fyrſt yeres.
            
               Stipendium, wages properly gyuen to ſouldyours, alſo ſubſidie paide to princis.
            
               Stipendia facere, to ſerue in warres, as a ſouldioure.
            
               Stipes, pitis, a ſtake, alſo a ſticke.
            
               Stipo, are, to ſtop chynkes or clyftes, properly in ſhyppes or botes, with towe and pitche. alſo to enuirone to the intent to defende one.
            
               Stips, uel ſtipis, pis, wages to men hyred: alſo money gyuen to beggars.
            
               Stipem confert, it bringeth in gayn.
            
               Stipem pergere, to ſowe money amonge the people, to giue a largeſſe.
            
               Stiptica medicamenta, medicines that doo bynde or reſtrayne.
            
               Stipula, holme, erige, or ſtrawe, apt to thatch houſes, it is of ſome taken for the huſke that cloſeth in the ſtrawe.
            
               Stipulatus, tus, & ſtipulatio, a bargayn or promyſe, or obligation to pay moneye, or to perfourme a thynge, whiche is required.
            
               Stipulor, aris, ari, to make a bargayne, to promyſe effectually that which he is required to do. It hath bothe the actiue and paſſiue ſygnification Stipulor abs te, I require of the or I am required of the.
            
               Stiria, an yſikle or droppe of yſe.
            
               Stiria, A countrey ioynynge to Auſtria and Carinthia in the eſte parte of Germanye, full of mountaynes ſauinge a littell parte bordryng on Hungary, the people be rude, and the women haue ſo great throtes by the corruption of the water and ayre, that not onelye theyr ſpeche is let therby, but (as ſome do wryte) whan they giue ſucke to theyr chyldren, ſome be fayne to caſte the bagges which do hange vnder theyr chynne, ouer theyr ſhulders. there is in that countrey plenty of yron and ſyluer if the negligence of people dyd not let the findynge therof.
            
               Stiricidium, & ſtillicidium, the droppynge of a houſe.
            
               Stirpices, weders in gardeynes.
            
               Stirpitus, vp by the rote.
            
               Stirpo, are, to pull vp by the rote.
            
               Stirps, ſtirpis, in the feminine gender ſignifyeth a ſtocke in kinrede, beinge the maſculine gender it ſignyfyeth the ſtemme of a tree or herbe.
            
               Stitiſſe uadimonium, to haue brought forth ſuertie or pledges.
            
               Stiua, is that in a ploughe, which the ploughe man holdeth, whan he doth eare, the plough tayle.
            
               Stlata, a brode ſhyp or bote, called an hulke.
            
               Stlembus, ſlowe and heuy.
            
               Stlatarium, any thynge that is borne on the ſea.
            
               Stlatarius, a maker of hulkes or botes.
            
               Stlitem, olde wryters vſed for litem, variance.
            Stlitibus iudicandis, for litibus iudicandis.
            
               Stlopus, a ſowne made with the mouth, whan the chekes are blowen.
            Stlotium, for lotium.
            
               Sto, ſteti, ſtare, to ſtande, to indure or abyde.
            
               Stare promiſſo, to abyde by his promiſe. To be full. Stat ager ſentibus, the fielde is ful of brembles. Iam puluere coelum ſtare uident, Nowe ſawe they the ſkye full of duſte. To boſe out. Hic corpus ſolidum inuenies, hic ſtare papillas Pictor marmoreo, Here in this marble ſtone ſhalte thou fynde paynted, the body founde, and the pappes imboſed. Alſo to be immouable or alwaye certayne. Sic ſtat ſententia, ſo the ſentence abydeth immouable, or is determined. Alſo Stat, my minde is. Stat conferre manum Aeneae, my mynde is to fyght with Aeneas Stat, is ſette. Omnis in Aſcanio, chari ſtat cura parentis, All the care of the tender louynge father was ſet on Aſcanius. Alſo ſtare, to coſte, Neque ipſe hoc periculum ignoro, expertus nō leui documento, quanti ſteterit mihi, quod ſemel
 imperata nō feci, Nor I am ignorāt of that daunger, hauyng experience of no lyght warnynge, howe moch it coſt me, that I dyd not thoſe thynges, that I was commaunded.
            
               Promiſsis ſtare, to abyde by his promyſe.
            
               Stare firmum, to ſtande faſte.
            
               Stat per me, per te, per illum, whanne I or any other is the cauſe, that a thynge is not done. Si poterit fieri, ut ne pater per me ſtetiſſe credat, quo minus hae fierent nuptiae, uo lo, I wold if it may be, that my father ſhuld thinke, that it was not long of me, that this mariage toke none effecte.
            
               Stat a me, he is of myne opinion.
            
               Stat apud te fides parum, Thou arte of a ſmalle credence.
            
               In acie ſtare, to be in the fielde durynge the battayle.
            
               Statur, I ſtande here.
            
               Stoecades, foure Iles in the french ſea againſt Languedocke.
            
               Stoecas, cados, an herbe and floure commonly called Sticados.
            
            
               Stoecas Arabica, commonly called of apothecaries Sticades Arabica, the one and the other preſerueth clothes from mothes if it be layde amonge them.
            
               Stoici, a ſecte of philoſophers, which affyrmed that no griefe mought happen to a wiſe man and that felicitie was onely in vertue.
            
               Stola, a womans gowne. It was alſo a longe garmēt, which the princes of Perſia did vſe, and was the onely garment of honour, as we do call ſuche apparayle a robe.
            
               Stolatus, he that weareth ſuche a robe, alſo it maye be called honourable.
            
               Stolidè, folyſhely, lewdely.
            
               Stoliditas, folyſheneſſe, lewdenes.
            
               Stolidius, more folyſhely.
            
               Stolidus, da, dum, foolyſhe, lewde of conditions, odiouſe.
            
               Stolones, braunches whiche do ſprynge out of the ſtemmes or rotes of trees.
            
               Stomachichus, he that is ſicke in his ſtomake.
            
               Stomachor, aris, ari, to haue indignation, to be vexed in mynde.
            
               Stomachoſè, angerly, hatefully, diſdainouſly.
            
               Stomachoſus, diſdaynous.
            
               Stomachus, is the pipe whereby meate gothe downe. It is alſo that whiche is called Ventriculus, whervnto we haue none other name but the ſtomake. ſometyme it ſignifieth indignation, vehement wrathe, hatrede, and abhorrynge of a thyng that lyketh not vs, ſome tyme facilitie, or gentylneſſe.
            
               Stomatichus, he that hath a ſore in his mouth.
            
               Storax, racis, a ſwete incenſe or gumme, which is alſo called ſtyrax, wherof be two kyndes, the one is called Storax calamita, the other is called ſtorax liquida.
            
            
               Storea, any thynge that is ſpred on the ground it is alſo a matte.
            
               Strabo, he that looketh a ſquynt, or gogle cied.
            
               Strages, a ſlaughter of men, or a diſcomfiture.
            
               Stragulum, euery ouermoſte garmente. alſo a counterpoynte or couerled.
            
               Stramen, minis, ſtrawe, litter.
            Stramentum, idem.
            
               Stramentitius, a, um, that whiche is made of ſtrawe.
            Stramineus, a, um, of ſtrawe.
            
            
               Strangulo, are, to ſtrangle.
            
               Stranguria, dyfficultie to pyſſe.
            
               Stratagema, a polycie or wyſe coūcil in warres.
            
               Strategus, a generall captayne of an army.
            
               Stratia, an hoſte or army.
            
               Stratiotes, a man of warre. alſo an herbe, whiche Io. Agricola ſaythe is our mylfoyle or yarowe.
            
               Stratioticus, ca, cum, warlyke, perteynyng to warres.
            
               Stratius, idem. alſo the name of one of the ſonnes of Neſtor.
            
               Stratumino, are, to paue.
            
               Strator, toris, he that helpeth his maiſter to horſebacke. yeman of the ſtirope.
            
               Stratum, any thinge that is ſtrawed alſo a bed.
            
               Strata, al that is layd on the bed. alſo a horſe harneyſe, a ſtrete or caulſay, paued with ſtone.
            
               Strebula, in the olde tungue of Vmbri was a piece of the fleſh that was offered in ſacrifice.
            
               Strena, a newe yeres gyfte, or preſente.
            
               Strenué, valyantly, quickly, boldely.
            Strenuitas, tatis, actiuitie.
            
            
               Strenuus, a, um, valiaunt, prompt actife, bold.
            
               Strepito, tare, to make a noyſe often.
            
               Strepitus, tus, a noyſe made with the handes or fete.
            
               Strepo, pui, pere, to make a great noyſe, properly in goinge or clappynge of handes, ſome tyme generally.
            
               Strepſiceroti, certayne beaſtes in Affrike, hauynge croked hornes.
            
               Stria, a rabat or ſmall furrowe made in ſtone or tymber, chamferynge.
            
               Striata, be alſo creuiſes or ſmall lines, whiche are ſene in herbes.
            
               Stribligo, ginis, a viciouſe fourme in ſpeaking where the wordes agree not, and the partes of ſpeche be out of order.
            
               Striblita, breade made lyke to ropes or cordes wounden.
            
               Stricte, ſtraightly.
            
               Strictim, ſhortely towched one after an other.
            
               Strictim referre, to reporte moche in fewe wordes.
            
               Strictim attondere, to clyppe all at once.
            
               Strictior, tius, more ſtraight.
            
                Strictiſsimus, a, um, moſte ſtraite.
            
            
               Strictiuella, a foule ill fauoured harlot.
            
               Strictiuae, oliues gathered with mans hande.
            
               Stricturae, ſparkes whiche do iſſue frome mettall whan it is taken out of the fyre, and beaten with hammers.
            
               Strideo, dui, dére, & ſtrido, dis, dere, to craſhe or make a noyſe lyke to cordes, whan they be drawen.
            
               Stridon, a towne in Dalmatia, where ſaincte Hierome was borne.
            
               Striga, a rewe of thynges whan they be layde in lengthe. Alſo a ridge of lande, wherof commeth ſtrigatus ager.
            
            
               Striges, ſhrycheoules, alſo women whiche are ſuppoſed to come by nyghte into houſes, and ſucke the bloudde of chylderne, ſome calle them hegges.
            
               Strigia, wyde garmentes made of lether vſed in warres.
            
               Strigil, gilis, an horſecombe, alſo a thyng wherwith wraſtlers bounde theyr bodyes, whan they had wraſtled. alſo a certayne veſſell.
            
               Strigiles, were rubbing combes made of ſwete wod, wherwith in India the men were rubbed for an exerciſe. Alſo kerchifes, wherwith wraſtlers after theyr labours wyped theyr bodies. alſo certayne veſſels, alſo pieces of fyne golde founde in mynes, vnmyxte with any other matter. alſo lyttell fyſhes moſte commonly taken in wynter tyme.
            
               Strigilecula, a diminutiue of ſtrigil.
            
            
               Strigillo, are, to ſtraine harde.
            
               Strigium, a ſpaynyſhe garment.
            
               Strigmenta, fylthyneſſe, whiche commeth frō a mannes body, whan he is waſſhed, alſo the corruption of oyle.
            
               Strigo, gonis, a well pight man, or well compacte or ſtronge.
            
               Strigoſus, a, um, cartayn leane, it is properly ſpoken of horſes or routher beaſtes.
            
               Strimon, onis, a riuer in Thracia.
            
               Stringo, xi, gere, to ſtrayne or wringe. alſo to ſtryke, to make thynne in cuttynge, to gather to ſhaue, to wounde. Stringere enſem, to drawe a ſworde.
            
               Strio, ſtriare, to make rabattes in ſtone or timber. alſo to make furrowes. It is properlye whan beaſtes in earynge at the ende of a furrowe tourneth to make a newe furrowe. ſome do call it, to wynde.
            
               Striare, is alſo to plant or to polyſhe.
            
               Stritare, to abyde or tarye with an yll wyll, or with moche peyne.
            
               Stritauum, olde writers vſed for Tritauo, my grandfathers grandefather.
            
               Stritomellus, a ſparrowe, whiche haunteth the ſea coſte.
            
               Strix, ſtrigis, a ſhriche oule, a wytch that changeth the fauour of chylderne.
            
               Striges, groſſe herbes or wortes.
            
               Strobilum, a pyne apple. ſometyme the kernels or fruite.
            
               Strobus, a tree, wherof perfumes were made. myxt with the wyne of dates, which perfume was ſwete, but it made the head heuy, all be it without any peyne.
            Stroma, tis, tapeſry.
            
            
               Strombon, a kynde of Labdanum.
            
               Strombus, a ſhell fiſhe of the ſea, whiche hath a kyng, whom they folowe. It was thought ſometyme that he whiche had ſene that fyſhe ſhulde haue good lucke in his affayres.
            
               Strongyle, & Strongylos, an yle in the ſea, called Aegeum, now called Axos, ſometime it was called Dia.
            
            
               Stropha, ſubtiltie in arguinge.
            
               Strophas, a whirlynge or ſodeyne turninge.
            
               Strophades, two Iles in the grekiſhe ſea.
            
               Strophia, garlandes, which prieſtes were wōt to weare.
            
               Strophiolum, a lyttell garlarde.
            
               Strophos, freatynge in the bowelles.
            
               Strophium, a maydens neckerchefe or lynnen partlette.
            
               Structilis, le, made of many pieces, or of dyuerſe thynges.
            
               Structiles columnae, pyllars made of diuerſe pieces.
            
               Structor, toris, a caruer of meate at a table.
            
               Structura, buyldynge ſettynge of thynges in good order.
            
               Strues, a pile of wodde. alſo a cake.
            
               Struices, an ordynaunce of many thynges together.
            
               Strufectarij, they whiche did cary cakes to the temple to be offered, as they do now cary the holy lofe on the ſonday.
            
               Struferarij, they whiche dydde ſacrifice at the trees that were burned with lyghtnyng.
            
               Strufetani, they whiche brought meale to be offered.
            
               Struma, a ſwellynge within the throte, whiche is gathered matter and bloudde. ſome thinke it to be that, which is called the kynges euil.
            
               Strumoſus, he that hath the kynges iuyll.
            
               Struo, ſtruxi, ſtruere, to ſette in order.
            
               Ageres ſtruere, to make rawſeyes.
            
               Fercula luxurioſe ſtruere, to make ſumptuouſe feaſtes.
            
               Mendatium ſtruere, to forge a lye or leaſing.
            
               Orationē ſolutam ſtruere, to wryte in profe.
            
               Verba ſtruere, to ſet his wordes in order.
            
               Strumum, a medicine or plaiſter for the kinges yuell.
            
               Strupearia, holydayes amonge the people called faliſci, at the whiche daye, the people doo go with garlandes on theyr heades.
            
                
               Struppum, is a lyke holydaye amonge the people called Tuſculani.
            
            
               Struppi, were lyttell wrethes made of leaues put on the heades of ymages in the temples, as now ſuperſtitious foles do ſet on ymages heades in the churches.
            
               Strutheus, the priuie member of a man.
            
               Struthia, a certayne kynde of quynces.
            
               Struthiocamelus, an oſtriche.
            Struthio, idem.
            
               Struthion, an herbe and rote called of Apothecaries Condiſi.
            
            
               Struthopus, a rounde foote lyke a ſparowe.
            
               Struthopedes, they whiche haue lyttell round feete.
            
               Strychius, an herbe, whiche maketh hym mad that eateth of it.
            
               Strychium bibit, a prouerbe ſignifyeng the man is madde.
            
               Strychnon, an herbe called Nyghtſhade. rede Solanum, & Solatrum.
            
            
               Studeo, dui, dere, to ſtudye, or to applye the minde, or care for a thynge, to endeuour, to fauour, to deſyre.
            
               Studuit Catilinae, he fauoured Catiline.
            
               Studioſus, ſtudiouſe, diligent, conſtant, addict or feruently diſpoſed. alſo fauoring a nother.
            
               Studioſè, ſtudiouſly, deſprouſely.
            
               Studium, ſtudy, ſometyme exerciſe, wyll, or appetite, deſyre, diligence, fauour, loue.
            
               Scinditur incertum ſtudia in contraria uulgus, The vnſtedfaſte people was diuyded in dyuerſe opinions.
            
               Stultitia, foly, it is knowen by foure thynges, or if he hath not in remēbrance that he ſhulde haue, or if he hath, he dothe not retayn it, or doth not folowe good councell, or dothe approue yll councell or affections.
            
               Stultior moricho, he that neglecteth his owne buſyneſſe at home, and applieth other mens abrode. It is alſo a prouerbe touchyng them whiche do thynges, that cauſe theym to be laughed to ſcorne.
            
               Stultior Choroebo, a prouerbe applyed to foles, which wyll aſſaye to do a thynge that is aboue theyr wyt or lernynge: for Choroebus, was a felowe, that aſſayed to nūber the wawes of the ſea, whan he hym ſelfe coulde not tell any number aboue fyue.
            
               Stultè, folyſhely.
            
               Stultiloquentia, & ſtultiloquium, a foolyſſhe babblynge.
            
               Stultiloquus, he that talketh or ſpeaketh foolyſhely.
            
               Stultior, ſtultius, more folyſhe.
            Stultiſsimus, ma, mum, moſte folyſhely.
            
            
               Stultius, more folyſhely.
            
               Stultorum feriae, was a tyme in the moneth of Februarie, that fooles kepte holye, fooles. holyedaye.
            
               Stultus, he that dothe a thynge vnabuiſedly or without diſcretion.
            
               Stupa, towe, the courſe parte of flaxe.
            
               Stuparius malleus, the hammer, wherwith calkers do beate towe in to ſhyps or bootes.
            
               Stupefactus, aſtonyed.
            
               Stupefio, I am aſtonyed or abaſhed.
            
               Stupeo, & ſtupeſco, pui, pere, to be aſtonyed or diſmayde ſometyme to meruayle at.
            
               Stupefacio, cere, to make aſtoned, or to cauſe to meruayle or be abaſhed.
            
               Stupentia, uel ſtupida membra, the membres whiche haue loſte all theyr ſence or felinge.
            
               Stupiditas, an abaſhemente.
            
               Stupidus, diſmayed, abaſſhed. alſo he that feleth nothynge, or lacketh his ſences.
            
               Stupor, poris, abaſhement, the ſodayne priuation of ſence or felynge.
            
               Stuprè, diſhoneſtly, ſhamefully.
            
               Stupro, are, to commytte aduoultrie or rape or to defloure a virgin.
            
               Stuprum, auoutrie, or defloration of a virgin.
            
               Stura, an yle agayne the mouthe of Tyber.
            
               Styga, a fenne in Egypte not far from the citie of Memphis.
            
               Stygeus, ea, um, perteynynge to Styx, the great fenne, which is fayned of poetes to be by the fielde called Elyſius, whiche the paynyms did ſuppoſe to be a place of pleaſure, wherein reſted the ſoules of good men.
            
               Stylobata, a trough of tymber, wherin water runneth, or is conuayed into a ceſterne.
            
               Stylus, a ſtile, whiche is qualitie of wordes in ſpeakynge, ſometyme harde, ſometyme eaſy, ſometyme in a meane, alſo an elegant fourme or order in writinge or ſpeakynge.
            
               Stymphalus, a ryuer in Arcadia.
            
               Stymphalide, a coppe of fethers, whiche ſtandeth on the heade of a byrde, as of a larke, an heron, a peacocke, and other.
            
               Stipticus, ca, cum, that which ſtoppeth or bindeth, or ſtraineth, if it be eaten or drounken. Alſo that whiche in taſtyng ſemeth to ſtraine the tunge, as a quince or red wyne.
            
               Styrax, racis, a ſoote gumme called ſtorax, wherof be two kyndes, the one is called ſtorax calamita, the other ſtorax liquida, whiche is Stacte.
            
            
               Styx, ſygnifieth ſorowe or heuyneſſe, poetes do fayne, that it is a fenne, whiche is in helle.
         
         
            ¶S ANTE V.
            
               SVada, called in greke Pitho, was called the goddeſſe of eloquence or dylectable ſpeche.
            
               Suadela, perſuaſion, fayre ſpeche.
            
               Suadeo, ſi, dêre, to ſpeake fayre, to intreate
 with fayre wordes, to indeuour, to induce a man into our opinyon, or to beleue vs.
            
               Suadibilis, le, that whiche maye be perſuaded.
            Suaſibilis, idem.
            
               Suanernicum, a kynde of amber, whiche is ye lowe, wherof beades be made, and is called Laumbre.
            
               Suapté, of his owne nature.
            
               Suarius, a ſwyne herde.
            
               Suaſibiliter, an aduerbe ſignifienge, in maner to perſwade.
            
               Suaſio, an exhortation, a mocion or perſuaſiō.
            
               Suaſor, ſoris, he that doth exhorte.
            
               Suaſum, euery colour that maye tourne into an other colour.
            
               Suauiatio, a ſwete kyſſynge.
            
               Suauiator, he that kyſſeth ſwetely.
            
               Suauiloquium, a ſwete ſpeche.
            
               Suauiloquus, he that ſpeaketh ſwetely.
            
               Suaſorius, a, um, that wherwith a man is or may be perſwaded.
            
               Suatim, lyke a ſowe.
            
               Suauior, aris, ari, & ſuauio, to kyſſe ſwetelye, or for ioye.
            
               Suauis, ſuaue, ſweete in taſte, ſoote in odour or ſmell, in a man it ſignifieth gentyll or courtayſe.
            Suauitas, & ſuauitudo, ſweteneſſe.
            
            
               Suauiter, ſwetely.
            
               Suauium ſumere, to kyſſe.
            Suauium facere, idem.
            Suauium, & ſauium, ſwete harte.
            
            
               Sub, vnder, by, or aboute. Sub lucem, by daye lyght. ſub idem tempus, in the ſame tyme, or about the ſame time. Sub horam pugnae, aboute the tyme of the battayle. Sub eas autem redditae ſunt, For they were delyuered after them. Sub ſarcinis, with the truſſes or cariage.
            
               Sub ueſperum, in the twye lyght. Subueſperum Caeſar portas claudi, milites
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ex oppido exire iuſsit, In the twye lyght Caeſar commaunded the gates to be ſhutte, and the men of warre to departe out of the citie.
            
               Sub Alexandro, in the tyme of Alexander.
            
               Sub aduentu, or aduentum, at the tyme, or at the poynte of his arriuayle, or commynge.
            
               Sub exitu uitae, at his dethe.
            
               Sub manu, at hande.
            
               Sub oculis, in his preſence.
            
               Sub urbe, harde by the citie.
            
               Sub lucem, at the breake of daye.
            
               Sub finem, at the ende.
            
               Poſtes ſub ipſos, afore the poſtes.
            
               Subacidus, cida, cidum, ſomewhat cygre or ſowre.
            
               Subacidulus, a, um, a lyttell ſoure.
            
               Subactus, ta, tum, conſtrayned, ſubdewed, driuen vnder, kneaded or wrought with handes as dowe is, laboured, exerciſed.
            
               Subaeratus, ta, tum, that whiche is braſſe with in, and other mettal without.
            
               Subaero, rare, to myngle with braſſe.
            
               Subagito, tare, to ſolycite. Subagito blandis, & benedicis uerbis, I ſolicyted with fayre and well ſpoken wordes. it is alſo to company with a woman carnally.
            
               Subalaris, ſubalare, that whiche is vnder the wynges.
            
               Subalpini, people vnder the Mountaines called Alpes, called Peemountaynes.
            
               Subalternatio, a ſucceſſion by tourne.
            
               Subalterno, nare, to ſuccede by tourne.
            Subaquaneus, a, um, & ſubaqueus, a, um, that whiche lyeth vnder the water.
            
            
               Subaquilus, la, lum, broune of colour.
            
               Subare, is ſpoken of women, whiche are as filthy as ſwyne in the acte of lechery.
            Subire, idem.
            
               Subareo, & ſubareſco, reſcere, to be or waxe ſomewhat drye.
            
               Subaſper, ſomewhat ſharpe.
            
               Subaudio, dire, to here or perceyue a lyttell.
            
               Subauſculto, tare, to harken a lyttell.
            
               Subbaſilicanus, he that walketh vnder the place where iugementes are practiſed.
            
               Subbibo, bibere, to drynke a lyttell.
            
               Subblandior, diri, to flatter.
            
               Subcalidus, da, dum, ſomewhat hote, warme
            
               Subcernicula, a fyne bulter, wherewith the floure is ſeuered from the branne.
            
               Subcerniculum, a rangynge ſieue.
            
               Subcingulum, a bracynge gyrdell.
            
               Subcineritius, a, um, roſted or baken vnder the aſhes, or axen.
            
               Subciſiua tempora, tymes borowed or ſpared from ſerious buſynes.
            
               Subciſiua opera, warkes done at tymes ſtolen from ordinarie buſines or labours neceſſary.
            
               Subcollo, lare, to lay a thynge on ones necke.
            
               Subcriſpus, he that hath a curled heade.
            
               Subcuſtos, an vnder keper.
            
               Subcutancus, a, um, that which is within the ſkynne, betwene the ſkynne and the fleſhe.
            
               Subdelego, gare, to commytte to an other any matter, whiche is committed vnto vs, by the kynge or prince.
            
               Subdialia, places to walke in without any couerynge.
            
               Subdialis, le, abrode in the ayre, without the houſe.
            
               Sub dio, that is not in a houſe, or vnder a couerynge.
            
               Subdititius, ia, ium, whiche is not properly his or hers, whoſe it is fayned to be. Partus ſubdititius, a byrthe fayned of an other mannes childe. Libri ſubdititij, bookes with falſe tytles or counterfayte auctours.
            
                
               Subditiuus, a counterfayte chylde.
            
               Subditus, a ſubiecte.
            
               Subditus, ta, tum, idem quod ſubdititius. alſoo put in the place of an nother.
            
               Subditus iudex, a iudge whyche is ſet in the place of a iudge departed.
            
               Sub diu, in the day tyme.
            
               Subdo, didi, dere, to put vnder, to adde, to put in the place of an nother, to put in daungier or ieoperdy.
            
               Subdere in locum alterius, to remoue one, & put an other in his place.
            
               Calcaria ſubdere, to thruſte to the ſpurre.
            
               Puerum ſubdere, to chaunge a chyld, whiche chyldren be commonly callyd changelynges.
            
               Subdere ſpiritus, to gyue one courage, or to make one proude or ſtately.
            
               Subdolus, he that deceiueth craftily, cautelous
            
               Subdolè, craftyly, cautelouſely.
            
               Subdubiè, ſomewhat doubtefully.
            Subdubitanter, idem.
            
               Subdubito, tare, I doubte ſomewhat.
            
               Subdubius, ſomwhat in doubte.
            
               Subdubitatio, a lyttell doubte.
            
               Subduco, xi, cere, to take away, to remoue, to lyfte vp, or drawe vp, to goo or ſteale awaye priuyly, to put vnder, to pull backe, to draw backe, to deceyue, to ſteale.
            
               Etiam nunc me ſubducere iſtis dictis poſtulas? And yet nowe wylt thou go about with theſe wordes to deceyue me?
            
               Proximo magnum poculum ille bibit, caput ponit, cum dormiſcit, ei ſubduco anulum, At the laſte he dranke a great draught, and layd downe his heade, whyles he ſlept, I ſtale his rynge from hym.
            
               Tempus eſt ſubducere hinc me, It is tyme to get me henſe.
            
               Lac agnis ſubducere, to weane lambes.
            
               Cibum ſubducere, to kepe one frome meate or to take ones meate away from hym.
            
               Subducere copias in collem, to brynge the hoſte vp to the hylle.
            
               Naues ſubducere, to drawe ſhyppes to land.
            
               Aliquem ſubducere, to deceyue one.
            
               Subductum o
                     ••
                  ibus uentis aedificium, The houſe is ſette for all maner of wyndes.
            
               Subducere rationes, to examine the charges with the alowances in accompte.
            
               Subducere ſummam, to make a reckenynge, or to caſte the ſumme in accompte or reckenynge.
            
               Subductio, a drawynge vp of a ſhyppe oute of the water, deduction or allowance.
            
               Subdulcis, ce, ſomewhat ſweete.
            
               Subduro, rare, to make ſomewhat harde.
            
               Subduror, ſubdurari, to be made ſommewhat harde.
            
               Subeo, iui, ire, to enter, to ſuffer or ſuſtayne, to enterpryſe, to goo vnder or in, to take Alſo to ſuccede, to reſyſte, to clymme or mounte vp. Alſo to take charge of any thynge. alſoo to growe or ſprynge vp, to comme to remembraunce, to put vnder, to ſuccede or come in a place, to aunſwere or reſyſte.
            
               Qui retinendi officij cauſa, cruciatus ſubierit ultro, He that wyll for the accomplyſhement of his duetie ſuffre tormentes wyllyngly.
            
               Quis enim curae tuae molem ſponte ſubeat? Who wold wyllyngly take on hym the great weyght of thy charge?
            
               Sera poenitentia ſubijt Regem, Late repentaunce came to the kynges remembraunce.
            
               Aeneas ſubijt inucronem, ipſum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , morando ſuſtinuit, Aeneas put vnder his ſworde, and taryenge lyfted hym vp.
            
               In quarum locum ſubierunt inquilinae, impietas, perfidia, impudicitia, In whoſe place ſucceded new inhabitantes, contempt of vertue, dyſloyaltie, lechery.
            
               Poteris ne orationem eius ſubire? Moughteſt not thou make anſwere to his oration?
            
               Hemi excelcitas, ſex millibus paſſuum ſubitur, The heyghte of the mountaygne of Hemus is clymmed or mounted in ſyxe thowſande paces.
            
               Tectum ſubire, to enter or comme into the howſe.
            
               Subire ad montes, to go frome the valey vp to the hylle.
            
               Vultum alicuius ſubire, to come before one.
            
               Spes animum ſubibat, I or he truſted or hoped.
            
               Subeunt morbi, ſycknes dothe come.
            
               Subire aliquid, to take charge of any thyng.
            
               Conditiones pacis ſubire, to accorde vnto peace.
            
               Deditionem ſubire, to render vp a garryſon beſyeged.
            
               Fortunam ſubire, to abyde the aduenture, or put all in a haſarde.
            
               Labores ſubire, to take peyne.
            
               Per uices ſubire, now one, and than an other, by tourne.
            
               Cruciatus ſubire, to ſuffer or indure tourmentes.
            
               Aleam ſubire, to put hym ſelfe in daunger.
            
               Subire crimen, to ſuſtayne blame.
            
               Incommoda ſubire, to be indamaged.
            
               Subire infamiam, to be dyſhonoured.
            
               Iudicium alicuius ſubire, to abyde the iudgement of one.
            
               Nomen exulis ſubire, to be a banyſhed man.
            
               Subire poenam, to be punyſhed.
            Supplicia ſubire, idem.
            
               Tela ſubire, to receyue ſtrokes.
            
               Verbera ſubire, to be beaten.
            
               Ne ſubeant herbae, that the weedes ouergrowe
 not.
            
               Cogitationi noſtrae nun
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   ſubijt, it neuer cam in our thoughte.
            
               Subit antiquitatem mirari, it cometh to my remembraunce to wonder at menne of the olde tyme.
            
               Subit recordatio, I remember well.
            
               Subit cogitatio, I haue beth
                  ••
               ght me.
            
               Subit animum. I do remember▪
            
            
               Calamitatem ſubire, to haue a great loſſe.
            
               Subire mortem, to receyue deathe.
            
               Periculum ſubire, to putte hym ſelfe in ieoperdy.
            
               Sermonem ſubire, to cauſe hym-ſelfe to be ſpoken of.
            
               Tempeſtates ſubire, to putit hym ſelfe in daunger.
            
               Turpitudinem ſubire, to runne in ſelaunder.
            
               Subire uim, to put hym ſelfe in ieoperdye to be ſlayne.
            
               Subeunt in hac reputatione, nowe commeth to remembraunce, &c.
            
               Subijt regem uere cundia, the kynge was aſſhamed &c.
            
               Fallendus eſt iudex & uarijs artibus ſubeundus, The Iudge muſte be wonne by pratye meanes that he may not perceyue.
            
               Suber, corke.
            
               Subeth, is a barbarous worde, pertaynynge to phyſyke, and ſygnifieth a depe ſtepe, not naturall, procedynge of groſſe vapours, ingendred of fleume, beyng in the pryncypal members, reſolued, and aſcendynge into the forparte of the heade, and cauſynge oppylations in the celles of the brayne.
            
               Subſibulum, was a whyte ornamente, fowre ſquare, and longe, whyche the nunnes, callyd Veſtales ware on theyr heades, whan they dyd ſacrifyce.
            
               Subhaſto, tare, to ſelle any thynge in tyme of warres that was prayſed. Haſta, a yerde, whyche was delyuered to hym that was appoynted to ſelfe anye thynge taken in warres.
            
               Subiaceo, cere, to lye vnder alſo to be ſubiect.
            
               Subiacto, tare, & ſubiecto, to caſte vp, as corne whan it is fanned.
            
               Subices, ſubiectes.
            
               Subiecto, tare, to caſt vnder often.
            
               Subiector, toris, a forger of teſtamentes, or he that bringeth forth one teſtamēt for an other.
            
               Subicito, tare, to company often with a womā.
            
               Subiculum flagri, a beatynge ſtocke.
            
               Subigo, egi, igere, to conſtrayn, to ſubdewe, to dryue vnder, to whet, to beate or ſtampe, som tyme to eare or tylle truly, to digge, to meddle with a woman, ſomtyme to lyft vp.
            
               Subijcio, ieci, ij cere, to put vnder, to make ſubiecte, ſommetyme to caſte vp, to reherſe. Simeminiſti quod olim dictum eſt, ſubijce, If thou doeſt remembre, what was ones ſpoken, reherſe it.
            
               Oua gallinis ſubijcere, to ſette egges vnder a henne to be hatched.
            
               Spem ſubijcere, to put one in comforte.
            
               Aliquid oculis ſubijcere, to make a thynge ſo playne as a man may perceyue it as welle as yf he dydde ſee it.
            
               Exemplum ſubijcere, to put an exaumple.
            
               Subijcere, to bryng to remembrance, to make aunſwere.
            
               Subijcere ferro terram, to tylle lande.
            
               Subijcere oculis, to report a thynge, as yf a man ſawe it.
            
               Subijcere ſenſibus, to purpoſe a thynge euydentyle.
            
               Crimini ſubijci, to put in faute.
            
               Faces inuidiae ſubijcere, to brynge one into hatrede.
            
               Teſtamentum ſubijcere, to brynge forthe a falſe teſtament.
            
               Vis ſubiecta uoci, the ſygnification and importaunce of a worde.
            
               In equum ſubiecit, he ſette hym on hors back.
            
               Subinde, moreouer, forthwith or anone, oftentymes. Subin, idem.
            
            
               Subingerere arietem, to delyuer a ſheepe to be kylled for hym that dothe ſacryfyce.
            
               Subinnanis, ne, ſomewhat vaynglorious.
            
               Subitò, ſodaynly.
            Subitaneus, & ſubitarius, a, um, & ſubitus, ta, tum, ſodayne.
            
            
               Subiugalis, le, vſed to the yoke.
            
               Subiugis, ge, a beaſt vſed to drawe in an yoke.
            
               Subiugo, gare, to make ſubiecte.
            
               Sub iugum mitti, to be ſubdued. It was properly whan a battayle was vanquyſhed, the vanquyſhers cauſed thre ſpeares to be ſet vp lyke a galowes, and conſtrayned theym that were vanquyſhed to go vnderneth it, in token that they were ſubdued, whiche was the greatteſt reproche that mought be diuiſed.
            
               Subiungo, gere, to adde or ioyne to.
            Sublabor, beris, lapſus ſum, labi, to ſlyp away.
            
            
               Sublabro, brare, to put into the mouthe.
            
               Sublatè, haultly.
            Sublatior, tius, hygher.
            
            
               Sublatus, ta, tum, lifted vp, mounted, aduanced
            
               Sublego, are, to ſubſtitute.
            
               Sublego, legi, legere, to ſteale. alſo to cheſe an nother into the place of hym that is deade.
            In locum demortui ſublegere, idem.
            
               Sublegere ſermonem, Clam noſtrum hunc illae ſublegerunt ſermonem, Priuylye they harkened, & bare away all that we cōmuned.
            
               Sublegere, to paſſe ouer in readynge quyckly, to ſteale a thynge that is hydde, to gather eftſones.
            
                
               Subleſtus, ta, tum, feble, faynt, lyghte, of nod force or value.
            
               Subleuo, are, to helpe, or ayde, to defende, to lyft vp, to ſuſtayne.
            
               Sublica, a proppe, a ſhore, a poſte, or other like thynge, to ſuſtayne or kepe a thynge vp, pyle dryuen into the ground for buyldyng or other lyke purpoſe.
            
               Sublicius, a brydge at Rome.
            
               Subligaculum, a nether coyfe or breche.
            Subligar, garis, idem.
            
               Subligo, gare, to vnderbynde.
            
               Sublime, on hygh.
            
               Sublimis, me, hygh, that which is aboue vs.
            
               Sublimitas, heyght.
            
            
               Sublimiter, hyghly, on heyght.
            
               Sublimo, mare, to ſette on hygh.
            
               Sublino, liniui, nire, to annoynte or touche, to paynte or ſtayne.
            
               Os ſublinire, to deceyue.
            
               Sublinitio, the fyrſt colour that is layd or dyed. alſo ſtaynynge with colours.
            
               Sublitio, onis, the grounde colour, wheron the perfyte colour is layde, in clothe dyed, it is callyd graſynge.
            
               Subluceo, cere, to ſhyne ſomewhat, or to gyue a lyttell lyght.
            
               Sublucidè, ſomewhat lyght.
            Sublucidus, da, dum, idem.
            
               Subluco, care, to vnderſhreade boughes, that the lyght may come vnder the tree.
            
               Sublucanum tempus, the ſprynge of day.
            
               Subluere, to vnderwaſſhe, as water, whyche runneth lowe vnder a banke or hille, and waſheth the foote thereof. Alſo to waſſhe ſomewhat cleane.
            
               Subluſtris, tre, that hath ſome lyght.
            
               Subluuies, a dyſeaſe of cattelle, whiche is betwyxte the cleys of their feete.
            
               Sub manu habere, to haue at hande.
            
               Sub manu eſſe, to be at hande or redy.
            
               Sub manu, after hande, forthewith.
            
               Sub manus, eaſily, handſomly. Bono animo es, negotium omne iam ſuccedit ſub manus Be of good chere, all the matter is come to paſſe handſomely. Lepidè hoc ſuccedit ſubmanus negotium, This matter cometh well and eaſily to paſſe.
            
               Sub merum, almoſte pure.
            
               Subminia, a womās garmēt, I ſuppoſe a kirtel.
            
               Subminiſtro, are, to do ſeruice vnder oone, to gyue or delyuer any thynge that is aſked for.
            
               Subminiſtrator, he that ſerueth vnder an other man, he that delyuereth any thynge that is callyd for.
            
               Submiſsim, & ſubmiſſè, ſoftely, proprely in ſpekynge. alſo humbly.
            
               Submiſſus,a, um, humble.
            
               Submitto, tere, to ſende priuyly or by ſtealth.
            
               Submittere, to ſende or brynge in the meane tyme. Alſo to putte or ſet vnder proprely, as a calfe, a lambe, or a fole, is ſette vnder the damme to ſucke.
            
               Submittere ſe, to humble hym ſelfe.
            
               Submittere capillum, to let heare to growe.
            
               Pretium ſdbmittere, to inhaunce theprice.
            
               Submoneo, nére, to warne one priuyly.
            
               Submordeo, dere, to byte ſoftely, or priuily.
            
               Submoueo, uere, to remoue or carye a thynge far of alſo to dryue out of a place alſo to dyſcharge a man of his offyce.
            
               Subnecto, tere, to bynde to, or hange to. alſoo to ſubſcribe.
            
               Subnego, gare, to denye ſomewhat.
            
               Subneruo, are, to cut ſynewes.
            
               Subnexio, a byndynge or hangynge to.
            Subniger, gra, grum, ſomewhat blacke.
            
            
               Subnitor, nixus, niti, to leane agaynſt a thynge, to be ſuſtayned vp.
            
               Subnodo, are, to make a knot vnder a thynge.
            
               Subnoto, tare, to note or marke.
            
               Subo, are to brymme as a boore doth whan he getteth pygges.
            
               Suboffendo, dere, to offende ſommewhat, or a lyttell.
            
               Suboleo, lère, to ſauour or ſmell a lyttell.
            
               Subopto, tare, to deſyre a lyttell.
            
               Subordior, dire, to begynne.
            
               Suborno, nare, to prayſe or honour. alſoo to ſuborne or brynge in a falſe wytneſſe or meſſanger, or fayne one perſone for an nother, to deceyue with.
            
               Suborior, riris, riri, to begyn to ſprynge or ariſe as the ſun
                  ••
                dothe, to prayſe or honour oone with wordes alſo to deceyue priuily.
            
               Suppedito, tare, to be ſufficient to ſerue, not to lacke any thynge, to brynge ſufficiently.
            
               Suppudeo, dere, to be ſomewhat aſhamed.
            
               Subremigo, are, to rowe vnder.
            
               Subrepo, pſi, pere, to ſteale awaye or rounne away pryuily.
            
               Subrepere animo, to enter ſodaynly or priuyly into the mynde.
            
               Subreptio, thefte, or a falſe ſuggeſtion.
            
               Subreptitiae literae, letters ſtollen out by a fals ſuggeſtyon.
            
               Subreptitius, a, um, ſtollen, or falſely come by.
            
               Subrideo, riſi, dêre,, to ſmyle or laugh priuyly.
            
               Subripeo, to ſteale, to take away ſecretely. ſomtyme to lyfte vp haſtily.
            Subriſio, & ſubriſus, a ſmylynge.
            
            
               Subrogo, gare, to ſubſtitute or ſubrogate, to make a deputie in an offyce, to put in an nother mans roume.
            
               Subrufus, a, ū, & ſubrubeus, a, ū
                ſomwhat red.
            
               Subrumi, lambes that do ſucke.
            
               Subrumor, ari, to be ſuckeled, or put to ſuck, as calues, lambes. &c.
            
                
               Subruo, ere, to enter with force, or priuyly by lyttell and lyttell alſo to dygge the erthe.
            
               Subſano, are, to ſkorne or mocke.
            
               Subſannatio, a mocke with bendynge the browes, and ſnuffynge vp of the noſe.
            
               Subſannator, to mocker.
            
               Subſarcinis, with truſſes or burdeyns.
            
               Subſcribo, ſcripſi, ſcribere, to wryte vnder, to ſubſcrybe, to fauour a mattier, to aſſygne a cauſe why, to affyrme.
            
               Subſcriptores, they whyche in cauſes iudicial do fauour the part of the accuſer or plaintif.
            
               Subſcudes, the vtter table, whervnto other tables are faſtned.
            
               Subſco, care, to cutte vnder or cut a lyttell.
            
               Subſellia, benches, whiche were vnder hygher ſeates, they were alſo benches, on the whiche Iudges dyd ſytte.
            
               Subſentio, ſenſi, ſentire, to perceyue ſomewhat.
            
               Subſequor, queris, ſequi, to folowe forthwith.
            
               Subſero, ſerere, to ſowe or ſet vnder a thyng.
            
               Subſeruio, uire, to ſerue, to accorde, or agree.
            
               Subſeſſae, ſcoutwatches, wherby hooſtes of men are intrapped as they paſſe.
            
               Subſideo, ſedi, ſubſedêre, to ſytte vnder, to lay in awaye for one.
            
               Subſidium, ayde in an extreme poynt.
            
               Subſido, dere, to falle downe, to auale.
            
               Subſigno, nare, to ſubſcribe or write vnder.
            Subſilio, liui, lire, & ſubſulto, ſultare, to leape a lyttell.
            
            
               Subſilles, lyttell plates belongynge to ſacrifice.
            
               Subſimus, he that hath a camoyſe noſe.
            
               Subſipere, to ſauour ſomewhat.
            
               Subſiſiuum, that whiche foloweth or is next.
            
               Subſiſto, ſtiti, ſiſtere, to reſyſte, to abyde, to be by hym ſelfe.
            
               Subſolanus, the eaſte wynd.
            
               Subſono, are, to ſowne a lyttell, to make a lyttell noyſe.
            
               Subſortitio, a deputation, whan one maketh an nother his deputie.
            
               Subſortitus, a ſubſtitute.
            
               Subſtantia, ſubſtance, alſoo matter. ſometyme goodes, which is alſo cōmonly called ſubſtāce
            
               Subſterno, ſtraui, ſternere, to ſtrawe or lay vnder any thynge, as ruſſhes, carpettes, and flowres.
            
               Subſtillum, a ryme or fallynge myſte, or a droppynge before and after rayne, it is alſo a ſyknes, whan a man may not pyſſe well.
            
               Subſtituo, tui, tuere, to ſubſtytute in the place of an nother.
            
               Subſto, ſtiti, are, to ſuſtayn or abyde conſtantly.
            
               Subſtratus, a, um, ſtrawed vnder, or layd vnder.
            
               Subſtreſto, pere, to make a lyttell noyſe.
            
               Subſtringo, xi, gere, to ſhrynke vndernethe.
            
               Subſtruo, truere, to vnderpynne a houſe
            
               Subſtructio, vnderpynnyng or groundynge of a howſe.
            
               Subſtupeo, & ſubſtupeſco, ſcere, to be ſommewhat dyſmayde.
            
               Subſtupidus, ſomewhat dyſmayde or abaſhed.
            
               Subſulto, tare, to ioumpe.
            
               Subſultim, by iumpes.
            
               Subſuo, ſuere, to ſowe vndernethe.
            
               Subſum, ſubeſſe, to be vnder, or within.
            
               Subtal, the holownes of the fote. alſo the palme of the hande.
            
               Subtegmen, minis, the threede, whych in weauynge is callyd the woufe.
            
               Subtegulanea, places vnder the eueis of houſes
            
               Subtendo, tendere, to pourpoſe or diuyſe any thynge, to deceyue an other manne, or to laye any thynge in a mannes waye for the ſame purpoſe.
            
               Subtento, tare, to eſpye.
            
               Subtepeo, pere, to be ſomewhat warme.
            
               Subtepidus, da, dum, ſomewhat warme.
            
               Subter, vnder.
            
               Subterraneus, nea, neum, that whyche is vnder the grounde.
            
               Subtercludo, dere, to ſhutte vnder.
            
               Subterduco, cere, to withdraw, to ſcape away.
            
               Subterfluo, xi, fluere, to rounne or flowe vnder a thynge, as water vnder a brydge.
            
               Subterfugio, gere, to eſcape.
            
               Subtergredior, di, to go vndernethe.
            
               Subtero, riui, terere, to broyſe, or weare.
            
               Subticeo, cui, cére, to anſwere nothyng to that whyche is ſpoken.
            Subticeſco, ſcere, idem.
            
               Subtondeo, dere, to clyppe vnder.
            
               Subtraho, xi, trahere, to take away, to ſteale.
            
               Subtrahere ſe, to drawe vnto quyetnes.
            
               Subtrahere famae, to withdraw from bruite.
            
               Subtrahere inuidiae, to eſchewe enuy.
            
               Subtriſtis, ſte, ſomewhat heuy or ſory.
            
               Subturpis, pe, ſomewhat foule, in part foule or dyſhoneſte, the matter or thynge dyſhoneſte, couered with cleane wordes.
            
               Subucula, a ſhyrte alſo a cake.
            Subueho, uexi, uehere, to beare.
            
            
               Subuecto, tare, to beare or cary often.
            Subuenio, ueni, uenire, to helpe.
            
            
               Subuerbuſta, meate burned on the ſpytte.
            
               Subuerto, tere, to tourne vp ſo downe. alſoo to diſtroy, to ſubuert.
            
               Subuerſo, ſare, to ſubuerte often.
            
               Subueteribus, was a place in Rome.
            
               Subula, an awlle, that cordyners doo vſe for a bodkynne.
            
               Subulcus, a ſwyneherde.
            
               Subulo, an harte hauynge hornes without rynes, called as I ſuppoſe, a ſpyttarde.
            
               Subuolo, lare, to flee away.
            
               Suburbanum, a manour or farme without the walles of a citie.
            
                
               Suburbia, the ſuburbes of a citie or towne.
            
               Suburrana regio, the ſtrete in Rome where the brothell houſes were.
            
               Subuulturius, a, um, that whyche apprehendeth men lyke as rauynes do carrayne.
            
               Succedaneus, a, um, that whyche ſuccedeth.
            
               Succedo, ceſsi, cedere, to ſuccede.
            
               Muris ſuccedere, to approch vnto the walles
            
               Succedere, to enter. Et noſtris ſuccede penatibus hoſpes, And enter thou my frende into my houſe. Alſo to goo vnder a thyng. alſo to ſpede welle, to be at a good poynte.
            
               Hac non, ſucceſsit, alia aggrediamur uia, This waye it ſpeedeth not, lette vs goo to an nother way.
            
               Succendo, dere, to inflame, to bourne.
            
               Succenſeo, ui, ere, to be angry for a good cauſe.
            
               Succento, tonis, was a certayne garment, whiche onely hoores dyd weare.
            
               Succento, tare, to ſynge a baſe.
            
               Succentor, toris, he that ſyngeth a baſe.
            
               Succenturiatus, he that made vp the number of the bende of men that lacked.
            
               Succenturio, are, to make vp the numbre of a hundred ſouldyours, or of that companye, that was callyd Centuria.
            
            
               Succerda, ſwynes dunge.
            
               Succemo, creui, cernere, to raunge meale in a ſieue.
            
               Succeſsio, ſucceſſyon.
            
               Succeſſor, ſoris, a ſucceſſour.
            
               Succeſſorē dare, to depoſe a mā of his office.
            
               Succeſſus, a, um, that whiche proſperouſely happeneth, or ſpedeth well.
            
               Succeſſus, us, ſucceſſe, be it good or yll.
            
               Succida, woulle vnwaſhed.
            
               Succidaneae hoſtiae, beaſtes for ſacrifice, whyche were kylled in the ſeconde place, or nexte to the fyrſte.
            
               Succidaneus, a, um, that whyche foloweth the fyrſte.
            
               Succidia, a pyece or flyche of bakon ſalted. alſo larde.
            
               Succido, cidi, cidere, to felle or cutte downe, alſo to falle vnder.
            
               Succiduus, a, um, that whyche dothe ſuccede or folowe. alſo lowe, redy to fall downe.
            
               Succidus, da, dum, moyſt, or full of iuyſe.
            
               Succingo, xi, gere, to gyrde. Alſo to enuyronne or compaſſe. Fruſtra ſe terrore ſuccinxerit, qui ſeptus charitate non fuerit, armis. n. arma irritantur, In vayne ſhall he enuyron himſelfe with terribleneſſe, whiche is not wallyd about with the loue of his cuntrey. For with vyolence, vyolence is ſtyred.
            
               Succingulum, a ſwordegyrdell.
            
               Succino, cinere, to make a ſofte noyſe, to ſynge a baſe or tenour.
            
               Succincta oratio, a compendyouſe or ſhorte Oracyon.
            
               Succinctè, compendiouſely.
            
               Succinctorium, a ſhort iackette or ierkyn.
            Succinctus, ta, tum, gyrte.
            
            
               Succinum, aumbre, wherof ſome beade ſtones are made.
            Succinus, na, num, of aumbre.
            
            
               Succiſiuum tempus, tyme of leyſure, vacante from buſyneſſe.
            
               Succlamo, are, to crye ſoftely.
            
               Succollo, are, to put vnder the necke or ſhoulders, to beare a thynge.
            
               Succortrila, a ſmalle voyce and a ſhrylle.
            
               Succreſco, ſcere, to growe vnder, or lowe, or a lyttell and lyttell.
            
               Succubo, bare, to lye vnder.
            
               Succubonium, idem quod ſuccuba, ſhe that lyeth vnder.
            
               Succubi, dyuelles, whiche in the fourme of women, do company with men.
            
               Succulentus, ta, tum, full of iuyſe.
            Succiplenus, idem.
            
               Succumbo, cubui, cumbere, to be ſubdued, to be ioyned to, to falle downe vnder an heuye burdeyne, to fayle for feblenes.
            
               Succurro, ere, to helpe, to come to remembrance
            Suctus, tus, ſuckynge.
            
            
               Succus, cus, cui, the ſuckynge of mylke.
            
               Succus, iuyce or humour, whiche the bodye receyueth of meate and drynke. alſo generallye all maner of iuyſe.
            
               Succuſſarius, & ſuccuſſor, a trottynge horſe.
            Succuſo, nis, idem.
            
               Succuſſatio, ſuccuſſura, & ſuccuſſatura, the trottynge or ſhakynge of a horſe.
            
               Succuſſo, are, to ſhake as a horſe dothe whan he trotteth alſo a trotte.
            
               Succutio, cuſsi, tere, to ſhake a thynge.
            
               Succula, a ſowe pygge, alſoo a certayne inner garment. alſo a certayne company of ſterres, callyd the .vii ſterres, whiche doo appere the xii. calendes of Iune, and be callyd Succulae & Hiades.
            
            
               Sudarium, a napkynne.
            
               Sudes, a certayne ſpeare, whyche is burned at the ende.
            
               Sudo, dare, to ſweate, to labour ſoore, to haue moche to do.
            Sudor, doris, ſweate.
            
            
               Sudum, the clere parte of the fyrmamente betwene cloudes. Alſo the clere fyrmament with out cloudes.
            
               Suefacio, ſuefio, fieri, to be wonte.
            
               Suere aliquid capiti, to gette a ſhrewde tourne.
            
               Metuo lenonem, ne quid ſuo ſuat capiti, I am aferde of the bawde, leſt he get a ſhrewde tourne,
            
               Sueſco, ſueui, ſueſcere, to be wonte.
            
               Sueui, a people in hygh Germany.
            
                
               Sueuia, the chiefe countrey of Germany in fertilitie holſomnes and beautyfull perſonages, it hath on the eaſt Bauiere, on the weſt Halſate, and the ryuer of Rhene, on the ſouth the mountaynes of Alpes: on the north Frankelande. It was ſometyme called Alemania, wherof all Germany was callyd Almayn, in Duche it is nowe callyd Swaue.
            Suffarcinatus, ta, tum, laded, truſſed.
            
            
               Suffarcino, nare, to laade or bourdeyne, to truſſe vp.
            
               Suffarraneus, he that caryeth meale or flowre to any place to ſelle in lyttell quantitie.
            
               Suffectus, is he, whiche an offycer beyng dead, or remoued, is ſette in his place.
            
               Suffes, was amonge the Carthaginenſes, as the Conſule was at Rome.
            
               Suffibulum, was an artyre, whyche the nunnes of Veſta dydde weare on theyr heades, whan they dyd ſacrifyce.
            
               Suffero, ſufferre, to ſuſtayne, to putte vnder, to ſuffer.
            
               Sufficio, feci, ficere, to ſuffyſe, to indure, to mynyſter, to ſubſtitute, to ſtayne.
            
               Sufficit, it ſuffyſeth.
            
               Suffimentum, perfume, or fumigation.
            Suffio, fiui, fire, to perfume.
            
            
               Suffiſcus, the codde of a ramme, whyche was made for a purſe to conteyne money.
            
               Suffitio, & ſuffitus, tus a perfume or fumigatiō
            
            
               Suffitor, toris, he that bloweth the fyre.
            Suffitus, ta, tum, perfumed.
            
            
               Sufflamen, that wherwith a whele is retayned or ſtopped of his courſe.
            
               Sufflatio, a blowynge.
            
               Sufflator, oris, he that bloweth.
            Sufflatus, ta, tum, blowen.
            
            
               Sufflo, are, to blowe.
            
               Suffocatio, a ſtranglynge.
            
               Suffocator, he that ſtrangleth.
            
               Suffoco, care, to ſtoppe the breath, to ſtrangle.
            
               Suffodio, foſsi, dere, to dygge vnder.
            
               Suffoſſus equus, a ſtumblynge horſe.
            
               Suffragatio, a declaration of a conſent or fauor.
            
               Suffragator, toris, a ſupporter or maynteyner.
            
               Suffragium, the voyce of people aſſemblyd in gyuing their conſent. alſo helpe or ſuccour, alſo a wrecke in the ſea.
            
               Suffragines, the ioyntes of the hynder legge of a beaſte, callyd the howx, ſometyme it dothe ſygnifie the paſternes, they be alſo the yonge ſprynges of vynes.
            
               Suffraginoſi equi, horſes, whych haue the peynes or ſcratches.
            
               Suffragor, garis, gari, to beare fauour.
            
               Suffrutex, ticis, that thynge whyche groweth, hauynge the forme meane betwene an herbe, and that whiche is Frutex.
            
            
               Suffulcio, cij, cire, to proppe vp.
            
               Suffulcior, cire, to be propped vp or vnderſet.
            
               Suffundatum, vnderlayde.
            
               Suffundo, dere, to caſt downe, or powre lykour on a thynge, to caſte abrode.
            
               Suffundo, dare, to buylde or ſette vppon a foundation.
            
               Suffuror, rari, to ſteale pryuyly.
            
               Suffuſio, a webbe in the eye.
            Suffuſus, a, um, ſprynkled, indewed.
            
            
               Suggero, geſsi, gerere, to mynyſter or gyue a thynge, to ſende forthe thynges, whereof are plenty.
            
               Suggerere ſumptus, to allowe expenſes.
            
               Suggeſtus, uel ſuggeſtum, a pulpytte or hyghe place, out of the whiche oratours or capytaines made propoſitions vnto the people.
            
               Suggrundia, the euys of a howſe, whyche deſendeth the walles from rayne.
            
               Suggrundaria, buryals of yonge infantes.
            
               Suggrundatio, the eueyſynge of a houſe.
            
               Suggillo, lare, to make a blacke ſpotte in the ſkynne with beatynge. It is alſoo to ſkorne, to detracte, or infame, to reproue, to condempne.
            
               Suggillatio, is a marke in the vyſage, blacke or blewe, made by ſomme ſtroke: a mocke, a detraction, an infamation behynde oone, a condemnation.
            
               Suggillatus, ſpotted, mocked, detracted, infamed, condemned.
            Sugo, & ſugeo, ſuxi, ſugere, to ſouke.
            
            Suinus, a, um, & ſuillus, a, um, of a ſowe.
            
            
               Sulcatim, in furrowes.
            
               Sulco, care, to falowe.
            
               Sulcus, cus, a furrowe. Serere tertio quarto quinto ſulco, To ſow in the thyrd, the fourth the fyfthe falowe. Sommetyme it is put for a dyche. Alſoo any maner of cuttynge of the earthe. proprely it ſygnifyeth any thyng that is longe and ſharpe edged. Biſulum animal, A beaſte that hath the feete clouen with two talons.
            
               Sulla, was a cruell tyrant of the Romanyns callyd alſo Sylla.
            
            
               Sulmo, monis, a towne in the countrey of Peligna, where Ouidius the poete was borne.
            
               Sulmonenſis, a man or woman of the citie of Sulmo.
            
               Sulphuraria, a place where brymſtone is boyled
            Sulphur, phuris, brymſtone.
            
            Sulphureus, ea, eum, of brymſtone.
            
            
               Sulphuratus, ta, tum, dreſſed with brymſtone.
            
               Sultanus, a ſowdane, whiche was the name of a kynge of Egypte and Siria.
            
               Sumach, in the Arabyke tungue is that which Dioſcorides calleth Rhus. it is alſoo callyd Ros ſyriacus. Manardus lib. i. epiſt. 4.
            
               Sumanus, he that alway taketh.
            
               Sum, I am, es, thou art, eſt, he is.
            
                
               Sū Amphytrionis, I am Amphitriōs ſeruāt Sunt mihi bis ſeptē praeſtanti corpore nymphae, I haue fouretene maydens of excellent beaultie.
            
               Sum in mora illi, I make hym to tary.
            
               Sum in moetu, I am aferde.
            
               Sum in noxia, I am put in the blame.
            
               Sum, olde wryters vſed for eum, hym.
            
               Sit ueſtra benignitas ad audiendum? Pleaſeth you to here?
            
               Sunt ſeptem dies, it is ſeuen dayes agone.
            
               Sumanalia, a great cake made lyke a whele, ſuche as is made at bridales & church goinges.
            
               Sumen, minis, is made of the pappes of a ſow, cut from her the daye after that ſhe hath varowed, and powdred with ſalt.
            
               Sumo, ſumpſi, ſumere, to take vppon oone, to take generally, to hyre, to conſume, to borow. alſo to ſpende or beſtowe on one.
            
               Quod enim peruentum, quo ſumpta nauis eſt, non domini nauis eſt, ſed nauigantium, Vntylle they comme to the place whyther the ſhyppe was hyred, the ſhyppe is not the owners but theyrs, whyche are paſſagers.
            
               In mala uxore at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   inimico, ſi quid ſumas, ſumptus eſt, On a ſhrewd wyfe, and an ennemye, what ſo euer thou beſtoweſt, is waſt.
            
               Sumere aquamè puteo, to drawe water out of the welle.
            
               Sumere confidentiā, to truſt, to take corage.
            
               Sumere mutuum, to borowe.
            
               Sumere obſequium animo, to reioyce, to take comfort.
            
               Sumere operam fruſtra, to labour in vayne.
            
               Sumere optionem, to chuſe.
            
               Sumere perſonam, to counterfayt an other.
            
               Sumere ſupplicium, to punyſhe.
            
               Summa, is a collection of thynges or wordes. alſo the princypall poynt of a matter, the concluſyon of a thynge.
            
               Summa aetas, the later age.
            
               Sūmates, the chief perſons of a realme or citie.
            
               Summatim, & ſummatè, compendiouſely by euerye parte of the matter, ſummarily. Ad ſummum duo, two at the moſte.
            
               Summè, excellently, chyefly.
            
               Summenianae uxores, hores kepte in the ſtede of wyues.
            
               Summenium, a place where baudry was kepte without the walles of a towne.
            
               Summiſsi, murmurers.
            
               Summiſsim, & ſummiſſe, ſoftly, not lowde.
            Summiſſus, a, um, baſe, lowe.
            
            
               Summitas, heyght, or hyghenes.
            
               Summitudo, dinis, the heyght of a thynge.
            
               Summitto, miſi, mittere, to conuey in priuyly, alſo to ſuffre to growe.
            
               Summittere barbam, to let the bearde grow, to let to departe.
            
               Summoenius, nia, nium, that whyche is vnder the walles.
            
               Summo, are, to make hygheſt.
            
               Summus, a, um, hygheſt, extreme, greatteſt, or very commendable, excellent.
            
               Summum, at the moſte.
            
               Summo iure agere, to take the rygour or extremitie of the lawe in ſuite.
            
               Summum faſtigium imponere, to fynyſhe a thyng perfitly, to bring a matter to a poynt,
            Summam manum addere, idem ſignificat.
            
               Sumptifacio, cere, to ſpende.
            Sumpti, for ſumptus, plurali numero.
            
               Sumptuarius, a, um, that whiche doth pertayn to expenſes.
            
               Sumptuariae leges, lawes made for reſtraynyng of outragious expences.
            
               Sumptuoſè, ſumptuouſely, chargeably.
            Sumptuoſus, a, um, ſumptuouſe.
            
            
               Sumptus, ta, tum, taken, or choſen.
            Sumptus, tus, expenſe.
            
            
               Sunium, a promontory or elbowe of the countrey of Attica.
            
               Suo, ſui, ſuere, to ſowe, to ioyne or make faſte togyther.
            
               Suopte ingenio, of his owne propre wytte.
            
               Sup, for ſuper, aboue.
            
               Supellectilis, le, & ſupellex, houſeholde ſtuffe, all thynges mouable within the houſe.
            
               Supellecticarius, a bondeman or ſlaue, whiche is accompted for chatell.
            Super, & ſupra, vppon, aboue.
            
            
               Super Garamantas & Indos proferet imperium, He ſhall aduaunce his empyre beyonde the Garamantians and Indians.
            
               Super coenam, at ſupper.
            Super haec, moreouer.
            
            
               Super Euclionis filiā, of Euclions doughter.
            
               Super Priamo, ſuper Hectore, of Priamus, of Hector. Hac ſuper te ſcribā ad te Rhegio, Of that matter I write vnto you frō Regiū. Super, for propter. Nec ſuper ipſe ſua molitur laude laborem, Nor he taketh the peyne for his prayſe.
            
               Super, for ualdè. His accenſa ſuper, with thoſe wordes ſhe beyng kendlyd or ſtyred.
            
               Superaddo, dere, to putte or adde to.
            Superbè, prowdely. Superbiter, idem.
            
               Superbia, pryde.
            
               Superbio, ire, to be prowde.
            
               Superbiloquens, & ſuperbiloquus, he that ſpeketh proudely, or hautely.
            
               Superbiloquentia, proude or haute wordes.
            
               Superbos, old writers vſed for mortuos, dead, bycauſe of the pompe, whyche was at the buryenge. Faciam ego hodie te ſuperbum, niſi hinc abis, I wyll kyll the, yf thou get the not henſe.
            
                
               Superbus, proude, ſomtyme magnifyke or noble, alſo hyghe, ornate, or garnyſſhed, ryche, wycked.
            
               Superbum bellum, vniuſt or vnhappy warre.
            
               Supercido, dere, to falle on.
            
               Supercilioſus, ſowre in countenaunce.
            
               Supercilium, the ouerbrowe. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth pryde, grauitie. It is alſo the haunce, whyche is ouer the doore.
            
               Supercilium attollere, to be ſtately or proude.
            
               Supercilium ponere, to laye aparte pryde or ſtately countenaunce.
            
               Supercreſco, ſcere, to ouergrowe.
            
               Supercubo, bare, to lye ouer.
            
               Superduco, cere, to put or lay on.
            
               Superedo, dere, to eate after a thynge.
            
               Supereſsit, for ſupererit, ſhall lyue, or be left on lyue. Supereſt, he lyueth, or is on lyue.
            
               Supereſt, there is plenty or more thā inough. Alijs quia defit, quod amant, aegre eſt, tibi quia ſupereſt, dolet, Some bycauſe they lack the thynge that they loue, be dyſcontent, and thou arte ſoory that thou haſte more thanne thou nedeſt.
            
               Supereſſe, to be the reſte or reſydue. Porro auſculta quod ſupereſt fallatiae, But yet heare what was the reſydewe of that crafte or deſceyte. To defende or pleade for one. Cunctari ſe, ne ſi ſupereſſet, eriperet legibus reum, He wolde tary, leſte yf he came and ſpake for hym, he ſhulde delyuer an offender.
            
               Superexto, tare, to remayne ouer.
            
               Superficiarius, he that hath a houſe of his own buylded on an other mans ground, and payeth therfore a quyte rent.
            
               Superficiariae aedes, howſes buylded on the lande of an nother man than buylded them.
            
               Superficies, the ouermoſt part of any thyng.
            
               Superfoetatio, one conception of a chylde after an nother.
            
               Superfluo, fluxi, fluere, to abounde, or be ſuperfluouſe.
            Superfluè, ſuperfluouſely. Superfluo, idem.
            Superfluus, a, um, ſuperfluous.
            
            Superforaneus, a, um, idem.
            
               Superfundo, dere, to powre vppon.
            
               Supergredior, gredi, to go aboue.
            Supera, for ſupra.
            
               Superiacio, ieci, iacere, to caſte on, or lay on.
            
               Superijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caſte vppon, to laye vppon.
            
               Superi, they whyche ben in heauen.
            
               Superincido, dere, to falle on.
            
               Superior, hygher.
            
               Superior aetas, the tyme or age paſſed.
            
               Superlachrimo, to wepe or droppe vpon.
            
               Supermeo, are, to go ouer, or ſlyppe ouer.
            
               Supernato, natare, to ſwymme ouer.
            
               Supernati, they whych haue the hynder part of the thyghes next the buttockes cut away.
            
               Supernè, a hygh, aboue.
            
               Supernia, the inward parte & hindermoſt part of the thyghes next the buttockes cut of.
            
               Supernus, na, num, highe or ouer. Superna regio, the hygh countrey.
            
               Supernumerarius, that which is in ſurpluſage aboue the true number.
            
               Supero, rare, to go ouer. Alſo to vanquyſhe or ouercome. alſo to ouerlyue. ſometyme to kyll. Quod ſuperat, whiche is more, or is lefte in a ſurpluſage.
            
               Superpondium, ouerweyght, that whyche is added to the iuſt weyght.
            
               Superſedeo, dêre, to omyt or leue to do a thing Superſedeas hoc labore itineris, take not the peyne to come nowe, or forbeare the peyn takyng in this iourney.
            
               Superſede iſtis rebus, let theſe thynges alone
            
               Superſede iſtis uerbis, let theſe wordis paſſe, holde thy tungue.
            
               Superſedi ſcribere, I forbare to wryte, I left vnwrytten.
            
               Superſtes, ſtitis, he that ouerlyueth or remayneth aliue after that other be dead, alſo aliue ſometyme preſente. Olde wryters callyd Superſtites, wytneſſes.
            
               Superſtes, he that is ſaufe. Deos quaeſo, ut ſis ſuperſtes, I beſech god ſaue you, lōg mought you lyue. alſo preſente. Superſtitem utrun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   monui, ne inuiſi abeant, I aduyſed theym bothe, that they ſhoulde not departe with diſpleaſure.
            
               Superſtitio, a ſuperfluous or vayne relygion or deuotion, an honouring of that which ought not to be honoured, a vayn reuerence or feare toward that thynge, wherin is no efficacye or power, but by the illuſyon of the dyuell, as dyuination by the crieng or flyeng of byrdes, obſeruation of tymes, and dreames, and other lyke vanities.
            
               Superſtitioſi, they whiche be tymorous without cauſe, fearynge that God is dyſpleaſed, where there is none offence done. They were at the fyrſt ſoo callyd, bycauſe they contynually prayed and offered to the goddis, to preſerue theyr chylderne, that they mought ouer lyue them. Fynally euery vndyſcrete or vnreſonable deuocion or religion, maye be callyd ſuperſtytion.
            
               Superſtito, ſtitare, to make hoole or recouer from deathe.
            
               Superſto, ſtare, to ſtande vppon.
            
               Superſtruo, ſtruxi, ſtruere, to buylde on.
            
               Superſum, ſupereſſe, to abounde, to remayne, vanquyſhe, to be ſuperfluous, to indure.
            Superuacaneus, a, um, ſuperfluous.
            
            Superuacuus, a, um, not neceſſary.
            
            
               Superuagnea auis, was of the dyuynoures or
 ſouthſayers called that byrde, whiche cryed from the toppe of any thynge.
            
               Superuenio, nire, to come vnloked for, to come vpon or after an other thynge.
            
               Superuiuo, uixi, uiuere, to recouer from peryll of deathe, or whan a man ſemeth to be dead.
            
               Superus, a, um, the hygheſt or ouermoſte.
            
               Superum mare, the ſea, which is called Mare Hadriaticum, wherin ſtandeth the citie of Venyce.
            
               Supinus, na, num, vpright, the bealy vpward ſometyme it ſignifieth on an hyll or hyghe place▪ alſo ydell.
            
               Supina aure audire, to gyue a dull eare.
            
               Suppar, almoſte euen.
            
               Supparaſitor, taris, tari, to folowe or flater for a mannes dyner.
            
               Supparium, a clothe or curtayne hanged vppe where enterludes were playde.
            
               Supparus, uel ſupparum, a ſmocke. it is alſo a topſayle of a ſhyppe.
            
               Suppedaneum, a fote ſtole.
            
               Suppedito, tare, to ſubdue, to miniſter ſufficiently, alſo to oppreſſe to endure.
            
               Ac ſtomachonon queo labori ſuppeditare, My ſtomake wyll not lette me indure the laboure. Alſo to furnyſhe expenſes, to gyue as moche as a man wolde haue. Nam ſi illi pergam, ſuppeditare ſumptibus Menedeme, mihi illaec uero ad raſtros res redit, Surely Menedemus, if I wolde gyue hym as moche as he wolde ſpende, that thynge wolde bring me to the poynte to rake for my lyuynge.
            
               Suppeditare, to ſubdue or treade vnder.
            
               Nunc uideo, in iudicio mecum contendere non uis, ubi ſuppeditari turpiſsimum, ſupperare pulcherrimum eſt, Nowe I perceiue thou wylte not contende with me before iudges, where it were a great ſhame to be ſubdued, and verye moche honeſtie to haue the better.
            
               Suppetiae, & ſuppetias, ayde or ſuccours.
            
               Suppetias ire, to go to the ſuccour or ayde of one.
            
               Suppetias uenire, to come to ſuccour.
            
               Suppetias occurrit, he came forthwith to the ſuccours.
            
               Suppeto, tij, tere, to aſke priuily or craftely.
            
               Suppetit, it is in a redyneſſe.
            
               Suppetior, ari, to ſuccour or ayde.
            
               Suppetunt dictis, data, aut facta. Non ſuppetunt dictis data, He perfourmeth not that that he promyſed. Vtinam quae dicis dictis facta ſuppetant, wold god thou woldeſt do as thou ſayeſt, or wold god thy dedes did agree with thy wordes.
            
               Suppetit lucrum, there is gayne ſufficiente.
            
               Res ita ſuppetit, the matter ſo requireth.
            
               Suppetias mihi, Brynge to me ſuccoures, ayde me.
            
               Suppetias adueni, come and helpe me.
            
               Suppetias ferre, to ayde or ſuccour.
            
               Suppilo, are, to ſteale vnderhande or craftely.
            
               Supplanto, tare, to put vnder the fote, to ouer throwe, to ſupplante or deceyue, in preuentynge one to his hynderance or dammage, to vnderplante or ſet a tree or vyne.
            
               Supplaudo, ſi, dere, to reioyſe priuily.
            
               Supplementum, that whiche ſupplieth or maketh vp that whiche lacketh in quantitye or number.
            
               Suppleo, plere, to make vp that whiche lacketh, to make euyn.
            
               Supplex, plicis, he that deſyreth any thynge knelynge or proſtrate.
            
               Supplicatio, a prayer, a requeſte.
            Supplicaſsis pro ſupplicaueris.
            
               Supplicans, tis, he that deſyreth a thynge.
            
               Suppliciter, humbly knelynge.
            
               Supplicium, peyne, tourment, or erecution of deathe. ſometime ſupplicia, are prayers.
            
               Supplitia pendere, to be put to execution.
            
               Supplico, care, to beſeche humbly.
            
               Supplimentum, a makynge vp of a number, whiche lacketh or is miniſhed.
            
               Supplodo, ſi, dere, to ſtampe or make noyſe with the fete. alſo to reiecte or caſt away.
            
               Supploſio, a ſtampynge or noyſe made with the feete.
            
               Suppono, ſui, nere, to put vnder, to put into the place of an other, to ſette a falſe or fayned thynge in the place of that whiche is the very true thynge.
            
               Supportare, to brynge or cary priuily.
            
               Suppoſitio, the puttynge or ſettynge of a fayned or falſe thynge in the place of the thynge ſelfe, as one chylde for an other.
            
               Suppoſtrix, ſhe that committeth that falſehod.
            
               Suppoſitus partus, whan the chylde of one womanne is laide with an other woman, which is not the very mother, as thoughe ſhe hadde borne it.
            
               Suppraedes, counterſuerties, they whiche are bounden to the ſureties, to ſaue thē harmles
            
               Suppreſſus, a, um, drowned, beaten vnder.
            
               Victi Perſi in naues confugerunt, ex quibus multae ſuppreſſae, multae captae. The Perſians fledde vnto theyr ſhyppes, whereof many were drowned, and many taken. Alſo hyd or conceled.
            
               Supprimo, preſsi, primere, to kepe downe, to kepe ſecrete, to kepe in ſilence.
            
               Supprimere iter, to ſtaye or omyt a iourney.
            
               Suppromo, pſi, mere, to drawe out drynke.
            
               Suppromus, a butlar. Bono cella ſuppromo credita, The ſeller or buttrie was commytted to a good butlar.
            
               Suppudet, I am halfe aſhamed, thou arte half
 aſhamed, or he is halfe aſhamed.
            
               Suppurantia, & ſuppuratio, matterynge of a ſoore.
            
               Suppuratorius, a, um, that whiche perteyneth to impoſtumes, or to make a ſore to matter.
            
               Suppuro, rare, to matter or be an impoſtume
            
               Suppuratio, an impoſtume or ſore that hathe matter.
            
               Supra, aboue, or ouer.
            Supra 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
               , for ſupra id quod.
            
               Supremè, hygheſt of all, or aboue all.
            
               Supremus, a, um, the hygheſt or greatteſte of all other.
            
               Supus, olde wryters vſed for ſupinus.
            
            
               Sura, the caufe of the legge. ſometyme the hole ſhanke or legge frome the kne downe.
            
               Surculaceus, & ſurcularis, re, that which bringeth forth yonge ſettes or ſprynges of trces.
            
               Surculus, a yonge ſet or ſlyppe, a nurſegarden, alſo a ſlyp of a trec or yonge graffe.
            
               Surcus, a ſtake.
            
               Surculoſus, a, um, full of ſlyppes.
            
               Surdaſter, he that is ſomewhae deafe and can not here.
            
               Surdé, deafely.
            
               Surdeo, dui, dêre, to be deafe.
            
               Surdeſco, ſcere, to waxe deafe or be deafe.
            
               Surditas, deafeneſſe.
            
               Surdo, dare, to make deafe.
            
               Surdus, da, dum, deafe, alſo that which hath no ſauour.
            
               Surrentum, a towne in Campania.
            
               Surrentinus, na, num, of that towne.
            
               Surregit, olde writers vſed for ſurgit, whereof commeth ſurrectio, a ryſynge.
            
               Surrepo, pere, to crepe vnder.
            
               Surreptitius, a, um, that whiche is doone by ſtelthe that none other man knoweth it.
            
               Surgo, ſurrexi, ſurgere, to riſe, alſo to growe or ſprynge.
            
               Surrigo, xi, gere, to lyfte vp.
            
               Surrigere aures, to laye his eare to a thynge to harken.
            
               Surripio, pui, pere, to ſteale or take away priuilie, alſo to lift vp on hye, to preuente.
            
               Surripere operam, Clanculum abij a legione, operam hanc ſurripui tibi, I departed priuyly from the hoſte, this tyme haue I borowed to do you pleaſure.
            
               Surripere ſe, to ſtele his away. Vt ſurripuiſtite mihi dudum de foro? O, howe dyddeſte thou ſteale awaye from me late out of the market?
            
               Surpiculus, a baſket or hamper.
            
               Surrogo, gare, to ſubſtitute, or put in an nother mannes place.
            
               Surrogatio, a ſubſtitution.
            Surſum, aboue. Surſum uerſum, vpwarde.
            
            
               Surſum deorſum, vp and downe.
            Suſ, for ſurſum.
            Suſcio, ſcire, for ſcio, ſcire, to knowe.
            
            
               Suſcipio, pere, to take.
            
               Suſcipere liberos, to get children on a womā
            
            
               Suſcipere fidem, to promyſe. Quas partes impleturum te, ſecundum ſuſceptam fidem confido, Whiche parte I truſte thou wylte perfourme, accordynge to the promiſe that thou madeſt.
            
               Conſilium ſuſcipere, to enterpriſe.
            
               Poenam dignam ſceleri ſuſcipere, to be puniſhed accordinge to his merites,
            
               Simultates ſuſcipere, to hate one priuilie.
            
               Vota ſuſcipere, to make a vowe.
            
               Suſcito, tare, to awake one out of his ſlepe, to call one to his warke.
            
               Sus, ſuis, a ſowe.
            
               Sus Mineruam, a prouerbe applyed vnto hym, whiche preſumeth to teache or correcte one, of whom he rather oughte to be taught or corrected.
            
               Suillus, la, lum, of a ſowe.
            
               Suſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   de
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fero, & ſuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   de
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   habeo, I force not I recke not, I care not.
            
               Suſae, arum, a great citie in Perſia.
            
               Suſcitabulum, a prouocation or ſterynge.
            
               Suſcito, tare, to ſtirre or prouoke.
            
               Suſpecto, tare, to beholde aboue, ſometyme to ſe benethe, or to loke downe.
            
               Suſpendeo, dere, to be hanged ouer or an hye. alſo to appere a lyttell.
            
               Suſpendioſus, he that is hanged.
            
               Suſpenſus, he that douteth to ſpeake or do.
            Suſpenſus, a, um, hanged vp.
            
            
               Suſpenſa manu, timerouſly, doubtefully.
            Suſpenſo gradu, Haec ubi ego audiui, ad fores, ſuſpēſo gradu, placidè ire perrexi, whan I harde thoſe wordes, I wente to the doore fayre and ſoftely.
            
            Suſpendium, hangynge. Suſpenſio idem.
            
               Suſpendo, dere, to hange vp, to be doubteful or ſorowefull. Suſpenſus animo, hauynge doubte, or beinge adrad.
            
               Suſpicio, ſpexi, ſpicere, to loke vp, alſo to honour, to anſwere.
            
               Suſpicans, he that hath ſuſpicion, ſuſpectinge.
            
               Suſpicor, cari, to haue ſuſpicion, to ſuſpec, alſo to ſuppoſe.
            Suſpectus, ta, tum, ſuſpected.
            
            Suſpicio, onis, ſuſpicion.
            
            
               Suſpicioſus, ſuſpeciouſe.
            Suſpiratus, tus, a
                     •
                  yghe.
            
            Suſpirium, idem.
            
               Suſpirioſus, ſhorte wynded, or he whiche fetcheth his brethe paynefully.
            
               Suſpiro, are, to ſighe. alſo to deſyre feruently.
            Suſsilio, lire, for ſubfilio.
            
               Suſtendere inſidias, to lay watche.
            
               Suſtentaculum, that whiche ſuſteyneth or
 beareth vp a thynge.
            
               Suſtento, tare, to ſuſteyne or beare vp, to ayde or helpe.
            
               Suſtineo, nui, nere, to holde vppe, to ſuffer, to forbeare, to fede, to refrayne.
            
               Suſtollo, tuli, tollere, to lyfte vp.
            
               Suſtollere animos, to be proude, or to haue an hyghe courage.
            
               Suſtollere aes alienum, to paye dettes.
            
               Suſtollere puerum, to bringe vp a chylde.
            
               Suſtulit, is properly of the father, as peperir, is of the mother.
            
               Suſtuli, I haue had, I haue brought vppe, I haue lyfte vp.
            
               Suſurrario, a whyſterynge.
            
               Suſurro, are, to whyſter.
            
               Suſurro, ronis, a whyſterer. alſo he which with falſe and ſecrete report maketh diſſention betwene men.
            
               Suſurrus, & ſuſurrium, a whyſterynge, or ſofte murmuringe, or ſuch noyſe as trees do make with the wynde, or a ryuer whan it runneth, or byrdes whan they chatter.
            
               Sutatis, a ſeamſter or ſhepſter.
            
               Sutela, a ſubtiltie or crafty warkynge.
            
               Suterna, ſhewemakers crafte.
            
               Sutilis, le, that whiche is ſowen.
            
               Sutor, toris, a ſhowemaker.
            
               Sutorius, a, um, perteynyng to a ſhoemaker.
            
               Sutorium atramentum, ſoutars bleche.
            
               Sutrina, a ſhowemakers ſhoppe.
            
               Sutura, a ſeame.
            
               Suturnium, an ewer or lauour.
            
               Suum, his owne, his proper goodes.
            
               Suus, a, um, his or hers. But howe this word ſhall be moſte aptely and conuenientely vſed, rede Valla or Calepines vocabularie. For it is more abundantly and properly declared of them, than can be expreſſed in englyſhe.
         
         
            ¶S ANTE Y.
            
               SYADES, ſterres called alſo Hyades, ſeuen in number.
            
               Syagros, a wylde bore.
            
               Sybaris, a citie in Grecia.
            
               Sybarita, a man of that citie.
            
               Sybaritica menſa, a prouerbe applyed to feaſtes and bankettes, whiche do excede in delycateneſſe.
            
               Sybaritici libelli, wanton bokes.
            
               Sybaritici ludi, plays whiche ar wanton and roſtely.
            
               Sybariticum carmen, a verſe or poeme conteynynge wanton matter.
            
               Syboti, people in the north parte of the worlde
            
               Sycaminus, a mulbery tree.
            
               Sychaeus, a mannes name.
            
               Sycion, he that fyrſte founde garlandes.
            
               Sycomorus, a great tree lyke a fyg tree, which hath abundaunce of mylke, whoſe fruite cometh not out of the toppes of the bowghes, as fygges do, but oute of the ſame boughes, and ſwete lyke to a wylde fygge: the graynes therof be leſſe than the graynes of fygges, & they be neuer rype, excepte they be ſcraped with an inſtrument of yron.
            
               Sycophanta, he that falſely accuſeth an innocent. alſo a bearer of tales, or a complayner.
            
               Sycophantia, a falſe accuſation, deceyte.
            
               Sycophantias ſtruere, to deuyſe, or inuent falſehode.
            Sycophantor, tari, idem.
            Sycophantiſſo, are, idem.
            
               Sycophantioſe, deceytefully by crafte.
            
               Sycon, olde writers called a fygge.
            
               Sycoſis, a diſeaſe in the fundement, which maketh a warte lyke to a fygge.
            
               Sycoſis, where within the eye lydde groweth a lyttell warte or other lyke thynge.
            
               Sydera, the plurell number of ſydus.
            
            
               Syderatio, a ſpyce of the fallynge euyll in men, but in trees it is taken for blaſtynge.
            
               Sydiae, the rindes of pomegranades.
            
               Sydus, ſyderis, a ſterre.
            
               Syene, a citie in the confynes of Egypte and Ethiope.
            
               Sygeum, a promontorye of Troye.
            
               Syla, a mountayne in Lucania, and a wod in it
            
               Sylla, a great tyraunte of Rome, whiche was of an vnſaciable crueltie.
            
               Syllaba, a ſyllable.
            
               Syllabatim, by ſyllables.
            
               Syllabicus, ca, cum, perteynynge to ſyllables.
            
               Syllanion, a famouſe maker of images, whiche was neuer taughte.
            
               Syllepſis, a fygure, where the plurell number and the ſynguler are ioyned together, as, Socijs & rege recepto.
            
            
               Syllogiſmus, a perfyte argument, which hath a neceſſary concluſion.
            Sylphium, reade Laſerpitium.
            
               Sylua, a woode or place ouergrowen with wodes, alſo any matter haſtely wrytten without ſtudy.
            
               Syluanus, was called god of woodes.
            
               Syluaticus, ca, cum, perteynynge to woodes.
            
               Syluecula, & ſyluula, a lyttel foreſte or wodde.
            
               Sylueſco, ſcere, to waxe or growe into woodes or buſhes.
            
               Sylueſter, ſylueſtris, tre, of wodde or foreſte, woddy, wylde.
            
               Syluicola, he that dwelleth in a foreſte or wod.
            
               Syluius, a mannes name whiche was borne in a foreſte.
            
               Syma, a citie in Aſia.
            
               Symbolum, a collation. alſo a token gyuen by one to an other vpon certayne appoyntmentes,
 generally a ſigne or marke to knowe a thinge by.
            
               Symbolus, a ſignet or ſeale, or a ſigne manuell
            
               Symbulus, a wyſe and good counſaylour.
            
               Symmachia, ayde in battayle, or leage made amonge men of ſondry countreys, to fighte agaynſte the other parte.
            
               Symmachus, a mannes name.
            
               Symmetria, is a conuenient agremente of the members or partes of any thynge, aunſwerynge in euerye parte ſeparate vnto the proportion of the hole figure, as in the arme the hande the legge the fynger and the foote, and other membres hauynge reſpecte to the hoole body, and ſemblably in all other thynges.
            
               Sympathia, a mutual combination of thynges natural in the operation of their powers and qualyties. as water in coldeneſſe doth participate with erthe, in moyſture with the ayre, the ayre with the fyre in heate, with water in moyſture.
            
               Symphiton petraeum, an herbe called Bugle.
            Symphitum, reade Conſolida maior.
            Symphitum magnum, comfrey.
            
            
               Symphonia, a conſent in tunc, alſo armony.
            
               Symphoniaca, or Symphonia, an herbe, whiche as Apuleius ſaithe, is Henbane, called Hyoſciamus
            
            
               Symphoniaci ſerui, were they whiche in the ſhyppe played on drounſlades and fyfes to ſtyrre the ſouldiours to fyght more aigrelye.
            
               Symphonio, are, to agree or accorde in one.
            
               Symphoneſis, colyſion of vowelles.
            
               Sympinatice, womenne addicte to ceremonies or deuotion.
            
               Sympinium, a cuppe ſeruynge for wyne in ſacrifice.
            
               Symplator, a frende of hym that is maryed whiche accompanieth hym to feaſtes.
            
               Symplega, warkes, in the whiche wraſtlers, and they whiche contende in fyghtynge, are beholden.
            
               Symplegades, two yles in the grekyſh ſea.
            
               Symplegma, an imbracynge together.
            
               Sympo
                     •
                  iaſtes, he that maketh a feaſt or bāket
            
               Sympoſium, a banket, or aſſembly at drynking
            
               Sympotria, a woman whiche kepeth company at drynkynge.
            
               Symniſta, a ſecretarye, or oone of the pryuye councell.
            
               Sympſalma, a concorde in ſyngynge.
            
               Symptoma, tis, a greeke worde vſed amonge phiſitions, for lacke of a latine worde conuenient for the thynge, whiche it ſignifieth, it is a certayne affecte folowyng ſyckneſſe lyke as cauſe dothe procede or is before ſickeneſſe it is a ſenſible griefe ioyned with the ſicknes.
            
               Sympudearia, funeralles or playes, wherein playes were made.
            
               Synada, a citie in Aſia.
            
               Synaereſis, a contraction of two wordes as Bigae, for brjugae.
            
            
               Synagoga, a congregation, ſpecially of iewes
            
               Synalephe, a colliſion of vowelles.
            
               Synanche, a ſickeneſſe in the throte, called the ſquynce, of Barbarouſe men, ſquinantia.
            
            
               Syncere, purely, vncorruptly.
            
               Syncerus, a, um, ſincere, pure, vncorrupted ſymple without diſſimulation.
            
               Synchronos, of one tyme.
            
               Synciput, ſyncipitis, the foreparte of the head alſo a ſwines heade ſowſed.
            
               Syncopa, or Syncope, a fygure, where a letter or ſyllable is taken awaye, as compoſtus for compoſitus. it is alſo a ſoundynge for debilitie of the vitall ſpirites
                  •
               
            
            
               Synecdoche, a fygure, where part is vſed for the hole, or the hole for parte.
            
               Syndicus, an aduocate.
            
               Syndipnium, a ſuppynge to gether.
            
               Synechon, continent.
            
               Synephites, a ſtoone, whiche is called alſo Leucongra.
            
            
               Syngrapha, ſyngraphus, & ſyngraphum, the wrytynge or deede, made or ſygned with the hande of hym that maketh a bargayne or couenaunte.
            
               Synochitides, a ſtone wherwith nigromancers do call vp diuelles.
            
               Synodus, an aſſemblye of menne, or generall councill.
            
               Synonimum, whiche in diuerſe wordes ſygnifieth on thinge, as Enſis, Gladius, bothe do ſignifie a ſword. Occidit, interfecit, necauit, do ſignifie, he kylled.
            
               Synopis, ſinoper or red leade.
            
               Synſtratiotes, companions together in warre.
            
               Syntagma, a treatiſe, an ordinaunce.
            
               Syntaxis, order in conſtruction. it is alſo a tribute or ſumme of money to be diſtributed into ſundry companies. it is alſo a volume gathered of diuerſe warkes. Eraſmus vſeth it for the ſacrament of the aultare. ꝙ recte aut appoſite alij uiderint.
            
            
               Syntexis, lacke, or weakeneſſe, whiche hapneth by longe ſickeneſſe.
            
               Syntereſis, the pure parte of conſcience.
            
               Synthema, a token gyuen to ſouldiours.
            
               Syntheſis, a ſhorte cote or ierkyn, alſo a veſſell made of many veſſelles.
            Syntomon, for circumciſum.
            
               Sypharium, a curtayne hanged before mynſtrelles whan they ſynge.
            
               Syphax, was the kynge of Numidia.
            
               Syracuſae, a citie in Sicile, nowe called Sarragoſa, in the olde tyme of a meruaylouſe renoume in ſtrength and riches. moreouer it is ſcituate that all the daye longe the ſunne is
 neuer out of ſyghte, by no clowde that keuereth it,
            
               Syracuſius, & ſyracuſanus, of that citie.
            
               Syria, a great realme in Aſia, whiche hath on the eaſte the ryuer of Euphrates, on the weſt the myddell ſea, and the realme of Egypt, on the northe Cilicia and Cappadocia, on the ſouthe Arabia.
            
               Syria, called alſo Aſſyria, a great countrey in the Eaſt, hauynge on the Northe, parte of Armenia, on the weſt Meſopotamiā, on the ſouthe Suſianam, on the eſte Mediam. it alſo conteyneth Phoeniciam. Paleſtinam, and Babyloniam.
            
            
               Syriacum, a kynde of ſwete radiſhe.
            Syriacus, ca, cum, of Syria.
            
            
               Syriaſis, an inflammation in the partes about the brayne and the pannicles, whiche happeneth to infantes.
            
               Syrictae, people whiche receyue theyr meate in oten redes.
            
               Syricum, a colour myxte with ſinoper & ruddel
            
               Syrium, wyne boyled to the thyrde parte.
            
               Syrinx, a pype or recorder.
            
               Syris, corne kepte in holes in the grounde, and couered with chaffe.
            
               Syriſca, a woman of Syria.
            Syriſſus, a, um, of Siria.
            
            
               Syrma, tis, the traine of a womannes gowne.
            
               Syrnia, a ſhriche oule.
            
               Syrophoenix, the ſea coſte of Syria.
            
               Syrtes, quycke ſandes or ſhelpes in the water made by the dryfte of ſande or grauell.
            
               Syrtites, a lyttell ſtone founde in the bladder of a wulfe.
            
               Syrupus, a ſyrupe.
            
               Syrus, a man of Siria, alſo an Ilande belongynge to Grece.
            
               Syſsitia, feaſtes, and companyes aſſembled at feaſtes.
            
               Syſimbrium, I ſuppoſe to be horeſmynte.
            
               Syſimbrium cardamine, water creſſes.
            
               Syzigiae, ſynewes, whiche do come frome the brayne to the eyes, ſo that he, which cometh frome the lyfte ſyde, gothe to the ryghte eye, and that which commeth from the right ſide gothe to the lyfte eye, ſo that the ſynewes do croſſe eche other.
         
         
            ¶T ANTE A.
            
               
                  TABANVS, a fly, whiche hath foure wynges, and byteth a man or beſt that the bloud foloweth.
            
               Tabefacio, ere, to corrupt.
            
               Tabella, a lyttell table.
            
               Tabellarius, a caryer of letters, an auditour.
            
               Tabellio, lionis, a ſcriuener that writeth commune inſtrumentes and dedes.
            
               Taberna, euery vyle habitation, alſo a ſhop or tauerne, where wares be ſolde, and al thinge that is vendible, as wyne, oyle, or any other thynge.
            
               Taberna meritoria, an ynne.
            
               Tabernaria fabula, a comedy or ēterlude, wherin are baſe perſonages, and no perſons of dygnitie or ſtate.
            
               Tabernaculum, a pauyllion or halle.
            
               Tabernarius, he that ſelleth any maner of wares. alſo a tauerner.
            
               Tabes, bis, corruption in the bodye. alſoo extreme leanneſſe, by a longe conſumynge ſickneſſe. It is alſo matter and corrupt bloudde myxte together. alſo the impoſtume of the lunges, procedinge of humoures deſcendyng frome the head into the ſtomake, and ſo wondynge and corruptynge the lounges.
            
               Tabeſco, bui, ſcere, to languiſhe or conſume, to be extremely leane, to be corrupted.
            Tabidus, da, dum, corrupted, conſumed.
            
            
               Tabificabilis, le, that whiche maye be corrupted, or fall into a conſumption.
            
               Tabificus, ca, cum, that whiche maketh o one corrupted, or conſumeth the body.
            
               Tablinū, was a wynter parlour, wherin were painted tables and bokes of ſtories.
            
               Tabo, a conſumption, waſtyng, or putrifaction of thynges.
            
               Tabor, a mountayne in the countreye of Galilea, where Chriſte was tranſfigurate.
            
               Tabula, a table, in the plurell number tabulae, doth ſignifie a teſtamente, or any commune inſtrument or writinge Alſo tabula, is a table to playe on with diſe or cheſſe men.
            
               Tabulae nouae, were whā detters were not conſtrayned to paye theyr dettes, that they dyd owe, and the olde obligations were diſſolued and newe were to be made for that whiche ſhulde newely be borowed.
            
               Tabularia, are places, where euidences and writynges be layde.
            
               Tabularium, a cheſte, in the whiche euydences and recordes are put.
            
               Tabulata, walles made of ſquare ſtones, as if they were burded They be alſo the boughes
 of trees and buſhes, which do grow ſtreight forthe and not not vpwarde.
            
               Tabulatus, ta, tum, made of bourdes.
            
               Tabulo, are, to make a thynge with bourdes, or to ioyne bourdes together.
            
               Tabulatio, a ioynynge or cloſynge of bourdes together.
            
               Taburnus, an hyll in Campania, wherein doo growe many olyue trees.
            
               Tace, egomet conueniam iam ipſum, Let alone, I my ſelfe wyll cōmune now with him.
            
               Tacenda, thoſe thynges whiche are not to be ſpoken.
            
               Taceo, cui, cêre, to kepe ſilence, to be in reſt, to be quiete, to be ſure.
            Taciturnitas, tatis, ſylence.
            
            
               Tacitus, he that holdeth his peace, and is ſecrete.
            
               Tacito pede, ſoftely, by ſtelthe.
            
               Tacitum eſt, not a worde is ſpoken of it.
            
               Tacitus, citius audies, be ſtyll, thou ſhalte here the ſoner.
            
               Tacitè, with out ſpeakynge one worde.
            Tactus, tus, feelynge.
            
            
               Tactus fulmine, burned or blaſted with lyghtnynge.
            
               Taedet, it weryeth me, it yrketh me, I am wery of it.
            
               Taedium, werynes, or heuynes of mynde.
            
               Taedulus, an olde dotarde, of whom all men are wery.
            
               Taenarus, a darke place at the foote of the hill called Malea, by the citie of ſparta, whiche was ſuppoſed to be an entry into hell.
            
               Taenia, the edge of a fyllette. alſo a womannes fyllet, or that whiche nowe they call rolles, properly it is a kerchefe, which maydens do weare on theyr heades. Alſo a whyte ſtoone, whiche in the water ſheweth long lyke a kerchiefe. It is alſo a village betwene Micenas & Corinthum.
            
            
               Taenon, a citie in Laconia, an other in Arcadia
            
               Tagaſta, a citie in Affrike.
            
               Tagax, acis, a felon, whiche happeneth on a manns fynger.
            
               Tages, was he, whiche taughte fyrſte the Thuſcanes the crafte of diuination, called Aruſpicium.
            
            
               Tago, gere, olde writers vſed for tango.
            
            
               Tagrus, an Hyll in Portyngale, where as it is wrytten, that mares doo conceyue of the wynde.
            
               Tagus, a riuer in Spayne, whiche diuydethe Caſtile from Portugall, wherein hath bene founde grauell of golde.
            
               Taigete, is the name of one of the ſeuen ſterres whiche ſo appiereth, as it maye ſcantelye be perceyued, whiche ſterre is alſo callyd Maia, & Electra.
            
            
               Talaria, were ſhowes, whiche Mercurius did weare, wheron were ſet whynges.
            
               Talaris, re, that whiche commeth downe to the ancley, as Toga talaris, a longe gowne, to the ancley.
            
               Talarius, ria, rium, perteynynge to dyſe, as Lex talaria, a lawe agaynſte dyſe plaienge.
            
               Talaſsio, was a ſonge contryned in certayne verſes, ſungen at weddynges. It was alſo a certayne exclamation or erie vſed at maryages, the begynnynge wherof beganne, whan Romulus and the Romaynes rauyſſhed the maidens of the Sabines, among whom was one of excellent beauitie, whom whan many of the Sabines wold haue reſcued, they whiche caried her toward Romulus, to thintent that ſhe ſhulde not be taken from them, cried Talaſsio, whiche was the name of a noble prynce of the Sabines, as if they wold haue broughte her to hym, and by that meane they eſcaped, and broughte her to Romulus. and afterwarde they vſed at mariages to crye Talaſsio.
            
            
               Talea, a ſtocke ſette in the erthe, wheron men do graffe. alſo a truncheon, a ſtaffe, a byllet.
            
               Talentum, was accompted ſommetyme for a poyſe or weyght, and therof were ſundry ſortes. one was called Atticum minus, or Commune, whiche conteyned .lx. poundes of Athenes weyght called Minae, or Mnae, which is of Troye weygh .lxii. pound, and a halfe An other was called Talentum atticum maius, whiche conteyneth .lxxx. Mnas, of troye weyghte .lxxxiii .li. and foure ounces. And that was alſo called Euboicū. An other was called Talentum Haebraicum, whiche conteyned an hundred Mnas, whiche is of Troy weyghte .C.iiii.li. and two ounces. An other was Talentum Syrum, whiche was but of xv. Mnas, of troye weyght .xv. pounde .vii. ounces and a halfe. Diodôrus writeth, that the commune Talent was but .xl.li. and nameth thre ſortes, The one called Ptholom aicum, whiche conteyneth .CC.lxxii.li. The ſeconde conteynynge .C.xxv.li. The thyrde a hundred pound. Talentum was alſo accō
               ted in valuation. Atticum minus uel commune, to the value of .lx. Minae, whiche of our money accomptynge an hundred grotes to euerye Mina, to an hundred pounde ſterlynge. euery pounde beinge of thre ſcore grotes. not withſtandynge the iuſte value of Talentum, is more or leſſe after the fyneſſe, baſeneſſe or weyght of the englyſhe grote. Talenrum atticum maius, was accompted to lxxx. Minas, whiche of our ſterlynge money is .C.xxxiii.li.vi.s.viii. pens. Talentum Haebrai cum ſanctuarij, conteyned an hundred Mnas Hebraicas, wherof euery one was .lx. Sicli,
                euery Siclus, beinge .iiii. ſterlynge grotes, ſo that Talentum was of our money ſterlynge .CCCC.li. Talentum Haebraicum uulgare, was halfe ſo moche, videlicet. CC. li.
            
               Talia, the blade of an onyon or chiboll.
            
               Talio, onis, an equall peyne in recompence of a hurte, as for the cuttynge of a mans hand, to loſe a hande, or for puttinge out of an eye, to loſe an eye.
            
               Talior, ari, to be cut: it is properly ſpoken of wodde, whiche we nowe cal talling of wood.
            
               Talipedo, dare, to go on the paſternes.
            Talis, tale, ſuche.
            
            
               Taliter, in ſuche wyſe.
            
               Talitrum, a fylyppe gyuen with ones fynger or nayle.
            
               Talpa, a molle or want.
            
               Talpa caecior, blynder than a molle, a prouerbe applyed to them, whiche lacke iudgemente in thinges that are playne.
            
               Talum reponere, to refourme that, whiche was negligently done, with more diligence.
            
               Talus, the ancle aboue the foote. It is alſo the paſtern bone of a beaſt, Alſo a dye or dice.
            
               Tam, as well, alſo, as, ſo. Tam bonus, as good
            
               Tam ſum amicus republicae, 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   qui maximè, I am ſo frendely, or as moche frende to the publike weale, as he that is moſte.
            
               Tama, whan with moche trauaile the bloude commeth downe to the legge, and cauſeth it to ſwell.
            Tam magis, for tanto magis.
            
               Tamerindi, a fruite growynge in India, the tree whereof is lyke to a palme or date tree, the fruite ſower, lyke grene damſyns, whiche is medicynable in aſſwagynge the heate of cholere.
            
               Tamaritae, people in Aſia, not ſarre frome the ſea called Caſpium.
            
               Tamarix, ricis, a tree vulgarly called Tamariſcus, reade Myrice, ſome cal it whitbeame.
            
               Tamen, not withſtandynge. alſo yet. Tamen à malicia non diſcedis, yet wylte thou not depart from thy malyce? ſomtyme it ſignifyeth forthwith, at the laſte, ſo that. Quod potero, faciam, tamen ut pietatem colam, I wil do that I maye: ſo that not withſtandyng I omytte not my duetie to my father.
            
               Tameſis, the noble ryuer of Tamyſe in Englande.
            
               Tametſi, albeit, alwaye.
            
               Taminea Vua, Dioſcor. li. 4. ſaythe that it is the herbe whiche is called Bryonia nigra, Cornelius Celſus. li. 3. ſayth, it is that whiche of the grekes is called Stauis agria, whiche is thought to be falſe, for Plinius. li. 26. ca. i. ſuppoſeth, that it is the wyld vyne called Labruſca, the ſame is affyrmed by Ruellius.
            
               Tam ne, olde writers vſed for eouſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , vntyll that.
            
               Tanager, a riuer in Lucania, betwene Campania and Calabria.
            
               Tanagra, a towne in Perſide.
            
               Tanais, a greatte ryuer in the northe parte of the worlde, whiche diuideth Europa frome Aſia.
            
               Tanaquil, was wyfe to Tarquinius Priſcus the kynge of Romaynes.
            
               Tanaus, was kynge of Siria.
            
               Tandem, at the laſt, ſometyme at the leaſtway alſo vneth, not withſtandynge.
            
               Tandiu, ſo longe.
            
               Tango, tetigi, gere, to touche, to meue, to vnderſtande, or perceyue, to come to to deceyue.
            
               Tangere ulcus, to rub on the galde place, to ſpeake to one of a thynge, whiche greueth hym to here of.
            
               Tetigit aures meas, It came to myne cares.
            
               Tanis, the principall citie of Egypte, where Moyſes dyd ſhewe meruayles.
            
               Tanos, a ſtone of the kynd of Emeralde grene and blacke.
            
               Tanquam, as it were, lyke.
            
               Tantalides, the progeny of Tantalus.
            
               Tantali horti, a prouerbe ſignifieng good thynges to be at hande, whiche not withſtandynge a man maye not vſe.
            
               Tantalus, the ſon of Iupiter and Plota, was kynge of Phrygia. of whom the poetes doo write that bicauſe he diſcouered the counſail of the goddes, he is in hel tourmented in this wyſe. He ſtandeth by a fayre ryuer, hauynge before hym a tree laded with pleaſaunte apples, and yet he is alwaye thurſty and hungry, for as often as he ſtoupeth to drynke. he holdeth vp his handes to gather the appuls, but both the water and the tre do withdraw them ſoo frome hym, that he can not touche them.
            
               Tanti, for ſo moche. This worde doth perteine to byenge and ſellynge.
            
               Tantidem, at that price.
            
               Tanti aeſtimo, tantifacio, tanti pendo, I ſet ſo moche by, or I ſo moche eſteme it.
            Tantillus, la, lum, & tantulus, a, um, the dyminutiue of tantus.
            
               Tantiſper, ſo longe.
            
               Tantopere, ſo moche, ſo vehemently.
            
               Tantum, onely.
            Tantum non, almoſte.
            
            
               Tantum ſat habes? arte thou content?
            
               Tantummodo, all onely.
            
               Tantundem periculum, ſo great daungier.
            
               Tantò, an aduerbe, ſignifienge ſo moche, as tanto magis, ſo moche more, tanto peior, ſo moche worſe.
            
               Tantum abeſt, it is ſo farre frome, or ſoo moche vnlyke.
            
               Tantundem, euen ſo moche.
            
                
               Tantumnum, alſo, ye alſo.
            
               Tantus, ta, tum, ſuche, ſometyme ſo moche, or ſo great.
            
               Taos, a ſtone of the colour of a peacoke.
            
               Tapetia, hangynges of houſes, or clothes wherwith pauementes are couered.
            
               Tapetum, tapes, tapis, tapeſrye, or clothes wherin are wrought diuerſe pictures, with thredes of ſondry colours.
            
               Taphiae, & taphus, an 
                  •
               e by Grecia, where dwelled the people called Telebois.
            
               Taphius, a citie in Egypt, the people whereof were called Taphnii.
            
               Taphos, in greke, is a ſepulchre or tumbe.
            
               Tapinoſis, a figure, wherby a great thynge is baſely deſcribed.
            
               Tapoſiris, a citie in Egipte.
            
               Taprobanē, an yle in the Indian ſea, and was of ſome old writers ſuppoſed to be in the contrarye parte of the worlde agaynſte vs, and therfore they called it an other worlde. It lyeth in the poynte betwene eaſte and weſt, the quantitie thereof is dyuerſelye deſcribed by ſundry authors. For Strabo writeth that it is in lengthe viii. thouſande furlonge, whiche is a .M. myles. Plinius, Martianus, and Solinus, doo affirme it to be in lengthe vii. M. furlonge, whiche is .viii.C.lxxv. myles, in breadeth .v. M. furlonge, whiche is .DC.xxv. myles. parte of it extendeth beyonde the equinoctiall lyne, more ſouth, and hath on the northeſt, the laſſe Inde, it is now called Samotra, and is vnder the ſubiection of the great Cam, and is gouerned by foure kynges in an exquiſite fourme of iuſtice: not withſtandyng that the people be idolatours. They hunt Tygers Olyphantes and Pantheres, of the whiche there is great plentye. alſo there be founden carbuncles ſaphires isrinctes topaces rubies and granates, in gret numbers. There groweth cinamome, cauell, benioyme, and other ſwete trees in great aboundaunce, and they haue moneye of golde ſyluer and braſſe, of the ſame waight and value, that the auncient coyne of the Romains were. There is alſo founden plenty of greate and orient perles.
            Tapſus barba
                  •
               us, an herbe, reade Phlomos & Verbaſcus.
            
               Tapſus, an yle by Sicile not far frō Siracuſe.
            
               Tapulla, a lawe made for feaſtes.
            
               Tapyri, people in Parthia, whiche vſe to giue theyr wyues in maryage to other men, after that they haue hadde foure or fyue chyldren by them.
            
               Taraconia, a countrey called nowe Aragon.
            
               Taracon, the chiefe citie therof.
            
               Tarandrus, a beaſte in body lyke to a great oxe hauynge a heade lyke to a harte, and hornes full of branches, the heare roughe, of the coloure of a beare, I ſuppoſe it to be a rayne deere.
            
               Tarandulus, the beaſte called a Buffe, whiche is lyke an oxe, but that he hath a berde lyke a gote.
            
               Tarantula, a kynde of the beaſtes called Stelliones, lyke to a lyſarde, of whoſe bytynge no man dieth, onely it ſtonyeth hym that is bytten.
            
               Taras, the ſonne of Neptunus, who buylded Tarentum.
            
               Taraxacon, an herbe called Souſiſtell. reade Cicerbita & Sonchus,
            
            
               Taraxis, whan the eyen do bolne out moch, and be redde.
            
               Tarbeli, the citie of Tarbes in Gaſcoyne.
            
               Tarcheſius, was a myſcheuouſe kynge of the people called Albani.
            
            
               Tarchon, a duke in Hethruria, whiche was alſo a great diuinour or ſouthſayer.
            
               Tardatio, a tarienge.
            
               Tarde, ſlowe, late.
            
               Tardigradus, that whiche hath a ſlowe paſe, or gothe ſlowely.
            
               Tardiloquentia, a ſlowe ſpeche.
            
               Tardiloquus, he that draweth his ſpeche in lengthe.
            
               Tardior, ſlower.
            
               Tardiſsimus, moſte ſlowe, or ſloweſt.
            Tarditas, & tarditudo, & tardicies, ſlowneſſe
            
            
               Tardius, more ſlowely.
            
               Tardiuſculè, ſomewhat ſlowely.
            
               Tardiuſculus, ſomewhat ſlowe.
            
               Tardo, dare, to tary, to beſlowe.
            
               Tardus, ſlowe, rude, ſomtyme well durynge. alſo thycke or groſſe.
            
               Tarentinus, a, um, of the Citie of Tarento in Calabria.
            
               Tarentum, a noble citie in Calabria, called Taranto.
            
               Tarmes, a wourme, whiche eateth fleſſhe, a magotte.
            
               Tarpeius, an hyll at Rome.
            
               Tarquinus ſuperbus, was the laſte kynge of Romayns, which was expelled out of Rome for his pryde and crueltie.
            
               Taracina, a towne in Campania called alſo Anxur.
            
            
               Tarſus, the chiefe citie in Cilicia, where ſaynct Paule was borne.
            
               Tarſis, a region in India, it is ſometyme takē for Carthage.
            
               Tartaria, is a countrey of incomparable greatneſſe, it boundeth on the weſt vppon Ruſſia, and extendeth into the eaſte, after the deſcription of the laſte Card, aboue .MDC. duch myles, whiche is of Italion myles .vi. thouſande and .iiii. hundred miles and more, the
 bredth from the ſouthe into the north is more vncertayne, it marcheth on the ſouth vppon Perſiam and Indiam. the northe is moche parte deſert for the coldeneſſe and barenneſſe therof. The people haue no cities or townes, or elles very fewe, but they lye in pauillions, and vnder their cartes, whiche they doo remeue into ſundry partes, as the tyme of the yere dothe requyre, dryuyng theyr cattel with theym, of whome they do eate the fleſhe moche parte rawe, and do drynke the mylke and bloude of them. The people be fierce and cruell, and therwith vyle and beaſtly in theyr lyuyng. They be all vnder the ſubiection of the great Chaam, yet haue they many puiſſaunt pryncis, whiche do vſe a wonderfulle obedyence towarde theyr emperour. They beleue in one god, creatour of all thynges, but they be not chryſtened. They ar ſo populouſe hardy and fierce, that the great kynges, whiche do marche vpon them, haue moche to doo to reſyſte them, as the great kyng of Ruſſi, and the kynge of Perſia Sophias. Alſo one of theyr prynces toke in playne battayl Pazaietes the great Turke, whom beynge bounden with chaynes and gyues of golde, and incloſed in a cage of yron, he caryed aboute with hym vntyl he dyed, and in that battaile there were ſlayne two hundred thouſande Turkes the captayne of the Tartariens was named Tamberlane. Theyr emperour Chaam beſydes Tartariam hath alſo ſubiect vnto hym the leſſe Inde, and all the royalmes and yles in the eaſte and ſoutheaſte part of the worlde and he nameth hym ſelf in his ſtyle, the ſonne of god, rede more in Chaam. Moche of Tartaria was that countray whyche was ſometyme callyd Scythia.
            Tartareus, ea, eum, of helle.
            
            
               Tartarum, the lees of wyne.
            
               Tartarus, the depeſt place in helle. it is alſoo a Tartaryan.
            
               Tartarinus, rina, rinum, olde wryters vſed for horryble or terrible.
            
               Tarteſij, people in Iberia, amonge whome be cattes of excedynge greatneſſe.
            
               Tarteſſus, a citie in the vttermooſte parte of Spayne, on the ſea ſyde by Gades, now callyd Cales, where Columella the moſt eloquēt and perfyt huſband was borne. it was called alſo Gadir & Cartheia.
            
            
               Taſcaneum, a whyte clay or marle.
            
               Taſimenes, ſeu taſmenes, one of the ſonnes of duke Neſtor.
            
               Tata, dady, whyche children call theyr father.
            
               Tatae, a wanton worde, wherwith one anſwereth to an nother.
            
               Tateus, a kynde of ſalte, whiche cometh out of Phrigia, and is medicinable for the eyes.
            
               Taua, Tynmouth in Englande.
            
               Taura, a barrayne cowe.
            
               Tatianus, a mans name. Tatius, a mans name.
            
               Taurarij, people in Scithia.
            
               Tauria, a ſcourge made of netes lether.
            
               Taurica Cherſoneſus, a countray in the northe part of Europa.
            
               Taurici, people of cruelle maners that offered ſtraungers in ſacrifice to Diana.
            
               Taurilia, were playes made in the honoure of internall goddis.
            
               Taurinus, na, num, of a bulle.
            
               Taurius, one of the goddis of the ſea.
            
               Taurominium, a mountayne in Sicile, ſo callyd for the plenty of neate, whych fed theron. alſo there was by it a citie of the ſame name.
            
               Taurominitanus, na, num, of the citie of Tauminium.
            
               Tauroſcythae, people of Scithia, dwellyng by the mountayne callyd Taurus.
            
               Taurus, a bulle, ſometyme a ſtronge oxe. It is alſo one of the xii. celeſtyall ſygnes.
            
               Taurus, a great and famous mountayne, whiche begynneth at the Indian ſea, and ryſyng into the north, paſſeth by Aſia vnto the fenne or mere called Maeotis, and bordereth vpon a great numbre of royalmes. alſo the hyll callyd Caucaſus is parte therof.
            
               Tautologia, a fygure where oone thynge is twyſe ſpoken.
            
               Tax, the ſounde of a ſtroke with a whyp.
            
               Taxa, a kynde of bayes or laurell, wherewith herbars are made.
            
               Taxatio, a ſettynge of a taxe or ſubſydy.
            
               Taxatores, they whych do rebuke one another.
            
               Taxim, ſoftely, ſcantly touched.
            
               Taxis, olde wryters vſed for tetigeris, thou ſhalt touche.
            
               Taxilli, ſmalle dyſe.
            
               Taxo, nis, a gray or brocke, or badger.
            
               Taxo, are, to touche often. alſoo to taxe or ceſſe a thynge at a certayne value. alſo to reproue one an nother.
            
               Taxus, a tree lyke to fyrre, whych beareth bearyes, wherin is mortall poyſon. It is alſo the tree callyd yew.
            
               Taygetus, a hyll, vnder the whiche is ſette the cities of Sparta and Amycle.
         
         
            ¶T ANTE E.
            
               TEARVS, a ryuer of Thracia, at the head wherof Darius kyng of Perſia, whan he went into Scithia, pyght his pauillions, and there abode thre dayes. And delytyng at the moſte pleaſant water of that ryuer, he ſette in the ſame place a pyllar grauen with letters of greeke, declarynge his being there, with cōmendation of the water.
            
                
               Techna, a crafte, alſo a wyle or ſubtyll meane.
            
               Techines, were they, whyche alſo were callyd Corybantes, and were fayned to be the ſonnes of Minerua and Sol.
            Technicus, ca, cum, artificiall, inuentine.
            
            
               Technides, a craftes man.
            
               Technophyon, a ſettynge forthe of crafte.
            
               Tector, toris, a pargettour.
            
               Tectorius, a, um, pertaynynge to coueryng.
            
               Tectorium, the playſtrynge or pargettynge of a howſe. Tectorium opus, pargettynge or plaſtrynge warke.
            
               Tectum, the roufe of a howſe. ſommetyme all the howſe.
            
               Tectoſagae, Tholoſe in Fraunce.
            
               Tectoſages, Languedocke in Fraunce.
            
               Tecum, with the.
            
               Tecum oro & quaeſo, I pray and beſech the.
            
               Tecum ſentio, I am of thyne opinyon.
            
               Teda, a tree out of the whiche iſſueth a lykour more thynne than pytche, improperly it is taken for all wod, whych beyng dreſſed withro ſen or wax, wyl burne bryght lyke to a torche.
            
               Taedulus, of whome all men be wearye. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth hym, whiche is wearye of ſome thynge.
            
               Tegaeum, a cytie in Archadia.
            
               Tegaeates, men of that citie.
            
               Teges, gitis, a courſe blankette or couerlydde, whyche lyeth on poore mens beddes. It is alſoo a matte.
            
               Tegericula, the diminutiue of teges.
            
               Tegillum, a lyttell couerynge.
            Tegmen, & tegimen, & tegmentum, a couerynge or couer.
            
            
               Tego, texi, tegere, to couer, to hyde, to defende or kepe.
            
               Tegula, a tyle.
            
               Tegulum, a couerynge.
            
               Te
                     •
                  um, a citie in Paphlaconia, where Anacreon the poete was borne.
            
               Tela, the clothe, whyche is ſpoken as welle of ſylke as of lynnen clothe or wollen.
            
               Telam exordiri, to begynne any buſyneſſe.
            
               Tellanae, a certayne kynde of fygges.
            
               Telamones, ymages, whyche do beare vppe pyllars or poſtes.
            
               Teleboae, people in Grece.
            
               Telegonus, the ſonne of Vlyſſes by Circe the wytche, who folowyng his father into Ithacam, ſlewe hym vnwetyngly.
            
               Telemachus, the ſonne of Vliſſes & Penelope.
            
               Telephion, an herbe which Leonicenus ſuppoſeth to be that, whiche the Arabians do calle Cali, but Ant. Muſa ſuppoſeth it to be rather a kynde of Anthyllis, but where Dioſcorides dothe deſcribe it to haue a ſtalke, and leaues lyke to purſlan, euery leafe hauinge lyke two wynges .vii. or .viii. branches, cōmynge from one rote full of blue leaues, which are thycke and tender, and hath flowres yelow or white. and therfore Ruellius ſuppoſeth it to be that herbe, which ſome do name Fabam inuerſam ſome Craſſulam minorem.
            
            
               Telephus, the ſonne of Hercules, whiche was nouryſhed with an hynde.
            
               Telepnium, an herbe in Aetolia callyd Orpyn.
            
               Telina, a certayne garment.
            
               Telo, lonis, is an inſtrument for warre, which is in this wyſe, a great poſte and hygh is ſet faſte, than ouer it cometh a longe beam, whiche runneth on a pyn, ſo that the one ende hauynge more poiſe than the other, cauſeth the lyghter ende to ryſe. With ſuch bere brewers in London do drawe vp water.
            
               Telonarius, & relo, lonis, a collectour or gatherer of tributes. Teloniū, the place where taſkes or tributes ar payde.
            
               Telos, in greke is an ende, honour, a legyon, a tribute or pēcion, it is alſo the name of an ile, where the oyntment callyd telina is made.
            
               Telpuſſa, a cytie in Arcadia.
            
               Tellus, li, a mans name whom the wyſe Solon iudged to be more fortunate than the ryche kynge Creſus.
            
               Tellus, luris, the earthe.
            
               Telum, all thynge whiche maye be throwen or caſt with the hande, be it ſtone, wod, or yron, it is alſo the generall name of all that, wherwith a man doth fyght, called weapon. ſometyme it is taken for a ſworde.
            Telyphonon, idem quod Aconitum.
            
               Temerarius, a, um, more hardye than nede, or wyſedome requireth, foolchardye. ſometyme dredefull, or to be dradde.
            Temeritas, tatis, & temeritudo, folehardines.
            
            
               Temere, vnaduyſedly, foolyſſhely, aduenturouſely. ſometyme it ſygnifieth almoſte. alſoo without cauſe.
            
               Temerius, more foolyſhe, or vnaduiſedly.
            
               Temero, rare, to vyolate.
            
               Temetum, wyne.
            
               Temulentus, ta, tum, drunke of wyne.
            
               Temulentia, drunkenneſſe.
            
               Temno, tempſi, temnere, to ſette lyttell by.
            
               Temo, monis, the beame, whyche contayneth the yoke.
            
               Tempe, a place in Theſſalia wonderfull pleaſaunt, hauynge trees and medowes meruaylous delectable, wher in byrdes of dyuers kyndes, do ſynge contynually with excellent melody. Therof all pleaſaunt woodes haue the name of Tempe.
            
            
               Temperamentum, a moderation.
            
               Temperanter, temperatly.
            
               Temperantia, temperance, which is a firme & moderate gouernance of reſon againſt ſenſualitie and other vicious affections of the mind
 
               Temperantior, temperantius, more temperate.
            
               Temperatura, a temperance or moderation in the mynglynge of thynges togyther.
            
               Temperies, temperatenes, proprely in heate or colde. ſometyme it is vſurped for temperamentum, and for temperantia.
            
            
               Temperior, oris, more tymely.
            
               Tempero, are, to temper or moderate in order or meaſure.
            
               Temperamus ſtylum, calamum, appetitum, whan we kepe in our wryting a mean forme, or do eate no more than is nedefull.
            
               Temperare alicui, to ſpare oone, or forbeare hym.
            
               Temperare animis, to moderate affections, to refrayne the doinge of a thynge
            
               Caedibus temperare, to refrayne from manſlaughter.
            
               Victoriae temperare, to be neuer the prowder for his victory.
            
               Tempſa, a cytie in the countraye callyd nowe Calabria.
            
            
               Tepeſtas, tatis, ſygnyfieth ſometyme the ſame tyme, ſometyme tempeſte, ſometyme wether, ſometyme a fayre wether.
            
               Tempeſtiuus, ua, uum, that whiche is done in conuenyent tyme.
            
               Tempeſtiuitas, tatis, ſeaſon or tyme conuenyent, oportunitie.
            
               Tempeſtiuè, in ſeaſon or tyme conuenient.
            
               Tempeſtum, olde wryters vſed for tempeſtiuū.
            
            
               Tempeſtuoſum, tempeſtuous or ſtormy.
            
               Templum, a temple or churche. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth heauen. alſo the principall became of a houſe. alſo a ſepulchre.
            
               Temporalis, le, that whyche dureth vntylle a certayne tyme.
            
               Temporaneus, a, um, that whiche is done ſodaynly, and at a tyme.
            Temporarie, temporanie, & temporaliter, vntyll a tyme.
            
            
               Temporarius, ria, rium, that whiche dureth or contynueth for a tyme alſo that whyche pertayneth to tyme.
            
               Temporius, an aduerbe ſygnifieth in tyme, or by tyme.
            
               Tempus, poris, tyme, alſoo the ſtate of tyme. ſometyme the temples of the head.
            
               Tenacia, & tenacitas, hardenes in ſparynge of expenſes, nygardſhyp, perſeueraunce, retaynynge, or kepynge
            
               Tenatior, & tenaciſsimus, the comparatiue and ſuperlatiue degree of tenax.
            
            
               Tenaciſsimae memoriae, of moſte ſure remembraunce.
            
               Tenaciter, faſtely, ſurely.
            
               Tenaſmus, & teneſmus, a deſyre to go often to the ſtoole, and may do nothynge, with a burnynge, and ſometyme a blouddy ſyege.
            
               Tenax, nacis, that whyche holdeth faſte, as glewe, ſometyme ſparynge or nygarde, to moche conſtant, harde to be moued.
            
               Tendicula, a nette or ſnare to take byrdes or beaſtes.
            
               Tendines, or tendones, the greate ſynewes or edrdes of the bodye.
            
               Tendo, tetendi, tendere, to extende or ſtretche, to lay a ſnare, to dwell, to go. alſo to lyft vp, to pretende, to pytche pauylyons. alſo to aſſay, to holde vp.
            
               Paruum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   patri tendebat Iulum, He held vp lyttell Iulus vnto his father. alſo to prepare, to go towarde a place.
            
               Tendere alicui inſidias, to lye in awayte to hurte one.
            
               Tendere plagas, to pytche hayes or nettes.
            
               Tendere ad aluora, to aſſaye to clymme higher.
            
               Tendere aduerſus, to repugne.
            
               Tendunt in diuerſum ſententiae, the opynyons be repugnant one to an nother.
            
               Tendutes, olde wryters callyd theym, whyche had great tethe.
            
               Tenebrae, the lacke of lyght, darkenes.
            
               Tenebreſco, ſcere, to be darke.
            
               Tenebricor, aris, ari, to make darke.
            
               Tenebricoſus, a, um, that maketh darke.
            
               Tenebriones, lyars and crafty knaues. Alſoo they whyche wylle not be ſeene abroode by day tyme.
            Tenebroſus, a, um, darke.
            
            
               Tenedos, an yle in the ſea callyd Aegeum, betwene Mitelene and Helleſpontum, not farre from Troy.
            ❀Tenedia bipennis, aut ſecuris, a quycke or ſharpe axe. A prouerbe applyed to Iudges, whyche be haſtye and cruelle in theyr ſentences.
            Tenellus, a, um, tender.
            
            
               Teneo, tenui, tenere, to holde, to apprehende, to poſſede, to holde or keepe in, to couer, to vnderſtande, to keepe backe, to perfourme.
            
               Tenes quid dicam? vnderſtandeſt what I ſaye.
            
               Tene tibi, take thou that.
            
               Per duas noctes ac diem unum tenuit, It dured two dayes and one nyght.
            
               Verecundia teneri, to be aſhamed.
            
               Tenere ſe loco, not to departe oute of that place.
            
               Argumentis & teſtibus teneri, to be vanquiſhed bothe with reaſons and wytneſſes.
            
               Tenere conſilium, to do by council. Praecipe, ut teneat conſilia noſtra, Gyue hym aduyſe that he may do by our counſayle.
            
                
               Tene, tene, tarye, tarye. Redi, quo fugis nunc? tene, tene, Tourne agayne, whyther runneſt thou nowe? tary, tary.
            
               Ten
                     •
                  re conſenſum, to agree or conſente vnto other.
            
               Tenet me amor, loue meueth me moche.
            
               Tenêre inſaniam. Sed hoc primum expurgare tibi uolo, me inſaniam ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tenere, neque mi eſſe ullum morbum, niſi quod ſeruio, But firſt I wyl declare my ſelf vnto the, that I am neyther out of my wytte, nor haue any ſpeknes, but that I am bonde.
            
               Tenêre ius, to knowe the lawe.
            
               Tenere legem, to be vnder a lawe.
            
               Tenere memoria, to remembre.
            
               Tenere medium, to kepe a meane.
            
               Tenere modum, to kepe a meaſure.
            
               Tenere ſe, to take hede of hym ſelfe.
            
               Tenere aliquem mendatij, to take one with a lye.
            
               Tene tibi, take it as thyne owne.
            
               Tenere cauſam, to vanquyſſhe or recouer agaynſte one in a matter.
            
               Teneri deſyderio, to deſyre moch or feruētly
            
               Teneri ludo, to take pleaſure in game.
            
               Teneri furti, to be gyltie of felony.
            Tenera aetas, youthe.
            
            
               Teneris annis, yonge yeres.
            
               Teneor, neris, neri, to be bounden, to be beholden to one.
            
               Tener, ra, rum, tender, mercyfulle, alſoo a geldyd man.
            
               Teneraſco, ſcere, to be tender or mercyfull.
            Teneritas, & tenerrtudo, tendernes.
            
            Tenere, & teneriter, tenderly, louyngly.
            
            
               Tenni, olde writers vſed for tenui.
            
            
               Tenitae, were called goddeſſes of lottes.
            
               Tenontes, the great and ſtronge ſynewes, whiche do kepe the necke vpryght. alſo a broode ſynewe, whiche goth from the hamme down to the heele.
            
               Tenor, noris, an order, a contynuaunce of a thynge.
            
               Tenos, an yle in the greke ſea, one of theym, whyche is callyd Cyclades.
            
            
               Tenta, ſtretched.
            
               Tentamentum, temptation.
            
               Tentigo, tiginis, a ſtyffenes.
            
               Tentipellium, a ſhoe with an yron ſoole, wheron the ouer lether is ſtretched.
            
               Tento, tare, to attempte, to aſſay or proue, to tempte one to do euyll.
            
               Morbo tentari, to be vexed with ſicknes.
            
               Caput tentare, to trouble the head.
            
               Tentorium, a tent or pauylyon.
            
               Tentum, a mans priuy member.
            
               Tentyra, a citie in Egypte.
            
               Tentyri, uel tynteritae, a venymous beaſt in an yle on the ryuer of Nilus, whoſe voyce the 
                  •
               ockodryll dothe feare.
            Tenuè, & tenuiter, poorely, ſymply.
            
            
               Tenunculus, la, lum, very ſymple, or lyttell in eſtymation.
            
               Tenuis, nue, lyttell or ſymple in eſtymation, ſmalle in quantitie, poore, thynne, leane.
            
               Tenui filo, with a ſmalle threede, applyed to ſtyle in wrytynge, whyche is not elegaunte, but playne.
            
               Tenuitas, tatis, ſmalleneſſe, pouertie.
            
               Tenuiter, ſcantely, poorely, barely.
            
               Tenuo, are, to make ſmalle, to make leane, or feeble.
            
               Tenus, ni, a ſnare. Beynge an Aduerbe, hit ſygnyfyeth vnto. Tenus urbem tendit, It extendeth vnto the citie, or noo further thanne the citie.
            
               Tenus, a prepoſition, ſygnifieth nyghneſſe, or vntyll a thynge.
            
               Titulo tenus, in a tytle oonely, or in wordes without effecte.
            
               Tepifacio, cere, to make warme.
            
               Tepefio, fieri, to be warme.
            
               Tepeo, & tepeſco, tepui, peſcere, to be warme or hotte.
            
               Tepidarium, a veſſell, wherein water is made temperate. alſo a chamber, wherinto men do go out of a bayne.
            
               Tepidus, da, dum, meane betweene hotte and colde, warme. Alſo koolid frome heate. ſometyme noyſull or vnprofytable.
            
               Tephrites, a ſtoone, whiche hathe the fygure of a newe moone, in colour blacke, or aſſhe colour.
            
               Tepidior, colder.
            Tepidiſsimus, a, um, mooſte warme.
            
            Tepidulus, tepidula, tepidulum, a dyminutiue of tepidus.
            
               Tepocon, a fourme of wrytynge downwarde.
            Tepor, oris, & tepiditas, tatis, warmthe, or warmeneſſe.
            
            
               Ter, thryſe.
            
               Terapne, a countrey in Lacedemonia, where the fayre Helene was borne. alſoo an Ilande nowe callyd Corſica.
            
               Terebinthus, a tree, the woode wherof is blak and harde lyke boxe, oute of this tree rounneth a gumme, callyd communely Turpentyne. All be it the common Turpentyne is not it, but an nother, whyche is as cleere as glaſſe, and is a ſoueraygne medicine to clenſe the ſtomacke of putrified humours.
            
               Terebinthina rheſina, the ryght turpentyne.
            
               Tereniabin, is Manna, whyche commeth out of Arabia.
            Ternarius, & ternus, terna, num, the thyrde innumbre.
            
            Terdenus, na, num, the thyrtenthe.
            
            
               Terebellum, a wymble or percer.
            
                
               Terebratio, a booryng with a wymble.
            
               Terebrae, ſiue terebrum, an augour, wherwith holes are bored.
            
               Terebro, brare, to bore or make an hole.
            
               Teredo, dinis, a litell worme that eateth wod.
            
               Terentius, the mooſte eloquent wryter of commedyes.
            
               Terentianus, of Terence.
            
               Terentum, a place in the fielde by Rome, called Campus Martius, wherin was an aultar of Pluto and Proſerpine.
            
               Teres, teretis, longe and rounde, lyke a tree or a pyllar.
            
               Teretrum, an inſtrument, wherwith a thynge is made rounde.
            
               Tergemini, three chyldren borne at one burden
            
               Tergeſtes, a citie in Italy.
            
               Tergeſtum, a towne in Slauony nowe called Trieſte.
            
               Terginus, na, num, that whiche is made of a beaſtes hyde.
            
               Tergiuerſatio, a nonſuite in the lawe, whan the pleyntife gyueth ouer his ſuite.
            
               Tergiuerſor, aris, ari, to tourne backe, to deny, in the lawe it ſygnifieth to be nonſuite.
            
               Tergo, & tergeo, terſi, tergere, to wype or make cleane.
            
               Tergum, the backe of man or beaſte, or of any other thynge. ſomtyme it ſignifieth a hyde of a beaſte.
            
               Terga dare, to rune away, proprely in batayle.
            
               Tergus, tergoris, a hyde of a beaſte.
            
               Terma, matis, the extremitie, the ende of a thynge, alſo the ſole of the foote.
            
               Termentarium, a lynnen clothe, wherwith the body is couered.
            Termentum, for detrimentum.
            
               Termes, a braunche plucked of a tree with the fruite on it. alſo a worme, whiche eateth fleſh.
            
               Termile, a mountaygne in Lycia, callyd alſo Chimaera.
            
            
               Ter milies, thre thouſande tymes.
            
               Termillum, a potte for wyne, whiche was alway ſet on the table, that euery man mought take as moche wyne as he wolde.
            
               Terminalia, was a certayne holy day, at the later ende of the yere.
            
               Terminalis lapis, a mere ſtone, laide or pyghte at the ende of ſundry mens landes.
            
               Termino, nare, to ende or fynyſhe.
            
               Terminus, a ſygne, whych declareth one mans lande from an other, or one countrey or territorie frome an nother. alſo it ſignyfieth the buttynge.
            
               Terminus deus, was an ydolle, whyche was ſuppoſed to haue preeminence ouer the boundes of lande, whoſe temple had euer an hole in the roufe, for as moche as they thoughte it to be vnlefull that boundes of lande ſhulde be couered or hydde.
            
               Termo, onis, olde writers vſed for terminus.
            
            
               Ternarius numerus, the numbre of thre.
            Ternus, na, num, the thyrde.
            
            
               Ternundenum, the thyrtenthe.
            
               Tero, triui, terere, to rubbe, to breake or broiſe.
            
               Terere iter, to go his way.
            
               Terere tempus, to conſume tyme.
            
               Terere otium, to lyue ydelly.
            
               Terpander, dri, an olde muſitian, whyche added
.vii. ſtrynges to the harpe.
            
               Terpſichore, one of the nyne muſes.
            
               Terra, erthe. ſometyme all the worlde, alſoo a prouynce, a territorie, a countrey, lande.
            Terraceus, a, um, of erthe.
            
            
               Terraneola, a byrde lyke to a larke, whych we call a buntyng.
            
               Terrefacio, facere, to make aferde.
            
               Terraefilius, he that is come vp of nought, and no man knoweth his kynrede.
            
               Terraemotus, erthequake.
            
               Terrenum, a fielde.
            
               Terrenus, na, num, on erthe, or lyuyng on erth, erthely.
            
               Terreo, rui, rere, to make aferde.
            Terreſtris, tre, erthely.
            
            
               Terreus, rea, reum, of earthe. Vas terreum, a veſſell of erthe.
            
               Terribilis, bile, terrible, that whyche is to be feared.
            
               Terricola, he that dwelleth in the lande.
            
               Terricrepus, he that rebuketh one terribly.
            
               Terriculamentum, a feare, or a feareful thyng.
            
               Terrificus, ca, cum, terryble, or that whyche in duceth feare.
            
               Terrigena, begotten on the erthe.
            
               Terriones, ploughmen.
            Terripauium, & terripudium, for tripudium, daunſynge.
            
            
               Territo, tare, to make aferde.
            
               Territorium, the fyeldes or counteaye lyenge within the iurysdiction and boundes of a citie, a territory.
            Terror, roris, feare.
            
            Terſus, ſa, ſum, cleane, pure.
            
            
               Terſus dies, of olde wryters was taken for a fayre day.
            
               Tertiata uerba, wordes not perfytly pronounced, as whan one is in feare or dreade of him to whom he ſpeaketh, he tremblyng in ſpeche vneth pronounceth the thyrde worde that he wolde ſay.
            
               Tertiarum, is a myxt mettall, wherin are two partes of leade, and one of tynne.
            
               Tertio, are, to do a thynge the thyrde tyme, or to make the thyrde tylthe in earynge.
            
               Tertio Conſul, where two haue bene Conſules before hym. Tertium Conſul, he that hath ben thryſe conſul. So that Tertio ſignifieth
 the thyrd in order and place, two going afore. Tertium ſygnifieth the tyme, where twyſe gothe afore. The lyke is of Secundo, quarto, and other numbres.
            
               Tertio pedato, at the thyrde retourne or comynge agayne.
            Tertius, a, um, the thyrde.
            
            
               Tertius decimus, the thyrtenthe.
            
               Tertullianus, was a great lerned man of Carthage, the ſonne of a capytayne of the Romaynes, was in his tyme a verye excellente man in wytte and lernynge, and wrate many noble warkes in defence of chryſtendome, but beynge in his myddel age made a prieſt, vexed with ſundrye wronges and dyſpleaſures, by the enuy of the clergye of Rome, he as it were inforced at the laſte felle into the hereſye of Montanus, whiche hereſye he dyd interlace with his bookes whiche he wrate. And lyued vntyll he came to extreme age. He flouriſhed about the yere of our lord .CCx. yeres. Saynt Cyprian whan he lyſted to reade the warkes of Tertulliane, he wolde bydde his ſeruant brynge to hym his mayſter.
            
               Teruncium, a poyſe or coyne of thre o
                  •
               nces.
            
               Teſca, a place where miſtical ceremonies were exercyſed.
            
               Teſqua, places harde or difficile to come vp to, where the Romayns dyd practiſe theyr dyuinations by flieng of byrdes callyd auguria.
            
            
               Teſſellatus, ta, tum, that whyche is wroughte with ſmalle pieces of ſtone, wodde, or bone, as in playenge tables or counterbourdes.
            
               Teſſella, a graffe.
            
               Teſſera, that whiche is in euery part ſquare as a dye. alſo it is a dye, moreouer a watchword or priuy token gyuen to ſouldiours alſo a token gyuen to people to receyue corne of the kynges almes. alſo a tayle, whereon is ſcored or marked the number of thynges receyued, whiche is alſo callyd Teſſerula.
            
            
               Teſſeradecas, fouretene.
            
               Teſſerarius, he that gyueth the watcheworde.
            
               Teſſerulae, lyttell pauynge tyles.
            
               Teſſo, teſsi, teſſere, to diſpoyle or pull of a garment or harneys by vyolence.
            
               Teſta, a ſharde of a potte or tyle. alſo an erthen pot. alſo all maner of ſhell fyſhe.
            
               Teſtaceus, a, um, that whiche hath a ſhell.
            Teſteus, idem.
            ❀Teſtaceum flagellum, a prouerbe applyed to ſodayn alteration of thynges, or of baniſhment vnlooked for.
            
               Teſtamentarius, a forger of teſtamentes.
            
               Teſtamentarius, ria, rium, pertaynynge to teſtamentes.
            
               Teſtamentum, a teſtament.
            
               Teſtatim, in pieces or ſhardes.
            Teſtatio, & teſtimonium, wytneſſe.
            
            
               Teſtator, toris, he that maketh a teſtament.
            
               Teſtatus, he that is dead, and hath made a wyl alſo openly knowen of all men or proued.
            
               Teſticulor, aris, ari, to putte the male to the female. Teſtillor, idem.
            
            
               Teſticulus, of a knowen ſygnification.
            
               Teſtificatio, a wyenes bearynge.
            
               Teſtificator, & teſtificatrix, he or ſhe that beareth wytneſſe.
            
               Teſtificor, caris, cari, 
               
                  •
               o beare wytneſſe.
            
               Teſtimonium, & teſtatio, wytneſſe borne of a thynge done.
            
               Teſtis, he that beareth wytneſſe.
            
               Sine teſte dolere, to be ſorowfulle withoute ſemblaunt.
            
               Teſtes, be alſo a mans genytours.
            
               Teſtor, aris, ari, to beare wytneſſe, to calle to wytneſſe, to pray god.
            
               Teſtu, olde wryters vſed for teſta.
            
               Teſtuaceum, that whiche is boyled in an earthen potte.
            
               Teſtudinatum tectum, a roufe, which is holow in foure partes, vaulted.
            
               Teſtudo, dinis, a ſnayl. alſo an engyn of warre to beate downe walles, whiche was made of bourdes, and couered with lether, or other thynges, whyche wolde not bourne. Within it was a piece of tymber, that hadde a great hoke of yron at the end, which piece mought be plucked backe, and putte forthe with the ſtrength of men, and therwith plucke ſtones out of the walles of townes beſyeged. It is alſo the roufe or vaulte of a houſe.
            
               Teſtus, ſtus, is a panne, wherein tartes, and other lyke thynges of paſte are baken.
            Tetanicus morbus, idem quod Tetanos.
            
               Tetanothra, a medycine, wherwith the face of a man or woman is made ſmothe withoute wrynkles.
            
               Tetanos, whan the ſynites are ſtyffe, ſoo that a man can not bowe ſome part of his body.
            
               Tetarmorion, the fourthe part of the zodiake cirkle, wherin are the .xii. ſygnes. It is alſoo that, which aſtronomers do cal the quadrate aſpect of planettes.
            
               Te te, thy ſelfe.
            
               Teter, tetra, tetrum, foule, ſtynkyng, cruell.
            
               Teterrimus, a, um, mooſte fowle or ſtynkynge, or cruell.
            
               Teterrimè, moſte abhomynably.
            
               Tethys, the wyfe of Neptunꝰ, callyd goddeſſe of the ſea. ſometyme it is taken for the ſea.
            Tetinierit, for tenuerit.
            Tetinus, for tenus.
            
               Tettigoniae, lyttell graſſehoppes.
            
               Tettigometrae, the mother of graſſehoppes.
            
               Tetracinus, a coygne, whyche was in valewe foure dragmas, or olde poyſe grotes, of .viii. to an ounce.
            
                
               Tetracolon, a ſentence hauynge .iiii. membres.
            
               Tetradoron, of foure handbredthe.
            
               Tetragonus, a, um, a thynge hauynge fore corners.
            
               Tetragrammaton, the name of god, whyche the Iewes do calle Ineffabile, that is to ſay, vnſpeakable.
            
               Tetragrammaton, in greeke, ſygnifieth of foure letters.
            
               Tetrametrum, a kynde of meter, hauyng but foure feete.
            
               Tetrarcha, the rule of the fourthe parte of a royalme.
            
               Tetraſyllabum, of fowre ſyllables, as Im pe ra tor.
            
            
               Tetr
                     •
                  , ſharply, cruelly, wyckedly.
            
               Tetrices, water, wherewith gardeynes are watered.
            
               Tetricus, a ſowre felow, and alway vnpleſant.
            
               Tetrinno, are, to ſwymme lyke a ducke.
            
               Tetritudo, crueltie or ſharpenes.
            
               Tetrius, more ſharpe or cruell.
            
               Tetro, trare, to make foule, to pollute, to make bytter.
            
               Tetulit, for tulit.
            
               Teucer, & Teucrus, the name of a kynge of Troyanes. alſoo of the ſonne of Telamone the valyant greke.
            Teucer, Teucra, crum, idem quod Troianus, of Troy.
            
            
               Teucrium, an herbe, whiche Anto. Muſa, ſuppoſethe to be that whyche is callyd Pimpinella.
            
            
               Teumeſus, a lyttell hylle in Boeotia.
            
               Teumeſus leo, a lyon, whyche Hercules dydde ſlea whan he was a chylde, and of his ſkynne made hym a cote.
            
               Teurion, the herb which is alſo called tripoliū.
            
            
               Teuta, a quene of Illiria, whyche lyued euer chaſte, and vanquiſhed many noble capitaynes, and dyuers hoſtes of the Romayns.
            
               Teutates, was in olde tyme amonge the french men taken for Mercurius.
            
               Teuthania, a piece of the countrey of Troy.
            
               Teutones, people nowe callyd Almaynes.
            
               Texo, texui, texere, to weaue a wynde threde. Alſoo to make, to buylde, to write, to gather, to ornate.
            
               Texta, an hearelace, wherewith the heare is bounden vp.
            
               Textilis, le, that which is weaued or wounden.
            
               Textim, an aduerbe, ſygnifyenge in weauyng or wyndyng vp.
            
               Textor, toris, & textrix, tricis, he or ſhe that weaueth or wyndeth.
            
               Textrina, & textrinum, the place where thynges be weaued or wounden. alſo the crafte of weauynge.
            
               Textrix, & textricula, a woman whyche worketh in a frame or ſtoole.
            
               Textura, the weauynge.
            Textus, & textum, the texte.
            
         
         
            ¶T ANTE H.
            
               THalamus, a chaumber where the houſbande and the wyfe do lye togyther.
            Thalaſicus, chamblette.
            Thalaſsio, uide Talaſsio.
            ❀Thalaſſus bonorum, a prouerbe applyed to them that promyſe greate thynges, as a man wolde ſay, a worlde, a countray of welthe. In Cambrydgeſhyre the vulgarword is, a mynd of good.
            
               Thalaſſomeli, is a lykour made of honye, ſalte water, and rayne water, and is putte into a veſſell raſed with pytche.
            
               Thales, a phyloſopher, whiche was one of the ſeuen wyſe men of Grecia.
            
               Thaleſtris, was a quene of Amaſones, whyche came to kynge Alexander with thre hundrede women with her, to the intent to haue yſſue by hym and his men: and whan ſhe perceiued, that ſhe and her ladyes were ſped, they departed home agayne.
            
               Thal
                     •
                  a, one of the graces, whyche the auncient poetes dyd ſuppoſe to be oone of the doughters of Iupiter, and gyuers of dilectable ſpeche, and pleaſant pronunciation.
            
               Thallia, the pyllynge of an oynyon or garlike.
            
               Thamyras, was he whyche fyrſte playde on a harpe, without ſyngynge therto.
            
               Thamnos, in latyne arbuſtum.
            
               Thanatos, mors in latyn.
            
               Thapſus, an yle by Sicile.
            
               Thapſia, an herbe lyke to fenell, and hath a yelowe flowre, and a flatte rounde ſede.
            
               Tharia, pyckelle, wherein fyſſhe is ſalted and kepte.
            
               Tharſos, a cytie in Cilicia.
            
               Thaſia, an almonde.
            Thaſia, nux, called alſo graeca.
            
               Thaſij, men of the yle callyd Thaſus in Egypt
            
               Thaſium, a certayne wyne, which is in Egypt.
            
               Tha
                     ••
                  a, in greke is a meruayle or myracle.
            Theatralis, le, & theatricus, ca, cum, that whiche pertayneth to theatrum.
            
               Theatridium, a diminutiue of theatrum.
            
            
               Theatrum, a place made halfe rounde, wherein the people aſſembled to beholde playes and ſundrye exercyſes. ſometyme it ſygnifieth the multitude that beholdeth.
            
               Thebae, arū, Theba, bae, & Thebe, bes, the name of cities, wherof one was in Egypt, builded by Buſirides, an other in Boeotia, builded by Cadmus, an nother in Cilicia, where Andromaches, the wyfe of Hector was borne.
            
               Thebaice, & thebaides, dates of the beſt ſorte.
            
                
               Thebais, idis, & idos, a countray of Egypt. It is alſo the name of a boke made by Statius the poete.
            
               Thebanus, na, num, a man of Thebes.
            
               Theca, a caſe, a ſhethe or ſcaberde, a boxe.
            
               Theleboae, people of an yle callyd Capreae, whyche lyeth agaynſt Naples.
            Theleboij, idem.
            
               Thelephus, a kynge, whyche camme in the ayde of the Troyanes, and was ſlayne by Achilles.
            
               Theligonium, an herbe, whyche hath bearies lyke to an olyue.
            
               Thelphuſa, a citie in Arcadia.
            
               Thelphuſsium, uel Thelphoſsion, a citie in Boeotia, where Pyndarus prayſed Bacchus
            
               Thelypteris, ſheferne, or the female ferne.
            
               Thema, matis, a thynge purpoſed to be dyſputed or reaſoned, it is alſo a fygure, wherin aſtronomers doo wryte the ſtate of heauen, in placynge or ſettynge the planettes in ſuche ſygnes and degrees, as they be in at the tyme of a mans natiuitie, or whan any thyng ſhall happen that they ſerche for.
            
               Thembinacha, a countray callyd alſo Nemia.
            
               Themes, an olde towne in the yle of Cypres, where braſſe was fyrſt founde?
            
               Themis, one of the ſyſters of Iupyter, ſhe was callyd the goddeſſe, whiche commanded men to aſke that whyche was lefulle. There was an other woman called Themis, which was callyd alſo Carmentis, it was ſometyme taken for fas, lefull.
            
               Themiſcyra, a cytie in Capadocia, afterward callyd Caeſaria.
            
            
               Themiſones, people by Licia.
            
               Themiſtius, a phyloſopher whiche wrate commentaries on Ariſtotles warkes.
            
               Themiſtocles, a noble capytayn of the Athenienſes, whiche being expellyd out of his countrey, and commen to Xerxes kyng of Perſia, was ſent by hym with a great army agaynſt the Athenienſes, but whan he perceyued his countrey in peryll to be dyſtroyed, he dranke poyſon, and chaſe rather to dye, than eyther to be vnfaythfull to Xerxes, or els to dyſtroye his countrey, although it were vnkynde towarde hym.
            
               Thenſa, a halowed carte or charyot.
            
               Theocritus, a poete of Grecia, whyche wrate Bucolica, or the contention of herdmen.
            
               Theologia, dyuinitie.
            
               Theomenia, the wrath of god.
            
               Theonino dente rodere, to rebuke a manne ſhamefully.
            
               Theophraſtus, a noble phyloſopher, and of excellent eoquence.
            
               Theos, in greke is god.
            
               Theotocos, the mother of god.
            
               Theorema, ſpeculation.
            
               Theoria, ſpeculation, vnderſtandynge.
            
               Theopolis, the chiefe citie of Syria, callyd alſo Antiochia.
            
               Thera, a cytie by Athenes.
            
               Theramnum, a cytie in Theſſalia.
            Theriace, ces ſeu theriaca, tryakle.
            
            
               Thereotrophion, a place where wylde beaſtes are kepte, as a foreſt or parke.
            
               Therioma, a ſoore of the priuy members, wherby all the partes theraboute, are corrupted, and therof iſſueth blacke and ſtynkynge humour.
            
               Theriſtrum, a thynne vayle, which the women of Paleſtina dyd weare.
            
               Thermae, are bathes of hotte water.
            
               Thermefacio, cere, to chaufe or make one hote with outragious eatynge and drynkynge of hote thynges.
            
               Thermopolium, a place where meates and drynkes were ſolde, wherewith menne were made hotte or warme in colde wether.
            
               Thermodoon, a ryuer in Cappadotia.
            
               Thermodonticus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to that ryuer.
            
               Thermopoto, tare, to drynke hotte or warme drynke.
            
               Thermopylae, a mountayne, whyche paſſeth through Grece, hauynge a narowe entrye or paſſage, where two thouſande Lacedemonyans, with theyr capytayne Leonidas, faught agaynſte fyue hundred and .xxviii. thouſande Perſyans, and reſyſted them two dayes, vntyll the ſayde Lacedemoniens were all ſlayne.
            
               Therpſichore, one of the muſes.
            
               Therſites, was a prynce that camme with the Grekes to the ſiege of Troy, whiche in perſone and condytions was of all other mooſte defourmed.
            
               Theſaurizo, are, to gather treaſure.
            Theſaurus, & theſaurum, treaſure.
            
            
               Theſeus, ſonne of Egeus kynge of Athenes, a ſtronge man and valyant, and the companyon of Hercules, and in famous actes nexte vnto hym, whiche was moch defaced by brekynge his fayth, whiche he had promyſed to Ariadne the doughter of Minois kynge of Creta, whome he lefte in a deſerte yle calyd Naxus, for the whiche as Vergyle wryteth, he is perpetually tourmented on a wheele in helle.
            
               Theſiphon, tis, a citie in Parthia, not far from Seleucia, the great citie of Aſſyria.
            
               Theſis, a clauſe in wrytynge or ſpeakyng, whiche contayneth a ſentence.
            
               Theſmophoria, the ceremonyes of Ceres the goddeſſe of grayne.
            
               Theſmophoros, was a name of Ceres.
            
               Theſpia, a fre towne in Boeotia.
            
                
               Theſpis, a towne in Boeotia by the hyll called Helicon.
            
            
               Theſpiades, the Muſes.
            
               Theſſalia, a region in Grece called alſo Aemonia, ſometyme Pandora, ſometyme Pyrrhea, of ſome Pelaſgia, of Homere Argopelaſgicon, it is inuironed about with foure great and famouſe hilles, on the caſt the mountaines of Pelion & Oſſa, on the north with Olimpꝰ, on the weſt with Pindus, on the ſouth with Othrys, it marcheth on Macedoniam on the eſte. The people were valiant men on horſebacke, and inuincible in battayle as Polybras writeth, but very iniuſte of theyr promyſe. The women there beinge wonderfulle wytches, tranfourmed men into the fygure of beaſtes.
            Theſſalicus, ca, cum, of Theſſalia.
            
            
               Theſſalonica, a citie in Macedonia.
            
               Thetis, tidis, the mother of Achylles.
            
               Theucitis, a ruſhe growyng in Nabachia, whiche hath the taſte of ſharpewyne.
            Theoſitas, for ſodalitas.
            
               Theutones, & theutonici, people in Germany called Duchemen.
            
               Thirromachus, one of the ſonnes of Hercules by Megara.
            
               Thi
                     •
                  ſias, he that is burſte or broken in his ſtoones.
            
               Thideus, was the name of the father of Diomedes.
            
               Thyeſtes, the ſonne of Pelops, and Hippodamia, who aſpyring to the kyngedome of Mycenae, commytted auoutry with the wife of his elder brother Atreus, who therfore ſlewe the chylderne of Thyeſtes, and cauſing them to be roſted, made his brother to eate theym vnwares.
            
               Thieum, for ſuccinum, aumbre.
            Thita praefigere, for condemnare.
            
               Thymelici, players of enterludes. hereby wold the place be corrected in the digeſtes. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   de his qui notantur infamia, where for Temelici wolde be put Thymelici, they be alſo common dauncers.
            
               Thoa, one of the nymphes.
            
               Thoas, the name of two kynges, one of Taurica, the other of Lemnos.
            
               Thoes, be wulfes in Ethiope, Arrianus dothe call them tygres in India.
            
               Tholos, a ſcochen or ſmall tergate, alſo the ſildynge of a houſe, or a rounde houſe.
            
               Thomices, lyches of hempe, wherwith halters are made, they be alſo lyttell bo
                  •
               ſters, whiche men do weare whan they cary burdens, for fretynge of theyr neckes and ſhulders with cordes or ropes.
            
               Thon, nis, he that fyrſte broughte phyſike in the fourm of a ſciens, among the Egiptians
            
               Thoota, the daughter of Phorcus, on whome Neptunus gate Polyphemus.
            
               Thoracatus, he that weareth curettes or breſt
                  •
                plates.
            
               Thorax, racis, is properly the hole bulke of a man from the necke to the myddell, it is alſo curettes or breſt plates. ſome tyme it ſignifyeth a towre.
            
               Thous, a duke of Troye.
            
               Thracia, a Region in Eurupa ioynynge vnto Macedoniā and Myſiā, & hath on the north the ryuer called Donow, on the eaſte the ſea called Pontus, on the ſouthe the ſea called Aegeū, therin is the citie of Conſtantinople.
            
               Thraceas, uel thraſsias, a northweſt wynde.
            
               Thraſimedes, the ſonne of Neſtor.
            
               Thraſomenus, a ryuer in Italy nyghe to Peruſia.
            
               Thrax acis, a man of Thracia.
            Threces, idem quod gladiatores.
            
               Threnodia, a mournynge ſonge.
            
               Threnos, a lamentacion, whiche was vſed at buryenge.
            
               Threſſa, a woman of Thracia.
            
               Throni, be one of the .ix. orders of angels.
            
               Thronus, the ſeate or chayre of an emperour or kynge.
            
               Thrulla, a truell, whiche maſons, tilers, and pargettours do vſe for layenge of morter.
            
               Thrulliſſo, are, to laye on morter.
            
               Thryallis, an herbe called Roſecampyne.
            
               Thryps, a mowthe.
            
               Thule, an yle beyonde Scotlande.
            
               Thunnus, a fyſhe called Tuny.
            
               Thuribulum, a ſenſar.
            
               Thuringia, Thuryn in Fraunce.
            
               Thurini, a people in Italye.
            
               Thuriferus, ra, rum, that whiche beareth Frankynſence.
            
               Thurifico, to make a perfume, or to ſence.
            Thurius, a, um, of incenſe.
            
            Thus, thuris, frankyncenſe.
            
            
               Thuſcana, a citie in Italye.
            
               Tuſculani, a people by Rome.
            
               Tuſculanum, a place not fer from Rome, wher Tullius, Cato, Varro, and diuerſe other noble Senatours of Rome had manour places.
            
               Thuſculum, a diminutiue of thus, Alſo a citie Latium.
            
               Thyas, a woman whiche offereth ſacrifice to Bacchus.
            
               Thyaſus, a daunce dedicate to Bacchus.
            
               Thyella, a ſtorme.
            
               Thymbra, an herbe called ſauery.
            
               Thymele, les, a woman, whiche fyrſt taught daunſynge in open places.
            
               Thymelici, maye be called daunſers of Moriſdaunces.
            
               Thymiama, matis, a ſwete perfume.
            
                
               Thymus, an herbe called tyme.
            
               Thymum, a wart, which is as gret as a beane
            
               Thynnus, a fyſhe called Tuny.
            
               Thyridion, a wycket or lyttell dore.
            
               Thyrſus, the ſtalke of lettyſe and of other herbes, whiche maye be eaten. ſomme do take it for a ſpeare with a ſharpe heade, which had boughes and leaues of yuy wrapped aboute them: ſuche ſpeares dydde Bacchus and his flocke of drunken harlottes, beare in theyr handes. Lucretius the poete taketh thyrſum for fury of an ardent mocion. ſome do name it to be a longe ſteme and ſtreyghte, ſuche as is of a 
                  •
               eſyll, or ſuche as do growe in fennes hauynge blacke knappes and rounde.
         
         
            ¶T ANTE I.
            
               TIARA, an ornament, whiche the women of Perſia did weare on their heades, whiche was rounde, and couered onely the hynder parte of theyr heades. princis and priſtes vſed alſo to weare it.
            
               Tiatura, a citie in the countray of Miſia.
            
               Tibareni, people in Scithia, beinge in Aſia.
            
               Tiberias, a citie in Galilea.
            
               Tiberis, a riuer called Tiber in Italy whiche commynge from the mountayne called Apen ninus, diuideth Ethruriam from Vmbria.
            
            
               Tibia, the leg, properly the ſhanke or ſhyn bone it is alſo an inſtrument called a ſhalme.
            
               Tibialis, le, perteynynge to ſhalmes.
            
               Tibiale, lis, pluraliter tibialia, legge harneys, called greaues.
            
               Tibicen, & tibicina, he or ſhe that bloweth a trumpette or ſhalme.
            
               Tibicen, is alſo any thynge, wherby is ſuſteyned, as a ſhore or proppe.
            
               Tibi, to the.
            
               Tibicis, a riuer in Scythia.
            
               Tibin, a baſkette or coffyn made of wyckers or bull ruſſhes, or barke of a tree: ſuche oone was Moyſes put in to by the daughter of Pharao.
            
               Tibiluſtria, were dayes whan men wente with trumpettes, as it were in proceſſion aboute theyr lambes.
            
               Tibini, tunes made with ſhalmes.
            
               Tiburtes, people in Italy nyghe to Rome.
            
               Ticinum a citie in Lumbardye nowe called Pauia.
            
               Tigillus, a rafter.
            
               Tignarius faber, a Carpenter that maketh a houſe of tymber.
            
               Tignus, & tignum, a rafter of a houſe, which beareth the roufe. 
                  •
               t is alſo generally all the timber, whiche ſerueth to a houſe.
            
               Tigrane, a riuer in the countrey of Media.
            
               Tigranes, the proper name of a kynge of Media of the greatter Armeny.
            
               Tigris, a beaſte of a wonderfull ſwyftnes, it is alſo one of the foure ryuers, which commeth out of Paradiſe, called Gion, it paſſethe through Armeniam and Mediam.
            
               Tigurini, people of Germanye, whiche do inhabyte the fourth parte of Heluetia, or Swizerlande.
            
               Tile, an yle beyonde Scotlande, called alſo Thule.
            
               Tilia, a tree, whiche ſome do ſuppoſe to be birche, not withſtandynge our byrche doth not beare fruite as great as a beane, rounde and longe, and lyke to yuy beries in the which are ſedes lyke to Arage ſede, as Theophraſtus writeth.
            
               Tilium, a citie in the weſte parte of Sardinia, on the ſea ſyde.
            
               Tilos, an yle in the Indian ſea, wherin is plenty of perle, and trees of dyuerſe fruites, and the leaues of trees there growynge do neuer fall, alſo wolle groweth on trees there, whiche do beare gourdes of the gretnes of quinces, and beinge rype do open, in the whiche do appiere the wolle, wherof are made fyne and preciouſe clothes. About that place doth begynne the mountayne of Caucaſus, whyche dothe paſſe throughe a great parte of the worlde.
            
               Timalos, an herbe and flower growynge in waters, called commonlye of apothecaryes Nenufer.
            
               Timaeus, a noble philoſopher of Pythagoras ſecte.
            
               Timanus, a ryuer in Italy beſides Aquilia.
            
               Timens, he that feareth for a tyme.
            
               Timidus, he that alwaye feareth, called tymorouſe.
            
               Timeo, mui, mère, to feare or dreade.
            
               Timeo te, I feare the as myne ennemy, leſte thou ſhalte do me harme.
            
               Timeo tibi, I am aferde of the as my frende leſte thou ſhuldeſt haue any harme.
            
               Timeo mihi abs te, I am afrayde that thou wylte do me harme.
            
               Timeo furem pomis, I am afrayd that one wyll ſteale myne appulles.
            
               Timeo moriatur, I am aferde that he wyll dye.
            
               Timidèè, fearefully.
            
               Timiditas, feare.
            
               Timiopôlae, ingroſſers or regraters of markets, whiche do bye moche corne or vyttayls together, to make it ſcarſe and dere.
            
               Timor, moris, & timos, feare of ſome euyll commynge.
            
               Timotheus, was the name of a noble capitayn of the Athenienſes; who for the good fortune that he had in battayle, was paynted lienge a ſlepe, and hauynge by hym a nette pitched,
 wherin fortune was taken. Alſo a cunnynge muſitian, whiche vſed to take of his ſcholers which had lerned before, double ſalarie, that he toke of other, whiche neuer lerned, ſayeng that he toke with them double labours, that is to ſaye, to make them to forget that whiche they had lerned afore, and than to teache them perfytely.
            
               Tin, olde writers vſed for Eum.
            
            
               Tina, & tinia, a great bolle, whiche being full of wine, euery man mought drynke therof as moche as he lyſted.
            
               Tinctor, toris, a dyer.
            
               Tinctilis, le, that whiche is dyed.
            
               Tinctura, dyenge.
            
               Tinea, a mothe, they be alſo wormes in the bealy, alſo wormes bredynge in bee ſtalles.
            
               Tineoſus, a, um, full of mothes.
            
               Tinge, a promontorie or elbowe of Affrica.
            
               Tingitana, a parte of Mauritania or Barbaria agaynſte Spayne.
            
               Tingo, xi, gere, to deepe a thynge into lycour to dye colours.
            
               Tinnio, nire, to rynge or make a ſound as mettall dothe, ſometyme as in a mannes eare.
            
               Tinnimentum, a ryngyng in the eare of a man
            
               Tinnunculus, a byrde, which maketh a ſharpe ryngynge noyſe, and is of the kynde of haukes, and in ſome place dothe brede in houſes whiche with his voyce dryueth awaye other hawkes, and therfore the byrdes of hym are kepte in erthen pottes couered with clay, and hanged vp in douehouſes, which cauſeth culuers meruaylouſly to loue theyr houſe.
            
               Tinnulus, la, lum, ſharpe in ſounde, as that whiche is made by beatynge on mettall.
            
               Tintinaculus, he that beateth with roddes, a tranſgreſſour of a lawe.
            
               Tintinabulum, a lyttell bell.
            
               Tintino, nare, to ringe lyke a bell.
            
               Tiphernum, a towne in Italy.
            
               Tiphis, an excellent carpenter, the which foūd fyrſt the meane to gouerne a ſhyppe. it is alſo a rother.
            
               Tipula, a worme, whiche runneth on the water as other wormes do on the lande, and hath ſyxe feete.
            
               Tireſias, a poet of Thebes, who finding twoadders ingēdring togither & ſtriking thē with a ſtaffe, he forthwith was turned into the form of a woman. A leuen yeres after he lyke wiſe finding two ſerpentes together he alſo ſtrake them, and became eftſones a man. Iupyter and Iuno contendynge to gether, whether the man or the woman was more prone vnto lechery, they chaſe Tireſium arbytre, whiche had experience in bothe kyndes, whoo gaue ſentence on Iupiters parte, wherwith Iuno beinge angry toke his ſyghte from hym. but Iupiter to comforte hym in his blyndeneſſe gaue to him that part of diuinitie to know al that was done or ſhoulde happen, by reaſon wherof he was had in great honour, and his aunſweres were eſtemed equall to theym of Apollo.
            
               Tirius, a Ryuer in Grecia: alſo the countreye where Hercules was borne in Peloponeſſo, nowe called Morea.
            
               Tirinthius, was a ſurname of Hercules.
            
               Tirinthis, a famouſe olde citie in Grecia.
            
               Tis, for tui, the genitiue caſe of tu.
            
            
               Tiſiphone, one of the furies of Helle, whiche was ſuppoſed to tourment homicides, or ſleers of men.
            
               Titanis, titanidos, the daughter of Titan called alſo Latona. it is taken alſo for the mone.
            
               Titan, & Titanus, was the brother of Saturn and is taken for the ſonne.
            
               Tithymalus, an herbe called ſpourge whereof be .vii. ſortes, all hauynge mylke ſharpe and bytynge. reade in Cataputia, & Lathyris, & Ricinum.
            
            
               Titillo, are, to ticle, to prouoke or meue pleaſauntely.
            
               Titio, onis, a fyrebrande or wod, whiche hath ben in the fyre.
            
               Titiuillitium, ſignifyeth nothynge.
            
               Titubantia, ſtammerynge.
            
               Titubo, are, to ſtacker in ſpeakynge or goinge, as a man beinge drunke or ſycke.
            
               Titubanter, ſtameringly.
            
               Titulotenus, no further than his title.
            
               Titulus, the title or inſcription of a warke or acte. ſometyme dignitie, alſo a monument or other remembraunce.
            
               Titus, the name of a man.
            
               Titus Liuius, the mooſte excellente hyſtorien or wryter of ſtories, in whom was the fountain of the mylke of pure eloquence.
            
               Titonus, the ſonne of Laomedon kyng of Troy whome Aurora tooke to her huſebande, and therfore ſhe is of the poetes called Titoni a coniux.
            
            
               Tityus, the ſonne of the Erthe, whome poetes fayned to be ſlayne by Apollo, bycauſe he wolde haue rauyſſhed Latona his Syſter. And therefore lyeth in hell, hauynge an Egle alwaye eatynge his lyuer. And it is alſo ſayd that his bodye was in lengthe nyne furlong. Wytneſſe Tibulle, whiche was a Poete, and alſo a greatte louer, and therfore coulde not lye.
            
               Tlepolemus, was the kynge of the Rhoodes, whiche came to the battayle of Troye with nyne ſhyppes.
         
         
            
            ¶T ANTE M.
            
               TMolus, a mountayne in Lidia, wheron dyd growe great plenty of ſaffron and vynes. it is alſo a lyttell buſhe, whiche beareth floures of ſaffron colour.
         
         
            ¶T ANTE O.
            
               TOdi, lyttell byrdes, I ſuppoſe it be the byrde, whiche is called a titmouſe.
            
               Toga, the common garment of men and women, called a gowne. And bycauſe the Romaynes ſpecially did weare that garment in the tyme of peace, toga was taken for peace as arma was for warre.
            
               Toga praetexta, a garmente whiche the Romaynes dydde were afore that they were of the age of xvi yeres. Afterward it was worn of them, whiche were in auctoritie.
            
               Toga polymita, a garment made with thredes of ſondry colours, as motley or bauldekyn.
            
               To gata Comoedia, a commedye or enterlude, wherein the maners of the Romaynes were expreſſed.
            
               Togata Gallia, the Countraye nowe called Lumbardye.
            
               Toga candida, was a garmente, whiche they dyd weare, that ſued for any greate offyce in the citie of Rome.
            
               Togati, apparayled in gownes.
            
               Togatus, he that weareth a gowne.
            
               Tolerantia, ſufferaunce.
            
               Toleranter, pacientely.
            
               Toliapis, the Ile of Tenet by Kente.
            
               Tolles, a waxynge kernell.
            
               Tolleno, nonis, that wherin any thyng is put or layde to be drawen vp. ſometyme a bucket wherwith water is drawen vp.
            
               Tollenon, an engine to drawe vp water which hath a great poyſe at the one ende.
            
               Tolero, rare, to ſuffer, to endure, to beare, to lyue poorely, or nyghely.
            
               Tolerare uitam, to lyue, or to maynteyne his lyfe.
            
               Tolerabilis, rabile, that whiche maye ſuffer or beare.
            
               Tollo, ſuſtuli, ſeu tetuli, tollere, to lyfte vppe to ſette vp, to take away, to nouriſhe, to deferre or prolonge, to haue a chyld by a womā.
            
               Tollere clamorem, to crie out.
            ❀Tollere criſtas, to ſet vp the creſt, applyed or them that be proude or arrogant, and doo ſtretche vp theyr browes with a diſdaynefull countenaunce.
            
               Tolle digitum, holde vp thy fynger, confeſſe thy ſelfe vanquiſhed.
            
               Tollere gradum, to ſette forthe, or to marche forthe.
            
               Tolle hanc patinam, take awaye this dyſhe.
            
               Verum, quod erit natum tollito, what ſo euer is borne, put it to nouriſhynge.
            
               Omnes tollo ex hoc die in alium diem, I put them all of from one day to an other.
            
               Tollere minas, to thretten or menace.
            
               Animos tollere, to be proude.
            
               Cachinnum tollere, to laugh out of meaſure
            
               In coelum tollere, to prayſe excedyngly.
            
               Toloſa, a citie in Guyen, called Tolouſe.
            
               Tolutarius, & tolutaris equus, an aumblynge horſe.
            
               Tolutiloquentia, a ſwyfte or faſte ſpeche.
            
               Tolutim, an amblynge pace.
            
               Tolutim loqui, to ſpeake faſte one worde after an other.
            
               Tomaculae, Tomacula, & Tomacla, a certayne ſorte of pouddynges, properly ſwynes pouddynges.
            
               Tomentum, floxe, whiche is ſhor
                  •
               e of wollen clothe, alſo lockes clypped of whyte wolle.
            
               Tomices, hempen cordes, alſo colers, whiche are put on carthorſes, for hurtynge of theyr neckes.
            
               Tomos, is taken for a volume where dyuerſe warkes of oone author be ſeuered in to ſundrye partes. Alſo a citie in the countreye of Pontus.
            
               Tomyris, was a noble queene of Maſſagetis in Scithia, agaynſte whom whan Cirus the great kynge of Perſia came, and had ſlayne her ſonne, ſhe pitchyng a fyld agaynſt him, & of purpoſe hauyng great plenty of vyttayles in her pauilions, after a lyttell ſkyrmyſhe ſhe and her hoſte fledde. And whan Cirus had a whyle folowed the chace, and blowen to the retraicte, he came to her campe, and fynding greate plenty of vyttayle, he and his people dyd ſo moche fylle them ſelfes therwith, that fallynge a ſleape, they were all taken by the queene, and ſlayne, and ſhe cauſynge a great veſſell to be fylled with the bloude of Cirus, and the Pertians, dyd caſte his heade therinto, ſaying, Bloudde thou haſt thyrſted, and nowe drynke therof thy fyll.
            
               Tonarion, a certayne ſhaulm with a ſoft ſoūd, on the whiche in the old tyme ſome oratours vſed to haue, to playe by theym, whan they pleaded, that by the tunes of the ſhaulme, theoratour moughte moderate and order his pronunciation.
            
               Tondeo, totondi, tondere, to clyp or ſheare.
            Toneſco, tonui, toneſcere, to thunder.
            
            
               Tongri, the duchy of Brabant.
            Tonimus, for tonamus.
            Tonitrus, & tonitru, & tonitruum, thunder.
            
            Tonitus, idem.
            
               Tonitruo, are, to thunder.
            
               Tono, nare, to thunder, to make a gret ſound
 or noyſe, to ſpeake loude.
            
               Tonſae, ſhepe, whiche be ſhorne or clypped. alſo ores of botes or ſhyppes.
            
               Tonſilis, le, that whiche is ſhorne or clypped.
            
               Tonſilla, a poſte, hauynge the one ende armed with yron, whiche is pitched into the erthe, to the ende that ſhyppes or botes maye be tyed therat.
            
               Tonſillae plurali, a diſeaſe within the chekes, and mouthe lyke to great kernelles.
            
               Tonſi montes, hylles without woddes.
            
               Tonſor, & ronſtrix, tricis, he or ſhe which clippeth or ſheareth.
            
               Tonſorius, a, um, perteynynge to clyppynge.
            
               Tonſtrix, tricis, a woman barbar.
            Tonſtricula, idem.
            
               Tonſtrina, a place where they do vſe to clyp, or a barbers ſhoppe.
            
               Tonſus, a, um, ſhorne or clypped.
            
               Tonus, a tune or accente. alſo the ſpace or dyſtaunce, whiche is betwene the erthe and the moone.
            
               Toparcha, he that hath the gouernaunce and charge of one only countrey.
            
               Toparchia, the rule of one countrey.
            
               Topazion, & topazius, a preciouſe ſtone of the colour of golde.
            
               Tophus, a kynde of ſtone, whiche is ſone reſolued in to ſande
            
               Topiarium, a warke made of trees, buſhes briers, or herbes, for pleaſure, and conteyned places to ſytte or walke in, as it is vſed now with box, eglantine, iacymine, and other like trees or thornes, that be flexible, or wyll be wounden.
            
               Topiarius, he that maketh ſuche warkes.
            
               Topiaria, the warke.
            
               Topica, warkes in that parte of logike, which declareth the places, out of the whiche argumentes maye be inuented, that moſte properly perteyneth to oratours.
            
               Topographia, the deſcription of a place, as of a countrey or citie.
            
               Topper, the olde writers vſed for ſone, ſhortely, or quickely.
            
               Toral, & 
                     •
                  oralium, in plurali numero, toralia, euery thynge that lyeth on a bed, as ſheetes, blankettes, and couerliddes. In the olde tyme it were certayne floures and ſwete herbes wounden together in ropes, and hanged before the place, where men dyd lye. Like as nowe they vſe in London at Mydſommer to hange afore theyr dores.
            
               Torcular, aris, & torculare, & torculum, a preſſe for wyne, ſider, or vertiuyce.
            
               Torcularius, a, um, belonginge to a preſſe.
            
               Toreuma, matis, & tereumatum, warke imbored in mettall or ſtone.
            
               Toreutis, a grauer.
            
               Toreutice, ces, the crafte of grauynge.
            
               Tormen, minis, frettynge or tourmente in the bealy and guttes.
            Tormina, idem.
            
               Tormentum, tourmente, or an engyn to tourmente men, generally all ordinaunce perteynynge to warre.
            
               Torminoſus, he that hath tourmentes or frettynge in his guttes.
            
               Tornacum, a towne called Tornay.
            
               Tornatilis, le, that whiche is tourned with a whele.
            
               Torniamen, maye be nowe taken for a tournayment or iuſtes.
            
               Torno, are, to torne or warke with a whele, as tournours done.
            
               Tornus, the inſtrument or wheele.
            
               Torpedo, dinis, ſlouthefulneſſe. alſo a fyſſhe, whiche in the takynge maketh the handes of them that do drawe, to be aſtonyed or deade for the tyme.
            Torpeo, & torpeſco, pui, torpere▪ uel torpeſcere, to be aſtonyed, or ſlowe.
            
            
               Torpor, poris, a debilitation or feblinge of mynde, an vnaptnes to do any thynge.
            
               Torporo, rare, to aſtonie, or make aſtonyed.
            
               Torquatus, a ringe doue, or ſtocke doue. it is he alſo that weareth a colar or chayne.
            
               Torqueo, torſi, quêre, to wynde in, to whirle about lyke a whiele, to ſuſteyne or beare vp, to tourment, to ſpynne.
            
               Torquere telum, to throwe a darte or iauelyn, that he runne rounde.
            
               Torquere ſaxa, to tourne great ſtones.
            
               Oculum torquere, to loke a ſyde.
            
               Torques, a colar, chayne, or bye of golde or ſiluer, ſuche as is worne by knyghtes or eſquyers about theyr neckes.
            
               Torrefacio, cere, to broyle or roſt at the fyre or by the heate of the ſonne.
            
               Torrens, tis, a ſtreame, that commeth downe of hylles, whiche is cauſed by moche raygne or ſnowe. Torrens, a participle, ſignifiethe flowynge with a great ſwepe. Torrentior, more flowynge with a greatter violence.
            Torreo, rui, rere, idem quod 
                  •
               orrefacio.
            
               Torreſco, re, to be broiled or roſted, or dryed.
            
               Torridae zonae, ar two girdels imagined in the fyrmament on euery ſyde of the equinoctiall lyne, vnder whiche gyrdels the people which inhabite there, are burned with the ſeruente heate of the ſonne, bycauſe the ſonne abydeth longeſte in thoſe .ii. places. & are alſo named
            Tropicus cancri, & tropicus Capricorni.
            
               Torridus, da, dum, dryed or burned.
            
               Tortilis, le, that whiche is bente or bowed.
            
               Torris, a ſticke of fyre.
            
               Tortiuum uinum, wyne of the laſte preſſe.
            
               Torto, tare, to tourment vehemently,
            
                
               Tortor, toris, a tourmentoure, or he that caſteth a ſtone with a ſlynge.
            
               Tortum, an engin, to throw great ſones with
            
               Tortuoſus, a, um, wounden or tourned many wayes.
            Tortus, ta, tum, croked.
            
            
               Toruè, toruum, torua, toruiter, properly in beholdynge ſowerly or grymly.
            
               Toruinus, an apparayle of a womans heade.
            
               Torus, a bedde. it was ſometyme made with herbes wounden together.
            
               Tori, the brawnes of the armes and legges, or the fleſhe myxte with ſinewes.
            
               Toroſus, a, um, mighty or ſtronge in brawnes of the legges and armes.
            
               Torſio, onis, Theodorus Gaza, and Longolius ſuppoſed to be a ſturgion. Paulus Iouius is of a contrary opinyon.
            
               Torulus, a lyttell bedde.
            
               Toruè, ſturdily in loke.
            
               Toruitas, tatis, ſturdines.
            
               Toruus, ua, uum, cruell and ſturdy in lokinge.
            
               Toſtus, ta, tum, toſted or roſted.
            
               Totidem, verily ſo many, euen as many.
            
               Tot, as many. Toties, ſo many tymes.
            
               Totus, ta, tum, all the hole, euery whit.
            
               Toxicum, venym or poyſon.
         
         
            ¶T ANTE R.
            
               TRbales, a certayne tourment.
            
               Trabalis, le, perteynynge to a beame.
            
               Trabalis clauus, an yron pin or greate nayle wherwith beames are mode faſt to the rafters.
            
               Trabea, a kyrtell worne by kinges vnder their mantelles of aſtate.
            
               Trabica nauis, a ſhip made with great bemes.
            
               Trabs, & trabes, a beame of a houſe.
            
               Trachale, the ouer parte of a fyſhe called Murex, of whom purple colour is made.
            
               Trachea, the weſon or pype of the lunges.
            
               Trachelum, the myddell parte of the ſayle of a ſhyppe.
            
               Trachelus, the chine of a man or beaſte, frome the heade to the haunche.
            
               Trachida, trachina, & trachurus, I ſuppoſe is a banſtikle.
            
               Trachinia, a kynde of roſes, not perfytely red, lyke to them, that we call frenche roſes.
            
               Traconia, a roughnes within the eye lyddes.
            
               Traconitis, a countrey in Syria ioynynge to Arabia.
            
               Tractabilis, treatable, that maye be intreated
            
               Tractare, to handell.
            
               Tractim, on length, a longe tyme or ſpace.
            
               Tracto, tare, to intreate. Haec arte tractabat uirum. She handled the man craftelye, or of that ſorte. alſo to vſe or exercyſe, to order or gouerne.
            
               Tractare rationes, to meddell with reckeninges, to be accomptable.
            
               Tractorium, a wyndlas to drawe vppe heuy thynges.
            
               Tractus, us, a ſpace▪ a countrey.
            
               Trado, didi, dere, to delyuer, alſo to teach, to commytte in truſte to an other man.
            
               Mores opibus tradere, to ſet more by his richeſſe than by his honour.
            
               Per manus tradere, to leaue it from one to an other.
            
               Prouinciam tradere, to gyue in charge.
            
               Memoriae tradere, to put in writynge.
            
               Traditio, a tradition.
            
               Traduco, duxi, ducere, to brynge frome oone place to an other, to bringe ouer, to tranſlate out of one language into an other. ſometyme to diſhonour.
            
               Traducere tempus, to paſſe the tyme, to bringe vp or nouriſhe.
            
               Traduces, vynes or trees trāſlated from place to place.
            
               Tragacantha, a thyng lyke to a gumme which vulgarly they call Dragaganthum.
            
            
               Tragelaphus, a beaſte in parte lyke a harte, in parte lyke a gote.
            
               Tragemata, that whiche are commonly called bankettynge dyſhes.
            
               Tragice, cruelly, in the maner of a tragedy.
            
               Tragicum tueri, to loke grymly.
            
               Tragicus, a wryter of tragedyes.
            
               Tragoedia, a tragedy, whiche is an enterlude, wherin the perſonages do repreſent ſome hyſtory or fable lamentable, for the crueltie and myſery therin expreſſed.
            
               Tragoedus, he that exercyſeth ſome parte in a tragedye.
            
               Tragonis, ſiue Tragion, a tree growynge in Candye, lyke to Iunyper, the iuyce wherof is lyke to mylke, and waxethe thycke lyke gumme.
            
               Tragum, is lyke a tyzan made of weate, it is alſo a fyſhers nette called a dragge.
            
               Tragonia, an herbe nowe called Taragon, late ſene in this realme, whiche hath a taſte lyke gynger, whiche herbe layde to the lefte ſyde, conſumeth the ſplene.
            
               Tragopa, a byrde in Ethiopia, greatter than an egle, & hath on his hed hornes lyke a gote.
            
               Tragopogus, a fyſhe called a barbell.
            
               Tragoriganon, an herbe whiche I ſuppoſe is called Peniroyal, growynge wylde.
            
               Tragula, a iauelyn with a barbyd heade.
            
               Tragurium, an ile in the ſea called Hadriaticū.
            
            
               Tragulam inijcere, to practiſe deceyte.
            
               Traha, a dray or ſled drawen without wheles.
            
               Trahax, acis, a couetous perſonne, the whiche draweth all thynges vnto hym.
            
                
               Traho, traxi, trahere, to drawe, to leade, to deferre, to delaye, to extende, to remoue, to prolonge, to tary, to liue.
            
               At
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   egomet me adeo cum illis unà ibidem traho, And I my ſelfe taryed as longe with them. Et uos ut tutam tranquillam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fortunam traheretis, mea perfeci uigilantia, And by my vygilancye I broughte to paſſe, that ye ſhoulde lyue in a ſure and quiete proſperitie.
            
               Trahere diem, noctem, tempus, to paſſe the daye, the nyght or the tyme.
            
               Rubiginem trahere, to waxe ruſty.
            
               Pallorem trahere, to be pale.
            
               In diuerſum trahere, to bringe in doubt.
            
               Trahere in religionem, to make conſcience of a thynge.
            
               Traijcio, ieci, ijcere, to leade ouer, to carye ouer, to brynge ouer, to ſrike through.
            
               Traiectitia pecunia, moneye caried ouer the ſea.
            Traiectus, tus, a paſſage. Traiectio, idem.
            
               Trallis, a citie in Lidia, an other in Phrigia.
            
               Trallianus, a man of that citie.
            
               Tralucidus, da, dum, clere, that a man maye loke throughe.
            
               Trama, vn vnder garmente.
            
               Trames, mitis, a croſſe waye.
            
               Trano, nare, to ſwymme ouer.
            Tranato, tare, idem.
            
               Tranquillè, ſoftly without noyſe.
            
               Tranquillitas, tranquillitie, reſt, quietnes.
            
               Tranquillo, lare, to make quiete.
            
               Tranquillus, la, lum, quiet, in reſt, peaſyble.
            
               Tranquillum eſt, it is fayre wether.
            
               Tranquillus locus, a good place to reſt in, a place of quietnes.
            
               Trans, ouer, from one place to an other.
            
               Tranſactio, an agrement vpon communicatiō
            
            
               Tranſactus, ta, tum, paſſed, longe agone, acheued.
            
               Tranſalpina Gallia, Fraunce on his ſyde, the mountaynes.
            
               Tranſalpinus, a, um, ouer the mountaynes of Alpes.
            
               Tranſcendo, dere, to go ouer, to excede.
            
               Traſcindo, ſcidi, ſcindere, to cut on ſonder.
            
               Tranſcribo, ſcripſi, ſcribere, to wryte out a copy. ſomtyme to tranſlate, to gyue or delyuer, alſo the tranſpoſition of a poſſeſſion from one to an other.
            Turne tot incaſſum fuſos patiere labores.
            
               Et tua Dardaneis tranſcribi ſceptra colonis Wylt thou Turnus ſuffer thy labours to be loſt, and thy realme to be gyuen to the inhabytauntes of Troye?
            
               Tranſcurro, rere, to runne forthe.
            
               Tranſcurrit aeſtas, the ſommer is paſſed.
            
               Tranſcurſus, us, a courſe.
            
               In tranſcurſu, In paſſynge forthe.
            
               Tranſenna, a loupe to loke out at, alſo a wyndowe, or caſemente. alſo a rope ſtretched out a ſnare or trappe.
            
               Tranſeo, ſiui, ſire, to go forthe, to paſſe ouer, to paſſe.
            
               Tranſire domum, to go home.
            
               Tranſeunter, paſſynge by or ouer.
            
               Transfero, tuli, ferre, to cary or brynge from one place to an other, to tranſlate from oone language to an other, or from ones poſſeſſion to an others.
            Tranſlatus, ta, tum, the participle.
            
            
               Transfigo, xi, gere, to thruſte through.
            
               Tranſfuga, he that departeth frome his owne people or capytayne vnto the parte of the ennemyes, or of them that are ſuſpected in time of truce.
            
               Transfodio, dere, to dygge throughe.
            
               Transfoſſus, a, um, digged or ſtriken through
            
               Transfiguro, rare, to tranſfourme, to turne in to an other fygure.
            
               Transfretatio, a paſſage ouer the ſea.
            
               Transfreto, tare, to paſſe ouer the ſea.
            
               Transfugio, gere, to flee from place to place.
            
               Transfugere ad hoſtes, is to go and yelde hym to the contrary parte.
            
               Transfugium, an yeldynge to ennemies.
            
               Transfulgeo, gere, to ſhyne throughe.
            
               Transfundo, fudi, fundere, to poure oute of one veſſell into an other, alſo to tranſlate frō one to an other.
            
               Libentius omnes meas laudes (ſi modo ſint aliquae meae laudes) ad te transfuderim. I haue more wyllyngly tourned my prayſe (if I haue any prayſe) vnto you.
            
               Tranſgredior, deris, di, to paſſe or go ouer or beyonde, to excede, to tranſgreſſe a lawe or commaundemente.
            
               Transgreſsio, is a fygure of retoryke, where a man leaueth the princypall matter, and entreth into an other thynge, and after retourneth to his matter. We commonly call it, a digreſſion.
            
               Tranſgreſſus, us, a paſſynge ouer the ſea.
            
               Tranſigere uitam, to paſſe his or theyr lyfe.
            
               Tranſigo, egi, igere, to dryue forthe, to treat a mater, to agree or condeſcende, or come to a poynte: as hapneth betwene men, whiche do contende for ſomewhat, to perfourme.
            
               Tranſilio, ſiliui, & ſilij, ire, to leape ouer.
            
               Tranſiluania, a countrey beyonde Hungarye, wherof the people were ſomtyme called Getae
            
            
               Tranſitio, a paſſinge ouer, a going forth.
            Tranſitus, idem.
            
               Transitorius, a, um, that which ſhortly paſſeth.
            
               Tranſlatio, a tranſlation, or bryngynge frome one place to an other.
            
               Translego, gere, to rede ouer.
            
                
               Tranſluceo, cere, to ſhyne throughe.
            
               Tranſmarinus, na, num, that which commeth from beyonde the ſea.
            
               Tranimigratio, a departynge or goinge frome one place to dwell in an other.
            
               Tranſmigro, grare, to go further, to dwelle further of, to tranſpoſe my dwellynge.
            
               Tranſmiſsio, a goinge or ſendynge further or ouer.
            
               Tranſmitto, miſi, mittere, to ſende frome one place to an other, to go or runne quickely, to ſend ſhortly or quickely to paſſe ouer a water
            
               Tranſmittere mare, to paſſe ouer the ſea.
            
               Tranſmittere tempus, to paſſe the tyme.
            
               Tranſmittere diſcrimen, to eſcape a danger.
            
               Tectū lapide tranſmittere, to throw a ſtone on the houſe.
            
               Bellum tranſmittere, to commyt the charge of a battayle to one.
            
               Tranſmitere literas, where paper ſoketh in inke, that the letters maye be perceyued on the other ſyde.
            
               Tēpus tranſmittere, to paſſe forth the time.
            
               Tranſmoueo, êre, to remoue from one place to an other.
            
               Tranſnato, are, to ſwym ouer.
            
               Tranſnomino, nare, to chaunge his name.
            
               Tranſpadanus, a, um, on this ſyde the ryuer called Padus, in Italy.
            
               Tranſpareo, rêre, to be ſene through a thinge.
            
               Tranſpicio, ſpexi, ſpicere, to loke throughe.
            
               Tranſquietus, ta, tum, in quiet or reſte frome henſeforthe.
            
               Tranſtra, tranſoms whiche do go ouerwharte a houſe, alſo the ſeates, wheron they do ſyt, whiche do rowe in a ſhyppe or bote.
            
               Tranſtyberinus, na, um, that whiche is or dwelleth beyonde the riuer of Tiber.
            
               Tranſuado, are, & tranſuador, ari, to wade ouer a ſhalowe place of a ryuer.
            
               Tranſueo, uexi, uehere, to cary ouer.
            
               Tranſuerbero, are, to ſtrike throughe.
            
               Tranſuerſus, a, um, ouerthwarte, not ſtraight or directe.
            
               Tranſuerſum agere, to tourne haſtely away from the purpoſe whiche a man went about.
            ❀Tranſuerſum unguem non diſcedere, not to go a nayle bredth from it. A prouerbe ſignifienge a lyttell diſtaunce.
            Tranſuerſum digitum, idem.
            
               Tranſuerto, cere, to turne awrye, or out of the ryght facion or waye.
            
               Tranſuideo, dêre, to ſe through a clere thinge.
            
               Tranſulto, tare, to leape ouer.
            
               Tranſumptum, that whiche is written out of a recorde, and approued vnder the kynges ſeale, or the ſignynge of a iudge. In the common lawe they call it an exemplification. ſom do alſo call it a tranſumpte.
            
               Tranſumptio, a figure called alſo Metalepſis, wherby one ſignifycation is gathered of anther: as of Nox atra, a blacke nyghte, is gathered Nox tenebricoſa, a darke nyght.
            
               Tranſuolo, are, to flee ouer, or leape ouer, or to go or runne beyonde a place.
            
               Tranſumo, ſumpſi, ſumere, to take of or from an other, to remeue from one to an other
            
               Tranſuo, ere, to ſowe throughe.
            
               Trapetes, petum, a myl wherin oyle is made
            
               Trapeza, a table, wheron an exchaunger doth tell moneye.
            
               Trapezita, an exchaunger or banker.
            
               Trapezus, zuntis, a Citie in the countreye of Pontus.
            
               Trapezuntius, a man of that citie.
            
               Trapit, olde writers vſed for Vertit.
            
            
               Traſibulus, was duke of Athenes whiche delyuered the citie from the .xxx. tirantes.
            
               Traſimenus, a ryuer by Peruſium in Italye where Hanniball ſlewe Flaminium the conſull of Rome, and .xxiii. M. Romayne, and toke ſyxe thouſand priſoners.
            
               Traſtou, a certayne roſine or gumme, the beſte of that whiche is called Gummihamoniacū.
            
            
               Traulius, he that ſpeaketh with gret difficulte
            
               Trebia, a riuer in Italy by Placentia.
            
               Trebellicum uinum, ſeu Trebulanum uinum, wyne growynge about the riuer of Trebia, in Lumbardye, the Italyons doo call it Trebiana.
            
            
               Trebula, an olde towne nygh to Rome.
            
               Trebulani, men of that towne.
            
               Trecae, trecarum, a citie in Champaigne.
            
               Treceni, thre hundred.
            Trecenti, & trecentum, idem.
            
               Trecentenus, na, num, the thre hundreth.
            Trecenteſimus, ma, mum, idem.
            
               Trecenties, thre hundred tymes.
            
               Tredecim, thyrtene.
            
               Tremebundus, he that trembleth moche.
            
               Tremefacio, feci, facere, to make to tremble or quake.
            
               Tremiſco, ſcere, to tremble.
            
               Tremo, ere, to quake as one doth in a feuer. alſo to feare.
            
               Tremulus, he that quaketh for feare.
            
               Tremor, oris, quakynge, alſo feare.
            
               Trepidatio, tremblynge, feare.
            
               Trepidanter, fearefully, tremblynge.
            
               Trepido, dare, to feare, to make haſte.
            
               Trepidus, da, dum, feareful, alſo he that doth a thynge haſtely.
            
               Trepondo, thre pounde weyght.
            
               Tres, thre. Treſsis, thre pounde.
            
               Treua, a citie in Almayne called Hamburgh.
            
               Treueris, a citie in Germany called Tryre.
            
               Treueri, people called Treues.
            
               Triambi, were thre whiche ſpake together in a tragedy.
            
                
               Triangularis, re, hauyng .iii. corners.
            Triangulus, la, lum, thre cornerde.
            
            
               Triarchus, a maſter of a ſhyp with .iii. toppes.
            
               Triarij. ſouldyors that be ſet alway in the rerewarde, whyche were the ſtrongeſt men, they faught ſtandyng, bowing their knies, as they wold rather dy than remeue frō their placis.
            
               Triatrus, a feſtiuall day kepte after the thyrde Idus of euery moneth.
            
               Tribaces, they which be worne with ſtrypes.
            
               Triballi, people of a countray beyonde Hungary nowe callyd Seruia.
            
               Triboci, people of the countrey of Alſate.
            
               Tribrachus, a fote in meter of .iii. ſhort ſiilables
            
               Tribula, & tribulū, a fiayle, or other lyke thing wherwith corne is threſhed.
            
               Tribulis, a kynneſman that cometh of the ſame ſtocke that I do.
            
               Tribulor, aris, ari, to be troubled with heuynes of mynde.
            
               Tribulus, a bremble.
            
               Tribunal, the place where a Iudge ſytteth in iudgement.
            
               Tribunatus, the offyce or dygnitie of a tribune.
            
               Tribunus, was an offycer amonge the Romanes, hauynge chyefe iurysdyction amonge the communes. Alſo a Capytayne in warres, hauyng auctoritie ouer ſouldiours, to view & ſe that they were well armed and exercyſed.
            
               Tribunitius, a, um, pertaynyng to the tribunes.
            
               Tribuo, buere, to gyue, ſometyme to ſet moche by. Alſo to fauour.
            
               Tribus, bus, a part of the people, ſomttyme diuided into thre partes. It ſemeth that it was ſomtyme taken for a family or particular iurisdiction among the people, and therof commeth tribulis. And therefore the partition of the people of Iſrael were into .xii. Tribus. Hereof be ſundry opinyons. Rede Calepine.
            
               Tributarius, he that payeth tribute.
            
               Tributim, by ſundry famylyes or partes of the people.
            
               Tributum, trybute.
            
               Tricae, fethers in the fete of chykens and pygeons, whiche do let them to go, and therefore al thynges whych do let a man ar callyd Tricae. Vide extrico & intrico.
            
            
               Tricaptum, a garment, which was ſo fine, that it ſemed to be made of ſmall heares.
            
               Tricenus, na, num, commeth of triginta, thyrty. it is ſometyme taken for tricentenum.
            
            
               Tricentuplus, a, um, thre hundred folde.
            
               Triceps, cipitis, hauynge three heedes.
            
               Tricerberus, a great hell hounde.
            
               Trichiae, be fyſhes callyd Sardynes.
            
               Trichila, a veſſell hauynge three lauers, out of the whiche water is poured.
            
               Trichomanes, an herbe callyd Maydenheare, whych groweth by welles and ſprynges, and is a lytle herbe, in facion lyke to a ferne, the leafe therof being tourned as it were the bak ſyde forwarde, and is narowe the braunches wheron the leaues be, do gliſten, and be very ſmall, brown in colour, and bitter in taſt, it is of a good temperance betwene hot and colde. Rede Adianton.
            
            
               Triclinarius, the ſeruant whiche dothe ſeruein the parlour.
            
               Triclinarius, a, um, pertaynyng to the parlour or dynynge chaumber.
            Triclinarium, idem quod triclinium.
            
               Triclinium, a parlour to ſup in, wherein were thre tables and thre beddes. For in the olde tyme they vſed to lye, whan they dyd eate.
            
               Trcôlon, hauynge thre membres.
            
               Tricones, men hauynge ſowre countenaunces, and that be neuer or ſeldome ſene to laugh alſo pykers of quarels.
            
               Tricongius, was one which dranke or he reſted thre meſures of wyne, callyd Congij, whiche as I ſuppoſe, was thre galons and a pynt of our wyne meaſure. Wherfore Tiberius the Emperour promoted hym to honour, and at the laſt made hym Conſul of Rome.
            
               Tricornium, that which hath thre hornes.
            
               Tricubitalis, le, of thre cubytes in meaſure.
            Tricubitus, ta, tum, idem.
            
               Tricus, a ſtone, whiche althoughe it be blacke, yet ſheweth he at the rote blacke, in the myddell ſanguyne, at the toppe whyte.
            
               Tridacna, an oyſter ſo great, that a man muſte make of hym thre morſels.
            
               Tridens, tis, euery inſtrument, tole, or weapon hauyng thre teethe.
            
               Tridentum, a city in Italy, callyd Trent.
            
               Triduanus, a, um, of thre days continuance.
            
               Triduum, the ſpace of thre dayes.
            
               Triennalis, le, of thre yeres.
            
               Triennium, the ſpace of thre yeres.
            
               Triennis, ne, thre yeres olde.
            
               Triens, tis, a coyn which is the thyrde part of a pound, it is alſo a cup contaynyng that poiſe.
            
               Trientalis herba, an herbe whiche hath leaues as great as the coyne callyd triens.
            
               Triental, a veſſel contaynyng the third part of that meaſure, which was named Sextarium.
            
            
               Trierarchus, the capytayn of a ſhyp, which is callyd trieris.
            
            
               Trieris, a great ſhyppe, whiche hath in it thre orders of ſeates for the rowers.
            
               Trietericus, ca, cum, for triennalis, that whiche hapneth to be done euery third yere.
            
               Trieteris, the ſpace of thre yeres.
            
               Trifariam, in thre partes or .iii. maner of ways.
            
               Trifarius, a, um, of the ſame ſignification.
            
               Trifaux, faucis, hauyng thre chekes.
            
               Trifax, & triforū, a weapon of .iii cubites long.
            
               Trifer, ra, rū, that which bryngeth fruit thriſe.
            
                Triferus, ra, rum, idem.
            
               Trifera, is a medycine and other delycate ſpyces, to expulſe eaſyly corrupt humours.
            
               Trifidus, da, dum, dyuided into thre partes.
            
               Trifinium, the buttyng of thre fieldes, whiche ioyne togyther.
            
               Trifolium, may be taken for the generall name of all herbes hauynge three leaues. All be it there is one herbe callyd ſo proprely.
            
               Trifur, furis, more than a theefe, three tymes wars than a thefe. Semblablye tri, ioyned with any thynge, ſignifieth more.
            
               Triga, a carte drawen with thre horſes.
            
               Trigarium, a certayne courſe with ſuch cartis.
            
               Trigamus, he whyche hathe or hathe hadde thre wyues.
            
               Trigarius, a place by campū Martiū, at Rome.
            
               Trigemini, thre chyldren at one byrthe.
            Trigeminus, na, num, idem quod Tres, thre.
            
            
               Trigemmis, a plant or ſlyp, hauyng thre ioyntes, and three buddes.
            Trigeſimus, ma, mum, the thirtieth.
            
            
               Trigeſies, thyrty tymes.
            
               Triginta, thyrty.
            
               Trigla, a fyſhe, I ſuppoſe it be a ſoore mullet, ſuch as ar takē in Deuonſhyre & in Cornwal.
            
               Trigles, a ſtone, whyche is of the colour of a ſoore Mullette.
            
               Trigo, gare, to bynde or to draw a thyng cloſe togyther.
            
               Trigon, gonis, a balle, alſo a turtyl. alſo a fiſhe callyd a thornebacke.
            
               Trigonalis, le, that whiche is three cornerde, hauynge thre lynes.
            
               Trigonia, the thyrde age.
            Trigonus, na, num, thre cornerde.
            
            
               Trilinguis, he that ſpeaketh thre languages.
            
               Trilix, licis, a garmente with three dyuers thredes.
            
               Trimatus, tus, the tyme of thre yeres.
            
               Trimembris, bre, hauyng thre membres.
            
               Trimeſtris, ſtre, of thre monethes.
            
               Trimetrum, a verſe of thre feete.
            
               Trimma, a wyne made with ſpyces, as that whiche is callyd ypocras.
            
               Trimorion, is named of .iii. ſygnes in heauen, whyche contayne .lxxxx. degrees or porcions. Wherfore Trimorion, is in calculation of natiuities from the tyme of the byrthe or conception, the lxxx. and tenth part or degree.
            
               Trimus, ma, mum, of thre yeres.
            Trimulus, the diminutiue of Trimus.
            
               Trimyxos, a lampe or candelſtycke, bearynge thre lyghtes.
            
               Trinacris, & trinacria, the countrey of Sicile.
            
               Trinepos, potis, he whiche is three dyſcentes lyneall from my chyldes chylde.
            
               Trineptis, a woman in lyke degree of bloudde as trinepos, potis.
            
            
               Trinitas, trinitie, the number of thre.
            Trinoxius, a, um, three nyghtes.
            
            
               Trinundinum, the thyrde fayre or markette, whiche was wonte to be proclaymed, to the intent that it ſhuld be the better remembred.
            Trinus, na, num, three.
            
            
               Trioboli homo, & triobolaris, a man worthe thre halfe pens, of lyttell value.
            
               Triobolus, thre halfe pens, or worthe thre half pence.
            
               Triones, plough oxen. alſo they be ſeuen ſterrep beinge in the northe.
            
               Triophthalmus, a lyttell ſtone, hauyng in him the fygure of three eyen.
            
               Triorchis, a kynde of hawkes, hauynge thre ſtones.
            
               Triparcus, a great nygarde.
            
               Tripartior, tiri, to diuyde into thre partes.
            
               Tripartito, an Aduerbe, ſygnyfyenge in three partes.
            
               Tripartitus, ta, tum, dyuyded in thre partes.
            
               Tripedaneus, a, um, hauynge thre feete.
            
               Tripes, pedis, with thre feete.
            
               Trifolium, thre leaued graſſe.
            Triphillon, idem.
            
               Triplaris, thryſe as moche.
            
               Triplex, plicis, three folde, treble, a table with thre leaues.
            
               Triplicitas, treble.
            
               Tripliciter, three folde.
            
               Triplico, are, to do or folde a thyng .iii. tymes.
            
               Triplium, a veſſell lyke a baſket.
            Triplus, a, um, treble.
            
            
               Tripolis, a cuntray in Affrica, an other in Syria, the thyrde in Phenicia.
            
               Tripolium, an herbe, whereof the roote is of ſome men ſuppoſed to be Turbit.
            
               Tripondium, thre pounde weyght.
            
               Tripontium, a towne in Vmbria in Italy, ſoo callyd bycauſe it hath thre brydges.
            
               Triptolemus, a man whyche founde the vſe of grayne in the countrey of Athenes.
            
               Tripudium, daunſynge.
            
               Tripus, podis, euery thyng that hath thre fete.
            
               Tripodes, were alſo tables in the temple of Apollo, of golde.
            
               Triquetra, a fygure thre cornerde. It was alſo a name of the yle of Sicile.
            
               Triquetrus, tra, trum, hauyng thre corners.
            
               Triremis, a galeye, hauynge three orders of oores.
            
               Tris, thre, or thryſe.
            
               Triſmegiſtus, the name of Mercurius, in latyn Ter maximus.
            
            
               Triſtegum, a chaumber in the thyrde ſtorye or floore of a houſe.
            
               Triſtimonia, heuyneſſe or ſorowe.
            
               Triſsis, thre pounde weyght.
            
               Triſtis, is alſo taken for doctus. Iudex triſtis
 & integer, A iuge wel lerned, and of a good conſcyence.
            
               Triſtis, agaynſt his wyll, not well content.
            
               Triſtitia, ſorowe, or heuyneſſe.
            
               Triſtis, ſorowfull, heuye, alſo cruelle, of moche grauitie, bytter, more dyffycile or harde, ſomtyme angry.
            
               Triſto, tare, to make heuy or ſorowfull.
            
               Triſulcus, ca, cum, hauynge thre edges.
            
               Triſulcum telū, a wepon hauyng thre edges.
            
               Triſyllabus, ba, bum, hauyng thre ſyllables.
            
               Tritauia, my great grandfathers mother.
            
               Tritauus, my great grandfathers father.
            
               Tritheles, an herbe whyche hathe thryſe in the yere flowres.
            Triticeus, a, um, of wheate.
            
            
               Triticum, wheate.
            
               Trito, tare, to breake or beate ſmalle.
            
               Triton, one callyd god of the ſea, the ſonne of Neptunus, it is alſo a ryuer in Aphrica.
            
               Tritonia, the name of Minerua.
            
               Trituro, rare, to threſhe corne.
            
               Tritura, threſhynge.
            Trituratio, idem.
            Tritus, ta, tum, worne.
            
            
               Triuenefica, a great ſorcereſſe.
            
               Triueri, Trier in Almayne, whyche nowe is vnder a byſhop.
            
               Triuia, a name of Diana.
            
               Triuialis, le, commune, or of ſmalle eſtimation vſed or taughte in hygh wayes, alſo rude, not elegant.
            
               Triuialis lingua, a homely forme of ſpeche.
            
               Triuialiter, communely, in the vulgar or homely facyon.
            
               Triuium, where wayes doo meete. alſo a place where commune recourſe of people is.
            
               Trium literarum homo, was ſpoken in ſcorne of hym, that wolde ſeeme to be a gentylman, where he was none, whych word was made by this occaſyon, that amonge the olde Romaynes, gentyll men vſed to wryte theyr names with three letters, as, Q, F, M, for Quintus Fabius Maximus. Alſo this prouerb was ſpoken of them, whiche were theues, bicauſe that Fur, contayned but thre letters.
            
               Triumphalis, le, belongyng to triumphes.
            
               Triumphalis uir, he that hath triumphed.
            
               Triumphator, he that triumpheth or hath triumphed for vanquyſhyng his enmyes.
            
               Triumphatus, ta, tum, of the whyche one hath tryumphed.
            
               Triumphatus, tus, a tryumph.
            Triumphatio, idem.
            
               Triumpho, phare, to tryumphe, to reioyce excedyngly.
            
               Triumphus, a tryumph, whyche is a ſolemne pompe or ceremony, where a prince, a conſul, or principall capytayne of an army, hath had vyctory of the ennemies of his countrey, and therfore is brought home and receyued with all reioycynge and honour that may be diuyſed of the people. The order and forme therof ye may ſe in Titus Liuius, Apianus, and Iulius Capitolinus.
            
            
               Triumuir, one of them, whiche is in any office, wherof be thre in lyke auctoritie.
            
               Triumuiralis, le, pertaynyng to an office or auctoritie, wherin be thre perſones.
            
               Triumuiratus, is an offyce in the publyque weale, wherin thre men haue equall iuris diction togyther. it is alſo the offyce or auctoritie of Triumuir.
            
            
               Triuncis, & triuncium, thre ounce weyght.
            
               Trixalis, a worme lyke to that which is callid Locuſta, but he hath no wynges.
            
               Trixago, ginis, an herbe callyd Germander, rede Chamaedris.
            
            
               Troas, adis, the citie of Troy, and the countrey about it callyd the leſſe Phrigia.
            
               Trochaeus, a foote in meter, whiche is of two longe ſyllables, and one ſhorte.
            
               Trochilos, a lyttell byrde, whyche is callyd kynge of byrdes.
            
               Trochiſcus, a lyttell wheele. alſoo Trochiſci, be of phyſytians callyd, lyttell balles, flattē at bothe endes, whyche be made of ſundrye poulders.
            
               Trochum, a certayne ſtoole or chayre, whyche wyll be tourned aboute.
            
               Trochus, a top, wherwith chyldern do play.
            
               Troclea, & trochalea, a poley, wherin the cord runneth, whereby any thynge is drawen vp, it is alſo the gyn, whyche is callyd a crane.
            
               Troezenē, a citie in the parte of Grece, celled Peloponeſus. It is alſo a countraye in the laſſe Aſia.
            
               Troglodytae, people in the furtheſt part of Affrica, beyonde Aethiopiam, whiche dwell in caues, and do eate the fleſhe of ſerpentes.
            
               Troia, the citie of Troy. alſo the cuntray wherin Troy ſtode.
            Troianus, na, num, of Troy.
            
            
               Troianus ludus, was a playe of chylderne on horſebacke.
            Troicus, ca, cum, for Troianus.
            Troiugena, idem.
            Troius, a, um, of Troy.
            
            
               Tropeus, he that dothe a ſhrewde tourne, and runneth away whan he hath done.
            
               Trophaeum, was a marke or token of tymber or ſtone, ſette in the place, where ennemyes were vanquyſhed or put to flyght, ſometyme it is taken for vyctory.
            
               Tropicè, fyguratiuely.
            
               Tropice, ces, a kynde of bulle ruſſhes, the ſeede wherof wyll make one to ſleape.
            Tropicus, ca, cum, fyguratiue.
            
            
                
               Tropei uenti, wyndes, whyche do come from the ſea.
            
               Tropologia, a fyguratiue ſpeakyng.
            
               Tropus, a fygure, a maner or faſcyon, an alteration of a worde or ſentence frome his proper ſygnification.
            
               Tros, troos aut trois, a Troyan. alſo the name of a kyng of Troyans, ſonne of Ericthonius.
            
               Troſſulum, a citie in Italy.
            
               Troſſulus, in the old tyme was taken for a horsman or man of armes. It is alſo a perſon delycate, well fedde, or fleſhy.
            
               Troximi, grapes to be eaten.
            Trua, idem quod trulla.
            
               Trucido, dare, to ſlea cruelly.
            
               Trucidatrix, ſhe that kylleth one.
            
               Truciter, cruelly.
            Truculentè, idem.
            
               Trucitas, crueltie.
            Truculentia, idem.
            
               Truculentius, more cruelly.
            
               Truculentiſsimè, moſte cruelly.
            Truculentitas, idem quod truculentia.
            
               Truculentus, cruelle in countenaunces or menaces.
            
               Trudo, truſi, trudere, to thraſte oute with vyolence.
            
               Truella, a veſſell wherewith water is throwen into the ſynke.
            
               Truliſſare, to parget.
            
               Trulla, wherein meate is put whan it is roſte or ſodden, callyd a trey. It is alſo a pyſſepot, of ſome it is taken for a greate cuppe, brode, and deepe, ſuche as great maſers were wont to be.
            
               Trulla, a trewel, wherwith maſons tylers and pargettours do lay morter.
            
               Trulleum, a bolle.
            
               Truncatio, a cuttyng in pieces.
            
               Truncatus, ta, tum, cut in pieces.
            
               Truncator, & truncatrix, he or ſhe that cutteth in pieces.
            
               Trunco, are, to cutte of.
            
               Truncus, a piece cutte of from the reſydue ſpecyally of a tree.
            Truncus, a, um, cutte of.
            
            
               Truo, onis, a byrde callyd alſoo Onacratalus, and is lyke to a ſwanne.
            
               Truſatilis, le, that whiche may be tourned and dryuen about with a mans hande.
            
               Truſatiles molae, a querne, ſuch as malte is grounde in, or muſtarde is made in, and is tourned with ones hande.
            
               Trutina, a wayenge bala
                  •
               nce. ſometyme it is taken for iudgement.
            
               Trutino, nare, to waye or examyne.
            
               Trux, trcis, cruell, horryble.
         
         
            ¶T ANTE V.
            
               TV, tui, tis, tibi, thou, of the, to the.
            
               Tuatim, after thy facion or cuſtome.
            
               Tuba ductilis, a braſon trumpet.
            
               Tuba, a trumpette.
            
               Tuber, beris, a puffe growyng on the ground, lyke a muſheron or ſpunge▪ It is alſoo generally euery ſwellynge in a mans bodye or vyſage. It is alſoo in a tree lyke to a greatte knotte.
            
               Tubercula, a lyttell ſwellyng or puſhe.
            
               Tubero, are, to ſwelle.
            
               Tubicen, cinis, a trumpettour.
            
               Tubulus, a lyttell pype, wherin water runneth from a ſprynge. it is alſo a riede.
            
               Tuburcinor, aris, ari, to eate haſtily.
            
               Tubus, & tubulus, a pype, wherin water is conuayed to a cundyte. It was alſo a thynge, wherwith they made walles hot, before there were chymneys.
            
               Tucetum, a meate made with chopped fleſſhe lyke to a gygot or alowe.
            
               Tudertum, a citie in Italy.
            
               Tudicula, a ladell, a pryntyng yron, wherwith veſſell is marked.
            
               Tudiculo, tudiculare, to ſteere, to prynte a marke.
            
               Tuditantes, they that trauayle in buſyneſſe.
            
               Tuditanus, the name of a man, ſo callid bicauſe he had a head as bygge as a bytell.
            
               Tuditis, a mallette.
            
               Tudito, tare, to labour for aduauntage.
            
               Tueſis, the ryuer callyd Twede, whyche dyuideth Englande from Scotlande. it is alſo the towne callyd Berwyke.
            
               Tuor, cris, eri, to defende, alſo Tueor, tuêris, to ſee.
            
               Tugurium, a howſe of huſbandry.
            
               Tuguriolum, a cotage.
            
               Tuipſe, thou thy ſelfe.
            
               Tuliſurgium, Bruneſwyke, a cytie in Almayn.
            
               Tulit, he brought.
            
               Tullij, ſome ſuppoſe theym to be ryuers, ſome flowynges of bloude out of ſundry membres or ioyntes.
            
               Tullianum, a doungeon within the commune pryſon of Rome.
            
               Tullius, reade in Cicero.
            
               Tum, than, whan he goth before cum, it ſignifieth as well.
            
               Tumba, a holowe place in the grounde, a ſepulchre.
            
               Tumdemum, fynally.
            
               Tumefacio, feci, to make to ſwelle.
            Tumeo, & tumeſco, ſcere, to ſwelle.
            
            
               Tumet, thou thy ſelfe,
            Tumidus, da, dum, ſwollen.
            
            
                Tumor, ris, ſwellynge.
            
            
               Tumulo, are, to make the grounde holowe, to burye.
            
               Tumulor, ari, to be buryed.
            
               Tumultuarie, in haaſte, withoute moche aduyſement.
            
               Tumultuarij milites, were men of warre, whiche in the tyme of a ſodayne rebellyon, or other ſodayne daunger, were taken without any muſters or other election.
            
               Tumultuarius, a, um, that which is done without aduyſement or in haſte.
            
               Tumultuo, are, to make rumour.
            
               Tumultuoſè, troublouſely, or without ſtudy.
            
               Tumultuoſus, ſa, ſum, troublous, or makynge rumour.
            
               Tumultus, tus, a rumour, a comotion of people
            
               Tumulus, a lyttell hylle or barowe, ſometyme a tombe.
            
               Tunc. than.
            
               Tunc temporis, at that tyme.
            
               Tundo, tutudi, tundere, to ſmyte, to braye or beate as in a morter.
            
               Tunetū, a citie in Affrica called nowe Tunyſe.
            
               Tungo, gere, olde writers vſed for Noſco, noſce, to knowe.
            
               Tunica, a iackette.
            
               Tunica pallia propior, my iacket is nerer than my gowne, A prouerbe applyed where we wyll ſygnify that all frendes are not to be lyke eſtemed or made of.
            
               Tunici, an herbe, whiche ſome do ſuppoſe to be that whiche bryngeth forth gylofers.
            
               Tunico, care, to put on a iackette.
            
               Tunicatus, he that weareth a iacket.
            
               Tuopte ingenio, of thyne owne wytte.
            
               Tuor, eri, to beholde, all be it that worde is not in vſe.
            
               Tura
                     •
                  ius, a ſtrete at Rome.
            
               Turbatio, trouble.
            
               Turba, a multitude or aſſēbly of people. Quid illaec turba eſt? numnam ego perij? What a multitude is yonder? am not I vndone for euer? Alſo it ſygnifieth trouble. Propter eam haec turba at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   abitio euenit, For her ſake is all this trouble or dyſſencion.
            
               Turbaſis, ſterche.
            
               Turbella, a lyttell trouble.
            
               Turbidè, troublouſely.
            
               Turbidus, troublous, not clere.
            
               Turbinatus, ta, tum, rounde and ſharpe, lyke a toppe.
            
               Turbino, nare, to make ſharpe at the ende.
            
               Turbiſtum, is a thynge myxt with the lykour, wherewith woulle is dyed, whyche maketh the dye to ſynke into the woulle, whereby the colour is made perfyte.
            
               Turbit, is a thynge moche vſed nowe a dayes to purge fleume, and yet be men vncertayne whatte verye Turbit is. Actuarius ſaythe, that it is the rote of Pityuſa. Manardus affyrmeth, that Turbit wherof Meſue maketh mencion is the ſecond kynde of Tithymalus, callyd of Dioſcoribes Myrſinites, but that Turbit wherof Serapio maketh mencion, is thought of ſome men to be Tripolium, after the deſcription of Dioſcorides.
            
               Turbo, bare, to trouble, to ſtere.
            
               Turbo, binis, a boyſtouſe wynde, whyche doth blowe downe trees and howſes. alſo a toppe, wherwith chyldren do playe. It is generally all thynge, whiche is round and brode aboue and ſharpe beneth.
            
               Turbulentia, trouble.
            
               Turbulentus, troublous, angrye, fulle of contention.
            
               Turcae, people callyd Turkes, whiche inhabyted the countray ioyned to the ſea callyd Caſpium, and the hylle callyd Caucaſus, ſome of theym were accompted amonge the people of Scithia, of whome Pomponius Mela maketh mencyon. Which about .DCC. and xxv yeres paſſed, wandryng about as vagabunde robbers waſted and deſtroyed dyuers countrayes, but afterwarde by the valyaunt proweſſe of chryſtyan princis in the tyme of Godfray de Boloigne, and after, theyr puiſſaunce was abated. But afterwarde in the yere of our lord .MCCC. one Othomanus the tenthe from Solymanus, which nowe is the great tyraunt of the Turkes, a ploughemans ſonne, valyant and ſubtylle of wyt, gatherynge a great army of vagabundes, wan a great countrey in Aſia the leſſe, and ſo ſucceſſiuely, euery one ſenſe hath increaſed their domynion, hauynge nowe vnder their ſubietion, all Aſiam the laſſe, Syriam, Mediam, Meſopotamiam, Aegyptum, Greciam, Illiriam, eueryche of theſe contaynynge many greate and famouſe royalmes. Beſides Hungary and the yle of the Rhodes, and many other yles ſometyme chryſtened. They do now calle Turchiam, proprely that which was named Aſia minor, and ſomme do name it Natoliam.
            
            
               Turdetania, a countray nowe callid Granado.
            
               Turdetani, & turduli, people of that countray.
            
               Turdus, is a kynde of byrdes of the which Ariſtotle ſayth, that there be thre ſortes, one is of the greatneſſe of a pye, and is callyd in greke Ixiboron, or Ixiophagon, as it were an eater of miſſelden. An other is leſſe, about the quantitie of a thruſh, and is in greke callyd Trichas, the thyrde is very lyttell, and in greeke is callyd Tyla, as Athenaeus wryteth. Plinius ſayth, that Turdus is in ſommer ſommewhat redde, and in Wynter
 waxeth blacke. alſo that in ſommer his necke is of a dyuerſe colour, in winter of one colour and that he maketh his neſt with claye on the toppe of a tree, ſome doo ſuppoſe that it is the byrde, whyche is callyd an ouſell or black byrde. Turdus is alſo a fyſhe callyd in greke Cichle, lyuing among ſtones and rockes, & is leſſe than a foote in length & hath .iiii. fynnes beſydes the hyndermoſte fynne, and is in fygure lyke to a tenche, in colour ruſſette, and hauyng on his bealye ſpottes of pourple and white.
            Turgeo, êre, & turgeſco, ſcere, to be ſwollen.
            
            
               Turgidilus, la, lum, ſomewhat ſwollen or bolned out.
            
               Turiones, the tendrelles of trees.
            
               Turma, a company of ſouldyours, contaynyng xxxii. horſemen.
            
               Turmatim, in order of battayle.
            
               Turonica, Tours in Fraunce.
            
               Turpis, pe, fowle, dyſſhoneſte, cruelle. Alſoo greatte.
            
               Turpiter, ſhamefully, dyſhoneſtly.
            
               Turpiſsimè, moſte ſhamefully or diſhoneſtly.
            
               Turpitudo, dyſhoneſtye, vyllanye, deformitie. ſometyme rebuke.
            
               Turpo, pare, to defyle, diſhoneſte, or bryng out of good faſhyon.
            
               Turreus, rea, reum, lyke a towre.
            
               Turrifico, care, to cenſe.
            
               Turris, a towre, or any thyng made like to it.
            
               Turricula, a lytell towne. alſo a boxe, out of the whyche dyce are throwen.
            
               Turriger, that whyche beareth a towre, as an Elephant.
            
               Turritus, ta, tum, hygh, alſo towred, or fulle of towres. alſo the name of the ydolle, whyche was callyd mother of goddis.
            
               Turtur, turis, a byrde callyd a turtell. It is alſo a fyſhe callyd Trigon.
            
               Turundae, pellettes of breadde or paſte, wherewith capo
                  •
               s or other fowles are crammed. Alſo a tente, whyche ſurgeons doo put into a wounde.
            
               Tus, turis, frankyncenſe, it is alſo wryten with h, as thus.
            
            
               Tuſcia, a countrey in Italye, wherin be the cyties of Florence, Sene, Luca, and Piſe.
            
               Tuſculum, a lyttell piece of Frankincenſe. alſo a citie by Rome ſet on an hyll.
            
               Tuſculanus, na, num, of that citie.
            
               Tuſculanum, was the terrytory about Tuſculum, where dwellyd Cicero, Varro, and diuers other noble men.
            
               Tuſcus, ca, cum, of the countrey of Tuſcia.
            
               Tuſſedo, dinis, the cowgh.
            
               Tuſsicula, a lyttell cowghe.
            
               Tuſsilago, ginis, an herbe, whyche putteth away the cough. ſomme men ſuppoſe it to be coltes foote, callyd of the Apothecaries Vngula caballina.
            
            Tuſsio, ſiui, ſire, to cowghe.
            
            
               Tuſsis, the cowghe.
            
               Tutanus, was ſuppoſed to be a god, which had the cuſtody of men.
            
               Tute, thou thy ſelfe.
            
               Tutela, the wardſhyp or cuſtody of infantes.
            
               Tutelaris diuus, the ſaynt whome we doo take for our ſpeciall aduocate to god
            
               Tutelina, was callyd a goddeſſe, vnder whoſe cuſtody was corne, whyche was in barnes or rykes.
            
               Tutia, is called of the grekes Pompholyx, the thycker part therof is Spodium.
            
            
               Tutiſsime, moſte ſure.
            
               Tutius, more ſure.
            
               Tuto, without peryll.
            
               Tuto, tare, to defende.
            Tutor, taris, tari, idem.
            
               Tutor, a garden, he that hathe the warde of an infant.
            
               Tutorius, a, um, pertaynyng to a gardeyn.
            
               Tutulus, a toppe of the heare wounden with a purple lace on the crowne of a womans head whyche was onely worne of her that was wyfe to the great prieſt at Rome, callyd Flamen Dialis.
            
            
               Tutus, ta, tum, ſure, defended from peryll, out of daunger.
            Tuus, a, um, thyne.
            
         
         
            ¶T ANTE Y.
            
               TYber, a great ryuer, whyche is by Rome
            
               Tyberinus, of Tyber.
            
               Tyberius, the name of an Emperoure of Rome.
            
               Tybur, & tyburtum, a citie by Rome.
            
               Tyburtinus, na, num, of the citie of Tyburtū.
            Tyburs, burtis, & tyburtis, hoc tyburte, of Tyber.
            
            
               Tydeus, the father of Diomedes the noble capytayne, whome Venus dyd wounde at the battayle of Troy.
            
               Tyle, callyd alſo Thule, an yle within one days iourney of the froſen ſea.
            
               Tylus, a worme, whyche lyeth vnder ſtoones and tiles, which haue lien long on the groūde and is ſomwhat blacke and ſkalyd, and hath many legges, whyche beyng touched, cloſeth hym ſelfe rounde as a peaſe, and is moſt cō
               monly callyd a cheſelyppe.
            
               Tymbra, a great fielde in the contrey of Troy through whyche the ryuer of Tymber rounneth into the ryuer of Scamander.
            
               Tymoetes one of the ſonnes of kyng Priamus
            Tymolus, idem quod Tmolus.
            
                
               Tympaniſta, he that playeth on a drumſlade or tymbrell.
            
               Tympaniſtria, a womanne that playeth on a tymbrell.
            
               Tympanites, a kynde of dropſye, wherin the bealy ſwelleth greate, a tympanye, whereof wynde is the chiefe occaſion.
            
               Tympanizo, to play on a tymbrell, tabour, or drumſlade.
            Tympanotriba, idem quod tympaniſta.
            
               Tympanum, a tymbrel, a tabour, or drumſlade. Seruius calleth it a couered charyot or cart, other do ſuppoſe it to be the ſtrake of a carte wheele. I ſuppoſe that it maye be taken for that, whyche is callyd the corſe of a charyot or horſelytter, made with bayles or bourdes ioyned, whiche is not moche from the opynion of Seruius.
            
               Tympanum, is alſo a great whele, wherin men do go and drawe vp water. it is alſo a platter, whiche ſerueth for meate.
            
               Tymphei, people in Etholia, whyche is in Grecia.
            
               Tyndarus, the father of the fayre Helene, for whom Troy was diſtroyed, and alſo of Caſtor and Pollux.
            
               Typha, groweth in fennes, with a longe and ſmothe ſtalke, hauynge on the toppe, a floure, whych flyeth away lyke the flowre of thiſtel.
            
               Typha Caerealis, is a kynde of corne lyke to our rye, by the deſcription of Theophraſtus, and I ſuppoſe it is that, whiche with vs is callyd rye.
            
               Typhon, & typhos, was a greate gyaunt, the ſonne of Tytan. It is alſoo a greate puyſſaunt wynde.
            
               Typhonae, be certayne impreſſions in the ayre lyke globes of fyre or dartes.
            
               Typhis, was a carpentar, whyche fyrſt dydde fynde the way to gouerne a ſhyppe.
            
               Typus, a fygure, an exaumple or a fourme, a lykenes or ſhadowe of a thynge.
            
               Tyrannicè, cruelly, tyrannouſely.
            
               Tyrannicus, ca, cum, of a tyraunt.
            
               Tyrannis, nidis, a cruell or vyolent rule or gouernaunce for a priuate commoditie, and not for a publyke weale.
            
               Tyrannicida, he that ſleeth a tyrant.
            
               Tyrannicidum, the kyllynge of a tyraunt.
            
               Tyrannus, a tyraunt.
            
               Tyranthina, a garment of purple colour.
            
               Tyranthinus color, purple colour.
            
               Tyrius, a, um, of the yle callyd Tyrus. Alſo vyolette or purple colour.
            
               Tyro, ronis, a yonge ſowldiour or man of armes. Alſo he that fyrſt entreth into the experience of any ſcience, art, or exercyſe.
            
               Tyroniacus, ca, cum, of a younge ſouldiour or lerner.
            
               Tyrocinium, the fyrſt exercyſe in any thyng.
            
               Tyros, a citie in Phenicia. alſoo an yle, where the colour of purple was fyrſt founden.
            
               Tyrunculus, a veray yonge ſouldyour or yong lerner.
            
               Tyrotarichus, a ſawce made with cheſe.
            
               Tyrrheni, the people of Thuſcane.
            
               Tyrſis, the circuite withoute the walles of a towne, wherein menne maye walke for their ſolace.
         
         
            ¶V ANTE A.
            
               
                  VACCA, a cowe. alſo 
                  •
                a citie in Numidia.
            
               Vacanter, at good leyſure.
            
               Vaccinus, na, num, of a cowe.
            
               Vacerra, madde, withoute wytte, percloſes or rayles, made of tymber, within the whiche ſome thynge is incloſed.
            
               Vacillo, are, to moue inconſtantly, to wagge or waue, to be vnſtable, or vnſure.
            
               Vacinium, the flowre, which is alſo callyd Hyacinthus, and hathe longe leaues, a rounde roote, a ſtalke of a ſpanne longe and more, hauynge on it many purple flowres, wherwith in ſome places they do dye purple.
            
               Vacillatio, a waggynge or wauerynge and inconſtant meuyng.
            
               Vacillantes literae, letters wrytten crokedly, or out of order.
            
               Vacillans teſtis, a wytneſſe, which inconſtantly dothe varye in report or depoſition.
            
               Vacat, it ſerueth to no purpoſe, it is ſuperfluouſe. Alſo it ſygnifieth I am at good leyſure, or without buſyneſſe. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth to care or force. Et cui eſſe deſerto uacat, And who careth to be well ſpoken or eloquent.
            
               Vacatio, vacation, or tyme whan a man is out of his common buſyneſſe.
            
               Vaco, care, to apply wytte or ſtudye. Vaco ſapientiae, I applye my ſtudy to wyſedome.
            
               Vaco rei diuinae, I apply my wyt to goddis ſeruyce. alſo to be empty or voyde. Fac uacent aedes, Cauſe the houſe to be voyded. Vacat occupatione, He is withoute occupation or ydell. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth to be ſuperfluous or vnprofitable.
            
               Quantum temporis uacabit ab officio publico, Durynge the tyme that I ſhall be at leyſure.
            Nullum tempus ei uacabat à cogitando, he neuer ceaſſed to thynke.
            
            Vacare ab omni adminiſtratione rerum, to meddell with nothynge.
            
            
                
               Vacabam culpa, I was nothynge gylty.
            
               Si uacat, yf ye be at leyſure.
            
               A metu uacare, to be out of feare.
            
               Populo uacare, to take noo hede or regarde what the people ſayth.
            
               Vacat mihi eſſe diſerto, I haue ſoo lyttell to doo in other thynges that I haue leyſoure to ſpeake.
            
               Vacuefacio, cere, to empty or auoyde.
            Vacuo, are, idem.
            
               Vacuus, a, ū, voyd, empty, or without a thyng.
            
               Vacuae aures, Date mihi uacuas aures, dum eloquor, Gyue your eares only to me, while I ſpeake, or here nothynge els.
            
               Vacuus animus, a mynd without care or ſolycitude.
            
               Animo uacuo, at leyſure.
            
               Vacuus equus, a ſpare horſe, whyche hath no man on hym.
            
               Vacuus a periculo, out of daunger.
            
               Vacuus à re aliqua, delyuered of any thynge.
            
               Vacuna, was callyd a goddeſſe, vnto whome huſbandmen after that harueſte was cleane done, dyd ſacryfice, as to the goddeſſe of quieteneſſe after labour.
            
               Vacuitas, emptyneſſe.
            
               Vadimonium, ſuretie to appyere at a daye aſſygned.
            
               Vadimonio obſtrictus, let to bayle or mainpriſe, whan a man is bounden to appyere at a daye aſſigned by a iuſtice.
            
               Vadimonium obire, to appere at the daye aſſygned.
            
               Vadimonium deſerere, to make defaulte at the daye, and not to appiere.
            
               Vadimonium miſſum facere, to diſcharge recognyſance or ſuerties that were bounden.
            
               Vadimonium differre, to gyue a longer day of apparaunce.
            
               Vadis, & uas, uadis, he that vndertaketh for an other.
            
               Vadium, ſuertie.
            
               Vado, dere, to go forthe, alſo to fynde ſuertie.
            
               Vado, dare, to wade.
            
               Vador, aris, ari, to fynde ſuerties.
            
               Vadoſus, a, um, ful of fordes or ſhalow places.
            
               Vadum, & uadus, a fourde or ſhalowe place in a water, where men and beaſtes may go ouer
            
               Vaeh, an interiection, wherwith we do curſe.
            
               Vafellus, he that is ſomewhat crafty.
            
               Vafer, fra, flum, ſubtill, crafty, ſly.
            
               Vaframentum, ſubtiltie or crafte, ſlyneſſe.
            
               Vafrae, craftely, fynely indeceyuynge.
            
               Vagabundus, a wanderer about.
            
               Vadigabar, an hebrewe worde, whiche in Latine is Numeri, oone of the fyue bokes of Moyſes.
            
               Vageni, a people dwellynge amonge the mountaynes called Alpes.
            
               Vagina, a ſhethe or ſcaberde.
            
               Vaginula, a lyttell ſhethe.
            
               Vagio, gire, to crie as a chylde.
            
               Vagitus, tus, the cryenge of a chylde.
            
               Vago, gare, for uagor, to wander.
            Vagor, aris, ari, idem.
            
               Vagus, ga, gum, wanderynge, and abidynge in no place.
            
               Vah, an interiection, wherwith we wonder at a thynge, alſo of reioyſinge.
            
               Vaha, an interiection of reioyſyng or laughing
            
               Valde, very moche.
            Valdius, for ualidius.
            
               Vale, farewell.
            
               Valentia, the fyrſte name of Rome. alſo a citie in Spayne.
            
               Valens, puiſſaunt, hole, ſtronge.
            
               Valentia, puiſſance, habilitie.
            
               Valentior, ualentius, more puiſſaunt or ſtrong.
            
               Valentiſsimus, moſte puiſſaunt or ſtronge.
            
               Valentulus, ſomewhat ſtronge.
            
               Valeo, lui, lêre, to be able, to be hole, alſo to be worth, to be ſtronge or puiſſant, to maye do or be of force or power. Neque tam imperita ut quid amor ualeat ne ſciam. I am not ſuch a foole, but I knowe what loue maye do, or of what power loue is.
            
               Male ualeo, I fare yle, I am yll at eaſe.
            
               Valere ab oculis, to be hole of the dyſeaſe in his eyes.
            
               Valére a pecunia, to haue money inoughe.
            
               Non tantum ualet, he is not of ſuche puiſſaunce.
            
               Valuit authoritas, his authoritie was great
            
               Valet amicis, he hath many frendes.
            
               Corpore ualére, to be ſtronge.
            
               Curſu ualére, to runne well.
            
               Valére gratia apud Senatū, to be in fauour with the Senatours.
            
               Valére opibus, to be riche.
            
               Valére ſtomacho, to haue a good ſtomake.
            
               Valére uiribus, to haue moche ſtrengthe.
            
               Valére apud aliquem, to do moch with one.
            
               Valet in id, it is good therfore.
            
               Valet ſeſtertijs uicenis, it is worth .xx. penſe.
            
               Valere à morbo, to be recouered frome ſyckenes.
            
               Valeat, fare wel he, I care not for hym. Imo habeat, ualeat, uiuat cum illa, well lette hym wedde her, I care not for hym, moche good do it hym with her, or let hym haue her, god be with hym, lette hym make mery with her. Si deus talis eſt, ut nulla gratia, nulla hominum charitate teneatur, ualeat. If god be ſuche one, that he hath neyther fauour nor loue to mankynde, I care not for hym, Valeant, qui inter nos disſidium uolunt, They that wyll haue vs at variaunce let them get them henſe, or god be with them.
            
                
               Valeriana, an herbe called Valerian, reade in Phu.
            
            Valeſco, ſcere, idem quod ualeo.
            
               Valeria, the ſyſter of Meſſala, wyfe to a noble man called Seruius, who beyng dead whan ſhe was aſked, why ſhe dyd not mary again, ſhe anſwered, that ſhe alwaye ly
                  •
               ed by Seruius her huſbande, it is alſo a countreye by Hungary, nowe called Stiria.
            
               Valerius, a mannes name.
            Valeſius, for Valerius.
            
               Valetudinarium, a place where men do lye, whan they be ſicke.
            
               Valgium, an inſtrument to make flores ſmoth.
            
               Valgulatio, a queſtion in rebuke of one.
            
               Valguſtus, a croked ſtaffe.
            
               Valgus, he that hath his legs bowed inwarde narowe at the knees.
            
               Valetudinarius, a, um, nowe and than ſycke, oftentymes ſycke.
            
               Valitudo, & ualetudo, dinis ſome tyme ſignyfyeth ſickenes, ſometyme helthe.
            
               Valetudini operam dare, to haue regarde to his lyfe.
            
               Longa & pertinax ualetudo, a long and continuall ſickeneſſe.
            
               Validè, valiantly, myghtily, puiſſantly.
            Validus, da, dum, valyant, myghty.
            
            
               Validior, ualidius, more myghty.
            
               Validiſsimus, moſte myghty.
            Validitas, tatis, myght.
            
            
               Vallecula, a lyttell valey.
            
               Vallaris, re, pertaynyng to a trenche in a felde.
            
               Vallaris corona, a garlande gyuen to hym whiche fyrſt entred into the trenche of the ennemyes campe.
            
               Valleſcit, olde wryters vſed for perierit, he is loſte or peryſhed.
            
               Vallis, a valey or dale.
            
               Vallo, are, to incloſe, to fortifye.
            
               Vallonia, was callyd the goddeſſe of valeys.
            
               Vallum, & uallus, a trenche, whiche is made in a felde to defende an hoſte, within the whyche pauyllions are pytched. alſo a poſt, whervnto vynes are bounde.
            
               Valli, are pales made ſharpe aboue.
            
               Valor, oris, value or price.
            
               Valuae, doores whych be ſhut on two partis.
            
               Valuulus, the codde of a beane or peaſe, or other lyke thynge.
            
               Vanans, olde wryters vſed for fallens, deceyuynge.
            
               Vandalia, a countraye in the northe parte of the world.
            
               Vanè, v
                  •••
               nly, foolyſhely, lyengly.
            
               Vane
                     ••
                  , ſcere, to vanyſhe, to be brought vn
               
                  ••
                
               
                  •
               ought.
            
               Vangiones, people in Germany of a cytie callyd Wormes.
            
               Vanidicus, a lyar or tellar of foolyſhe tales.
            Vaniloquus, idem.
            Vaniloquidorus, idem.
            
               Vaniloquentia, vayne ſpeche.
            
               Vanitas, tatis, vanitie, lyghtnes, leſyng, foly.
            
               Vanitudo, vanytie.
            
               Vanno, are, to vanne corne.
            
               Vannus, a vanne.
            
               Vanus, a, um, voyde or empty. alſoo foolyſſhe or enuyous, a maker of lyes, not lykely.
            
               Vapor, oris, & uapos, a vapour or hot brethe iſſuyng out of a thynge.
            
               Vaporarium, a place made hotte to ſytte in, in the wynter tyme.
            
               Vaporo, rare, to heate or make warme a place
            
               Vappa, wyne, whiche hath loſt his verdure. it is ſometyme taken for a man, in whome is no wytte or perfyte reaſon▪
            
            
               Vapo, onis, a beaſt that fleeth.
            
               Vapularis, he that is beaten.
            
               Vapulo, lare, to be beaten.
            Variabilis, le, varyable.
            
            
               Varar, Dunbar in Scotlande.
            
               Variantia, uarietas, & uariatio, varietie, dyuerſitie in thynges.
            
               Varices, & uarice, uariculae, are veynes, whiche do ſwelle excedyngly.
            
               Varicoſus, he that hath ſuche veynes ſwollen.
            
               Varicor, aut uarico, to tranſgreſſe, to paſſe ouer a thyng neglygently.
            
               Varicus, an Aduerbe, whyche ſygnyfyeth ſtrydynge.
            
               Varae manus, croked handes.
            
               Vari, ſpottes in the face.
            
               Variè, dyuerſely.
            
               Variae, for Pantherae, beaſtes of dyuers colours.
            
               Variegatus, a, um, paynted or garnyſſhed with ſundry colours.
            
               Varius, a fyſhe callyd a troute.
            
               Vario, are, to make dyuerſe.
            
               Variolae, meaſyls.
            
               Varius, a, um, dyuers, vnlyke, inconſtaunt, varyable.
            
               Varolus, a deuourer. alſo a pycker.
            
               Varro, ronis, was a noble Romayne, of all other moſte excellently lerned.
            
               Varus, whoſe legges are croked inwarde.
            
               Varus, a ryuer, whyche dyuydeth that part of Fraunce, that is callyd Narbonenſis frome Italy. Alſo it was the name of a poete.
            
               Vas, uadis, a ſuretye that vndertaketh for annother man. alſo a pledge.
            
               Vas, uaſis, a veſſelle.
            
               Vaſa conclamare, to crye, to truſſe vp caryage and bagguage, as whan an armye dothe remoue.
            
               Vaſcones, people in the parte of Spayne callyd Taraconenſis.
            
            
               Vaſcularius, a potter.
            
                
               Vaſcularius, a goldeſmythe, the whyche maketh plate.
            
               Vaſculum, & Vaſcillum, a ſmall veſſell.
            
               Vaſtatio, deſtruction.
            
               Vaſterna, a horſelytter, or any thynge borne by two horſes.
            
               Vaſteſcant, olde writers vſed inhorreſcant.
            
            
               Vaſto, are, to waſte or deſtroye.
            
               Vaſtus, a, um, great, huge, ſomtime deſolate.
            Vaſtitas, tatis, uaſtitudo, & uaſtities, greatnes alſo deſtruction.
            
            
               Vaſum, a veſſell.
            
               Vates, a prophete, a poete.
            
               Vateſco, ſcere, to be diſtroyed, to be dried vp, to be forſaken.
            
               Vaticanus collis, a hyll in Rome, where nowe is the churche of ſayncte Peter.
            
               Vaticinor, aris, ari, to prophecie or tell what ſhall happen, to coniecte.
            
               Vaticinium, a prophecy, a coniecture.
            Vaticinatio, idem.
            
               Vatidicum, for propheticum, that whiche is ſpoken in a prophecy.
            
               Vatius, idem quod valgus, he that hath croked legges outwarde.
            
               Vatrax, & uarricoſus, he that hath ill legges, from the knee downewarde.
         
         
            ¶V ANTE B.
            VBER, & huber, a womannes breſte. uide Huber.
            
               Vbi, where, in what place. ſometyme whan, after. Vbiloci, idem.
            
            
               Vbij, people in Germany dwellynge in Colain and the partes adioynynge.
            
               Vbi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , in all places, euery where, in all.
            
               Vbi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   gentium, in all countreys.
            
               Vbi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , loci, in euery place.
            
               Vbilibet, where ye wyll.
            
               Vbicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , in euery place, Vbicubi, idem.
            
         
         
            ¶V ANTE D.
            ☞ VDVS, da, dum, moyſte.
            
            Vuidus, da, dum, moyſte inwarde.
            
         
         
            ¶V ANTE E.
            
               VE, idem quod Vaeh, alſo it is put for uel; or 
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               .
            
               Vecors, dis, mad, or troubled in ſpirite
            
               Vecordia, madneſſe or trouble of mynde.
            
               Vectabulum, wherin any thynge is caryed.
            
               Vecticularia uita, to haue moche to day and no thynge to morowe, ſodaynely ryche, and as ſodaynely poore.
            
               Vectigal, a tribute, a pention, a rent, a yerely reuenewe.
            
               Vectigalis, le, by whom or wherof tribute, pencion, or rente. is payed.
            
               Vectis, a barre. alſo a leuer, wherewith thynges be lyfte, or borne by men. It is alſo the name of an yle of Englande called the yle of Wyghte.
            Vecto, are, to cary. Vectito, idem.
            
               Vectatio, cariage.
            
               Vector, toris, he that is caried, ſometyme he that caryeth.
            
               Vectorius, a, um, apte to carie.
            
               Vectura, cariage, alſo the hyre or money gyuen for cariage.
            
               Vedra, the riuer of Were in Wales.
            
               Vegeo, gere, to be in helthe.
            Veget, for uegetat.
            
               Vegetius, a noble man that wrate of marciall doctrine.
            
               Vegeto, uegetare, to recreate, to quicken, to conſerue.
            
               Vegetus, ta, tum, hole, ſtronge in helth quicke
            
               Vegrandis, great and yll fourmed.
            Vehea, for via.
            
               Vediouis, & veiouis, was called a god which had no power to do good, but onely harme.
            
               Veheare, olde wryters vſed for uehere.
            
            
               Vehemens, tis, vehemente, great, vrgente, fyers, ſharpe.
            
               Vehementia, vehemency, myghte.
            
               Vehementer, vehemently, ſharply, myghtely.
            
               Vehementior, tius, more vehement or ſharpe.
            
               Vehementiſsimus, ma, mum, moſt vehement or ſharpe.
            
               Vehes, a carte or wayne.
            
               Vehia, in the olde Tuſcane 
                  •
               unge was a carte.
            
               Veiatura, for Vectura, cariage.
            
               Vehicularius, a carter.
            
               Vehicularis equus, a cartehorſe.
            
               Vehiculum, a generall name to all thynges, whiche ſerueth for cariage.
            Veho, uexi, uehere, to carie.
            
            
               Veios, a citie in Hetruria.
            
               Veientes, people with whom the Romaynes had longe tyme warres.
            
               Veientanus, na, num, of the citie of Veios.
            
               Veli, the people of Veios.
            
               Vel, or ſometyme alſo, chiefely, namely, at the leaſte.
            
               Velabrum, a place in Rome. It maye be alſoo called a tente, whiche craftes men do ſet vp, where they haue no howſes, to be in ſtede of theyr ſhoppes.
            
               Velamen, minis, a couerynge.
            
               Velaria, clothes wherwith tentes ar made, alſo the ſame tentes.
            
               Velatura, a frayte.
            Velatus, ta, tum, apparayled.
            
            
               Velanni, Velay in Fraunte.
            
               Veles, uelitis, a ſouldiour that weareth lyghte
 harneyſe.
            
               Velia, a fenne in Italye, in the countreye of Calabria.
            
               Velifico, care, to ſayle.
            
               Velina, a ſtrete in Rome, by the hyll called Mons Palatinus.
            
            
               Velis equiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , by ſea and by lande.
            
               Velitaris pugna, battayle done by theym that are lyght harneyſed.
            
               Velitatim, by leapes or ſkyppes.
            Velitor, aris, ari, & uelito, uelitare, to ſtryue, to brawle.
            
            
               Velitatio, brawlynge.
            
               Velitrae, plurali numero, a citie in Italy .xx. myles from Rome.
            
               Veliuolus, a, um, that whiche gothe with a ſayle, or is occupied with ſayles.
            
               Vella, olde writers vſed for uilla.
            
            
               Vellaturam facere, to lyue by cariage frome one towne to an other.
            
               Vellicatim, by pluckes.
            
               Vellico, care, to pynche, ſometyme to rebuke, to byte, to rent.
            
               Vello lere, to plucke vp, or pull a thynge.
            
               Vellus, velleris, a flyſe.
            
               Velo, lare, to couer or hyde, to bynde, to apparayle.
            
               Velocitas, ſwyftneſſe.
            Velocior, velocius, ſwyfter.
            
            Velociſsimus, ma, mum, ſwyfteſt.
            
            
               Velociſsimè, moſte ſwyftly.
            
               Velociter, ſwyftly.
            Velox, locis, ſwyfte.
            
            
               Velum, a ſayle, a curtayne or a vayle.
            
               Velut, ueluti, as, lyke as.
            
               Vena, a veyne.
            
               Venabulum, a huntynge ſtaffe.
            
               Venalitiarius, he that ſelleth ſlaues.
            
               Venalis, le, that whiche is ſet to ſale.
            
               Venalitium, a place where any thynge is ſolde.
            
               Venalitius, he that ſelleth.
            
               Venaphrum, a citie in Campania.
            
               Venaria, an yle, wherein be many veynes of mettall.
            
               Venaticus, ca, cum, perteynynge to huntynge.
            
               Venaticus canis, a hounde.
            Venatorius, a, um, idem.
            
               Venator, a hunter.
            
               Venatrix, a woman hunter.
            Venatura, idem quod uenatio.
            Venatus, tus, huntynge. Venatio, idem.
            
               Vendax, acis, he that gladly ſelleth.
            
               Vendibilis, le, eaſy and redy to be ſolde.
            
               Vendicatio, a clayme.
            
               Vendico, care, to vendicate, to clayme.
            
               Venditarius, a, um, redy to be ſolde.
            
               Venditatio, an auaunt.
            
               Venditio, a ſaale.
            
               Vendito, tare, to ſell often, to auaunt.
            Vendo, didi, dere, to ſelle.
            
            
               Veneficium, the acte and crafte of poyſonynge.
            
               Veneficus, & uenefica, a maker of poyſon, a vſer of ſorcery.
            
               Venenariae mulieres, womenne that doo ſell poyſon.
            Venenatus, ta, tum, poyſoned.
            
            
               Veneno, nare, to poyſon.
            
               Venenoſus, a, um, that hath poyſon.
            
               Venenum, poyſon, it is the generall name of al that doth alter the nature or colour of that thynge, wherwith it is myxte.
            
               Veneo, niui, nire, to be ſolde.
            
               Venerabilis, worthy to be honoured.
            
               Venerabundus, he that dothe worſhyppe any thynge.
            Venerandus, idem.
            
               Veneranter, reuerentely.
            
               Veneratus, ta, tum, humbly prayed vnto▪ ſome tyme reuerende.
            Veneror, aris, ari, to honour.
            
            
               Veneratio, honour, reuerence.
            
               Venereus, a man diſpoſed to lechery.
            
               Venetiae, arum, the citie of Venyce.
            
               Veneti, Vanes in Brytayne. Alſo the people of Venyce.
            
               Venetus, ta, tum, of Venyce. Alſo the colour of lyght blewe or blunket.
            
               Venia, pardon, forgyueneſſe. Tua uenia, by your lycence.
            
               Venibo, auncient writers vſed for ueniam.
            
            
               Venio, nire, to come, to ſpringe.
            
               Venire in mentem, to come to remembrance.
            
               Venit in mentem, it commeth to my mynde.
            
               Venitur ad me, they came to me.
            
               Venila, for unda, water in a ryuer.
            
               Venor, aris, ari, to hunte, to gette a thynge craftelye.
            
               Venta, an hauen in Englande called Briſtowe
            
               Ventanea, thynges that ſeme to be daungerus and yet therin is no daunger.
            
               Venter, tris, the bealy or panche. ſometyme it is taken for the ſtomake.
            
               Ventilabrum, a fanne or flabelle, wherwith wynde is made.
            
               Ventilatio, a fannynge or wynnowynge.
            
               Ventilator, a vanner or wynnower of corne.
            
               Ventilo, are, to gather wynde, to vanne or winowe corne, to tourne oute of one hande in to an other.
            
               Ventito, tare, to come often.
            
               Ventoſus, a, um, wyndy, alſo lyght.
            
               Ventoſitas, wyndyneſſe.
            
               Ventulus, a lyttell wynde.
            ❀Vento uiuere, to lyue by the wynde. A prouerbe applyed to them, whiche haue no ſubſtaunce to lyue on.
            
               Ventus, wynde.
            
               Ventus operam dat, the wynde bloweth a
 good coole.
            Ventus popularis, vayneglory.
            
            
               Ventrale, a ſtomacher.
            
               Ventrioſus, a gorbealy.
            
               Ventriculus, the ſtomake.
            
               Venum ire, to be ſolde.
            
               Venundo, dare, to ſell.
            
               Venundatio, byenge and ſellynge.
            
               Venus, ueneris, called goddeſſe of loue, ſometyme lechery, alſo carnall appetite, alſo beautie, by whiche a man is ſtired to loue.
            
               Venuſtas, tatis, beautie, properly of women. ſomtime a dilectable pronuntiation of ſpeche
            
               Venuſté, properly, pleaſauntly, amiably.
            Venuſtulus, a, um, ſomewhat fayre.
            
            Venuſtus, ta, tum, fayre dilectable.
            
            
               Venuſto, are, to ornate or make beautifull.
            
               Veprecula, a lyttell bramble.
            
               Vepres, bryars.
            
               Vepretum, a place full of briers.
            
               Ver, ueris, the ſprynge of the yere.
            
               Veratrum, an herbe called alſo Helleborus.
            
               Verax, acis, he or ſhe that ſaythe truthe.
            
               Veracitas, tatis, truthe in ſpeche.
            
               Verbaſcum, an herbe wherof be .ii. kindes, of whiche one is ſuppoſed to be Molin or longe worte, the other is ſuppoſed to be that which is called primroſe, ſome doo thynke it to be roſe campin.
            
               Verbena, & uerbenaca, an herbe called veruin ſometime Verbenae, are all leaues ſodeynely plucked vp, to garnyſhe howſes or churches or to make garlandes.
            
               Verber, a ſmall longe ſticke or yarde.
            
               Verberaljs, worthy to be beaten.
            Verberatio, Verberatus, tus, a beatynge
            
            
               Verbereus, a, um, worthy to be beaten.
            
               Verbero, rare, to beate, to punyſhe.
            
               Verberare cogitationis conuicio, to blame or rebuke one in his mynde.
            
               Verbero, ronis, a perſon worthy punyſhement the reproche of all ſeruauntes.
            
               Verberito, tare, to beate ofte ofte.
            Verbigero, rare, for uerba facere, to talke.
            
            
               Verbenarius, was oone of the ambaſſadours ſent fro the Romayns vnto theyr ennemies, which ware on his head a garland of veruin
            
               Verboſe, an aduerbe, ſignifienge with manye wordes.
            
               Verboſitas, moche talkynge or ſpeakynge.
            
               Verboſus, full of wordes.
            
               Verbulum, a lyttell worde.
            
               Verbum, a worde, alſo a ſentence compriſed in one worde, a prouerbe.
            
               Verba ad rem conferre, to do as he ſayth.
            ❀Verba mortuo dare, to ſpeake to a deade manne, a prouerbe whan a manne loſeth his labour.
            
               Verba dare, to deceyue.
            
               Verbi cauſa, as by example.
            Verbi gratia, idem.
            
               Verba iſtaec ſunt, theſe are but wordes.
            
               Verbis meis ſalutem dicito, ſalute hym in my name.
            
               Vercellae, was a citie in Liguria, nyghe to the mountaynes called Alpes.
            
               Veré, truely.
            Verecundanter, & uere cunditer, ſhamefaſtely
            
            
               Verecundia, ſhamefaſteneſſe.
            
               Verecundé, ſhamefaſtly.
            
               Verecundor, aris, ari, to be aſhamed.
            Verecundus, da, dum, ſhamefaſte.
            
            
               Veredarius, a meſſanger that rydeth by poſte.
            
               Veredus, a lyght horſe, a huntynge nagge, or ſwyfte geldynge.
            
               Verenda, places in a man and woman, which without ſhame may not be named.
            
               Verendus, da, dum, to be feared or dradde.
            
               Vereor, reris, reri, to feare as the chylde doth the father. Timêre, to feare, as the ſlaue or boye dothe his mal
                  •••
               
            
            
               Vereor dicere, I dare not tell.
            
               Vereor abs 
                     •
                  e, I am aferde of the, leſte thou wylte do me diſpleaſure.
            
               Vergiliae, the .vii. ſterres, called alſo Pleiades.
            
            
               Vergo, uerſi, aut uerxi, gere, to declyne or bowe downe.
            
               Veridicentia, truthe in ſpeakyng a true tale.
            
               Veridicus, ca, cum, he or ſhe that telleth truthe.
            
               Verifico, care, to verifie as lawyers do ſaye, to auerre.
            Veriloquentia, idem quod ueridicentia,
            
               Veriloquus, & ueriloquax, he that ſpeaketh truthe.
            
               Veriſimile, lykely.
            Veriſimiliter, idem.
            
               Veriſimilis, le, lyke to be true.
            
               Veriſimilitudo, lykelyhode.
            
               Veritanus ager, a feld diuided among the people, ſo that euery man may haue a porcion.
            
               Veritas, trouthe.
            
               Vermiculatim, an aduerbe, ſygnifyenge in ſmall pieces.
            
               Vermiculus, a lyttell worme.
            
               Veriuerbium, a true tale.
            
               Vermiculor, aris, ari, to be full of vermyne, or wormes.
            
               Vermiculata opera, warkes whiche are of ſmall pieces of diuers colours, wherin ar ſet out ſondry pictures, lyke as we ſe in ſpruſe tables or counters.
            
               Vermina, prickinges in the body, that it ſemeth wormes were cut a ſonder.
            
               Vermino, nare, to haue wormes.
            
               Verminatio, the diſeaſe of the wourmes, properly in cattell.
            
               Verminoſus, a, um, full of wormes, or that wherin wormes are.
            
                
               Vermis, a worme. alſo it is a fyſhe in the riuer of Ganges, whiche is in length .lx. cubytes, and is blewe in coloure, whiche hath ſuche ſtrength, that whan Oliphantes come to the water and do drynke, he wyll take one of thē by the noſe, and plucke hym in to him.
            
               Verna, a bondeman or bondewoman, borne in the houſe of the lorde, of his bondeman and bondewoman.
            
               Vernaculus, la, lum, al that taketh beginning in our owne countrey, as Vernacula lingua, the countrey language, the comon ſpeche peculiar or proper to countrey or houſe.
            
               Vernaculi, be alſo men of yll maners and language, whiche vſe to ſlatter or to ſpeake in rebuke.
            
               Venacula putatio, cuttynge of vynes in the ſprynge of the yere.
            
               Vernalis, le, perteynynge to the ſprynge of the yere, alſo ſeruile.
            
               Vernaliter, lewdely, flatteryngly.
            
               Vernatio, the olde ſkynne of an adder. it is ſometyme taken for age.
            Vernilis, le, ſeruile.
            
            
               Vernilitas, flattery.
            
               Vernilitus, olde writers vſed for a flatterer.
            
               Verniliter, flattery.
            
               Verno, are, to ſprynge as herbes done, alſo to ſynge as byrdes done.
            
               Vernula, a diminutiue of uerna.
            
            
               Vernus, a, um, luſty, freſhe, as the ſpring time.
            
               Verò, truely, verily. ſometyme it doth affirme that whiche foloweth. alſo but yet.
            
               Vero, is alſo a ryuer in Byſkay.
            
               Vero, are, to ſaye truthe.
            
               Veromanditi, Vermandors in Fraunce.
            
               Ver
                     •
                  na, a noble citie in Italy in the countreye called Marchia Taruiſina, not far from the mountaynes, where Catullus the poete and Plinius were borne.
            
               Verones, people dwellynge nyghe to the ryuer of Vero.
            
               Veronenſis, & Veronius, a man of Verona.
            
               Verpus, pa, pum, that whiche hath no ſkinne It is alſo the myddell fynger.
            
               Verpi be alſo Iewes.
            
               Verra, an altar at Rome, wherat they prayed that chyldren ſhulde not be wronge borne.
            
               Verres, a hogge vngelded, a tame boore, as aper maye be called a wylde bore.
            
               Verricula, olde writers vſed for articulus.
            
            
               Verriculum, a nette called a dragge.
            
               Verrinco, care, to tourne or chaunge a thinge vnto better.
            
               Verrinus, a, um, of a bore.
            
               Verruca, an hyllocke or knappe on a hyll. alſo a warte.
            Verrucaria herba, wartworte.
            
            
               Verrucoſus, he that hath wartes.
            
               Verrucula, a lyttell warte.
            
               Verrunca, olde writers toke for a hyghe place.
            
               Verſatilia, thynges that are tourned or wounden one about an other, as two cordes or two ſtickes wounden together, alſo pyllers made of the ſame faſcion.
            
               Verſatilis, le, that whiche tourneth or maye be tourned.
            
               Verſicolor, oris, chaungeable, or that whiche changeth colour, alſo of ſondry colours.
            
               Verſicolorius, a, um, any thynge tourned out of his naturall colour, alſo that whiche is of dyuerſe colours myxte to gether.
            
               Verſiculus, a lyttell verſe.
            
               Verſipellis, a crafty perſon that wyll tourne often as he lyſteth.
            
               Verſo, are, to tourne.
            
               Verſat animum cupido regni, He thynketh and diuiſeth howe to be kynge.
            
               Animum muliebrem uerſare in omnes partes, to tempte the woman by all maner of wayes.
            
               Authores uerſare, to reade often good authores.
            
               Dolos uerſare, to deuyſe howe to begile one.
            Verſare in corde, to thynke.
            
            
               Oues uerſare, to paſture ſhepe.
            
               Verſare diu quid ferre recuſent, to thynke longe what they wyll refuſe to ſuſteyne.
            
               Verſare teſtes, to examine witneſſe in diuers maners of wayes.
            
               Verſor, ari, to haunte, to be often tymes in a place, to be occupied in a thynge or matter.
            
               Mihi antè oculos dies noctes
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   uerſaris, I thinke vpon you daye and nyght.
            
               Verſatur circa res omnes, he medleth with euery thynge.
            
               In acie uerſari, to be in the battayle.
            
               In diſcrimine uerſari, to be in daunger.
            
               In munere ſuo uerſari, to be buſy in his office
            
               In re aliqua uerſari, to traite of ſome matter.
            
               Inter manus uerſari, to be often tymes handled.
            
               Verſoria, the needell in a ſhyppe, to knowe the coſtes.
            
               Verſura, a tournynge. it is alſo whan a manne boroweth of one to paye his dettes to an other, and to borowe in ſuche wyſe is Verſuram facere.
            
            
               Verſura, is alſo the coyne or corner of a houſe or wall, wherat menne doo tourne. it is alſo whan the horſes or oxen do tourne in a carte or ploughe.
            
               Verſuram ſoluere, is to chaunge creditours, as to borowe of one man to pay an other. ſom do reade Verſura ſoluere .i. uerſura facta aes alienum ſoluere.
            
            Verſus, ſa, ſum, tourned.
            
            
               Verſus, us, a verſe. ſommetyme an order. alſo
 a 
                  •
               onge, towarde.
            
               Verſutè, craftely.
            
               Verſutus, mutable, oft tournyng, wyly expert.
            
               Verſutia, wylyneſſe.
            
               Verſutiloquus, a crafty ſpeaker.
            
               Vertagus, a hounde, whiche wyll hunt by hym ſelfe.
            
               Vertebrae, places in the body, where the bones do not meete, but are knytte to gether in ſuch wyſe with ſenewes, that they maye tourne the more lyghtly.
            
               Verto, ti, tere, to tourne, to drawe, to tranſlate or interprete out of one tungue into an other, to conſider.
            
               Vertere terga, to run away, to fle inbattaile.
            
               Vertere ſolum, to go from one countrey into an other to dwell.
            Vertere, for verſuram facere.
            
               Vertere ſtultitiae, to repute folye in a thynge.
            
               Vertere uitio, to put the blame in one.
            
               Quis erit, uitio qui id non uertat tibi? Who is it that wyll not put the blame in the?
            
               Agrum uertere, to tyll the grounde.
            
               Bene tibi uertat, god ſpede you well.
            
               Dij bene uertant, I praye god tourne it to good.
            
               In crimen uertere, to blame a thynge.
            
               In diſcrimine uerti, to be in daunger.
            
               In fugam uertere, to put to plyght.
            
               In rem ſuam uertere, to tourne it to his profytte.
            
               In relligionem uertere, to be ſcrupulouſe.
            
               Male uertit res paecuaria mihi, I am an ylle marchaunt of cattell, or I am vnlucky in byenge of cattell.
            
               Vertex, & vortex, ticis, a whyrlewynde. alſo a whirlepoole in a water, alſo the crowne or top of the hed alſo the top of euery thynge.
            Vertibulum, idem quod uertebra.
            
               Vertibula, a fyſhe called alſo vrtica.
            
            
               Verticulum, a wherue, which is a round thing ſet on a ſpyndell, to cauſe it to tourne.
            
               Verticillum, a lyttell wherue.
            
               Vertigo, ginis, a ſickeneſſe of the head, wherin it ſemeth to a man, that he ſeeth thynges tournynge.
            
               Vertigus, a whirlſnge about.
            
               Vertius, a man of great ſtrengthe.
            
               Vertunalia, the ſolemnitie of Vertunus, which was kepte in October.
            
               Vertunus, was called the god of byenge and ſellynge, it is ſometyme taken for the yere.
            
               Veru, a ſpytte or broche.
            
               Veruetius, a, um, lyke a ſhepe.
            
               Veruecinus, a, um, of a wether.
            
               Vernat, for circundat, it compaſſeth.
            
               Verutum, a caſtynge darte with a ſtrynge.
            
               Veruactum, the ſommer tylthe.
            
               Veruina, a longe darte or iauelyn.
            
               Veruculum, an inſtrument of goldſmithes like a lyttell broche.
            
               Veruex, uecis, a wether ſhepe.
            
               Verus, ra, rum, true, ſubſtancial, vncorrupted, good, iuſte, profytable.
            Veritas, tatis, truthe.
            
            
               Verum, an aduerbe, ſignifieth truely, alſo but
            
               Verumtamen, yet not withſtandynge.
            
               Veſanus, a, um, cruell, furious, wood.
            
               Veſania, fury, woodneſſe.
            
               Veſcor, ſceris, ſci, to eate, to vſe. Actius vſed it to ſee.
            
               Veſcus, ca, cum, euery thynge that maye be eaten, alſo lyttell or leane.
            
               Veſca, browſe, leaues, wheron beaſtes do fede in wynter.
            
               Veſſones, Champaine in Fraunce.
            Veſculus, a, um, very leane.
            
            
               Veſicaria, an herbe, whiche apothecaries doo call Alkakengi.
            
            
               Veſica, a bladder.
            
               Veſpae, they whiche do burie deade corſis.
            
               Veſpa, a waſpe.
            
               Veſper, the euenynge, or euentyde, alſo the euenynge ſterre.
            
               Veſper, ra, rum, of the euenynge.
            
               Veſperi, an aduerbe, ſignifienge late, at the ende of the daye.
            
               Veſpero, raré, to be euenynge.
            Veſperaſco, ſcere, idem.
            
               Veſperna, olde writers vſed for coena, ſupper.
            
               Veſpertilio, onis, a reremouſe or backe.
            
               Veſpertinus, na, num, that whiche is done in the euenynge.
            Veſperugo, ginis, idem quod ueſper.
            
               Veſpices, places thycke of buſhes.
            
               Veſpillo, onis, he that caryeth deade men to be buried.
            
               Veſta, the daughter of Saturnus, whiche for her chaſtitie was honoured for a goddeſſe, ſometyme it is taken for pure fyre.
            
               Veſtales, were virgins, whiche mynyſtred to Veſta, whiche were choſen betwene the age of .vi. yeres and ten yeres, and .xxx. yere they remayned virgines, afterwarde it was leful for them to marye.
            Veſter, tra, trum, your.
            
            
               Veſtiarium, a warderobe, wherin garmentes are layde.
            
               Veſtiarius, the yoman of the robes, or he that kepeth the warderobe.
            
               Veſtibulum, a voyde place without the doore where men do tary whyles they doo knocke and vntyll the doore be opened.
            
               Veſticeps, cipis, a yonge man, whiche begynneth to haue a berde.
            
               Veſtigabundus, he that ſeketh moche.
            
               Veſtigator, he that ſeketh for a thynge.
            
               Veſtigium, the prynte of a mannes fote in the
 grounde. It is taken alſo for a ſigne or token of any thynge that is done.
            
               Veſtigo, gare, to ſeke.
            
               Veſtimenta, a veſture or garment.
            
               Veſtini, people in Italye.
            
               Veſtio, iui, ire, to apparell, to adorne, to keuer.
            
               Veſtiplica, a mayden whiche layeth vp her mayſtreſſe garmentes.
            
               Veſtis, a veſture, a garment, ſometyme it is put for a berde.
            
               Veſtiſpicus, & ueſtiſpica, he or ſhe whiche kepeth theyr maiſters or maiſtres apparayle.
            
               Veſtiſsimus, a, um, beſt apparayled, beſt clad.
            Veſtitus, ta, tum, apparayled.
            
            Veſtitus, tus, apparayle.
            
            
               Veſtrapte, & veſtroptè, of your owne.
            Veſtras, tratis, yours.
            
            
               Veſulus, a mountayne in Ligurta by Alpes, at the rote wherof the riuer called Padus, or Po ſpryngeth out.
            
               Veſuuius, or Veſeuus, an hyll in Campania, foure myles from the citie of Naples, wheron groweth plenty of vynes and olyues, but the toppe therof is barayne, by reaſon of fire whiche ſometyme riſeth out of the erthe. it is alſo called Veſulus.
            
            Veter, olde. Veterior, ueterius, elder.
            
            Veterrimus, ma, mum, eldeſte.
            
            
               Veteramentarius, a coblar or botcher.
            Veteraneus, a, um, auncient.
            
            
               Veteranus, ſommetyme ſignifieth olde. Alſoo he that hadde ſerued a hole yere in the citie. ſomtime he that hath long contynued in warres, an olde ſouldiour.
            
               Veterator, oris, ueteratrix, a crafty begiler.
            
               Veteres, men of olde time paſſed.
            
               Veterina, beaſtes whiche do ſerue for burdeyn as horſes, mulettes, and aſſes.
            
               Ve, uide in Veh, Ve uobis, out vpon you, ſorowe come to you.
            
               Veterinarius, he that letteth to hyre horſes or mules.
            
               Veterinarius medicus, a horſeleche, or ferror.
            
               Veterinarius, a, um, belongynge to horſes and mules.
            
               Veternus, ſlepe without wakynge, alſo ſlouth or ſluggyſhenes, alſo to moche ſlepe.
            
               Veternoſus, he that ſlepeth to moche, ſluggiſh, ſlouthfull alſo he that hath the dropſy.
            Vetereſco, & ueteraſco, ſcere, to be olde.
            
            
               Vetero, rare, to make olde.
            Veto, tare, Veto, tere, to prohibite.
            
            
               Vetonica, an herbe called Betayne.
            
               Vetulonia, a place in Tuſcia, called alſo Viter bium. Veterbo.
            
            Vetulus, la, lum, a diminutiue of uetus.
            
               Vetus, teris, olde, auncient.
            
               Vetuſtas, age.
            
               Vetuſté, agedly.
            
               Vetuſteſco, ſcere, to be olde, to be the warſe for age.
            
               Vetereſco, ſcere, to be the better for age.
            Vetuſtus, ta, tum, olde.
            
            
               Veuina, a longe darte.
            
               Vexillarrius, & uexillifer, the baner bearer.
            
               Vexillum, a baner.
            
               Vexo, are, to vexe or trouble.
            
               Vexabundus, he that troubleth or vexeth other
            
               Vexatio, vexation
            
               Vexator & uexatrix, he or ſhe that vexith other
         
         
            ¶V ANTE I.
            
               
                  VIA, a way, a iourney, the maner, or meane cuſtome.
            
               Via militaris, the brode hyghe waye, for horſemen and fotemen.
            
               Viam munire, to make or repayre a waye.
            
               Viatica coena, banket gyuen to a man at his departynge.
            
               Viaticor, aris, ari, to prepare vytayles neceſſary for iourney.
            
               Viaticum, neceſſaries for iourney, be it in vittayle or other thyng, preparation for iorney.
            
               Viator, toris, a trauayler by the waye, a waye farynge man, whiche warneth men to aſſemble to counſayle, and ſerueth officers, to call men vnto them.
            
               Viatorius, a, um, perteyninge to the waye.
            
               Viatoria uaſa, veſſelles whiche do ſerue for iourneye.
            
               Vibex, bicis, a ſpotte remaynynge in the ſkyn, after beatynge.
            
               Vibratio, a brandyſhynge.
            
               Vibriſſae, heares in a mannes noſe.
            
               Vibriſſo, are, to quauer in ſingynge.
            
               Vibro, brare, to ſhake a thynge, or to make a thynge to ſhake or quauer.
            
               Viburnum, the ſprynge which commeth out of the rote of a tree.
            
               Vicani, men of the village.
            
               Vicarius, a, um, that whiche is in the ſteede or place of an other. Alſo the ſeruaunte of hym, whiche is a ſeruaunt.
            
               Vicariam operam impendere, to execute an other mannes offyce.
            
               Vicatim, in villages or ſtretes, alſo ſtreete by ſtrete, or vyllage by village.
            Vicem, uice, plurali, uices, uicibus, tyme and tymes.
            
            Per multas uices, multis uicibꝰ, many times.
            
            
               Vnica uice, ones. ſomtyme it ſignifyeth paynes. alſo peryll, ſometyme place. or ſtede.
            
               Fungar uice cotis, I wyll vſe it in the ſteede of a whetſtone.
            Vicenarius, a, um, the twentieth.
            
            
               Vicentia, a citie in Venetia, betwene Verona and Padua.
            
                Vicenus, a, um, twenty.
            
            
               Vicia, a certayne grayne, whiche lyke to a vine runneth vpon the ſtalkes of herbes, whiche do growe hye.
            
               Viciarium, the ſowynge of ſuche grayne.
            
               Vicies, twenty tymes.
            
               Vicinia, the neyghbourhede, whiche corruptly we call vicinetum.
            
            
               Vicinitas, tatis, nyghneſſe. ſometyme the multitude of neyghbours.
            
               Vicinus, a neyghbour.
            
               Viciſsatim, by tymes, by tournes.
            
               Viciſsim, by tourne, nowe one, nowe an other, ſometyme it ſignifieth on the other parte. ſometyme ſemblably.
            Viciſsitas, idem quod viciſsitudo.
            
               Viciſsitudo, dinis, the tourne, nowe one, nowe an other.
            
               Victima, the beaſt that is kylled in ſacrifyce.
            
               Victimarius, the mynyſter, whiche ſerueth to the ſacrifice. Alſo he whiche bought the ſacrifice to ſell it.
            
               Victito, tare, to lyue by eatynge certayn meate.
            
               Victor, toris, he that vanquyſheth.
            
               Victoria, victory.
            
               Victoriatus, a certayne coyne, wherein was the image of victory.
            
               Victorioſus, accuſtomed to haue victory.
            
               Victrix, plurali victricia, perteining to victory.
            
               Victrix, a woman that vanquiſheth.
            
               Victurus, the participle of the future tenſe, as well of Viuo, as of Vinco.
            
            
               Victus, tus, & uictuis, ſuſtinance or fedynge. Alſo a kynde or fourme of lyuynge.
            Victus, ta, tum, vanquyſhed.
            
            
               Vicus, a ſtrete in a towne. alſo a vyllage.
            
               Viculus, a lyttell ſtrete or village.
            
               Videlicet, as who ſaythe. ſometyme it ſignyfyeth ſurely.
            
               Video, di, dêre, to ſe. it is ſometyme applyed to other ſences, as Vide qualis eſt ſonus, Here what a noyſe it is. Vide quid oleat, Smell wherof it ſauoureth. Vide 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   durum ſit, Fele howe hard it is. Alſo it ſignifyeth to take hede or conſider, to prouide. Vide tibi, prouide for thy ſelfe. Tu uideris, loke therto, well, take good hede, for I care not for it.
            
               Videro, I wyll prouide.
            
               Videor, I remember me well.
            
               Videre uideor, me thinketh I ſee.
            
               Videtur mihi, me ſemeth.
            
               Viden for Vides ne
                     •
                  
                doeſt thou not ſee?
            
               Vidua, a wydowe.
            
               Viduertas, calamitie or miſery.
            
               Viduitas, wydowhedde, lacke of thynges neceſſary.
            
               Vidulum, wherin any thynge is kepte.
            
               Viduo, d
                     •
                  are, to dyuyde or take awaye, to leaue alone.
            Viduus, a, um, diuided alone.
            
            
               Vienna, a Citie in Auſtria, an other in Dolpheny.
            
               Vieo, êre, to bende, to bynde.
            
               Vietor, toris, a couper, whiche with howpes byndeth veſſelles.
            
               Vietus, ta, tum, ſofte, weake, bendynge.
            
               Vietus, a howpe, or ſtrake of a carte.
            
               Vigeo, gui, gêre, to lyue, to be ſtronge, to thryue in growynge.
            Vigeſimae, as decimae.
            Vigeſimarium aurum, idem.
            Vigeſimus, ma, mum, the twentieth.
            
            
               Vigil, lis, watchful, vigilante. alſo a watchman
            
               Vigilans, tis, vigilant, watchefulle, diligente, circumſpecte.
            
               Vigilanter, watchefully, diligently, vigylantly, circumſpectly.
            
               Vigilantia, vigilanci, diligence.
            
               Vigiliae, watches, as well by day as by night. ſometyme the men whiche do watche.
            
               Vigilo, are, to wake, or watche, to be vygylant, or very diligente. alſo to here diligently alſo to take peyne. Vigilare, decet hominem qui uult ſua tempori conficere officia, a man muſte take peyne, that wyll finyſhe his buſynes in tyme conuenient.
            
               Vigiſonus, a broke by the citie of Padua.
            
               Viginti, twenty.
            
               Vigor, goris, ſtrength, force.
            Vigoroſus, a, um, ſtronge, firme.
            
            
               Vilis, le, vile, of no value. alſo good chepe, of lyttell price.
            
               Vileo, & uileſco, ſcere, to be vile, or of ſmal or none eſtimation of price.
            
               Vilitas, good chepe, contrary to derthe.
            
               Viliter, an aduerbe, ſignifienge cheape.
            
               Vilito, tare, to make cheape.
            
               Villa, a manour out of a citie or towne. alſo a vyllage.
            
               Villanus, a man of the village.
            Villaris, re, & Villaticus, ca, cum, perteyning to the village.
            
            
               Villico, & uillicor, aris, ari, to be occupyed aboute huſebandrye, to haue the rule of huſebandrye.
            
               Villicatio, occupation about huſebandry. Alſo the rule of huſebandry vnder the owner.
            
               Villicus, & uillico, a bailiffe of huſebandry.
            
               Villula, a lyttell village.
            
               Villum, ſmall wyne.
            
               Villus, heare.
            
               Vimen, minis, roddes, whiche wyll wynde lyghtly, wherof baſkettes are made.
            
               Vimineus, a, um, wyckers, wyndinge roddes or oſyars.
            
               Viminalis, le, apte to wynde.
            
               Viminalis collis, a lyttell hyll at Rome.
            
               Vinacea, kernelles of grapes.
            
                
               Vndo, are, to ryſe in wawes.
            
               Vndoſum mare, a troublous ſea, and fulle of wawes.
            
               Vndulata ueſtis, chamlet, or a garmēt wrought as it were with ryuers.
            
               Vndula, a lyttell wawe.
            
               Vnguentum, & ungentum, a ſwete oyntment. it is vſurped for euery oyntment.
            
               Vngues, muſkyls.
            Vngo, unxi, ungere, to annoynt.
            
            
               Vnguen, nis, oyntement, or any thynge that is facry.
            
               Vnguentaria, the craft to make oyntmentes.
            
               Vnguentarius, a maker of ſwete oyntmentes.
            ❀Vngues arrodere, to gnaw on his nayles, Aprouerbe applyed to them, whiche are in a ſtudy, howe they may alter ſuche thynges as they do repent them of.
            
               Vnguicula, a lyttell ſofte nayle. A teneris unguiculis, from his tender youth or infancy.
            
               Vnguis, a nayle of the fyngars or toes. it is alſoo a dyſeaſe whyche at lengthe couereth all the eye with fleſſhe in the corner of the eye. It is in an hors takē of Hierocles for an haw in the eye.
            
               Vnguis, in a roſe is the white and thycke part of the flowre, next the toppe of the ſtalke.
            
               Vngula, a howfe of a horſe, or other beaſt.
            
               Omnibus ungulis, with al myght and power
            
               Vngulatus, he that hath fowle great nayles.
            
               Vngulum, of olde wryters was taken for a rynge.
            
               Vngularius, a great nayle and ragged.
            
               Vnguſtus, a croked ſtaffe, or ſuche as cōmonly men doo calle a croke, wherwith they drawe to them any thynge.
            
               Vnicalamum frumentum, wheate, which hath but one rede growyng out of the roote.
            
               Vnicallis, an herbe which hath but oone ſtalke without any braunches.
            
               Vnicè, onely.
            
               Vnicolor, oris, of one colour.
            
               Vnicornis, Vnicornius, & Vnicorniū, a beaſte callyd an vnycorne.
            
               Vnicuba, a woman which lyeth or companieth but with one man.
            Vnicus, ca, cum, one alone.
            
            
               Vnigenitus, one chylde without mo.
            
               Vn
                     ••
                  gae uineae, vynes in the whiche vppon the proppes beyng ſet vp, ſundry rayles are laide on the one ſyde.
            
               Vnio, iui, ire, to ioyne togyther.
            
               Vnio, onis, concorde. ſometyme a perle.
            
               Vnioculus, he that hath but one eye.
            
               Vnipes, pedis, hauynge but one foote.
            Vnitas, tatis, vnitie.
            
            
               Vnitio, a ioynyng togyther.
            
               Vnitus, ta, tum, ioyned togyther in one.
            Vniuerſalis, le, vnyuerſall.
            
            
               Vniuerſipotens, he that hath power ouer all.
            
               Vniuerſipotentia, power ouer all.
            
               Vniuerſitas, vniuerſitie or generalite.
            
               Vniuerſus, a, um, vnyuerſall, ſomtyme it ſygnifieth all, or the hole.
            
               Vniuira, a woman hauyng but one huſbande.
            
               Vniuocum, that whyche ſygnyfieth but oone thynge.
            
               Vniuocè, of the ſame ſygnification.
            
               Vnoſe, olde wryters vſed for ſimul, togither.
            
               Vnni, Hungariens.
            
               Vn
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                  , any tyme.
            
               Vnus, na, num, one, alſo alone.
            
               Vnus & alter, both, nowe one, nowe an other.
            Vnuſquilibet, Vnuſquiſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , Vnaque
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , Vnumquod
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , eueryche.
            
            
               Vnis aedibus, in the ſame houſe.
            
               Vno animo, of one accorde.
            
               Vnus quiuis, who ſo euer thou wylte.
            
               Vni ſex dies, ſyxe dayes contynuall.
            
               Vno ictu, at one ſtroke.
            
               Vno uerbo, at one worde.
            
               Vnum, one thynge.
            Vnus ex multis, Vnus ex omnibus, one alone, onely.
            
         
         
            ¶V ANTE O.
            
               VOberca, a towne by Bilbo in Spayne.
            
               Vocabulum, the denomination of any thynge.
            
               Vocalis, le, loude. alſo that which hath a voyce alſo a vowell.
            
               Vocalitas, a tune or ſounde of a voyce.
            
               Vocatio, a callynge.
            
               Vocator, a caller.
            
               Vociferatio, a crienge out.
            
               Vociferator, he that crieth out.
            
               Vociferor, aris, ari, to cry out, to crye lowde.
            Vocifero, idem.
            
               Vocito, to calle often.
            
               Voco, care, to calle, to bydde, to aſke.
            
               Me ad Democritum uocas, thou doeſt allege Democritus, and woldeſte haue me to beleue hym.
            
               Ad calculos uocare, to calle one to accompt.
            
               Ad exemplar alterius uocare, to exhorte one to folowe the example of an other man.
            
               In diſcrimen uocare, to put in daunger.
            
               In ius uel in iuditium uocare, to accuſe one openly: to brynge an action agaynſt one.
            
               Voconia, a kynde of peares.
            
               Vocula, a lyttell voyce, ſometyme obloquy.
            
               Voculatio, an accent in ſpeche.
            
               Vola, the myddes of the hande or the foote. it is taken for the ſoole of the foote.
            
               Volaticus, ca, cum, that whyche flyeth or goth away ſodeynly, flyttynge.
            
                
               Volatilis, le, that whych can flye.
            Volatus, & uolatura, a flyght.
            
            
               Volema, a great peare, a wardyn.
            
               Volens, wyllynge.
            
               Volenter, wyllyngely.
            
               Volentia, wylle.
            
               Voliba, a towne in Cornewayle callyd Bodmyn.
            
               Volito, tare, to flye often.
            
               Volo, are, to flye, to rounne or goo quyckely, or faſte.
            Volo, uis, uolui, uelle, to wylle.
            
            
               Volo tuam gratiam, I deſyre your fauour.
            
               Volo te, I wolde ſpeake with the.
            
               Volones, were bondemen at Rome, whiche in the warres of Carthage, whan there lacked Romayns, offered theym ſelues to fyghte for theyr mayſters, and bycauſe they dyd it wyllyngly without conſtraynt or callyd, therfore they were callyd Volones.
            
            
               Volſella, an inſtrument to plucke heares from the body or face.
            Volua, for uulua.
            
               Volubilis, le, that whiche is eaſyly tourned.
            
               Volubilis, is an herbe, whyche rounneth vppe by trees, hauynge redde braunches, and the leaues bytynge and blyſterynge the tungue.
            
               Volucer, cri, ſwyfte, lyght.
            
               Volucra, a beaſte, whyche eateth the tender vynes.
            
               Volucres, byrdes, fowles.
            
               Volucrior, more ſwyfte.
            
               Volucris, cre, all thynges that doth flye.
            
               Volucrum, the after byrthe in a woman.
            
               Volumen, minis, a booke. ſometyme part of a boke, callyd a volume.
            Voluntarius, a, um, voluntary, wyllyng.
            
            Voluntas, tatis, wylle.
            
            
               Voluo, uere, to wrappe, to tourne.
            
               Voluox, & uoluola, idem quod Conuoluolus, a lytell wourme with many legges, whiche eateth the leaues of vynes, and of other trees.
            Volup, for uoluptas.
            
               Volupe, delectable.
            
               Volupia, & Voluptia, goddeſſe of voluptie or delectation.
            
               Voluptabilis, le, that whiche reioyceth.
            
               Voluptaria loca, places of pleaſure.
            
               Voluptas, tatis, an inordynate reioycyng or delectation in thynges worldly or carnall.
            
               Voluptatem magnam nuncias, thou telleſte me good tydynges.
            
               Spero f
                     ••
                  e nobis hanc coniunctionem uoluptati, I truſte that this alyaunce ſhall be to our comforte.
            
               Voluptatem eius capio, I take greate pleaſure in hym.
            
               Voluptuarius, & uoluptarius, he that is gyuen to carnall delectation.
            
               Voluptuoſus, a, um, voluptuouſe, vnſaciable in carnall pleaſure or delectation.
            
               Voluta, that whyche karuers and paynters doo call drapery & cylery, wrought lyke cloth or leaues tourned dyuers wayes.
            
               Volutabrum, a place where ſwyne do walowe.
            
               Volutabundus, walowyng, tournyng, toſſyng in the mynde.
            
               Volutatim, an aduerbe ſygnifyenge, eftſoones toſſynge in the mynde.
            
               Voluto, tare, to tourne lyenge, to walowe, to reuolue and toſſe in the mynde.
            
               Vomer, meris, the culter of a plowgh.
            
               Vomica, a rotten impoſtume, whereout rounneth matter.
            
               Vomitus, vomyte.
            Vomitio, idem.
            
               Vomo, mui, mere, to vomyte or parbreake.
            
               Vopiſcus, where two chyldren are conceyued, and one of them is abort, he that commeth to perfyte byrth is callyd Vopiſcus. It was alſo the name of oone that wrate the lyues of emperours.
            Vopte, for Vosipſi.
            
               Voraciter, lyke a glutton.
            
               Vorago, ginis, a ſwolowe or gulfe.
            
               Voro, rare, to ſwolowe downe meate ere it be chewed. alſo to eate gredyly.
            
               Vorax, racis, a glutton.
            
               Voracitas, gluttony.
            Vorſura, for uerſura.
            ❀Vorſurā ſoluere, a prouerb applied to them that ſo dyſcharge theym ſelues of one buſyneſſe, that they enter into an other more peynfull or daungerous.
            Vortex, for uertex.
            
               Vortumnalia, a ſolempne feaſte to the god Vortumnus.
            
            
               Vos, you.
            
               Votiuus, ua, uum, that whyche is vowed. alſo deſyred.
            
               Votiua uerba, uotiuae praeces, wordes and prayers, wherin we deſyre ſomewhat.
            
               Votum, a vowe, ſometyme a deſyre.
            
               Votiuae aures, eares whyche deſyre to heare.
            
               Votium, olde wryters vſed for uetitum.
            
            
               Voto, & uotito, to make auowe.
            
               Voti compos, he that hath that whyche he deſyred.
            
               Voueo, ui, uere, to vowe, or make a vowe.
            
               Vox, uocis, a voyce.
            
               Voce aſſa, with the voyce onely of a manne without any inſtrument of muſyke.
         
         
            ¶V ANTE P.
            ❀Vpupa, a lapwynk or blacke plouer.
         
         
            
            ¶Z ANTE E.
            
               ZEa, a kynde of wheate.
            Zelo, are, & zelor, lari, for aemulari.
            
               Zelor, aris, ri, to be angry, or to haue zele
            
               Zelotes, for aemulator, he that hath enuye at one, or aſſayeth to folowe an other in liuing.
            
               Zelotypia, ialowſye.
            
               Zelotypus, ialowſe.
            
               Zelus, ſometyme enuy, ſometyme loue, ſometyme emulation.
            
               Zenobia, a quene of Siria, whiche in greeke and latyne was very well lerned, and was al ſo valyaunt in armes.
            
               Zephyrus, the weſte wynde.
            
               Zeros, a kynde of chriſtall, which hath ſpottes white and blacke.
            
               Zeta, & Zetacula, a littell chamber for one bed and two ſtoles, ioyned to an other chamber, with courtaines, ſoo that the courtaines beinge drawen, it made but one chaumber. and hauynge windowes on thre partes therof to receyue in the heate of the ſonne.
            
               Zenith, is a word belongynge to coſmography and ſignifyeth a poynte in the firmament directely ouer the crowne of a mannes heade where ſo euer he be.
            
               Zereth, an hebrewe meaſure whiche is an handbrede.
            
               Zeugma, a fygure, wherby many ſentences ar ioyned together with one verbe, as, Ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   is es Catlina, ut te, aut pudor à turpitudine, aur metus à periculo, aut ratio a furore reuocarit, Ne thou art ſuche a man Catilyne, as eyther ſhamefaſtneſſe can withdrawe from diſhoneſtie, or feare frome daunger, or reaſon from vengeable angre.
            
               Zeuſis, an excellent paynter, which ſo paynted a boy caryeng grapes, that byrdis cam to the table and pecked on the grapes, wenyng that they had ben very grapes, which Zeuſis beholdynge, was with him ſelfe angrye, and ſayde. If I had made the boye as well as I haue done the grapes, the birdes durſte not haue come ſo nyghe to the grapes.
            
               Zeus, a fyſhe taken about Calis in Spayne, whiche is blacke, but he is very delycate.
         
         
            ¶Z ANTE I.
            
               ZIgena, a fyſhe of the ſea.
            
               Zigari, people, whiche we do call Egiptians, that wander about in euery realme and be horrible theues.
            
               Zigarum, the countrey from whenſe the ſayde people do come.
            
               Zizania, cockle w
                  ••
               che groweth in corne.
            
               Zinziber, gynger.
         
         
            ¶Z ANTE O.
            
               ZOdiacus, a cercle 
                  〈◊〉
                heuen, wherin 
                  〈◊〉
                the .xii. ſygnes.
            
               Zographia, the pyctur
                  ••
                of beaſtes.
            
               Zoilus, was a poete, which enu
                  ••
                Homerus, and therfore the enuiers of well 
                  •••
               ned men are called Zoili.
            
            
               Zoelicum, certayne flaxe, that commet
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                of Spayne, wherof threde is made for n
                  •
               tt
                  •
                to take byrdes.
            
               Zomos, gruell.
            
               Zona, a gyrdell.
            
               Zonatim, in compaſſe aboute.
            
               Zopiſſa, pitche taken from ſhyppes whiche being tempred with waxe and ſalte, is of more efficacie than other pitche.
            
               Zopyron, an herbe, whiche ſome do ſuppoſe to be Pulyol mountayne.
            
               Zopyrus, was a manne, whiche by phiſnomye knewe euery mannes condicions. And whan in beholdyng Socrates he iudged hym to be vnthrifty, and therfore was ſcorned of many men. Socrates anſwered, Zopyrus is not deceyued, for in dede I had ben ſuche one as he ſayth, if I had not by philoſophy ſubdued nature. Alſo Zopirus was a noble Perſian, ſeruaunt to Darius, whiche whan the citie of Babylon rebelled agaynſt king Darius, and that he had made longe warre▪ and could not ſubdue them, vnwares to any man, did cutte of his owne noſe, and wounded him ſelfe, & fled to Babylon, ſayinge, the kynge had ſoo diſfygured hym, bycauſe that he perſwaded hym to haue peace with the Babylonians, whiche they herynge, made him theyr chiefe capitain. Than by lyttel and lyttel declaring to them the ſtrength of the kynge, and howe they mought not indudure long agaynſt him at the laſte he cauſed them to ſubmit them ſelues to the kynge, and to receyue him into the citie. Wherfore Darius was wont to ſaye, that he hadde leauer haue one Zopyrus than twenty Babylons.
            
               Zoroanda, a ryuer, whiche the great water of Tigris maketh on the one ſyde of the mountayne Taurus.
            
               Zoroaſtes, the fyrſte fynder of Magike.
         
         
            ¶Z ANTE V.
            ¶Zura, bearies of white thorne.
         
         
            ¶Z ANTE Y.
            ¶Zygia, a pipe, wherin men dyd play at weddynges.
            
               Zythus, drynke made with barley ſodden. It may be taken for ale or biere.
            ☞ FINIS DICTIONARII. ❧
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  LVCRECIA ROMANA
                  THOMAS BERTHELETVS
               
            
            
               ❧ LONDINI ❧ IN OFFICINA THOMAE BERTHELETI TYPIS IMPRES. CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM. ANNO M.D.XLII. ❧
            
            
               
               
               
                  Circle divided into four quarters with geometrical alphabetical markings.
               
            
         
      
   