
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ A PROCLAMATION concernyng eatyng of vvhite meates, made the .III. day of February, the .XXXIII yere of the reygne of the kynges moſt royall maieſty.
            
               
                  FOR AS MOCHE as by dyuers and ſundry occaſyons, as well hearryng, tynges, ſaltfyſh, ſamond, ſtockfyſhe, as other kindes of fyſhe, ben this yere ſkaut, and alſo enhanced in price
                  •
                about the old rate and comen eſtimatiō of their valour: ſo that if the kynges louynge ſubiectes ſhulde be enforced onely to bye and prouyde hearrynge and other ſalte ſtore of fyſſhe, for the neceſſary and ſufficient ſuſtentation and mayntenaunce of their houſholdes and families, all this holy tyme of Lent, accordyng as they haue ben wont in times paſt to do, & ſhuld not be by ſome other conuenient meanes releued therin, the ſame myght and ſhuld vndoutedly redounde to their importable charge and detryment. And for as moche as his highneſſe conſidereth, howe this kynde and maner of faſtynge, that is to ſaye, to abſteyne from mylke, butter, egges, cheſe, and all other white meates, is but a mere poſytiue lawe of the Churche, and vſed by a cuſtome within this realme, and of none other ſorte or neceſſitie, but the ſame may be, vpon good conſiderations and groundes, altered and diſpenſed with from tyme to tyme by the publike auctority of kinges and princes, whan ſo euer they ſhal perceiue the ſame to tende to the hurt and damage of their people. THE KYNGES hyghneſſe therfore moſt graciouſely conſideryng and tenderyng the welth and cōmoditie of his people, hath thought good, for the conſyderations aboue reherſed, to releaſe and diſpence with the ſayde lawe and cuſtome of abſteynynge from white meates this holy time of Lent, And of his eſpecial grace and mere motion gyueth and graunteth vnto al and ſingular his ſubiectes within this his realme of England, Wales, Cales, Guy
                  •
               es, Hammes, and in all other his graces dominions, free lyberty, faculty, and licence, to eate all maner of white meates, as mylke, egges, butter, cheſe, and ſuche lyke, durynge the tyme of this Lent, without any ſcruple or grudge of conſcience: any lawe, conſtitution, vſe, or cuſtome to the contrary notwithſtandynge. Wherin neuer the leſſe his hyghnes exhorteth, and in the name of god requireth, all ſuch his faythfull ſubiectes, as may, wol, or ſhall enioy this his ſayd graunte or faculty, that they be in no wyſe ſcruple or doubtefull therof, nor abuſe or tourne the ſame in to a fleſhly or carnall liberty: but rather endeuour them ſelfes to their poſſible powers with this libertie of eatynge of white meates, to obſerue alſo that faſt, whiche god moſt ſpecially requireth of them: That is to ſay, to renounce the world and the deuyl, with al their pompes and workes, and alſo to ſubdewe and repreſſe their carnal affections, and the corrupt workes of their fleſſhe, accordinge to their vowe and profeſſion made at the font ſtone. For in theſe poyntes ſpecially conſiſteth the very true and perfyt abſtinence and faſtinge of a Chriſten man.
            GOD SAVE THE KYNGE. ▸

                  ❧ Tho Berthelet
regius impreſſor excudebat. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
   