
      
         
            
            
            Le franc Diſcours.
            A Diſcourſe, preſented of late to the French King, in aunſwer of ſundry requeſts made vnto him, for the reſtoring of the Ieſuits into Fraunce, as well by theyr friends abroad, & at home, as by themſelues in diuers Petitionarie Bookes.
            Written in French this preſent yeere, 1602. and faithfully Engliſhed.
            Printed Anno. Domini. 1602.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To all true Catholicks and other her Maieſties louing Subiects.
            THE Printer ſaith, we must be ſhort: briefelie therefore thus. The reports which the Ieſuits giue out amongst their adherents: do in ſome points not much diſpleaſe vs. Though we cannot haue (if they proue true) what we deſired: yet haue we ſo much, as makes their harts to groane. We are (as they ſay) acquit in Rome frō ſchiſme. Burne then your booke Ma. Lyſter: which you writ against vs. Tichborne, Hadddock, Aray, or whoſoeuer gaue information, that we were cōdemned in Rome for Schiſmaticks, to ſpeake plaine Engliſh, lyed. And you R. Archpt Garnet, Iones, & all the ſort of you, bluſh for ſhame: (it is ſome ſigne of grace) in that you were ſo peremptory, to lay ſo falſe an imputation vpō vs. It appeareth now, that you ſhewed therein neither iudgement, nor learning: but what ſpight, & malice, let the world iudge. But more particulerly to you Ma. Archp: Is it not reaſon, that you ſhould with teares bewaile

your raſhnes: in condemning the cenſure of Paris? It is ſomthing, that you haue ſo groſſe a foyle: but that is not ſufficient. What iniurie alſo haue you done to your Canoniſts, whoſe testimonies you peruerted triūphantly? Could neither your owne reading, nor your deere Fathers illuminations, theyr familiaritie vvith GOD, the companions of Ieſus, better direct you? Behold (good Readers) your Apoſtles, your Masters, your Pilots, your Leaders.
            Our faculties are iudged (as we alſo heare) to haue beene validae ab initio, ſufficient from the beginning, that first we receiued them. Repent then in like maner Ma. Prouinciall. Your words were blaſphemous, when you writ: that it was ſin to intreate vs, or helpe vs to ſay maſſe: and that they, who ſhould receiue the Sacrament at our hands, ſeemed to receiue povſon. How ridiculous alſo haue then your featherleſſe bolts beene (Ma. Archp:) which full blindly (God knoweth) you haue ſhot about in euery corner at vs? Many Edicts, and prohibitions you haue publiſhed Magiſtraliter to vexe vs: but with more boldnes, then diſcretion, as now you may ſee. And for you Ma. Parſons: hath he ſo indeed? Durst his holines checke you? Could not the Spaniſh Embaſſadors preuent ſuch a diſgrace? But

hold vp your head man. Though our Archp: ſhall be no more bound (as they ſay) to depend vpon your lips: yet you knowe him to be a truſtie Roger vnto you, and your crue. What he was before commaunded to doe, hee will now performe of his owne accord. As good neuer a whit, as neuer the better: as long as he ſitteth at the helme.
            
               Yea, (but ſay you) my Maiſters: who muſt ſtill gouerne the Seminaryes? Wee hope we ſhall curbe you well enough. Beſides, my children, or ſubiects, the fellowes of Ieſus, ſhall remaine amongſt you in ſpight of your harts. Good wordes Father, Christ Ieſus, and your broode, fellow and fellow-like? Good fellewes, wee aſſure you. But must you gouerne ſtill our Seminaryes? Keepe thē your children from them, deere Catholicks: except you intende purpoſely to haue them trayned vp in treaſon, if they may haue their wills. You muſt remaine amongſt vs. We are hartilie ſorrie for it: and that in two respects. First, becauſe you are theyr mediate head: and ſuch a head, as we ſuspect is either mad, or lately become addle. Why man: what meane you, by the Propoſitiōs ſent vs lately out of France? You haue forſooth a Reformation in hand: whereunto the Counſell of Trent muſt yeeld

homage. All must be ſquared to the Apostles times. It is well ſaid good Fryer. The apportioning of euery Clergie mans part, to liue vppon: commeth within the Rules of your newe diſcipline. And what then ſhall become of his holines estate? Must hee haue no larger a portion, to maintaine him with, then S. Peter had? Blocks (you will ſay:) I onely ſpeake of England. By your good fauour Ma. Fryer, you alſo affirme, that after you haue doone your pleaſure in England: all other churches elſwhere, muſt conforme themſelues to ours. Certainly, the man is either not well in his wits: or els wee ſhall haue R. P. ſhortlie transformed into T. C. But of theſe points, you ſhall heare more before it be long. Secondly: how many Ieſuits of your humour in England, ſo many vaſſals & ſworne friends to the King of Spayne: and conſequently ſo many enemies to her Maiestie, her state, and kingdome: nay wee know not, how many els wee may ioyne with them, Ieſuited ſeculer priests, lay Ieſuits, and all other Catholicks, that will be aduiſed by them, and follow theyr precepts. But must you remaine heere? tell vs truly: Indeede wee feared as much. And therefore we thought it our duties, to acquaint both you (good Readers) and all the rest of her Maiesties true

ſubiects (be their religiō otherwiſe how it ſhal) with the Ieſuits Catechiſme (lately publiſhed) & with this preſent Treatiſe: that ſeeing wee cannot preuaile, to haue them all called hence, wee might make it apparant to all (that wil not hoodwinke themſelues wilfully) what is to be looked for at their hands. A Ieſuit is a Ieſuit, whereſoeuer he become. Neyther may England expect leſſe, then France hath felt: if they continue amongst vs, and be not better hamperd, then yet they are. We wiſh, and deſire with our harts, that all true harted Engliſhmen, and eſpecially they, who are in authoritie, will be pleaſed to conſider ſeriouſly of the things, which wee haue written tending to this purpoſe: and withall (for this time) to reade and obſerue (if not this whole diſcourſe yet) the 85. 86. 87. 88. 89. pages thereof. GOD preſerue this Realme from their Spaniſh deſignements: her Maieſtie frō their Clements, Barrieres, and Ehuds, of the Ieſuiticall inſpiration: the good eſtate of the Catholick church from their franticke deformations: vs poore ſecular prieſts from their malitious practiſes: and you all true Catholicks from the leauen of ſuch Phariſees. Amen.
            
               Yours to doe you faithfull ſeruice in our functions.
            
         
         
            
            The Errata.
            
               PAge 44, line 8, for of our Nation, read of their Nation.
            
               Page 82, line 25, for Bull, reade Libell.
            
               Page 85, line 6, for Spaniard, reade Sauoyan.
            
               Page 108, line 1, for proue, reade procure.
            
               Page 112, line, 21. read gloried in it, & ſince their baniſhment alſo, as hath &c.
            
               Page 130, line 23, reade haue of the murther of our late, &c.
         
      
      
         
            
            A free, and faithfull Diſcourſe, written to the King, touching the Restoring of the Ieſuits, which is ſo earneſtly ſought, and ſued for at his hands.
            
               THE many Petitions ſundry vviſe preſented vnto your Maieſtie in fauour of the Ieſuits, and the many reaſons alledged vnto you againſt them, cannot but breed in your mind much doubt, and diſtraction. Vppon this ground I conceiued, that it might be ſome contentation to your Highneſſe, to ſee in briefe what I haue layd downe on either part, ſtepping ouer many poynts of ſmall moment, and inſiſting onely vppon ſuch as are of weight, & able to moue the hart of a mightie Prince in a cauſe of high importance, & requiring preſent and ſpeedie reſolution.
            It is moſt true (my gracious Soueraigne) that by reſtoring the Ieſuits, you ſhall giue great contentment to a number of Catholicks

within your Realme, who eſteeme them men of ſpeciall vſe and ſeruice for the rooting vp of theſe Newe opinions in Religion, and moreouer binde and aſſure vnto you, the greateſt part of my Lords the Cardinalls, who much fauour, and affect them as for ſundry other reſpects, ſo eſpeciallie in regard of their exceeding trauailes vndertaken for the ſpreading, and enlargement through the whole world as well of the Catholicke Religion, as of the power, and authoritie of the Holy Sea. They are men fit for action, induſtrious, vigilant, & valiant, to whom the Pulpit reſts greatly indebted for comming in ſo dangerous, and troubleſome a ſeaſon.
            Theſe are the mayne, and principall reaſons, which may ſway your Maieſtie on the one ſide; as for that poynt, which is alledged touching their Instructing of youth, it deſerues not almoſt to be thought vpon: in as much as (all thinges rightly weighed) they haue in truth done more hurt, then good to learning. My reaſon is this in a word.
            Before theyr comming into Fraunce, all the wits of beſt hope, all the youth of beſt breeding, were alwaies brought vp in the Vniuerſitie of Paris, where were ſeene continually

twentie, or thirtie thouſand ſtudents between French & Forrainers. This famous multitude drew thether all the excellent Schollers, all the notable men of Europe, ſome to ſhew themſelues, others to benefit themſelues. The publique Lectures founded by Frauncis the firſt, were for ten yeeres before their comming ſued for, and ſupplied by the worthieſt Schollers of thoſe times. At that time were read in the Colledge of Cambray alone, more excellent & learned Lectures in one month, then haue beene ſince in a whole yeere throughout all the Vniuerſitie, taking the Ieſuits alſo into the number. Who finding meanes to plant themſelues by degrees in all the chiefe Citties of the Realme, haue thereby intercepted & cut off the ſprings, from whence iſſued this great multitude of ſtudents, & therewithall quite extinguiſht an other eſſential good, which ſpred it ſelfe to all the young frie, that were brought vp at Paris, who grewe to more puritie of ſpeech, ciuilitie of manners, and conformitie of minde to the geneall ſtate and gouernment, then ſince that time they haue done, neuer ſetting foote out of theyr ſeuerall Countries.
            
               
One poynt more, I muſt not forget, which was likewiſe noted by the Vniuerſitie of Padua, in their Complaint exhibited in anno 91. againſt the Ieſuits, before the Signiorie of Venice, at which time they were inhibited to read to any, but thoſe of their own Societie: the poynt is this. That the maine ſcope of their owne ſtudies beeing Diuinitie, they vſe to ſubſtitute ouer all theyr Formes (the firſt onely excepted) none but young Punies, fitter (God wot) to be taught, then to teach: inſomuch as our youth continuing vntill 15. or 16. vnder the hands of ſuch rawe, and ignorant fellowes ſildome or neuer growe to be of anie eminent note, or attaine (as we ſee) to any excellencie in their profeſſions. This was apparantly prooued in anno 94. what time the 
                  Ʋniuerſity preferd their Complaint againſt them. They endeuoured to finde out ſome worthy Lawyer, of theyr owne Schollers, to whom they might commit the Defence of theyr cauſe: (which might perhaps haue beene ſome helpe to theyr matter) they founde out a number as well young practitioners, as auncient Pleaders, who had been trained vp in their ſchooles, but not a man of them all thought able to

ſuſtaine the burden of ſo weighty a cauſe: and in the end, they were faine to haue recourſe to another, without doubt, an excellent Lawyer, but neuer any Scholler of theirs. They bring vp their Schollers, rather to contemplation, then to ſtudie, and action. Likewiſe for Phyſicke, a learned profeſſion, and full of deepe knowledge, how many rare men do we ſee of this profeſſion, that haue been their Schollers? As for Humanitie, and the myſterie of the tongues, therein are they leſſe conuerſant. Will you haue the truth, their proper element is Diuinitie, that's their Facultie, that's their field: therein are they expert: and to that purpoſe they cull out in the very bud, the moſt pregnant & ſharp wits, & looke who once comes vnder their fingers, hardly gets away againe: by meanes whereof, their Order becomes a confuſion of ſeuerall nations: moreouer, they take a courſe to helpe and further one another, and by cōference to haue vſe of one anothers ſtudies: In concluſion all the world muſt acknowledge them to be kings in this Facultie, the Queene of all Faculties.
            
            In ſaying that they are not skild in the depth, & myſterie of the Tongues, my meaning

is not to denie, but that in their number may be found men of ſome reaſonable knowledge in Humanitie, but this I ſay, that we may not looke to finde amongſt them any, comparable to thoſe foure ornaments of Fraunce, the peeres of learning, ſo acknowledged, and confeſt ouer the whole world, of whom there are three yet liuing, and the fourth alſo ſuruiues in his better part. All the Ieſuits that euer were, are ſcarce worthy to be accounted ſo much as Schollers to any one of theſe foure, and I am certaine the wiſer ſort of them wil confeſſe as much: mary their aunſwere wil be, that it is not their ſtudie; & that the mark they ayme at, is Diuimtie, as in truth it is.
            Furdermore we are to obſerue, that thoſe amongſt them, who attaine to any extraordinarie knowledge that way, buſie not their braines any longer with the Instructing of youth, but preſently betake thēſelues to the ſtudie of Diuinitie, wherein beeing prompted, and aſsiſted by the beſt paines of the greateſt men amongſt them, they fall a practizing with theyr pennes: and do good ſeruice (we muſt cōfeſſe) for the maintenaunce of our Catholicke Religion againſt the writings of our Aduerſaries.
            
            
               
And certainly this plentifull number of theirs, hath yeelded ſome one or two excellent in this kinde, who flouriſh in an elegant phraſe, a confident ſtile, lofty paſsions, good methode, and a thouſand pleaſing poynts of Art: in concluſion (if I bee able to iudge) the two Petitions by them preſented to your Maieſtie, are two exquiſite peeces, wherein whatſoeuer our great Maiſters of the Art of Rhetoricke, haue left in precept, is carefully put in practile. To giue thē theyr due, I ſee not howe their cauſe could haue beene better defended.
            As then it cannot be doubted, but that their painfull endeuours in the ſtudie of Diuinitie, haue incenſed thoſe of the pretended Reformed Religion againſt them, ſo can it not be denied, but that there are diuers things not in their actions only, but euen in their doctrine it ſelfe, which make them odious to many good Catholicks, euery way as ſounde, and zealous as themſelues. I will inſiſt onely vpon one poynt (for I may not abuſe your Princely audience) but ſuch a poynt as is well vvoorthy your audience, none more worthy, in as much as your whole ſtate depends theron.
            
               
It may pleaſe your Maieſtie to vnderſtand, that amongſt the Sorbonists there haue ſtept foorth at times, yet but ſildome times, ſome who beeing ouerſwayed, and carried away by the colourable reaſons of thoſe, who at Rome haue publiſht Treatiſes touching the power of the Keys, haue aſſayed to ſet this doctrine on foote, That the Pope had power to excommunicate Kings, and abſolue ſubiects from their oath of allegeance. But ſuch Poſitions haue been no ſooner broached, but preſently condemned, as ſchiſmaticall, as well by the whole body of the Sorbone, authorized generally by the Church of Fraunce, as alſo by the Decrees of your Court of Parlemēt, the two chiefe ſafegards of your prediceſſors to ſhielde them from all practiſes, intended againſt them.
            The Popes are for the moſt part (as at this preſent) men of great integritie, and well affected to the Realme of Fraunce, in remēbrance of thoſe great benefits, which the Holy ſea hath heretofore receaued frō your Maieſties Crowne: Neuertheleſſe, there happen ſuch to be choſen otherwhiles, as doe wholie encline in affection to the Spaniſh partie.
            
               
If this miſchiefe ſhould happen, and that the people were perſwaded in conſcience, that theyr King might be lawfully excommunicated, & themſelues diſcharged of their oth of allegeance, queſtionleſſe our Kinges would be in great ieopardie, to ſee themſelues quite diſpoſſeſt of their ſoueraigntie and ſtate, and ſhould in truth holde theyr Crownes but by curteſie and fauour, depending vpon the pleaſure, or diſpleaſure of whomſoeuer it ſhould pleaſe my Lords the Cardinals, to promote to the Sea; the moſt part wherof are poſſeſt of rich benefices in the Duchie of Milan, in the kingdome of Naples, and moreouer in Spayne it ſelfe. This were not to be an imperiall King, but a Viceroy, a king in name, but in effect a Lieutenant Generall, ſuch as were thoſe petie Kings, whom the Romans were wont to crowne, and vncrowne at their pleaſure. All that euer liued ſince Chriſtianitie firſt ſet footing within this land, haue euermore deteſted this opinion, as the moſt peſtilent that coulde be infuſed into the mindes of Subiects, and the moſt repugnant to the word of GOD, who tels vs, that his kingdome is not of this world. Vpon which text Saint Auguſtine hath Iohn. 18
               
theſe words. Hearken ye Iewes and Gentiles, 
               Tranſl. 115. in loan. 
               harken all earthly kingdomes, I preiudice not your ſoueraigntie in this world. And S. Luke, Chap. 12. One of the companie ſaid Maiſter, commaund my brother to deuide the inheritance with me; and he ſaid vnto them, Man who made mee a Iudge, or a deuider betwixt you?
            
            Vpon which place Saint Bernard comments in this manner. They which maintaine 
               
                  
                     ••
                  b. 1, de conſid. 
               that opinion [ſpeaking of the contrarie] ſhall neuer be able to ſhew, that any of the Apostles did ſit at any time as a Iudge, or vmpire, or a deuider of Land betweene man and man. To conclude, I reade that the Apostles haue been iudged by others, but that euer they ſate to iudge others, I neuer read. Erit illud, non fuit, that may be in time to come, but neuer yet hath beene.
            
            Vpon theſe infallible grounds, and infinite others (which for breuity I omit) hath the Sorbone, and in the Sorbone the whole Church of Fraunce, euermore concluded this Poſition to be ſchiſmaticall: That the Pope had power to excommunicate our Kings, or any way to proceed against theyr Moſt Chriſtian▪ 
               Maiesties. And Iohn Tanquerel was in the yeere 1561. adiudged by ſentence

of the Parliament to make open ſubmiſſion, and to aske forgiuenes of the King, for preſuming to inſert the ſaid Propoſition amongſt his Theſes, (abeit he openly proteſted, that he did it not but by way of diſputation) and eſcaped very hardlie from beeing condemned to die for it. It fell out happily for him, that the King was but eleuen yeeres old, had he been but 14. it had certainly coſt him his life.
            When I ſay that the Sorbone hath euer condemned this Poſition, I meane, euer vntill ſuch time as the Ieſuits had trayned and bred vp a great part of the ſtudents in their Lectures of Diuinitie, which they reade daily in theyr Colledge. For to ſay truth, in the yeere 1589, when the Bull of excommunication againſt the late King vvas brought into Fraunce, and the queſtion propounded in the Sorbone, Whether the Pope had power to excommunicate the King or no, preſently the moſt auncient Doctors as Faber the Syndic, Camus, Chabot, Faber the Curat of S. Paules, Chauagna
                     •
                  , and all the reſt of the elder ſort, men of the ſoundeſt heads, and harts ſtoutly oppoſed, and withſtood it. But the pack was made ſure. For the younger crew, who had all of them

beene the Ieſuits auditors in Diuinitie, as Boucher, Pigenat, Varadier, Semelle, Culli, Aubour, and a number of others, carried it by voyces, both againſt the worde of GOD, and all the auncient Canons of Fraunce.
            
            That it is the opinion of the Ieſuits, that the Pope hath power to excōmunicate Kings, to free their ſubiects from the oath of allegeance, to depriue them of their ſcepter, theyr crowne, and state, it cannot be denied: inaſmuch as they themſelues beeing by the Vniuerſitie of Paris, charged with this peſtilent and pernicious doctrine, are ſo far from denying it, as that in their Apologie, written with deliberation, in the yere 1595, by the generall aduiſe of the whole Societie, intituled La veritè Defendue, that is, The defence of the truth against the Pleadings of Anthonie Arnald, in the 70. page they vſe theſe verie words. Thou needest not to proue that Kings are, or ought to be ſole temporall Lords in theyr owne Realmes, ſeeing that the Pope (as I haue ſaid) pretends no title to this ſoueraigntie, except it be to reforme, as a Father, nay as a Iudge, thoſe who otherwiſe would be pernicious to the Church. For in this caſe he not onely may, but ought to ſhew himſelfe
               
theyr Superiour both for theyr good, & the good of the Realme. This Exception I knowe, makes thee halfe mad: I ſee it goes mightily against thy stomacke, yet there is no remedie, it must downe with thee, and thou moreouer must acknowledge thy ſelfe to be voyde both of ſence and conſcience in denying it. For first of all it is for the behoofe and the good of Princes, who for the most part are ſooner bridled, or brought to their duties for fear of their temporall eſtate, which they euermore hold deere, (although they be wicked) then of theyr ſpirituall, whereof they make light account, vnleſſe they be religious, which is not vniuerſally ſeene in them all. For this cauſe did God menace the Kings of Iſraell if they diſobeyed his commaundements, rather to depriue them of theyr temporall Kingdoms, then to exclude them frō eternall life, which he confirmed by practiſe vppon the first King, whom hee bereaued of his ſcepter and kingdome.
            
            The Ieſuits perceiuing that all the Canons of the Church of Fraunce, and all the Decrees of your Maieſties Parlement, are directly oppoſite to this pernicious doctrine, which they by little and little inſtill into the minds of the people, (being therewith

in former times altogether vnacquainted) they are driuen to this plunge, to ſay that the hiſtories of our Kings, which we bring for inſtance, are but examples of diſobedience, or Rebellion againſt the Holie ſea. Theſe are their words. Art thou ſo ill 
               La verite defend. page 64. 65. et 66. of the firſt impreſſion. 
               aduiſed, art thou ſo vnwoorthy a childe of thy mother Fraunce, as to cite out of the French Chronicles, examples of rebellion, blemiſhing thereby the glory of our Kings, and of our comon mother?
            
            And about two pages after, Jn a King whatſoeuer is, is eminent, be it good, or euill, if he employ his power to doe ill, there is no way to bridle and restraine him, but by an eminent power: for which cauſe hath this ſword beene practiſed, and put in vre in the perſon of diuers Kings, and in diuers kingdoms: and albeit the practiſe haue not alwayes ſucceeded, yet might it alwaies haue done, If the ſubiects had been well diſpoſed, or prepared aforehand.
            Was euer any thing more plainly deliuered, and yet was euer any thing more flatly repugnant to the word and will of God? Gods will is, when hee ſends vs vertuous Kings, that wee render him thankſgiuing, when hee ſends vs bad and wicked Kings, yet that we praiſe his Name notwithſtanding,

beeing certainly perſwaded, that hee doth it for the beſt, to weane vs thereby frō the loue of the worlde, that wee may with the more willingneſſe and alacritie depart Baruc. 1. therewith. 1. Pet. 2.
            
            It is God onely, who ſeateth Kings in their thrones, it is he onely, who by taking them to himſelfe (at his owne good pleaſure) is able to remoue them. The Keyes which he committed to S. Peter, & to our Holy Fathers his ſucceſſors, haue relation onely to the kingdome of heauen, and no way to terreſtriall kingdoms. Himſelfe while he ſoiourned heere vppon earth, did he euer, out of his omnipotencie, offer to chaſtiſe Kings, and to treade vppon theyr Diadems? No: quite contrary, his whole life was but an opend booke, and ſtorie of humilitie, neither hath hee put any other ſword into the handes of his Apoſtles, to plant his faith withall. He ſaid vnto them, The Kings of the Nations beare rule ouer thē, and they which exerciſe authoritie among 
               Luke, 22, 
               them, are called Gracious Lords, ſo ſhal it not be amongst you.
            
            It was no part of Gods will, that eyther S. Peter, or our Holy fathers his ſucceſsors, ſhould take more vppon them, then himſelfe

had done: neither in truth did the ancient Biſhops euer attempt it. If others of later time take a contrary courſe, they doe therein abuſe their authoritie, and are in no wiſe to be obeyed. This hath euer beene the iudgement of the Church of Fraunce, excommunicating all thoſe that auouched the contrarie, as authors of a barbarous & moſt accurſed doctrine, which endeuouring by impietie to make men religious, doth euermore beget a world of murders, firing of houſes, rauiſhment of wiues, rapes of virgins, making whole Citties deſolate, and whole Countries deſert. This is the gulph of gulphs, the ſea of abhominations; we haue taſted it to the vtmoſt.
            And yet for all this doe the Ieſuits grow daily more obſtinate in this opinion, perſwading vs (if at leaſt wee will be perſwaded) that the Bulls of Rome, haue power to depoſe all the Kings of the earth, and to depriue them of theyr temporall ſtate and ſoueraigntie.
            
            Agreeable thereunto is that which Father Bellarmine a Ieſuit, nowe Cardinall, writeth vpon this argument: In regarde of 
               1. Controu. 
               the perſons, (ſaith he) the Pope, as Pope, cannot 
               3. li. 5. ca. 6. 
               (though there be iust cauſe) by his ordinarie
               
               power depoſe ciuile Princes in that manner as he depoſeth Biſhops, that is, as their ordinary Judge: but as a ſupreame and ſoueraigne Prince in caſes ſpirituall, he may (if need ſo require for the ſauing of ſoules) tranſlate kingdoms, take them from one, and giue them to another, as we will proue. And in the eight chapter, for proofe heereof he alledgeth all their violent, and tyrannous proceedings directly oppoſed to the word of God, and through all hiſtories deteſted, and abhorred: the ſequel whereof plainly ſheweth that the chiefe ſtrengthning, and eſtabliſhment of the Turkiſh Empire proceedeth from the outragious ciuile warrs amongſt the Chriſtians, cauſed by ſuch vſurpations, which haue made Europe on all ſides from Eaſt to Weſt, to bathe herſelfe in the blood of her own children.
            S. Ambroſe kept himſelfe farre enough from touching (ſo much as in thought) the ſcepter, crowne, or temporall eſtate of the Emperour, or from diſcharging any ſubiect whatſoeuer of his oath of allegeance: neither in truth could hee haue doone it, without flatly impugning the commaundements of God. That which he did, was but a ſharpe admonition or reproofe, to

ſignifie & make known the grieuous qualitie of the treſpaſſe.
            Furthermore, I muſt not forget to note, that the ſame 1. Controu. 3. lib. 5. ca. 7  
               Bellarmine, and the ſame  Ieſuits, in their aforeſaide La veri. deſend. page 42. of the laſt impreſſ. 
               Apologie, doe  vpholde, and endeuour to approoue the common Extrauagant, viz. vnam ſanctam, de maioritate et obedientia, which hath beene heeretofore condemned in Fraunce. By vertue of which Extrauagant, though the Pope forgetting himſelfe ſhould ſwarue from iuſtice, and attempt more, then hee had warrant to doe, yet are men bound, to yeelde obedience thereunto, and God only may iudge of his dooings. Inſomuch as in caſe the Pope ſhould iniuriouſly and contrary to all right, ſhoote his thunderbolts againſt a King, (as we haue ſeene the like practiſed in anno 89, in the perſon of our deceaſed Maiſter, a moſt deuout Catholicke) yet, if wee belieue the Ieſuits, no man liuing may enter into iudgement of the matter, as beeing forbidden vs, and reſerued onely to GOD: In the meane time muſt this King in the viewe of all his ſubiects, nay by his ſubiects themſelues, be diſpoſſeſt of his crowne and ſtate, and into his throne may ſtep any other, whō it ſhall

pleaſe that Supreame power to aſſigne, which is authorized by Bellarmines vvarrant, to tranſlate kingdoms, to take them from one, and to giue them to another. The verie termes vſed by Tanquerell, (Regno et dignitatibus priuare potest: hee may take from them their crowne and dignitie) vvhich were condemned by that famous ſentence of the Parlement. Yet was not Tanquerell ſo audacious to auouch, that the Pope hauing taken it from one, might giue it to another.
            
            Father Bellarmine the Ieſuite goes a ſtep further. For hee peremptorily affirmes,    In the Tractat: de exemptione clericorum. Printed with the Treatiſe of Indulgence. 1599  that all the Clergie of the Realme, are exempted from beeing your ſubiects. A poſition as flat contradictorie to the expreſſe word of God, and to the Canons of the Church of Fraunce, as the reſidue that hath beene ſpoken. Yet doth he ſtoutly maintaine it, labouring by meere Sophiſtry to auoyde that ſaying of S. Paule, Let euery ſoule be ſubiect to the higher powers, for there is no 
               Rom. 13. 
               power but of God, and the powers which are, are ordained by GOD. And a little after. Therefore we must be obedient, not onelie to auoyde theyr anger, but alſo for conſcience ſake. For this cauſe alſo you pay tribute, for
               
               they are the ministers of God, appoynted to that end. Whereuppon S. Chryſostome noteth, that thoſe words are not ſpoken onelie in regard of the Laïty, but likewiſe of the Clergie, of religious perſons, nay of the Apoſtles themſelues.
            Moreouer, the ſame Father Bellarmine ſtriues to defeate thoſe wordes of S. Peter. Submit your ſelues to all manner ordinance of man, for the Lords ſake, whether it bee vnto 
               1. Pet. 8. 
               the King, as vnto the ſuperiour, or vnto gouernours, as thoſe which are ſent by him.
            
            Whereunto Bellarmine amongſt other things aunſwereth: that at that time it was neceſſarie with all diligence to admoniſh the Christians, to performe obedience to theyr kings, for feare least the preaching of the Goſpell might otherwiſe haue beene hindered.
            
            What is this, but to make our Chriſtian Religion, a religion of meere Impoſtors, a Religion of Matchiaueliſts, pretending at the firſt, that our kingdom is not of this world, all of vs, as well of the Clergie, as other, liue in obedience to Kings and Gouernours: But afterwards hauing once gotten the winde, and ſeazed the Sworde into our ovvne hand, then to change our note cleane contrary, and in preſumptuous manner to arrogate

to our ſelues, that which almightie God hath reſerued as his own prerogatiue ouer the Kings of Iſraell, & all other whatſoeuer. Indeede this is right the Ieſuits religion, theſe be their policies, this is the path they tread, to inſinuate or get footing within a Realme: but Chriſtian religion keepes a far other courſe, it ſpeakes ſincerely, and vnfainedly, without cloaking, without colouring, without diſſembling: it neither withdraweth, nor embezeleth any ſubiect whatſoeuer from his Prince, as doth the religion of the Ieſuits. For marke I beſeech you, Bellarmines cōcluſion, in the 271. page of the ſaid Tractat: De exemptione cleric: You will ſay perhaps, this were a wrong done to Princes, if against theyr wil they were depriued of their right, which they had ouer Clergie men, before they were of the Clergie. Whereunto I aunſwere: that there is no wrong doone them: inaſmuch as a man in vſing his owne right, doth no man wrong. But who ſo chooſeth that calling, which he iudgeth most fitting, and agreeable to his diſpoſition, he vſeth but his owne right, although it follow accidentally, that the Prince is depriued of his ſubiect.
            
            This is not to ſtand long hammering about

the matter: This is to make ſhort work, and to tell you in a word, that looke how many Clergie men your Maieſtie hath, ſo many ſubiects hath the Pope in France. And to that effect in the 255. page he hath theſe very words: The Pope hath exempted all the Clergie, from the ſubiection of theyr ſeculer Princes, whereuppon it followeth, that as concerning the Clergie, they are not Soueraigne Princes. This is (my liege) in good French, to erect another ſtate within the ſtate, and another kingdome within your kingdom. For proofe of which doctrine, flatly repugnant to Chriſtian religion, he frames a Simile, in the ſame place, & tells vs: This is all one, as if a King ſhoulde make ouer ſome part of his Realme into the ſubiection of another, and in ſo dooing, eyther by the law of armes, or ſome other iust title ſhould forfeit a part of his Soueraigntie. Adding withall, that the establiſhing of this his Poſition, is of more dangerous conſequence to Princes, then the loſſe of a maine battell, or of an entire Prouince might be. And hee ſayth truly, for the maladie is within our bowels, and they that are already loſt, do by theyr cloſe confeſſions many times drawe & inueigle others; to the ſubuerſion of that

Monarchie, vnder which they were borne. And whereas (ſaith hee) wee are ſometimes fame to stoope to the ciuile Magistrate, it is 
               Page 268. de exemp. cler. 
               but perforce, as beeing constrained to strike ſaile: but this caſe inferreth no conſequence. They affirme moreouer, that the constitutions of Princes, although they cōtaine nothing repugnant to the ſcripture, nor to the Canons and ſacred Decrees, yet doe they not binde the Clergie, farther then ad directionem, non ad coactionem, to informe them, but not to enforce them. They bee their owne wordes, page 269, agreeing with that which followeth page 271. that ſubiects after they are entred into the Clergie, are no longer ſubiects to the ſeculer Prince, who forthwith looſeth & forfeits them. And in truth it is a cleere caſe, that he is no longer a ſubiect, who can no longer be inforſt to yeeld obedience to the Lawes.
            Theſe hereſies (my Liege) were once wholie rooted out of your Realme of Fraunce, but theſe fellowes begin to ſowe them thicke againe, and haue founde the meanes cunningly to conuey this De exemp cleric.  Treatiſe   into Fraunce, together with that of Indulgences, ſhuffling it in amōgſt the preaſe, that it might paſſe vnregarded.
            
               
Of this Poſition, viz. That thoſe who are entred into the Clergie, are no longer ſubiects, followeth a ſtrange conſequence, to wit, that they may conſpire & practiſe againſt their King, and yet not incur the guilt of treaſon. This is deliuered in expreſſe termes, in the Aphoriſmes of confeſsion, written by the Ieſuite, Emanuel Sa, vpon the word Clericus. The rebellion of a Clergie man against his King, 
                     •
                  s not Treaſon, becauſe he is exempted from being the Kings ſubiect. And vpon the word Princeps they doe more manifeſtly declare, how farre they diſagree from the word of God, who enioyneth vs with patience to tolerate euill Princes, beeing ſeated Pet 2. in the throne of their aunceſtors, as being giuen vs by his owne hand. But vvhat ſay theſe men? A King may be depoſed by the State in caſe of tyrannie, or if he gouerne not as he ought, or for any other iust cauſe, and another may be choſen by the greater part of the commons. Howbeit ſome are of opinion, that hee may not be depoſed but onely for Tyrannie.
            Where firſt of all wee may note theyr bad meanings, to leaue a poynt of that cō
               ſequence at large, and vndetermined, and yet who knowes whether they do it in policie,

or no, that they may be at choiſe to hold eyther the one or the other part, according as ſhall beſt fit their deſires, and deſignes. Secondly, what is more diſſonant from Chriſtian religion, then to leaue it to the libertie of the people, to iudge of the good, or ill gouernment of theyr Prince, & to make them belieue, that without perill to theyr conſcience, & offence to God, they may, either depoſe him frō his crown, or depriue him of his life? prouided alwayes that the greater part be of that mind. A clauſe moſt important, for if the leſſer part were of that brainſick opinion, then might they fortune to periſh in the attempt; and vvhat pitty were it to looſe a companie ſo well diſpoſed to Ieſuitiſme, that is, to hunt their Lord and Maiſter out of his proper inheritance, crying after him, Atyrant, Atyrant? And this is the reaſon, why Pardo the Inquiſitor of Anwerp, in the very end of that booke dated 1597, allowes it this commendation, that it vvas like to yeeld greate fruite, and commoditie, and God knowes whether it were not in his thought, that the greateſt commoditie it could yeelde to his Maiſter, vvas to helpe forward the deſtruction of your

kingdome, with whom at that time he was at mortall warrs. Furthermore, the ſame Ieſuits, in thoſe Aphoriſmes of Confeſſion, (which they daily beate into the mindes of the people) adde hereunto vpon the word Tyrannus, He which gouerneth tyrannicallie a kingdome, whereof hee is rightfully poſſeſſed, cannot be depoſed, but by authoritie of a Parlement: but ſentence beeing once giuen, the next at hand may execute it. And he may be depoſed euen by thoſe his ſubiects, that haue ſworne perpetuall obedience to him, in caſe, after admonition, he doe not reforme himſelfe.
            
            I leaue it to your Maieſties conſideration whether this doctrine touch you neerlie, or no. Certaine I am it imports not ſo much to the whole worlde beſides, as it doth to you alone, and to your poſteritie. Fraunce is your owne inheritance, vvhich you hold onely by God & by your ſword. If the world ſhould continue ten thouſand yeeres longer, and your poſteritie as long (as wee are to wiſh it might) it ought in right to raigne continually ouer Fraunce, neither ſhall any Pope, (as ſome of them may fortune to be enemies to your houſe) euer haue authoritie to abſolue ſo much as one Frenchman, from that allegeance,

which he ſhall owe to your ſucceſſion. But if theſe Poſitions may once creepe in amongſt vs, then ſhall your poſteritie weare the Crowne, and enioy the ſcepter ſo long, as ſhall ſtand with the pleaſure of the Holy Sea, and no longer.
            Out of this firſt principle is deduced a ſecond, whereuppon I ſee much vvritten on both ſides, but none comes neere the marke. Some affirme that the Ieſuits counſell men to murther Kings, but they doe them wrong. For they (God wot) cleane contrariwiſe ſerue and obey Kings, and many times alſo with hartie affection: but marke theyr diſtinction. They holde that, ſuch as are excommunicate by the Pope, are no longer Kings, but Tyrants, and what they comment vpon the word Tyrannus, your Maieſtie hath alreadie heard. In briefe, grant but theyr firſt propoſition, & the ſecond will followe of neceſſitie. For allowe the Pope power to intermeddle with the ſcepters and temporall estates of Kings, (according to the Ieſuits doctrine) then is it cleer that a King, (beeing once by his Holines declared excommunicate) remaines a priuate perſon, and no longer King: and if he offer obstinately to continue his raigne, he is to be held a
               
               Tyrant. Whoſoeuer will yeelde them the former propoſition, ſhall be drawne perforce to the latter. That Libell written by Iohn Guignard a Ieſuit with his owne hand, (as hee acknowledged in the open Court of Parlement, both the chambers beeing aſſembled) contained both theſe Propoſitions, but vnder moſt inſolent and outragious termes. For among other things, hee breakes foorth into theſe vvordes, That cruell Nero, was ſlaine by a Clement, and that 
               The late king vſed many times to goe on proceſsion in the habite of a Munck. counterfet Muncke, was diſpatched by the hand of a true Muncke. This heroical act performed by Iames Clement, as a gyft of the holy Spirit, (ſo termed by our Diuines) was worthily commended by the late Prior of the Iacobins, Burgoin a Confeſſor and Martyr. The Crowne of Fraunce, may and ought to be tranſlated from the houſe of Bourbon, vnto ſome other: & the 
               A terme giuen the king that now is, by the Leaguers for that he was borne at Biarne, a towne in Gaſcoine. Biarnois (although cōuerted to the Catholick faith) ſhall be more fauourably dealt withall then he deſerues, if receiuing a ſhauen crowne in exchange, he be recluded into ſome ſtrict Couent, there to doe penance for all the miſeries hee hath brought vppon Fraunce, and to render thankes to God, that had giuen him the grace to acknowledge him before his death. And if
               
               without armes he cannot be depoſed, let men take armes against him, if by war it cannot be accōpliſht, let him be murthered. Your Maieſtie may ſee the originall copie, it is vvell worth the ſight.
            Moreouer, Ambroſe Varade was Rector of their Colledge at Paris, choſen by themſelues, as one of the honeſteſt men in their Order, and is at this day in as great credite amongſt them, as euer he was. Yet if your Highneſſe pleaſe but to ſend for a copie of Barrieres arraignment, you ſhall there reade, that this Varade was the man, who (the next month after your Maieſties happy conuerſion) did animate the ſayde Barriere, to goe and ſheath his two-edg'd knife in your breaſt, binding him therevnto by the Sacrament, and aſſuring him by the liuing God, that he could not doe a more meritorious act, and that hee ſhould therefore be carried by Angels into Paradice. If this be not true, 
                  Ʋarades might do well to come in an cleere himſelf in Court: he was in this towne what time your Maieſtie entred it, and ſome fewe dayes after, but he lay cloſe all the while, and ſtole away diſguiſed; taking his courſe to Rome, where now hee liues in as high eſtimation

among the Ieſuits, as is poſſible. It is an eaſie matter to denie any thing in words, but deedes are of greater validitie, and confute words.
            
               
                  Ʋarades then beeing detected of this cruell and deteſtable crime, ſhould haue beene brought vnto you piniond by the Ieſuits themſelues, to receaue due puniſhment, for examples ſake, if they had not been all of his minde. But when as quite cōtrary, they honor him (as you ſee) more then euer they did, & ſtick not at this day, to regiſter his name among the worthiest perſons of their Order, wee may conclude that in reſpect of their wiſh, will, and affection, they did all of thē encourage Barriere, by the mouth, and mediation of Varades, and that this parricide was not particuler in him, but generall in them all. It is a practiſe grounded vppon their maine principle, from the execution wherof they expect their chiefe credit, and commendation, as heereafter ſhall be ſhewed.
            If you aske me, where it is that Varades is by them yet at this day recond for one of the worthiest perſons of their Order, I muſt refer you to the Of the firſt 
                     •
                  mpreſſion.  265. page De la veritè defendue, publiſht a whole yere after Varades  
               
fled. What haue not many woorthy perſons of this ſocietie endured? Who knoweth not (to ſpeake of our country of Fraunce) the indignities which haue been offered, and the ſlaunderous reproches which haue beene vttered against Iohn Maldonat, Aimond Augier, Claudius Mathew, Iames Tyrius, & at this preſent against Iames Commolet, Bernard Rouillet, and Ambroſe Varades? Where by the way we muſt note, that theſe men are with them extolled for notable Martyrs, as hauing ſuffered meruailous afflictions. This is as proper, and as charitable a ſpeech, as when they terme the Complaint of the Vniuerſitie of Paris againſt them in the yeere 64, a cruell perſecution. A ſtrange abuſe of the word. It were a farre more proper ſpeech, to call thoſe outragious, and bloodie warrs, which were by the Ieſuits kindled through all parts of the Realme, The perſecution of all the good ſubiects of Fraunce.
            
            But if Barriere had been a ſcholer of the Ieſuits, nuzled, & trayned vp in their doctrine, he would hardly haue been brought to appeach Varades. For they belieue it to be preſent damnation, to reueale to the Magiſtrate, who they were that wrought or incited
               
               them to ſuch attempts. And this is a third Propoſition, which followeth out of the firſt, and ſecond. For if the Pope may lawfully excommunicate Kings, and that beeing excommunicate, it is a good, and meritorious deede to murther them, then doth it follow of congruence, that the partie ought constantly to endure martyrdome therefore, and not to procure their death, who ſet him the readie way to euerlaſting life. Theſe Propoſitions are linckt and combined together, they hang all by one thred. And this is the reaſon, why Chastell forbare to accuſe any one of the Ieſuits in particuler; For, hauing reſolued, to ſtab you in the throte with his knife, and belieuing, (as he profeſt) that the act was lawful and meritorious, it followes, that he belieued, he ſhould be certainly damned, if hee diſcouered the partie, who (in his erroneous opinion) had directed him the way to Paradiſe. And yet ſee how God, the Protector of Princes, is wont to drawe the truth from out of theyr mouths, that moſt of all endeuour to couer, and conceale it. For theſe are the verie words of Chastels examination, whereof your Maieſtie may ſee the Originall, which ſhall be auouched and iuſtified for true, by

more then thirtie of my Lordes the Preſidents, and Counſellors of the Parlement, whoſe teſtimonie is a thouſand-folde of more validitie, then whatſoeuer the parties can alledge in their owne cauſe.
            
               Being demaunded, where he learnt this new diuinitie? he anſwered, hee learned it by Phyloſophie. Being demaunded if hee ſtudied Philoſophie in the Ieſuits Colledge. Hee anſwered he did, and that vnder Father Gueret, vvith whom he had been two yeeres and a halfe. Being demaunded, if hee had not beene in the Chamber of Meditations, into which the Ieſuits vſed to bring the most notorious ſinners, there to beholde the pictures of many deiuls in diuers terrible ſhapes, vnder pretence to reduce them to a better life, in truth to affright theyr minds, and incite them by ſuch terrours to doe ſome notable ſeruice. He anſwered, that hee had been oftentimes in the ſaid chamber. Being demaunded, by whom he had been perſwaded to kill the King. He anſwered, that he had heard in diuers places, that it was to be held for a most true principle, that it was lawfull to kill the King, and that they, who ſayd it, called him a Tyrant. Beeing demaunded whether this argument of killing the King, were not ordinarie with the Ieſuits. Hee aunſwered,
               
               that hee had heard them ſay, that it was lawfull to kill the King, & that he was out of the Church, and that he was not to be obeyd, nor held for King, vntil he were abſolued by the Pope.
            
               Againe beeing demaunded in the great chamber (my Lords the Preſidents & Counſellors thereof and of the Tournelle beeing aſſembled) he made the ſame aunſwers, & did in eſpeciall propound, & maintaine that maxime, viz. that it was lawful to kill Kings, & in particuler, the King now raigning, who was not in the Church (as hee affirmed) becauſe he had not the Popes approbations.
            
            Whoſoeuer ſhould reade the Peticions, which the Ieſuits haue preſented vnto your Maieſtie, would ſuppoſe that Chastell neuer toucht, or accuſed them at all: ſo confidently doe they ſtand in denyall of the truth. But I know not, what greater accuſation can be deuiſed, or what waightier crime they can be charged withall, then to haue bewitcht & poſſeſt the tender ſoules of young youth, with ſo deſperate a doctrine, as carrieth them on to the ſlaughter of their Prince.
            With this agreeth that which wee reade in the Confeſſion of William Parry, made at

his death, that Benedetto Palmio a Ieſuite, firſt cauſed him to vndertake that reſolution for the murther of the Queene, & that afterwards one Wats a Prieſt, to whom he imparted it, diſſwaded him from the attempt, telling him the act was damnable: vvhereupon, ſeeing this contrarietie of opinions, he repaired to Anniball Codretto a Ieſuite, to be confeſt, who tolde him, it coulde not be but this Wats was an heretick: for the true Church made no queſtion, but that Kings, excommunicated by the Pope, were ipſo facto, Tyrants, and therfore ought to be ſlaine. Likewiſe the Commenter, vpon that booke, which is called the Epitome of Confeſſions, otherwiſe the 7. booke of the Decretals, page 308, after hee hath commended the Ieſuits, all he can, (as they haue many commendable parts, we muſt confeſſe) at laſt, for the cloſe and vpſhot of al their praiſes, he adds this, They aſſault tyrants, they weede the cokle out of the Lords fielde.  
               Tyrannos aggrediuntur, lolium ab agro Dominico euellunt. Your Maieſtie may reade the booke, you will eaſily make conſtruction of this peece of Latine, I haue heard you interpret much harder in my dayes.
            To be ſhort, there is no man can doubt, but by this weeding the cockle out of the lords
               
               field, (wherein he commendeth them to be ſo expert, and ſo reſolute) is meant the diſpatching, and making riddance of thoſe, who by the Bulls of Rome, are declared excommunicate, whom they terme all by the name of Tyrants, what religion ſo euer they profeſſe.
            And certainly all the world can witnes, that the late King was alwaies a moſt earneſt Catholick, and no man but knoweth, how well (and that by many particuler benefits) hee deſerued of the Church; yet after the ſentence of excommunication was at Rome declared againſt him, Father Cō
                  molet, and Father Bernard, (both which are by the Ieſuits in theyr afore-named Apologie euen at this day extolled and deïfied) and generally the whole company of the Ieſuits, neuer affoorded him better title to his dying day, then the names of Tyrant, Holofernes, Moab, Nero, & ſuch like, which practiſe ſuteth very fitly with their definition of a Tyrant aboue ſpecified.
            At Christmas in 1593, your Maieſtie was cōuerted Catholicke, yet notwithſtanding at Bartilmewtide following, the ſame Commolet, vſed theſe words in the Pulpet. Wee ſtand in need of an Ehud, be he munck, or ſouldiour,
               
               or ſhepheard, it matters not, but wee ſtand in need of an Ehud. And not long after, hauing aduertiſement that the matter was informed againſt, he ſecretly conuayd himſelfe away. This can be no more denied, then the fact of Varades, which yet they labour to couer & diſguiſe, affirming that Barriere indeede diſcloſed his intent vnto him: mary Varades made him aunſwere, that hee, beeing a Prieſt, might not giue him any counſell in the matter. Say there were nothing but this, was not this in other words to ſay, You ſhould about it without more talke, let your words be fewer, & your deedes more?
            
            But if your Maieſtie pleaſe to ſende for the triall and confeſſion of Barriere, you ſhal there finde, that 
                  Ʋarades, Rector of the Ieſuits, confirmed him, incouraged him, and bound him by the bleſſed Sacrament, to ſtrike the ſtroke reſolutely, & couragiouſlie. Once certaine it is, your Maieſtie neuer eſcaped a greater daunger in your life. And what wonderful triumph would they haue made, thinke you, at your death, who ſhewed ſuch exceſſiue ioy at the ſlaughter of the late King, proudly inſulting ouer his Hearſe, by letters diſperſed into al parts

of the world, and for the greater glorie, printed by them at Rome? Theſe are inſerted amongſt their ſolemne, and annuall Letters, page 305, and are thus tranſlated. The ſame day that the King expelled vs out of Bourdeaux, was hee expelled out of his life. The report was, that hee ſent vs to 
               A Towne in Guienne, 5. leagues diſtant from Bourdeaux.  S. Macaries, with an intent to cut all our throates there, had not his owne been cut first. The report of this newes, strooke our aduerſaries into a wonderfull amazement.
            
            I neuer was poſſeſt with greater admiration in my life, thē when I read this branch of their Letters. For who could euer haue belieued, that Chriſtians, much leſſe Religions perſons, would haue openly profeſt ſuch rancour, ſuch enmitie ſo immortal, as death is ſelfe could not determine? Nature teacheth vs to haue remorſe, and commiſeration of our enemies, when wee ſee them lie breathleſſe vppon the earth: they ceaſe to be enemies, when once they ceaſe to be. But to tread vpon the dead corſe of their Maiſter, of their liege-Lord, of their King, of the formoſt King of Chriſtendome, and thereupon to ſound victory & tryumph, can there be, or be imagined any impietie, any inhumanitie, any cruelty cō
               parable

to this?
            It is true, the poore Prince had no feeling of this outrage, neither indeede was it done to him ſo much, as to your Maieſtie, and to any whatſoeuer hee be, that beares the name of a Frenchman: this I am ſure, hee felt and taſted a deepe portion of that poyſon of the League, which was tempered by Claudius Mathew, a Ieſuit, who died in Italie about the end of 88, beeing ſurfeted with his cōtinuall trauailes into Spaine, Italie, Swizzerland, Germanie, & the low Countries alſo, (after the death of Mounſieur) for the contriuing, knitting, and fortifying of this great, and horrible confederacie againſt the late King, and the whole line, and familie of Bourbon: Guignard a Ieſuit hath written it, and your Maieſtie hath read it, That the crowne of Fraunce, might 
                     〈◊〉
                   ought to be tranſlated from the houſe of Bourbon to ſome other. Furthermore, they that vnderſtand the whole ſecret of the League, ſpare not with open mouth to ſpeak it, that the Father Ieſuits, were the true Fathers & founders of the League, and conſequently aunſwerable for the death of all thoſe, who were ſwallowed in that vaſt gulphe, by thē ſet open: I will recite you a briefe ſtorie,

which ſhall cleere this poynt of all controuerſie.
            There is no man but knowes, the purpoſe and deſignement of the Sixteen gouernours choſen, during the rebellion by the ſeditious multitude within Paris, to rule the cittie.  
               Sixteene, who by a Letter, which was intercepted,   made tender of the Cittie of Paris to the King of Spaine. And whether goe theſe Sixteene to chooſe them a Preſident of that their bloodie counſell? Went they not directly to the Ieſuits, who commended vnto them Father Otho Pigenat? This is confeſt by themſelues in their Apologie, printed at Paris: mary they pretend, it was to mitigate and allay the humour of the Sixteene. Some man perhaps would aunſwer, that this was, to quench fire with oyle, to turne a Ieſuite among a crewe of ſeditious perſons. For my part I ſay not ſo, I ſay the Sixteene did in truth neede a bridle, & not a ſpurre, and that the onely courſe to bring their deſignes to the mark they ſhot at, was to temper their extreame & outragious violence. But in the meane time, who ſeeth not a wonderfull correſpondencie, and agreement betweene theſe Sixteene executioners (for by what fitter name can I call them? ſeeing with their owne hands they hangd vp the chiefe Preſident of the Parlement,

the onely Preſident that remained at Paris) who ſeeth not I ſay, a ſinguler correſpondence of thoſe Sixteene, with this ſociety of Ieſuits, ſince they deſired to haue a Ieſuit for their Preſident, aboue any other of the Clergie, or Laïty?
            
            Moreouer, who knowes not that from the beginning of the yeere 85, their Colledges both at Paris and elſe-where, were the common retreits for al thoſe that laboured the aduauncement of the Spaniſh affaires. Thether were the packets addreſt, there opened, and from thence diſperſed: that they had daily entercourſe with the Spaniſh Embaſſadour Mendoza, and thoſe that ſucceeded him at Paris, and generally with the Agents & Factors for king Phillips cauſes, in all the good townes where they remained. Your Maieſtie knowes it, no man better.
            The troth is (my liege) they alledge, that you are nowe vnited in ſo ſtraight a league of amitie with the king of Spaine, as that theſe obiections ought rather to make for them, then againſt them, inaſmuch as your Maieſtie affects none more entirely, then thoſe who beare a hartie and entire affection to the Spaniard. This ſpeech may happily

come now in ſeaſon, but I aſſure you, I thought it ſtrange to hear this ſpeech folowing, to fall from their pens at that time, when wee were in the chiefe heate of our warrs with the Spaniſh king. Jn 
               La veri. defend. page 129. of the firſt impreſſ.  Charles the ninths dayes the Spaniards were not ſpoken of but in the better part: but the hereticks in hatred, not of our nation, (for then ought they to carry a deeper hate to the Engliſh and to the Almaines, who haue heaped more miſchiefes vppon Fraunce, then any other Nation) but of their Religion, haue endeuoured to make them odious vnder pretence of the ſtate. This me thinks was ſomething too much, to diſcouer and vnmaske, their loue to the Spaniard, at ſuch a time, whē vpon the borders of Picardie, thouſands of Frenchmen periſhed by their ſwords. Me thinks theyr Fatherhoods ſhould not ſuffer themſelues to be ſo much tranſported either by theyr owne affection, or by the generall vow of their Order, as to forget in what place they were bred and borne, & not to be touched with the leaſt feeling of the wofull calamities of their Country, eſpecially they being catholicks, whō the Spaniards thus ſlaughtered in great multitudes, without all remorſe, or reſpect either of age, or ſex.
            
               
This (mee thinkes) ſauours of a hart too ſauadge, and degenerate, to ſpeak ſo largelie in defence of them, who at the ſame inſtant were bathing their hands in the blood of our countrymen, and thoſe Catholicks alſo. VVhat though the Spaniards giue theſe Fathers reſpect, honour, & reuerence aboue ordinarie, though they binde them by many ſpeciall benefits, and ſinguler fauours, though they entitle them by the name of Apoſtles (as they themſelues doe publiſh in their writings) yet ought they not for all this (eſpecially in Fraunce) to vſe the ſame ſtile of them in the heate of war, as in the time of peace.
            In the Petition which they afterwards preferd to your Maieſty, they haue dilated this argument, though with greater libertie of ſpeech, yet with more reaſon, then at that time. Their wordes are theſe. And whereas they challenge vs to be Spaniſh: that was an accuſation, faſhioned in the forge of of time, and it bare a good test in that ſeaſon, (onely in reſpect of the ſeaſon) that is, while the warre continued betweene Fraunce, and Spaine. In thoſe dayes it was an odious name, a name full of ſuſpition and hate: but now, that that your Moſt Chriſtian maiestie hath knit
               
               the fast knot of a ſacred peace with his Catholick highnes, and that the French is brother to the Spaniard, and the Spaniard to the French, now is this chalenge out of date, it is vnſeaſonable, it is vnreaſonable.
            
            And yet (my liege) to tell you true, this I obſerue (beſides the too euident proofe, which we haue formerly had thereof) that through out all theſe glorious and painted ſpeeches, they ſtill diſcouer theyr harts to be mightily engaged to the king of Spain. The troth is, they haue an earneſt deſire to deliuer your Maieſtie of all iealouſie, and diſtruſt thereof, and to that purpoſe employ the vtmoſt of their art: yet notwithſtanding, a man ſhall perceaue, they would not at any hand, but your ſubiects ſhould take notice, that they remaine true deuoted ſeruaunts to king Phillip, preſuming that this opiniō, makes greatly to the aduancement of his affaires. Which when I compare with the ſentence of the Inquiſition, diſannulling the Determination of the Sorbone pronounced againſt the Ieſuits in anno 54, (as themſelues are wont to vaunt:) as alſo vvith their firſt foundation erected by a Spaniſh Captaine: and moreouer with thoſe wordes, which are contained in the

               Vita Ignatij. Printed at Anwerpe in anno 1587, page, 403.  Legend of their ſaid Patrone: Wee ought earnestly & vnceſſantly to pray to his heauenly Maiesty, that it would pleaſe him in health, and happines, long to proſper the Catholicke king Phillip, who by his hereditarie, and incō
                  parable pietie, and deuotion, his ſinguler wiſedome, his incredible vigilancie, his puiſſance, infinitely exceeding any Princes, that is, or euer was in the world, ſtandeth as a Bulwarke for the defence of the Catholicke Religion. And this he doth, not only by his forces, which haue euer been inuincible, but by the means alſo of his Famous Court of the Inquiſition, which ſtudieth day and night for the good of the Catholicke religion.
            
            When, I ſay, I compare all theſe poynts together, it makes me ſorely to miſtruſt (I muſt confeſſe it to your Highneſſe) that if misfortune ſhould kindle any freſh coales of warre, betwixt your Maieſtie and the Spaniard, you ſhould haue theſe falſe brethren ready, vnderhand to performe you al the lewd and bad offices that could be deuiſed. In the meane time, be ſure, they are not idle; but continually purſue the aduauncement, & encreaſe of their doctrine aboue mentioned, wherein they profeſſed, in the yeere 89, they had taken mighty paines
               
               with aunſwerable profit & ſucceſſe. [And we find it too true] For ſuch a Bull as the laſt, had it beene addreſt againſt The late kings father.  
               King Henrie the ſecond, it coulde not haue ſhaken the   leaſt Towne in Fraunce: which notvvithding, by the helpe of the Ieſuits, and theyr almoſt thirtie yeres trauailes, procured the death of his ſonne, who would haue made it but a mockerie, as his predeceſſors had done before him. Is it not wonderfull, that an armie of two hundred thouſand men, could not haue been able to effect ſo much againſt our late King, as about two hundred Ieſuits haue doone, by diſpoſing his ſubiects, that is, by drying vp their naturall ſap in ſuch ſort, as the fire tooke at the firſt touch: whereas before that time, al France was an Ocean, whereinto theſe kinde of thunderbolts no ſooner fell, but they fell out.
            True it is, that as long as your Maieſtie and your ſucceſſors ſhall continue in good termes with the Holy ſea, the maine fruite & effect of this doctrine will not appeare. And you are to hope, that you may alwayes ſo continue, but times to come can promiſe no aſſurance, and thats the reaſon, that in time of peace, you ſet men a

worke to fortifie your frontire Townes. It is almoſt impoſſible, that the Keyes, for three ſucceſſions together, ſhould eſcape the hands of a Spaniſh partaker, there being ſo many ſuch in the number of the Cardinalls: if that ſhould happen (giue me leaue to tell your Maieſtie freely & without diſſimulation) your crowne, ſcepter, & kingdome, would come to this iumpe: if there fortund more of your ſubiects to cleaue to the Ieſuits opinion, then to the contrarie, if their faction were the ſtronger, thē farewell crowne, and kingdome: if theirs were the weaker, you ſhould indeede continue 
                  •
               n your Soueraigntie, but not without the confuſion of many your ſubiects, and the effuſion of much blood, aſwell ſound, as corrupt.
            Furdermore, your Maieſtie is to conſider, that this doctrine of Excommunication, carries with it at this preſent, more danger, and perrill to our Realme, then in former times, when we had Sicilie, Naples, & Milan, which haue ſometimes beene ſubiect to the French king.  territories, & ſorces   in Italie: by meanes wherof we weare at hand to ſuccour the Pope, in caſe he might be forced to doe any thing to our preiudice. But as now the caſe ſtands, a 
                  Ʋiceroy of Naples, with the Spaniſh partakers, that

are within Rome, holde the Holy Fathers necke vnder their girdle, vvho might be thriſe beſieged, and ſackt, before we could come halfe way to the reſcue. Another inconuenience is, that Rome was neuer able to ſuſtaine it ſelfe, but by the ſupply of come from Sicilie, their granarie.
            And amongſt the reſt, this poynt deſerues ſpeciall obſeruation, that the Ieſuits, being guiltie to themſelues, of what perill theyr doctrine is to the ſtate of Princes, are carefull and warie not to diſcouer it, when firſt they creepe, & inſinuate into a State: but hauing once got firme footing, then do they ſpread it by degrees from hand to hand amongſt the people, who are by nature ouer-apt, and prone to receaue this poyſon. For what can ſound more plauſibly to the minds of a multitude, then to be releaſed of that bond of ſubjectiō, wherunto they are by their birth tied, & engaged? I know that men of vnderſtanding forget not that excellent ſaying of the Philoſopher, That for a man to liue in ſubiection to his Prince, is true, and perfect libertie: and the lawes both of Nature and Nations, doe teach and tie vs to ſerue, and honour that Prince, vnder whoſe gouernment we firſt

enioyed the light of the Sun: and that no fleſh and blood is able to diſpence vs, for that obedience, whereunder God himſelfe hath bound and concluded vs: but for one well diſpoſed mind, that is thus perſwaded, you ſhall finde three that are of a contrarie opinion, and the miſchiefe is, that cōmonly the ſtouteſt, the moſt reſolute, & deſperate fellowes, are ſooneſt caried down this ſteepe, and head-long diſcent; and a ſmall number of ſuch ſtirring ſpirits, prooue too hard for a multitude of others. Haue vvee not had experience heereof? I am verily perſwaded, that whē the late king was firſt proclaimed Tyrant in Paris, vpon pretence that hee was excommunicate by the Pope, and therefore to be expelled his kingdome, the citie affoorded two for one, that were of a contrarie beleefe, and would gladly haue ſeene him raigne peaceably in the Louver, and a douſen of thoſe rebellious malcontents hangd at the The place of execution within Paris.  
               Greue. But they ſtoode ſtaring   one vpon another: they wanted courage, they wanted not ſtrength. So haue three theeues many times by ſurpriſal robd halfe a ſcore Merchants. They that keepe the beaten roade, and continue in their natural obedience, take their reſt in the night,

and follow their buſines in the day: wheras contrariwiſe, ſuch as labour to exchange their old maiſter for a new, ſuch as ſtudy to ouerturne the State, they haue their aſſemblies by night, holde their ſecrete parlies, encreaſe their ſtrength daily: they haue no buſineſſe elſe to entend, (for they liue in the meane time vpon their ſecret penſions) ſo that in the end, they ſuddenly ſurprize the contrarie ſide. He that firſt laieth hand on his weapon, hath the aduantage.
            This then being ſo, that the Ieſuits, firmly vphold theſe dangerous Poſitions, and ſcatter thē throughout the worlde (as hath beene ſhewen) I aſſure your Maieſtie, the danger of ſuffering this doctrine to take roote, ſeemes to mee (I muſt confeſſe) to ouer-ballance all thoſe conſiderations, that may be alledged to the cōtrarie. For as for ouerthrowing the New opinions in Religion, we may ſay, and ſay truly, that as during the firſt fiftie yeeres, the opinions of Luther & Caluine were ſtoutly propoſed, preached, and publiſhed, ſo for theſe fiue, & twenty, or thirtie yeeres, they haue beene notably confuted, both by word, & writings, ſuch as for depth of learning, haue by infinite degrees exceeded all, that euer were ſet

foorth by men of former times. And our ſelues can teſtifie, that the beſt, & moſt ſufficient amongſt them, are daily reclaimed into the boſome of the Church: A matter that (in my opinion) ſhould work in vs all, exceeding comfort, and contentment. For theſe bleſſed conuerſions are not forced with the Racke, with tortures, or with terror of death: as is the manner of the Spaniſh Inquiſition, (vnto which, and to the forces of Castile, the Ieſuits wholy attribute the preſeruation of the Catholick religion, as hath beene formerly declared:) but by the ſword of the ſpirit, and the euerlaſting word, mildly deliuered by our Doctors, Paſtors, and reuerent Biſhops, whom I eſteeme no whit inferiour, for learning, to the Ieſuits, although they ſometimes borrowe their arguments, which are in truth very ſound and ſubſtantiall.
            And albeit the Ieſuits haue ſometimes furthered ſuch conuerſions, yet this I will ſay, that they are not (in my iudgement) ſo fortunate heerein, as are the Biſhops, and Doctors of our Church. Their carriage is ſo auſtere, and ſo far different from the nature of our French Nation, as it difaſteth men at the firſt encounter. They conuerſe

and company ſo much with Spaniards, & withal frame themſelues ſo preciſely to the imitation of their Paetron (a Spaniard born) that their lookes, their preſence, their faſhion, and behauiour, carie with them too great aſemblance of ſeueritie.
            Who ſo deſires to cure a ſick perſon, muſt apply himſelfe to his humor, and cal about him ſuch Phyſicians, as the patient can fancie and affect. Such are not the Ieſuits to Frenchmen: They haue in ſo furious maner thundred out ſuch intolerable blaſphemies againſt the deceaſed King, as the horror therof dooth to this day retaine an impreſſion in mens minds. Frenchmen haue a certaine inclination by nature, to loue theyr Prince: and that cauſeth their harts ſuddenly to riſe, and ſtart within their breaſts, when they heare ſuch outragious ſpeeches vttered againſt their kings. I once ſent them word, (for I once loued them well, if not too wel) by a cloſe copartner of theirs, with whom I had talke about theyr doings: that I was ſorie to ſee them ſo furiouſly enraged againſt a dead man, and that the ſeruices, which this vnfortunate Prince had performed to the Church in his life time, hauing in her quarrell ſo often

times, in ſuch a number of battailes, in ſo many ſieges, aduentured his deereſt blood, might (mee thought) deſerue at leaſt to haue his memorie ſpared, when hee vvas dead: They made him anſwere, there was ſome reaſon in that he ſaid, but the time required another courſe, for nowe or neuer was the ſeaſon, to ſettle and eſtabliſh the Catholick religion quite thorow Fraunce. I ſoone aymed at the meaning thereof, to wit, that they were determined, to worke the people into a diſlike with the preſent gouernmēt, vnder which they had ſo long liued, perſwading them to change theyr naturall Lord for a new, and vtterlie to extirpate the race & familie of Bourbon. And when I afterwards, beheld the Receaued into Paris by the Sixteene, where they remained 3. yeres.  garriſons   of Castilians, and Neapolitans within Paris, I tooke that to be an entrance to the accompliſhment of their former aunſwere: and to be plaine (my liege) I made reconing, the game had been at an end, & that your Maieſtie was neuer like to ſet foote vvithin Paris; iudging that the ſmaller townes would be faine in the end to ſtrike ſayle to the greater.
            But God who hath alwaies had a ſinguler care of this kingdome, the firſt

Chriſtned kingdome in the world, hath otherwiſe diſpoſed it, and hath by plaine miracle, in deſpight of your enemies, ſeated you in quiet poſſeſſion of all this ſpacious Empire, and to heape vp the meaſure of your happines, hath giuen you a beauteous, a noble, and a vertuous Princeſſe, and within ten months, (fore-ſtalling both our wiſhes, and our expectations) a true and liuely Image of your ſelfe.
            The care for this young Prince, more then for your owne perſon, exciteth your Highnes, with mature deliberation to conſult of all the important affaires of your State, in which number, this poynt touching the Restoring of the Ieſuits, may vvorthily claime a place.
            In this conſultation, one of theſe three courſes muſt be reſolued vpon; eyther to yeeld the Ieſuits abſolute contentment to their deſires, or to make them yeeld abſolute obedience to your Decrees: or elſe to  
               That is, neyther to reſtore them wholie into France, nor to remoue them out of Bourdeaux & Tholouſe, where they yet remaine.  
               let matters rest in ſuch condition as now they are.
            
            I will firſt enter into examination of the laſt branch, becauſe it beares at firſt ſight the moſt plauſible ſhew, yet is in truth the leaſt queſtionable: it beeing a cleere caſe, that the Ieſuits are, eyther wholie to be reſtored,

or to be enforced, wholy to yeeld obedience to your Decree. If it be iuſt, and commodious for your ſtate, that they be permitted to ſtay, then is it reaſon they ſhould remaine as inhabitants, and not as exiles: if otherwiſe, then let them be gone, and not be ſuffered, by their cōtumacie to giue example of rebellion, as they haue doone too long. The Lacedemonian ſtate, was wont to direct out but a ſmal ſcroule of Parchment, leſſe then your little finger, & theyr commaund was inſtantly to be put in execution. It is a matter of abſolute neceſſitie, that your Highneſſe be obeyed as well at Bourdeaux and Tholouſe, as at Paris and Fontaine-bleau. You want no ſeruaunts in thoſe places, and whatſoeuer you ſhall commaund, like a King, and abſolute Lorde, will be executed, make you no doubt.
            If the Ieſuits be incommodious to your ſtate, then ſuffer thē not to take any deepe roote in thoſe two Prouinces. The Tree which this yeere may be plucked vp vvith one hand, will the next yeere aske both: and the third, will neede a mattock, and an axe. This neighboring vpon Spaine, giues vs iuſt cauſe of ſuſpicion & iealouſie. They

haue been alwayes charged to be Spaniſh; they haue declared it in the whole courſe of their actions, the older this complaint hath beene, the truer, and 
                  〈◊〉
                it ſeemes to be. They haue beene ch
                  •
               ſed out of the reſidue of the Land, and doe you not ſee, how they intrench thēſelues anew in thoſe two Prouinces, adioyning vnto Spaine, frō whence they had their firſt originall? what example of lowlines & obedience call you this?
            If in any part of your realme, they ſhould be leaſt ſuffered to fortifie, it is in ſuch a frontier, as is ſituate far from our Sun, and neere to the climate of Madrill: A man would iudge, that Spaine ſets in, to backe them: or that they retire thether of purpoſe to barricado, & ſtrengthen thēſelues againſt your Maieſtie, as who ſhould ſay, You haue driuen vs out of Paris and other places, but your armes are too ſhort to force vs any further. Can this be borne? I cannot tel how certaine Of Bourdeux & Thoouſe.  Bourgomaiſters (ſo reputed) who haue beene ſometimes   trained vp vnder their diſcipline, and fitted to their humour & appetite, and who now ſo ſtoutly vndertake the matter on their behalfe, I know not (I ſay) how they conceiue

of it: but they muſt know, that they owe as much obedience to your Maieſtie, as the meaneſt vaſſall in Paris, none excepted. This is too high a preſumption, this is to open a contempt. Your want of iſſue hath hetherto made them holde you in neglect, (to vſe the wordes of an ancient Emperour) now make them knowe, that they ſhall owe their allegeance to you, and your poſteritie for euer, and it will make the proudeſt of them all to tremble. The remembrance of a treſpaſſe doone to the Father, neuer dies in the ſonne.
            
            It remaines then (my liege) that eyther the Ieſuits must yeelde obedience to your Decree, or elſe that your Decree must be diſanulled: behold the Gordian knot, of this cō
               ſultation. Many will reioyce at the firſt, & many likewiſe at the ſecond. To ſpeak my opinion, your Maieſtie is not (as I thinke) ſo much to reſpect, what will be pleaſing to this, or that particuler humour, as what is iust, and commodious to the whole. You cannot ſo carie your ſelfe heerein, but that you ſhall glad manie, & grieue many: yet muſt you reſolue one way, and not alwaies floate, and wauer between both. What ſafer anchoring can a man reſt vpon, then

               commoditie, and iustice: vvherein alſo honestie is compriſed?
            1. As touching iustice, God hath cōmitted it into the hands of Kings: The Kings your predeceſſors (my liege) haue from all antiquitie heere of disburdened themſelues vpon the conſcience of their The high Court of iu
                  
                     •
                  tice at Pa
                  
                     •
                  is, (as the Kings bench 
                     •
                  s with vs, & 
                     •
                  ot as our 
                     •
                  arlement, 
                     •
                  he aſſembly of the 3. e
                  
                     •
                  tates) wher
                  
                     •
                  n there ſit 
                     •
                  s Iudges, 
                     •
                  n weightie 
                     •
                  auſes, 12. 
                     •
                  eeres, ſixe Eccleſiaſti
                  
                     •
                  all, & ſixe 
                     •
                  emporall: 
                     ••
                   ordinarie 
                     •
                  aſes there 
                     •
                  re other 
                     •
                  udges ſub
                  
                     •
                  rdained. In ſeuerall Prouinces. 
               Parlement of Paris, & ſince for the multitude of cauſes, they haue ordained (b) ſeauen other Parlements. But the Court of Peeres, hath euer retained (as it was meete and requiſite it ſhould) the power, and prerogatiue, to decide all matters, that concerne the generall ſtate. This Bench is furniſht with many worthy perſons, and ſuch as are infinitelie practiſed in all ſorts of cauſes, but aboue al, in the determination, & iudgemēt of matters criminall. For if any men liuing doe proceede thereunto, with exact and ripe knowledge of the whole cauſe, vvithout doubt it is they: And there was neuer man vet called in queſtion, but if he knew him ſelfe to be cleere, would craue them for his Iudges before any other. Your Maieſtie can partly teſtifie as much.
            
               The whole proceeding of 
                     •
                  he Parlement of Pa
                  
                     •
                  is againſt 
                     •
                  he Ieſuits. It is not ſince laſt day, that this Parlemēt hath receiued Complaints againſt the Ieſuits: for in the yeere 64, they heard no leſſe

then ten Lawyers pleading againſt them al at one time: amongſt whom he that was Aduocate for the ſtate, (a very woorthy man, and a moſt loyall ſeruant to his Maiſter, as euer was any) did at that time, (a ſtrange, & wonderfull thing to tell) prognoſticate, and foretell, all their actions and proceedings, which ſince that time haue in our knowledge been verified, and accompliſht. When men afterwards ſaw al thoſe things fall out true in practiſe, vvhich hee had prophecied; as firſt the ouerthrow of the Vniuerſitie, beeing by them brought downe frō 
               thirtie to three thouſand ſcholers, (as before was ſhewed) & that the ſubiects began by litle, & litle, to ſhrink from the obedience due to their naturall Prince, & to fixe their eyes vpon a new Loadſtar: it made them begin to murmure, and ſay thus to them-ſelues (for the Ieſuits had by this time made their faction ſtrong and were growne terrible amongſt vs) all this was fore-told vs by Meſnil, the kings Aduocate, but we would neither belieue him, nor the Sorbone, which at the ſame time alſo prophecied, that this Societie was ordained for destruction, not for edification, & was like to breede great trouble and annoyaunce to
               
               temporall Princes. They are the preciſe words of the Decree: Your Maieſty if you pleaſe, may ſee the Originall.
            But when they beheld all order of gouernment ouerthrowne, the reines of obedience cut in ſunder, the Magiſtrates impriſoned, and ſome of them maſſacred, the multitude like Lions broke looſe, making ſpoile and hauock of all honeſt people, & then theſe holy Fathers ſounding the trū
               pet to this multitude, and heere Commolet, there Bernard, vomiting out a worlde of blaſphemies againſt their King, againſt their liege Lord, and on the other ſide glorifying the King of Spaine, declaiming in his praiſe, ſetting him forth for the mightieſt Monarch in the world, of greater puiſſance, of larger dominions, then the Romanes euer were: that hee would neuer forſake them, hee held them (forſooth) ſo deere, onely they ſhould take courage, & know their owne ſtrength: beeing confident, that his ſuccours for men, monie, & vittailes ſhould neuer faile them: Then in truth all well minded ſubiects, who had any impreſſion of the Flower de luce remaining in their harts, beganne to be toucht with deepe repentance, that they had not

in time giuen eare to theſe Caſſandraes: but repentance came too late.
            When your Maieſtie had reduced Paris vnder your obedience, it was expected of all hands, that you ſhould inſtantly haue hunted out all thoſe bad ſeruitors, who had with their enuenomed cups, poyſoned a great part of your ſubiects, and with open face declared themſelues ſworne enemies to the King deceaſed, and your ſelfe. But your Maieſtie, in your ſinguler wiſedom, thought it good, to let the matter remaine in the handling of the Court. The Vniuerſitie, which (not without iuſt cauſe) imputed their ouerthrow in particuler, (beſides the generall ruine of the State) to this Societie of the Ieſuits, preferd their Complaint into the Parlement, in May 94. The ſeculer Clergie of Paris did the like. The cauſe was pleaded in Court, á huis clos▪
                 but yet priuately, which was no ſmall benefite to the   Ieſuits: for if the doores had beene ſet open, the greateſt part of that, they vvere charged withall would haue beene witneſſed by the whole Aſſiſtants; and freſh ſupply of matters, was like daily to haue come in, during thoſe many dayes, that the cauſe was in hearing.
            
               
In this meane time, happened that ſtroke which God turned away frō your throat, and vſed your teeth for a defence againſt it. No man made queſtion, from vvhence this ſtroke was ſent, eſpecially after knowledge, that the actor was a ſcholer of the Ieſuits nurturing, of whom hee learnt (as himſelfe confeſſed) that the King was as yet out of the boſome of the Church, & therefore ought to be ſlaine, as appeares by his depoſition in open Court. And in truth, this deſperate, and accurſed reſolution, could ſpring from no other roote, but frō thoſe barbarous, and ſauage Poſitions before remembred. Such cōceptions are not ingendered by the ordinarie courſe of nature, eſpecially in the harts of French-men, who are far remote from Affrica, and neuer ſaw any Monſters, before the Ieſuits were ſcene in Fraunce. Our ſoyle produceth no ſuch venemous plant of it ſelfe, it cannot be, but ſome, or other hath ſowen it amongſt vs.
            Vppon this confeſſion they ſent to the Ieſuits Colledge, vvhere amongſt other things, was found a diſcourſe, pend by Father Guignard, and written with his owne hand; containing in it, the ſap & marrow of all this barbarous, this bloodie, this prodigious

doctrine. This vvhole practiſe iumpt with that which had been prophecied, but not beleeued in anno 64, & with other predictions thē newly foretold. The court proceedeth, to a full, & ſolemne triall (in the aſſemblie of the two chambers.) Guignard openly acknowledgeth this to be his owne hand writing, & Chaſtell likewiſe confeſt it, in preſence of the whole Bench, to be the Ieſuits ordinarie & familiar talke, that the king was ſtill out of the Church, (albeit he were turned Catholicke,) in as much as the excommunication ſtood ſtill in force: & that therefore he ought to be ſlaine: which in all poynts cōcurred with that which Guignard wrote, if without force hee cannot be depoſed, then let men take armes against him: if by armes it cannot be accompliſht, then let him be ſlaine.
            
            Vppon theſe proceedings, what milder courſe could the Parlement aduiſe on, then to aſſent to the Request of the Vniuerſitie: God himſelfe ſeeming by a kinde of miracle, to ſhew himſelfe as Iudge in the cauſe, by ſetting forth (without further miſchiefe) to the view of the world, the truth of that which had at ſeuerall times beene prophecied againſt that Societie, and which theyr

cunning ſlights, their ſmooth gloſings, and their fained pretence of pietie & zeale, had charmed vs from apprehending ſo ſtedfaſtly, as to take a ſpeedie courſe for theyr riddance from amongſt vs.
            Thus vpon full knowledge of the cauſe, the Parlement of Paris, pronounceth Sentence, by which they are awarded to depart the whole Land, and your ſubiects prohibited to ſend their ſonnes to any of theyr Colledges without the Realme: VVhich is a clauſe of ſpeciall importance: the execution wherof not beeing lookt vnto, your Maieſtie ſhall reape but halfe the benefite of this Sentence. For how ſtudious and careful wil they be, to ground ſuch children, as ſhalbe ſent them, in theſe dangerous principles, & to impoſe it, as a charge vppon theyr conſcience, to ſeaſon others with the ſame licquour? You are borne in hand (my liege) that it is a matter meerly impoſſible, to enforce the execution of this branch, and that men cannot be kept frō ſending their children out of the Land vnto the Ieſuits: it is not ſo; you ſhal finde it a matter of the eaſieſt performance in the worlde. For let there be a penaltie of a thouſand crownes inflicted for the firſt time, (the one mo
                  ••
               ie

thereof to accrew to the informer) and the ſame to be doubled, as often as the Decree ſhal be broken, you ſhal not ſee a man that will dare to tranſgreſſe it. And is not heere a matter of wonderfull difficultie, that it ſhould deſerue to be accounted impoſſible?
            By an other Sentence, is Guignard adiudged to die: his horrible blaſpemies againſt the deceaſed King, whoſe ſubiect and vaſſall he was, and his brainſicke doctrine againſt your Maieſtie, would not permit his life be ſpared, without the hazard and pertill of yours. This Edict carried, in all mens opinions, ſo great a weight of iuſtice, ſo great a force of neceſſitie, as it was no ſooner publiſhed, but Anno 1594 put in execution through all iuriſdictions, ſaue onely in In Languedoc. 
               Tholouſe and In Guienna. 
               Bourdeaux. For Tholouſe there was reaſon, it ſtanding as yet in terms of diſobedience with your Maieſtie, not  beeing reduced vntill Aprill in 96. As for In Guienna. 
               Bourdeaux, it was at that time repleniſht with moſt deuout Catholicks (but moſt vowed enemies to the Spaniards, and the Ieſuits, their vpholders) who thirſted after nothing more, then to ſee thē hunted out of Guienne, as they had beene out of all other

parts of the Realme. But the Ieſuits, hauing ſpeedie intelligence of this Edict, giuen out againſt them, had ſoone (as their wonted maner is) by means of their cōfederates, raiſed a mightie, & a ſtrong faction in Agen, and Perigueux, where the embers of the fire of rebellion, were as yet burning hote. There they cauſed to be framed diuers inuectiue Libels, but in ſo inſolent, & intolerable a ſtyle, as is not poſſible for anie man to cōceaue, that hath not been aforetimes acquainted with the pen of a Ieſuit. For in briefe, all the Courts that had adiudged them to exile, what were they but a crew of hereticks, that had ouer-ruled your Maieſtie to publiſh this Edict? You ſhall heare thē ſpeake it. The enemies of the Cathelicke, Apostolicke, and Romane religion, haue poſſeſſed your Maiestie, with falſe, and famed ſuggeſtions, to bring them into hatred, and iealouſie with you, and with your State: and without forme, or ſhadowe of triall, or entring into any due examination of the cauſe, haue condemned them to exile, & baniſhment. Did the Parlement of Fraunce euer receiue ſo foule, ſo vnworthy, ſo ſlaunderous an imputation, ſuch a vile indignitie? and not content with this, they proceeded further,

and brake out into threats, telling vs in their Peticions, that wee ſhould ſee an alteration in our ſtate for this geare: and that wee must not thinke ſuch an earthquake could be, without ſome change vpon it.
            
            In Frauncis the firſts dayes, ſuch a Peticion I will not ſay (for who durſt once haue entertained a thought of ſuch a one) but one that had come neere it almoſt in a worde, would haue coſt him his life, that ſhould haue beene ſo audacious, as to preſent it. This extreme preſumption, this inſolencie, theſe braues, theſe outrages, proceeding from them, and their broode, infected with their poyſon, (the effect whereof is, to ſet light by Princes, and by their lawes, and Magiſtrates) gaue meruailous offence to your Maieſties ſeruaunts, who were thorowly reſolued, to take ſuch order, as your Maieſtie ſhould be obeyed: and not to ſuffer your Edict to be contemned, and controlled. But the great number of Townes, which as yet ſtood out, and were ſupplyed by the Cittie of Tholouſe, cauſed them in wiſedome to haue patience for a time. They found, that the rage, & furie of your enemies, who as yet bare their ſwordes drawne againſt you, was not able to holde

out for any time, inaſmuch as they grewe ſcanted of theyr meanes, and that then order would be eaſily taken, for the execution of this Sentence: howbeit as we ſee, ſundry reſpects, & occurrences haue delayed, and put it off till this day: And this (my liege) is the plaine, and vndiſguiſed truth of the whole cariage of this matter: this hath been the proceeding, and iudgement of your Court againſt the Ieſuits, executed in part, and in part pretermitted.
            It is not vnknown to your Maieſtie, that the ſtrength of all States, conſiſteth in the maintenaunce, and execution of ſuch Edicts, as are concluded in theyr Supreame Courts. When we take in hand to reuerſe them, it behoueth vs to proceede therein with great aduiſement & circumſpection: it is a worke of high attempt, and of no ſmall, nor ſlender conſequence. All Edicts beare your name in their forehead, they cannot be violated, without wounding the Maieſtie Royall, whoſe iudgements ought to be irreuocable, and vnchangeable.
            Beſides all this (my liege) in this aſſemblie of both the Chambers, (whom they challenge for hereticks) they are not able to name ſo much as one man, that is not a

moſt ſound Catholicke, without the leaſt ſuſpition to the contrarie. They haue been theſe ſeuen yeeres in ſifting, and ſearching into their liues, let them ſay, were they euer able to chalenge any one of them? Then what a ſely, and friuolous allegation is it, to ſay, they of the newe opinion hate vs? I grant it to be true, but what were they of the new opinion able to doe in this aſſemblie? As much as in the Conſiſtorie of Rome: I ſpeake it confidentlie, not a iot more.
            Yet they wil not ſo giue it ouer: they ſay the whole Parlement hated them. I would know the reaſon? Is it, becauſe they came not to The Parlement of Paris was remoued to Tours in 1589. during the rebellion. 
               Tours? Howe could they hate the Ieſuits for that cauſe, when as the beſt part of the Being deteined for fear of the Leaguers, inſomuch as th
                     •
                   King vvas faine to appoint new to ſupplie their places at Tours. 
               Preſidents themſelues, neuer ſtirred foote out of Paris? Is it becauſe the Ieſuits are ſound Catholicks? Much leſſe: inaſmuch as the Iudges of the Parlement, are euery way as ſound as they, and without touch, or taint of hereſie. Then whats the cauſe they ſhould thus malice you? Aſſuredly, you are able to ſupply no aunſwere, that may beare the leaſt colour in the world, except you ſay they hate vs, becauſe wee were the fountaine of all the miſeries & calamities that haue fallen vpon France.

Let that be true, yet I ſay that this allegation of hatred, can ſtand you in no ſtead. If Catiline had been apprehended, ſhould he not haue found any at Rome vpright, and impartiall enough to be his Iudges? without queſtion hee ſhould. And yet I dare ſay, the whole Senate, and all good Common-welths men beſides, counted him the fire-brand of their Countrie. Belike vvee ſhould ſet vp a new Court of Peeres, to ſit in iudgement vpon Traytors, & thoſe that further the practiſes and attempts of ſtrangers.
            Where by the way (my liege) I will giue you this Item (which you wil allow mee, I know, to be moſt true) that if all your ſubiects had borne good affection to the Ieſuits, or had they borne the like affection to your Maieſtie, as the Ieſuits did, the Ieſuits had not at this time preſented you with ſo many goodly Peticions as they haue doone, you had neuer come within the Louver. Haue they the face to denie thys? If they haue, yet will not your Maieſtie cō
               clude with mee notwithſtanding? Theyr laſt ſhift (and that a ſtrange one) is this: that not knowing what to pretend againſt the iuſtice of this Sentence, they are driuen

to ſay: If Chaſtell did charge vs with this matter, or if we were guiltic, & culpable therin, why were we not put to death? I aunſwer; They meaſure other mens harts by theyr owne. For hauing themſelues ſate Preſidents in that bloodie Of the Sixteene, wherof a Ieſuit was Preſident.  
               Counſell, which to   make their tyrannie dreadfull, put an infinite nūber of perſons to death, they iudge that, meaſuring it by their owne courſes, they were worthy a more ſeuere and rigorous puniſhment. But will you knowe the cauſe, why they were not put to death? It was, becauſe they had neither Spaniards, nor Ieſuits for their Iudges, vvho at the Terceras in one day, and vpon one ſcaffoid, cut off the heads of eight, and twentie Eſquires, and two and fiftie Gentlemen, all Frenchmen, & hangd vp 500. gray Friers, or ſuch like religious perſons, for preaching in the behalfe of the King of Portugall. Wee in Fraunce hate and deteſt thoſe cruelties, we euer ſway and encline to pittie, ſo it be not cruell pitty. To take the liues of ſo many perſons, had been crueltie, & to harbor thoſe amongſt vs, who had cauſed, and committed ſo manie barbarous outrages, (beating their braines indeede about nothing els) had beene another extreame crueltie.

What third courſe then remained, but to baniſh them? It is an excellent ſaying of Tacitus. My Lordes, if you conſider the monstrous villanies of theſe men, hanging were too eaſie a puniſhment for them: but I can aduiſe you a meanes, how you ſhall neuer repent you, for hauing beene either too remiſſe, or too rigorous: Baniſh them all.
            
            Moreouer, the Ieſuits not hauing what els to exclaime againſt this Sentence, ſo behoouefull, and neceſſarie for the ſtate of Fraunce, breake into this ſpeech, (marke I beſeech you, how far their rage, & phrenzie doth tranſport them) La veri. def. page 183.  
               The Parlement of Paris, is no longer at Paris. VVhere is it   then? Where is this famous Parlement of Paris, ſo much renowned, ſo much admired thorow all Fraunce, thorow all forraine coūtries? Is it at Madrill? Is it thether that you will appeale from the King, and his Parlement? Is it there, that you wil triumphantly ouerthrow this notable Edict, as once you did the Decree of the Sorbone, in anno 54?
            Marke (my liege) note I beſeech you, the peremptorines, the inſolencie, the intolerable preſumption of theſe men, to dare to auouch in Fraunce, that the Parlelement
               
               of the Peeres of Fraunce, is no more in Fraunce, the Parlement of Paris, is no longer at Paris. But how can we expect, that theſe men ſhould ſpare this Court of Soueraine Iuſtice, ſince they ſubornd Barriete.  villaines with two edgd kniues, to worke the deſtruction   of their Soueraignes themſelues?
            Vpon theſe premiſes I conclude it to be iust, moſt iust, yea iustice it ſelfe, to enforce the execution of the ſentence of the Parlement. You cannot erre in following this path, a path beaten by all your predeceſſours, who haue been iealous of nothing ſo much, as of the execution of the Decrees of their Parlement. Otherwiſe, what aſſurance could they build, that their children, which they haue left ſomtimes in the cradle, ſomtimes in the wombe, ſhould cōmaund after them ouer ſo many large Prouinces, without the power of their iustice, which is the arme, and ſtay of their ſcepter, the ſupport of their crowne, and the prop, & piller of their ſucceſſion. Therefore whatſoeuer he be, that ſhall aduiſe, or moue your Maieſtie to vveaken the Edicts of your Parlement, vpon an important matter of your State, did neuer duly ponder the conſequence, the weight, the ſequell, of ſuch a

deed. You muſt neuer looke to haue anie thing firme, or ſtable in the worlde, after you haue once deiected, diſabled, & ouerthrowne, this the greateſt ſupport of your greatnes: your maine & ſtrongeſt ſortreſſe, both againſt the rebelliōs of your ſubiects, and the attempts of ſtrangers. So much for the iuſtice of this act, let vs now come to the commoditie and profite thereof.
            2. Who is ſo blind, as not to ſee, that this Sentence, ought to be reconed as one of the ſpeciall bleſſings that God euer beſtowed vpon you? If their Seminarie or nurſerie, Chaſtell woūded the King nine months after his entry into Paris. were able in nine months to yeelde an inſtrument, to act their murtherous plots, how many was it like to haue produced in the ſpace of ſeuen yeeres? There is great ods betweene the going of a hundred paces, and of eight hundred miles. VVhen Frō the Ieſuits Colledge to the Louver. a man hath leaſure to ruminate, and to aduiſe vvith his pillovve, hee oftentimes relenteth, and changeth his purpoſe: one good minute is ſufficiēt, & there be (as the prouerbe goes) foure, and twentie houres in the day: But when in the ſame heate of blood, in the ſelfe ſame furie, iſſuing forth of that helliſh Chamber of Meditations, hee may in an inſtant be in your boſome, there

lies the danger (my liege) this is an apparant, All this hath relation to Barriere: vide leſ. Cate. lib. 3. cap. 6. and imminent perrill. He needs not lodge at any Inne by the way, there can no aduertiſement be ſent frō Lions (your Maieſtie knowes what I meane) he cannot be deſcried by his tongue, nor deſcribed by his apparrell: there wil no intelligence come, no pictures wil be ſent you from any place abroade: the reſolution is no ſooner taken, but performed in an inſtant: And vvho doubts but ſuch a miſchiefe, the neerer it is, the more it is to be feared? To go one ſtep further, let vs coniecture by theyr former cariage, what fruite wee may expect from them in times to come.
            In the firſt place (my liege) it ſeemes moſt reaſonable, that your Maieſtie aſſent to that branch of their Peticion: viz: That the The ſaying of Lewes the 12. firſt duke of Orleans, & after King of Fraunce.  King of Fraunce, reuenge not the quarrels of the Duke of Orleans: that is, of the King of Nauare. This demaunde is full of equity: for whatſoeuer they haue wrought againſt your Maieſtie, by the commaundemēt of the late king, ought not to be cō
               ſtrued to their hurt: nay I will go further, it ought to make for their good: they did it in regard of the ſeruice of their king you were not their King at that time. Neither

to ſay truth, was this matter euer mentioned in their accuſations. But this is an ordinarie trick with them, to feigne monſters to themſelues, & ſubdue them when they haue doone. It was neuer layde to theyr charge, and had it beene, yet would it haue had no hearing in your Parlement. No, they tooke a cleane contrarie courſe: for amongſt a multitude of other matters, they entred into particuler examination, how the Ieſuits had behaued thēſelues towards the late King: concluding, that if they had well, and faithfully ſerued him in his extremitie, and diſtreſſes, albeit it had beene againſt his owne ſon (if hee had had a ſon) they deſerued praiſe & commendation for their labour. The late King, was no king of Nauarre, hee was no Duke of Orleans, hee was king of Fraunce: I will not adde that he was beſides theyr kind benefactor, and theyr ſpeciall fauourer in all their cauſes, (litle ſuſpecting, God wot, what horrible miſchiefes, they in the mean time complotted againſt him) for in ſaying hee was King of Fraunce, I conclude all: Hee was their Soueraigne, they were his naturall ſubiects, & tied in allegeance to him, what ſoeuer hee had beene, (and yet liued there

euer a more gracious Prince?) but let vs ſee, haue they acquited themſelues of thys allegeance? haue they ſerued him loyallie, or haue they not lewdly betraied him? this is the pith of the controuerſie: heere you muſt cloſe, and not trauerſe aloofe off, ſeeking out large fields of plauſible common places, therein to diſplay the colours of your Rhetoricke: you muſt come to the poynt of this Obiection. Liſten well what I ſay, my maiſters; it is not a Duke of Orleans, or a King of Nauarre, that I ſpeake of, I ſpeake of your owne King: Let vs heare, haue ye acquited your ſelues of your dutie, to this your ſoueraigne Prince, your kinde Soueraigne, your gracious King, who held you in ſuch high eſtimation, who euer vſed you with ſuch exceeding courteſie, & kindnes, both in word, and action? I am wiſely occupied, to aske them this queſtion: they will aunſwere me at leaſure: and to ſay truth, what can they aunſwere, which your Maieſtie ſhall not be able of your own knowledge to controll, & conuince? I appeale no further for witneſſe, then to your highneſſe, what words the late King vttered of them. I dare ſay it, there was neuer Prince complained more, nor more

cauſe had to complaine of the treaſons of his ſubiects, then this good King. And did he not, howſoeuer of a milde, gracious, & too too gentle diſpoſition, did hee not (I ſay) cauſe them to be expelled his cittie of In anno 1589, but they afterwards replā
                  ted themſelues. 
               Bourdeaux: the onely men amongſt all his ſubiects, whom hee euer proceeded ſo ſo ſeuerely againſt. An intallible ſigne, that they had beyond all meane, and meaſure prouokt, and incenſt him. But how can any man make queſtion hereof? Haue we alreadie forgotten, that it was iuſtified vnto him by good euidence in writing, that the Ieſuits were the originall founders of the League. They were the men, who by their Syrens ſongs, had hereunto be witched men of all conditions, from the higheſt to the loweſt, who knit, & contriued this cō
               federacie againſt the State; and at Rome laboured the Excommunication tooth, and naile againſt your Maieſtie, & afterwards made the bruite of that thunderbolt to be heard in Fraunce, hauing thereunto prepared the minds of your ſubiects with this accurſed perſwaſion, that the King was liable to the ſentence of Excommunication, and that being excommunicate, hee was no longer King, but a Tyrant, and Vſurper, and they
               
               diſcharged of their oath of allegeance? And who is ſo blinded with preiudice, but that he plainly ſeeth, that if Iames Clement had not taſted of this poyſonous doctrine, hee would neuer haue giuen way to ſuch a thought, as to vndertake the murther of his Soueraigne, of his liege Lorde, of his naturall Prince? Was it not this damnable opinion, ſetled, and engrafted in his hart, which incouraged him to ſheath his knife in the belly of the Lords annointed, which gaue ſtrength to his arme, to redouble the blow, hee being certainly perſwaded, that this Heroicall act, (as Guignard termes it) would beare him directly into Paradiſe? Is it the ſtone, or ſhaft, that cōmits the murther, or is it he, that ſends it? Who is (I ſay) ſo wilfully, or ignorantly blinded, but hee knoweth & muſt confeſſe, that when the Ieſuits firſt ſet footing in this Realme, the harts of all our Countrimen were ſo far eſtranged from theſe hereſies, (for I can call them no better; and to ſpeake truly, what hereſies can there be more dangerous, then theſe?) as that it was hard amongſt a million of men, to find one, who would euer haue entertaind ſo much as a thought that way? Contrariwiſe, our Aunceſtors marched

ouer the Mountaines, and made paſſage thorough Italie, to 
                  
                     •••
                  iface the 8. for excō
                  municating Phil. le bel. take him priſoner, vvho offred to excommunicate the King of the Flower de luce, and enioyned that preſumptuous Prelate, to open ſhame, & ſubmiſſiō, who ſcattered the firſt ſparks of this fire amongſt vs. To conclude, before the Ieſuits came to neſt in Fraunce, the harts of our countrimen were moſt eſtranged from theſe accurſed Poſitions.
            
            The Wherewith the Ieſuits are charged. 
               Apologie of Iames Clement (ſay they) is fathered by Boucher. It may wel be ſo. Boucher knowes, he ſhall neuer come at Paris to aunſwer it: (the ſentence of death giuen againſt For ſaving amongſt other things, that the king might be excōmunicated, which Boucher alſo, with other Sorboniſts, determined, page 15. of this booke. 
               Guignard, implieth his cō
               demnation) the Ieſuits liue in expectation daily to be receaued, Boucher then dooth but the part of a friende, to take it vppon him: and a faſter, and more aſſured friend then Boucher, the Ieſuits neuer had: and there was reaſon for it, he paſſed the whole courſe of his ſtudies in Diuinitie vnder thē: as all the Vniuerſitie can witneſſe. But not to dwell longer vppon that point, let vs take a view of the Bull it ſelfe, let vs open this damnable Apologie, and examine the ground, and ſubiect thereof, what is it, but this, that the King may lawfully be excommunicate,
               
               and his ſubiects freed from their oath of allegeance? And what elſe doe the Ieſuits preach, what other ſtring doe they harpe vpon through all theyr bookes, before alledged? Furdermore, what is the laſt cloſe of this booke, but that wee labour to finde out an Ebud? and vvho taught him that leſſon, but Before pag
                     •
                   38. 
               Commolet and Guignard: who writeth thus, If without force hee cannot be depoſed, let men take armes against him, if by war it cannot be accompliſht, let him be ſlaine. And a little before, this heroicall act performed by Iames Clement, as a gift of the holie Ghost, (ſo termed by our Diuïnes) hath been worthilie commended. &c. Let vs take a better ſurueigh of theſe wordes our Diuines: who may theſe Diuines be? Is it S. Augustine, or S. Bernard, or thoſe other fathers, men ſpotleſſe in life, & matchleſſe in learning? No ſuch matter: I haue ſhewed you the contrarie. Who are they then? They are forſooth, the reuerend Fathers the Ieſuits: men of a higher ranke (I wiſſe) then they. Theſe are Before, page 45, & Ieſ. Catechi. lib. 1. cap. 9. 
               Apostles, they are receiued into the ſociety and company of Ieſus: alas the other, which I named ere-while, are but his poore, & humble ſeruaunts, not worthy to vnlooſe the latchet of his ſhooe:

And for an vpſhot, this Father Guignard, who wrote theſe Poſitions, with a penne of ſteele dipt in the blood of our Kings, is by them Page 266. of the Apol. of Iac. Clement. lamented, as a great loſſe: and what doth this Defence of murtherers containe in it, more ſauouring of madneſſe, & lunacie, then theſe points I haue named? But let the Ieſuits aunſwere mee to this: if they did not giue allowance to that Apologie, would they ſuffer it to be ſolde publiquely in Douay? would they allow it currant paſſage in that place? For my part. I would not giue counſell to touch the life of the King of Spaine, ſooner would I loſe mine owne: no I am ſo farre from it, as I maintaine, that whoſoeuer ſhall attempt againſt the life of a King, ſhall vndoubtedlie receaue damnation for his hire. It is an attempt againſt the maieſtie of God, who hath eſtabliſht him as his Vicegerent.
            Indeede wee muſt confeſſe, the Ieſuits cannot bar this Apologie from being openlie ſould in Douay, and caried about from Inne to Inne, to be put away to Frenchmen which trauaile that way. Alas, theſe poore religious perſons can bear no ſtroke in ſuch townes, as are ſubiect to the houſe of Austria: they are not reconed of in thoſe

places (God wot.) I will tell you a ſtrange thing, and it is true. There is no man but knowes, how hard it is for a Frenchman to get entrance into the Caſtle of Milan: and when all is done, hee muſt paſſe vnder the name of a Spaniard, and at his perill to, if he chaunce to be diſcouered. Yet this I wil ſay, that let all the French Ieſuits, that remaine at this day in Guienne, & Languedoc, preſent themſelues before the gates, & let but one Ieſuit of Milan auouch them of his knowledge, to be Ieſuits, they ſhal preſently haue the bridge let downe, and the great gates ſet wide open to receiue them. Such a ſinguler vertue hath the die and tincture of Ieſuitiſme, as that it drownes all naturall colours whatſoeuer. And in truth, to what perſons liuing are the Spaniards more indebted, then to this Societie? who haue vndertaken ſuch toyles, and trauailes for the aduauncement, & encreaſe of their Empire, as they, whom onely they haue to Vnion de Portugal fol. 197. 
                     •
                  . thanke for the kingdome of Portugall, as their owne hiſtorie doth acknowledge?
            But from whence proceedes this vvonderful affection of the Ieſuits vnto Spaine? The cauſe is two-fold. The firſt taken frō their originall, which was Spaniſh, & that

was it, that firſt ingrafted in them this ardent affection, wherein they haue been by tradition frō hand to hand, nou
                  •
               riſht, bred, and traind vp. Secondly, they ſet it downe for a principle, that the Turkiſh Empire, can neuer be brought to finall ouerthrow, but by ſome Monarche of Chriſtendome, and caſting their eyes round about, they ſee none in their opinion comparable, for wealth, puiſſance, and poſſeſſions, vnto the houſe of Austria, in whoſe handes it the whole Empire, part of Germanie, and the Low Countries, the better halfe of Italie, all Spaine, and the East and West Indies: beſides that they eſteem the king of Spain the onely man, able to reduce all Chriſtendome to the Catholicke religion.
            No man knowes better, then your Maieſtie, how far the deſignes of the houſe of Austria tend and aſpire, who promiſe to themſelues no leſſe, then the Ieſuits vviſh them. Three The King of Spaine, the Duke of Sauoy, & the Archduke. Brothers by alliance, doe incloſe & compaſſe you on all ſides, from of Bayonne to Calice, they repreſent a A King Spaine fained to haue three bodies, told by Hercules. 
               Geryon: but ſo long as theyr cloſe cōfederats, who win them into the good opinion of your ſubiects, ſo long I ſay, as theſe be ſent packing out of your realme, you ſhal haue

no cauſe to ſtande in feare of the former. Geryon was King of Spaine, but hee met Hercules Gallicus, or Ogmius: Lucian in Here. with a Hercules of Gaule. Your Maieſtie knowes, that the fable of the Toiane horſe, was inuented to no other end, but to teach vs firſt, that fiftie cloſe enemies in a State, ſhall be able to effect that in one night, which fiftie thouſand open enemies cannot atchieue in ten yeeres. And ſecondlie, that there are euermore ſome, that perceiue La
                     ••
                  oon, & Caſſandia in Troy. theſe cloſe enemies, but their admonitions are neuer regarded.
            This hath beene hetherto truly verified in our ſtate: for there was neuer any thing fore-told, touching the Ieſuits, and theyr deſignements, but hath iuſtly fallen out: yet was there neuer any of thoſe predictions belieued, vntill the blow was felt.
            But to winne new credite to their cauſe, they alledge two things: 1. that they are a great number: 2. that they haue doone great ſeruice to certaine Princes. For the firſt, I vnderſtand not to what purpoſe this muſter of their numbers may ſerue, vnleſſe it be to ſcare, and affright vs. And I proteſt, I am afraide of them vvithin the Realme: but out of the Realme, I doe not feare, that theyr great numbers, will euer

come to beſiege Bayonne: prouided there be none of them left at Bourdeaux, to depriue vs of our ſenſe, and of the vſe of our handes.
            Perhaps they wil pretend, that this fruitfull encreaſe of their nūber, is an argument of Gods bleſſing vpon their Societie: but this were both a dangerous, and an abſurd conſequence. For it wil be a long time, ere they come to equall the nūber of the Sent into Fraunce by their king a Pagan, to muther S. Lewes: whence all martherers haue beene ſince called Aſſaſins. Ieſ Catech. 3. lib. Annal de Fran. fol. 1236. b. 
               Arſacides, or Murtherers. 
               Aſſaſins, men of their owne ſtampe: to omit the Arians, the Albigenſes, the Iewes, and Mahumetans. This is the common argument of the Lutherans, which the Ieſuits haue refelled, and will they now drawe it in, to ſerue theyr ovvne turne? This were an incongruitie.
            As for their ſeruices performed to certaine Princes; there was neuer queſtion made of their wit and abilitie: but what is there more dangerous in the world, then an extraordinary wit bent vpon miſchiefe? Then whereto ſerues ſo many great words of their ſufficiencie, did euer any man ſay, they were fooles? They are able to doe good ſeruice, vvho doubts it? but it muſt be to thoſe, who ſhall haue the good hap to continue alwaies in grace & fauour with

the Pope: and to haue no difference with the houſe of Austria: for in this caſe, whoſoeuer put his truſt in the Ieſuits, let him be ſure at firſt, or laſt, they will ſhewe him a iugling tricke.
            If your Maieſtie pleaſe to reade but the Orations of the Polonian Gentleman made in their Senate, you ſhal there ſee an Iliade of tumults, and ciuile warrs, amongſt the Chriſtians, which inhabite thoſe large and vaſt See Ieſ Cat lib. 3. ca. 1:  Countries (extending frō the North  to the Eaſt) ſtirred and excited by the onely meanes of the Ieſuits, who haue there cauſed of late more battels to be fought, then had been in fiue hundred yeeres before. Your Maieſtie hath ſome experience of their dooings in this poynt, if you pleaſe to call them to minde: once certaine I am, we neede not goe from home to ſeeke examples, vve our ſelues may ſerue but too well for example to other nations. I would to God we had not ſuch iuſt cauſe to complaine, and feare, as wee haue: which yet we cannot but double, when wee conſider the Conſtitutions of their Order, and the tenor of their Bulls, by vertue whereof they are ſworne to obey they Generall, 
               Summa cō
                  ſtit. pa. 307 
               per omnia et in omnibus, as to Chriſt, himſelfe, if he

were here in perſon. Aunſwere mee then, if God himſelfe ſhould commaund vs any thing, ought wee not to doe it, though it were for Abraham to kill his owne ſonne Iſaac? Who ſeeth not, that when a poore ſelie wretch, that hath beene bred vp in theſe Poſitions of the excōmunicaton of kings, ſhal be ſhut vp into this chāber of Meditations, and a ſecond 
                  Ʋarades bring him a cō
               maundement from his Generall, to murther his Soueraigne, being neere at hand: who ſeeth not I ſay, but hee will vndertake it, ſtedfaſtly belieuing, that otherwiſe hee ſhould be damned, and his ſoule be caſt into vtter perdition, for diſobedience to his Generall? But admit, that ten, twentie, or thirtie refuſe it, there needes but one to accompliſh this wofull and lamentable act. Aſſuredly (my liege) it ſeemes very ſtrange to mee, that theſe men, who are ſo earneſt with your Maieſtie in their behalfe, ſhould not ſet before their eyes, what themſelues haue ſeene & taſted heeretofore: or weigh with themſelues, that if a ſecond misfortune ſhould happen, both they, and theyr whole race, ſhould for euer be infamous throughout Fraunce. I would wiſh them to thinke vppon it, and to remember, that

nothing is ſo eaſilie hid frō ſight, as a lewd purpoſe, and that it is not in the power of man, to ſound the hart, & inward thought, God hauing reſerued that ſecret to himſelfe; and why will they then put it vppon ſo deſperate a plunge?
            If notwithſtanding all this, any of them ſhall obſtinately continue their importunitie, (as my truſt is they will not) yet conſider I beſeech you, that their faces neuer felt the Ieſuits kniues, that they were not the marke Barriere ſhot at: vveigh vvith your ſelfe, that ſome of their ſolliciters may be engaged in the cauſe, hauing manie waies to employ the Ieſuits in thoſe places where they liue: ſome alſo there may be that thinke Fraunce would continue too long without ciuile warrs, if theſe trumpets, and firebrands of fedition were not called home againe. All of them haue an eye to their particuler ends: euery man reſpects his priuate good. It ſtands your maieſtie in hand to aſſure your eſtate to your ſelfe, and your poſteritie, againſt all maner of ſtormes, tempeſts, and thunderclaps whatſoeuer.
            Yea but (ſay they) the Pope is become a mediator in this behalfe, he deſires it, hee
               
               would haue it ſo, and wil you denie him that requeſt, being ſo many waies beholding to his Holines? I aunſwere diuerſly heereunto. 1. Firſt of all, that his Holineſſe vvill not ſubſcribe to their doings, that ſhal endeuour to perſwade your Maieſtie, to a matter ſo hurtful to your ſtate, pretending for their reaſon, his requeſt, at whoſe hands you haue receiued ſo many extraordinarie fauours. For what greater burden, then a beſ
                     ••
                  e, (ſaith an ancient Writer) if it binde me to do that, which may harme my estate? And another more elegantly: If a man in reſpect of his former benefits, haue required me to do any thing, that hath turnd to my hurt, he hath not onely forfeited his due thanks, but moreouer, hath giuen me iust cauſe of complaint. A King of Fraunce were reduced to a miſerable condition, if he had no meanes to acknowledge a pleaſure, but by ſetting his ſtate and Country on fire. 2. Secondlie, I preciſely denie, that his Holines, would haue is ſo. He wiſhes Fraunce too well, he knows that himſelfe muſt depart the world: but this Societie, ſhall by ſucceſſion be continued to all perpetuitie, ſo that when they ſhall breake forth vppon vs, hee ſhall not be here to reſcue and relieue vs.
            
               
The Philoſopher ſaith that to knowe whether a man will a thing, or no, it must be in his power not to will it. And who ſeeth not, that the Pope hath not power, to denie the Ieſuits, whatſoeuer letters they ſhall ſue for at his hands? Elſe what would my L. the Cardinals ſay, who fauour the proceedings of the Spaniſh king, from whom ſome of them receaue yeerely penſions? VVould they not in bitter manner complaine, that ſuch men (forſooth) were forſaken in their neede, vvho vndertake ſo weariſome trauailes for the aduauncement of the Holie ſea? I conclude then that his Holines is cō
               ſtrained to ſigne all their demaunds, & will forced, is no will. 3. I will go one ſtep further,   admit the Pope would haue  A towne of the French Kinges, in Daulphine neere to Auignion.  
               Valentia ioyned to the Countie of Which be longeth to the Pope, ſometimes the ſea of the Papacie 
               Auignion, I demaund, whether it would be graunted, or no? Aſſuredly it would not. And doth not that, which toucheth your generall State, import more, then tenne 
                  Ʋalentias? 4. Fourthly, I haue beene taught, that the Decrees of our Parlement fruſtrate all ſuch Bulls, as may preiudice the liberties, and Canons of the Church of Fraunce, or the Edicts and Ordinaunces of our King, or the Decrees of our ſaid Parlement, but I neuer

yet learnt, that the Popes will might reuerſe the Decrees of our Parlement.
            
            What courſe is then to be taken in this matter? The courſe is plaine & eaſie: that his Holineſſe be fullie informed of thoſe weightie reaſons, which inforce an abſolute neceſſitie of putting the aforeſaid Sentence of the Parlement in execution. Amongſt which there is one very memorable, not heeretofore remembred: that indeede other companies, and ſocieties, did in thoſe times, affoord heere and there a man, who behaued themſelues in vile, and outragious manner againſt their Soueraigne, and therein matched the Ieſuits to the full. They marched (I ſay) hand in hand with the formoſt of them: if the one ſtrained his throat with thundring againſt the King, the other ſpared not his: whereof now the Ieſuits can well remember vs, they play the Orators therein, they retch that ſtring to the higheſt noat; their books and Petitions, containe wholie diſcourſes of that ſubiect; the ſumme vvhereof is, if we had a deepe hand in thoſe vndutifull actions, be you ſure there were of other Orders, who cam not far behind vs. But yet in all this they come not to the point: no, they will

none of that, that is ſlipt ouer in ſilence: that in all other Orders, though ſome there were, who bare a vehement affection to Spaine, yet there were others, which did worthy ſeruice at Tours, Caen, Renes, Angiers, Chalon, and thoſe other few Townes of note, which remained vnder the obedience of our late King. Theſe good men, woorthily deſeruing the name of Chriſtians, of Catholicks, of Religious perſons, ceaſed not in their pulpits, (the ſeats of truth, & not of leaſing, of comfortable inſtructions, and not of contumelious inuectiues) to confute, and ouerthrow, that miſchieuous doctrine of rebellion, which the Ieſuits, built and ſet vp in their daily Sermons within the reuolted Citties. But this is wonderful, this is that memorable point, that in the vvhole troope of the Ieſuits, there was not one founde, (one is a ſmall number) & yet I ſay againe there was not one, that from Whē the rebelliō began againſt the laſt king. 89 to vvhat time the king that nowe is, entred Paris. 94, was heard to let fall one word, that might be ſtrained to the good of his Prince, or countrie: but euermore vehement in behalfe of the Spaniard, and to qualifie the hard conceit of his gouernment. What can any man replie hereunto? Who can denie this to haue

beene a generall, a terrible, a monſtrous, a helliſh conſpiracie? and now hauing miſt their marke, they take vs belike for meruailous ſely ſots, if they hope, wee will keepe them ſtill in ſtore, that at the next opportunitie, hauing taken better ayme, they may deſtroy both vs and our State together.
            True it is (my liege) that to rid you of all feare, and feeling, they frame two allegations: One is, that they are mightily reformed, they are not the men, they were, whē your Maieſtie ſaw them, they are none of thoſe, that wrought you ſo many diſpleaſures. Secondly, it is alledged, that if they were willing to harme your Maieſtie, yet they want force to effect it.
            For proofe of the firſt, they make oſtentation of a ſolemne 1. Ieſ. Catech. lib. 3. ca. 13.  
               Decree concluded amongſt   them, that they ſhall no more intermeddle in matters of State. But let vs ſee, what date this Decree beares; they ſay of anno 93. Hath your Maieſtie then alreadie forgotten, that ſince that time, they haue practiſed twiſe againſt your life? Behold the performance of this glorious Decree, Doe not we know the generall exception of all their ſtatuts: Vnleſſe it be for the good
               
               of the Church, an exception, that extends as farre, as they liſt to ſtraine it? But will you vnderſtand, how they are reſolued, not to intermedle any more with the State, & the good reſpect thy carie towards it? Doe but peruſe their aforeſaid Apologie, giuen out vnder the title of The defence of the 
               La veri. def. 
               truth, and in the 229 page you ſhall meete with theſe words. But what kind of creature is this ſame State? Let vs behold her face, that the Ieſuits may no more intermedle in her affaires, and thereby incurre the heauie diſpleaſure of her iealous friends, and fauourites. And in the 231. page, Let theſe good Catholicks be aduiſed, what they ſay, accuſing the Ieſuits for intermedling in too many matters, & let them take heede, that they thēſelues ouerthrow not the state, by making ſo light account of their religion, and that in ſeeking the quiet, & peace of the earth, they both miſſe of it, & loſe beſides the peace of heauen.
            
            Is it poſſible, in a more inſolent, and preſumptuous manner, to profeſſe, that they will continue more then euer heeretofore, to worke the ruine and ouerthrow of the State, whoſe face they ſay they know not? And they haue reaſon, for they neuer harboured in their harts any other proiect, but

the ſubuerſion of States, diſauthorizing of Magiſtrates, and ſeducing of ſubiects from their allegeance. Moreouer, you heare how they proclaime thēſelues ſworne enemies to all that are friends to peace. Neither muſt it be forgotten, that in the very ſame page 229. to make odious to the people, all ſuch as wiſh the ſafety of your ſtate, your crown, & Scepter, they haue framed a new terme, calling them Eſtatiens. 
               Statemongers. During their tempeſtuous raigne, they termed vs Politicians, they dare no longer meddle vvith that word, it hath beene too often By the Edict of Pacification. called in: they coyne a nevve of the ſame ſtamp. An ordinarie tricke with their Fatherhoods.
            
            Your Maieſtie ſeeth then, in what ſort the Ieſuits accompliſh this painted Decree, which notwithſtanding they oppoſe as a ſhield againſt all Obiections what ſoeuer. But who euer heard, that any man was ſo ſimple, to build vpon ſuch promiſes, or to ground aſſurance vpon the like Decrees, or reſolutions? It would bear as likely a ſhew, if the Pirats ſhould ſend word to the Merchants, that they haue in a generall Synode, concluded to roue or rob no more, & that they may now ſafely giue thē leaue to ſaile

in conſort with them. A pretie tale to tell a child. And who is ſo ignorant in the courſe of matters abroad, as that hee knowes not, how the Ieſuits are as great, if not greater entermedlers, then euer they were? VVee   need not goe far for inſtance:  In ſome townes in the Lowe countries, as Douay, Valencienne, Turayne.  our verie next neighbours grone vnder their tyrannie, and ſtudie for nothing els, but how to be deliuered of them.
            But to digreſſe no farther from our purpoſe, I would faine knowe, if the Ieſuits were admitted into theſe quarters againe, vvho ſhould be their controller, or ouerſeer? who could haue intelligence vvhat meſſengers went to and fro to their Colledges, what ſecret aſſemblies vvere there holden, what counſels were there giuen: who ſeeth not, that they muſt foorthwith haue the raines as looſe, as in the yeere 88? I will yet ſay more, albeit men ſhould diſcouer their cloſe packing againſt the State, yet who, thinke you would be forward to detect thē to the Magiſtrate? who would not rather feare to ſee the yeere 89 returne againe, and himſelfe once more ſubiect to their importable yoake, eſpecially ſeeing them reſtored after their baniſhment?
            But when they find it ſo difficult a matter

to perſwade your Maieſtie, that there can be any want of ill will in a Ieſuit, they flie to the ſecond point, that theyr power will not ſerue, to harme a Prince of your puiſſance. And the better to diſpoſe your Highnes to the beliefe of this Article, they are not forgetfull throughout all their Peticions, to extoll and ſound out your victories, and to that effect they tranſlate into French, all the auncient Panegyrics, that be. Men are naturally delighted to heare their happineſſe, their puiſlance, the aſſurance of their State, and their childrens, and in a word, to heare their whole praiſes ſpoken. And in truth, when I heare ſuch, as holde you as deer as their owne liues, ſuch as loue you, with an vnfained zeale, and affection: it reioyceth mee, I ſay, when I heare ſuch men aduance your Martial atchieuements, and your victories aboue the cloudes. It is the due of vertue, it is her food & nouriſhment, it is her firſt foundation, it is her faireſt recompence. But let vs be warie (my liege) let vs be iealous, howe wee lend our eares to the enchaunting praiſes of our enemies.
            Auncient Writers haue recorded, that the moſt ſubtile kinde of Sorcerers, bewitched

by prayſing. Let vs take heed of theſe Syrens, that tickle the eares with their ſweet harmonie, thereby to bring the ſaylers aſleep, while theyr Bark ſplits vpon a rock. Doe you not (my liege) when you heare ſuch ſugred words flow frō their mouthes, do you not (I ſay) call to your remēbrance the wounde which you receaued in your owne mouth by a graft of their Seminarie? When you ſee theſe flowers of eloquence proceede from their pennes, are you not thereby put in minde, that by force thereof, their Rector confirmed, & encouraged Barriere. Oh my liege, they can wel ſet out in their Petition, how the famous Orator of Rome, extolled (the clemencie, I wil not call it, which is ſo long commendable, as it is ioyned with diſcretion, otherwiſe i
                  •
                it no vertue,) but the fooliſh lenitie of Iulius Caeſar, howe (I ſay) hee extolled it aboue his two, and fiftie victories; but they leaue out the concluſion of the ſtorie, they tell you not how Tully with his pleaſant language, rockt Caeſar ſo faſt a ſleepe, as that in the meane while, hee called about him from exile, all the deadlieſt enemies he had, who ſoone after ſlewe him with their poiniards, whom neither Mars, nor Bellona, nor millions

of armed ſouldiours, were able to annoy. Suffer your ſelfe to be trained in like manner, and they will ſpare you no more, then the other did Caeſar. And then vvill they be as forward to ſounde the triumph, as the ſame Orator was, who afterwards exclaimed: A fewe haue ſtrooken Caeſar with theyr weapons, but all haue ſlaine him vvith theyr wiſhes.
            
            Your Maieſtie (I know) will reply, that this great Emperour was an Vſurper: I aunſwer againe, that one skin of Romiſh parchment (according to the Ieſuits doctrine) is able to make you a Tyrant: a doctrine which they profeſſe, & glory in at this day, neither will they denie it heereafter, vnleſſe their Generall, (a Spaniard borne, as his 4. predeceſſors haue beene) allow them a diſpenſation ad cautelam, to couer their doctrine, thereby to worke their returne into Fraunce. But very hardly will they bee brought, ſo much to bite in their tongues, as to ſay, the Pope hath not power to excō
                  municate, and cenſure Kings, and to diſcharge theyr Subiects of their oath of allegeance, 
               
                  ••
               r howe ſhall they then reconcile theyr writings? Theſe cōtradictions would ſupplie matter of freſh accuſation, and new euidence

againſt them.
            But to returne to our purpoſe. It is alledged (my gracious Soueraigne) that you are ſo ſurely ſeated in your ſtate, ſo feared, and redoubted, as all things tremble vnder your might, and alas what hurt can you take from this poore Societie? This beares a faire ſhew, and ſo much the fairer, being as it is for the moſt part true, to our exceeding ioy, and contentment, and to theyr greefe and deadly diſcomfort. But firſt of all (my liege) weigh this, that theſe men, who ſo highly ſet forth your power, haue maintained, and kept their footing in two Prouinces of your Realme, in deſpight of your power of your Edict, of the Decrees of your Parlement. I knowe, of late they haue had a kinde of diſcharge, but it vvas long ere they had it. Furdermore, it may pleaſe your Maieſtie to remember, that in May 84, the late King was firmly ſeated in the inheritance of his Brother, his Father, and his Graundfather, hee was ſupported and ſtrengthened by a Brother, that had ſtore of men at commaund; and yet within foure yeeres after, the Ieſuits draue him out of the Louver: I ſay the Ieſuits, the reſt were but the armes, & the legs; they were

the head; they guided the Barke; vvho knowes it better then your Maieſtie?
            And yet (my liege) freely to vtter what I thinke; though I would be loth to adde to your iuſt feares, as neither would I diminiſh them at all (howbeit of the two, the latter is the more dangerous: for diſtruſt is a wholſome drugge in matter of a State, you haue often tried it, and it hath proued well with you) therefore (I ſay) freelie to acquaint your highnes with my thoughts, I doe not belieue, that in your dayes, (the number whereof God encreaſe, to equall thoſe you haue alreadie paſt) the Ieſuits ſhall haue free ſcope to play theyr parts on open ſtage: and yet I thinke, (and I make no doubt, but your Maieſtie will ioyne in opinion with mee) that it lies not in your power, nor the power of all your Parlements to hinder them, but that in all places, where they come, they wil with a light, and charie hand (as if they toucht it not) ſheade into the harts of your ſubiects their poyſonous opinions, concerning the point, and power of excommunication. This then is one Hurt, which you may take from them, and that no light, nor meane one, but of great, nay greateſt import: for what greater

can there be, then that which in leſſe perhaps then foure yeeres, may loſe your Highnes a million of ſubiects? O what a dangerous infection is this? This I ſay is a miſchiefe, which will happen in your own dayes, during your owne raigne, how vigilant, or circūſpect an eye ſoeuer you beare vpon their actions, you ſhall not be able to preuent it, thinke vpon it I beſeech you.
            Theyr Agents propounde certaine cautions, and I wot not what reſtraints, or limitations: their Agents abuſe you. Let vs ſee what theſe cautions be, ſhew vs thē, lay them downe vpon the Carpet. What? ſhall not the Ieſuits be allowed conference with any? Shall they be recluded from the ſight and companie of men? To what vſe ſhal they then ſerue? Shall they not inſtruct our youth? And yet this is the onely colour which their chiefe ſpokeſmen are wont to pretend: albeit in verie truth, they haue halfe eclipſed the beams of learning, which great king Frances, the patrone of all good literature, reſtored in Fraunce, (and there is no remedie for this euill, but by taking avvay the cauſe thereof throughout the Realme.) They ſhall haue our youth then vnder their tutoring: If be admitted,

how can we thinke to hinder them, from ſeaſoning their ſcholers with all thoſe peſtilent documents, whereof wee haue ſpoken?
            But admit, they be not reſtored to the libertie of a Colledge, yet can you not abbridge their ancient conſorts (the dregs & ſinke of cities) frō comming at them. And God knowes, what ſtrange effects nouelties breede in Fraunce. God knowes what trumpets, what fore-runners are alreadie com, God knowes how they would ſound victorie, and aduance their enſignes again. Shut vp their gates you will not, to barre men from all recourſe vnto them: the pretext of pietie wil neuer be to ſeeke: moreouer, with what importunity is your highneſſe like to be daily aſſaulted, as well from within, as from without your Realme, for the calling in of theſe Orders, & reſtraints, which are nowe propoſed onely for a colour, to make way for theyr entrance. They that nowe ſo buſily offer theſe conditions, wilbe the firſt that ſhal opē their mouthes, for the reuoking of them, and for the entire reſtoring of the Ieſuits. This is it, they whiſper into the Ieſuits eares, accept of this onward, get but your ſelues in againe, let vs

once make a breach in the Edict, and take you no thought for the reſt. How manie ſollicitors will they finde in their preſence, who haue ſuch a number to ſue for them in their abſence? And then ſhal your Maieſtie want the maine ſhield of that Decree of Parlement, which would be kept inuiolate: for what fairer excuſe can you haue, to aunſwer all importunity withall? & this ſhield beeing once broken, what ſhall you haue then to alledge, why they ſhould not be reſtored to as ample libertie, as they enioyed in 88? vnleſſe peraduenture you ſay, they be dangerous people. Oh my liege, why doe you not nowe ſay it? Haue you not in freſh memorie, examples enowe of theyr dooings? If you haue not, doe but looke out at your window, you can hardly be in any part of your realme, whence you may not behold infinite ruines of houſes, which they haue brought to aſhes, innumerable Orphans, which haue reduced to beggerie. Doth not this moue your hart? I know it doth: your hart 
                  〈◊〉
                tender, not to feele the touch heereof. But their Agents holde you faſt by the throat: haue you no armes to free your ſelfe? Oh my liege, this is but a hundreth part of the miſchiefe, they are

like to proue, euen in your dayes. If your Maieſtie loſe this leafe of paper in ſome corner of your Cloſet, and fortune hereafter to finde it againe, you ſhall then witnes whether I haue ſpoken truth, or no.
            But grant, they wil not dare to mutter, ſo long as they ſhall behold your face, ought the wiſedome and forſight of a Prince, to extend no further, then his owne time, eſpecially hauing iſſue, to ſucceede him? Men in time of health (my liege) feele not many blinde infirmities, which in ſicknes grieue and paine them. So fares it vvith great States, & policies: for when by ſuch accidents, as pleaſeth GOD to ſend, they come to be diſtempred, a number of ſicke, and crazed humours, then breake forth, which during the health, and flouriſhing eſtate thereof, were neuer perceiued. Theſe are the times, theſe are the opportunities, which the Ieſuits ſhly await, and attend: and neuer faile to lay hold on them, when they fall. If they be not able at the firſt aſſault to force the place, they double theyr ſtrength at the ſecond, & againe redouble it at the third. Perſeuerance caries it in all things. The defendants haue not alwayes the ſame ſpirit, and courage to reſiſt.
            
               
What more dangerous diſeaſe, then a relapſe, which yet is the more inexcuſable, being occaſioned by our owne default, but moſt of all, when wee knewe before hand, by what meanes this miſchiefe was like to grow, and had no care to preuent it. God grant I may proue a falſe prophet, but my hart preſageth, that the Ieſuits will in the end, reduce this vvhole Countrey into aſhes: wee haue once alreadie ſeene it on a light fire, they kindled it, they brought it to ſo terrible a blaze, as that it was ſeene from Aſia. We had then as it fortuned, a Prince of rare perfection, exceeding couragious, an expert ſouldiour, wonderfull vigilant, all yron to endure labour, all ſteele in warlike encounters, who for that time, ſmotherd thoſe flames: but GOD giueth not at all times ſuch worthy Princes, eſpecially, in the vigor of their yeres. And who ſeeth not that at the firſt ſunne-ſet of this raigne, that fire ill put out, will break forth anew into greater flames, then euer before, and vtterly deſtroy, and conſume our children. Ah my poore infants, it is your caſe that I lament, as for my ſelfe, my declining age doth exempt me from this feare.
            Mee thinks (my liege) I heare one whiſper

in your eare to this effect: It is true, theſe allegations are auouched to your Maiestie vnder writing, and carie no ſmall probabilitie with them, yet can I not conceaue, howe the Ieſuits coulde make ſo large offers of ſeruice to your Maiestie, if their doctrine vvere ſuch indeede, as wee heare it ſaid to be. And it may be, hee that ſpeakes this, ſpeakes it from the truth of his hart, & out of an honeſt meaning, as, I am perſwaded, the moſt part of thoſe, that appeare in their cauſe, know not the truth of theſe matters, which I haue recited; for if they did, they would bee as earneſt ſuiters to your Highneſſe, to cōmmaund the abſolute execution of the Edict, as now they are importunate ſolliciters to haue it infringed. Behold then the cleere manifeſtation of the ſimple truth.
            When the Ieſuits, preſented to your maieſtie thoſe Peticions, ſo gloriouſly ſet forth, ſo full of ſmooth inſinuation, ſo fraught with alluring perſwaſion, ſo flowing vvith ſweet and elegant phraſe, you ſtoode at that time, in good cōdition with the Pope. VVhat reaſon might then diſſwade them from offring you their ſeruice? What had they elſe to ſay? was it their courſe, ſtill to proclaime themſelues your vowed & capitall

enemies? Was that the way to Paris? But doe you not obſerue this (my liege) that in the whole volumes of their Peticions, (though otherwiſe vnreaſonable long) they haue not launced, no not ſo much as toucht this point of the queſtion, this knot of the controuerſie, this doctrine ſo pernicious, to wit, whether they do not beleeue, and accordingly teach, that the Pope hath power to excommunicate kings, and to enter-meddle with their crownes, vvhich is the ground, & foundation of all the murthers that haue beene either acted, or attempted in Europe, and the ſpring, and fountaine, of all the calamities, which we haue endured, ſince this damnable doctrine began to be ſo currantly diſperſed amongſt vs. This is the point (my Maiſters, you that frame thoſe elegant Orations) this is the iſſue, wherein you are to ioyne, and not to tel vs a ſtorie, what obedience ſubiects owe naturally to their Prince. A ſtrange noueltie forſooth! but haue you not your exception at hand? And what is that? Mary that [we owe obedience to Kings] ſo far forth as they be not excommunicate by the Pope, who hath power to vnlooſe all their ſubiects from their oath of allegeance. This is the

hindge of the whole cauſe: aunſwere vs heerevnto directly, without equiuocation: is it true, that you bring this exception, or are you wrongfully charged ther-withall? But why doe I looſe time, in demaunding what they hold in this point? You haue their bookes, they are loden with this doctrine, they call, and beate vppon no other point but this. From what fountaine haue iſſued all the miſeries which wee haue endured, if not from this? Are we ſenceleſſe, trow you? Who cauſed the Excommunication againſt the late King to be receaued in Fraunce in 89, which without the Ieſuits help, had taken no better effect, then the other of Againſt the King that nowe is, which was condemned by the Par
                  
                     •
                  ement then holden at Tours, to be 
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  nt open
                  
                     •
                  y by the executioner. 91 did in Tours, where there were no Ieſuitical ſpirits, no harts ingaged to the Spaniards? Doe wee not ſee that they are, and euer haue beene ſo far from denying this doctrine, as that cōtrariewiſe they haue gloried in it, as hath beene declared in the beginning of this diſcourſe? But doe wee take them to be ſo voyde of iudgement, as in their Petitions, to touch this ſtring? It ſhould then appeare, they had not well learnd their Rhetoricke, which teacheth to ouer-ſlip in ſilence thoſe obiections, which wee are not well able to aunſwere:

the reader doth not alwais giue ſuch heedfull attention, ſuch a matter is ſoone forgotten: if we aunſwere any thing neere it, it ſufficeth. And had euer Orator better proofe with a point of art, then the Ieſuits with this? Who did euer giue your Maieſtie notice, that they paſt ouer the maine point of the cauſe? or had you euer this caueat giuen you, that the Ieſuits bring their wordes but halfe way out, that they ſpeake not plaine French, that they gloſe vvith you, now you are in termes of amity with the Pope; but tell you not, vvhat they would do, if God ſhould ſo afflict vs, as to call the Pope that now is, and to raiſe vp in his ſtead, a Who excōmunicated Philip de bel. 
               Boniface the eight, a Who interdited Charles the 6. and his Realme. 
               Bennet the 13, or a Who excōmunicated Lewes the 12. 
               Iulius the ſecond, to ſend forth the like excommunications, as were by them thundred out againſt our Kings, the most Christian, the moſt Catholicke, and the moſt auncient Kinges of Chriſtendome? We haue ſufficient knowledge (my liege) by all their writings, by the whole courſe of their actions, and by their open profeſſion in the pulpet, that at one ſuch clap (if their wordes might carie credite) they vvould make you, or any of your ſucceſſors, a king without ſubiects, a Lord without land, a

priuate perſon, accurſt, and giuen ouer, a ſpectacle of miſerie, an outcaſt, & an exile, in a word, ſuch a one, as they were once in good hope to haue made, and indeede had made you, and the late King, if all the Catholicks in Fraunce had been ſound Ieſuits, ſuch as you are now counſelled to make them, by recalling theſe Apostles, thorowly to inſtruct the Fathers, and deepely to imprint into the mindes of their children this article of beliefe, that you, & your whole posteritie, may vvith one Bull, be for euer remoued from the throne of 
               From whō this King is diſcended. S. Lewes.
            But what ſhall I neede to inſiſt vppon reaſons, when I can inſtance by examples, ſuch as may touch your Maieſtie to the quick? I know (my liege) you haue learnt and gone thorowe a number of hiſtories, (you haue in my hearing recounted many, which ſom that went for great Clarks, had neuer heard tell of) but though you had neuer learnt more then this, yet this I am ſure you haue learnt, which I will briefelie recite, for it cannot be thought, but that you haue quite forgotten it. In the yeere 1512, Katherine, Queene of Nauarre, had nine and twentie yeeres enioyed her kingdome, deſcended vnto her by the death of

               Fraunces Phoebus, her brother, and ſucceſſiuely from a number of Kings her aunceſtors: ſhee had beene eighteene yeeres crowned with Iohn d'Albret, the king her husband, in The chiefe cittie of Nauarre.  
               Pampelune: God had giuen  them iſſue, one ſonne, & three daughters: their realme was in ſo flouriſhing eſtate, and of ſuch puiſſance, as euermore it put the Castilians and Arragonians to the worſt. At this time they were in firme league with them both, and in faſt, & auncient alliance with the crowne of Fraunce, exceedingly beloued of Lewes the twelfth, a mightie King, and a gallant Warriour, to be ſhort, all Europe, to any mans iudgement durſt not haue thought of making any attempt vpon thē: notwithſtanding, in that yere of 1512, did the Iulius Secundus. Pope, in malice to the French Nation, ſhoote forth his bolt of Excommunication, againſt theſe Princes, abſolued their ſubiects from their oath of allegeance, and abandoned their realme for a pray to him that could first ſeaze it: as is the ordinarie ſtile of their Excommunications. By force of the ſame Bull vvas Lewes the twelfth. our King ioyntly excommunicate, as In anno 1510. before time he had beene. But what ſequel had it? For the French, there was not one man of them

that did ſo much as ſtagger in their allegeance; but cleane contrarie (mark I beſeech you my liege, the good diſpoſition we had by nature, vntill our teeth were ſet on edge with the Ieſuits doctrine: the obſeruation heereof, will giue you the better light, to iudge hovve great a vvounde they haue made in your Realme) cleane contrarie, I ſay, all our aunceſtors then liuing, not one excepted, doubled their reſolution, to ſerue and follow their King, mauger the malice that Pope Iulius bare him, and did ſo enflame their zeale & affection toward their Prince, as they were in a manner fond of his ſight, calling him, their Father, their Protector, their good King, to be ſhort, the title of Pater patriae, is to this day annexed to his name, & ſo ſhall continue for euer.
            On the otherſide what enſued in Nauarre? The King & Queene called a Parlement, at Tudelle: there did the ſubiects firmlie reſolue to abide in their allegeance to the death, notwithſtanding the Popes thūderbolts. But within a while after, there ſtept forth a crew of ſeditious fellowes, diſcontented perſons, men of a ſhipwrackt & deſperate eſtate, & thirſting after change, who notwithſtanding haue euermore at

hand the maske and pretext of religion, ſo as, to heare them ſpeake, you would take thē for the onely Catholicks in the world: theſe fellowes, I ſay, began to ſprinckle amongſt the people, the doctrine before mentioned, which ſince that time we haue ſeene powred out in Fraunce by the miniſtration of the Ieſuits. But what was the iſſue hereof in Nauarre? This: that this ſeditious crew, ſtrooke all the reſidue of the ſubiects into a dead Palſey, tooke frō them the vſe of their armes, and legges, ſome by force of Religion, ſome by feare of theyr threats, and menaces: inſomuch as theſe Princes (your Maieſties great grandfather, and grandmother) wereWhen the King of Spaine, came to inuade them, by warrant of the Bull.  left in the midſt of their ſubiects without ſubiects, in the   midſt of their ſeruaunts without ſeruants, in the midſt of their armie, without ſouldiours. To conclude, there was neuer reuolt heard of, neuer treaſon committed, ſo foule, ſo ſhamefull, ſo miſerable: the poore Princes beeing driuen, with their foure infants, (from one of which your Maieſty is deſcended) to flie for ſafegard into France: a skin of parchment hauing effected that in the ſpace of an houre, which all Arragon & Castile, were not able to atchiene in

a thouſand yeeres. For a Prince to be driuen out of his Realme, hauing beene firſt broken and diſcomfited in three, or foure maine battailes, is a caſe which affoords varietie of example, and thereby ſupplies ſome comfort; but to ſee himſelfe driuen by force out of his kingdom, & not a ſubiect of his, once to drawe his ſworde in his quarrell, and all vnder the ſhadow of religion, this exceedes all the ſorrowes, all the diſcomforts, all the miſeries, which either the world can exemplifie, or mans wit can imagine.
            The yeere following, viz. 1513, our king, touched with a iuſt compaſſion to ſee a King and a Queene, for his ſake, cleane thruſt out of their kingdome, prepared an armie, which marched ouer the Pyrenaean mountaines, directly to Pampelune, charging the ſame ſo cloſe, as that Liſle, Villiers, and Cannay, aduaunced their colours vppon the walls, but it was defended vvith ſuch reſolution within, as they were forced to retire, without dooing any good. About eight yeeres after, at the inſtance of the ſaid Albret king of Nauarre, king Fraunces ſent a ſecond Armie, which by force poſſeſt Pampelune, but it was ſoone after regained

by the Spaniard. In this ſeruice, Jgnatius Loyola, one of the Captaines of the Spaniſh companies, behaued himſelfe verie valiantly, albeit his valour Vita Ignat
                     ••
                   in the beginning.  coſt him at that time one of his legges, beſides that the   other was grieuouſly wounded.
            This Captaine is the Patron and founder of the Ieſuits, and marke (I beſeech you my liege) whether the diſciples haue not at an inch followed their Maiſters footſteps: whether they haue not continued their feruent affection towards the kingdome of Castile, & their vehement hatred towards the Realme of Fraunce. Their Patron was a great meanes to retaine the Nauarrians vnder the Spaniſh yoake, and his followers haue ſet the libertie of Fraunce vppon the deſperate chaunce of one battaile: I ſay of one: for wee could not haue loſt one battaile, without looſing your highneſſe, inaſmuch as you would neuer flie to any other retreit, but to the ſtandard of the Flower de Luce: and then looſing you, who ſeeth not, that Fraunce, had beene in the ſame condition, that Nauarre, is, remaining like a Gally-ſlaue vnder the yoake of Spaine, working at their Ores, & fettred in their chaines?
            
               
Let vs proceed one point further. Their Patrone was a chiefe Commaunder in the Spaniſh garriſon within Pampelune: and his followers likewiſe planted, and vpheld for the ſpace of three yeres, a Spaniſh garriſon in Paris. But al this is nothing to that, which now I come to touch. The diſciples of this Loyola, foreſeeing out of theyr ſharpe, and percing iudgement, that the The King hat now is.  grandchild of this King, & this Queene, (ſo miſerablie turnd out of their inheritance)   would one day become the terrour of Spain, haue left nothing vndone, which could fall into the imagination of the moſt vowed, and mortall enemies in the world, for the extirpation of this young branch. And ſeeing him in deſpight of theyr malice, mounted into the throne of S. Lewes, they haue redoubled both their feare, and their practiſes againſt his perſon & State, powring out in ful meaſure vpon his people the ſame poyſon, which had before times beene the principall meane of the loſſe of Nauarre, and which could neuer haue beene brought into Fraunce, but by theſe politicke, and preſumptuous Mountebanks.
            No part of theſe proceedings is vnknown

to this heire of Queene Catherine, & yet notwithſtanding, I know not what influence, or maleuolent aſpect, as fatal, & ineuitable to Fraunce, as to Nauarre, hath in a manner ouer-wrought him to harbor theſe ſectaries of Loyola in his Realme, out of which, by ſolemne ſentence of his High Courts, they haue been baniſht, and expelled. Can any man beleeue ſo ſtrange a ſtorie, that a Prince, after hee hath ſo manie yeeres encountred the Lyons skin, ſhould in the end ſuffer himſelfe to be ſurprized with the Foxes caſe?
            But the world yeeldes not euery day a Iulius ſecundus. True. Neyther affoords it euery day a crowne to loſe. But there needs not euery day a Iulius, one will ſuffice for all, prouided he find the French as wel prepared, and diſpoſed as hee did the Nauarrians. O my gracious Soueraigne, enter (I beſeech you) into a ſerious conſideration, of this which nowe I ſhall deliuer. The Againſt Lewes the 12. 
               Excommunication of Iulius, coulde not make one towne in Fraunce to ſhrink: the Againſt the late King. 
               excōmunication of Sixtus, cauſed a reuolt in Paris, Lions, Roane, Tholouſe, Marſeilles, Amiens, Narbonne, Orleans, Bourges, Nantes, Troyes, Digeon, and infinite others.
            
               
Howe thinke you by the Ieſuits? Are they not woorthy Champions? Are they not gallant fellowes? If in thirtie yeeres ſpace, they haue profited ſo well, vvhat would they haue doone in continuance of time, hauing alreadie ſhaken, and weakened ſo many conſciences, hauing ſeaſoned with their doctrine ſuch a nūber of young ſtudents, who daily grewe into charge of ſoules? Whence is it, that in all ſocieties, the ancienter ſort haue been for the moſt part your loyall ſubiects, and the younger almoſt all your profeſt enemies? Whence is it, that wee haue ſo often ſeene the ſon directly oppoſite in opinion to his Father, but that the auncient ſort did neuer ſucke this milke of Ieſuitiſme?
            But will your Maieſtie beleeue, that they can be ſo audacious, as to glory and vaunt, how great, and ghaſtly a wound they haue made in the harts of your ſubiects, vvhich they enlarge, teare wider, and make bigger from day to day? I neede but to make recitall of thoſe words, which I formerly copied out of their Apologie. And therefore we ſee that this ſword hath beene practiſed, & put in vre in the perſon of many Kings, & in many kingdoms. And albeit the practiſe hath
               
               not alwaies ſucceeded, yet might it alwais haue doone, if the ſubiects had beene well prepared thereunto. Doth this neede an interpreter? doth he not tell you: Frenchmen were not in auncient times well prepared to reuolt from their Kings at the firſt thunderclap of excōmunication; but contrariwiſe, they redoubled their loue, and allegeance towards them; but in thirtie yeeres ſpace we had wrought and prepared ſo great, and ſo good a number of them, as wee were in a neer poſſibilitie to obtaine a full conqueſt. If by our policie, and the mediation of our many friends abroade, wee can but maintaine our footing in Fraunce, wee will ſo thorowly diſpoſe & prepare their mindes, as that the next time wee doubt not to ſound an abſolute triumph.
            Surely your Maieſties poſteritie ſhall ſtande greatly bounde vnto you, if you ſo miſerably inthrall, & in danger them to the luſt and humor of the next Spaniſh partaker, that ſhall be aduanced to the Holy ſea: by reſtoring thoſe, who are ſo hardie, and preſumptuous, to ſowe this ſchiſmaticall doctrine, and which is more, to glory in it, to proclaime it openly, to publiſh it commonly, and thereby to keepe the maine

buſines continually on foot. To what purpoſe dooth your Maieſtie ſo cheriſh that young infant in the cradle, if in the meane while you bring in theſe Maſons, to raiſe ſtrong forts within his realme, that at the firſt ſound of the trumpet, all his ſubiects may be ſtrooken into as great an amazement of their ſences, into as great a numnes of their ioynts, in a word, that they may be found as well prepared or diſpoſed, as the Nauarrians were in 1512? Is it not enough that this doctrine hath loſt him Pampelune, vnleſſe it rob him of Paris alſo?
            True it is, that the Ieſuits in their Petitions offer ſureties, to warrant, & ſecure you, and yours, from all danger whatſoeuer. I muſt tell your Maieſtie, I neuer yet heard, that ſureties haue beene taken in caſe of a Crowne: and to ſpeake vprightly, before what Iudges ſhal he ſue, or conuent them, beeing himſelfe driuen out of doores, and deſtitute of all place of refuge, and abode? But we muſt apply our ſelues to their conditions. VVell then, let vs accept of theyr ſureties, prouided they be of ſubſtance, & abilitie to acquite the forfeiture, els is theyr offer friuolous, and to no purpoſe. Let vs ſee, what theſe ſureties ſhall be. Amongſt

your ſubiects, it is impoſſible to finde any of wealth ſufficient: for their eſtate cannot be the thouſanth part of the whole, which is to be ſecured. Amongſt ſtrangers vvhom can they nominate of woorth, to counteruaile the realme of Fraunce? I vnderſtand their minds (my liege) the pledge, & ſuretie which they will tender your Maieſtie for their faith, and allegeance, muſt be the King of Spaine, who is readie to become bound for them, bodie for bodie. He is of infinite wealth, hee is mightie in poſſeſſions, he is deepely in loue with Fraunce, then what exception can you take to him?
            So then we are thorow for the ſecuritie, let vs now thinke of the reſidue. How will your Maieſtie diſpoſe of that Piller, which ſtands before your Pallace, in whoſe marble ſides, is recorded to poſteritie, the affection of this populous nation of the Ieſuits towardes their good King, towardes theyr great King, their Deliuerer, who the ſelfe-ſame yere had freed their necks from the Spaniſh yoake? A Piller more honourable, & more glorious, then thoſe of Traiane, and Antoninus, which ſtand in ſpight of time, ſacred to immortalitie. Will you leaue it ſtanding, and yet doe contrarie to

that which your ſelfe haue decreed by the Sentence, therein engrauen? What will the world ſay, when they ſhall reade the contrarie, to that which they ſee? Is this that famous Parlement of Fraunce? theyr Decrees are written in Marble, but in effect they are ſet at nought, they are troden in the dust. Surely this were too too diſhonourable.
            What is thē to be done? The firſt work you doe, you muſt race downe this Piller. Howe? race it downe? Liues there a man ſo impious, as to ſuggeſt this damnable counſell? Your ſelfe to deſtroy the monuments of your worthieſt, and moſt renowned victories? to taint your name and memorie with the blot of feare, and faint hart? that as wee celebrate one of our famous Kings, for the firſt which brake in ſunder the yoake of the Romane Empire, vnder vvhich the miſerable Gaules had many yeeres languiſhed: ſo cleane contrary, our Chronicles may point you out to all afterages, for the firſt, which bowing to the becke, and commaund of Rome, ſhal with your owne handes, rend of your Laurels, wither your garlands, and miſerablie deface the memorials of your proweſſe, and honourable deſerts towards your Realme,

towards your citie of Paris, the ſeate of this large Empire, the glorie of Europe, & the wonder of the world.
            Oh my liege, what could the Generall of the Ieſuits wiſh for more? If a maine armie of Spaniards vnder the leading of his Subiects, & the reſt of the Sixteene, their aſſociats, ſhould enter Paris by the breach, would they not begin with the defacing of this Piller? Shall Fraunce then vnder your raigne, and by your cōmaund receaue the fouleſt infamie, and moſt ſhamefull foyle, that it could ſuffer from the inſolencie of the Spaniards?
            If the day following your Maieſties happie conuerſion at S. Denis, there ſhould haue come an Angel from heauen, & haue vſed this ſpeech to you: The Ieſuits, and the Spaniſh garriſon, which they haue placed within this great Cittie, (pointing to Paris) & which they therein maintaine and continue, by preaching them into the loue and fauour of the people, are the onelie lets that bar thee frō entring it. All true Frenchmen wiſh thy entrance, and enter thou ſhalt, in deſpight of theſe recreants, and that ſpeedily. Nine months after, theſe fellowes will attempt thy death, but they

ſhal not be able to effect it; that great God of heauen, will put by the blow, and cauſe the murtherer to confeſſe, that the accurſed Lectures of the Ieſuits, and their ordinarie ſpeeches againſt thee, did violentlie beare & ſpurre him forward to ſtrike this ſtroake: which his confeſſion GOD will haue to be verified, and confirmed by their owne hand writings. For this cauſe ſhall they all be baniſht, but after ſeauen yeeres, thou ſhalt reſtabliſh them againe, to the ſubuerſion of thy Realme, and confuſion of thy whole race.
            If, I ſay, an Angell from heauen had fore-tolde you this, would your Maieſtie haue belieued it? Aſſuredly you vvould not: the latter point, depending vppon your owne vvill, would haue ſeemed ſo ſtrange, & vnprobable. And yet notwithſtanding, conſider (if you pleaſe) in howe neere termes you haue ſtoode to the fulfilling, and accompliſhment hereof: hauing ſo ſoone forgotten, vvhat miſchiefe theſe men haue wrought you, and are in poſſibilitie to worke you dailie; who ſpare not to call our auncient Kings rebels, becauſe they haue not throwne theyr diademes, & ſcepters to the ground, vpō the firſt bruite

of an excommunication ſent foorth againſt them: and vvho by conſequence of this their brain-ſicke doctrine, haue made an infinite number beleeue, that our king deceaſed, was a Tyrant, and a Rebell, vvhich perſwaſion was vndoubtedly the cauſe of his death.
            O my gracious Soueraigne, doe you not in your imagination ſeeme to beholde the tall, pale, heauie, and ſorrowfull image, of that great Prince, your deere brother, ſuch as he was, when grieuouſly wounded, and all begored in blood, he witneſſed towards you the affection of a Father, vntill the verie laſt gaſpe of his life, holding you faſt embraced in his armes, in the midſt of his armie, which was bedewed with teares, & inflamed with reuenge? Hee is in heauen, he is in bleſſed eſtate, he gaue his life for the liberty of his coūtry, & to free his children from the yoake of ſtrangers: hee beholds your actions from aboue. And wil you cancell the Decrees of his Court, eſtabliſht againſt theſe particides, Before, page 80. & 81.  who occaſioned him to be ſtal
                  •
               d, when he liued, who haue   wounded him ſince his death, by ſounding out this acclamation in al parts of Europe: the ſame day, that he expelled vs out of Bourdeaux,
               
               was he expelled out of his life. The report was, he ſent vs to S. Macaries, vvith an intent there to cut all our throates, had not his owne beene cut first. It is not one Ieſuite alone, it is the whole body of the Ieſuits in groſſe, that by theyr annuall, and ſolemne letters, proclaime this triumph ouer all Europe: (what ſpeake I of Europe?) ouer all the world, where they haue their colonies: there they ſhew at this day, the wofull effects of theyr dangerous Poſitions; there (I ſay) they hang forth as an enſigne of theyr victorie, the bloodie ſhirt of our ſlaughtered king, the proude ſpoiles of the formoſt king in the world, ſtrooken deade vvith thoſe thunderbolts, which they cauſed to breake forth in France, where, before their comming, they neuer had power to doe hurt. And would your Maieſtie take from vs the onely comfort, which remaineth to our ſelues, and the onely monument, and remembrance, which our poſteritie ſhall haue of our late King, of our deceaſed maſter? Alas, my poore maiſter, my vnhappy Soueraigne, though by other meanes I be not able to expreſſe my zeale, yet at the leaſt will I poure ouer thy hearſe, theſe lateſt teares, theſe laſt lamentations, of thy

moſt humble ſeruaunt, of thy moſt faithful ſubiect. Peraduenture they may be aſſiſted with the ſighes of a million of Frenchmen, who will vouchſafe to reade mee, if not in this age, yet in times to come. For vvhy ſhould not theſe ſobbes, why ſhould not theſe grones of mine continue, as long as there ſhall any true Frenchmen remaine in the world?
            If our fore-fathers had ſwallowed this poyſonous doctrine of excommunicating kings, and of the power to tranſlate kingdoms, this great ſucceſſion had neuer deſcended to your Maieſtie, it had long ſince beene wreſted out of the hands of your predeceſſors. The baniſhment of the Ieſuits is the death of this accurſed doctrine, and the death of this doctrine, is the life, glory, and beautie of your Royall houſe. They which ſhal tell you the contrarie, would ſee it willingly ouerthrown: your Maieſtie knoweth it, & knowing it, if you do not preuent it, you vndermine the foundation of your owne State, in ſteede of ſtrengthening and aſſuring it.
            The magnanimitie, and noble courage   of a  The king that now is, at the battell of Ivry.  worthy King, doth not onely ſhine in the fielde, in the heade of a dangerous

battaile, lending courage to his nobles, and couered ouer with a plume of feathers, to make himſelfe a marke for the enemy, bidding defiance to theyr valour, and to their forreſt of pikes, whereinto he breakes like a ſlaſh of lightning; but is as much, and much more ſeene in conſultations of the weightie, & important affaires of his State, wherein prudent circumſpection ought to beare ſway, but ſo as there be baniſht all doubt of diſpleaſing, all feare of offending. Such weakenes is vnſuting to your Maieſtie, it is vnwoorthie a King of Fraunce, though not of your proweſſe. A King of Fraunce is ſubiect to no controule, but to Gods only. Let your Maieſty reſpect, what is iust, and commodious, for your ſelfe, for your ſucceſſion, for your ſtate, and ayme at nothing els.
            It is iust, that the Decrees of your Parlement, of your high Parlement, of the Parlement of Fraunce, ſhould be executed, & accompliſht in France: therein conſiſteth the principall ſtrength, and ſinews of your State. Who is it then, that would perſwade your Maieſtie, your ſelfe to cut off your owne right arme? VVill you knowe the truth? It is King Phillip, vnder borrovved

names, that deſireth, that purſueth, that perſwadeth it. He is your brother, it is true, but hee hath a dangerous counſell: hee is young, he is ambitious, and hee is powerfull: he knowes right well, that he wrongfully detaines from you, the The late King of Spaine, by his teſtamēt reſtored Nauarre to the king of Fraunce.  inheritance Nauarre. of Queen Katherine: this worm did gnaw his fathers conſcience vpon his death-bed. In his life time he flattered himſelfe vvith the authority of Pope Iulius: but when he ſawe that hee was going to appeare before his great Maiſter, before the great Iudge, the horror of it made his haire ſtand vpright on his head: then could neyther the ſlatteries of his Inquiſition, nor the ſoothings of the Ieſuits, ſecure him againſt his owne knowledge, & conſcience, he could   not but vtter it, hee could not but confeſſe it by his teſtament, thereby to giue eaſe, & appeaſement to that hell, to thoſe flames, to thoſe torments. But ſo farre is his ſonne from performing his Fathers will, as that hee harboureth a world of incredible deſignes to the contrarie: Fraunce is the only rubbe in his way. Then what an aduantage were it for him, to haue alwaies within the hart of this great kingdome, men ſo faſt and firme to him, ſo readie, & reſolued

to execute whatſoeuer he can wiſh, howe dangerous ſoeuer? Howe great a furtherance were it to his deſignements, to retain amongſt vs ſuch eſpials, ſo vigilant, ſo aduenturous, and withall, of ſuch notorious ſecrecie, as whoſoeuer ſhal encline to practiſe againſt the State, be hee French or Stranger, hee will neuer doubt to haue recourſe vnto them. In other ſocieties a man may miſtake one for another, and ſo miſcarrie: ſo did Barriere. For had hee diſcouered himſelfe to none but to the Ieſuits, without all doubt your Maieſtie had been ſurprized. What did the Templers euer in Fraunce, or the Humiliati in Italie, or the Couent Friers in Spaine like vnto this?
            The power and might of a King, is infinite great, I grant it, vnder prouiſo it be accompanied with wiſedome and foreſight, (the chiefe vertue that can raigne in a Prince.) Great & maine ouer-ſights once committed, doe verie hardly, or not at all, admit any cure. What man will heereafter vndertake any matter (thinke you) againſt the Ieſuits, let thē conſpire neuer ſo much againſt your State, or perſon. Who will euer be their accuſer? who will giue euidence: who will be Iudge againſt them?
            
               
For the firſt time there be perhaps that will oppoſe, lewd and dangerous perſons: but when they ſee themſelues forſaken, when they ſee theſe ſerpents lurking about their houſes, which are one day likelie to deſtroy and deuour their children, this makes their harts to faint, this quailes their courage: ſo as within a while, men by little and little frame themſelues to the times, euerie one applieth and diſpoſeth himſelfe thereunto. (A moſt dangerous word for Princes.)
            If the late King were nowe amongſt vs, he were able to ſay ſomwhat to this point, this great Of harbouring the Ieſuits.  ouerſight, hath ſent him where   now hee is. Oh my liege, make vſe of his example, take paterne by your neighbour Princes. Marke whether euer Charles the fift, or his ſonne, thoſe famous politicians, thoſe notable Stateſmen, would ſee theyr ſeruitors diſcouraged, or diſmaid: Marke whether euer they draue them to ſue for the fauour of thoſe, whom they had made theyr enemies for the behoofe of the State. See if euer they entertained any, whom they had reaſon to miſtruſt.
            If your Maieſtie did but call to minde the firſt foundation of the Ieſuits, theyr

originall, their encreaſe, the place from whence they ſprung, me thinks you ſhould preſently conceaue a deteſtation of theyr ſect. But hauing taſted theſe cruell fruits of their Seminarie, fully aunſwering the wiſhes of your deadlieſt enemies, and nowe beeing deliuered by a ſolemne Sentence of your Parlement, from this perillous & pernicious faction, what ſhew of reaſon, what colour can you haue, your ſelfe to reſtore murtherers into your State, ſedition amongſt your ſubiects, factions, and partialities into your Prouinces, which ſince the baniſhment of the Ieſuits, haue ſeen more quiet, and peaceable dayes, then they had done in thirtie yeeres before?
            God loues not to be tempted, his hand hath twiſe protected your Maieſtie, from their bloodie attempts: hee hath furniſht you with ſo many good Prelates, & Doctors on all hands, with ſo many learned, & deuout Religious of all Orders, men full of pietie, knowledge, dutie, & loialtie towards your maieſtie, a thouſand times more fit for the aduauncement of our Catholicke religion, then they that are infected with this dangerous hereſie, grounded vppon the power to change kingdoms, and to take them
               
               from one, and transfer them to another: and why wil you ſo ſlenderly regard the fauor, which he out of his heauenly bountie hath extended towards you, ſnatching you out of the very graue, and out of the armes of death? a death by them much deſited, wiſhed, and practiſed, wholie endeuouring to burie Fraunce, together with her two laſt Kings, all in a Tombe? Doe you not feare (my liege) to prouoke his wrath, who will be admired in his prouidence, and praiſed in his bountie, and protection? Doe you not beleeue that he ſate as Preſident in the midſt of that honourable aſſembly, of that great Court, the moſt ſacred Court of the world, beeing met in conſultation of matters, that concerned the life of their Prince, & the preſeruation of his State? And will you cancell this their Decree? Oh (my liege) what doe you knowe, whether you owe your breath to that Decree? what can you tell, whether GOD hath vſed it as a meane to preſerue you aliue vntill this preſent? whether hee hath made it a wall betweene you, and the aſſaults of your priuie enemies? Are you able to ſearch the depth of his iudgements? can you ſound the bottome of his counſels? knowe you not that

they are vnſearcheable, that they are bottomleſſe?
            The mightie God, who from aboue beholdeth the deep diſſembling, the ſmooth hypocriſie, and the ſecret venome, vvhich the Ieſuits foſter within their breaſts, this great God (I ſay) who knoweth their auncient purpoſe, eſſentially rooted in theyr veines, which is, to deface the glory of this Realme, and Monarchie, giue your Maieſtie grace, rightly to diſcerne & diſtinguiſh the friends of Alexander, from the fautors of the Ieſuits: and by giuing commaundement for the abſolute execution of that your ſolemne Edict, to let all Chriſtendom know, that you are as skilfull by wiſedome to ſafegard your ſelfe frō the ſubtile practiſes, and ſecret vnderminings of your enemies, as you are able by valour to breake, ſcatter, and confound their armies, and open hoſtilities.
            
         
      
   