
      
         
            
            
            Ordinances decreed for reformation of diuers diſorders in printing and vttering of Bookes.
            1 THat no perſon ſhall print, or cauſe to be imprinted, nor ſhal bring, or cauſe, or procure to be brought into this Realme imprinted, anie Booke or copie againſt the forme and meaning of anie ordinance, prohibition, or commandement, conteined, or to be conteined in anie the Statutes or Lawes of this Realme, or in anie Iniunctions, Letters patents, or ordinances, paſſed or ſet foorth, or to be paſſed or ſet foorth by the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſties grant, commiſſion, or authoritie.
            2 That whoſoeuer ſhall offend againſt the ſaid ordinance, ſhall not onelie forfait all ſuch Bookes and Copies, as ſhall be ſo printed or brought in; but alſo ſhall from thencefoorth neuer vſe or exerciſe, nor take benefit by anie vſing or exerciſing of the feate of printing, and ſhall ſuſteine three moneths impriſonment, without baile or mainpriſe. And if he be not before ſuch offence bound with ſureties, in forme hereafter expreſſed, then he ſhall alſo forfait for euerie offence. x. li.
            3 That no perſon ſhall ſell, vtter, put to ſale, bind, ſtitch, or ſowe, anie ſuch Bookes or Copies, ſo printed or brought in, contrarie to the ſaid ordinance, vpon paine to forfait all ſuch Bookes and Copies, and for euerie Booke. xx. s.
            4 That all Bookes to be ſo forfaited, ſhall be brought into the Stationers hall in London, and there the one moitie of all ſuch forfaitures of monie ſhall be reſerued to the Queenes Maieſties vſe, and the other moitie ſhall be deliuered to him or them that ſhall firſt ſeiſe the ſame Bookes or Copies, or make complaint therof to the Wardens of the ſaid Companie. And all the Bookes ſo to be forfaited, ſhal be deſtroied or made waſte paper, by the diſcretion of the ſaid Wardens.
            5 That it ſhall be lawfull for the Wardens of the ſaid Companie for the time being, or anie two of the ſaid Companie, thereto deputed by the ſaid Wardens, as well in anie ports, as other ſuſpected places within this Realme, to open and view all packs, drifats, maunds, and other things, wherein Bookes or Paper ſhall be conteined, brought into this Realme: and alſo to make ſearch in all workehouſes, ſhops, warehouſes, and other places, of Printers, Bookeſellers, or ſuch as bring Bookes into this Realme to be ſold, or where they ſhall haue reaſonable cauſe of ſuſpicion: and all the ſaid Bookes to be rou
                  •…
               d againſt th
                  •
                ſaid ordinance, to ſeiſe and carrie to the ſaid Hall, to the vſes aboueſaid, and the parties therein offending, to lead and preſent before the Queenes Maieſties hie Commiſſioners in cauſes Eccleſiaſticall.
            6 That euerie Printer, Stationer, Bookeſeller, Merchant, and other perſon, vſing anie trade of Bookes, printing, binding, ſelling, or bringing into this Realme, ſhall before the ſaid Commiſſioners, or before anie other perſons therevnto 
                  •
               o be aſſigned by the Queenes Maieſties moſt honourable priuie Councell, enter into ſeuerall recogniſances of reaſonable ſummes of monie to her Maieſties vſe, with ſureties or without, as to the ſaid Commiſſioners ſhall be thought expedient, that he ſhall trulie obſerue all the ſaid ordinances, well and trulie yeeld and paie all ſuch forfaitures, and in no point be reſiſting, but in all things aiding to the ſaid Wardens and their deputies, for the true execution of the premiſſes.
            
               We vnder written thinke theſe ordinances meete and neceſſarie to be decreed and obſerued.
               
                  Mathew Cantu
                        •…
                     .
                  Edm. London.
                  Amb. Caue.
                  Dauid Lewes.
                  Thomas Yale.
                  Robert Weston.
                  Thomas Huicke.
               
            
            
               Vpon the conſideration before expreſſed, and vpon the motion of the Commiſſioners, we of the priuie Councell haue agreed theſe to be obſerued and kept, vpon the paines therein conteined.
               
                  At the Starre Chamber the xxix. daie of Iune. Anno. 1566. and the viij. yeere of the Queenes Maieſties reigne.
                  
                  N. Bacon. C. S.
                  Winchester.
                  R. Lecester.
                  E. Clinton.
                  Amb. Caue.
                  E. Rogers.
                  F. Knolles.
                  W. Cecill.
God preſerue our moſt gratious Queene ELIZABETH.
               
            
         
      
   