
      
         
            
            
            ¶ Ordinaunces decreed for reformation of diuers diſorders in pryntyng and vtteryng of Bookes.
            
            THat no perſon ſhall prynt, or cauſe to be imprynted, nor ſhall bryng, or cauſe, or procure to be brought into this Realme imprynted, any Booke or copye agaynſt the fourme and meanyng of any ordinaunce, prohibition, 1. or commaundement, conteyned, or to be conteyned in any the ſtatutes or lawes of this Realme, or in any Iniunctions, Letters patentes, or ordinaunces, paſſed or ſet forth, or to be paſſed or ſet forth by the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſties graunt, commiſſion, or aucthoritie.
            That whoſoeuer ſhall offende agaynſt the ſayde ordinaunce, ſhall not only forfayte all ſuche Bookes and copies, 2. as ſhalbe ſo prynted or brought in, but alſo ſhall from thence forth neuer vſe or exercyſe, nor take benefite by any vſyng or exercyſyng of the feate of pryntyng, and ſhall ſuſteyne three monethes impryſonment, without bayle or maynpryſe. And yf he be not before ſuch offence bounde, with ſuerties, in fourme hereafter expreſſed, then he ſhall alſo forfayte for euery offence .x. li.
            That no perſon ſhall ſell, vtter, put to ſale, bynde, ſtytch, or ſowe, any ſuch bookes or copyes, ſo prynted or brought in, contrary to the ſayde ordinaunce, vpon peyne to forfayte all ſuch bookes and copyes, and for euerye 3. booke .xx. s.
            That all bookes to be ſo forfayted, ſhalbe brought into the Stationers hall in London, & there the one moitie of all ſuch forfaytures of money ſhalbe reſerued to the Queenes Maieſties vſe, and the other moitie ſhalbe delyuered 4. to hym or them that ſhall fyrſt ſeiſe the ſame bookes or copies, or make complaynt therof to the Wardens of the ſayde companie. And all the bookes ſo to be forfayted, ſhalbe deſtroyed or made waſte paper, by the diſcretion of the ſayde Wardens.
            That it ſhalbe lefull for the Wardens of the ſayde company for the tyme beyng, or any two of the ſayde companie thereto deputed by the ſayde Wardens, aſwell in any portes, as other ſuſpected places within this Realme, 5. to open and viewe all packes, dryefattes, maundes, and other thynges wherin bookes or paper ſhalbe conteyned, brought into this Realme: and alſo to make ſearche in all workehouſes, ſhoppes, warehouſes, and other places, of Prynters, Bookeſellers, or ſuch as bryng bookes into this Realme to be ſolde, or where they ſhall haue reaſonable cauſe of ſuſpition: And all bookes to be founde agaynſt the ſayde ordinaunce to ſeiſe and carry to the ſayde Hall, to the vſes aboueſayde, and the parties therin offendyng to leade and preſent before the Queenes Maieſties hye Commiſſioners in cauſes eccleſiaſticall.
            That euery Stationer, Prynter, Bookeſeller, Marchaunt, and other perſon vſyng any trade of bookes pr
                  ••
               
               tyng, byndyng, ſellyng, or bryngyng into this Realme, ſhall before the ſayde Commiſſioners, or before any o
                  〈…〉
                
               6. perſons thervnto to be aſſigned by the Queenes Maieſties moſt honorable priuie Councell, entre into ſeuerall Reconiſaunces of reaſonable ſummes of money to her Maieſties vſe, with ſureties or without, as to the ſayde Commiſſioners ſhalbe thought expedient, that he ſhall truely obſerue all the ſayde ordinaunces, well and truely yelde and pay all ſuch forfaytures, and in no poynt be reſiſtyng, but in all thynges aydyng to the ſayde wardens & their deputies, for the true execution of the premiſſes.
            VVe vnder written thynke theſe ordinaunces meete and neceſſary to be decreed and obſerued.
            
               Mathew Cantuar.
               Edm. London.
               Amb. Caue.
               Dauid Lewes.
               Thomas Yale.
               Robert VVeston.
               T. Huycke.
            
            Vpon the conſideration before expreſſed, and vpon the motion of the Commiſſioners, we of the priuie Councell haue agreed theſe to be obſerued and kept, vppon the paynes therein conteyned. At the ſtarre Chamber the .xxix. day of Iune. Anno. 1566. & the .viii. yere of the Queenes Maieſties raigne.
            
            
               T. Bacon. C. S.
               VVyncheſter.
               R. Leceſter.
               E. Clynton.
               Amb. Caue.
               E. Rogers.
               F. Knolles.
               VV. Cecill.
            
         
      
   