
      
         
            
            
            THE ARRAINMENT OF THE WHOLE SOCIETY OF IESVITS IN FRANCE, holden in the honourable Court of Parliament in Paris, the 12. and 13. of Iuly. 1594.
            Wherein is laied open to the world, that, howſoeuer this new Sect pretendeth matter of Religion, yet their whole trauailes, endeuours, and bent, is but to ſet vp the kingdome of Spaine, and to make him the onely Monarch of all the Weſt.
            
               Tranſlated, out of the French copie imprinted at Paris by the Kings Printer.
            
            AT LONDON Printed by Charles Yetſweirt 
               Eſq 1594.
            CVM PRIVILEGIO.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE PLEA OF M. ANTONIE ARnauld Counſelor in Parliament, and heretofore Counſelor and Atturney generall to the late deceaſed Queene Mother, for the Vniuerſitie of Paris plaintife, against the Ieſuites defendants, the 12. and 13. of Iuly. 1594.
            
               The Subiect of the Plea.
               
                  THe Ieſuites hauing borne out themſelues againſt ſundrie complaintes of the Vniuerſitie, by the ſupport of ſuch as vſed their ſeruice in executing of their great and miſchieuous enterpriſes, became at length after the blocking vp of the town imperious cōmaū
                  ders in Paris, and kindled the fire of ſedition in al the chiefe townes of the Realme, vſing blaſphemous raylings without ceaſing in their ſermons and confeſſions, againſt the memorie of the late King, & againſt the kings Maieſtie that now reigneth, whome they wounded and ſtonge with their venemous tongues, and the moſt ſlaunderous wordes they could by any meanes deuiſe: And to heape vp the full meaſure of their impieties, attempted to murder the King by the handes of one Barriere, who was executed at Melun, and confeſſed it at his death. Which was the cauſe of the firſt reſolution, taken and agréed vpon by the Vniuerſitie of Paris, ſince the towne returned to the obedience of the King, to be humble ſuters that the Ieſuites might be baniſhed. To which ende and purpoſe, a ſupplication was preſented againſt them to the Court of Parliament, the authoritie of which Court, though they kicked and ſpurned againſt for the ſpace of certaine daies, yet in fine being enforced therunto (by an order ſet downe on thurſday the 7. of Iuly 1594. the tenure whereof was, that vpon the Monday then next enſuing their default of appearance ſhould receiue iudgemēt, without any more delay) they brought in their Counſel that day into the

great chāber, before the Court was ſet: which Coūſelor gaue the Court to vnderſtand, that in way of defence of his Clients cauſe he ſhould be conſtrained to vtter much matter, which would be very diſpleaſing to many which were now become Seruants to the King, and therefore praied the Court, that the doores might be ſhut, whileſt the matter was pleaded. This was a ſubtill practiſe of the Ieſuites, to ſecrete from the people, (whome they had to this day bewitched with their ſorceries and enchantments,) their illuſions and daungerous practiſes, wherby they laboured to ſubiect all Europe to the thraldome of Spaine. Notwithſtanding, this cunning-plat of theirs tooke ſo good ſucceſſe, that order was taken by the Court, that the doores ſhould be ſhut whileſt the matter was in pleading. Maſter Antonie Arnauld pleaded for the Vniuerſitie, Maſter Lewes Dolle for the Curate of Paris, who ioyned with the Vniuerſitie, Maſter Claud Duret, for the Ieſuites, Monſieur Seguier for the Kings Attourney generall.
            
            
               The plea of Maſter Antonie Arnauld Counſelor in Parliament for the Vniuerſitie of Paris plaintife: againſt The Ieſuites defendants, the 12. & 13. of Iuly. 1594.
               IT may pleaſe this Honorable Court, I will begin this action with an other maner of proteſtation, then our aduerſe parties haue vſed: for whereas they gaue out yeſterday to the world, that the doores ſhould be ſhut whileſt this matter was in pleading, by reaſon of the threates which they had caſt out of ſpeaking againſt many, which had now ſubmitted themſelues to the Kings obedience, and were content and forward to hazard their liues daily in the warres for his ſeruice: I proteſt on the cōtrary, to offend no man neither in worde nor thought, but ſuch as ſtand and remaine metamorphoſed Spaniards.
               
               The reaſon of the diuerſitie of theſe two proteſtations is apparant inough. The Ieſuites can not do a greater péece of ſeruice to the King of Spaine their Maſter, then in this place to ſlaunder

ſuch men, as haue, in ſorte as the world ſeeth, ſharpened his edge, by putting ſo ſtrong and important townes into the handes of his greateſt and moſt daungerous enemy.
               And on the other ſide, the Vniuerſitie of Paris, (the Kinges eldeſt daughter, for whome I ſpeake,) can not doe his Maieſtie a greater ſeruice, then to kéepe inuiolably the Law of Forgetting; which is the originall and fountaine of the peace which we now enioy, and that we are and hope to enioy from hence forward.
               I remember that I haue read, that at what time the battaile of Pharſale was agréed on by the Generals & Leaders on both ſides, and the Trompetters were commaunded to ſound their Trompets, certaine of the beſt of the Romaines, and ſome Grecians (that were then preſent in the field, but not within the battaile) ſéeing the ſtate of both thoſe huge and mighty armies ſo néere to danger, began to conſider with themſelues to what point the forces of the Romane Empire were brought. For their armour was all one, the ſetting and ordering of their battailes was all alike, their Enſignes were without difference, reſembling the one the other in all points, the verie flower of all the valiant men of one ſelfe ſame Citie, and a mightie ſtrength now vpon the inſtant to ruinate it ſelfe: giuing a notable example how blinde, raging and furious the nature of man is, when it giueth it ſelfe ouer to be carried away with any violent paſſion. For if they would haue ruled and gouerned that which they had wholly conquered, the greateſt and beſt part of the world both by land and ſea, had bin in their ſubiection, and vnder their obedience.
               In like ſort, whoſoeuer that knoweth our ſtate well, will conſider to what point of greatnes, of happines, of honors, of riches, and mightines, the Crowne of France had now attained vnto, had it not bin for our warres more then ciuill, and that the flower of ſo many valiant men (which might now haue bin aliue, had not our ciuill diffentions bin) had but more then ſufficient to haue gone and aſſailed our old enemie euen within M
                        ••…
                     ill, and haue brought him to parle & compromiſe for his treaſures 
                     〈◊〉
                   it wels, eſpecially vnder the happy conduct of ſo great and excellent a Leader,

who hath the harts and armes of Nauarre, of Aragon, and Portugal ſtretched out vnto him as their hoped for deliuerer out of the handes of this horrible tirannie of Caſtile: whoſoeuer, I ſay, wil conſider theſe things, can not hold himſelfe from entring into iuſt choler and extreame indignation againſt them that haue bin ſent in amongeſt vs to blow the bellowes, and kindle the coles of this great fier, without ceaſing and intermiſſion, wherewith this Monarchie hath bin almoſt waſted and conſumed
               That theſe inſtruments and firebrandes of the world are the Ieſuits, there is no man that doubteth, but onely two ſortes of people: the one, which are of nature ſo feareful, that they thinke they are ſtil within the clutches of the Sixteene Murderers, and the Ieſuits their counſaile: and the other which are of their brotherhood and congregation, and haue ſecretly executed the moſt dangerous point of their vowes, as a whole towne may be Ieſuiticall.
               
               But theſe men ſpeake but ſoftly, as not daring to be heard. And on the contrarie ſide, wée ſée a great and vniuerſall conſent of all honeſt men, as well of ſuch as departed out of this towne during the warres, as of them that tarried behind, and with ſo great zeale and ſtout courage opened the gates of the Capitall to their King, (For we can not all of vs but feare alike, deſire alike, and hate alike.) Wée ſée, I ſay, ſo great an affection of all the heartes that are true French, and vnfainedly deſirous of the greatnes and increaſe of this Crowne, that they are readie (vpon a grounded hope they haue vpon an infallible aſſurance of your Iuſtice and deuotion to his Maieſties ſeruice) to hunt out all thoſe murderers of Kinges, theſe confeſſors, and eggers on forward of ſuch parricides: to hunt them, I ſay, out of France, and from amongeſt all them that are vnder the obedience of the Flower de Lys, ſworne enemies to theſe monſters, that haue bereft them of one of their deareſt children, and are now come to the watch to heare of the like newes of the King that now raigneth, whom they haue alreadie murdered, as much as in them might lie by aide, counſaile, and burning deſire, and at this day ſtriue with tooth and naile wholly to ſubuert and breake in a thouſand pieces the piller whereupon the Scepter reſteth,

which they haue ſhaken many a day: which they haue ſhaken, I ſay, in the ſight of all men of vnderſtanding, that foretold it in this great Oracle of France, not when the doores were ſhut, but when they were full open, and with as great reſort of people, as is now in this great hall, deſirous to come in. That foretold it, I ſay, not doubtfullie and in a cloude, but cléerely, and with all the circū
                  ſtances which wee haue ſeene: foretelling vs of all the miſeries which wee haue felt, and the calamities which haue brought vs within two fingers breadth of our vtter ruine. But their foreſights, their aduertiſements, their proteſtations, were no leſſe fruteles then true, true Caſſanders,
               
               Tongues by the ordinance of God neuer beleeued of the Teuerians.
               And why ſo? whence came this ſo great and dead ſléepe? and how commeth it to paſſe that theſe miſeries could not be remedied, which were ſo prouidently foreſéene? The cauſe is verie manifeſt. The Golde of Spaine had gotten a paſſage into the purſes of the greateſt fauorites, that daily mainteined and ſet vp theſe Trompets of warre, theſe firebrands of ſedition, theſe tempeſtuous and ſtormie windes, which can doe no other but daily and howerly vexe and diſquiet the calme of France
               
               As for ſuch as in great ſinceritie reiected this gold of Spaine, the greateſt part of them notwithſtanding became faint hearted, and caſt downe-countenanced, and féeble handed, when the time came wherein it behoued them to ſtrike this mayne ſtroke for the liberty of the Gaules, and to exterminate theſe traitors which haue bin ſent in amongſt vs by herdlems.
               Few were found that ioyned courage, force, and reſolution with honeſtie, and yet ſuch as they were, the enemy found the meanes to ridde his hands of them, all credite & authoritie was taken from them: But yet at the length, the féeble handed receiued ſtrength, and we may not onely without feare, but alſo with honor and reputation ſpeake againſt theſe wicked enchanters, that haue giuen the wine of rebellion to the people to drinke, and haue foſtered them with a moſt dangerous kinde of foode, ſowring the dow of

                  Fraunce with the leuen of Spaine.
               
               Thinke not, you ſpials of Caſtile, that you ſhalbe able to breake this blow, of the heate of Fraunce, and ſende vs backe to your accuſtomed too too long delaies of iudgements, and framed for giltie perſons, as you did in the yéere ſixtie foure. At what time, men ſpake of your actions but as in way of propheſying: and for one man that perceiued a right the thing that was futurely like to come to paſſe, there where alwaies ten that did not ſo much as dreame of any ſuch matter. But at this day, what man is there, that in his bodie, in his goods, in the loſſe of his parents, or of his friendes, hath not felt the horrible effects of your conſpiracie, and the violent executions of the commaundements, which you gaue to the people in pulpites, places dedicated to truth and pietie? which you haue filled with fire, with blood, and horrible baſphemies, making the people beléeue that God was a murderer of Kings, and attributing to heauen, the ſtroke of a knife forged in Hell.
               
                  Henry the third, my renoumed and redoubted Prince (who haſt this contentment in Heauen, to ſée thy lawfull and noble ſucceſſor, hauing marched vpon the bellies of all thine enemies, to reigne now peaceably in thy houſe the Loure, and vpon the frontier, to breake, ſcatter, and put to flight (an accident a thouſand times more diſhonorable, then the loſſe of ten battailes) the Spaniſh armies, and thunder with thy Canons, againſt the rebellious Cities that ſtoode out to the laſt, accompanied with ſixe thouſand Gentlemen boyling with impatiencie to continew the glorious reuenge of thy death,) aſſiſt mée in this cauſe, and repreſenting continually before mine eies thy bloodie ſhirt, giue me force and ſtrength to make all thy ſubiects féele the griefe, the hatred, and indignation which they are bound to beare againſt theſe Ieſuites, who by their bloodie confeſſions, by their frantike ſermons, by the ſecrete Counſailes with the Ambaſſadour of thine enemie, poiſoner of thine onely brother, haue bin cauſers and ſéedsmen of all the miſeries which thy poore people hath endured, and the end of thine owne life.
               
                  My good Lords, Charles the fift, and Philip his ſonne, ſéeing them ſelues full fraught with the gold of the Indes, not yet drawen dry, haue conceited vnto themſelues and embraced no ſmaller hope, then to make themſelues Monarks and Emperours of the Weſt, and to ſet vp the houſe of Auſtria in like greatnes in Europe, as the houſe of the Ottomans is in Aſia.
               
               Theſe great men of State were not ignorant, what force the ſcrupules of conſcience were of in the hearts of men, and how déeply and bottomleſly they pearce into mens breaſts.
               The compaſſing of the greateſt part of the Court of Rome was but a trifle to them, by meanes of their great penſions, and of the rich benefices of Millan, Naples, Sicile, beſide the liuings of Spain, which were wonderfull riche.
               But becauſe the charge that is in this great Citie is heauie, and burdenſome, they wanted light and ſtirring fellowes to be placed in all quarters, to execute whatſoeuer might tend to the good and aduancement of the affairs of Spaine. Theſe are the Ieſuits which are ſcattered abroad in huge and mightie ſwarmes: for there are betwéene nine and ten thouſand of them, and haue already founded two hundred and four ſcore Spaniſh Colonies, they poſſeſſe in reuenues aboue two thouſand millions of gold, they are Lords of Erledomes and great Baronies in Spaine, and in Italy, and attained already to ye dignitie of Cardinals, readie to be made Popes: and in caſe they ſhould haue continuance but thirtie yeares more in all the places where they haue neſtled themſelues already, it would be without doubt the richeſt and mightieſt companie in Chriſtendome, and would wage Armies, as already they begin to contribute.
               Their principal bow is to obey their Generall and Superiour (who is alwaies a Spaniard, and choſen by the King of Spaine) euerie way and in all things. This appeareth true moſt manifeſtly by experience. Layola their firſt General was a Spaniard. Laynes the ſecond a Spaniard alſo. The thirde Euarardus was a Flemming, a ſubiect of the King of Spaine. Borgia the fourth was a Spaniard. Aqua Viua the fift, liuing at this day, is a Neapolitane,

ſubiect to the King of Spaine. The wordes of this fourth vow are ſtrange, yea horrible: for they goe thus farre, In him they muſt acknowledge Chriſt preſent, as it were, If Ieſus Chriſt ſhould commaund to goe and kill, they muſt do ſo. If therefore their Spaniſh Generall commaund them to goe and murder, or cauſe the King of France to be murdered, they muſt of neceſſitie do ſo. Their Hiſtorie compyled by Peter Ribadenaire a Ieſuite, imprinted at Antwerpe in the yeare 1587. vnder the title, De vita Ignatij, ſheweth that their inſtitution hath no other end but the aduancement of ye affaires of Spaine, where they were receiued long time before they were receiued in any other part of the world. Marke, theſe are the words written in the page 146. of that Booke. For this Society, not yet borne in their Author Ignatius, was firſt allowed of in Spaine, & after that it was borne, was mightily reſiſted in Italye and France. Moreouer they are not bound ſo ſtrictly to any thing, as to pray day and night for the proſperity of the warres, and for the victories and triumphs of the King of Spaine. Behold the words of the page 169. We are bound day and night to appeace and wearie God with our prayers, to protect and defend Philip the Catholique King in al ſafety and happineſſe, who of his auncient and exceeding pietie, ſinguler wiſedome, and wonderful watchfulnes, of the mightieſt power of al Princes that euer were, ſetteth himſelfe as a Walle for the houſe of God, and defendeth the Chatholique faith. A matter which hee doth not onely with his inuincible power, but with thoſe ſcout-watches of the holy Fathers, which haue the rule and gouernment of the Senate of the Catholike faith. So that we may not find it ſtrange, that ſo many honorable perſonages do aſſure vs that they haue heard them pray for Philip our King. For there is not a Ieſuite in the world, that doth not once in the day pray this praier: and as the affaires of Spaine require, whereſoeuer they become, they make their vowes for him eyther publikelie or ſecretly.
               And on the contrary ſide, it is wel knowen to all men, that they neuer pray in any ſort for our King, to whom alſo they haue no oath of obedience, as whereof they are not otherwiſe capable, becauſe their corporation is not allowed in France, and being liege

vaſſals, & wholly bound as wel to their Generall as to the Pope: which point doth manifeſtly diſcouer their conſpiracie, & ſheweth euidently, that their vow tendeth to the ſubuerſion of the ſtate. For within the compaſſe of almoſt ſixtéene hundred yeres (wherin the Chriſtian Religion was watered with the blood of Chriſt, & his Martyrs) there hath not a Sect bin heard of, that hath had ſuch ſtrange vowes as this ſect hath.
               So farre of is it, that the Clergie of France hath euer bin ſpotted with the like, that on the contrary ſide, whenſoeuer the Popes combined themſelues without cauſe with the Enemies of this Crown, and would haue imploied the authority and power which they haue from God to edify withal, would haue imploied it, I ſay, to the diſtruction of the moſt floriſhing ſtate of Chriſtendome, and whom they may thanke for their temporalties, they haue found great and holy Parſonages, who with a common conſent of the whole Church of Fraunce haue manfully reſyſted ſuch enterpriſes.
               But in this later age, one part of the Clergie is found to haue ſucked of this poiſoned milke, and this doctrine of the Ieſuites, that whoſoeuer had bin choſen Pope, (notwithſtanding that from time to time it had bin well knowen that he was a Pentioner & Partiſan of Spaine, and a ſworne enemie to France,) yet might he notwithſtanding make the whole Kingdome a pray, and diſcharge the Subiectes from their obedience which they owe to their Prince.
               This ſchiſmatical and damnable propoſition, directly contrary to the word of God, which hath wholly ſeperated and put a difference betwéene the Spirituall and Temporal powers. This propoſition which would make Chriſtian Religion, as contrary to ye maintenance of States and Kingdomes, as in truth it helpeth to eſtabliſh them: This propoſition, I ſay, hauing taken place in the hearts of ſome Frenchmē, hath brought vs theſe rages, theſe crueltyes, theſe murders, and horrible confuſions which wee haue ſéene.
               In the yeare 1561. Iohn Tanquerel Bacheler of Diuinitie was

condemned to recall his error in being ſo bold and hardie as to ſet downe amongeſt other his diſputable queſtions, this for one, that the Pope might excommunicat Kings. In Ianuarie 1589. at what time there was a queſtion put forth in the Diuinitie ſchole called Sorbonne, whether ſubiects might be fréed from the obediēce of the King: Faber the Chauncellor, Camus, Chabot, Faber the Curate of Saint Paule, Chauagnac and the moſt auncient Diuines withſtood it ſtoutly, but the great number of the Scholers of the Ieſuits, Boucher, Pichenat, Varadier, Semelle, Cueilly, Decret, Aubourge, and many other caried it away with pluralitie of voices againſt al the maximes of Fraunce, & liberties of the French Church, which the Ieſuites call abuſes and corruptions. Theſe are the goodly fruits of their leſſons in Diuinitie.
               The Kings of France are the eldeſt ſonnes of the Church, ſonnes which haue deſerued as much as may be, withſtanding and ſuppreſſing the incroching of the Kinges of Caſtile, Aragon, and other that went about to take away the right of the Church of Rome. Loke when the Pope will acknowledge the King, for his eldeſt ſonne, and chiefe king of Chriſtendome, then will the Frenchmen acknowledge him for their holie Father: but as long as he playeth the part of a Father in law, and not of a Father, of a Partiſan, and not of a mediator, as long as of a malitious ſtomake he ſhall beſtow his might and main to diſmember France, to purchaſe vnto himſelfe a ſoueraigne commaundement there, and to tread the Flower de Lys vnder his féete, or to ioyne them in way of triumph to the armes of Spaine, which are farre different from them, Let our Sea bankes be oppoſite vnto theirs, & our ſurges vnto their ſtreams, let our armies be againſt theirs, and let the Nephewes themſelues fall together by the eares.
               
               Thus haue our fathers liued: in the time of Lewys the gracious, Gregorie the 4. would néedes intrude himſelfe to come to excommunicat the King: the Church of France willed him to return excommunicate himſelfe: the like befell in the time of Charles Chauue againſt Pope Adrian.
               
               
                  O braue and inuincible Church of France! in thoſe daies, thou waſtfull of French courages in déede, Chriſtians in déed, Religious in déed, whoſe principall vowe was euery way and in al things, to obey Gods commaundements which are alwaies iuſt, and not all the inſolencies and enterpriſes which Rome or Spaine would make againſt the French: but ſince that thine enemies haue combined themſelues togither againſt thy greatnes, they haue ſent to thée theſe new Colonies of Caſtillians, theſe conuents of Murderers, bound by their ſolēne vowe to obey their Spaniſh Generall as Ieſus Chriſt come downe vpon the earth, and to goe and murther Kings and Princes, or to cauſe them to be murdered by others, to whome they recommend their raging furie, Since that time, I ſay, where are theſe braue reſolutions of the Church of France?
               As we reade of certaine twinnes, that the death of the one, was the end of the other, in like ſort this law, which bindeth vs not to ſtart from our obedience dew to the King, what excommunication ſoeuer come from Rome, this law, I ſay, is ſo firmely knit to the ſtate, and the ſtate to it, that euen as the day of their beginning is one, ſo muſt and ought their ende to be. It is this ſincere, perfect, and abſolute obedience, that winneth battailes, that ſcattreth our enemies, which aduaunceth the deſert, and crowneth the labour, without which nothing can proſper, nothing can be durable. This is the true bonde, the ornament, and ſtrength of all things. Kingdomes can beare no felowſhips, nor lights with lights agree▪ if there be two ſunnes, all the world wilbe ſet on fire. So though the Primates, Archbiſhops & Biſhops haue the principal charge of religion in France, yet notwithſtanding before and aboue all thinges, they muſt giue their othe of fidelitie to the King, ſo farre are they from hauing a contrarie vowe to obey the Pope abſolutely.
               Holy Lewes ſet himſelfe ſtoutly & with great ſharpenes againſt the bulles of Rome, as may be ſéene by his placarde, the Popes of Rome had wrought a good reuenge, if they could haue rooted out all the race of that good & valorous King. Whereabout the Cardinall

of Plaiſance laboured mightily being ſent into France vnder the title of Legate, who imployed all the meanes he had, all his greatnes, and all his forces to ſubuert the Salique law, the true Palladion of France, and without which, the Flower de Lys, could neuer haue mounted to ſo high a degrée of honour and glorie, as euen at this day maketh them to gliſter and ſhine maugre the beardes of all the practiſes, of all the treaſons, of all the vnderminings of Spaine, farre aboue all the proudeſt and topſailed in the world.
               Let vs goe on and ſée how theſe fellowes may abide in France, which haue this fourth and principall vowe of abſolute obedience euery way and in all thinges, to their Spaniſh generall, and to the Pope (commaunded and daily menaced by King Philip, who hath his foote vpon his throte by meanes of Naples and Sicile, and of his partiſans within Rome it ſelfe) To the Pope, I ſay, who maintaineth in the Chapter, Ad Apoſtolicae. de Sentent. & re iudicata. in 6. and in the extrauagant Commu. vnam ſanctam. de Maioritate & obedientia. That it is neceſſary for euery man, if he will euer be ſaued, to be ſubiect to the Biſhop of Rome. And becauſe the world may not thinke, that this ſaying may be ſalued by the diſtinction of Spirituall and Temporall, behold how namely and expreſly he declared himſelfe to be head, ſuperiour, and abſolute maiſter both in Spirituall and Temporall thinges, ouer all Kinges and Princes of the earth, mainteyning that he hath power to iudge and depoſe them: So then both the ſwords, that is to ſay, both the Spiritual & the Material are in the power of the Church: but the one is to be vſed for the Church, the other by the Church: the one by the hands of the prieſt, the other by the hand of Kings and Souldiers, but yet at the becke and ſufferance of the Prieſt, and the one ſworde muſt be vnder the other: & the Temporal authoritie be ſubiect to the Spiritual power: for as the truth witneſſeth, The Spiritual power may inſtitute and iudge the earthly power, if it be not good. So is the propheſie of Hieremie verified vpon the Church and Church power: Behold I haue appointed or placed thee this day ouer Nations and Kingdomes, &c. as followeth there. Therefore, in caſe the earthly power ſtray out

of the way, it ſhalbe iudged of the Spirituall power: but if the Spirituall power ſtray out of the way, the leſſer ſhalbe iudged by the greater: but if the higheſt goe aſtray, that is to be iudged of God onely, and not of man, as witneſſeth the Apoſtle, The Spiritual man iudgeth al things, and himſelfe is iudged of no man.
               
               If theſe propoſitions be not erronious and Schiſmatical, what followeth but that al we that obey the King are excommunicate, that the whole kingdome of France ſtandeth interdict, accurſed, and a pray to Sathan? But how did our aunceſtors (whoſe vertue euen at this day ſupporteth our faults) behaue and cary themſelues in ſuch accidents, and in ſuch rencounters? Philip the faire ſent to Boniface the eight, that he had no authoritie at all ouer the Kinges of France, and that they that ſaid to the contrarie were fooles and madmen. Read Belannin, heare all the Sermons, all the confeſſions of the Ieſuites, they ſende all ſuch propoſitions to the bottomleſſe pit of Hell togither with Philip the faire, and all thoſe that burnt Pope Boniface his bull openly at an aſſembly of the ſtates of this towne of Paris, declaring the ſeate of Rome vacant. This Belarmin a Ieſuite mainteineth, that the Popes haue power to put downe the Kings and Princes of the earth, alleaging for his reaſon, certaine tirannous attemtats and enterpriſes.
               Pope Benedict the 13. would néeds follow Boniface, but his bull containing a diffamatorie libell againſt the authoritie of King Charles the ſixt, was openly torne in pieces, and they that brought it, were put to their fine, and committed to priſon.
               
                  Lewes the 12. ſurnamed Father of the people, was as much hated in Rome as he was loued in France: he had beſtowed on Iulius the ſecond many townes in Italie: in acknowledgment whereof, Iulius ſtirred vp the Spaniards, Almaines, Suiſers, and Engliſhmen againſt him: but in the yéere, 1510. the King cauſed a Councell to be aſſembled at Towers, where it was decréed and enacted, that warre ſhould be made vpon him, which was alſo confirmed in an other Councel holden at Piſa. Whereupon the Pope tooke vpon him to excommunicate the King and the kingdome, giuing

them abſolution from all their ſinnes that could kill a French man. Thus you enlarge one mans territories, and take from an other, other ſome you make tributaries, you increaſe, you diminiſh, you giue, you take away kingdomes, who gaue you this power? For as for God, he hath ſaid, that your kingdome is not of this world.
               This great excōmunication could not make a breach in France, but it gaue a blow to the kingdome of Nauarre, which was allied to vs, where the ſubiects were not ſurely grounded againſt ſuch enterpriſes: and Fardinand King of Aragon ſeazed vpon the beſt part of the ſtate of Nauarre, while Iohn of Albreat great grandfather to the King that now is, was in the armie of France.
               
               God graunt that ſome reuenger may riſe out of our bones.
               Here am I forced to ſpeake a word or two, touching the beginning of the Ieſuits, but I will do it ſhortly, becauſe my matter calleth me away.
               In the yéere 1521. the Frenchmen vndertooke to reſtore one to his inheritance which he had loſt by their meanes. They beſieged Pampelune, and beate it with ſuch a furie, as they carried it away, and wanne it. Ignatius Layola Commaunder of one of the companies of the garriſon of Caſtile, was more heddy in defence of it, then any of the reſt, and there had his legges broken, which accident cauſed him to folow the warres no more, but vowing within himſelfe, an vnreconcileable hatred againſt the French, no leſſe then Hannibal did againſt the Romains, through the helpe of the Deuill, he hatched this curſed conſpiracie of Ieſuits, who haue bin the cauſers of ſuch ruine as France hath receiued.
               Foreſightfull Nature hath made the cruelleſt and moſt murdering creatures, leaſt fruitfull: the Lioneſſe bringeth foorth but one, and but once whileſt ſhe liueth. If they were as fertile, as other beaſts, the world could not poſſibly be inhabited. But it is a ſtraunge thing to ſée, how this wicked race borne to the ruine and deſolation of mankind, hath multiplied in a few yéeres: being growen from the number of thrée ſoore perſons, which was their firſt foundation, vnto ten thouſand. In ſo much as that if they ſhould continue to increaſe in like proportion, they would become

within thirtie yéeres ſpace more then twelue hundred thouſand, and would make whole kingdomes, all Ieſuits.
               
               Had they come into France with diſplayed enſſignes, they had paſſed frō the birth to the graue: but they ſtily crept into our Vniuerſitie of Paris, and tooke vp lodgings in little chambers, where they continued a good while, lurking as Fores for a pray, and playing the ſpies, receiuing directions from Rome, and very peremptorie letters of recommendation to ſuch as were the greateſt fauourites in France, and hunted after credite and honour in Rome (which ſort of people was alwaies greatly to be miſdoubted for the affaires of this Realme.) So that by this ſlie and forly maner, hauing vnderminingly crept in by little and little, and in fine hauing gotten the Cardinals of Tournon and Lorraine for their Preſidents and Iudges, they procured a Decrée, made at Poiſſy touching the receiuing of their colledge which had bin oftentimes reiected before, to be confirmed and ſigned in their behalfe (the Vniuerſitie not being admitted to ſpeake for themſelues againſt them) with this prouiſo, that their profeſſion ſhould be baniſhed, and that they ſhould abandon the name of Ieſuits.
               
               They deſired no better entrāce then this, making full accompt, that by litle and litle, and ſtylie without any perceiuing at all, to gather vnto themſelues ſuch a number of Ieſuiticall conuerts by their confeſſions, ſermons, and inſtructions of the youth, that in concluſion they ſhould not onely be maiſters of their deſire, but alſo ruinate their aduerſaries, and haue a ſoueraigne commandement ouer the ſtate. As in déede they effected it to the ſight of all the world, from the time of the ſhutting vp of this Towne, vntill the happie reducing of it to the obedience of his Maieſtie.
               What tongue, what voice is ſufficient to expreſſe the ſecrete Counſails, the moſt horrible conſpiracies, more daungerous then the conſpiracie of Catiline, which were holden in their Colledge in S. Iames ſtreete, and in their Church in S. Antonies ſtreete? where did the agents and Ambaſſadours of Spaine, Mendoza, Daguillon, Diego, Diuarra, Taxis, Feria, and others hold their ſecret méetings and aſſemblies, but among the Ieſuits? where did Louchard,

Ameline, Cruce, Crome, and ſuch like notorious manquellers, and murderers build their conſpiracies, but amongſt the Ieſuits? who made that bloodie anſwere to the Catholique Apologie, but the Ieſuits? who employed all their ſtudies to ſpeake againſt the parſon, and right of his Maieſtie that now reigneth, as falſe and ſlaunderous matters as poſſibly their wicked heads could deuiſe. What are they that from the yéere 1585. would giue no abſolution to the Gentrie of France, vnleſſe they would vowe and promiſe to bande themſelues againſt their Soueraigne being a moſt Catholique King, and ſuch an one, as againſt whom they could make no exception, but onely this that he would not die ſo ſoone, as their Magiciens had foretold he ſhould? who were the cauſers of the loſſe of the towne of Perigeux, but the Ieſuits, which went and made a tumult euen in the towne houſe? who were the cauſers of the reuolt of Rhennes, which continued but eight daies, and was as much as all Britanie was worth, but the Sermons of the Ieſuits, as they themſelues had cauſed it to be deliuered out in Print euen in this Citie? Who were the cauſers of the loſſe of Agen, Tholoſe, Verdun, and generally of al the Townes wherin the y haue gotten footing, Bourdeaux onely except where their traiterous purpoſes were preuented, and Neuers, where the preſence of Monſieur de Neuers and the weakenes of the walles appalled the courages of them whoſe harts they had empoiſoned?
               Where did the two Cardinals, which termed themſelues Legates in France, aſſemble their Counſailes but onely amongſt the Ieſuits? where was it, that Mendoza the Ambaſſadour of Spaine vpon Alholen day in the yéere 1589. at what time the King had entred the Faurburges, held his Counſaile of ſixteene, but in the Colledge of Ieſuits? Where was it, that the yéere following the reſolution was taken, rather to famiſh the nienth and tenth part of the inhabitaunts of Paris, then to yéeld vp the towne to the King? who was it that lent the enemies Wines, Graine, and Otes for their horſes vpō Mortgage of the Iewels of the crowne, but onely the Ieſuits, as they were found by Lugoly, ſeiſed thereof the morow after that the King came into this towne? Who was

preſidēt of the coūſaile of thoſe ſixteene Murderers, but Comolet, Bernard, and Father Odo Pichenar the cruelleſt tygre in al Paris, who tooke it ſo much to heart, to ſée things go otherwiſe then he made accompt of, that he became mad, and remaineth to this day in chaines, within their College of Bourges? An auncient writer ſaid, that if it were poſſible for man to looke into the harts of the wicked, he ſhould behold there, both rents and ſtrokes: for as the bodies with woundes, ſo are the mindes of the wicked rent and torne in ſunder with crueltie, luſtes, and wicked counſailes.
               
               When K. Philip by the perſwaſions of the Ieſuits, had brought in his Spaniſh garriſon into Paris, and would haue that which he held now by force, coloured with ſome faire ſhew, whom ſent he, but father Mathieu the Ieſuite, carying a name like to the ſurname of an other Mathieu a Ieſuite, the principall inſtrument of the league that was made in the yéere 1585. This Mathieu, during his ſhort abode in this towne, being lodged in the College of Ieſuites, cauſed there a letter, to be written and ſigned, whereby thoſe noble maiſters, that termed themſelues the Counſelers of the ſixtéene quarters of the towne of Paris, gaue not onely the towne but the whole kingdome to King Philip, which thing will appeare better by the letter it ſelfe, then by any other diſcourſe that may be made.
               
                  
                     SIre, where as your Catholique Maieſtie hath bin ſo gracious vnto vs, as to giue vs to vnderſtand by the moſt religious and reuerend Father Mathieu, not onely his holy intentions towards the general good of Religion, but in particuler his great affections and fauours towards this Citie of Paris. And a litle after. We truſt in God that before it be long, the armies of his holines and your Catholique Maieſties being ioyned togither, wil deliuer vs from the oppreſſion of our enemy, who hath hither vnto, by the ſpace of an yeere and halfe ſhopped vs vpon al ſides, ſo that nothing can come into the towne, but with hazard, or by force of armes, and would preſſe further, ſtoode he not in feare of the garriſons, which it pleaſed your Catholique Maieſtie to ſend vs. We may boldly aſſure your

Catholique Maieſtie, that the vowes and deſires of al the Catholiques, are to ſee your Catholique Maieſtie hold the Sceptre of this Crowne, and reigne ouer vs, as we moſt willingly caſt our ſelues into your armes, as into the armes of our Father, or that your Catholique Maieſtie would be pleaſed to appoint ſome one of his poſteritie. And if it ſhal ſtand with his good pleaſure to appoint vs any other beſide himſelfe, that it may pleaſe him to make choyſe of a Sonne in law, whome we wil receiue as King with al the beſt affections, al the deuotion and obedience that a good and loyal people can and are bound to yeeld to their liege and Soueraine. For we hope ſo well of the bleſſing of God vpon this alliance, that what we haue already receiued of this moſt puiſſant and moſt Chriſtian Princeſſe Blanche of Caſtile, mother of our moſt chriſtian and moſt religious King S. Loys, we ſhal receiue it, yea to the double of this great and vertuous Princeſſe daughter of your Catholique Maieſtie, vpon whome for her rare vertues, the eies of al men are fixed and ſet, as a moſt pleaſing obiect, and in whome moſt gloriouſly ſhineth the blood of France and Spaine, to no other end and purpoſe, but by a perpetual alliance to fraterniſe and ioyne in one brotherhood as it were theſe two great Monarchies vnder their gouernment, to the aduauncement of the glorie of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the beautie of his church, and vnion of al the inhabitants of the world vnder the Enſeignes of Chriſtianiſme, As your catholique Maieſtie, with ſo many notable and triumphant victories by the fauour of God, and his 
                           •
                        ide hath mightily preuailed and aduāced the ſame, ſo we moſt hartily pray to God, who is the Lord of battailes, to continew your proceedinges therein with ſuch accōpliſhment, that the whole worke may be conſummate and perfited in al poincts: to which end and purpoſe, that it would pleaſe him, to prolong your catholike Maieſties daies in perfect & bliſſeful health, accompanied with daily ſucceſſe of victories, and triumphes ouer al your enemies. From Paris this 2. of Nouemb. 1591. And beneath on the one ſide. The reuerend Father Mathieu this bearer, who hath greatly comforted vs, fully inſtructed with the ſtate of our affaires, ſhall ſatisfie your Catholique Maieſtie in all thinges which may ſeeme defectiue and wanting in our letters, beſeeching

your Maieſtie moſt humbly to credite him in whatſoeuer he ſhal report vnto you from vs.
                  
               
               The date of this Letter is infinitely to be conſidered, for it was written the ſecond of Nouember 1591. and 13. daies after, they that wrote the Letters, and vnderſtood by father Mathieu King Philips purpoſes, they, I ſay, that ſtarted not from the Ieſuites, ne went to any other mens confeſſions but theirs, executed this great & horrible cruelty, moſt butcherly murdering (after the maner of Spaniardes, and without forme or figure of proces) that man, whom the day before they reuerenced as their Lord chiefe Juſtice, to wit, Monſieur Briſſon. Theſe Spaniards, Ieſuites, and ſixteene Murderers, or rather ſixtéene hangmen and their adherents, being of opinion, that this tragicall and hideous ſpectacle which they preſented to the people in a great aſſemblie at the Greue, would hearten them, and inflame them to bath themſelues in the bloud of all honeſt men that could not abide to taſt of the Spaniſh tirannie. But God, that abhorreth ſuch and ſo execrable enterpriſes, diſpoſed the matter otherwiſe, and ſo wrought, that ye fearful day, which they thought ſhould haue bin an aſſured eſtabliſhment of the Spaniſh cōmandarie within Paris, was the ruin & ouerthrow of it, Then was Troy taken. The moſt drouſie & ſluggiſh ſpirits began to be awake, the moſt daſtards to change their dread into deſperatenes, and they that were moſt bewitched by the ſermons of the Ieſuits, to know that the Empire of Caſtile, which had bin painted out vnto them ful of méekenes, ioy, and happines, was nothing but an heape of moſt barbarous crueltie.
               This Letter written to the King of Spaine, and intercepted néer to Lyons by the Lord of Chaſſeron, and ſent to the King: the originall whereof was ſéene and is to be ſéene daily, giueth vs cléerely to vnderſtand, that the Ieſuites and other traitors to Fraunce, haue no other marke to ſhoote at during all theſe warres, but to make the King of Spaine Monarch of all Chriſtendome. The common Prouerb of theſe hipocrites is, one GOD, one POPE, & one KING of Chriſtendom, the great King Catholique and vniuerſal.
               
               
                  All their thoughts, all their purpoſes, all their actions, all their ſermons, all their confeſſions, haue no other white they aime at, but to bring all Europe vnder the ſubiection of Spaniſh gouernement. And becauſe they ſée no Sea wall ſo ſtrong as the French Empire is, to kepe of this great inundation, they buſie themſelues about nothing ſo much, as to breake inſunder, to diſmember, to ruinate it by all maner of ſeditions, diuiſions, and ciuill warres, which they ceaſe not daily to kindle in it, labouring with might & maine eſpecially to extinguiſh the Kinges houſe, which they ſée brought to a few Princes. And indéede, who was it that of purpoſe, to make the race of Monſieur the Prince of Conde Loys de Bourbon, (in which rare conſiſteth the moſt part of the bloud royall) execrable and abhominable to all Frenchmen, publiſhed amongeſt vs, that he cauſed himſelfe to be crowned King of France, but the Ieſuites? who were ſo impudent and ſhameles in a matter notoriouſlie knowen to all the world to be falſe, as to write in the life of Ignatius pag. 162. that the Prince had cauſed French crowns to be coined with this inſcription: Lewis the 13. by the grace of God the firſt Chriſtian King of the French, which is a moſt arrogant inſcription, ſay they, and iniurious to all the moſt Chriſtian Kinges of France. They ſay not, ought to be, as of a matter doubtful, but, is, as of a matter certaine.
               O you noble Princes, children of ſuch a Father, why doe you not with our owne handes execute theſe deceiuers of the world, which ſéeke to ingraue as it were, & imprint vpon your foreheads the fouleſt and moſt ſhamefull marke that may be thought of in the world.
               But what doe I ſtand vpon? vpon reproches done to the dead? alas, their purpoſe and burning zeale is to murder the liuing: was it not in the Colledge of Ieſuites at Lyon, and alſo in the Colledge of Ieſuites in Paris, that the reſolution was laſt taken to murder the King in Auguſt 1593. Are not the depoſitions of Barriere executed at Melun, notorious to all the world? and do not thoſe depoſitions make all true French hearts tremble and quake, all them I ſay, that haue not built their plottes and hopes vpon the

death of the King? was it not Varade principall of the Ieſuites, ſo choſen by them, as the honeſteſt and beſt Ieſuite, that exhorted and encouraged this murderer, aſſuring him that he could not doe a more meritorious worke in the world, then to murder the King though he were a Catholike, and that for this déed he ſhould goe ſtraight to Paradice? And to confirme him the more in this miſchieuous reſolution, did he not cauſe him to be confeſſed by another Ieſuite, whoſe name can not be knowen, and may happily be in this Towne lying in wait for like occaſions? what more? Did not theſe impious, godleſſe, and execrable murderers, giue this Barriere the Sacramēt, imploying the moſt holy, moſt precious, & moſt ſacred miſterie of our Chriſtian Religion, towards the murdering of the chiefeſt King of Chriſtendome? But how glad would they be, to be guilty rather of the fact committed, then of the fact intended?
               
               The ſhop of Satan, wherein are hammered and forged all the murders that haue bin executed or attempted in Europe, within theſe fortie yeres: the right ſucceſſors of the murderers that murdered Raimond Erle of Tripoly, Conrard the Marquis of Monferrad, Edward ſonne of the King of England, and many other great Princes. Their Biſhop alſo whom they worſhipped (as the Ieſuites doe their General, alwaies a Spaniard) cauſed a Pollarful of two edged ſharpe kniues to be carried before him, and the miniſter that carried it, cryed: Get you backe, flie away before him who holdeth the death of Princes in his handes.
               
               There was a murdering Ieſuite taken of late in Flanders, who depoſed at his death, that there was another ſent out of Spaine to murder the King. Helas, what can we tell whether he be now in the Colledge of Ieſuites or no, waiting his fit oportunitie, vntill the king come hither? For to ſhew that the Ieſuits can not diſauow their companions of ſuch enterpriſes, and that the higheſt point of their Honor ſtandeth in executing ſuch murders, terming them Martyrs which haue ſpent their liues therein, there are aboue thrée thouſand perſons that know, that Comolet preaching at Chriſtmas laſt in Saint Bartholomews Church, tooke for his

theame the third chapter of the Booke of Iudges, where it is reported that Ehud ſlew the King of Moab, and ſcaped away, and after that he had diſcourſed at large vpon the death of the late King, and exalted and placed amongeſt the Angels, this Tigre, this deuill incarnate, Iames Clement the murderer, he fell into a great exclamation: We haue neede of an Ehud, we haue need of an Ehud, were he a Frier, were he a Souldier, were he a Lackey, were he a ſhepheard, it made no matter: Needes we muſt haue an Ehud, one blow would ſettle vs fully in the eſtate of our affaires, as we moſt deſire.
               
               Behold my good Lords, behold againe and againe, behold, I ſay, to how high a degrée, our blockiſhneſſe, or rather our negligence, (pardon me I beſéech you for my ſo ſaying, griefe and anguiſh of heart forceth me to it) cauſed the boldnes, the pride, the raſhnes, the impudencie of ſuch traitors, of ſuch ſpials of Spaine, of ſuch murderers, to clime, and to mount vp, as to be ſo bold as to vſe the Pulpit for a place to ſound out the murder of Kinges in. This is their pure doctrine. Allyn head of the Colledge of Seminaries at Rhemes, hath written a booke expreſly of it. And to this effect, when William Parrie was executed, he confeſſed that Benedicto Palmio a Ieſuite had informed him, that it was lawfull to kil and murder all Kinges and Princes excommunicate by the Pope. Vppon which point hauing afterwardes had conference with a learned Prieſt called Vates, he told him, that it was a falſe propoſition, and that he ſhould be damned if he did ſo: And in this doubtfulnes and contrarietie of opinions, Parry went to confeſſion to one Annibal Codreto a Ieſuite dwelling in Paris, (this is the man that wrote in a booke imprinted at Lyons, that their Societie tooke their name hereuppon, becauſe God had giuen them for companions to his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, and Ieſus had accepted them for his companions) this Codreto told him, that it could not be but Vates was an heretike, aſſuring him, that he could not do a more meritorious worke, and that the Angels would carrie him into Heauen.
               You Kinges and Princes of the earth, what aſſurance can you promiſe your ſelues of your liues within your Palaces, and in the

middeſt of your Gardes, if this deuilliſh propoſition, vomitted out of the bottomles pit of hell, do once ſeize the hearts and mindes of your people, as the Ieſuites ceaſe not dayly and hourely to beate it into their heads by their curſed confeſſions, whereunto alſo they are boūd by their rules: Let them lay hands vpon tirants, and pluck vp darnel out of the Lordes field. They haue an article in their Bulles and Statutes, which tendeth to no other end. They ſtay not for any yere of probation, but receiue all fiſh that commeth to their net, that are readie to take their vowes, which being once done, though the partie be very ſimple, yet without repeale foreuer, the Votarie that hath giuen his word, is bound to the Generall, and yet may the Generall diſplace him at his pleaſure, vntill he be profeſſed: a matter that falleth not out ſometimes in the ſpace of 25. or thirtie yeares after.
               How commeth it to paſſe, that the condition of theſe men, is ſo ſtrange, ſo extraordinarie, ſo vnequal, that this contract betwéene them cannot be reciprocal? To the end that when a man hath bin holden in ſuſpenſe ſometimes for the ſpace of 25. yeres amongeſt them, if any inheritances fall vnto him, then will they take him in, but if none befall him, they may remoue him, vnleſſe he vndertake to execute whatſoeuer they will commaund him: ſo that, he that hath ſpent all his youth amongeſt them, ſéeing himſelfe on the one ſide brought to beggerie, and on the other ſide fed with faire promiſes of aſſured Paradice, will eaſily reſolue with himſelfe either to be a murderer himſelfe, or to exhort, confeſſe and miniſter the Sacrament to all murderers that come.
               As oft as I call to minde into what extremity of miſeries, both euery one of vs in particuler, and the ſtate of France in generall ſhould haue bin brought, in caſe this murder ſo cunningly perſwaded, ſo liuely imprinted in Barrieres heart by Varade principal of the Ieſuits, had bin executed, the horrible ſeruitude that Fraunce ſhould haue bin in at this day, the inſolent pride and triumphes of the Spaniards, and the miſerable eſtate of this great Citie, where the infant of Caſtile would haue proudly commaunded, I muſt néedes confeſſe, that choler and iuſt indignation, makes me as it

were beſides my ſelfe, to ſée that yet theſe traitors, theſe wretched caitifes, theſe manquellers, theſe murderers of Kinges, continue amongeſt vs, liue amongeſt vs, enioy the benefite of the aire of Fraunce: And how liue they? They are in the Palace, they are made much of, they are ſupported, they make leagues, they make factions, and all ſort of new alliances and aſſociations. What? Alas, if God ſo permit that within theſe few dayes ſome Ieſuite, or other ſet on worke by them, be apprehended, as he of Melun was, thinke you, how many ſoeuer you be that ſupport them in your diſcourſes, wherein you thinke your ſelues wiſe, conſiderate, aduiſed, and to ſpeake in a word, Spaniards, thinke you, I ſay, that you ſhall be in ſafetie amongeſt vs? No, no, in all other matters, man cannot be too modeſt, and of good ſtay of himſelfe: but when the life, the ſafety, the preſeruation of this ſo ſacred a perſon, ſo neceſſarie for France, as without whom the ſtate would be vndon, would be eclipſed for euer, and forthwith become one of the prouinces of Spaine, commeth in queſtion, herein, I ſay, a man can not be too hot. He that is cold, he that is modeſt in this caſe, is a traitor: vertue in ſuch caſes ſtandeth in exceſſe not of affections onely, but of paſſions alſo. Though the might of all nations were conſpired againſt vs, though al the world were in an vprore about vs, though the Seas were full of Nauies, though monſtruous and ſtrange beaſtes were brought in vppon vs, yet wouldeſt thou kéepe vs vnconquered, O moſt vnconquerable Soueraigne: but who can promiſe that this Piller and Starre of Fraunce ſhall continue for euer, in caſe that theſe wretched caitifes that do nothing but practiſe daily againſt his life, if they that receiue theſe murderers ſent from Lyons whileſt it rebelled, and now from Spaine: if they, I ſay, that make the heartes of the religious deſperate, that daily ſharpen the edge of the peoples hearts againſt his Maieſtie, be mainteined and preſerued in this ſtate.
               But they inſtruct the youth, what to doe? to deſire and wiſh for the death of their Kings. Farre be it from vs to mollify and ſwéeten the puniſhment due to the Ieſuites for their hainous crimes, becauſe they inſtruct ſome youth: Nay rather, this ought to be a

motiue to induce vs to aggrauat and augment it an hundred fold. For it is this goodly inſtruction of your youth, it is theſe curſed propoſitions which they ſtill into their tender minds, vnder a pretēce of teaching of them learning, (as poiſons are not giuen, but ſwéetned with ſuger, and vices deceiue not but vnder the ſhew and ſhadow of vertues) it is theſe bold confeſſions, (where, without witneſſes they paint not the faces but the hearts of their ſcholers with the tincture & painting of rebellion againſt their Prince and Magiſtrates) that hath filled ſo many places, and ſo many dignities with Spaniſh hearts, enemies to the King and his ſtate.
               The tender age of Children drinketh vp error with the firſt milke.
               Some of their ſcholers haue reiected their perſwaſions, & they do hate them a thouſand fold more, then ſuch as neuer knew them: but where one hath reſiſted them, a thouſand haue bin marred.
               We reade in the 52. of Dion, that Maecenas ſhewed Auguſtus, that there was none ſo good a way to eſtabliſh a peacefull ſtate to himſelfe and people, as to cauſe the nobilitie of Rome to be taught and inſtructed by ſuch Scholemaſters, as loued the ſtate of a Monarchie. For the world altereth and changeth in ſhort time, and this youth ſhall forthwith be aduanced to great offices. In like ſort, nothing can be more daungerous, then to haue our youth taught by theſe Spaniſh ſpialles; who aboue all things hate the French Monarchie.
               It is a very eaſie matter to imprint ſuch an affection as a man will, in theſe weake mindes: and nothing harder then to diſroote them. For the preceptes that are learned in our tender yeares, take deepe roote. It was not the riuer of Eurotas that made men warlike, but the good inſtitution of Licurgus. It is not the riuer of Seine, or the riuer of Garonne that hath made ſo many wicked Frenchmē: but the colledges of the Ieſuits at Paris, Tholouſe, and Burdeaux. Since ſuch Scholers came to charges, the manors of our aunceſters fell not away by litle and litle: but ran down headlong like to violent floods, and raging ſtreames.
               Chriſtian religion hath all the marks of true Iuſtice and profite,

but none ſo apparant as the exact and preciſe charge of due obedience to Magiſtrates and preſeruation of gouernement: and theſe people, which terme themſelues the fellowſhip of Ieſus, haue no other matter they ſhoote at, but to turne all lawfull magiſtracie vpſide downe, to eſtabliſh the tirannie of Spaine in all places: and to this end doe they frame and faſhion the mindes of youth, committed vnto them to be inſtructed in good literature, religion, and piety.
               
                  Oh Lord, what nightiſh darkeneſſe poſſeſſeth the hearts of men euen for the verie bent to wickednes. Tereus is taken to be godly, and reapeth praiſe by lewdnes.
               
               The Carthaginians ſacrificed their children to Saturne, their Fathers and mothers being conſtrained to be preſent and aſſiſting to the ſacrifice, with cherefull countenaunce. It is a ſtrange thing that we haue ſéene the time, when a man was not accompted a Catholique, vnleſſe he put his children to ſchole to a Ieſuite: and ſuch as ben brought vp in this Colledge, had their paſports to goe whither they would, no man was to make inquirie what condition of life they were of. So that Parents framing themſelues to the time, were conſtrained to loſe their Children, which were ether charmed, or very often vtterly murdered, as it were, if they found them to their vent. There are too manie miſerable examples hereof, knowen wel inough to euerie mā, & publik complaints left to poſterity for this wickednes, againſt theſe cruell manſtealers that bereaue Parents of their Children, and oftentimes ſpoile thē of the ſupporters and pillers of their houſes, as it befell to Airault the Sherife of Angers, who hauing eight ſmall Children in his old age, was by the Ieſuites robbed of his eldeſt Sonne, who might by this time haue ſuccéeded his Father in his rome, and become a father to his yonger Brethren and Siſters. They ſtale him from him when he was about foretéene yeares of age, and kept him in Italie and Spaine, ſo that he could neuer heare newes of him, notwithſtanding all admonitions, and eccleſiaſticall cenſures that hée could procure againſt them, which they make but a mocke of, contenting themſelues with an abſolution ſent them from

their Spaniſh generall.
               In the meane while, when Airault ſhall come to die, the Ieſuits will put in foote for the right of the eldeſt ſonne in his goods and liuing: for they neuer bring any of their nouices to the vowe of pouertie, vntill they haue no hope of any ſucceſſion: and before they become profeſſed, they giue all their goods to the Colledge. So nothing goeth out of their clouches, all commeth in: both by Inteſtates and by wils which they hunt after euery day, on the one ſide fearing the weake mindes of ſuch as are at deaths doore with the terrors of Hell, & on the other ſide, promiſing them open Paradiſe if they giue any thing to the Felowſhip of Ieſus. As Maldonat did to S. Andre preſident of Montbrun, drawing from him by a confeſſion full of couetouſnes and maſked iugling, all the moueables and gaines he had gotten by his many yéeres trauaile and ſeruice, of which monſtruous abuſe and treacherous fraude Monſieur Pibrac complained of in full Court. The world knoweth what a maner of Teſtament and Will they cauſed Gondran the preſident of Dijon to make, by which Will and Teſtament he gaue halfe a Crowne to his ſiſter his onely heire, & ſeuen thouſand Franckes in land a yéere to the Ieſuites. It is well knowen how they robbed the houſe of Bollons, one of the richeſt houſes in all Bordeaux. And of late, how they receiued for the right of inheritance of the houſe of Monſieur de Largebaſton preſident, the lande of Faiolles, which they ſolde for twelue thouſand Crownes, and ſent the money into Spaine, to be put into their Treaſorie there: for they kéepe nothing in France, but onely the immoueables which are bequeathed them without power of alienation.
               It is alſo notoriouſly knowen, how they ſtole away the onely brother of the Marquis of Canillac, a Gentleman at this day of eight thouſand Francks of reuenue, and heire apparant to aboue fiue and fortie thouſand, whome they kéepe with good aduiſe from entring into the vowe of pouertie, becauſe they ſtand in good hope to become Lords and Maiſters of the ſucceſſion of his elder brother, who is vnmarried, and one that daily hazardeth his life in the Kings warres for his ſeruice, and is his Liuetenant in Auuergne.
                  
And without doubt, if that noble man faile, if they haue no worſe ſucceſſe in their iudgements then they haue had hethervnto, they will become Marquiſes of Canillac, and ſo pull downe this houſe, which is at this day one of the greateſt, and mightieſt, and of greateſt honour in all Britanie.
               
               Our nation hath bin alwaies charged with want of wiſedome. As for iuſtice, liberalitie, valour and courage, wée haue inough; yea too much: but too too litle wiſedome. What a careleſſe ſtupiditie is this, that ſuch Caterpillers as theſe are, vnder a colour of diſdaine to take a couple of ſous, and other vſuall auailes that are giuen to Scholemaiſters for inſtructing mens children, haue gotten within theſe thirtie yéeres two hundred thouſand Francks of reuenue.
               In our Vniuerſitie, there was neuer any thing taken of the poorer ſort: but if a Gentlemans ſonne giue foure or fiue crownes to his Reader, for his yéeres trauaile, is this any great matter? Is it not reaſon, for him that hath ſpent his yéeres in learning to haue ſome little maintenaunce to buy him an handſome gowne withall: To denie this, were not onely not to recieue a poore ſtudent, but vtterly to ſinke him. Heretofore poore yong men found the meanes to be entertained of the richer ſort till twenty or two and twenty yéeres, and ſo began to get ſomething: which cauſed euery yéere a thouſand more to giue themſelues to ſtudie, then otherwiſe would haue done. But ſince the Ieſuits haue drawen all ſcholers to thēſelues, men are become out of heart: for take away rewarde of ſtudies, and learning faileth.
               All the greateſt and moſt excellent perſonages of ancient time were of opinion that it was reaſon, that ſuch as tooke paines in bringing vp their youth in learning ſhould be recompenſed: and beſides reaſon, they thought it very requiſite and neceſſarie.
               And yet notwithſtanding theſe fellowes following the ſteppes and practiſe of cunning impoiſoners, (which alwaies mixe their drammes of poiſon finely and ſubtilly with ſome ſwéete and delicate ingredient) haue deuiſed none ſo fit a way to draw away al ſcholers vnto themſelues, as the refuſing of theſe ſimple and ſmall

contributions or allowances. For licencious youthes had rather ſpend the money their parentes ſende them in diſhoneſt houſes, then giue it to their Tutors, that all the yéere long trauaile for them.
               Yet this were nothing, were it not for the inchantements and ſorceries wherewith they bewitch youths. But as the Romaines were very carefull to bring vp the nobilitie of France at Authun, where they trained them vp to the loue of the Empire, and to forget the auncient libertie of France: euen ſo the tyrant of Spaine hath his Ieſuits diſperſed in France, to imprint the loue of his name and of his gouernement in the tender mindes of our children. God hath planted heauenly ſeedes in the bodies of men, which if a good husband haue the cultifying of, the fruite falleth out anſwerable to the ſeede: but if an euill husband haue them in hand, he deddeth them, as barren and mariſh groūd doth; and ſo for good corne reapeth nothing but weedes. And take we what paines we can to wéede out ſuch opinions, our labour is but caſt away, and our time loſt. For the ſtomacke being once diſtempered by a diſeaſe, it altereth the nature of all the meates it receaueth. So that we haue no other remedie but the feare of Lawes, and enforcements, as great hatreds muſt be bridled with great dreads: but that obedience is alwaies more loyall and more acceptable, that procéedeth from loue, then that that is grounded vpon feare. They that are ſtong with the Serpent Dipſas, haue a continuall drouth, through the force of the poiſon ſcattered through all the vaines and drying vp the ſtore of blood, in ſo much as the ſicke man doth nothing but drinke, and yet his thirſt can neuer be quenched: In like ſorte they that haue once taſted of this venemous and peſtilenciall inſtruction of the Ieſuits, thirſt continually after the diſquieting of the repoſe and quiet ſtate of their Countries, and the aduancement of the gouernement of Spaine.
               
               The hiſtorie of Portugal is well knowen: K. Philip had an eye vpon that his neighbour kingdome a long time: but bring it to his ſubiection he could not vnleſſe he procured the Kings death, & the death of the greateſt part of the Nobilitie. In this ſeruice he emploied

the Ieſuites which were about King Sebaſtian, who call themſelues in that Countrie, Apoſtles: theſe fellowes hauing by their ſlie and ſubtile practiſes bereſt him of all his old ſeruaunts, eſpecially of Peter of Alcaſſonne his Secretarie, and perſwading him to goe ouer into Afrike againſt his enemies, ten thouſand times ſtronger then all the power he had or was able to make, cauſed him to vndertake the voyage, where he loſt his life, and the liues of all the Nobilitie almoſt of Portingal. During the regiment of the Cardinal, which was not long, the Ieſuites beſtirre themſelues ſo well with their practiſes, that incontinently after the Cardinals death, and Antonie receiued & acknowledged King by all the ſtates of the Countrie, he was forced to ſlie the lande, (all his Maritime and port townes being fallen from him in one day), and ſaue his life by trauaile on foote more then foure hundred miles. The Iſles of Tercere held out yet for King Antonie, which was a good footing & ſtopped al the trafficque of the Indies, the Frenchmen tooke part with them, vnder the conduct of the Commander of Chattes. All the inhabitants of the Iſlands, al the Monkes, and Friers, and the reſt ſhewed themſelues moſt loyall and affectionate to their King, and ſworne enemies to the Caſtillians. But on the contrarie ſide the Ieſuites which had bin the inſtrumentes of the reuolt of the kingdome, began to thunder againſt the French, and exalt King Philip. What did they then? In lieu of caſting them into the ſea, or at the leaſt, of driuing them out of the land, they were contētonely to ſhut them vp wt in their cloiſter. All this is largely diſcourſed in the Hiſtorie imprinted at Gennua, by the commandement of the K. of Spaine, & is wholly to his aduantage. Moreouer all that is there ſet downe touching the Ieſuites, is ſet downe for their reputation & honour, as men that had bin the principall inſtrumentes of the vnion of Portingal to Caſtile: as their trauaile at this day is to no other ende and purpoſe, but to vnite the kingdome of France to the crowne of Spaine.
               
               What did the Ieſuites? when they ſawe their time, in a night they brake downe the wall that rampired vp their gates, and caried the ſacrament of the Altar before them, making but a ſcorne

of God in abuſing his myſteries to raiſe ſeditions withal: and began to coniure the people ſo well, that they appalled and cooled their courages, ſo that the French conducted thither by the Marſhall Stroſſy could haue no ayde nor aſſiſtance from them, which was the cauſe of his diſcomūture. And here you are to marke how the Hiſtorie reporteth that foure ſcore Noble men, and two and fiftie French Gentlemen were boucherly put to death by a Spaniſh decrée in one day, vpon one ſcaffolde in Ville franche, and a number of Souldiers hanged. The ſame hiſtorie reporteth, how that during this warre, fiue hundred Friers, or other Religious perſons which had preached or ſpoken for King Antonie, had bin put to death. Behold the precepts of the Ieſuites. Kill, murder, hange, play the Bouchers: We ſée alſo in France, that they that goe to their confeſſions, and be norſed at their breaſts, are ſo cruell, that they kill one another.
               
                  Marcelin in his 27. ſaieth, that about the Riuer Euxinus there was a people called Odriſae, which were ſo accuſtomed to ſhed the blood of man, that if they had no ſtore of enemies, they would in their feaſts and bankets launce their owne fleſh. Theſe felowes murder one an other, though they haue enemies inough in the field.
               Goe too then my Lordes of the Nobilitie, follow theſe diſciples of the Ieſuites, to the ende they may recompence your ſeruices at their beſt leaſure and pleaſure with ſtabbes of daggers: and for your beſt auaile make ſome corner of France a prouince of the Moores, and from Baetica receiue your lawes. How much more honorable were it for you, with your common loyaltie and mutual aſſiſtance to ſaue and recouer this kingdome.
               Therefore take hearts vnto you and be of good courage, you braue and vndoubtable Nobilitie of France, holde on to conioyne your ſelues in one armie. God the protector of kingdomes, God that hath alwaies caſt his eie of commiſeration vpon France in the greateſt afflictions it euer ſuſteined, will plant amongſt you without doubt, loue and concord. He will make your countenances fearefull, your armes ſtrong, he will ſend his Angels to

ſtrengthen you, that within fewe daies you may roote out of France all theſe infected, and proude Caſtillians.
               
               
                  Alexander ſaid that Antipater was outwardly clad with white, but inwardly was altogither redde: So there are a number that in vtter apparance are the Kings ſeruants, and are ſkilful inough to make their profite of his good fortune: but within, they are altogither blood redde, wholly Spaniſh. Theſe men that can not but vſe the Ieſuites to execute their miſchieuous enterpriſes, dare not ſay openly that it were good to let them continue in France, (for to vſe any ſuch ſpeach, and to weare a redde croſſe is all one) but they can ſay, it is no time now to rid them from out amongſt vs, and allege reſpects wherefore, which I meane to anſwere. But firſt of all it is expedient to beate downe their chiefeſt bulwarke, which ſtandeth in the referment to counſaile ſet downe in the yéere 64. To which I will bring fiue anſweres, the leaſt whereof is more then ſufficient.
               The firſt is, that this inſtance of 64. is failed, not onely thrée, but thirtie yéeres agoe. And whereas they ſay, that the failing of the inſtance, hath no place in Parliement, that is not ſo, but when the proceſſe is not diſcontinued. And as for this matter which is now in queſtion, ſo farre is it from hauing bin vſed, that on the contrarie ſide, the copie of the pleas and bils haue not bin ſo much as taken out, which is the firſt act whereby the partie, that is referred to Counſaile, receiueth his firſt inſtruction.
               The ſecond anſwere is, that the inſtance of 64. differeth wholly from that that is tendred at this preſent: firſt the qualities are diuers: for the Ieſuites were then plaintifes, and be now defendants. Secondly, the queſtion was, whether they ſhould enioy the priuileges of the Vniuerſitie or no. And now the queſtion is, whether they are to be caſt out of France or no. At that time, to appoint them to counſaile, was to denie them their demaunde. Now it were as much as to put to Counſaile whether the King ſhould liue or no, if in the meane while, we muſt entertaine theſe murderers amongſt vs, that deſire nothing more earneſtly then his death.
               
                  Thirdly, there is great difference betwéene the yéere 64. and the yéere 94. In 64. that miſchiefe was feared, which is fallen out and many would not be perſwaded to conceiue it, being deceiued by the ſugred and honied wordes of theſe hipocrites. Who would haue thought at that time, to haue ſeene Spaniſh dead paies in Paris, the Spaniardes march vp and downe in thoſe faire and large ſtréetes, their armes a kenbow, their ſtaring eies, their frowning foreheads, their maieſticall and ſolemne march as ſofte as foote can fall.
               In the yéere 64. Barnard and Comolet were not heard to call the King, Holofernes, Moab, and Nero, mainteining that the kingdome of France was electiue and that it belonged to the people to eſtabliſh the Kings, and alledging this text of the old Teſtament, Thou ſhalt chouſe thy brother for King, thy brother, ſay they, that is not to ſay, of the ſelfe ſame linage, or of the ſelfe ſame nation: but of the ſame religion, as this great Catholike king, this great king of Spaine. Comelet was ſo impudent and bold as to ſay, verie blaſphemouſlie, that vnder theſe wordes, Deliuer me O Lord out of the myre, that I may not ſticke in it, Dauid vnderſtood prophetically the rooting out of the houſe of Bourbon. During theſe warres they would haue erected a Colledge of Ieſuits at Poitiers, ſaying that a riche and religious Lord would giue eight hundred crownes of reuenue for the foundation. And when they had bin inſtantly preſſed a great while, to diſcouer who this great Lord was, being not able to name any other, they were conſtrained maugre their beardes to confeſſe that it was the King of Spaine, who will neuer thinke it much to be at ſuch a charge to entertaine ſuch a pernicious and dangerous vermine amongſt vs as theſe Ieſuites are. And this was witneſſed by all the deputies of Poitiers, which put to their helping handes to reduce that towne to the obedience of the King.
               In 64. the Ieſuites had not as yet the Booke of life amongſt them, wherein they haue ſithence kept a record of all that, that they learne by their ſecrete ſhriftes of all houſes and families, informing themſelues by children and ſeruaunts, not what their

conſciences are, but what ſpeach and talke their parents and maiſters haue commonly in their houſes, whereby they may know what diſpoſition they are of. Comolet preaching at the Baſtile before the Gentlemen that were then priſoners in the beginning of the yéere 89. ſaid vnto them after a thouſand impudent blaſphemies, that he that had bin their King was not their King, plotting from thence the murder which they executed afterwardes. When Trouue, and Captaine Aubrey were impriſoned in the Baſtile by Buſſy the Clerc, the Coūſaile of the fortie, could not get them out: but onely Comolet, as an Orpheus of his owne authoritie, ſet them at libertie, ſuch was the dependencie of the ſixteene Murderers vpon the Ieſuites. At what time there came newes of the Popes election that is now, Comolet being come out of the pulpet, went vp againe, and began to crie out, Heare thou Politician, I will tell thee newes, we haue a Pope, what maner of Pope? one that is a good Catholique? What more? one that is a good Spaniard. Goe and hange thy ſelfe thou Politician. The Ieſuites vſed no ſuch language in the yéere 64. an auncient writer ſaieth, Yong Serpents deceiue: when one hath paſſed his naturall bigneſſe and is growen to a monſter, when it hath infected the fountaines, and by breathing burneth which way ſoeuer it goe, men ſeeke to deſtroy it with ſome ſhot or other: euils ſpringing may eſcape, but great are mette withall. Titus Liuius ſaieth elegantly, It can not be, but the diſeaſes muſt be knowen, before their remedies can be found out: ſo did euill motions breake out in men, before lawes were made to bridle them. Plato in the beginning of his firſt booke of Lawes ſaieth, that Minos, went once in euery ninth yéere to know of Iupiter what Lawes he ſhould giue to the Cretenſians: becauſe that time beareth ſuch a ſway in the chaunge & alteration of al things, that what ſéemeth good at one ſeaſon, is hurtfull at an other. We find by experiēce, that good Lawes, and honeſt examples, draw their original from others offences: for faultineſſe goeth before puniſhment, in time: & amendment is the yonger brother to offence.
               
               Speake to the Marquis of Piſany, he will tell you that ſince the yéere of 64. when he was in Spaine and Italie, as Ambaſſadour

about the affaires of Fraunce, hee found no matter of weight, wherein a Ieſuite had not an oare. Speake to them that had the decifering of al the letters of importance, which were intercepted during theſe warres, they will tell you, that they neuer read any pernicious point, where a Ieſuits finger was not. And euen latelie at Lions, ſince the Towne yéelded to the King, a Ieſuite that had begun to ſay his Maſſe, perceiuing a Gentleman in the church wt a white ſcarfe, ran out of the Church being ful of people of a purpoſe to raiſe a ſedition: a matter yt they attempted ſince, and will no doubt be the loſſe of that Towne being of great importance, if they be not ſpéedelie baniſhed out of the Countrey by your order and decrée.
               Fourthly, who ſo breaketh the modifications and conditions whereupon a graunt is made vnto him; is worthie to looſe the benefite that he might receiue by the graunt. Now ſince the yere 64. the Ieſuites haue directly broken the conditions of their aduiſe of Poiſſy, which is the onely allowance they haue had in Fraunce. Firſt they haue broken them herein, that they haue reteined their name of Ieſuites, which they were expreſly charged not to doe, becauſe this glorious name is particulerly reſerued to the onely Sauiour of the world: and there was neuer any amongeſt the Chriſtians to this day found ſo tranſported with pride, as to dare to attribute this name either to himſelfe in particuler, or to other and himſelfe in common. They alone haue bin ſo impudent, as to take this name in their propoſitions, by which (through their houſed intiſing & ſugred ſpeach, carying one thing ſecreated in their hearts, and another ready at their Tongues endes) their meaning was within thrée moneths to flatter them, whom they would with all their hearts ſée inſtantly plūged in the depth of the Inquiſition of Spaine. Secondly, they haue broken the aduiſe of Poiſy, whereby their Colledge was receiued, and their profeſſion reiected. For they haue bin ſo bold as to plant it in way of triumph in the middeſt of Saint Antonies ſtréete, where they are at this day ſo impudent, as to haue in their cappes the full armes of France, with a Cardinals hat aboue, to let vs vnderſtand that in deſpite of ye King

to whom they are not bound by oath of fidelitie, and whom they ſought and will ſéeke daily to murder: they acknowledged one Charles the tenth to haue bin King of Fraunce, vnder whom they hopes to haue wrought with this Kingdome, as they wrought with the Kingdome of Portingal vnder another Cardinal. Thirdly, their aduiſe of Poiſy purporteth expreſly, that they may not procure any Bulles contrary to theſe reſtraints ſet downe by this act: and in caſe they doe procure any, they ſhal ſtand as none, and of none effect nor value, which is verifyed vppon this verie condition. But now they haue procured Bulles ſo contrarie to this aduiſe of Poiſy, that whoſoeuer make any limitations or reſtrictions againſt their priuileges and inſtitutions, are by vertue therof excommunicate with the greateſt excommunication, yea whoſoeuer ſhall dare to diſpute or reaſon the matter, though it be but onely to ſéeke out the truth. Heare the verie words of their bull of 84. And obey their Gouerners in al thinges and euerie way, and be immediatly ſubiect to this Sea, and clerely exempt from the ſubiection of all ordinaries and delegates whatſoeuer, or of any other Iudges, as by the vertue of theſe preſents we do alſo exempt them. A point directly contrary to this clauſe of the aduyſe of Poiſſy. Vppon condition, that the Byſhop Dioceſan ſhall haue all ſuperintendancie, iuriſdiction, and correction ouer the ſaid Societie and Colledges. And conſequently their aduiſe of Poiſly is become voide, as well by the courſe of law before alledged, as by the clauſe expreſſely ſet downe to make it voide by the ſaid aſſembly. They ſhal renounce expreſſely and in plain termes all priuiledges giuen by their Bulles, which are contrarie to the points and articles aforeſaid. Otherwiſe and in want hereof, or in caſe they doe hereafter obteine any other, they ſhalbe as none, and of none effect nor value. But ſée yet a more ſtrange clauſe ſet down in their Bul of 84. by which, both we that ſpeake againſt them, and you my Lords that are the Iudges, and they of Poiſſy alſo, which made the aduiſe, are al excommunicate. We commaund therefore (vpon their holie obedience and vnder paine of excommunication of the ſentence giuen, & of diſabling, to all ſeculer offices and benefices, and reguler of al orders

whatſoeuer, forthwith to be incurred without further declaration, reſeruing to our ſelues and to our ſucceſſors onelie, the abſolution from the ſame,) that no man of any ſtate, degree, or preheminence whatſoeuer, be ſo hardie and bold as either directlie or indirectly to impugne or gainſay any inſtitutions, conſtitutions, or theſe preſents touching the ſaid ſocietie, or any of them, or of al the foreſaid Articles, or any other matter cōcerning the ſame, though it be done in way of diſputation onely, or to ſeeke out the truth.
               
               Fiftly, and laſtly, and to ſpeake plainly without flattery in a matter of ſuch weight, and a ſpéedie iſſue whereof all honeſt men doe earneſtly deſire, who knoweth not, how that in Anno 64. there was not a man within this place ſo hardy as durſt ſpeak fréely againſt the conſpiracie of Spaine? All good men were afraide, and ſpeachleſſe: when as it was a miſerable caſe to ſpeak what a man would not; and full of danger to ſpeake what he would willingly ſpeake. The whéeles, the gallowſes would not haue bin ſufficient puniſhments for them that durſt to haue bin ſo hardie: What think you thē you Spaniſh ſpials you may alledge for your ſelues at this day to maintaine your ſelues? Will you ſay, becauſe you haue bin ſuffered heretofore, nay that is reaſon ſufficient to baniſh you out of Fraunce, to wit, your force, your violence, your tiranny, & the tiranny of your ſupporters, of your Spaniards, which haue bound our hands, which haue ſtopt our mouthes, which haue made you ſo couragious, which haue made you ſpeake ſo proudly, which haue ſet you ſo hie: you I ſay, moſt wicked varlets with your bloody handes, moſt peſtilent and proud through your inſatiable couetouſnes, you that haue no regard of loyaltie, you that are void of God and all honeſtie, to be ſhort, you that make your gaine of all thinges be they honeſt or diſhoneſt.
               But they be not wicked varlets alone, there is a point that makes them worſe: for if they onely had bin wicked themſelues, our miſerie had bin the leſſe. The great number of Frenchmen whom they haue marde, hath bin the cauſe of our miſeries. And yet now they ſéeke to throng themſelues amongeſt this preſſe of people, and hide their heads, thinking to leſſen their fault through

the fellowſhip of many offenders, as though in this their wicked lewdnes they did but kéepe the Kinges high way, doing as other men doe. But it fareth farre otherwiſe; for the greater the number is of lewd and euil affected ſubiectes, the greater is the harueſt of the Ieſuits, for theſe are their fruits; And why is not this whole ſinke of Sixtéene and their adherentes, vpon their way to Spaine? Why are they not baniſhed for euer out of the aire of France, which they haue poiſoned this long while? What do theſe Ieſuites here ſtill? what doe they? Sée we not well inough what they doe? What vndermininges, what violences, what corruptions, what ſeditions haue they not already committed and done? Beléeue me my Lords, they loſe no time; ſuch buſie heads, moſt ſharpe in deuiſing, moſt impudent in attempting, moſt vigilant in effecting, are not vnprofitable: they receiue packets daily from Spaine, and from all corners of France, and deliuer them at Soiſſons: they carie their Packets out of the towne themſelues, (for to rifle and ſearch a Ieſuite, were to commit high treaſon againſt God himſelf, neither was there euer any Captaine that durſt to this day attempt ſuch an act,) they receiue into their chamber of counſell al that wil deuiſe or contriue any thing againſt the ſtate of the town; if onely they will but make a ſhew to reſort to their Churches, or confeſſe to their Ieſuites what practiſe is intended by anie man againſt any of the Sixteene, which doe nothing but practiſe our diſtruction? Shall we ſtill ſuffer our ſelues to be abuſed by theſe hipocrites? Shall we be ſtill like to the Barbarians, that made but a ſcoffe of the fortifications which the enemies made againſt their walles, vntill they found their walles beaten downe about their eares, and their Towne fooliſhlie loſt? Shall we ſuffer our enemies to gather together the pieces of their ſhipwrecke? Shall wée ſuffer the Ieſuites to faſten the knots againe of their practiſes, and frame a new their faction in the conſciences of the people, which are alwaies the greateſt number?
               In all this action, this is the ſtrangeſt point to behold and conſider, what delaies, what formalities of Iuſtice haue bin vſed, and how vppon the ſodaine, and euen at a verie inſtant, taking not ſo

much leaſure as to breath themſelues, they could defend by briberie and corruption, what they committed by miſchieuous wickednes. We haue not baniſhed them as they did at Burdeaux, which was the braueſt and moſt honorable act that the Mareſhal of Matignon euer did, though he ſtand renowmed and highly thought of, and ſo wil in the memorie of al poſteritie for many noble victories atchieued by his handes. But this blow of reſolution which hée gaue, was a meanes of the preſeruation of Guyenne, which otherwiſe had bin loſt, and would haue drawen after it euen at that inſtant, the loſſe of all the reſt.
               O braue and noble Mareſhall, thou fearedſt not the reproches, the wicked tongues, the ſtinking vomits of theſe amongſt vs, that falſly terming themſelues the Kinges ſeruantes, doe foſter, doe mainteine, doe ſupport, and fauor his moſt cruel, moſt deteſtable, moſt coniured enemies: Howbeit in the end they ſhal all come to naught, and that moſt ſhamefully togither with their Ieſuites, notwithſtanding their goodly and colourable pretences, the chiefeſt whereof is this.
               What wil they ſay at Rome? Oh, what doe they ſpeak of Monſieur the Marſhall of Matignon? wil you know what they ſay at Rome: Let vs diſtinguiſh the ſpeakers: The Spaniardes will ſay, that they which baniſhed the Ieſuites out of France, are all of them Heretikes. Haue they any other talke in their mouthes? I will not ſpeake onely of our ſelues that haue followed the King and his fortune, but alſo of them that tarried here in the Towne, and yet couragiouſlie, and with euident peril of their liues, oppoſed themſelues againſt the aboliſhing of the Salique law. Did not the Spaniards ſay, that they were all Lutherans and Heretikes?
               On the other ſide, they that are at Rome and in Italie, and are not Spaniardes, they I ſay, wil ſay, that this is the time wherein the French men will ſhew themſelues to be French men in déed, franke and frée, and ſworne enemies to the Spaniards. This is the time wherein they manifeſt to the world, that they are quicke of ſight, & looke into their ſtate aright, by driuing out from amongeſt them theſe ſpialles of their enemies: to be ſhort, this is the time

wherein they meane to liue in ſtrengthfull and aſſured health, now that they purge theſe melancholike and ouerburnt, and moſt malicious humors out of the bodie of their common wealth. But though the Ieſuites be daungerous to Fraunce, yet at the leaſt they haue wrought mightie wonders amongſt the Indian people. True it is, and ſuch wonders indéed, as we haue good cauſe to take knowledge of: for they haue cauſed twenty millions of thoſe poore ſoules, as their own hiſtorie reporteth, and termeth them lambes, to be conſumed by fire and ſword of the Caſtilians. They haue wéeded out the paganiſm, not by conuerting the Pagans, but by playing the bloudy bouchers with them. Their maner of diſpeopling of the Iſland called Spaniola, is much to be marked. They put all the men a part to worke in their mines, and the women they forced to cultify the earth: ſo that kéeping them from generation, & vſing al the crueltie they could againſt the liuing, in leſſe then 12. yeares they inhabited the whole Iſland which is not ſmall, with Caſtilians. In Peru they haue publike places of torture within the marches, wherein they may put a thouſand at once, and there the Souldiers and the Lackies torment theſe poore people, thereby to make them confeſſe where their treaſure is. And if any of them eſcape out, they goe and hange themſelues in the mountaines and their wiues by them, and their poore children at their féet. Theſe monſters of tirannie, doe as ordinarilie hunt after men, as we doe after the Bucke and Stagge, cauſing their dogges to deuoure thē, and their Tigers, when they ſend them to ſeeke honie and waxe, and alſo by their Tuberons when they cauſe them to goe a fiſhing for perles in the moſt daungerous parts of the ſea. If they carie out anie of theſe poore people to warre with them, they giue thē nothing to liue on, but conſtraine them to eate their enemies, ſo that the Spaniſh armies are verie boucheries of the fleſh of man. And yet we maruail at the cruelties which they vſe in theſe parts of the world, which are but fleabitinges, or honie ſoppes rather in compariſon of that that they can doe. Their couetouſnes was ſo extreme, that they laded their ſhippes with thriſe as many moe of theſe poore ſilliones then their ſhips could bear, or they had victuall

for, in ſo much, that they caſt ſo many of them ouer board, that to paſſe from ye Iſle of Lucaies vnto Spaniola, which is a good diſtāce, a man néeded not anie compaſſe, but onelie the trace of theſe poore Indians dead floting vpon the ſea, where they had caſt them.
               O yee Frenchmen behold, againe and againe, behold I ſay; the great fauour of God towards vs in drawing vs out of the ſlauerie of this monſtrous & prodigious nation: Chaines and Irons ſhould haue bin your beſt intertainment, full Argoſes of you ſhould haue bin carried to the Indies to worke in their mines, whileſt they had placed Colonies in your Townes, and giuen your houſes in the countrey for a reward: And yet notwithſtanding, this murdering and caſting in chaines and Irons, al the true Catholiks, & to leaue none in Fraunce but Atheiſts, robbers, murderers, inceſts, & penſioners of Spain, ſhould haue bin termed nothing but the planting of the Catholike Religion.
               But if the Ieſuits be ſo wicked, why is there not an inditement framed againſt them? I anſwere you, that Monſieur the Kinges Atturney generall knoweth how to proſecute that which he thinketh beſt, but the matter which the vniuerſitie, (the Kings eldeſt daughter, who can not hold her tongue from crying out againſt them that would murder her father) calleth vppon, is, that all the reſt may be baniſhed out of the realme, whileſt the other be arrained that are in hold: the danger that we are in, wil not wel abide ſlow working medecines and lingring Phiſitions. The hiſtorie of the humble Friers, and of the Cardinall Bouromee is verie notorious and freſh in memorie: one of theſe Friers would haue murdered the Cardinal. Vpon the inſtant that old order was put downe, and al that were of it baniſhed out of Italie by Pope Pius the fifth rightfullie ſo called, for that he moſt occupied himſelfe in making leagues againſt the Turke, whereas others buſie themſelues in making leagues againſt Fraunce. And ſhall not the Ieſuites at this day be bani
                     •
                  hed, that would haue murdered the K. of Fraunce, and for letting Varade that murderer breake priſon, & ſending him away? They that defend this propoſition, make more accompt of the life of a Cardinall, then of a King of Fraunce, the

eldeſt ſonne and protector of the Church.
               By the ciuil law, all the iſſue of that man that practiſeth ye death of the Prince, euen to the verie childe that ſucketh the mothers breaſts, are diſhenherited and brought to miſerie: ſo fearefull is the example of treaſon, and ſhall we preſerue the companions of Varade, ye haue vowed the ſelf ſame vow that he did, that haue the ſame deſire & purpoſe that he had, that holy him away. Whenſoeuer one Ieſuit, ſhall attempt ye murder of one of our Kings, ſhal he onely be baniſhed? This is a good propoſition, and well worthy to be mainteined, that it is better that twentie Kinges of France be murdered, then all the Ieſuites ſhould be baniſhed France. They that are of this opinion, care not how many Kinges we change.
               If they were to be executed as the Templers, their inditements would be framed. But what ſay the Ieſuites? That they came into Fraunce for our good: yea but experience hath ſhewed vs, that they haue cauſed our ruine. What néedeth further inditement? ſéeing they aduaunce our enemies ſo greatlie. There is an excellent ſaying in Tacitus to this purpoſe. O noble Counſellers, if we looke no further, but conſider with what vile language they haue abuſed mens eares, priſons and gallowſes are too good for them. It is time you haſten to iudgement, that neither they may ſcape ſcotfree, nor you repent your ſelues of your ſeueritie mixt with clemencie: let them be diſpatched with fire and water. Behold a good iudgement for the Ieſuits.
               
               Moreouer, happily before the yeare 85. this formaliſing might haue bin tollerated, for vntill that day their lewdneſſe and treacherie was ſhadowed with a goodly maſke, but now they goe ſo open faced, that we néede neither letters nor witneſſes. Quintilian ſaith finelie. There be ſome crimes of treaſon againſt the commonwealth, which may be ſufficiently condemned by the view of the eie.
               
               And Seneca to this purpoſe in the tenth booke of his controuerſies ſaith, whether the common wealth be hurt or no, it is not to be proued by arguments, the hurt of the common-wealth appeareth forthwith. He that ſhould haue laied hands on Iulius Caeſar, had there bin any néed of confrōting of witneſſes to prooue that he had

paſſed the Rubicon, that he had entred into Italie with an armie, and taken the treaſure of the commonwealth? The painters and Poetes giue a naked ſworde to Iuſtice, to giue vs to vnderſtand that we may not alwaies ſtand vpon doubtes and tract of time: neither play the part of euill Chirurgians, who for want of healing the ſore in due time, protract the cure ſo long, till the ſtrength of the patient be vtterly caſt downe & not poſſible to be reſtored.
               But what call we notorious? All our Doctors define it in one worde, to be that, that is done before the people. And I would to God that the crimes of the Ieſuites were not ſo great, ſo certaine, and notorious as they are, then ſhould we not haue ſuffered ſo much miſerie as we haue.
               
                  O that I might pleade, and not ouercome?
                  O wretch that I am, why is my cauſe ſo good?
               
               But they haue left nothing to the Counſeler for him to breake his head withall: for, to denie matters, that are as cleare as the Sunne, increaſeth the fault, and confuteth it not. Philo the Iew, writing vpon the ten commaundements, ſpeaking of the voice of God, giueth a good reaſon why we are ſaid to ſee the worde. Becauſe ſaieth he, that that which God ſpeaketh is not onely a bare worde, but a worke. It is an vſuall and common Prouerbe amongſt vs, the voice of the people is the voice of God, whereby is meant the voice of the beſt ſort and not of the multitude. Becauſe they ſpeake of ſuch thinges as they know, of thinges which haue bin ſéene, and wherein they can not lie.
               But ſome will ſay that the Ieſuites are not all ſtraungers: as though the Spaniards by adoption, and by othe, had not done vs more harme then the naturall Spaniards. I will rather take them for Citiſens, which are borne in the remoteſt place of all Scythia, and yet thinke well of France, then they that are borne of Paris and brought vp there, and employ themſelues moſt vnnaturally and wickedly, to deſtroy the place, libertie, and honour of their countrie wherein they were borne. Comolet, Bernard, and ſuch like, are they not Frenchmen borne, and yet are there any of any nation that haue ſo impudently vomited out all ſortes of blaſphemous

ſpeaches againſt his Maieſtie, and the memorie of the King that dead is, as they haue done? Are there any men in the world that haue trauailed ſo much as they haue done to turne the ſtate vpſide downe? for if a man make a ſhew of religion, he may doe what he will vnder that pretext, his penny is good ſiluer: to murder or cauſe Princes to be murdered, which are excommunicate by the Pope, is the chiefeſt part of their ſending. Varade himſelfe, the encourager, and puſher on forward of that Murderer of Melun was he not a Pariſien? Oh ſir, the Ieſuites would haue bin baniſhed out of France long agoe, had there bin no other Spaniards amongſt vs but ſuch as are natifes and borne beyond the mountaines of Pirene. The pleaſures and excéeding great fauoures, which King Philip beſtoweth vpon the Ieſuites, maketh it notorious inough, how that he maketh accompt of them as of his good ſubiects, and inſtruments of his ſoueraintie. The great Ieſuiticall Argoſee, which fetcheth their gold and Marchandiſes from the Indies, (for they draw from all parts of the world, to increaſe their treaſure in Rome and Spaine withall) this great veſſell, I ſay, payeth no fifth to King Philip. A matter of more value to them, then two hundred thouſand crownes a yéere. For their part of the conqueſt of Portingal, he gaue them the preſent which the kings of the Eaſt Indies payed from thrée yéeres to thrée yéeres to the King of Portingal, which is worth in Gold, and Pearles, & Spicerie, more then foure hundred thouſand crownes. In recompence of which bountie, they ſpeake of him, as of the greateſt Prince that euer was in the world, farre ſurmounting the force of the Romaines, and hauing more countries vnder him then all the Kings of the world.
               Goe on yée Spaniſh ſoules to praiſe and magnifie the forces of the King of Caſtile, he will make you all Cardinals, as well as Tolledo the Spaniſh Ieſuite. They will no ſmall benefices, (& yet for the better maintenance of their table, they vnite & knit many Priories and Abbies togither) but they wilbe Cardinals; to the ende they may be Popes, this is good fiſh for their nets. Who was it that brought that bold and proude meſſage to Monſieur of Neuers,
                  
but this Ieſuiticall Spaniſh Cardinal? Who was not aſhamed to ſay to him in Ianuarie laſt, that the thrée Prelates, which were preſent at his Maieſties conuerſion, ſhould be made to come before the Cardinall of S. Seuerin chiefe of the Inquiſition, for abſolution for that fact. What a ſhame, what blaſphemie againſt God and his religion, to demaunde abſolution, for the beſt worke, the holieſt worke, the profitableſt worke, & moſt neceſſarie worke that could be done in Chriſtendome? But becauſe it was diſcommodious, damageable and hurtfull to the King of Spaine, the Ieſuites will euer condemne it, and iudge it worthie penaunce and abſolution. Hereupon it came, that at the firſt bruite of his holy conuerſion, they ſent Du Puy from Paris to Rome, at this day their Prouincial, to perſwade the Pope that it was but a fained matter.
               But now it irketh them that time is ſo farre ſpent and ſo many dartes plucked out.
               How can we doubt to baniſh theſe Murderers, ſeing that ſince the yéere 1550. (as Monſieur the Counſeler of Meſnil hath well obſerued it in his plea) when the Ieſuites preſented their letters, ſigned in the preſence of the Cardinall of Loraine, and grounded vpon their admiſſion in Spaine, (a goodly cōſideration ſurely) theſe letters were ſimply and abſolutely refuſed by the Court, aſſembled the two halfe yéeres. And foure yéeres after, vpon a ſecond inſtancie by the Ieſuites, the Court would know the opinion of the Sorbone, which being aſſembled by foure daies ſpace togither (the holy Ghoſt no doubt being their director and preſident) moued as it may ſéeme by an inſtinct from aboue, reiected them, counting them a moſt daungerous and moſt pernicious companie, for the ſtate of the Kingdome and for Religion, and ſuch as would cauſe many quarels, diuiſions and diſſentions amongſt the French nation. And becauſe it may be apparant, that we adde nothing of our owne heads, behold the very wordes of the decrée of Sorbone, which in few words, ſetteth downe the miſerie that we haue receiued by this new and dangerous ſect.
               
                  This new felowſhip, challenging vnto it ſelfe the vnwoonted name of Ieſus, ſo loſely and vnaduiſedly without any diſcreete choiſe

receiuing into their fellowſhip tag rag, be they neuer ſo lewde, wicked, and infamous, carying no difference from ſeculer prieſts in their outward habite, in ſhauing of their crownes, in ſaying their canonicall houres priuately, or ſinging them openly in the Church, in cloiſters and ſilence, in difference of meates and daies in faſtinges, and diuers other rites and ceremonies, (whereby ſtates of religion are ſeuered one from the other and mainteyned) endowed with ſo many and ſundrie priuileges, licences and freedomes, eſpecially in the adminiſtration of the Sacrament of penaunce and Euchariſt, and that without difference of places, or parſons, alſo in the office of preaching, reading & teaching, in preiudice of Ordinaries, yea of Princes & tēporall Lords, againſt the priuileges of Vniuerſities, to the great burden of the people, ſeemeth to be againſt the honeſtie of monaſtical religion, it weakeneth the ſtudious, godly, & neceſſarie exerciſe of vertues, abſtinencies, cerimonies, and auſteritie of life, yea that more is, it openeth a gappe, to a general Apoſtaſie from other religions: it withdraweth from Ordinaries that ſubiection and obedience that is due vnto them, it ſpoileth as well the Lords temporall as the Spirituall of their rights and Iuriſdictions, it bringeth in a confuſion into both pollicies, many quarels amongſt the people, many ſtrifes, diſcordes, contentions, emulations, rebellions, and ſundry ſchiſmes. Theſe thinges therefore diligently weighed and conſidered, this felowſhip ſeemeth to be a daungerous thing for the matter of faith, like to be a worker of the diſturbance of the peace of the Church, & an vtter ouerthrow of monaſticall life & tending rather to the pulling downe then to the building vp of the Chriſtian faith.
               
               Before the effects of their conſpiracies were knowen, we maruailed much in our Vniuerſitie, ſaying what maner of people are theſe? Are they regulers or ſeculers? for we haue no thirde ſort. They are not ſeculers, becauſe they liue in common, haue a generall, and to be ſhort, make a vowe of pouertie, and yet haue the whole managing of the goods of their Colledges. Againe, they be not regulers: for they haue no rule, nor faſting, nor diſtinction of meate, neither are bound to any certaine ſeruices, and may ſuccéede, though they can not rid themſelues of their oth. They haue

foure or fiue ſortes of vowes, Simple, Compounded, Solemne, Secreete, Publike. To be ſhort, they make a hurly burly and turne all things vpſide downe, and if you aſke them what they are, they anſwere you, As you ſée.
               We marueiled greatly, I ſay at that time, but now we leaue. And why ſo? Becauſe in a word, they be nether ſecular nor regular. What than? Nothing but verie ſpials of Spaine, you may terme them as you pleaſe, they wil not reade, if you will not haue them; they will take what othes you will, onely with this prouiſo, that you will let them alone, to betray at their pleaſure, to play the ſpials, to raiſe falſe bruites amongſt the people, and now for the aduantage of the Spaniard, kindle and blow the fire of our diſſenſions. This is all they demaund, this is their vowe, their profeſſion, their rule, their plottings, their greateſt happe that can befall them.
               It is not the Sorbone of Paris onely that hath condemned them; but in Rome it ſelfe, the honeſter ſorte perceiuing the plotting of Ignatius the Spaniard, oppoſed themſelues againſt this ſect. Behold what they themſelues doe write of this matter in the life of their Ignatius, pag. 149. And afterwardes, vpon the requeſt of Ignatius, that his inſtitution might receiue confirmation, the matter was cōmitted by the Pope to three Cardinals: who laboured greatly, that it might not be receiued, eſpecial the Cardinal Bartholomaeus Guidicionus, a godly and learned man, and one that did not like that there ſhould be ſuch a multitude of religions in the Church of God, as there be now a daies, mooued thereunto perhaps by the decrees of the Laterane and Lion Counſels: which two Counſels do reſtraine and prohibite the multiplying of new religions, or peraduenture by reaſon of the decay of diſcipline which was much altered and worne out in ſome of thē, which he thought were more fit to redreſſe, then to deuiſe and make new. And thereupon it is reported that he wrote a booke. So that he being of this opinion, ſharpely withſtood ours, and of all men, was the greateſt aduerſarie, that our Societie had, ſome few other ioyned their endeuors to his. How than came it to paſſe that it was receiued, all theſe impediments notwithſtanding? The

promiſe of the fourth vow of expreſſe obedience to the Pope aboue all the Princes of the earth. Sée what they themſelues write of this matter in the ſelfe ſame Page 144. Whoſe religion, ſhould be the religion of the reguler clerkes, but their purpoſe is to be at the Popes commaundement, and to frame their liues wholly according to that rule, which he had long before deuiſed & ſet downe. Which thing the Pope did willingly giue eare vnto. the 3. of Sept. at Tibure. Anno 1539.
               
               So that, they were reiected both in France and Italie by all the greateſt Catholikes which were no Spaniards: vnleſſe peraduē
                  ture they & their adherents be ſo impudent as to ſay, that the Sorbone was an heretike in the yéere 54. when they made that decrée againſt them. As they are ſo impudent to publiſh amongeſt the women of their congregation, that all they which purſue this cauſe, are heretikes that come from Geneua and England. And were it not, that I, that, now ſpeake had not bin knowen from my childhood, brought vp in the kings Colledge of Nauarre, and my profeſſion ſo notorious, and my preferment to publike and Honorable charges euer the ſince the yéere 80. and 85. did not exempt mée too too manifeſtly frō their illuſions they would happely imagine that I was ſent from ſome one of thoſe places of purpoſe to plead againſt them. But who ſhalbe counted a good Catholicke, that ſpeaketh againſt the Ieſuits, ſéeing they haus cauſed the Sorbone to be pronounced Heretickes by the Inquiſition of Spaine. We learne this of themſelues who make their vaunts, that when they ſaw this decrée of Sorbone againſt them, they betooke themſelues to the Inquiſition of Caſtile, to cauſe the Sorbone of Paris and their Decrée to be condemned. Sée, (my good Lordes) who ſhould be able to eſcape out of the handes of this brutiſh, barbarous Spaniſh Inquiſition, the ſnare laid for all men that oppoſe themſelues againſt the greatnes of Caſtile, the bloudie ſhoppe of all crueltie, the ſcaffold of all the moſt tragicall, hideous, and horrible ſlaughters that can be deuiſed in the worlde: who, I ſay, ſhould be able to eſcape out of the hands of this Inquiſition, ſéeing the Sorbone of Paris is condemned amongſt them? But where

is this condemnacion? Behold here it is reported in the life of their Ignatius pag. 403. Furthermore, becauſe the Decree of Sorbone was againſt the authoritie of the Sea Apoſtolike which hath allowed and confirmed our religion, the Inquiſitors of the faith haue by their Decree forbidden it to be read in Spaine, as a thing that is falſe, and offenſiue to godly eares.
               
               You may not maruell that the Inquiſition is ſo carefull for the Ieſuits, for theſe two foundations haue no other marke they ſhoote at, but to eſtabliſh the tyrannie of Caſtile, ouer all Europe.
               
               And ſhall we ſtill continue colde in baniſhing them, that make prouiſions in Spaine, againſt all that we can do in France? To baniſh them that giue all the aduiſe they can to our enemie, that kindle all treaſons, corrupt the mindes of all youth, and haue no deſire in the world, but to murder the King? what will you looke for more? weighty enterpriſes, muſt haue ſpéedie diſpatches, no delaies muſt be vſed. Euery man is iuſtly prouoked againſt them, the wound of the miſeries which they haue wrought vs, is yet freſh before our eies. Either this Audience ſhall frée France of theſe new Monſters engendred to diſmember it, or if their ſubtelties, their craftes, the bruites which they caſt abroad, doe maintaine them, I tell you plainly and as lowde as I can, though they haue found ſo much fauour as to haue the doores ſhutte, yet my voice ſhal pearce through to the foure corners of the Realme, and I will yet conſecrate it to the poſteritie that will iudge without feare, and without paſſion, who are beſt Frenchmen, and moſt deſirous to leaue it ſuch a liberty, as we haue receiued from our fathers, I tell you plaine, (and I wil ſtretch out my voice, as lowde as I can) they will doe vs yet more harme, then euer they did. And I know not what will become of our ſtrength, whether it wilbe diſmembred or no, I know not whether our goods and our liues ſhalbe ranſacked once againe or no.
               I conceaue nothing in my breſt but heauie newes.
               The affaires of the world paſſe, and runne away in a moment, the idle Mariners tarie a ſhoare, while the weather is faire. That Iudgement is the beſt, that vſeth no delaies. And to what purpoſe

are theſe delaies? To giue them leaſure to come to the marke they ſhoote at, full of alarames, yea full of the blood of the beſt ſort. Tigres and Lions neuer leaue of their cruelty, ſometime they will lie ſtill, and when thou lookeſt not for it, their mitigate frowardneſſe becommeth worſe. O that we might be ſo happie all togither, as to enioy our Countrey freed from all theſe miſeries, with no leſſe feruent affections and zelous pietie, then I am moued to be earneſt in this cauſe without hatred to any man. My minde can neuer be of from this murderer of Melun, and my hart will neuer be at reſt as long as I ſee theſe ſhréeuing Ieſuites and eggers on of ſuch murderers remaining in France. If they might once be baniſhed, then ſhould I be aſſured, then ſhould I ſée all the miſchieuous practiſes of Spaine, broken a ſunder in France. All the Brotherhoodes of the name of Iheſus, of Cordon, de la Vierge, de la Cappe, du Capelet, of the little Collet, and a thouſand others would be put out. Then could not the Traitors, that practiſe againſt the State, know to whome they might addreſſe themſelues. For, to goe to the Embaſſadour of Spaine there is none amongſt vs: to goe to a ſuſpect perſon, that would quickly be diſcouered; and beſides, the papers and writinges of priuate perſons, fall after there death into the handes of the Magiſtrates, but this Society dieth not: and moreouer, vnder pretence of deuotion, the aſſemblie of this Councell is alwaies couert. To be ſhort, of an hundred, that ſhall repoſe any confidence in them, you ſhall not finde two amongſt them, that will diſcouer themſelues one to another:
               No man ſhall know this but thou that onely art priuie to my vowes.
               Euen as therfore the Phiſitiās leaue nothing in ye ſicke bodies, that may be hurtfull, ſo it behooueth vs to cut of all whatſoeuer it may be that may be an impediment to our libertie. And let vs not be like to them that are ſicke of choler, that will in no wiſe take a medicine to ridde them at once of that humour, and to make them whole: but content themſelues to take away onely ſome part of the humour, that doth diſtaſt them, and in concluſion

pay for it with vſurie of extreame griefe and anguiſhes that cut déep into them. As there are certaine ſauors which cauſe them that haue the falling ſicknes come quickly to themſelues againe, but yet heale them not, they are good for a while, and are no remedies for the griefe but impediments. No more can the Ieſuites be taken to be within the compaſſe of the Kinges declaration, which hath this exception in proper termes? Forpriſe and excepted the attempt and fellonie committed vpon the perſon of the King, our moſt honourable Soueraigne and brother, and the enterpriſe againſt our owne perſon: which can in no wiſe be referred to any other but to the Ieſuites, which ſent the murderer firſt from Lyons, and then from Paris. Moreouer the ſelfe ſame Edict of the 4. of Aprill in Anno 1594. pardoneth none but ſuch as renounce all leagues and aſſociations as well within the Realme as without. Now the principall vow of the Ieſuits being to obey their Generall, who is a Spaniard, in all thinges, and the Pope, they can by no meanes renounce this aſſociation which is the ſtricteſt in the world, vnleſſe they renounce their ſocietie. To be ſhort, they can not be Ieſuits, and receiue benefit by the Kinges edict, which ſaith in an other place, that ſuch renouncinges and oath of fidelitie muſt be done within a moneth. Which the Ieſuits haue not accompliſhed vnto this day, neither cā they ſhew any act, to ſerue for an inducement for vs to thinke, that they had any ſuch purpoſe: as in verie déed they be not capable of it, for no man can be liege vaſſal to two Lords.
               There is an old writer ſaith verie elegantly, What auaileth it to be valiant in the field, and to liue lewdly at home? Whiles the King is on horſebacke to ruinate, defeat, and put to flight his enemies, and to force townes that hold out headdily againſt him, whileſt he endureth the heate of the Sōmer, the could of the Winter, and indangereth himſelfe daily in the Warres for our libertie, ſhall wée ſuffer the Ieſuites in all his principall Townes, which do nothing daily with their confeſſions but ſtirre vp a thouſands of new enemies, and hold ſecret counſels of rebellion, and all ſortes of treaſons? As it auaileth not againſt the plague, to be careful of a mans

health, for it ſeizeth one as well as another: So is it to ſmall purpoſe for Magiſtrates to be carefull to torment themſelues, to trot vp and downe euerie way, as long as the plague continueth in the middeſt of the Town and Vniuerſitie, we ſhal looſe our people by thouſands on a plunge.
               The Ieſuites had neuer a fairer day in Fraunce, then they had in theſe laſt warres, which they could willingly call the golden world, as Commodus did: for they ſaw all other Colledges be peſtered with their ſtrange garriſon, and ſpoiled euerie day by them, they ſaw all the Scholers with them, and the whole Vniuerſitie brought to the onely Colledge of Ieſuites, as it is almoſt at this day. A man would not beleeue what ſlaughters they made in the mindes of theſe yong youths, ſpeaking of nothing in all their diſcourſes and in all their Themes, but of reaſons why it was lawfull to murder the King. And yet the miſchiefe that they haue done in Paris, is nothing in compariſon of that, that they haue cauſed to be wrought in other townes.
               To thinke that the intereſt of the Vniuerſitie of Paris is bounded within the encloſure of their walles, that were to ſhoote at a wrong marke, and not to conſider the truth of things as they are: For if you ſtop the ſprings, which make great riuers when they be once ioined together and come into one, they muſt néedes drie vp. Suffer the Ieſuits in all the Prouinces, what will become of your Vniuerſitie of Paris thinke you? And in déed if we compare the high degrée of reputation, which you my Lords, haue ſéene our Vniuerſitie in, with the continuall decay thereof ſince the Ieſuites came into France, & ſetled themſelues in all Townes from whēce Scholers came, and the extreme pouertie, miſerie, and want that it is now brought vnto, readie to yéeld vp the Ghoſt, if by you, my Lords, her Children, ſhe be not ſuccoured in this extremitie: is it not apparant, what iuſt cauſe ſhe hath to complaine, & with what regard you ought to heare her in the requeſt, ſhe now preſenteth to you?
               If the day of our preſeruation be as well welcome to euerie one of vs, as the day of our birth is to our parēts, ſurely the day wherin

the Ieſuits ſhalbe baniſhed out of France, wilbe as faire and ioyful a day as euer was the day of the foundation of our vniuerſitie. And euen as Charles the great after that he had deliuered Italie frō the Lombards, Germanie from the Hungarians, had made two iourneies into Spaine, and oftentimes ſubdued the Saxons; erected the Vniuerſitie of Paris, which hath bin for eight hundred yeares ſpace the moſt floriſhing in the world, in all arts and ſciences, and hath bin a refuge to learning baniſhed out of Aſia, decaied in Greece, Egypt, and Afrike: So Henrie the great, hauing chaſed out the Spaniards by the force of his armes, and baniſhed the Ieſuites by your decrée, ſhall ſet vp our Vniuerſitie in her auncient brightnes, and in her former glorie, and his name and praiſe ſhall for euer be ſounded forth vpon our Theaters: His triumphes, his victories, and his high exploits of armes, ſhalbe for euer the ſubiect of our verſes and of our Panegyriques.
               
               And you, my Lords, that haue this good happe, this rare and wiſhfull bliſſe, to be iudges of this great and important cauſe, lift vp your cogitations, I beſéech you, ſtretch them out euen to the world to come, your name, your memorie ſhall be for euer engrauen in Letters of Gold, not onely in our Vniuerſitie, but in the heartes of all honeſt men, and in the heartes of all true Frenchmen.
               
                  Thou golden Clio, thou ſuffereſt nothing to periſh, thou ſuffereſt no famous thing to die, reſeruing the monument of old ages, to be laid vp in future Bookes. The titles of labors that would wax olde, thou repaireſt with the flower of during youth, for thy ſake vertue warfareth, at thy becke faults become appalled.
               
               Therefore, ſéeing this occaſion is offred you, hold it: and beare in mind, that you are Princes of the moſt honourable councell in the world. Doubt you not but your decrée ſhalbe ſpéedily executed euerie where. The report thereof ſhall no ſooner come to other townes, but they wil vpon the verie inſtant, baniſh from amongſt them all theſe Spials of Spaine. They that ſay, that the Parliament can not make them to depart further then out of the limits of their iuriſdiction, they know not how far the iuriſdiction of this

Court ſtretcheth in ſuch caſes. It hath no other boundes nor limits, but euen as farre as the point of the Kinges moſt victorious ſword, who will cauſe your decrées of councell to be executed euē to the middeſt of Piedmount, where his good fortune hath alreadie planted the Flower de Lys, ſo farre forth as all the Canons of Spaine can not ſhake it.
               The King doth greatly deſire it: can you thinke that he loueth them that ceaſe not daily to make attempts againſt his life? and that haue bin the cauſers of all the miſeries, which his poore people endureth? If you had once ſet downe your decrée, an hundred thouſand men would not be able to empeach thexecution of it: his Maieſtie will haue you pertakers in ſome ſort of his triumphes.
               And following the examples of his Anceſtors, diſgeſteth the factes of the Empire by the handes of his Counſellors and Iudges.
               He hath chaſed the armed and open garriſon of Spaniards out of Paris: chaſe you, my Lordes, the couert and ſecret garriſon, chaſe that which brought in the other, that cauſed it to ſtay ſo long, and would haue doubled it, if they could haue had but one paſſage vpon the Oyſe, at what time they came as farre as Beuuais. The time is come though it be latter than is for the honor of the reputation of Fraunce, but yet it is ſo ſeaſonable, as it may not be differred.
               Conſider if it pleaſe you, my Lordes, how farre you are come, you haue pronounced the Duke of Mayenne giltie of treaſon, and the tyrant of Spaine, and his mainteiners which ioine armes with him, common enemies to Chriſtendome. It is well done, play the men, and ſee how farre you are gone: you haue taken the towne of Paris frō them, which they thought to haue ſubiected to their Soueraintie for euer. Nothing in the world gréeueth them ſo much, as that they tooke not away all your liues. Now they make litle account of all of you: if you fall into their handes againe, the Baſtile ſhall not be your priſon, but your graue▪ and yet I cannot tel, whether they will vouchſafe you ſo much fauor. God hath this day put power into your handes to make a clere diſpatch, and to break

in ſunder for euer all their practiſes, and all their intelligences: It will be as good as the loſſe of two battails vnto them, when they ſhall vnderſtand that all Ieſuites are baniſhed out of Fraunce. O my Lords, let not ſlip this faire, this readie occaſion of deliuering your ſelues from them, which make no other vſe of their learning, then as Caracalla did, to be a fit inſtrument to doe miſchiefe. Chaſe away this kinde of people, which haue no fellowes in all ſortes of wickednes: ſo ſharpe witted, ſo readie, ſo bold, ſo craftie, ſo watchfull in miſchiefe, ſo diligent in wickednes. Againſt whom when you ſhall ariſe, my Lords, to giue iudgement, remember I beſéech you, how eaſie a puniſhment baniſhment is to them that haue ſo great riches in Spaine, in Italie, and in the Indies: whereas in the yeare 1530. they had but a ſmall penſion ſent them out of Spaine, as they themſelues confeſſe. Remember alſo, if it pleaſe you, the loſſe of your parentes, of your friendes and of your goods: of the deſolation of ſo great a Countrey, of the loſſe of ſo many great Captaines, of ſo much braue Nobilitie, of ſo many braue Souldiers carried away with the furie of our warres, which they alwaies blowed ye coles of, as they do yet at this day. And doubt not a whit, but if you ridde Fraunce of this poiſon, it will fare with it, as it doth with bodies, which become more healthfull by long diſeaſes, which giue them a more perfect and clere health, then they tooke from them. And in caſe their Counſell commend vnto you the magnanimitie and clemencie of the King, remember you, my Lordes, that it is this King, whoſe bloud they haue euery day in their vowes, his death in their prayers, his murdering in their deteſtable and execrable Counſels. Remember yée, that it is this King from whom they haue laboured euen from their verie founder Ignacius, to take away part of the Crowne of Nauarre, and now labour after nothing els, then by might and maine to take away from him the Crowne of France, which their deſire is to ſubiect and vnite to Spaine, as they haue done Portingall.
               
               Sire, you haue borne too long: you haue too much endured theſe traitors, theſe murderers in the middeſt of your Kingdome. For your owne part, your fame and glorie is gone to the vttermoſt

Empires of all the world: there is no talke nor ſpeach, but of your victories, and of your conqueſtes: and you haue gotten the Surname of Great for euer, and ſo ſhall it be eternized: your wonderful feats of armes, haue filled your handes with palmes, treading vnder the foot of your authoritie, the raſhnes, the diſloyaltie, & the ſpoiles of all your enemies. But, Sire, you are not in the world for your ſelfe alone, conſider, if it pleaſe you, how greatlie the glorie of your name would be weakened, if it ſhould be found read in Hiſtories, that want of ſmothering theſe Serpents, or at leaſt, driuing them out of your Kingdom, turned in the end to your loſſe, and to the loſſe of all your poore ſubiects after you. Sire, you haue to doe with a patient and froward enemie, who will neuer leaue of his hope and plottinges againſt your ſtate, but when his life muſt end. All the reſt of his ſleights haue failed him, & are foūd to weak. The laſt remedie that he hath, is to cauſe you to be murdered by theſe Ieſuites, ſéeing he can not otherwiſe ſtop the ſtreame of your good fortune. He will haue patience, he wil diſſemble, but ſtill his eie ſhalbe vpon his marke, & as long as his colonies of Ieſuites remaine in France, or his aduoiſes, and his packets may be receiued, or his murderers exhorted, cōfeſſed, houſeled, encouraged, nothing wilbe too hard for him. Sire, if your princely courage wil not ſuffer you to be afraid for your owne perſon, at the leaſt wiſe, take ſome apprehenſion of it for your poore ſeruants. They haue left their wiues, children, goods, houſes, cōmodities, to follow your fortune: the reſt that remained in ye great towns, haue expoſed themſelues to be bouchered by the Sixteene, to the end they might open the gates vnto you: And now, Sire, wil you haue no care of your life, to preſerue theirs that is inſeperably ioined to yours? wil you haue no pitie of ſo manie women, ſo manie poore children, which ſhould become ſlaues for euer to the Spaniſh pride and cruelty? Sire, you haue open enemies inough to fight withal in France, Flanders, and Spaine, defend your ſides from theſe domeſtical murderers: ſo that you remoue them far inough of, we feare not all the reſt. The Spaniard can not make vs ſlaues, but by marching through your bloud: the Ieſuites his creatures, wil neuer be at reſt in Fraunce,
                  
vntill they haue ſhed it. Hitherunto the care of your faithful ſeruants hath ſtopped the courſe of their parricides. But, Sire, if they be let alone amongeſt vs, they may alwaies ſend you murderers, which theſe fellowes ſhall confeſſe and houſell as they did Barriere, and we, Sire, cannot watch alwaies. It cannot be, but they that ſhoot ſo long at one marke, wil hit it at the length: their bloudie mindes, all to be ſmeared yet with the bloud of the death of the late murdered King, whoſe murdering was plotted and reſolued vpon in their Colledge, and their thirſting after the atchiuing of their attempt vpon your life, giueth them no reſt neither day nor night: but they goe alwaies muſing, alwaies turning, alwaies trauailing to come to this laſt point, which is the full cup of their deſires, and of the deſires of all the Ieſuites. Sire, the conſiderations which they that haue no apprehenſion of féeling of your death, repreſent vnto you on the contrarie ſide, are ſo many euident and manifeſt treaſons. When you haue aſſured your own life, when you haue aſſured the ſtate of ſo many great & mighty Cities by baniſhing the publike counſaile which your enemies haue yet within them, by meanes of the Ieſuites, then ſhall you bee feared on the other ſide the Mountaines: And then, Sire, ſhall you haue that Honour and reſpect done to you, that is due to the greateſt King in all Europe: to the Kinge that hath vppon his head the Crowne of glorie and libertie to be the greateſt King of all Chriſtian people. But as long as ſome haue hope to diſpatch you and all true Frenchmen, through the practiſes, ſleights, & confeſſions of the Ieſuites, you ſhall haue thoſe indignities done to you, that neuer any King of France did yet endure. Sire, you are the eldeſt ſonne of the nobleſt, of the worthieſt, the auncienteſt houſe that is vpon the face of all the earth, all the courſe of your life is nothing but pillers of victorie, but triumphs, but bay trées, but victories which you haue gotten of all them that durſt lift vp an hand againſt you: All prophecies call you to the ſeigniorie of the world, and now what are theſe people, who are theſe traitors, who are theſe baſtards of France, that goe about to put into your head fears to offēd a ſtranger, to the end you ſhould

retein theſe murderers, that ceaſe not to practiſe againſt your life. Sire, the Kinges of Fraunce haue bin accuſtomed to giue lawes to others, and not to take any. The great God of battailes, that hath led you by the hand hitherunto, preſerue you to farre greater thinges then theſe are: But Sire, diſpiſe not the good aduertiſements which he giueth you, and baniſh with theſe murdering Ieſuites, all thoſe, that building their fortune vppon your Tombe, will labor by all the meanes they can to kéepe them ſtill within your Kingdome.
               I conclude, that it would pleaſe the Court, to cauſe the requeſt of the Vniuerſitie to be recorded, and to Decrée that all the Ieſuites of France voide and departe the realme, territories, and Countries vnder the obedience of his Maieſtie within fiftéene dayes after notice giuen, which ſhalbe done in euery one of their Colledges or houſes by ſpeach to one of them for all the reſt. Otherwiſe, and in default of ſo doing, and in caſe any of them be found in France after the ſaid time, that forth with, and without any formalitie of proceſſe, they ſhalbe condemned as guiltie of Treaſon to the higheſt head, and hauing enterpriſed againſt the life of the King. And call for the charges.
            
            
               The reſolution of the Vniuerſitie, ſolemnely and lawfully aſſembled the 18. of Apr. in An. 1594. to be humble ſuters, that the Ieſuites might be vtterly baniſhed.
               IN the yéere of our Lord one thouſand fiue hūdred nientie foure, vpon Monday the 18. day of April, the Vniuerſitie of all ſortes and degrées of this famous ſtudie of Paris, being aſſembled togither in S. Mathurins Church for a generall preceſſion to be made from the Vniuerſitie to the holy Chappel of the Kings palace in Paris, to giue thankes to the moſt high God for the happie deliuerie of this famous Citie out of the handes of the Spaniſh enemies, for the proſperitie, and moſt happie ſucceſſe of the moſt Chriſtian & moſt victorious King Henry the 4. King of the French and Nauarre our moſt drede and liege Lord, for the preſeruation of

the Citie vnder the gouernement and protection of our ſaid liege Lord the King, and for many other reſpects touching and concerning this Vniuerſitie, and for the humble ſupplication preſented by Laurence Bouceret doctor of Artes, that the Ieſuites might be called in queſtion and be vtterly baniſhed out of the Realme, the ſaid Vniuerſitie, as their maner is, duely aſſembled at their accuſtomed houre, with a whole conſent of al the Doctors and Maiſters of all the foure faculties, and with the conſent of the foure Procurators of the nations, no one man gaine ſaying, ordeined, decréed, and determined, that the ſaid ſupplication of the ſaid Doctor Bouceret was to be allowed, and therefore that the Ieſuites were duely and orderly to be called in queſtion, and to be wholly baniſhed out of the Realme. To which ende and purpoſe, it ſéemed good to the ſaid Vniuerſitie to make choiſe of certaine ſelect men out of euery facultie to proſecute the cauſe, whereupon the Diuines named Maiſter Adrian d' Amboiſe Preſident and rector of the Kings Colledge of Nauarre, and ſuch an other Doctor as the ſaid d' Amboiſe would thinke good to make choiſe of: the Canoniſtes allowed well of this procéeding, and becauſe there was then preſent but one onely Doctor of that facultie, to wit D. Dauidſon, he promiſed to name ſome other of his Doctors: the Phiſitions, D. Iames Couſinet: Laſtly, the facultie of Artes named D. Laurence Bouceret, and D. George Criton. And ſo with one conſent it was agréed and concluded, no man gaine ſaying, by D. Iames d' Amboiſe, Chancelor of the Vniuerſitie, and by the whole Vniuerſitie, the day and yéere aboue written. Thus ſigned, du Valle. And on the ſide. Seene by vs, Iames d' Amboiſe Chancelor of the Vniuerſiie. And ſealed with redde waxe.
               
            
            
               
               The Pleading of M. Arnauld The requeſt of the Vniuerſitie to the ſame end.
               To our LL. the Court of Parliament.
               MOſt humbly beſeechen the Chancelor, Deane, and Faculties, Procters of the Nations, Ayders and Scholers of the Vniuerſitie of Paris, ſaying, that whereas they haue of long time complayned to this honourable Court of a great diſorder fallen out in the ſaide Vniuerſitie by a certaine new ſecte, ſprong vp as well in Spaine as in other places thereabout, taking vpon them an ambitious title, of the Societie of the name of Ieſus, and haue from time to time, and namely ſince theſe laſt troubles ſhewed themſelues partakers with the Spaniſh faction, and their inſtruments, to the vtter vndoing and deſolation of this ſtate, as well in this towne of Paris, as elſewhere throughout the realme of France and other Countries, a matter forſeene euen from the beginning of their aduauncement by your ſaid Suppliants, and namely by the Decree of the facultie of Diuinitie which was at that time made againſt them; purporting that this new ſecte was foiſted in, to breake all order as well politike as Eccleſiaſticall, and ſpecially the order of the Vniuerſitie, as appeared by their refuſing to obey the Chancelor, Archbiſhops, Biſhops, and Curates, and other ſuperiours of the Church. And whereas the Impes of the ſaid pretended ſociety of Ieſus, about thirtie yeeres agoe, not hauing as yet then ſpued out their poyſon in all the other townes of France, but onely in this towne, preſented a ſupplication to be incorporate into the ſaid Vniuerſitie; and that beyng conſidered vpon was referred to Counſaile, and order ſet downe that in the meane ſeaſon, all things ſhould ſtande in that ſtate they were, which was in effect, that the Ieſuites ſhould not meddle in any thing to the preiudice of that order, which notwithſtanding they obeyed not, but that more is, beſide their pernicious purpoſes, intruding themſelues and medling with matters of State, ſerued as inſtruments and ſpials in this France, for the aduancement of the affaires of Spaine, as it is well knowen to all the worlde, and their requeſt

as aforeſaid referred to Counſaile, was not orderly purſued, nor the pleas taken out on either ſide, wherby it came diſcontinued. In conſideratiō wherof may it pleaſe your good LL. to ordeine that this ſect may be baniſhed, not onely out of the Vniuerſitie, but alſo out of the whole realme of France, calling to your aſſiſtance in this behalfe the Kings Atturney generall, and ſo ſhal you do well. Thus ſigned. Le Royer. and on the ſide, D' Amboiſe Chancelor of the Vniuerſitie. And ſealed with redde waxe.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   