
      
         
            
            
            ¶ Actis made by dyuers our moſt noble progenytours kynges of this realme agaynſt vnlawfull games.
            
               WHere as in the ſtatute made at Caturbery the xii yere of the reigne of king Rychard, amōgeſt other thinges it was accorded & aſſented, that the ſeru
                  ••…
               es & laborers of huſbādry & laborers & ſeruantes of artificers, and of vytaylers ſhuld haue bowes & arrowes, and vſe the ſame the ſondayes and other feſtiual days, and vtterly leaue playeng at the 
                  •
               ailes, as wel handball as foteball, and other games called coytes, dyce, bowling, & kailes, and other ſuche 
                  •
               othryfty games, and that the ſheryffes, mayres, baylyffes, and conſtables, ſhal haue power to arreſt al that doth contrarie, as in the ſayd ſtatute is more fully cō
               teyned: It is ordeyned the .xi. yere of kyng Henry the iiii. that the ſayd ſtatute be firmely holden and kept: Ioynyng to the ſame, that euery ſuche labourer or ſeruant, that doth contrary to the ſame ſtatute, ſhal haue impriſonment by .vi. dayes. And the mayres and ſheryffes, or the mayres and baylyffes of cities and boroughes, and the conſtables in other townes ſhall haue power to putte this ſtatute 
                  〈◊〉
                execution from tyme to tyme: and if they do not therof execution, the ſame mayres and ſheryffes, or mayres and baylyffes aforeſaid ſhall pay to the kynge for euery defaut .xx. s. and the conſtables or conſtable of euery towne, that doth not like execution of this ſtatute, ſhall pay for euery their or his defaute .vi. s. iiii. d. And that the Iuſtices of aſſiſes ſhall haue power to enquyre in this caſe in theyr ſeſſions from tyme to tyme of them that do contrary to this ſtatute, and therof to certifie in the chauncery.
            ¶ Item it is ordeyned the .xvii. yere of kynge Edwarde the .iiii. that after the feaſte of Eaſter nexte commynge, no perſone gouernour nor occupier of any houſe, tenement, gardeyn or other place within this realme, ſhal willyngly ſuffre any perſon to occupie or play any of the ſayd games callyd cloſhe, kayles, halfbowle, handin and handout, or quekbord, or any of them, within any of their ſayd houſes, tenementes, gardeins, or any other place, vpon payne to haue the impriſonment of thre yeres, and to forfayte and loſe for euery offence xx. li. The one halfe therof to our ſoueraigne lorde the kyng, to be applyed to the vſe of his houſe, in all ſuche places where ſuche forfayture ſhall happen to fall, other than where any perſon ought to haue the forfayture of the goodes of felons and fugitiues, by any lawfull graunt, auctorytie of parlyament, or otherwyſe. And it is ordeyned by the ſayde auctorytie that al ſuche perſons theyr heyres and ſucceſſours, whiche ought to haue any ſuche forfaytures in ſuche places, ſhall haue all ſuche halfe as ſhall be hereafter forfayte by any of the premyſſes: And the other halfe therof to hym or them that in this behalfe wyll purſue by action of dette at the common lawe. In whiche action lyke proceſſe, triall, iudgement, coſtes, damages, & execution ſhall be had as is vſed in other actions there purſued. And that no perſone from the ſayde feaſte of Eaſter, ſhall vſe any of the ſayd games, called cloſhe, halfbowle, kayles, handin and handout, or queckborde, vpon peyne of two yeres impriſonment, & to forfayt for euery defaut .x. li. The one halfe therof to our ſouerayne lord the kyng, to be applyed to the vſe of his houſe, in al ſuche places where ſuche forfayture ſhal happen to fall, other than where any perſon ought to haue the forfayture of the goodis of felons & fugityues by any lawful grant, auctoryte of parlyament, or otherwyſe. And it is ordeyned by the ſayd auctoryte, that al ſuche perſons theyr heyres & ſucceſſours, whiche ought to haue any ſuch forfaytures in ſuche places ſhal haue al ſuche halfe that ſhalbe hereafter forfayt by any of the premiſſes: And the other half therof to hym or them that in this behalfe wyll ſue by accion of dette in lyke maner and fourme to be had, tried, ruled, and ordred as is aforeſayde.
            ¶ Item it is ordeyned and enacted the .xi. yere of the reigne of the moſt noble kynge of famous memory Henry the .vii. that none apprentyſe ne ſeruant of huſbondry, labourer ne ſeruant artificer play at the tables from the tenth day of Ianuarye next commynge, but only for meate and drynke, ne at the tenys, claſhe, dyce, cardes, bowles, nor any other vnlaufulle game in no wyſe out of Chriſtmas, and in Chriſtmas to play onely in the dwellyng houſe of his mayſter, or where the mayſter or any of the ſayde ſeruauntes is preſente, vpon peyne of impryſonement by the ſpace of a daye in the ſtockes openly. And that the houſeholder where dycynge, cardynge, tenys playenge, bowles, claſhe, or any other vnlaufull game afore reherſed ſhall be vſed, otherwiſe than is afore reherſed, and that laufully be preſented before the iuſtices of peace, the mayre, ſheryffe in his tourne, or ſtewarde in his lete, or by examination had afore the ſayde Iuſtices of peace, that proceſſe be made vpon the ſame as vpon enditement of treſpas agaynſt the kinges peace. And that the ſayd myſdoer be admytted to no fyne vnder the ſomme of .vi. ſhyllynges .viii. d.
            ¶ Item it is ordeyned & enacted the .xix. yere of the ſayd moſt noble kyng Henry the .vii. that none apprentyſe ne ſeruāt at huſbandry, laborer ne ſeruaunt artificer, playe at the tables from the feaſte of Eſter nexte cōmyng, ne at tennys, cloſhe, dyce, cardes, bowles, nor any other vnlaufull games in no wyſe, out of the .xii. days at Chriſtmas, and than to play only in dwellyng houſes of his maiſter, or where the mayſter or any of the ſayd ſeruantes is preſent, vpon peyne of impriſonment by the ſpace of a day in the ſtockes openly. And that the houſholder, where dyſynge, cardynge, tennys playenge, bowles, cloſhe, or any other vnlaufulle game afore reherſed, ſhall be vſed, otherwiſe than is afore reherſed, and that laufully ben preſented before iuſtices of the peace, mayre, ſheriffe in his turne, or ſteward in his lete, or by examination had before the ſayd iuſtice of peace, that proceſſe be made vpon the ſame as vpon indytement of treſpace agaynſte the kynges peace, and that the ſayde myſdoer be admytted to no fyne vnder the ſomme of .vi. s. viii. d.
            GOD SAVE THE KYNGE.
Tho. Berthelet
regius impreſſor excude
                  •••…
                CVM PRIVILEGIO.
Proclamation by Henry Vll. against unlawful games at Christmas, A. D. 1500.
         
      
   