
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ A PROCLAMATION concernyng eatyng of vvhyte meates, made the .IX. day of February, the .XXXIIII. yere of the reygne of the kynges moſt royall maieſty.
            
               
                  FOR AS MOCHE as by dyuers and ſundry occaſions, as wel hearryng, lynges, ſaltfyſh, ſamond, ſtockfiſh, as other kindes of fiſſh, ben this yere ſkant, and alſo enhanced in prices aboue the old rate and common eſtimation of their valour: ſo that if the kinges louyng ſubiectes ſhulde be enforced onely to bye and prouyde hearrynge and other ſalte ſtore of fyſhe, for the neceſſary and ſuffycyent ſuſtentation and mayntenaunce of theyr houſholdes and families, al this holy-tyme of Lent, accordyng as they haue ben wont in times paſt to do, and ſhuld not be by ſome other conuenyent meanes relieued therin, the ſame might and ſhuld vndoutedly redound to their importable charge and detriment. And for as moche as his highnes conſidereth, howe this kind and maner of faſtyng, that is to ſay, to abſteyne from mylke, butter, egges, cheſe, and all other white meates, is but a mere poſitiue lawe of the Churche, and vſed by a cuſtome within this realme, and of none other ſorte or neceſſitie, but the ſame may be vpon good conſiderations and groundes, altered and diſpenſed with from tyme to tyme by the publyke auctoritie of kinges and princes, whan ſo euer they ſhal perceiue the ſame to tend to the hurt and damage of theyr people. THE KYNGES highnes therfore moſt graciouſly cōſidering and tendering the welth and commoditie of his people, hath thought good, for the conſiderations aboue reherſed, to releaſe and diſpence with the ſayde lawe and cuſtome of abſteyning from white meates this holy tyme of Lent, And of his eſpecial grace and mere motion giueth and graūteth vnto all and ſingular his ſubiectes within this his realme of England, Wales, Cales, Guynes, Hammes, and in al other his graces dominions, free lyberty, faculty and lycence, to eate al maner of white meates, as mylke, egges, butter, cheſe, and ſuche lyke, during the tyme of this Lent, without any ſcruple or grudge of conſcience: any law, conſtitution, vſe, or cuſtome to the contrary not withſtandyng. Wherin neuer the leſſe his highnes exhorteth, and in the name of God requireth, all ſuche his faythfull ſubiectes, as maye, wol, or ſhall enioy this his ſaide graunt or faculty, that they be in no wiſe ſcruple or doubteful therof, nor abuſe or turne the ſame into a fleſhly or carnal libertie, but rather endeuour them ſelues to their poſſible powers with this libertie of eating of white meates, to obſerue alſo that faſt, whiche god moſt ſpecyally requyreth of them: That is to ſay, to renounce the world and the deuyl, with al theyr pompes and workes, and alſo to ſubdewe and repreſſe their carnal affections, and the corrupt workes of their fleſh, accordyng to their vowe and profeſſion made at the font ſtone. For in theſe poyntes ſpecyally conſyſteth the very true and perfyte abſtynence and faſtyng of a Chriſten man. This to endure and continue from yere to yere, tyll the kynges hyghnes pleaſure ſhalbe by his maieſties proclamation publyſhed to the contrary.
            GOD SAVE THE KYNG ▸
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ 
               Tho. Berthelet regius impreſſor excudebat. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   