
      
         
            
            
            Menſe Iunii Anno regni metuēdiſſimi dn̄i nr̄i regis Henrici octaui .xxii.
            A proclamation made and diuyſed by the kyngis highnes▪ With the aduiſe of his moſt honorable Counſaile, for puniſſhinge of vacabundes and ſturdy beggars.
            
               THe kynge our moſte dradde ſoueraigne lorde, hauynge always in his moſte bleſſed remembrance, as well the cure and charge of his dignite royall, as alſo the preſent aſtate of this his realme, and his ſubiectes of the ſame, conſidereth, that in all places thorowe out this his realme of Englande, vacabundes and beggars, haue of longe tyme encreaſed and daily dothe encreaſe in great and exceſſiue nombres, by the occaſyon of ydelnes, mother and roote of all vices: wherby haue inſurged and ſpronge, and dayly inſurgeth and ſpringeth cōtynuall theftes, mourdres, and other ſundry haynous offences and great enormities to the high diſpleaſure of god, the inquietation and damage of his true & faithfull ſubiectes, and to the diſturbance of the hoole common weale of this his ſayd realme: And where as many and ſundry good lawes ſtatutes and ordinaunces haue ben before this tyme deuiſed and made, as well by his hyghnes as alſo by diuers his moſte noble progenitours kynges of Englande, for the moſte neceſſary and due reformation of the premyſſes: yet that not withſtandynge, the ſayde nombres of vacabundes and beggars, be not ſeen in any parte, to be mynyſhed / but dayly to be augmented and encreaſed in to great rowtes and companyes. Whiche his grace euidently perceyueth to happen, for as moche as his ſayde lawes, ſtatutes, and ordinances be not from tyme to tyme put in effectuell execution, accordynge to his gracis expectacion, pleaſure, and cōmandemēt: His highnes therfore wyllynge to declare to all his ſubiectes, his moſte godly and vertuous purpoſe, and perſeuerance in the perſecution correction and reformation of that moſte damnable vyce of ydelnes, chiefe ſubuerter and confounder of cōmune weales, Eftſones wylleth and ſtraytely commandeth all Iuſtices of the peas, maires, ſheryffes, conſtables, burſholders, tethynge men, and other his mynyſters, as they wyll auoyde his hygh indignation and diſpleaſure, that if they or any of them, ſhall after two dayes nexte enſuynge after this proclamation publiſſhed. happen to fynde any vacabunde or myghty beggar (be it man or woman) out of the hundred where he or ſhe was borne, or out of the towne or place, where he or ſhe laſt dwelled in, and cōtinued by the ſpace of thre yeres nexte before, and that vpon knowledge of the ſayde proclamation, he or ſhe hath not demaunded a Byllet, to conuey them ſelfe to the ſayde hundred or owellynge place, and ſo be in theyr iourney thetherwarde, within the ſayd two daies, that than the ſayde Iuſtices and minyſters and euery of them, ſhall cauſe the ſayde vacabundes and beggars and euery of them, to be ſtripped naked, from the priuey partes of theyr bodies vpwarde (men and women of great age or ſeke, and women with childe onely excepte) and beinge ſo naked, to be bounden, and ſharpely beaten and ſkourged. And after that they be ſo beaten in fourme afore ſaid, that there be deliuered to them and euery of them ſo whypped or ſkourged, a ſedule or byllet, the forme wherof appereth in the ende of this preſent proclamation: And that the ſayde ſedule or byllet be ſigned with the hande of the Iuſtice of peas, mayre, ſheriffe, conſtable, burſholder, tethinge man, or other miniſter, by whoſe cōmandement the ſayd vacabūde or beggar was whipped or ſkourged. And in caſe that any of them can not write, than the ſame byllet to be ſigned, by one of the beſt and moſt ſubſtantiall inhabitantes nexte adioynynge. And if it happen the perſon beaten in forme aforeſaid, to be eftſones foūden in the ſayd place, as a vacabunde or beggar, that than he or ſhe to be taken and eftſones beaten & ſkourged as is afore ſaid: And ſo from tyme to tyme, and as often as they ſhall happen to be taken out of the place to them lymitted, for theyr abode by the ſtatute. ¶ More ouer, if any of the ſayd vagabundes or myghty beggars, whipped in forme aforſayd, do after the ſayd whippinge, make their abode in any place longer than a dyner tyme, or the ſpace of one night, vntyll they be cōme to the ſayd place of their habitaciō appoynted beinge nat veryly ſeke or hurte) that than they ſhalbe eftſones whypped, and ordered as is before written. Semblably if any vagabunde or mighty beggar beinge taken, wyll affirme that he was late whypped, and can not ſhewe forthe a cedule or byllet ſigned, as before is mencioned / he ſhall, not withſtandynge his ſaid affirmacion, be ſtripped naked and ſeen by the Iuſtice, or ſome of the miniſters before named. And if it may euidētly appere vnto them by the tokens on his body, that he hath ben al redy ſkourged or beaten, they ſhall than ſuffer hym to departe without other harme, with a byllet ſigned by them, mēcionynge where, and at what tyme he was beaten. And if they fynde no tokens or ſignes of ſkourgynge or beatinge on his body, than they to ſe hym to be whypped or ſkourged, and further ordered as is before written. And more ouer, the kyngis highnes cōmandeth al Iuſtices of the peace, mayres, ſheriffes, cōſtables, burſholders, tethyngmen, and other his ſayd miniſters, that al vayne pitie and other excuſes layde aparte, they endeuour them ſelfes with all their power, ſtudy, and diligence, to put this his ſayd ordinance in effectuell execucion, without any delay. And alſo that they endeuour them ſelfes to kepe theyr marches and ſerches, accordynge to the lawes and ſtatutes of this realme, and accordynge to the inſtructions before this tyme made and diuiſed by his highnes and his honorable coū
               ſayle, and by his grace to them ſent, to be put in due execution: As they wyll anſwere to his highnes at theyr vttermoſte peryls.
            God ſaue the kynge.
         
         
            ¶ The fourme and tenore of the ſedule or byllet aboue mencioned.
            
               
                  〈◊◊…〉
                the countie of D. as a vagabunde, without a cedule or token of ſkourginge, and therfore whypped at C. afore
               
                  ••••…
                
               
                   _____ 
                day of the moneth of 
                   _____ 
                the 
                   _____ 
                yere of the reigne of our ſoueraigne lorde kynge Henry the eyght, in the pres
               
                  ••••…
                
               
                  〈◊…〉
                and other of the inhabitantes of the ſame towne.
            
               Tho. Bert
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  etus
regin
                  〈…〉
               
            
         
      
   