
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A PROCLAMATION concernynge payment of tythes and oblations, as well within the citie of London as elles where within the realme.
            
               THE KYNGES mooſt royall maieſtie hauynge perfyt knowlege and vnderſtandinge that as well his louynge ſubiectes 
                  〈◊〉
                of his citie of London of the one p
                  〈…〉
                as the perſons cutates of the churches of his ſayd cytie of the other partie, by their mutuall aſſentes compromitted them ſelf to ſtande abyde and performe the order decret and at
               
                  〈…〉
               rement of his right truſty and right entierly beloued counſailours, the mooſt reuerende father in God Thomas archebyſſhop of Canturbury Metropolitane and prymate of Englande, Thomas Audeley knyght lorde Chauncellour of Englād. the reuerend father in god Stephyn byſhoppe of wyncheſter, Thomas Crumwell Eſquier chief ſecretary to the kynges hyghnes, and mayſter of the rolles, Thon Fitz Iames knyghte, chiefe iuſtice of plees to be holden before the kynges hyghenes, and Roberie Norwyche knyghte chief iuſtice of the kynges commen benche, in and vpon the debate and variaunce that was moued betwene the ſayde partyes for the rate and certayntie of tythes offetynges and other dewties claymed by the ſayde perſonnes and curates to be payde by the kynges ſayde ſubiectes the citezens of his ſayde Citie, where vppon the ſayd counſayllours of our ſayd ſouetayne lorde by great aduyſe and deliberation, by one accorde and aſſente amonge other thynges haue ordayned and decreed, that euery the kynges ſayde ſubiectes, citizens, and inhabytauntes of his ſayde Citie, ſhulde frome the tyme of their awarde and decree paye for their tythes after the rate of ſyxtene pence halfepeny for euery .x. s. of their houſe rent, and for euery .xx. s. to paye .ii. s .ix. d. and ſo accumptynge and aſſendynge allwayes by .x. s. ſhulde paye for euery ten. s. after the rate of ſyxtene pence. ob. and not aboue. And yet neuertheleſſe the kynges hygheneſſe is enfourmed, that dyuers and ſondrye perſons inhabyted within his ſayde Cytie, not onely refuſe to paye their ſayde tythes, accordynge as is lymitted by his ſayde counſayllours, but alſo that many of the ſayde cyteſens and of other the kynges ſubiectes inhabyted in ſondry partes of this realme, grudged and murmured to paye their tythes offerynges and other lawfull duetyes to the perſons, vicars, and other hauynge cure of their ſoules, lyke as heretofore by the lawdable cuſtomes of this realme they haue done and bene accuſtomed to do, and obſtinatly and wilfully withdrawe and deteyne their ſayde dewties, agayne Iuſtice equite reaſon and good conſcience, to the great peryll of theyr ſoules. For reformation wherof the kynges ſayd royall maieſtie beynge the ſupreme heed in erthe vnder God of the church of Englande, myndinge and entendynge to mayntayne and ſuſtayne the honour of God and the godly obſeruances and tyghtfull duetyes cuſtomably and by laudable cuſtomes dewe to the eccleſiaſticall miniſters of the churche of Englande, in as large and ample maner as heretofore hath bene laudably and honorably vſed and accuſtomed within this his realme, doeth therfore by this his preſente Proclamation ſtrayghtely charge and commaunde all and euery his ſayde ſubiectes of his ſayde Cytie, to ſatiſfie paye and contente to their perſons vicars and other, hauyng cure of their ſoules, in the name and lewe of their tythes after the rate aboue expreſſed, lymitted by the kynges ſayde counſellours. And that al ſuche of his ſayde cytie as paye leſſe of yerely ferme than .x. s. and all and euery other perſon and perſons men women and chylderne, inhabyted within the ſayde cytie, beinge of age to receyue the bleſſed and holy Sacrament of the aulter, the very body of our lorde Ieſu Chriſte, ſhall paye yerely for their foure offerynge dayes two pence, the houſholders inhabyted within the ſayde citie, payinge aboue the yerely rent of ten ſhyllynges, only for their owne perſons excepted & to be diſcharged of the .ii. d. for the ſayd foure offryng dayes.
            ¶ And ouer this his hyghenes ſtrayghtly chargeth and commaundeth, that all and euery his other Subiectes, in all other parties of this his realme, ſhall paye and contente to the perſons vicars and other the miniſters of the churche, and hauynge cure, ſuche tythes as well prediall as perſonal offerynges and other dewtyes, which by the laudable cuſtomes of this realme they heretofore haue bene oblyged accuſtomed and bounden to paye, without deteynynge any parte therof, and without further deniall, contradiction, moleſtation, or trouble in any behalfe, vpon peyne that euery perſon offendinge this his gracious Proclamation, to haue impriſonment, & to make fyne at his gracis will and pleaſure, & ouer that the offenders ſhall renne into his highnes diſpleaſure & indignatiō.
            ¶ And his maieſtie alſo chargeth and commaundeth as well all and ſinguler archebyſſhoppes, byſſhoppes, and other hauynge eccleſyaſticall iurisdiction, as all and ſinguler mayres, ſhyreffes, bayllyffes, aldermen, and all other his miniſters trewe liege men and ſubiectes, as well of his citie of London, as cls where within his realme, that they and euery of them, put their effectuall endeuour for the dewe execution of this his proclamation frome tyme to tyme as to them ſhall apertayne vpon the paynes aboue reherſed.
            GOD SAVE THE KYNGE.
Thomas Berthelet
Regius Impreſſor excudeba
                  •
               . CVM PRIVILEGIO.
         
      
   