
      
         
            
            
            THE
Order of keeping a
Court Leete, and Court Baron:
with the charges appertayning
to the ſame: Truely and playnly deliuered in the Engliſh
tongue, for the profite of all men,
and moſt commodious for young Students
of the lawes, and all others within
the iuriſdiction of thoſe
Courtes.
            By Ionas Adames.
            
            Quicquid agas prudenter agas, & Reſpice finem.
            
            Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin & William Kirckham,
& are to be ſold at the little North doore of Saint Paules
Church, at the ſigne of the Blacke-boy. 1593.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE ORDER OF
Court Leete, and Court
Baron.
            
               FIrſt, there ſhall be a precept made by the
Steward vnto the Bayliffe, to warne the
Court by a reaſonable time: that is to ſay,
ſixe or more dayes before the Court bée
kept, in ſuch forme as followeth: but it
is the better, if warning be ſixteene daies before, as it is
in the Common Bancke.
            
               The Precept.
               A. B generoſ▪ Seneſcal.Blackforde. Manerij praedicti Baliuo eiuſdē
Salutē. Tibi praecipio pariter & mādo, quod
diligenter praemonere facias omnes tenentes infra Manerium
praedictū, tam reſidentes quam non reſidentes, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
omnes Tenentes Cuſtumarios Manerij praedicti, quod ſint
coram me in hac parte ſufficienter deputato apud Blackford
praedictam, die Iouis viceſimo ſex to die Martij, proxime ſuturo
poſt datum huius, ad faciendum ſectam ſuam, tam ad
viſum Franc. Pleg. quam ad Curiam Baron. & omnia alia
quae eis incūbent, & pertinebūt, & haec nullatenus omittas,
& habeas ibi hoc praeceptum: Datum ſub ſigillo meo, decimo
die huius menſis Martij. Ao. Regni Elizabeth Dei gratia
Angliae, Franc. & Hiberniae Reginae, fidei defenſor. &c.
Viceſimo quarto.
               
                  
After that the Steward is ſet in the Court, hée muſt
firſt enter in writing the title of the Court in the beginning
of the Court Rolle, with the name of the place in
ſuch forme as followeth.
            
            
               The entrie of the Court Leete, and
Court Baron.
               VIſus Franc. Pleg. cum Curia C. L.Blackforde. generoſi Domini
eiuſdem ibidem tent. die Iouis, videlicet viceſimo ſexto
die Martij, An. Regni Dominae noſtrae Elizabeth Dei gratia
Angliae, Franc. & Hiberniae Reginae, fidei defenſoris,
&c. viceſimo tertio tent▪ per A. B. Seneſcallum ibidem.
               When that is done, the Steward ſhal cauſe the Bayliffe
which ſerueth the Court, if it be in a Léete, to make
proclamations, that is to ſay, thrée Oyes: and if it be in
a Court Baron, then but one, and after ſhall ſay as
followeth.
               All manner of perſons which had warning to appeare
here this day, to ſerue the Quéenes Maieſtie for
her Léete, and the Lord of the Manour for his Court
now holden, draw néere and giue your attendance, and
euery one anſwere to his name as he ſhalbe called, vpon
payne and perill that may fall thereof.
               And after all be called, and thoſe that are abſent bée
marked to be amerced, then the Steward ſhall cauſe agayne
(if it be in a Léete) to be made other thrée Oyes.
Then after the thrée proclamations made, the Steward
ſhall cauſe the Bayliffe to ſaie.
               If anie will bee Eſſoynd, come in and you ſhall bee
heard.
               And in a Court Baron, if any will be eſſoyned or enter
any playnt, come in, and you ſhalbe heard, and then
the Steward ſhall ſay, Eſſoynes and proffers of ſuite
and plée thrée times, and in the end Eſſoynes for this
day.
               
                  
Then if there bee any perſon that hath any lawfull
impediment that he cannot bee here as he is bound, let
one aſke an Eſſoyne for him (the Court ſitting) to ſaue
his default.
               And then the Steward ſhall enter the Eſſoyne in the
Court Rolle in this manner.
            
            
               The manner of entering the Eſſoynes.
               
                  A. B. per C. D. eſſoniatur de cōi. & ſic de alijs. Looke
alſo if there bee any Tenaunt in the Manour that
hath any action, or cauſe of action, ſithence the laſt
Court day, let him put in his playnt the Court ſitting,
and it ſhalbe entered.
               Looke alſo if there be any precepts, attachments or
diſtreſſes hanging in the Court Roles enquire of them
openly in the Court, and knowe if the Baylie haue ſerued
them.
               Alſo if there be any old playntes hanging in the Court
Role before this Court holden, cauſe the parties to bée
called, and before th'enqueſt bee charged, knowe if the
plainte ſhall paſſe by the homage.
               That done th'enqueſt ſhalbe empanneled. Then bid
the Foreman lay his hand vpon the booke, and ſweare
him in forme following.
            
            
               The Oth of the Foreman.
               Cauſe the Baylie to holde the booke vnto the partie or
parties ſworne, but the Steward ſhall giue the Oth.
               YOu ſhall diligently enquire, and true preſentment
make of all ſuch things as you ſhall be charged with,
concerning as well the Quéenes Maieſties Léete, as the
Lords Court of the Mannor: you ſhall well and truely

kéepeIf the Court Baron be kept by it ſelfe, there ſhall be omitted in this oth theſe words, the Queenes counſell, for that it is not the Queenes Court, but the Leete is. 
                  the Queenes Counſell, your fellowes and your
owne: you ſhall not conceale nor hide any thing for fauour,
feare, promiſe, or affection you beare to any perſon
or perſons, or preſent any thing for hatred or malice you
beare to any man: but you ſhal preſent and tell the truth,
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, ſo helpe you
God, and by the contents of this booke. And this being
done, cauſe him to kiſſe the booke.
               After the foreman is ſworne by himſelfe, cauſe thrée
or foure of th'enqueſt to lay their right hands together
on the booke, and giue them their oth as followeth.
            
            
               The Oth of the reſt of the Iurie.
               AL ſuch oth as A. B. hath made before you on his behalfe,
you and euery of you ſhall well & truely kéepe
on your behalfes, ſo helpe you God and by the contents
of this booke.
               And then cauſe euery one that is ſworne to kiſſe the
booke.
               And ſo in like manner ſweare the reſt.
               After they be ſworne, cauſe the Baylie to number
them that be ſworne, as the Steward doth reade them.
            
            
               The Proclamation after the
Oth taken.
               THen make proclamation and ſay thus. All you that
be here ſworne, draw néere and heare your charge,
and all the reſt kéepe ſilence, vpon paine and perill that
ſhall come thereof. Before the charge, gather the common

                     〈◊〉
                  , which the Tenants doe pay euery Léete, according
to the cuſtome of the Mannor.
            
            
               
               The exhortation to be giuen vnto the Iurie before
the charge, to conſider their Oth.
               MAſters, the charge which you haue promiſed by your
Othes to obſerue, toucheth and concerneth diuers
good lawes and ſtatutes made for the whole Commonweale
of this Realme, and alſo for the priuate wealth of
euery of you, which matters the Lord of this Fraunches
conſidering, and wiſhing your wealth and quietnes,
willing alſo good orders to be obſerued and kept among
you, and that right and equitie might be miniſtred
to euery of you, hath cauſed therefore the Quéenes Maieſties
Léete and her Court to be ſommoned and kept
here as this day: I will therefore by your fauour, before
I enter into the matters of your charge, declare vnto
you by what authoritie you are brought hither, and
wherein you are bound to ſerue.
               One cauſe is, for that the Quéenes Maieſtie and her
noble progenitors haue giuen and graunted vnto the
Lord of this Mannor, a ſtrength and power to kéepe a
Léete or Law day at two times in the yeare, which Léet
or Lawday al the Hed-borowes, Tythingmen and Deſiners,
and all other perſons which be reſident or dwelling
within this Léete, being of the age of twelue yeares
or aboue, are bound by the lawe of this Realme to appeare:
for that there they may heare the Lawes and
Statutes opened and declared, that thereby they may
know and auoyd the daungers of the ſame, and further
to enquire of the breakers of the ſame: and preſent them,
that ſuch offenders might be puniſhed.
               The other cauſe or authoritie is, for that you be the
Lords Tenants, and are bound by reaſon of your Tenure
to appeare at the Lord his Court Baron, when it
ſhall happen to be kept according to the law, that is to
ſay, at euery thrée wéekes ende, and being here by theſe

two authorities, you are boūd to ſerue in all ſuch things,
as you are ioyntly and lawfully charged withall, as well
concerning the Quéenes Maieſties Léete, as the Lords
Court Barron.
               And thus you haue heard in briefe, the cauſes whereby
you are bound to come to this Léete and Court
Barron.
               Alſo to the entent that this your Oth which you haue
taken, may be the better knowne, I thinke it good by
your patience ſomewhat to ſay concerning the ſame.
               Firſt in ſwearing, thrée things chiefly ought to bée
conſidered: The firſt is, that you ſweare truely, that is,
you muſt ſeclude all fauour and affection to the parties,
not fearing the rich, nor pitying the poore, not conſidering
the ſimplenes of any perſon, nor the ſmalnes of the
offence, but hauing the truth onely before your eyes,
for loue thereof ſay and ſpeake that which you knowe
to be true, and no further.
               The ſecond is, you muſt ſweare in righteouſnes, that
is, for the very zeale and deſire you haue in the declaring
of the truth, for the executing of iuſtice, for the obſeruing
of couenants, honeſt promiſes, Statutes, lawes, & good
Cuſtomes, and hauing a reſpect in doing and performing
theſe things, you doe that which is to the glorie of God,
the honor of the Quéene, the preſeruation of the people
and Common-weale: and this manner of ſwearing is
commanded of almightie GodCaput. 6. 
                  Deutronomie, ſaying:
Thou ſhalt feare the Lord thy God and ſerue him, & ſhalt
ſweare by his name. That is, we muſt ſerue God onely,
feare him and confeſſe his holy name, which is done by
ſwearing lawfully. Swearing alſo in many other places
of Scripture is commanded, but the ſame conditionally,
which is, we muſt ſweare in truth, in iudgement, and in
righteouſnes, &c.
               Thirdly, in ſwearing and taking an oth, you muſt doo
it with iudgement, not raſhly nor vnaduiſedly, but ſoberly,

conſidering what an Oth is: and to put you in minde
thereof, I will in fewe words declare what an Oth is.
An Oth is the calling or taking to witneſſe of God his
name, to confirme the truth of that we ſay. And S. Paul
ſayth,Hebrues 
                        •
                      verſ. 16. 1
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   
                  An oth for confirmation is among men an end of
all ſtrife. For in doubtfull and obſcure matters, where
the knowledge of men faileth, we flye vnto God, that he
which is the onely truth, may giue teſtimonie vnto the
truth, and he which vſeth God for a witneſſe, doth alſo
call for reuenge of periurie at his hands, if he deceiue and
ſpeake not the truth: alſo in laying your hands vpon
the booke, you doe ſweare, truely to enquire and make a
true preſentment of thoſe things wherwith you be charged,
and not to let from ſaying the truth, and doing truly,
for fauour, feare, loue or malice of any perſon: you muſt
conſider that in the ſame booke is conteyned God his euerlaſting
truth and moſt holy word, whereby we haue
remiſſion and forgiuenes of our ſinnes and euerlaſting
life. Alſo in the Goſpell book is cōtained God his plagues
and threats to obſtinate ſinners, periured men, falſe witneſſe-bearers,
cōdemners of innocent and guiltleſſe perſons,
ſo that if you willingly forſweare your ſelues, you
vtterly forſake God, his mercie and truth, the merites of
our Sauiour Chriſt, his natiuitie, life, paſſion, death, reſurrection
and aſcention, the ioyes of heauen and euerlaſting
life, betaking your ſelues to the diuell the author of
all lyes, periurie and deceit: and by forſwearing, and
forſaking the truth, you doe forſake Chriſt, the light and
truth it ſelfe. And although that periurie doe eſcape
ſometime vneſpied and vnpuniſhed, and be kept ſecrete
betwéene ſome of you and others, yet your hearts will
iudge and repute one an other falſe, and be ſuſpitious of
each others doings: but God being faithfull he will not
deny himſelfe, and therefore he will not ſuffer the profanation
of his name to be vnpuniſhed: alſo at the laſt day,
when the ſecrets of all mens hearts ſhall be opened, then

the truth and your owne conſciences ſhall accuſe you,
and Chriſt the righteous Iudge ſhall iuſtly condemne
you to euerlaſting death and damnation. For this ſinne
of periurie God by hisMalac. 3. Prophet hath threatned to puniſh.
Wherefore let vs pray vnto God that we may vſe
ſuch othes as be godly & lawfull, that is, that we ſweare
not raſhly, in trifles, or in matters of no waight, but whē
it is néedfull and neceſſarie onely: alſo that we doe conſider
the ende, that our othes may ſerue to the honour of
God, and to the boulting out and teſtifying of a trueth.
And thus hauing put you in minde of your dueties and
Othes, the which I truſt you will diligently weigh and
conſider in performing and doing the ſame, to the comfort
of your conſciences: I will procéed no further therein,
but declare vnto you the Articles of your charge.
            
            
               The charge of Court Leete.
               YOu muſt vnderſtand, that high Treaſons, petie
Treaſons, and Fellonies, which are againſt the
Crowne and dignitie, are to be enquired of and preſented
in Court Léete: but not puniſhable there, the which
offences ought to be ſet downe in writing and indented,
the one part to remaine with the Steward, the other
with the Iurie, and the ſame muſt be deliuered to the Iuſtices
of the Aſſiſes at the next Gaole holden within the
Countie.
               Firſt, you ſhal enquire of high Treaſons, as if there
be any among you which doe compaſſe, imagine or entend
the death of our Soueraigne Ladie the Quéene: or
if any doe vtter the ſame by words or writing: or if any
goe about to make warre againſt her: or if any bee adherent
to any of her enemies. If any counterfeiteth,
clippeth, fileth, waſheth, or otherwiſe falſifieth the money
of this Realme, or the Coyne of any other Realme,
which is enhabled to bee currant within this Realme:

or if any counterfeiteth any of the Quéenes Maieſties
Seales, as the great Seale or Stampe: theſe are high
Treaſons. Alſo counterfeiting of the Quéenes Seale is
to take waxe printed with the Quéenes Seale, and to
faſten it to a writing not made by the Quéene. Theſe
are to be enquired of here as Fellonies, and to be certified
as aforeſayd. Raſtal. Treaſon 26.
               Alſo if any kill his Maſter or his Miſtres:Petie treaſon. or if a
Prieſt, or other religious man kill his Ordinarie, this
is petie Treaſon, and to be enquired here as Fellonie.
25. E. 3. cap. 2.
               Alſo if any woman kill her huſband,A woman to kill her huſband is petie treaſon. it is petie Treaſon,
and it is to bee enquired of as Fellonie. 19. H. 6.
fol. 47.
               Alſo cutting out of a mans tongue,Fellonies. and putting out
his eyes of malice, is Fellonie, and to be enquired of
here.
               Alſo Murder is when any of malice purpoſeth to kill
another Felloniouſly,Murder. and it is to be enquired here as
bloodſhed.
               Alſo Manſlaughter as a treſpaſſe is here to be enquired,Manſlaughter.
that is to ſay, when the place is not appoynted to
fight, but ſuddenly they fight together, and the one killeth
the other as they méete by chance, alſo it is to be enquired
here for bloodſhed.
               Alſo if one kill another in defending himſelf,In defending himſelfe and killing by miſfortune. he ſhall
looſe his goods. The ſame lawe is where one killeth an
other by miſfortune, &c. Stamf. 15. A.
               
               Alſo you ſhall enquire of Rape,Rape. which is, it a man rauiſh
any woman againſt her wil, be ſhe wife, widdow or
mayde, though ſhe afterward conſent vnto it, it is Fellonie.
You ſhall enquire alſo of their ayders: for they
ſhall be iudged Rauiſhers, as well as he that did the
déede. 22. E. 4. fol. 22.
               Burglars are thoſe which in the time of peace,Burglarie. or in
the night time with a Fellonious entent to robbe or kill,

doe breake any houſes, Churches, walles or gates, and
enter into them: this is Burglarie, and here to be enquired
of. Stamf. fol. 30. B.
               
               Robberie is when a man taketh any thing from any
other perſon Felloniouſly,Robberie. though it were but the valew
of a penny: this is Fellonie, and to be enquired of.
               Alſo the burning of a houſe felloniouſly is Fellonie:Burning of a houſe or barne
Alſo burning of Barnes in the night, is to be enquired
of.
               Alſo robbing of Churches or Chappels,Robbing of Churches. and taking of
any Ornaments out of the ſame felloniouſly, is Fellonie,
and to be enquired of.
               If any reſcue any which is taken for fellonie,Reſcue. this is
Fellonie, and here to be enquired of.
               Alſo taking of Doues in Douehouſes with a fellonious
entent,Taking of Doues. is Fellonie, and here to be enquired of.
               Alſo taking of yong Pigeons,Yong Pigeons and yong Goſhawkes. or yong Goſhawkes in
their neſts, is Fellonie, and here to be enquired of.
               Alſo taking of fiſh felloniouſly out of Ponds,Taking of fiſh to be enquired
of. But if the ſame be taken out of a Riuer, there
it is not Fellonie.
               Alſo the taking of tame Déere with a fellonious entent,Taking of tame Deere, Signets, Swās, Peacockes.
is Fellonie. The ſame lawe is for the taking of
Signets, Swannes marked, and Peacocks, and the
ſame to be enquired of.
               Alſo if any receiue a Fellones goods,Receiuer. knowing of the
Fellonie which he hath done, this is Fellonie, and here
to be enquired of. And note that all other Fellonies
which be Fellonies by the Common law, are here to be
enquired of.
               Acceſſaries are enquirable,Acceſſaries. and that is if one procure
or commande another to doe a Fellonie, but not preſent
when he doth it:Acceſſary after fellonie done. this procurer or commander is acceſſarie.
Alſo acceſſarie after Fellonie is done, is where one
receiueth a Fellone, knowing of the Fellonie.
               Eſcape voluntarie is when one arreſteth another for

Fellonie,Eſcape voluntarie. and after ſuffereth him to goe whither he wil,
this is Fellonie, and alſo to be enquired of.
               Eſcape negligent is when one is arreſted for Fellonie,Eſcape negligent.
& after eſcapeth againſt his will that arreſted him,
and if he be not freſhly purſued and taken, before they
that do purſue, looſe the ſight of him, he that kéepeth him,
or his Gaoler, ſhall looſe a grieuous fine, and hereof
enquire.
               Petie Larcenie is taking of any thing with a Fellonious
intent,Petie Larcenie. vnder the value of xii pence: as Hennes,
Géeſe, Pigges, or ſmall things out of windowes, and
thoſe things are to be enquired of. You ſhall vnderſtand
that the Lord of whome the Land is holden,Eſcheate. ſhall haue
the Lands by Eſcheate, where their Tenaunts bee attaynted
of Petie Treaſon, or Fellony, and the King ſhal
haue a yeare, a day and waſte, permagn. Chart. Chap. 22.
and therefore you muſt enquire what Landes and Tenements
thoſe perſons ſo offending haue, and what
goods for the King, except the Lord haue Fellons goods
by the King his graunt, 9, H. 7. fol. 23. Alſo you ſhall
vnderſtand that thoſe matters in the charge aforeſayd,
are to be enquired of and preſented as aforeſayd, but not
puniſhable here, but they are to be certified by the Steward
in Seſſions as aforeſayd. But the reſt of the matters
of the charge which enſue, are enquireable and preſentable,
and be alſo puniſhable here in Léete, but not
certified as the other were.
            
            
               Thoſe things which hereunder follow, are
to be preſented in Leete, and alſo
to be puniſhed there.
               FIrſt you ſhall enquire if all your Conſtables,Conſtables, Hedboroughs. Hedboroughs,
Deſiners, and all other ſuitors which owe
any ſuite hither, be here or not, & preſent all their names
that make default.
               
                  
Alſo if any haue dwelt within the Lordſhip the ſpace
of a yeare and a day,Of th'age of xii. yeares. and be of th'age of xii. yeares, and
not ſworne to the Quéene to be true and faythfull, this
is inquirable.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any of the Lords Villaines
be fugitiue,Villanies. and remayne elſwhere out of the Lordſhip,
and be not in the alegiance of the King a yeare and a day,
preſent the ſame.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any Cuſtomes,Cuſtomes. or ſeruices
due to this Court be holden backe, how, by whome, and
in what Baylies time the ſame was, and preſent the
ſame.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any Purpreſtures bée made
vpon the Land,Purpreſtures. wood, or water, with blockes, ſtakes,
ditch, hedge, or by, or with any other thing done to the
noyſance of the people, that is to ſay, to the multitude,
and not onely to one: alſo if any walles, houſes, pales or
hedges be made or erected to the noyance of the people,
this is to be preſented.
               Alſo if any common high wayes,High wayes, waters, ditches or pathes. waters, ditches or
pathes be turned out of their Courſes, it is to be enquired
of.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any encrochment be made
on the Quéenes high wayes,Encrochment. of any of the Lords ſoyle,
Common, or one neighbour vpon another, and preſent
it.
               Alſo if any Laſtalles be made in high wayes to the
noyſance of the people,Laſtalles, or if any carryon be caſt in the
high way,Carrion. this is inquireable.
               Alſo if any commonly breake the peace,Make frayes. as making
of frayes in diſturbance of the people, this is enquirable.
               Alſo if there be any common Barretors in the Lordſhip,Cōmon Barretors
as ſcolders and brawlers to the noyance and diſturbance
of their neighbours,Breakers of pound. preſent their names.
               Alſo if any breake the common Pounde, to take a

diſtreſſe out of the ſame, preſent their names.
               Alſo if any Outcries be made againſt the Lawes in
diſturbance of the people,Outcries againſt the law. it is to be enquired of.
               Alſo if any Reſcous be made within the Segniorie
vpon the Sheriffe or his Bayliffes,Reſcous made againſt the Sheriffe or his officers. or vpon any of the
Kings Officers, in diſturbing of them to take any perſon
to be arreſted, it is to be enquired of.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any Euiſdroppers which
ſtand vnder walles or windowes,Euiſdroppers. by night or day, to
heare tales and to carrie them to others, to make ſtrife
and debate betwéene their neighbours, preſent their
names.
               Alſo if there be any common breakers of hedges,Breakers of hedges. preſent
their names.
               Alſo if any kéepe and mayntaine anie Baudry in
their houſes,Keeping of bawdrie. it is cauſe of breaking the peace and is a
vice that corrupteth the Common weale, and for that
cauſe it is here to be enquired of.
               Alſo if there be any Vagabonds,Vagabonds. and thoſe which
walke by night,Roberts men. and ſléepe in the day, alſo if there be any
that be common hunters of Tauernes or Alehouſes,
hauing nothing to liue vpon,To go on meſſage for Theeues. they are to be enquired of.
               Alſo if any goe in meſſage for théeues, it is to bee enquired
of.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any perſon haue watered
any hemp or flaxe in any Riuer,For corrupting the waters. running water, ſtreame
or brooke, or in any common ponde where beaſts doe vſe
to drinke, they ſhall forfeit for euery time ſo doing, one
pound, the one parte to the partie grieued, or any other
which will ſue fo the ſame in the Léete, by action of debt,
Bill, plaint, information or otherwiſe, and preſent the
offendors.
               Alſo if any haue and vſe any meaſures of buſhelles,Falſe waights.
gallons, Yarde or Ell, or falſe Ballances, or pounds,
they are to be enquired of.
               Alſo if any vſe double poundes,Double waights. or meaſures, that is

to ſay, one little or ſmall weight to ſell by, and a greater
to buy with, in deceiuing the people, the ſame is to be
enquired of.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire of th'aſſiſe of Bread and Ale,Aſsiſe of Bread and Ale.
that the ſame be kept, that is to ſay, that euery one ſell
according vnto the rate and price of grayne, and that the
ſame be made holeſome for man, and hereof enquire.
               Alſo if Tiplers ſell by cuppes or diſhes, or meaſures
vnſealed and not ſealed,Tiplers. it is enquirable.
               Alſo if Butchers,Butchers and al other victualers do ſel holſome meate at a reaſonable price. Fiſhmongers, or other victuallers
ſell any corrupt victuall, not holeſome for mans body, it
is enquirable: alſo that all other that ſell victuall, if they
ſell the ſame at a reaſonable price, and not to be exceſſiue,
hauing regard to the prices how victualles bee ſolde in
places neere thereabouts, and he that is conuicted, ſhall
pay double that he hath receiued to the partie damnified,
and the ſame is to be enquired of.
               Alſo that Hoſtelers doe not ſell Hay,Hoſtler for ſelling his Hay & Otes. nor Otes but
at reaſonable prices, and that they doe not take for the
Buſhell, but a halfepenny ouer the common price in the
Market, and that they take nothing for litter, and this
is enquireable.
               An Hoſtler may bake his bread for horſes in his houſe
in any thorough fare Towne,Hoſtler may bake his bread. which is no Citie where
common Bakers dwell, and if he bake and not make
the ſame according to the prices of graine, it is to be puniſhed
in Léete.
               Alſo if any Hoſtler or other perſon,Harbouring any ſuſpect perſon harbour any ſuſpected
perſons, perceiuing them to be of euill behauiour,
it is to be enquired of.
               Alſo if Millers take any exceſſiue tolle,Millers. it is to be enquired
of: and he ought to take for tolle but the twenty
or 23. grayne according vnto the cuſtome, and according
vnto the ſtrength of the water. Alſo if the Miller
within this Lordſhip change the graine which he hath
ground, it is enquirable.
               
                  
Alſo it is to be enquired if all the Artificers do make
good worke as they ought,Artificers. and if any make deceit in the
ſame, in deceiuing of the people, you ought to preſent
their names.
               Alſo if any Conſtable,Miſdemeanor of officers. Ale-taſter, Bayliffe, or any other
officers within this Lordſhip, haue well and truely
done their Offices or no, it is to be inquired.
               Alſo no Purueyor ſhall make any purueyance for
the King his houſe,Purueior. of any thing, to the value of fortie
ſhillings or vnder, except he make ready payment to the
partie, vpon loſing his office, and to pay the value to the
partie grieued: and if he doe the contrary, if the Steward
or Tythingman, vpon complaint to them make no
reſiſtance to the Purueyour, they ſhal forfeit to the partie
grieued, the value of the thing taken, and double damages
and this is the miſdemeanour of theſe Officers,Peace and watch.
and of thoſe miſdemeauours, and of all others, the Officers
are enquirable. Alſo the Conſtable ought to ſee the
peace and watch to be obſerued as it ought.
               If any Treaſure bée found, that is to ſay, put in the
earth,Treaſure foūd. and no man knoweth who hid the ſame, this is the
Kings, except the Lord haue the ſame by ſpecial wordes,
or by preſcription.
               If any Eſtraies be, they are enquirable, & that is, if any
horſe,Eſtraies. pigges, hogges, cattell or Swannes, which
haue come into this Lordſhip & haue béen there a yeare
and a day, and not claymed, then the Lord may haue the
propertie of the ſame by preſcription, but the ſame ought
firſt to be impounded in an open pounde, proclaymed in
thrée markets next adioyning, and if none claime them,
then they ſhalbe ſeaſed, and ought to be put into ſome ſeuerall
land, and not in any couert or wood, where the
owner cannot finde them, for if they be in couert the propertie
is not changed, though they be there a yeare and
a day.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any Théefe vponWaiſe.
                  
hue and crie, or otherwiſe doth waiſe his goods, that is
to ſay, doth leaue or forſake his goods, or any percell of
them, which he hath ſtolne, by reaſon whereof the King
is ſeiſed thereof or the Lord by the graunt of the King:
ſuch goods are called waifes, and therefore preſent the
ſame: alſo if any officer ſeaſe vpon any Théefes goods,
though there be no purſuite made in theſe caſes, the
King or the Lord by graunt or preſcription ſhall haue
theſe goods, &c.
               If anie flie,He that fl
                        •
                     eth. that is to ſay, if any be found by Inditement
of murther before the Coroner, or if he be indited
of Fellony, and acquited and found that he flieth, then
he ſhall forfeit his goods to the king, and the Lord may
haue them by Charter, and not by preſcription, and this
is enquirable.
               If any horſe or mare be put vpon a waſte ground,Horſe or Mare ſcabbed.
and be ſcabbed, or hauing an infectious diſeaſe, hee ſhall
forfeit to the Lord of the viz. Franc. Pleg. tenne ſhillings
and this is enquirable.
               If any Exigent be awarded againſt one endited of
Fellony,Exigent. by the kéeping of his goods, they are forfeite,
though after he be acquited of Fellonie, and the King
ſhall haue his goods, and the Lord by Charter, and not
by preſcription without Charter, and this is enquireable.
               If any be outlawed in debt,Outlawed. Treſpaſſe, or other perſonall
action, his goods be forfeited, and the King ſhall
haue them and not the Lord, except it be by Charter, and
not by preſcription, and this is enquireable.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if the cōmon Fine haue béene
here to be payde according to the cuſtome.Commō Fine. and whether
the ſame be gathered according vnto the vſage, this is
commonly gathered by the Hedborough.
               Note that euery one that hath view of Franc. Pleg.
ought to haue Pillorie and Stocks to do Iuſtice:Stocks. alſo in
euery town where there is a Léete, there ſhall be ſtocks,

and for default thereof the town ſhal forfeit fiue pounds,
and the ſame is enquireable.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any haue vſed in any
of their garments,Appare▪
                   Veluet, Satten, Damaſke, Taffata,
Sarcenet, Chamlet, or any furres, as Foynes, Ienets,
Martines, Squirrell, Foxe, Graie, Conie, Hare, or other
Furres growing within this Land, or golde, or ſiluer,
in or vpon any of their garments, otherwiſe then
the Statutes made in the 24. yeare of H. 8. and 1.
and 2. of Phil. and Marie doe allow, you ſhall preſent
the offendors.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any Baker,Victualle
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   Bruer,
Butcher, Cooke, Tipler, &c. doe take exceſſiue gayne or
no: alſo whether they conſpire, couenant, promiſe or
make any oth not to ſell victuall, but at a certaine price,
and preſent the ſame.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any Artificers,Artificers. workmen,
or, laborers haue conſpired promiſed, or made any othes
that they will not make or doe their workes but at certaine
priſes, or not to finiſh that which another hath begun,
or wil doe but certayne worke in a day, preſent
them for they ſhall forfeit certaine penalties, 24. H. 8.
Cap. 12.
               Alſo you ſhal enquire if any man being the Quéenes
ſubiect not lame or maymed,Archers. not hauing any lawful impediment,
being within the age of forty yeares, except
ſpirituall men, and Iuſtices, doe vſe and exerciſe ſhooting
in long-bowes, and whether the fathers of ſuch as be of
tender yeares, doe bring vp their children in the knowledge
of ſhooting, and whether euery man childe of ſixe
yeares and vpward, haue a bowe and foure ſhaftes: if
they haue not, their gouernors ſhall forfeit certaine penalties:
preſent therefore ſuch offendors.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if the Buttes bee made and
continued,Buttes. & if your Buts be not made and continued, ye
ſhal forfeit for euery 3. moneths for default thereof xx.s.
               
                  
Alſo you ſhall enquire if any Tanner haue offered to
be ſould any hide of Bull,Tanners, Curriers, and tanned leather. Oxe, Stéere or Cow gathed or
cut, whereby the ſame is deminiſhed, he ſhall forfeite for
euery one twelue pence.
               Alſo no Currter ought to currie any leather in a
Shoomakers houſe,Curriers. and none ought to currie any leather
euill tanned.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if there be any Crow-nets, if
there be not,Crow-nets, and Crow-neaſts. the Lord ſhall haue the moytie of ten ſhillings,
which ſhall be forfeited by the Pariſh or Towne
for not hauing the ſame. Alſo if they deſtroy not the
Crow-neſts when they begin to bréede, they ſhall be amerced.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any perſon by any meanes
haue taken and killed any yong broode Spaune or Frie,For the taking and killing of fiſh.
of Salmon, Eeles, Pikes, or any other fiſh in any
Streame, Riuer, Brooke, Floodgate, or in the tayle of any
Mill, and preſent the offenders. And further, when
any perſon hath taken in any of the places aforeſayd, any
Salmons, or Trowtes out of ſeaſon, or any Pikes
or Pikerels not being in length ten ynches, or any Barbell
not being in length twelue ynces, or any Salmons
not ſixtéene ynches: If any haue done ſo, they ſhall forfeite
certaine penalties.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any breake by day or night
the head or damme of any Pond,Breaking the head of any pond. Poole, or Moate, within
which the Lord hath fiſh, to the entent to ſcatter, ſteale,
and deſtroy the fiſh, he ſhall pay to the Lord treble dammages,
and ſhall be impriſoned thrée moneths, and after
finde ſureties for ſeuen yeares of his good abearing.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any doe hunt Déere out of
the Lords lande,Hunting of Deere. or kill any of his Déere, and preſent
them.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any perſon doo kéepe or maintaine
any Common houſe,Vnlawfull games. Alley, or place of Bowling,
Quaytes, Cayles, Tenniſe, Dicing, Tables, or Carding,

or any other vnlawfull games, and preſent them:
if they doe they ſhall forfeite certaine penalties. Alſo
you ſhall enquire if any perſon doe haunt the ſayd houſes
and places. Alſo further you ſhall enquire if your Conſtables
and other officers doe make true ſearch in ſuch
places which be ſuſpected to be frequented with any vnlawfull
games, yea or no, if they doe not they ſhall forfeite
certaine penalties, you ſhall therefore preſent ſuch
offenders. 33. H. 8. Cap. 9.
               No ſtoned Horſe being of the age of two yeares,Horſes. except
he be fourtéene handfuls high, ſhalbe put to paſture in any
Common, Forreſt, or Chaſe, vpon paine of forfeiting
the ſame Horſe. Alſo the ſayd lands ought to be yearely
driuen at Michaelmas by the Lord, Tything men, Conſtables,
&c. or within fiftéene daies after, vpon paine of
fortie ſhillings: and if vpon the ſame driuing there be
found any Mare, Fole, or Gelding, not able to beare
Foles, or not able to doe profitable ſeruice, the ſame ſhal
be ſlaine and buried. 32. H. 8. cap. 13.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if the inhabitants after Robberies
and Fellonies committed,Hue and crye. doe make freſh ſuite
from towne to towne, or from Countie to Countie, or
from Hundred to Hundred, according to the Statute of
Wincheſter. 13. E. 1. cap. 2. For if a man be robbed in the
day time, and the Théefe eſcape and is not taken within
halfe a yeare after the Robberie, for lacke of Hue and
crye, the Borough or Hundred ſhall anſwere to the partie
all his goods and damages. Alſo if any perſon be killed
in a Towne in the day time, and the murtherer or
manſlayer eſcape, not taken nor arreſted by thoſe of the
Towne, then the Towneſhip ſhall be amerced. 18. E. 2.
               Alſo you ſhal enquire if your Conſtables and Churchwardens
haue appoynted any ſurueiour for the mending
of high wayes,For the mending of high wayes. leading to Market townes or no, and if
any choſen, refuſe the ſame office, he ſhall pay twentie
ſhillings. Alſo you ſhall enquire whether the ſame ſurueiours

haue taken vpon them the ſayd office, and put
the ſame in execution: and whether the Pariſhoners haue
done their duties, and preſent all thoſe that haue offended
contrarie to the ſame Statute, for the offenders ſhall
forfeite certaine penalties.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if the ditches be ſcoured,Scouting of ditches & cutting of hedges. and
buſhes cut according to the Statute made in the firſt
yere of Q. Elizabeth, for not doing of the ſame they ſhal
forfeite ten ſhillings.
               The moytie of all the forfeitures for theſe Statutes,Nota.
the Churchwardens ſhal haue to beſtowe vpon the high
wayes.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any perſon haue watered any
Hempe or Flaxe in any Riuer,For watering hempe or flaxe running water, Streame
or Brooke, or other common ponde where beaſts doe vſe
to drinke, they ſhall forfeite for euery time ſo doing one
pound, the one part to the partie grieued, or any other
which will ſue for the ſame, and ſhall giue a remedie to
ſue for the ſame in Léete by action of debt, bill, plaint,
information or otherwiſe.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any refuſe to come to
Muſters before any perſon authoriſed to take the ſame,Muſters.
he ſhall be impriſoned for ten daies, except he pay to the
King fortie ſhillings: and if any perſon appoynted to
take Muſters receiue any money to releaſe any appointed
to ſerue, he ſhall forfeite ten times ſo much as that he
receiued. 4. & 5. P. M cap. 3.
               If any perſon to the number of twelue,Ryots. make an vnlawfull
aſſemblie, as in breaking of Bankes, Encloſures,
Parkes, Fiſhponds, Barnes, Houſes, and ſuch
like, and proclamation be made by the Sheriffe or Iuſtice
of Peace that they depart, and notwithſtanding
they remaine together an houre after proclamation
made, euery ſuch attempt is Felonie. Alſo euery Copyholder
being a Yeoman, Huſbandman or labourer, of
the age of eightéene yeares, and vnder thréeſcore, not

ſicke, nor hauing a reaſonable excuſe, and being required
by the Iuſtice, Sheriffe, &c. to apprehend thoſe perſons
aforeſayd, and refuſe, ſhall forfeite his eſtate during his
life, and his Lord may enter. Alſo the Farmer being a
Yeoman, &c. refuſing, is in the ſame caſe to his Landlord.
Alſo it is Felonie if any perſon without compulſion,
bring, ſende, or deliuer any money, harneſſe, artillerie,
weapons, or victuals, to any perſon aſſembled in ſuch
manner. Alſo the Iuſtice of Peace or other officer may
raiſe a power to ſuppreſſe them: and if any officer kill any
ſuch rebellious perſons, or maime them, they ſhall be
free: and if any perſon knowe of any ſuch pretended rebellion,
and doe not openly declare the ſame within xx.
houres next after ſuch knowledge, he ſhalbe impriſoned
for thrée moneths without bayle or mainepriſe, if he be
not diſcharged by a Iuſtice of Peace: alſo he that letteth
or hindereth that proclamation that the ſame bee not
made, committeth Felonie.
               
                  Anno quinto Eliza. cap. 1.Of the Queene and aſſurance of her power. If any extoll or ſet forth the
authoritie of the Biſhop of Rome againſt the forme of
this Eſtatute, he ſhall encurre the daunger of a Premunire,
and this Eſtatute is to be declared in Léete.
               None may trace,Tracing of Hares. deſtroy, or kill a Leueret in the night
with dogge, or otherwiſe, and he that doth it ſhal forfeit
ſixe ſhillings eight pence. 14. H. 8. cap. 11.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if thoſe perſons which doe ſell
Wines be thereunto licenſed,Licenſes for Wine. according vnto the Statute
made in the vii. yeare of E. 6. &c. vpon a grieuous
paine and forfeiture, and for euery day occupying or ſelling
of Wine without licenſes. Alſo you ſhall enquire
how many there are licenſed, and preſent them. Of this
and all other matters and defaults you ſhall diligently
enquire and make a true preſentment.
            
            
               
               Then after the charge is giuen, the Steward ſhall commande
the Cryer to make proclamation, and after
proclamation made three times, the Steward ſhal ſay.
               IF any can enforme the Steward or this enqueſt of any
petie Treaſon, Felonie, petie Larcenie, Purpreſture,
breaking of Pounds, or of reſcues, or of any other
thing done againſt the peace, or of any perſon of euill behauiour
within the Léete, or of any Artificer that doth
make deceipt, or of any other miſdemeanour of any officer,
or other perſon here, or of any Waife or Stray,
Treaſure found, or of any other thing here to be enquired
of; come in and you ſhall be heard.
            
            
               Then if any come in he ſhall be ſworne to giue euidence
to the Iurie, and after that the Steward ſhall ſay to the
enqueſt.
               GOe you together and enquire of the matters of your
charge, and when you be agréed I ſhall be readie to
take your verdite.
            
            Finis del Charge de
Court Leete.
         
         
            
            THE ORDER OF
keeping Court Baron.
            
               The ſtile of the Court.
               
                  CVria Baronis M. L. ibidem tenta die
Martis,Overſtoy. videlicet decimo quarto die
Maij, Anno Regni Elizabeth Dei gratia
Angliae, Franc. & Hiberniae Reginae
fidei defenſoris, &c. 21. tent. per A. B. Seneſcallum.
               After the ſtile of the Court entered, you ſhall cauſe
the Bayliffe to crie once Oyes, and then call the
Iurors.
               
                  
                     
                        Examp.
                        
                           
                              Iohn Doe,
                              Richard Roe,
                              Iohn Den,
                              Richard Fen,
                              Walter Hellen
                              Robert Allen,
                           
                        
                        Iuratores.
                        
                           
                              Rob. Dodge,
                              Tho. Lodge,
                              Adam Clark,
                              Dauid Parke,
                              Henry Loe,
                              Williā Croe.
                           
                        
                        Homage.
                     
                  
               
               After the Iurie is called, the Bayliffe ſhall crie an
other Oyes, and then the Steward ſhall ſay:
               If any will be eſſoyned or enter any playnte, come
in and you ſhalbe heard.
               
                  
And after the Eſſoynes be entered, and your plaints
determined, then empanell the Iurie, and ſweare them.
               After th'enqueſt is empanelled and ſworne, make
another Oyes, and ſay, you good men which be empanelled,
come neare, and you and all other kéepe ſilence during
your charge.
            
            
               An exhortation to the Iurie.
               MY Maſters, you that be ſworne, before I giue you
your charge in this Court Baron, I thinke it good
to declare vnto you by what authoritie you are commaunded
to bée here, and for what cauſe. Chiefly you
are appoynted to be here for that you be the Lords Tenants,
and are bound by reaſon thereof to appeare at
the Lords Court Baron when it ſhal be kept according
vnto the lawe, that is to ſay, at euery thrée wéekes ende
being warned, and being by the ſame authoritie there to
end and determine Iniuries, Treſpaſſes, Debts, and other
actions, where the debt or damage is vnder fortie
ſhillings. And alſo that nothing be done within the Manour
hurtefull to the inheritance of the Lord of the Manour,
which ought to be enquired and preſented for the
Lord: and that you be the more diligent and carefull in
enquiring and preſenting the ſame, I haue miniſtred an
oth vnto you, which is the calling or taking to witnes of
God his name, to confirme the trueth of that you ſhall
ſay and preſent, minding neither fraud nor deceit, but
onely the trueth, not partiall, but ſéeking the glory of
God, the profite of your neighbours, and the common
weale of God his people.
            
            
               The Charge.
               FIrſt you ſhall enquire of the ſuitors which owe any
ſuite to this Court whether they be heires or noe, and

preſent their names that make default, for they which
be abſent ought to be preſent here as well as you, except
they haue ſome lawfull impediment to the contrarie, for
they holde their landes aſwell to doe their ſuite as to pay
their rent, ſo that if they doe not their ſuite they ſhall bee
amerced, or the Lord may haue good remedy for the ſame:
otherwiſe you ſhall vnderſtand, that euery common ſuitor
is bound to the lawes to appeare at the Lords Court
Baron at euery thrée wéekes ende:The tenants are bound to appeare at euery 3. weekes end at the Lords Court Baron notwithſtanding,
the Lord for your eaſe, (which he eſtéemeth more then
his owne profite ſuffereth the ſame to be kept but ſeldome,
as appeareth, for which cauſe euery of the Tenants
ought the more willingly to come vnto his
Court at ſuch times as he doth appoynt for the ſame: for
if they wilfully abſent themſelues, then they render euill
for good, and beſides that they incurre the daunger
of periurie, for when they did their Fealty, they were
ſworne to be true Tenaunts vnto their Lorde, and to
paie and doo all manner of ſuites, cuſtomes, and ſeruices
due for their Tenements, at their day aſſigned,
and therefore let euery man remember his oth and duety,
and doo his ſuites and ſeruices according to the ſame, or
elſe he ſhall fall into the daunger aforeſaide.
               Next you ſhall enquire whether there bee any Tenaunts
dead ſithence the laſt Court day or before,What tenants is dead ſince the laſt Court.
whoſe death as yet is not preſented, and you ſhall preſent
the ſame:What land he holdeth and by what ſeruice. alſo what Landes and Tenements he holdeth
of this Lordſhippe at the time of his death, and
by what ſeruices, that is to ſaie, whether it were by
Knights ſeruice, Socage, Tenure, or Copiholde, and
what aduantage the Lord ſhall haue by his death, as
Warde, Mariage, Beleefe, Eſcheate, Fine, Herriot,
&c.Alſo who is his next heire. and who is his next heire, and what age he is of,
and in whoſe kéeping, and preſent it. You ſhall vnderſtand
there be diuers manner of Tenures, but moſt men
doo holde by Knights ſeruice, or Socage tenure.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
Knights ſeruice is when the Tenant holdeth of the
Lord by Eſcuage,Knights ſeruice what it is. that is to ſay, by the ſeruice of the
ſhield, alſo to holde by Caſtle guarde, that is to ſay, to
kéepe a Caſtle, or Towre, or doore, or other place of his
Lords vpon reaſonable warning, whē the Lord heareth
ye enemies do come into England, y• is Knights ſeruice.
               Alſo he that holdeth by Homage,Homage, fealtie, & Eſcuage Knights ſeruice. Fealty, and Eſcuage,
holdeth by Knights ſeruice. Alſo he which holdeth
of his Lord to blow a horne to warne the men of that
countrey when enemies do come into England, holdeth
by Knights ſeruice,Knights ſeruice is done by the body of a man and Knights ſeruice ought alwayes
to be done by ye body of a man, and that ſeruice
draweth vnto it, Warde, Mariage, and Reléefe: for
when ſuch a Tenaunt dieth, ſeyſed, and his heire male
within age,Knights ſeruice draweth vnto it warde, mariage & releefe. and vnmaried, the Lord ſhall haue the land
holden of him, and alſo the mariage of him vntill he bée
of lawfull age, that is to ſay, the age of xxi. yeares. But
if ſuch a Tenant dieth ſeyſed, his heire female being of
the age of xiiii. yeares or more, then the Lord ſhal neither
haue the wardſhip of the Land, nor yet of her body,
for that the law entendeth, that a woman of that age
may haue a huſband able to doe knights ſeruice: and if
ſhe be within the age of xiiii. yeeres and vnmaried, then
the Lord ſhall haue the wardſhip of her land, and alſo
of her body vntill ſhe be of the age of xvi. yeares. And
ſome ſuch Tenants do holde by halfe a Knights ſeruice,
& ſome by halfe a Fée, & ſome by more, and ſome by leſſe:
& if ſuch a Tenant dyeth which holdeth by one Knights
Fée, & his heire being of full age, then the Lord ſhall haue
Homage and Fealtie, & alſo fiue pound for a Reléefe, & of
him which holdeth by half a Knights Fée, ii. pound x. ſhillings,
& he that holdeth by more ſhall pay more, & he that
holdeth by leſſe ſhall pay leſſe, you ſhall therefore preſent
whether any ſuch Tenant died ſeaſed of any ſuch lands &
Tenements ſo holden yea, or no.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any Tenaunt which

held by Knights ſeruice, made any Feoffement to his
heire, and after dyed, his heire being within age, yea or
no.
               And whether any ſuch Tenaunt made any alienation
of any ſuch land ſo holden to any perſon by colluſion,Alienation by colluſion and holding by Knights ſeruice to
defeate the Lord of his Warde, or other profites, yea or
no, and preſent that: for in all theſe caſes the Lord ſhall
haue the Warde and mariage of his heire, and alſo of his
lands, as well as if the ſayd Tenaunt had dyed ſeyſed of
the ſame land.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any ſuch Tenaunt
which held by Knights ſeruice,Feoffement a ſon vſe, the land holden in Knights ſeruice did make any Feoffment
by déede to his vſe, or any Recognizance by fine to his
vſe, or ſuffer any recouerie againſt him to his vſe, and after
dyed, and no Will by him declared, and preſent it:
for in thoſe caſes alſo the Lord ſhall haue reliefe of his
heire, being of full age, and other dueties, aſwell as if his
Tenaunt had dyed ſeyſed.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether the heire of ſuch Tenaunt,
entred into any ſuch lands ſo holden,Entre for condition broken. for any condition
broken, being made by any of his aunceſtors, and
preſent it.
               And whether any ſuch Tenaunt hath entred into any
houſe of Religion,Entre into Religion. and is there profeſſed yea or no, and
preſent it: for in theſe caſes the Lord likewiſe ſhall haue
ſuch profites, as hee ſhould haue had if his Tenaunt had
dyed ſeyſed.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any Tenaunt which held by
Knights ſeruice,Diſſeiſin of the tenaunt, & death before any reentree. was diſſeiſed of lands ſo holden, that is
to ſay, put out of them by one which had no rightfull
title to the ſame, and after dyed before any reentree, or
ny lawfull recouerie had, and preſent it, for the Lord
ſhall haue the wardſhip of the bodie of the heire and of
his lande, as well as if his Tenaunt had dyed thereof
ſeiſed.
               Socage Tenure is, as if the Tenaunt holdeth of the

Lord by fealtie and certaine rent for all manner of ſeruices,What Socage tenure is.
or by homage and fealtie for all manner of ſeruices,
or by fealtie onely for all manner of ſeruices, or to pay a
ſumme of money for eſcuage, or to pay a certaine ſumme
of money for Caſtle gard: al ſuch Tenures are Tenures
in Socage: and all other Tenures which are no Tenures
by Knights ſeruice, are Tenures in Socage: and
where ſuch Tenaunts dye ſeyſed of any lands ſo holden,
the Lord of whom the land is ſo holden, after the death
of his Tenaunt, can haue no more profite but onely his
fealtie and reliefe,Reliefe is as much money as one yeares rent. that is to ſay, as much money and ſeruice
as one yeres rent doth amount vnto. As if the Tenaunt
held by fealtie, and ten ſhillings for a Reliefe, ouer
and beſides the ten ſhillings which he ſhall pay for his
rent, and in ſuch caſe after the death of the Tenaunt,
ſuch reliefe is due to the Lords maintenance, ſo that the
heire be of the age of xiiii. yeares, and he ought to tarrie
for his reliefe vntill the day of payment of the rent, but
he ought to haue his reliefe maintenant, and for that he
may diſtraine immediatly after the death of his Tenaunt.
               Alſo if a Copyholder dye ſole ſeyſed of any lands or
Tenements ſo holden,A Copyholder dyeth. his heire being of the age of xiiii.
yeares, then he ſhall pay a fine vnto the Lord and doe
fealtie, and be admitted Tenant: but if the heire be within
the age of xiiii. yeares, then ſome Garden ſhall be admitted
to occupie his Copyhold, and to pay and to doe
his ſeruice due for the ſame, that is to ſay, if lands diſcend
from the father, then the mother or ſome of her next kin
ſhall haue the occupation of the ſame lands, vntill the
heire be of the age of fouretéene yeares, and they ſhall
a little fine for the Gardenſhip, and the heire at his entrie
ſhall pay the whole fine, you ſhall enquire thereof
and preſent the ſame.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any Tenaunt which
held by Socage Tenure, did make any Feoffment in fée

to his vſe, and dyed ſeyſed of the vſe, his heire being within
age, and no Will by him declared of the vſe, and preſent
it: for the Lord ſhall haue his reliefe, as well as if he
had dyed ſeyſed of the ſame lands.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any Fréeholder hath
aliened or ſould away his Fréehold lands or tenements,Whether any Freeholder hath aliened any of his freehold lands.
or any parcell of them, and preſent it: for he which hath
bought the land, before he enter, ought to come and giue
notice vnto the Lord that he hath bought the ſame, and
ſo the Lord ſhall knowe his Tenaunt, and the ſeruice
which the former payd vnto the Lord, ſhall be apportioned
according vnto the valew of the lands.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any which held by
Herriot ſeruice,Herriot ſeruice Herriot cuſtome. or Herriot cuſtome, dyed ſeyſed of any
lands or Tenements ſo holden, and preſent it, for their
ſeruice ſhall be apportioned: alſo the Lord ſhall haue of
euery of their ſeuerall parts diuers Herriots at their ſeuerall
deaths: alſo if one man haue two ſeuerall parcels
of lands holden by Herriot ſeruice, and by two ſeuerall
titles, and dyeth ſeyſed of the ſame, the Lord ſhall haue
after his death two Herriots.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any Copyholder dyed ſeyſed
of any lands ſo holden,Whether any Copyholder dyeth ſeyſed of any ſuch lands and preſent it: alſo whether any
Copyholder hath made any leaſe of his Copyhold, or otherwiſe
aliened or ſould the ſame, and preſent it, for it is
a forfeiture of his Copyhold: for if a Copyholder will alien
or ſell away his Copyhold, he ought to come into the
Court and ſurrender the ſame into the hands of the
Lord, to the vſe of him which ſhall haue the ſtate, or els
out of the Court he ought to ſurrender it vnto the Bayliffe,
or to ſome of the Tenaunts of the Lordſhip,How a Copyholder ought to ſurrēder his Copyhold to the
vſe of him which ſhall haue the ſtate, and they to whom
the ſurrender is made, ought to preſent the ſame at the
next Court, and then pay his ſine for the ſame, and take
it to his vſe in the Court, and doe his endeuour to be admitted,
and if he be not at the ſame Court, then the Lord

ſhall haue the meane profites of the ſame lands, all the
rent ſeruices and reparations being deducted, vntil he be
amerced of his fine according to his dutie.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any Copyholder hath made
any ſurrender of his Copyhold,Whether any Copyholder hath made any ſurrender. or any part thereof
ſithence the laſt Court day, or before, and preſent it, and
into whoſe hands it was made, and in whoſe preſence, or
to whoſe vſe: for at euery ſurrender the Lord ought to
haue a fine, and the partie into whoſe hands the ſurrender
is made, ought to come to the next Court, and
preſent the ſame, & to yéeld vp his right into the Lords
hands, to the vſe of the alienée, according vnto ye truſt repoſed
in him, or otherwiſe he forfeiteth his Copyhold,
except he haue a reaſonable excuſe: for that he doth as
much as he may to defeate the Lord of his fine, and alſo
to defeate the other partie to whoſe vſe the ſurrender
was made.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any Tenaut of the Lordſhip
haue giuen any lands into imortemane,Mortmaine. & preſent it.
               Mortemaine is if a man giue or ſell any landes to any
houſe of religion, or to any other which be corporate
by the Knights graunt: alſo if one make a Feoffement
vpon truſt to the vſe of an houſe of religion, or to the
vſe of a Guilde or fraternitie Corporate, that is mortemayne.
               Alſo if one exchange landes or Tenements with
an Abbot or other body corporate, this is mortemaine.
Alſo if a man of religion or other body corporate doth
holde of any man by Knights ſeruice, and hée releaſe
vnto him this his mortemaine, and then the King or
L. may enter, & ſhall haue the ſame by force,A ſtatute made thereof that the king or Lord ſhall haue the ſame. you ſhall
therefore preſent them that haue giuen any landes or
Tenements in mortemayne.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any Tenaunt for
tearme of life or yeares, or any copyholder of this Lordſhippe
hath made any waſte,Waſte. or ſuffered any waſte to

be done vpon their lands and Tenements, yea or no.
               Waſt is as when any Tenaunt for tearme of life,What waſt 
                        〈◊〉
                      and how the ſame is done
yeares, or any Copyholder pulleth downe any houſe, or
cutteth downe any Timber, Trées, or ſuffereth the
houſe willingly to fall, being on their Copie tenements,
or if any of the Tenaunts plough vpon any medowe
ground, or if they ſuffer any wall or pale which were couered
to be vncouered, by reaſon whereof the ſame wall
or pale doth fall in decay, or if any of them digge coales
chalke, or ſande, or make any Mines in their grounds,
then they make waſt. Alſo if they fell a trée to the valew
of thrée ſhillings foure pence, this is admitted waſt:
but if a man cut downe Timber to repaire the olde houſes
which ſtand vpon parcell of the ſame ground, and
therewith doth repaire them, then it is no waſt: but if he
with the Timber build a newe houſe, then the cutting
downe of ſuch timber is waſt: Or if he cut downe any
timber to ſell, to repaire ſuch houſes which are fallen in
decay, ſuch is waſt. But if waſt be done with a Tempeſt,
no Tenaunt ſhall be puniſhed for ſuch waſt: but if
waſt be done by any daunger, the Tenaunt ſhall be puniſhed
for ſuch waſt. Alſo it is no waſt to fell in a reaſonable
time ſuch trées as haue béen felled within twentie
yeares before: but if a Tenaunt cut downe ſuch trées
to burne vpon their Tenemēts, where they haue wood
ſufficient, this is waſt. Alſo a Copyholder may not cut
downe wood to ſell, but he may to burne, vpon his Tenement,
or to make reparations as aforeſayd.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any Tenaunt in poſſeſſion
or reuerſion dyed ſeaſed of any lande or Tenements
holden of this Lordſhip,Whether any tenant in poſſeſsion or reuerſion dyed ſeaſed without any heire. hauing no heire at the
time of his death, yea or no, and preſent it, for then the
Lord ſhall haue the land holden of him by Eſcheate. You
ſhall vnderſtand that none ſhall haue lands in fée ſimple
as heires vnto any man, vnleſſe he be heire of the whole

blood: for if a man haue iſſue two ſonnes by diuers women,
and dyeth ſeyſed of the ſame land, and the eldeſt entreth
and dyeth without iſſue, the yongeſt ſhall not haue
the land as heire vnto the brother, becauſe he is of the
halfe blood, but ſome other heire of the fathers ſide ſhall
inherite the ſame land, and if he haue no heire on the fathers
ſide, then the next heire on the mothers ſide ſhall
not haue the land, but the Lord of whom the land is holden
ſhall haue the land by Eſcheate, and ſo when land
deſcendeth on the mothers ſide, the heire on the mothers
ſide ſhall enherite, and not the heires of the fathers ſide.
Alſo you ſhall vnderſtand,A baſtard may not inherite. that a Baſtard can neuer be
heire vnto any man, nor yet haue heire vnto himſelfe:
therefore if any Baſtard, or any other Tenaunt haue
dyed ſeyſed without heires, you ſhall preſent it.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any Tenaunt was ſeyſed of
any lands or Tenemēts,Whether any tenant dyed being put out of lands which he had no right. and was put out of his land by
one which had no rightfull title, and afterward dyed
without any heire, the Lord ſhall haue his Eſcheate as
well as if his Tenaunt had dyed ſeyſed.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any Tenaunt of this
Lordſhip hath committed any petie Treaſon,Petie treaſon, felony or murder committed of any tenant, for which he was hanged, or had iudgement to be hanged. Felonies,
or Murders, for the which he was hanged, or for the
which he had iudgement to be hanged, though afterward
he payed his charge and was deliuered to the Ordinarie,
and preſent it. And whether any Tenant hath
committed any petie Treaſon, Felonie or Murder, for
the which he hath forſworne the Land, for the which he
was outlawed, or for the which he was beheaded, or for
the which he was ouercome by wager of battaile, or by
death, and preſent it: for in all theſe caſes the Lord of
whom the lands are holden,Whether there be any rents loſt, or ſeruices withdrawne. ſhall haue the lands by Eſcheate,
and alſo the euidences concerning the ſame.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if there bee any Rents, Cuſtomes
or ſeruices withdrawne frō the Lordſhip, which
of right ought to be done, and preſent it, and what rents,

cuſtomes and ſeruices they are, and by whom they are
withdrawne, and where the land lyeth, that the Lord
may haue the remedie for the arrerages thereof.Whether the tenaunts doe vphold and repaire their tenements.
               
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether the Copyholders or
the Farmers of this Lordſhip doe vphold and repayre
their Tenements, yea or no, and preſent the ſame. You
ſhall vnderſtand that euery Tenaunts is bound to thrée
things: firſt, that he be true Tenaunt to his Lord: ſecondly,
that he ſufficiently repayre his Tenements: and
thirdly, that he pay and doe all ſuites, cuſtomes, and ſeruices
at his daies aſſigned: for he tooke vpon him ſo to doo
when he did his fealtie: & if he doe not pay his ſuites, cuſtomes
& ſeruices, the Lord ſhall haue good remedie & recouer
the ſame with his damages: & if he be a Copyholder,
and do the contrarie, he doth forfeite his Copyhold.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any Tenant of this Lordſhip
which is bound by reaſon of his Tenure to doe ſuite vnto
the Lord,Whether any tenaunt haue withdrawne his ſeruices. will doe the ſame yea or no, and preſent it: and
whether any haue vſed to withdraw their ſuite from the
Lord his Mill, in not grinding their corne there, yea or
no, and preſent it.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any Waife or Stray,Waife and Stray.
is, or was within this Lordſhip, and whether the Lord
bee anſwered of the ſame, yea or no, if not, preſent by
whom they are conueyed away: alſo you ſhall enquire
if any Herryot be conueyed away, yea or no, and preſent
it, and by whom.
               A Waife is if a théefe vpon hue and crye and purſuite
after him,What a Waife is. or otherwiſe to eaſe himſelfe of his cariage,
without hue and crye doth waife his goods, that is to ſay,
doth leaue and forſake his goods which he hath ſtolne, or
any parcel of thē, by reaſon whereof y• King, or any other
Lord or officer in his right, or in his own right do ſeaſe y•
goods, in thoſe caſes ye goods ſo ſeaſed are called Waifes, &
the ſame law is, if any officer take any goods of a théefe,
ſuſpecting that he hath ſtolne them, though there bée no

purſuite made, and in theſe caſes, the King, or els the
Lord by reaſon of a graunt made by the King, or by preſcription
ſhall haue the goods ſo waifed, if the owner of
them doe not make freſh ſuite after the Théefe to attaint
him for ſtealing of the ſame goods: which freſh ſuite
if he make, he ſhall haue his goods agayne, though they
be waifed, but then he muſt ſue an appeale, and ſo haue
them.
               An eſtray is as when any Horſe,What an eſtray is. Mare, Oxe, Shéepe,
or other Beaſts are in the Lordſhip, and no man knoweth
the owner of them, they ſhall bée ſeaſed vnto the
vſe of the King, or to the Lord which hath ſuch an eſtray
by the King his graunt, or by preſcription, and if the
owner come and make claime within a yeare and a
day, then he ſhall haue it agayne, or els after the yeare
and the day the propertie thereof ſhall bée to the King,
or els to the Lord which hath the ſame by graunt or preſcription,
ſo that the Lord make proclamation thereof,
according to the lawe, in the next markets, and in the
Church.
               Alſo you ſhal enquire whether any perſon haue made
reſcues againſt the Lord,Reſcous. or any other officer, and preſent
it.
               Reſcous is when the Lord diſtreyneth in the land holden
of him for his rent, or ſeruices behind, or if the Lord
come vpon the lands and would diſtreyne, and the Tenaunt
or ſome other will not ſuffer him, that is Reſcous.
Alſo if the Lord diſtreine for ſeruice behinde, or for
damage feſaunt, and in driuing Cattell to pound, the
Beaſtes enter into the houſe of the owner, if in ſuch
caſe he that diſtreyneth doth pray deliuerance, and the
poſſeſſor will not deliuer them, that is a Reſcous,
therefore you ſhall preſent it, if Reſcous haue béene
made.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any perſon hath broken
the Lords pound,Breach of pound. that is, to haue taken away a diſtreſſe

put in, yea or no, and preſent it. You ſhall vnderſtand,
that if the Lord doe diſtraine any Tenaunt for
Rent, or ſeruice behinde, he may impound the ſame diſtreſſe
in a common pound if hee will, or in his owne
ground, or in his neighbours if hée will, by the licence of
his neighbour, and all thoſe places in which the Lord
doth impound any Cattell, are called the Lords pound,
but not alwayes when another doth impound any diſtreſſe
in his owne pound or in his neighbours: It behoueth
him to giue notice to the other partie, for that if
the diſtreſſe be quick he may giue it meate, and then if
the beaſt die for want of foode, hee that was diſtrayned
ſhall be at the loſſe, and then he that diſtrayned before
may diſtrayne agayne for the ſame Rent or duety.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any Tenaunt of this Lordſhip,Whether any Tenant hath let any Farme fall to decay, viz. not maintayned for huſbandry as before.
hath let any Farme or houſe fall into decay, which
at any time ſithence the firſt yeare of the raigne of King
H. 7 hath béen let with twenty acres of land being in tilling,
yea or no, and preſent it, for if they ſuffer their
houſes to fal into decay, the Lord may take and diſtraine
for halfe of the iſſues and profites of the ſame, and kéepe
to his owne vſe vntill ſuch times as the houſes ſhall bée
ſufficiently builded and repayred, that is to ſay, mayntayned
againe for huſbandry.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any inhabitance or common
haue ouercharged the cōmon or high wayes, or your cō
                  mon
fieldes, by putting in more Cattell then they ought
to kéepe, and whether any of them hath put their Cattel
in any their commons aforeſayd, before the dayes agréed
vpon, and preſent it, for the Lord as it ſéemeth may diſtrayne
the ſurpluſage, damage, Feſaunt, or elſe you
may make among your ſelues orders and lawes for your
owne profite, that none ſhall doe vpon payne of certain
penalties, &c. and by ſuch lawes the inhabitants & commoners
ſhall be bound, &c.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any perſon haue made any

pittes in the high wayes,Whether any pits be made in the high wayes, breaking of hedges hogs vnyoked, or vnringed. and whether any perſon doe
commonly vſe to breake hedges, and to ſuffer hogges to
got vnyoaked, or vnringed, to the annoyance of their
neighbors.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any perſon hath ſtrained
or ſtopped any wayes, water, ditches, pathes, or turned
any of them into a wrong courſe,Stopping wayes, waters, &c. & preſent it.
               Alſo if any haue encroched any land of the Lordes,
that is to ſay, Land, Medowe, Paſture, Wood, Heath,
Moore,Whether anie haue encroched. or any other vacant land without licence of the
Lord, by ſetting of his hedge, pale, or otherwiſe, and preſent
the ſame.
               Note that all the vacant and waſte land within the
Manour, is to the Lord of the Manour.
               Alſo you ſhal enquire whether any perſon eared,Whether anie haue remoued anie markes plowed
vp, or remoued away any Méere marks, baulks or limites
betwéen one péece of land and another, & preſent it.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any haue ſtalked with a
buſh or beaſt to kill Déere which is in the Lords Chaſe
and Parke,Whether anie haue ſtalked with buſh or beaſt. and preſent it.
               Alſo you ſhal enquire if any perſon hath, or kéepeth away
any Euidences,Whether anie haue or doe keepe away any euidences Charters, or Court Rolles, Cuſtomarie
terres, or any other euidences which concerne the
Lordſhip, or any parcell therof, yea or no, and preſent it.
               Alſo you ſhal enquire if any perſon haue fiſhed, fouled,
hawked,Whether any haue fiſhed fouled, hawked. or hunted in this Lordſhip or Lords warren,
and preſent it.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any perſon haue taken any
Feſant,Whether anie haue taken any Feſants, &c. Partridges, with net, ſnare, or other engine vpō
the Fréehold of the L. of this Manour, and preſent it.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any haue taken away the
egges of the Lords Swannes out of their neſts,Swannes or ſwannes egges. and
preſent it.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any lande of the Lordes bée
kept backe,Concealed land. or occupied by any without the licence of the
Lord: alſo what land it is, & how much land hath béene

ſo occupied, and of what value by the yeare the ſame is,
and preſent it.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether the Lord haue any
villain within this Lordſhip,Whether the L. haue a villain within the Lordſhip. & what goods, cattels, and
landes he hath, what eſtate he hath, that the L. may ſeiſe
thereupon: alſo what other things he hath: alſo if any
villaine carie his goods out of this Lordſhippe without
licence of the Lord, or if any fréeman eſpouſe a wife without
licence of the Lord, you ſhall preſent the ſame. Note
if a villaine purchaſe land, and dooth alyen the ſame to
another before the Lorde enter, then the Lord after ſhal
not enter: otherwiſe it is if the Lord enter before the alienation
of ye villain: the ſame law is of goods, but the L.
may not ſeyſe of ye goods that ye villain hath as Executor.
               Alſo you ſhal enquire if any treſpaſſe be done in any
of the Lords liberty,Treſpaſſe in the corne, graſſe, &c. 
                  viz. in his corne, graſſe, Medowes,
paſture, woods, hedges, waters or ponds, or if any take
honie, ſwarmes of Bées, or any Hawkes, or eyrie of
Hawkes, or ſuch like treſpaſſe, and preſent them.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire if any land be encloſed,For incloſing in ſeueralty grounds without licence of of the L. &c. and the
ſame kept in ſeueraltie which ought to lie open, without
licence of the Lord and other fréeholders, you ſhall preſent
the ſame, for that no Tenaunt of the Lordſhip ſhall
looſe the Common in the ſame.
               Alſo if any Copyholder let his Copyholde land for
longer time then a yeare and a day without licence,A Copyholder may not let longer then a yeare & a daie.
except it be by cuſtome that he may let for longer time,
and if he doe, it is forfeiture, and preſent the ſame.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any Tenant of this
Lordſhip hath béen outlawed in any action of Treſpaſſe,Whether anie be outlawed.
or other action and preſent it: & whether the L. be anſwered
of his goods & cattels, yea or no, & preſent ye ſame.
               Alſo you ſhall enquire whether any Tenant for yeres
or life,Granting greater eſtates, &c. haue graunted any greater or larger eſtate then
they had in their landes or Tenements, yea or no, and
preſent it, for that is a forfeyture of their eſtate.
               
                  
Alſo you ſhall enquire if the Bayliffe,Whether the Bayliffe & other officers doe execute their office. Hedborough,
Conſtable, and Hay ward, and all other Officers haue
well and truelie executed their offices, yea or no, and preſent
it.
               To conclude, you ſhall enquire whether all the defaults
and plaints that were preſented at the laſt Court
be ſufficiently amended yea,Whether the defaults and playnts be amended. or no, and whether all the
orders and lawes heretofore made be obſerued and kept,
yea or no, and preſent it. And further, you ſhall enquire
for al things which in your conſciences you think ought
to be ſearched and enquired of, and by the othes that you
haue taken you ſhall truely and diligently enquire of all
the premiſes, and plainely without concealing of any
fault, bring in a true verdite in writing, ſubſcribed with
your owne handes, ſealed with your Seales, by ſuch an
houre, or as ſoone as you can.
               And finally if you ſhall know any thing that ought
to be preſented to the Lords aduantage, you ſhall do vs
to wéete by the Oth that you haue made, and bring vs in
a true preſentment. And nowe you may depart and enquire
of your charge, hauing a regarde of your Othes.
               
            
            Finis de le Charge de
Court Baron.
         
      
   