
      
         
            
               
               
To our very louing friends the Iuſtices of Aſsize for the Counties of Northampton, Warwicke, Leicester, Derbie, Nottingham, Rutland, and Lincolne.
            
            
               AFter our very heartie commendations. Whereas his Maieſtie was mooued for diuers iuſt and waightie conſiderations, to grant foorth his Letters Pattents for a generall Collection to be made within the Kingdome of England, and dominion of Wales, towards the repairing of the ancient Hauen of the Port Townes of Dunwich, Southwold, and Walberſwicke in the Countie of Suffolke: which being likewiſe recommended by Letters from this Board, to your beſt furtherance as a worke of great conſequence for the ſafety, and defence of that Coaſt. Information is now made vnto vs, that there are diuers ſummes of money collected in the ſeuerall Counties of England and Wales: which are detained by the Clerkes of the Peace, Church-wardens, and Conſtables, vnto whoſe hands the ſame are come. And foraſmuch as the foreſaid worke of repairing that Hauen being alreadie begunne, and with much labour and expence of great ſummes of money put in good forwardneſſe, will be in danger to be all loſt, and waſhed away with the Sea, vnleſſe ſome courſe be taken for a ſpeedie ſupplie of money to perfect the ſame: We haue thought good to pray, and require you, at the next Aſſiſes in each Countie throughout your Circuite, to giue publike and ſtrict Command to the Clerkes of the Peace, High Conſtables, and all others to whom it ſhall or may appertaine, that they faile not, at their perill, to returne, and pay in, at Fiſhmongers Hall in London, all ſuch moneys as are collected for this ſeruice, together with all the Briefes deliuered vnto them for collecting the ſame, betweene this and the end of Michaelmas Tearme next. Further, willing and requiring, all Maiors, Sheriffes, Iuſtices of Peace, Bailiffes, and all other his Maieſties Officers, to affoard their beſt aſſiſtance for the due performance of theſe directions. Of the accompliſhment wherof we purpoſe to take ſuch notice, as the neceſſitie and importance of the ſeruice requi
                  •
               eth. And ſo we bid you very heartily farewell.
            
               From Whit-hall this 12. of Iuly. 1620.
               
               Your very louing friends,

                     G. Cant.
                     Fr. Ʋerulam Canc.
                     E. Worcester.
                     Th. Arundell.
                     H. Southampton.
                     Kellie.
                     Robert Naunton.
                     Geo. Caluert.
                     Fulke Greuyll.
                     Iul. Caeſar.
                     Edw. Coke.
                     Lyonyll Cranfielde.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London by Robert Barker, and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings moſt excellent Maieſtie. 1620.
         
      
   