
      
         
            
            
            HEnricꝰ octauꝰ dei gr̄a Anglie & Frācie rex, fidei defenſor & dn̄s Hibernie, Maiori & vicecomitibꝰ Lōdon̄ ſaltm̄ vobis mādamꝰ quod imediate poſt receptionē preſentiū in ſingl is VVardis ꝑochiis & aliis locis infra Ciuitatē nr̄am Lōdon̄ & libertates eiuſdē vbi magis expediēs videritis exꝑtenr̄a publics ꝓclamarōes fieri fac̄. i hec verba.
            
               WHere at this preſent parliament begon at London ye thyrd day of Nouēbre in ye .xxi. yere of the riegne of our moſt dred ſouereyn lorde the Kynge, & from thens adiorned to weſtmiſtre, & there holdē & proroged by diuers and ſondry prorogations, & yet contynued. It is ordeyned & prouided emonges other thiges that Bochers ſhulde ſell by weyght beeff / and Porke / for a halfe penny the pounde, and Moton and Veale for a halfe penny and halfe farthynge the pounde, as by ye ſame acte more at large is conteyned For as moche as the Bochers of the ſayd Citye of London and of the ſuburbes of the ſame, can not ſo cōuenyently vtter and ſell theyr vytayles, at ſuche pryces as Bochers inhabyted in other partes of the realme may do, by reaſon that the ſayd Bochers, of London & of the ſuburbes of the ſame, aſwell for meyntenaunce of theyr houſes & ſeruauntes, & berynge lottes and ſkottes, by the ordres and cuſtomes of the ſayd Cytye, as for hyrynge of groundes, lyinge nygh ye ſame Citye for the preſeruacyon of theyr catelles tyll they be kylled, at ſuche hygh fermes and rentes: ben dayly put to moche more hyer, greater & exceſſyue charges, coſtes, and expences then Bochers inhabyted in other partes of this Realme been.
            ¶ The kynge our moſte dred ſouereygne lorde therfore beyng aduertyſed of the premyſſes, conſyderyng alſo that in the ſame ſeaſon of winter catels are moche more derer thē they be in the ſomer tyme when they are noriſſhed & fed with plenry fulnes of graſſe, and wyllynge that the Bochers of his ſayd Citye & ſuburbes of the ſame beynge his louyng ſubiectes, ſhuld haue and take ſuche reaſonable garnes, by excerſyſe of theyr myſteryes as they myght honeſtly lyue withall accordynge to theyr behauyours, and to gyue them corage that his ſayd Citye, aſwel at ye aſſemble of this his preſent ꝑlaymēt now to be holden as at all other tymes, ſhulde be plentyfully furnyſſhed with good vytaylles, is pleaſed and contented by the aduyſe of his counſell, that the Bochers of his ſayd Citye of London, and ſuburbes of the ſame, from the date of this his graces Proclamacyon, vnto the feeſt of the Natyuite of ſaynt Iohn̄ Baptyſt nexte comynge, ſhall and may ſell Beeff, and Porke, for a halfe penny and halfe ferthyng the pounde, and Motton and Veale, for halfpenny & ferrhynge the pounde. And that this his moſte gracyous letters of proclamacyon ſhal be to euery of the ſame Bochers of his ſayd Citye & ſuburbes, ſuffycient warrant & dyſcharge ayenſt his hyghnes & all other, for ſellyng of fleſſhe at the pryces afore lymytted in the ſame, any thyng cōteyned in ye ſame acte to ye cōtrary therof notwithſtādyng. ¶ Prouyded alway that the ſayde Bochers ſe his ſayd Citye, well and plentyfully prouyded and furnyſſhed with good and holſome vytalles.
            ¶ And ferthermore his hyghues ſtraytly chargeth & cōmaundeth the Mayre and Sheryffes of his ſayd Citye, that now is & herafter ſhalbe, yt they frō tyme to tyme, ſuruey & ſe ye ſame to be effectually done, as they wyll anſwer to his mageſty at theyr vitermoſt perylles in that behalfe. ¶ And ouer this the kynges hyghnes ſtraytly chargeth and cōmaundeth that aſwell all Bochers inhabyted in other partyes of his Realme, as alſo all Gracyers, Fermers, Broggers and Breders of cattell, ſhall vtter and ſell theyr cattell at reaſonable and conuenyent pryces, and in ſuche maner and fourme as by ye ſaid ſtatute and by dyuers other ſtatutes here tofore made is ordeyned and prouyded, as they wyll anſwere at theyr vttermoſt perylles for the ſame. ¶ In wytnes wherof we haue cauſed theſe preſentes to be ſealed with our great ſcale.
            
               At weſtmynſter the .xxiii. day of Octobre, the .xxvi. yere of our reygne.
               
            
            ¶ God ſaue the kynge.
         
      
   