
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Proclamacion ſet furth by the body and ſtate, of the Kynges Maieieſts priuey Counſayle, concernyng the deuiſers, writers, and caſters abrode, of certain vile, ſlaunderous, and moſte trayterous letters billes, ſcrowes, and papers, tendyng to the ſeducement of the kynges maieſties good & louyng ſubiectes.
            
               FOraſmuche as there be diuerſe lewde and ſedicious perſones whiche do labor now to maintain the trayterous doynges of the duke of Somerſet, and for that purpoſe dooe deuiſe, the moſte vile, falſe and traitetous villes, papers, and bokes that euer wethard of, ſtrawyng theſame in the ſtretes, aſwell within the citie of London, as in diuerſe tounes, and other places in the countrey, wherein thei do falſely and traiterouſly trauaile, to ſlaunder the kynges Maieſties counſaill, thin kyng thereby to amaſeand abuſe his Maieſties good ſubiectes, whiche bee in a readineſſe to ioyne with theſaied Counſaill, for deliuery of the Kyng our ſouereigne Lordes moſte royall perſone, remainyng to his greate perill and daunger, in theſaied dukes cuſtody, and for the reſtoryng of this noble realme, to ſome better ordre and quietnes, whiche ſhalbe the benefite of vs all vniuerſally: The kynges Maieſties moſte honorable counſaill, for auoydyng of the inconuenience and greate daunger, that by ſuche ſedicious and ſlaunderous billes, papers, and ſcrowes, might enſue to his Maieſtie, dooe in his highnes name, and by his graces aucthoritie, require, and neuertheles commaunde, al and euery his maieſties good ſubiectes, whiche loue his highnes and this realme, to vſe all their wiſedomes, pollicies, and diligences, to ſerche out the writers, diuiſers, caſters and counſailors to ſuche traiterous billes, and papers, and theſame to apprehende, and preſent before theſaied moſte honorable Counſaill, that thei maie receiue condigne puniſhment, accordyng to their demerites. Wherein as thei ſhall doo moſte acceptable ſeruice to his maieſtie, and their naturall countrey, ſo theſaied counſaill, dooth in his maieſties name promiſe, that whoſoeuer ſhal attache, and bryng in any ſuche diuiſer, writer, or caſter abrode, of ſuche vile and traiterous billes, papers, ſcrowes, or bokes, or geue ſuche certain informacion, to theſaied counſaill, of their names and doynges, as theſame maie bee apprehended, and their offences proued againſt theim, ſhall receiue for their trauailes and paines therein, by waie of his maieſties reward, the ſome of one hundred Crounes. Dated at London, the .x. of October, in the thirde yere of the moſte proſperous reigne, of our ſouereigne lorde Kyng Edward the ſixt, Kyng of Englande, Fraunce, and Irelande, defend or of the faithe, and of the Churche of Englande, and Irelande in yearth the ſupreme hed. Subſeribed by the lordes, and others of the priuey connſaill, whoſe names hereunder do folowe.
            
               The Lorde Riche, Lorde Chauncellor.
               The Lorde Sainct Ihon, Lorde greate Maſter, and Preſident of the Counſaill.
               The Lorde Ruſſell, Lorde priuey Seale.
               The Lorde Marques of Northhampton.
               The Erle of Warwicke, Lorde Greate Chamberlain.
               The Erle of Arundell, Lorde Chamberlam.
               The Erle of Shrewſbery.
               The Erle of Southhampton.
               The Lorde Wentworth.
               Sir Thomas Cheiney Knight of the Order, and Threaſaurer of the kynges Maieſties houſe, and Lorde Warden of the Cinque Portes.
               Sir Willyam Herbert knight, Maſter of the Kynges Maieſties horſe.
               Sir Anthony Wingfeld, knight of the ordre, the kynges Maieſties vice Chamberlein, and capitain of the Garde.
               Sir Ihon Gage knight of the order, Conſtable of the Towre.
               Sir Willyam Petre knight, Secretary.
               Sir Edward North knight.
               Sir Edward Montague knight, chief Iuſtice of the Comon place.
               Sir Raufe Sadler knight.
               Sir Ihon Baker knight.
               Sir Edward Wotton knight.
               Maſter docter Wotton Deane of Cantorbury.
               Sir Richard South well knight.
               Sir Edmund Peckham knyght, high Threaſaurer of all the kynges Maieſties Myntes
            
            God ſaue the Kyng.

                  〈…〉
                excudebat.
         
      
   