
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  〈…〉
                proſperous reigne, againſt ſuche as ſlaunderouſly whiſper and ſpread abrode falſe rumours of the further abacing of the coyne.
            
               WHereas the kinges maieſty, vpon the publiſhing of the laſt proclamation. for the abacing of the ſhilling to. ix. d. minded to haue broughte his coine vnto a more perfection of finenes then it was, & ſo frō time to time to haue amended it, as in very dede he purpoſeth to do, with al the ſpede that may be. Now it is come to paſſe, yt by the ſpreading of falſe & vntrue rumors, the prices of al thinges are growē ſo exceſſiuely, that it is intollerable for his louing ſubiectes to endure it, by reaſon that certein lewd perſones of their owne light heddes haue immagined, that bycauſe hys highnes hath already ſumwhat abated the value of his ſayde come, therfore his maieſty ſhould yet more abace it, and of their imaginacions, haue vttered this fond rumor, in ſuche ſorte, as euery man that hathe corne, cattel or other kinde of victual, mere to be brought to the markettes, rather wil kepe it then vtter it feating their loſſe in the fal of the money, wherof foloweth a ſcarſite in the market, where no ſcarcite ought to be, and a merueilous dearth wher plenty is of al maner of victualles. And as this gredy reſtreining of them that hath plentifully, bredeth the plague of god vpon them, both for their light credite, and for thei inſatiable couetouſnes, as in the death of a numbre of thē it hath of late ben ſene: So the kinges highnes hauing charge from god, to ſe his common welth well gouerned, muſt haue an earneſt 
                  ••
               e, to the ſtreighte puniſhment of them that raiſe theſe ſlaunders 
                  •
               monges his ſubiectes. Wherfore his maieſty ſtraightlye prohibiteth & defendeth, all & euery of his ſubiectes, of what eſtate, degre, or condicion ſoeuer he or they be, that from the publiſhing of this preſent proclamaciō, they inuent not, ſpeake, mutter, or deuiſe, any maner of tale, newes, or reporte, either touching the abacing of theſaid coyne, or that in any maner of wiſe may ſounde either to the diſhonor of his maieſties perſone, or to the defacing of his highnes procedinges, or of is councel, or to the diſquieting of his louing ſubiectes, vpon payne of. vi. monethes impriſonment, and ſuche fine to the kinges maieſties vſe, as ſhalbe thought mete by the Iuſtices of the Peace, in the Shire where thoffence is committed, if thoffend or be able to pay it immediately before his deliuerie: and in caſe the offend or be not able to pay it, then he to be put on the pillory, and one of his Eares cut of, or bothe, if the greuouſnes of his offence ſhal ſeme to the Iuſtices, Maior, or other officer ſo to require. And whoſoeuer ſhal heare any ſuche tale, rumor, inuencion, or deuiſe, and do not immediatly reuele it vnto ſome Iuſtice of the peace, Maior, Bailiffe, Conſtable or ſuche other Officer, he to incurre no leſſe paine then the firſt offendor: the like wherof to be inflicted vpon the Iuſtice, Maior, Bayliffe, Conſtable, or other officer to whome the accuſacion ſhalbe geuen, in caſe that vpon the trial therof, they do not put the effect herof in execution vpon the offendors, and the accuſor of ſuch officers to be rewarded at the kinges maieſties handes, 
                  •
               or thuttering and declaration of thofficers fault, in not executing his charge, in ſuche ſorte, as they ſhal haue good cauſe an other time to watche for the like.
            God ſaue the King.
         
      
      
         
            RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat. M. D. LI.
         
      
   