
      
         
            
            ¶By the Quene
            
               FOrasmuche as the tyme wherein common Interludes in
the Englishe tongue ar wont vsually to be played, is now past vntyll
All Hallontyde, and that also some that haue ben of late vsed,
are not cōuenient in any good ordred Christian Cōmon weale to be
suffred. The Quenes Maiestie doth straightly forbyd al maner Interludes to be playde eyther openly or priuately, except the same be
notified before hande, and licenced within any Citie or towne corporate, by the Maior
or other chiefe officers of the same, and within any shyre, by suche as shalbe Lieuetenauntes
for the Quenes Maiestie in the same shyre, or by two of the Iustices of peax
inhabyting within that part of the shire where any shalbe played.
            
               AND for instruction to euery of the sayde officers, her maiestie doth likewise charge
euery of them as they will aunswere: that they permyt none to be played wherin either
matters of religion or of the gouernaunce of the estate of the commō weale shalbe handled
or treated, beyng no meete matters to be wrytten or treated vpon, but by menne of
aucthoritie, learning and wisedome, nor to be handled before any audience, but of graue
and discrete persons: All which partes of this proclamation, her maiestie chargeth to be
inuiolably kepte. And if anye shal attempte to the contrary: her maiestie giueth all maner
of officers that haue authoritie to see common peax kepte in commaundement, to
arrest and enprison the parties so offendinge for the space of fourtene dayes or more, as
cause shall nede: And furder also vntill good assuraunce may be founde and gyuen, that
they shalbe of good behauiour, and no more to offende in the like.
            
               AND further her maiestie gyueth speciall charge to her nobilitie and gentilmen, as
they professe to obey and regarde her maiestie, to take good order in thys behalfe wyth
their seruauntes being players, that this her maiesties commaundement may be dulye
kepte and obeyed.
            Yeuen at our Palayce of Westminster the .xvi. daye of Maye, the first yeare of oure
Raygne.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London in Poules churcheyarde by
Rychard Iugge and Iohn Cawood Printers
to the Quenes Maiestie.
            
            Cum priuilegio. Regiae Maiestatis.
         
      
   