
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Proclamacion, ſet furthe by the kynges Maieſtie, with the aduiſe of his highnes moſte honorable counſaill, for the publiſhyng of ſundery ſtatutes and actes of Parliament heretofore made, for the prohibicion of the cariyng out of the realme of gold or ſiluer, and of eſchaunge and reeſchaunge.
            
               FOraſmuche, as there hath growen, and daily groweth, great diſpleaſure of God, and ineſtimable dāmage and hurt, to the kyng our ſouercigne Lorde, and to his people, of this his realme of Englande, by the inordinate chaunges and rechaūges of money, and cariyng out of the realme golde or ſiluer, in money, bullion, plate, or veſſell, that hath been of long tyme vſed, and yet continueth in his realme, without licence and aucthoritee, geuen by the kynges Maieſtie, to ſuche chaungyng, rechaungyng, and cariyng out of the realme, to the greate impoueriſhement of this his ſaied realme: for remedy whereof, diuerſe and ſundery notable and profitable ſtatutes and ordinaunces haue been made, prouided and ordeined, emongeſt the whiche, one very notable and profitable ſtatute was made, ordeined and enacted, in the .iij. yere of the reigne of the right noble and famous prince, of worthy memory, kyng Henry the .vij. graundfather to our ſaied ſouereigne lorde, aſwell for the confirmacion of diuerſe and ſundery profitable ſtatutes, before that tyme made and prouided, for that Godly intent and purpoſe, as alſo for the due execucion of the ſame. In the which eſtatute, of kyng Henry the .vij. it is further conteined, that no man ſhould make any eſchaunge, without the kynges licence, ne make any eſchaunge, or reeſchaunge of money, to be paied within this lande, but onely ſuche as the kyng ſhould depute thereunto to kepe, make, and anſwere ſuche eſchaunge, and reeſchaunge, vpon pein of forfeicture of ſuche penalitie, as is conteined in the Statute, made in the tyme of Kyng Richard the ſecond: whiche is, that the offendor ſhall forfeicte, as muche as he maie forfeicte, aſwell for the priuey and apert ſendyng, or bringing, or cauſing to be ſent or brought, out of the realme, of any gold or ſiluer, in money, bullion, plate or veſſell, as alſo by eſchaunge to be made: all whiche thynges, bee more at large conteined, in the ſaied ſeuerall eſtatutes. Our ſaid ſouereigne lorde, by thaduiſe of his counſaill, conſideryng, and right well perceiuyng, the greate enormities and preiudice, whiche groweth vnto his Maieſtie, and the common wea
                  ••
                of this his ſaied realme, by occaſion of the ſaid cariyng, chaungyng, and rechaungyng: willeth, defendeth, and ſtreightly, by this his Proclamacion commaundeth, that the ſaied former ſtatutes, and euery of them, be obſerued and kepte, in all and euery Article and poynct, articles and poynctes, and that due execucion be there of made, as apperteineth, vpon ſuche peines and penalties, as in the ſaid ſtatutes been compriſed. And that no maner of perſone or perſones, of what degree, eſtate or condicion ſo euer he or thei bee, ta
                  ••
                vpon hym or thē, to cary out of the realme, any gold or ſiluer, in coyne, or bullion, or make any eſchaunge or reeſchaunge, contrary to the forme of the ſaied eſtatutes, and this his highnes Proclamacion, without his Maieſties licence and aucthoritee, to hym or theim to be geuen.
            And his maieſtie willeth it to be vnderſtand and knowen vnto all his ſubiectes, his graces ful mynd and pleaſure is, that thei and euery of theim, obſerue and kepe his lawes, ordinaunces and ſtatutes heretofore made, concernyng the premiſſes, as thei will auoyde his greate indignacion and diſpleaſure, and further to incurre the daūger of his lawes, whiche his highnes willeth, duely to be put in execucion, without reſpect or fauor, to be geuen vnto any offendor, contrary to his ſaid lawes and this his highnes proclamacion.
            God ſaue the Kyng.
         
      
      
         
            RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excirdebat Menſe lunij. Anno. 1551.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   