
      
         
            
            
            ¶ AProclamation ſet fourth by the Quenes maieſtie, with the aduiſe of her mooſt honorable counſell, for the newe ſeuerall monies, and Coines of fyne ſterlynge ſyluer and Golde, and the valuation of euery of the ſame, newe ſet ſurth by her heighnes.
            
               THe Quenes moſt excellent maieſtie, of her greate and aboundaunte clemencie, callynge to her graciouſe remembraunce, what great and intollerable charges hath come and chaunſed mooſt ſpecially vnto her heighnes, and alſo to her louynge ſubiectes, aſwell by the reaſon of theſe baſe Monies of late made within her maieſties realmes, as alſo by greate quantities of the lyke baſe monies made and counterfeyt in other realmes, and iſſued out within this her graces realme, and other her heighnes dominions. For the tender zeale her grace beareth to her louinge ſubiectes, in no wyſe can longer ſuffer the ſame inconueniencie, but is fully reſolued and determined with all conueniente ſpede to cauſe to be made, and ſet forth certayne coynes, aſwel of golde as of ſyluer of the perfect fynes accordinge to the rates hereafter enſewyng, which ſhall redounde muche to her heighnes honor, and to the great wealth, commoditie, and profit of her louinge ſubiectes.
            Wherefore her maieſtie hath ordered, and eſtabliſhed to be made within her mintes, theſe ſeuerall coynes, aſwell of ſyluer in fynes of the ſtanderd ſterlynge, as alſo of Golde, as hereafter enſeweth, that is to ſaye: The whole Soueraigne of fyne golde, whiche ſhalbe currant within al her realmes and dominions. for .xxx. s. of the lawful monies of England. One other pece of fine gold, beyng half the Soueraygne aforeſayde, whiche ſhalbe called the Ryoall of golde, ſhalbe currante for .xv. s. of the lawfull monies aforeſayd. One other pece of fyne golde, whiche ſhalbe called the Aungell currant for .x. s. of the lawfull monies aforeſayd. One other pece of fyne golde whiche ſhalbe called the half Aungel, currant for .v. s. of the lawfull monies aforeſayde. And of coynes of ſyluer as here enſeweth. That is to ſay: One pece of ſyluer monies which ſhalbe called the grote, and ſhalbe currant for .iiii. d. of the lawfull monies of Englande. Item one other pece, the halfe of the foreſayde grote, whiche ſhalbe called the halfe grote, and ſhalbe currant for .ii. d. of the lawfull monies aforeſayde. Item one other pece, the half of the halfe grote, which ſhalbe called the penny, and ſhalbe currant for .i. d. of the lawfull monies aforeſayde. All whiche monies aforeſayde, the Quenes heighnes, ſtraytly chargeth and commaundeth al maner of perſons, within hir realmes and dominions (the realme of Ireland only excepted, for aſmuche as her heighnes coynes there hath a ſpeciall ſtanderd) of what eſtate, or degree, ſoeuer they be, to receaue, and paye, the ſayd ſeuerall peces of monies, aſwell of golde, as of ſyluer, at the ſeuerall rates before rehearſed, vpon payne of her heighnes diſpleaſure, and to be further puniſhed, as ſhal ſeme to her grace moſt conuenient. And her maieſties expreſſe commaundement is, that all ſuche baſe monies, whiche haue bene reduſed to the value of a lower rate, ſhal go currant in paiment in like maner and ſort, as the ſame be currant at this daye, and as is declared in the proclamation laſt made, in the tyme of the late moſt noble Prince, kynge Edwarde the .vi. in that behalfe, vntyl ſuch tyme as her heighnes, with the aduiſe of her counſell ſhall take further order, touchinge the ſame.
            
               Geuen at our manor of Rychemonde, the .xx. of Auguſt. In the fyrſt yeare of our moſt proſperous reygne.
               
            
            God ſaue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Reginae excuſum. Anno. M. D. L III. 
            
               Cum priuileg to ad imprimendum ſolum
            
         
      
   