
      
         
            
            ¶Instruccions, geuen by the kynges maieſtie, to his Commiſſioners, appoyntted for the execucion of certain ſtatutes, made in the fourth yere of the reigne of kyng Henry the ſeuenth and the .vii. and the .xxvii. yere of the reigne kyng Henry the eight, to be inquired of, in the Shires and places, in the Commiſſion hereunto annexed, expreſſed.
            
               FIrst, ye ſhall enquire what tounes, villages, and hamletes, haue been decaied and laid doune, by encloſures, within the Shire conteigned, within your Commiſſion, ſithe the firſt yere of the reigne, of kyng Henry the ſeuenth.
            Item, what lande was in tillage, at the tyme of the ſaied encloſures, and what was then in paſture.
            Item, how mnay plowes, by reaſon of the ſaid encloſures, be decaied & laied doune.
            Item, how many Meaſes, Houſes, Cottages, and dwellyng houſes, be fallen in decaie, and the inhabitauntes of the ſame, departed from their inhabitacion there, by reaſon of encloſures taken awaie of the landes, or otherwiſe. And how muche lande, belonged to the ſame.
            Item, if any perſone haue ſeuered the landes, from any houſe of huſbandry, whereby it is made a cottage, a Shepe houſe, a Dary houſe, or otherwiſe conuerted, to any other vſe, then for a dwellyng place, of an huſband man.
            Item, by whom the ſaid encloſures and decaies wer made, and how long agone, and if thei wer made within the ſame tyme, and of what yerely rent and proffites thei be,
            Item, who hath now the ſtate of inheritaunce, and the profites of the ſame encloſure, and houſes decaied, and of whom the landes be holden.
            Item, how many newe Parkes be now made, ſithe the ſaied tyme.
            Item, what arable lande, at the tyme of the makyng of the ſaied Parkes, wer imparked with the ſame.
            Item, how many Parkes within the Shire be inlarged, ſith the ſaid tyme, and how muche of the ſame ground, was then arable and put in tillage.
            Item, how many Plowes, houſes, inhabitacions be decaied, by reaſon of the ſaied newe imparkyng.
            Item, if any perſone hath or doth kepe, aboue the nomber of twoo thouſande ſhepe, beſide lambes of one yeres age, either in his awne right, or in the name of his wife, child, kinſman, or any other perſone, and whether he hath kept the ſame, vpon his awne landes, or vpon his Ferme landes, or otherwiſe, by couin or fraude, and how long he hath kept them.
            Item, how many Shepe ye thynke haue been neceſſary, for the onely expenſes of ſuche perſones, houſhold for one yere.
            Item, if any perſone hath letten, any landes to ferme▪ by copie of Court Rolie, reſeruyng the ſhepe paſture of the ſame to hymſelf, or if any perſone hath taken, from any other their Comons, wherby thei be not able to brede and kepe their cattell, and maintein their huſbandry, as thei were in tymes paſt.
            Item, if any perſone hath had or occupied, aboue the nomber of two houſes, or tenementes of huſbandry, liyng in any Toune, Uillage, Hamlet or Tithyng, and how long thei haue occupied the ſame.
            Item, whether ſuche perſone, hath taken the ſame in Farme, for terme of life, yeres, at will, by Indenture, or copie of Court rolle, or otherwiſe, ſithe the feaſt of the Natiuitie of our Lorde God, a thouſande CCCCC.xlv. And where ſuche perſone dwelleth.
            Item, if any perſone, or body pollitique or corporate, that hath by gifte, graunt, Leaſe, or Demiſe, the ſcite or precinct, and Demeanes of any Monaſtery, Priory, or religious houſe, diſſolued by thact of Parliament, made in the .xxvii. yere, of the reigne of the kyng that dedde is, do kepe an honeſt continual houſe and houſhold, in the ſame ſcite or precinct: and do occupie yerely, aſmuche of the ſame demeanes, in plowyng and tillage of huſbandry, as was commonly vſed, to bee kept by the gouernors, Abbottes, or Priors of the ſame houſes, Monaſteries, or Priories, or by their Fermer or Fermers, occupiyng the ſame, within the tyme of .xx. yeres, next before the makyng of the ſame ſtatute.
            Item, that you our ſaied Commiſſioners, for your better inſtruccion, take with you copies of al ſuche offices as were founde concernyng the premiſſes, in the .ix. or tenth yeres, of the reigne of our moſte noble father, Kyng Henry the eight.
            Item, that you cauſe tappere before you, at all places where you ſhall ſit, for thexecucion of this Cō
               miſſion, ſixe perſones of euery Pariſhe, that is to ſaie: Twoo Freholders, twoo Fermers, twoo Copie holders, or tenauntes at wil, if there be ſo many there dwellyng, or els as many as be there dwellyng to make preſentment by their othes, of all ſuche thynges, as bee preſentable before you, by vertue of this Commiſſion.
            Item, if any perſone hath or kepeth, in his occupacion, in one Toune, Pariſhe, Lordſhip, or Hamlet, any more tenementes of huſbandry then one: And by what title he ſo hath or kepeth them.
            Item, if any Comons or high waies, haue been encloſed or imparked, contrary to right, and without due recompence. That then the ſame ſhalbe reformed, by the ſaied Commiſſioners.
            God ſaue the Kyng.
         
      
      
         
            Excuſum Londini, in aedibus Richardi Graftoni Regij impreſſoris.
            Meſe Iulii.
            M.D.XLIX.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
   