
      
         
            
            
            By the Quene,
            
               FOraſmuche as diuerſe light, and ſedicious perſons, delytyng in continuall alterations, and neuer contented with the preſent eſtate, haue of late muche preſumed, and yet ceaſe not to inuente, ſpreade, and publiſhe many falſe, vntrue, and vayne rumors, and brutes, raſhely diſcourſyng vpon the great, and moſt weightye affayres, touchyng the Quenes hyghnes royall perſon, & ſtate of the realme, contrary to their boundē dueties of allegiaunce, & contrary to al good ordre, in ſuch outragiouſe ſort, as (if remedie were not prouided in time) great incōuenience might enſue. FOR remedye wherof, her hyghnes conſideryng, that of the ſufferaunce of ſuche lewde libertie of ſpeakyng, euyll doynges, and attemptes, haue manye tymes folowed, doth therefore ſtreyghtly charge and commaunde al her louyng ſubiectes, of euery ſort and degree, from henceforth, not only for their owne partes to forbeare, to publyſhe any ſuche rumors or tales: but alſo to declare to the next iuſtice of peace, or other officer, any perſon, whatſoeuer he be that they ſhal knowe to be offendours in this behalfe, to thintent, they may (by the ſayde officers) be committed to pryſon, and further punyſhed by pillory, or otherwiſe, as the qualitie of the perſon, and of his offence may ſeme to deſerue.
            
               AND her highnes further pleaſure is, that yf the hearers of any ſuche lyghte, ſediciouſe, or naughtie talke, ſpoken in his or theyr preſence, ſhall not, accordynge to this proclamacion, open the ſame to the nexte Iuſtice, or other officer, (as aforeſayde,) that then the ſame perſon, ſo hearynge, and not declarynge the ſame, and beynge therof iuſtly conuicted, ſhalbe reputed, and taken for the fyrſte author of the ſayde rumours, and haue ſuche punyſhmente for the ſame, as the fyrſte author ſhoulde, yf he were apprehended.
            
               REQVIRING, and ſtraightly charging and commaunding all iuſtices of peace, Mayours, Bayliffes, Sheriffes, Conſtables, Hedboroughes, & al other her highnes officers, and miniſters, whatſoeuer they be, to do theyr beſt endeuour, for the effectual execution of this preſent proclamation, and due punyſhment of all offend ours in this behalfe, as they wyll aunſwere to the contrarye at theyr perils.
            God ſaue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               Londini in aedibus Iohannis CawediTypographi Regiae Maieſtatis excuſum. Anno. M. D. L III. 
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum
            
         
      
   