
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  〈…〉
               er, in any 
                  〈1 line〉
                and open praier, or to miniſter any ſacramēt otherwiſe, or in any other maner or fourme, then is mēcioned in theſaied boke, or that by any of theſaied meanes, ſhall vnlawfully interrupt or let any Perſone, Vicar, or other miniſters in any Cathedrall or pariſhe churche, Chapel, or any other place, to ſyng or ſaie commō and open praier, or to miniſter the ſacramentes, or any of thē, in ſuche maner & fourme, as is mencioned in theſaid boke, that then euery parſon beyng therof lawfully conuicted, in fourme aboue ſaid, ſhall forfet to the kyng our ſouereigne lorde, his heires and ſucceſſors, for the firſt offence. x. l. And if any perſon or perſones, beyng once conuict of any ſuche offence, eftſones offende againſt any of the premiſſes, and ſhall in fourme aforeſaied, bee thereof lawfully conuict, that then theſame perſone ſo offendyng and conuict, ſhall for the ſeconde offence, forfet to the kyng out ſouereigne Lorde, his heires and ſucceſſors. xx. l. And if any perſones after he in fourme aforeſaied, ſhall haue been twiſe conuict of any offence, concernyng any of the premiſſes, ſhall offende the third tyme, and be therof in fourme aboueſaid lawfully conuict, that then euery perſone ſo offendyng and conuict, ſhall for his third offence, forfet to our ſouereigne lorde the kyng, all his goodes and cattalles, and ſhall ſuffre empriſonment duryng his life. And if any perſone or perſones, that for his firſt offence concernyng the premiſſes, ſhal bee conuict in fourme aforeſaid, dooe not paie the ſome to be paied by vertue of his conuiccion, in ſuche maner and fourme, as the ſame ought to bee paied, within ſixe wekes next after his conuiccion, that then euery perſone ſo conuict, and ſo not paiyng the ſame, ſhall for the ſame firſt offence, in ſtede of theſaied. x. l. ſuffre empriſonment, by the ſpace of three monethes, without baill or mainpriſe. And if any perſon or perſones, that for his ſecond offence, concernyng the premiſſes, ſhalbe conuict in fourme aforeſaied, do not paie the ſome, to bee paied by vertue of his conuiccion, in ſuche maner and fourme as the ſame ought to be paied, within ſixe wekes next after his ſaid ſecond cō
               uiccion, that then euery perſone ſo conuict, and not ſo paiyng the ſame, ſhall for the ſame ſeconde offence, in ſtede of theſaied. xx. l. ſuffre empriſonment duryng ſixe monethes, without baill or mainpriſe.
            
               AND it is ordeigned and enacted, by the aucthoritie aforeſaied, that all and euery Iuſtices of oyer and, Determiner, or Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie, in euery of their open and generall Seſſions, to enquire, heare and determyne, all and all maner of offences, that ſhalbee committed or doen contrary to any article, conteigned in this preſent act, within the limittes of the Commiſſion to the directed and to make proces for the execution of the ſame, as thei maie doo againſt any perſone, beyng endited before them, of treſpaſſe or lawfully conuicted thereof.
            
               PROVIDED alwaies, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaied, that all and euery Archebiſhopp, and Biſhopp, ſhall or maie at all tyme and tymes, at his libertie and pleaſure, toyne and aſſociate hymſelf, by vertue of this acte, to theſaied Iuſtices of Oyer and Determiner, or to theſaied Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, at euery of theſaied open and generall Seſſions, to be holden in any place within his Dioces, for, and to the inquirie, hearyng, and determinyng, of the offences aforeſaied.
            
               PROVIDED alwaies, that it ſhalbee l
                  •
               full ſo any manne, that vnderſtandeth the Greke, Lattin, and Hebrewe toungue, or other ſtraunge toungue, to ſaie and haue theſaied praiers, heretofore ſpecified of Matins and Euenſong
                  •…
               , Latten, or any ſuche other toungue, ſaiyng the ſame priuatly, as thei do vnderſtande. And for the furthe
                  •
                encouragyng of learnyng in the toungues, in the Vniuerſities of Cambridge and Oxford, to vſe and exerciſe in their common and open praier, in their Chapelles (beyng no pariſhe churches) or other places of praier, the Matins, Euenſong, Letany, and all other praiers (The holy Communion commonly called the Maſſe, excepted, preſcribed in theſaied boke) preſcribed in Greke Latten or Hebrewe, any thyng in this preſent act, to the contrary notwithſtandyng.
            
               PROVIDED alſo, that it ſhalbee lawfull for all men, aſwell in Churches, Chapelles, Oratories, or other places, to vſe openly any Pſalme or praier, taken out of the Bible, at any due tyme, not lettyng or omittyng thereby the Seruice, or any part therof mencioned in theſaied boke.
            
               PROVIDED alſo, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaied, that the bokes concernyng the
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
            
         
      
   