
      
         
            
            
            By the Kynge and the Queene.
            
               THe Quenes moſte excellent maieſtie, being credibly enformid, That notwithſtanding dyuers of her highnes reſtraintes, and proclamations lately made and ſette furthe, aſwell for the ſtay from goynge to the Sea of Shyppes, and other veſſels, and of ſhipmaſters, mariners, gonners, ſea faryng men, and watermē fittic and hable to ſerue her maieſtie in theſe preſent warres, for the defence of her highnes Realmes, dominions, and people, as alſo for the more annoyaunce, and impeachment of thenemies of the ſame. Yet neuertheles no ſmall number of the beſt and hableſt of the ſayde Shipmaſters, maryners, gonners, Sea farynge men, and watermen, contrarye to the obedience, and duety of good ſubiectes, not regardinge the premiſſes, but in contempte thereof, haue withdrawen them ſelues from her highnes ſayd ſeruyce, and by colorable meanes conueyed them ſelfes into dyuers good ſhyppes, and other veſſels, lately ſet fourthe towardes outewarde Realmes, and places, in voyadges, for traficque of marchaundiſes. And alſo in aduenturynge and warrefare. So as by ſuch vndewe meanes, and diſobedience, her maieſties nauy royall cannot be furnyſhed, but with the refuſe, and baſyſt ſort of men of ſeruyce, much to the daunger and hinderaunce of her highnes ſayde nauye royall, and alſo of her maieſties ſayd realmes, dominions and people.
            FOR reformation and ſpedy redreſſe whereof and to thend, that the ſame, her maieſties ſayd nauye royall, and preſent ſeruyce, may be furth with the better furniſhed & appoynted, both with the principall and choiſe of ſuch ſhippes, and other veſſels, And alſo of the ſaid ſhipmaiſters, maryners, gonners, ſea faring men, and watermen, as be at this time moſt mete and able, to ſerue the ſame, according to her highnes exſpectation, and order taken in that behalfe.
            HER highnes doth by this her maieſties proclamation expreſſly, and ſtraightly charge, and commaund, yt frō henceforth no maner of perſō or perſons vnder paine of confiſcation & forfeyture of there ſhippes and goodes, and alſo of impriſonment of their bodyes, do attempt by any waies or meanes, to ſet furth vnto the Sea, oute of any hauon, ryuer, creke, or place, of this her highnes Realme of Englande, or Wales, vpon any maner of voyadge either on marchaundizes, aduenturynge, or otherwyſe, any maner of ſhip, or kinde of veſſell, without a ſpeciall lycence be firſt obteyned, and had for that intent vnder the great Seale of her Maieſties Admyralty, in dewe forme to be made, as in ſuch caſes it hath bene vſed and accuſtomed, any proclamation heretofore made and ſette forth to the contrary in any wiſe not withſtandinge. And her hyghnes dothe lykewyſe charge and commaund that all ſuch ſhippes and veſſels, and alſo al capytaines, ſhipmaſters, maryners, and other perſonnes, that are gone to the Sea, at their owne aduenture or otherwyſe, by force or color of her maieſties proclamation, ſet forth for that purpoſe, do (vnder like paine) retorne againe into this Realme, before the laſt day of this preſent moneth of May, the ſame her hyghnes proclamation or any other thing therin conteined, to the contrary in any wyſe notwithſtanding.
            AND furthermore her maieſtie doth ſtraightly and expreſſly charge and commaund, al vice admirals, Maiors, Sheriffes, bayliffes, and other hed officers and gouernors of cities, countyes, boroughes, townes, & places by the Sea coſtes, of her highnes ſaid realme of England & wales, that euery of them, al reſpects ſet apart, and as they tēder her maieſties fauor, do effectually for ſe that this her maieſties proclamation, may be with al expeditiō duly publiſhed. And alſo truelye obeyed, kept, and obſeruyd, as euery of thē wil anſwere for the contrary at his extreme peryll.
            
               Geuen at our manor of Grenewich, the thirde day of Maye. 
               
               God ſaue the Kynge and the Quene.
            
         
      
      
         
            EXCVSVM LONDINI IN AEDIBVS Iohannis Cavvodi, Tipographi Regiae Maieſtatis.
            Anno. M. D. LVIII
            Cum piuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
   