
      
         
            
            
            By the Kynge and the Queene.
            
               THERE as the Queenes hyghnes is infourmed that dyuers and ſondry euyll diſpoſed perſonnes ſhipmayſters, mariners, and ſea faringe men, latelye preſted and reteyned to ſerue in her maieſtyes Nauy of ſhyppes, preſently prepared and ſet forth to the Seas, aſwell for the defence of her graces Realmes and dominions as alſo for the better annoyaunce and empechemente of the enemye, haue withoute anye iuſt cauſe and ſufficient paſporte and lycence obteyned of the lorde Admy rall, or vyceadmyrall of the flete in that behalfe appoynted, contrary to their duetyes of obedience and ſeruyce, due by good ſubiectes, with drawen them ſelfes from the ſayde ſeruyce, both to the greate detriment of her Maieſties affayres, and to the euyll example of other her highnes ſubiectes, nowe ſeruynge and placed alreadye, and appoynted in the ſayde Nauy. Her hyghnes therefore myndynge that the ſayd offenders, vſyng and practyſyng ſuch deceyte and fraud ſhuld not eſcape vnponiſhed, and that alſo by this example of ponyſhment, al other perſons ſo reteined or to be reteyned to ſerue on the Seas, may take ſuffycyent admonition and warnyng howe to auoyde the daunger of ſuche offence, and to preuent the peryll whych myght enſue throughe the lacke of their duetyes to be by them admyniſtred in thys behalfe, doth by thys her hyghnes proclamation expreſſly & ſtrayghtlye forbyd, that no perſon or perſons hereafter, by any coloure▪ fraude, or deceite do attempte vpon payne of death, to with drawe him or themſelfes from her graces ſayd ſeruyce, without a ſufficient paſporte, ſigned by the hand of the Lorde Admyral, or of the ſayde vyceadmyrall of the flete, wherein he or they ſhalbe ſoo appoynted to ſerue.
            And further moſte ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth all Iuſtices of peace, Maiors, Sheryffes, Bailyffes, Conſtables, Hedborrowes, and al other her hyghnes officers, many ſters. and ſubiectes, to whome auethoritye is commytted for th execution of lawes, and for the good gouernaunce and order of the people, to apprehend and commyt to warde euery ſuch ſhypmaiſter, maryner, or ſea faring man, which at any tyme ſithens he was preſted, or that from the time the ſame ſhalbe hereafter preſted, hath or ſhal commyt offence contrary to the tenure of thys proclamation, wherſoeuer the ſame perſon or perſons ſhal happen to be founde, in anye Citye, Towne, Borroughe, Vyllage, or other place wythin thys her Maieſtyes Realme, there to remayne wythoute bayle or maynepryce, vntyll the Lorde Admyral being certifyed therof, do geue order for his or theyr enlargemēt or cōtinuaunce in pryſon as to hys diſcreſſion ſhall ſeme conuenyent. And for aſmuche as thys ſeruyce on the Seas ſhal much conduct to the furtheraunce of the honor, and ſeruice of the Realme, whyche euerye good Subiecte oweth to render, and to hys vttermoſte power accordyng to hys degree and vocation, to aduaunce and ſette forthe.
            Her hyghnes oftſones willeth and requyreth al iuſtices of peace. Maiors, Sherifes, and other the ſayde offycers, that they do attend to the diligent and carefull execution of the premyſſes, as they and euery of them tendre her maieſties fauour, and wil anſwer for the contrarye at his or their extreme perills. 
            
               Geuen at Grenewich the. xxix day of March.
               
            
            God ſaue the Kynge and the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            EXCVSVM LONDINI IN AEDIBVS Iohannis Cavvodi, Tipographi Regiae Maieſtatis. Anno. M. D. LVIII Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
   