
      
         
            
            
            By the Kyng and the Quene,
            
               FOraſmuch as the kynge and Quenes Maieſties, haue perfecte intellygence, that aſwell Straungers reſortyng hyther, as their highnes natural ſubiectes, haue now of late for their great gayne and lucre, not onely vſed to melte the monies and coygnes, of this Realme, but alſo to buy and ſell the ſame monyes, & coignes, at and for higher pyrſes, and values, then the ſame be rated, valued and curraunte, by the lawes, Statutes, and proclamations of this Realme. Whereby greate quantities of the ſayde monyes and coygnes, hath ben, and are by dyuers perſons, in ſecrete manner, dayly tranſported, caryed and conueyed out of thys Realme, and great quantytie thereof molten, to the great defraudyng of their Maieſties Subiectes, dyminyſhynge of their hyghnes mony and coygne, and to yt no lytle impoueriſhyng of the Realme, & more is lyke daylye to be, onleſſe ſome ſpedy remedy be prouyded in that behalfe. Their Maieſties therefore, not onelye tenderyng the wealth of this their ſayde Realme, and their louyng ſubiectes, of the ſame, but alſo to prouyde remedye herein by this their highnes proclamation, Strayghtly charge and commaund that no manner of perſon or perſones, whatſoeuer he or they be, doo from henceforth buy or ſell anye maner of money or coigne, of this Realme, or curraunt within the ſame, by what name ſo euer it be called, at or for any other pryce or value, then the ſame is valued, rated, and curraunt by the lawes, ſtatutes, or proclamations of this Realme, nor melte any of the ſayde monyes, or coygnes, vpon payne of their Maieſties indignation, and high diſpleaſure. And that aſwell the melter as the buyer and ſeller of ſuche monye or coygne, ſhall forfeyte the ſame monye and coygne, ſo boughte, ſolde, or melted, and to ſuffer impryſonment of his or their bodyes, at their highnes will & pleaſure, and further to incurre ſuch paines penalties and forfeytures, as be in ſuche caſe by the lawes and ſtatutes of this Realme appoynted and prouyded. And to thintent, that ſuch as would go aboute to ſearche and finde out anye of the offences aforeſayd, may be the better incoraged to do the ſame, their Maieſties will and pleaſure is, that whoſoeuer ſhall fynde out and dyſcloſe any of the ſayd offences, or ſhall make ſeaſoure of any ſuch monye, or coygne, bought ſolde, or molten, contrary to the tenor of thys proclamation, or the lawes or ſtatutes of thys Realme, in that caſe made and prouyded, and the ſame ſhall lawfully and duelye proue, ſhall haue the hole penaltye and forfeyture of euery ſuch offence, geuen aſſigned or lymited, by anye the lawes, or ſtatutes aforeſayd, whych ſhould or ought to accrue to their Maieſties. Prouyded that it ſhalbe lawefull to anye perſon, to ſell the coignes of this Realme, or anye other coigne into anye of the kynges and Quenes Maieſties myntes, vpon ſuch pryſes as their Maieſties there doo geue, And thoffycers there may buy the ſame, ſoo to melte and coygne them to their hyghnes vſe, any thyng in this preſente Proclamation notwithſtandyng. And moreouer their Maieſties, do ſtrayghtly charge and commaund al and ſynguler their Iuſtyces of peace, Mayiors, Sheryffes, Baylyffes, Conſtables, and all other their hyghnes offycers, and mynyſters, to put aſwell thys proclamation, as all ſuch good actes, and ſtatutes in execution, as heretofore haue ben made touchyng the buying and ſelling, and meltyng of the kynges and Quenes Maieſties coygne, of thys Realme. Geuen at our maner of Saynte Iames, the .xxvii. day of Apryll.
            
            God ſaue the Kynge and the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               Excuſum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi, Typographi Regiae Maiestatis. Anno. M. D. L. VI. Cum priuilegio.
            
         
      
   