
      
         
            
            
               
                  WHere as the Quenes maiestie, hath in this present laste session of parliament, with the assent, and consente, of the lordes spirituall and temporall, and the commons in the same assē
               bled, made amongest others, one estatute to repeale sondrye actes of parliament made in the time of the late Queene her maiesties sister, and to reuyue and make good certaine other necessarie and godly lawes, vsed in the tymes of the reygnes of king Henry the .viii. her maiesties father, and kynge Edwarde the sixte her maiesties brother, of noble memories: amongst the whiche one godlye acte ther is reuiued, entituled: an acte against such persons as shal vnreuerently speake against the Sacrament of the bodie and bloude of Christe, comenly called the Sacramente of the alter, and for receiuing therof vnder bothe kindes, made in a parlyament begon at Westminster the .iiii. day of Nouember, in the first yere of the saide kyng Edward the sixt, and continued to the .xxiiii. day of December then next folowing. And bycause ye time of Easter is so at hand, and that great nombers, not only of the nobility and gentlemen, but also of the common people of this realme, be certainly persuaded in cōscyence in such sort as they cannot be induced in any wise to communicate or receiue the said holy sacrament but vnder bothe kindes accordinge to the first institution, and to the common vse both of the Apostells and the primatiue church. And for that also the forsaide statute nowe made in this last parliament being of great length, cannot be printed and published abrode, nor any other maner of dyuine seruice for the communion of the saide holy Sacrament (than that whiche is nowe vsed in the churche) can presently be established by any lawe, vntyll further time therfore maye bee had. For to auoide al contention and discorde, and to quyet the consciences of suche great nombers: It is thought necessarie to her maiestie, by the aduise of sondry of her nobility and Commons lately assembled in parliament, to signify and declare, like as by this present proclamacyon her maiestie dothe signifie and declare to all maner her maiesties subiectes, that the forsaide statute made in the said first yere of kinge Edwarde the syxte, is nowe wholly reuiued and in force, to al maner of purposes, and intentes, and that the same is and ought to be folowed, obeied and vsed. And therfore her maiestie by the saide aduise, straitly commaundeth and chargeth al maner of persons, and specially all maner pastors and Curates to whom the ministracion of the saide holye sacrament doth belong, charitably and quietlye to obserue the fourme and maner of the said estatute nowe reuiued, concerning the ministracion vnder both kyndes. And yet least dissētion or disquiet might arrise, if in any place the preistes and ministers of some church shall refuse to deliuer the saide holy sacrament in both kindes to their parishoners which shal humbly requyer the same: her maiestie by thaduise aforesaid requireth & commaundeth all maner her subiectes, that so shall reuerently and humblye requier the same, and cannot haue it quietly graunted by their preist or curate, yet not to molest the said preist at this time of Easter for the same, least occasion therby be giuen of breach of charity: but to resorte to some other honest, discrete and learned preist and minister, either in the same churche or sume other, & to receiue of him the said holy sacrament reuerently, vnder both kindes as is abouesaid. And notwithstanding the same, to pay al maner other tithes and

               dueties to their propre parson or Curate, as otherwile they haue done, leauyng the consideration of the Curates contempt, to such as in that behalfe, haue cause to redresse it.
            
               AND further her Maiestie commaundeth straitlye, all maner of Maiors, Sheryffes, Iustices of peace, and other hed officers, as they wyll aunswere for the contrary, to haue an earnest regarde that peace and concord be kept, aswell in Churches, as without, specially during al this feast of Easter, and not to fayle, but forthwith to commit to prison, all disordred persons, that shall seke willingly to breake, either by misordred dede, or by railing, or contemptuous speach, the common peace and band of charytie, whych ought amongest all good christians to be at thys present most aboundant and of most force and value.
            
               Yeuen at our Palayce of Westminster the .xxii. day of Marche▪ the first yeare of oure Raygne.
               
            
            God saue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN POVLES CHVRCHE yarde, bi Richarde Iugge, and Iohn Cavvood, Printers to the Quenes Maiestie. ANNO▪ M.D.LIX.
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
      
   