
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Proclamacion, ſet furthe by the Kynges Maieſtie, with the aſſent of his dereſt Vncle, Edward Duke of Somerſet, Gouernor of his moſte royall perſone, and of his realmes, dominions and ſubiectes Protector, and others of his moſte honorable priuey counſaill, concernyng theffect, of his maieſties pardon, graunted to certain of his ſubiectes, lately hauyng made vnlawfull riottes and aſſembles.
            
               THe Kynges Maieſtie, by the aduiſe of his entierly beloued Vncle, Edward Duke of Somerſet, Gouernor of his perſone, and Protector of all his Maieſties Realmes, Dominions, and Subiectes, and the reſt of his priuey counſaill: conſidereth, that as it is the fruite of his mercy, to receiue his humble, repentant, and ſorowfull ſubiectes, knowlegyng their offences, to the benefite and grace of his mercie: So alſo, is it the reputacion of his Maieſties mercie, to defende, and ſaue harmeles, all ſuche whiche ſubmitteth theimſelfes, to his mercie, and to let theim fele his proteccion, with their quiet, as thei haue ſought it, with their deuoute repentaunce, and ſo to ſaue his repentaunt people with mercie, as his Maieſtie ought to puniſhe, his obſtinate ſubiectes with iuſtice. In conſideracion whereof, his Maieſtie, by thaduiſe aforeſaid, willeth, admoniſheth, and commaundeth, firſt all maner of his ſubiectes, whiche of late, by their humble ſubmiſſion, and ſorowfull repentaunce, of their offences committed, in ſundry vnlawfull, and rioteous aſſembles: That thei from hencefurthe, be of ſuche good behauiour, in the peace of God, and the Kynges Maieſtie, and in all their actes and deedes, bee ſo quiet, peaceable, and well ordered, that the Kynges maieſtie, maie thynke his grace and pardon, beſtowed vpon theim with effecte. And likewiſe his Maieſtie willeth, and ſtraightly commaundeth, all maner his other Subiectes, of what degree ſo euer he bee, hauyng ſuffered any maner of grief, dammag
                  •
               , or loſſe, by the acte of any of the aboue ſaied, the kynges ſubiectes, whileſt thei offended, and before thei re
                  ••…
               iued the Pardon from his Maieſtie, that thei ſhall not by accion, ſute, violence or compulſion, force, puniſh▪ aduenge or correct, any maner of offence, treſpaſſe, or vnlawfull acte, committed by theſame offendors, and pardoned by theſame acte: but ſhall ſuffre and permit them to enioye and take, the benifite of the Kynges Maieſties pardon, with like intent and purpoſe, as theſame hath been ment, and intended by the kynges Maieſtie. Geuen at Richmount the .xii. of Iuly, the third yere of his highnes reigne.
            God ſaue the Kyng.
         
      
      
         
            
               Excuſum Londini, in aedibus Richardi Graftoni Regij impreſſoris.
                M, D. XLIX. 
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   