
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A proclamacion, ſet furth by the Kynges Maieſtie, with the aſſent of his deareſt vncle. Edward Duke of Domerſet gouernor of his moſte royall perſone and of his Realmes Dominions and ſubiectes Prolongacion of the formet Proclamacion made for the callyng in of Teſtons.
            
               WHere as the Kynges moſt excellent maieſtie with thaduyſe and aſſent of his dereſt vncle Edward duke of Somerſet, gouernour of his Roial perſone, Protectour of his highnes Realmes, dominiōs, and ſubiectes and the teſt of his graces coūſail. hath hertofore by proclamaciō bering date the .x. day of April in the ſecond yere of his reigne, geuē notice & rō
               maundemēt to almaner his louyng ſubiectes and others haunting his Maieſties Realmes or domimōs that from the laſt day of ye moneth of Decēbre laſt paſſed forwardes, yt peces of .xij. d. cōmonly called Teſtōs ſhould no lēgar be curraūt nor paſſe in paymēt or receipt as his graces coyne, but be takē only for Bulliō: Wherunto his maieſtie was moued vpon ſuche cōſideraciōs as in theſayd former proclamaciō was more at large expreſſed. For aſmuche as it hath ſithēs come to his highnes knowlege, that by reaſon of ye great nōbre of theſame Teſtons, which at this preſent are diſperſed abrod in ſo many mēs hādes. beſides no leſſe caut
                  •
               le & policy vſed cuē hard vpō the day, by diuers making hole paymētes in theſayd coyne, & ſpecially for that thoſe yt haue plēty of other mony, take vnreaſonable allowance of the poorer ſort which is moſt to be relieued for the exchaunge of thoſe Teſtōs, moche detriment and inconueniēce ſhould enſue to the poſſeſſours of theſame, onles a remedy by prolonging of the terme then appoynted for their calling in were prouided: His Maieſtie therfore by the aduiſe aforſaid, is moſt graciouſly pleaſed, willeth, & cō
               maundeth that the terme of the callyng in of theſayd pieces of .xij. d. cōmonly called Teſtons, ſhalbe yet further prolonged and extended to the firſt day of May next comming after the date herof. And that during al the meane ſpace, theſaid Teſtons (being of his highnes ſtanderd) ſhalbe curraunt through out his highnes Realmes and dominions after no leſſe value and ſort, then yf theſayd former proclamacion for their calling in had not ben made.
            Prouided alwayes that after theſayed fyrſt day of May, theſayed Teſtons ſhall no lenger bee currant, but be vſed in ſuche ſorte, as that former Proclamacion doth ſpecify, this preſent prolongaciō notwith ſtandyng.
            And further his Maieſtie exhorteth all his ſayd louyng ſubiectes, that like as his highnes for their benefite was moued to reuoke theſayed Teſtōs, and for their more commodity is pleaſed to prolōg the day of their callyng in: ſo thei alſo in the meane while will haue the better regard and hede that ſuche Teſtons as thei take, be of his Maieſties ſtanderd and coynt, ſeyng the nombre to be ſuche of falſe and foreyn Teſtons as are now ſo diſperſed abrode, to the deceipt & loſſe of the takers: and that during this tyme of reſpit, thei endeuour them ſelues from day to day by portions and ſmaller ſommes, to bryng in ſuche Teſtons as thei ſhall h
                  ••
               e into any his Maieſties myntes, as ſhall beſt ſerue for their purpoſe, there to receiue the iuſt exchaunge of theſame: So as by lyngeryng or defertyng of the bryngyng in of ſuche Teſtons vntill theſayed fyrſt day of May, lymitted by this peremptory admonition, their negligence be not cauſe that when the myntes (if the whole maſſe come in at once) are peſtred, their exchaunge ſhall not be ſo redy vnto them as otherwiſe it ſhoulde.
            Moreouer, becauſe his Maieſtie moſt graciouſly aboue other thynges tendryng the relief of the poter ſort of his louyng ſubiectes, doth conſidre, that their nede or vnhabilitie to forbeare by a ſpace (be it neuer ſo ſmal) thexchaunge of their Teſtons at his graces myntes, might be an occaſion that others of the richer ſorte with whome thei ſhoulde perchaunce be driuen to bargayne for other money in lieu of their Teſtōs, ſhould then exact or take of them vnreſonably for thexchange (as it hath camē to his highnes knowlege that ſomme al redy haue not ben aſhamed to demaunde and take ſo agaynſt all conſciēce and equitie) His highnes therfore by thefor. and a
                  •••…
                do the ſtrayghtly charge & cōmaunde that no 
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
            
         
      
   