
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ A proclamation ſet fourth by the Kynge and Quenes maieſties, agaynſte Thomas Stafforde, and others traytours his adherentes.
            
               WHere as Thomas Stafforde, and others maliciouſe and euell diſpoſed ſubiectes his adherentes, hauinge conſpyred to perpetrate dyuers heynous treaſons agaynſt the moſte royall perſons of theyr maieſties, and therevpon fearynge to receaue iuſt punyſhment for his and theyr deſertes, fled into the partes of beyonde the ſeas, and there remaynynge for a tyme, haue, perſiſting in their ſaid malyce, deuyſed & attempted dyuers tymes to ſtyrre ſeditions and rebellions within this realme, to the great diſturbaunce of the quietnes, peace, and tranquillitie therof, by ſendyng hether into the realme, diuers bokes, letters, and wrytynges, both printed and wrytten, farced and filled full of vntruthes, and ſeditious and moſt falſe ſurmiſes, of thinges ſayde to be done and deuyſed by the kynge our ſoueraigne Lorde and his ſeruauntes, whiche were neuer ymagined or thought. And to ſhew theyr vtter malyce with more effecte, the ſame Stafforde dyd lately, with certayne of his ſaid complices vnnaturall Engliſh men, & ſome ſtraungers, entre into this realme, and by ſtealth toke theyr maieſtyes Caſtell of Scarborough, in the countye of Yorke, and ſet out a ſhamefull proclamation, wherein he trayterouſely calleth, nameth, & affyrmeth our ſaid ſoueraigne Lady yt quenes highnes, to be vnryghtful and moſte vnworthy Quene, and that the kynges maieſtie oure ſayde ſoueraygne Lorde, hath induced and broughte into this realme the number of. xii. M. ſtraungers and Spanyardes, and that into the ſayde Spanyardes handes. xii, the ſtrongeſt holdes of this realme be delyuered. In whiche proclamation alſo the ſayd traytour Stafforde, dyd name and take hym ſelf to be protectour and gouernour of this realme by theſe moſt falſe and vnnaturall meanes myndynge to allure the good ſubiectes of theyr maieſties, to withdraw theyr dutye of allegiaunce from theyr ſayd maieſties, and to adhere to hym the ſayd Stafford, to theyr confuſion. Albeit the ſayd Stafforde and other traytours his complices, be by the helpe of God, and dylygence of the earle of Weſtmerland and other noble men and gentlemen, good ſubiectes of thoſe parties, repreſſed, apprehended, and forth comynge, to receaue iuſt punyſhment accordyng to theyr deſertes, and that it may be wel thought, that no wyſe nor honeſt man thinketh, or can iuſtly gather any cauſe to thinke that the kinges maieſtie myndeth any other thynge vnto the quenes maieſtie and the realme, but onely to be carefull, and ſtudious of all thinges, tendinge to the benefyt, ſurety, honor, and defence of the ſame, and in this part moſt louinglye and dayly beſtoweth the great trauayle of his royall perſon, beſydes ye large expences of his goodes & treaſure, yet to thintent none of theyr ſayd louyng ſubiectes ſhuld by ſimplicitie be ſeduced and deceaued throughe the deuelyſh deuiſes of the aforeſayde, or anye other lyke traytours, theyr maieſties of theyr great clemency and tender zeale towardes theyr ſayd ſubiectes, haue thought good to warne and admonyſh them of the premyſſes, exhortyng and chargyng them, to geue no eare or credite to the ſayd falſe proclamations and bruytes, ſet out or ſpred by the ſayd traytours, or hereafter to be ſet out by any others, wherby they ſhal the better auoyd the daungers which they may otherwyſe incurre by adhearynge or reſorting vnto the ſayd traytours, and that alſo theyr ſayd louynge ſubiectes do vſe them ſelues quietlye without ſtyrre or ryſinge, tyll they be commaunded in the name of theyr maieſties, by the lieutenaunt of the county where the ſayd ſubiectes dwel or inhabit, or by the Sheriffe or ſuch Iuſtices as ſhal haue aucthoritie from their highneſſes in that behalfe to rayſe and leuy theym. And that the ſayd ſubiectes, and euery of them, ſhal endeuer them ſelues to apprchend and take, and before the ſame lieutenaunt, Sherif, or Iuſtices of the peace of the ſayd county, bryng all and euerye ſuche perſon or perſons as they ſuſpect, or know to be of the company of the ſayd traytours, or to fauour and ayde them, and all ſuche other alſo as ſhall procure the people vnlawfully to ſtyrre, or ſhal ſediciouſely, or maliciouſly, ſpred or tel any ſeditious newes concerning the doynges of the ſayd traytours or otherwyſe. Strayghtly chargyng and commaundinge all Iuſtices of peace, Mayers, Sheriffes, bayliffes, Conſtables, and al other their maieſties officers and miniſters, to ſe this proclamation put in execution, as theyr maieſties ſpecially truſt them, and as the ſayd officers and miniſters wyl aunſwer to the contrarye at theyr vttermoſt perylles. 
            ¶ Geuen at our Palace of Weſtminſter the laſt day of Apryll.
               
               God ſaue the kynge and the Quene.
            
         
      
      
         
            Excuſum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi, Typographi Regiae maieſtatis.
            Cum priuilegio ad Imprimendum ſolum. Anno. 1557.
         
      
   