
      
         
            
            
            By the Kynge and the Quene
            
               
                  WHERE AS THE Quenes Maieſtye at the ouerture and begynnynge of the warres wyth Fraunce, did by her hyghenes proclamation, warne her louynge ſubiectes to forbeare all trafficque, and contracting wyth anye of the Frenche nation, durynge the ſayde warres: For aſmuche as her hyghenes is geuen to vnderſtande that (the former proclamations notwythſtandyng) dyuerſe and ſundrye of her ſubiectes do neuertheleſſe by indirecte meanes bryng into thys Realme, ſundrye kyndes of marchandize, cummynge from the countrye of the ennemye, and namely wynes: her Maieſtye therefore by thys her preſente proclamation, ſtrayghtlye chargeth and commaundeth, that from the .xx. daye of Apryll next enſuinge, no wynes growen or made wythin ye frenche kynges dominyons, other then ſuch wynes as ſhall be taken from the ennemye as lawefull pryſe, be broughte in to thys Realme, without her hyghnes ſpeciall lycence, vppon payne of loſſe and forfeiture to her highnes vſe of the ſayd wynes ſo brought in. and impriſonmente, and fynes of the owners of ſuch wynes at her hyghnes pleaſure.
            And where her hyghnes doth further vnderſtande, that diuers quantities of wynes aforeſayde, are alredy brought into ſundrye portes and hauens of thys Realme, her maieſtie doth alſo ſtreightly charge and commaund, that the parties which haue brought in or cauſed to be brought in the ſayd wynes, do not in anye wyſe vent, or putte the ſame to ſale, onleſſe the ſame haue ben taken from the enemye, as lawefull pryſe, before they ſhall haue vnderſtanden her highnes further ordre concernyng the ſame, vpon lyke payne & forfeyture to her highnes vſe, as afore. Dated the thyrty of March, at her maieſties manor of Grenewich.
            God ſaue the kynge and the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               EXCVSVM LONDINI IN AEDIBVS IOhannis Cavvodi Tipographi regiae maieſtatis.
            
            
               Anno. M. D. LVIII.
            
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   