
      
         
            
            
            By the Quene,
            
               THe Quenes highnes by thaduiſe and conſente of her graces priuye Counſaylis pleaſed & doth ordayne, that from the date and publication hereof forwardes, all maner Frenche crownes of the Sunne, beynge of the iuſte ſtanderde fineſſe and weyght ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of ſixe ſhyllynges foure pence of curraunte moneye of thys Realme, and all maner of crownes of the Emperours coigne, being of the iuſte ſtanderde fines and weyght, ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of ſyxe ſhillynges foure pence, of curraunte moneye of thys Realme. Euerye double ducket of Spayne with two faces, beyng of the iuſte ſtanderde fines & weyght, ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of thyrtene ſhillynges foure pence of curraunt money of thys Realme. Euery ſingle ducket of Spayne with two faces, beynge of the iuſt ſtanderde fines and weyght, ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of ſixe ſhillinges eyght pence of curraunt money of thys Realme. Euery double royall of plate ſyluer of the Spayniſhe coigne, beynge of the iuſte ſtanderde fines and weyghte, ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of thyrtene pence, of curraunte moneye of this Realme. Euery royall of plate of the Spayniſhe coigne, beynge of the iuſte ſtanderde fines and weyght, ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of ſixe pence halfpennye, of the curraunte money of thys Realme. And euery halfe royall of plate of the Spaniſhe coigne beinge of the iuſte ſtanderde fines and weyght, ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of thre pence farthynge, of curraunte money of thys Realme. And that euery of the ſayde ſeuerall coignes aboue mentioned, beynge of the iuſte weyght and fines accordynge to the ſtanderde of the ſame, ſhall commonlye bee payed and receyued throughe out this her highnes realme and other her graces dominions in al paymentes and receptes, for and after the rates and values before in thys proclamation expreſſed and declared,
            Streightly chargyng and cōmaundyng al, and ſingular her highnes ſubiectes and others, dwellyng, conuerſyng or traffecking within the ſayed her graces realme & dominions, that they and euery of them obſerue, fulfyl, and execute theffecte, and tenour of thys preſent Proclamation, vpon payne that whoſo diſobeieth or refuſeth ſo to doe, beyng by due profe therof detected, ſhall fuffre impriſonment, and further puniſhment at her highnes pleaſure. 
            
               Geuen at our palais of Weſtminſter the eyght daye of Marche, in the firſte yere of our raigne.
               
            
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Reginae Mariae excuſum. Anno. M. D. L. IIII. 4. die menſis Maij.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   