
      
         
            
            
            By the Kynge and Quene,
            
               WHere it is of late brought to the knowledge of the kynge and Queenes Maieſties, that many wycked and vngodly perſons, ſome of purpoſe to ſtirre vnquietnes and ſeditions amonges their Maieſtyes good & faythfull ſubiectes, and others becauſe they maye thereby make theyr owne gaynes & vtter the corne & other thynges at the greter pryces, haue cōtrary to their bounden dewtyes ſpred and cauſed to be ſpred rumours, of the decreynge or fall of the coygne or monyes commenlye called teſtous of which rumour thus maliciouſly and vnmercyfully begon & ſpred abrode much contention hath growen amongeſt their Maieſties good ſubiects, the pryces of grayne and other thinges be vncharitably enhaunſed and many other great inconueniences haue ariſen, and greter be like to aryſe yf ſpedy remedy be not prouided herein. Lyke as their Maieſties be hartely ſory that any man to whome god hath geuen aboundaunce of thynges, ſhould in this vnmercyfull ſorte in thys tyme of darthe wherewith it hath pleaſed almighty God, preſently to plage the world, for the ſynnes & wickednes therof ſeke vpon thys pretence theyr owne gaynes with ſo great an iniury and oppreſſion of ther pore nedy neigh bours. So doth their Maieſties by this their proclamation ſtraitelye charge and commaund al their ſubiects of what ſorte or degre ſoeuer they be, that they and euerye of them in all their traffiques, byinges and ſellynges do quietly and obediently receyue vtter and paye aſwel the ſaid coyne or monye called teſtons as all other coygnes or monyes, of what ſorte ſoeuer the ſame be, accordyng to there iuſt valuations heretofore by theyr maieſties aucthoritie proclaymed & publiſhed, vpon payne of their maieſties vtter indignatyon and moſt ſharpe punyſhment by impryſonment and fyne at their maieſties pleſure. And their Maieſties further ſtrayghtly charge and commaund vppon like paynes al Maiors, Baylytes, Sheryfes Iuſtyces of peace, and all other offycers in all the countyes, Cyties, townes, and other places of this there maieſties Realme, aſwell within liberties as without, that they and euery of them, take diligent care and forſee within the lymyttes of their charges and offices that this their maieſties pleſure be in al things wel obeyed and obſerued, And that the markets in all places, may be from tyme to time ſufficiently furniſhed with corne and other neceſſary victualls, cauſyng ſuch as ſhalbe found diſobedient or offenders in any the premyſſes to be furthe with commytted to warde, and further poniſhed accordynge to theyr maieſties lawes, and theffect of this their proclamation, not fayling as ther maieſties doth ſpecyally truſte them, and as they wyll aunſwere for the contrary at their vttermoſt peryls.
            
               From Saynte Iames the .xxii. of December. 1556.
               
               God ſaue the kyng and the Quene.
            
         
      
      
         
            Excuſum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Regiae Maieſtatis.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
   