
      
         
            
            
            A proclamacion ſet furth by the Kinges Maieſtie with the aouiſe of his highnes moſt honorable priuy Counſail, concernyng caſters, and ſpreaders abrode of ſlaundetous and ſedicious billes. the .xx. day. of May in the .v. yere of his moſt proſperous reigne.
            
               Oraſmuche as diuers lewde and ſedicious perſones, minding to ſowe contencion in diuers partes of this realme, haue of their malicious and cankered affections, forged and made many ſtaunderous and wicked billes, aſwell againſt the kinges maieſties moſt honorable Counſayll, as againſte other noble perſonages within this Realme. And theſame billes hath ſpred and caſt abrode in ſtretes and in diuers other places. and hath faſtened theſame, at ſuche priuie corners where they thoughte they might beſt publiſhe their conceiued malice: The Auctors where of (becauſe they haue wrought their malice ſo couertly) cannot caſely be founde out to be puniſhed according to the lawes, ſtatutes and proclamations made in that behalf. And yet neuertheleſſe their deueliſh deuiſe taketh place and effect for that the ſaide billes haue not bene broken, de faced and deſtroied immediatly, after they haue bene founde, not only to the ſtaunder and infamy of many godly and weldiſpoſed perſones and defacing of their weldoinges in the common wealth, but alſo to the maintenaunce and incouraging of ſuche malefactors to perſeuer and continue in their lewdenes: Therefore the kinges Mateſtie with the aduiſe of his moſt honorable counſaill ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth al and ſinguler his louing ſubiectes to whoſe handes any ſuche ſtaundetous Billes or Writinges ſhall come, or that ſhall finde theun caſte abrode, or ſe theun faſteued to poſt, piller, or other place, theſame ſhall by the auothoritie of this proclamation furthwith with out further de'ay, breake, burne, deſtroy or deface without ſhewing them to any other perſone or perſons, that the effect and meaning of theſaide bil may not apeare and be conſerued therby. And whoſoeuer after his or their ſight, reading or knowlege therof, ſhall ſuffer theſame billes to ſtand ſtill or remaine not deſtroyed, nor defaced, as is beforeſayde, or ſhall publiſhe theſame to any other by any maner of meanes, theſame ſhalbe taken and puniſhed as the Auctor, maker and deuiſor of theſame, and being brought before a Iuſtice of the peace lefully conuicted, ſhal ſuffer impriſonment and make fine at the kinges maieſties pleaſure.
            God ſaue the King
         
      
      
         
            
               RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat.
            Menſe Maij.
            A. M. D. LI.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   