
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Proclamation ſet forth by the Kyng and Quenes moſt excellent maieſties with th aduice of theyr moſt honorable counſayle of certeyne moneyes and coynes of fyne gold & fine ſyluer with the valuation of the ſame, newlye ſet forth by theyr highneſſe.
            
               
                  WHERE the Quenes highnes (calling to her gratious remē
               braunce the great and intolerable charges, growen & chaunced to her highneſſe ſpeciallye, and alſo to all her louing ſubiectes, as well by reaſon of the baſe moneyes, made within her realmes and dominions, as alſo by greate quantities of the like baſe moneyes, made and counterfeyte bothe in thys her highneſſe realme, and in other forren realmes conueyed hyther, and iſſued oute within her graces realmes and dominions) cauſed to be made and ſet forth in the fyrſte yeare of her raygne certeyne coynes of moneyes, as well of fyne golde, as of fyne ſyluer, accordinge to her highneſſe proclamation, ſente forth in that behalfe.
            
               THE King and Queenes maieſties of theyr great and aboundant clemencies, mindinge to auoyde all inconueniences, happening and growing thereby for the tender scale and loue they beare to all theyr louyng ſubiectes, and for the commoditie of theyr ſaid louing ſubiectes, are reſolued and determined to continue the ſayd fyne moneyes, and therfore haue newlye cauſed to be made and ſet forth within theyr mintes certeyne peces of coynes of moneyes of golde and ſyluer of the fyne ſtanderdes, with ſuche ſtampe and prynte (deuiſed by theyr graces appoyntement) as is mete and conuenient for the ſame, and moſt redcundynge to theyr graces honours, after the rates and values hereafter expreſſed.
            
               THAT is to ſaye, one pece of fine golde called a Soueraigne of the value of thirtic willinges of lawfull moneye of Englande. One other pece of fyne golde halfe of the ſayd Soueraigne, called the Royal of gold of the value of fiftenne willinges of the lawful moneyes afore ſayde. One other pece of fyne golde called the Aungell of the value of tenne willinges of the lawfull moneyes aforeſayde. One other pece of fyne golde called the halfe Aungell of the value of fyue willinges of the lawfull moneyes aforeſayd. One pece of fyne ſyluer moneyes called the willing of the value of twelue pence of the lawfull moneyes of Englande. One other pece halfe of the ſayd willing of the value of ſixe pence of the lawfull moneyes aforeſayde. And one other pece called the Grote of the value of foure pence of the lawful moneyes aforeſayde. Al which peces of coynes of moneyes of gold & ſyluer the King & Quenes maieſties willes & pleaſures is, walbe curraunt within this their highnes realme of England, and the dominions of the ſame, after ſuche value, and in ſuche maner and forme, as aboue is declared. Strayghtlye charging and commaundinge all maner of perſons within theyr ſayd realme and dominions, of what eſtate or degree ſocuer they be, to receaue and paye the ſayd ſeuerall peces of moneyes, as well of golde as of ſyluer accordinglye, vpon payne of theyr highneſſe diſpleaſure, and to be further puniſhed, as ſhall ſome to theyr graces moſt conuenient. Neuertheleſſe theyr maieſties expreſſe cōmaundement is, that all ſuche baſe moneyes as haue bene reduced to the value of a lower rate, ſhall go curraunte in receypte and payment in lyke maner and ſorte, as the ſame be curraunte at this daye▪ according to the proclamation laſt made in the time of the late moſt noble Prince Kyng Edward the .vi. in ye behalfe, vntill ſuche time, as theyr highnes with th aduice of theyr counſaile ſhal take further order, touching the ſame.
            
               GEVEN at our pallaice of Weſtminſter the .xxvi. daye of December, in the fyrſte and ſeconde yeares of our raygnes.
         
      
      
         
            Excuſum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Topographi Regiae Maiestatis Anno. 1. 5. 5. 4. 26. Decembris.
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
         
      
   