
      
         
            
            By the Quene.
            
               
                  THE QVENES maiestie considering howe necessary it is and pleasynge to almyghtye God, to haue concorde and peace with al princes, and specially with such as be hir neighbours: And finding not onelye hir realmes and dominions lefte to hir in hostilitie and warre after the deceasse of hir deare sister the late Quene, with the realmes of Fraunce and Scotlande, but also an honorable occasion offred of treatyce of peace with both the saide Realmes: hath therefore vpon good aduyse, remoued all ennimitie, and hath vpon most godly, honorable and profitable consyderations (vpon the second of thys moneth) passed, concluded and agreed, a good, perfect, syncere and perpetuall amitie, peace, intelligence, confederacion and vnion, to remayne and continue for euer betwene hir most excellent Maiestie, hir heires and Successours on the one party: and the ryght high and mighty Prince Henry the French Kyng on thother party, their realmes Countries, Cities, townes, landes, dominions, territories, segnories, castels, vassales, and subiectes, by lande, sea, and freshe water, and else where. And the like peace also betwene hyr sayde Maiestye and the kyng and Quene, Dolphines of Scotlande, and theyr Realmes and Countryes. By the which peace it is prouided, that al hostilitie and warre shall cease on either partie, and that the saide Prynces, their Subiectes and vassalles, shall lyue together in peace, amitie, intelligence and frendshippe. And that all thynges be vsed and exercised as frely and lyberally, as they haue done in any former tyme of peace, had betwene the said Realmes and dominions.
            
               ALL which premisses hir Maiestie hath thought mete to notifye to all maner hir subiectes of what estate soeuer the same be, that they and euery of them, obserue all that hereto belongeth: as the lyke is at the Citie of Paris in Fraunce on the french parte publyshed and notyfyed.
            
               
                  YEVEN at the palace of Westminster the seuenth of Apryll the first yeare of the raigne of our soueraigne Lady Elyzabeth by the grace of god Quene of Englande, Fraunce and Ireland. defender of the fayth. &c.
               
            
            God saue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN POVLES CHVRCHE yarde, bi Richarde Iugge, and Iohn Cavvood, Printers to the Quenes Maiestie. ANNO. M. D. LIX.
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
         
      
   