
      
         
            
            
            By the Quene.
            
               
                  THE Quenes maieſtie conſiderynge, howe neceſſarye it is and pleaſynge to almyghtye god, to haue concorde and peace wyth all prynces, and ſpeciallye wt ſuche as be hir neighbours: And findinge not onely hir realmes and dominions lefte to hir in hoſtilytie and warre after the deceaſſe of hir deare ſiſter the late Quene, with the realmes of Fraunce and Scotlande, but alſo an honorable occaſion offred of treatie of peace with both the ſaid Realmes: hath therfore vpon good aduiſe, remoued al ennimitie, & hath vpon moſt godly, honorable and profitable conſiderations (vpon the ſecond of thys moneth) paſſed, concluded and agreed, a good, perfect, ſincere and perpetual amitie, peace, intelligence, confederacion and vnion, to remayne and contynewe for euer betwene hir moſte excellent maieſtie, hir heires and Succeſſors on the one partie: and the ryght high and mightye Prince Henrye the Frenche kinge on thother party, their realmes, Countries, Cities, townes, landes, dominions, terrytoryes, ſegnories, caſtles, vaſſalles and ſubiectes, by land, ſea, and freſhwater, and elſewhere. And the like peace alſo betwene hir ſayd maieſtie and the king and Quene, Dolphines of Scotlande, and their Realmes and coſitries. By the which peace it is prouided, that al hoſtility and warre ſhal ceaſe on eyther partie, and that the ſayd Prynces, their Subiectes and vaſſalles, ſhall lyue together in peace, amitye, intelligence and frendſhippe: And that all thynges be vſed and exerciſed as freely and lyberallye, as they haue done in anye former tyme of peace, had betwene the ſayd Realmes and dominions.
            
               ALL which premiſſes hir maieſtie hath thought mete to notifie to al maner hir Subiectes of what eſtate ſo euer the ſame be, that they and euerye of them, obſerue all that hereto belongeth: as the like is at the Citie of Paris in Fraunce on the french part publyſhed and notifyed.
            
               
                  YEVEN at the palace of Weſtminſter the ſeuenth of Aprill the firſt yeare of the raigne of our ſoueraigne lady Elizabeth by the grace of god Quene of Englande, Fraunce and Ireland, defender of the faith. &c.
               
               GOD ſaue the Quene.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by Rycharde Iugge and Iohn Cawood printers vnto the Quenes maieſtie.
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   