
      
         
            
            
            By the kynge and Quene
            
               THE Quenes moſte excellente hyghnes intendyng very ſhortly to prepare and ſette for the a nauye of ſhyppes vnto the ſeas, aſwell for the defence of her Maieſtyes Realmes and Dominions, as alſo for the better annoyaunce and empeachement of thenemie, doth by vertue of this her hyghnes proclamation, ſtrayghtly charge and commaund that no maryner or watermanne belongyng to the Sea or Thamys be from henceforthe empreſted by anye perſon or perſons, or employed in anye other ſeruyce, but to be reſerued and ſpared, to the publyque ſeruice of her hyghnes and the Realme, vpon the water, for the furniture of her ſaid Nauie.
            And to thintente no deceite or fraude be vſed by anye of her hyghnes ſubiectes, to the violation and breache of thys proclamation, and hynderaunce of ſo expedyent and neceſſary a ſeruyce intended by the ſame. Lyke as her Maieſtye vtterly forbyddeth that any man ſhal hereafter vnder pretence of enterteynmente or retinue, kepe any mariner or waterman but he ſhall ſuffer the ſame to be taken vp and employed by the Lorde Admirall and hys inferior officers, for the ſeruyce of her Maieſtye vppon the Seas, ſoo doeth her hyghnes hereby moſte ſtrayghtly charge and commaunde vpon payne of deathe, that all and euerye the ſayde maryners and watermen, be and ſhewe them ſelues after the publyſhynge hereof obedient, aſwell to the ſayd Lorde Admyrall hym ſelfe, as to his inferior and vnder officers alſo of the admiraltye, wythout refuſall or contradiction of anye order to be by hym or them taken, for the aduauncement and furtheraunce of her Maieſties ſeruyce in this behalfe.
            God ſaue the kynge and the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ EXCVSVM Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cavvodi. Typographi Regiae maieſtatis.
            Anno. M. D. L. viii.
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae maiestatie.
            
         
      
   