
      
         
            
            
            A Proclamacion ſet furth by thee Kynges Maieſty, wyth the aduiſe of hys mooſt honorable Counſaill, for the aouoydyng of ydle perſones out of the citie of London.
            
               THE Kyng our Soueraigne Lorde, by thaduiſe and cōſent of hys highnes mooſte honorable priuie counſaill, Streightly chargeth and commaundeth that al and euery perſone and perſones of what eſate, condicion or degree ſo euer he or they be beyng his graces natural ſubiectes borne, whiche wer not borne within his Maieſties Citee and Chambre of London, the Borough of Southwarke or the Suburbes within the liberties of the ſame, nor be houſholders there, or haue ſufficient to liue by, and good and reaſonable cauſe there to remaine, nor haue cōtinued and dwelled within the ſame by thee ſpace of three yeres together now laſte paſte, and nowe do continewe ſoiourne and abyde there within the ſayed Citie, Borough, or Suburbes, not beyng reteyned in ſeruice with any Perſone, nor applyeng theim ſelues to any bodely laboure or lawefull occupacion. and takynge Stipend and wages for the ſame, do not onely furthwith vppon this Proclamacion, departe and auoyde oute of thee ſayde Citie, Boroughe and liberties thereof, but alſo with al conuenient ſpede, do returne and get theim ſelues home agayne either into their natiue Countreyes where they were borne, or elles into the places within the realme where they laſt dwelt by the ſpace of three yeres together according to the tenure fourine and effect of the eſtatute in that behalf, concernyng the ordering of aged and ympotente perſones & the puniſhement of vacaboundes idle and loyteryng perſones and Maſterles menne. lately made and prouided, vpon the paynes in the ſame eſtatute lymited and expreſſed. And that the ſaid Mayre, Aldermen and Shriefes and euery of theim, & al and euery other his Maieſties Officers and Miniſters within the ſayde Citie, Borough of South warke and liberties therof (all excuſes ceaſſyng and ſet aparte) endeuoure theimſelues with all conuenient diligence frome hencefurth, frome tyme to tyme too ſee, procure and cauſe the ſaide eſtatute and euery braunche and article therin conteined, iuſtly to be obſerued and put in due execucion accordyngly, as they and euery of theim tendre his Maieſties fauour and will a voyd his highnes Indignacion, and diſpleaſure.
            God ſaue the Kyng.
         
      
      
         
            
               RICH ARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat. Menſe Maii. A, M. D, L. Cum Priulegio ad imprimendum ſolum
            
         
      
   