
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A proclamation ſet furthe by the Kynges Maieſty, with the aduiſe of his moſt honorable priuey counſayll, for the valuacion of the Shillinges and grotes to a meaner and lower value and rate.
            
               WHeras, the late king of moſt famous memory, king Henry the .viii. father vnto our moſt redoubted ſouereigne Lord the Kinges maieſty that now is, conſideryng at the beginning of his laſt warres, that great & notable ſommes of money, wer requiſite to be prouided for the maintenance and ſupportacion of theſame, did therfore deuiſe, to abace, and diminiſhe the goodnes of the Coyne, and therupon, cauſed to be coyned and ſetfurth to be currant amonges his ſubiectes, certein peces of mony called Teſtons valuing theſame at .xii. d. 
               ſterl. the pece, and likewiſe, grotes of theſame bacenes, after the rate of .iiii. d. 
               ſterl. the pece. After which time, our ſaid ſouereine lord that now is, perceauing, that aſwell ſtraungers in forrein partes, as diuers lewde perſons within this realme, did by reaſon of the bacenes of theſayde Coine, counterfaict no ſmall quantitie of like mony: His Maieſtie therefore mynding to remedy theſame, deuiſed and cauſed to be coined and ſetfurth, to be currant with in this Realme, and other his dominions, other peces of mony called Shillinges and grotes, vnder another ſtampe, likewiſe valuing theſaid Shillinges, at .xii. d. 
               ſterl. the pece, and the grotes at .iiii. d. 
               ſterl. the pece.
            Foraſmuch as this notwithſtāding, it hath appered ſithens moſt certainly, vnto our ſaid ſouerein Lorde, and to his highnes counſaill, that not onely diuers ſtraungers of beyonde the ſeas, but alſo ſūdry falſe and naughty Perſonnes within this Realme, haue in like maner, from time to time, counterfaicted and falſely coyned the ſayde Shillinges and Grotes, ſet furthe by our ſaide Souereygne Lorde, and with the ſame counterfaicte and falſe Monies, in greate and notable Summes, do trafficque and bie al maner of victualles, Wares and other kinde of Merchandizes, geuyng they care not what Prices for the ſame: Where vpon hathe riſen one greate and ſpecial occaſion of ſo greate dearthe, of all maner of thinges as at this day dothe appere among all men, to the greate loſſe of his maieſtie and his ſubiectes, and to the greate ſlaunder of the whole Realme, and to the empoueriſhement of euery man in his Degree, that hathe theſame mony, and woulde kepe it in ſtore. His Maieſtie therefore gratiouſly conſidering, with the good aduiſe of the Lordes, and others of the priuie counſaill, what greate benefite, commodite and reputation ſhal ariſe and folow very ſhortly after, to the whole body of the realme, if that theſaide Coines wer amended, and brought to ſuch a fineneſſe, as may make theſame certaine, like as in times paſt it hathe bene. Albeit that theſayde firſte abacement of the Coyne was greatly beneficiall vnto his ſayde Maieſties Father of famous memory, and alſo to the King our Souereigne Lorde that nowe is, yet his Maieſtie conſidering that this amendement of the coyne ſhalbe bothe great honor to this Realme, and alſo a merueilous benefite vnto the whole common wealthe, for the bringing doune of the highe prices of all thinges, hathe like a moſt gratious Prince determined to reforme theſame. And foraſmuche as thys can not be broughte to paſſe oneleſſe the ſayde mony called Shillinges, coyned by his maieſty, and grotes coyned both by his maieſty, and by the king his father, might be rated at a value, more nere vnto the goodnes and finenes of theſame, then now they be rated at, whiche thing taking place, his highnes with al the ſpede that maye be, determineth to reforme this preſent coine, and to bring it (with goddes leaue) to ſuche perfect goodnes and fineneſſe, as ſhal geue all his louing ſubiectes greate cauſe to reioyce. Therefore his maieſtie doth ordeine and determine, that from and after the laſt Day of Auguſt now nexte enſuyng, the ſayd Shillinges coyned and ſetfurth by his Maieſtie, ſhalbe curraunt within this Realme of Englande, and the towne of Caleis and Marches of the ſame, for ix. d. 
               ſterl. and not aboue, & the ſaide grotes at iii. d 
               ſterl. & not aboue And therfore ſtraightly chargeth and cōmaūdeth, al and euery perſon and perſons, of what eſtate, degre or condicion ſo euer theſame be, to paye and receaue after the ſaid laſt day of Auguſt the ſayde coynes of Shillinges for. i
                  •
               . d. 
               ſterl. and theſayd grotes for .iii. d. 
               ſterl. And for no higher, or lower price, within this his highnes realme, & the toune of Caleis & Marches of theſame, vpon paine of forfeiture to his maieſty, of ſuche ſomes of mony as ſhalbe paid or receaued otherwiſe then by this proclamation is ſetfurthe, and alſo vpon paine of impriſonment with a further fine to be ſet vpon thoffendors, at his maieſtes pleaſure. Geuen the laſt of Aprill, in the .v. yere of the reigne of our ſayd ſouereigne Lorde King Edwarde the .vi.
            God ſaue the King.
         
      
      
         
            
               RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat. M. D. LI.
            
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum
            
         
      
   