
      
         
            
            
            
               THe Quenes highnes by thaduiſe and conſente of her graces priuie Counſayll is pleaſed & doth ordeyne, that from the date and publication hereof forwardes, all maner Frenche crownes of the Sunne, beinge of the iuſte ſtanderde fineſſe and weyght ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of ſixe ſhyllynges foure pence of curraunte moneye of this Realme, and all maner of crownes of the Emperous coigne, beinge of the iuſte ſtanderde fines and weyght, ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of ſyxe ſhillynges foure pence, of curraunte money of this Realme. Euery double ducket of Spayne with two faces beynge of the iuſte ſtanderde fynes & weyght, ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of thirtene ſhillinges foure pence, of curraunte money of this Realme. Euery ſingle ducket of Spayne with two faces, being of the iuſt ſtanderde fines and weyght, ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of ye value of ſixe ſhillinges eyght pence, of curraunte money of this Realme. Euery double royall of plate ſyluer of the Spaniſhe coigne, beinge of the iuſte ſtanderde fines and weyghte, ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of thyrtene, pence of curraunte money of this Realme. Euery royall of plate of the Spaniſhe coigne, beinge of the iuſte ſtanderde fines and weyght, ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of ſixe pence halfpennye, of the curraunte money of this Realme. And euerye halfe royal of plate of the Spaniſhe coigne beynge of the iuſte ſtanderde fynes and weyght, ſhalbe demed and accepted to be of the value of thre pence farthinge, of curraunte money of this Realme. And that euery of the ſayde ſeuerall coignes aboue mentioned, beinge of the iuſte weyght and fynes accordynge to the ſtanderde of the ſame, ſhall commonlye be payed and receyued through out this her highnes Realme & other her graces dominions in al paymentes and receptes, for and after the rates and values before in this proclamation expreſſed and declared.
            Strayghtlye charginge and cōmaunding all, & ſinguler her highnes ſubiectes and others, dwelling, conuerſing or trafficking within the ſayd her graces realme and dominions, that they and euery of them obſerue, fulfill, and execute theffecte and tenour of this preſent Proclamation, vpon payne, that who ſo diſobeyeth or refuſeth ſo to do, being by due proofe therof detected, ſhall ſuffre enpriſonmente, and further puniſhement at her highnes pleaſure.
            Geuen at our Palais of Weſtminſter the eyghte daye of Marche, in the firſt yeare of our raygne.
            God ſaue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Reginae Mariae excuſum. Anno. M. D. L iiii.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum
            
         
      
   