
      
         
            
            
            By the Quene.
            
               MAry by the grace of God Quene of England, Fraunce, and Irelande, defender of the fayth, & of the church of England and alſo of Ireland in earth the ſupreme heade.
            To all Mayres. Shiriffes, Bayliffes, Conſtables, & to all other our officers miniſters & ſubiectes, and to euery of thē gretynge. Where by reaſon of our abyding here at our pallace of Weſtmynſter, aſwell for our coronation, as for this oure preſent parliament and terme, great reſort of our nobles, and other of our ſubiectes haue repayred hyther to oure cities of London and Weſtminſter, & there haue taryed, & yet ſtyll do remayne, by occaſion wherof ſuch byllets, fagottes, talewoodes, and other fewels as were prouyded, and brought to the ſayd cities for theyr prouiſion, are greatly waſted and conſumed, where by the ſame our cities, and the Suburbes of the ſame are lyke to lack ſufficient and compotent ſtore therof, for their furniture for this preſent wynter, as we be enfourmed by the heades and gouernours of the ſame our cities. We myndyng the preſent reliefe of the ſame want, and lacke of fewell, do ſtrayghtly charge and commaund all and ſynguler our louynge Subiectes, whiche haue any maner of talewood, byllettes, fagottes, or other fewell whatſoeuer, cut downe, felled, and made, or to be made readye to be caryed, that they and euerye of them, with all conuenient ſpede, do brynge, and cauſe to be brought to our ſayd cities and ſuburbes of the ſame all and ſynguler the ſame talewode, byllets, fagottes, and other fewell.
            And further we wyll, and by theſe preſentes do geue lycence to all and euery our ſayd ſubiects, whiche ſhall brynge any of the ſayd fewell to our ſayd cities or the ſuburbes of the ſame, that they and euery of them ſhall, and may, franckly, and frely, vtter, ſell, and put to ſale the ſame fewell, and euery part thereof, to our ſayde nobelles and Subiectes, at reaſonable and compotente pryces, without impechement, or incurrynge of any for fayture, loſſe, payne, or penaltye, conteyned in the acte of parliament, made for the aſſyſe of wood, the fyrſt day of March, in the .vii. yeare of ye reigne of our deare brother, kynge Edwarde the Sixt, for, or by reaſon, that the ſame fewell, or any percell therof ſhall fortune to lacke or want any parte of the iuſte aſſyſe or proportion whiche it ought to beare and kepe, by vertue of the ſayde acte, any thynge in the ſame acte conteyned to the contrary, notwithſtandynge. ¶ In witnes wherof, we haue cauſed this our preſent letters of licence and proclamation to be made patentes. Wytnes our ſelfe at Weſtminſter, the .xx. day of Nouember, the fyrſte yeare of our reygne.
            God ſaue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Reginae excuſum. Anno. M D. LIII.
            
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum
            
         
      
   