
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A proclamacion ſet furth by the Kinges Maīeſtie with the aduiſe of his highnes moſt honorable counſail, for the ſhortening of a day, limited in another proclamation, concerning the abacing of the value of Shilinges and Grotes.
            
               WHereas the Kinges maieſtie, very lately by proclamation did ordeine vpon diuers great and profitable conſiderations that the pece of ſiluer coine, called the ſhilling, ſhoulde after the laſt day of Auguſt next, be currant for. ix. d. and not aboue, and the peece of ſiluer coine called the grote, ſhould likewiſe after the ſame day be currant for. iii, d. and not aboue: His maieſtie now vnderſtandeth, vpon the aduertiſement of his priuie Counſaill, that although his meaning was muche fauourable to his people, in the ſetting ſo long a daye, not minding that the ſodynes therof ſhould be ouer greuous: Yet neuertheleſſe, the couetouſnes of certeine kinde of people, is ſo inſatiable, that by the craft vſed in this behalf, the goodnes of his maieſty towardes his people, is muche abuſed, by the exceſſiue raiſing of the prices of victual and other thinges, in the handes of Graſters, great Fermours, Merchauntes and ſuche like, that it appeareth now very nedefull, to ſhorten the former day. Wherefore his maieſtie, with the good aduiſe of the Lordes, and others of his priuey counſail, doth ordeine, determine and publiſh, his moſt royal pleaſor to be, that the ſaid peece of ſiluer coine, named the ſhilling, ſhall at and immediately, after this preſent proclamation publiſhed, be curtaunt, paide and receaued but onely for. ix. d. and not aboue. And likewiſe, the peece of ſiluer called the grote, ſhal at and immediately after this proclamation publiſhed, be curtaunt, paide and receaued, for iii. d. and not aboue: Willing and ſtraightly commaunding all maner of perſones, ſo to receaue and pay the ſame, neither for more nor leſſe, vpon like peines conteined in the former proclamation, any thing in the ſaied former proclamation notwithſtanding.
            
               At Grenewiche the of Iune. The fift yere of the reigne of the kinges maieſtie.
               
            
            God ſaue the King.
         
      
      
         
            RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat. M. D. LI.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   