
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ A Proclamation for the Marchauntes Aduenturers.
            
               
                  ELizabeth dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, & Hiberniae, Regina fidei defenſor, &c. Maiori & vicecomitibus Ciuitatis ſue Londonienſis, ſalutem. Vobis mandamus quod ſtatim viſis preſentibus in ſingulis locis, infra Ciuitatem predictam & Suburb, eiuſdem, tam infra libertates quam extra, vbi magis expedire videritis ex parte noſtra, ſolemniter & publicae proclamari fac. in haec verba.
            
            
               WHERE in the Parliament begonne and holden at Weſtminſter, the firſt daye of March, in the ſeuenth yeare of the Raygne of our deareſt brother Kyng Edward the Sixt, and there continued till the laſt day of the ſame month of March. It is there reſited by one acte of Parliament, then & there made intituled an act reuiuing a Statute made in the xvii yeare of our moſt noble progenitor, king Edward the fourth, amongeſt other thinges it was then ordeyned and enacted by auctheritie of the ſame Parlyament, that no perſon ſhould cary or make to be caried out of this Realme or Wales, from no part of the ſame, any manner of moneye of the coigne of this Realme, nor money of the coine of other realmes, lādes, or Lordſhippes, nor plate, veſſell, bullion or Iuell of gold, garniſhed or vngarniſhed, or of Siluer withoute the kinges licence, but ſuche perſons as be diſpenſed with in the ſtatute made in the ſecond yeare of our moſt noble progenitor king Henry the Sixte, and other diuerſe Statutes made vpon paine of felonye. The which eſtatute and ordinance ſo made in the time of our ſaid moſt noble progenitor King Edward the fourth, was made to endure from the feaſt of Eaſter in the xviii. yeare of the ſaid King Edward the fourth, vnto thend of ſeauen yeares then next enſuing, which ſaid eſtatute and ordinaunce ſo before rehearſed by aucthoritie of Parliament, holden in the fourth yere of the late king of famous memory, Henry the Seuenth, was confirmed & eſtabliſhed to be good & effectuall from the feaſt of the purification of our Lady in the yeare of our lorde God a thouſand foure hundreth, foure ſcore and nine, to thend and terme of twenty yeares then next enſuinge, as by the ſame Statute alſo more plainely appeareth. And where alſo at the ſaid Parliament holden at Weſtminſter, in the Seuenth yeare of our ſaid deareſt brothers reigne, it is enacted by aucthoritie of Parliament, that the ſaid eſtatute & ordinaunce before rehearſed, made in the xvii. yere of our moſt noble progenitor king Edward the fourth, and euery clauſe, article, ſentence or prouiſion therein conteined, is by authoritie thereof confirmed and enacted, to be good & effectuall from the firſt day of May then next enſuing, and to endure vnto thend of twenty yere then next following. As by the ſaid act made in the ſeuenth yere of our ſayd deareſt brothers Raygne playnely appeareth.
            
               NEVERTHELES vpon good and reaſonable conſiderations vs mouing, we be pleaſed and contented, that from and after the publication of this our Proclamation, it ſhalbe lawfull vnto all notorious Marchauntes, and all and euery other perſon and perſonnes paſſing by our ſpeciall lycence out of this realme, into any outwarde parties beyond the Seas, to carye with them for theyr reaſonable coſtes and expenſes, the ſomme of foure poundes of any money currant within this Realme, or vnder and not aboue, or any Rynges or Signettes of golde or Syluer vpon theyr fyngers, without anye loſſe of lyfe, landes or goodes, or any other payne, forfeyture, impryſonment, or penaltie to be to them or any of them for the ſame. The ſayde eſtatutes or any other Statute, ordenaunce or lawe heretofore made to the contrarie in any wyſe notwithſtandyng. Et hoc ſub periculo incumbenti nullatenus omittatis.
            
            
               Teſte me ipſa apud Weſtminſter primo die Maij. Anno Regni noſtri primo.
               
            
            God ſaue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by Richard Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Quenes Maieſtie. Anno M. D. LIX. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   