
      
         
            
            
            By the Quene,
            
               THe Quene our ſoueraygne Ladye graciouſlye conſidering the good wylles, forwardnes, and harty d
                  •
               ſpoſitions of her trewe louynge ſubiectes, alwayes heretofore exhibited, to the ayde & ſuccoure of the common weale, with theyr proper ſubſtaunce & goodes, when the ſeruyce, ye neceſſitie, & honour of the realme hath ſo required, aſwell in the tymes and ſeueral reygnes of the mooſt excellent prynces our late ſouereygne Lordes, her deare Father, and deare brother, Kynge Henry the eyght and Kinge Edwarde the ſyxte, and ſpeciallye ſynce the tyme of her vocation to the crowne, in the defence of her royall perſon, agaynſt the maliciouſe force of the moſt arrande Traytour ſyr Iohn Dudley late Duke of Northumberlande, and his complyces. Notwithſtandynge it is well knowen to the multitude of hyr ſayde good ſubiectes, howe by the euyll gouernemente of the realme in theſe late yeares, ſpecially ſince the ſayde Duke hath borne rule, the treaſure of the ſame is meruelouſlye exhauſted, and her hyghnes nowe preſentlye charged, with payment of notable great Sommes, beynge the debte of her ſayde brother the kynge, partely due to dyuers of her ſayde ſeruauntes and ſubiectes, and partely to certayne marchaunt ſtraungers, and others, whiche for her owne honour, and the honoure of the realme, her highnes determineth by the helpe of God truly to diſcharge, content, and paye in tymes conueniente and reaſonable, yet hauynge both a ſpeciall mynde to the weale of her ſayde ſubiectes, and accomptynge theyr louyng hartes and proſperitie as her owne weale, and the chiefeſt treaſure that ſhe deſyreth, nexte the fauour and grace of God, and hauyng a full affiaunce in her ſayde ſubiectes, that yf the ſtate, the cauſe, & honour of the realme ſhall ſo requyre, they wyll at all tymes hereafter exhibite theyr ſemblable ſeruyce. Notwithſtandynge in the latter Seſſion of the laſte parliament holden in the tyme of the ſayde late kynge Edwarde the ſyxte, towardes the paymentes and diſcharges of the ſayde notable debtes, there was graunted by acte of parliament vnto the ſayde kynge Edwarde two diſmes, and two fyftenes, and one Subſedie of four ſhyllynges of the pound, to be rayſed and leuyed of the Manours, Landes, and Tenementes, and two ſhyllynges eyghte pence of the goodes and catelles of her ſayde Subiectes, whiche grauntes are nowe due vnto her hyghnes by the ſayde acte, and wolde diſcharge one greate peece of the ſayde debtes. Her maieſtie for the conſiderations aforerehearſed, of her mere grace and great clemency, for the releif and ſuccour of her ſayde good ſubiectes, hath freely for her and her heyres, and ſucceſſours, pardoned and remytted, & by theſe preſentes frely & fully pardoneth & remitteth vnto her ſayd ſubiectes, and theyr heyres and executours, the ſayde Subſidie of foure ſhyllynges the pounde, and two ſhyllynges eyght pence the pounde, graunted in the latter ſeſſion, and laſt parliament, truſtynge her ſayde good ſubiectes wyll haue louynge conſideration thereof for theyr partes, whome ſhe requyreth hartely to bende them ſelues wholy to ſerue God to his glory, with continuall prayer vnto the ſame for the honoure and auauncemente of her grace, and the common weale. Geuen at oure manour of Rychemonde, the fyrſte day of September. In the fyrſt year of our mooſt proſperous reygne.
            God ſaue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi 
               Typographi Reginae excuſum. Anno. M. D. LIII.
            
               Cum privilegio ad imprimendum ſolum▪
               
            
         
      
   