
      
         
            
            
            By the Quene.
            
               THe Quene our Soueraine Ladye, vnderſtandynge that a nultitude of euyldiſpoſed perſones, beyng borne out of bet highnes dominions in other ſundrie nations, fleinge from the obeyſaunce of the Princes and rulers vnder whome they be borne, ſome for hereſye, ſome for murder, treaſon. robberye, and ſome for other horrible crimes, be reſorted and come into her maieſties realme, and here haue made their demour and yet be commoraunt and lyngryng, partly to eſchewe ſuch condigne puniſhment, as their ſayde horrible crimes deſerue, and partlye to dilate, plante and ſowe the ſeedes of their maliciouſe doctrrine, and lewde conuerſation, amonge the good ſubiectes of this her graces Realme, of purpoſe to infecte her good ſubiectes with the lyke, in ſo muche as beſides innumerable hereſies, which diuerſe of the ſame beynge heretiques, haue preached and taught, within her highnes ſayde Realme. It is aſſuredlye knowen vnto her maieſtie, that not onely their ſecrete practiſes haue not fayled to ſtyrre comforte and ayde, diuerſe her highnes ſubiectes, to this moſt vnnatural rebellion, againſt god and her grace, but alſo ſome other of them, deſiſte not ſtyl to practiſe with her people eftſones to rebell: Her maieſtie therfore hauynge (as is afore ſayde) knowledge and intelligence hereof, hath for remedie herin determined, and moſt ſtrayghtly chargeth and commaūdeth, that al & euery ſuch perſone or perſons borne out of her highnes dominions, now commoraunte or reſiaunte within this Realme, of what ſoeuer nation or countreye, beynge eyther preacher, prynter, bokeſeller, or other artificer or of whatſoeuer callynge els, not beinge denizen, or merchaunt knowen, vſyng the trade of merchaundiſe, or ſeruaunt to ſuche Ambaſſadours as beliegers here, from the princes and ſtates ioyned in league with her grace, ſhall within xxiiii. dayes after this proclamation, auoyde the Realme, vpon payne of moſte greuouſe puniſhement by impriſonment, and forfaiture and confiſcation of all theyr goodes and moueables, and alſo to be delyuered vnto their naturall Princes or Rulers, agaynſt whoſe perſones or lawes, they haue offended. Geuynge to all maiors, ſhrieffes, bailifes, cunſtables and other her miniſters, officers & good ſubiectes, ſtraightly alſo in charge, yf they know any ſuch perſone not borne in the Quenes highnes dominions (except before excepted) that ſhall after the time and daye limited in this proclamation, tarye within thys realme, that they ſhall apprehende the ſame perſone or perſons, and commit hym or them to warde, there to remayne without bayle or mainpriſe tyll her graces pleaſure or her counſailles be ſignified vnto them, for the further orderynge of the ſaide perſone or perſones.
            And that yf any of her ſayed officers, after the ſayed xxiiii. dayes apprehende, take or know of any ſuche, that they ſhall with diligence immediatlye certifie her ſayde counſail therof, to thintent order may furthwith be geuen, for their puniſhment accordynge.
            God ſaue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Regine Mariae excuſion▪ Anno. M. D. LIIII.
            
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   