
      
         
            
            
            By the Kyng and the Quene.
            
               WHERE as Henry Dudly, Chriſtofer Aſton thelder, Chryſtofer Aſton the yonger, Frauncys Horſey, Edwarde Horſey, Roberte Cornewell, Alias Cornewall, Richarde Tremayne, Nycholas Tremayne Richard Ryth, Roger Reinoldes. Iohn Dale, Ihon Calton, Hamond, & Meuerel, forgetting theyr dueties to almyghty God, their alle gyaunce to the kinges & Quenes Maieſties, & not regarding yt good & quyet ſtate of their natyue country, haue of late vnnaturally, and moſt trayterouſly attempted, ymagined, conſpired, compaſſed, and practiſed many notable Actes, conſpiracies, and deteſtable treaſones, entendyng therby not onely the deſtruction of the Kynge and Quenes moſt Royall perſones, but alſo the diſturbaunce of the peace and tranquillitie of thys Realme, and the inuaſion, and ſubuerſyon of the ſame, yf their malyces & malignityes myght haue taken ſuch ſucceſſe as they entended. Who knowyng them ſelfes falſe conſpiratours, and traytours to the ſayde kynge and Quenes Maieſties, & their ſayd Realme, haue of late contrary to ye lawes of this Realme, withdrawen themſelues and be fled, and departed into the parties of beyond the Seas, where they doo ſtyll remayne, and contynue in contempt of their ſaid Maieſties, & of their lawes, not cefſynge to pracetyſe and execute their malicyous and trayterous purpoſes, and enterpriſes agaynſt our ſayd Soueraygne Lorde and Lady, the kyng and the Quenes Maieſtyes, & thys theyr Realme and domynion, contrarye to their duty of allegyance, where by they cannot preſently be brought to tryal accordyng to the lawes and ſtacutes of this Realme, in that caſe prouided forſuch offēces conſpiracyes, and treaſones, as haue bene by them and euery of them committed, perpetrated & done.
            And to thintent our ſaid Soueraygne Lord and Lady, the king & Quenes Maieſties, true faithfull and iouynge ſubiectes, of thys Realme, being ignoraunt of ſuch conſpiracies & treaſones, as haue bene perpetrated committed & done by the ſaide Henry Dudley, Chriſtofer Aſton thelder, Chriſtofer Aſton the yonger, Frauneys Horſey, Edward Horſey, Robert Cornewell, Alias Cornewall, Rycharde Tremayne, Nicholas Tremayne, Richard Ryth, Roger Reinolds, Iohn Dale, Ihon Caltō, Hamōd and Meuerel, ſhuld not incurre the daungier of their highnes lawes, or be impeached or troubled, for aydyng comfortyng or helpyng them or any of thē hereafter, do therefore by this their highnes procla mation, pronounce, publyſhe. and declare the ſaid Henry Dudley, Chriſtofer Aſton thelder, Chriſtofer Aſton the yonger, Frauneys Horſey, Edwarde Horſey, Roberte Cornewell, Alias Cornewall, Rycharde Tremayne, Nycholas Tremayne, Rychard Ryth, Roger Reinoldes, Ihon Dale, Ihon Caltō Hamond, and Meuerell, and euery of them to be notorious, and manifeſt traytoures, to their ſaid maieſties, and their ſayd Realme. And therefore wyll and commaunde all and ſinguler their good true, & naturall ſubiectes, that they do not ayde the ſayd Henry Dudley, Chriſtofer Aſton thelder, Chriſtofer Aſton the yonger, Fayuncys Horſey, Edwarde Horſey, Robert Cornewell, Alias Cornewall, Rycharde Tremayne, Nicholas Tremayne, Rycharde Ryth, Roger Reynoldes, Ihon Dale, Ihon Calton Hamond and Meuerell, nor any of them, with any thyng, nor adhere or haue acceſſe vnto the ſaid trai toures or any of them wythin thys Realme, or without. But do that lye in theyr powers, to apprehed the ſayde traytoures, and euery of them, as they wyll auoyd theyr Maieſties high indignation & diſpleaſure, and the penalties, of their lawes and ſtatutes. And further the kyng and Quenes moſt excellent Maieſties, ſtraightly charge and commaund all and ſinguler Iuſtices of peace, Maires, ſherifes Baylyffes, Conſtables. Cuſtomers, Comptrollers, Searchers, and all other their hyghnes officers, & mynyſters, of the portes, and Crekes of this theyr ſayd Realme, and the dominions of ye ſame, to haue a vigilant eye, and regarde to the ſayd portes, & Crekes, and to ſtay, apprehende and take al and euery ſuch perſon and perſones, which after the publication of this theyr highnes Proclamation, ſhall attēpte to paſſe out of this realme, (except marchauntes, and ſuch as ſhall haue theyr maieſties ſpeciall lycence▪ or may paſſe ouer by force of the ſtatute of Rycharde the ſecond, progenytor of our ſayd ſoueraigne Lady the Quene, made in the fyftyeare of his Reygne. And them and euerye of them, to commytte to ſafe cuſtodye, warde or pryſon, ſo to remayne vntyl further order ſhalbe taken by theyr Maieſt
                  ••
               s or their moſt honorable Counſayle for theyr delyuerye, or otherwyſe as the caſe ſhall requyre.
            
               Geuen at oure maner of Grenewych the fyrſt daye of Apryll.
               
            
            God ſaue the Kynge and the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            Excuſum Londini in aeedibus Iohannis is Cawald, Typographi Regiae Maiestatis. Anno. M. D. L VI. Cum priuilegio.
         
      
   