
      
         
            
            
            By the Kyng and the Quene.
            
               THe kyng and Quenes moſt excellente Maieſties, vnderſtandinge howe that dyuers naughty and inſolent perſons, haue nowe of late attempted to make quarelles, ryottes, and frayes, aſwell in Churches and Churchyardes, contrary to the lawes and Statutes in that caſe prouyded, as in ſundrye other places, Cities, Townes, and Marketes. And for thaccompliſhment of their noughty purpoſes & quarelles, haue cauſed ſwordes & Rapyers, to be made of a much greter length, then heretofore hath bene accuſtomed, or is decent to vſe and were. And with ye ſaid wepons, do vſe and weare gauntlettes, and vambraces, and bucklers with longe pykes in them, contrary to thauncient vſage of this realme, and the lawes and ſtatutes of the ſame. Whereby dyuers irreuerente and prophane behauyours in the ſayd Churches and Churchyardes, and many tymes maymes, hurtes, manſlaugh ters and murders, haue ben of late commytted and done, and muche more is lyke to be, yf ſome remedye be not the ſoner prouyded in that behalfe.
            Theyr hyghneſſes myndyng to take away thoccaſion of ſuche miſchiefes, and diſorders, doo ſtreyghtlye charge and commaunde al and ſinguler theyr Iuſtices of peace, mayres, ſheryffes, baylyffes, conſtables, & other theyr maieſties miniſters and officers, that all and ſinguler the ſayd Lawe and ſtatute, concernynge the fyghtynge and quarelynge in churches and churcheyardes, be duly executed, and that from henceforth no perſon or perſons, of what eſtate, or condition ſo euer he or they be, do vſe or weare by nyghte or by daye, nor ſell any ſworde or rapier aboue the length of a yarde and a halfe quarter in the blade at the moſt, nor any buckler, with more pykes therein then one, and the ſame not to be ſharpe, or aboue .ii. ynches longe, or of a broder ſyſe then hath ben moſt commenly vſed within this Realme, nor vſe or weare any gauntlet, or vambrace, nor any other weapon of defence, other then theyr common ſwordes, rapiers, daggers, and bucklers, accordinge to thauncient vſage and cuſtome of this theyr maieſties Realme, vpon payne of the loſſe of ſuche weapons ſo vſed or worne, contrary to the tenour and effect of this proclamation, and to ſuffer impryſonment of his or theyr bodyes, and to make fyne at theyr maieſties wyll and pleaſure.
            And further theyr maieſties ſtrayghtly charge & commaund all and ſinguler the ſayd Iuſtices of peace Mayers, ſheryffes, baylyffes, conſtables, and other theyr maieſties offycers, and miniſters, to ſee this theyr hyghnes proclamation duly executed, and to commyt thoffenders therein to ward and pryſon, there to remayne without bayle or maynepryce, vntyll theyr maieſties pleaſure ſhalbe further knowen in that behalf. And that they fayle not thus to do, as they tender theyr maieſties pleaſure and commaundement, and wyll aunſwere for the contrary at theyr vttermoſt perylles.
            
               Geuen at our manour of Grenewyche, the .xvii. day of March.
                
               God ſaue the kyng and the Quene.
            
         
      
      
         
            Excuſum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Regiae Maieſtatis.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
   