
      
         
            
            
            By the Kynge and the Quene.
            
               WHere at the openyng and begynnyng of the warres with the frenche, the Queenes Maieſtie cauſed her proclamacyon to be made and therein gaue warning and licence to ſo many of that nation inhabitynge within this Realme as were not denizons to depart the ſame, within forty daies after, vpon payne to be taken as enemies. For asmuch as her highnes is giuen to vnderſtand that this notwithſtanding there remayneth to this houre, aſwell within the Citie of London, as ells where in ſundrye other partes of the Realme, no ſmale numbre of the ſaide french men whiche be no denizons at all, and yet not auoyded hence accordyng to the tenure of the ſayde proclamation, to the manyfeſt contempt thereof, and tendyng not onely to the great daunger of thys common welth, by ſuch practyſes as they myghte attempte. But alſo miniſtryng iuſt occaſion of murmour, and diſcontentacion to others her naturall and louyng ſubiectes: Her Maieſties pleaſure therefore is, foraſmuch as they haue not vſed her hyghnes clemencye and mercye, but contrary wyſe by diſobeing the ſame ſhewed a manifeſt contempte of her commaundemente, that furthwc vpon the publyſhyng of thys her highnes preſente proclamation, it ſhalbe leful for anye of her ſayde louynge ſubiectes not onely to take the ſayd french men not being denyzons, and euerye of thē priſoners, and ſo to vſe them, But alſo for theyr apprehenſyon and takyng of them in that ſorte ſhall enioye to their owne proper vſe all ſuch goodes and cattelles, as the ſayde french or any of them had, or poſſeſſed at the tyme they were taken.
            
               Geuen at Weſtminſter the .xxvii. day of Ianuary, the forth and fyfte yeares of the Kynge and Queenes Maieſties moſt noble Raygnes.
                
               
               God ſaue the Kynge and Queene.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ 
               EXCVSVM Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cavvodi, Typographi Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
            
               Anno. M. D. L. viii. Cum priuilegio Regiae maiestatis.
            
         
      
   