
      
         
            
            
            By the Kynge and the Quene.
            
               THe Kynges and Quenes moſt excellent Maieſties, moſt gracyouſly conſidering how that a great quantitie of forged & counterfeyt coynes, of Golde, aſwel of thys Realme as of other Realmes beyng currante within the ſame, hath bene of late, and daylye is counterfeyte forged and brought into their ſayd maieſties Realme, by dyuerſe noughtye and euyll dyſpoſed perſons, to the great dyſceyte preiudice loſſe, and hynderaunce of their louynge Subiectes, receyuynge the ſame, and more is lyke daylye to be yf ſome conuenient remedye ſhould not be the ſoner prouyded in that behalfe. Theyr maieſties therefore myndynge not onely to geue knowledge, and warnyng therof to all theyr ſayd louynge ſubiectes, but alſo to put ſuche counterfeytours, and naughtye perſones in feare, that woulde goe about hereafter to commyt ſuch lyke offences, doo by this theyr hyghnes proclamacion warne and admonyſh all theyr ſayde louynge Subiectes, that they, nor any of theym, after the proclaymynge hereof, take, or receyue in payment, or otherwyſe, any of the ſayd coygnes of gold of this realme, or anye other coygnes of golde, beynge curraunt within the ſame, except they, and euery of them do fyrſte trye the ſame coignes of golde by weyght, or knowe by other meanes the goodnes thereof, ſo as they, ne any of them be deceaued in receauynge of the ſame. And if they or any of them ſhal vpon triall as aforeſayde, fynde any of the ſayde coygnes to be forged or counterfeyt, that then they, and euerye of them, ſhall immediately deface, or cauſe to be defaced, and breake, or cauſe to be broken in peces, euery ſuch counterfeyt coygne and coygnes, and the ſame ſo defaſed and broken, ſhal with conuenient ſpede, delyuer or cauſe to be delyuered to the next Iuſtyce of the peace of the county where they, or any of them ſhal then dwell or inhabyte. Chargynge and commaundynge all ſuche Iuſtices of peace as ſhall receaue any ſuche counterfeyt coygnes, defaſed and broken in maner and fourme aforeſayde, to reteyne, and kepe the ſame, vntyll the next Aſſiſes to be holden within ſuch countye and countyes, where ſuche counterfeyte coigne ſhalbe ſo defaced broken and delyuered, and ſhall then delyuer the ſame to the Iuſtyces of aſſyſe to be by them brought vp, and deliuered to the Lordes and others of theyr maieſtyes pryuye counſayle, attendaūt vpon theyr mooſt royall perſons. 
            
               Geuen at our maner of Grenewych the thyrde day of Apryll.
               
            
            God ſaue the kynge and the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            Excuſum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Regiae Maieſtatis. Anno. M. D. L VI. Cum priuilegio.
         
      
   