
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Proclamacion, ſet furthe by the kynges Maieſtie, with the aduiſe of his highnes moſte honorable counſail, the. xvij: day of Iuly, in the .v. yere, of his highnes moſt proſperous reigne, wherin diuers wholſome and profitable lawes, made againſt regrators, forſtallers, and engroſſers. &c. are mencioned and recited
            
               THe kinges moſt royall maieſtee, hauing perfect knowlege daily out and from all partes of this his realme, that the great & exceſſiue prices both of Corne, Cattel, Butter, Cheſe & other victualles, neceſſary for mennes ſuſtenaunce, for the mooſt parte groweth by the gredy and inſaciable couetous deſires and appetites of the Breders, Broggers, Engroſſers, Graſiers, Victuallers, and forſtallers (minding only theyr owne lucre, without reſpect of the common wealth, to the great domage, empoueriſhing and diſquieting of his maieſties ſubiectes) can not in reſpect of the office cōmitted vnto his maieſty of god, for the preſeruatiō of his people, but furthwith prouide ſpedy remedy for reformacion therof. And therfore his Maieſtee letteth all maner his ſubiectes to vnderſtand that by the aduiſe of his counſail, he purpoſeth moſt ſeuerely and ſtreightly, to execute all ſuche lawes as haue bene heretofore, moſt godly and holeſomly made and ordeined, againſt al ſuche Breders, Broggars Engroſſers, Graſiers, Victuallers, Regrators and Forſtallers, aſwel of victualles, as of Merchandizes and namely one old ſtatute, made againſt forſtallers, the tenor wherof hereafter foloweth. No forſtaller ſhalbe ſuffred to dwell in any towne, the whiche for his lucre wil make haſt to mete any corne, fiſhe, hering and other thinges, to be ſold ſomtime by water, ſome time by land, the whiche ſo taken, doth imagine to ſel it the more dere: Alſo they that come to the merchantes ſtraungers offring them to the ſale of their ware, & exhorting them to ſell their ware more deere, then they did purpoſe to ſell it, and ſo by crafte and engine, beguileth both the townes & the countrey. The firſt time that he is therof conuict he ſhalbe greuouſly ainerced, The ſecond time, he ſhalbe put vpon the pilory. The thirde time, he ſhalbe put in priſon and make fine. The fourth time he ſhalbe abiured, and baniſhed the toune. And that ſhalbe obſerued of al maner of forſtallers, & of them, that gene vnto them counſail and ayde. And it ſhalbe inquired, if any Steward, or Baylife, for any rewarde, did remit the iudgemente of the Pillory, or Tumbrell, iudged or of righte to be iudged. ¶ And further, where there was in the .xxv. yere of the reigne of his maieſties moſte dere father, king Henry theight, a good ſtatute made againſt regrators and forſtallers of fiſhe, his maieſtie cōmaundeth that according to the forme of theſaide eſtatute, that the ſtewardes of the faires, of Sturbridge, S. Yues, and Ely, cauſe theſaide eſtatute to be openly proclaimed, and red, within their limites, and that likewiſe the Shiriffes of the counties of Eſſex, Suffolke, Norffolk and Lincolne, & the Maiors, & Bayliffes, of cities and tounes corporate, within the ſame ſhires, ſhall before the laſte of Iuly, nexte comming publiſhe and cauſe to be proclaimed the ſaid eſtatute, at conuenient places. And where there were in the laſt ſeſſion of parliament, holden at weſtminſter, in the .iiii. yere of his maieſties reigne, good lawes made aſwell againſt them that ſhould buy any maner of Oxen, Steres, Routes, Kyne, Heighfers, or Calues, otherwiſe then in open faires, or markettes, (except it be for his own prouiſiō of houſhold, Teeme, or Deicie,) or that ſhould ſel the ſame again aliue, in the ſaid faire, or merket, where the ſame cattel was bought, & againſt the Butcher, that ſhould buy any fat cattel, and ſell the ſame againe on liue, as alſo againſt ſuche whiche vſe to buy butter, and cheſe, to ſel againe, (except they ſel the ſame by retaile in open ſhop fayre or market, and not in groſſe,) his maieſty ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth, all maner of his ſubiectes, to whome the ſame may apperteine, that they ſhal duely obſerue and kepe, the good intente, and meaning of al the ſaid eſtatutes, and Lawes, vpon ſuche peines and penalties, as be conteined in the ſame. And further his maieſtee ſtreightlye chargeth and commaundeth, all and ſinguler his Maieſtes Iuſtices of peace, Maiors, Shiriffes, and other hed officers, of euery Shire, Citee, Boroughe, and toune corporat within this his maieſties realme, that they and euery of thē, within their limites to their vttermoſt power and habilite ſhall endeuour themſelues, with all diligence, from time to time, to ſe, and cauſe this his highnes proclamation, and lawes, to be executed and obeied, as they wil enioy his maieſties fauour, and aduoyde his indignation: That in cace vpon this admonition, the gredy malice of couetous men, ſhal by profe appeere to be nothing amended, but to continue ſtil in their corrupt intencions of diſobeiyng the lawes, and empayring of the common wealth: His maieſte as hed of the ſame, and of all his louing ſubiectes, is reſolued to prouide in ſuche wiſe for the redreſſe, and repreſſion of ſuche gredy diſordinate enhauncers of prices, as ſhalbe muche more ſharpe and penall, then any former lawe, or proclamation, heretofore made or ordeined hath bene,
            God ſaue the Kyng.
         
      
      
         
            RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat Menſe Iulij. Anno. 1551.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   