
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A proclamation, diuiſed and made by the kinges highnes, by the aduiſe of his maieſties counſayle, the .xviii. daye of Decembre, in the .xxxv. yere of his highnes reigne, for reſtraint of wares and marchaundiſes to be conueyed and tranſported out of the frenche kynges dominions in to the realme of England.
            
               THe kinges moſt royal maieſty being enformed, that not withſtanding there is open warre proclaimed and manifeſtly knowen betwene his highnes and the frenche king, vpon ſundry occaſions only myniſtred on the part of the ſame frenche king, Yet neuer theles diuers of his maieſties ſubiectes and others, do dayly tranſport conuey and bryng into this his highnes realme of England, and other his maieſties dominions, out of the realme of Fraunce, and other the frenche kinges countreyes, diuers and ſundry kyndes of wares and marchandiſes, to ſell exchaunge barter and vtter, wherby the ſaid frenche kyng and his ſubiectes and adherentes, being the kinges maieſties ennemies, haue taken & dayly take great cōmodities, benefittes, profittes, and aduantages, and be therby enriched and encouraged to mainteyne their wrongfull and iniuſt warres annoyaunces attemptates and malicious purpoſes, moued by them and their occaſion againſt othe honour trouthe and all honeſty. FOR reformation wherof, the kinges ſayd maieſtie ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth all and ſinguler his louyng ſubiectes and all other perſons as well denyzens as ſtraungers, of what ſo euer eſtate degree or condition ſo euer they be, that they nor any of them ſhal not at any time after .xiiii. daies now next enſuyng after this preſent proclamation proclaymed, by any maner of meanes conuey tranſporte or brynge in to this realme or in any other his highnes domynyons, to be ſolde exchaunged bartred gyuen or by any other wayes or meanes vttered, any maner of wares marchaundiſes or other commodities, of what name nature kynde or qualitie ſo euer they be of, beinge made growyng or encreaſed within the ſaide realme of Fraunce, or any other the frenche kynges domynions, without ſpecyall lycence vnder his great ſeale to be obteyned of the kynges highnes for the ſame, vpon peyne that euery ſuche perſon, brynging into this realme any ſuche wares marchandiſes or commodities, contrary to the forme of this his maieſties proclamation as is aforeſayd, to forfayte and loſe the ſame wares marchaundiſes and commodities or the value of them, and to ſuffer punyſhement by impriſonment or otherwiſe at his hyghnes pleaſure.
            ¶ God ſaue the kynge.
         
      
      
         
            Tho. Berthelet regis impreſſor excuſſie. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
   