
      
         
            
            
            By the Kynge and the Quene.
            
               ALthough we ye Quene at oure fyrſt cōming to the Crowne were geuen to underſtand yt the notable & heynouſe treaſon, enterpriſed by ye late Duke of Northumberland was ſupported and furdered by Henry the Frenche kynge, and his miniſters, by him put in truſt, and that ſhortly after in the conſpiracy, moued againſt god, and vs, by wyat and his trayterous bad, the ſayde kinges miniſters did ſecretly practiſe and giue their fauourable compfort thervnto, contrary to the treatice of peace betwene both ye realmes, and al good amitie & honor, yet the great loue we beare to the peace of Chriſtendome and to the quiet of our louinge ſubiectes, moued vs rather to impute the ſame to his miniſters whome he vſed in ſeruice, then vnto him ſelfe, thinking euer by that our pacience to haue induced him to beare vs true amitie, and to vſe good neighbored towards vs, and our Subiectes, for the which reſpect we were not onely contented to beare ſuch iniuryes, as to our ſelfe, had bene by hym done, but alſo traueled to be a meane of pacification, betwene Themperour, and the ſayd king, ſending our ambaſſadoures to Callyes for that purpoſe, to our great charge, as the world knoweth, which our trauayle and good zeale was not ſo well employed, and taken of him as of vs ment, for not long after that time when the deuyll had put in the heddes of Dudley, Aſheton, and others their complices to enter into a new conſpiracy agaynſt vs. The ſayd kynges Ambaſſadour was not onely pryuy thereof, but alſo receiued them into his houſe, there ſuffering them to aſſemble and contriue their malicious and deueliſh enterpriſe. And although the ſayd king were aduertiſed therof by our Ambaſſadour with him reſident, and alſo frendly deſyred not to ſupporte or fauour any ſuch doinges. Neuertheles the ſame conſpiracy being afterwardes detected, and ſundry of thoffendors confeſſing it by iuſt order of law executed. Dudley, Aſheton, & others flyeng into Fraunce, were both receyued of the king, and alſo mainteined with annual pencions by hym geuen, contrary to his promyſe which he made vnto a perſonage of honour, ſent to him from vs, gyuinge thereby a moſt daungerous example, and pernicious vnto al princes, whoſe eſtate & lyfe cannot be ſues yf traytoures may be receiued and ſupported. The like minde towardes vs he declared in receiuing ſundry famouſe and notoriouſe pirates enemies of Chriſtendome, and ſpoilers of oure ſubiectes, whome he mainteyned with men mony and ſhippes, to exercyſe their piracy, & to declare that no pacience, or good demeanour of our part can moue him to beare vs good amitie, of late he ſent Stafford with other rebels whome he had interteyned in that Realme, furnyſhed with armour mony, municion and ſhippes, to ſurpriſe our Caſtell of Scarborough, not contented this longe time to haue borne with pirates and ſuche as haue robbed our marchauntes, and other ſubiects by ſeas, and to haue vſed diſhonorable practiſes for the ſurpriſing of Callies, and our pieces on that ſyde, the miniſters whereof hath bene openly knowne & the ſpyals taken, for the better mainteining of which vngodly doings and greter anoyaunce of our realme he hath continually ſuffered in his countrys, forgers of falſe monies, and counterfeiters of our coine, for the which cauſes, and alſo for that he hath wt al hoſtilitie inuaded the lowe countryes to the defence & preſeruation whereof we are bounde by ſpeciall treatye, and conſidering that neither by demaundynge redreſſe hereof we can obteine any, neyther by good meanes whiche we haue hether to vſed enioye anye amitie, or good neighbored at his hand, neither by promyſe be aſſured of ye ſame, we haue thought better to haue him knowen and taken for an open enemie of whom we may beware, then vnder the pretenſe of amitie a ſecret worker againſt vs, and a priuy enemy, ſuch as we haue hetherto found hym, to the greate daunger of our perſon, and loſe and damage of our ſubiects. And therfore we giue warning to al our louing ſubiects, fromhenceforth to forbere al traffitque and contracting wt any of that Realme, and to repute ye ſaid French kyng, and his ſubiectes as open enemies annoying them by al ſuche meanes as men may, & are wont to do ther enemies. And although he hath vſed wtout iuſt cauſe ordenouncing any war, to annoy our marchauntes and ſubiectes, yet giue we vnto al his marchauntes & ſubiectes fortye dayes ſpace after this proclamation to depart this our Realme wt ſuche goodes as they haue here and maye by our lawes cary away to ye which effect we ſhal giue them or any of them our ſafe conduct and paſporte yf they ſhal require it. Geuen at our pallyce of weſtminſter the .vii. of Iune the third and forth years of our Reygnes.
            God ſaue the kynge and the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               Excuſum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi, Typographi Regiae maieſtatis. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum. Anno. 1557.
         
      
   