
      
         
            
            ¶ By the Quene, ¶ A Proclamation to explane the Quenes Maiesties meanyng, vpon a former made in March last.
            
               WHere of late vpon diuers great considerations, the Quenes moste excellent Maiestie, by her proclamation did prohibite the transportation into this Realme (vntyl a tyme, as it appeareth by the sayd proclamation) of any wares or commodities out of the lowe Countries, beyond the Seas. For that as it hath appeared to her Maiestie, by letters and message lately sent to her from her deare Cosin the Duchesse of Parma, Regent in the saide lowe Countries, that it is doubted by the Marchauntes residyng in those Countryes, if any vessell laden from thens to passe into Fraunce, Spayne, or Portingale, should by wynde or other necessary cause, be forced to enter into any Porte of this Realme for succour, without dischargyng or puttyng to vent any of their marchandizes, whether in those cases her Maiesties intention was or is, that the same shoulde be stayed and deteyned. Her Maiestie geueth all persons to vnderstand, that although by many hard, vnseasonable, and vncurteous proceadynges in these lowe Countryes and other where, agaynst the entercourse, and to the purpose of subuertyng of all her Subiectes hauntyng those Countryes, she hath ben prouoked to do more for her Subiectes, then hitherto she hath done: Yet hauyng no maner of intention to impaire the amitie betwixt her and the Kyng of Spayne her good brother, but rather to fortifie and increase it, she neuer ment nor now meaneth, that any maner of person transporting out of the said low Countries, in any vessell, any wares to be discharged in any other Countrey, out of England, and yet by occasion necessarily forced to come with the sayd vessell into any Porte of this Realme, shalbe impeched or molested for so doyng, except the same shal also vnlade or discharge any their wares or marchaundizes to thintent to be put to sale, or otherwise distributed in this Realme by waye of traffique or marchaundize. And so her Maiestie wylleth her intention and meanyng, to be by all maner her subiectes vnderstanden, & fauourably interpreted, towardes the subiectes of the Kyng of Spaine, or of any other Prince or Potentate, so occasioned to come into any Port or Creeke of her dominiers.
            Geuen at our Manour of Richmone the .xi. day of May, the sixth yere of our raigne. 1564.
            God saue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted by Richard Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Quenes Maiestie.
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
         
      
   