
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Proclamation againſt the deceiptfull wynding and folding of Wooles.
            
               FOr reformation and redreſſe of many deceits, and falſhoods vſed and practiſed in wynding and folding of Wooles: The Quéenes moſt royall Maieſtie, by the aduiſe of her moſt honorable Counſell, ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth, that no maner of perſon or perſons, whatſoeuer he or they be, at any time héereafter, go about, or take vpon him or them, to wynde or folde any manner of wooles, in any countrey, where any ende wooles are accuſtomed to be wrought, or in the Counties of Lincolne, Leiceſter, or Rutland, before he or they ſhall be admitted and allowed by the Maiſter and Wardens of the Company and felowſhip of the Woolmen of the Citie of London, or one of them for the time being, or before the Maior of the Staple of Boſton, for the time being, for the wooles of the grothe of the counties of Lincolne, Leiceſter, and Rutland, aforeſaid, by thaduiſe of a ſworne Packer. And that euery perſon or perſons, ſo allowed and admitted, for an able and lawfull workman or workmen in forme aforeſaid, ſhall haue a Teſtimoniall or Certificat of his allowance and admittance, vnder the Seale of the Maior of the Staple at Weſtminſter, for the time being, or of the Maior of the Staple of Boſton, for the time being, for the wooll of the growing of the counties aforeſaid: And that none of the ſaid perſons ſo allowed and admitted, or that ſhall be ſo allowed, and admitted, ſhall go about or take vpon him or them, to wynde or folde any woolles, before he or they haue taken a corporall othe, before one of the ſaid Maiors, for the time being, according to the intent aboue limited, that he or they ſhall truely and iuſtly without deceipt, wynde or folde, all and ſingular ſuch wooll or woolles, as he or they ſhall take vpon him, or them, to wynde or folde, ne ſhall vſe any deceipt, craft, fraude or guyle therein, vpon paine that euery perſon, which ſhall take vpon him to wynde or folde any maner of woolles, being not admitted, and ſworne as is aforeſaid, ſhall ſuffer impriſonment by the ſpace or x. daies, and to be ſet vpon the Pillorie, in the next market towne, with a fléece of wooll hanging about his necke.
            And her Maieſtie by the aſſent aforeſaid, further ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth, that no grower, bréeder, brogger, or gatherer of any end woolles, or other woolles within the Counties aforenamed, ſhal at any time hereafter ſet on worke any wooll folder, or wooll wynder, to folde or wynde his or their wooll, or woolles, vnleſſe the ſaid woolfolder, or woolwinder, bring with him or them a Teſtimoniall or Certificat vnder the Seale of the ſaid Maior of the Staple of Weſtminſter for the time being, or the Maior of the Staple of Boſton, for the time being, in forme as is aforeſaide, teſtifiyng him or them to be ſworne and admitted, for an able workman to folde and wynde woolles, in manner and forme as is aforeſaid, vpon paine of impriſonment and fine at the Quéenes Maieſties pleaſure.
            And further, where by an Act made in the xxiij. yéere of the reigne of her Maieſties moſt déere father, King Henry theight, yet ſtanding in force, it was enacted, that no maner of perſon do wynde, or cauſe to be wounde any fléece of wooll, not being ſufficiently riuered or waſhed, ne wynde or cauſe to be wounde in any fléece, any deceiuable thing, whereby the fléece may be the more waighty, to the deceipt and loſſe of the buyer, vpon paine the ſeller of ſuch deceiptfull woolles to forfaite for euery ſuch fléece vj. d. Her Maieſtie being informed that notwithſtanding the ſaid good Act, much deceipt is vſed in waſhing, winding, and folding of woolles: Doth ſtraightly charge and commaund, all and euery her Subiects, to obſerue the true meaning of the ſaid Act, vpon paine of forfeiture, of the penalties therin contained, and as they will auoid her Highnes further diſpleaſure. And for the auoyding, and eſchewing of further craft and deceipt now of late vſed: The Quéenes moſt Royall Maieſtie, with thaduiſe aforeſaid, ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth, that from hencefoorth, no grower or bréeder of woolles, whatſoeuer he or they be, ſhall permit and ſuffer his or their ſhéepe, being waſhed and dried againe, ready to be ſhorne, to go aboue v. or vj. daies vnſhorne or vnclipped, if the weather be dry, vpon paine of impriſonment and fine at the Quéenes Maieſties pleaſure.
            And further her Maieſtie by thaduiſe aforeſaide, ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth all and euery Iuſtice of Peace, Maiors, Sheriffes, Bailiffes, and all other officers and miniſters, as they will auoide her Highnes diſpleaſure, and aunſwere to the contrary at their perils, that they and euery of them cauſe euery ſuch offendor and offendors to be puniſhed for ſuch offence or offences, according as is afore expreſſed and declared.
            
               Yeuen at our Manour of Gréenwich the x. of Auguſt, in the fourth yéere of our raigne. Anno. M. D. LXII.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            *Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Iugge, and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
      
   