
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            
               WHERE in the Parliament begon and holden at Weſtminſter the eyght daye of Iune, in the .xxviii. yere of the raigne of the noble kyng of famous memorye kyng Henry the eyght, father to our Soueraigne Lady the Queenes Maieſtie, one Act and Statute was then and there made, entituled, an Act limittyng the pryſes of Wynes. And where alſo in the ſeſſion of the Parliament holden vpon prorogation at Weſtminſter the .xxii. day of Ianuary, in the .xxxiiii. yere of the ſayde noble kyng, one Acte and Statute was then and there made, entituled, an Acte to aucthoryſe certayne of the kynges Maieſties Councell to ſette pryſes vppon Wynes, to be ſolde by retayle. By the whiche ſayde ſeuerall Actes and Statutes, aucthoritie is geuen vnto the Lorde Chauncellour of Englande, Lorde Treaſourer of Englande, the Lorde preſident of the kynges moſt honorable Councell, Lorde priuie Seale, and the two chiefe Iuſtices of eyther Benche. or .v. iiii. or .iii. of them, by their diſcretions to ſet the priſes of all kyndes of wynes yerely▪ from tyme to tyme, when they ſhalbe ſolde, in groſſe, and by retayle, and therof Proclamation to be made in the Citie. Borough, and Towne, where any ſuche wynes are to be ſolde. Whiche ſayde order, for the retaylyng of wynes, is further limitted and appoynted by the Statute made in the fyfth yere of the raigne or our Soueraigne Lady the Queenes Maieſtie, entituled, an Acte touchyng certayne politique conſtitutions made for the mayntenaunce of the Nauie: As by the ſayde ſeuerall Actes and Statutes amongeſt other thynges more at large it doth and may appeare.
            Foraſmuch as the Lorde keper of the great Seale of Englande, the Lorde Treaſourer of Englande, and the Lorde chiefe Iuſtice of England, in the execution of the ſayde ſeuerall Actes and Statutes, haue by their deliberat aduyſes, taxed, limitted, aſſigned, and appoynted the pryſes of Gaſcoigne and Frenche wynes, to be ſolde within this the Queenes Maieſties Realme, aſwell in groſſe, as by retayle, wherein they haue had reſpect and conſideration, that by reaſon of the great froſtes, and other vnſeaſonable weather, happenyng the wynter laſt paſt, that the plentie and encreaſe of the ſayde Gaſcoigne and French wynes, haue ben much more byndered and diminiſhed, then in many other yeres paſt: And therefore her Maieſtie, by the councell of the ſayd Lordes, is pleaſed and contented, for this tyme, that they geue therein the greater pryce, whiche her byginies meaneth neuertheleſſe at other tymes to be abated, as occaſion may hereafter ſeeme good and conuenient. That is to ſaye, euery Tunne of the beſt Gaſcoigne wyne, to be ſolde after the cuſtome and impoſt payde to the Queenes Maieſtie, at the pryce and rate of .vii. li. vi. s. viii. d. the Tunne, & not aboue. And euery Tunne of the beſt Frenche wyne, to be ſolde in lyke maner after the ſame rate of .vii. li. vi. s. viii. d. the Tunne, and not aboue. And euery Pype, Hoggeſhead, Punchion, Terce, and other veſſell of the ſame ſeuerall wynes, to be ſolde after theyr quantities, accordyng to the ſame rates, and not aboue. And for ſmall and thynne wynes, to be ſolde vnder the ſame rates, as the byers and ſellers therof can agree. And for the retaylyng of the ſayde Gaſcoigne and French wynes, the ſayde Lordes and Iuſtyce, by aucthoritie aforeſayde haue aſſigned & appoynted the pryſes as foloweth. That is to ſay, euery gallon of the beſt Gaſcoigne wine to be ſolde for xii. d. the gallon, and not aboue. And euery gallon of the beſt Frenche wyne, to be ſolde 
                  〈◊〉
                for .vii. d. the gallon, and not aboue. And for the retaylyng of ſweete wynes, the ſaide Lordes and Iu
               
                  ••••••
               
               ▪ by aucthoritie aforeſayde, haue aſſigned and appoynted the pryſes as foloweth. That is to ſay, euery gallon of the beſt Muſcadell, to be ſolde for .xvi. d. the gallon, and not aboue. And euery gallon of the beſte Malm
                  •
               ſey, to be ſolde for .xiiii. d. the gallon, and not aboue. And euery gallon of the beſt Sacke, to be ſolde 
                  〈◊〉
                iii. d. the gallon, and not aboue. And alſo that euery Pottel, Quart, and Pynt, of all the ſayde ſeuerall wines, ſhalbe retayled and ſolde after and accordyng to the ſayde ſeuerall rates and pryſes.
            The Queenes Maieſtie, our Soueraigne Lady, therfore ſtrayghtly chargeth and commaundeth all and ſinguler her Subiectes, and others, puttyng any maner of Gaſcoigne, Frenche, or ſweete wynes to ſale, within this her Maieſties Realme, that they, ne any of them, in any maner of wyſe, by any craft, couin, or 
                  〈…〉
               te agreement, ſhall ſell any of the wynes aboueſayde, otherwayes, or at any hygher pryſes, then 
                  〈◊〉
                aboue limitted, vppon payne to forfayte and pay ſuch penalties as are conteyned and expreſſed in the ſeuerall Actes & Statutes therof made. And further her hyghneſſe pleaſure and commaundement is, that 
                  •
               ll and ſinguler Maiors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Conſtables, and other her officers and miniſters, to whom it appertayneth, that they and euery of them, with diligence, cauſe and ſee that this her Proclamation be put in due execution, after the tenour of the ſame: And alſo accordyng to an other Acte of Parliament made in the .xxxvii. yere of the raigne of her Maieſties ſayd father kyng Henry the eyght, agaynſt ſuch as wyll refuſe to ſell theyr wynes at pryſes taxed as is aforeſayde, as they wyll aunſwere thereto, at their perylles.
            
               Gyuen at her Maieſties Palaice of Weſtminſter, the .xx. day of December, in the .viii. yere of her Maieſties raigne.
               
God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               Imprynted at London by Richard Iugge & Iohn Cawood, prynters to the Queenes Maieſtie.
            
         
      
   