
      
         
            
            ¶By the Quene
            
               THe Quenes Maiestie beyng infourmed, that in some partes of her
Realme, sundrye either ignoraunt or malicious people do spreade
rumours abrode, that the base Testons of foure pence halfpenye
should not be currant after thende of Ianuary next: Hath thought
meete (leste the lyke false and sedicious rumours myght be further
spread) to do all maner her subiectes to vnderstande, that it hath
ben alwayes and so is meant by her Maiestie, that all maner the
base monyes, whiche hath ben of late decreed by Proclamacion,
sauyng the Testons of twopence farthynge, shoulde continue and
be currant styll, and so taken and payde from subiecte to subiecte, at theyr values as they be rated
by former Proclamacion, and so to continue vntyll the same maye be by her Maiesties subiectes
brought to the mynt at London▪ and there exchaunged for newe sterlynge monyes, with thallowaunce
to the brynger, of three pence in the pounde. Wherin suche expedicion is made, as in a matter
of such a moment, possyble hytherto coulde be, and shalbe nowe from day to day much more.
            And as for the peeces of two pence farthyng, it is and was meant and declared in the Proclamacion,
that they shoulde be taken as currant monye vntyll the last day of Ianuary, that daye beyng
the ende of foure monethes from Michaelmas laste. And yet neuerthelesse, because within that
tyme it shalbe harde to bryng vp and make exchaunge of the same in the mynt with newe monies:
Her Maiestie is well pleased, that whosoeuer shall brynge anye of the same Testons of two pence
farthyng after the sayde last day of Ianuary to the sayde Mint at London, within the space of
three monethes after, shall haue for the same in newe syluer two pence farthyng: So as her Maiestie
meaneth, asmuch as in her shalbe, to beare herein with the burden of her poore subiectes.
And her pleasure is, that this shoulde be notified to all her louyng subiectes: geuyng also straight
commaundement, that no maner person do refuse to take in payment any of the sayd base monyes,
that is to say: the fourepence halfpeny, the threhalfpence, the threfarthynges, at the values rated
by the former Proclamation, at any tyme hereafter: neither the other base Testons of twopence
farthyng at the same rate, vntyll the last day of Ianuary. And in anye wyse to cause all persons
doyng the contrary, to be seuerely punyshed as obstinate and sedicious.
            And further, her Maiestie chargeth all maner of officers and ministers, diligently to see to the
attachement and punyshment of certayne lewde and sedicious persons, that from towne to towne,
and Countrey to Countrey, do cary and spreade sedicious and slaunderous tales, importynge to
simple people a feare, that Cattell vnmarked shoulde be forfeited: or that all people Chrystened or
Maryed, shoulde paye for Christenynges and Maryages certayne summes of monye to her Maiestie,
with suche lyke vayne and sedicious follyes, neuer meant, nor within the compasse of anye
meanyng of her Maiestie or her counsayle. The staye wherof, by speedy and seuere punyshment,
her Maiestie strayghtly requireth of all maner of Iusticiaries, as they wyll or ought to aunswere
to the contrary, & from hence forth to geue order, that assone as any such lewde tale is vttered, that
the reporters therof may be eyther punyshed with speede, or els produce the aucthours.
            Yeuen at her hyghnesse Palyce at Westminister, the .xxiii. day of December.
            God saue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London in Powles
CHVRCHYARDE, By Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood,
Printers to the Quenes Maiestie.
            ¶Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
         
      
   