
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The briefe content of certayne actes of Parliament agaynſt thinordinate vſe of apparell.
            
               Anno. xxiiii. Henrici. viii.
               None ſhall weare in his apparell any
                     
                        
                           Cloth of
Golde ſyluer, or tincele.
                           Satyn, ſylke, or cloth myxt with golde or ſyluer, nor any Sables.
                        Except
Erles, and al of ſuperiour degrees and Viſcountes, and Barons in theyr doblets & ſleueleſſe coates.
                     
                        
                           Wollen Cloth made out of the Realm
                                 •
                              
                           
                           Veluet

                                 Crimſin 
                                 Scarlet or 
                                 Blewe.
                              
                           
                           Furres.

                                 Blacke Ienets.
                                 Luzerns
                              
                           
                        Except
                           
                              
                                 Dukes
                                 Marqueſſes
                                 Erles or
                              theyr children.
                           Barons & knyghtes of thorder.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Veluet in

                                 Gownes
                                 Coates, or vtter moſt garments.
                              
                           
                           Furre of Libardes Embroderye
                           Pricking or
printyng
                                 with golde
                                 ſyluer or
                                 ſylke.
                              
                           
                        Except.
                           Barons ſonnes.
                           Knyghtes or
                           mē that may diſpend cc. li. by yere
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Taffata
                                 Satyn
                                 Damaſke or
                                 ſylke Chamlet in
                              his vttermoſt garmentes.
                           
                              
                                 Veluet otherwyſe then
in Iakectes, dobletes. &c.
                                 Furre whereof the kynde groweth not within the Quenes dominions. Except 
                                       •
                                    rey 
                                       •
                                    enets. Bodge.
                              
                           
                        Except A man that may diſpende one hundred pounde by yere.
                  
               
               Anno. i. et. ii. Philippi et Mariae.
               None ſhall weare any ſylke in
                     Hatte, Bonet,
                     Nyghtcap,
                     Gyrdell, Scabbard,
                     Hoſen, Shoes,
                     Spurlethers.
                  Except
                     The ſonne and heyre or doughter of a knight or the wyfe of the ſayd ſonne.
                     A man that may diſpende. xx. li. by yere, or is woorth two hundred poundes in goodes.
                  
               
            
            ¶ Theſe be the briefe contentes but of certayne partes of the lawes now remaining in force, to thobſeruance whereof her maieſtie thynketh beſt to induce her ſubiectes by thys ſhorte memoriall, and yet neuertheleſſe wiſheth that all of inferior eſtates, ſhoulde notneglect the reſt of the ſame lawes, leſte if they ſhalbe founde to contemne theſe orders here mencioned, they maye fele the payne of the reſt.
            There be certaine other exceptions in the Statutes: as for ſuche as haue licence by the Quenes Maieſtie, or ſuch as ſhall run in any Iuſtes, or ſhall ſerue in warre, or ſhal haue apparell geuen thē to be worne by her Maieſtis and ſuch like. All whiche are wel to be conſydred by them that wyl clayme any priuilege thereby, and that at theyr peryll.
            ¶ And where there is menciō made of values of yerely liueloodes & goodes, the beſt accompt therof is to be made by the taxations in this laſt ſubſedy, ſo as if any wil be excuſed by pretence of hys lyueloode or ſubſtaunce, to offende, it is as meete that he aunſwere to the Prince in ſubſedye for that value, as ſeke defence to breake anye good lawe, wherof her maieſtie geueth to all men admonition.
            
               
                  Anno. M. D. L. IX. Menſe Octobris
               
            
         
      
   