
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ By the Queene.
            
               THE QUENES Maieſtie contynuing in her former earneſt diſpoſition to deliuer this Realme from the infamy of all maner of baſe monyes, and to reſtore the ſame to thauncient poſſeſſion of as good monyes in fynes, as euer was in the ſame, meaninge thereby beſyde thaduancement of thonour and fame of this Realme, to reſtore by courſe of tyme, thancient good chepenes and prices of all things neceſſary for the vſe of her Subiectes, hath by good aduiſe of her Counſell, thoughte mete by this Proclamation to make euen a full ende of thaboliſhing of all kinde and maner of baſe monies within this Realme, and therefore 
                  〈…〉
               e at this time no other baſe monies be lefully curraunt, but onely two ſmall peces, whereof one is yet curraunt for peny halpeny, and thother for halfpeny farthing, and beſides theym as it is thoughte, there remaineth ſome ſmale quantitie of three other pieces of baſe monies, ſcantly worth conſideration, which were in former time coyned one for a peny, one other for a halfpeny, and a third for a farthing, and nowe not certaynelye valued, but yet amonges common people taken vncertaynelye. Her Maieſtie geueth all her Subiectes to vnderſtande, that 
                  〈…〉
               ne of all the ſaid peces of baſe monies, nor any other kynd of baſe money, ſhalbe taken or allowed to be as curraunt money within this Realme of Englande, after the twentie daye of Iuly next, but to be accompted from the ſayd twenty day of Iuly as Bullion, and yet for reliefe of all ſuch as ſhall, at, or before that tyme poſſeſſe anye of the ſame: Her Maieſtie is pleaſed that whoſoeuer ſhall bring any of the ſaid two former peces nowe curraunt, for three halfpence, or three farthinges, betwixt this & the xxv. of Auguſt next enſuing to her Myntes in the Tower, ſhall haue for the ſame in fyne moneys, not onely the values according to the rates of the ſayd three halfpence, and three ſarthinges, but alſo in conſideration of their portage, three pence for euery pound thereof, within the ſpace of twentie dayes or leſſe, and after the ſayd xxv. of Auguſt, vntill the xx. of Septembre, to haue onely the value according to the ſeuerall rates of three halfpence, and three farthinges, without any allowaunce for portage: And as to thother baſe peces being taken for the values of halfpenyes and vnder whereof there is litle accompt to be made, becauſe of the ſmale quantitie coyned thereof, yet for the ſatiſfying of euery perſon that ſhall haue any ſuche ſmale peces at any tyme betwixt this and the twenty day of Septembre, the ſame ſhall haue at the ſaid Mintes, the full value of the ſyluer conteyned in the ſame, as the ſame ſhalbe duely proued, and from the ſayd xx. of Septembre, her Maieſtie determineth to receaue no more baſe monies of this Realme, into any her Myntes. And thus her Maieſtie hauing now as it were atcheued to the victory and conqueſt of this hidiouſe monſter of the baſe monies, which although it hath had no great continuaunce in this Realme, yet hath the ſame bene in parte no ſmale occaſion of many euyles in the ſame: Willeth and requireth al maner her Subiectes, to vſe all the expedition that they may in bringing to the Myntes all their baſe monyes, that her Maieſties officers and miniſters appointed 
                  〈◊〉
                refyning and coynage may ſpedely ende this good worke, and not to waſt their time for lacke of ſpedye bryngyng in thereof, as of late they haue done to the great charge of her Maieſtie, and her ſayd Miniſters.
            
               Yeuen at her Maieſties Manor of Grenewiche the xii. daye of Iune the thirde yeare of her Maieſties Raygne. And the yeare of our Lord GOD. M, D. LXI.
                  
               
God ſaue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Richard Jugge and John Cawood Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
            
         
         
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   