
      
         
            
            ¶ By the Quene,
            
               THE Quenes Maiestie, hauinge sundry complayntes made to her, aswell by the Ambassadour of her good brother the kynge of Spayne, as by certayne marchauntes straungers, and theyr factours, that of late certaine shippes and marchaundizes, passynge through her narrowe Seas, haue bene vppon the South coste of thys her Realme of Englande, or nere thervnto, taken by French shippes that came out of Newehauen in Normandy, and that certayne of her subiectes shoulde be aydynge thervnto, or at the least after the same so done, shoulde take part of the commodities thereof: Hath thought it mete and necessary, to notifie her pleasure and intention, generally to all her portes on the sayde South part of Englande, because hytherto the particularities of the offences, are not to her declared nor knowen, whiche is this. Her Maiestie vpon the worde of a Prynce, assureth all persons, that she neuer knewe of any such attemptes, intended by any of her subiectes, neyther gaue aucthoritie or permission, nor knoweth of any geuen, by any vnder her, to any person, to allowe or procure any such act: but hath and doth meane, whatsoeuer any particuler euyll subiectes of hers, shall haue geuen contrary cause to thynke, to see all marchauntes of all other nations, passynge through her narrowe Seas with theyr shippes and vessels, or hauntynge her portes, to be as fauourably vsed and preserued, as her owne naturall subiectes.
            And therfore her Maiestie ordereth and commaundeth, that for the satisfaction of these complayntes, whersoeuer it shall appeare, that any subiect of hers, hath eyther helped to take any shyp, or sease any goodes, eyther vpon the sayde narrowe Seas, or in any part of thys Realme, wherevnto he or they haue no iust tytle, by lefull meanes, and with consent of the owners: That euery publyke officer in euery suche place, where eyther such person so offending, or the goodes so iniustly gotten, can be found, to arrest and commyt to prison the person, and to sease the goodes, vntyll it shall further appeare vppon the particuler prosecution of the parties damaged, what is further to be done by lawe and iustice. And for the time to come, her Maiestie strayghtly chargeth all maner her subiectes, to forbeare from the attempt of takinge or disturbynge of any shyppes or vessels, or from aydynge of any other so to do: but to lyue in good peace with all maner of subiectes, appertaynynge to any Prynce or countrey, with whom her Maiestie is in amitie. For otherwyse, her Maiestie wyll no wyse spare from extremitie of punishment without fauour or remission.
            Yeuen at her Maiesties pallayce of Westminster, the .viii. day of February, in the fift yeare of her hyghnes raygne. 1562.
            God saue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Powles Church yarde, by Rycharde Iugge, and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Quenes Maiestie.
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
         
      
   