
      
         
            
            
            Falshood in Friendship, or Vnions VJZARD: OR VVolues in Lambskins.
                  1. Diſcouering the errors in vniuſt leagues.
                  2. That no ſubiect ought to arme himſelfe againſt his King for what pretence ſoeuer.
                  3. An aduertiſement to thoſe fewe of the Nobilitie which take part with Infamie.
               
            
            LONDON Printed for Nathaniell Fosbroke, 1605.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE MASQVE OF THE League and the Spanyard diſcouered.
            
               THE Tyrant of Spayne, gaping and watching a long time for the inuaſion of Fraunce, and generall ruine of the French, working (to his own deſire) the diſorders not long ſince, and which yet continueth in all the eſtates of thys Realme. Seeing likewiſe, that the laſt of the houſe ofThe laſt King that was murdered by the Iacobine Fryar. 
               
                  Ʋalois ſwayed the Scepter, after the death of Monſieur his brother, who was reported to be poyſoned; By his owne ſubtilty, & by the means of hys Agents, Ambaſſadour, and adhering Pencionars,

(whom he hath drawn into a very great and high hope to his owne profit and their perdition) hath raiſed a League, and thereby engendred Monſters, more horrible and hiddious, then thoſe that (of old) are ſayd to be ſubdued by the valour of Alcmenaes Sonne.
            It were needleſſe to make further ſearch for newe horrours in the depth of Lybia: let mee rather queſtion howe to baniſh hence the crueltie and barbariſme of theſe Scithians, Gothes by nature, theſe Moores & Sarraſin Spanyards, whoſe firſt Fathers had theyr originall from the Gothes, and from hence thys League (the mother of all miſchiefe) that is heer ſo louingly cheriſhed, had her beginning. Thys Pandora hath ſo caſt abroade her poyſons out of her boxe, as the ayre, the earth and men, beeing vnprouided of a counter-poyſon, yea, very neere all things els, are infected therewith. It hath changed in many places, the face of this fayre Monarchie, into an Anarchie or many headed gouernment: it hath ouerthrowne the throne and royall Authoritie, violenced the Magiſtrates, murdered the Prince, peruerted all order and policie, both diuine and humane. It hath made Fraunce a den of theeues, murderers, robbers and ſpoylers, ſuch Monſters hath thys League prodigiouſly brought foorth; among infinite of the very worſt ſort, is ignorance, malice, deceit, guile, hypocriſie, robbing, theft, inceſt, feigned Religion, all kinde of execrations,

murder, ſacrilidge and particide; thys Witch, engendered by the terror and ambition of the Spanyards, hath made a ſtrange metamorphoſis of a moſt beautifull eſtate.
            But GOD the Authour of all good, foreſeeing in mercie ſuch as he made choiſe of: gaue courage to theyr harts to deteſt thys Scithia, to flye from thys Lybia, whoſe Monſters ſtrangle liuing men, as hath beene known and ſeene: and ſo to come into a ſweete ayre, pure and not poyſoned, vnder the gracious Lawes of their naturall and legittimate Princes. To worke this effect, (a meruaile amongſt them eſteemed of greateſt meruaile) it is his will and pleaſure, that out of a great euill, ſhoulde ſpring and ariſe as great a good, that from a moſt ſtrange conſpiracy of fellons, murderers, and parricides of theyr King, ſhould be raiſed and lifted to the Maieſtie royal, the man, whoſe life this Sorcerer daily ſought to abridge & confound. For heereon did he build, and to this day doth builde all his arteficiall and pernicious deſeignes, thinking heerby at one bit (as it were) to ſwallowe and deuoure the King, (whom the luſtie cutters of this Medea, ſcornfully call a 
                  Biarnois, a name of ſcorne that they gyue the King. 
               Bea
                     •
                  n-niſh man) yet in ſted of preuenting, is he placed in the front of the gate of Fraunce, and lifted to the higheſt royalty thereof, through the midſt of many treaſons, and euen (as it were) againſt his owne will, hath God ſeated him in the Empire.
            
               Thus thinking to ruinate and ouerthrowe at once thys very ſickly eſtate▪ ready to ſtagger and fall downe vnder the burdenous weight of oppreſsion: the onely and ſoueraigne meane of reliefe is found, and where the very ſtroke of death was directed againſt the hart, heere-hence ariſeth the ſpeciall remedie and medicine of the wounde.
            Thou Circes, what ſayſt thou? thou horrible Megera, what ſaiſt thou? thou foreſpent Sorcerer lyke the ſhadow of death, what ſaiſt thou? canſt thou perſwade thy ſelfe as yet to preuaile by thy enchauntments? are not thy falſe and poyſoned drugs now manifeſtly diſcouered? knowes not each one thy counterfeit diſſembling? are not thy vnderminings preuented? thy blowes rebated? thy ſinnowes ſhrunke vp? holdeſt thou ſtil thys auncient withered Saraſin for thy ſupport? putteſt thou thy hope in the Duke of Parma and his Spanyards, who by nature vſe crueltie euen towards thine own followers, becauſe they loue the League no better then they doe theyr Kings, in reſpect they are French borne, & but ſerue themſelues with them, onely to reache the higheſt of theyr tyrannous enterpriſe? thinkeſt thou yet to help thy ſelfe with thy Monks coule and hoode, to bath againe thy parricide hands in the bloode royall? VVhat meane is left thee whereby to exterminate thys royall houſe of Burbon, iſſued from S. Lewes, to whom God in

ſucceeding right hath tranſ-ferred the Crowne?
            Thou bendeſt thy browes, thou curſeſt, thou ſpighteſt, and grindeſt thy teeth to beholde all thy Magicke artes deluded, thou art ready to burſt with rage and deſpight, and deafneſt our eares with exclaimes, that thus at laſt thou art kept at a bay. The vertue, the Lawrell, the fortune and victories of our Hercules of Gaule, the queller of ſo many Monſters thy children, makes thee ready to die with fury, ther are ſo many puniſhments, and ſo many deſerued corrections hammering in thy head. Thy goodly Armies, thy puiſſant forces, nor all thy preſumption wil ſerue to benefit thee, the fields all couered with thy ſtrange men at Armes, in ſhort time will be (as oft heeretofore they haue beene) died and imbrewed in theyr owne vnhallowed bloode, by the ſtrength which the great God of Armies, hath vouchſafed to the arme of our victorious Prince.
            How is it, that thou forceſt reaſon? chaungeſt the Lawes, exterminateſt the blood royall, and chaſeſt the true heyres, to place a ſtranger in theyr roome? who can endure this? No, no, the valiant, vertuous, and moſt magnanimous iſſue of S. Lewes, with ſo many couragious Princes of his blood, and ſo many worthy & noble Frenchmen: hath both wiſedome, counſell, experience, and the ſword wherewith to defende hys royall houſe, and in iuſtice to correct the iniury that

hath beene doone vnto him.
            Magitian, thou lookeſt pale and wan, when I oppoſe againſt thee the force of this Sampſon, the counſell of this Neſtor, the valour of this Achilles, the generoſitie of this French Prince, with the martiall labours and happy fortunes of this Alcides. Thou flyeſt (Enchanter) and all thy pollicies faile thee, thy practiſes, thy poyſons, thy parricides, thy incantations, with thy other wicked helps: which can nothing at all preuaile againſt this rock of conſtancie, ſtrength and vertue: but feare conuerteth thy winges to thy heeles, and many times hath forced thee to take a ſhamefull flight.
            Thinkeſt thou the encloſement of walles, and Rampiers of Citties can warrant thee? tryumpheſt thou already of two ſmall Townes, which the Spanyards haue taken with ſuch paine and loſſe of theyr men, as the gaines they made thereof was very little: marie the marks of their crueltie there exerciſed (according to their nature) meruailous great? Dooſt thou buckler thy ſelfe with Fortreſſes, Cittadels, and one Baſtillon? vnable are they to ſheelde thee, hauing beene vanquiſhed in field, & glad to flye the battaile with thy newe forces? Wilt thou ward thy ſelfe with walles, and therein put aſſuraunce of thy defence? Our Hercules ſhall pluck thee out as another Antheus, or ſo ſhut thee vp with his powerfull Arme, as euen there thou ſhalt ſmoother,

and ſo looſe thy life.
            Thou ſheweſt thy ſelfe to be ſenceleſſe, rauing, mooued with impacience, and ſtark mad: the fire of thy frenzie makes thee trauaile and torment thy ſelfe; but theſe thy very lateſt behauiours, this heate, furie, frantique feuer and plague, brings thee into a ſprightly reſolution of thy ſtrength, and ſo will foorthwith conduct thee to thy death.
            VVhat medicine may ſerue thee in thys mortall malladie? what hearbe can any way releeue thee, whereby thou maiſt refortifye thy ſelfe, and ſo withſtand our valiant Hercules? to what Saint haſt thou vowed thy ſelfe? who ſhall be thy Aeſculapius? what phiſicall drugges and ſimples canſt thou helpe thy ſelfe withall? I vnderſtand thou haſt gotten a newe Armie of Spanyards, conducted by the Duke of Parma, who feares vs with the renowne of his valour, and the taking of one or two ſmall booties, (he hauing notwithſtanding alreadie refuſed the battaile fiue times, becauſe againſt ſo many of the noble and generous French, he durſt nor be too prodigall of the liues of vile Moores, the Kings euils, and the very baſe beggers of the Coūtry.) With theſe barbarous Rodemontes wouldſt thou diſharten vs, they that gaue ſuccour to the Rebels of Paris, and the Ambaſſadour Mendoza of Spaine, or, to terme him more rightly, The lyar of Spayne: hee that not long ſince fled with thy

puiſſant Armie into Laon, when hee perceiued himſelfe purſued by his Maieſtie with fifteene hundred horſe, ouer-ſpent and wearied with extreame iournyes: yet perſwading thee he wold deſtroy them all, with ſo many ſtrange powers, as amounted to many Cornets of Spanyards, who like the forces of Pharao came to ſwallowe vp Gods people: yet as then enſued, ſo doubtleſſe will he now permit, that they ſhall be ouerthrowne in the Red Sea, which ſhall be made of their owne proper blood.
            Thy olde Caballe and couerture of Religion, is as good to thee as nothing, this drugge was long ſince vttered, and returnes thee no profit: the Catholique Noble men that abhorre thee, doe very well knowe, that heerein is no vertue left to ſheelde thee from falling; at thys hooke and line, angling for the eſtates, thou faſtneſt ſundrie licoriſh baytes, of Croſſes, Miters, Dignities, Prelat-ſhips, Partages of Prouinces, Offices, Gouernments, and great prerogatiues, which thou promiſeſt to diſtribute among ſuch, as with thee doe caſt the Nets for ſo rich a Fiſh.
            The firſt Fathers of this halfe crowned Iewe, (who to thy proper ruine, and his own aduancement, plucks the hart out of thy bellie) to wit, Atlas, Oris, Anus, Siceleus, Luſus, Ʋlus, (as then in the Pagan Religion) tooke Spayne by the like bayte, feigning themſelues religious, and men of good behauiour; So this olde Foxe,

ſeeing himſelfe readie to ſucceede his forefathers, hath practiſed, and doth practiſe the like in the vſurpation of this Crowne, hoping to make a bootie of it, and to tyrannize therein at his owne pleaſure: but that our noble Prince makes him let goe his holde, and ſurrender vp the eſtates he proudlie vſurpeth, namely, the Realme and eſtate of Nauarre, ſometime troden down by Ferdinand of Caſtile and Arragon, one of thy Grandfathers.
            This Ferdinand, vſurped on D. Iohn of Albret, the thirtie fiue King of Nauarre, who eſpouſed Katherine Siſter to King Phoebus the thirtie foure, who died without iſſue, whereby ſhe came to the Crowne, in the yeere one thouſand, foure hundred, eyghtie-three. Then Henrie of Albret the ſecond, the Sonne to Iohn of Albret, ſucceeded in the right of Nauarre, the yere one thouſand, fiue hundred, and ſeauenteene, & eſpouſed Margaret of Fraunce, the Siſter to K. Fraunces the firſt. Of this marriage came Jone, whom Bertrand Helie calleth Charlotte, who ſucceeded in the right of her Father, the yeere one thouſand, fiue hundred, fifty-fiue, and was married to the moſt puiſſant and magnanimous Duke, Anthonie of Vendoſme, of the moſt illuſtrious and royall houſe of Burbon: whereof is left this Mars in earth, Henrie the thirde of that name, the true ſucceeder in the rights of Nauar, & now by lawfull ſucceſsion, the moſt Chriſtian

and moſt victorious King of Fraunce, the fourth of that name.
            Theſe effects make knowne thy pretence to the verie ignorant, thy diſloyaltie, thy ingratitude, & thy impietie (in many places) hath made the people wiſe: they know that the dotage and ſimplicitie of men, is the aſſured foſter nurſe of Tyrants. The bountie and clemencie of our King towardes his Subiects, yea, euen his enemies hath, from a great number, taken away the frontlet of ignoraunce; the Chriſtian & Catholique Religion, floriſheth more among his faithfull Subiects, then els where, obedience there maintaineth it, where cōtrariwiſe, ſuch diſobedience as thou vſeſt, hatcheth nought els but rebellion, breach of faith, and laſtly vtter ruine and confuſion.
            Thy Maſque cannot hide thee from beeing noted for a moſt diſloyall and infernall Furie; thou haſt brauely extolled thy ſelfe like a God, thou haſt ſmoothly beguiled the people wyth outward ſhewe of Religion and holineſſe: theſe make thee known for ſuch a one as thou art, & that thou dooſt but lye, when thou tearmeſt thy ſelfe a Chriſtian and a Saint.
            The mercinarie tongues of thy falſe Preachers, with all theyr coſenages and impoſtures, are other ſophiſticall wares of ſlender valewe: in that they cannot maintaine thy health, albeit they haue broken and altered the humours of a great

number of thy folowers, to make them like and conformable to thine owne. Who ſees not that the Sermons which thou cauſeſt them to make, are Phillippicall Appologies, and inuectiues? Where is the Goſpell of peace, concord, charitie and loue? Where is the office chriſtian, brotherly kindneſſe, humilitie, deuotion and obedience? Where is the Chriſtian catechizing, or the exerciſe of Gods commaundements? Thou by them preſcribeſt a cleane contrary matter, for thou haſt hired theyr tongues, to thunder foorth a Goſpell of blood, vengeance, diſobedience, and rebellion: ſuch Trouch-men and Trumpeters of ſedition, haue learned of thee to ſpeake, ſo to diſtill into French-mens harts thy golden poyſon, whereof already the Rebels feele the bitter taſte and deadly operation.
            Thou haſt thruſt into theyr hands the flaming firebrande, wherewith they haue circled the foure corners and very midſt of Fraunce: and all was wel neere loſt, without the ſuccour of our Alcides, who ranne to the water, and would not ſuffer his Houſe and Heritage to be conſumed in the violence of thys fire. They haue annimated the ſimple, (who now are wexen to be deuiliſh partakers, and tearme themſelues zealous Catholiques) to the ſpoyle, maſſacre and totall ruine of theyr Parents, freends, and Countrimen, to receyue therefore in the end with them, the earneſt of diuine iuſtice on

the Iibbets and Gallowes: the ſpectacles and witneſſes whereof, are continually before theyr eyes, for theyr notorious crimes and offences. By theſe kindled fires, haſt thou already murdered one King, and by the ſame purſueſt him that now raigneth, that he beeing ſlaine, and all his race cut off, the eſtate might be tranſ-ferred to thy ſelfe; a horrible & moſt lamentable caſe, that Eccleſiaſticall perſons will pertake in ſuch enormous foule deedes and treaſons.
            One Iohn de Prochite, chiefe Authour of the conſpiracie againſt the French-men in the Realme of Scicilie, performed the ſame, beeing diſguiſed in the Outward holines, the coūtenance to ſedition & murder, note the examples. habite of a Gray Fryar: and ſo ſollicited and induced the Scicilians to the maſſacre of the French, which by them was doone one euening in the Eaſter holy-daies. So thou, like theſe Prochites, couered wyth the habites of penitence & Religion, diddeſt compaſſe thy villanie and treaſon againſt our late King, whom thou murderedſt by a Jacobine Monke, or rather, to tearme him righter, A hoodded deuil, & ſo continueſt againſt the Princes of his houſe and blood, of whom thou haſt ſworne the deſtruction.
            Thus by Monkes thou iniureſt the eſtate, which thou wouldeſt diſmember, and deuide among thoſe Coniurers, (albeit thy craftie Authour pretendeth otherwiſe) and thus are the faithfull ſubiects to the Crowne abuſed. Vnder

this Maſque, what impieties are cōmitted thorow all Fraunce by Monkiſh Souldiours, who haue changed their former ſimplicity, pouerty, and humility, into audacious trechery and preſumption?
            And becauſe the Spaniſh hypocriſie, the ſhadow of their Atheiſme, is one of the principall pillers of thy contriued conſpiracie, and that thou makeſt our men beleeue (by the introduction thou haſt made to the K. of Spaine, who at thys day raiſeth warre in the heart of Fraunce, to deſtroy thee together with the King if he can, after hee hath firſt ſerued hys owne turne with thee:) that theſe Moores are good Catholiques, and theyr followers religious. If any ſuch were to be founde, it were ſhame to deny it, then looke a little on theyr deuotion, and whether the Monachall rage kindled not a notable ſedition in Lisbone, in the yeere one thouſande, fyue hundred and nine, when two bloodie Two Iacobines the procurers of foure thouſand and more to be murdered in Lisbone. 
               Jacobines parted from theyr Cloyſter, with a Croſſe in theyr hands, (a tricke at this day practiſed among our fyring Monkiſh Souldiours, that beare a Croſſe in the one hand, and a ſword in the other, with Corſlets on theyr backs vnder theyr Cowles, as if Ieſus Chriſt and warre-weapons agreed together, when neuer was he ſeene harneſſed or weaponed amongſt hys Apoſtles and Diſciples,) and ſo dyd they enflame the people againſt certaine

that were newly conuerted to Chriſtianitie: that they altogether gouerned by their malice and enuie, crying they were but dogs and heretiques, ſlewe forthwith more then foure thouſand; thys beeing the principall ſpurre of thys mercileſſe butchery, that the ſedicious might ſpoyle and make hauocke of the others goods.
            The King, who was named Emanuell, beeing aduertiſed of this exceeding Maſſacre, cauſed the two aforenamed plagues of the Cloyſter and the Common-wealth to be apprehended, they that had excited this pittifull and bloodie Tragedie, who by his commaunde, were publiquely burned in Ebora: and information beeing giuen againſt the other theeues and murderers, about three-ſcore and tenne of them were moſt iuſtly hanged.
            At thys day in Fraunce it is hereſie with the Leaguers, to doe iuſtice on ſuch like naughtie villaines, when as theyr crimes, trecheries, and murders, are as miraculous. An obſeruaunt Gray Fryar, named brother An obſeruant Fryar perſwaded the King of Caſtile, to put ſundry Chriſtians to death, tearming them Apoſtataes. 
               Ferdinand de la Place, wyth other that were hys zealous companions, went ſo faſt as he could to Madrill, to the King of Caſtile: there this impudent and bloody Monke, perſwaded him ſhamefullie to put to death certaine Chriſtians, whom he termed to be Apoſtataes, which afterwarde was found to be moſt falſe. So many abuſes & miſchiefes hath beene committed by theſe counterfeit

hypocrites, theſe ſcellerous and hooded murtherers: as not without cauſe, in the yeere one thouſand, two hundred and threeſcore, vnder the raigne of S. Lewes, was the order of the begging Friars extolled to the third heauen for theyr profeſsion, yea, they preferred themſelues before all other in holineſſe of life, and ſtoutlie commended their voluntarie pouertie: whereby they prouoked many Prelats againſt them, and almoſt all men that were ſeene in Diuinity. But Guillaume du Temple d' Amour, a Doctor of Sorbonne, (being a man of better conſcience then any at thys day of the ſame Colledge, who create the like inſtruments of rebellion by their pernicious reſolutions, and defende the abhominable murder of the late moſt Chriſtian and religious King) with other more of great learning: both diſpiſed and diſproued openly, ſuch Beggers, alleadging, that theyr pouerty was vowed without cauſe, and that he would maintaine ſuch manner of life, to be but a pretext of Religion, and onely fit for ſuch The dyſgrace of the begging Fryars, by a Doctor of Sorbonne.
                beggers as deſired to liue in looſenes and idlenes. In the end neuertheleſſe, they got the vpper-hand in their cauſe, by the iudgement of Pope Alexander, and the Booke that this Doctor made, (which at thys day remaineth in the Librarie of Sorbonne) was condemned. But ſhoulde not thys Doctor haue highly aduantaged his cauſe, if he had liued tyll now? adding to his plea the impieties,

parricides, & all ſorts of crimes, ſmoothly hyd and couered (for the preſent time) vnder the habites of this holineſſe.
            Thou haſt (wretch) brought in and practiſed another manner of people, that are called Ieſuites, Ieſuits too proud to be Beggers, they rather make beggers to maintaine themſelues. not beggers, but ſuch as make beggers: of whom the ſcandalles are more ſecrete, yet much more pernicious then of the other. But why ſay I, thou haſt practiſed thys bad generation, ſeeing thou thy ſelfe art not onely practiſed, but begotten & ingendred by them? Howe now? mee thinks I heare ſome one ſay, belike then thys Alecto or accurſſed League, hath many Fathers? Verie true: the Spaniſh pride and ambition (as I haue ſaide) brought it into the world, as a miſhapen maſſe or lumpe, but theſe turbulent Ieſuites, with the Rodemont of Mendoza, haue ſo louinglie lyckt it, as they gaue it forme, compoſition, and garments to decke it withall.
            Theſe thou eſteemeſt fit for thy coniuration, or els they are founde to be very neceſſarie members: to thee cleaue theſe hypocrites, for the particuler profit of themſelues, and of theyr Maiſter the King of Tyrants, they being all of the Spaniſh Nation, or at the leaſt iſſued from Spaine. For about the yeere one thouſand, fiue hundred, and twentie-one A Spanyard the firſt Authour of the Ieſuits. 
               Ignatius de Layola was the firſt founder of theſe Ieſuites, (an obſtinate enemy to the houſe of Albret, & which

malice yet continueth in his ſeede) at what time Pampelunae reuolted, & the affectionate friends to the royall Houſe of Albret, (from whence deſcended the King, by the late Queene Mother of moſt worthie memory) with thoſe of Foix, as alſo the true heire of the Realme Henrie d' Albret: tooke occaſion (by the retreit of the Garriſons of Pampelunae, that ſallied forth to ſuccour the Gouernours of Caſtile) by reaſon of the warres and deuiſions then beeing, to haue theyr ſecrete intelligences in Bearne and Fraunce. In fauour of whom, King Fraunces ſent Andrew de Foix, Lord of Aſperraut, the younger Brother to Od
                     •
                  t de Foix Lord of Lautrech: who gathering vnto him thoſe of the faction of Grammont, tooke the Caſtel of Saint John at the foote of the gate. Whereupon, the Duke of Nagera Don Anthonie Manrique, ſeeing himſelfe ſo ſuddainly ſurpriſed and that the Citty of Pampelunae began to grow tumultuous: ſecretly got forth thereof, and withdrew himſelfe into Caſtile, leauing his houſe to the peoples ſpoyle.
            Thys Layola, then at the diſlodging of thys Viceroy Manrique out of Nauarre, remained in Garriſon in the Caſtell of Pampelunae, with other Souldiours belonging to the Emperour. It ſo chaunced, that the Caſtel was aſſayled by the people, and the mouth of the Cannon directed by the aſſailants to a certaine place: where, by

hap, it met with thys Layola, who had both hys feete bruſed in peeces with the ſtones, that the force of the bullet droue out of the wall, ſo that he fell downe from the height of the Caſtell, & beeing with-drawne, was afterwarde preſerued from death, and hys hurts healed.
            Then ſeeing himſelfe thus maimed and vnapt for Armes, he gaue beginning to thys good kinde of people. Let vs not then account it ſtrange, that theſe men ſo deſperatly applie themſelues to remoouing of eſtates, eſpeciallie thys heere, conſidering they are come of a Spaniſh Father a warriour, a naturall enemy to this eſtate: whom heerein they follow very perfitlie, but not in change of lyfe. For thys holy Father, beeing thus metamorphozed, could weare noA lame beginning of ſo proud a kinde of people, that ſette whole kingdoms together by the cares. ſhooes, and therefore went bare-foote, and came for followers firſt to Paris, where beeing vexed by ſome, and relieued by other-ſome, his owne Maiſter, Peter Fabri, Diego Laynes, John Codury, Claudius Gay, Paſquall Brouet, Fraunces Xauierre, Alphonſus Salmeron, Simon Rodrigues, and Nicholas de Bonadilla, ſtudents in diuinitie, he raunged into the rule ordained by himſelfe, each making a vowe of perpetuall pouertie and chaſtity.
            But to them alone I will not giue thys honour, for many other haue trauailed in this high peece of worke, as faithfull ſeruaunts, and counſellers of ſo woorthie Fathers: the bellowes of

ambition, abortiue ſonnes of the Father of lyes, bringing nothing hether but what they learne of him, and marked with his marke to know them for his owne.
            Thy face (Sorcerer) if writhen, and like to that Si
                     •
                  illaes, whom the Poets feigne to be the Mother of the Gods: but thy Bawdes and Pandars, haue made thee a falſe viſage, ſo faire as can be, to entiſe young Lordes and Gentlemen to loue thee. The draught of thy diſſembled countenaunce, to diuers of thy chiefe conſorts, hath brought immediat death: yet ſeemed it ſo excellent, as in theyr eyes it ſurpaſſed the auncient Marble portraite of 
                  Ʋenus, that wonderfullie enflamed men with loue. Diuers Lords and Gentlemen haue been rauiſhed with thy looks, whom thou in the end haſt depriued of life, in ſundry battailes and encounters: to make them receiue due chaſtiſement to theyr impudent & diſhoneſt affection.
            But who would not diſ-robe thee of thy ſhadow (falſe 
                  Ʋenus) ſeeing it is nothing elſe but gold▪ ſiluer, & all ſorts of ſtones about thee, with Perfume, Amber, Muske, and Ciuet, that thus makes thee ſmell ſo ſweete as violets? Thy garment is bordered about with certaine Ciphers, onely vnderſtoode by thy principall Cabaliſts, with diuers Letters and Charracters wrought on the imbroyderie▪ carrying thy a report: This 
               The badge & countenaunce of this moſt vn-holie League. 
               is the Sanctuarie or defence of the Catholique religion,

and of the Common-weale. All the forepart and exteriour ſhew of thy body▪ is fayre, yet ſemblable to painted and guilded Sepulchers, that containes within them nothing but loth-ſome ſmels and rotten bones: farre dyffering from theyr goodly appearaunce, yet like to that deceite ſhrowded with the Mantle of hypocriſie.
            Thou haſt gotten Archers for the guard of thy perſon, who on their beſt coates, beare the double Croſſe of Ieruſalem, but on the other, the red Croſſe, with teares. In what part ſoeuer thou marcheſt, thou art followed wyth a great Court of all ſorts of people becauſe thou giueſt heere, and beſtoweſt there. Thou makeſt ſome Marſhals of Fraunce, others Gouernours, others Chauncellours, others Preſidents, others Secretaries at commaund, ohers Counſellers of thy Priuie counſell and the brotherhood: deſpoyling the better ſorte of their Offices, and ſubſtituting ſeruaunts. So manie boot-halers, ſo many Banck-rupts, ſo manie ſhameleſſe perſons come to kiſſe thy hande: each one ſtriuing who ſhall beare thy Commiſsions ſo full of profit, who ſhall firſt extort a gyft, by falſly giuing the Pope to vnderſtand, the fulminations againſt the death of the Prince; who is in Spayne, who is in Flaunders, who in Lorraine, & who in Sauoy. When thou ſheweſt thy ſelfe in publique, theſe poore Brokers

of thy Colledge, theſe Carriers of rogations, theſe Graplers for benefices and pencions, theſe Fiſhers with Croſſes, theſe Preachers for reward, with the geſture, habite and Caſtillane countenaunce, goe publiſhing with hart and voyce: An other bragge and diſſembling ſhewe of theſe wicked Cōfederats. 
               See heere the blood of Charlemaine, ſee heere the enemie to the Heretiques and Pollitiques. And thys is but to beguile the valiant Princes that take part with thee, as ſome haue written, to wit, the Authour of the Booke called Stemmata Lotharingiae, in thus blazing thy diſcent: euen as thou deceiuedſt & brought to a poore end, the couragious Duke of Guyſe & his Brother, who but for thee (the onely cauſe of their loſſe) had much credite and many honours in thys Realme. And not long ſince vnder thy ſhadow, I ſaw a band of Armed men, breaking and renting the armes of Fraunce, vnder the authoritie and conduct of a ſimple Attorney, at this day named Buſsi: who hauing doone violence to iuſtice, & forced (perforce) the Senate againſt the Senate, alas, led captiues and pryſoners the chiefe of Harley, the example of conſtancie, and only preſident of vertue: as alſo the other principall Officers of the Court, to the Dungeons in the Baſtille, which at thys day remaineth in his hand.
            Fayre Goddeſſe, one can heare nothing more openly cryed by thy back-bearers, then thy cō
               mendations, and panegiricall prayſes: and contrariwiſe,

the execrations of Henrie of 
                  Ʋaloys, and of the Bearn-niſh-man: he is not the ſonne of a good Mother, that rayles not againſt them, & who ſo holdes his peace, is thought a ſuſpicious perſon, a pollitique, and a Huguenot.
            
            By how many ſundry waies, haſt thou dealt againſt the very cinders and aſhes of that good King, ſince thy violent hands ſo bloodily murdred him? And how at this inſtant dooſt thou baffle and abuſe our lawfull King his ſucceſſour, who deſerues not this Empire alone, but (as Alexander had) the whole world? Albeit thou art throwne down from this thy greatnes, and that notwithſtanding thy pollicies, thou canſt not reach (I will not ſay to thy deſſeignes) but to the ſtep frō which thou art with-held by by the ſtrength of our Alcides, & very neer vanquiſhed: yet neuertheles thou preſumeſt neere Paris, with thy Duke of Parma, whome thou tearmeſt thy Deliuerer: thou makeſt the earth tremble where thou paceſt: thou haſteſt to the ſuccour (but indeede the generall ruine rather) of this ſincke of all filth, this Babylon Paris, where, as a Shyp without a guide, thy followers flote alofte with euery guſcke of winde, ready to endure ſhyp-wracke, and fall from Scilla into Charibdis or run on the ineuitable rocke of thy imminent end and deſtruction.
            Nowe, the Spanyards diſcerne thee abounding infurie like the wounded beaſt, as the wild

Bore purſued, or the chafed bul, & therfore they nouriſh thee with the ſuccour of thy ſworne enemie, execrable Enion, furthering thy charmes wherwith continually thou bewitcheſt the people, that thou with them mayeſt be confounded together. What need thy borne-foe ſtir further? thy The Frēch againſt the French execute the bloody will of the Spanyards. ſelfe holdeſt the weapon on thy peoples throats: if they ſpeake of peace or returning to duetie, thou diſ-armeſt them, thou killeſt them, thou hangeſt them, thou cutteſt their throats, thou caſteſt them into the Riuers. Thou haſt no care of the extreame calamitie of ſo many poore people, of the ſtrange neceſſity & want, wherby thou haſt and ſtill dooſt ſend forceably to wracke ſo many innocents, ſo many artizans and Husbandmen, who liue (as it were) but from this day vntyll to morrowe. If they leaue thee, thou watcheſt them with Spyes, to robbe, ſpoile, and laſtly kill them: but let vs not abaſh our ſelues hereat▪ for at all times thou haſt been cruell, and onely ſeedeſt thy ſelfe with theftes, ſpoiles, blood, and pittileſſe murders.
            Thou (deuilliſh Circes) haſt had recourſe to one like thy ſelfe, to be maintained and conſerued in nature and reaſon alike: but heere thou wilt prooue to haue a contrary and far different iſſue. Thou art cruel, and calleſt to thy helpe all kinde of crueltie, to holde for euer, if thou couldeſt, thy Babylon, ſlaue-like to thy tyranny, if thy aſſociats did not ſurmount & out-goe thee.

Thou now makeſt thy ſelfe ſtrong with Spanyards thy freendes, who at all times haue beene enemies to the honeſt minded French: the cruelties of them committed in Fraunce, in Italie, and in Flaunders, haue beene manifeſted enough vnto vs, and as yet remaine freſh in our memorie. But if wee would fee how they haue imployed their induſtrie, to make themſelues renowmed with the Prototype, firſt patterne and mould of all barbarous crueltie: let vs read the hyſtorie of the horrible inſolencies and deteſtable tyrannies, exerciſed by them of late memorie in the Weſt Indiaes, vnder the raigne of Charles the fift, and Phillip his ſonne, thy Atlas and thy chiefeſt Minnion. Thys Hiſtorie is written by a Spanyard himſelfe, named D. F. Bartholmew de las Caſas, a religious man and a Biſhop, and out of the Caſtilliane tongue, was turned into French. And is likewiſe in Engliſh, by the name of the Spaniſh Colonie.
            
            Good GOD! how cruell did this Sarraſin ſhewe himſelfe, in his tyrannous conqueſt of Portugale, where hee murdred and maſſacred the faithfull Subiects of the King Don Antonio: and martyred an hundred or ſixe-ſcore Eccleſiaſticall perſons, men of worth and good qualitie, as alſo the poore religious men that tooke not part with him. Thou ſhouldeſt forſake this vowed enemie, in thy pretence to this Realme, which pertaines not to thee, neither canſt thou gaine it by thy forces ſo often vanquiſhed: but

heerein thou reſembleſt the bold-faced and ſhameleſſe A fitte example of the Leaguers proceedings in Fraunce. Woman iudged by Salomon, who was contented, that the Childe which neuer ſprang from her body, (rather then it ſhoulde be deliuered to the rightfull Mother:) ſhould be deuided and cut in halfes, according to the diſcreet iudgement of the King, who pronounced that ſentence, onely to know the true Mother, well knowing that ſhe would neuer condiſcend to ſuch a crueltie.
            Thou canſt not by right obtaine Fraunce, wherein remaineth nothing of thine, and therefore thou wouldeſt rather diſmember it, and giue it as a pray to the Spaniard our greateſt enemie, then we ſhould enioy our true & legittimate ſucceſſour, who ſhewes himſelfe a Father of his Countrey & the eſtate, and as one rather deſirous to looſe, then ſee it ruinate: woulde by kindneſſe call home the Rebels to repentance. Heereto tended his ſo long ſiedge againſt Paris, beeing certaine, that if hee had not deteſted the ſpoyle thereof, (notwithſtanding it was the fordge of all this rebellion) hee had long ſince forced, taken and poſſeſt it, or layd it leuell with the ground in cinders.
            Thys ſuccour of the Spanyards, (which at at this preſent are thy Gods, yet in the ende, thou ſhalt finde them rauening Woolues) is very conformable to thee: but if by thy incantations and charmes, thou canſt call the deade

from theyr graues, or draw them out of the fire infernall, call to thy ayde if thou wilt, That periured himſelfe to the valiāt black Prince, Son to King Edwarde the 3. of England, who re-ſeated thys faithleſſe K. in his ſeate whē he had loſt it. 
               Don Pedro, the firſt and onely of that name, ſur-named the cruell, hee beeing the fourth King of Caſtile, and the thirtie-fyue of Leon, who began his raigne in the yeere one thouſand, three hundred and fiftie, by crueltie, and therein continued all his life tyme. In vnhappy houre hee eſpouſed fayre Blanch of Burbon, (of that royall houſe which raigneth at this day in deſpight of thee) whoſe life he ſhortened by poyſon in the pryſon of Medina Sidonia: and her bodie was afterward taken vp by the French, who (on this occaſion) entred into Caſtile on the behalfe of Don Henry, and ſo was buried at Tudela in Nauarre.
            Rayſe vp thys Python, rayſe 
                  •
               p this monſtrous Tyrant if thou canſt, whoſe cruelties ſurpaſſed all other cruelties: addicted to vnlawfull loues, to murders, maſſacres, perſecution of his Lords, cruell to his Subiects and his owne proper blood: a periured wretch, a parricide, an impious robber, he will ſerue thee for a goodly guide to thy men of warre.
            Call vp Erithia, who vnder collour of Religion and holineſſe, in the time of the former Kings, eſtabliſhed and cauſed to be builded in Spayne, a great and magnificent Temple, in the Ile of Tarteſſus, nowe called Calis, or Tarifa, whereof ſhe then changed the name, & cauſed

it to be called Erithia. To this Temple was due the renthes of the pyllages and theeueries of the Weſt parts, by perpetual ordinaunce, and very long time obſerued: becauſe thoſe Kinges of Spaine, to couer theyr thefts and ſpoyles, gaue part thereof vnto their falſe The Spanyards ſtill cōtinue like deuotion to their Gods. Gods.
            Drawe foorth of Hell a moſt ambicious Cardinall of Spayne, called Ximenes, no meane enemy to them that were of greateſt authoritie in his time, for he could ſcant brooke any companion in the gouernment of Caſtile, and therfore would deuide betweene the King and himſelfe, the authority royall. Call the authours of the tumult of Medina Sidonia, and thoſe turbulent fellowes, that forced and violenced the Courts of Parliament and Chauncerie, in Vailledolid: whereupon enſued a rigorous determination, yet no more then the rebellious breakers of iuſtice had deſerued.
            Summon the ſedicious people of the Cittie of Badaios to the Realme of Caſtile, who reuolted from theyr King Don Sancho, and yet neuertheleſſe were too cruelly puniſhed: for the King hauing giuen thē aſſurance of their lyues, ſuddainly cauſed them to be maſſacred, without ſparing man, woman, or child, to the number well neere of foure thouſand. Send for the A Catalogue of honeſt minded Spanyards, ſuch as they remain ſtill to thys day. ſedicious of Lisbone, of whom I ſpake before. Call for the rigour & crueltie of the Spaniſh Inquiſition. Ayde thy ſelfe with the factious

of Caſtile, for the Biſhop of Siguenca. Draw to thee by thy ſortiledges, the conſpyring Vailledolitaines, in the yeere foure hundred & ſixtie foure, who rebelled againſt the King Don Henrie the fourth, who were accompanied with certaine of the chiefeſt perſonages, beeing mooued with a kind of iealouſie againſt Don Bertrand de la Cueua, made Maiſter of the Caualierie of S. Iames, becauſe he was the Kings Minion: yet defended they themſelues with other reaſons, and made the deſire of publique benefite, a ſhadowe for theyr conſpiracie. Which was not puniſhed when it might haue beene, through the negligence and ouer-great compaſsion in the King, who rather loued to ſhewe himſelfe quiet, then valiant.
            Hee endured the peremptory ſpeeches of the Byſhop of Calorra, without being moued, and was betrayed on all ſides, but principallie by Aluaro Gomes, whom he putting in truſt with hys greateſt affayres, becauſe from meane degree he had highly aduaunced him: yet hee notwithſtanding wrought the meanes, wherby hys aduerſaries warred againſt him, and gyuing no credite to the coūſel was giuen him: was betrayed to the Arch-biſhop of Toledo, & depriued of courage, was afterward diſgraded ignominiouſly in Auila, & ſo depoſed frō his royall ſeate. But it may be theſe fellons are not bad enough to receiue thy preſt-money, becauſe thy

preſent companions, ſurpaſſe them in villanie and treaſon; for theſe rehearſed, contented thē
               ſelues wyth chaſing theyr King, marie thy companions haue murdered theyrs. Then call yet if thou wilt from Plutoes kingdome, other worſe Bloodie Spanyards, murderers of Kings, & ſpoylers of Common-weales.Spanyards: the rebellious Subiects of Phillip de Caſtro, Prince of Arragon, whom they kylled in Caſtile; the Granadanes, who ſlew Joſeph the ſeauenth, and Iſmaell the fift, theyr Kinges; The Valentians in the yeere one thouſand, three hundred, and fortie-ſeauen, becauſe of the ſucceſsion in the Realme of Arragon: notwithſtanding, their rebellions were ſubdued by the King, Don Pedro the fourth, who gaue battaile to theſe rebellious confederates: Sarragoſſa was captiuate, and Valentia conquered, albeit at the firſt, the Valentians thought to make reſiſtance, and many skyrmiſhes paſt betweene them and theyr Kings: but beeing many times vanquiſhed and repulſed wyth loſſe, they reſolued in the end, to ſurrender vp the Citty, which the King (beeing by nature ſharpe and rigorous) would haue raſed, that the plough might paſſe thereon, and then haue ſowed ſalt in the place, in hatred of the diſhonourable inſolencies hee ſuſtained by the 
                  Ʋalentians.
            
            Neuertheleſſe, he was diſſwaded from hys angry purpoſe, by his Lordes that then were with him: and contented himſelfe with the execution of iuſtice on certain of the conſpirators.
            
               I ſee thee nod thy head, and that yet thou haſt neede of other kind of whelpes: for theſe yet rehearſed, thou wilt but place among ſo many Rebels, as holding yoke with thee, do yet truſt to the clemencie of our Alcides, & wold be ſubmitted to his mercie. Then ioyne to all theſe, to increaſe and make vp the number of thy newe Spaniſh Armie: the League of Arragon againſt theyr King: rayſe vp the vſurpers of Zaell in the Realme of Valencia.
            I will propoſe no other No examples alleadged, but onely of the wicked Spanyards. Rebels to thee, then onely of the Spaniſh Nation; confederates & Nurſſes of thy Fore-fathers; extreame cruell, and agreeable to thy humours. The Rebels of Gallicia, who caſt off Ramis, the third King of Leon; The coniuring Biſhops, that ſcaffolded theyr King of Arragon, and made him pay an honourable fine, becauſe hee had taken the reuenewes of the Churches, whereto hee was conſtrained by neceſsitie, to ſatiſ-fie the charges of the wars againſt the Moores, in the yeere one hundred, foure-ſcore and two. Get to thee alſo by the ſame enchauntments, the Rebels of Sallamanca, againſt the King of Leon; Of the Nauarrets, by whom neuertheleſſe theſe ſeditious were beſieged, taken and chaſtiſed; Of the Lords of Lara, who mooued great threatnings and attempts, in the raigne of King Henrie of Caſtile: An Almorand, quarrellons and ſedicious againſt the eſtate of Nauarre; The mutinous,

of Ebora, hauing for their cheefe leaders, Gonſallo and 
                  Ʋincent Ianes.
            
            If the Spaniſh Tyrant Phillip, if his ſonne in lawe the Duke of Sauoy, if the Duke of 
                  Parmaes war but for his owne profit, and the King his maiſter. 
               Parma, who is come to thy ſuccour for his owne profit and his maiſters, ſuffice not with theyr forces, in ſteede of them which haue beene vanquiſhed by our inuincible Hercules and his valiant Noblemen: call vppe to thy ayde by thy charmes, the predeceſſours of thy King, no leſſe cruell and bloody, to wit, Alphonſus, King of Caſtile and Leon, vnhappie, vicious, and moſt tyrannous: Almundir, deſirous to raigne: Berenger, the murtherer of his brother R
                     •
                  mond, whervpon hee dyed very miſerably: Bermond, the 21. King of Leon: Henry the fourth of Caſtile: Eringo, who poyſoned the King Bamba, and raigned ouer the Gothes: Don Alphonſo, the 11. who cauſed his brother the infant of Caſtile to bee ſmothered: Ferdinand of Arragon, who conſpired with the Duke of Ferrara, to poyſon the King Don Ferdinand▪ Garcia, King of Leon: Mahomet the fourth, King of Granado: and many others beſides.
            If the women that beare thee company, haue not their wits ſharpe enough, to aduance both thine & their own affaires: withdraw thy ſelfe to hell, and there conſort thee with that wicked Queene of Metz, Brunechilde the Sorcereſſe, by nation a Spaniſh Goth, daughter to Atanagilde,
               
the twelfth King of the Gothes, whom Sigibert King of Mets married for the plague of France. And if thou wilt, for company ioyne with her Goſwind the Gotthiſh Queene, who conſpired againſt King Richard very troubleſomely: take likewiſe Brunehauls, Fredegonde, and all the deuilliſh women of the world. Ayde thy ſelfe yet if thou pleaſeſt, with Cerberus, the Siſters Eumenides, and with all the horrible route of hell, becauſe thy The holy League, is hell it ſelfe. ſelfe art very hell in-deede. Reuiue againe all the Monſters vanquiſhed by auncient Hercules: but being thy ſelfe ſo monſtrous, thou hadſt neede fortefie thee well with the Monſters already ſubiected by the force of the aduenterous Thebane.
            
            Dooſt thou trauaile thy ſelfe to ſeeke on the earth, and vnder the earth, all that is an emie, pernicious, monſtrous, cruell, turbulent, bloody, barbarous, odious, horrible, and contrary to vertue, knowing the ſame to bide in thine owne ſelfe? Needeſt thou any other aſsiſtance then thine owne? other forces or other horrours? Thou ſurpaſſeſt all the horrours of earth and hell, all the malices of the ayre: and neuer was any crueltie or treaſon exerciſed, but thine hath ſurmounted them. Canſt thou not content thy ſelfe to haue thys Geryon of Spayne thy ſuccourer? Are not theſe thy fathers ſtrong enough to maintaine thee in thy greatneſſe?
            But when thou ſhalt be thus aſsiſted with all

that I haue ſpoken of: can all theſe forces, all theſe cruelties, treaſons, charmes, Magical-arts, Fryers frocks and hoodes, theſe Monſters, the horrours infernall, & theſe Furies, ouer-throw our Alcides? The body is ſtronger then the ſhadowe, and trueth more forcible then falſehoode.
            Thou groundeſt thy ſelfe on an vniuſt cauſe, on humaine ſtrength and exceeding violence: our Hercules (in his iuſt cauſe) buildeth not on fleſhly forces, but on GOD onely that eſtabliſhed him, the vertue, equity and right of hys claime; thy in-iuſtice and ambition, are the enemies, that hetherto haue diſgraced and defiled thee. Thinkeſt thou to conquer by flattering and embracing thy foe? the ſpye that betrayes thee, and diſcouers all thy enterpriſes? Would God thou hadſt beene ſmothered in thy byrth, then had not this eſtate beene in ſuch combuſtion where thou raigneſt: but thou haſt gyuen him the fayre collours, which beguileth thee, and ſtrengtheneth vs, thou haſt honoured and ſhaddowed him with the goodly titles of The blandiſhed titles of ye League wherby they deceiue the world. 
               Catholique, zealous, the enemie of the Heretiques and Pollitiques, the Freende of the Common-wealth, and the holie Ʋnitie.
            
            Theſe couertures are too ſlender and feeble to blinde the eyes of our Lynceus: and are no other to thee then Nets, to wrappe thee in, as

               Venus with Mars, by the cunning of Vulcane, or as ambuſcadoes, on ſuddaine to ſurpriſe thee. Thou flyeſt fayre, with thy enemie after thee following at thy heeles, and euer-more to our great aduantage: he ſpurres thee, and yet (as I haue ſaid) keepes thee companie, albeit thou haſt deckt him with ſo many double Croſſes and bought Pater noſters, after the faſhion Caſtillane and Albanois, as hee ſeemes to thee thy ſpeciall friende; thus loueſt thou thy fraudulent coulloured enemy, and hateſt and purſueſt vs to thy vttermoſt.
            And albeit ſo many learned pennes, haue diſcouered him for a bold-faced ſhameleſſe beaſt, defacing his faire gliſtering collours, where-with like a Peacock hee makes thee follow him about: let vs once againe lift vppe this counterfeite Maſque, and wee ſhall ſee wyth what Chymara, and with what Hydra our Hercules hath to deale.
            He that vnder thy Enſigne makes open war vppon vs, and couert warre vppon thee, or rather this enemie that fights for vs againſt thee, (for he neede not doubt, but the faithleſſe ambition which thou haſt brought foorth and begunne, will bring both thee and thy other Coniurers to a miſerable end,) decks himſelfe with feigned loue to the Common-weale & the holy vnitie. VVhat publique-weale? what holy

vnitie meanes he? Calleſt thou it cōmon-good to ruinate ſo many Countreyes and Citties? is this deteſtable League, this coniuration ſo pernicious to the eſtate and the Catholique Religion, a holy vnitie? If it be? the effects doe publiſh themſelues. VVas neuer ſeene ſuch out-rages, ſuch impieties, wracke of Religion, corruption, licentiouſneſſe and Atheiſme: as ſince thou thus exaltedſt thy ſelfe, and haſt trode both iuſtice and Religion vnder foote: thy Armes haue brought in thys dyſorder, and generally hath dyſperſed bothe bloode and fyre.
            Thou prophaneſt iuſtice, thou forceſt and ſlaue-like leadeſt it vnder thy irregular and moſt indirect Lawes: thou makeſt the Catholique Religion the Goddeſſe of warre, that ſtrikes, ſpoyles, and kylles. Haſt thou no ſhame? Knoweſt thou not that Religion is full of peace, and makes it her glorie to ſuffer and endure torments, and not to torment any? Knoweſt thou not that ſhee defends her-ſelfe by Martyrs, by Fayth, Humilitie, Obedience, yea, all the other Vertues: and not by mortall Armes?
            The Church is millitant, but with what warre, hurts and woundes? euen thoſe of her Spouſe CHRIST IESVS; who ſo giues Religion anie other Armes, then thoſe that

Chriſt Ieſus gaue to hys Church, in ſtedde of aduauncing, dooth ruinate it. The Armes gyuen by GOD to a Chriſtian, are iuſtice, in ſted of a Corſelet, Iohn, 29. Wiſd. 5. Eſay, 59. the Helmet of Health, the inexpugnable Target of Equitie, the Shield of Fayth, the Sworde of the Spirit, which is the worde of GOD.
            Heere-vpon Saint Paule ſayth: 2. Theſ. 5 
               Let vs which are of the daie, bee ſober, putting on the Breaſt-plate of Fayth and Charitie, and the hope of Saluation for our Helmet. For God hath not appointed vs to wrath, but to obtaine Saluation by our Lord Jeſus Chriſt.
            
            And to the Epheſians he ſayth: Ephe. 6. 
               Finally my Bretheren, be ſtrong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on all the Armour of GOD, that yee may ſtande againſt the aſſaults of the deuill. For wee wreſtle not againſt fleſhe and bloode, but againſt Rulers, againſt powers, againſt worldly Gouernours of the darkeneſſe of this world, againſt ſpirituall wickedneſſe in heauenly places.
            
            
               For this cauſe take vnto you the whole Armour of GOD, that yee may be able to reſiſt the euill daie, and hauing fyniſhed all things, to ſtand faſt: hauing your feete ſhodde with the preparation of the Goſpell of Peace. Aboue all, taking the Shielde of Fayth, where-with you maie quenche all the fierie Dartes of the Wicked.
            
            
               Take alſo the Helmet of Saluation, and the

Sworde of the Spirite, which is the Woorde of GOD.
            
            Theſe Armes are commendable, & meete for a Chriſtian, and hee is forbidden to vſe other materiall Armes, where he goes for Religion and for hys conſcience, 
                  •
               hich are no proper meanes to maintayne and defende them withall.
            And nowe at thys inſtant comes to my memorie, an example well worthie noting, ſhewing that Religion ought not to be debated or prooued by corporall Armes; The Hyſtorie is taken from the faythfull Corriualles of Spayne.
            The Maiſter of True Religion not to be decided by the ſword, note the example. 
               Acantara, D. Martin Ianes de la Barduba, of the Portugall Nation, entred in quarrell with the King of Granado, about Religion, and woulde make proofe of the trueth of his Religion by Armes. Heereupon, at the motion of a certaine Hermit, vvho had promiſed hym victorie againſt the Infidell Moore King, (in deſpight of the King of Caſtile to whom he was ſubiect, and had forbidde him to enter war on this occaſion:) he brought an Armie to the Fielde, gaue Battaile to the Moore King, and there by the iuſt iudgement of God, was worthily puniſhed; For there was he ſlaine, and hys Armie vanquiſhed, & driuen to flight by the Granadanes.
            
            
               In thys caſe he vſed no manner of collour or pretence, the trueth was, that he tooke Armes for the maintenaunce of the Chriſtian Religion, and yet neuertheleſſe was ouer-come. Then thou, that vnder cloake of Religion haſt raiſed theſe Armes, and perpetrated ſo manie ſundry euils: what thinkeſt thou will become of thee?
         
         
            
            
               ❧ That it is not lawfull for a Subiect to Arme himſelfe againſt his King, for what pretence ſo euer it bee.
            
               IS it not permitted thē (ſayſt thou) to bandie our forces againſt an hereticall Prince? Albeit thou hadſt ſuch a one, yet is it not for a Subiect to Arme himſelfe againſt his King, and that the Catholique Noble men which follow him, may well gyue thee to vnderſtand. Tuſh▪ this is nothing els but thy deceit it fits thee well to haue ſuch a colloured pretext although thou haſt no hereticall Prince. For the good life and behauiour of his Maieſtie, with the deſire hee hath to be better inſtructed without obſtinacie, if he were in errour as he is not, exempts him from

that infamous name, and renowneth him wyth the moſt Chriſtian King.
            The tree is knowne by his fruite: good reaſon then that thy barbarous actions, ſhoulde ſhewe thee to be plunged in the bottomleſſe depth of Atheiſme. For if thou didſt beleeue in GOD, or but loue him: thou wouldeſt folow his word, and obey thy Prince: what euer he be in hys conſcience, he ſeeketh not to conſtraine thine. He is a Chriſtian, & moſt Chriſtian King, further of from the infidelitie and impietie that raignes in thee, then thou or thy helpers, are neere your tyrannous willes to deſpoile him of hys Crowne.
            I would particulerly aunſwer to all thy falſe inductions, placed in a rancke vnder thys ſlye pretence: if others (better able then I) had not doone it before mee, wherein there is not anie thing forgotten.
            This is to bee granted, that a ſoueraigne Prince is not to be violate, and hys Subiects are bound to obey him (whatſoeuer he be:) without doing that which is contrarie to the honour of God. If the King command me to goe to war in his ſeruice, to mount my horſe, and to giue a charge vppon the enemies of his eſtate: I will doe it moſt gladly, and am bound in duetie ſo to doe. If he commaund me to change my Religion: I will not doe it, neither is there any ſuch duetie to be exacted on me. But his Highneſſe

is ſo wiſe, as he well knowes, that his power tendeth not that way: at his deſcretion and appointment remaines our bodies and goods, the conſcience onely appertaineth to God. He can not force it, and if (perchaunce) he ſhould offer the meanes of Religion, not to be changed by any conſtraint, but to be withſtood by pacient ſufferaunce, til God in iuſtice right the cauſe. conſtraint: I would withſtand him by ſufferance, and giue ouer force, not reſiſt againe by force. I will change my Countrey to ſhunne this compulſion, or I will dye in the defence of my Religion: notwithſtanding, our good Kings thoughts are farre from this, he wil not make warre againſt God, to take from hym his kingdome, which is our conſcience & ſoule, he being inſpyred with him, and burning in the zeale of his loue. Hauing deuided the French Empire with God: thinkeſt thou hee will take from him his part, or but enterpriſe vppon hys eſtate?
            Hee is no Tyrant to doe ſo, like thee, that wouldeſt vſurpe, and teare it altogether out of his handes: but hee ſhall well enough defende thee, thou haſt a puiſſant and vnconquerable aduerſarie againſt thee, hee that with him hath part of this Empire. And when thou haſt preſented all thy humaine forces, thoſe that thou haſt gathered together of loſt men and ſtrange Spanyards, equall in number with the Armie of Xerxes: yet ſhalt thou not be able, (I will not ſay to fight) but onely to hold head againſt our Alcides, hauing hys Maiſter, the moſt mighty

King of Kings to be hys helper, who holds him by the hand, who in thys eſtate eſtabliſhed him and the predeceſſours of hys race, for the ſpace of ſixe hundred yeeres and more, & commaundeth vs to obey him: thou (to thy extreame damage) haſt prooued hys force more then Herculean.
            
            Hys Edicts and holy ordinaunces be obeyed, and moſt expreſly already propoſed by manie pennes, and ſundry Doctors of diuinitie, for our perfection: which conſiſteth in the obedience due to GOD, and conſequently, to ſuch as he hath placed ouer vs, Math. 10.23. Rom, 13. 1, Pet. 2, Kings, Princes, and other theyr Lieuetenants, for the chaſtiſing and puniſhment of male-factors, and ſounde aſſuraunce of the good.
            To reſiſt the King and hys ſeculer authoritie, is to ryſe againſt GOD, the Authour and protector of royall dignitie: by which Prou, 8. Kings raigne, and the Princes of the earth exerciſe iuſtice towards theyr Subiects; That we ought to obey our Princes, and not rebell for any maner of cauſe. By which the wiſe are maintained, Rebels proſtrated, theyr enterpriſes ouer-throwne, and the iniury doone to the bleſſed and annoynted of the Lord, ſearched into, and venged wyth ſeuerity. The antiquity of the Royall eſtate, is moſt excellentlie noted in the holie Scripture, and recommended in Melchiſedech King of Salem, in the tyme of the great Patriarch Abraham, long before Moiſes.
            
            
               Kings depend and are eſtabliſhed by God ouer theyr people: God ſayd to the people of Iſraell; Deut. 17. 
               When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God giueth thee, and enioyeſt it, and dwelleſt therein, and if thou ſhalt ſay, I will ſette a King ouer me, like as all the other Nations that are about me: thē thou ſhalt make him King ouer thee, whom the Lord thy God ſhal chuſe from among the number of thy Brethren, and thou maiſt not ſette a ſtranger ouer thee, that is not of thy Bretheren.
            
            Since thys Lawe, in the tyme of Samuel, the 1. Sam. 9.Iſraelites, deſirous to vſe theyr priuiledge receiued of GOD: demaunded that a King might goe before them, leade theyr warres, defend theyr Countrey, and venge them on theyr enemies, euen as by all other Nations they behelde the Maieſtie royall to floriſh and be aduaunced. Which by the commaundement of God was graunted to them, wheron ſucceeded Dauid, choſen according to Gods owne hart, and ſo continued this dignitie among the Iſraelites: tyll by the deuiſion of the people, & diuorce of the auncient Religion, it was tottered and ſhaken, and afterward in the ende, diſsipated and brought to nothing.
            Neuertheleſſe, what captiuitie enſued on the people of the Hebrewes; what-ſoeuer ſtrange Kings were commaunded them: yet had they euermore in chiefe commendation the Royall greatneſſe, and were inſtructed by the

Prophets to obey and pray for their Kings, yea; although they were Ethnickes and Pagans, in ſo much as GOD had appointed them theyr Lords, during theyr bondage and captiuitie.
            
               1. Peter, 2Subiects ought in all feare to ſubmit themſelues to theyr Princes, not onely the good and humaine, but thoſe likewiſe that are ſtearne & rigorous, for this is agreeable to the wil of God. If any one for the cauſe of hys conſcience towards God, endureth vexation and ſuffers vniuſtly, our God in no caſe will permit the Seruaunt to contend againſt his Maiſter, nor the vaſſayle to take vp Armes againſt his King.
            But the King (ſayſt thou) is contrary to thee in doctrine, what dooth thys pretence auayle thee? when were he contrary in doctrine, and as impious and ſacriligious as thy ſelfe: yet it followes not, that iuſtly thou art to reuolt from him, to make warre vpon him, to attempt hys life, and the ſpoyle of his eſtate.
            It is certaine that Saule, for hauing contraryed Gods commaundement, in pardoning the Amalechites, whom he ſhould haue put to the ſword: hee was giuen ouer to the euill Spirit, who by times tormented him, and declared him vnworthy of the Realme: Notwithſtanding, was it lawfull for any liuing man among his ſubiects, to enterpriſe againſt him? So much wanted it in Dauid himſelfe, who coulde finde farre greater occaſion to doe it than any other,

not onely pretending to the Crowne, (hauing beene before by the Prophet Samuell annoynted 1 Sam. 16. King of Iſraell) but alſo carrying in memorie the iniuries he receiued of Saule day by day, in recompence of his good and faithfull ſeruices: albeit he were a fugetiue, he, his father, and all his race: albeit in deſpight of him, (through cruell indignation) Saule had cauſed to be ſlaine, the ſacrificing Prieſts of God, to the number of foure ſcore and fiue, that wore the linnen 1 Sam. 22. Ephode: beſides, diſcomfited their cittie Nob, & in the ſame rage ſlewe with the edge of the ſworde, ſo many men, women, children, yonge ſucking Infants, Oxen, Sheepe, and Aſſes, as were there to bee founde, onely becauſe the hygh Prieſt Ahimelech gaue Dauid to eate in extreame neceſſitie, as alſo deliuered him the ſword of Goliah, being ignorant that he had fled the Court, and was in Saules diſpleaſure.
            Although that Dauid was ſearched through all the corners of Iſraell, in the Mountains, Deſerts, Rockes, and places very neere vnacceſſable: although that Saule had appointed & concluded his death, and Dauid hearing this ſentence, well knew himſelfe to be innocent: although that God had giuen the King into hys handes, and eaſily hee might haue put him to death. Yet had he no will to touch the perſon Royall, aſſuring himſelfe, that who ſoeuer durſt be ſo hardy, what good right ſo euer he coulde

pretend in the cauſe: yet ſhould he not ſtande innocent before the face of God.
            Which well hee witneſſed in the Caue of 1. Sam, 24En-gadi, and in the Deſert of 1. Sam, 24 Ziph, euen there where ſoone after Saule was diſcomfited. For euen as Dauid was hyd in the Rockes of En-gadi, Saule beeing aduertiſed thereof, tooke three thouſand of the moſt choſen men in all Iſraell, and ſo went to ſeeke Dauid and his men, in ſollitarie and vn-habitable places. There Saule cauſing his men to come before hym, went into a Caue to eaſe himſelfe, and Dauid and hys men remained behind within the ſame Caue, whē as Dauids people thus ſpake to him. Nowe is the day, whereof the Lorde thy God tolde thee:
               1. Sam, 26 
               ſee heere J giue thine enemie into thine hand, and thou ſhalt doe with him what thou pleaſeſt.
            
            
               Dauid behelde his enemy alone, in a place conuenient, farre enough from hys men, diſgarniſhed of defence, and brought in all poynts according to hys owne wyll. Hee coulde haue ſmytten hym, without hazarding the meaneſt of hys people, or without moouing his enemies troupe: now could he haue left the Hoſt a buried memorie of the place wher Saule had withdrawne himſelfe, that there ſhould not remaine any tracke of hys entrance or foorth-comming. Albeit he knew by thys deede, he ſhould be deliuered from all hys enemies at once, and aduanced to the Maieſtie royal promiſed him before:

notwithſtanding, hee was ſo farre of from reknowledging the ingratitude and ill will of the King, as ſecretly hee aroſe, and cutting a peece of the skyrt of hys garment, beeing yet touched in his hart becauſe he had done ſo much, he ſayd to hys men.1. Sam. 24. 
               The Lord keepe me from dooing that thing to the King my Soueraigne Lord & Maiſter, the Lords annointed, let not me lay my hand on his perſon that is ſacred and annointed. For albeit hee is nowe in my power to reuenge my ſelfe, yet will I not doe that which I knowe is defended and prohibited by God, ſeeing he is annointed of him.
            
            Thus Dauid appeaſed the people wyth hys words, and woulde nor permit them to ryſe againſt Saule, notwithſtanding all the reaſons they could alleadge: ſo that Saule acknowledging his humanity, by the demonſtrations he had of Dauid at his comming forth of the Caue, he fell into teares, and thus ſpake vnto Dauid.
            
            
               Thou art more righteous then I, for thou haſt rendred me good, whereas I intended thee euill, and thou haſt ſhewed mee this daie the good thou haſt doone me: for aſmuch as when the Lord had gyuen me into thy handes, yet thou wouldeſt not kill me. For who ſhall find his enemie, and let him depart into a good waie: wherefore the Lord will reward thee with good, for that which thou haſt done vnto me th
                     ••
                   day. And nowe J beholde, and knowe for a certaintie, that thou ſhalt be King, and the kingdome of Iſraell ſhall be ſtabliſhed in thy hands.
            
            
               Such were the words of Saule to Dauid, beholding the humanitie Dauid had vſed towards him: by which pardoning of hys enemy, he aduaunced hym, and was ſo farre of from beeing auenged, as hee withdrewe himſelfe from his right of raigning in the Kingdome which God had giuen him.
            I cannot omit in thys caſe another deede of Dauid toward Saule. The Ziphians being come to Saule in Gibea, aduertiſed him that Dauid was hid in the Mountaine of Hachilah, which was face to face before the Deſert of Ieſimon. Then Saule renuing hys mortall enmity againſt Dauid, accompanied himſelfe with three thouſand able men, and pitched his Campe on the Mountaine of Hachilah▪
            
            Nowe Dauid dwelled in the wildernes, and knew by hys eſpials that Saule was come neere him; wherfore (in the night) hee came to the place where Saule had placed his Campe, and hymſelfe ſlept within the Fort, hys Tents beeing pitched rounde about him, and very neere him was Abner the ſonne of Ner, the chiefe Captaine of hys Armie. Which Dauid perceiuing, diſcended into that place with Abiſay, & approched neere his enemy Saule, when Abiſay thus ſpake to Dauid. 
               1 Sam, 26. 
               God hath cloſed thine enemie into thy hand this day, now J pray thee let me ſmite him once with my ſpeare to the earth, and J will not ſtirre a foote from thee: wherto Dauid anſwered.

I will not haue him ſmitten: for what is he can lay his hand on the Lords annointed, and be guiltleſſe. And Dauid ſaid furthermore. So truelie as the Lorde liueth, no harme ſhall be doone him: but rather God ſhall ſmite him, or his day ſhal come to die, or he ſhall diſcend into battaile, and there periſh. The Lord will keepe me from laying my hand vpon his holie and annointed: but J pray thee onelie take hys Speare that ſtandes at his heade, and his Cruſe of water, and ſo let vs depart.
            
            Thus Dauid contented hymſelfe wyth thys brauado: euer-more declaring hym to be no way excuſable, that ſhould attempt any thing againſt the perſon of the King.
            Let me ſay beſide, that Saule beeing ſlaine in the fight againſt the Philiſtines,1. Sam, 31 and Dauid hearing tydings of hys death, was very ſorrowfull, and vſed meruailous lamentations; commaunding him to be brought before hym that had cut off his heade, who thought to delight hym with bringing the head of Saule, ſaying that he had doone him to death, when Dauid, mooued with pitty and anger:2. Sam, 1. 
               How is it (quoth he) that thou waſt not afraid to lay thine hand on the Lords annointed? Thy blood be vppon thine owne heade, for thine owne mouth hath teſtified againſt thee, ſaying: I haue ſlaine the Lords annointed.
            
            All the water of the Sea cannot then ſerue to waſh the murderers of the late King, neyther ſhall any of them be held excuſable, that purſue

the life and eſtate of hys ſucceſſour, our vertuous and moſt valiant Prince. But thou alleadgeſt the Prouerbe common among the barbarous: Si ius violandum eſt, regnandi gratia violandum eſt: If right be to be violate, for a kingdoms ſake it is to be violate. Wherfore then vſeſt thou the pretence of Religion and common-good, to ouer-throw the moſt ſimple with theſe deceits? Thys prouerbe is of Tyrants and Atheiſts, who regard not that God is the reuenger of Kings, and returneth euill to ſuch as enterpriſe againſt theyr eſtates.
            VVhat aduauncement receiued Abſalon, liſtning to the pernitious counſell of 2. Sam, 16 
               Achitophell, and following it, attempted againſt the perſon of King Dauid hys Father? What happened to 1. Kings, 1. 
               Adonia, who thought to vſurpe the Realme againſt Salomon, hauing deceiued the Mother of the King, as very well it was made knowne vnto him afterward? How is it chaunced to thoſe, who (to the hard hap of Fraunce) taking a morſell wyth the Spaniſh enemie and the trecherous League, haue troubled thys eſtate? Howe will it fall out with ſuch, who after beeing in fauour wyth the coniuration, dyd by a Monke murder the late King? let them not now ſtand doubting, ſeeing that GOD is iuſt.
            But to confute the colloured obiection of the Leaguers at thys day, who ſay, that the King

is of a contrary Religion, and thereby pretende an excuſe for theyr conſpiracie. Haue they not read in the holy Scripture, that 1. Reg. 12, 
               Jeroboam king of Samaria, had reiected the auncient Religion? VVhat Prophet perſwaded to make war againſt hym? Hys Sonne dyed of diſeaſe becauſe of hys ſinne: the ruine of his Realme was fore-told him, but not executed by hys Subiects, offenders againſt the Law of God.
            Great euils befell to1. Reg, 17. 
               Achab & the Realme of Iſraell, for hauing brought in new Religion by the perſwaſion of Jezabell, Daughter to the King of the Sidonites; falſe Prophets were permitted, the Altars were deſtroyed, and the better ſort of people put to death. Neuertheleſſe, 1. Reg, 18, 
               Elias the chiefe Prophet of that tyme, albeit he was of wonderfull zeale: yet did hee not cō
               maunde that any one ſhoulde riſe againſt the King?
            The Prophets of God were hid in Caues, an hundred in one place, and an hundred in an other, ſecretly nouriſhed with ſimple breade and water, the good men of behauiour afflicted on all ſides: and yet was none of them offended with the King, or any enterpriſe prepared againſt hys perſon.
            The Prophet onely ſhewed him his ſinne, and that 1. Reg, 17 GOD would puniſh it by drought, three yeeres and a halfe: but who euer read, that hee incited any one to contend againſt his

Prince? Farre off from him was, quae vim virepelleret, he willed none to repulſe violence with violence, and ſo to deliuer their Countrey: but hearing that 1, Kin. 19. 
               Jezabell ſought for him to put him to death, he referred vengeance to the hand of God only, who ſheweth himſelfe a Reuenger, when any one is vniuſtlie puniſhed by the Magiſtrate, (whome no man is permitted to reſiſte with armes) according as it happened to Achab and Jezabell. For beſides the death of many Prophets, they cauſed righteous 1, Kin. 21. 
               Naboth to bee murthered, thereby vniuſtly to gette his Vineyarde, and then our God, who reſerued the puniſhments heereof till conuenient time, ſuffered Achab to endure ſuch neceſſitie, as hee ouerthrewe himſelfe and was 2, Kin. 22. ſlaine. As for Iezabell, ſhee was 2, Kin. 9. throwne from the height of a Towre by her Eunuches, rent in peeces with dogs, & her members ſcattered in the vineyard of the innocent, whoſe death ſhee had before ſollicited.
            Dyed not2, Kin. 22. 
               Athalia, who put to death all the royall Children of Ochozias: whereto withſtood the high Prieſt Jehoiada, that reſerued Joas, in whom the reigne was afterward eſtabliſhed and made peaceable? But very true is it, that when Joas fell into forgetfulneſſe of thys good turne, hee conſented to the death of Zacharia ſonne to Iehoiada: for which cauſe, God ſuffered that he ſhoulde be ſlayne by hys owne

proper ſeruants, which (notwithſtanding) none of the ſacrificing Prieſtes nor Prophets woulde attempt or perſwade, conſidering that aboue all things the perſon Royall is to be reuerenced.
            How many 
                  Epiphanius in hys booke of the lyues of the Prophets. Prophets were in tymes paſt put cruelly to death by Kings, who neuer excited any tumult againſt them, but rather councelled and induced them to repentance? Eſay was parted through the myddeſt of the bodie with a Sawe, by the commaundement of the King Manaſſes.
            
            
               Jeremie was kept priſoner vnder Zedechias, by the Gouernours of the Lande of Beniamin. The Dan. 3, and 6. three Children were caſt into the midſt of the fiery Fornace, by the commaundement of Nabuchodonozer King of Babilon. Daniel was two ſeuerall tymes caſt out to the Lyons, vnder the raigne of Pagane Kings; Yet reade we not that theſe dyd ſo much as ſpeake euill of the Princes & Magiſtrates, that gaue ſuch ſentence on them.
            Looke then vpon our Sauiour Chriſt hymſelfe, the true example of iuſtice, albeit hee knew the wicked intent ofIohn. 19. 
               Pilate, did he make any acknowledgement of hauing power from aboue? Where dyd he commaund to force the cruell Magiſtrates, albeit he could haue done it when himſelfe pleaſed? Moreouer, did he not reproue the wiſh ofLuke. 9 S. Iames and S. Iohn, who deſired that fire might diſcend vppon Samaria,

becauſe theyr entrance there was refuſed? Acts, 23, S. Paule, albeit he were ſmitten before the Prince of the Prieſtes: dyd he not freely ſay He knewe not his greatnes when he reproued him? For it is written (quoth he) Exod, 23, 
               Thou ſhalt not curſe or ſpeak euill of the Ruler of the people: howe much leſſe lawfull is it then, to attempt any ill againſt hys perſon?
            But ſtill thou obiecteſt, that the King is of a contrary Religion. The late King whom thou dydſt murder, was not he a Catholique? yet in thy bloodie paſsion haſt thou ſlaine him, contrary to the will of God. And ſhould it be that our King were of a contrary Religion, and an enemie to the Lawes of God, (which hee is not, but feares & honours him: cheriſheth his ſubiects both of the one and other Religion, would gladly pacifie hys Kingdome, & requires to be inſtructed if he were in errour,) is that ſufficient cauſe for thee to kyll him, whom GOD alone hath lifted to thys authoritie? The contrary were more neceſsary rather, as S. Paule ſayth Rom, 12 
               To ouer-come euil by dooing good, 
               1, Pet, 2, 
               ſo that our good works may ſerue to ſtop the mouthes of ignoraunt and fooliſh men: whereby thoſe may be confounded, that eſteeme Religion to be an enemy to the publique quiet.
            
               Dan. 1, et 3.For who doubts that Nabuchodonozer was a not a man of pernicious opinion, when hee deſtroyed the Temple, ouerthrew the Altar, pyld

away the holy Veſſels, led captiue the people of Iſraell into Babilon, and conſtrained many to worſhip the Image which he cauſed to be erected? yet neuertheleſſe, ſo farre were theſe people from conſpyring againſt him, as Baru, 3. 
               Baruch the Scribe to Ieremie, in the name of them wrote to the Iewes that remained at Ieruſalem, that they ſhould pray for the life of Nabuchodonozer, King of Babilon, and Balthazar hys Son. See Daniell himſelfe, was not he faithfull to Darius and Cyrus theyr ſucceſſours? Albeit he was a ſtranger and a Captiue, found he not grace of thē for hys loyall ſeruice? yet notwithſtanding, he was by nation a Iewe, the other Gentiles: he the ſeruaunt of God, the other Idolaters: he a Prophet of God, the other blinded in al their doctrines.
            I would haue all the Prophets alleadged, & find me but one, that vnder any pretence whatſoeuer it were, dyd at any tyme take Armes againſt hys Prince: yet were they vſed but as vagabounds, glad to lyue in Heb, 11 
               Mountaines, in ſollitarie and deſert places, to eſcape, and not to mooue perſecution.
            
               Math, 3. Iohn, 1, Marke, 1,S. John the fore-runner of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, ſaw in his time Herode Idumean, a counterfeit Iewe, vſurpe the Realme of Galilee and Iurie, he knew the Romaines to be Gentiles and Idolaters, that they had by force not right, depriued the people of Iſrell of theyr libertie:

brought them to be tributarie, ordained Gouernours after theyr owne minde, and doone ſuch things againſt the people of God, as hee myght well complaine on and lament: did he for al that purpoſe any thing to their preiudice? or teach them to reuolt againſt theyr Empyre? The Phariſies came to hym for counſell: gaue he them any meane to mutinie againſt the Romaines? The Souldiours and men of war came to hym, ſayd he any thing elſe to them, but that they ſhould remaine contented wyth their wages?
            Dyd he ſay to them, that the Romans ought not to raigne, or becauſe it was permitted, that therfore they ſhould riſe agaynſt them? Moreouer, Herodias moleſted him, King Herode hated him, becauſe he was not a pleaſer of theyr perſons; He knew wel that his death was plotted by Phillips wife, dyd hee therefore animate his Diſciples to ſette themſelues againſt her or Herod? or dyd he practiſe any meane to eſcape? Nothing leſſe, but willingly entred the pryſon, ſubmitted hys necke to the Executioner, offered himſelfe to the death: hauing good meanes by hys followers that day by day viſited hym, to rayſe a mutinie among the people for his deliueraunce. For how ſhould hee haue prepared the Eſay, 40 Lords way, if at that time and place hee had ſhewed himſelfe impacient? Hee was the fore-runner of hym, that taught him to obey,

pay tributes, & doe the reſt of hys dutie to the Princes of this worlde, albeit they were Pagans and Idolaters.
            That it ſhould be ſo, our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST, dyd hee euer preach or permit, that any one ſhould ſtyrre againſt Caeſar? he ſo much deſpiſed it, as beeing demaunded if it were lawfull to pay hym tribute or no, hee aunſwered Math, 22. 
               Giue vnto Caeſar that which is Caeſars, and vnto God, that which is Gods. I ſay furthermore, himſelfe, although he was poore, yet paid he the Trybute for him and S. Peter: commanding him to take out of a Math, 17. Fiſh a peece of money, to dyſcharge there-with his duetie. Hee ſawe the Publicanes and gnawers of the people, to be exacters & ranſackers of poore ſoules, vnder pretence of ſeeking the Romaine Princes right: neuertheleſſe, he neuer did or would take occaſion to murmur, but himſelfe haunted to the Publicans, and dyd Luke, 22 eate & drinke wyth them.
            He well noted the ambition of the Kings of the Gentiles, ſaying: they would ſtand vppon the tytles of gouerning: yet did hee euer animate the people to chaſe them frō their ſeates? He knew the cruelty of Herod, the iniuſtice of Pilate, the auarice and hypocriſie of the Scribes and Phariſies: notwithſtanding, he euer-more commaunded to obey them. Dyd he find fault with the Scribes and Phariſies ſitting in Moiſes
               
chayre? or that the people ſhould not do what they ſayd, albeit theyr workes were very contrary? Beeing brought before Herode, dyd he murmure? When he was bounde to be preſented before the wicked Iudges, as well Iewes as Pagans; Did not he forbid Iohn, 18, S. Peter to vſe the ſworde? yet neuertheleſſe he knew himſelfe to be innocent, the other vile men: he iuſt, the other vniuſt: he trueth it ſelfe, the other full of lyes, and corrupted by falſe witneſſes.
            He could with one word haue ouer-thrown them, as ſometime hee did the imperious Rulers: he could haue paſt thorow the middeſt of them, as he dyd in Nazareth: hee coulde haue made the earth ſwallowe them, as of olde the mutinous were with Dathan, Corah, and Abiram. Notwithſtanding, to leaue an example to ſuch as were his, he eſteemed it better to ſuffer, and councelled rather to flye, then vſe violence againſt the Magiſtrate.
            So other-whiles, ſeeing his Diſciples began to animate themſelues againſt the Phariſies, Math, 15 
               Let them alone, (quoth hee) they be the blinde, leaders of the blinde: and ſo taught them rather to Arme themſelues with pacience, then to offer any violence. He very often fore-told them, Math, 10 
               That they ſhould be brought before Kings, Princes and Iudges, for his ſake: Did he therefore bid them finde ſome meane to ſette footing in the Realmes they entred, to the end they ſhold cō
               plot

and practiſe the death of the Lordes that there ruled? Did he councell them after theyr entraunce into ſpeech, to aduaunce theyr complaints, afterwarde Armes, and then treaſons?
            Did hee euer aduiſe to vſe humaine forces, to ſuch as had nothing but the two Iames 1. weapons in the time of their furie? To take from any for ſuch as had left their owne; to lift ſuch to the Luke 22. ſeates of the earth, as war-fared onely but for heauen? He told them that they ſhould be happy when they endured perſecution, when they were afflicted and chaſed. Did he ioyne hereto, that they ſhould be happy when they had murthered a King, ſpoiled a faire Countrey, prayed on all the goods of poore people, maſſacred and killed all ſuch as withſtood them?
            In what place of the Scripture canſt thou finde, one onely point for confirmation of ſuch deedes? Where canſt thou ſhew that the Apoſtles made themſelues heades of ſuch enterpriſes? From what word doſt thou gather, that the Subiects may bandye themſelues againſt their Prince? If we ſhall come to the Apoſtles, wee ſhall read ſufficiently, howe they endured perperſecution by Tyrants: yet ſhall wee not read, that by corporall armes they offered rebellion. The Apoſtle S. Peter was helde priſoner by King Herode: the Armes of the 
               Acts 12. 
               Church, was faſting and Prayer for his deliuerance. The ſelfe ſame Herod put to death S. Iames, the brother

of S. Iohn: yet did not the Church in any caſe mutinie againſt him. Acts, 7. S. Stephen was ſtoned by the wicked ſentence: with what Armes did he reuenge himſelfe? He knewe that the Prophet had ſayd: Leaue vengeance to me, for J will doe it: therefore he ſpake no euill, but prayed to God for his perſecutors.
            Thys charity dyd hee learne of hys Maiſter Chriſt Ieſus: who kiſsing the Traytour Iudas, called him friende, and prayed vpon the Croſſe for hys tormentors. Likewiſe he had learned of him, that he which ſheddeth blood, is the child of the deuill, ſuch as the Iewes were, in following the deſires of their fathers. Iohn, 8, 
               For (quoth he) the deuill your father, was a murderer from the beginning. And becauſe that Math, 6, 2, Cor, 6, 
               light and darkeneſſe▪ Chriſt and Beliall, God and the deuill are not alike; Therefore our Sauiour gaue his Diſciples manifeſtly to vnderſtand, that they ought to abhorre bloode and ſlaughter. VVhich S. 2, Cor, 9, 
               Paule well witneſſed, when he gloried not in temporall Armes, but ſpirituall: not in the honours of thys world, but in afflictions for Ieſus Chriſt: in priſons, faſtings, ſhyp-wracks, hatred, perrils on the way, daunger of ſpoyles, deceite of falſe bretheren, and other perſecutions, aſſuring himſelfe, that theſe were the meanes whereby a Chriſtian man was to be exalted.
            
               Pſal, 44
               Hee (ſayth he) ſhall be hated and deſpiſed of the world. Likewiſe, Rom, 8, 
               He is as a ſheep appointed

for the ſlaughter. Great difference is betweene the Apoſtles and the falſe Apoſtles at this day, in ſeeking the meanes to ſurprize Kings, gainſt whom they no way practiſed any reuenge. We endured perſecution, ſayth Saint Paule, yet were we not vanquiſhed, in that, as witneſſeth S. James, 
               Iames, 1, 
               That the perſecution of our fayth, moulded vs in patience, whereby all the worke of a Chriſtian is accompliſhed.
            
            For thys cauſe he taught hys ſcholler Timothie,
               1, Tim, 1, to make prayers for Kings, Princes, and Gouernours, to the end hee might liue peaceaably: albeit ſuch as then raigned in hys tyme, were Pagans and Idolaters. 1, Pet, 2, S. Peter enioyned the lyke to the Churches, to honour their Kings, acknowledging that they were eſtabliſhed of GOD, who ordained that all perſons ſhoulde be ſubiect to the higher power; He commaunded they ſhould be obeyed, and if any one offered to reſiſt them, he went againſt the ordinaunce of God.
            
            Notwithſtanding, who ruled in hys tyme? Was hee a Chriſtian Prince? or any King that looued true Religion? Hee was a barbarous Nero, inhumaine, an Idolater, the moſt cruell of all the worlde. Dyd the Apoſtles reſiſt his tyrannie by Armes, although he was not theyr naturall Prince? Acts, 13S. Paule reuerenced Agrippa and Felix, he honoured Lisbius the Proconſull: he neuer lifted weapon againſt the Princes, after

he had rid himſelfe of thoſe Armes, which at firſt he bare againſt Chriſt Ieſus. Of a Woolfe, he became a Lambe: of a blood-ſeeker, peaceable: of a ſedicious, humble and obedient: of a mutiner, ſoft and tractable: thys chaunge hee made of himſelfe, after he was brought into the yoke of the Euangelicall doctrine. On the contrary, madly theſe falſe Apoſtles, haue throwne off thys manner of life, forſaken Chriſtian Religion, gyuen place to rebellion, enemies to GOD, the Church & Princes: ſedicious, robbers, ſpoylers, murderers, and in all points lyke to the Prince of diſſention.
            For who-ſoeuer commeth into the Church, is conducted by the Spirit of peace, 1, Cor, 13, 
               endureth all things, rendereth good for euill: and according to the words of Chriſt, Math, 5, 
               loueth his enemies doth good to them that hate him, pray for them that perſecute and afflict him, ſurmounting the wicked, not in euill, Rom, 13, but in good. But he that is abandoned to the euill ſpirit, is ruminating on bad thoughts, prepareth traines for his brother, and by force ſeeks to lay hold on hys enemy. And in all theſe actions is not foūd any one more deteſtable againſt God and man, then to riſe againſt the perſon of a King or Prince, to ſmite or murder him: for he is hallowed and annointed of God, of whom he repreſenteth the maieſtie, though he be but a man, and mortal as others are.
            
               Thou vnder-proppeſt thy hatefull will, to kill thys King as thou didſt the laſt, with the examples of Iaell and Judith, the firſt whereof kylled Siſera, chiefe of the Armie to Iabin King of Chanaan: Iudg. 4, he flying to ſaue hys life in her houſe, and ſhe perceiuing him a ſleepe, tooke a nayle of the Tabernacle, and a hammer in her hand, and ſo droue it thorow the temples of his head. The other leauing the Cittie of Bethulia,Iudith, 13, and brought into the Pauillion of Holophernes, Captain of the Armie to Nabuchodonozer, ſeeing hym drunke and a ſleepe, occaſion preſenting it ſelfe, ſhe cut off his head, and brought it away in a bagge by her ſeruaunt.
            Theſe actes truly were very gracious in theſe Dames, and worthy of great commendation, in reſpect they attempted not againſt theyr King or Prince: but againſt ſuch as wold ouer-throw the eſtate royall of theyr Country▪ and there againſt oppoſed thēſelues with all their ſtrength. Do theſe examples excuſe thy villanie & faith-breaking with thy King? In thoſe tymes, Jabin & Nabuchodonozer had no right ouer thoſe people, they came as ſtrangers and enemies againſt them (as at thys day thy aliens and confederate Leaguers, come againſt our King, againſt his eſtate, and againſt his ſubiects,) and therefore were they ſo entertained by them.
            But after that God had permitted, that one of them ſhould commaunde his people▪ what

was he that would not endure it paciently, and (as we haue ſaid before) did not vſe prayers in Ieruſalem, for Nabuchodonozer & Balthaſar his Sonne?
            I could ſtand long vpon the reaſons and examples of elder times, to teſtifie the obedience and reuerence, that the firſt Chriſtians bare to theyr Emperours and Kings, they that were both Pagans & Ethnicks: acknowledging their dignity to be venerable, albeit they would not follow theyr Religion. Which hath beene approued by the Can Iulianus, Can. qui reſiſtit poteſtati. Can Imperatores, et Can. ſeq. 11 q. 3. Canons of auncient Popes, and deliuered in theyr owne Decretalles: as before me hath beene very well noted, by the Authour of the Labyrinth of the League. They all haue agreed, that the pretence of Religion what ſoeuer it be, coulde not giue any collour to a Chriſtian man, to mutinie and rebell againſt hys Prince, to take his life from him and hys eſtate.
            They ordinarilie pronounced this ſentence, Tertul. in his Apol.
               Malumus occidi, quam occidere, that they loued rather to be kild, then to kill. For although they were vniuſtly afflicted by their Princes: rather woulde they ſubmit themſelues to the death, then lyft Armes againſt them. Therfore not to grow tedious to the Reader by prolixitie, I will ceaſe from bringing in the auncient Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtories, and teſtimonies of the Fathers: conſidering that diuers other haue largely diſcourſed thereon.
            
               Thou pretendeſt a collour of libertie and eaſe of the people, but dooſt thou therefore bring any remedie? Dooſt thou diſcharge them when thou pilleſt and ranſackeſt the poore, and burneſt what-ſoeuer thou canſt not cary away? Thou wouldeſt call the King to iudgement, according to the fable of the Aeſope Apolo. Woolfe and the other Beaſtes: to the end, that vnder the ſhadow of reaſon, thou mighteſt vſe violence and murder him.
            Doe we reade of the auncient Prophets, that they complained of Occaſion taken by the impoſts for the weale-publique. exactions of their Princes, and that thereon they grounded occaſions to make warre againſt them? All theyr care was, to ſhew the Princes their faults, and to admoniſh them of Gods vengeances: not to prouoke the people, and to incite thē to lift Armes againſt them. And it is not to be doubted, but ſuch as gouerned in theyr time, were well worthy of reprehenſion: for which cauſe, Eſay in the beginning of hys prophecie, thus deliuered his words to the people of Iſraell. Eſay, 1, 
               Thy Princes are wicked, and companions of theeues, they loue gifts altogether, and gape after rewards. As for the fatherleſſe, they helpe him not to his right, neyther will they let the widdowes cauſes come before them. Therefore ſaith the Lord God of Hoſtes, the mightie one of Jſraell: Ah, I muſt eaſe me of mine enemies, and auenge me on my aduerſaries, and ſet thy Iudges againe as they were ſometime, and thy

Councellers as they were from the beginning, and then ſhalt thou be called the righteous Cittie, the faithfull Cittie.
            
            Thus this good Prophet fore-told the iudgment of God againſt theſe Princes, and the reſtoring of the good Iudges and Counſellours: conſidering that the reprobate were the cauſe of the euill happened in Iſraell. A little after, he ſayth. Eſay, 3, 
               My people, thy Leaders deceiue thee, and corrupt the way of thy foot-ſteps. The Lorde shall enter into iudgement with the Elders and Princes of the people, and ſhall ſay vnto them. It is you that haue burnt vp my Ʋineyarde, and the ſpoyle of the poore is in your houſes.
            
            The Prophet Ezechiell ſufficientlie witneſſed & noted the vices of the Princes in his time, ſaying, they were as Eze, 45, 
               Woolues that rauiſhed the pray, that effuſed blood, that they loſt their ſoules, and gaue themſelues to auarice. Hee brought in GOD, ſpeaking againſt their exactions and impoſts, and admoniſhed them to keepe onely a iuſt ballance. Amos calleth them Amos, 4. 
               Kine of Baſan, outragious to the needie, & oppreſſours of the poore. Micheas deliuering them before God, reprooueth them Mich, 3, 
               that they hated the good, & loued the euill, they pluckt off the skinnes of the people, & their fleſh from their bones. Sophonia calleth thē 
               Soph. 3, 
               roring Lyons: all which tytles ſufficiently teſtifie, that the Gouernours and Iudges in theyr times, were verie wicked. Yet notwithſtanding, none

of the Prophets, although they beheld the people to ſincke vnder the exactions, as deſpoyled of all, and brought into pouertie, did at anie tyme, vnder pretence of the Weale-publique, counſell the people to mutinie or rebel againſt theyr Princes, but rather vehemently perſwaded them to pacience.
            Calleſt thou in queſtion any Pagans, or of the doctrine of Mahomet, or Heretiques, who for maintenaunce and aduauncement of theyr deceitfull & falſe opinions, haue wickedly conſpired againſt their Princes? Alexander, who was ſlaine by a Souldiour, that proſtrated hymſelfe at his feet before the Cittie of Tauris. Amurath, the firſt King of that name in Turkie, who after hee had diſcomfited the Deſpote of Seruia and Bulgaria, was traiterouſly put to death by a ſlaue of Bulgaria, who feigned that he came to ſaue his life. King Sigibert, enuironed with all his people, who at the motion of Fredigonde, was aſſailed and murdered by two aduenturous Gentlemen. Certaine people of Phenicia, holding the Law of Mahomet, called murderers, otherwiſe Beduines, dwelling in hollow nookes of the moſt ſpacious Moūtains, lyuing vnder a Lord, whom our predeceſſours knew by no other name, then the Auncient or Great of the Mountain: they vnder imagination of a Paradiſe of pleaſure, which he had perſwaded into theyr heades, bare this marke on

them, that they made a ſollemne vow to maſſacre all Princes they could lay holde on, that were contrary to theyr ſect and opinion.
            By them was the County of Tripoli put to death, Edward of Englande taken, and many other great Lords, who by them were either ſlain or held as priſoners. From them came firſt the word of murder, as whē one cōmitteth ſlaughter or ſuch like crueltie, by watching for ſpoile. I knowe that dyuers other raiſed themſelues againſt theyr Kings and Princes, vnder the couerture of Religion: but I deny that ſuch murderers, (ſeeing neceſſarily we muſt ſo call thē) were Chriſtian Catholiques, or that for the true faith they enterpriſed ſuch maſſacres, ſo oft and many times condemned in the holy Scripture.
            Moreouer, Alexander and Amurath were not Princes and Superiours to ſuch as ſlewe them, the other likewiſe were led by a ſathanicall ſpirit, euen as theſe murderers or Beduines were; And the 
                  Sleiden in his tenth booke of the eſtate of Religion. Anabaptiſts, who within thys little while preached the aduauncement of the Kingdome of GOD, teaching all Princes to crowde in with theyr feete likewiſe.
            Then tell me Leaguer, what remedy is left for thy euill? What excuſe can ſaue thee for thy late murder? Thy leueying of al thy Armes and hoſtility againſt thy laſt Prince, and hys ſo worthy ſucceſſour our Alcides, the reſtorer of the eſtate, and the Father of hys Countrey?
            
               Sayſt thou he is a Tyrant, or an Heretique, if thou gyueſt him theſe tytles, it is onely but thy paſsion that leades thee, becauſe of the death of the Duke of Guyſe & hys brother: for before their death, the pernicious booke which thou didſt cauſe to be imprinted, in fauour of thy tyrannie, intituled, An aunſwer of the true Catholique Frenchmen, to the aduertiſement of the Engliſh Catholiques, for excluding the King of Nauarre from the Crowne of Fraunce, publiſhed abroade in Paris ſince the Barricados: exalted him, and called him the enemy of hereſie, in the leafe 125. beſide, named hym, the moſt religious and deuout of all the Kings of Fraunce, or thorowe the worlde, leafe fiue hundred ſeauentie-three, and fiue hundred ſixtie-one. That he was verie fooliſh and a beaſt, who ſhoulde imagine him to fauour an heretique, leafe one hundred fortie-ſixe, and fiue hundred ſixtie-two. That the Catholiques ought to ſerue him faithfully, and by all manner of good words to adore him, leafe thirty. How comes it to paſſe then thou art ſo ſuddainlie changed, and gone ſo farre from thy dutie toward thy Prince, by thee acknowledged ſo Catholique, and voyde of all ſuſpicion of hereſie? But if belying thy ſelfe, thou wouldeſt notwithſtanding tearme him to be a Tyrant, lyſten the reſolution of Thomas of Aquine agaynſt Tyrants.
            
               
               
                  
                     Thomas of Aquine in his firſt booke and ſixt Chapter of the gouernment of Princes.Truely, (ſayth hee) if there be an exceſſe of tirannie, it were much better to ſuffer for a time thys myſ-gouerned tyrannie: then in contending againſt it, to be wrapped in many great dangers, more full of griefe and trouble, then the tyrannie it ſelfe.
For it may ſo fall out, that they which make head againſt the Tyrant, and lift themſelues in reproofe of hym: cannot get the vpper-hand, and ſo by that meane the Tyrant ſhall be irritated and prouoked to become more cruell. But if any one ſhould goe beyond the Tyrant, and vanquiſh him: from the ſame ſucceſſe often-times enſueth great diſcorde and diſſention among the people: eyther meanewhile the preſumption is offered againſt the Tyrant, or after he is brought vnder, for then the multitude deuide thēſelues in diuers parts, touching the qualitie and manner of theyr gouernement.
               It happens alſo ſometimes, that when the people giue chaſe to the That it is not lawfull to kyll a Tirant, nor ſhould a Tirant therin offend himſelfe. Tyrant, by the ayde and Armes of any aſsiſtant: the helper attributeth the power to himſelfe, and becommeth tyrannous likewiſe: ſo that the feare to endure another, conſidering what they did with him againſt the firſt, preſſeth downe the people with a more troubleſome and grieuous thought of ſeruitude. For it falleth out by cuſtome in tyrannie, that the laſt is more inſupportable then the firſt: when the Tyrant giues not ouer hys

predeceſſors extortions, but himſelfe (following the mallice of hys own hart) inuenteth new and farre more worſe.
               For this cauſe, as oft-times els it happeneth, in the Cittie of A notable example wel worthy memory. Saracuſa each one deſired the death of Dioniſius the Tyrant: yet a certain old Woman prayed continually for his health, and deſired that he might lyue after her. The Tyrant beeing aduertiſed of the earneſt prayer of thys olde Woman, demaunded of her wherfore ſhe did ſo, and what was her meaning thereby: whereto ſhe thus aunſwered. When I was a young Mayden, and our Countrey at that tyme had a verie troubleſome Tyrant: I deſired hee might die, when not long after he being ſlaine, there ſucceeded him another farre beyond him in cruelty. Then thought I, we ſhould be moſt happy indeede▪ if we might behold likewiſe the death of him: but he beeing deade, the thirde Gouernour became worſe then both the other. Nowe therfore if you ſhould die, doubleſſe one more cruell would come in your ſted and therfore I pray that we may keepe you ſtill.
               But if the exceſſe of tyrannie bee too intollerable, ſome are of the opinion, that it appertaineth to the vertue of couragious and valiant men: to kill the Tyrant, and expoſe themſelues to the danger of death, for deliueraunce of the people, as of the like we haue example in the old Teſtament. For Iudg, 3. 
                  Aioth gaue a ſtroke with

his dagger in the belly of Eglon King of Moab, who oppreſſed the people of God with exceeding great ſeruitude: and killing him, himſelfe was made Iudge ouer the people. But thys deede is not conuenable, neither dooth it agree with the doctrine Apoſtolicall. 2. Pet. 2. For S. Peter teacheth vs, to be obedient, not onely to good and ciuill Lords or Princes, but alſo to the wicked and troubleſome. For this is moſt gracious, when for the cauſe of conſcience and loue of God, any one endureth iniurie, or ſuffereth vniuſtlie.
               In thys caſe then, when ſo many Romaine Emperours perſecuted tirannouſly the fayth of Ieſus Chriſt, and a great multitude as wel of the Nobles as alſo the meaner ſort, were conuerted thereby to this fayth: they were praiſed & commended becauſe they reſiſted not, but endured pacientlie and with courage the death, for the loue of Chriſt Ieſus, as we may ſee manifeſtly in the holy Legion of the Thebanes. Shoulde we then rather iudge and eſteeme, that Aioth had kild an enemie, then one that was a Gouernour of the people, albeit he was a Tyrant.
               By this reaſon we read in the old Teſtament likewiſe, that they were put to death which killed 2. Kin. 25, 
                  Joas King of Iuda: although hee had left the ſeruice of God, and the ſonnes of them were reſerued aliue, according to the cōmaundement of the Law.
               
                  
Now thys ſhall be dangerous to the people and theyr Gouernours, if any one by particuler audaciouſnes and preſumption, attempt the death of ſuch as preſent the chiefe office, although they bee Tyrants: for often-times in ſuch dangers, the bad commeth ſooner in place then the good, and the Empire or ſigneurie of Kings, is as burdenous and intollerable, vnder the The wicked will indure as little vnder kings, as vnder Tyrants. wicked, as vnder tyrannie, therfore according to the ſentence of Salomon: The wiſe King doth diſsipate the wicked and vngodlie.
               
               Then by the like preſumption, the loſſe of the King bringeth more daunger and damage to the people, then profite and remedie by the end and cutting off a Tyrant: Likewiſe, that it is more neceſſary to proceede againſt the crueltie of Tyrants, rather by publique authoritie, then by particuler wilfulnes or preſuming. But if any people haue right to prouide themſelues of a King, and that by them he is choſen: for iuſt cauſe, the King ſo eſtabliſhed, may by the people be ſuppreſt, or his authoritie taken from him by them that created him King, becauſe ſo tyrannouſly hee abuſed the Maieſtie royall. Now are the people to bee iudged vnfaithfull, in forſaking and ſubiecting thys Tyrant, becauſe before hee was neuer Gouernour of himſelfe, neither carryed that faithfull and honourable minde, as is required in the office of a King: Thus miſleading and miſgouerning his people,

hee deſerues not that hys ſubiects ſhoulde keepe the promiſe they made and ſwore to him.
               So the Romaines chaſed out of the Kingdome 
                     Tarquinius the prowde. 
                  Tarquine the proude, whome they had receiued as their King: but becauſe of the tyranny of him and his ſonne, they ſubiected thē
                  ſelues to a leſſer authoritie, namely of Conſuls. In like caſe 
                     Domitian the Tyrant. 
                  Domitian, who ſucceded the moſt modeſt and debonnaire Emperours, Veſpaſian his Father, and Titus his brother: becauſe hee excercyſed tyrannie, hee was ſlaine by the Romaine Senate, and by their decree were reuoked and annihillated, all ſuch things as he badly had eſtabliſhed & ordayned againſt the Romaines. For this cauſe S. Iohn the Euangeliſt, the beloued Diſciple of Chriſt,S. Iohn the Euangeliſt. who was ſent in exile by Domitian, into the Ile of Pathmos: was recalled from thence, and ſent by the Senate to Epheſus. But if any ſuperiour Gouernour, hath right to giue a King to the people: he ought to regarde his dealing, & to yeeld remedie againſt the malice and wickedneſſe of the Tyrant.
               Heereof 
                     Archelaus ſonne to King Herod
                   
                  Archelaus may remaine example, who hauing begun to raigne in Iurie, in the place of King Herod his father, began to imitate him in wickednes and crueltie: when the Iewes framed a cōplaint againſt him before Auguſtus Caeſar, then firſt his authoritie was deminiſhed, the name of King taken from him, & the moitie

of his Realme deuided to his two brethren. And becauſe by thys meane hee could not bee kept from vſing tyranny: Tyberius Caeſar ſent him in exile, to the cittie of Lyons in Fraunce.
               And if it bee not poſſible to haue humaine ſuccour againſt a Tyrant, let vs make our recourſe to God, the King ouer all, who will help the oppreſſed in trybulation: for it is in the power of God, to conuert the heart of a Tyrant into mildneſſe, according to the words of Prou. 21. 
                  Salomon: Cor Regis in manu Dei; quocun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      voluerit, inclinabit illud: The hart of the king is in the hand of God, he may turne it whether ſoeuer he will. For he turned, into meekenes the crueltie ofHeſt. 6. King Aſſuerus, who prepared to put the Iewes to death.
               Hee likewiſe conuerted and changed the cruell King Nabuchodonozer, that he became a Preacher of the diuine power, ſaying: Dan. 4.
                  Nowe therefore I Nabuchodonozer, praiſe, extoll, & magnifie the King of heauen, whoſe works are al truth, his wayes iudgement, and thoſe that walke in pride or arrogancie, is he able to humble and abaſe. But as for Tyrants, they are reputed by him vnworthie of conuerſion, he will cut thē off, or bring them into baſe eſtate, according to the words of the Wiſeman Eccle. 10. 
                  God deſtroieth the ſeates of proud Princes, and ſetteth on them ſuch as are meeke and humble in their ſted. Hee it is, who ſeeing the affliction of his people in Exod. 14. Egypt, and hearing

the cry of them: ouerthrew the Tyrant Pharao with his Armie in the Red-ſea. It is he, that not onely threw from the throne Roall the fore-named Dan, 4. 
                  Nabuchodonozer, who was become verie proude, but alſo depriued him of the company of men, and changed him into a beaſt.
               Hys arme is no whit ſhortened, but hee can and will deliuer his people from Tyrants. For he promiſed to his people by the Prophet Eſay, that he would giue reſt to the trauaile,Eſay. 40. confuſion, and troubleſome ſeruitude, wherein they were before ſubiected. And by Ezechiell hee ſaith: Eze. 34. 
                  J will deliuer my flocke from the mouthes of ſuch ſheepheards, as doe nothing but feede themſelues.
               
            
            
               But to the ende the people may obtayne this mercifull benefit from God, it is neceſſarie for them to leaue theyr ſinne: becauſe that in vengeaunce thereof, the wicked and vngodly (by diuine permiſsion) get hold of the principalitie; And God ſaith by the Prophet Oſee: 
                  Oſee 3. Iob. 12. 
                  I will giue thee a King in my furie, and in Iob it is written: that hee will ſuffer the hypocrite to raigne, becauſe of the ſinnes of the people. It is requiſite thē to take way the fault, to the end GOD may ceaſe to puniſh vs by the meanes of Tyrants.
Hetherto Thomas Aquinus ſhewed the errour of ſuch as lifted themſelues againſt Princes, albeit they were Tyrants, and dyd intreate their Subiects cruelly.
            
               Sayſt thou then vnder this pretence of tyrannie, that iuſtly thou mayſt raiſe thee againſt the King, to kyll him, murder him by treaſon, and ſo to take his eſtate from him? For the firſt, he is no Tyrant, and though hee ſhoulde conſent to make any tyrannous Act▪ (as therein thou ſaiſt moſt falſe) yet thy wordes ſauour of moſt abhominable errour, and are condemned by the The coū
                  ſell of Conſtance.
                counſell of Conſtance, who aboue all things would haue aboliſhed and raſed foorth ſuch a pernicious doctrine: That it ſhoulde bee lawfull to kill a Tyrant, for any cauſe what ſoeuer it be. They declared ſuch people to be wicked, erronious in fayth and manners, reproouing and condemning them as Heretiques, or ſcandalous preparers of the way to fraudes, deceites, dreames, periuries, and treaſons.
            Thys holy Sinode declared furthermore and ordained, that ſuch as obſtinatly affirmed and maintained this doctrine, were heretiques, and ought to be puniſhed according to the holie and Canonicall ordinaunces.
            Then tell me Sorcerer, art not thou an heretique, hauing murdered not a Tyrant, but a iuſt, debonnaire & lawfull King▪ Art not thou an heretique, to purſue the life and eſtate of his admirable ſucceſſour? whom thou art enforced to confeſſe & account for a mightie, generous and affable Prince, gracious euen toward his verie enemies, a conſeruer of Religion,

although he make profeſsion of that is contrarie to thee. But thou feareſt (as it ſeemeth) that beeing the heade of his Subiects, hee wyll not change his Religion, but rather his clemencie in rigour and ſeuerity: thys proceeds but frō the fardle of thy malice.
            As concerning the matter of Religion, I haue thereto aunſwered thee alreadie: but for the alteration of his kinde nature into another more rigorous, I am perſwaded that he is eſtabliſhed by GOD to doe iuſtice to the wicked. Beſide, he is ſo ſoundly acquainted with mercy and gentlenes, as hee will neuer from them degenerate: but will pardon hys ſimple Subiects that gaue but conſent to rebellion, and were not authours or procurers thereof.
            Dooth it then appertaine to thee to iudge thy Prince? Rom. 6. Men (ſaith the holy Scripture) ſee the outward part, but God onely regardeth the inward. God reſerueth to himſelfe the examinations of the intents and thoughts of men: wherefore preſumeſt thou then to iudge the hart of thy Soueraigne, when thou ſayſt he will doe but as ſuch a King, or ſuch a Queene?
            Art thou a Prophet, or hath GOD reuealed to thee the minde & thoughts of the King? It is not for thee, beeing a ſeruaunt and Subiect to iudge thy Maiſter, Rom. 14. but it appertaineth to the Maiſter to iudge his ſeruaunt: thy offences are the cauſe of thys temerarious iudgement.
            
               A man can haue no better cenſure of others then of himſelfe: for he is of this nature, that he thinkes others doe erre in what himſelf erreth, ſo becauſe thou art a lyar and deceiuer of thy King, thou iudgeſt his Maieſtie after thine own affections, and in reſpect thou art not capable of any good, therefore thou attributeſt an euill end to all good works, eyther becauſe thou valueſt them as nothing, or for the enuious wyll thou beareſt to the King.
            The Sunne, whoſe radiant beames paſſeth thorow the glaſſe, receiueth his collour of the ſame glaſſe: in like ſort, the iudgement which paſſeth the hart of a wicked man, muſt needes be wicked, becauſe hys hart is painted wyth a wicked collour: ſo thy euill opinion of the Kings deedes, proceedes but from thyne owne euill diſpoſition.
            A wande thruſt neuer ſo right into the water, ſeemeth crooked and broken: euen ſo thy broken, vicious, and rebellious hart, cenſureth the ſound actions of the King to be broken: as the ſicke-man that reiecteth good wholeſome meates, and imagineth them to be bitter, becauſe himſelfe hath loſt his taſte.
            The deuill, ſeeing hee could not ouer-come by ſlaunder the good workes of Iob. 1. 
               Job, iudged wickedly of hym, that what he did, was doone to an euill end, and therefore he ſayd to God: The good which Iob did, was rather for his owne

profit, then his loue. 
               2. Sam. 10 King Dauid wyth a holie intent, ſent to viſite Ammon King of Ammon, to comfort hym after the death of his Father Nahas: but the people ſayd incontinent, that Dauid had ſent priuie Spyes for inuaſion of the Kingdome.
            So Leaguer, in like manner thou interpreteſt to an euill end the good endeuours of the King, as alſo of hys followers and faithfull Subiects. The better ſort of people, becauſe they are well minded, iudge euer-more the better way, and wyll themſelues excuſe the bad dealings of theyr neighbours, ſo much as in them lyeth to performe.
            
               Ioſeph in Egypt excuſed ſo much as he could, the mallice of hys Brethren, who enuiouſly had ſold him into that Kingdome, ſaying to them: Gene. 45 
               That God had permitted it for their profit, and the ſuccour of ſo manie people. 
               Acts. 7. Saint Stephen excuſing before God the mallice of hys perſecutours that ſtoned him, ſayd: they did it through ignoraunce: ſo to make leſſer the faulte of hys enemies. Euen ſo the mallice or good inclination of each ones hart, is cauſe of their iudgements good or euill.
            The naturall heate in a man, that is healthfull, of good nature & complexion, conſumeth all that he eateth, and conuerteth it into good blood: as by the like example, the man that feareth God, & is enflamed wyth his loue, turneth

what-ſoeuer he beholdeth to profit therby, but the wicked conuerteth euery thing to euill. A good man giueth credite to all good wordes, (ſayth Prou. 1. 
               Salomon:) and thys facillitie in beliefe, is not to be blamed in him, but rather commended. Thys is the holy ſimplicity of the Doue, which Mat. 10. Ieſus Chriſt commended to his Apoſtles, wherein conſiſted: that they ſhould not be malicious, they ſhould iudge well of all, and take in good part what-ſoeuer they ſaw doone by their Bretheren.
            The Ioſua. 9. 
               Gabaonites came to Joſuah with an euill diſpoſed will, and betrayed the holy perſon and people of GOD by theyr falſhood & deceits: and ſo long as Joſuah with his followers did well, theſe Gabaonites woulde not beleeue, but that they were come to beguile them. Charitie thinketh no euill, or miſiudgeth of anie one. A good man hath no eyes to looke on the faultes of another: but thou that art wicked, hauing loſt both charitie and the vertue of obedience, thou conſidereſt raſhlie, thinking others to be ſinners, and thy ſelfe iuſt.
            Our Sauiour reprooueth thee, where hee ſayth: Luke. 6. 
               Hypocrite, thou ſeeſt not the great beame in thine owne eye, but thou well noteſt the lyttle moate in thy neighbours eye. It is a great matter, that not caring for thine owne conſcience, thou art become ſo buſie an examiner and inquiſiter of the deedes of thy Superiours, as thou wylt

ſee and pry into theyr thoughts: wherein thou ſheweſt thy ſelfe but a foole, that hauing to correct ſo many faults, by thee committed beeing a Subiect, thou wilt preſume to iudge of thy King & Prince, as alſo hys Seruaunts, whoſe deedes imploied to a good end, by thee are miſconſtrued and iudged after thyne owne fancie. In the old Law, God forbad the Prieſt to iudge preſently of the Leper, but to let Leuit. 13. 7. dayes firſt be paſt. If then God wold not permit the prieſt to iudge ſo ſuddainly of the Leper, whom he manifeſtlie beheld: thinkeſt thou he wyl ſuffer thee (beeing a Subiect) to iudge of thy King, and of the mallice (which thou ſayſt) is in hys hart, where-into thou haſt no eyes to diſcerne?
            Thou Leaguer, thou examiner of the hart and thoughts of thy King, remember the chaſtiſement of God on the Bethſamites, becauſe they would needes ſo curiouſly looke & ſearch into the Arke of the Teſtament, as it paſſed thorow their Countrey: 1. Sam. 6 God ſmote to death three-ſcore and ten men of the chiefeſt ſort, and fifty thouſand of the common people. The hart of thy King is as the Arke, inſcrutable, & much more interiour and ſecrete are the intentions of a Kings hart and his ſeruaunts: then were the tables of the Law, the veſſels for the Manna, or the rod which was within the Arke of Iſraell. If then thou weeneſt ſo curiouſly to ſift and examine the thoughts & meaning of thy King, being good and iuſt, yet notwithſtanding interpreted

by thee to an ill ende, thou canſt not eſcape the puniſhment which God inflicted on the Bethſamites: iudge not then raſhlie, nor detract thy King. The Apoſtle ſaith Rom. 1. 
               detracters are abhominable before God: then ſpeake wee in general, how much more abhominable are ſuch ſubiects, as dare detract againſt their King and Superiours? All theſe detracters and ſlaunderers, promiſe to themſelues by their rebellion, a high ſtep into glory; hauing hetherto lyued at theyr eaſe, on robberies and ſpoyles made on the faythfull French-men. But ô God! howe farre of are they from theyr account, hauing in hatred the bridge of true repentance, wyth ſolemne acknowledgment of theyr offences, ouer which all ſinners that are Chriſtians muſt of neceſsity paſſe. What-ſoeuer good the K. doth, thou art in ſuch ſort poſſeſt with the ſpirite of diſſention, as thou ſayſt it is no more then a Dreame or fantaſie.
            Thou blameſt the Catholiques, that they are allyed with ſuch as thou calleſt Huguenotes, for maintenaunce of the royall authority in the houſe of Burbon, the moſt famous of the world. Didſt thou imagine them to be ſo mad, after the ſlaughter of theyr moſt Chriſtian King, as to defend the cauſe of murderers? And then when no queſtion was to be made of the eſtate, wouldeſt thou haue them falſely breake theyr bond to theyr naturall & legittimate Prince, to whō
               
by dutie they owe all fidelity? Thy tearme of Religion, ought not hinder the aſsiſtance due to him by allegeance: for the Prince is elected of God, what is he thē that ſhal refuſe & be diſobedient to the heauenly appointment? And who hath made this alliance or coniunction of the Kings Catholique & faithfull ſeruaunts together, for the placing him in his eſtate, but thy ſelfe Leaguer? that didſt betray and kill a moſt Catholique King, to tranſ-fer the Crown whether thou pleaſeſt.
            Art not thou thy ſelfe leagued with certaine Proteſtants, who euery day make a preaching in thine Army, & commit great indignities in the Churches, which thou both knoweſt and beholdeſt? But heereof I neede not make anie wonder, for thou art content, that thy zealous The Leaguers may doe what they pleaſe, and yet it is no ſinne with them. Catholiques ſhall ſpoile euen to the high Altare, and yet not be ſacriligious. Thou pilleſt Churches, & our King vſeth them as a defence for hys perſon: ſo according to thy mallice inuetterated by nature, thou immediatly turneſt all hys good works into poyſon, as all things els likewiſe of thys vertuous Prince.
            The The Pope for money, diſpenſeth with all Religions. Pope himſelfe, did he make any dyfficultie in matters of eſtate, to cōſent heretofore with the Huguenetes, by meanes of a certaine anuall penſion, for the conſeruation of the Countie of Auignon, which appertained to him? The Emperour Charles the fift, and Phillip hys

ſonne King of Spaine, the ſource and ſupport of the League: did they find any fault in aſſembling their troupes and Armes, compoſed of men of all religions, for the ayde and defence of theyr buſines?
            Thou Sorcerer, dooſt thou oppoſe to mee by the mouthes of thy falſe Prophets, that 2. Chr, 18 
               Joſaphat was contented by the Prophet Iehu, to ioyne in affinity with Achab? And by the prophet Elizeus he was likewiſe vnited to Ochozias King of Iſraell, he beeing giuen to do ill? That King 2. Chr. 16. 
               Aſa for making a couenaunt with Benhadad King of Aſsiria, was tempted? That God by the mouth of Eſay, as alſo by the Kinges of Iuda, ſayd: Eſay. 30. 
               Euill be on you that walke to goe downe into Egipt, and haue asked no queſtion at my mouth, but ſeeking ſtrength in the ayde of Pharao, haue knit your ſelues with the number of Egipt, therefore ſhall the ſtrength of Pharao be your confuſion? That in Ieremie we read the like words,Iere. 48. and how GOD commaunded hys people, not to make any alliance with the Cananites, Amorites, and other Infidell Nations? I aunſwer to theſe arguments, that the prohibition made to King Ioſaphat, reached no further then to himſelfe particulerly: becauſe hee was ioyned with a King not onelie irreligious, but alſo impious. And Aſa is reprooued, becauſe forgetting God, he truſted in humane power, whereto in lyke manner tendeth the reprehenſion of Eſay. But a

Chriſtian Prince, that beleeueth in God, may not hee (according to occaſion and time) receiue the amitie and alliance of another Prince, different in Religion, eſpecially in the affayres of the eſtate? Said not Places cō
                  trary to thē alleadged before. 
               Moiſes, When thou cō
                  meſt neere to a Cittie to fight againſt it, thou ſhalt offer them peace.Deut. 20. Jf then they aunſwere thee againe peaceably, and open the gates to thee, then let all the people that is founde therein, be tributarie to thee and ſerue thee.
            
            Dyd not Ioſu. 5.16 
               Ioſuah receiue the Gabaonites into alliance: which (albeit hee had diſcouered their fraude and treaſon) he woulde neuer after breake? What ſayſt thou to the alliance Gene. 20 
               Abraham made with King Abimelech? Was not 1. Sam. 23, and 27. 
               Dauid in ſuch ſort ioyned in amity with king Achis, as himſelfe was made of the Guarde to the perſon of the King? Dyd hee not beare like amitie to 1. Sam. 29 
               Nahan King of the Ammonites, & allied himſelfe with him? Hys Sonne 1. King. 5. 
               Salomon, did not he the lyke with Hyram King of the Tyrians? Of whom by the meane of alliance, he receiued both matter and worke-men, to build the Temple of God in Ieruſalem?
            It is not then vnneceſſarie, that Catholique faithfull Subiects, ſhould ioyne themſelues with their naturall and legittimate Prince, although he differ from them in Religion: and with thoſe alſo of contrary opinion, in ſo iuſt a cauſe: and if they ſhould doe otherwiſe, who doubts but

they are to be attainted and conuinced, of the ſelfe ſame crime as Rebels are?
            What ſaiſt thou then now? Wilt thou make the Law? appertaineth it not to the King to do it, who relieth on no bodie els but God? Dareſt thou attempt againſt his Maieſtie? Dareſt thou yet oppoſe thy ſelfe againſt Gods annointed? Hydra, dooth more heads ſtil bud foorth, hauing alreadie loſt ſo many? Who doubts but hell is called hell? Thou haſt murdered Henrie the third, a Chriſtian King, and yet thy violence is not therewith pacified. Thou haſt ſtriuen, & ſtill dooſt daily ſtriue, to glut thy falſe and moſt cruell hart with the blood of our preſent King, who hath been ſo kind and debonnaire to thee, and beeing able to doe nothing by force, thou haſt recourſe to Magique-artes and Charmes: but the goodneſſe of God is farre beyonde thy mallice, and in pittie he wil not permit, but that the King and his poore Subiects, who ſuffer by thee ſo many abuſes and enormities, ſhall haue the vpper-hand in theſe waighty affayres, and that it is his pleaſure, to let vs ſhortly ſee thy noſe flatted to the earth, wyth thy neck broken, and neuer heere-after to be better then thou art: as I am fully perſwaded thou canſt not be, beeing clothed with ſuch cruell paſsions and violent executions. Spare not (for vs) ſtill to lighten the warre with thy ambition, that thou take to thee thy Spaniſh King & Maiſter, that thou

beſtow on him the ſupreame power, that thou aſſociate thy ſelfe with men of ſpoile, and fit for the halter, robbers, theeues, murderers, & ſuch like, and that all ſuch are the moſt gratefull and welcomeſt gueſts to thee: we expect no other, but the ende of thee and them at the The onely end of treaſons and Traytors. Fourca or Gallowes.
            Thou braggeſt a little, that thou haſt ſome Gentlemen of good birth, whoſe Fathers (with the price of their liues,) did valiantly defende the crowne: theſe haſt thou in ſuch ſort inueigled, by thy wicked wrappings & enchaunting perſwaſions, as their fault and themſelues are alike, and their crime of Leſae Maieſtatis, beares witnes of their vertue. They Idoll-like honour thee, and willingly are charmed with thy Siren perſwaſions, thy ſweet ſongs & affecting blandiſhments, becauſe thou layeſt thy ſelfe wide open to theyr lightnes. But I attende the time, that according to the good nature they receiued from their Aunceſtors, if any at all be left within them: they comming to diſcouer how hidious thou art, how falſe and full of all deteſtation, in the end wil ſet their feet on thy neck, bebefore they be ſwallowed in this depth altogether; as already many of the better aduiſed are; who find themſelues drawne forth of thys Labyrinth, euen as it were by the thredde of Ariadne.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ An aduertiſement to the ſmall companie of Noble men, that follow the League.
            
               YOV Gentlemen of honourable minde & byrth, that make loue to thys deceitfull Courtezane, good God! how are you abuſed? Doe yee not behold, that in promiſing ſhe plucks from ye? and in giuing, ſhe takes away? Deſpoyling ye of your Nobleſſe, renowne and honor? See ye not that ſhe cheriſheth ye, to the end to ſlack and weaken ye to your King and Countrey, by making ye drunk with her vnlawfull loue? Know ye not the cunning of this withered Geryon, that would ſeperate and deuide ye, in the end to triumph ouer ye? Doe ye not yet diſcouer her mallice? Haue ye yet your eyes

ſealed vp? will ye not purge them of the powder of ſo many collours and falſe pretences, as are thrown into them, that yee might cleerelie diſcerne your ſelues to come into a good way?
            The League you reuerence ſo much, is like a Tree ſecretlie and ſubtillie planted in the midſt of you,A very apt ſimilitude of ye League. the fruit whereof at the firſt beholding, ſeemeth faire, yet are they verie bitter and poyſonable to poore Fraunce: how happens it thē, that they are ſo ſweet and ſauorie, to you whoſe taſtes are ſo fine & delicate? Know yee not that ſuch Leagues, confederacies, and particuler aſſociations of Subiects amongſt themſelues, or with other Princes, vnder what-ſoeuer pretence it be, are forbidden by Monarches? Yea, the King of Spaine himſelfe that thus beguiles yee, hath by expreſſe Edicts inhibited his Subiects from thē: yet ſhal this old Reynard (by the ſame meanes) ſpoile & deſtroy you? Are ye ignorant (my Lords) that there was no accuſation more great, againſt
                  Lewes Duke of Orleance, ſlaine by meanes of the Duke of Burgundie. 
               Lewes of Fraunce Duke of Orleance, after he was ſlaine by the pollicies of the Duke of Burgundie: then becauſe he was allied and leagued with the Engliſh Duke of Lancaſter? Nor can yee defende your ſelues with the authoritie of the late moſt worthie Prince, the Cardinall of Burbon, whoſe integritie and holie zeale to Chriſtian Religion, the Maiſter whom you ſerue, vnder the afore-named pretence of pietie and Religion abuſed. And doubtleſſe

as much would he doe, to this honourable, vertuous & religious Prince, the Cardinall of Burbon his Nephewe, if he did not well perceiue, that ſo great a Prince and Prelate, by his wiſedome and moſt carefull fore-ſight, (inſtructed by nature, & cōfirmed from his yongeſt tender yeeres, by the vertuous documents hee receiued of Mounſieur de Bellozane, a ſharp ſighted, good Catholique, & moſt faithful Frenchman) would diſcouer his fraude and coniuration, and finde readie at his fingers endes, what he entended to his King and all other of his blood. It was not lawfull for that great Prince, the late Cardinall of Burbon, of praiſe worthy memorie, ſo kindly and eaſily (notwithſtanding his authoritie) to league himſelfe, or to giue any occaſion or couerture of a League: becauſe it pertaineth to none but the King to do it, or to commaund or conſent to Leagues, hee hauing the onely ſoueraigne authoritie. But the enemies to the King, the eſtate and his honour, very eaſilie deceiue him, vnder the colour of Religion & the Weale publique.
            You are capable of reaſon, then conceiue what I ſay. Forſake the error of thys vile kynde of people, that are dulled and infected with this daungerous poyſon: defende your ſelues with this preſeruatiue, and conſider, that theſe Rebels haue their weapons in hande euen againſt you, ſeeing they menace the eſtate, which you ought

and are bounde to maintaine and defende, becauſe thereon dependeth your Nobleſſe, goods, and liues. The League would ſoone periſh, if theſe fewe would forſake it. The enemie hath diuers times receiued ſhrewd checkes, but that your aſſiſtance and hoſtilitie relieued him: had we your fidelitie, with all the reſt of this noble body, ſoone ſhould both the checke and mate be giuen him, or rather this Hydra with ſo many heads, ſhold be ouerthrowne and vtterly vanquished.
            Abandon and giue ouer this Sorcerer, vnwrappe your ſelues out of theſe ſnares, if you bee wiſe, and knit your ſelfe in a Gordian knot vnto your King, our Hercules, who holdes his armes wide open to receiue you courteouſlie, albeit ye haue ſo greatly offended. Would ye by any badde deede of perſidie, looſe the name of Frenchmen, heeretofore ſo admyred amonge ſtrangers, as that for the auncient Nobleneſſe of the French, it was attributed by the Orientall Zonar. in the Hiſtory of Mich and Alexand. Comines. Othofriſing. Cron Liſ. 7. c. 4 Vrſperg. de expeditione Godfrey de Bullen. Greekes, before all the Latines and people of the Weſt?
            Can ye endure that the Spanyard, who wold commaund euery where, shall diſtaine your names and famous race? Will ye let your ſelues looſe the naturall enfranchiſe and libertie, ſo long time frequent among the auncient french, before it was peece-meale rent by manners and opinions of ſtrangers, nowe when yee haue nothing left more deere, then your honour and reputation? Neuer thinke to make your ſelues

great by that which you ruinate, but think what ſhall become of you & yours in ſuch accidents. The difficulties and occurrances that happen in an eſtate, troubled with affaires of partialities, are the more ful of dangers, in that they depend on what may enſue, and cannot eaſilie be referred to anie certain rule; ſo that prouidence muſt there haue greater place thē knowledge. But the humane ſpirit is ſo blinded with ſelfe-loue, and dazeled with things preſent, carrying ſhewe of delight: as it imagines ſuch pleaſures ought alwaies to endure, and little cares for ought may afterward come to paſſe: the next way to vſe ſpeciall regard heereof, is not to entertaine our thoughts with flattering deſſeignes or opinions.
            So GOD, who to himſelfe hath reſerued all power, deſtributeth no otherwiſe his gyftes to men, but that often-times hee ouer-throwes their determinations ſo ſoone as they are conceiued: and ſome-times, fore-ſeeing the ſcope of mens drifts, conuerteth the enterpriſe to the ruine of the inuenter.
            Then flatter not your ſelues concerning the part you take, which is directlie againſt God, againſt the eſtate, and againſt your King, and ſo cōſequentlie, to the extirpation of al the French Nobilitie: for the Stranger, accompanied with a multitude of baſe peaſants and groomes, will looſe and betray you to the Switzers. If anie one

of the wiſer ſorte, that attendes on which ſide the winde will turne, and now are halfe Spanyards, nowe on the Kings ſide, according to the occurrences, ſhall ſay vnto me, that I ſhew my ſelfe ouer paſsionate: I aunſwer him, that in generall deuiſions, a man ought to take one partie, for otherwiſe hee ſhoulde ſhewe himſelfe to be faultie, ſtanding as a Neuter, and ſo deſerue the puniſhment ordained by Solon for ſuch people. As for me, reaſon tels me, that I faile not in taking and following the part of my King, whom God hath lawfully and by the degree of ſucceſſion giuen vs, to gouerne and relieue this poore afflicted kingdome, which doth nothing elſe but ſtagger, beeing ſo extenuate and weake, as if his Maieſtie (aſsiſted by God) did not ſuſtaine and reſtore it, hardlie ſhould ſhe find any other to helpe her with recouerie of health: albeit this is not the firſt time that Fraunce hath been deuided into Leagues and partialities, after which it hath beene reunited and reconciled.
            For the diſeaſe of this eſtate is ſo ſharpe and violent, albeit the cauſe thereof is well knowne to all: as if it find not in aunſwerable remedie, by the admirable preſcription of ſome ſpeciall and no vulgare Phiſition, vndoubtedly immediate death will enſue.
            Which were great pittie (my Lordes) that Rebels ſhould ſo doe, after they haue mangled, diſsipated and ſpoyled it, vnder collour of reformation,

and pretence of Religion: haue likewiſe brought in the Spanyard, euen to the verie hart of the eſtate, and then cauſed him to diſcend into Brittaine & Prouince, to enrich himſelfe with the publique ruines and hauocke of French-mens goods.
            Doe ye not already behold, that the Spanyards are Maiſters within The maner how the Spanyarde behaues himſelfe in Paris, and al places els where he preuaileth. Paris? Doe yee not ſee them gorging the riches & treaſure of the Cittizens? See yee not likewiſe how they handle the fooliſh people, that when they come to acknowledge theyr fault, they are ſo feeble and faint-harted: as they eaſily chaſe & driue them forth of their houſes, wherof they preſently will haue the authority and diſpoſing; beſide, eyther by faire meanes or force, deale with theyr wiues, theyr daughters, and their ſeruaunts.
            
               Ode 4. Pythi. 
               It is eaſie (as Pindarus ſaith) for the rude & baſe multitude, to trouble and ouer-turne a great Cittie: but to bring and re-eſtabliſh it in the former floriſhing eſttae, requireth a little more paine and trauaile. For ſuch onely can doe that, to whom God (as the true Gouernour) giueth the means and counſell how to performe it. The King alone can re-eſtabliſh Paris, and the Spanyarde, aſsiſted with the Rebels both without & within, gapeth but for the generall ruine therof. The King labours to preſerue it, as beeing his proper heritage, and principall ſeate of the Kinges: the Spanyard imployeth his daily paine for the

loſſe therof, & accounts it beſt to vſe if as a garriſon, a pernicious garriſon, a garriſon which will be the miſerable end of the greatneſſe and excellencie of Paris: for whoſe ſafety, the King endured before it the diſcommodities of a long ſiedge, deſiring rather to recouer it by reaſon, and reknowledging of offences paſt, thē to take it by force, and ſo commit it to ſack & the Souldiours ſpoyle.
            Therfore thou needeſt not accuſe the King becauſe ſo long time he beſieged The cauſe why the K. made ſuch a long and lingering ſiedge before Paris. Paris, with no other intent: rather heereby thou ſhouldeſt conceiue an argument, of moſt wonderfull and debonnaire kindneſſe, or rather a princely fatherlines towards his Subiects, who are as deere to hym as his naturall Children. What man is he ſo fooliſh, that will thruſt fire into his houſe, vnder ſhadowe that it is occupied by his enemies: if he haue the meanes left to chaſe them away, or to make them become hys Freendes? VVhat Father is it, beeing neuer ſo greeuouſly offended with hys Sonne, will therefore immediatly worke his death or deſtruction? Will he not rather vſe diſcretion, and tarry the time, wherein by neceſſitie, or other kinde of trauerſing, hee may bring him againe into the right way, or acknowledgement of hys fault? In vain were it to doubt otherwiſe: marrie if the ſonne perſeuere long time ſtubborne, and the Father be ſeuere, in the end he will chaſtiſe him according

to his deſerts. The King then hath proceeded like a good Father of a familie, hauing vſed incredible pacience and kindneſſe, euen till the extremity, when he might haue ruined and confounded all his enemies. God therefore will permit him a double recompence, and if heereafter the Rebelles be handled by his Maieſtie more rigorouſly, themſelues thereof haue giuen him iuſt occaſion.
            It is harde to order or well guyde an aduice and deliberation, for reducing a Kyngdome vexed wyth troubles and ſedicions, into a ſounde aſſuraunce: as the Pylot (what-ſoeuer experience he hath,) findes it difficult for him to guide the Shyp, when he is hindered with exceeding rough Seas, and extraordinarie tempeſts: when he ſhall be dryuen from hys right courſe of Nauigation, and ſee the veſſell begin to ſplyt and ſhyuer againſt the Rockes, beeing vnable longer to man the ſtearne. But GOD gyueth grace to the King, as a moſt good, aſſured, & expert Pylote, to recouer the Barque of the Common-wealth of Fraunce, ſo menaced and in danger of ſhip-wrack: to the confuſion of all his enemies.
            And nowe to returne to you my Lordes, loue yee better to lyue miſerably, vnder the tyranny of them that would deſtroy yee: then vnder the ſweete and agreeable ſubiection of the moſt gracious King on the earth? Who makes

no ſpare of himſelfe, but ſtandes expoſed to all daungers, to winne you by his Armes, and by the aſsiſtance of ſo many great Lords and Gentlemen, to re-ſeate peace, quiet and tranquillity. As Ode 8. Pythi. 
               Pindarus writes, comparing Peace to a fayre and mylde weather, which cauſeth aboundance, and fertilitie of all good things, and is (as he ſaith) the ſoule of the ſpirite and thought, the daughter of Iuſtice, that conſerueth and maintaineth the greateſt Citties, hauing the moſt excellent keyes of counſell, and good deliberation.
            
            VVyll not you then trauaile with your King, to gaine thys fayre and precious Iewell? Will not you followe him, to chaſe hence the cruell dyſquieters of your Countrey? Loue ye better to conſent to theyr inuaſion, to looſe and bury your ſelues in theyr Conqueſts: then liue vnited to your King, in peace, in your Houſes, and Caſtels, wyth your Wyues and Chyldren? Wyll yee ſuffer your ſelues to fall head-long into thys diſcorde, which ingendereth nothing but confuſion, which in ſuch ſort dazeleth the very greateſt ſpyrits, as they ſhall not ſee and know what is good for them? How ſoueraigne a vertue is it to counſell well, and howe equall there-with is it, to liſten good counſell and follow it?
            It is greatly to bee feared, conſidering the mallice of theſe Rebels: that it bee not ſaide of this eſtate, as Cicero wrote of the Romaine common-wealth:

the ſhaddowe whereof, (to our great paine) remaines in this kingdome. Cicero con. Cattel.
               Sedition is lightly mooued, and oftentimes on very ſmall occaſion, but ſuddainlie it engendreth dyuers troubles, as raging ſtormes and tempeſts, that ſundry wayes toſſe and turmoyle the Common-wealth: and ſometimes it falles out, that the Author of theſe broyles dooth as the Bird, who hauing got bird-lyme by chaunce into her winges, the more ſhee ſtriues to looſe her ſelfe, the faſter her winges cleaue together with the lyme. If then wee woulde haue the Common-wealth to liue and floriſh, let vs liue in agreement with our King: for concorde is the verie ſoule of the Common-wealth.
            
            The vnitie which you haue followed vntill this preſent, is contrarie both to your quiet and welfare of the ſtate. Perceiue yee not by the diſorders heere engendred by the enemies of the Realme, that their entrance was made onely to triumph ouer you? And will yee forget your ſelues ſo much, as to imagine it may any way redownde to your profit and aduantage? be not I entreate you ſo eaſily deceiued. What miſ-fortune is it to The ſtate of Fraunce in former times. Fraunce, that heeretofore hath beene a refuge to other afflicted Nations: a terror to the very proudeſt people that reigned in Greece, in Paleſtine; and hath been renowmed thorowe Europe, Aſia, Affrica: hath aſtonied the Almaignes, conquered the Gaules, commanded

in Italie, often-times combatted the hardie Engliſh, with-ſtood Emperours, and other great Monarchies, chaſed the Sarraſins of Spayne, (who neuertheleſſe haue left behind them too many of their ſeede.) What miſhap is it (I ſay) that Fraunce ſhold now be conſtrained to ſend for the ſuccour of Strangers, not to augment her glory, to conquer from the enemy the auncient patrimony of the Crowne, and thereby to erect Trophies of your victories, according to the famous teſtimonies left by your Aunceſtors: but to deliuer vp herſelfe to them as a pray, to expoſe to their pillage, holy Temples, Pallaces and Caſtels: to giue them raunſome, or rather to ſell them her Gentlemen, peaceable Cittizens, Merchaunts, handicrafts-men, women, children, and ſucking infants: yea, euen againſt herſelfe to coniure ſo reſolutely?
            Behold the eſtate wherein you may now ſee thys poore King, beggered (well neere) by the meanes of your League, glyding vnder the ſpecies (albeit a falſe pretence) of Religion, heere too long a time. Will ye not (my Lords) by the accuſtomed fidelity of true French-men, vnmaske your eyes, ſee into what Labyrinth you are entred, and ioyne in this moſt iuſt cauſe, to recouer with your King the happy times, that were in the raignes of K. Lewes the 12. Fraunces the firſt, and Henrie the ſecond, whom your Fathers and Grand-fathers faithfully ſerued?
            
               Who is the French Hiſtorian, that now can ſay of the three eſtates of this Realme, as Titus Liuius wrote of the good accorde of the three orders ordained in Rome? 
                  Titus Liuius concerning the three good orders in Rome. 
               Certainly (ſaith he) the Cittie of Rome is verie happie, inuincible and eternall by her concorde: the Knights are excellent men, and worthy to be praiſed: the people kinde and dutifull: the mildnes and humanitie of the Senate, onely conquers, through the prompt and voluntarie obedience of the people. The Antitheſis heere is moſt apparent, for The contrary eſtate of the Citty of Paris. Paris is brought into ſuch eſtate, as ſhe may cal herſelfe vnhappy, & neere her deſtruction. The Eccleſiaſticall perſons, that ought to maintaine this great Citty in peace & concord: they breath forth nothing but bloode and fire, ſowing no other ſeed but of diſſention, and perſwading the people to force iuſtice, and abuſe the Magiſtrates.
            Conſider my Lords, you that haue read Hiſtories, how diſcorde and partialitie (the cauſe or ſedition and troubles) hath wrought the fall and vnfortunate end of moſt mighty Empyres and floriſhing Common-weales, that ſtrange enemies neuer brought them ſuch miſery and calamity, as their own domeſticall diſquietnes: where vnder the countenaunce of Weale publique, liberty, and ſuch like pretences, (euen as the Leaguers do at thys inſtant) they conſpired and compaſſed the vniuerſal ruine of the eſtate.
            It hath been well noted from time to tyme,

that neuer was any floriſhing Cittie deſtroyed by an Armie of Strangers, if firſt of all ſhe nouriſhed not ciuill warres in her owne boſome: then muſt it needes follow, that after long ciuill warre, eyther her eſtate is changed, or els by the ſtranger, ſhe is brought into a lamentable condition. Doe not your ſelues heere beholde the like? Paris, is it not already (and that very willingly) in the Spanyards gouernement, vnder collour of deliuerance, ſeeing it remaineth now at hys deuotion.
            O Who ſo blinde as they, that wilfully run on their owne deſtruction. blinded French-men! who for reiecting the ſweet Lawes of peace, abiure the fidelity you owe to your King, & to ſheeld ye from the puniſhments due to your breach of fayth, became Rebels & murderers of the late King: making recourſe to your enemy, who hath circkled you with his Armes, that knowes right well how to raiſe his profit on your inſolencies, as already ye ſee what he hath doone? Were it not better for you to acknowledge your faults, and deſire pardon of the King, who naturally is inclined to mercy? And you my noble Lords, who through miſgouernment haue ſuffered your ſelues to be carryed away with the paſsions of the League, ſhall doe much better to reioyne againe wyth your King and heade, you beeing (as you are) principall members of the eſtate: whereby at once will be quenched ſedition, diſcorde, warre, & partialities, as alſo the ſtranger chaſed away,

who ſmiling in his ſleeue at our deuiſions, by theſe bad affaires returneth himſelfe good profit. I beſeech ye conſider what Plato ſaith Plato li 5, de Repub. 
               Ciuill war is nothing els but ſedition, a capitall & pernicious plague to the Common-wealth, which infecteth with the contagion thereof, all the partakers therein: and moſt commonly it proceedeth of couert and ſmall occaſions, like vnto a pyning Ague, which beeing not at the firſt perceiued, and by medicines preuented, conſumeth the body by little and little to iuſt nothing. This ciuill warre is then the more dangerous, in that it is enterpriſed againſt the King and the eſtate, vnder a falſe pretence: which will cauſe, (if you open not your eyes, & God vouchſafe to holde ſtrong hande with the true and holy intent of the King) ſuch ciuill ſpoyle among our ſelues, as wee ſhall be made forreiners in our owne Country.
            For thus will the Spanyard (if he can) deale with ye in the end, ſet foote vpon your throates to rid himſelfe of you, and then will make warre on ye: nor as a freend or confederate, but as an enemy both to one and other; Not as a Protecter, or Deliuerer (as the fooliſh rebellious people vainlie tearme him) but as a proude Vſurper and blood-thirſtie Tyrant. Can ye thinke his cōming into Fraunce is for any other intent? If ye dreame on any other friuelous opinions, ye but abuſe your ſelues. Preuent then in good tyme this ſlye deceitfull Spanyard, beate backe

his ſtratagemes with other of more honor: for if ye with-hold your ſelues ouer-long from aſſwaging this diſcord, which is daily and hourelie aduaunced by your mortall enemie, that already leades yee with him as captiues in tryumph: ye ſhall find it as hard to get any remedie or helpe, as to heale the Feuer Ethique, that hath got the maiſterie in a languiſhing bodie.
            This rebellion hatched ſo long time by the practiſes and deuiſes of the Spanyard, who alreadie vaunteth that he hath yee in poſſeſsion, and (as it were) tyed faſt in his ſnares: as euerie hand-while mooued and enflamed, as An apt ſimilitude of the French rebellion. a fyre kindled in a thicke wood, and as the one wyth the winde, ſo the other with ſmooth ſhadowes, ſweet ſpeeches, and notorious trecheries, is diſperſed with ſuch violence, as the greater part of Fraunce is rent and mangled; The reſt that is left, and abideth in obedience to the King, receiueth wonderfull diſcommodities. Notwithſtanding, they are reſolued not to forſake hym, or to participate with a thought of thys rebellion, becauſe they are not ignorant, that GOD hath expreſly commaunded in ſo many places, (as heer-tofore wee haue declared) to obey our ſoueraigne Princes and Magiſtrates: and beſide, they know right well by the behauiour of Rebels, that the greateſt euil in ſedition & treaſon, as Cornelius Tacitus & others haue learnedlie deſcribed, is; 
                  Cornelius Tacitus, hys cenſure on rebellion. 
               That euerie one woulde commaund,

hauing no other counſel or reaſon, then their owne wil. Moreouer, the moſt factious and turbulent, will euer preſume on moſt authoritie: by whom the Magiſtrates and peaceable Cittizens are ordinarily ſuſpected, and are in danger to be preſcribed, robbed, killed, or baniſhed. There is ſuch mixture of defiances, as nothing is ingendered but hate, ſuſpition and priuie diſſembling: ſo that all honeſtie, all Fayth and humilitie, is vtterly forgotten and violated, and true reconciliation euer-more hindered.
            
            All things amongſt Rebels are very miſerable, yet if there fall out any thing to their own deſire: nothing is more miſerable then ſuch a ſucceſſe, as not onely makes them to be more arrogant and vntractable, but rather entertaines or nouriſheth them more & more in miſchiefe. Do ye not behold, that (of neceſsitie) the Duke The Duke de Maine ouer-ruled by the Spanyards: but ye Duke of Parma is of a contrarie minde. 
               De Maine muſt doe all things by the aduiſe and will of the Spanyards, although by them he pretends to conquer? Marie, the Duke of Parma, he is too fine to ſerue them as a Seruaunt, he rather wold vſurpe for himſelfe (if he could) a cruell and tyrannicall gouernement: to maintaine himſelfe by force, ouer-throw the Noblemen of this Country & afterward, beate down the people with feare and terrour.
            VVill not you then take aduantage offered againſt theſe Rebelles? If yee loue your King and Countrey, as I thinke ye doe, lay hold

yet on the vallour of your Aunceſtors, who valiantly repulſed the Spanyard when hee would haue entred Fraunce, & made a famous ſlaughter of all his followers. Conſider the vnfortunate fal & ruine of the ancient eſtate of Greece, & very lateſt Empire therof, of Carthage, Rome, Italie, and infinite other Common-weales, kingdoms and Signories, which onely happened by partialities and deuiſions.
            
               Phillip de Commines heereof wrote well and truelie.Phillip de Commines. 
               Such diſſention and diſcordes (ſaith he) are verie eaſily ſowne amongſt rebellious people, and they are a true ſignall of the ruine and deſtruction of a Countrey or Kingdome, when they take roote therin, as they haue doone in diuers other Common-weales and Monarchies. And to thys purpoſe, (if I were not well aſſured, that the mallice and ambitions of the rebellious Leaguers, rather thē deſtenie, is the cauſe of the deſolation of thys eſtate) I could ſay, as Saluſt ſometimes ſaide of Rome.
                  Saluſt, his opinion of the eſtate of Rome. 
               J am perſwaded, ſeeing all things that had beginning muſt haue end, that then by deſtinie, the ruine of Rome ſhall approch: when the Cittizens fight againſt the Cittizens, and ſo beeing ſpent and weakened, ſhall be expoſed as a pray, to ſome King or ſtrange people: otherwiſe, all the Nations of the world aſſembled together, cannot ouer-throwe this Empire. But any man, (not ſiniſterlie carried awaie) doth euidentlie perceiue, that the originall and ſource of the downe-fall of this eſtate,

except God ſet his hand to in time: ariſeth frō the rebellion of theſe Leaguers, ſo long time practiſed by the Spanyard and his adherents.
            To eſcape then from ſo great an euill, withdrawe your ſelues (my Lords) to this partie, reconcile your ſelues to your King and relieue your Countrey, expoſed by the Rebels as a pray to the Spanyard, who hath no little while beene plotting and practiſing this deuice for his purpoſe. Demoſthenes fore-ſeeing the ruines of Greece, (through the vnderminings and policies of Phillip King of Macedon, who kept it in deuiſions, not only Cittie againſt Cittie, but the Cittizens deuided againſt each other in euery Cittie, by corruppting the chiefe Gouernors that were drawne to take part with him:) imployed all his paines to reconcile the Athenians and other people of Greece, from ſuch dangerous factions, and to regard the maintenance of their eſtate. For my ſelfe, I haue not the eloquence of Demoſthenes wherewith to perſwade yee, but this I plainely giue you to vnderſtand, that an other A compariſon between Phillip of Macaedon, and Phillip of Spaine. 
               Phillip, King of Spayne, hath vſed the like deceits in Fraunce, wherby to ſpoile and ruinate the Countrey, as Phillip King of Macedon did in Greece, to make himſelfe Lord thereof.
            Fly my Lordes, fly this partialitie, cauſe of ſo great troubles, pernicious to the publique ſocietie and priuate kind of life, euermore readie to

hurte, and which bringeth no meane damage, according to the occaſion and occurrences of the time, your ſelues do daily behold the effects heereof, for the Armie of the Leaguers beeing hemde in with this partiall Monſter, as well among the French-men as the Spaniards; it will come to paſſe, that without any great labour beſtowed by the King, their owne deuiſion wyll both fruſtrate their enterpriſes, and hinder the victorie they liue in hope to haue: euen as it happened in the battaile of Cannas, where the Romains loſt the day, thorow the partialitie of the two chiefe Leaders, Paulus Aemilius and Terentius Ʋarro.
            
            I cannot thinke that the Duke De Maine and the Duke of Parma, the onely commaunders of the League, will agree long time together, but that the one muſt giue place to the other: for the Spanyard is too braue & arrogant, to holde yoke with the French Rebels, hauing occaſion ſo fayre and fit for the purpoſe, whereby to gette the maiſterie ouer them now or neuer. My Lords, you that are faithfull Gentlemen and Seruaunts to the King, me thinks thys one cauſe ſhould induce a good accord and vnion among ye, for the ſeruice of his Maieſtie, & that ye ſhoulde be both iealous and enuious of the charge and honors diſtributed by his highnes, not to haue thē tranſ-ferred to ſuch as are ſo farre vnder you in woorthineſſe: and vnleſſe

this fire of iealouſie kindle the ſooner in yee, it will redounde to the great diſaduantage of the publique affaires, and your own proper ruine. As for the reſt of you my Lordes, that ſide it with the Rebels, wrap not your ſelues in theyr offences, looſe not your ſelues altogether in the heape of theyr diſcords, nor yet forget, that you but defend their perfidie & impietie: in ſo myſerable a confuſion, forſake ſuch part-taking.
            
               Large and liberall proteſtations, but no deedes enſuing them. They can talke enough, that the publique Lawes and common rights ought to be kept, as alſo the auncient receiued religion of Chriſtian Catholiques, the liberty of the eſtates, the comminalty of the Citties, the authority of the Princes, Officers of the Crown, the Magiſtrats, and Parliaments: yet notwithſtanding they trauaile day and night (as by their effects is plainly diſcerned) to trouble all theſe by diſorder and ſedition, and to thruſt the eſtate into the hande of a ſtranger, who makes himſelfe aſſured therof alreadie, except (next the helpe of God) you ioyne with vs to remedy this danger.
            The Leagues and deuiſions that were in Gaule, betweene the Nowe called Burgonians.
                
               Sequani and The Iriſh people. 
               Autini, when as Julius Caeſar there arriued, was the cauſe that brought the Gaules vnder the Romaine obedience.
            This League of Rebels is more pernicious & dangerous to the eſtate, were it not we haue a King that wel enough wil preuent them: but

God eſpecially on our ſide, who hitherto hath ouerthrown the enterpriſes of the Rebels and theyr Defenders, and will confounde the one with the other, that in the end we may haue the maiſterie ouer them. Behold howe the Spanyard woulde reconcile, and bring ye into quiet, if it were poſsible for him: if ſo be the King and his fayre forces had their hands bound, to gyue leaue to theſe Rebels and their gracious Deliuerers, to vſe them at theyr pleaſure.
            Doe not yee remember the ciuill The wars between the houſes of Orleance & Burgundie, when the K. of Englande entred into Fraunce, wheron enſued moſt ſtrange miſhaps. warres, that endured ſo long time in the reignes of King Charles the ſixt, and Charles the ſeauenth, occaſioned through the partialities and diſſentions, betweene the houſes of Orleaunce & Burgundie, when the Burgundians cauſed the King of England to enter Fraunce? The times were then ſo full of calamity and miſerie, the French being afflicted with warre, famine & peſtilence ſo cruelly, as the Fieldes were long time fallowed and vnmanured, the Citties ranſacked, the houſes and Fortreſſes, ruined, deſtroyed and burned, the great Lordes and loyall Officers of the Crowne, the moſt worthy, heroyick & valiant perſonages kilde, maſſacred or baniſhed: then was iuſtice proſtituted and brought into baſtardie, merchandiſe and publique negotiation aboliſhed; In breefe, all religion and humanitie violated, & for certaine yeeres was ſo great a mortalitie in Paris, as the Woolues could not

be kept out, but entred the Cittie, and deuoured the dead bodies. Are we not now in danger to beholde the like times? If the French Rebels get not ſome whol-ſome Elleborus, and become wiſe by the remembraunce of paſſed examples: well may they doubt to ſee farre worſe troubles.
            For the violence of this warre (ſo long time cloſely practiſed and intended) tooke beginning by exceſſe of treaſonable offences, and afterward proceeded by murder of the King: the progreſſe and end cannot but preſage, but to be worſe then the warres I haue alreadie alleaged.
            Let vs be aduiſed by what wee haue ſeene, becauſe the teſtimonie of ſight is more aſſured and certain, then that which we receiue by hearing: and we know, that there is nothing ſo diuine, humaine, holy, religious, chaſt, nor anie thing ſo well eſtabliſhed and ordained, but the rebellion of theſe Leagues hath troubled, ſpoiled, broken, violated, defaced and ouer-thrown.
            See yee not alreadie a moſt deplorable eſtate of all the Leagued and rebellious Citties? Semblable to the opinion of Thucidides, vvho ſpeaking of the vniuerſall dyſſention which in his tyme happened in Greece, moſt ellegantlie in theſe tearmes ſet downe his minde.
            
               
                  Theucidides in the 7. booke of his Greecian hyſtorie. 
               So ſoone as anie noueltie or inſolence is vnderſtoode to be committed in a Cittie, there are ſuch as

preſently practiſe howe to make it worſe: prouoked (moreouer) to enterpriſe new ſtratagems, eyther to declare themſelues more inſolent, or for their burning deſire to be reuenged. And what-ſoeuer euil is doone, they haue arteficiall names to diſguiſe it withall, which (for their excuſe) they change into contrarie ſignification, as if they were no ſuch matters as they call them. For they tearme raſhneſſe, to be hardineſſe and magnanimitie, ſo that ſuch ſudden fellowes, are called valiant defenders of theyr freendes. Softnes or temporiſing, they name honeſt feare: modeſtie, couert cowardlines: violent rage, couragious reſolution: wiſe and diſcreet deliberation, cloked diſsimulation. So by theſe meanes, he that is moſt vehement and audacious, is reputed faithfull, and (as they ſay) verie zealous, and wel affected to the cauſe: and he that wil not ad-here to thē, is held ſuſpicious.
            
            
               As for him that brauely executes their enterpriſes and reuenges, he is a wiſe and able man: but much more he, that knowes beſt how to fore-ſee and diſcouer the intent of his enemie, and prouides that no man on his ſide ſhall depart from the faction, or ſtand in feare of the Reſiſter. In breefe, who moſt readily out-rageth or offendeth others, is praiſed, but eſpecially, he that can induce another to execute his determinations. Such a faction is farre greater among ſtrangers, thē freends or kinred, becauſe they are diſpoſed to all enterpriſes, without any excuſe: euen ſo, conſpiracies and aſsemblies, are not doone by

authoritie of the Lawes, or for the weale publique, but for auarice, againſt all reaſon: and the fayth kept among ſuch, is not for Religion (as they would haue it ſeeme) but to entertaine ſuch contagious euill in the Common-wealth.
            
            
               Thucidides declared, that ſuch was the valour and courage among theſe partialiſts, as the one party thought nothing that proceeded frō the contrary faction, and altogether tended to no other end, then the extermination and deſtruction the one of the other. As for anie appointment or reconciliation made with theyr ſollemne oath, there was very ſlender aſſurance in their words, when they had neyther feare or reuerence in an oath: becauſe they wold keepe them no longer, then while they found occaſion to lay hold on theyr aduerſaries, or ſome-what returned to their own aduantage.
            Theſe Factions cuſtomably enſue thorow couetouſnes and ambition. factions proceeded of couetouſnes and ambition, and they that were the cheefe heereof in the Citties, made an honeſt pretence of euery partialitie. Each one in words debated the defence of the Common-wealth, but theyr deedes did witneſſe the contrary: becauſe that without hauing any regarde to the common-good, they laboured but to ſatiſ-fie their owne greedines, making profit of others ſpoyle, & executing vengeances as themſelues pleaſed. If there were any one that ſhewed himſelfe a newter, he was forth-with aſſailed by both parties:

where becauſe he was affected to neither ſide, or the enuie of them to ſee him in quiet, he was thruſt into the euil which the other ſuffered.
            
               The miſerie that ſuch confuſion breedeth. In ſuch ciuill diuiſions, the miſhaps are ſo great, that without cōſideration of good turnes and benefites receiued, or the vertuous actions of excellent men: the people ſo furiouſly caſt themſelues vpon them, as they ceaſe not to purſue them, euen to death or baniſhment. As it happened in Athens to Themiſtocles, Ariſtides, Demoſthenes, and Phocion: in Rome, to Coriolanus, Camillus, Scipio Affricanus, Cicero and others.
            Beholde ye not my Lordes, you that ſhould ſee more cleerely thē the reſt, euen a like forme of eſtate among theſe Leaguers and Rebels? Will yee not acknowledge it to be an extreame diſorder and inſolence? See yee not heere tyranny in place of Monarchie? which is the moſt perfect, firme, and ſureſt fourme of a Common-wealth, ſo highly commended by Homer. 
               Homer Illiad. 
               It is not good (ſaith he) that many haue an equal authoritie, but one ſole King to haue the prehemenence: to him hath God giuen a golden ſcepter, therwith to cō
                  mand and well gouerne his Subiects. Heere you ſee in ſtead of an Optimatum principatus. 
               Ariſtocratia, (which is the iuſt and ciuill adminiſtration of certaine vertuous perſonages, who haue all their thoughts and deliberations prouided for the Weale-publique, beeing called by the Latines The chiefe noble perſons in a Common-weale, by whom the reſt are to be gouerned. 
               Optimates,
               
ſuch as through the will and conſent of the ſoueraigne Prince, haue euermore beene ioyned to thys Monarchie, to keepe it in a temperate ſtate & cōdition:) is now growen among vs a confuſed Where a few factious holde the regiment. 
               Oligarchia, which is the gouernment of the moſt mightie and factious. And in the ende, by vnbridled libertie, in many places and Citties where the Rebels are, you ſhall beholde not any where the people haue ye rule without any Superiour. 
               Democratia, or populer eſtate, wel & pollitiquely gouerned by the Lawes, but rather a moſt miſerable A confuſed rule of ye multitude. 
               Olocratia, an inſolent domination of the multitude, or rather a many headed Anarchia, the oppreſſion whereof is moſt horrible and pernitious. For you knowe that the people either ſerue humbly, or commaunde imperiouſly, and taſting a little of the bayte of libertie, exemption of taskes, ſubſidies and charges: in furie they reiect and throwe off the yoke of obedience to the King, Superiours and Magiſtrates, themſelues weilding and managing the higheſt authoritie.
            Then pretending an equalitie, they practiſe nothing els but ſeditions, mallice, robberies, ſpoyles, inſolencies, and deſtructions: wherevpon Plato thus ſpake very notably. The whole Common-wealth ſhall decay and perriſh,
               
                  Plato hys iudgement of the Cō
                  mon-weale. 
               when it is to be gouerned by Braſſe or yron, that is to ſay, by fooliſh men, ſuch as are borne rather to ſerue and obey, then to rule and commaunde. For albeit that men are (both the one and the other) compoſed of

ſoule and bodie, and that in the ſoule is beſtowen the ſeed of the diuinitie, which ought to be receiued, tilled, and husbandred by reaſon, to the ende it may bring forth fruite according to the ſeede: yet is not the culture or husbandry in all men alike, but there is found a great difference betweene their ſpirits: ſo that in ſome it appeareth, that the diuine ſeed poured and thrown into a barren field, is eyther ſmoothered and loſt, or taketh ſo weake roote, that it cannot proſper and increaſe. Such is the varietie & difference among men, as ſome for the exerciſe of reaſon and vertue, are more noble, valiant, and borne, (as it were) to commaund: others againe, for their ruſticitie and ignoraunce, ſeeme more proper or aptly diſpoſed to ſerue.
            
            Therefore Plato helde this opinion A notable opinion of Plato.
                that God in the creation of man, did ſo diſtinguiſh and ſeperate their natures, that ſuch as were naturally apt and proper to commaund: them in generation he formed (as it were) of fine gold: ſuch likewiſe as were meet and conuenient for theyr aide and aſſiſtance, hee conſtituted not of ſo precious a mettal, yet of pure ſiluer: the third ſort, as labourers and work-men to attende on the other, of a more groſſe matter, to wit, braſſe and yron.
            GOD eſtabliſhed Superiours to commaund, and made the other to obey, the one eſtate worthy of honor, the other, not to preſume ſo high: as the Potter (according to the Apoſtles

words) of one ſelfe ſame matter maketh a veſſell to honor, and annother, ſeruaunt to meaner things. You ſee my Lords the trouble, dyſorder, and vniuerſall confuſion of your partakers, yet will ye follow them, and giue thē your voice? Will yee imploy your courage, put on your Armour, draw your ſwords, for the defence of theyr vniuſt cauſe, and to aduaunce the Spanyards vſurping? Where is the vertue and honor which Trogus Pompeius in his time attributed to the French Nation? when he thus ſpake of them: 
                  Trogus Pompeius, hys praiſe of the French-Nation. 
               They are ſharpe, hardie and valiant, & the firſt of them, next Hercules (who therfore was admirable & reputed immortal) reached the height of the inuincible Alpes, they beeing not paſſe-able by reaſon of the cold, and managed ſundry battailes, hauing vanquiſhed the people of Pannonia, vvhich at thys day are called Auſtria and Hungaria. Ah open your eyes my Lordes, and come to your Prince whom you ought to acknowledge, conſider what before I haue declared to yee out of the word of God, to bring again the ſtrayed & rebellious people in obedience to their King.
            Heerein ye may perceiue, that a Subiect cannot find or pretend any occaſiō to rebel againſt his King, notwithſtanding any cauſe what-ſoeuer it be. But perhaps thou wilt tell mee, that in the warre for the Weale-publique againſt King Lewes the eleuenth, certaine of the chiefeſt ſort entred Armes, moued with a diſcontent againſt

the King, becauſe they were not honoured and recompenced as their deedes had deſerued: yet he gaue to ſuch as were vnworthy, men vtterlie vnknowne & of ſmall acquaintance.
            They reconciled themſelues to theyr King, and did not as theſe Leaguers doe, who vnder collour of reconciliation, troubled the eſtate, & in the ende bereft the King of lyfe. And that which is moſt horrible to ſpeak, and ſcandalous to men of ſound Religion, they practiſed wyth an vnhappy Iacobine Fryar, making him the inſtrument and Executioner, of theyr accurſed conſpiracie and monſtrous crueltie. As for the other thou talkeſt of, they only were but Malecontent, as they wel declared by their appointment and reconcilement with their King: but theſe Leaguers, breaking all order and pollicie diuine and humane, after they had proditoriouſly by a trayterous Fryer, or rather a very deuill of the Cloyſter, maſſacred & murdered the late King: would change the eſtate, or as the truth is, they would tranſport a ſtranger out of one houſe into another. Haue not theſe Leaguers deſpoyled the good nature of the auncient French Nation, vnnaturally to participate with the treaſon of the Spanyards? And if they tearme themſelues good French-men, looke on their pernicious damnable complots, againſt the King, and the eſtate of Fraunce. Doe they not apparantly be-lie Julius Celſus, who thus ſpeaks

of the French-men in his fift booke. 
                  Iulius Celſus in hys 5. booke. The French (ſaith he) are men ſound and plaine, no deceiuers, or troth-breakers: and by cuſtome, they will rather fight for vertue, then for fraud, malice, treaſon or ſuch like. How can theſe Leaguers then by any right, attribute vnto themſelues thys faire and excellent French title: ſeeing they are Rebels, enemies to the Countrey, and Traytors to the eſtate they ſhould moſt labour to preſerue? Doe not all Nations of the earth deteſt the perfidie of Rebels againſt the Maieſtie royal, which is the image of the Diuinitie, the King being Lieutenant & Vicegerent of God, in the kingdome which he hath put into his hande? Haue not the Allemaignes good occaſion at this preſent, to call thē 
               A word of very great diſgrace in the Dutch-tongue, to wit, villains. 
               Schellums, hauing in ſuch ſort diſpoyled the naturall fayth of true French-men toward theyr King? coniuring againſt him, atempting his eſtate & life.
            Can they be ſo ignorant as not to know, that the K. hath the ſoueraigne power next vnder God, and that no ſubiect of his can take it from him, without full condemnation of Crimen leſae Maieſtatis in the higheſt degree, a moſt horrible Traytor, and more to be deteſted then if he had murdered his own Father?
            See yee not alſo my Lords, that God (who is iuſt) doth dailie purſue them with vengeaunce and puniſhment, by the fidelitie of ſo many generous and magnanimous Princes of the blood

royall of the houſe of Burbon, that onely remaineth heyre to the Crowne, beſides, with ſo many great Lords of Fraunce, ſo many Gentlemē, and all the good and loyall French-men? You likewiſe, that are iſſued of Fathers ſo vertuous and faithfull to the Crowne, who (for the moſt part) made prodigall expence of theyr bloode, for the defence of thys moſt royall eſtate: ſee ye not now how a ſtranger would rauiſh and carry it away?
            Will ye be ſo blinded, as to imploy your forces in ſo bad a cauſe? Are ye ſo vnnaturall, as willingly to betray your King and Countrey? Will ye turne your backes in ſo true and iuſt a cauſe, and ſubiect your ſelues to the iniurious rebellion of the Leaguers? The other Lordes and confederates of this Crowne, are mooued with vs, and reſolued to purſue ſuch monſtrous iniuſtice: will you then be ſo blinded & deceiued, with the falſe inducements and perſwaſions of the League, as to maintaine the ruine and ouerthrow of the eſtate, and of your owne ſelues likewiſe?
            Ah that it might pleaſe yee, to lende your eares a while to this my ſimple and not deceyuing declaration, perhaps ſome one of you, being touched either with hate, enuie, or ſome other diſcontentment, or the bond of affection he beares to the chiefe of the contrary part: vvill enter into conſideration, that he cannot do this,

without blemiſh to his honour and reputation, which hee ought to eſteeme more deere than any thing elſe, ſo that rather then he will conſent to ſuch a deteſtable rebellion, & generall ſpoile of his natiue Country, the loue wherof he ought to preferre before all other vaine paſſions: hee will imitate the example of worthy A notable example of Scipio Africanus.
                
               Scipio Africanus, who thought it better to withdraw himſelfe to Linternum, then bee the cauſe of trouble and ſedition in Rome, albeit the Common-wealth had dealt with him very vnthankfully. Would yee my Lords purchaſe the tytles of Rebelles, with this rude heape of people? which cannot agree with you: in that betweene your courage and thoſe of the vulgare ſort, there is no ſimpathie or likelihoode, but euen ſo great a difference, as is betweene vice & vertue. Wold ye my Lords haue the diſhonored name, of factious enemies againſt the king & the eſtate? Ah thinke what a hell and eternall infamie, followes ſuch as are cōdemned of high treaſon, breach of faith and rebellion: are ye ignorant that the end of all pernitious complots deuiſed by rebels, by the help of God, return to their own euerlaſting ſhame and confuſion?
            In euery Kingdome & Common-wealth, we ought principally to regard the benefit therof.The opinion of Thucidides.
                
               For if the Eſtate be in proſperitie (as ſaith Thucidides) euery one particulerly ſhal profit & feele the bleſſing therof: but if it be deſtroyed & ouerthrownt, all the particuler members, notwithſtanding whatſoeuer

Treaſure or riches they haue, ſhall therwith bee loſt and vtterly ſpoiled. When I ſpeake of the good of the Common-wealth, I meane not onely the riches & hazarde
                  •
                of fortune: but alſo the good more firme and aſſured to the better part of man, which is of the Spirit, wherby the commō-wealth is made more happie, and is defended againſt all the aſſaults of Fortune. In a priuate mans houſe are theſe vertues: in a Common-wealth good lawes and manners, preſcribed and eſtabliſhed by wiſe Kings, Princes, Gouernors, and ſoueraigne Magiſtrates, to well order, command & gouern their ſeruants in a direct compaſſe, ye people likewiſe to obey dutifully, thereby to liue in peace and tranquillitie. The happines of mē, and of the Common-wealth. 
               For the felicitie of men, and of the Common-wealth, commeth both from one ſelfe ſame fountaine, to wit, reaſon, which ought to rule in all things: and ſuch are the Citties, as are the Cittizens, whoſe lines and behauiour makes the Cittie happie or vnhappie.
            
            
               
                  Plato his two kindes of diſciplines. 
               Plato in the Cittie which he reformed, inſtituted two kind of diſciplines: the one for the exerciſe of the ſpirit, which he called Muſique, to wit, an harmonie or concordance of the ſpirite, when the actions agree & conſent with the vertues. The other was for the exerciſe of the bodie, which he tearmed The exerciſe of wreſtling, or ſuch like exerciſes for the body 
               Gymnaſteum, which augmented and maintained the ſtrength of the body: to declare, yt theſe two exerciſes coupled together, did vpholde an eſtate pollitique, as

they make a man fit and aptly compoſed.
            Will not you (my Lords) trauaile to recouer this good & quiet for your coūtry? Will ye yet longer time conſent to their diſorders and inſolencies, that doe nothing elſe but hinder vs from this good? Make ye ſo little account of your honour, as to hold hand with them in their execrable complots? You ſhould immitate the Pilot, who leaſt the ſhippe ſhould be altogether rent and mangled, wiſely fore-ſeeth & aduiſeth, leaſt he ſhould be accounted wiſe after the hurt is receiued. For it is a moſt ſimple and fooliſh kind of ſpeech, to ſay after the iniurie and daunger is gotten: I neuer thought on this. When the ſhip is beaten with outragious tempeſts, & ſo fiercly aſſailed with the windes, as there remaines no hope of bringing her to ſome Porte, whereby ſhe might eſcape the perrill and ſhip-wracke: the skill of the Pilot then ſerues him to no purpoſe. Then ſhun you theſe Rockes, flye from theſe tempeſts & dangers in due time, although yee beginne when it is almoſt ouer-late: yet me thinkes he ſaide wiſely, that better is late, then not at all.
            
            But if on the ſide you now follow, you vainlie promiſe your ſelues, ſome happie iſſue of your guilefull deſeignes & imaginations: conſider my Lordes what our Elders haue ſaide, A ſaying worthy to be noted.
               Man hath deſire in his power, but not Fortune, for what ſhall happen is vnknowen to man. Let the

Leaguers purpoſe what they will, deuiſe theyr enterpriſes and the execution of them, leuey ſo many men and ſtrange forces as they can▪ and vſe what ſtratagemes ſhall come into their heades: yet the diuine prouidence, who hath eſtabliſhed in this eſtate the order of Superioritie and the Maieſtie royall, whereby to command vs, with the moſt happie and aſſured forme of a Common-wealth: As I haue already ſaide, will diſpoſe of all, according to his infallible and neuer changing will. In vaine then doe theſe Rebels repoſe their truſt on ſtrange forces, againſt him that can conſume them all, and their imaginarie deliberations, which are no other (as Pindarus ſaieth of man) then a 
               Ode. 12. de Olymp. 
               dreame or ſhaddowe. The hopes of mortall men remooue many thinges, ſometimes high, ſometimes lowe, feeding but on vaine fantaſies and oppinions. There is no man liuing in the worlde, that canne conceiue a certaine ſigne of his future actions: becauſe of things to come, the councels are concealed, and many occaſions happen to men, farre different from their liking and expectation. Yet ſome there are, that being ſmitten with tempeſts of griefe and ſorrowe: immediatly the euill is turned into as great a good.
            
            Theſe thinges you ſhoulde thinke on, that attende an vniuſt cauſe of Rebelles, who haue troubled the eſtate, ſlaine their King, and nowe continue diſobedient to their Prince, whome GOD by lawefull ſucceſſion hath giuen vs:

that they will bee deceiued in their attempts, and all theyr opinions are but vayne and friuolous. They imagine one thing, and an other will happen: they thinke to ouer-goe the Eſtate by the force and aſſiſtance of the Spanyard, and the Spanyard will vanquiſh and ſpoile them by themſelues. But although GOD permitteth, for our correction, and proofe of the auncient conſtancie and fidelitie of the French, that theſe leagued Rebels ſhould afflict and ouer-trauaile vs: yet his iuſtice will neuer ſuffer, that they ſhal confound or tread vnder foot, the eſtate Royall, or to diſpoſe it where they pleaſe, hauing placed and eſtabliſhed it for ſo many ages▪ in the royall Lynage of S. Lewes. But in the end he will take vengeance on their crimes, treaſons, periuries, murthers, with other horrible diſorders and ſhames, giuing them as a pray, euen vnto thoſe people, whom now they holde as theyr great friendes and confederates: the worſt is, The Spanyards haue no regarde, but make hauocke of all. that they will deſtroy a great number with them, which neuer did partake in their deteſted treaſon.
            Some ſubtill cunning Rebell, as a collour or ſhaddowe to ſuch diſloyalties, will ſaye vnto mee. That all thinges are ſubiect to alteration and change, and there is nothing that perpetually continueth in one ſelfe ſame eſtate, for heauen it ſelfe is not exempt from change and ending. I aunſwer, that I am very certain of this

alteration, likewiſe that there is a courſe of ages and diſpoſitions of things in the world, as in our humaine body: to wit, after they are borne, they haue their infancie, child-hood, and ſtate of a yonge ſtripling: then they increaſe in manly ſtrength, and ſo continue a while in force and vigor: afterward they become aged, declining, and in the end periſhinge. For this is a maxime in Phiſique, that all thinges compoſed by generation, are diſſolued by corruption, and the ende of the one is the birth of the other. Such variety and change commeth not onely to priuate men, who declare ſufficiently theſe effects, by the mutabillitie of their deſſeignes and enterpriſes, ſuffering themſelues to bee carryed away with nouelties, that makes a confuſion of their wits, and in the ende is their vtter ſpoyle; but likewiſe to Families, who at the inſtant when they imagin they haue freely builded their fortune, and tryumph in the conceit of their owne greatneſſe: they behold their preſent fall, and all their foundations throwne on a heape together.
            I knowe likewiſe, that Empires, Kingdomes, Signories, & the moſt flouriſhing eſtates, are no leſſe expoſed to remoouings, varieties, & changes: as it may ſeeme a naturall reuolution, that oftentimes makes the ſtate of a Cōmon-wealth to change and rechange. But what is the cauſe of the change that thou wouldſt make? Is it not the change of thy manners? of thy fidellity into

diſobedience? of thy milde and gentle nature, into audacious behauiour? of thy loyaltie, into breach of faith: of thy duetifull office of a true ſubiect, into all looſe libertie and licenciouſnes? Is it not ambition and greedy deſire to reigne, that in this ſort tranſporteth men of high courage, being madded with their enterpriſes, that without feare and reuerence of Religion, (which dooth defend them from ſuch tyrannies) or care of their faith and loue to their Countrey, they ſtriue to attaine the ſoueraigne place of commanding? couering themſelues with the maxime ofEteocles in Euripid. 
               Eteocles, as it is in Euripides or practiſing as Iulius Caeſar. 
               Iulius Caeſar did, and other Vſurpers. For at this day, in ſuch remoouements as tende to this ende, the pretences of Religion and the Weale-publique (as I haue before declared) ſerue to no other ende, then to bring a ſleep the moſt ſimple and fooliſh, who are rauiſhed with the deceitfull eloquence and faire perſwaſions, of thy factious & rebellious Preachers. I ſay vnto thee moreouer, that the better to hide the cō
               iuration of the Leaguers, thou mighteſt lay before me this place of Plato. 
               Plato. 
               That there is a certaine fatall reuolution, and changing of Kingdomes and Comm-weales, which is done by the courſe and inclination of heauen and the ſtarres. To which I thus reply. That Chriſtians in iudging better, attribute the cauſe of ſuch reuolutions to the prouidence diuine: which moderates and gouernes

this huge frame, and all thinges elſe therein comprehended.
            God hath eſtabliſhed Kingdomes & ſoueraigne eſtates, he dooth maintaine and preſerue them, he ſuffers them to be afflicted with diuers calamities, hee ouerthrowes or tranſ-ferreth from one to an other, from Familie to Familie, and from Nation to Nation. Heereof wee haue example by the Monarchies of the Aſsirians, the Babilonians, the Perſians, and the Romaines: the Empire of Greece, ſuch as it hath beene ſince the deuiſion made between the two parties of the Eaſt and Weſt: but without more remembrance of theſe aforeſaide changes, we ſhall be ſufficiently furniſhed, with the wonderfull alteration, which the Turke hath there brought in. And not to vſe theſe externe examples, let vs looke on them that are our owne particuler & domeſticall: In this eſtate theSee the hiſtorians, that haue written of the originall of Hugh Capet both auncient and moderne.
               Merouingians firſt of all reigned, & after them the Carlingians, to whome Hugh Capet ſucceeded, beeing iſſued of the Merouingian bloode, and legitimate Princes of Fraunce, by reaſon whereof, hee was placed in poſſeſſion of that, which had beene vſurped on his Grandfathers the Merouingians, and was willingly obeyed beyond all the Monarches and Kings in the world. Nor ſhal ye finde any race that hath ſo long endured, (as thanks be to God it ſtil continueth in the ſex
                  •
                
               The King of Fraunce that now is, diſcended of the Merouingians frō 
                  Hugh Capet
                Maſculine) then thys whereof wee

now ſpeake: if wee ſhould ſearche all Monarchies both auncient and moderne.
            I confeſſe that ſometimes happeneth the alteration of Monarchies, namely by the diuine permiſsion, and that they are tranſ-ferred from one houſe to another: but heerein I yeeld not, that God will haue the change made by diſloyaltie, breach of fayth, and treaſon, committed by ſubiects againſt theyr Prince, to whom he hath commanded them expreſly to be obedient. For the King is the annointed of God, and who-ſoeuer reſiſteth the King (as I haue amply declared in the ſeconde part of this diſcourſe, by the authority of holy Scripture) reſiſteth God, the eſtabliſher of Kings and Princes on the earth, to gouerne in his ſted. And if it ſo fall out, that ſubiects by force or violence, attempt the eſtate and life of their King: they doe againſt the ordinaunce of God, and earely or late they ſhal be chaſtiſed. Hence then it came, as I haue breeflie touched, that the Carlingians, hauing perforce helde the Realme againſt the Merouingians, by the Armes of Pepin a ſtranger prince: God pleaſed that the Crowne ſhould return by Hugh Capet, of whom our Kings are diſcended to this preſent day, in the race of the Merouingians, who therof was a while vniuſtly fruſtrated.
            Will yee then permit (my Lordes) that our King Henrie the fourth, a branch of the Merorouingians,
               
by Hugh Capet, and S. Lewes of the ſelfe ſame race, ſhould be depriued of the ſucceſsion which appertaineth to him in right and iuſtice: Will not you aſsiſt him againſt ſuch as ſeeke to hinder his peaceable poſſeſsion? Are ye ſo weake of minde and ſpirit, as to let him be ſmitten and conquered by his enemies, without giuing the aſsiſtance you owe him of duetie? Take ye ſuch delight in your owne ruine, as it ſtirres ye not, when the ſtranger treades your ſtate vnder his feete, but you drawe your weapons to helpe him to his enterpriſe? Knowe ye not that alteration in all things, but chiefelie in theſe publique affaires, is moſt dangerous?
            Without wandring for farre fetcht examples,
                  Phillip de Commines on the ſtrife between the houſes of Lancaſter and Yorke. 
               Phillip de Commines deliuereth one of the Realme of England, where thorow the partialities betweene the Houſes of Lancaſter and Yorke, each aſpyring to the Crowne: dyed in eyght and twenty yeeres, more then four-ſcore perſons all of the blood royall, with the verie flower of the Engliſh Nobilitie, and infinite other valiant men, the onely and beſt Souldiours in all the Land. The other Lords were thruſt in priſon or baniſhed, paſsing the remainder of theyr liues very miſerably in ſtrange Coūtries. In the end, the two Houſes being vnited by the marriage of Henrie the ſeauenth, with Elizabeth daughter to King Edwarde the fourth, all theſe troubles ceaſed.
            
               See the hurt that enſueth by ſuch deuiſions, what more ſtrange matter are wee then to expect in ſuch a huge rebellion as this is of the Leaguers? Find you it any way reaſonable, that the true and naturall ſucceſsour of the Crowne, ſhold endure any other to call his right in queſtion, & by force of Armes to take it from him, that is the moſt hardie & valiant Prince on the earth: and who hath learned to haue his Armour oftner on his bodie, then the habit royall, or the pompe and ſeruice that other Princes haue which lyue in quiet?
            It is the common cauſe of all Monarchies, to maintaine againſt the Subiects the eſtate of a iuſt and lawfull King, and you beeing Noble-men, that holde aſſuraunce of your nobleſſe, goods and faculties of your King, will not you maintaine the ſame againſt his Subiects and rebellious enemies?
            The Lawe and cuſtome of Fraunce receiued at the firſt eſtabliſhing of the Kingdome, dyd alwaies refer the Crowne to the next Male iſſue of the blood royall: our Kings then heerin beeing giuen vs by nature, mee thinkes there is no reaſon that any occaſion ſhoulde remooue our eſtate. The Crowne is ſeated in this ſo ancient, illuſtrious and royall Houſe of Burbon, next ſucceeding that of Valoys, diſcended of the linage of Orleance.
            
            
               In the time of K. Charles the ſixth, thorowe the practiſes of the Duke of Burgundie, who had made a League with the King of England, againſt The Dolphin of Fraunce diſherited by his Father, yet holpen by God to his right in the ende. 
               Charles Dolphine ſonne to the King: beſide the exheriditation his Father made of him, depriuing him of ſucceſsion in the kingdome, there was a certaine iudgment giuen againſt him, in an aſſembly held at Paris, wherby he was exiled & baniſhed the Realme, beeing declared vnworthy there to ſucceede. On this vniuſt iudgement, he appealed to God and hys ſword, when the iuſtice of his cauſe beeing aſſiſted by the inuincible power of GOD: the Crowne was preſerued for him, and hee eſtabliſhed with very wonderfull victories thorow all all his kingdome, from whence hee chaſed the Engliſhmen, beeing reconciled to the Duke of Burgundie, and deceaſſed, to the great griefe of all his Subiects, leauing them in good peace & quiet.
            Whereby you may perceiue, that albeit euery one was ſet againſt the true heyre to the Crowne, yea, the Father himſelfe: yet God in his admirable prouidence, woulde not permit, that the kingdome ſhould be tranſ-ferred from the race and linage of S. Lewes, neither is it to be doubted, that his grace preuenting, with the deuoire of all good and faithfull French-men: but that it will be continued to all his poſterity, whereof this moſt famous and royall Houſe of

               Burbon, is the very neereſt and onely heyre to the Crowne.
            What cauſe then is there to prolong theſe ciuil warres & troubles for the eſtate, ſeeing we haue the legittimate ſucceſſour? Ah, nothing els but abſurd and monſtrous ambition. But ſome zealous Rebel tels me▪ that he is an Heretique: tuſh, theſe are old ſtale lyes, thys poynt, if he were ſo, ſeeing he demaundeth and offereth to be better inſtructed, is not as yet diſcided.
            To be an heretique, (as els where I haue ſaid) is obſtinately to holde an opinion concerning Religion, and rather to die then to forſake it. Seeſt thou in our King any ſuch headdie or obſtinate reſolution? Howe many times hath hee giuen thee to vnderſtand his ready will and intent? Moreouer, this is no argument and good conſequent: The friuelous obiection of the Leaguers. 
               The King is not of our Religion, therefore hee is diſhabled from ſucceeding in the Crowne. Thou argumenteſt very ill, & not like any good Logitian. The debate thou vrgeſt for the Crowne, makes a greater breach & blemiſh into Chriſtian religion, then if willinglie thou didſt conſent & giue him place, as in dutie thou art bound to do: ſeeing that right, neither thou or hee can hinder from him to whom it appertaineth, which thou haſt neither eyes 
                  •
               o behold, or wit to conceiue. If heerin thou mightſt preuaile, couldſt thou be tearmed a good Chriſtiſtian? that flyes and abhors as a plague▪ the ininfamous

note of rebellion, yea, forſakes landes, goods, wife, children and all, to follow his King. That tearme thou maiſt returne vpon thy ſelfe, though now thou calleſt his Highneſſe followers, pollitiques and heretiques, as pleaſeth thee to baptiſe thē: notwithſtanding, they are more aſſured of their fayth then thou art, and better Chriſtians then any that take part with thee.
            Of what Religion were our firſt Kinges of the Merouingians race, vntill Clouis the fift king of Fraunce, and firſt Chriſtian King? VVere they any Chriſtians, or knewe they what the name of a Chriſtian was? What were their ſubiects hauing receiued the Chriſtian fayth? Dyd they for thys cauſe refuſe the obedience they ought in dutie? Did they reiect, chaſe or kyll them? Ye ſhall not find one ſuch poynt, or anie Hiſtory that maketh ſuch mention.
            But you Rebels (that are too much at your eaſe) will not acknowledge your King, who ſo many times hath proteſted to ye, to preſerue & maintaine ye in your eſtates, and in the Chriſtian Catholique Religion, (vnder a ſhadow, ſaiſt thou) himſelfe not beeing a Catholique. Dooſt thou know the inward of his words & purpoſe? Is there any one can ſay, that euer he falſified his fayth? Hee hath ſollemnely ſworne to defende the Catholique religion, as his proper life: thinke then if it ſhould be hindered, although he neuer will goe againſt his owne commaundement,

thy ſelfe muſt be the onely cauſe therof. Obey thē the King, let the eſtate be brought againe into quiet, and then thou maiſt aſſure thy ſelfe, that when the King would alter any thing in Religion (whereon I am perſwaded be neuer ſo thinks But to keepe hys own conſcience ſtedfaſtlie to GOD.) he cannot do it, nor is it any part of his intent. You rather ought to pray to GOD with vs, that he will graunt him grace ſtedfaſtly to embrace the Catholique religion, & to plant it heere mildly, by reaſon and not force, violence or fyre: likewiſe to loue and eſteeme ſo many valiant good French of contrary opinion, that ſell not (as our zealous Leaguers doe) theyr King and Countrey to the Spanyard. It is not by blood and death to winne mens conſciences, but by the doctrine, proofe and good example, which greatly wanteth in your falſe Apoſtles.
            I beleeue there is not any Chriſtian Catholique, a faythfull member to the Crowne, but would earneſtly deſire, that the King, (enriched with ſuch ſtore of vertues, required in ſo great a Prince as he is) ſhold likewiſe be a Chriſtian Catholique to the end, that as we ought to haue but one King, ſo wee might alſo haue but one fayth and Religion, wherein, as in the feare of God, our Prince earneſtly labours to haue vs liue. Heereof not onely the Philoſophers and Chriſtian Doctors, but alſo Emperours are aſſured witneſſes, by many conſtitutions recited

as well in the Eccleſiaſticall hyſtories, as alſo in the bookes of Theodoſius & Juſtinian, who greatlie trauailed to maintain the vnion of the Chriſtian Catholique Church. When there is vnitie in religiō in an eſtate, who doubts but al things do proſper the better? We deſire (without offending our ſelues, againſt them that are contrary to our religion) that they would louinglie become partakers with vs: and not (purſued to the death, by the animoſitie wherwith the Rebels follow both them and vs,) ſubiect vs together vnder one ſelfe-ſame detection or An iniurious accuſatiō, where good & bad are regarded a like. 
               Categorie.
            
            VVee deſire (I ſay) that according to the good and holy cuſtome helde of olde, the King ſhould be ſacred and annointed at his Corronation, and take the oath of a Catholique Prince, that is, to maintaine the Catholique Church, & all the rights, franchiſes, and priuiledges thereof. We know well, that ſince the raigne of Clouis, Fraunce hath beene conſtantly maintained in the Catholique Religion, which is the ſame (as ſay the I. C. de ſumma Trinit. et fide Cath. L. Redētes. C. eod. tit. Emperours Gracian, Valentinian, and Theodoſius,) that was giuen and taught by Saint Peter to the Romaines, and vvhich both holy Emperours, Biſhops and Councels haue euer ſince followed, for which cauſe it is yet called Apoſtolique and Romaine. We are not ignorant (although ſome call vs heretiques, becauſe that acknowledging the Princes authoritie,

according as God hath commaunded vs, we haue withdrawn our ſelues to his ſide:) that manySee Nota Chronice de Genebrard. which treateth of this matter. Bellarminus, Coſterus, & others. great perſonages haue ſhewen as much by authority of the holy Scripture: that the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church, both Greekes and Latines: that the Catholique Religion is the onely and true Religion, which hath beene from the Apoſtles vnto this preſent by continuall ſucceſsion, alwaies taught & preſerued in the Romaine Church. But we are certaine withall, that through the vices which haue ſlipt thereinto by fault of the Paſtours, the eſtate of that Church hath much more neede of reformation thē others. We know likewiſe, that we are admoniſhed by Ieſus Chriſt and hys Apoſtles, to liue in concord and vnity with God, as S. Paule witneſſeth in theſe words: The God of patience and of conſolation, giue you the grace to know one onely thing amongſt ye, according to Jeſus Chriſt: to the ende, that with one ſole courage, and with one mouth, you may glorifie God his Father.
            
            
               Marcel. lib. 22. 
               Religion is a conſtant vertue, teaching the true adoration of God, which is done with an intire ſpirit: and the vnity thereof is figured by the garment of Chriſt Ieſus, wouen without a ſeame, that it was not to be cut or deuided. This is in truth, a faire aſſembly of ſuch as are knit in one brotherly vnanimity & conſent, as well in religion as policie: whereof the Prophet Dauid ſingeth, beeing aſſured that to ſuch, God wil ſend his bleſsings, and lyfe euerlaſting.
            
            
               To this effect, Plato and Cicero (albeit they were both Pagans) haue written: Plato Cicero. 
               That there is nothing more agreeable to the higheſt God, that gouerneth the whole world, than the aſſemblies of men, that aſſociate and meete together in one ſelfe ſame will and affection. There is but one Catholique Church (ſayth S. Paule) which frameth all Chriſtians of one minde and ſpirite: concerning the doctrine whereof, it were in vayne ſo diſpute, after ſo many auncient Ireneus aduerſ. haereſ. Lactant. de vera ſap. li. 4 Tertul. de praeſcript. Cyprian li. 1. epiſt. 8. lib, 3. epiſt. 11. li. 4. epiſt. 8. S. Auguſt. epiſt. 162. and other Authors. See Geuadius de primatu Petri Doctors of the Church, and religious Counſels.
            We deſire nothing more, then that the King (according to the moſt Chriſtian tytle of hys Predeceſſors) and his people ſhoulde be vnited in Chriſtian Religion, as for preſeruing peace in his Kingdome, he is declared the Defender and Protector of the Catholique Religion: with proteſtations ſo oftentimes reitterated, ſo to preſerue it as his proper life. Nor is he ignorant what Cicero ſayth: That Religion beeing troubled, the whole Common-wealth is troubled, becauſe the diſquiet and change that happeneth therein, dooth nothing elſe but cloy the ſpirites of men with diſorder and confuſion: whence proceedeth contempt of Gods true worſhippe, and hee beeing offended, puniſheth and afflicteth with diuers woundes and calamities, the Countrey that is fallen into ſuch a miſerie. This therfore his Maieſty wold fore-fee by his wiſdome, deſiring that Religion ſhoulde bee preſerued,

euen as (before God) the gouernment of the eſtate is put into his hande. God hath giuen vs ſuch a one, adorned with ſo many heroycall vertues, as makes him admirable to all Nations of the world: Would you then haue vs goe ranging about, and vrge a beleefe contrarie to that we doe beleeue? Is it poſſible we ſhould doe ſo? Faith is the gift of God, and is not imprinted in mens conſciences, by ſtroakes of ſwordes, or any other weapons: it is neceſſary that the ſpirit of God ſhould be in quiet: all the harts of men, eſpecially of vs that are his ſubiects, would herein dye and be conſumed. Of neceſſitie is it, that this grace commeth from aboue, and we can do no otherwiſe, but pray to God for his Maieſtie, and that he will graunt vs to be ſtill mindefull of our dueties, hee is our King, wee ought to obey him, and he ought to preſerue & maintaine vs, according to the Laws & ſtatutes of the Countrey, as all other Kings hys predeceſſours haue doone.
            But what ſhalt thou gaine by deſiring the thing thou dooſt? I beleeue, that if the King were ſuch a Catholique as thou wouldeſt haue him, and for one Maſſe, he ſhould diſpoſe himſelfe euery day to heare two: yet the Rebels would ſay no leſſe of him, then they did of the late King, that he did it for hypocriſie, and to be quiet in hys eſtate. What can we elſe iudge? ſeing their intent is to exterminate his life, with

all the generous and royall linage of Burbon, to follow the ſeruice of a Stranger. But (as I haue ſayde) GOD hath euer-more preſerued that race, euen for ſixe hundred yeeres and more, to this preſent: and yet by hys holy will ſtil continues it, for the good & quiet of this poore diſtreſſed kingdome.
            Theſe Armes that you haue taken againſt him (ô Rebels) will turne to your owne ruine and confuſion, ſeeing God forbids ye ſo to doe, what-ſoeuer pretence ye make of Religion. Religion ſhould moue ye to pitty, and not to rage: to compaſsion, and not furie: to loue & regard of your King, and not to rancour or hatred: to a naturall French-affection of hys ſeruice, and not to an obſtinate will, to wound, deſtroy, and take his life from him, if ye could.
            Now ſay my Lords and Gentlemen, if yet ye haue not ſufficient manifeſtation, that euen againſt Tyrants, Religion cannot ſerue for anie cloake or collour? The Spanyard, hath not be declared ſo much, who tearming himſelfe in Fraunce, Protector of the Catholique Religion, hath not hee (neuertheleſſe) ſuffered Paganiſme in many places of Granado, Andalozia, and Arragon, for the great Religion, or any thing ſerues the Spanyard, if hee may get any profit by it. profit hee got by it many yeeres together? Will ye not yet bethinke your ſelues, what good affection the Spanyards haue (of old) borne to the French? Did they not (no long time ſince) kindly intreate thē at Florida:

where they pluckt out theyr eyes, to make them die the more miſerably? Their drift is, to bee Commaunders ouer ye, and if you haue goods and faire wiues, to put you and your heyres to death, to poſſeſſe your wiues and your goods: as they haue practiſed the like in Flaunders, Naples, Millaine, and in euery place where they by force doe domineere. It is the Crowne, it is the Crowne that all this debate is for, although we hauing (as I haue proued) a lawfull ſucceeder, there cannot be gathered any occaſion for ſuch a debate.
            VVhen heere-to-fore there happened anie ſuch like ſtrife, they had recourſe to the eſtates of Fraūce: as it chanced after the death of Lewes the 10. called Hutin, that the Crowne was adiudged to Phillip le Long his brother. And after Charles le Bel to Phillip de Ʋalloys his Couſin, againſt Edward king of England, who pretended the cauſe of his Mother, the daughter of Phillip le Bel, & ſiſter to laſt three kings: but there ſhe had no right, by force of the Salique Lawe, which excludes the daughters of Fraunce from any ſucceſsion. It is now no queſtion of holding the eſtates, in this regard, ſeeing no one maketh doubt, but that the Crowne appertaineth to Henry of Burbon, by whō, for his race & admirable perfections, with his happy fortunes in war, amidſt ſo many trauerſes: the eſtate receiueth more honor, being gouerned by ſuch a king, thē
               
the King dooth of the eſtate, which comes to him by ſucceſſion, as beeing the very neereſt heire to the Crowne.
            Then you braue Lordes and Gentlemen of Fraunce, whoſe famous Grandfathers defended this Kingdome by their vertuous ſtrength, and made their glorie wondered at through the world: ſpend not your valiant & noble blood to your eternal deſtruction, but as your ſpirits are rockes of far more excellent perfection, ſo ſeeke ſuch waies as are more worthy and cōmendable for ye. To bring again this eſtate, with the whole body of the Nobillity, who haue euer ſtood with the King, & from whom through falſe impreſſion your ſelues are diſmembred: into her former ſplendour & honorable quiet. Vnite your ſelues to your king your ſoueraigne Lord, to extirpate this rebellion, and chaſe hence your entertained euils, the Spanyards, your auncient and mortall enemies: thereby to bring and re-eſtabliſh this poore afflicted Realme, into ſuch peace and tranquillitie, as all good mindes deſire, and is promiſed by your generoſitie & force, with the grace and bleſſing of God: who I pray to open your eyes, to let you wade no further in the loue of thys vnlawfull League, that like a ſubtill Thais, is prouided of a thouſand baytes and ſleights to catch yee withall. But if ye continue in her ſeruice, ye ſhall find your ſelues betweene two ſtooles, wher-through (as the Prouerbe is)

the taile falles to ground: and too late repentance, with moſt pittifull end, will be the recompence of your pernicious purſutes, and the diſhoneſt pleaſures you haue had with her.
            Followe, followe then the ſteppes of the moſt magnanimous and valiant Princes of the blood, ſo many great Lordes, Marſhalles of Fraunce, Dukes, Earles, Marqueſſes, Barons, and Gentlemen of marke, the number wherof is infinite and innumerable, al which expoſe them ſelues and their deuoire, for the ſeruice of hys Maieſty, the reliefe of the eſtate, to preſerue you (if ye forget not your ſelues) in your goods, priueledges, and immunities, ſeeking nothing but the quiet and proſperitie heereof.
            God giue them grace, and you likewiſe, to make ſome profit of this fore-warning, to the end, that wee hauing occaſion more and more, to bee thankefull to the King for his infinite bountie, & thoſe faithful ſubiects that attend on him: the celeſtiall fauour and aſſiſtance accompanying the Kings power, your amendment and reconciliation, may turne to the happie ſucceſſe of theſe publique affayres, the reſt and re-eſtabliſhment of thys diſolate Kingdome.
            FINIS.
            
               A. M.
            
         
      
   