
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ By the Quene.
            
               THe Quenes Maieſtie beyng infourmed, that in ſome partes of her Realme, ſundrye either ignoraunt or malicious people doe ſpread rumours abroad, that the baſe Teſtons of foure pence halfepeny ſhould not be currant after the end of Ianuary next: Hath thought meet (left the lyke falſe and ſeditious rumours might be further ſpread) to doe all maner her Subiectes to vnderſtand, that it hath beene alwayes and ſo is meant by her Maieſtie, that all maner the baſe Monyes, which hath ben of late decreed by Proclamacion, ſauing the Teſtons of twopence farthyng, ſhoulde continue and be currant ſtill, and ſo taken and paid from Subiecte to Subiecte, at the values as they be rated by former Proclamacion, and ſo to continue vntill the ſame may be by her Maieſties Subiectes brought to the Mint at London, and there exchaunged for new ſterlynge Monyes, with thallowance to the brynger, of three pence in the pound. Wherin ſuche expedition is made, as in a matter of ſuch a moment, poſſyble hytherto could be, and ſhall be nowe from day to day much more.
            And as for the peeces of two pence farthing, it is and was meant and declared in the Proclamacion, that they ſhoulde be taken as currant money vntyll the laſt day of Ianuary, that day beyng the ende of foure Monethes from Michaelmas laſte. And yet neuertheleſſe, becauſe within that tyme it ſhall be harde to bryng vp & make exchaunge of the ſame in the Mynt with newe Monyes: Her Maieſtie is well pleaſed, that whoſoeuer ſhall brynge anye of the ſame Teſtons of two pence farthyng after the ſaide laſt day of Ianuary to the ſayde Mint at London, within the ſpace of three Moneths after, ſhall haue for the ſame in newe ſyluer two pence farthing: So as her Maieſtie meaneth, as much as in her ſhall be, to beare herein with the burden of her poore Subiects. And her pleaſure is, that this ſhoulde be notified to all her louing Subiectes: geuyng alſo ſtraight commandement, that no maner perſon doe refuſe to take in paiment any of the ſaid baſe Monyes, that is to ſay: the fourepence halfpeny, the threhalfpence, the threfarthings, at the values rated by the former Proclamation, at any time hereafter: neither the other baſe Teſtons of twopence farthing at the ſame rate, vntill the laſte day of Ianuary. And in anye wyſe to cauſe all perſons doyng the contrary, to be ſeuerely puniſhed as obſtinate and ſedicious.
            And further, her Maieſtie chargeth all maner of officers and miniſters, diligently to ſee to the attachment and puniſhment of certaine lewde and ſedicious perſons, that from towne to towne, and Countrey to Countrey, doe carrie and ſpread ſedicious and ſlaunderous tales, importyng to ſimple people a feare, that Cattell vnmarked ſhoulde be forfeited: or that all people Chryſtened or Married, ſhould pay for Chryſtenynges and maryages certaine Summes of Monye to her Maieſtie, with ſuch lyke vayne and ſedicious follies neuer meant, nor within the compaſſe of anye meaning of her Maieſtie or her Counſaile. The ſtay whereof, by ſpeedy and ſeuere puniſhment, her Maieſtie ſtraightly requireth of all maner of Iuſticiaries, as they will or ought to anſwere to the contrarie, and from hencefoorth to giue order, that aſſoone as anye ſuch lewde tale is vttered, that the reporters thereof may be either puniſhed with ſpeede, or els produce the aucthours.
            
               Yeuen at her highneſſe Palyce at Weſtminſter, the xxiii. day of December.
               
            
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richarde Jugge and John Cawood, Printers to the Quenes Maieſtie. ¶ Cum privilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   