
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ By the Queene.
            
               WHereas by an act of Parliament made in the fifth yere of the Queenes Maieſties raigne, it was among other thynges enacted, that from the firſt day of Aprill in the yere of our Lorde God. 1564. it ſhould be lawfull to all and euery of her highneſſe Subiectes, at his & their wyll and pleaſure to carry & tranſport out of this Realme, in the ſhips or other veſſels of any the Subiectes of the ſame, all and euery kinde of herryng & other ſea fiſhe, to be taken vpon the ſeas by any of the Subiectes aforeſayde, and all and euery perſon and perſons which ſhoulde by vertue of that act tranſport or carry any herrynges, or other ſea fiſhe from or out of any Port or Harborough of this Realme, to any place out of the dominions of her Maieſtie, ſhoulde be free from payment of any Cuſtome, Subſidie, or Pondage money for the ſame fiſhe ſo carried or tranſported, duryng the ſpace of foure yeres then next folowing, and ſo further duryng her Maieſties pleaſure, as by the ſame act appeareth: Her Maieſtie hauing ben well infourmed of the great benefite which therby hath enſued to her Subiectes, is well pleaſed, and doth by theſe preſentes geue her louyng Subiectes to vnderſtand, that it ſhall be lawfull for them and euery of them, to continue & enioy the whole effect and benefite of the ſayde prouiſions in the ſayde act, in ſuch ſorte as is before expreſſed, vntyll ſuch tyme as vpon further cauſe her Maieſtie ſhall thinke meete to repeale or alter the ſame.
            And whereas it was at the ſame tyme further enacted for the benefite & commoditie of this Realme, as is in that act diuerſly expreſſed, that the fiſhe dayes in euery weeke, aſwell thoſe which of auncient tyme were by lawe alowed and continued, as alſo the wedneſday in euery weeke then limitted by the ſayde act to be obſerued and kept as a fiſhe day, ſhoulde be well and duely kept as fiſhe dayes, whereof none of her Maieſties Subiectes can pretende any ignoraunce: Which ordinaunces, namely that for the wedneſday, haue not ben, nor be ſo well in moſt partes of the Realme obſerued, as for the benefite of the common weale were meete, but rather broken, to the manifeſt contempt of the lawes: Therfore her Maieſtie ſtraytly chargeth & commaundeth, aſwell all her louyng Subiectes to haue due regarde to the ordinaunces of the ſayde acte for kepyng of thoſe fiſhe dayes, vpon the payne that may folowe, as alſo all and euery the Iuſtices of the peace, and other Iuſtices, officers, and miniſters, to whom the execution therof apparteyneth, to be diligent to enquire and puniſhe the offendours in that behalfe, as they and euery of them wyll aunſwere for the contrary.
            
               Yeuen at her Maieſties Manour of Grenewich the xxiiii. day of Iune. 1568. the tenth yere of her highneſſe raigne.
               
God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ 
               Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richarde Iugge and John Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
            
         
         
            ¶ Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   