
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Quene
            
               THe Quenes Maieſtie vnderſtandinge, that of late tyme ſundrye perſons beynge infected with certayne daungerous and pernicious opinions, in matters of religion, contrarye to the fayth of the Churche of Chryſte, as Anabaptiſtes and ſuche lyke, are come from ſundrye partes beyonde the ſeas, into this her Realme, and ſpeciallye into the Citie of London and other Maritime townes, vnder the collour and pretence of fleyng from perſecution, agaynſt the profeſſours of the Goſpell of Chriſte: Whereby yf remedy be not ſpeedely prouyded, the Churche of God in this Realme ſhall ſuſteyne great daunger of corruption, and ſectes to encreaſe contrary to the vnitie of Chriſtes Churche here eſtablyſhed.
            For redreſſe wherof: Her Maieſtie by aduiſe of her counſayle, hauyng commaunded the Archebiſhop of Canterbury, Byſhop of London, & other Biſhops to ſee the pariſhes in London and other places here with ſuſpected, to be ſeuerly viſited, and all perſons ſuſpected to be openly tryed and examined, touching ſuch phanaticall and heretical opinions: Wylleth and chargeth all maner of perſons borne eyther in forreine partes, or in her Maieſties dominions, that haue conceaued any maner of ſuch hereticall opinion as the Anabaptiſtes do holde, and meaneth not by charitable teachynge to be reconciled, to depart out of this Realme within twenty dayes after this Proclamation, vppon payne of forfayture of all theyr goodes and Cattelles, and to be impryſoned and further punyſhed, as by the lawes eyther eccleſiaſticall or temporall, in ſuch caſe is prouyded. And her Maieſtie alſo chargeth and cōmaundeth vpon payne of impriſonment, that no Miniſter nor other perſon, make any conuenticules or ſecrete congregacions, eyther to reade or to preache, or to miniſter the Sacramentes, or to vſe any maner of deuine ſeruice, but that they ſhal reſort to open Chappels or Churches, and there to preache, teache, miniſter, or pray, accordyng to the order of the Churche of Englande, ercept it be in caſes of ſickenes, or where noble men and ſuch others that haue in al former tymes ben accuſtomed to haue deuine ſeruice ſayde in theyr Oratories within theyr houſes, for dyuers neceſſary reſpectes, vpon payne that whatſoeuer perſons or company ſhall make ſuche ſecrete conuenticules, euery perſon to be impriſoned without bayle or mainpriſe, vntyll the commyng of the Iuſtice for delyuery of the ſame Gayle, and then to be punyſhed by theyr diſcretions.
            
               Yeuen at our Caſtell of wyndſor. the .xxii. day of September, the ſeconde yere of our raigne. M. D. lx.
               
               God ſaue the Quene.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Powles Church yarde by Rycharde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, printers to the Quenes Maieſtie.
         
      
   