
      
         
            
            
            A Proclamation for pardon to them of Tyndale and Riddeſdale.
            
               WHere as the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie hath ben infourmed by her right truſty, and right entierly beloued Coſin, the Duke of Northfolke, whyleſte he was her Maieſties Lieuetenaunt generall in the North, and alſo by her ryght truſty and welbeloued the Lord Grey of Wylton, whyleſt he was warden generall of the Eſt and myddle marches agaynſte Scotlande, that there were and bee dyuers of her ſubiectes, within the countie of Northumberlande, in the parties of Tindale and Riddeſdale, and other partes thereto adioynyng, that haue of long tyme ben culpable and gyltie of ſundry crymes, for the whiche the ſayd Lieuetenaunt generall, in ſome parte by order of the lawes of the Realme, dyd cauſe execution to be made in the moneth of Marche laſte. And finding the numbre of the offendours, and theyr repentaunce very large and great: Was moued on her Maieſties behalfe to haue commiſeration, and ſo to ſtay further proſecution agaynſt them, vntyll her Maieſties pleaſure were knowen, and the repentaunce and ſubmiſſion of the ſayde offendours notified.
            Here vpon her Maieſtie beyng inclinable to ſhewe mercy towardes ſuche as ſhewe them ſelues ready to liue lyke true ſubiectes in the peace of God, and the Realme: Is pleaſed that by this her Proclamation, it be notified to all maner of perſons, inhabitauntes within the ſayde countie of Northumberlande in the partes of Tindale and Riddeſdale, that her Maieſtie doth acquite & pardon all ſuch perſons of the ſame partes as haue cōmitted any offence-worthy death, before the ſayd moneth of Marche, and not ſuche as haue committed any offence worthy death ſence the ſayde moneth of Marche. And for the more certeintie of the perſons that ſhalbe pardoned: Her Maieſtie wylleth and cōmaundeth, that whoſoeuer meaneth or wyll take any commoditie of this her Maieſties pardon, ſhall repayre to the Lord Chauncellour or keper of the great Seale of Englande, with certificat vnder the hande and Seale of the ſayde duke of Northfolke, or of the Lorde Grey of Wylton, or of the Warden of any the myddle or Eſt marches, conteyning the name and ſurname of the partie, with a note of ſuch offences as for the which the partie wyll requyre his pardon, and a teſtimonie that he hath founde ſuertie to be of good behauiour. And therevpon the ſayde Lorde Chauncellour or keper of the great Seale, ſhall graunt to ſuch perſon a ſufficient pardon, vnder the great Seale of Englande, exceptyng all hygh treaſons to the perſon of her Maieſtie and wylfull murders. And the ſame perſons ſhal pay only ſuch fees for the ſame, as were payed for pardons obteyned at her Maieſties Coronation, and no greater.
            Prouided alwayes that no perſon ſhall haue any benefite by force of this Proclamation, but ſuch as ſhall ſue foorth a pardon in fourme aforeſayd, before the laſt day of Hyllary terme next.
            
               
                  
                     Anno. 1560 4 Nouembris. the ſecond yere of her Maieſties raigne.
               
            
            GOD SAVE THE QVENE.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Powles CHVRCH YARDE, By Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Quenes Maieſtie.
            ¶ Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
         
      
   