
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Queene,
            
               THe Queenes Maieſtie vnderſtandyng the great diſorder that of late hath ben, and yet is dayly vſed in and about the Cities of London and Weſtminſter, and eſpecially in and about Weſtminſter hall, and the palaice of Weſtminſter, by dyuers lyght and euyll diſpoſed perſons, who in great rowtes and companyes haue aſſembled them ſelues together, agaynſt ſuch as be infourmers vpon penall lawes and Statutes, commonly called promoters. And ſo beyng aſſembled, haue not onlye beaten, and very euyll intreated diuers of the ſame infourmers: but alſo haue made great outcryes agaynſt the ſame perſons, wherby the Courtes and places of Iuſtice in Weſtminſter hall, and other places thereaboutes, haue ben muche diſquieted and troubled, and the Queenes Maieſties peace broken, whereof great miſchiefe and inconuenience myght lykely growe, yf ſpeedy remedy be not therin prouided. Wherefore her Maieſtie doth ſtrayghtly charge & commaunde all perſons, that they, nor any of them, do hereafter commit or do, or conſent, or procure to be committed or done, any ſuch diſorder or miſbehauiour, by any act, deede, or wordes, openly or ſecretely, agaynſt any ſuch infourmers, or agaynſt any other perſon or perſons, in any the places aforeſayd, or in any other place within this Realme, vpon payne to ſuffer impryſonment of theyr bodyes by the ſpace of three monethes, without bayle or maynpryſe, and alſo to haue ſuch further open punyſhment for theyr offences, by whyppyng, ſtandyng vpon the pyllory, or otherwyſe, as by her Maieſties Counſell of her hyghneſſe Court of Starre chamber, ſhalbe iudged and ordered. And further, her Maieſties pleaſure & expreſſe commaundement is, that diligent inquirie ſhalbe made of ſuch, as haue ben offendours in any the premiſſes, to thintent that due and condigne punyſhment and correction may be to them miniſtred, accordyng to theyr offences. And that all Iuſtices, officers, and miniſters, ſhall in all places where ſuche offences ſhall happen hereafter to be committed, cauſe the offendours, theyr procurours, and abbettours, to be apprehended and taken, and preſently to be committed to ſome pryſon, there to remayne in ſafe kepyng, vntyll they may be brought before her Maieſties ſayde Counſell in the Starre chamber, there to be ordered to ſuch punyſhment, as by the ſaide Counſell ſhalbe thought conuenient.
            
               Yeuen at her Maieſties Pallace of Weſtminſter, the tenth day of Nouember. 5166. in the eyght yere of her Maieſties raigne.
               
            
            GOD ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Rycharde Iugge, and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   