
      
         
            
            
            THE
AVNCIENT
Order, Societie, and Vnitie
Laudable, of Prince Arthure, and
his Knightly Armory of the
Round Table. With a Threefold Aſſertion frendly in fauour
and furtherance of Engliſh
Archery at this day.
            Tranſlated and Collected by R. R.
            
               Pſal. 133. verſ. 1. & verſ. 4.
               O how happy a thing it is and ioyfull for to ſee,
               Brethren together faſt to hold the Band of Amitie.
               Euē ſo the Lord beſtoweth on thē his bleſſings manifold
               Whoſe harts and minds without all guile, this knot do keepe and hold.
            
            
               LONDON
Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe dwelling in
Diſtaffe lane neere the ſigne of the
Caſtle 1583.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right worſhipful M. Thomas Smith Eſquier
chiefe Cuſtomer to her Maieſtie in the port of London, and to
the worſhipfull Socyety of Archers, here yearely celebrating the renowmed
memory of the magnificent Prince Arthure and his Knightly traine of the Round Table,
Grace, Mercy, Peace, and Plenitude of temporall and eternall
Beatitude in Chriſt Ieſus our onely Lord and
Sauiour, Amen.
            
               
                  ISAAC the Sonne of Abraham and childe of
promiſe ſignified Ioy (Right worſhipfull Patrone
and worſhipfull good Citizens.) And Iacob his
ſonne otherwiſe called Iſrael ſignified ſtrong with
God, alſo by interpretation. Wherein as we ſee
Iſaac the father, Ioy goeth before, and Iacob the
ſonne ſtrong with God followeth: This maketh a
moſt apt miſtery of Gods almightie power and
wil, and a moſt conuenient order in accompliſhing
of the ſame. For as in thoſe ancient Ludis Saecularibus dedicated in
honour of Apollo and Diana, the Trompeter ioyfully going before ſounded
the ſignification of ſome great Nouel which ſhould enſue therupon, when he
alſo ſaid vnto the people, Come to the games which no mortal man
hath ſeene or ſhal ſee the like: So here ſemblably portendeth this Ioye
in the father before going ſome ſtrange or rare euent in the ſonne ſtrong
with God following him.Geneſ 32. And ſo in deede it was. For, Iacob as we reade
wreſtled with the Angel of God, and by prayer preuailing with him, bare
away the bleſſing. And what was that? verely that he ſhould thenceforth
Preuaile both with God & man. This wreſtling then may be a famous
example, & an earneſt tryal of al the faithfull children of God, by excellent
enterpriſes and exerciſes of life euen in the beholding eye and ſight of the
ſame God of Abraham, Iſaac and Iacob. The 12. Tribes of Iſrael proceding
from Iacobs loynes were the Lordes elect & Gods peculiar people, and
ſo mighty a Nation as none more mighty vnder the ſunne, in whom the oracle
of Gods Angel promiſed to Iacob, was altogither by Gods prouidence
performed.Exod. 18. Theſe had a Ruler, euen Moyſes ordained by God himſelfe, and
one which ſpake face to face with God: He was commanded alſo to chuſe
men of courage ouer them as his Subſtitutes, namely Rulers ouer thouſands,
Rulers ouer handreds, and Rulers ouer tennes, and it is written, that they
made Iſrael a holy nation. The Lord him ſelfe alſo commanded theſe to ſet

markes on the mountaine of Sina,Ibidem. and ſanctifie it. He enioined them
yearly to celebrate the feaſte of the Lordes paſſeouer,Exod. 12. to obſerue that day in
their poſterity for euer. And in their peace 
                  〈◊〉
                in the day of their gladnes
that they ſhould blow their Trompets ouer their ſacrifices and ouer theyr
peace offerings,Numb. 10. that they might be a remembrance for them before their
God. Likewiſe in their warres to blowe an alarme with the Trompet, to
the ende they might be remembred before the Lord their God;Ibidem. and be ſaued
from their enimies.Ibidem. And then did the ſame Moiſes as grand captaine
and guide go before them with the Arke of the Teſtament, the foreſaid 12.
Tribes marching orderly after the ſame: for whoſe defence againſt their enimies
on a time he praied thus vnto God. Riſe vp Lord and let thine
enimies be ſcattered, and let them that hate thee fly before thee.
And when the Arke reſted he praied thus for them. Returne Oh Lord
vnto thee many thouſands of Iſrael. Hercules in peace was famous
among the heathen for ordaining thoſe games of wreſtling, running & learned
exerciſes at Olimpus by him dedicated to the honour of Iupiter. Ceſar
in peace time prouident for wars was alſo famous among the Romains
for ordaining thoſe ſword plaies to the better exerciſe and encouragement of
young men againſt the time of nedeful wars the more boldly and ſkilfully to
encounter with their enimies. And Anthonius ſirnamed Pius, in time
of warres was more famous among them for exerciſing al maner of mighty
and ſauage beaſtes to be rid vpon and trained for the battel, as well as his
owne ſouldiours fearcely to foile his enimies: who of him ſelfe alſo was ſaid to
be ſo coragius and valiant, that he ſlewe with his ſhafts 100. Lions of his enimies
power at one bickering. But Apollo aboue al others was moſt famous
(in war times for recouery of peace) at Delphos when being named
the God of wiſdome and Prince of Archers with his 1000. ſhaftes ſlaying
and nailing to the ground that perillous ſerpent Pithon, he deliuered the
people from perill thereof to liue in peace afterward, and betaking himſelfe
thereupon to his pleaſant paſtime accuſtomed of hunting Deere and Goate,
did alſo inſtitute by this his cheualry, thoſe games in Latin called Pithij
after the name of the ſerpent ſlaine. All theſe foure (I ſay) were famous in
their eſtate and condition, for maintenance of cheualry and actuity in peace
time and warres: and haue their due commendations accordingly as it
ſtandeth with credit: But bicauſe theſe were without the knowledge of god,
& mere prophane, therefore their actions, fame and memory are the more
obſcure and leſſe permanent with glory. But contrariwiſe immortal Fame
followeth the noble ordinances & actions of the Faithful which alwaies
haue bene, are and ſhal be within the watch of Gods heauenly Eie, within
the helpe of his holy hand, and within the precinct of his almighty and eternall
protection. As it is moſt notably verified by Eccleſiaſtes 10. cap.
where it is ſaid, He that is cheefe among brethren is honorable,

So are they that feare the Lord in his ſight. ver. 21.
            
               Here is that indiſſoluble band of amity betwene God & goodmen which
the wiſeman affirmeth of Sap. 7. For ſhe is an infinite treaſure vnto
men, which whoſo vſe become pertakers of the loue of god,
and are accepted for the gifts of knowledge. ver. 14.
            
            Here is that euerlaſting knot of peace & loue which the princely Prophet
Dauid ſo highly praiſeth betwene Brethrē in & for God their father. viz
                  •
               .
Pſal. 133. As the dewe of Hermon which falleth vpon the mountaines
of Sion, for there the Lord appointed the bleſſing of life
for euer.
            
            And here is that Round Table of cheefeſt Cheualry ordained by the
Lord of Lords, and King of Kinges, euen Iehouah the God of hoaſtes before
whoſe heauenly preſence (of immenſe maieſty and immortall magnificence)
enuironed round about with Patriarckes, Prophets, Princes, Apoſtles,
Euangeliſtes, Angels, Archangels, and Soules of the righteous, inceſſantly
ſhal be ſounded Amen.Reuel. 
                     ••
                  . 
               Praiſed be God, praiſe ye our God
al his holy ones, and ye which feare him, ſmal and great.
            
            Amongſt which number of mighty Kings, Conquerours and warriers
in ſacred hiſtories moſt famous. (Right worſhipful Patrone and worſhipfull
Citizens) let not I beſeech you the noble ordenance of that princely Prophet
and Conqueror King Dauid dye in obliuion, but liue in your perpetuall memories,
1. Cron. 11. & 12. how he for maintenance of princely chiualry and knighthood, had
not onely about him 30. Mighty men of armes, and of the 12. Tribes with
him retaining a mighty number as it were like the hoaſt of God.2. Reg. 2. But alſo the
firſt ſtatute that euer he enacted after he was King, was inſtituted, that all
the Children of Iſrael ſhould learne to ſhoote in the Bowe: which exerciſe
by ſo noble and choſen a King eſtabliſhed as he mencioneth thereof many
times in his Pſalmody. So I beſeech you remember how he promiſed the
Lord of hoſtes,Pſal. 119. verſ. 15. 
               That he as at a marke would aime to walke in the
waies of the Lord.
            
            Our ancient Arthures noble ordinance order and famous memory like as
your worſhips do yearely with worthy ſolemnity celebrate as the Iſraelites
did their daies of gladnes in their peace time. So if I were worthy with
Cicero to exhort you,Lib. 2. de offic. to prefer al duty auailable to maintaine Neghborhood
and fellowſhip of men aboue that duty which conſiſteth in knowledge &
ſcience. I would herein encourage your worthy good wils to way and conſider
what our moſt noble and famous Kings of England in that your famous
accuſtomed exerciſe of ſhooting, haue moſt renowmedly enterpriſed &
eftſoones renewed. But touching your famous order & fellowſhip of knights
in ſhooting,Ann. 1279. 5. Edw. 1. though in K. E. 1. his time A valiant Knight and manly Mortimer
at Kenelworth appointed a knightly game, which was called

the Round Table of 100. knightes and ſo manie Ladies (nameth
not expreſſely ſhooting to be one) yet for exerciſe of armes thither
came many warlike knightes of diuers knigdomes. And the moſt famous
& victorious king E. 3. builded at Wincheſter an houſe called the
Round Table of an exceeding compaſſe,Ann. 1344. 18. Ed. 3. to the exerciſe of like or farre
greater Cheualry therein: when he alſo was the firſt king (for memory therof
moſt magnificent) which inſtituted euen there alſo the moſt noble order of
S. George his knightes of the honorable Garter yet vſed: whoſe perpetuall
fame for his princely actions, encouragement and euent by the exerciſe of
ſhooting in his wars as I haue in this booke inſerted as moſt worthy: So the
moſt famous,Ann. 1485. 1. Henr. 7. prudent, politike and graue Prince K. Henry the 7. was the
firſt Phenix in chuſing out a number of Chiefe Archers to giue daily attendance
vpon his perſon, whom he named his Garde. But the high and
mighty renowmed prince his ſon K. H. 8. not onely with great prowes and
praiſe proceeded in that which his father had begon:Ann 1509. 1. Henr. 8. But alſo added greater
dignity vnto the ſame, like a moſt roial renowmed Dauid, enacting a good
& godly ſtatute for the vſe and exerciſe of ſhooting in euery degree.Ann. 33. H. 8. cap. 9. And
furthermore for the maintenance of the ſame laudable exerciſe in this honorable
City of London by his gracious Charter confirmed vnto the worſhipful
Citizens of the ſame, This your now famous order of Knightes of
Prince Arthures Round Table or Society: Like as in his life time whē
he ſawe a good Archer in deede, he choſe him and ordained ſuch a one for a
knight of the ſame order. After the conquerous Dauid enſuing the daies
of a moſt prudent and peaceable Salomon, we reade he had alſo a puiſant
power,Cantie. 3. 60. valiant men of the mightieſt in Iſrael, & 24000. Lords of the
Tribes of Iſrael monthly by courſe ſeruing through out the yeare:1. Cron. 27. his peace
and proſperitie in al reſpectes ſo ſurpaſſing his princely Progenitors, as the
Quene of Saba ſeeing the ſame was aſtoniſhed therat ſaying:3. Reg. 10. 
               Thou exceedeſt
the fame that I hard: Bleſſed be the Lord thy God which loued
thee to ſet thee on his throne as king in the ſtead of the
Lord thy God. ver. 8. The like wherof (for the time he liued) as it appeared
in that gracious Prince and bleſſed K. E. the 6. So ſince that tyme
God hath for theſe many yeares much more manifeſted as wel to vs at
home, as our neighbours about vs, the incōparable peace, proſperity & bleſſed
eſtate of our ſacred Salomon Queene Elizabeth and this her Maieſties
Iſrael euen the allotted inheritance of the Lorde moſt admirable.
This then being ſo true, as none can iuſtlie denie, Oh what Cauſes haue we
al and euery one of vs highly to praiſe God therefore, and pray vnto him for
the long continuance of the ſame. What cauſes of mutuall gratulation and
reioiſing thereat haue we in al degrees, and to ſtudie for the augmentation
and preſeruation of this aboundant bleſſednes. Herein for one minimus exminoribus,
               
I acknowledge my ſelfe (Right worſhipful Patrone & worſhipful
Citizens) anſwering with poore Pederectus,
               Plutarchus in Apophtheg. not worthy to be choſen
in the number of 300. which in this Citie for this purpoſe excell others in
worthines of learning, liberal art or humane dexteritie, but yet cherely and
frendly I will take my leaue of your good Worſhips, reioicing that this Citie
hath 300. ſuch perſons better then my ſelfe am in any point able to ſatisfie
your ſo worthy and notable expectation: Notwithſtanding thinking my
ſelfe as much bounden herein as the beſt, and as much beholding vnto my
countrie as the moſt which can do better, I haue brought forth at this preſent
this ſimple ſhow of my beſt abilitie & ſincere good wil towards the premiſes.
And as an addition vnto my laſt yeares tranſlatiō of the aſſertion of Prince
Arthure incident in purpoſe and conuenient in order. I dedicate this ancient
order, ſocietie & vnitie of Prince Arthur & his knightly armorie, vnto you
the famous & worſhipful preſident & to you the knights of Engliſh Archery
in the ſame order with a condigne commendation and encouragement vnto
my natiue countrie vniuerſallie therunto. Hūbly & hartely beſeching you to
accept in good part this my poore paines, as partly in fauour & furtherance
of the lawdable exerciſe of ſhooting in this our proſperous peace time, vnder
the bleſſed gouernment of this our ſo ſacred Salomon Queene. The continuance
whereof with continuall praier let vs all craue at the hands of the
higheſt Iehoua that it would pleaſe him many mo yeares to multiplie the
ſame in his manifold mercies, to the continuall honour and glory of his bleſſed
name, our mutuall conſolation in this our happy Iſrael, and to the publike
comfort and commoditie of his vniuerſal Church. And finallie that we
with our neighbors & they with vs Famouſly continuing in the Concord
& Vnitie of Chriſtian Faith, & true religion of the Goſpel of Chriſt Ieſus.
May in fine by his merites and mercies enioy thoſe bleſſed Ioies celeſtiall
which Eie hath not ſene the like, eare hath not heard the like, nor hart hath
not conceiued the like: which God in mercy hath ordained for them that
loue him. To whom be al power, dominion, praiſe, honor, and glory, for euer
and euer, Amen.
            
            
               Your worthy good worſhips moſt
humble and dutiful Orator
Richard Robinſon Citizen of London.
            
         
         
            
            A Praiſe of the Bovve and
Commendation of this Booke, written by
Thomas Churchyard Gent.
            IN forraine land and natiue ſoyle, where ſoldiars I haue ſeen:
            And chefly in the martial dais (whē youth was freſh & green)
            I haue beheld both Bow & ſhot, the Bow for Archers meet:
            The ſhot for vſe of powlders force, and lads of liuely ſpreet.
            And iudging by experience great, in place where both were tried:
            I found where ſhot was graunted good, the Bow was not denied.
            Firſt ere we found out ſhot aright, the Bow great battels won:
            And long the Bow great glory gate, before we knew the Gun.
            As lo this Booke doth mention make, & ſhewes in verſes good:
            For murthering ſhot came in of late, when Bovv in honor ſtood.
            In elders daies when manhode ſhone, as bright as blaſing ſtarre,
            And chriſtian hart and noble mind, diſdaind this turkiſh warre.
            The Bow was vſed as force of mā, & ſtrēgth of arms might draw
            To glad the frend and daunt the foe, and hold the world in awe.
            But whē that ſtrēgth and courage fail'd, and cūning crept in place
            The ſhot and roring Canon came, ſtout people to deface.
            
               
The Bow not fit for cowards hand, for cowards ſtrēgth doth faile:
            VVhen man drawes arrow to the head, and then doth foe aſſaile.
            with ſword and dagger Lion-like, that bends both brow and taile
            And grins and gapes with gnaſhing teeth, to make his enemy quail
            The ſhot lies lurking in a hole, and ſpies aduantage great:
            Then bullet, match, and powders force, do work a wicked feate.
            The Archer ſhowes a manly face, in field and euery where:
            And when his arrowes all are ſpent, he dies with courage there.
            The ſhot no ſooner all diſcharg'd, but legs for life muſt ſhift:
            Theſe bold and venterous nimble boyes, can find no further drift.
            But geue the charging horſmen place, the Archers do not ſo:
            For foure and twenty headed ſhafts, belongs to euery Bow.
            
            And ſurely ſhoote the Archers may, at many a thing ye know.
            When men in broyles and battailes doubt, how warres and world
wil goe.
            There is a knight a ſoldiar great, in court doth white ſtaffe beare:
            That knowes what Bowes haue done in field, againſt both ſhielde
and ſpeare.
            Yea many more are yet aliue, that honours Bovv indeed:
            And can record what noble actes the Bow hath done at need.
            I ſaw in ſundry ſoyles my ſelfe, much ſhot diſcharg'd in vaine:
            Yet graūt we muſt that through the ſame are thouſands daily ſlain
            But enterlard the ſhot with Bow, and tel me then your mind:
            A gallant courſe of wars vnknown, in field then ſhal you finde.
            Fiue thouſand Bowes that ſhooteth ſtill, in Battel may do good:
            They gall the horſe, or kill the man, or draw ſome deſperate blood.
            And thick as moates in ayer they flee, which hinder much the ſight
            And haply makes when horſes is hurt, the mounted man alight.
            
               
VVel, ſpeak of ſhot what beſt you may, the Bovv is braue in field:
            And ſure in ſkirmiſh Archers oft, makes f
                  ••
               ble ſhot to yeelde.
            A rare deuiſe I will ſet out, to ſtrengthen Man and Bovv,
            
            And when the plaine deuice thereof the world ſhall ſee and know.
            The Bovv ſhall come againe in fame, and win his wonted grace:
            Looke out of hand for my diſcourſe, til then come Bovv in place,
            And take thine Ancient, rowme & vſe, as Arthures Knights thee gaue,
            Thou art a fearfull fore in field, and yet a paſtime braue.
            That brings vp youth, and pleaſures age, a noble thing in view
            An auncient arte, a worthy guiſe, that ſcornes all practiſe new.
            An exerciſe that all men loue, an vſe of Armes and ſtrength,
            And to this Engliſh ſoyle of ours, wilt bring great fame at length.
            So ceaſe I heere, in prayſe of Bovv, thinke of me what you pleaſe,
            A longer matter ſhall I ſhow, before I croſſe the Seaes.
            
               Finis qd. T. Churchyard.
            
         
         
            
            THE AVTHOR
his French Preface, thus Engliſhed.
            
               WIlling I am to ſet down (for the beginning of this
TREATICE) a briefe declaration and aduertiſement
vnto the READERS, for their more eaſy
vnderſtanding of the ſtate and Condition of ARMORY:
And to knowe howe one ought to
Blaſon the ſayde ARMORIES, Eſcuchons and
Enſeignes, and ſuch other things of Semblable ſtate and manner.
But firſt of all, wee will ſpeake and treate of him or them, who
firſt founde out and inuented the deuyſe of ARMES,
and for what cauſe the ſame was done.
            
               Eccleſ. 10.
               The Glory of the Rich, Of the Honorable,
and of the Pore,
is the feare of God.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Of the Inuention of ARMES:
and for what cauſe the ſame were founde out: And
of what Nacyon they haue beene eſtabliſhed.
            
               THE moſt valiant and victorious Alexander Sirnamed
the Greate, for the excellency of his Noble
deedes in Battell, & who was King of Macedony:
Likewiſe the pollitike Iulius Caeſar, and
many other Noble Kings, Princes and Lordes
(deſiring to know how their Vaſſailes & Subiectes
might beare them ſelues valiantly, and in communication
treate of all deedes of Armes, and alſo to the end to ratifie
their proweſſes and valiencies, and that euery one were truely
and iuſtly recompenſed, according to his deſeruinges, and
that he had well deſerued the ſame,) vouched ſafe to ordaine
and inſtitute, that in their Eſcucheons ſhould bee painted or
purtrayed Some certaine Figure, or likenes of any thing: wherby
one might more eaſily knowe and diſcerne their deedes of
Armes, and alſo for the better diſcerning and Judgement of
their excellent valiantneſſe. This Figure, Signe, Marcke
or difference was called Armes: Which Armes haue beene
aſſigned by the ſayde Princes and Lordes, not onely of thoſe
ſame valiant and couragious Perſonages, but alſo by thoſe
of their blood and poſteritie: To the end, that in Remembring
the foreſaide valiancies, they ſhould be the more enclined, and
encoraged to enſew and Imitate the Noble exploites of their
Auncetors, which haue gone before them.
         
         
            
            Of the Matter of ſubſtance
of ARMES, and whereof
they are made.
            
               ALL Armes are compoſed of Three things only,
that is to ſay, of Mettall, of Couloure, or of Pens,
alias Furres, or of any the ſayde thinges. In
Armes are onely two Mettals: That is to ſay,
Gold and Siluer. Fiue Couloures are there alſo:
1. Gueules, or Red, which is of vermiliō
                coulour,
2. Azure, which is of Pers or Blew: 3. Sable, which is Black: 4. Sinople,
which is Green: and 5. Pourpre or Purple, which is made
of Azure and Vyolet. And there are alſo two Pennes, or Furres,
onely: That is to ſay, Vair, and Hermines.
            
            And it is to be noted, that one ought to blazon on this maner.
ſaying. vizt.
            
               Such a Lord beareth of GOLD, of AZVRE, or of HERMYNES:
and alſo the ſame COVLOVRES & the PENNES
or Furres: And although that the Hermyne bee of Siluer and of
Sable, and the Vair, bee of Siluer, and of Azure, yet, notwithſtanding
in blazoning, them wee muſt name them by Hermynes,
of Siluer and of Sable, and not (onely) the Vair, of Siluer
and of Azur: But wee ſay onely, Such a LORD beareth
of HERMYNES, or hee beareth of Vair, ſeeyng that the
Hermyne is of other Mettall or Coulour then Siluer, or Sable
is: And that Sable and the Vair is of other Coloure then of Siluer
or Azur. In which caſe wee ſay: Such a Lord beareth Vair
and Hermynes, or Synople, or other like.
         
         
            
               
               Of the ſignification
of Golde in Armes.
               1.
               GOLDE in Armes ſygnifieth ſoure Vertues. vizt.
Noblenes, (2) Good will, (3) Reſtora tyue, & (4) Hautynes
or Magnimity.
               In Stones, it ſignifieth the Carboncle.
               
               Of Planets it hath the Sonne.
               
               Of the four Elaments the Fyer.
               
               Of Gomplexions: The Perſon Sanguyn.
               
               
                  Of the xii. Sygnes, Aries, Taurus and Sagittarius.
               And Of the Dayes in the weeke: The Sonday.
               
            
            
               Of the ſignification
of Siluer in Armes.
               
                  2.
               
               SILVER in Armes ſignifieth fyue Vertues. vizt.
(1.) Humility, (2.) Beauty, (3.) Purity, (4.) Clearenes, and
(4.) Innocency.
               In Complexions: The Perſon Flegmaticke.
               
               
                  Of Planets: The Moone.
               Of the foure Elaments. The Water.
               
               
                  Of the xii. Signes: Cancer, Leo, Scorpio and Piſces.
               
                  Of Precious ſtones: The Pearle.
               And of the Dayes in the weeke: Mondaye.
               
            
            
               
               Of the Signification
of Gueles or Red in Armes.
               
                  3.
               
               GVELLES or Red in Armories, ſignifieth Valyantnes
               In Complexions: The Perſon Cholerique.
               
               
                  Of Elaments: Fyer.
               
                  Of the xii. Siges: Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius.
               
                  Of Precious ſtones: The Ruby.
               
                  In Mettalls: The Latyn Copper, and
               
               Of the Dayes in the Weeke, Saturday.
               
            
            
               Of the ſignification
of AZVRE.
               4.
               AZVRE in Vertue ſignifieth Renowme and Beauty.
               In Complexions: The perſon Sanguyn.
               
               
                  Of the Planets, Venus.
               
                  Of the xii. Signes: Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius.
               
                  Of Precious ſtones, The Saphyr.
               Of the Dayes in the weeke: Fryday.
               
               Of the foure Elaments: The Ayer.
               
               And of Mettalls, the Siluer: whereof wee make Azure cullor.
            
            
               
               Of the ſignification
of SABLE.
               
                  5.
               
               
                  SABLE, ſygnifieth in ARMES, Mournyng & Sorow:
               
               In Complexion, the Perſon Melancholique.
               
               Of the ſeuen Planets, Mars,
               
               
                  Of the xii. Sygnes, Taurus, Virgo and Capricornus.
               
                  Of Precious ſtones, the Dyamant.
               Of the Dayes in the weeke: Tewſdaye.
               
               Of the Elementes, the Earth.
               
               And of Mettalles, Iron: whereof, wee make Blacke Colour.
            
            
               Of the ſignification
of SYNOPLE.
               
                  6.
               
               
                  SYNOPLE, or Greene, in Vertue: ſignifieth, 3. poinctes,
               Honour, Loue and Curteſie.
               Of the Seauen Planets, Mercury.
               
               
                  Of Precious ſtones: The Emeralde.
               Of the Dayes in the weeke: Wenſday.
               
               Of Mettalls: the Quick-ſiluer, whereof greene couloure is
               made: And it ſignifieth alſo: Plants, Trees, Herbes, and all green
thinges that groweth vppon the earth.
            
            
               
               Of the ſignification
of PVRPLE.
               7.
               
                  POVRPRE or Purple in Armes ſignifieth moderation:
and hath in Vertue 3. poinctes,
               Liberality, Aboundance, and Riches.
               Of the Seauen Planets, in hath Iupiter.
               
               
                  Of Precious ſtones: The Balay.
               Of the Dayes in the Weeke, Thurſday.
               
               Of Mettalls, it hathe Tynne.
               
            
         
         
            Of Nyne thinges
which are in the Eſcucheon making
The third Part therof.
            
               NYNE things there are in the Eſcucheon to be cōſidered
of. Vizt. Cheef, Pal, Band, or gard; Feſſe, Cheuron, Gyron,
Orle, Croſſe, and Saultoir: Theſe thnges ought to containe
the Third Part of the Eſcucheon. And you ſhall alſo note,
that Sixe of the ſayd Nyne thinges, that it is to ſay: Band, Pal,
Feſſ. Gyron, Cheuron and Orle, when they are of many peeces
they do blaſon them ſelues from one onely moity or quantity,
as if we ſay: Such a Lorde beareth of GOLD, in one BAND
of SABLE, of v. or vi. peeces.
            
            Alſo more, when the Croſſe and the Saultoir onely maketh
the Third part of the Eſcucheon, Yet, notwithſtanding, if hee
haue in one Eſcucheon many Croſſes, then ought he to blaſon,
according to the nomber which is there.
         
         
            
            Of the nombre where vntill a
Man may nomber all Things which are in Armories:
And when one ought to mencyon any
thing without Nomber, or
Strawyng.
            
               
                  TORTEAVX, or Pellets: Beſans, and Cotices,
Do nomber themſelues vntill, VIII.
            
            
               Lozēges or Dyamont ſqwares, and Checquers,
nomber themſelues ontill, VI.
            
            
               Beaſtes, Byrdes, Flowers and Fiſhes, and generally
all other things which are in ARMES:
Nomber themſelues vntill, VI.
            
            And if they paſſe the ſaid Nombers: wee blazon them with
out nombring or Strewyng, As in the Ariues of Laual where
one mentioneth D'or, to xvi. AEgles d' Azure: And in thoſe of
Peulle, where one mentioneth D'or enterlaſed with AEgles,
d'Azure without nombring. So, as one may finde them by
the Figures tricked, and deſcribed in the blazon of Armes.
Who ſo will knowe more, hee ſhall there finde
written more largely, and alſo in the
blazon of Coloures.
            
            Thus much concerning knowledge of Armes
blazoned: Wherof (the French Author
vncertaine by name) on this
maner introduceth.
            ¶Now, To the Armorie of Prince ARTHVRE
and the KNIGHTS of his Round
Table floriſhing by the fame of
Engliſhe Archery,
at this daye.
A• 1583.
         
         
            
            
               ELIZABETH (Gods Fulnes)
Hee graunt oure QVEENE to Raigne
With longe and Perfect Bleſſednes,
His glorye to Mentaine.
            
               
                  Prince Arthures Armes for that
Society of Archers in
London.
                  M. Thomas Smlth Cheef Cuſtomar
for her Maieſty in the
Port of London.
               
            
            
               AMonges praiſeworthy Monuments which Engliſh KINGES haue made
               For maintenaunce of Manly acts, whoſe Fame ſhall neuer fade,
               King HENRY the 8▪ hath condigne praiſe and Princely memory,
               (For chuſing Knights of ARTHVRES traine to mentaine Archery):
               
                  Anno. 1543. S. W. Bowyer Maior.Whoſe Maieſty at Myle end with his NOBLES vſed this game,
               That Citizens and Subiects all might exerciſe the ſame.
               But ſpecially for CITIZENS hee made this Order theare,
               
                  Anno. 1544. S. Martin Bowes. Maior.One Cheeftayne choſe and certeyn Knights to ſport them once a yeare.
               His Daughter deare. ELIZABETH our Soueraigne QVEENE likewiſe,
               Confirmes this Order ſtill, and doth mentaine this exercyſe
               Eche Subiect pray and praiſe GOD for her long and proſperous Raigne;
               
                  Iob. 29.Our Bowes in our handes ſtronger then with Honour ſhall remaine.
            
            
               
               S. Lancelot du Lac
               1.
                     H. O.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN Siluer Shield, Three Bandes of Blew
                  Hee bare, full valyant hee,
                  And ventrous was, one of the Cheefeſt
                  Approued in Cheualry:
               
               
                  Of Knights which did the Table Rounde
                  
                  adorne with condigne prayſe:
                  His factes and fame in bookes compilde
                  Are founde in theſe our dayes.
               
            
            
               
               S. Boort de Gauues
               2. 
                     H. K.
                  
               
               
                  IN Siluer Sheelde with Hermynes Black
                  Hee bare Three Bandes of Red:
                  
                  Valyant and hardy was this Knight,
                  His Chronicles haue ſpred:
               
               
                  Who more of him will knowe, let them
                  Reade of the Table Rounde:
                  Eke Lancelot his booke and thoſe
                  Which vertewes faine forth ſounde.
               
            
            
               
               S. Gowainede Orcany
               3. 
                     E. D.
                  
               
               
                  IN Purple Shield, an Aegle ſpled
                  
                  
                     All Golde, Sir Gawayn gaue
                  
                  One of the Knights moſt conquerous
                  Hee merits tame to haue
               
               
                  Amongſt them which the Table Rounde
                  Enobled with Renowne
                  By deeds of Armes in Contreyes cauſe,
                  To bring her foes a downe.
               
            
            
               
               Meſsyr Triſtran de Lyonis
               4. 
                     G. T.
                  
               
               
                  IN Sheeld all Greene one Lyon of Gold
                  
                  And armèe Gules hee bare
                  That no leſſe worthy is this Knight
                  Of fame, then others are,
               
               
                  For hee ſo vertuouſly behaued
                  Himſelfe in all aſſayes,
                  And valyant in his conqueſts, that
                  A Booke his fame diſplayes.
               
            
            
               
               Sir Lyonnet de Gauues
               5. 
                     W. C.
                  
               
               
                  IN Siluer Sheelde nyne Starres Sable
                  Three bandes of Red bare hee:
                  A warlike wight, and worthy Knight
                  As any others might bee:
               
               
                  And who conſidereth well his Armes
                  
                  Including vertewes rare,
                  May him with the moſt valyantſt Knights
                  condignely heare compare.
               
            
            
               
               Helyas le Blanc
               6.
                     H.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN Siluer Sheeld 3. Barres of Red
                  One Lambeau ouerthwart
                  Of Sable, with three feet, hee bare,
                  As one which played his part,
               
               
                  About the Table Rounde Renowmed,
                  And euer ready preſt
                  For noblenes and honoures ſtate
                  To do his very beſt.
               
            
            
               
               Hector des Mares.
               7.
                     W. O.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN Siluer Sheelde Three Barres all Red
                  A middes the ſame The Sonne
                  
                  All Azure, bare this noble Knight,
                  Which highe Renowne hath wonne
               
               
                  By valyancy and venterous deedes
                  Exploited farre and neare:
                  Who doth deſerue dewe memory
                  As fame may witneſſe beare.
               
            
            
               
               Blyomberyes de Gauues.
               8.
               
               
                  IN Siluer Shield with half Moones ſett,
                  Three Barres all red hee bare.
                  
                  Aboute the Table Rounde hee was,
                  A conquerour moſt rare:
               
               
                  Who for his warlike proweſſe and
                  His Martiall mighty ſkill,
                  Was much eſteemed, and of his Prince
                  beloued with great goodwill.
               
            
            
               
               Meſsire Gaherryet.
               9.
               
               
                  IN Purple Sheelde, ſplead Aegle Golde
                  
                  With feete depainted Red,
                  
                  A Barr all Red ouerthwart, hee bare
                  Whoſe valiant actes compted
               
               
                  Amongſt thoſe of the Table Rounde,
                  As Launcelot and the reſt
                  May ſeeme to calenge condigne praiſe,
                  and fame euen with the beſt.
               
            
            
               
               Keux le ſeneſchall.
               10.
               
               
                  IN Azure Sheelde Two ſiluer Wings,
                  
                  (By office Seneſchall
                  
                  Or Steward) bare this Noble Knight
                  To whome might well bee fall.
               
               
                  With dew Renowme enregiſtred
                  For proweſſe rare to bee
                  Amongſt them of the Table Rounde,
                  Renowmed by valiency.
               
            
            
               
               Meſsire Iuaine.
               11.
               
               
                  
                     IN Azure ſhield, A Lyon Golde
                  
                     Armé with Red, this Knight
                  Did beare: who ſought to amplify
                  By all dew meanes and might
               
               
                  The Table rounde: hee valiant was,
                  And hardy found in proof:
                  Therefore hee merits memory
                  Vnto his dewe behoof.
               
            
            
               
               Bruor le Noir.
               12.
                     W. B.
                  
               
               
                  IN Siluer Sheelde, a Lyon Rampant,
                  Y checquered Blacke and Red
                  
                  (Of warlike nature conquerous)
                  He bare, eke Reputed
               
               
                  Amongſt them of the Table Rounde,
                  Coragious, ſierce and bolde:
                  He was, with proweſſe euer preſt,
                  Dame Honour to vpholde.
               
            
            
               
               S. Segurades.
               13.
                     T. T.
                  
               
               
                  IN Golden Sheelde, this gallant Knight
                  A Rock all Sable bare
                  One of the Table Rounde, hee was
                  Of eſtimacyon rare,
               
               
                  Firme as Rock amiddes the Seayes
                  Eke ſtedfaſt hee of mynde
                  was, all aduerſities to dure
                  from tyme to tyme enclyned.
               
            
            
               
               S. Patris le Hardy.
               14.
                     I. A.
                  
               
               
                  IN Siluer Sheelde a Freture Red
                  
                  of peeces ſixe bare hee,
                  A true and perfect Practizer,
                  Of Noble Cheualrie,
               
               
                  About the Table Rounde eke one
                  full well which vnderſtood.
                  Eche tricke and trauell longing to
                  Cheualrie and Knighthood.
               
            
            
               
               S. Saphar le Mefcogneu.
               15.
                     I. E.
                  
               
               
                  IN Sheelde one half part Gold and Greene
                  
                  Ychecquerd, thother Vair,
                  
                  Of great eſtate this Knight did beare,
                  With hauty courage raire.
               
               
                  And though as tuching Parentage
                  
                     Vnknowne, ſo named hee was:
                  Yet by his deedes hee was diſcernd
                  Moſt valiant in eche caſe.
               
            
            
               
               S. Sagremor le Deſree.
               16.
                     B. S.
                  
               
               
                  IN Sheelde (whereof Sable 3. partes)
                  Two Golden ſtarres fixt there:
                  The fourth part Siluer with a ſtarre
                  of Sable) did hee beare.
               
               
                  Both by his name and armes therfore
                  It doth appeare full well,
                  That hee one of the Table Rounde,
                  In proweſſe did excell.
               
            
            
               
               Le Roy Ban de Benock
               17.
                     I. W.
                  
               
               
                  IN Siluer Shield Three Bandes of Blew
                  
                  Did beare this Kingly Knight
                  And for King Arthures dewe Renowme
                  expreſt his force and might
               
               
                  Dulce and debonaire hee was
                  To ſerue at all aſſay
                  In euery Noble feate of armes
                  And beare the bell away.
               
            
            
               
               Le Roy de Claris.
               18.
                     T. H.
                  
               
               
                  IN Sheelde of Golde one Croſſe Potence
                  
                  All Red this Noble King,
                  And Kingly Knight of Table Rounde
                  Did beare, moſt floriſhing.
               
               
                  In factes and fame both farre and neare
                  For the magnificence
                  Of Princely proweſſe, pricke and praiſe
                  To get by valyence.
               
            
            
               
               Le Morhoult de Ireland
               19.
                     T. M.
                  
               
               
                  IN Siluer Sheelde One feſſe of peeces
                  Fyue through out the ſame
                  Hee bare a Lyon Rampant Red,
                  and arme greene, whoſe name
               
               
                  Might ſeeme to ſignifie in truth
                  Eche mighty enterpriſe
                  A pray moſt fit for his Corage,
                  As is the Iriſh guiſe.
               
            
            
               
               Danayn le Roux,
               20.
                     I. L.
                  
               
               
                  IN Shield all Red a Porpentyne
                  
                  Of Gold armé Azure,
                  
                  This Knight bare, (of the Table Rounde)
                  One bould aud hardy ſure.
               
               
                  Of quality hee hath his name
                  Of courage venterous,
                  Of Pollicy and power alſo,
                  To bee moſt conquerous.
               
            
            
               
               S. Brallain, ſirnamed, as
ye would ſay: Le Cheuallier
aux deux Eſpées.
               21.
                     T. C.
                  
               
               
                  
                     In Sheelde all Siluer Sable Bore
                  With three Blew Starres bare hee
                  Whole faith and factes with gliſtering fame
                  Shine in the higheſt degree,
               
               
                  As one whoſe vertues ampleſied
                  His Princes highe Renowme
                  Amongſt thoſe cheef in Cheualry
                  About the Table Rounde.
               
            
            
               
               Galehault,
               22.
                     R. B.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN Siluer Sheelde with Azure Starres,
                  
                     A Lyon Red Rampant
                  
                  
                     Armé greene this Knight dyd beare,
                  as ond of force puiſſant
               
               
                  Which dyd the Table Rounde adorne,
                  And amplify alſo
                  With hautynes and valyancy,
                  As others many mo.
               
            
            
               
               Lamorat de Liſtenoys
               23.
                     W. H.
                  
               
               
                  IN Purple ſhield, with Croſſets Golde,
                  
                  A Leoperd Siluer hee
                  Arme Red, did beare as one
                  Deſcended of degree
               
               
                  Both Noble bold and valiant
                  In feates of armes yfound
                  As other famous Knightes eke which
                  were of the Table Round.
               
            
            
               
               Meſsire Gullat.
               24.
                     W. D.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN Siluer Sheelde, One Croſſe all Red
                  full Chriſtian like hee bare
                  Of hart and courage conquerous,
                  A knight hee was euen rare
               
               
                  Thus admirable was hee held,
                  Well wee may eke ſuppoſe
                  He wanne his armes, as Chriſtes frend
                  Ageanſt vnchriſtened foes.
               
            
            
               
               S. Gueherries
               25.
                     C. B.
                  
               
               
                  IN Purple Sheelde bordered about,
                  With litle rondles Red
                  
                  
                     Spled Aegle Golde with Siluer feete
                  Hee bare emblazoned:
               
               
                  Of valyant corage prompt hee was
                  For to atcompliſh tho,
                  All Noble feates of armes, and gaine
                  Dewe fame that longd thereto.
               
            
            
               
               Aggrauain le Orguelleux
               26.
                     W. M.
                  
               
               
                  IN Purple Sheelde, ſpled Aegle Golde
                  
                  With Members Red bare hee
                  Ouerthwart the breſt a Barre of Greene,
                  
                  As one that ſeemed to bee
               
               
                  Of nature like vnto his name
                  Both fearce and promptly preſt
                  With Martiall might ſtill to ſurmount,
                  For fame and doo his beſt.
               
            
            
               
               Dodynel le ſauage
               27.
                     W. D.
                  
               
               
                  IN Siluer Sheelde Aegle Azure
                  
                  Hee bare with Golden feete
                  Full Noble. mighty, valiant,
                  And therfore one moſt meete
               
               
                  For conſtancy and corage great
                  Enregiſtred to bee
                  Amongſt them of the Table Rounde,
                  Renowmed by valyancy.
               
            
            
               
               Oſement Coeur hardy
               28.
                     I. E.
                  
               
               
                  A Sheelde yquartered Siluer, and Red
                  Hee bare in deeds the ſame,
                  Of valiant and coragius hart
                  as hee was calde by name,
               
               
                  Whoſe vertues meete to bee aduaunſt
                  Dame Honour hathe aſſigned,
                  After his death by fame to lyue,
                  And to bee borne in mynde.
               
            
            
               
               Mador de la Port
               29.
                     N. G.
                  
               
               
                  IN Sable Sheelde Seauen Apples ſo
                  
                     of Siluer couloured Red
                  This Knight did beare, whoſe nature well
                  to his Armes anſwered.
               
               
                  Dulce and debonaire, in vertue
                  One which was frutefull founde:
                  And therefore meete amongſt the reſt
                  To adorne the Table Rounde.
               
            
            
               
               Dynadem d'Eſtrangore
               30.
                     T. C.
                  
               
               
                  IN Siluer ſhield, a Lyon Black
                  
                  With Greene all arme
                           •
                        
                      hee
                  Did beare one of the Table Rounde
                  Which eke in his Degree
               
               
                  Endeuoured with his Comperes
                  The ſtate therof t'aduaunce
                  Not letting for any labour Toylle,
                  nor any one mi
                        •
                     chance.
               
            
            
               
               Eglantine Rochemont
               31.
                     T. B.
                  
               
               
                  IN Siluer Sheelde the Ragged Staff
                  
                  
                     All Red did beare this Knight,
                  One of the Table Rounde hee was,
                  which ſhewed his force and might
               
               
                  Strong and ſtedfaſt put in truſt,
                  By try all firme and ſure.
                  A ſtaffe of ſtay in all aſ
                        •
                     ay.
                  With honour to endure.
               
            
            
               
               Guallogrenant de windeſor.
               32.
                     R. B.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN Sheelde all Red Two Gemmels Gold
                  And Sable this Knight bare
                  Coragius eke and conquerous
                  He was reputed rare:
               
               
                  Not ſhrinking to ſhew forth his force
                  And puyſance allway preſt
                  Aduenteruſly and valyantly,
                  For fame to do his beſt.
               
            
            
               
               Sir Brandelys
               33.
                     T. C.
                  
               
               
                  IN a Red Sheeld 3. Swordes Siluer
                  
                  Handles and pommells Azure
                  
                  Thintitulation of his armes
                  Heare ſignify for ſure
               
               
                  That hee was actiue, warlike and
                  Could weelde his weapons well
                  To aduaunce Dame honours dewe renowme
                  Her frowarde foes and qwell.
               
            
            
               
               Sir Leonard le hardy
               34.
                     W. B.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN Siluer Shield Three Lozenges
                  Of Siluer and Sable
                  
                  Hee bare and was a worthy Knight
                  about the Round Table,
               
               
                  Whome though both God and Nature made
                  Deformd of Perſonage:
                  Yet by his doughty deedes hee was
                  Moſt famous in that age.
               
            
            
               
               Bruyant des Iſles.
               35.
                     T. B.
                  
               
               
                  IN Sable Sheelde a Ronning Dog
                  
                  Of Siluer armee Red
                  
                  This Knight did beare, of noble race
                  For hee was deſcended:
               
               
                  Louing all honour and proweſſe,
                  Diſpaching eke with ſpeede
                  By courſe and recourſe to and fro,
                  What ſo hee had decreed.
               
            
            
               
               Henry le Ioyeux
               36.
                     H. S.
                  
               
               
                  IN Siluer Shield Three Croſſes fixt
                  Of Sable all beare hee,
                  And not without cauſe had hee name
                  As ioyfull one to bee:
               
               
                  For pleaſantly and curteouſly
                  Hee could himſelf demene:
                  And in his Matters quite himſelfe
                  Full manly this is plaine.
               
            
            
               
               Meliadus del Eſpinoy
               37.
                     I. B.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN Golden Sheelde Three Croſſes Red
                  Called Florones did hee beare,
                  And was Sirnamed del Eſpinoy
                  
                  By difference to appeare
               
               
                  From King Melyadus in race:
                  His Armes full Noble tho,
                  And of great approbation were
                  In Chriſtian faith alſo.
               
            
            
               
               Meliadus le Noir oeil
               38.
                     I. R.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN Siluer Sheeld 3. Cheurons all
                  Of Sable, bare this Knight.
                  Who in ech warlike enterpriſe
                  Did ſhew his force and might:
               
               
                  Though hee Meliadus ſo was
                  Sirnamed with the black eye,
                  His vertewes cleare and ſinceare yet
                  Were famous farre and nye.
               
            
            
               
               Surados des ſept Fountaines
               39.
                     I. W.
                  
               
               
                  IN Sheelde half Golde, half Azure eke
                  With Siluer droppes beſet
                  This Knight dyd beare, as one which was
                  in eſtimation great:
               
               
                  Sirnamed Knight of Fountaines ſeauen,
                  By reaſon in eche place
                  Betweeue thoſe Fountaines ſeuerall
                  He ranne his Martiall race.
               
            
            
               
               Lucan le Bouteiller
               40.
                     I. M.
                  
               
               
                  IN Golden Sheelde A Wolf paſſant
                  Red, armêe eke Sable,
                  This Knight the Butler cald did beare,
                  One of the Rounde Table:
               
               
                  Ferce and greedy of his pray
                  whome that hee did pur
                        •
                     ew,
                  And prompt againe with proweſſe wheare
                  And whome hee would reſkew.
               
            
            
               
               Perſides le Gent
               41.
                     VV. C.
                  
               
               
                  IN Siluer Sheelde, with Gonſtones ſet
                  Of Azure, bare this Knight,
                  Though he Sirnamed Ientle was
                  Yet, theare no martiall might
               
               
                  Or warlike force did want in him,
                  To abandon furious foo,
                  With ſhot of gonne to ſhake or rend
                  Their force and ouerthrow.
               
            
            
               
               Tuſcane le Romane
               42.
                     T. P.
                  
               
               
                  IN Golden Sheelde a Hand Sable
                  
                  Holding a Sworde All Red
                  
                  This valyant Romane Knight did beare,
                  Is Rightly reputed.
               
               
                  Of hart and corage Conquerus,
                  Ready for Frend and foes
                  Both to defend, and to deſtroy,
                  His ſhaking ſworde hee ſhowes.
               
            
            
               
               Godfry le Lacois
               43.
                     I. P.
                  
               
               
                  IN Sheelde All Red a Towre of Golde
                  
                  Maſonned with Sable.
                  
                  This Knight did beare and worthely well
                  Was of the Rounde Table:
               
               
                  I Fortreſſe of fidelity,
                  And tower of truſt was hee,
                  To ſaue his Frendes, withſtand his foes,
                  And purchas dignity.
               
            
            
               
               Thor le Filz de Arez
               44.
                     I. VV.
                  
               
               
                  
                     A Golden ſhield, moſt ſeemly ſet
                  With Sable troſſes ſhort
                  This knight did beare, at which his armes
                  might trewly well import,
               
               
                  That hee was valyantly inclyned
                  To ſeates of armes, no leſſe
                  Studing honour to augment,
                  His 
                        •
                     ame and to encreaſe.
               
            
            
               
               Perceual de Galles
               45.
                     VV. A.
                  
               
               
                  
                     A Purple Sheelde with Croſſets Gold
                  
                  Beſet this Knight did beare,
                  As hee in voyde allotted place
                  Of the Rounde Table theare,
               
               
                  Which ſat him downe in ſeate ordained
                  As for A Bachellour:
                  
                  Of whome a Booke compild there is
                  With fame and dew Honour.
               
            
            
               
               Sadoc de Vencon
               46.
                     I. N.
                  
               
               
                  
                     A Shield, wherin a Sea was ſet
                  Of Siluer and Sable
                  
                  This Knight did beare, which ſignified
                  A miſtery admirable.
               
               
                  Some great and profounde proweſſe ſure
                  Theare ſeemed in him to bee,
                  With ebbes and floodes of proſperus ſtate
                  And of aduerſity.
               
            
            
               
               Gringalois le Fort
               47.
                     W. R.
                  
               
               
                  IN Sable Sheelde, an Vnicorne
                  
                  All Siluer, bare this Knight
                  Beloued for his vertewes ra
                        •
                     e,
                  And for his Martiall might.
               
               
                  Strong, valyant, and victorius
                  Agenſt his noyſome foo
                  Comforting and reſcewyng Frendes,
                  Which were diſtreſt alſo.
               
            
            
               
               Malaquin le Galoys
               48.
                     W. T.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN Siluer Sheelde, A Siluer Cup
                  ycouered this Knight bare
                  Which with thoſe of the Table Rounde
                  For vertue might compare.
               
               
                  Ne could they want his Company,
                  Nor Prince his proweſſe miſſe,
                  In all thoſe conqueſts, deedes of armes,
                  And other ſeates of his.
               
            
            
               
               Talemor le Volant
               49.
                     I. R.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN a Greene Shield, A Siluer Doue
                  Membres Red this Knight
                  Did beare, ſo ſwift in valyant race
                  As Doue was in her flight,
               
               
                  Embracing honour with both winges
                  Deuoide of Enuyes gall,
                  
                     Aduauncing vertewe, loue and fame
                  Surmounting therewithall.
               
            
            
               
               Arain du Pin
               50.
                     H. B.
                  
               
               
                  A Greene Sheelde with 3 Pyneaples
                  All Golde this Knight did beare
                  Why hee ſo called was, (The cauſe
                  Not ſmall) may well appeare.
               
               
                  
                     Firſt for his lofty of ſpring, next
                  For honour, vertewes hyre,
                  
                     Thirdly for fame moſt floriſhing,
                  Whereto hee did aſpyer.
               
            
            
               
               Meſsire Palamides
               51.
                     A. VV.
                  
               
               
                  
                     A Sheelde of Siluer and Sable
                  
                  
                     Ychequered hare this Knight,
                  Is what hee was, and whence hee came
                  By name that ſo hee hight:
               
               
                  It ſeemes hee was by valyancy
                  An Imitator trew,
                  Of that Noble Palamydes
                  
                  From Troy, wich did iſſew.
               
            
            
               
               Sir Hebis
               52.
                     VV. B.
                  
               
               
                  IN Sheelde, two parts Sable with
                  Two Barres thereon Argent
                  
                  The third part Azure with demy pale
                  
                     Yeallow and Blew content.
               
               
                  About the Table Rounde although
                  One of the laſt hee bee,
                  Yet for his ſeruice iuſt and trew
                  Not leaſt was his degree.
               
            
            
               
               S. Lamwell of Cardyff
               53.
                     E. P.
                  
               
               
                  
                     A Sheelde Red, where (a Lady fayre
                  In Mantell clothed Greene,
                  
                  On Siluer palfrey mounted is,
                  As though ſhee were ſome Queene)
                  
               
               
                  This Knight did beare: as one which did
                  By ſeruice dewe attend,
                  Or els in ſome diſtreſſed caſe
                  His Lady deare deſend.
               
            
            
               
               S. Phetipace of VVinchelſey
               54.
                     T. C.
                  
               
               
                  
                     A Sheelde ſour partyed Gold and Blew
                  
                  A pale Argent downeright,
                  
                     With 3. Red Croſſes ouerthwart.
                  
                  A Barre of Sable pight
               
               
                  This Knight did beare: betokning well
                  Noblenes and Renowne:
                  Which liues aloft by laſting fame,
                  Though Death and Dolour frowne.
               
            
            
               
               S. Plaine de force
               55.
                     P. D.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN Golden Sheelde a Feſſe all Red
                  With an arme armèe Argent
                  Holding a Siluer Columne broke
                  Hee bare, whereby is ment
               
               
                  To his Sirname, as full of force
                  His nature right did gree,
                  Wreſtling with one which was moſt ſtrong,
                  By ſtrength got victory.
               
            
            
               
               S. Bodovier of VVinchelſey
               56.
               
               
                  
                     A Sheeld half Argent with a Feſſe,
                  
                  A Tryangle, therein eke Red.
                  
                  With three mullets Azure, thother half Gules
                  
                  A Siluer Arme holding a Sword armed,
               
               
                  The handle of Gold, this Knight did beare:
                  As one which was of highe eſtate,
                  Idding thereto ſuch valyant actes,
                  Which dubbed him Knight twice fortunate.
               
            
            
               
               S. Degraine ſans Mal
               57.
                     I. P.
                  
               
               
                  
                     A Sheeld, the firſt part Red, an Arme
                  
                  
                     Siluer armed, with Ring of Gold,
                  
                  The ſecond part vert and Azure, the thirde
                  
                     Gold & Azure, the 4 part Gules doth hold.
               
               
                  Hee bare theſe, as by valyant force,
                  Reaping Reward for verte was rare,
                  Deteſting all vice (thus reuyded fame)
                  May him with moſt worthieſt knights compare.
               
            
            
               
               S. Pryamus
               58.
                     T. H.
                  
               
               
                  
                     IN Sable Sheeld Three Gryffons Golde
                  Paſſant Carbonckled with eke Golde
                  
                  This comely Knight condignely bare
                  For his demerites manyfold,
               
               
                  As whether hee were S. Pryam of Troy
                  
                  Or els from whence hee haue his name,
                  Great was his force, his foes to anoy,
                  Defending his Frends from harme & blame.
               
               Here ende the Knights names and their Commendations.
               
                  
                     
                        Retaine the Good, Refraine the ill.
                        Repute not amiſſe of my Goodwill.
                     
ꝙ. Richard. R.
               
            
         
         
            
            A Breefe Repetition of the Table Rounde.
            
               
                  IN ſo much as wee haue ſpoken of the Noble
Knightes of the Round Table, which were in the
tyme of the moſt Magnificient King Arthure
of Great Brittayne, and that wee haue in brief
and roundly explained the deuiſe of euery their
Eſcucheon and plaine Armories: It is good as
mee ſeemeth and of great congruity to declare alſo ſome what,
of theſtate and inſtitution of that Round Table. Becauſe peraduenture
many which haue ſeene thoſe Armories, may yet
bee ignorant what thing yt 
               Round Table was. I ſay therfore yt
the Rounde Table was one ordenance and inſtitution which
King Arthure of great Britayne made and ordained, (as I haue
layde): And it was on this maner made to defend the Iſland
of Malogres within the ſaid Kingdome of Great Brittaine. By
this ordenance ought & were bound to come & aſſiſt him once
in the year at ye feaſt of Whytſontyde all trauayling Knights,
and theare to enranck themſelues at the ſayd table, and were
ſet downe in great honour and reuerence, feaſting in the preſence
and Companie of the ſaide King Arthure. And moreouer,
euery Knight of this order was bound to rehearſe and recon
vp all his feates of armes, valyant actes and conqueſtes
which they had exployted, by the labour and trauaill of their
Bodyes for the honour of Nobility, and eſtate of Knighthood
and as well for the honour of their Ladyes as for other purpoſes
tending vnto al honour and glory: In ſuch ſort that they
all, and euery of thē ſo aſpired to that eſtate, that they mightely
amplified the ſaid Round Table, whereby the nomber of
them was very great. Like as one may ſee by their Armories
and Eſcucheons, which haue beene aſſembled together, and ſo
blazoned: to th' ende that they which ſawe and behelde them

might take good Example thereat, and better vnderſtande
the condicion of the Arte of Warre: And ſo knowe what the
eſtate of Nobility and Knighthood were for the augmētation
of vertewe and attainement of Glory and praiſe. Whereby
many young Princes and Lordes might come to more greate
perfection in following the feates and deedes of them which
were alſo nombred and named The Knights of the Rounde
Table, or trauelings Knights. And it was no maruaile made
amōgſt them if ſuch perſonages (as exploited euery excellent
deede of armes and matters of proweſſe) were be loued: Becauſe
Honour and Glory are the Rewardes of Vertue, as ſaith
the Philoſopher. And for ſo muchas (euery one ſeeing him ſelfe
to bee beloued and reuerenced) that ſame vertewe which in
him is loued or embraced of others, encreaſeth & is augmented
more and more I ſpeake thus much for the Imitation of thoſe
which are vertewous. and for the nature of the Imitation
of vertue it ſelfe. Yee haue here ſeene in open appearāce
therfore theſcutcheons, deuiſes & Armories
of the noble & valiant Knights of the Round
Table, which you may beholde & conſider
of to the ſame effect
and ende.
            
               Pſalm. 145. Verſ. 11. & 12.
               Gods Sainctes do bleſſe him, and they do His Kingdomes Glory ſhow,
               And blaſe his power to cauſe the Sonnes of men the ſame to know.
            
            
               Pſalm. 149. Verſ.. 2.
               Let Iſraell reioyce in him, that made him of no thing,
               And let the Seede of Syon eke bee Ioyfull in their King.
            
         
         
            
               
               THE FIRST ASSERTION
and is Sacred Hiſtoricall.
               
                  GOD the Author of Peace and Loue did ſo therein delyte,
               That of one Man hee Members twaine dyd make & them vnyte:
               To whom when Children twaine hée gaue,Geneſ. 2. & 3 the more to multiply
               This Peace and Loue, Sathan poſſeſt one of them by and by.
               
                  Cayn it was who did maligne His Brother Habell ſo,
               That hée ne ceaſt by cruell Death this bond to breake in to:
               Wherefore when hee had iſſew left, the Lorde of loue decréede,
               That Cayns hatred ſhould bée rewed for that his filthy déede.Chap. 4.
               
               As learned Lyra writes thereon how Lamech old and blinde:
                     
                        •
                     G. Alleij. 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               With Bow and ſhafts did walke the woods, ſome wiſhed pray to finde.
               His Boy that lead him through the ſame (as ſéemed him) eſpyde
               Some beaſt, which nathles Cayn was, where hée himſelfe did hyde,
               
                  So that (ſaith Lyra,Geneſ 5) Lamech ſlew a man there in his wounde:
               Lo heare was harmles Abels death with his reuenged founde.
               If Lyra thus wée may beleeue, Lo here the Bowe and ſhaft,
               Ordained Gods weapon of reuenge on Murders cruell crafte
               Lo here the Bowe and arrowe, was firſt choſen inſtrument,
               As guerdon dew for wicked déede by Goddes moſt iuſt iudgement.
               A Figure of Goddes Peace and Loue the rayne bow yet was ſet,Chap. 9.
               
               As couenant twixt him and the earth that hée no more would let
               The furious floods conſume the Lande, which frutefull afterward
               Hée made for humaine vſe to ſerue his choſen and ſauegard.
               
                  Iſmael in the wildernes an infant crying lay,Geneſ. 23.
               
               Gods Angell heard the ſame, and did vnto his Mother ſay,
               
                  Hagar ſée thou bée of good cheare, thy Childe vp forthwith take,
               And cheriſh it for God will ſure a People great him make.
               So this Child grewe, and it is ſayd an Archer hee became
               And afterward in the wildernes did dwell, called Paran.
               
               
                  Iſaac waring old did byd Eſaw his eldeſt Sonne,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 27.
               
               His Bowe and quyuer for to take into the féeldes and ronne,
               To kill ſome venſon, which hée did, but yet in the meane while,
               
                  Jacob the younger brother could full kindly him beguyle:
               
                  
Whereby we ſée whom God doth loue, vnlikely though they ſéeme,
               Are ſooneſt bleſt, when worldlings of their will are fruſtrate cleene.
               
                  Ioſeph the ſonne of Iacob ſo found fauour with his God,
                  Geneſ. 49.
               
               
                  That He was reconed as a braunch which ſhould increaſe abroad:
               
                  Of him t'is ſaid, His Bow bode faſt, his armes eke ſtrengthened were,
               Euen by the handes of Iacobs God as did full well appeare.
               
                  Ruben, Gad, and halfe Manaſſe Tribes three elected, in field
               With manly might did ſhoote in Bow, and carry ſword and ſhéeld:Leuit. 1.
               
               What time with Hagarites Iethur, Nephis, and Noab they
               Fought valiantly,1, Paral. 5. the Lord did them aſſiſt in all aſſay.
               
                  Ioſuah diſcomfiting fiue Kings,Ioſuah. 10. (though Tribes that did him ayde,
               As there to handle Bowes and ſhafts are not expreſſly ſaid)
               Yet there a Booke is mencioned,Verſ 13. euen Iaſhar ſo by name.Or Liber
               
               Not now in vſe (which ſome affirme) ſhowed ſhootings auncient fame.
               And ſure the Lord Iehoua himſelfe doth meane thereby his power,Deu. 
                        •
                      32.
               
               When threatning wiſe the wicked ones he brings thus in terror,
               His Arowes on them he will ſend (he meaneth in angry moode:)Verſ. 33.
               
               
                  And eke His Bow that he will bend,Verſ. 42. And dye his ſhafts in bloud:
               Theſe ſhafts of his ſo ſharpe no ſtone can cauſe them to rebound,
               But through the thréefold armed coate they pearce with mortal wound.
               
                  Balaam in his prophecie of Iſraels happy ſtate,Nume 24.
               
               Saith, that his force the Vnicorne in ſtrength ſhould coequate.Verſ. 42.
               
               The Nations, he ſhold eate alſo, and brooſe his enemies bones:
               
                  Yea, He ſhould ſhoot his Arowes through thoſe great & mighty ones.
               
                  Debora ſhe euen Baracks wyfe who iudged Iſraell,
                  Iudges. 5, 
                        ••
                     .
               
               In that her ſong for victorie, which God gaue her, doth tell,
               How God deliuered Iabin King of Canaan to her hand,
               Whoſe Archers noyſe was ſo appeaſt eche were throughont her Land.
               That where none earſt could water drawe, now all deuoid of feare,
               Might haue inough ſith thoſe their foes ſo happily vanquiſht were.
               Whereby we note, although the wicked ſuch defences haue,
               Yet for becauſe in vſe of them Gods goodnes they depraue,
               And arrogate vnto themſelues, all glorie, hope, and praiſe,
               Therefore theyr good things turne to euill ſometime, if not alwayes.
               
                  Hanna the wife of Elcana when ſhée did pray ſo ioyed,1. Samuel 2.
               
               The Bow with mightie men was broke to her rebuke employed:
               
               And waykeilngs girded forth them ſelues with ſtrēgth (ſhe ſaid) like mē
               
               As who ſay God makes ſimple ſoules do great things now and then.
               
                  
                  Ionathas, the Sonne of Saule king Dauids mortall foe,
               Was Dauids faithfull Frend, when hée this watchword gaue him to,
               That hee ſhould three dayes hyde him by the ſtone Ezel by name,1. Samuel 10. Cap.
               
               Duriug the time of Saule his wrath and furious raging flame.
               Then Ionathas ſayd hée would ſhoot thrée Arrowes at that ſtone,
               As at a marck, and after hee would make a Boy to rome,
               And ſeeke the ſhaftes, when if I ſay vnto the Boy once, (See,)
               
               The arrowes are on this ſide thée, bring them and come, ſaith hée,
               The matter then goeth well for thee, no hurt as liueth the Lorde:
               But if I ſay vnto the Boy, (Behold:) by this watchworde,
               The arrowes are beyonde thée, then, make haſte and get thée away,
               For God hath ſo diſmiſſed thee, This Ionathas could ſay.
               
                  Saule and Ionathas his Sonne,1 Samuel. 31. Cap. with his two Brethren mo,
               When the Philiſtyans fought with them, felt God his iudgements ſo
               By the Archers and Bowemen of th' vncircumcyſed theare,
               
                  Saule wounded was, but his thrée Sonnes outright diſpatched were.
               
                  Dauid then before hée was of Iuda annoynted King.
               Ouer Saule and Ionathas moarned, thus lamenting,
               The Bow ſaith hée of Ionathas turned neuer back in vaine,
               Neither Saules Sword once empty went from the blood of the ſlaine:
               Sée theare the minde of Goddes elect, in doyng good for ill,
               Sée pity ſhowed for cruelty, for mallys eke goodwill.
               
                  Dauid enduring yet long warres euen with that houſe of Saule,
                  2 Samuel. 1. Cap.
               
               By Goddes goodwill exalted was, when his foes had the falle,
               And proſpered ſo that hée was King ouer all Iſraell:
               
               Hée conquered Ieruſalem and Iebuſytes ſo fell,
               Who did deny him to come theare, when yet victoriouſly,
               Hee wan the Caſtle of Syon, which hée called his Citty,
               When hee made Ioab generall,1. Croun. 11. which Iebuſites firſt ſmote,
               With whome were mighty Men of armes euen many a one to note:
               When one or other of twelue trybes came to him day by day,1. Croun. 21.
               
               Vntill he had a full great hoaſt, Like the hoaſt of God to ſay:
               
               Who doth conſider well all this moſt amply may beholde,
               
                  Gods fauour towardes Dauid théef and mercies manyfold.
               
                  So as Hee againe A man was founde euen after Goddes owne hart,Pſalm. 89 D Luthers Wordes.
               
               Yea a King to whome both faith and promiſe God did ſure imparte:
               Whoſe Pſalmody his ſacred zeale to God wardes did declare,
               Whoſe Regiment did ſhewe for his a Princely prudent care,
               
                  
As when he firſt enacted that eche Childe within his Lande,2. Sam.
               
               Should be inſtructed for to ſhoot, their Enemies to withſtande.1. Chap. verſ 18.
               
               In peace time prouident for warres (he ſaid): He was at peace,
                  Pſalm. 119.
               
               
                  With them that hated peaces: In warres, he did at no time ceaſe,
               To ſerue his God, that he would graunt aſſured ſtate and ſtay,
               As at a marke that he might ayme to walke ech godly way.Idem. ve. 15.
               
               For why, he had experience good, whome God doth ſo elect,
               Ought not to feare what euer fall, his duty to neglect:
               But truſteth,Pſa. 7. ver 14. God hath mortall Darts, yea arrowes keene and ſharp,
               
               For them that him do perſecute, whiles they do miſchief warp:
               And though the wicked bend their Bowes,Pſal. 11. ve. 2. & make their Arrowes preſt
               To ſhoot in ſecret, and to hurt the ſounde, and harmles breſt:
               Yet God his fiery Thunderboultes can caſt them heare and theare,Pſalm. 18. verſ. 13.
               
               And with his fiery lightning ſhafts can foyle his foes with feare:
               And as a marke he will them ſet, in a moſt open place,Pſal. 21 verſ. 12.
               
               And charge his bow-ſtrings readily againſt his Enemies face.
               Gods Arrowes ſharp and kéene which are,Pſalm. 45. their harts ſo ſore ſhal ſting,
               That Folke ſhall and knéele to him,Verſ. 6. as to the mightieſt King:
               In Syon brake he ſhaft and bowe,Pſal. 76. the ſworde, the ſpeare and ſhielde,
               And brake the Ray,Verſ. 3. to ouerthrow the Battell in the fielde:
               So that his Children ſhall not feare,Pſal. 91. verſ. 5. nor yet become afflight,
               For all the ſhafts that flye by day, nor terrour in the night.
               Yet for an ordenary meane King Dauid doth aduance,
               The Bowe and ſhaft, as mans defence, and for his foes noyance:
               Extolling eke the exercyſe by that ſame troupe or traine,
               Of Shooters, which in peace or warres Gods glorie do maintaine.
               As when 
                     〈◊〉
                   Children come to age (ſaith he) and actyuenes,
               Oh well ys he whoſe quyuer with ſuch ſhafts the Lord doth bleſſe:Pſalm. 127. verſ. 4. & 5.
               
               Whether Prince ſo peopled be, or Parent Children ſuch,
               And ſo many be bleſt with all, they néede not feare the gruch,
               
                  Or gréeuous force of Enemy,
                  Rom 8. If God be on their ſide:
               In which reſpect the prayer of Dauid may be applyde,
               When for Gods ſafe deliuerance from eche ſuch Enemy,Pſalm. 147.
               
               (Thine Arrowes ſhoot and them conſume) vnto the Lorde prayth he.
                  Verſ. 6.
               
               Then ſéeth he, God taking his parte, it nought his foes ſhall boote,
               
                  For,
                  Pſalm 58. verſ. 7. They no hurt at all ſhall do, when they their ſhafts ſhall ſhoote:
               So Dauid and his Princes all after his warres, offered,
               Towards the building of Gods houſe▪ and thankes to him rendred,
               
                  
And when he had raigned .xl. yéers iuſt ouer Iſraell,
                  1. Croun. 29.
               
               In his owne Citty hee ſlept and lay, which Zyon was to tell.
               Whoſe Sonne that wiſe King Salomon ſuccéeded in his throane,1. Reg. 2.
               
               A Prince of peace and glory ſuch, as like was neuer a one:
               Him all the foreſaid Potentates, in eche thing méete obaide.
               His charets .xiiij C. tho, and Horſemen, it is ſayde,
               Twelue M. were which hee nothing ſo much had care vppon,2. Croun. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
               
               As for to builde the Temple, and to pray in Gibeon,
               
               To keepe the Arck yeelde peace offrings, and ſtill aduance Gods worde,
               With inſtruments of muſick ſweete lauding the liuing Lorde:
               The race of whoſe Raigne .xl. yeares then béeyng conſummate,2. Croun.
               
               In the City of Dauid eke he ſlept intumulate.
               
                  Aſa King of Iuda did deſtroy all Idolles theare,
               Commanding his, the lyuing God truly to ſerue and feare:
               Ere hee with the Aethiopian King and his huge hoaſt would feight,2. Croun. 14
               
               He prayde vnto Iehoue, and hée did heare his prayer ſtreight:
               Of the trybe of Beniamyn, which bare both Bow and ſhield,
               A valiant hoaſte hée had which got the victory in that fielde.
               
                  Iehoſophat of Iuda King,3. Cro 17. his fathers rowme poſſeſt,
               Who proſpered truſting in his God, and was with riches bleſt,
               He toke of Strangers tribute, and had of Beniamyns trybe
               200000 warlike wights with Bowe and ſhéeld to byde.
               
                  Ahab, King of Iſraell, in following the aduiſe,
               Of thoſe 400 Prophets dyd but fondly enterpriſe,
                     
                        •
                     . Crou. 18.
               
               At Ramoth theare in Gilead geanſt the King of Aram,
               
               To feight regarding not Michah, euen then a certen Man
               Drewe a Bowe and ſmote Ahab betwéene his ioyntes and eke
               The Brigandyne, that ſo hée dyed to late for helpe to ſeeke.
               
                  Vzzia choſen to be King of Iuda dyd obay
               The Lorde Iehoue,
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Cro. 26. and on a time did giue a bold aſſay,
               To warr againſt the Phyliſtens, with bowes and arrowes fell,
               And God in eche his enterpriſe dyd proſper him full well.
               
                  Ioſyas King of Iuda, was a Prince of godly mynde,
               The temple he reſtored, and his prayer heard did fynde,
               When he a couenaunt made with God.
                     
                        •
                     . Cro. 35 But when vniuſty hée
               Genſt the AEgiptian King would feight neglecting Ieremy,
               
               And that ſame King which did dehorte him from that wilfull feight
               The Archers ſhot and wounded him vnto the death there ſtreight.
               
                  
                  Iehu annoynted of the Lorde,2 King. 9. tooke bowe and arrowes kéene,
               And ſtrongly ſmote Iehoram tho, his armed armes betwéene
               The arrowe pearſt euen through his hart, God would it ſo to bée,
               The whordomes of their Ieſabell, and wich-crafts plagued hée.
               
                  Elyſha ſayd vnto Ioas,
                  4. King 13. then king of Iſraell
               
               Open a window Eaſtward and, ſhoote as I ſhall thee tell:
               The Arrow of health that it may bee, The Arow of the Lords health,
               Againſt all Syria to ſubuert them and their common wealth.
               Iob,Iob. 16. when the Lord afflicted him, by Metaphor did mone
               The Lorde hath ſet mee as a marke (ſaith he) for him alone,
               And that his Arches hemd him in, and compaſſed him rounde,
               They ſpared mee no whit (ſaith he) but ſore my loynes did wounde:
               When eke Gods iudgements in his wrath vpon the vngodly,
               Hée prooues doth light to their deſerts, he ſaith, though they do fly
               
               The Iron weapons warlike yet,Iob. 20. with the Steele bow they ſhall
               Bee ſhot, and on them ſhaftes moſt ſharp by lots muſt light and fall:
               But nombring vp Goddes benefits on him then multiplide.Iob 29.
               
               His bow, with honour ſtronger dyd in his owne hand abide.
               
                  Eſay,
                  Eſay. 5. the Prophet of the Lorde, when he dyd prophecy
               Of Ieruſalems Kuine, and of her captiuity,
               Pronounced vnto her Goddes wrath, in theſe wordes verament,
               That all Goddes arrowes ſharp ſhould bee, and all his bowes eke bent.
               Fortelling how Ieruſalem for ſinne,Chap. 7. beſeged ſhould bée
               With arrowes and with bowes ſhall one agenſt her come, ſaith hée.
               
               Ere that the Medes and Perſians ſhould Babylon deſtroy:Chap. 13.
               
               With Bowes (ſaith hée) they ſhall aſſaile thy Children to anoy.
               Of Idumeas ruyn and, of all Arabyas too:
               
                  He verifiyng ſaid,
                  Chap. 22. 
                  they fled from drawne ſword and bent Bowe,
               And that the reſidew which were euen their owne Archers ſtrong,
               
                  Of Kedars Sonnes a few or none ſhould them befound among.
               The ſame Eſay reporteth eke, when Hezekiah King
               Of Iuda heard the blaſphemy of Rabſechas rayling.Chap. 37.
               
               Sent from Senacherib, he aſked counſell of Eſay.
               
               Who promiſd him the victory, and that without delay.
               But as for the Aſſyrian king, he neuer enter ſhall
               This Citty, nor once ſhoot a ſhaft (ſaith hée) to worck her thrall.
               
               This Prophet tellls when as the Lord would chuſe his people ſo,Chap. 41.
               
               Subdewing kings he gaue them as The duſt his ſworde vnto.
               
               
                  
And ſcatered them vnto his Bowe as ſtuble, ſignifiying.
               
               No power can ſcape his mightie hand, him to reſiſt applying.
               He prophecyeth in the perſon of (Chriſt) the faithfull to aſſure,
               That God his ſecret fauour, and his feruent loue ſhould dure,
               
                  Towardes them. Vnder the ſhadowe of his hand, he hath hyd me,
               And in his quyuer a choſen ſhaft he me hath hydd,Chap 49. 
                  ſaith he,
               
               Laſtly, I read that Eſay ſaith, God will his Church enlarge,
               By the Apoſtles,
                  Chap. 66. 
                  Miniſters, and his Diſciples charge:
               
                  In Affrica, Cilicia, in Parthia, and Italy.
               To them (he ſaith) that draw the Bow, not knowing his glory,
               Nor haue not heard his fame as yet, ne yet his glory ſeene,
               To thoſe ſame Gentiles preach he will, that they may him eſtéeme,
               
                  Ieremy,
                  Chap. 50. in prophecying of Babylon that whoore,
               Her wickednes and Idolles (ſaith) God will them plague full ſore,
               And that of mightie Nations, he, a multitude will bring,
               Out of the North (in batle aray,) themſelues enarmouring:
               Their Arrowes ſhall be as of one that is moſt ſtrong certaine:Verſ 9.
               
               And expert too, for none of them ſhall once returne in vaine:
               He ſhowes, the Lorde commaunds, they ſhall Put themſelues in aray,
               
               Geanſt Babell round about,Verſ. 14. all ye (that bend the Bowe) I ſay.
               Shoote at her (ſaith he) ſpare no ſhaftes, for ſhe againſt the Lorde
               
                  Hath ſinned, ſo that he the ſame hath greeuouſly abhorde.
               The voyce of them that flée and ſcape from out of Babylon
               
               
                  Shall be,
                  Verſ 28. To ſhew (Goddes vengeance great ouer her) vnto Syon.
               Call vp the Archers geanſt Babell, all ye that bend the Bowe,
               Beſige her round about, let none eſcape, not hye nor lowe.
               Rewarde her after her owne workes, for ſhe hath ſinned. Thus
               
               Saith Ieremy, ſhall ſhe be ſerued for ſinnes flagitius.
               
                  Yea, more he addes that: Many Kings from th'earth ſhall raiſed be
               Againſt her,Verſ. 41. they ſhall holde the Bow and Buckler, eke ſaith he:
               
               But drawing nearer to her end (To him that bendes the bow,
                  Chap. 51.
               
               And him that lifts vp brygandyne,Verſ. 
                        •
                     . 
                  by theſe wordes he doth ſhow,
               
               
                  The Lord will ſay, ſpare not her youngmen, but ſlay all her hoaſt,
               Make bright the Arrowes,Verſ. 10. gather the ſhields, as if ye ſpare no coſt:
               
               The Lord hath raiſed vp the ſpirite in the King of the Medes:
               His purpoſe is geanſt Babell, to deſtroy her feete and heades.
               
                  And afterward, he veryfieth:
                  Chap. 5
                        •
                     . The ſtrong men of Babell
               Are taken,Verſ. 5
                        •
                     . and their bowes are broke: God graunt it hap ſo well:
               
               
                  
But in his Lamentacions yet,Lamentat. this Prophet doth auowe,
               God bent his bowe,Chap. 11. and made him as a marke for the arrowe:
               The arrowe of his quyuer he cauſed to enter into my raines.verſ. 12. &. 13
               
               This ſpeech doth ſhew the Prophets grief, for his frends grief & paines,
               
                  Ezechiel much alike foreſheweth of Gog and Magogs fall,Ezech.
               
               
                  Which fought againſt Gods People ſore,Chap. 39. and that with power not ſmal
               Wherefore, the Lord of hoaſtes by him doth fearcely thus inuay
               Gogs Bow out of his left hand, he will ſmyte and daſſhe away.
               And out of his right hand will cauſe the Shaftes to fall downe flat.
               A fyre on Magog will he ſend, ſo as forthwith on that,
               
               They which inhabite Cityes do, throughout all Iſraell
               Shall go forth and ſet fiery flame vppon his weapons fell,
               Vppon his ſhields and Bucklers, and vpon eche ſhafte and Bowe,
               Yea vpon their ſtaues euen in their handes, to burne them on a rowe,
               For ſeauen yeares ſpace: Thus ſaith the Lorde, at my table ye ſhall
               With Horſes, Charyots and valiant men of Warre be filled withall,
               So that the Lorde himſelfe doth ſay, by this Prophet Ezechiel,
               Iacob I will redeeme and ſhewe mercy on Iſraell:
               
                  Oſeas the Prophet well concludes then this ſaid prophecy,Oſe. 1.
               
               With bow nor ſworde God his will ſaue, but with his mere mercy.
               
                  Zacharias zealus in the Lorde confirmes a truth twofolde,Zacha. 9.
               
               Threatning Gentiles deſtruction,Verſ. 10. which are ſo wilfull bolde,
               To warre againſt the Lordes Iuda, he telleth them therfore
               
                  The Bow of their Batle ſhalbe broke, and God will then reſtore
               
                  Peace to the heathen folke on earth, which had vnquyet reſt.
               And ſo where warres did worke much woo, Gods peace ſhal make them bleſt
               But when he ſpeakes of Iudaes bliſſe,Verſ. 11. enlarged, he doth ſhow,
               
                  That God his choſen Iuda hath bent out euen as a Bowe.
               In raiſing vp of Syons ſonnes, O Grecia, then ſaith he:
               
               
                  Beholde euen as a Gyants ſworde,Nehem. 
                  ſo ſtrong I haue made thee.
               
                  Nehemyas choſen of the Lorde Ieruſalems walle to builde,
               By Sanballat,
                  Chap. 4. 
                  Tobyas, and the Arabians then withhyld
               Was hindered much,verſ. 16. yet with th'one half of Iudaes yong men there,
               
                  And with th'other half, which helde, the Bow, the ſhield and ſpeare,
               With manly courage Reard, it was the walle and proſperous ſtood,
               The Rulers ſaw the ſame with ioy maugre th'enemies mood.
               
                  Fſdras prophecying (againſt Aſia and Babilon,
                  Fſdras,
               
               
                  Egipt,
                  Chap. 9. 
                  Syria, and of eche gréeuous affliction,
               
                  
Which vppon all the worlde ſhal comme by Goddes decréed iudgement
               
                  Saith, Strong is his righ hande by whome his Bow ſhall ſo bee bent,
               His arrowes which hee ſhoots, are ſharp and ſhall not miſſe, he ſaies,
               
               When they begin for to bee ſhot into the latter dayes.
               
                  Iudith a worthie Wydow was, and handmayde of the Lorde
               Which prayde to God in her diſtreſſe,Iudith. 12. and walked in his worde
               What tyme that Tyrant proude aſſailde Nabuchadnezer hée
               With Olophernes his Chéeftaine, and all their huge army
               
                  To come againſt Gods Iſraell, Tuelue thouſand Archers ſtoute,
               And ſixeſcore thouſand others mo of that his Rakehell Rowte,
               Beholde God heard this woman weike, when ſhe for hers ſo praide:
               Thy power Oh God in multitude conſiſteth not, ſhe ſaide,
               
               Nor thy might in ſtronge men remaines: But thou the hope onely,
               Of humble myndes deffendſt wayklyngs and which forſaken bee,
               
                  Thoſe thou protectſt. Her prayer ſo did pleaſe the lyuing Lorde
               As by his might this woman weyke conld vſe the pearſing ſworde
               That ſhée cut of the Captaines head, ſo mightie in miſcheef,
               His members quayld, Gods will preuaild, and hers found ioy for gréef.
               
                  Iudas Machabeus, he, the firſt which bare that name,
               One of the Worthies nyne ſo cald deſerues immortall fame
               For valiantly encountering with Demetrius and his hoaſt,
                     
                        •
                     . Mac. 9.
               
               Whoſe Archers marching in forwarde, for all their heathniſh boaſt.
               
                  Iudas in the Lordes quarrell, yet his Brethren dyd comfort,
               Though there he loſt his life in feelde the ſame for to ſupport,
               
                  Iohn the deuyne Reuailes to all thoſe that true Chriſtians bée,
                     
                        •
                     euel. 6.
               
               Firme conſolation in diſtreſſe by Chriſte our Lorde ſaith he,
               Beholde a white Horſe, and he which vppon the ſame doth ſit,
               A bow had ready drawne in hand: A Crowne and giuen him fit,
               And hee ſhould go forth conquering, and ouercome eche wheare,
               This Chriſte our King doth ſignify, which ſuch a rule ſhall beare,
               Through out the worlde, that hée ſhall ſhoote the ſhafts of his goſpell,
               To ſaue for euer his elect, conquering ſinne, death and hell.
            
            
               THE SECOND ASSERTION
and ys Prophane Hyſtoricall.
               
                  PASS on my penne from Priſtine ſoyle of ſacred Parnaſſe mount,
               And raunge the Rurall prophane féeldes to ſhew of what account.
               The Bow and Shaft haue béene to fore in learned Writers dayes:
               
                  
Let Claudianus firſt infer thereof his frendly praiſe:
               Hee ſaith that Nature firſt of all the vſe of Shooting gaue,
               
                  In the Porpentyne, that beaſt, who ſéemes ſharp prickes to haue,
               Which ſtrongly ſmyte what ſo they hit: whereby ſome learned men
               In finding this did imitate with Bowes and ſhafts as then.
               
                  Pliny referres to Scythes, this, the Sonne of Iupiter.
               
               
                  Plato, Chalimachus and Galen more Noble writers ferr
               Affirme Apollo, paterne chief and Patrone firſt to bée,
               Of Shooting in the Aethnickes dayes: as they in one agrée.
               So Ouid iumpes with their accord,Lib. 1. wen lo in that his fable,
               Hée telles how th'earth brought Python forth a ſerpent admirable
               What tyme the Delyan God which neuer vſde before that drift,Metamor,
               
               Th'art of Shooting, but at Deare and Roes which ronne ſo ſwift:
               A thouſand ſhaftes dyd ſpend vppon that vgly monſter theare,
               And none of them but forſt the bloud to iſſew out of her.
               So that his quyuer almoſt voyde, he naild her to the grounde,
               And dyd her nobly at the laſt by ſhooting ſharp confounde:
               Wherfore that he more famous might make this his enterpriſe,
               A great and ſolempne game he dyd thencforth himſelf deuyſe
               Which of the Serpent ſlaine the name of Pythians ſports did beare,
               Who for maſtry in feats of force ſhould oken garland weare.
               Moreouer,Lib. eodem. 
                  Ouid doth declare Apollo, after that
               With Gupid (for his Archery) the god of loue did chat:
               And ſéemed to chyde him as a childe with martiall might to mell
               Thy bowe and ſhafts more méete (ſaith he) are with me for to dwell,
               But Cupid thought this vncouth ſpéech, and to contend with him
               Did nothing baſh (at beaſt ſaith he) I graunt that bow of thyne
               Thou fréely vſe: And ſo at thée his ſhafts ſhall ſpend my Bowe,
               And looke how much inferiour is eche beaſt to God, ſo knowe
               And holde for truth, that euen ſo much thy glory leſſe ſhall bée
               In ſhootings noble exercyſe, then myne is in degrée:
               
                  Apollo afterwardes approued theſe Cupides words moſt trewe
               When he was wounded with his ſhafte as ſequell did enſewe
               When hée, which God of phiſicks arte and ſurgery was calde,
               Could make no medicyn for reléef of himſelf ſo enthralde,
               In Daphnes loue: who for becauſe a Virgin ſhée would bée,
               He proffering kiſſes ſwéete in vaine, the Goddes then prayed ſhée,
               Th'earth might rather her deuoure all quick euen as ſhe was.
               
                  
Then yéelde vnto Apolloes loue: But ſée the altered caſe,
               Well ſaith this God, ſith thou my loue thus ſcornefull dooſt abuſe,
               Into my Tree thou changd ſhalt be, and thée Ile alwaies vſe
               Thou ſhalt adorne my golden lookes, and eke my pleaſant harp.
               Thou ſhalt adorne my Quyuer full of arrowes keene and ſharp.
               The valiant Knights and Emperours thou ſhalt adorne alſo.
               Before the Capitoll eke ſtand, with triumphes ſtately ſhow
               For Conquerours and victors ſuch, as valiant acts haue done,
               Before Auguſtus Pallaice doore, as braue as is the ſunne.
               This Poët eke full conningly in couert wiſe doth ſhewe,
               Examples vertues to embrace, and vyces to eſchewe.
               As where he doth on fained Goddes and Goddeſſes there treat,
               Sometimes he toucheth their reuenge, for crimes and vyces great.
               Like, as when Ioue had companie of the Nymphe Parhâſis,
               
               A Knight of Phoebus troupe,Lib. 2. which bare, a bowe ſometyme ywis,
               She drawyng neare a certaine wood vnbending there her bowe,Metamor.
               
               Layde her quyuer vnder her head, and coucht her ſelfe a low,
               Soone Iupiter ſpyed her and, with her ſtroue for ſome play,
               (In'haſte her quyuer almoſt forgot) as then ſhe fled away.
               Whome when Dyana ſo diſcryde, as ſhe was following deare,
               By Iunoes iuſtice was tranſformd into an vggly Beare.
               
                  Phebus hearing that his loue Coronis,
                  Eodem. on a time.
               The faireſt Nymphe in Theſſaly, with one Iſthis had lyne.
               A Gentleman although he were, Phebus this brookt not well.
               But threw his garland from his head, his harp toth'ground eke fell.
               His colour changed his fury flamed, his bow and ſhafts he takes,
               To ſlay the Mother and the Childe, all meane and might he makes.
               
                  Phebe or Diana ſhe,Lib. 3. the Goddeſſe of hunting game.
               To bath her ſelfe in Criſtall ſtreame awearied once came,Metamor.
               
               And being (with her troupe of Nymphes about her) in the déepe.
               Her bowe and quyuer did betake to one of them to kéepe,
               With that comes Cadmus nephew by, a huntſman euen that way,
               Whome wandringly (whiles to beholde this Goddeſſe) he did ſtay,
               She caſt an angry looke on him, as though ſhe would haue ſhot,
               A ſhafte at him, had her bow béene bent, as ſhe had it not.
               Yet Nathles water ſprinckling ſhe, his face, and head vppon
               Apaire of olde Hartes hornes, his head had growyng vp anon,
               By which this metamorphoſe he, who was a Man of late,
               
                  
                  And Huntſman two, to beaſt is like, whome his owne bounds did hate
                  So that of them he chaſed was vp hill and downe the dale,
                  Who after thoſe his houndes before, did hallow lowd and hale:
                  With turne, and returne, ſkip and ſkud, they followe him as their pray,
                  Whoſe folly cauſd his fate ſo yll with finall death that day.
               
               
                  
                     Salmaſis Dianas nymph (but water fairy) went
                  Oft times vnto a certaine poole,Lib. 4. to hunt was her intent:Metamor.
                  
                  Yet ſhe with loue of Mercuries ſonne ſurpriſde, in pleaſures paſt
                  Her youthfull yeares: (vnknowen to Phoebe) her ſiſters at the laſt
                  Would oft perſwade her painefull life, which profit might procure,
                  Her idle time in caſting dart, or ſhooting to enure,
                  But ſhe neglecting their aduiſe a wanton ſtill would be,
                  And ſtriue with him her louer ſo, vntill both he and ſhe
                  Were chaunged from their former ſhape, one monſter made, and were
                  An Hermaphrodite which both man and woman did appeare.
               
               
                  
                     Alpheys (a Riuer cald) deſcribed her race of auncient Loue,
                  Which would not leaue her,Lib. 15. till ſhe cride vnto Diana aboue,
                  Helpe Lady deare: for I thy true and truſtie ſquyer (ſaith ſhe)
                  Which haue thy Bow and arrowes oft times carried after thée,
                  Am now attacht of Cupids Knight, preſerue my Virgins ſtate:
                  Therewith the Goddeſſe béeing mooued, a cloude did diſſipate,
                  And couer ſo her Nymphe therewith, that ſhe in ſafetie was.
                  Her Louer fruſtrate of his will, away from her did paſſe.
               
               
                  
                     Ceypheys Lordes within his Court a while at quiet were,Lib eodem Metamor.
                  
                  But when a ſodaine rumour they (I wot neare what) did heare,
                  
                     Ceyphey affirmed himſelfe to be no occaſioner of the ſame,
                  One Atis nimble with the dart, but which did better frame
                  In handlyng Bowe and ſhaft, forthwith at Perſey gan to bend,
                  Whom Pallas ſhrouded with her ſhield, and did from harme defend.
                  Then Perſey tooke a fierbrand and daſht in Atis face,
                  Bée baltering him about therewith that ſlaine outright he was:
                  Whoſe death Lycab of Aſſur Land reuengd with Atis Bowe,
                  And with his ſhaftes, that Perſey then quite dead he laide alowe.
                  Of diſcord and diſſention here loe thus they rewed the end,
                  With miſchiefe they are ouermacht which miſchiefe doe pretend.
                  And though the partie which begins, when he hath miſchiefe done
                  Hath his pertaker euill, yet God his wrath can no man ſhone:
                  
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      what the guyltleſſe want in power, the ſame performe God will,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      take their quarrell as his owne, the Killers for to kill.
                  
                     Phebus bright and Mayas ſonne (ſaith Ouid) both tyme when
                  Came th'one from Delphos, and th'other from the mount Cyllen.
                  
                  
                     Apollo Phebus yet ſo cloſe could ſtep to Chyon, where
                  He pleaſure tooke which was forſpoke by Mercury his Compere
                  Which Chyon in Appolloes eares diſprayſing Dame Dyane,
                  
                  Herſelfe vnto hym to preferre, it ſo to paſſe then came.
                  
                     Phebe offended therwithall, her venging Bow ſtreight bent
                  And ſhot her through the toung as for her worthie puniſhment:
                  Of Ouid I omit here more, as touching tales to write,
                  And now to other Wryters paſſe of Archery which recyte.
               
               
                  
                     Apollo, Chéefeſt of Archers was by Poets doome enſtalde
                  Whome they the Bearer of the Bow and mighty Shooter calde,
                  Whereupon Claudianus ſaith.
                  Mars Clipeo melior, Phebus preſtantior arcu: In Engliſh. vizt.
                  
                  
                     Mars with ye Buckler better was: But Apollo him with the Bow did paſſe.
                  And Valerius Flaccus: ſaith.
                  Arcupotens aduerte precor nunc denique Apollo.
                  
                     Apollo mighty Archer how? Turne thée I pray thée to mée now.
                  
                     Hyppochoon, Mneſtion, and Eurytion all thrée
                  Were Archers, which (as Virgill ſaith) contendted valiantly,
                  Euen for the garland all at ones, when paſtymes funerall
                  By AEnéas were celebrate for his Father naturall,Virgill.
                  
                  Namley Anchyſes: when AEney forſaking Affrica,
                  
                  And ſayling ſo through Italy, came into Silicia,
                  
                  Eke Coryney of Italy (ſaith Virgill) ſhot full well,
                  But Aſyla the Troyan dyd in ſhooting farre excell.
                  
                     Acaſtus, hée the Hunter was, an Archer tall and good,
                  Who went with Meleager for to kill the Bore in wood.
                  Which ſpoylde the Cuntry Caledon (of whome Ouid pardy
                  Saith) fierce Leucippus, and Acaſt with ſhafts ſo Noble hée.
                  
                     Parys an Archer ſtrong ſo was, that hée did ouerthrowe
                  
                     Achilles with one ſhaft onely and wounded him alſo.Virgill. Ouid in Epiſtell.
                  
                  The ſame Paris is of himſelf ſo ſaid to make good proof,
                  His ſhaft was not more to be feard, then when ſhe flew aloof.
                  
                     Lycota conning Archer,Ouid. lib. 12 was more conningly caſt downe
                  
                     
                     Mopſus of Crete for ſhootings ſkill of Silius hath renowne
                  
                     Ilerdes ſuch an Archer was whoſe ſhaft ſo ſurely aymed,
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
                  That Birdes hye houering in the ayer,Sil. 1
                           •
                        . he killed more then maymed,
                  Ne was hée onely warryer ſtout, but huntſman ſkilfull ſo
                  In euery courſe that hée could kill the hynde, the bucke or doo.
                  
                     Alcon an Archer was of Crete,
                     Vale Fl
                           •
                        c. whoſe child a Dragon fell
                  Perforce had caught away from him:Lib 1. Argo. at which hée did leuell,
                  His ſhafts with ſuch deliuery ſure, that hée the Dragon ſlew,
                  His childe harmeleſſe and from that beaſt did manfully reſkew.
                  
                     Enarus,
                     Saxo Gram maticus. was an Archer ſo endewed with ſtrength and art,
                  Hée bent his Bowe with ſuch a force, nought could his ſhoot reuert.
                  
                     Deucaleon, Hypereſeus Sonne, by Hypſo the Nymphe was
                  An Archer which in ſhooting farre did others much ſurpaſſe.Vale. Fl
                           •
                        c.
                  
                  
                     AEthalides an Orator was,Lib. 1. Argo. which for his eloquent tonque
                  Men dyd beléeue of Mercury,
                     Lib. 1 Arg. hée was the onely ſonne,
                  And that this Man in Archery had fortune ioyned with fame,
                  
                     Valerius Flaccus in his booke doth verify the ſame.
                  
                     Catenos,
                     Quint Cur. Lib. 6. de geſt Alexander. hée a Souldiour did his ſhaft ſo ſurely leuell.
                  That birdes hye mounting in the ſkye hée downe ſtarck dead could fel.
                  
                     Toco a certen Souldiour was an Archer of ſuch ſkill,
                  Although in Cuppes his tongue could walke more voyd of wit thē wil,Saxo. gram.
                  
                  That hée at banquets oft would boaſt an apple very ſmall
                  A farre of held he fech of could euen his firſt ſhaft withall.
                  
                     Aſpares one inhabitant in Garamantia Lande,Pontanus.
                  
                  By fyne deliuering of his ſhafts, is praiſde for eye and hand.
                  
                     Euritus,
                     Idem. King of Ochaly, and Father of Ioles,
                  
                  The art of ſhooting taught vnto the valiant Hercules.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Hercules, a Shooter ſuch did ſhew himſelfe to bée
                  So ſtrong in ſtroke,Pontanus ſo ſure ſure in ayme, ſo certen with the eye,
                  Hée Centaur Neſſus ouerthrew though from him farre hée ſtood:
                  And of the hartes (as ſwifte as winde) hee bathde his ſhafts in blood,
                  Beſides theſe hée the Harpyas (a Rauenous byrde by kinde)
                  Could cauſe to tumble out of the ayer, as fethers toſt with winde.
                  
                     Comodus the Emperour,Herodia. Sonne of Marck and Fauſtine, was
                  So ſure a Shooter coumpted, that when beaſts aloof did paſſe,Lib. 1.
                  
                  Or ſwiftly ronne he neuer miſt, but one or other ſure,
                  He ſlew with ſhafte, and none eſcapte nor could his 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
But wat his eye once deſtned had if ſo hée might yt ſée,
                  The ſame was ſure with Bow and ſhaft his pryzed pray to bée.
                  
                     Domitian the Emperour hée in ſhooting ſo excelled,
                        
                           •
                        x. Aurel.
                  
                  That now and then a childe which forth his fingers ſtreched held,
                  He made his marcke twixt fingers twaine aloof held vp and wyde:
                  The Childe vnharmed was, and eke his ſhafts did ſurely glyde.
                  Againe two honderth beaſtes hée did with arrowes kill moſt ſharp,
                  Some of their heads two ſhafts had like the hornes of a wilde hart.Tranquil.
                  
                  
                     Eight Contreyes, Geta, Scithia, and with them the Ithurians,
                  
                  The Parſij, Parthi, Sarmati, Cretii, Arimaſpyans,
                  And almoſte all the Countreyes of the worlde towardes the eaſt
                  Were noted much in archery to haue their ſkill encreaſt.
                  And theſe by ſeuerall Epithets had ſeuerall properties,
                  Eche one his owne pertaining to this ſhootings exercyſe,
                  The Poets terme the Ithuryan Bowe: the Parthyans ſhafts they name:
                  The Getian ſtring,Sabellicus in Oraculo. and Quyuers eke were attribute by fame
                  Vnto them of Sarmatia, and ſo ſemblably enſewed
                  In all the other Contreyes their owne propertyes renewed.
                  And though in ſhooting eche of theſe ſkilfull and practized were,
                  
                     The Parthyans yet and Perſians chéef prick and praiſe did beare:
                  So excellent Archers were they déemed, that as they ranne the way,
                  They ſhot behinde them, that therwith their Enemies they could ſlaye:
                  And turning euen from them they could ſo hurt them which purſewed,
                  As if with wachfull eyes they had euen face to face them vewed.
                  Whereof Lucane the Poet thus mencyoneth.Lucanus.
                  
                  Ocyor & miſſa Parthi poſt terga ſagitta: That is in Engliſh.
                  
                  More ſwifter then Parthyan ſhaft ſo quick: behind their backe which is let ſlipis
                  
                     Cyaxares King of the Medes,
                     Herodian in Clio. which great Grandfather was
                  To Cyrus, kept of Scythians, (which did with Bowe ſurpas)
                  A ſorte of ſhooters for the nonce, euen to enſtruct and teache
                  His Sonne Aſtyages, that arte moſt ſkilfully to reache.
                  
                     Cyrus a Childe, in this arte was ſo deligent educate,
                  That Xenophon who writ the ſame,Xenophon in inſtitut. Cyri. would neuer haue nominate
                  The vſe and proffit greatly ſo with Princely ſtate to grée,
                  Had not nature experience and effect enforſt to hée,
                  As Tully ſaith moſt congruent, not onely for to ſhowe
                  What Cyrus did, but what a Prince by dewty ought to doo,
                  Both in paſtimes for pleaſure, and in ſeryous matters when
                  
                     
The ſame may proffet Prince, himſelf and alſo other men.
                  
                     Darius King of Perſia, the firſt that name which bare,
                  Dyd ſhew how fit a thing it ought to bée,Strabo. and nothing race
                  A PRINCE to practize Archery,
                     Lib. 15. as for the ſame pretence
                  Hee left for worthy memory on his tombe this ſentence.
               
               
                  DARIVS the King lyeth buried heare,
                  Which in ſhooting & ryding had neuer his peare.
               
               
                  
                     Theodoſius the Emperour had commendations Dew,Themiſt. in Orat. 6.
                  
                  Giuen him by Themiſtius his Philoſopher trewe,
                  For thrée things which hée of a Childe did vſe eſpecially,
                  As Shooting, Ryding well on Horſe, and feats of Cheualry.
                  
                  
                     Cyrus what time hée conquered in manner all the world,Herodianus in Clio.
                  
                  Among his Perſians made this Lawe, and left it ſure enrould,
                  Their Children ſhould from fiue yeares age vntill the yeare twenty
                  
                     Learne thrée things well, To ryde, To ſhoot. Tell truth and neuer lye.
                  
                     Leo the Noble Emperour did full Chriſtianly ordaine
                  A Law,Leo de Stratagem. 20. eche man in time of peace ſhould ſhooting ſo mentaine:
                  Till hée were xl. yeares of age, and that eche houſe priuate
                  Should haue a Bowe and xl. ſhafts in order like and rate,
                  Ready for eche vſe of néede: The omitting of which Lawe
                  (Saith Leo) among the youth, hath béene th'effycient ouerthrawe
                  Of Romane glory erſt ſo braue, with loſſe of a great deale
                  Of th'Empire ſelfe, and hynderance of our floriſhing publike veale.
                  
                     AEthiopians of the world the furdeſt Southward are,
                  Whoſe excellency in ſhooting,Herodo. in Thalia. that ſame hiſtorie doth declare
                  When to their King, Cambyſes King of Perſia once did ſende
                  Ambaſſadours with many gifts: Their ſubtill drifte and ende
                  Th'ethiopian King diſcuſt to prooue them very ſpyes,
                  And blamed their King Cambyſes for ſuch vniuſt enterpryſe:
                  But princely intertaining them, a Fowe he tooke (which bent
                  And drawne by him vnbent againe) vnto their King hée ſent
                  The ſame with gréeting (and ſaith hée) deliuer it him from mée,
                  And ſay when any Perſian can ſhoot in the ſame that hée,
                  Then ſet on AEthyopians, but in meane time let him yéelde
                  Thankes vnto God, that hath not giuen the Perſians force in féelde
                  To conquer other mens Contreyes. The bowe when as it came
                  Among them, none at all was found which once could ſtirr the ſame:
                  
                     
Saue onely Smerdis Brother to Cambyſes who, the ſtring
                  Two fingers ſtyrd, and furder could not, for the which doing,
                  
                     Cambyſes him ſo ſore enuyed, as doth the ſtory ſay,
                  That his owne Brother Smerdis hée therfore outright did ſlay.
                  
                     Seſoſtris,
                     Herodot. in Euterp. the moſt mighty king that Ruled AEgipt Lande.
                  Ouercame a great part of the worlde, and that by Archers band
                  The Arabyans, Iewes, and Syrians hée brought in ſubiection,
                  And further into Scithia went, then elſſe did any one:
                  Hée ouer came eke Thracya till the Coaſtes of Germany,
                  
                  In token wheare of euery ſuch obtained victory,
                  Images hée dyd erect after his owne likenes
                  In th'one hand Bow, in th'other ſhaft holding for to witneſſe,
                  What weapons in his conqueſt, hée did vſe in thoſe his dayes,
                  Whereby he gained glory condigne, and eke a laſtingpraiſe.
                  
                     Teweer amongſt the Graecians for his ſhooting bare the bell
                  Who (when Hector the Graecyans ſhips by fire thought to quell:Diod, Sic.)
                  With his Bow droue them backe agen: Neither could noble Troy
                  
                  Haue béene deſtroyd by Graecyans, if with ſhootings dire anoy
                  Of Hercules ſhaftes, it had not bene aſſaulted as it was,
                  Whereby the ruyn of the ſame the ſoner came to paſſe.
               
            
            
               THE THIRDE ASSERTION
Engliſhe Hyſtoricall.
               
                  RElinquiſhing thoſe prophane feates and fautors, now my penne
               Approche theproweſſe and the praiſe of natiue Elgliſhmen:
               
               From Brute the Troyans time, who as hée vſed ſhooting theare
               When vnwares he his Father ſlew, in foreſt hunting deare.
               After hée had by that miſchaunce his Syluius deare bereft,Anno ante Chriſt. 1108
               
               Aryued in this our Albyon then his natiue Troy ſo left.
               The Brytons his ſucceſſors ruled this Lande, till Caeſar hée
               Conquered the ſame, not long before Chriſtes natiuity:
               The Romanes held the Brittaines in their rule and tribute long,The Romans continewed. 483. yeares
               
               
                  Agricola a Capteyn (ſent the Romanes from among)
               With ſhot of arrowes and of darts did gréeue the Brittons much
               They with huge ſwords and bucklers ſmal eke kept the Romans tuch.
               
                  Hengiſt a Saxon hether came,Poſt Chriſtum. 490. in kent whoſe Kingdome was.
               And ward vppon the Brytons till he lyued in quyet caſe
               
                  
                  ARTHVRE the mirrour of manhood,Anno poſt. Xpū. 518. and Champion of Cheualrie.
               Subdewed the Saxons to him tho, with many a victorie
               Among the Brittons after his time, weſt Saxons ſtill bare ſway,
               
                  Alfird,
                  872. a Godly learned King a Saxon, ſtories ſaye
               By cruell purſute of the Danes which troubled then this Land,
               Dyd wander with his Bow and ſhafts their force and did withſtand:
               For God not onely victor him full many a time did make
               Ouer the Paganes, but by him enforſt their force to ſlake.
               
                  Harolde the Dane vſurpt and tooke on him to raigne as king,
               Vntill the tyme of Willyam Duke of Normandies coming:
               Whoſe powers together béeing met Haroldes was ouermatcht,
               And hée (a ſhaft ſhot into his head) at once was ſo diſpacht.
               
                  Willyam the Duke had conquerd there this Land & ruled the ſame,An. a xpō. nato. 1066.
               
               But not in bondage would ſhée lyue thoug he her ouercame
               It's worth the reading therfore heare to ſhew how Stigand then
               Archbiſhop,1. W. 1. and how Egelſtyn that Abbot playde the men:Archb. and Abot of Cantirbury
               
               For fréedome of their Cuutrey, thus therfore they did deuiſe,
               A power of Horſemen and footemen ſhould for time exercyſe
               Alongſt their féeldes as't were lanelike long boughes & large to beare,
               To make the Duke ſhould thether come, when hée therof did heare.
               And as they ſaid it hapned ſo, the Duke came with his traine,
               Who ſeeing this thought it had bene euen mouing trées certaine:
               Whereto approching with meane ſpace (diſcomfited in minde)
               Hée pawſd, the Kentiſh power a far did ſmell him in the winde.
               Who (when within their army him encloſed got they had)
               Down caſt their boughs vp bent their Bowes their ſhafts to ſhoot moſt glad.
               The trompets ſound, their Banners waue, their weapōs buſied were,
               To feight with whome they ſo deſyrde in Euntryes quarrel there.
               So hée, who thought he had in his fiſt the whole land late ſo faſt,
               Began his life now to deſpaire, affrighted and agaſt:
               Then they oracion frendly framed, condicions graunt hée ſhould,
               Their wonted fréedome that they might in certaine order holde:
               Hee thereto grées, confirmes the graunt by pledge ſufficyent ſo,
               That by this meanes thoſe liberties continwed hetherto.
               
                  Willyam Rufus was his ſonne,Anno 1100 who ruled not ſo well,
               As that men could not wéepe for ioy of his death to heare tell,13. W. 2.
               
               To his owne ſubiectes wicked hée and ſo to ſtrangers was:
               But moſt wicked vnto himſelfe when Gods will taking place
               
                  
In Hamſhyer that new forreſt, as hée hunted on a time,
               A Knight in ſhooting at a Deare gaue him his fatall fine.
               But now of Noble Princes I will penne the noble praiſe,
               Euen ſuch as worthie Archery mentained in their dayes.
               
                  Henry the Firſt of England King,Anno. 1105. fought many a battel ſtrong
               Agenſt the French with Archers ſtout,Anno. 1119. & 1128. 6. 20. & 29. of H. 1. his other powers among:
               A victor eke hée ſtill preuaild in warres: and in peace tyme,
               His People vnto ſhooting did them ſelues greatly enclyne.
               
                  Stephen, King of England ſtoutly dyd with Archers in his hande
               As alſo by his other powers the Scottiſh broylles withſtand:Anno. 1139.
               
               He made warres eke genſt Robert then the Earle of Gloceſter
               
               Who did inuade his Kingdome with ten knights and in nomber
               Of Archers iuſt ſo many,4. St. 1. which on horſeback paſſed through
               The midſt of all the Realme, but yet reſiſted well enough.
               
                  Henry the ſecond valyantly aduentured Irelands ſoyle
               With warlike power,Anno 1171. ſome Archers were,17 H 2. with labour ſmall and toyle
               The Archbiſhops and Biſhops did receiue him for their King,
               And hée them ruled like worthie prince in loue and peace tendring.
               
                  Richard Coeur de Lyon cald a king and Conquerour was,
               With Phillip king of France,
                  Anno. 1191. who did vnto Ieruſalem paſſe:
               Olde Chronicles report,2. Ric▪ 1. his power had Archers them among,
               Whoſe force confounded Pagans fell and layde them dead along.
               In this Kings time was Robyn Hood: that Archer and outlawe,
               And litle Iohn his partener eke, vnto them which did drawe
               One hondred tall and good Archers, on whome foure hondred men
               Were their power neuer ſo ſtrong could not giue onſet then:
               The Abbots Monkes and Carles rich, theſe onely did moleſt
               And reſkewd woemen when they ſaw of théeues them ſo oppreſt,
               Reſtoring poore mens goods, and eke aboundantly reléeued
               Poore Trauellers which wanted food, or were with ſicknes gréeued.
               
                  And, heare becauſe of Archery I do by penne explane
               The vſe, the proffet, and the praiſe, to England by the ſame,
               My ſelf remembreth of a childe in Contreye natiue mine:(1553.)
               
               A May game was of Robyn-hood and of his traine that time
               To traine vp young men,(7. E. 6.) ſtripplings and, eche other younger childe
               In ſhooting, yearely this with ſolempne feaſt was by the Guylde,
               Or Brother hood of Townſmen done, with ſport, with ioy, and loue
               To proffet which in preſent tyme, and afterward did proue.
               
                  
                  Iohn King,1210. ſubdewed Ireland with manly force and might
               Of Horſemen, Archers, ſpeares, and ſuch as put their foes to ſlight.
               
                  Edward the ſecond that valyant Prince,
                  1513. when Scotland hée reſeewed,
               From them,7. E. 2. whoſe force his Father had not long before ſubdewed,
               In his hoſte for his ſecond ward had Archers and footmen,Scotland.
               
               But many of the Enemies were ſlaine by Archers then.
               
                  Edward that victorious King the thirde ſo cald by name,Anno 1540
               
               When his noble Nauy agenſt the French Kings nauy came,The Batle on the Sea.
               
               Hee had the winde moſt wiſhfully and ſonne ſo at his back,
               His purpoſe and his enterpriſe that hée no time did ſlack:13. E. 3.
               
               A ſhower of Engliſh arrowes ſharp from long bowes powered downe,
               Vppon the Frenchmen, whereby fell to our men great renowne,
               When at that Bickering Frenchmen there to leaue their ſhips were faine,
               And leape into the ſeayes for want of landing place certaine.
               Therles of Northampton,
                  1544. and of Oxeford fought alſo,
               With Charles Duke of Brittayne,
                  17. E. 4. as the Chronicles do ſhoe:
               At Morleys where oure men of armes,Batle at Morles. and Archers valyant might
               Subdewed that Contrey, foilde their foes, and wan that field outright.
               That yeare the King the noble Earle of Darby eke did ſend,Gaſcoyne.
               
               Newly create firſt King of Man, with an army to thend
               Hee Gaſcoyne by ſtrong power might win,Anno. dicit. which hée wt great goodwill,
               And Archers ayde, (as God would giue him leaue) did ſo fulfull:
               For many a walled Towne hée theare and caſtle alſo wonne,
               With ſkermiſhes which made his foes to flée away and ronne,
               So that hée dubbed there. 50. Knights as Chronicles declare,
               And to his King with honour dewe did homewards then repare.
               The noble King in perſon came agenſt the French at length,
               And made the Engliſh Dragon mount in feelde with force and ſtrength:Creſſy.
               
               When Oleflam that Frenchmen bare, went flittering to and fro,
               Which ayded was at Creſſy feelde by other Kings twaine me,
               Of Boheme and of Malogres: their men innumerable,
               The Engliſh fiftéene hondreth ſcarſe nothing like comparable.
               
                  K. Edward hée corageouſly endured from noone to night,
               The Engliſh Archers did their beſt with arrowes long and light.
               Their Footemen (being plaſt among their Horſemen gréeued and gald,
               With Archers girdes) were troden downe and ſo ſore ouerhalde,
               That great and gréeuous was their crye, but greater was the ſhowte,
               Which in purſute our Shooters gaue th'enimies hoaſt throughout:
               
                  
Their aray was broke, they ſcattered were, and by our armed men
               Were many of them beaten downe, the reſt did flee as then.
               And ſee,Anno. dict. about that preſent time. The Scots with power inuade
               This Realme as farre as Dyrham come,Dyrham. with weapon and with blade:
               Th'archbiſhop of Yorke and States there left as then which were,
               With the Archers tall a nomber good and ſhout of Lankaſhier
               Encountring with the King of Scots and all his hoſte, in fine,
               
                  Dauid their King ſore wounded was with ſhafts that preſent time.
               A nomber of his chéef Lordes and Knights were taken there captiues,
               Of common Souldiours moſt parte ſlame, a few fled with their lyues.
               
                  K. Edward yet did vnderſtand Calys betrayed ſhould bée,Anno. 1349.
               
               Hée therefore as a valyant Prince gathered an Army,
               Of horſe and man,
                     
                        •
                     4. E4. of billes and bowes, of ſpeares and ſwordes alſo,
               Embarcked in an Nauy meete, and Calys comes hee to:
               About their Kingly Conquerour this Engliſh Army clings,Callys.
               
               As who (next God) would cleaue to him aboue all earthly things,
               Hée with a Kingly courage doth likewiſe vnto them call,
               Hée placeth them in Batle ray and princely cheares them all.
               But ſpecially to his Archers which, ſtood on the hilles there drye
               Doo well yee Archers play the men, and know (ſaith hee) that I
               
                  Am EDWARD of Windſore: herewith, thēſelues they did prepare,
               To ſet vppon their Enemies, no force nor might they ſpare.
               The ſhafts from hilles ſo hye ſent downe into the valleys lowe,
               Did waſh the Frenchmen euery wheare like mighty flakes of ſnow,
               But ſuch a waſhing as that was with woundes and wofull plight,
               They ſeldome ſaw, which with the ſame were foyld and ſlaine outright.
               
                  God giuing him this victory, the King doth order take,
               For all things meete, and his returne to England ſtreight dothe make:
               Wheare hée the firſt Feaſt did ordaine of S. George the Marter,
               And made the Firſt moſt noble Knights of thorder of the Garter.
               
               After this yet euen that yeare the Spainyards did beſet
               The Brittaine Sea,Winchelſey. with Forty and foure Ships like Caſtles great:
               The King againe 50. great Ships with Pynnaces preparde,The 2. Batle on the Sea.
               
               More like vnto ſmall Cotages. Hee then and Prince Edward
               
               His Sonne with Nobles Knights and Squiers, and their retenue ſmal,
               Amongſt whome (lo the Archers were not leaſt nor worſt of all)
               Embarckt them ſelues & Croſſe the Seays till ſuch time as they meete
               With their prouoking Enemies, I meane the Spaniſh fleete:
               
                  
To bickering and then they fell on both ſides for beſt game,
               Twentie and ſeuen Spaniſh ſhippes by night did flie with ſhame,
               Which left Seauentéene for Engliſh ſpoyle, and priſe the eeuen before,
               The Realme fared better by the ſame againſt their wils full ſore.
               
                  Edward the Blacke Prince ſo ſyrnamed King Edward the 3. his ſon,Anno. 1356.
               
               (Who lately with the Spanyards fought) as Generall now is come,29. E. 3.
               
               With men of Armes foure thouſand, and one thouſand ſoldiours ſuch,
               As Armour bare, of Archers eke, two thouſand which kept tuch,
               Vnder conduct of Earles thrée,30. E. 3. of Oxford, Saliſbury,
               
               And Suffolke, which to méete the king of Fraunce did make them redy:
               By Poytiers Towne, in pitched field the Prince himſelfe doth take,Poyters.
               
               
                  Looke at large in Iohn Stowes. Chronicle.
                  Chéefe charge vpon himſelfe, And doth a graue oration make
               
               
                  To his Soldiours all, but ſpecially, his Archers worthines
               
               
                  He doth extoll, from time to time, Exhorting them no leſſe,
               
               
                  To hold on their fidelitie and prooued Proweſſe ſtill,
               
               Which they did ſéeme moſt dutifull at that time to fulfill:
               When they ſo faſt their arrowes ſhot vpon the French that day,
               Their quiuers emptied were apace, then catch that can or may,
               From euery wounded corps a ſhaft, in haſte and it beſtowed,
               Vpon another where he could, to pay the debt he owed.
               Thus paſſed they the time with toyle, when all their ſhafts were ſpent,
               To lay on load with Sword and Bill, to hand ſtrokes toot they went,
               The French King and his ſonne they tooke, and almoſt all his peares,
               And Thirtie thouſand ſlew beſides in thoſe their warlike feares.
               Prince Edward (God thus giuing him a valiant victorie,)
               Returneth to his Father ſtreight, and with him his armie.
               
                  Richard the ſecond in his time (the Scots inuading ſo
               His land,1385. ſo far as Warck Caſtle) to ſtoppe his faithleſſe foe,8. R. 2.
               
               Who now had brent within his land,Warck Caſtle. his promiſſe likewiſe broke,
               Againſt him ſent a choſen power, to giue him battell ſtroke.
               Th' Earle of Buckingam did leade a thouſand Launſes tall,
               Two Thouſand Archers, made his hoſte, moſt faithfull and loyall,
               But when they came into the field of th'enemies to haue ſight:
               They neuer ſhewed their faces, nor once ſigne that they would fight.
               Wherefore the Earle with his power purſued them homewards then,
               Burning their Countrey as he could, and ſo made hither againe.
               Againe the King to Scotland ward his power did addreſſe,Anno. 1385.
               
               Of Knights,8. R. 2. of Squiers, and Archers ſtoute, whoſe number to expreſſe,
               
                  
The like not heard of in thoſe dayes, which enterd Scotland Roade:
               Who thither come,Scotland. their Enemies fled their ſight and not aboade.
               The King and all his ſtates holding a Parlement as then,
               At Weſtminſter a ſtur began,1369. through Criminall cauſes,18. R. 2. when
               Four thouſand of the Kings Archers (the parliament about)
               Encompaſſed,Weſtminſt. as though ſome euill were worcking in the rowte:
               Their Bowes were bent, and they ready the ſame for to withſtand,
               But that the King in perſon was euen preſently at hand,
               Which did appeaſe the ſturr ſuppoſde that afterward would fall,
               So all was hwiſht, and euery man went well apaide withall.
               The king in Perſon went with power ouer into Ireland
               
               To Diblyn,
                  1399. where he being come did ſtreight way vnderſtand,
                     
                        •
                     1. Ric. 2.
               
               His common Enemy Mack more ſo ſauage ferce and fell,Ireland.
               
               Againſt all dewty did reſiſt, and others made rebell:
               His grace thought meete to make out then the Earle of Gloceſter,
               
               With Launces tall two hondreth and 2000 Archers thether:
               The Enemy and all his power to bring vnder his bande,
               For I will haue him, (ſaith the king,) or els out of this Lande
               A liue hence will I neuer go. The Chronicles at large
               Declare what thereof did enſew in that enioyned charge.
               
                  Henry the 4. of England King,1402. a certen power ſent forth.3. 
                        •
                     . 4.
               
               The Earle of Nor thumberland,Scotland. and others in the North,
               With armed men and Archers tall appointed all aright,
               Who with the Scots their army and their Archers eke ſhould feght.
               Our Archers with theirs changed no ground, and both did manly well:
               (So as the nobles and the reſt on both partes truth to tell,
               While they did ſtand as lookers on) our Engliſh Archery
               
               Slew many a Scot and looke the flower of all their Cheualry:
               
                  Henry the 5. that pereles Prince and Conquerour puiſant
               Agenſt the French at Agincourt about him attendant
               Had but 7000 feighting men,Anno. 1315. and many of them ſick,2. H 5.
               
               Yet moſt of them a yeard in length their ſhaftes there drew to prick,
               Euen all the Cheualry in france, and downeright ſo them ſlew,
               Which 40000 coumpted were:26. perſons. Of oure Men ſlaine but few.
               To Troys in Campaine Championlike this King with army came
               Of 16000 Souldiours and the moſt part of the ſame
               Were Engliſh Archers which behaued them with the reſt ſo well,An 1420.
               
               And valyent,
                     
                        •
                     . H. 5. that the victory vnto the king then fell.
               
                  
                  Richard the thirde and Henry Earle of Richmond met in féeld
               At Boſworth where both partes were ſtrong with horſe,Anno. 1485. ſword, bow, & ſheeld
               
                  Richard,
                  2. R. 3. two for wings had, in midſt of whome his Archers were
               Th' Earle 2. wings of horſmen had and Archers few, did bere
               Themſelues eche vnto others ſo, that after long felle fight
               The King was ſlaine, and to the Earle the victory did light:
               Who there was Crowned King in feeld, as God him grace did giue,
               Not ſuffering Tyrants longer then hée thinkes good heare to liue.
               
                  K. Henry the 7. that noble Prince (the Earle of Richmond yore,Anno. 1490
               
               Sent Sir Humfrey Talbot but,5 H 7. with Archers iuſt ſixeſchore
               To Newports ſeege in Flaunders ſoyle: theſe Archers euery one
               An arrowe ſhot which made the flemings groueling for to grone:
               So that 8000 of them ſlaine by ſhafts and gonne ſhot were,
               Of Engliſhmen in all the hoaſt, and not one hondreth theare.
               At Black heath feelde the King his power with Corniſh rebells met,Anno. 1497.
               
               Whoſe Archers drawing a clothyeards length of force were very gret:12 H. 7.
               
               But greater was the power of God (aſſiſtant with the King,
               His Army, and his Archers eke,) thoſe Rebells conquering:
               Of whome 2000 ſtaine there was, and infinite captiues,
               Which had (their guerdon dew to ſuch) the loſſe of all their liues.
               
                  Henry the 8. that mighty Prince and mirour of Maieſty
               Ayded the Douches of Sauoy with power of Archery,Anno. 1511.
               
               Fiftéene hondreth tall good men men,3. H 8. genſt Duke of Gelderland
               
               Which did full great good Seruice there her Enemies to withſtand
               Sir Edward Poynings did conduct this Army to and fro.
               Of whome the Chronicles much fame and valyancy do ſho.
               This mighty Prince did, alſo ayde the King of Aragon
               
               Agenſt French power where as I read our Archers many one
               Of the French Horſemen galled ſo,Anno 1522. that foundring,4. H 8. downe they fell,
               And chaſing their footemen alſo, ſlew many, as ſtories tell.
               
                  K. Henries Ship,Anno. dict. the Regent cald with Carik French grapling,
               Our Archers geanſt French-croſbowes ſhot & held them ſuch tackling:
               So as in fine the Engliſhmen the Carick layde aboarde,
               Where vnto them the pryze and pray the Lorde God did affoard.
               
                  Arde and Gwynes,
                  Anno 1513. and Turwyn too with Turney teſtified
               Our Archers force,5 H 8. which freſhly ſhot, as then was veryfied:
               
                  King Henry in his Campe at Arkes, by Culpepers Conduct
               Did cauſe 200 Archers ſtout to bee at fall inſtruct,Turwyn & Turney.
               
               
                  
Vnder the Banner of S. George to iſſew manly owte,Anno. dict.
               
               Which ſet to fercely on the French and flew ſo through the rowte,
               That (they forthwith diſconfited) twice twelue of them were ſlaine,
               And Twelue ſcore taken Priſoners were, not ſmall yet was the gaine
               Oure Engliſh got, when as the braſon ordeinance and féelde peeces,
               Before time loſt they wan againe, with bootyes ſpoyle and fleeces.
               
                  Whiles the King in France was on this manner buſied theare,Anno. 1513.
               
               The Scottiſh King began as faſt his broyles in England heare:5 H 8.
               
               Genſt whome the noble Norffolke Duke with Northren noble harts
               Of Archers Cheſhyer,Floddon Feelde. Lankaſſhyer, and others playd their partes
               Euen brant againſt that Flodden-hill ſo ſwift their arrowes flew,
               
                  K. Ieamy and many a noble Scot wherby they downeright ſlew.
               Two Knights I read wanne worthy praiſe in France, at the Turne Pike
               
               Neare Hames, with xvi. Archers and no mo which put to flight
               So many Frenchmen as then ſled:Anno. 1520. Both Engliſh Knights theſe were,12. H. 8.
               
               Sir William Walgraue and Sir George that Somerſets name did bere
               Theſe turned ſo many owte of their Iacks at Turnepike nere to Hame
               
               All France it turned to reproch and, them to perpetuall fame.
               Among that thouſand Souldiours which the Citty of London ſent.Anno dict.
               
               Archers, Harquebuſhes, Pikes, and Billes conuenient,
               Which paſt from Douer to Calys: what ſeruice Bowemen there
               Perfourmed, the Chronicles thereof at large do witneſſe beare.
               But to bée, bréef, what Archers haue accompliſht Cheualry?
               In this Kings dayes to Gods dew praiſe and Contreyes vtility?1523. 1524.
               
               The Duke of Suffolke paſſing Some,
                  1542. and Earle of Surrey then
               Which Iedworth brent.1543. And thoſe two Knightes withall the Northern men
               Which ouerthrew the Scottiſh power.1544. And thoſe to Launderſay
               
               Sent by the King.Eodem. As alſo vnder Lorde Edward Seymer they
               To Scotland which embarcked were. To Mutterell eke in Fraunce
               Which ſent were, and the ſame beſéeged, by (Gods will,) not by chance
               All theſe and euery hoaſte of them (I ſay) in this Kings time
               Some part of proweſſe, praiſe, and proffet to the Bowe reſine.
               
                  K. Edward the 6 that Mirrour myld and pearle of Princely grace,
               His Vnckle the Duke of Somerſet did ſend in rightfull caſe,
               With Army vnder his conduct agenſt the Scottiſh power,1549.
               
               Eche Army other did affront with countenance ſterne and ſtower:
               Our Archers marched in aray at Muſkeleborow féelde,
               They ſhot their ſhaftes ſo ſharp to foyle the Scots or make them yéelde,
               
                  
God gaue our men the victory, ſuch they 14000 ſlewe
               Of Scottes, and 1400▪ were tane Priſoners of their crewe,
               Many of them Gentlemen: and but Engliſh thréeſchore
               At that time ſlaine, the reſt aliue did praiſe the Lorde therefore.
               
                  Queene Maryes dayes moſt miſerable and troubleſome though they were
               Of Archers actes (nothing or ſmall) the Chronicles witneſſe beare.
            
         
         
            ELIZABETH Gods Vizegerent our Gracious Soueraigne deare,
            Which Ruleth now in Righteouſnes her Subiects euery where:
            Whome God a Mother ouer vs hath made in mylde mercy,
            A Nurce of Peace and Amity eke to Nations farre and nye:
            Began her raigne with Rooted truthe. whence bloſſomes all proceed
            Of Bleſſings, as the Bliſſall God doth Bleſſed make in deede.
            Whoſe Frutes appearing at the firſt of Amity, Loue, and Peace,
            
            Firſt to her owne, to Others next, do more and more encreaſe:
            Firſt to her owne, Gods tender milcke of Goſpell trewe gaue ſhee,
            To vs, as Mothers Children giue by God his gift moſte free:
            To Others next as Nurſe ſhee giues to Nacyons farre and neare,
            The pappe of Peace and Amity the frutes of Faith ſinceare
            In One reſpect our proſperous ſtate ſo long poſſeſt, this ſhoweth,
            In th'Other a bettered ſtate from worſe to better by her groweth:
            To witneſſe this our publike Wealth and Peace Domeſtic Calles,
            Her Treaſures ſpent in our defence geanſt Forayn foes and bralles.
            Her Ancient Laws and Lyberties, & League ſhee firme maintaines
            To keep in Mutuall Amity vs with Neighbours, oh what gaines,
            Is ours yt is not hers? what paines, what cares, what coſt, what coſt, what charge?
            Hath ſhee not had in forraine ſoile, to ſet the bond at large?
            Witnes hereof, our Neighbours Woes, her Grace, and wee may bee,
            That their welfare with oures alſo might in one will agree.
            The ſtate of Fraunce of Scotland, and of Contreyes ſo diſtreſt,
            May witnes this, that they with vs by her are better bleſt:
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               
When woe to welfare altered is, when bale to bliſſe is chaungd,
            Who frō this Bonde of Brotherhood now in Chriſt would be eſtrangd?
            Ye Children then of Iacobs God, as Branches frutes which beare,
            Pray that your Bowes may ſtil faſt byde & armes ſtrong euery wheare:
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
            
            Pray that this threefold Bond of Bliſſe neuer infringed may bee,
            Of Naturall loue, of Publike peace, and Mutuall amity:
            Pray that our firme defence from God and Prince contenewe may,
            Pray, that yearely; from yeare to yeare and many a yeare I ſay,
            God her will graunt vs Neſtors yeares A Mother in Iſraell,
            And that wee all Coheyres with Chriſt in Heauen aboue may dwell.
            
               So be it.
ꝙ R. Robinſon.
            
            
               Luke. 2.
               
                  Glory to God on hye, On Earth Peace,
                  And to Men a Goodwill.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               At London
Printed by R. I. for Iohn VVolf:
Dwelling in Diſtaffe Lane, Oueragainſt
the ſigne of the Caſtle.
            
            
         
      
   