
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ By the Quene.
            
               
                  THE QVENES moſte excellent Maieſtie, beyng infourmed, that there is preſently growyng and encreaſyng in certaine euyll diſpoſed perſons, in and nere the citye of London, ſuch an inordinate boldnes, as they hauing knowledge of Proceſſe ſent forth out of ſundry Courtes of Recorde, to attache them by their bodyes, to anſwer vnto Iuſtice: doe not only arme themſelues priuely to withſtande in forcible maner, the officers hauynge charge to execute the ſame Proceſſe: but doe alſo make aſſaultes and open frayes vpon the ſayd officers, bothe to the manyfeſt contempte of publyke aucthoritie and to the danger of the liues of the ſayd officers. Whervpon her maieſtie hauing it broughte alſo to her remembrance, in what ſort the Noble kyng her maieſties father, kyng Henry the eight, vpon the like diſorder growen about the xxix. yere of his reigne, did prouide ſpeedy remedy by a verye ſtreight proclamation, vnder great and mortall paynes to the offendors therin. Whervpon alſo manyfeſt quietnes did enſew, to the execution of all the like proceſſe by Seriants, Bailiffes, and ſuch other miniſters.
            For theſe conſiderations, her maieſtie hauing alſo regard to maintein her authoritie geuen her by almighty God, ouer al maner of perſons within her dominions, and to preſerue due reuerence to her lawes and to the miniſters therof, ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth all maner of perſons, of what condition ſoeuer they be within any of her dominions, quietly & peaceably to obey and yeld themſelues, to the Arreſtes 
                  〈◊〉
                attachments of al Maiors, Sheriffes, bailiffes, ſeriantes, & other miniſters, without refuſall, reſcues, or reſiſtance, vpon payn that aſwell the principall offendors, as their ayders, mainteyners, and procurers in any ſuch reſcues or reſiſtance, ſhalbe committed to priſon, there to remaine cloſe without any maner of lybertie. And to be furder ſeuerally chaſtiſed and puniſhed for the ſame contempt (beſides the puniſhmente due for the cauſe, whervpon the attachment was awarded) as ſhalbe expreſſely deuiſed, limitted, & appointed by her maieſties own ſpeciall direction, with thaduiſe of her Counſell. And in the meane ſeaſon not to be bailed or deliuered out of priſon by any maner of officer without hauing ſpecial warant therfore, from her Maieſtie: for ſo doth her highnes meane to take the care to her ſelfe, to puniſh ſuch a notable contempt. And to deuiſe ſuch ſeuerall maner of puniſhmentes, for terror and example, as ſhalbe requiſite to the maner & other circumſtances of the offence. And furder her Maieſtie cōmandeth, that all other perſons being preſent or nere to any ſuch reſcues to be made, ſhall do their beſt endeauour to ayde the publike officer, & to attache the offendors and their adherents, vpon payn to be likewiſe impriſoned, vntill her maieſties pleaſure ſhalbe therin ſpeciallye declared. Or that the Iuſtices of the Aſſiſſe, or of Oyer and terminer at their next comming nere to that place, or the preſident and counſell (if the caſe ſhal ſo require) in the Marches of Wales, or in the North, ſhall otherwiſe order therin, according to the quality of the fault. Wherin her maieſtie chargeth the ſame Iuſtices, Preſidents and Counſell, to vſe ſuch ſeueritie as to the cauſe ſhall appertayn, and moue others, by thexample and terror of puniſhment to forbeare from the lyke.
            
               Yeuen at Weſtminſter the xxi. day of March. 1564. The ſeuenth yere of her Maieſties Reigne.
               
God ſaue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ 
               Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richarde Jugge and John Cawood, Printers to the Quenes Maieſtie.
            
         
         
            ¶ Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   