
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            A Proclamation againſt the deceiptfull winding and folding of Wools.
            
               FOR reformation and redreſſe of many deceits and falſhoods vſed and practiſed in winding and folding of Wooles: The Queenes moſt royall Maieſtie by the aduiſe of her moſt honourable Counſell ſtraightly chargeth and commandeth that no maner of perſon or perſons, whatſoeuer he or they be, at any time hereafter, goe about or take vpon him or them to wynde or folde any manner of wooles in any Countrey, where any ende wooles are accuſtomed to be wrought or in the Counties of Lincolne Liceſter, or Rutland before he or they ſhall be admitted and allowed by the Maſter and Wardens of the Company and fellowſhip of the Woolmen of the Citie of London, or one of them for the tyme being, or before the Maior of the Staple of Boſton for the tyme being, for the woolles of the grothe of the Counties of Lincolne, Leiceſter, and Rutland aforeſaid, by thaduiſe of a ſworne Packer. And that euery perſon or perſons ſo allowed and admitted for an able and lawfull workeman or workemen in forme aforeſaid ſhal haue a Teſtimoniall or Certificate of his allowance & admittance vnder the ſeale of the Maior of the Staple at Weſtminſter for the tyme being or of the Maior of the Staple of Boſton for the tyme being, for the Wooll of the growing of the Counties aforeſaid. And that none of the ſaid perſons ſo allowed and admitted, or that ſhall be ſo allowed and admitted, ſhall goe about or take vpon him or them to wynde or fold any woolles, before he or they haue taken a corporall othe before one of the ſayd Maiors for the tyme being according to the intent aboue limited, that he or they ſhall truely and iuſtly without deceipt wyn de or fold all and ſinguler ſuch Wooll or Woolles as hee or they ſhall take vpon him or them, to wynd or fold, ne ſhall vſe any deceipt, craft, fraud, or guyle therein, vpon paine that euery perſon which ſhall take vpon him to wynd or fold any manner of Wooles being not admitted and ſworne as is aforeſayd, ſhall ſuffer impriſonment by the ſpace of x. dayes and to bee ſet vpon the Pillorie in the next Market towne, with a fleece of Wooll hanging about his necke.
            And her Maieſtie by the aſſent aforeſaid further ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth that no grower, breeder, brogger or gatherer of any end Wooles or other Wooles within the Counties aforenamed ſhall at any time hereafter ſet on worke any Woolfolder or Woolwynder to fold or wynd his or their Wooll or Woolles, vnleſſe the ſaid Woolfolder or Woolwinder, bring with him or them a Teſtimoniall or Certificate vnder the Seale of the ſaid Maior of the Staple of Weſtminſter, for the tyme being, or the Maior of the Staple of Boſton, for the tyme being in fourme as is aforeſayd, teſtifiyng him or them, to be ſworne and admitted for an able workeman to fold and to wynd Wooles in manner and fourme as is aforeſaid, vpon paine of impriſonment and fine at the Queenes Maieſties pleaſure.
            And further whereby an Act made in the xxiii. yeare of the raigne of her Maieſties moſt deare father, King Henry theight yet ſtanding in force it was enacted that no manner of perſon doe wynde or cauſe to be wound any fleece of Wooll, not being ſufficiently riuered or waſhed, ne wynde or cauſe to be wound in any fleece any deceiuable thing whereby the fleece may bee the more waightie to the deceipt and loſſe of the buyer, vpon paine the ſeller of ſuch deceitfull Woolles to for faite for euery ſuch fleece vi. d. Her Maieſtie being informed that notwithſtanding the ſaid good Act much deceipt is vſed in waſhing winding and folding of Woolles, doth ſtraightly charge and command all and euery her Subiects to obſerue the true meaning of the ſaid Act, vpon payne of forfeiture of the penalties therein contained and as they will auoyd her Highneſſe further diſpleaſure: And for the auoyding and eſchewing of further craft and deceipt now of late vſed. The Queenes moſt royall Maieſtie with thaduiſe aforeſaid ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth, that from henceforth no grower or breeder of Woolles whatſoeuer he or they be, ſhall permit and ſuffer his or their ſheepe being waſhed and dryed againe ready to be ſhorne, to goe aboue v. or vi. dayes vnſhorne or vnclipped if the weather bee dry, vpon paine of impriſonment and fine at the Queenes Maieſties pleaſure.
            And further her Maieſtie by the thaduiſe aforeſaid ſtraghtly chargeth and commaundeth all and euery Iuſtice of Peace, Maiors, Sheriffes Bailiffes and all other officers and miniſters as they will auoide her Highneſſe diſpleaſure, and anſwere to the contrary at their perils, that they and euery of them cauſe euery ſuch offendor and offendors to be puniſhed for ſuch offence or offences according as is afore expreſſed and declared.
            
               Gyuen at our manour of Grenewich, the x. of Auguſt, in the fourth yeere of Our raigne. Anno M. D. Lxij.
                  
               
God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde by Richard Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
            
         
         
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
      
   