
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ By the Queene.
            ¶ A Proclamation to adiourne part of Midſommer Terme.
            
               THE Queene our Soueraigne Ladie for diuers vrgent cauſes and great conſiderations, her Maieſtie ſpecially mouing, and for the high Commoditie of her moſt louing ſubiects, by the aduiſe of her moſt Honourable Councell, is fully reſolued and determined to adiourne part of this next Terme of the holy Trinity, commonly called Trinity Terme: that is to ſay, the Vtas of the holy Trinity, the Quindecim of the holy Trinity, and Tres Semaynes of the holy Trinity, vnto the Vtas of S. Michael next comming, beeing the firſt day of Michaelmas Terme: And therefore her Maieſtie doth ſignifie vnto all and ſingular her louing ſubiects, that they and euery of them, which haue cauſe or commandement to appeare in any of her Highneſſe Courts at Weſtminſter, at the Vtas, Quindecim, and Tres Semaines of the holy Trinity, or at any of them, or at any day meane betweene any of the ſaid three Returnes, may tarry at their dwellings, or where their buſineſſe otherwiſe ſhall lie, without reſorting to any of the ſaid Courts for that cauſe. And that without danger of forfeiture, penaltie, or contempt to incurre towards her Highneſſe in that behalfe. And neuertheleſſe, her Maieſties pleaſure is, that two of her Iuſtices, that is to ſay, of either Bench one, ſhall the firſt day of this next Trinity Terme, called Craſtino Trinitatis, according to the auncient order of her Lawes, keepe the Eſſoynes of the ſaid Craſtino Trinitatis, and ſo to keepe & continue the ſaid Courts in her ſaid two Benches at Weſtminſter, vntill the firſt day of the Vtas of the holy Trinitie next, to the intent that they may make an order for the continuance of proceſſe depending in the ſaid Courts; And alſo award Writs and Records of Niſi Prius, and ſuch other proceſſe as may be for the furtherance of Cauſes and ſuits depending before them: At which Vtas of the holy Trinitie Writs of Adiournement ſhall be directed to the ſaid Iuſtices, giuing them authoritie to adiourne the ſaid Vtas, Quindecim, and Tres Semaynes of the ſaid Trinitie Terme. And that the ſame adiourenment ſhall be made in the firſt day of the ſaid Vtas, commonly called the day of the Eſſoynes. And whereas in the terme of the holy Trinitie, yeerely it hath beene vſed and accuſtomed, that the dayes and places of the Circuits of the Queenes Iuſtices of the Gaole deliueries, Aſſiſes, Niſi Prius, and Oyer and Determiner, haue beene appointed and ſet vp in open places, to the intent that euery perſon hauing cauſe of ſuite before them, might haue knowledge of the ſayd times and places, for the better and redier expedition of their ſaid ſuits; Her Maieſties pleaſure is that the ſame order of appointment both for the times, dayes, and places of the ſaid Gaole deliueries, Aſſiſes, Niſi Prius, and Oyer and Determiner, now for this time be appointed and ſet vp, and notice made thereof this preſent Terme of Eaſter, for the better knowledge thereof to be had for them that ſhall haue to doe before them. And her Maieſties further pleaſure is, that all matters, cauſes, and ſuits depending in any of her other Courts, betweene partie and partie, as in her Highnes Courts of Chauncery, Starre Chamber, and Exchequer, and Court of Wards and Liueries ſhall haue continuance, and the parties ſhall haue day from the laſt day of this Terme, vnto the firſt day of Michaelmaſſe Terme next comming. Prouided alwayes, that all Collectors, Receauours, Sheriffes and other Accomptants, and all other perſons that ought, or ſhould accompt or pay any money in any of the ſame Courts of the Exchequer, Court of Wards and Liueries, or in any of them, or to enter into any accompt in any of the ſame Courts, ſhall be bound to appeare, pay, and doe in euery behalfe, as though no ſuch Proclamation of adiornement had beene had, Any thing mentioned in this preſent Proclamation, or in any Writ of Adiornement to the contrary in any wiſe notwithſtanding. And the Queenes Maieſtie ſtraightly chargeth and commandeth, that no Clerke or Officer, of any of her ſayd Courts of Kings Bench, or Common Place ſhall make any Proceſſe for the perſonall appearance of any perſon in any of the ſame Courts, to be had in Craſtino of the holy Trinitie next comming.
            
               Teſte Regina apud Weſtm. xxiiij. die Maij. Anno regni Reginae Elizabethae, &c. Secundo.
               
            
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
   