
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ A Decree of the Priuye Counſell at vveſtminſter. Anno. 1.5.5.9. xx. October
            Articles agreed vppon by the Lordes and other of the Quenes Maieſties pryuy Counſayle, for a reformation of their ſeruauntes in certayne abuſes of apparell thereby to gyue example to alother Lordes, noble men and Gentlemen.
            
               EVery Lord and Mayſter hauing ſeruauntes, ſhal furthwith cauſe a viewe to be taken of al his ſeruauntes, attending about the Citie, and conſidre their degres and habilities of lyuyng, how many may diſpende and be aſſeſſed to the Subſedie at. xx. pound of yerely lyuelyhode, or at two hundrede pounde in goodes, and therevpon cauſe them to vnderſtande what is laweful for them to weare in their apparrel, and take ordre to reforme it, in this maner or ſuch lyke.
            FYrſt as many as haue anye apparrell vnlawfull for them to weare, and can withoute ther loſſe leaue the ſame, to leaue it furthwith, and to be ſtrayghtly charged that they procure no newe.
            NExt that ſumme mete perſons be aſſigned by the Mayſter, to take a certaine viewe of al the ſeruauntes preſente apparrell, beyng vnlawefull, and make a certaine boke therof, and therevpon gyue commaundemente that noo newe be bought or worne after the ſayd viewe taken.
            THyrdly theſe bokes ſhalbe delyuered eyther into the countinge houſe, or to the gentlemen huyſhers, there to remayne, to thend that yf any ſhalbe empeched for wearyng of any vnlawfull apparrell, that then the ſame might be tryed whether it were newely prouyded ſithens the viewe taken or no.
            ITem, ordre ſhalbe taken and charge gyuen by the Lordes and Mayſters, that vpon this reformation the mallycyous inuention and frowarde nature of any ſeruauntes, ſhall not deuyſe anye newe faſhion, or ſorte of apparrell, that ſhould be as ſumptuous as the former, though not contrary to the wordes of the ſtatute, thereby ſekyng by fraud to auoyde the payne of the lawe, with which peruerſe condition the wiſedome of the Mayſters muſt mete. both to chaſtyſe ſuch lewde ſeruauntes, and to confort ſuch aswyllyue in ordre and honeſt and cumlye maner.
            ANd becauſe many Gentlemen and ſeruauntes, haue at this preſent, ſumme by giftes, ſome otherwiſe, furres, embrodiries, and other garmentes, or ornamentes, contrary to the lawes of the Realme. It is conuenient that euery perſon hauing ſuch beyng not well hable to chaunge the ſame. But meanyng hereafter to obſerue the lawe & not be empeched for his default herein, ſhall deliuer a true certificate ſigned with his hand, of all ſuch his apparell as is not lawefull for his degree to the Lord Chamberlayne of the Quenes Maieſties houſeholde, if he meane to weare the ſame apparrell in anye the Quenes Maieſties Chambers, or to the comptynge houſe, if he meane to weare thee ſame, within the gates of the Courte. So as for the tyme ſuche perſons as were their former vnlawefull apparrell maye be forborne and ſpared.
            ANd it ſemeth not vnmeete to refrayne the conetuouſe lewde condition of the Taylors, and hoſyers, that euerye Lorde 
                  •••
                Mayſ
                  •••
                
               
                  ••
               ther by hymſelfe, or ſome his principall officers preſcrybe to all maner of his ſeruauntes, that none of them ex
                  •••
               e ſomme conuenient and reaſonable price for their garmentes, and ſpecially for their hoſe, wherin a diuerſitie would be had betwene them which be hable, and ſo aſſeſſed in Subſedye, either at xx. pound yerely lyuely hode, or two hundred pound in goodes, and all others that be not. And yet notwithſtandynge that all this trauayle is to be taken for reformation of the ſhamefull exceſſe of Apparrell, as thoccaſion of dyuerſe of pouertie, in others, of robberies and ſuch like. Yet it is mete and conueniente that all Lordes ſeruauntes (ſpecyally in the Court) ſhoulde go ſemely and cumly for the honor of their Maiſter, which may be well done, wearynge the commodities of thys Realme, and vſyng meaſure in all ſhape and forme of apparrell.
            God ſaue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Povvles Churchyarde bi Richard Iugge, and Iohn Cavvood, printers to the Quenes Maieſtie.
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   