
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            
               WHereas the Queenes Maieſtie, aſwell for the commoditie of her Realme, as for the benefite of ſundrie of her Subiects, hath heretofore ordeined a Lotterie generall to be erected in her Citie of London for her ſaid Realme, of the which the furtheſt day of reading of the ſame hath beene alſo heretofore ſignified by certaine Proclamaticns to be intended at the furtheſt, before Candlemas next, To the ende that by the diſcourſe of the ſame Reading (as it was promiſed by the Chart) euery one might haue knowledge, and to enioy the Prices that Fortune ſhall giue vnto them: Her Maieſtie being newly informed, that generally the people deſire very much to haue the daye of the reading with ſpeede, thinking Candlemas ouer long, with diuerſe other opinions raiſed among her ſaid people, as it ſeemeth, by diſquiet and curious heads, contrary to her Maieſties ſincere will and meaning.
            For remedie whereof, and ſpecially to ſatiſfie the doubtfulneſſe of the ſimpler ſort, Her Maieſtie of her naturall accuſtomed grace and benignitie (by the aduiſe of her Counſell) hath ordeined and by theſe preſents doth giue all perſons to vnderſtand, that the day of the reading (which ſhould be at Candlemas next, as afore is ſaid ſhall begin the thirde day of Nouember next without any delay: And therefore euery one hauing intereſt herein may giue their attendance, or other wiſe direct themſelues accordingly. Giuing to vnderſtand alſo to all maner of perſons, that the Collection of the Lottes in any place being out of the Citie of London, ſhall not endure any longer than vntill the xx. day of September next, and in the Citie of London vntill the laſt day of the ſame moneth of September, and no longer.
            And becauſe ſome may bee diſpoſed by themſelues or in company with others to aduenture in the ſaid Lotterie ſome notable ſumme of Money, if it weregranted that they ſhould enioy the aduantages that heretofore were giuen to others, laying in their moneyes within the three Moneths ſpecified in the Chart (the which is long paſt and expired:) Her Maieſtie of her liberalitie and benigne grace (as before is ſaide) is pleaſed and content, that euery one that ſhall aduenture and lay into the ſaid Lotterie thirtie Lottes or vp ward (according to the conditions of the ſaid Chart) before the xx. day of September next, ſhall enioy the aduantages ſpecified by the ſaid conditions in the ſaid Chart.
            
               Yeouen at our Manour of Hauering the xiii. day of Iuly in the yeare of our Lord God, 1568 and in the tenth yeare of her Maieſties Reigne.
               
¶ God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Henrie Bynneman, dwelling in Knight rider ſtreete, at the ſigne of the Marmaide.
         
      
   