
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            
               WHereas the infection of the plague and peſtilence doth at this preſent remaine and continue within the Cities of London and Weſtminſter, to the great griefe of the Queenes Maieſtie our Soueraigne Lady, and perill of many of her good Subiects of the ſame, (the which almightie God for his mercy ſtay) and that by acceſſe of her people thither about their lawfull and neceſſary ſuites and affaires in this next Terme of Saint Michael, (the plague then enduring) might be rather occaſion to increaſe the ſame, then diminiſh it, which ſhould be great ſorrow to her Highneſſe, and danger to her whole Realme. Minding therefore the preſeruation of her louing Subiects, from the perill and danger of the ſaid infection, hath thought it expedient by the aduiſe of her Counſell, for ſundrie good conſiderations, to adiourne the whole Terme of Saint Michael next comming, from and in the firſt day thereof, vnto the firſt day of Hyllarie Terme then next enſuing. And therefore her Maieſtie doth ſignifie vnto all and ſingular her louing Subiects, that they and euery of them which hath cauſe or commandement to appeare in any of her Highneſſe Courts at Weſtminſter, in or at any day or time in the ſaide Terme of Saint Michaell, may tary at their dwellings, or where their buſineſſe otherwiſe ſhall lye, without reſorting to any of the ſaide Courts for that cauſe, before Octauis ſancti Hillarii, next comming, and that without danger of forfaiture, penaltie or contempt to incur towards her Highnes in that behalfe. And neuertheles her Maieſties pleaſure is that two of her Iuſtices, that is to ſay, of either Bench one, ſhall the firſt day of Michaelmas Terme, called Octauis M
                     •
                  chaelis, according to the ancient order of her Lawes, keepe the Eſſoines of the ſaid 
                  〈…〉
                M
                  〈…〉
               , at which vtas of Saint Michael, writtes of adiournement ſhalbe directed to the ſaid Iuſtices, giuing them authoritie to adiourne the ſaide whole Terme of Saint Michaell, and the ſame adiournement ſhalbe made in the firſt day of the ſaid vtas, commonly called the day of the Eſſoines. And her Maieſties further pleaſure is, that all matters, cauſes and ſuites, depending in any of her other Courts betweene partie and partie, as in her Highnes Courts of Chancerie, Starre Chamber, and Exchequer, Courts of Wardes and Liueries, and Duchie of Lancaſter, ſhall haue continuance, and the parties ſhal haue day from the date of theſe preſents, vnto the ſaid firſt day of Hyllarie Terme, next comming.
            Prouided alwayes, and her Maieſties pleaſure and commandement is, that all Collectours, Receiuers, Sheriffes, and other accomptants, and all other perſons that ought or ſhould accompt or pay any ſumme or ſummes of money in any of her Maieſties Court of Exchequer, Courts of Wardes and Liueries, or in her Duchie of Lancaſter, or in any of them, or to enter into any accompt in any of the ſame Courts: ſhall repaire vnto her Maieſties houſe of Sion in the Countie of Middleſex, where her Highnes hath appointed ſuch officers and miniſters, as for that purpoſe her Maieſtie hath thought expedient, and there to paye and doe in euery behalfe, as though no ſuch Proclamation of adiournement had bene had or made: Any thing mentioned in this preſent Proclamation, or in any writ of adiournement to the contrary, notwithſtanding. Willing and commanding euery of her ſaide Subiects, to whom it doth appertaine, to obſerue and keepe their aſſemblies and apparances in her Highnes ſaide Courts at Weſtminſter in Octauis ſancti Hyllary, next comming, then and there to be holden and kept, there to doe their offices and dueties in euery behalfe, as they will anſwere for the contrary, at their perils.
            
               Yeuen at her Highneſſe Caſtell of Windſor, the xxi. of September, the fifth yeere of her Maieſties reigne.
               
¶ God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London in Powles Church yarde by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   