
      
         
            
            ¶ By the Quene.
            
               THE Quenes Maiestie, perceauyng by experience, that her enemies the French, intende to procure by couin certaine persons of this Realme, being more geuen to lucre, then to theyr dueties, to colour and beare the name as owners, though not in trueth, of great quantitie of wynes and other cōmodities, to be brought out of the Frenche kynges countreys by indirecte meanes, into this Realme, to the great gayne of her enemies, and damage to all her good Subiectes: Hath thought necessary for the weale and state of her Realme, whiche ought to be preferred aboue any particuler mens interestes, to prouide for some remedye. And therfore, least any shoulde excuse them selues by ignoraunce, doth notifie such kynde of colouryng of French mens goodes, to be an aydyng and comfortyng of her enemies, whiche by the auncient lawes of this Realme, is hygh Treason. Wherof her Maiestie wylleth all maner her Subiectes or any other that haue geuen theyr othe of allegeaunce to this Crowne of Englande, to take good heede for the daunger that must nedes therof insue. And further also, her Maiestie by aduise of her Councell, doth 
                  •
               rayghtly charge and commaunde all maner her Subiectes, vtterly to forbeare to bryng into this Realme duryng these warres, any maner of wynes, of the growth of any part of the Frenche kynges dominions, or to bargayne with any maner of person for any such wynes, vpon payne that whosoeuer shall do any thyng to the contrary therof, to forfait the whole wynes, and to be committed to pryson, there to remayne during her Maiesties pleasure, as one that beyng thus forbydden, may duely be charged to be aydyng and comfortyng to her Maiesties enemies. Prouided neuerthelesse, that such wynes as shalbe lawfully, and without fraude, taken by any of her Maiesties subiectes, as men of warre vppon the Seas, from her Maiesties enemies the French: may be brought into any port of this Realme, & solde, as the same myght before this Proclamation.
            And yet to the ende her Maiestie maye vnderstande the estymate of the wyne so brought in by men of warre: Her Maiestie commaundeth all suche as shall so take any, and shall bryng or sende the same into any porte, shall permit the officers of the porte, to take a viewe and note of the quantitie therof. And the sayd officers shall so do, without exactyng any thyng of the owner or taker of the wynes, otherwyse then before this tyme they myght haue done: And shall within twenty dayes or lesse tyme, accordyng to the distaunce of the place, after the viewe duely taken, certifie by wryting to her Maiesties priuie Councell attendyng on her person, the sayde quantitie of wyne, with the names of the takers.
            Prouided also, that notwithstandyng this prohibition, it shalbe lawfull for suche persons as in the moneth of Nouember last, had licence of her Maiestie for the quantitie only of two thousand Tonnes of wyne, to be brought into this Realme in strangers bottomes, to take the effecte and benefite of the same licence for the saide quantitie of two thousande Tonnes, to be brought in strangers bottomes, being in amitie with her Maiestie.
            
               Apud Wyndsor. 8. I
                        •••••
                     ii. 1563.
               
            
            God saue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted by Richard Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Quenes Maiestie.
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
      
   