
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ By the Queene.
            
               THe Queenes Maieſtie being ſundry wayes enfourmed, that many marchaunts, aſwell of her owne ſubiects as ſtraungers, ſeeking their owne ſinguler game and aduauntage, contrary to all reaſon and the common wealth of her Maieſties good and naturall ſubiects, and directly againſt thauncient lawes and Statutes of this Realme, haue of late gathered into their hands great quantities of Hoppes, making ſuch a monopoly of the ſame Hoppes. as the hundreth weight of Hops which hath ben vſually ſolde within theſe fewe yeeres at xiii. s. iiii. d. or xx. s. at the moſt for euery hundreth, be now ſolde for ſyxe poundes and more. The ill example whereof, myght bryng the lyke monopolies of other wares and marchaundizes, to the great loſſe of the multitude of marchaunts vſyng the trade of marchaundize, and to the great decay of the common wealth of this her Maieſties Realme:
            Doth therefore ſtraightly charge and commaunde, that from and after the firſt day of February next, no Marchaunt be he her Maieſties naturall ſubiect, or ſtraunger, ſhall put to ſale any Hoppes, directly or vndirectly, in groſſe or by retayle, at any greater or more pryce then forty ſhillings for euery hundreth at the moſt, vpon payne of incurring ſuch penalties, as ben prouided by her Maieſties lawes, and vpon her Maieſties hygh diſpleaſure and impriſonment. Straightly chargyng and commaunding all manner her Maieſties officers and miniſters, to whom it ſhall appertaine, to fee that the premiſſes be effectually put in execution, and the offenders therein duely puniſhed.
            
               Yeuen at her Maieſties Caſtle of Wyndſor, the xxx. of Ianuary, the ſyxt yeere of her highnes raigne.
               
            
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted by Richard Iugge and Iohn Cawood Printers to the Queenes Maieſty.
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   