
      
         
            
            PROVISION FOR the poore, now in penurie.
            OVT OF THE STORE-HOVSE of Gods plentie: Which they ſhall be ſure to find in all places, that are indued with his graces, to thinke ſeriouſly on this ſentence following.
            
               Pſal. 41.1.
               Bleſſed is he that conſidereth of the poore, the Lord will deliuer him in the time of trouble.
            
            Explaned by H. A.
            
            
            LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede. 1597.
         
         
            
            To the Chriſtian Reader, in what calling ſoeuer, Grace, &c.
            
            
               THe complaint of the poore through penurie in Englande, hath continued long, (good Chriſtian reader) and yet it appeareth their want groweth greater. What ſhould this import? but either they cry not aright themſelues, to him that is able & willing to help, or elſe the bowels of tender compaſſion are ſhut vp in ſuch as ſhould relieue them. Touching the poore that crie hard for foode, and finde ſmall ſupply: the reaſon is, for that they doe not complaine vnto God of their grieuous ſinnes (the verie maine cauſe of all their calamities:) which if they looke to haue releaſed, and no further increaſed, they muſt confeſſe in maner following. Firſt, that they haue miſſpent much good time in idle roging vp and downe, and woulde not worke: therefore the Lord doth iuſtly requite them, that now when they would, they ſhall not eate (or verie little.) Second, that in the time of abundance, they haue beene great waſters in bibbing and belly cheare: therefore nowe iuſtly they feele the want thereof. Thirdly, That when God by his meſſengers, called vpon them to leaue their euill wayes, and ſerue him better, they would not heare to follow the ſame: Therfore doth God nowe ſhut vp his eares, and others alſo, when they cry for foode. If they would gladly then finde ſupplie, they muſt reſolue to turne to God quickly, to confeſſe all their ſinnes, to aske him pardon, to promiſe amendment,

and to pray dayly for increaſe of his grace, that they may performe the ſame, then will he ſhorly ſend them releefe. To come to thoſe that ſhould relieue the poore, whom God hath indued with wealth and abilitie, whereof ſome are willing to ſupply their wants, and do it in ſome places to Gods glorie and their owne comfor
                  •
               , but others (alas) are too hard hearted, vnwilling almoſt to part with any thing (albeit they richly abound with all things, (and they may bee proued to haue bin makers of poore) vnto whō I ſpeak in the name of the Lord,
                  Prou. 21.13 
               That if they ſtill refuſe to heare and helpe the needie when they crie for ſuccour, they ſhall crie themſelues and not bee heard when they would faineſt ſpeed. I wiſh thē therfore in time to ſhewe mercie (as this booke informeth them) leaſt when they looke not for it, they finde ſtrict iudgement without any mercie:
                  Iam. 2.13. for ſhall the Lord Ieſus ſtand at the doore (in his needfull members) and will they not releeue him that came to ſaue them?Mat. 25. ch. Then ſhall they bee reiected at the laſt great day into eternall torments. Lay this to your hearts ye rich men of the world, and open your eares and purſes to the poore,Gen. 41. ch. whilſt God giueth ſpace and offereth you grace, leaſt when you would haue it, you cannot finde it. If I could my ſelfe as well remoue their wants (as Ioſeph preuented the like in Egypt) I ſhould not thus ſue for ſuccor at your hands. The Lord open your hearts to extende compaſſion, that in the ende you may find conſolation. So be it.
            
               
                  Your poore welwiller, Hen. Arth.
            
            
         
         
            
            
               The Text diuided.
               Bleſſed is he that conſidereth the poor, The Lorde will deliuer him in the time of his trouble. Pſal. 41.1.
                  
                     
                        1. The deſcription of a good man. In theſe wordes, Bleſſed is hee, that, &c.

                           
                              1. The title aſcribed to ſuch a perſon, That he is bleſſed.
                           
                              2. The manifeſt marke of ſuch a man: That he conſidereth of the poore.
                        
                     
                     
                        2. The benefite belonging to ſuch a perſon: The Lorde will deliuer him, &c.

                           
                              1. His ſafe preſeruation, in theſe words: The Lorde will deliuer him.
                           
                              2. The time when, eſpecially, In the time of his trouble.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            In the handling of which points, verie profitable inſtructions will appeare concerning the poor, how they may bee relieued this deare yeare in all places, without ſurcharging any perſon.
         
      
      
         
            
            Prouiſion for the poore now in penurie, out of the Storehouſe of Gods plentie.
            
            
               
                  Bleſſed is he that conſidereth of the poore, The Lorde will deliuer him in the time of his trouble.
                  
                     Pſal. 41.1
               
            
            
               THere is no dutie of Chriſtianitie more commaunded or commended in holy ſcripture, Then Loue out of a pure heart vnfeyned,
                  Ioh. 13.15. cha.
                becauſe it hath relation to both the tables of gods law and therefore is tearmed by Chriſt himſelfe (the fountaine of true loue) The verie badge to know his diſciples from Sathans bondſlaues (who delight euer in malice and miſchiefe) neither can there bee any thing wherein the loue of Chriſtians may appeare more plainely, then in reléeuing one another in their neceſſitie.
                  Ephe. 4.2.15. In diſcharging which dutie, the moſt able and willing are flowe inough, and many faire profeſſors murmur thereat, as Iudas did at Marie Magdalen, who found openly a great default with her, for pouring a box of precious Oyle, vppon the bleſſed head of Ieſus, (though ſhe did it dutifully,
                  Mat. 26.6 13. to prepare him to his burial) pretending good wil vnto the poore, yt it might haue bin ſolde & giuen vnto them (not that indéed he ſought their ſupply)

but intended to haue it to his owne vſe, becauſe he was a théefe and bare the bag,
                  Ioh 13.3.9. as Chriſt reporteth of him, and that the woman had wrought a good worke on him: ſaying further, They ſhould haue the poore at all times with them, to helpe them (if they would) giuing ſuch to vnderſtand that found ſo great fault with Maries fact,
                  Mar. 14.3.9. that they made a great ſhew to relieue the poore, but when they ſhould ſéeke for ſuccour vnto them, they would be then ſlow inough to ſuſtaine them: which amongſt many is a common corruption in theſe daies,A common default in theſe daies. rather to find fault at others well dooing, in giuing of almes, then to bée liberall that way themſelues, to giue good almes vnto others. To redreſſe which default (the poore in all places béeing in penurie) I haue vndertaken to be their Solicitour,The author the poores Solicit
                     ••
                  . vnto all manner of perſons, which ought in equitie either to ſupply them, or to prouide that ſuch as make default (being well able) may bee compelled thereunto by further authoritie from the Almightie, if this gentle motion in the words precedent will not preuaile, which héere I will repeate and explane vnto them, (by Gods aſſiſtance)
Bleſſed is he that conſidereth of the poore, the Lord will deliuer him in the time of his trouble.
            
            IN this parcell of holy Scripture we are to obſerue eſpecially two parts.
            
               
                  1 Firſt the deſcription of a good man or woman in theſe words expreſſed, Bleſſed is he that conſidereth of the poore.
               
               
                  2 Second, the benefit belonging to ſuch a perſon, that is to ſay, The Lord will deliuer him in the time of his trouble.
               
            
            In the deſcription of this good man, we are to remember two other points.
            
               
                  1 Firſt, the title aſcribed vnto him, That he is (bleſſed)
               
               
                  2 Second, the manifeſt marke of ſuch a man, That he conſidereth of the poore.
               
            
            Concerning the benefit belonging to ſuch a man, wee are to

meditate of theſe two points alſo.
            
               
                  1 Firſt, His ſafe preſeruation, contained in theſe words, The Lord will deliuer him.
               
               
                  2 Second, The time when eſpecially, viz. In the time of his trouble.
                  
               
            
            To begin with the firſt point, and procéede in the particulars, where the kingly Prophet Dauid ſaith: Bleſſed is hee that conſidereth, &c. His meaning is not, that ſuch a good man onely is bleſſed, but ſuch a woman alſo,Both kinds bleſſed. for in this place Man ſignifieth mankinde, that is, both ſexes, man and woman. As our Sauiour Chriſt in generall tearmes ſaith: Bleſſed are the mercifull, naming neither man nor woman,
                  Mat. 5.7. but compriſeth them both within the compaſſe of true bleſſedneſſe, (if they be mercifull)
            Moreouer, though in the deſcription of this godly perſon, or any other in vſuall ſpéech, the title is euer ſet downe before, to mooue others to better attention of that which followeth,The firſt in vſe, the ſecond in order. yet hauing relation vnto the qualities of that perſon, it muſt in order follow the ſame, and be handled the latter, for in due procéeding, the caſe ſtandeth thus: He that conſidereth the poore, he is bleſſed. As if the Prophet ſhould ſay, whoſoeuer would know one ſpeciall marke (amongſt others) of a bleſſed man,Six parts concerning the poore. hee that conſidereth the poore is ſuch a one. In which ſhort ſentence we are to obſerue ſixe eſpeciall points.
            
               
                  1 What kinde of poore the Prophet here meaneth.
               
                  2 What it is, rightly to conſider of them.
               
                  3 What perſons rightly conſider the poore.
               
                  4 To produce ſome examples of the poore conſiderers.
               
                  5 The double effect of conſidering the poore.
               
                  6 Their dangerous eſtate that conſider not the poore.
            
            To begin firſt with thoſe poore whom the Prophet here propoundeth to bee conſidered of: in a word they bee all ſorts of poore good and bad, that are in any kinde of neceſſitie: which may be manifeſted by Saint Pauls words: Doo good to all,
               
                  Gal. 6.10. 
               eſpecially to thoſe of the houſhold of faith: containing both

ſorts within the compaſſe of our compaſſion, by the which occaſion,Six circumſtances cō
                  cerning the poore. theſe circumſtaunces concerning the poore are to bée remembred.
            
               
                  1 The ſeuerall kinds of poore to be holpen.
               
                  2 That none ought to be idle, nor yet to begge.
               
                  3 Why God will haue the poore amongſt vs.
               
                  4 What prouiſion is made for them by law.
               
                  5 Her Maieſties continuall care for their ſupplie.
               
                  6 What meanes to relieue them, is put in practice.
            
            
               Two ſorts of poore.Concerning theſe ſeuerall kinds of poore, that now eſpecially are to be conſidered of, may wel be diuided into theſe two ſorts.
            
               
                  1 The impotent poore.
               
                  2 The poore able to woorke.
            
            
               The impotent poore foure ſorts.The impotent poore, (though many in number) may well be conteyned within theſe foure kinds, all wanting wherewith to relieue themſelues.
            
               
                  1 Aged perſons paſt their worke,
               
                  2 Lamed perſons vnable to worke.
               
                  3 Little infants without parents.
               
                  4 Poore ſicke perſons during their weakneſſe.
            
            
               To be relieued in the whole.All theſe of neceſſitie, muſt be maintained in the whole, (if they haue not of their owne towards their ſupply) for touching the ſicke poore, (though they haue ſome goods, gotten by ſore labour in their health) yet I ſée no reaſon, that they ſhould ſell the Cowe which giues the children milke, nor the tooles they worke with, nor any néedfull thing belonging to their maintenance: all which things in compaſſion are to be ſpared, as the lawes of Moſes prouided in that caſe.
                  Deut. 24.
            
            Concerning the poore that are able to worke, they may be diuided into theſe two ſorts.
            
               
                  1 Such as may earne their whole maintenance.
               
                  3 Such as muſt be relieued in part,
            
            The poore that are able to liue by their labour, are of thrée ſortes.
            
               
                  1 Able to worke of three ſorts.
                  1 Such as are willing to take pains, and cannot get worke.
               
                  
                  2 Such as are yong and luſtie, yet vnwilling to labour.
               
                  3 Such as are committed for ſome offences, and haue not wherewith to be maintained.
            
            The poore not able to liue by their labour,2 VVilling to worke three ſorts. and yet fitte and willing to take paines, are of thrée ſorts alſo.
            
               
                  1 Orphaned children aboue ſeuen yeares olde.
               
                  2 Such as bee ouercharged with children, hauing nothing to maintaine them but their hand labour.
               
                  3 Such as fall to decay in their workes, by reaſon of theyr yeares, weakneſſe or infirmities.
            
            All which ought to be relieued in part, as their neceſſitie ſhal require.
            The ſecond circumſtaunce touching the poore, is,3 None to begge or be idle. to prouide that none liue idlely that can labour, nor any begge that are vnable: for both thoſe perſons ſtaine our profeſſion by theyr bad examples.
            But ſome will obiect, was not Lazarus a begger,An obiectiō
                lying dayly at the rich mans doore, and yet recommended in holy Scripture to be one of the redeemed in Ieſus Chriſt.
            The example of Lazarus is commended for his patience (not for his begging) being onely conſtrained therevnto,Anſwere. or elſe to famiſh. So ſmall regarde then was had of the poore, that were vnable to worke: for, if begging had been lawfull, Chriſt would haue ſayde, You ſhall haue Beggers alwayes with you,
                  Mar. 14.7 in ſtead of the Poore.
            The ſtrangers in London (if report be true) may be a patterne in theſe reſpects to all our Engliſh nation, for they are ſo carefull to kéepe their Countrey people, both from idleneſſe, and begging, that ſuch as can worke, neither want worke,How the ſtrangers in Londō prouide for their poore nor yet wages, and ſo ſoone as any fall in decay, their ſtate is imparted vnto their company, and then commonly, they abſtaine one meale on the next Lordes day, and giue the price thereof towards the parties maintenance. And their care in this caſe was ſo great in the primitiue Church,
                  Act. 4.34 37. that manie ſolde their liuing to maintaine theyr poore Brethren, and kept a

cuſtome euerie Lordes day to lay vp ſome money towardes the reliefe of poore ſtraungers,1. Cor. 16.1.5. The care in the primitiue curch of the poor. when a collection ſhould bée made for them: ſo vnwilling they were, that any Chriſtian ſhould begge in thoſe dayes, to the diſhonour of Chriſt and his Goſpel.
            
               3 VVhy the poore are ſcattered amongſt vs.The thirde circumſtaunce touching the poore, is to ſearch out the cauſe why God hath left the poore amongſt vs, (ſcattered as it were in all countries) which may ſéeme to bée in two reſpects, partly to trie our loue vnto them, and partly to approue our faith vnto God, that he may bleſſe vs, as Moſes declareth after this maner.
            
               
                  Deut. 15.1.18.If anie of thy brethren be falne poore, in the Citie, (as yée ſhall haue the poore alwayes with you) yée ſhall lende and giue him (as neceſſitie requyreth, without any grudging (not looking for it againe) that the Lorde thy God may proſper thy procéedings.
            The fourth circumſtaunce concerning the poore, is to conſider,Three ſtatutes for the poore. howe the lawes of this lande hath prouided for them, which conſiſt in thrée Statutes made to that ende ſince her Maieſties reigne.
            
               
                  1 The firſt, made in the fourtéenth yéere of her highneſſe reigne, intituled, An Act for the puniſhing of all rogiſh vagabonds.
               
                  2 The ſecond, made in the eightéenth yeare of her highneſſe reigne, intituled, An Act for ſetting the poore on worke, &c.
               
                  3 The third, made in the fiue and thirtith yeare of her highneſſe reigne, intituled, An Act for the neceſſarie reliefe of ſouldiers and mariners.
            
            
               1 Statute, how rogues ſhould be puniſhed.In the firſt Act, there is reſtraynt, that none ſhall wander abroad without licence vpon ſpeciall occaſion: all other vagarant perſons able to worke, to be taken and puniſhed as Rogues and Vagabonds, The firſt offence, to be ſtocking and whipping: The ſecond, to be burnt in the eare: and the third to be taken and hanged as felons.
            
               The ſecond act tendeth, to ſet the poore on work,2 How the poore ſhuld be ſet on worke. that there ſhould be houſes of correction builded in all countreyes, and ſtocks in money prouided, to ſet all the poore (that can worke) or lacke worke, to ſpinne, knit, or ſuch like, (and all the impotent to be otherwiſe reléeued by wéekely contribution.) If any refuſe to worke that are able,2. Theſ. 3.10. to be puniſhed with want of meat (as the apoſtle warneth) with flocking, whipping, or otherwiſe, at the gouernours diſcretion.
            The third act prouideth, that all manner of Souldiers and marriners that fal to be maimed in her maieſties warres,3 Statutes for releefe of Souldiers. ſhall be maintained honeſtly in their owne Countreyes (by generall ceaſſments) according to the places they ſerued in before, bringing due teſtimonie thereof, from their generall or Captaine.
            If theſe thrée ſtatutes were duely put in execution,VVant of execution, &c. (according to the true meaning thereof, there neither could nor would be ſo many poore, nor ſo great penurie, as there is at this day.
            The fift circumſtance concerning the poore,5 Her maieſties chrian care for the poore in two reſpects. to mooue our compaſſion towards their ſuſtenance, is the conſideration of her maieſties moſt gracious regard and forwardneſſe, to haue their wants ſupplyed in all parts, appearing plainely in theſe two points cheefly.
            
               1 Firſt in releaſing her owne right by cuſtome for the bringing in of corne from forraine kingdomes,1 In releaſing her cuſtome. to ſerue the want throughout her dominions (which will amount to no ſmall ſumme, both to incourage her merchants to venture, & to bring downe the price to reléeue the poore, which (God be thanked) it hath doone already in many places.
            
               2 Second, in cauſing her maieſties moſt honorable councell,2 The councels letters ſent in the poores behalfe, by hir maieſties meanes. to direct theyr letters in her owne name, to the two Archbiſhops, of Canturbury and Yorke, to ſignifie her pleaſure to all their brethren in both prouinces, that Wedneſday ſuppers ſhould be ſpared of the more able, & wholly conuerted towards

the due reléefe of the poore.
            I may not omit héere the chriſtian perſwaſions of the Lords of the councell,The councels care for releeuing the poore. in their godly letters to the ſaid Archbiſhop, to mooue them by all good meanes to ſéeke the maintenance of the poore, and withall in ſetting downe neceſſarie direction to all the Iuſtices in this Realme, for the reſtraint of waſteful expences, and due prouiſion to ſerue the markets, with corne in all parts (ſo much as is poſſible) to procure reléefe for her maieſties people, that none might periſh by this great penurie.
            Whereunto if we adde the forfaiture of 12. pence for euerie houſholders abſence from Church (man and woman) forenoone and after,Twelue pence a time for abſence from diuine ſeruice. ſunday and holiday (according to the ſtatute) without ſufficient cauſe alledged) to be duely collected by Churchwardens and others appointed to that end, with the like regard for Wednſday ſuppers: there would be ſufficient reléefe for the poore in all places (if corne were much déerer) as by indifferent computation will appeare. If we eſtimate the price of foure able perſons (their ſuppers only) towards the reléefe of one poore body, that could not worke.
            The ſixt circumſtance concerning the poore, is to ſearch out how thoſe prouiſions made by Law for their due reléefe,VVhat meanes to releeue the poore is put in practiſe. is put in practiſe: that is in few words, whether the impotent be prouided for, whether the able to labour haue worke and wages to liue vpon, and whether all idle vagabondes that are able and will not worke, be puniſhed for example ſake (according to the ſtatutes before expreſſed)
            It may be ſpoken to the praiſe of ſome well diſpoſed people in ſome good townes,Some good townes do prouide for the poore. within ſome parts of her maieſties dominions, that a man paſſing through the ſame ſhall ſée not one begger aſking any almes, (except one or two that kéepe the common box, according to the order) to take the beneuolence of trauellers and ſtrangers: ſo well are the ſtatutes obſerued in thoſe places.
            
               The poore of VVakefield.For the towne of Wakefield, where my abode is, (though the poore be many and needy) yet thus much in truth I may ſpeak,

to my knowledge, that if any be pinched with penurie, the default eſpecially reſteth in themſelues, though ſome other perſons can not be excuſed. For, (to the prayſe of God bée it ſpoken) there is not onelie a houſe of correction, according to the Lawe, but withall,The able want no worke if they will. certaine ſtockes of money put foorth into honeſt Clothiers handes, who are bounde with good ſureties, to ſet all the able poore to worke, after fiue pence, or ſixe pence a pound of wooll ſpinning (as they ſhall deſerue) if they will fetch it.
            For the impotent poore in euery ſtréete, they haue béene conſidered of, (by the moſt able and forwarde men of that Towne) and a generall ceaſſement voluntarie made for their ſupplie wéekelie,A weekely collection for the impotent. which by confirmation of her Maieſties Iuſtices, is ſtill kept of euerie able houſeholder, beſides the Wedneſdayes Suppers, for the which the Church-wardens take paynes accordingly, wherein if euerie one woulde diſcharge that dutie required of her Maieſtie, to let the poore haue the full benefite of their ſayde Suppers, there ſhould not one perſon haue cauſe to begge there for all this deare yeare. As for the yonger ſort, fitte to learne trades and occupations, there is order taken to put them to apprentiſſhippe, or otherwiſe to ſeruice.
            Hauing thus farre onely made declaration of the ſeuerall kindes of poore, and what prouiſion hath béene made for them by Actes of Parliament, and new of late by her Maieſties good meanes, and ſpeciall direction from the Lordes of her Counſaile: Let vs nowe procéede to the ſecond ſpeciall poynt of the former ſixe.Second poynt.
            
            What it is rightly to conſider of the poore.
            Concerning this poynt, there be ſixe propoſitions of ſpeciall importaunce to be conſidered of.Six poynts of conſideration.
            
            
               
                  1 The proceeding cauſes of ſo manie poore in all Countreyes.
               
                  2 That God might haue made our eſtate lyke vnto theirs.
               
                  
                  3 That we ſhould do to them as we would be done vnto.
               
                  4 Why we all ought to helpe to relieue them.
               
                  5 Thoſe places of ſcripture tending to compaſſion.
               
                  6 How their preſent want may be relieued.
            
            To begin with the firſt propoſition touching the procéeding cauſes of many poore in all Countreys, though ſome impute the ſame to the dearth of graine, and the occaſion thereof to vnſeaſonable weather,1 The proceeding cauſes of the poore. eſpecially in harueſt time, by tempeſtuous winds which ſhoake out the corne when it would haue béene ſhorne, yet muſt we ſearch further from whence thoſe windes came, and the cauſe thereof, which were the procéeding cauſes indéede.
            For the former of theſe laſt cauſes, all windes and ill weather procéede directly from the iuſtice of God,Gods iuſtice. (as many places of the holie Scripture proue the ſame) eſpecially in the Prophecie of Amos, where it is ſayde, There is no euill befalles to any Citie,
               
                  Amos 3.6. 
               but the Lord hath done it, (meaning by euill, all maner of afflictions.
            
               Mens ſins prouoking Gods iuſtice. Leu. 26. Deut. 28.Concerning the latter, the Scripture likewiſe doth make mention, that the ſinnes of all people do prouoke Gods iuſtice, to plague vs ſundrie wayes, as all men may perceyue in pervſing the Prophets (eſpecially the booke of Deuteronomie, and Leuiticus.)
            The due premeditation whereof, will vrge vs to conſider of thoſe particular ſinnes, which procure Gods iuſtice to puniſh vs with penurie.
            
               
                  1 Partly procéeding from the poore themſelues.
               
                  2 But more eſpecially from the poore makers.
            
            
               Six ſinnes proceeding from the poore.The procéeding ſinnes from the poore themſelues, whereby they prouoke the Lord to pinch them, are theſe ſix eſpecially.
            
               
                  1 Firſt, their miſſpending of former times in idleneſſe, when they might haue wrought.
               
                  2 Secondly, their wilfull waſting of their goods when they had them, in bibbing and belly-cheare.
               
                  3 Thirdly, their impacient bearing of their preſent want,

complaining often without cauſe.
               
                  4 Fourthly, their dayly repining at others proſperitie, to haue ſo much, and they ſo little.
               
                  5 Fiftly, their banning and curſing, when they are not ſerued as themſelues deſire.
               
                  6 Sixtly, their ſeldome repairing to their pariſh Churches, to heare and learne their duties better: all which muſt be amended, if they would haue their wants ſupplyed.
            
            The procéeding ſinnes from the poore makers, wherby they prouoke Gods iuſtice to plague vs with this preſent penurie,The poore makers ſins ten in number. in all places, are many and grieuous, eſpecially ten, which may be tearmed the bréeders of the poore.
            
               
                  1 All exceſſiue proude perſons in apparell.
               
                  2 The vnmeaſurable waſters of meate and drinke.
               
                  3 The importable oppreſſion of many Landlords.
               
                  4 The vnconſcionable extortion of all vſurers.
               
                  5 The vnſatiable couetouſneſſe in corne-mongers.
               
                  6 The wilfull wrangling in law matters.
               
                  7 The immoderate abuſe of gamming in all Countreys.
               
                  8 The diſcharging of ſeruants and apprentiſes.
               
                  9 The generall abuſe of all Gods benefites.
               
                  10 The want of execution of good lawes and ſtatutes.
            
            All which muſt néeds increaſe the poore, and the increaſe of poore muſt likewiſe procure penurie, and ſcarcitie in all places, as by diligent examining the former particulars, will appeare plainely to the view of all perſons.
            To begin firſt with all proud perſons,1 All proud perſons. that kéepe no moderation in their apparell, neither in coſt nor change, and commonly (farre aboue their calling) muſt not their maintenance vrge great ſums of money? It may be more then either their rents or getting will extend, which muſt néeds inforce them, either to racke their tenants by fines, or elſe to run on ſcore in their creditors bookes, till they ſell them one lordſhip after an other, and then muſt the tenants pay for their pride and will not this dealing make many poore?
            
               
               2 Al prodigal perſonsThe ſecond ſort of poore makers, be all ſuch kinde of prodigall perſons, as riotouſly waſte their goods and ſubſtance, in ſurfetting and drunkenneſſe, in banketting and bellicheare, day after day deuouring more meate and drinke into one bellie, then woulde well ſerue two or thrée perſons: and muſt not this dealing make all graine and victuals the ſcanter, which in the ende muſt néedes pinch the poore, through want of the ſame?
            
               3 Oppreſſing landlords.The thirde ſort of poore makers, are all vnreaſonable oppreſſing Landlordes, and that by thrée hookes, either by turning theyr Tenaunts out of doores, to enlarge theyr Demaines with their tenements, or inhauncing of their rents, or elſe in making them ſell all their goods, that they are not able to till their land, but let it cut to others: and muſt not this dealing make many poore?
            
               4 Extorting vſurers.The fourth ſort of poore makers, are all kinde of Vſurers, whether it bée in money or wares, who deale ſo vnconcionably with men in theſe dayes, that they are not aſhamed to extort twentie, thirtie, or fortie poundes in the hundreth, ſo they can defraude the lawe: and will not this dealing make many poore?
            
               5 Couetous corne-mongers.The fifth ſort of poore makers, are all ſortes of couetous Corne-mongers, who commonly kéepe one yeares ſtore before hande, cloſely laide vp in their Arkes or Garners, and rather then they will ſhew themſelues ſo louing to bring it to the Market, to make corne cheaper, can be contented to ſée theyr neighbours famiſhed: and muſt not this dealing increaſe their penurie?
            
               6 VVilfull wranglers in lawe matters.The ſixth ſort of poore makers, are all wilfull wranglers in Lawe matters, conſuming their ſubſtaunce in wreaking their wicked willes one of another (and ſometymes brether with brother, about verie trifles) as I coulde name a couple that might once haue béene accorded vnder twentie Nobles, within this fewe yeares, and newe haue quite ſpoyled one the other, with ſuites in lawe: and muſt not

not this dealing increaſe the poore?
            The ſeauenth ſort of poore makers,Vnthriftie gameſters. are all immoderate vnthrift gameſters, (at dice and cards ſpecially) which (if they be lawful) ought onely to bee vſed for recreation, to make them more apt to walke in their vocation, and not to make gamening an occupation to get their liuing thereby, (and that for the moſt parte to others deſtruction, their wiues and children) looſing poſſibly more in one night, then they can recouer all the yeere after, and force great men ſometimes to ſell whole Lordſhippes to ſatiſfie their luſts: and will not this dealing make many poore?
            The eight ſort of poore makers, are ſuch,8 Diſcharging of ſeruants. as vnlawfully diſmiſſe their Seruants and apprentiſes before their tearme end, and breake vp houſekéeping for ſauing of charges, being well able to maintaine them ſtill: and will not this dealing increaſe the poore?
            The ninth ſort of poore makers,9 Abuſes of Gods benefits. is the generall abuſe of all Gods benefits (almoſt in all eſtates) very few kéeping any moderation, beſides our vnthankfulneſſe, which muſt needes increaſe the prices of all things, ſo as the meaner ſort can hardly gette maintenance: and muſt not this dealing make the more poore?
            The tenth ſort of poore makers,10 VVant of due executiō of good lawes. is the want of execution of thoſe Lawes and orders made for theyr prouiſion, which fault reſteth in Magiſtrates and officers appoynted to that ende, and in many miniſters, who ought publikely and priuatly to reprooue abuſes, and put all perſons in minde of their duties, yet either they cannot, or will not performe the ſame, whereby the moſt do liue in diſorder: and will not this dealing increaſe the poore?
            Now if one of theſe poore makers may bréede many poore, (as the oppreſſion of Tenants by one cruell Landlorde) howe many will they bréede all tenne together? I thinke they will fall out to bee innumerable, namely if wee conſider howe many ſuch poore makers euery country hath, yea euery towne

in one reſpect or other, (for what towne is there but hath ſome gameſters, aleſtakes, and ſuch like, that daily increaſe the poore) which they would not doo if they did but often thinke of this one point, 
                  
                     Luke 16.2.That euery perſon at the laſt day ſhall giue an account of his owne ſtewardſhip. &c.
            
            
               The Lords proceeding iniudgemē
                  
                     •
                  
               The meditation hereof, will make them more carefull to walke in Gods feare, if they looke at that day to finde his fauour, when euery perſon ſhall bee adiudged according to the vſing or abuſing theyr gifts,
                  Mat. 15. to the helping or hindering of the poore (as Chriſt the great iudge ſhall then procéede with them) receiuing the mercifull into his kingdome,How all poore makers ſhould iudge thē
                  ſelues. reiecting the mercileſſe into hell torments, to be damned for euer with Sathan and his Angels, except they iudge themſelues in time (to preuent the iudgement of the Lord) in maner following.
            The vaineglorious perſon may thus thinke, I haue procured Gods iuſtice to plague vs,1. How all proude perſons ſhould iudge thē
                  ſelues. by ſpending ſo much in change of apparrell (aboue my calling) and ſo little or nothing to reléeue the poore: if I ſhould holde on this courſe I ſhall bee condemned, therefore (by Gods grace) I will héereafter go more ſoberly in my apparrell, to doo the more good to ſuch as neede the ſame, that Chriſt may receiue me into his kingdome.
            The prodigall vnthrift may ſay in like ſort, I haue procured Gods plagues vpon vs,2. How all prodigall perſons ſhuld iudge thēſelues. by waſting much money in bibbing and bellychéere, that others now do féele the want therof, therfore (by his grace) I will be more ſparing in time to come, that the poore may haue more plentie, and I eſcape damnation which I haue deſerued.
            The oppreſſing Landlord may likewiſe ſay, I haue prouoked Gods iuſtice to plague vs,How al oppreſſing landlorde ſhuld iudge thēſelues. in ſpoyling of ſo many of their goodes and liuings by incroching vppon them, by inhauncing their rents, and by exceſſiue fines, whereby I haue brought them to the beggers ſtaffe, therefore (by Gods grace) I will no more doo ſo, but héereafter deale more mercifully with them, leaſt I be damned with deuils in hell.
            
               The deuouring vſurer may ſay in like ſort,4. How al Vſurers ſhuld iudge themſelues. I haue procured the Lord to plague vs, by my extorting much money from many, and getting my goods with polling and pilling of other perſons, and thereby haue brought them into pouertie: but (by Gods grace) héereafter I will leaue that trade,
                  Pſal. 15. (and rather ſéeke to make reſtitution) otherwiſe I cannot inherit Gods kingdome.
            The couetous cornemonger may likewiſe ſay,5. Howe al cornemongers ſhould iudge thē
                  ſelues. Prou. 11.26. I haue prouoked Gods iuſtice to plague vs, being a meane to inhaunce the price of all graine, by withholding my corne from the market this déere yéere, and ſo haue procured the poore to curſe me, but henceforth (God willing) I will helpe to bring downe the price againe, leaſt I be curſed for euermore.
            The wilfull wrangler may ſay in like ſort,6. Howe al wilful wrāglers in ſuits ſhuld iudge themſelues. I haue procured Gods plague vpon vs, by waſtefull miſſpending much money in lawe, to my owne great dammage and others alſo, which would haue doone much good to the poore, towardes theyr releefe this déere yéere. But (by Gods grace) I will héereafter further the ſame, by leauing law ſuits, and liue in charitie, that Chriſt may receiue me into his kingdome.
            The vnmeaſurable gameſter may likewiſe ſay,7. Howe all waſtefull gameſters ſhuld iudge themſelues. I haue prouoked the Lord to plague vs by my wilfull waſting much time and money by immorderate gamening, which would haue holpen the poore very well: but (by Gods grace) heereafter I will leaue that lewd courſe, that I may ſpare the more to reléeue them, and ſo (through his mercies) come to ſaluation.
            The niggardly houſe kéeper may ſay in like ſort,8 How al bad houſe-keepers ſhuld iudge themſelues. I haue procured Gods plagues vpon vs, by putting away my Seruants and apprentiſes this déere yéere, (to ſpare charge onely through couetouſneſſe) whereby the poores want hath béene the greater: but (by Gods grace) I will héereafter become more liberall, to reléeue their neceſſitie, that I may inherit eternall felicitie.
            Hee that enioyeth his eaſe and pleaſure,9. How al ca
                     •
                  eful perſons should iudge thē
                  ſelue
                     •
                  . may likewiſe ſay, I haue prouoked the Lord to plague vs, by my vnthankfulneſſe and idle expences, more then I layde out to reléeue the

poore, in moſt places almoſt pined through penurie. But (by Gods good grace) I will héereafter ſet leſſe by my delights, and more to helpe the néedie (as God requireth) that I may bee receiued into his heauenly tabernacle, when this life is ended.
            The careleſſe magiſtrate or miniſter may ſay, I haue procured the Lord to plague vs,How all careleſſe magiſtrates ſhould iudge themſelues. both by my owne default of duty, and little regarde to call vppon others to looke to their charges, towards the reléefe of the poore this deare yéere. But (by Gods grace) I will be more carefull henceforth of my dutie, and ſée them ſupplyed, ſo as none (through my default) ſhall be famiſhed, that I may ſhew my ſelfe bleſſed of Chriſt, both in this world and that to come.
            
               If euery one w
                     •
                  uld mend one al ſhould proſper the better.If all able perſons to whome God hath giuen the gifts of this world, would thus iudge themſelues and amend that is a miſſe, (as we are all bounde) the poore ſhould then be well prouided for in all places, and God be ſo pleaſed with our compaſſion to his néedie members, as we ſhould procure (from his liberall bountifulneſſe) more plentifull increaſes of all things needfull, to fill our mouthes full of his deſerued praiſes, for his mercifull procéedings with his poore ſeruants, that depende vpon his prouidence.
            The ſecond chéefe point that all able perſons are to conſider of,2 point of conſideration▪
                is onely thus much, that God might haue made our eſtate like vnto the poore: that his more bountifull dealing with vs, ſhould open our hearts to be ſo much the more beneficiall to them, or elſe wee ſhew our ſelues vnworthy of his bleſſings, and deſerue in iuſtice to be depriued of them.Marke this well.
            
            The third cheefe point that all able perſons are to conſider of,3 Point of conſideration. Mat. 5.12. is the wordes of our Sauiour, That we ſhould do to others as we would be doone vnto: which implyeth thus much, that as our ſelues would wiſh to bee holpen in our neede, ſo ſhould wee be readie to helpe all others in theyr neceſſities (ſo much as we may) then are wee aſſured God will ſupply vs in our neceſſities.
            
               The fourth chiefe poynt that all perſons are to conſider of,4 Point of conſideration. is, the eſpeciall cauſes moouing, why we ſhoulde bée carefull to ſuſtain the poore: which may be contained within theſe foure kindes.
            
               
                  1 God hath commaunded in his holy word, that we ſhould be carefull of their ſuſtentation.
               
                  2 They bée our owne fleſh and naturall kinſfolkes, both by creation, and regeneration, and left amongſt vs to trie our compaſſion.
               
                  3 Chriſt Ieſus ſhed his precious blood for them, as well as for vs.
               
                  4 They be our fellowe heyres, of Chriſt his moſt bleſſed and euerlaſting kingdome.
            
            The often and diligent premeditation of theſe few poyntes, ſhould lead vs all to this conſideration,Mark theſe points well that if we tender Gods holy commaundement, if we haue any loue or compaſſion in vs, if wee make account of Chriſtes precious blood, or if wee ourſelues looke to inherite his kingdome, after this life ended, then muſt wee bée mindfull to relieue his members,
                  Mat, 25. that is, the poore, who at this preſent are in great penurie, in moſt places, and are in daunger to bee famiſhed, without helpe.
            
               5 The fift chiefe point:5 Point of conſideration. Twelue places of ſcripture. that all able perſons are to conſider of, are thoſe perſwading places of Scripture, which do moſt vrge vs, to the due relieuing of the poore in all places, whereof I will onely ſet downe twelue, vnder which all the reſt may be contained.
            
               
                  1 Caſt thy bread vpon the waters,
                  
                     Eccle. 11.1. 
                  and after many dayes thou ſhalt be ſure to finde it.
               
               
                  2 He that giueth vnto the poore, lendeth vnto the Lord,
                  
                     Pro. 19.17. and 28, 27. Rom. 12.31. Heb. 13 16. 2. Cor. 9. 
                  who will recompence it in due ſeaſon.
               
               
                  3 To do good, and to diſtribute vnto the needy forget not, for with ſuch ſacrifices God is pleaſed.
               
               
                  4 He that giueth not ſparingly vnto the poore, God will giue liberally vnto him, for he loueth a chearfull giuer.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Pſal. 112.9.
                  5 He that diſtributeth vnto the poore, his righteouſneſſe ſhall remaine for euer.
               
               
                  
                     Luke 14.13.14.
                  6 Call the poore, the lame and the blind to thy Table, ſo ſhalt thou bee bleſſed of the Lord, and bee recompenced for the ſame at the laſt day.
               
               
                  
                     Luk. 12.33
                  7 Giue almes to the needie, ſo ſhall yee get a treaſure in heauen that neuer ſhall decay.
               
               
                  
                     Pſal. 41.1
                  8 Bleſſed is he that conſidereth the poore, the Lorde will deliuer him in the time of his trouble.
               
               
                  1. Ioh. 3.17
                  9 He that hath this worlds good, and ſeeth his brother want, and ſhutteth vp his compaſſion from him, howe dwelleth the loue of God in him.
               
               
                  
                     Pro. 21.13.
                  10 He that ſtoppeth his eares at the cry of the poore, ſhal crie himſelfe and not be heard.
               
               
                  
                     Matt. 5.7.
                  11 Bleſſed are the mercifull, for they ſhall be ſure to obtaine mercie.
               
               
                  
                     Iam. 2.13
                  12 There ſhalbe iudgement without mercy, to thoſe that ſhew no mercy, but mercifulnes reioiceth againſt iudgment,
               
            
            
               Conſider of this concluſion.There is no heart ſo hard (if it be not of flint) but will relent, and ſhewe ſome compaſſion to relieue the poore, vpon the pervſing of theſe places, if he either take God to be iuſt, or mercifull, to performe his promiſes: or beléeue there is a hel and a heauen, after this life ended, where they ſhall remaine in ſorrow or ioy that ſhall be endleſſe. For all theſe exhortations alledged, are within the compaſſe of Canonicall Scripture, and written for our inſtruction,
                  Rom. 15.4 as by examining them in their particulars will appeare, and by application become more profitable.
            
               1 Place. Eccle. 11.1. Applied.The firſt place: Caſt thy bread vpon the waters, &c. are Salomons ſpeaches, the wiſeſt king that euer was, and a figure of Chriſt, where water ſignifieth the poore, (as weake as water.) Now he dooth aſſure ſuch mercifull men, that theyr almes ſo beſtowed ſhall not be loſt. What able perſon then but will giue the more, if he truſt Salomons words to be true, that himſelfe ſhall finde it.
            
            
               The ſecond place:2 place. Pro. 28.27 Applied. Pro. 29.17. Matt. 10.42. 
               He that giueth vnto the poore ſhal not lacke, &c. are Salomons alſo, which ſhould encourage all able perſons to giue the more, becauſe thereby they ſhall procure the Lord to bleſſe their prouiſion, that they ſhould not want: becauſe he hath promiſed to recompence the ſame, (if it were but a cuppe of colde water giuen in good will) accounting the ſame as doone to himſelfe, ſo well hée lyketh the workes of charitie.
            The third place:3 place. Heb. 13.16 Applied. 
               To do good to thoſe that ſtand in neede forget not, for with ſuch ſacrifices God is pleaſed. The Apoſtles ſpeaches: wherein we ſée how the Lord accounteth of ſuch works (as ſacrifices) acceptable in his ſight, which ſhould moue all able men to double their almes, if they deſire to pleaſe ye lord.
            The fourth place: He that giueth liberally vnto the poore,
               4 place. 
               God will giue bountifully vnto him: the Apoſtles ſpéeches alſo. And further, that God loueth ſuch a perſon.
               2. Cor. 9. Applied. Which muſt néedes moue able perſons to giue fréely to the poore, if they eyther tender their owne benefite, or to ſhewe themſelues to bée ſuch as God loueth.
            The fifth place: He that diſtributeth vnto the poore,
               5 place. Pſal. 112.9. Applied. 
               his righteouſneſſe ſhall remaine for euer, are the wordes of the Prophet Dauid, which will enforme all able perſons thus much, that if they deſire to be accounted, and continue righteous in Gods ſight for euer, then muſt they of neceſſitie be liberall diſtributers vnto the poore, according to their ſeuerall wants.
            The ſixt place: Call the poore, &c. to thy table,
               6 place. Luke 14.13.14. Applied. 
               and thou ſhalt be bleſſed, and recompenced for the ſame, at the reſurrection of the iuſt, Theſe be the wordes of our Sauiour Ieſus, which ſhould bee as a ſpurre to all rich perſons, to pricke them forward in giuing of their almes, if they take Chriſt to be euer faithfull in performing promiſe.
            The ſeuenth place: Giue almes to the needie,
               7 place. Luk. 12.33. Applied. 
               ſo ſhall ye get a treaſure in heauen, that neuer ſhall decay. Theſe be ye words of our ſauiour alſo, which of all other ſhould moue worldly rich

men,Applied. to liberall almes giuing, that they may get great ſtore of treaſure in the world to come, as they haue in this worlde, if they take Chriſt to be true of his promiſe.
            
               8 place. Pſal. 41.1.The eight place: Bleſſed is he that conſidereth the poore, the Lord will deliuer him in the time of his trouble. The words of Dauid the kingly Prophet, which muſt néedes perſwade all thoſe able perſons,Applied. that knowe they haue béene, or ſhall be in trouble, to be beneficiall vnto the poore, if themſelues deſire to find any comfort in their diſtreſſes.
            
               9 place. Iohn. 3.17.The ninth place: He that hath this worlds good, and helpeth not his brother, whom he knoweth to want, how dwelleth the loue of God in him?
               Applied. (meaning, it is impoſſible.) The words of S. Iohn whom Chriſt loued ſo dearely, which ſhould prouoke rich men to grow rich dayly in the works of mercie, if they would ſhew themſelues,
                  Iohn 4.30 either to loue God, or to haue the loue of God dwelling in them.
            
               10 place. Prou. 21.13 Applied.The tenth place: He that ſtoppeth his eare at the crie of the poore, ſhall crie himſelfe and not be heard. The words of Salomon a figure of Chriſt which ſhould inforce rich men to liſten well to the crie of the poore, and helpe to relieue them, or elſe they ſhall one day crie themſelues, and not be heard, which aſſuredly will once come to paſſe.
            
               11 place. Mat. 5.7. Applied.The eleuenth place: Bleſſed are the mercifull, for they ſhall obtaine mercie, The words of our Sauiour Ieſus alſo, which ſhould allure men to ſhewe compaſſion vnto the néedie (eſpecially the wealthyer ſort, that haue gotten theyr goods by indirect meanes) if they looke that God ſhoulde ſhewe them mercie for theyr ſinnes, in that reſpect, when they ſue for the ſame.
            
               12 place. Iam. 2.13 Applied. The whip cord reaſonThe twelfth place: There ſhall bee iudgement without mercie, to ſuch as ſhew no mercy, &c The words of S. Iames the Apoſtle of Chriſt, which may be called the whip corde reaſon, to vrge and compell all able perſons to performe dayly the workes of mercie, and neuer to bee wearie in doing ſo well, if they would not exclude themſelues from mercie, at the

laſt iudgement day, when they ſhall moſt ſtand in néed therof.
            But to confirme the ſame of certaintie, that the mercileſſe ſhall then want mercie, and cannot come by the ſame, let all ſuch perſons marke betime the manner of Chriſts procéeding with them.
                  Mat. 25.4
                     •
                  .46. Chriſts maner in proceeding againſt the mercileſſe. 
               Departe from me (ye curſed) into euerlaſting fire, &c. For I was an hungred (in my needy members) and ye gaue me no meate: I thirſted, and ye gaue me no drinke: I was a ſtranger, and ye lodged me not: I was naked, and ye clothed me not: I was ſicke and in priſon, and ye viſited me not. Thus euen for their want of perfourming the workes of charity (as the bowels of compaſſion ſhould compell them thereunto) they ſhall be condemned to euerlaſting torments.
            The ſixt point of conſideration,6. point of conſideration howe the poore may bee ſupplied. for all able perſons to thinke vppon, is, how the poore may and muſt be releeued, if we will ſhew our ſelues to be true Chriſtians, or euer looke that Chriſt ſhould comfort vs at our laſt ending, when death ſhall arreſt vs, to carrie vs either to ioy or paine, and that euerlaſting.
            The ſerious conſideration therefore of theſe points is moſt néedfull: for,Al in vaine hitherto, if this preſent penurie bee not prouided for. though we lay open the naked eſtate of all poore people neuer ſo barely, and produce neuer ſo manifeſt reaſons of great importance to moue all able men vnto compaſſion, yet conſidering their preſent want is ſo much, and the meanes ſo ſcant wherewith to reléeue them, with the time ſo long till God ſend new ſtore (the ware corne ſéed in the moſt cold countreyes being yet vnſowen) which threatneth a further famin to follow, without due prouiſion now in time: Let vs then conſider of this maine point.
            
               1 How the want of the poore may be ſtill reléeued.
            Concerning the want of the poore,1. How the poore may be releeued it may be ſupplyed two manner of waies.
            
               
                  1 Firſt by remoouing the cauſe of their wants.
               
                  2 Second, by adding a further ſupply.
            
            Concerning the cauſes of the poore (as hath béen plainely explaned before) the ſame doth procéede partly from themſelues through their idlenes, &c.The double cauſe of the poore: want. but more eſpecially from the poore makers,

(whereof there be ſundrie ſorts before named) who if they would ſurceaſe their immoderate exceſſe (as hath béene moued by many ſounde reaſons) the poore would gette daily reléefe thereby.The double cauſe of the poores want. For, as it is a tried rule in Phiſicke, Take away the cauſe of any maladie,
               The cauſe taken away the effect ecaſeth. and the effect of curing will follow of it ſelfe: for as the one is in remoouing, the other is in comming, (the one as it were following the other) the like is the cauſe concerning the poore: for if the waſtefull expences in their makers, (as it were all drawen out of their purſes) were againe reſtored into the ſame, they ſhould haue little cauſe to complaine, for both they ſhould haue more ſtore of money to buye what they néede, and vittels then would be more plentie.
            
               Reſtraint of expences, a ſupply to the poore▪
               As for example, the very ouerplus of prodigal perſons, ye miſſpent ſo much in bibbing & bellichéere, which bréedeth diſeaſes in thē: if that were ſpared héereafter in al places, how many thouſands throughout al Englād might be wel reléeued, it would be incredible, ſéeing euery towne will afford ſome ſuch vnthrifts.
            
               How many thouſands might bee ſupplied.The like may be ſaide of all other ſorts of exceſſiue perſons, that if they were drawen to due moderation, and their ouerplus conuerted to the vſe of the poore: it would appeare by computation that maintenance enough might be had for almoſt innumerable poore perſons, if corne ſhould beare the double price in all markets.
            
               Prouiſion of corne brought in frō beyond the Seas.Touching the ſecond point, which is the procuring of ſupply in corne from other countreyes, that care hath hitherto manifeſted it ſelfe in her gracious Maieſtie and moſt honourable Councell (as the great aboundance of white rie brought into England from beyond the ſeas, doth demonſtrate, the Lorde grant it may hold out ſtill.
            
               3 Cheefe point to conſider rightly of the poore.The poore mans want, and meanes to ſupply, being thus far reuealed, let vs now procéed to the ſecond chéefe point concerning the poore (what perſons indéede conſider rightly of them) that is in few words, all thoſe men of ſubſtance that ſuffer no able workmā or woman to want work or wages to liue on this déere yéere, nor any of their impotent neighbors to be vnreléeued

(ſo much as they may) and thoſe that doo ſée the youth ſet on work, & al able perſons that are vnwilling, or els do puniſh thē as the law appointeth,4. Cheefe point to produce ſome examples of poore conſiderers, ten in number. theſe do indéed performe the ſame accordingly, to the good example of all other perſons.
            The fourth chéefe point concerning the poore, is to produce ſome ſpeciall examples, of ſuch as kept good hoſpitalitie, or otherwiſe vſed to reléeue the poore, which ſhall ſtand as patterns to all poſterities, of liberall conſiderers of the poore, contained within the canonicall ſcriptures, which are ten in number.
            The firſt example ſhall be a couple of brethren Abraham & Lot by name, who were ſo much giuen to hoſpitalitie, as ſcarce they wold ſuffer any poore traueller to paſſe by their doores,1. Abraham and Lot. Gen. 18. & 19. but did entertain thē liberally: a good example to great houſekéepers
            The ſeconde example is Nehemiah that noble gouernour, who finding the Iewes ſore oppreſſed at his returne from Babilon,
               2. Nehemiah. Nehe. 5. did not only remitte a part of his own right aſſigned vnto him, but alſo kept at his table daily an hundreth and fiftie of them, which before had béene baniſhed amongſt the heathen, and moued others to the like compaſſion: a woorthy preſident to all ſuperiour gouernours.
            The third example, is Iob the iuſt, a wealthie man of the land of Huſſe, who was ſo pittifull vnto the poore,3 Iob the iuſt. Iob. 29. & 31. that he became the eyes to the blinde, the féete to the lame, and as a father vnto the fatherleſſe, neuer denying the néedies requeſt, nor beeing once wearie in ſupplying their wants: a notable patterne for all rich perſons.
            The fourth example, is Dauid the king,Dauid the king. Pſal. 16.2.3. &. 37 25. who tooke ſuch pleaſure in prouiding well for all poore people (eſpecially ſuch as delighted in godlineſſe) that he would not ſuffer, neither euer did ſée either them or their ſéede to begge in his dayes: a moſt famous preſident for all kings and princes.
            The fift example, is repenting Zacheus,
               
                  
                     •
                  . Repenting Zacheus. Luk. 19.1.9. who ſometimes had béene an extorting vſurer, yet when hee was truely conuerted by Chriſt, at the firſt offered the halfe of his goods to reléeue the poore, and to reſtore foure folde to all

manner perſons whom he had pinched any kinde of way: a memorable patterne for al oppreſſing vſurers to follow in theſe dayes, if they would pleaſe God.
            
               6. Dorcas. Act. 9.36.42.The ſixt example is one Dorcas, a notable woman, who was full of good workes, and charitable almes, giuing many gownes and coates to the poore, as was ſhewed by ſundrie to Peter the Apoſtle: a moſt worthie patterne for Ladies and gentlewomen.7 Captaine Cornelius. Act. 10.1.5.
            
            The ſeauenth example is Cornelius the captaine, a very religious deuout man, fearing God greatly, and alwaies bountifull in beſtowing almes: a rare example for Captaines to follow.
            
               8. Able chriſtians in the primitiue church Acts 3. & 4.The eight example, were the firſt Chriſtians in the primitiue church (after Chriſts aſcenſion) who were of ſo tender compaſſion in thoſe daies, that rather then they would ſée their brethren to begge and diſcredit their profeſſion, thoſe that had poſſeſſions willingly ſolde them to ſupply their wants, which ſtood in neede, and ſo brought their money to the Apoſtles, to deuide the ſame accordingly. A forcible patterne to perſwade able men to be liberall reléeuers of the poore.
            
               9. The citizens of Corinth. Rom. 15.20 2. cor. 8. ch. Philip. 4.15.18.The ninth example, the godly Cittizens of Corinth of Philippi, and other places, who were not onely willing to releeue their neighbours, but in the time of ſcarcitie in other countreyes, did fréely beſtow their almes in money (aboue their abilitie) and ſent the ſame to ſupply theyr wants that were conuerted and become Chriſtians. Moſt woorthy examples to mooue able Citizens at the leaſt, to haue ſpeciall care this déere yeare, to releeue theyr needie neighbours.
            
               10. Our Sauiour Chriſt. 2. Cor. 8.9 Philip. 2. ch
               The tenth and moſt worthy example of all, is our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, who was ſo repleniſhed with the bowels of compaſſion to reléeue our eſtate in great perplexitie, that rather then we ſhould be vtterly loſt (though he were Lorde of heauen and earth, yet willingly (as it were) renounced his right, and abaſed himſelfe to the very loweſt degree of a Seruant, for our ſakes and ſafetie (beeing his ſeruants) that wee

might be endued with all his bleſſings,
                  Rom. 8. and made heires with him of his celeſtial kingdome. A perfit preſident of that compaſſion, which all true Chriſtians ſhould ſéeke to imitate towards the diſtreſſed, ſo much as we may.
            If none of the former alledged examples, can preuaile with vs,Our ſauiours example of force. to part with any portion towardes the ſuſtentation of our néedie neighbors, yet if we will not ſhew our ſelues paſt grace, our Sauiours example wil procure the ſame from vs, and that in bountifull meaſure. For,
                  Coll. 2.13.14 15. ſhall he willingly ſpoyle himſelfe to pay our debts, when we were vnable to diſcharge the ſame? and ſhall we be vnwilling to giue ſome part of that plentie he hath giuen vs, vpon our néedie neighbor for his ſake? God forbid. If the ſpéeches of Iohn the Apoſtle be true,1. Ioh. 3.16. That we ought to lay downe our liues for our brethren, (after Chriſts example): as no man can deny the ſame that hath grace in him.Marke this diligently. Then much more ought we to reléeue their want with ſome of our wealth. O then, ſéeing their caſe at this inſtant is very lamentable for lack of reliefe, let vs not ſhut our compaſſion from them, like the hard hearted Prieſt and Leuite,
                  Luk. 20.30 37. but let vs reſemble the kind Samaritan, that neuer left helping the wounded man, till he was reſtored again to health: euen ſo ſhould we doo vnto the poore, if we would approue our ſelues kind Chriſtians.
            The fift chiefe point concerning the poore, is, to ſearch out the double effect that will follow the due conſidering of them. Firſt, their great want ſhall be well relieued: and their Reléeuers (in what degrée ſo euer,) approoue themſelues to be thoſe true Chriſtians in whom the Lord delighteth, both of them rebounding to further his glory.
            The ſixt chiefe point concerning the poore, Is, to conſider of their dangerous eſtate, that do not ſéeke daily to helpe their ſupply (being now ſo néedfull) and they well able,
                  Luk. 16. who ſtand all in danger of endles deſtruction, to be damned with Diues (as you heard before. All which inducements (and ſpecially this laſt) ſhould draw on all able men, (and namely the poore-makers) to become more liberall in reléeuing their want, for if ſuch ſimply

as do not ſupply them,The poore makers eſtate dangerous. Mat. 25. be in daunger of damnation (as Chriſt himſelf witneſſeth) then how can the poore-makers eſcape moſt feareful plagues, except they in this life make reſtitution, which grace God graunt them.
            Now let vs procéed to conſider of that title which the Prophet heere aſcribeth to all ſuch perſons as duly conſider of the poore,The almes giuers title bleſſed. Mat. 5.7. whom he truly tearmeth to be bleſſed, which is confirmed by the Lord Ieſus, where he ſaith, The mercifull are bleſſed: which importeth thus much in fewe words, that ſuch a perſon is In Gods fauour, and ſo known to others: which is the greateſt honour that any of his ſeruaunts can attaine vnto in this life, as we commonly call him, A happie man.
            
            
               The courtiers phraſeFor, as Courtiers vſe when one is aduanced, to terme ſuch a perſon in high eſtimation with his Prince, and as the ſpéech runneth, Well graced of all men: ſo the caſe ſtandeth with all good almes giuers,
                  Mat. 25. eſpecially ſuch as rightly giue the ſame, that they are not only bleſſed with Chriſt, for whoſe ſake chiefly they beſtow the ſame, but ſo accounted of all his ſeruants, which is the higheſt title that Dauid a King, dooth vſually aſcribe vnto any of the Choſen, and ought ſo much the more to moue vs to mercy, to pittie the poore, and reléeue their miſery, for that we ſhall not only approue our ſelues thereby, bleſſed of God, but to reſemble him our heauenly Father,
               
                  Luk. 6.36. which ſhould the more enlarge our compaſſion towards the néedie.
            
               An obiection.By this occaſion, the poore may obiect, If ſuch perſons only as conſider of our eſtate, be accounted bleſſed, then it may ſéem that we are accurſed.
            
               Anſwered.To this may be anſwered, That Dauid doth not ſay, Hee that conſidereth of the poore (is onely bleſſed,) But that (He is bleſſed) ſetting a marke as it were on ſuch a man, (That he is bleſſed of God) to incourage others to follow his example in helping ye poore, that they may ſo ſhew themſelues bleſſed alſo.
            
               Both ſorts bleſſed. Math. 5.3.6.10.Note that Dauid excludeth not the poore frō being bleſſed alſo, (eſpecially ſuch as be poore in ſpirite, and méekly beare their appointed burthen) for well he knew that ſuch are bleſſed alſo as

Chriſt reporteth of them.
            By the which rule, euery poore perſon may truly try, whether he be bleſſed of God, or no:Howe the poore may trie if they be bleſſed. for if any of them grudge at their low eſtate, or vſe words or geſture ſhewing diſcontent, or any vnlawfull meanes to better the ſame, then they are in danger of Gods diſpleaſure: but if they méekely beare his burthen laid vpon them, do neither inwardly nor outwardly murmurs at the ſame, nor vſe indirect meanes to better their eſtate, but patiently wayt the Lords will in all things, then aſſuredly they are bleſſed of God, as well as their reléeuers.
            But an other queſtion may hereupon ariſe,A queſtion. whether all the poore reléeuers be bleſſed or no?
            The anſwere is eaſie,Anſwered. That all reléeuers of the poore are not bleſſed, (howſoeuer the world do account of them,) as ye proud Phariſie will approue who was reiected (notwithſtanding his good workes,) becauſe he abuſed them to Gods diſhonour.
                  Luc. 18.
            
            By whoſe example, we are to learne thus much, That it is not alwayes a certaine ſigne of a bleſſed man, to be liberal in good workes or giuing of almes, (except other circumſtances be therewith conſidered,Sixe circumſtances of acceptable almes) which I will comprize vnder theſe ſixe kindes.
            
               
                  1 That the giuer thereof, be the ſeruant of Chriſt.
               
               
                  2 That he giue it ſimply for his ſake.
               
               
                  3 That he be in charitie with all perſons.
               
               
                  4 That he giue it in compaſſion, without vain-glory.
               
               
                  5 That he do not boaſt thereof afterwards.
               
               
                  6 That he do not ſeeke to merit thereby.
               
            
            All which Circumſtances are to be obſerued in giuing of almes, if the partie ſéeke to pleaſe God thereby, for he that fayleth in any one point, cannot aſſure himſelfe to bleſſed.
            For, touching the firſt, it is very manifeſt, that as the branch cannot bring forth frute, except it be, and abide in the vine,
                  Ioh. 15. no more can any perſon liuing pleaſe God, except hee be and abide in Chriſt, and ſo become his obedient and faithfull ſeruant, as himſelf witneſſeth: wherby all Infidels are abandoned

with their almes, becauſe they are not the members of Chriſt.
            The ſecond circumſtance to be conſidered, Is, that we giue our almes ſimply for Chriſtes ſake onely,
                  Luk. 12. Mat. 25. to helpe and relieue his néedie members (without any other ſiniſter reſpect) for ſo hath he commaunded, (as before is ſhewed) neither may we do otherwiſe, if we conſider the goods we haue are his, to vſe to his glory,
                  Luk. 16. and that we muſt one day make account of them.
            The third circumſtance, Is, that we be in charitie with all maner perſons, when we giue our almes. For, (as the Apoſtle truly affirmeth) if we ſhould giue away all that we haue to the vſe of the poore,1. Cor. 13. and our bodies beſides to be burned to aſhes, yet ſhould all be loſt, (except we both liue and die in charitie) for God is charitie,1. Ioh. 4.16 and he that liueth in charitie, dwelleth in God, and none but ſuch perſons.
            The fourth circumſtance, is, That we giue our almes fréely in compaſſion, (without all vainglory) for, although the Phariſes were liberall in almes,
                  Mat. 6.3.14. yet becauſe they did all to be ſéene of men, and recommended by them, they loſt their reward at the hands of God. Therefore Chriſt teacheth all his Diſciples, (ſo much as is poſſible) not to let their left hand know in theſe caſes, what the right hand doth: ſo will God one day reueale it to their comfort.
            The fift circumſtance, is, That when we giue our almes, we may not vſe to boaſt thereof afterwards,
                  Luk. 18. as the proud Phariſie did, that he had giuen ſo much, and others ſo little, leaſt we looſe our labour as he did, (who was reiected (not for his almes) but for his vnlawfull bragging of the ſame.
            The ſixt circumſtance, is, To take héed in any caſe that we do not ſéeke to merit by our almes, leaſt we exclude our ſelues from Gods mercy, whereby alone the elect are redéemed in Chriſt Ieſus.
                  Iob. 3. But when we haue done the beſt that we can, humbly to confeſſe (as he hath taught vs,) That we are all vnprofitable ſeruants) ſo farre ſhould we be,
                  Luk. 17.10 from ſéeking at all to merite thereby.
            If the Papiſts and others would thinke of theſe points, that

make ſo much vaunting of their almes giuing, they ſhould be ſoone rid of two bad opinions, both touching the maner and end of their almes. For, (as the Apoſtle ſaith,
                  Gal. 3. Eph. 2) If the perfect law of God could not bring vs life, (becauſe we wanted power to performe it) ſhall we once imagine to merit an higher place in heauen, by our imperfit good workes, (the beſt wherof are polluted with ſin, as before is ſhewed): it is impoſſible.
            Neither let the Papiſts vntruly reproach vs, that we deny good workes, or déedes of charitie, for (as they may perceiue by that which hath bin ſaid) we vrge them to all Chriſtians, vpon paine of damnation to thoſe that refuſe them, becauſe they cannot without them approue themſelues to be true beléeuers,
                  Iam. 2. Hebr. 11. and without faith no man can pleaſe God, yet we do not put them in Chriſts place, as the cauſe or matter of our ſaluation, but as effects only procéeding from faith, whereby we make it manifeſt, that we do belong vnto his redemption,
                  Luk. 1.7.4 becauſe we deſire in all things to pleaſe him.
            Now are we come by courſe to conſider of that aſſured benefit which he ſhall reape, that is, rich in good workes, and giuing of almes, which is ſet downe in this ſentence following, The Lord will deliuer him in the time of his trouble. Wherin wee are to note (as before is remembred) theſe two ſpeciall points.
            
               
                  1 His ſafe protection, That God will deliuer him.
               
               
                  2 The time when, In the dayes of his diſtreſſe.
               
            
            Concerning the former point, The Lord will deliuer him, who hath compaſſion on his néedie neighbour. Oh how ſtrong a motiue muſt this néeds be, to moue all good Chriſtians to that worke of mercy (namely if we conſider theſe two points.)
            
               
                  1 Who the Lord our protector is.
               
               
                  2 How many and great our daungers are,
               
            
            Touching the former, If we either caſt vp our eyes to the heauens, or conceiue his goodneſſe to all his creatures, how he created, nouriſheth, preſerueth & guideth them,
                  Pſal. 19.
                     •
                  6 by his Almightie power and prouidence, to ſerue our vſe, and to ſet foorth his

glorie, we ſhould then knowe who the Lord our protector is. But if we looke inwardly with the eyes of fayth, into his moſt holy and immortall worde,Gods power manifeſted. Gen. 1. which he hath left amongſt vs, to inſtruct vs further of his power and goodneſſe, how hee created all things of nothing, and that with a worde (without other inſtrument) and how he cauſed the ſea to giue place, for the ſafetie of his ſeruants, and after to returne and ſwallow vp their enemies.
                  Exod. 14. Then ſhall we behold the power of that God who is our protector.
            But, which ſurpaſſeth all the former teſtimonies of the Lords powerfulneſſe, as farre as heauenly things excéede all earthly things, if we rightly conſider of our own wofull eſtate and condition,The Lords powerfulneſſe moſt of al appearing in our redēption. Epheſ. 2.
how (through the fall of our firſt anceſtors) all we theyr poſteritie, were not only depriued of his protection, but became bondſlaues to ſinne and Satan, without recouerie (as of our ſelues) or any cauſe in vs to moue the Lords mercie, to redéeme vs all from their intollerable thraldome and tyrannie, ſaue onely our miſerie, we being all ranke rebels againſt him, by our continuall practice.
            Behold, notwithſtanding, the goodneſſe & greatneſſe of Gods loue and powerfulneſſe, for our reſtauration into his loſt fauor, appearing moſt of al, in ſending his only begotten ſonne Ieſus, the very iewell and heire apparant of heauen and earth, to take vpon his perſon our weake and fraile nature,The power of Chriſt Ieſus in our weake nature. 1. Cor. 15. Colloſ 2. and therein to incounter with ſinne and Satan, and all their partakers, whom he in his manhoode ſo mightily confounded, that he led away captiuitie captiue, & triumpheth ouer them in eternall victorie, and all for our ſakes, to bring vs to felicitie. Oh then how ſafe are we, that haue this almightie God, for our protector?
            To come to the latter point, how many and great our daungers are,Three kinds of danger. may be conſidered in theſe thrée reſpects▪
            
            
               
                  1 The malice of our enemies, how many and mightie.
               
                  2 The perils we ſtand in, how great and variable.
               
                  3 Our dayly ſinnes, how many and monſtrous.
            
            All which approue the prouidence of God to be the more

powerfull in our protection, notwithſtanding.
            Concerning our enemies, for thoſe that are outward, whom we tearme bodily, I refer them to euery mans conſideration,1. Our enemies: Bodily: Ghoſtly. how they are any way vexed by them, and onely will nominate thoſe that be ghoſtly, which ſéeke the ſubuerſion of our ſoules and bodies, in eternall confuſion, who are tearmed in ſcripture, diuels and damned ſpirits, which are innumerable,1. Pet. 5.8. and withall ſo mightie & malicious, that if God did not reſtraine their rage againſt vs, we ſhould be deſtroyed all in one moment.
            Touching thoſe perils we dayly ſtand in,2 Our perils. they may be conſidered by others deſtruction.
            Some by ſtormes and tempeſts.
            Some by fearefull fires.
            Some by flowing waters.
            Some by ſores and ſickeneſſe.
            Some by dearth and famine.
            Some by warres and battels.
            With a number ſuch like, wherevnto we are ſubiect, and ſhould incurre them without Gods protection.
            To come to our ſins,3. Our ſins. which may be tearmed the very hooke which pulleth theſe daungers dayly vppon vs, how many and monſtrous they are in Gods ſight, (eſpecially our pride, exceſſe, and extortion) may partly appeare in their particulars before touched, but are made much more manifeſt, by the Lords plaguing vs at this preſent with ſcarcitie and penurie in moſt places, ſo as the poorer ſort are like to periſh, without better prouiſion.
            Thus farre hauing ſhewed the daungers wee ſtand in,2 The time when God wil deliuer his. Pſal. 50.15. let vs nowe more preciſely poynt out the time when God will deliuer all thoſe perſons, that are founde carefull to relieue the poore: that is to ſay, in the dayes of theyr trouble: So that they faile not to call vppon the almightie Lord: for ſo himſelfe ſayeth, Call vppon mee in the dayes of thy trouble, and I will deliuer thee, &c.
               Two points
            
            
               Whereby we may learne theſe two chiefe points.
            
               
                  1 When and from what troubles the Lord wil deliuer vs.
               
               
                  2 How we may be ſure and certainly know, that God will deliuer vs.
               
            
            
               1 Touching the former, whē and from what troubles God wil deliuer vs: that is to ſay, when we our ſelues are in any danger, either of inward or outward enemies, or otherwiſe, by water, by fire, by tempeſts, by ſickneſſe, by famine, or ſuch like: and then (eſpecially) when we are in extremitie, and in daunger to die, the Lord wil either ſend preſent remedie, or elſe take vs vnto his mercy, and make vs partakers of his felicitie, for euermore to magnifie his great name.
            
               2 The meanes how to know that God will deliuer vs from al
                  •
                ex
                  ••
               emities,
                  Iam. 5.16.17.18. is, by our conſtant calling on his name, with faith and firme hope that he will deliuer vs, which in the ende wil preuaile with his maieſtie, to deale with vs gratiouſly, and ſend vs ſupply, as he knoweth moſt to further his glory.
            To conclude therfore, ſéeing at this preſent the hand of God is heauy vpon vs, in moſt places of this Realme of England, appearing plainly in this great penury, amongſt the poorer ſort eſpecially,Faithfull prayer, a ſpeciall meanes to preuaile with God, which was neuer more needfull. and threatned further in greater meaſure, by ſeuerall ſignes from heauen, by ſtrange diſeaſes on earth, and by forraigne inuaſion of deuoted enemies, our ſinnes moſt of all prouoking the ſame, which wil in the end procure our deſolation, without ſpéedie conuerſion, which we can neuer attaine vnto, (what meanes ſoeuer be vſed for the ſame) without Gods eſpeciall grace and direction, which muſt be obteined by earneſt petition: Let vs all then inceſſantly, aſke, knocke, ſéeke and ſue for the ſame continually, at the footeſtoole of his mercy, in the name and mediation of Chriſt Ieſus onely, with aſſurance to ſpéed, ſo ſhall we not only remoue his diſpleaſure, but be aſſured to procure his fauour, for euermore: So be it.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   