
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ By the Queene.
            
               THE Queenes Maieſtie continuing her moſt gracious purpoſe, to the reformation of the baſe monies of this Realme, and hauyng alreadye cauſed to be coyned in fyne ſterling monyes ſuch quantity, as being added to other fine moneys coyned in the tymes of her late deare Brother and Syſter, King Edward, and Queene Mary, doth furre exceade the quantitie of moneys, vſed of auncient tyme in this Realme: Hath by aduiſe and good deliberation had with her Counſayle, thought neceſſary to proceede to the diminution of certaine baſe monies, yet remayninge curraunt within her Realme. And becauſe her Maieſtie deſyreth nothing more then to dyſcharge her Subiectes, and ſpecially her poore Comminaltie of all maner of burden, to be ſuſteyned herein: Her Maieſtie by aduiſe of her ſayde Counſayle, hath thus ordered as followeth.
            FIRST her Maieſtie giueth all her Subiectes to vnderſtand, that all peeces of baſe monies, latelye valued and now curraunt at iiii. d. ob. ſhall not be taken ne allowed as curraunt money, after the ix. day of Apryll next following, which is xv. dayes after our Lady day in Lent, and is by her Maieſtie ſo ſpeciallye appoynted, becauſe the Tenauntes and meaner ſorte of her Subiectes, that lyue as Tenauntes, and Fermers, may haue a conuenient tyme to pay theyr Rentes at our ſayde Ladye daye withoute trouble, yf they ſhall chaunce to haue prepared any part of the ſame in the ſayd ſortes of money. And from the ſayd ix. day of April, the ſaid pieces of iiii. d. ob. to be accompted not curraunt but Bullion. And becauſe neither the poorer, nor the rycher ſort of her Maieſties Subiectes, ſhould take any loſſe by the conuerting of the ſame, at that time into Bullion: Her Maieſtie is pleaſed, that whoſoeuer will bring any of the ſame monies betwixt this and the xxv. of Aprill, to her Mynte in the Towre, ſhall haue for the ſame, both the value, accordinge to the rate of iiii. d. ob the peece, and iii. d. for the pounde, in newe ſterling monies, within the ſpace of twenty dayes, or leſſe. And after that, vntill the xx. of May, to haue for the ſame, the like rate, ſauing and excepting the iii. d. vpon the pound: and from thence forwarde, her Maieſtie meaneth to receaue no more of the ſame into her Minte.
            Furthermore, her Maieſtie thinketh meete to admonyſhe her Subiects, that although in the beginning of this refyning and coynage, ſuch difficulities happened, as the expedition of exchaunge could not be ſo ſpedily made as was ment: Yet for that it is manifeſt, that vſe and experience hath taken away all thoſe difficulties, and that nowe the miniſters of her Mintes, be able to make ſpedy retourne of fyne monies, for the baſe: Her Maieſtie would that her Subiects ſhould not forbeare to come to her ſayde Myntes, without doubte there to be ſatyſfied, for ſmale ſummes at ſight, or within two or three dayes, and for greater, within. viii. or tenne, and at the furtheſt not to continue aboue twenty, for ſo her Maieſtie vnderſtandeth the habilitie of her officers nowe to doe it, and ſo hath directed them to execute the ſame.
            Finallye, her Maieſtie chargeth all manner her Subiects, to indeuour themſelues to bring vnto her Mintes, not onely the ſayde baſe monies of iiii. d. ob. but alſo as they maye conuenientlye, the other peeces of i. d. ob. and ob. q. whiche her Maieſtie dothe permit to remaine currante for the eaſe of her people, for lacke of ſmall monies, of which ſort is ment to haue a coynage as ſhortlye as may be, in good and fyne ſterlinge monies. And becauſe it may be, that diuers of her Maieſties owne proper Tenauntes, Fermers, Bailiffes, or Receauers, may after the ſaide ninthe of Aprill haue in their handes percell of her Maieſties reuenues, her pleaſure and contentation is, that her officers in the receipte of her Exchequer, ſhall receaue the ſame as currant money vntill the xxv. of Maye next.
            
               Yeuen at Weſtminſter the xix. of Frebuarye in the thirde yeare of her Maieſties reigne.
               
God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Richard Jugge, and John Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   