
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            
               WHereas in the Chart of the Lotterie lately erected, amongſt other things deuiſed for the aduantage of the aduenturers, there was a limitation of three moneths, within the compaſſe whereof, who ſo aduentured money into the ſaid Lotterie, ſhould be partakers of diuerſe profits and aduantages more then others that ſhould aduenture their money after the ſaid three moneths ended.
            Foraſmuch as in ſundrie parts of the Realme, the principall perſons that were appointed to bee the Treaſurers for the money that ſhould bee gathered in the ſeuerall ſhires of the Realme, had not receiued their inſtructions and charge in ſuch due time as was requiſite, by reaſon that vpon the firſt nommation of them, there were after ſundrie alterations of ſome by reaſon of ſickneſſe, of others by reaſon they were dead about the time of their nomination, and of ſome others, that after ward were ſo otherwiſe occupied in publique offices, as the ſaid ſeruice could not be by them executed, ſo as of the ſaid ſpace of three moneths, there paſſed ouer a good part, to the detriment of the aduenturers. Her Maieſtie being duely aduertiſed of the premiſſes, to the end that in the affaire of the ſaid Lotterie, aduanced by her Maieſtie for the good of the common weale, all her louing ſubiects ſhould be intreated with an indifferencie of dealing, and participate alike of the aduantages expreſſed in the ſaid Chart, without any preiudice of time paſſed away from them without their fault or occaſion: is pleaſed, that the aduantage of the ſaid three moneths now expired, ſhall be enlarged and proroged to all maner of perſons, that haue or ſhall aduenture their money into the ſaid Lotterie, for three monethes longer, to haue courſe and coutinuance for the ſpace of foure ſcore and ten dayes accompting xxx. dayes to the moneth, to begin within euery ſhire their accompt excluſiuely, from the xxiiii. of December laſt paſt.
            So as whoſoeuer within the ſaid three moneths of prorogation, ſhall aduenture, or at any time before haue aduentured their money into the ſaid Lotterie, ſhall haue and enioye all maner, and as ample aduantages and commodities, as by vertue and tenour of the ſaid Chart, they ſhould haue enioyed if they had aduentured their money into the ſaid Lotterie within the ſpace of the three moneths mentioned in the ſaid Chart.
            And where as through the fault of Printing of the Chart, there hath bene miniſtred occaſion of certaine doubts and faults found in the ſaid Chart, among the which one is in the third Article of the conditions ſet foorth in the 
                  •••
               d Chart, in the firſt lyne of the ſame Article, in theſe words (to the number of thirtie Lots and vpward) it was and is ment, and is now explaned, for the benefite of the aduenturers, that thoſe words ſhalbe amended and redde thus to the number of xxx. Lots or vpward.) And where alſo through liſte fault, in the fourth and next Article of the ſaid Conditions, in the beginning of the ſaid Article be conteined theſe words (whoſoeuer ſhall gaine the beſt, ſecond and third great prices) The meaning and intent thereof for the like benefite of the aduenturers was and is to haue the vnderſtanding and reading of the ſaid words thus (whoſoeuer ſhall gaine the beſt, ſecond or thirde great prices So as in both thoſe Articles this worde (and) is to be changed into this word (or.)
            And where as alſo ſome haue mooued a ſcruple and doubt, that foraſmuch as no mention is made in the ſaide Chart incaſe of death of any of the aduenturers, before the time of the reading of the ſaid Lotterie, that the commodity of the prices and other aduantages rehearſed in the ſaid Chart, that ſhould happen to the aduenturers at the time of the reading of the ſaid Lotterie, ſhall remaine to the heires, executors or aſſignes of the ſaid aduenturers. For the explaning thereof, it is to be vnderſtand, and the meaning thereof was alwayes: That euery aduentuter may make ſuch aſſignation by Teſtament, deed or otherwiſe, of the commodity that may fall vnto him by the good fortune of the ſaid Lotterie, as he may or might otherwiſe do and diſpoſe of any other goods. And that ſuch as ſhall haue the ſaid aſſignation, their executours or aſſignes, bringing with them the Counterbill, being deliuered by the Collector to the aduenturer or aduenturers (the reading of the Lotterie being finiſhed, or elſe at the time appointed in the ſaid Chart) ſhall receiue all ſuch prices and aduantages as the aduenturer himſelfe ſhould haue, if he were liuing.
            Finally, if any other ſcruple, ſuſpition, doubt, fault, or miſtyking may happen to be found (as euery thing for the ſatiſfaction of euery perſon, cannot be ſo exactly ſet forth in writing, but ſome doubts may chance to enter into the conceipts of men, and ſpecially of thoſe that be inclined to ſuſpitions.) her Maieſtie for a full and generall ſatiſfaction of all ſuch and all other aduenturers in this Lotterie giueth to vnderſtand, that the ſame reſorting to the Creaſurers of the Shires, Cities or good Townes, ſhall receiue at their hands ſuch reſolution and anſwere, to all and ſinguler their ſaid doubts, ſcruples and demands, as ſhalbe to their reaſonable contentation and ſatiſfaction.
            ¶ God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Henrie Bynneman, dwelling in Knight rider ſtreet, at the ſigne of the Mermaide. anno 1567. Ianuarii 3.
         
      
   