
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            
               WHereas the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie by her Highneſſe Proclamation in Nouember laſt, did appoint and limit the reading of the Lotterie within her Citie of London this x. of Ianuarie. And by the ſame did giue ſtraight charge and commandement to all and ſinguler her officers, miniſters and ſubiects hauing therein to do, to prepare themſelues accordingly, as by the ſaide laſt Proclamation may appeare. Her Maieſtie perceiueth, that of ſome miſtruſt or doubtfull interpretation of the proceedings in the ſaide Lotterie, the firſt intention (to haue the collection and aduentures to haue amounted to a certains maſſe & ſumme of money, (where with a great number the aduenturers might haue bene largely benefited, according to a Chart thereof publiſhed in Auguſt, 1567.) is not, nor can not bee accompliſhed: Whereupon it is thought meet (without any further expectation or delay) to proceed to the publiſhing of the ſaid Lotterie, for ſo much as is already collected, and to cauſe euery Aduenturer to be truely, indifierently, and ratably anſwered, according to the maſſe collected, without any indirect dealing towards any perſon. And to the intent that euery perſon hauing any intereſt herein, may vnderſtand what in reaſon to expect for his Aduenture. It is to be vnderſtand to all Aduenturers in the ſame Lotterie, that the very certaine ſumme of money collected, and chargeable to the ſame, is a twelfth part of the whole maſſe firſt by the ſaid Chart appointed, and no more, as by due certificat and good accompt thereof (by her Highneſſe Commiſſioners and Treaſurers, being perſons of ſpeciall credite in that behalfe) made, her Maieſtie is certainely enformed. Whereupon all Aduenturers ſhall be duely anſwered of their Priſes accordingly after the ſaid rate: That is to ſay, To him that ſhall win the beſt and greateſt Lotte, the ſumme of foure hundreth and ſixteene pounds, thirteene ſhillings and foure pence, which is the iuſt twelfth part of fiue thouſand pounds, before appointed to haue bene giuen, if the whole ſumme had bene collected. And ſo conſequently euery perſon to be anſwered of the ſeuerall Priſes contained in the ſaide Chart, after the ſaide Rate.
            Giuing alſo to vnderſtand, that for the ſupplying of the full number firſt appointed by the Chart, euery perſon hauing aduentured any one Lotte of the value of ten ſhillings, ſhall be admitted to twelue aduentures or hazards, after which aduentures or hazards, the ſaid rate of a twelfth part, ſhall be duely anſwered and payed in ready money. And whoſoeuer hath aduentured more then one Lot, after the rate of ten ſhillings, ſhall be anſwered and payed in like ſort: which ſeuerall aduentures, hazardes or Priſes growing of the ſaid Lotterie, ſhall be duely anſwered and payed (after the Rate of the ſaid twelfth part) according to the appointment and promiſe contained in the ſaid firſt Chart.
            And for this purpoſe, all perſons hauing intereſt herein, ſhall and may begin to giue their attendance this preſent tenth day of Ianuary, and ſo to continue.
            
               Yeouen at her Highnes honor of Hampton Court, the ninth day of Ianuary, 1568. and in the eleuenth yeere of her Maieſties moſt proſperous Raigne.
               
            
            ¶ God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Henrie Bynneman, dwelling in Knight rider ſtreete, at the ſigne of the Marmaide.
            Cum gratia Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   