
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            
               ❧ A Proclamation declaryng the vntrueth of certaine malitious reportes deuiſed and publiſſhed in the Realme of Scotlande.
            
            
               THE Queenes Maieſtie of this Realme of Englande, vnderſtanding that there are publicſhed ſundry matters lately in Scotlande, contrary to all trueth and meaning of the ſayde Queene, as it appeareth maliciouſly deuiſed to blemiſhe the honour and ſinceritie of her Maieſtie, and to bryng Therle of Murrey in hatred with his owne friendes beyng natiue good Scottiſhe men: hath thought it good to let it be openly notified to all perſons, both Engliſhe and Scottiſhe that are diſpoſed to heare the trueth, that howſoeuer it be ſayde or written by any perſon of what ſtate ſoeuer the ſame be, that any ſecrete practiſe hath ben made betwixt her Maieſtie & Therle of Murrey, wherby it ſhould be conuented & accorded that the Queene of Scottes ſonne ſhoulde be deliuered into her Maieſties handes, to be nouriſhed in Englande as ſhe ſhould thinke good, and that the Caſtels of Edenburgh and Stryueling ſhoulde be in Engliſhe mens keping, and that the Caſtell of Dūbretton ſhoulde be beſieged and taken, and rendred to her Maieſties behoofe, and that Therle of Murrey ſhould be declared legittime to ſucceede to the crowne of Scotlande after the deceaſſe of the young prince or kyng without barnes, and in that caſe Therle of Murrey ſhould acknowledge to holde the Realme of Scotland in fee of her Maieſtie as Queene of Englande: Her Maieſtie as ſhe is and by Gods grace intendeth during her lyfe to be a prince of honour, and a maintayner of trueth, doth in the worde of a Queene, let all perſons to know, that all and euery theſe foreſayde thinges aboue ſpecified, are altogether falſe and vntrue, and are deuiſed by perſons of inere malice and rancour, beyng diſpoſed to nouriſhe factions and diſcordes, and hating the good quietnes and concorde betwixt the two Realmes of Englande and Scotlande. For this her Maieſtie likewiſe aſſureth all perſons, that as of theſe vntruethes and falſhoods there was neuer conuention nor accorde betwixt her Maieſtie and the ſaide Earle, nor betwixt him and any her miniſters to her Maieſties knowledge: So was there not at all any conuention or pact, eyther by worde or wrytyng, made betwixt her Maieſtie and the ſayde Earle, for any thing, ſince his laſt comming into this Realme, although it is true that ſome motions haue ben made, aſwell by Therle of Lennox and the Ladie his wyfe, beyng, as it is knowen, parentes to the late murthered father of the prince, as by others, that if hereafter it ſhoulde be ſcene that the ſayde prince could not continue in ſafetie in Scotlande from thattemptes of the murtherers of his father, and other his mortall enemies, that then he might be nouriſhed in Englande vnder the cuſtodie of ſuch as nowe haue the charge of hym, and are knowen to haue moſt tender care of hym. But hereof was there neuer any maner of conuention or accorde, neither yet was there heard by her Maieſtie any worde of the Earle of Murrey, or of any in his company, to alowe of any remouing of the ſame prince out of Scotlande, or out of the charge of them that nowe haue the cuſtodie of hym. And likewiſe her Maieſtie aſſureth all maner of perſons, that ſhe eſteemeth all other reportes falſe, that are ſayd alſo to be made of any league and intelligence betwixt the Earle of Murrey and the Earle of Hertforde, with other ſuch like improbable falſe deuiſes and ſlaunders. All whiche her Maieſtie woulde haue to be of all honeſt perſons both Engliſhe and Scottiſhe that loue trueth and hate falſhood, to be eſteemed for falſe, and to haue ben ſediciouſly and maliciouſly inuented, deuiſed, and publiſſhed. Finally, this her Maieſtie willeth all perſons to vnderſtande, that in this cauſe betweene the Queene of Scottes and her ſonne, there hath lacked no good meaning, nor yet doth, to haue had the ſame well ended with quietnes for the whole nation of Scotlande, and without any preiudice to the crowne of Scotlande, or to the dignitie thereof: The let and impediment of whiche good ende, her Maieſtie woulde all perſons to vnderſtande, not to haue come of her or her counſell, as hereafter ſhall more manifeſtly appeare.
            
               Gyuen at Hampton Court the xxii. of Ianuary. 1568. the xi. yere of her maieſties raigne.
               God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   