
      
         
            
            
            By the Queene.
            
               WHere the Queenes Maieſtie hath of late tyme had of her louyng ſubiectes, certayne ſummes of money by way of loane, for the repayment whereof, her Maieſtie cauſed this laſt ſommer, knowledge to be geuen to the parties that payde the ſame, at what tyme the ſame ſhoulde be certaynely payde to euery of them, hauyng reſpect to the tymes of their firſt payment made to the Collectours: Her Maieſtie meaning to obſerue the ſame her determination, hath thought beſt to notifie by this her proclamatiō, that the paymēt ſhal be made in this ſort folowyng: that is to ſay, That euery perſon that ſhould, according to the foreſayde ſignification, and in reſpecte of the tyme of theyr paymentes made, receaue any ſummes of money this moneth of Nouember, ſhall haue the ſame freely and fully payde, before the ende of this ſame preſent moneth of Nouember: and whoſoeuer lykewyſe ſhoulde haue payment accordyng to the foreſayde ſignification, in the next moneth of December, ſhal haue the ſame alſo freely and fully payde, immediatly after the twentieth of the ſame moneth of December, and ſo conſequently euery perſon ſhall haue lyke payment euery moneth afterwarde, immediatly after the .xx. of the ſame moneth reſpectiuely.
            And becauſe her Maieſtie hath ben partly infourmed, that ſome abuſe hath ben heretofore in ſome miniſters, hauyng charge to make payment of the lyke ſommes lent to her Maieſtie, contrarie to her meanyng, and that in ſome part of the Realme, ſome of her good ſubiectes haue ben by ſiniſter dealing induced to make payment of parcels of the money demaunded by priuie Seale, whiche ſummes haue ben retayned and not payde ouer to her Maieſties vſe, and ſome alſo hath ben payde or lent by way of reward, to procure a forbearing to lende any to her Maieſtie, which abuſes her Maieſtie meaneth to cauſe to be ſearched, tryed, and puniſhed. And therefore for more ſuretie, that none of her ſubiectes, that hath lent to her Maieſtie, vpon her priuie Seales, any ſumme of money, ſhoulde be delayed or miſuſed in the repayment: Her Maieſtie hath geuen commiſſion to the Lorde Keeper of her great Seale, the Erle of Leiceſter, the Lorde of Burghley, and ſyr Walter Myldmay knight, to direct the repayment thereof in this ſort: That whoſoeuer ſhall bryng her Maieſties letters of her priuie Seale, with the ſubſcription, or byll of the Collectour, teſtifying the receipt of any money demaunded and conteyned in the ſayde priuie Seale, and ſhewe the ſame to the Lorde Keeper, or to any of the others, ioyned with him in commiſſion for this purpoſe, ſhall haue order immediatly to receaue the whole ſumme due to hym, at Weſtminſter, without paying any maner rewarde to any officer, or perſon, for the payment, or for any maner colour of expedition therein. And yf any perſon to whom the ſame ſhal be due, be not hable, or ſhall not be diſpoſed to come perſonally for the ſame, to any of the ſayde Commiſſioners, or that (it may be) the ſame may be deceaſſed, & ſo the debt due to ſome other: In thoſe caſes, ſo as the letters of priuie Seale, and the ſubſcription or byll of the Collectour, teſtifying the receipt thereof, be preſented with ſome letter of atturney, or other aſſignation in wrytyng, ſufficiently aucthoriſing the partie that ſhall preſent the ſame for receipt thereof: the ſayde perſon ſhall alſo haue preſent free and full payment, and without delay or rewarde, in any ſort or maner. For ſuche is her Maieſties intent, that her louyng ſubiectes ſhoulde be thankefully and freely payde, whiche alſo ſhoulde haue ben to their proper handes in the countreys: but for more delayes and vncertaynties, that thereof many wayes myght folowe, to the hynderaunce of her ſubiectes.
            Finally, her Maieſtie moſt earneſtly deſireth, that if any perſon hath ben miſuſed by pretence of demaundyng any money vpon any ſuche priuie Seale, to geue any thyng in rewarde, or lende any portion to be ſpared from lendyng to her Maieſtie, that the ſame perſons wyll ſpeedily notifie the ſame, eyther to the Sheryffe of the Shire, or to any ſuche perſon as hath had charge in theſe laſt yeres paſt to be Lieuetenauntes of the Shires, or their deputies, or to any other perſons whom they ſhall thynke otherwyſe meete: whom alſo her Maieſtie chargeth to make certificate to the ſayde Lorde Keeper, or any other of the Commiſſioners nowe ioyned with hym, and thereupon her Maieſtie wyll order, that vpon the certayntie thereof knowen, the parties ſhal haue full repayment thereof.
            
               Gyuen at our Manour of Grynwich, the .xxiiii. day of Nouember. 1571. the .xiiii. yere of our Reigne.
               
               God ſaue the Queene.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   