
      
         
            
            
            By the Queene.
            
               ❧ A Proclamation agaynſt maynteyners of ſeditious perſons, and of trayterous bookes and writinges.
            
            
               THe Queenes Maieſtie conſydering with her ſelfe, howe it hath pleaſed almightie God at this preſent to conſerue her Realme in an vniuerſall good peace, and her ſubiectes in a conſtant obedience vnto her Maieſtie, notwithſtandyng the ſundry ſecrete malitious ſollicitations of certayne fugitiues and rebelles, beyng fled, and nowe remaynyng out of the Realme, by their ſeditious meſſages and falſe reportes ſent into the ſame, tendyng to prouoke others to be partakers of their malitious treaſons: Can not but firſt geue the due thankes & prayſe therof to almightie God, and therwith commende both the loyaltie of her good ſubiectes for their obedience, and allowe of this their vniuerſall conſtancie in the conſeruation of themſelues together within the bande of common peace. And furthermore alſo to geue admonition and warnyng, ſpecially to the ſimple ſort of her good louyng ſubiectes, that they be no wyſe abuſed with the wicked practiſes of the ſayd fugitiues and rebelles, by any their adherentes ſecretly remayning or repayring into the Realme, and wandring in corners, mouyng good ſubiectes to be diſobedient to the lawes, and ſcattering falſe rumors and newes, both by ſpeache, and by bookes and wrytinges, onely of intent to breake the common peace of the ſame, and to procure more partners with them in their treaſons and rebellions. And therfore her Maieſtie chargeth and commaundeth all maner her good ſubiectes, to be earneſtly ware hereof, and to employ their vttermoſt diligence in the apprehention of ſuch ſecret perſwadors of diſobedience, and breakyng of lawes, and of the ſowers and ſtirrers of ſedition, and ſpecially of ſuch as do or ſhall bring into the Realme any ſeditious bookes, wrytinges, or ſuch lyke trayterous deuiſes agaynſt the lawes & gouernment of the Realme, or any wyſe preiudicial to the royall ſtate of her Maieſtie. And if any ſhalbe founde wyllingly to ayde or comfort any ſuch ſeditious perſons in their ſayd malitious attemptes, or ſhal receaue and kepe, or conceale any maner of ſuch ſeditious bookes, wrytinges or bulles, in print or written, & ſhal not preſently diſcouer the ſaid perſons, and procure them to be apprehended, nor cauſe the ſaid kynde of writinges to be ſpedyly preſented to the ſuperiour officers, as hath ben by Proclamation lately laſt ordered and deuiſed: her Maieſtie geueth it to be vnderſtande, that then al and euery ſuch perſon ſo offendyng after this admonition, ſhalbe taken, reputed, and puniſhed, as abettors & maynteynors of the principall Traytors that were aucthors of the ſame: Meanyng in this behalfe, conſydering this playne admonition, not to be hereafter moued to ſpare the execution of ſuch offendors, vpon pretence or allegation of ſimplicitie or ignoraunce, to excuſe their defaultes.
            
               Geuen at our honour of Hampton Court the .xiiii. of Nouember. 1570. the twelfth yere of our raigne
               
               God ſaue the Queene.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   