
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ By the Queene.
            
               A Proclamation for maintenaunce of Tillage.
            
            
               THE Queenes Maieſtie our Soueraigne Lady, callyng to her moſt gracious remembraunce, the good and profitable lawes and ſtatutes made and ſet foorth in the tyme of her noble progenitours, for the mayntenaunce of houſes and tenementes of huſbandry, and the encreaſe of Tillage, and for the mayntenaunce of hoſpitalitie in diuers of the late priories and monaſteries, and agaynſt the lettyng downe of townes, and the decay of houſes of huſbandry, and alſo agaynſt the conuertyng of earable grounde from Tillage into paſture, as by the ſaid lawes and ſtatutes more at large doth and may appeare: And foraſmuch as her Maieſtie is geuen to vnderſtande, that notwithſtandyng the ſaide good and profitable ſtatutes and lawes, diuers and ſundry of her ſubiectes in many ſhires of this realme, vpon a greedy and couetous minde, not hauyng regarde to obey the ſayde lawes, haue and do dayly decay Townes and houſes of huſbandrye and incloſe their groundes, and conuert the ſame from tyllage into paſture, and kepe not ſuch hoſpitalitie as by the ſaide lawes they ought to do, to the great diſpleaſure of almightie God, the prouocation of idleneſſe, and deſtruction of her Maieſties people, wherby her realme is in ſome part weakened, and more is like, if ſpeedy reformation be not had therein. The perill that may enſue many wayes therby, her highnes entendeth to foreſee, and to let the parties offendyng therein to vnderſtande, that her Maieſtie mindeth to haue ſpeciall regarde therevnto. And yet doth neuertheleſſe in the meane ſeaſon by theſe preſentes ſtraightly charge and commaunde them, and euery of them that haue offended in any the premiſſes, that they do foorthwith refourme all ſuch thynges, as they and euery of them haue done or ſuffered contrary to the ſayde lawes and ſtatutes, wherin yf her Maieſtie ſhall perceaue they do neglect her commaundement therin, her highneſſe intendeth foorthwith, and with all ſeueritie to proceede agaynſt ſuch offendours, and to ſee reformation of their offences, accordyng to the expreſſe wordes and true meanyng of her Maieſties lawes, without any further tolleration or remiſſion. And for the better vnderſtandyng of all ſuch offendours, her highneſſe pleaſure is, that all her Iuſtices of aſſiſe, and Iuſtices of the peace, within the limittes of their Commiſſions, ſhall make diligent inquirie of the offerences aforeſayde, from tyme to tyme in all their aſſiſes and ſeſſions: and ſhall further make ſpeciall report to her highneſſe, what they ſhall fynde of any ſuch offendours in the premiſſes, or any part therof.
            
               Geuen at her Maieſties Pallaice of Weſtminſter, the firſt day of March. 1568. in the .xi. yere of her highneſſe moſt proſperous raigne.
               
God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   