
      
         
            
            
            By the Queene.
            
               WHere by occaſion of certayne arreſtes made in the lowe Countreys of the kyng of Spayne, in the yere of our Lorde 1568. by order of the Duke of Alua Lieutenaunt and Captayne generall in the ſayde lowe Countreys, the Queenes Maieſties ſubiectes with all theyr goodes, ſhyppes, marchaundizes and monies were there taken, deteyned, and ſeaſed, and the lyke after that was executed in Spayne and other the ſayde kynges Countreys. For remedy wherof, the Queenes Maieſtie at the inſtaunce of her marchauntes and ſubiectes whom the ſame dyd concerne, dyd vſe ſuch meanes in ſtaying of the goodes and marchaundizes of the ſubiectes of the ſayde kyng within her dominions, as by the treatiſe of peace and entercourſe betwixt the predeceſſours of her Maieſtie, and the ſaide kyng was lawful, and as had ben before tymes vſed: and ſence that tyme alſo her Maieſtie of late vpon motion made to her by ſundry marchauntes ſtraungers, pretendyng intereſt in ſome part of the goodes here ſtayed, hath ben pleaſed to admit a communication and treatie to be had aſwell here in this Realme, as on the other ſide of the ſeas, for the behoofe of the marchauntes of both partes, to the intent there myght be a releaſe, deliuerie, and reſtitution or recompence of and for all maner perſons arreſted, with their goodes, ſhippes, marchaundizes and monies, and thereby ſome further occaſion geuen to reuiue the former freendly entercourſe of marchauntes on all partes, accordyng to their mutuall deſire: the diſcontinuaunce whereof was neither intended nor occaſioned by her Maieſtie. Here vpon it hath ſeemed meete to her Maieſtie, therein folowyng the lyke order as in the ſayde kynges name by deliberation of the ſaide Duke of Alua in the ſaid lowe countreyes, hath ben publiſhed about the beginnyng of this moneth, that ſome certayne knowledge ſhoulde be had of the loſſe and damage of her Maieſties ſubiectes by reaſon of the foreſaid arreſtes, ſo as their indempnities myght be prouided for.
            And therfore her Maieſtie wylleth and commaundeth that all and euery her ſubiectes, or others inhabitauntes within her Realmes & dominions, that wyll or deſire to haue deliuerie and reſtitution of their goodes, or any other thinges deteyned and arreſted in any her Maieſties countreyes, ſhall within one moneth after the publication hereof in any ſhire of this Realme, preſent or ſende into the handes of the principall officers of any one of theſe cities and townes folowyng, that is to ſay, London, Southampton, Briſtoll, Cheſter, Newcaſtle, Hull, and Ipſwiche, as they ſhall finde it moſt conuenient, a certayne and particular declaration of the perſons, ſhippes, goodes, marchaundizes, debtes or money, which hath ben taken or ſeaſed by reaſon of the ſaide arreſtes in any of the ſayde kynges countreys and dominions. And after the ſame ſhalbe ſo deliuered to the foreſayde principall officers of any of the foreſayde Cities or Townes: Her Maieſtie further wylleth and commaundeth that to all the ſayde declarations filed together, the common ſeale of the ſayde Cities and Townes ſhalbe affixed: and after then, immediatly ſent and deliuered to the court of the admiraltie in the ſaide Citie of London, there to remayne to be conſydered as her Maieſtie ſhall further order for the benefite of her ſubiectes.
            Gyuen at her Maieſties manor of Otelande the laſt day of Iune. 1570. in the twelfth yere of her Maieſties raigne.
            
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   