
      
         
            
            
            ¶ To all and euery the Queenes Maieſties Officers, Churchwardens, Sidemen, Swornemen, and others, hauyng any gouernment or ouerſight for the time being, of or in any Churche, Chappell, or Pariſhe, within the Prouince of Caunterburie.
            
            
               WHERE the Queenes Maieſtie, being very carefull for the good gouernment of her Realme & Dominions, in al godly & holſome religion agreeable to the word of God, and beyng verye deſirous to haue both her lawes and orders well and faithfully obſerued, and her louyng ſubiectes repoſed in godly quiet, concord, & vnitie, and ſpecially in matters of religion: We vndernamed of her Maieſties cōmiſſion Eccleſiaſticall, with other our aſſociates, as our duetie is, aduiſedly conſydering her good zeale worthy to take place, to the honor of God, and the godly quiet of her ſubiectes, haue thought good to ſignifie thus much, and alſo to charge you & euery of you whom it may concerne. And therefore we wil and require you, and in the Queenes Maieſties name ſtraightly charge & commaunde you, & euery of you, that in no wyſe ye ſuffer any Parſon or Miniſter to miniſter any ſacrament, or ſay any publique prayers in any your Churches, Chappels, or other place appointed for Common prayers, in any other order, maner, or ſort, then onlye accordyng to the preſcription of the booke of Common prayers, and the Queenes Maieſties lawes publiſhed in that behalfe. And that in no wiſe ye ſuffer anye perſon publiquelie or priuatelye to teache, reade, or preache, in any the ſayde Churches, Pariſhes, Chappels, Priuate houſes, or other places, vnleſſe ſuch be licenced to preache, reade, or teache, by the Queenes highneſſe aucthoritie, the Archbyſhop of Caunterburie his licence, or by the licence of the Byſhop of ye Dioceſſe: and that he be ſuch a Miniſter as is licenced to preache after the fyrſt of May laſt, and not remoued from the Miniſterie by vs, or anye other lawfull aucthoritie: And that you haue a diligent care in the accompliſhment of this her highneſſe ſeruice and pleaſure by vs thus to you declared, as you and euery of you wyll aunſwere to the contrary.
            
               Yeuen at Lamheth in the Countie of Surrey the .vii. of Iune, in the yere of the raigne of our Soueraigne Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of Englande, Fraunce, and Irelande Queene, defender of the fayth. &c. the thirteenth.
               
               
                  
                     Matthewe Cantuar.
                     Edwinus London.
                     Robart VVinton.
                     Richarde Ely.
                     Nicolas VVigorn.
                     Richarde Ciceſtren.
                     Gabriell Goodman.
                     Thomas VVilſon.
                     Thomas Bromley.
                     George Bromley.
                     Peter Oſborne.
                     Thomas Yale.
                     Richarde VVendeſley.
                     Iohn Merſhe.
                  
With other aſſiſtens.
            
         
      
   