
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The fourme of the othe made by ſuch as haue made their humble ſubmiſſion to the Queenes Maieſties Commiſſioners, for their offences in the late rebellion begun in the North in Nouember. 1569. and the twelfth yere of the raigne of the Queenes Maieſtie, Elizabeth by the grace of GOD. &c.
            
               FIrſt, ye ſhall ſweare that ye be heartyly ſory that ye haue offended the Queenes Maieſtie in your late rebellion. And that you do and ſhall repute and take all othes and promiſes heretofore made to any perſon or perſons, for and touchyng the ſayde rebellion, to be wicked, vnlawfull, and of none effect: And alſo that you haue offended God and her highneſſe in taking of any ſuch othe, or in making any promiſe for that purpoſe: And that from hencefoorth ye ſhalbe true and faythfull ſubiectes vnto the Queene our ſoueraigne Lady, Elizabeth by the grace of God, Queene of England, Fraunce, and Irelande, defender of the fayth. &c. And that you ſhall from hencefoorth obey and alowe all lawes, ordinaunces, and ſtatutes of this Realme, not beyng repealed: And all the ſame ye ſhall agaynſt all perſons maynteyne, and defende to the vttermoſt of your power: And ſhall aſſiſt all ſuch Iudges, Iuſtices, Cōmiſſioners, Officers, & Miniſters, aſwell eccleſiaſticall as temporal, as the Queenes Maieſtie ſhall appoynt for the due execution of any of her Maieſties lawes, ordinaunces, iniunctions, ſtatutes, or proclamations.
            Item, ye ſhall neuer hereafter duryng your lyues make any vnlawfull aſſemblies or commotions, ne put your ſelues in any number in forceable aray at the commaundement of any perſon what ſo euer he be, but onely by the commaundement of the Queenes Maieſtie, or of her Lieftenant, or Lieftenantes, officers, or miniſters, hauyng ſufficient aucthoritie of her Maieſtie to appoynt the ſame.
            Item, you ſhall not do or commit any treaſons, murders, or felonies, ne knowe any ſuch to be done by any perſon what ſo euer he be, but you ſhall open and bewray the ſame to the Queenes Maieſtie, or to ſuch as haue her Maieſties lawes in adminiſtration. And in caſe there ſhall happen to be any perſon or perſons, which ſhall vtter and declare vnto you or any of you priuily or openly, any ſeditious matters, or ſhall write any ſeditious letters, or moue you to any inſurrection, or any vnlawfull aſſemblies, or ſpeake any ſclaunderous wordes of the Queenes Maieſtie, or of any of her counſellers: you ſhall lykewyſe open and diſcloſe the ſame, and ſhall endeuour your ſelues to apprehende, or cauſe to be apprehended all ſuche perſons, & ſo to haue them committed to ſure priſon, vntyll you ſhall knowe her Maieſties pleaſure by order of her Counſell, or other Miniſters. And you ſhal alſo ſweare that you do vtterly teſtifie and declare in your conſciences, that the Queenes hyghneſſe is the onely ſupreme gouernour of this Realme, and of all other her hyghneſſe dominions and countreys, aſwell in all ſpirituall or eccleſiaſticall thinges or cauſes, as temporall: And that no forraigne prince, perſon, prelate, ſtate, or potentate, hath or ought to haue any iuriſdiction, power, ſuperioritie, preeminence, or aucthoritie eccleſiaſticall or ſpirituall within this Realme: And that you do vtterly renounce and forſake al forraigne iuriſdictions, powers, ſuperiorities, and aucthorities: And that you wyll from hencefoorth beare fayth and true allegiance to the Queenes Maieſtie, her heires and lawfull ſucceſſours: And to your powers ſhall aſſiſt and defende al iuriſdictions, priuileges, preeminences, & aucthorities graunted or belonging to the Queenes hyghneſſe, her heires and ſucceſſours, or vnited and annexed to the imperiall crowne of this Realme, So helpe you God, and by the contentes of this booke.
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   