
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ By the Queene.
            
               
                  WHereas the Queenes moſt Excellent Maieſtie by her hyghneſſe Proclamation, geuen at her Manour of Hauering the xiii. of Iuly laſt for diuers conſiderations in the ſame expreſſed, was pleaſed to ſhorten the day before limited for the reading of the Lottery erected within her citie of London, and by the ſayde Proclamation appoynted the reading therof to begin the third of this preſent moneth of Nouember, thinking the ſayd Proclamation to haue ben a ſufficient warning and knowledge geuen to all ſuch her Maieſties ſubiects as had truſt committed to them, in ſundry Shires of the Realm, for collection of the ſummes of money to be aduentured in the ſayde Lottery, for to haue returned the bookes ſent to them for that purpoſe in time conuenient, before the third of this moneth. Neuertheleſſe, the negligence of diuers hauing charge in the ſame ſeruice, hath ben ſuch, as vntill this time they haue forborne to make due returne of the whole bookes, ſo as the ſayde beginning of the reading of the ſayde Lottery, can not without preiudice of many of her Highneſſe ſubiects aduenturers therin, preſently proceede. Wherefore her Maieſtie meaning to haue the ſayd reading neither to be taken in hand to the preiudice of a great number of her ſubiects, neither yet to bee hereafter lenger prolonged then may ſeeme reaſonable: willeth all maner of perſons, by this her highneſſe Proclamation to vnderſtand, that the ſayde reading ſhall begynne the tenth of Ianuary next enſuing, and for no reſpect to be further prolonged. And ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth all and euery her louing ſubiects whatſoeuer, hauing charge or truſt of any bookes, or otherwiſe touching the ſame committed to them, to returne the ſayd ſeuerall bookes before the laſt day of this moneth of Nouember: ſo as the other miniſters hauing herein to doe, may betwixt the ſayd day and the ſayd tenth of Ianuary (which time alſo is requiſite to be had for the preparation of all thyngs thereunto neceſſary) without all excuſe, take order and prepare themſelues to the due execution hereof. Whereunto her Maieſtie ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth all her ſayde officers, miniſters, and ſubiects, hauyng to doe therein, to haue ſpeciall regard, as they and euery of them will aunſwere to their negligence at their perils.
            
               Yeuen at our Honour of Hampton Court, the ſecond day of Nouember, the tenth yeere of our Raigne.
               
            
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Printed at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Iugge, and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   