
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            A proclamation to repreſſe all piracies and depredations vpon the Seas
            
               FOraſmuch as it is come to the Queenes Maieſties vnderſtanding, by meanes of certayne complaintes, aſwell by her owne ſubiects as others, that there are ſundry perſons vpon the narowe Seas, of diuers nations, and ſome borne within her Maieſties dominions, hauyng ſhippes armed in warlike maner, who partly at the firſt went manifeſtly to the Seas in maner of marchaunts, and haue afterward by ſiniſter meanes chaunged their trade, and armed themſelues for the warre: ſome others haue ſecretly ſtollen out of obſcure places, with a pretence in theſe troubleſome tymes, that are ſeen aſwell eaſtward betwixt the kingdome of Denmake and Sweden, and their adherentes, as weſtwarde in the dominions of Fraunce, both lamentable to behold, to ſerue on the Seas either on the on part or the other, and yet indeede haue at length directed themſelues from all lefull ſeruice of warres, to lyue as pirats, robbing and ſpoylyng all maner of honeſt marchauntes of euery nation without difference, whom they are able to ſubdue. For remedy whereof, although her Maieſtie hath of late tyme geuen certayne ſtrayt orders through all her portes, that no maner of perſons other then knowen marchauntes, ſhoulde be ſuffered to ſell or diſtribute any maner of wares or marchaundiſes in any her portes, nor that any within her Realme ſhould vittayle, or otherwiſe relieue any maner of perſon any wiſe to be ſuſpected of piracie. Yet now vpon theſe new complaintes, her Maieſtie finding that thereby hath followed no ſuch full remedy as was looked for: for that purpoſe her Maieſtie hath thought meet to deuiſe and publiſh by her proclamation ſome further effectuall remedy. And therefore doth ſtraytly charge and command all maner her ſubiects, to forbeare from ayding or receauing of any pirate, or any perſon hauing not lefull aucthoritie from her Maieſtie, or not being a knowen marchaunt, by contractyng, bying, ſellyng or exchaungyng, or by vittaylying of them or any of their company, whereby they or any of them ſhalbe the more enhabled to returne to the Seas to commit any piracie or diſorder, vpon payne for ſo doing to be puniſhed preſently, as the principall offendours and pirates ought to be. And furthermore, whoſoeuer ſhal hereafter arme or prepare any veſſel to the ſea, except it be ſuch as ſhal by her Maieſties auctority, be ſpecially appointed to kepe the Seas, as her Maieſtie now is occaſioned to do for ſome other reſpects, or ſuch as ſhall haue expreſſe licence and permiſſion by her Maieſtie: the ſame ſhall geue knowledge to the officers of the portes of their whole furniture, who ſhall duely ſearch and viſite the ſame, to the intent to ſtay ſuch perſons as apparauntly ſhalbe ſo furniſhed for the warres, and not for marchaundiſe or fiſhing. And if there ſhalbe any maner of ſuſpitition, that the ſaid perſon though he ſhal pretende to trade for marchaundiſe, or fiſhing, hath or may haue any intent by his prouiſions or furniture, otherwiſe then to vſe the trade of marchaundiſe, or fiſhing: that in ſuch caſe of ſuſpition, the officers of the ports ſhall ſtay, and no wiſe ſuffer the ſame to paſſe to the Seas, without good bands by ſufficient ſureties firſt had, to vſe nothing but a leful trade of Marchaundiſe or fiſhing. And if the officers ſhall ſuffer any perſon otherwiſe to repaire to the Seas then aboue is mentioned, they ſhall not onely aunſwere for any piracies which any ſuch perſon ſhall chaunce thereafter to do vpon the Sea: but ſhall ſuffer impriſonment vntill the offenders may bee apprehended, if they ſhall be liuing. And generally her Maieſtie declareth and denounceth all ſuch pirates and rouers vpon the Seas to be out of her protection, and lefully to be by any perſon taken, puniſhed, and ſuppreſſed with extremitie.
            
               Geuen at her Maieſties Pallaice of Weſtminſter, the xxvii. day of April, the xi. yeere of her Maieſties moſt noble xaigne.
               
            
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
      
   