
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            
               WHereas the Queenes Maieſtie our Soueraigne Lady by reaſon of the plague and peſtilence in the Citie of London, dyd lately by her proclamation adiourne part of the Tearme of S. Michael, that is to ſay, from the vtas thereof vnto Craſtino animarum, then to haue begun at the citie of Weſtminſter, as at the place accuſtomed: Her Maieſtie had very great hope that the ſayd ſickneſſe through the fauour of Almightie God, and by the coloneſſe of the yere, and other occaſions by that time would haue ceaſſed, neuertheleſſe her highneſſe is crediblie enformed that the ſayd ſickneſſe yet continueth within her ſaide citie of London, for the which her Maieſtie is right hartily ſory. Her highneſſe is therefore forced aſwell for the preſeruation of her other good ſubiects of all degrees, that ſhould repayre to London by reaſon of the tearme, as alſo for many other great conſiderations to adiourne the reſt of the ſaid tearme. That is to ſay, from Craſtino animarum aforeſaid, vntill the Octabis of S. Hillarie next comming, then to begin at Weſtminſter as hath ben accuſtomed. Which her Maieſtie ſignifieth to all and ſinguler her louing ſubiects of this her Realme, to thintent that they and euery of them which hath cauſe or commandement to appeare in any of her highneſſe Courtes at Weſtminſter, in or at any day or tyme from and after the ſayde Craſtino animarum, may tary at their dwellinges, or where their buſineſſe otherwiſe ſhall lye, without reſorting to any of the ſayde Courtes for that cauſe, before the Octabis of S. Hillarie next comming, and that without daunger of forfayture, penaltie, or contempt to incurre towards her highneſſe in that behalfe. And neuertheleſſe her Maieſties pleaſure is, that two of her Iuſtices, that is to ſay, of eyther benche one, ſhal the ſayde Craſtino animarum according to the auncient order, adiourne her ſayde two Courtes at Weſtminſter, at which day writtes of adiournement ſhalbe directed to the ſayd Iuſtices, to adiourne the ſame in and from the ſayd Craſtino animarum, vntyl the Octabis of S. Hillarie as before is ſayd. And her Maieſties pleaſure is, that all matters, cauſes, and ſuites, depending in any of her other Courtes between partie and partie, as in her highnes Courtes of Chancerie, Starre chaumber, and Exchequer, Courts of Wardes and Liueries, and Duchie of Lancaſter, ſhall haue continuaunce, and the parties ſhall haue day from the date of theſe preſents, vntyll the Octabis of S. Hillarie as before is ſayd.
            Prouided alwayes, and her Maieſties pleaſure and commaundement is, that all Collectours, Receauers, Sheriffes, and other accomptantes, and all other perſons that ought or ſhoulde accompt or pay any ſome or ſommes of money in any of her Maieſties Courte of Exchequer, Courtes of Wardes and Liueries or of her Duchie of Lancaſter, or in any of them, or that ſhould enter into any accompt in any of the ſame Courtes, ſhall at their dayes appointed repayre vnto the accuſtomed places at Weſtminſter, where her hyghnes hath appointed ſuch officers and miniſters as for that purpoſe her Maieſtie hath thought expedient: and there to pay and do in euery behalfe, as though no ſuch Proclamation of adiournement had ben had or made: Any thing mentioned in this preſent Proclamation, or in any writ of adiournement to the contrary notwithſtanding.
            And her highneſſe further pleaſure and commandement is, that all Shiriffes ſhall returne their writtes and proceſſe againſt all ſuch accomptauntes and detters at the dayes therein appointed: and if any perſon or perſons, who ought to accompt or pay any ſomme or ſommes of money to her Maieſtie in any the Courts and places aforeſayd, do make default therin: that then her highneſſe writtes and proceſſe ſhalbe awarded and ſent forth againſt euery ſuch perſon and perſons, and the ſame be duely and orderly ſerued, and returned by the Shiriffes and officers therevnto appoynted, in ſuche lyke maner and fourme, as the ſame ſhould haue ben, if this preſent Proclamation had not ben made. And if any Shiriffe or other officer ſhall make default, or be negligent in ſeruing, executing, and returning of any the writtes and proceſſe aforeſayd, that then euery ſuch Shiriffe and other officer, ſhall incurre ſuch paines and penalties, as by the ſayde Courtes, or any of them ſhalbe taxed and aſſeſſed. Wyllyng and commanding all and euery of her Maieſties Shiriffes, officers, and miniſters, and ſubiects, to whom it doth or ſhall appertaine, to obſerue and kepe their aſſemblies and apparaunces, with all their returnes and certificates in her highneſſe ſayd Courtes at Weſtminſter in the Octabis of S. Hillarie next comming, then and there with the fauour of God to be holden and kept, and their to do their offices and duties in euery behalfe, in lyke maner and fourme, as they ſhould or ought to haue done if this preſent Proclamation had not ben had or made, as they will anſwere to the contrary at their perils.
            
               Geuen at her Maieſties Caſtel of Windſor the xxiii. day of October, in the eleuenth yeere of her Maieſties raigne.
               
God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Richard Iugge, and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
      
   