
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            
               A Proclamation for bringing into the Realme of unlawfull and ſeditious bookes.
            
            
               WHereas diuers bookes made or tranſlated by certayne the Queenes Maieſties ſubiects, for the more part remayning on the other ſide of the ſea, without lawfull licence, contayning ſundry matters repugnaunt to trueth, derogatorie to the ſoueraigne eſtate of her Maieſtie, and ſtirring and nouriſhing ſedition in this Realme, are commonly in ſecret ſort here diſpearſed by malicious perſons among ſundry her Maieſties ſubiects, to thintent to drawe them to errour, and withdraw them ſediciouſly from their dueties and allegiance due to her Maieſtie, as their onely ſoueraigne. For redreſſe hereof, like as of late tyme ſome mylde example hath ben made in the ſtarre chaumber at Weſtminſter, in correction of certayne perſons found faultie in the ſecret diſpearūng, buying, & allowing of ſundry of the ſayde ſeditious bookes: So her Maieſtie meaning of her clemencie, neither to haue any aduantage taken for things herein already paſt, nor any her honeſt and quiet ſubiectes to be entangled with the like hereafter for lacke of admonition in due tyme: willeth and earneſtly chargeth all manner of perſons, to forbeare vtterly from the vſe or dealing with any ſuch ſeditious bookes, made or tranſlated by any perſon, contayning matter derogatorie to the Soueraigne eſtate of her Maieſtie, or impugning the orders and rites eſtabliſhed by the lawe for Chriſtian religion and deuine ſeruice within this Realme, or otherwyſe ſtirring and nouriſhing matter tending to ſedition: and that ſuch as alredy haue any of the ſayde bookes, ſhall preſent, or cauſe to be preſented the ſayde bookes, within twentie and eyght dayes after the publiſhing of this proclamation, to the byſhop of the dioceſſe, or ordinarie of the place, and to receaue of him a teſtimoniall of the tyme of the deliuery thereof: and without expreſſe licence in wryting of the ſayde byſhop or ordinary, or ſome archbyſhop, or other byſhop of the Realme, not to kepe or reade any ſeditious bookes, vpon paine of her Maieſties grieuous indignation, and to be puniſhed ſeuerely, as the qualitte and circumſtaunces of the offence ſhall require and deſerue.
            
               Gyuen at her Maieſties pallaice of Weſtminſter, the firſt day of March. 1568. the eleuenth yeere of her Maieſties raigne.
               
God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
      
   