
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ By the Queene.
            
               WHereas the Queenes Maieſtie our Soueraigne Lady by reaſon of the plague & peſtilence in the citie of London, dyd lately by her proclamation adiourne part of the Tearme of S. Michael, that is to ſay, from the vtas therof vnto Craſtino animarum, thē to haue begun at the citie of Weſtminſter, as at the place accuſtomed: Her Maieſtie had very great hope that the ſayde ſickneſſe through the fauour of Almightie God, and by the coldeneſſe of the yere, and other occaſions by that tyme woulde haue ceaſſed, neuertheleſſe her hyghneſſe is crediblie enfourmed that the ſayde ſicknes yet continueth within her ſayde citie of London, for the which her Maieſtie is right hartyly ſory. Her highneſſe is therefore forced aſwell for the preſeruation of her other good ſubiectes of all degrees that ſhoulde repayre to London by reaſon of the tearme, as alſo for many other great conſiderations to adiourne the reſt of the ſaid tearme. That is to ſay, from Craſtino animarum aforeſaid, vntill the Octabis of S. Hillarie next comming, then to begin at Weſtminſter as hath ben accuſtomed. Whiche her Maieſtie ſignifieth to all and ſinguler her louing ſubiectes of this her Realme, to thentent that they and euery of them whiche hath cauſe or commaundement to appeare in any of her highnes Courtes 
                  〈◊〉
                Weſtminſter, in or at any day or tyme from and after the ſayde Craſtino animarum, may tary at their dwellinges, or where their buſines otherwyſe ſhall lye, without reſorting to any of the ſayde Courtes for that cauſe, before the Octabis of S. Hillarie next comming, and that without daunger of forfayture, penaltie, or contempt to incurre to wardes her 
                  〈…〉
               s in that behalfe. And neuertheleſſe her Maieſties pleaſure is, that two of her Iuſtices, that is to ſay, of eyther benche one, ſhal the ſayde Craſtino animarum according to the auncient order, adiourne her ſayde two Courtes at Weſtminſter, at which day writtes of adiournement ſhalbe directed to the ſayde Iuſtices, to adiourne the ſame in and from the ſayd Craſtino animarum, vntyl the Octabis of S. Hillarie as before is ſayd. And her Maieſties pleaſure is, that al matters, cauſes, & ſutes, depending in any of her other Courtes betwene partie and partie, as in her highnes Courtes of Chaun
               
                  〈…〉
                Starre chaumber, and Exchequer, Courtes of wardes and Liueries, and Duchie of Lancaſter, ſhall haue continuance, and the parties ſhall haue day from the date of theſe preſentes, vntyll the Octabis of S. Hillarie as before is ſayde.
            Prouided alwayes, and her Maieſties pleaſure and commaundement is, that all Collectours, Receauers, Sheriffes, and other accomptantes, and all other perſons that ought or ſhoulde accompt or pay any ſome or ſommes of money in any of her Maieſties Courte of Exchequer, Courtes of Wardes and Liueries or of her Duchie of Lancaſter, or in any of them, or that ſhould enter into any accompte in any of the ſame Courtes, ſhall at their dayes appointed repayre vnto the accuſtomed places at Weſtminſter, where her hyghnes hath appoynted ſuch officers and miniſters as for that purpoſe her Maieſtie hath thought expedient: and there to pay and do in euery behalfe, as though no ſuch Proclamation of adiournement had ben had or made: Any thing mentioned in this preſent Proclamation, or in any writ of adiournement to the contrary not withſtanding.
            And her hyghnes further pleaſure and commaundement is, that all Shiriffes ſhall returne their writtes and proceſſe againſt all ſuch accomptauntes and detters at the dayes therin appointed: and if any perſon or perſons, who ought to accompt or pay any ſomme or ſommes of money to her Maieſtie in any the Courtes and places aforeſayde, do make default therin: that then her hyghnes writtes and proceſſe ſhalbe awarded and ſent foorth againſt euery ſuch perſon & perſons, and the ſame to be duely and orderly ſerued, and returned by the Shiriffes and officers thervnto appoynted, in ſuche lyke maner and fourme, as the ſame ſhoulde haue ben, if this preſent Proclamation had not ben made. And if any Shiriffe or other officer ſhall make default, or be negligent in ſeruing, executing, and returning of any the writtes and proceſſe aforeſayd that then euery ſuch Shiriffe and other officer, ſhall incurre ſuch paynes and penalties, as by the ſayde Courtes, or any of them ſhalbe taxed and aſſeſſed. Wyllyng and commaunding all & euery of her Maieſties Shiriffes, officers, and miniſters, and ſubiectes, to whom it doth or ſhall appertayne, to obſerue and kepe their aſſemblies and apparaunces, with all their returnes and certificates in her highnes ſayde Courtes at Weſtminſter in the Octabis of S. Hillarie next comming, then and there with the fauour of God to be holden and kept, and there to do their offices and dueties in euery bebalfe, in lyke maner and fourme, as they ſhoulde or ought to haue done if this preſent Proclamation had not ben had or made, as they wyll aunſwere to the contrary at their perils.
            
               Geuen at her Maieſties Caſtel of Windſor the .xxiii. day of October, in the eleuenth yere of her Maieſties raigne.
               
God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
         
      
   