
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ By the Queene.
            
               
                  THe Queenes Maieſtie vpon very wayghtie and neceſſarie conſiderations, tendyng firſt to the honor of almyghtie God, and next to the ſuretie of her ſelfe and the whole ſtate of her louyng ſubiectes of all degrees: hath with very good deliberation and aduiſe of her counſell reſolued to eſtabliſhe her realmes, dominions, and ſubiectes in ſtrength, aſwell in ciuill as in martiall pollicie, and to the furtheraunce of ſome part of neceſſarie thynges belongyng to the ſtate martiall. Her Maieſtie geueth knowledge to all maner her ſubiectes, that by ſpeciall perſons of good truſt, there ſhalbe particuler inquiſitions made in all partes of the Realme, in what ſort the ſtatutes and lawes of the ſame are obſerued, which are prouided for maintenaunce of the breede of horſes, and for kepyng and hauyng in redyneſſe and duely furnyſſhed for ſeruice of horſes and geldynges, and of all maner of armour and weapons. And conſequently vpon ſuch inquiſitions, her Maieſtie alſo meaneth ſpeedyly to haue parfite muſters made of the ſame, and the errours and lackes which therin ſhalbe founde, to be by frequent muſteryng and exerciſe amended and ſupplied.
            And becauſe her Maieſtie conſidereth, that the intermiſſion of tyme hath bread ſome lacke of ſuch furniture as by the lawes vpon great paynes are required: her Maieſtie being not of a diſpoſition to vſe ſeueritie towardes her ſubiectes, in reſpect of the penalties alredy iuſtly due, but to haue all her people, as nowe the tyme requireth, to be in ſtrength: chargeth and commaundeth all maner of perſons of all eſtates, to prouide and furnyſhe them ſelues, accordyng as by any law or ſtatute, or by any other ſpeciall tenure it ſhalbe founde to be due, of horſes, geldynges, armour, and weapons, and of meete perſons to ſerue therwith: ſo as the ſame may be fully redy before the firſt of April next, vpon ſuch penalties as by the lawes ſhalbe by ſpecial commiſſions through all partes of the Realme founde due. Wherin her Maieſtie meaneth, in conſideration of this fauourable warnyng, not to ſpare or mittigate any maner of penaltie that ſhalbe due for any part of the tyme paſt. And thus much of her generall determination in the meane time her Maieſtie hath thought good to notifie by this her proclamation, not doubting but ſuch other thinges as her Maieſtie intendeth ſhortly hereafter to propounde to al her ſubiectes for a further ſtrengthnyng of themſelues, ſhalbe well alowed, and duely executed, as tendyng principally to the benefite of themſelues, and to the honor and ſuretie of the Realme againſt all euentes.
            
               Gyuen at Hampton Court the thirde day of February. 1568. in the eleuenth yere of her Maieſties raigne.
               
God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Richard Jugge and Iohn Cawood, printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   