
      
         
            
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            
               A Proclamation for maintenaunce of Tillage.
            
            
               THE Queenes Maieſtie our Soueraigne Lady, callyng to her moſt gracious remembraunce, the good and profitable lawes and ſtatutes made and ſet foorth in the tyme of her noble progenitours for the maintenaunce of houſes and tenements of huſbandry, and for the increaſe of Tillage, and for the mayntenaunce of hoſpitalitie in diuers of the late priories and monaſteries, and agaynſt the lettyng downe of townes, and the decay of houſes of huſbandry, and alſo againſt the conuertyng of earable grounde from Tillage into paſture, as by the ſaid lawes and ſtatutes more at large doth and may appeare: And foraſmuch as her Maieſtie is geuen to vnderſtand, that notwithſtandyng the ſaide good and profitable ſtatutes & lawes, diuers and ſundry of her ſubiects in many ſhires of this realme, vpon a greedy and couetous minde, not hauing regarde to obey the ſaide lawes, haue and do dayly decay Townes and houſes of huſbandrye, and incloſe their groundes, and conuert the ſame from tyllage into paſture, and kepe not ſuch hoſpitalitie as by the ſaide lawes they ought to do, to the great diſpleaſure of almightie God, the prouocation of idleneſſe, and deſtruction of her Maieſties people, whereby her realme is in ſome part weakened, and more is like, if ſpeedy reformation be not had therein. The perill that may enſue many wayes therby, her highnes entendeth to foreſee, and to let the partyes offendyng therein to vnderſtande, that her Maieſtie mindeth to haue ſpeciall regarde therevnto. And yet doth neuertheleſſe in the meane ſeaſon by theſe preſents ſtraightly charge and commande them, and euery of them that haue offended in the any of the premiſſes, that they do foorth with refourme all ſuch things, as they and euery of them haue done or ſuffered contrary to the ſaid lawes and ſtatutes, wherein yf her Maieſtie ſhall perceaue they do neglect her commandement therin, her highneſſe intendeth foorthwith, and with all ſeueritie to proceed againſt ſuch offenders, and to ſee reformation of their offences, according to the expreſſe wordes and true meaning of her Maieſties lawes, without any further tolleration or remiſſion. And for the better vnderſtanding of all ſuch offendours, her highneſſe pleaſure is, that all her Iuſtices of aſſiſe, and Iuſtices of the peace, within the limittes of their Commiſſions, ſhall make diligent inquiry of the offences aforeſayde, from tyme to tyme in all their aſſiſes and ſeſſions: and ſhall further make ſpeciall report to her highneſſe, what they ſhall fynde of any ſuch offendours in the premiſſes, or any part thereof.
            
               Geuen at her Maieſties Pallaice of Weſtminſter, the firſt day of March. 1568. in the xi. yere of her highneſſe moſt proſperous raigne.
               
God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Richard Iugge, and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie.
         
         
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   