
      
         
            
            
               ❧ By the Queenes Commaundement.
            
               FOraſmuch as it is found by good proofe, that many perſons which haue ſerued of late on the Seas, in the iourney towardes Spayne and Portingall, in comming from Plimmouth, and other Portes of the Realme, haue fallen ſicke by the way, and diuers died as infected with the plague: And that it is likely that many will haue purpoſe to come from the ſaid Nauie, to the Citie of London, and ſo conſequently to the Court, whereby danger of infection may come to her Maieſties houſholde, and ſo approche to her ſacred perſon. Therefore it is commaunded by publication hereof, both at the Court Gate, and in all the Townes within the Uerge, that no perſon that hath ſerued within the ſaid Fleete, ſhall come to the Court, nor within the Uerge, except ſuch as ſhall be ſpecially ſent from thoſe which were the Generals of the Nauie, with letters to the Court: which perſons ſhall not enter within the Court Gates, vntill the cauſe of their comming from the Generals, with letters of importance be notefied to ſome of her Maieſties priuie Counſell, and thereupon the Queenes Porters warned to ſuffer them to enter into the Court.
            And if any ſuch perſon ſhall contrary to this commandement, from this day being the xxii. of this moneth of July, attempt to come either to the Court, or within the Uerge, and ſhall not immediatly vpon knowledge hereof depart with conuenient ſpeede, the ſame ſhall be apprehended by the Knight Marſhall and his Deputies, or by any Iuſtice or Conſtable dwelling within the Uerge, and ſhall bee committed to the Marſhalſeas without any bayle, vntil he ſhall be diſmiſſed by ſome two of the Priuie Counſell attending on her Maieſties perſon.
            And yet it is not meant, but if any ſhall haue neceſſarie cauſe to come to the Court, to exhibite any ſuite or information concerning his ſeruice in the ſaid Nauie, the ſame perſon ſhall cauſe the ſame his ſuite or information to be ſent to the Court in writing, or by meſſage to be brought by a perſon that hath not bene in the ſaide Nauie, and not knowen to be infected, to bee deliuered either to one of her Maieſties ordinarie Maſters of Requeſts, or to the Knight Marſhall, or to ſome one of the Priuie Counſell, by which meanes the ſuite may be duely vnderſtoode, and ſo a reaſonable anſwere to bee made thereto.
            
               At Nonſuch 22. Julii. Anno 31. Reginae Eliz. b. 1589.
                  
               
God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Chriſtopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie.
         
      
   