
      
         
            
            ❀ By the Queene.
               ❧ A Proclamation to restraine acceſſe to the Court, of all ſuch as are not bound to ordinarie attendance, or that ſhall not be otherwiſe by her Maiestie.
            
               THe Queenes Maieſtie being duely informed how greatly and in many places the infection of the ſickneſſe is at this time diſperſed, by reaſon whereof her Highneſſe in her princely care and wiſedom, waying the danger thereof, and how neceſſarie it is to haue reſtraint made of haunt and repaire to her Maieſties Court, doeth vpon this good conſideration, and that her Court may (with Gods fauour) be the better preſerued frō infection, charge and command, that no maner perſons, but ſuch as haue cauſe to remaine or come to her Court for their ordinarie attendance vpon her Maieſties perſon, or to doe ſeruice in her Court, ſhall make their repaire to her Court, or within two miles of the ſame, vpon payne to be committed to priſon for their contempt. And where by her Maieſties commaundement there are certaine orders made, who, & how many ſhall be commanded to attend for the ſeruice of her Maieſtie, either for her Chamber, or for her houſhold, or for attendance vpon her Counſailors, or other her Maieſties ordinarie Seruants in Court, and that no mo ſhall be admitted to follow the Court, or to enter into the ſame: Her Maieſtie ſtraightly chargeth both her Counſailors and her principall officers of her Chamber, and of her Houſhold, that they ſee the ſame orders duely obſerued, and that ſuch as ſhall breake the ſame orders, ſhall be ſharply puniſhed. And conſidering that Trinitie Terme begun at Weſtminſter the fifteenth day of this moneth, in ſome part is adiourned, as by her Highneſſe Proclamation is notified, Her Maieſtie alſo commandeth that all priuate ſuitors ſhal forbeare to come to the Court where her Maieſtie ſhall reſide, vntill the ninth day of October next. And if there be any extraordinarie cauſe for any perſon to come to the Court with matter to be certified to her Maieſtie, or to any of her priuie Counſell, who ſhall require to be heard preſently without further delay, the ſame partie ſhall not enter within the gates of her Maieſties Court, vntill hee haue either by her Maieſties Porters of her gates, or by ſome other perſon allowed to ſerue within the Court, giuen knowledge of his name, place and Countrey, from whence he commeth, to be ſignified to the Lord Chamberlaine, or Vice-chamberlaine, or to ſome other perſon of her Maieſties priuie Counſell, and thereupon as the caſe ſhall require, to be licenced by any of them to come within the gates of her Court, and not to tary any longer then they ſhall be ſo licenced. And if the parties ſhall haue onely letters to deliuer to any within the Court, then not to come within the Court gates, but to ſend the ſame letters to the perſons to whom they are directed, from whom when they ſhall haue anſwere, they ſhall not longer continue neere to the Court, vpon paine of impriſonment. Finally, her Maieſtie commandeth that no maner of perſon allowed to attend in her Court, ſhal repaire to London, or to the ſuburbes or places within two miles of the Citie, nor any other Citie, Borough, Towne, Village, or places infected, without ſpecial licence of the Counſailor or other officer vnder whom he ſerueth, in writing to be ſhewed to any officer that ſhall ſeeke to impeach him, vpon paine to bee impriſoned by attachment of the knight Marſhall or of his officers, if the partie ſhall not ſhew in writing ſufficient warrant both for his going and returning. Her Maieſtie alſo ſtraightly chargeth and commandeth the Knight Marſhall of her Houſhold, that he ſhall cauſe due ſearch to be made of all Vagabonds commonly called Rogues that ſhall haunt about the Court, or in any places within the Verge, and them to apprehend and commit, to bee ordered and puniſhed according to the lawes prouided for ſuch offendours.
            
               Giuen at her Highneſſe Mannor of Noneſuch, the xviii. day of Iune, 1593. and in the xxxv. yeere of her Maieſties Raigne.
               
            
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ❀ Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Chriſtopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie.
         
      
   