
      
         
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            
               ❧ A Proclamation for keeping the Terme at Hartford Ca
                  •
               tle, and for adiournement
of the ſame from Menſe Mi
                     •
                  hae
                     •••
                  
                vntill Craſtino Anim
                     ••
                  um.
            
            
               WHereas the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie▪ vpon information giuen vnto her Highnes of the
infection of the plague growen and diſperſed in her Cities of London a Weſtminſter, did by her
Proclamation dated at her Mannor of Woodſtone the eighteenth of September for the conſiderations
therein expreſſed, cauſe the Terme of S. Michael to be adiourned vnto the fourth returne
thereof commonly called Menſe Michaelis, hoping by that time▪ through the goodnes of Almightie
God, and ſuch orders as by her Maieſties ſpecial comman
                  •
               ement were appointed t
                  •
                be
kept & obſerued, the ſaid infection of the plague might haue bene much diminiſhed: Foraſmuch
as her Maieſtie hath ſince receiued knowledge by certificats ſent frō London and Weſtminſter,
that the plague ſtill continueth litle abated or diminiſhed, and therefore doubteth that 
                  〈…〉
               the ſaid
Terme ſhould be kept at Weſtminſter frō the ſaid Menſe Michaelis, it could not be but dangerous to ſuch her louing ſubiects,
who for ſuits and other cauſes ſhould make their neceſſary repaire thither: Therfore vpon like conſiderations, her Maieſtie
hath by aduiſe of her ſaid Counſel, found it very expedient, that it ſhould be adiourned from the ſaid Returne commonly called
Menſe Michaelis, vntil the Returne cōmonly called Craſtino Animarū
                next enſuing. And thereby the reſt of the vſual terme
to be continued & kept. For which purpoſe, eſpecial choice is made of her Maieſties caſtle of Hartford in her Countie o
                  •
               
where heretofore the Terme vpon the like occaſion hath bene kept▪ and at which place her Maieſties pleaſure is that
now the reſidue of the ſaid Terme ſhalbe kept: Doth therefore declare & hereby ſignifie her wil and pleaſure, That Writs of
adiournment ſhalbe directed to the Iuſtices of either Bench, and to the Iudges of all other her Maieſties Courts to whom
like Writs haue bene vſually directed, giuing them authoritie to adiourne the ſaid reſidue of the ſaid Terme frō Weſtminſter
aforeſaid vnto the ſaid caſtle of Hartford, there to begin in the ſaid Craſtino Animarum next enſuing, & ſo to continue: And
the ſame adiournement ſhalbe made at the ſaid Returne called Menſe Michaelis. And alſo that all matters, cauſes a ſuits betweene
partie and partie, as in her Highnes Courts of Chancerie, Starchamber, Eſchequer, the courts of Wards & Lyueries,
the Duchie of Lancaſter and court of Requeſts ſhal haue continuance, & the parties ſhal haue day from the ſaid Menſe
Michaelis vntil the ſaid Craſtino Animarum at the ſaid caſtle of Hartford. Willing and commanding them and euery of them
to whome it doth appertaine, to obſerue and keepe their apparances & aſſemblies in all and euery her Highnes ſaid Courts
at the ſaid caſtle of Hartford in the ſaid Craſtino Animarum, in like maner, fourme and condition, as they would, ſhould, or
ought to haue done, if the ſaid Terme and Courts had bene holden and kept at Weſtminſter, as they and euery of them wil
anſwere at their perils, any thing in her Maieſties ſaid former Proclamation to the contrary notwithſtanding.
            And further, her Maieſtie conſidering that if there ſhould happen to be any acceſſe and apparance of her louing Subiects
at the ſaid Caſtle or at the Towne of Hartford, during the reſidue of the Terme, of ſuch as haue had the plague in their
houſes, or haue bene themſelues infected therewith, there might inſue great peril and dammage, to thoſe that haue as yet
bene cleere thereof, and ſo further inconvenience might grow thereby to the reſt of the Realme: her Highneſſe therefore
for the auoyding thereof, doth ſtraightly charge and commaund, that no ſuch perſon or perſons, who haue beene ſo infected
or haue had the plague in their houſes at any time ſince the xx. day of Iuly laſt, of what eſtate or degree ſoeuer he or
they be, ſhall repaire to the ſaid Caſtle or towne of Hartford, during the reſidue of the ſaid Terme, except he or they ſhall be
commaunded by ſpeciall proces, or otherwiſe haue ſpeciall commaundement, for his or their perſonall apparance. And
yet neuertheles euery ſuch perſon or perſons ſo infected before his or their repayre to the ſaid Caſtle or Towne, ſhall before
he or they enter into any houſe within the ſaide Towne or into the ſaid Caſtle, openly notifie and declare by ſome meſſage
his or their ſtate, touching his or their infection, with the cauſe for the which he or they ſhall be called by proces or other
commaundement, to ſuch perſon or perſons, as ſhall be appointed by the Lord Keeper of the great Scale of England, to
haue the charge of the keeping of the gate of the ſaid Caſtle and entries into the ſaid Towne. So as if the ſaide party ſhall
be ordered to come into the Towne, or into any Court within the ſaid Caſtle, the ſame ſhall after (during the time of his
or their abode there) beare and hold vp in his or their hād vpright to be ſeene, one red rod, of the length of one yard or more,
vpon paine of her Maieſties diſpleaſure, and impriſonment of their bodies during her Highneſſe pleaſure. And further
her Maieſty ſtraightly chargeth and commandeth al Iuſtices of peace of the ſaid County of Hartford dwelling within xii.
miles of the ſaid Towne and Caſtle of Hartford, and all Iuſtices of peace in the county of Eſſex dwelling within vii. miles
of the ſaid caſtle, & al bailiffes, conſtables, and head officers of any boroughs, towns, villages, or hamlets within viii. miles
of the ſaid Towne and Caſtle of Hartford, that they and euery of them ſhal from and after the day of the proclaiming of this
Proclamatiō within the ſaid county, do their beſt indeuors to make & ſet forth ſuch good orders, as by the goodnes of God,
may tend moſt to the preſeruation of al places within the ſame circuite of viii. miles from infection of the plague. And for
that purpoſe to aſſemble themſelues together weekly at ſome conuenient place in both the ſaid counties, frō the time of the
publiſhing of this Proclamatiō, vntil the end of the reſidue of the ſaid Terme, aſwel for the deuiſing, as for the execution of
ſuch good orders. And that the ſaid Iuſtices of peace ſhal in the firſt day of the ſitting in the reſidue of the ſaid Terme, ſignify
& declare to the L. Keeper of the great ſeale of England, al that they & the ſaid conſtables and other the ſaid officers ſhall
then haue done in & about the premiſſes. And ſhal alſo from time to time folow ſuch directions as they ſhal receiue from the
ſaid L. Keeper and other of her Maieſties counſel, being at Hartford, tending to the preſeruation of the places within the
circuite aboue ſpecified from the ſaid infection of the plague: Not doubting but that aſwel the ſaid Iuſtices as other the inferior
officers wil carefully diſcharge their duty in that behalfe, as they tender the continuance of her Maieſties fauor, and
wil anſwere for the contrary at their perils.
            
               Giuen at her Maieſties Honor of Hampton Court the xxi. day of October
1592. in the xxxiiii. yeere of her Highnes raigne.
                God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Chriſtopher Barker, Printer
to the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie.
         
      
   