
      
         
            
            ¶ By the Queene.
            
               ❧ 
               A Proclamation for adiournment of part of Michaelmas Terme. 1592.
            
               FOraſmuch as the Queenes Maieſtie our ſoueraigne Ladie is crediblie informed that the infection of the plague is at this preſent in ſundry places in and about the Citie of London, and in other places neere adioyning to the ſame: Whereas by the continuance thereof, through the greater repaire and reſort of her louing ſubiects, great perill and danger might not onely enſue vnto her moſt royall perſon, but alſo to her moſt louing ſubiects repayring thither for their ſutes and cauſes, and thereby alſo giue occaſion of diſperſing of the ſame into other parts of the Realme: Her Maieſtie for the ſaid neceſſarie conſiderations, and hoping that the ſame will by the goodneſſe of Almighty God, with the coldnes of the yeere, & ſuch wholſome orders as are taken in her 
                  ••
               d City, the rather ceaſe by the adiournment of part of this next Terme of S. Michael now at hand, from the Vtas of the ſame vntill the fourth returne of the ſaid Terme called Menſe Michaelis next comming: Her Maieſtie therefore of her eſpeciall fauour and clemencie is pleaſed and contented to adiourne the ſaid Terme of S. Michael, (that is to ſay,) from the Vtas thereof vnto the ſaid fourth returne of the ſaid Terme called Menſe Michaelis next comming, which her Maieſtie ſignifieth to all and ſingular her louing ſubiects of this her Realme, to the intent that they and euery of them, which hath cauſe or commandement to appeare in any of her Highneſſe Courts at Weſtminſter, in or at any day or time from and after the ſayde Vtas of S. Michael, may tarie at their dwellings, or where their buſineſſe otherwiſe ſhall lie, without reſorting to any of the ſaid Courts for that cauſe before the ſaid Menſe Michaelis next comming, and that without daunger of forfeyture, penalty, or contempt to incurre towards her highneſſe in that behalfe. And neuertheleſſe her Maieſties pleaſure is, that two of her Juſtices (that is to ſay,) of eyther Bench one, ſhall the firſt day of Michaelmaſſe Terme, called Octabis Michaelis, according to the ancient order of the lawes, keepe the Eſſoynes of the ſaid Octabis Michaelis, at which Vtas of S. Michael writs of adiournment ſhall be directed to the ſaid Juſtices, giuing them authority to adiourne the ſaid Terme of S. Michael, that is to ſay) from the Vtas therof vntil the fourth returne, as before is ſaid: And the ſaid adiournment ſhal be made in the firſt day of the ſaid Vtas, commonly called the day of the Eſſoynes. And further her Maieſties pleaſure is, that al matters, cauſes and ſutes depending in any of her other Courts betweene partie & partie, as in her Highnes Courts of Chancerie, Starchamber and Eſchequer, Courts of Wards and Liueries, Duchie of Lancaſter and Court of Requeſts, ſhall haue continuance, and the parties ſhall haue day from the date of theſe preſents, vntill the fourth returne, as before is ſayd.
            Prouided alway, and her Maieſties pleaſure and commandement is, that all Collectors, Receiuers, Sherifes, 
                  ••
               d other Accomptants, and all other perſons that ſhould or ought to accompt or pay any ſumme or ſummes of money in any of her Maieſties Courts of Eſchequer, Court of Wards and Liueries, or of her Duchie of Lancaſter, or in any of them, or to enter into any account in any of the ſaid Courts, ſhall repaire vnto her Maieſties houſe of Sion, where her Highneſſe hath appointed ſuch officers and miniſters as for that purpoſe her Maieſtie hath thought expedient, and there to pay and doe in euerie behalfe as though no ſuch Proclamation of adiournment had bene had or made. And her Highneſſe further pleaſure and commandement is, that all Sherifes ſhal returne their Writs & Proces againſt all ſuch Accomptants and debters at the dayes therin appointed: And if any perſon or perſons, who ought to accompt or pay any ſumme or ſummes of money to her Maieſtie in any the Courts and places aforeſaid, do make default therein, That then her Highnes Writs, & Proces, ſhalbe awarded and ſent forth againſt euery ſuch perſon and perſons, and the ſame to be duely & orderly ſerued and returned by the Shiriffes and officers therunto appointed in ſuch like maner and forme as the ſame ſhould haue bene, if this preſent Proclamation had not bene made. And if any Shirife or other officer ſhall make default or be negligent in ſeruing, executing, or returning of any the writs and Proces aforeſaid, That then euery ſuch Shirife and other officer ſhall incurre ſuch paines and penalties, as by the ſaid Courts or any of them ſhalbe taxed & aſſeſſed. Willing and commanding all and euery her Maieſties Shirifes, Officers, miniſters and Subiects, to whom it doth, or ſhall apperteine, to obſerue and keepe their aſſemblies and apparances, with all their Returnes and Certificats in her Highnes ſaid Courtes at Weſtminſter in Menſe Michaelis next comming, then and there to be holden and kept, and there to doe their offices and dueties in euery behalfe, in like maner and forme as they ſhould or ought to haue done if this preſent Proclamation had not bene had or made, as they will anſwere to the contrary at their perils.
            
               Giuen at our Mannour of Woodſtocke the xviii. day of September 1592. and of our raigne the xxxiiii. yeere.
               
            
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Chriſtopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie.
         
      
   