
      
         
            
            ¶By the King.
            
               
                  WEe haue by our late Proclamation, published for the apprehension of
one Anthony Copley, signified what griefe it was vnto vs, that any Subiect
of this Realme, of how meane condition soeuer, should giue vs iust cause to
put in vse the power of our Lawes for any offence against vs in matter of
Loyaltie. And although wee haue no litle comfort in the experience which
that first occasion gaue vs, of the loue and obedience of the vniuersall number
of our Subiects, by whose diligence and care of our person the said Copley
hath bene apprehended: Yet hath the same brought vs withall, cause of further griefe, in that
by the said Copleys confession, there is discouered a conspiracie of a great number of others to haue
made an attempt not only dangerous to our Person, but to our whole State: whereof some principall
Gentlemen of qualitie are already apprehended, some others cannot yet be found by the ordinary
Ministers of our Iustice. Wherefore, we haue thought good to giue knowledge of them
to all our Subiects by open Proclamation, not doubting but to finde as good fruits of their loue in
their diligent enquirie after these persons, as we did of Copley: Requiring and charging all Lieutenants,
deputie Lieutenants, Iustices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, and
all other our Officers and Ministers whatsoeuer, to vse all care and diligence in the enquiring,
searching for, and apprehending of Sir Griffia Markham Knight, and such other persons, as are
here in the foote of this Proclamation described. And if they shall be so happie as to finde any of
them, to send them presently vp to some of our Councell. And though we doubt not but that wee
shall finde good proofe of the care of all good Subiects in doing their dueties herein: Yet seeing it
is a cause that doeth so neerely concerne not onely our Person, but the subuersion of the State of
this Realme, Wee cannot but adde this further Charge, That if we shall perceiue that any shall
vse remissenes, negligence, or other omission of their duety in pursuing this our pleasure, We shall
haue cause to iudge otherwise of them, and to proceede otherwise with them, then willingly wee
would haue cause to doe with any Subiect of this Realme; in whom we must acknowledge that
in generall we haue found as much loue and duety, as could possibly be expressed.
            
               Giuen at our Honour of Hampton-court the sixteenth day of Iuly 1603. in the first yeere of
our Reigne of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the sixe and thirtieth.
               
God saue the King.

            
               
                  ❧The description of the persons.
               SIr Griffin Markham hath a large broad face, of a bleake complexion, a bigge nose, one of his hands is maimed by
an hurt in his arme receiued by the shot of a Bullet, hee hath thinne and little haire vpon his beard; All his brethren
are tall of stature, yong, and without any haire of their faces, or exceeding swarthy and bad complexions, and
haue all very great noses.
               
                  WIlliam Watson priest is a man of the lowest sort, about xxxvi. yeeres of age, his haire betwixt abram and flaxen,
he looketh asquint, and is very purblind, so as if he reade any thing he putteth the paper neere to his eyes, hee
did weare his beard at length of the same coloured haire as is his head. But information is giuen that nowe his
beard is cut.
               
                  WIlliam Clarke priest is a man of middle stature, inclining to the lower sort, about the age of xxxvi. yeres, his haire
is betwixt red and yellow, he keepeth his beard close cut, he is not leane nor corpulent, but betwixt both, rather
leane.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧Imprinted at London by Robert Barker,
Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Maiestie. Anno 1603.
         
      
   