
      
         
            
            ❀ By the Queene.
            
               THe Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie in her Princely nature, conſidering how dangerous a matter it is by continuance of the Faire called Bartholomew Faire, vſuallie kept in Smithfield, to increaſe and diſperſe the infection of the ſickeneſſe, being preſently in ſundry places, in, and about London, to ſundry other places of her Realme, being cleare and not touched with any ſuch infection, or to bring more infection thither from other places: hath thought it neceſſarie for auoiding of ſuch danger, to ſtay for this preſent the holding or keeping of the ſaid Faire at this time of S. Bartholomewes day, in ſuch ſort as was vſuall, whereas there was a generall reſort of all kind of people out of euery part of her Realme to the ſaid Faire. And therefore to preuent theſe dangers, her Maieſtie doeth now command, that in the vſuall place of Smithfield, there be no maner of market for any wares kept, nor any ſtalles nor boothes for any maner of merchandiſe, or for victuals ſuffred to be ſet vp, but that the open place of the ground called Smithfield, be only occupied with ſale of horſes & cattell, & of ſtall wares, as butter, cheeſe, & ſuch like, in groſſe, and not by retaile, the ſame to continue for the ſpace of two dayes onely. And for vent of woollen Clothes, Kerſies, and Linnen cloth, to bee all ſold in groſſe, and not by retaile, the ſame ſhall be all brought within the cloſe yarde of S. Bartholomewes, where ſhops are there continued, and haue gates to ſhut the ſame place in the nights, and there ſuch cloth to bee offered to ſale, and to be bought in groſſe, and not by Retaile, the ſame market to continue but three dayes, that is, the Euen, and day of S. Bartholomew, and the morow after: And that the ſale and vent of Leather be kept in the outſide of the Ring of Smithfield, as hath bene accuſtomed, without erecting of any Shops or Boothes for the ſame, or for any victualler, or other occupier of any wares whatſoeuer. And for notice hereof to be giuen to ſuch of her Maieſties good Subiects, as for lacke of knowledge of this her Maieſties princely ordinance, might reſort to London to ſell or buie ſmall wares by Retaile, and there receiue infection, and carie the ſame into their Countreys: Her Maieſtie commandeth that the L. Maior of London ſhall cauſe this her Maieſties Proclamation to be preſently publiſhed in all vſuall places of the Citie, in the time of two or three Market dayes, and to be alſo proclaimed by the Shirifes of Middleſex, Kent, Surrey, and Eſſex, in ſome places of thoſe Counties neere to the ſaid Citie, whereby none may reſort to the Citie, at this feaſt of S. Bartholomew by pretence of any Faire, but ſuch as ſhal haue cauſe to ſell or buie the cōmodities in groſſe, and in the place appointed, as is aboue mentioned. And if any ſhall attempt to doe any thing contrarie to this ordinance, the ſame to be puniſhed by ſtraight impriſonment without baile, during her Maieſties pleaſure, or further puniſhment according to the qualitie of their offence. And for the reſtraining of any ſicke and infected perſons, or any of their families from comming abroad to endanger others, and for ſome further ſtaie (by Gods permiſſion) of the preſent infection: Her Maieſtie hath cauſed certaine orders to be by her Counſell preſcribed to be obſerued by the Lord Maior, and other officers of priuiledged places about London. Giuen at our Caſtle of Windſor the ſixt day of Auguſt, in the xxxv. yeere of our Raigne. 1593.
            
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ❀ Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printer to the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie.
            
         
      
   