
      
         
            
            
               ❧ The ſeuerall Rates and taxations for VVages, made and ſet foorth by the Iuſtices of Peace, for the Countie of Deuon.
            
               
                  HONI ·  SOIT · QVI · MAL · Y · PENSE
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            
               WHere in the Parliament holden at Weſtminſter the xii. day of Januarie, in the fift yeere of the reigne of our Soueraigne Lady the Queenes Maieſty, it was enacted by the Queene our ſoueraigne Lady, the Lords ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons in that Parliament aſſembled, that the Juſtices of the Peace of euery Shire, Riding, & libertie, within the limits of their ſeuerall commiſſions, or the more part of them, being reſiant within the ſame, and the Sherife of the Countie, if he conueniently might, and euery Maior, Bailife, or other head officer within any Citie or Towne corporate, wherein is any Juſtices of the Peace within the limits of the ſaid Citie or Towne, ſhould by force of the ſaide Act, yeerely after Eaſter at times conuenient, appointed by the ſame, aſſemble themſelues together, and calling before them ſuch diſcreete and graue perſons of the ſaid County, Citie and Towne, as they ſhould thinke meete, and conferring together, reſpecting the plentie or ſcarcity of the time and other circumſtances neceſſarily to be conſidered, ſhould by vertue of the ſaid Act, within the limits and precincts of their ſeuerall commiſſions, limite, rate, and appoynt the wages, as well of ſuch and ſo many of the ſaid Artificers, handicrafts men, huſbandmen, or any other laborer, ſeruant, or workeman, whoſe wages in times paſt hath bene by any law of Statute rated & appointed, as alſo the wages of all other laborers, artificers, workmen, or apprentices of huſbandry, which haue not bene rated, as the ſame Juſtices, Maiors, or head officers within their ſeuerall cōmiſſions or liberties, ſhould thinke meete by their diſcretions to be rated, limited, or appointed, and the ſame rates & taxations ſhould certifie vnto the Queenes highnes Court of Chancery before a certaine day limited in ye ſaid Act. Wherupon it ſhould be lawful for the Lord Chancellor, or Lord keeper of the great ſeale of England, for the time being, vpon declaration thereof to her Highneſſe, her heires or ſucceſſors, or to the Lords & others of her Maieſties priuie Counſel, to cauſe Proclamations to be printed & ſent down into euery of the ſaid ſhires and places, conteining the ſeuerall rates appointed by the ſaid Juſtices & other head officers, commanding thereby in her Highnes name, all perſons ſtraitly to obſerue & keepe the ſame, vpon the danger of the puniſhment and forfaitures limited & appoynted by the ſaid Act and Statute.
            And where alſo it is further enacted by the authority aforeſaid, that all maner of perſon and perſons, after ſuch Proclamation made, ſhould obſerue and keepe the ſaid rates for wages, vpon paine of the forfaitures & penalties conteined in the ſaid Eſtatute, vntill by further order by Proclamation, according to the purport of the ſame Eſtatute, it ſhould be otherwiſe ordered and proclaimed: Wherefore the Queenes Maieſtie, hauing receiued into her ſaide Court of Chancery, amongſt diuers other Certificates, from ſundry her Highneſſe Shires, Cities and Townes, one Certificate from the Countie of Deuon, conteining the Rates for wages hereafter following, made and appointed by the Juſtices of the Countie of Deuon, according to the tenour of the ſame Acte: And minding to haue the ſame rates put in execution in all pointes, as by the proceſſe of the ſame Act is preſcribed, like as her Maieſtie hath and intendeth to doe in all other her Highneſſe Counties and Shires, and other places of Libertie within this her Realme: Therefore her Highneſſe ſtraightly chargeth and commaundeth all maner perſon and perſons within the Countie of Deuon, to keepe and obſerue in all poyntes the ſaide rates, taxations, orders and appointments for wages hereafter following and ſet foorth vpon the paines and forfeitures appointed by the ſaid eſtatute, and vpon paine of her Highneſſe diſpleaſure.
            And further her Highneſſe pleaſure & expreſſe commaudement is, that all Juſtices of Peace, Sherifes, & other Officers of the ſaide Countie of Deuon
                  〈◊◊〉
                
               
                  •••…
               e the ſame rates duely and ſeuerely to bee obſerued and kept in all points: And this Proclamation to bee vſed in euery behalfe, according to the tenor and effect of the ſame Act. And her Maieſties further pleaſure and commandement is, that if any queſtion, ſcruple 
                  〈◊〉
                doubt, ſhall ariſe vpon any of the taxations or rates for the ſayde Countie of Deuon, hereunder mentioned: That then the ſame ſhalbe reſolued and determined by her Highneſſe Juſtices of Peace, that did make and ordeine the ſame taxations and rates: And that all perſons ſhall performe and keepe the ſame reſolutions, orders, and determinations, ſo by them to be made and determined touching the ſame.
            
               
               The Countie of Deuon.
               
                  ¶ The Rates of wages of Artificers, Seruants, and Labourers, rated by the Juſtices of Peace in the Countie of Deuon at the Caſtle of Exon, the xxix. day of April, in the xxxvii. yeere of the reigne of our Soueraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth, by force of a ſtatute made for orders to be taken for Seruants, Artificers, Apprentices and Labourers in the fifth yeere of the reigne of our ſayd Soueraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth, what wages Artificers and Labourers ſhould take.
               
               
                  
                     INprimis no Bailife of Huſbandry, chiefe Hinde, or Milner, ſhall take aboue liii. s. iiii. d. by yeere and his Liuery, or viii. s. iiii. d. for the ſame.
               Item, no common men ſeruants of huſbandry aboue the age of xvi. or vnder twenty, ſhall take for his wages aboue xxx. s. by the yeere, and being aboue the age of twenty, ſhall take for his wages by the yeere aboue xl. s.
               Item, no women ſeruants vnder the age of fourteene, ſhall take any wages but meate drinke and cloth, and aboue xiiii. vntill xviii. aboue xii. s. and her liuery, or vi. s. for the ſame, and from xviii. not aboue xvi. s. viii. d. and her liuery, or vi. s. viii. d. for the ſame.
               Item, no women labouring at Hay, ſhall take by the day aboue ii. d. and meat and drinke, and without meate and drinke vi. d. labouring in Corne harueſt, not aboue iii. d. by the day with meat and drinke, or vii. d. without meat and drinke, and at all other worke, i. d. by the day and meate and drinke, or v. d. without.
               Item, all Labourers in Huſbandry at taſke worke, as they can agree.
               Item, that all maner of Huſbandry labourers, ſhall take from Alhollontide vntill Candlemas for their wages, but iii. d. a day with meate and drinke, and vii. d. without meate and drinke, and from Candlemas to Alhollontide being the reſidue of the yeere, not aboue iiii. d. a day without meate and drinke, or viii. d. a day without meate and drinke, (except mowing of Corne and Graſſe) for which they ſhall take by the day vi. d. and meate and drinke, or xii. d. without meate and drinke: and all labourers working by weeke or moneth, after the ſame rate.
               Item, a maſter Maſon, a maſter Carpenter, a maſter Joyner, a maſter Plumber, a maſter Hellier, a maſter Plaiſterer, a maſter Thatcher, and euery of them hauing ſeruants or apprentices according to the ſtatute, and able to take charge of the worke, ſhall take by the day with meat and drinke not aboue vi. d. and without meate and drinke not aboue xii. d.
               Item, that euery other Maſon, Carpenter, Plumber, Hellier, Plaiſterer, Tyler, Shingler, Joyner, Cowper, and other labourers, being no maſters, ſhall take by the day not aboue v. d. with meate and drinke, and xi. d. without meate and drinke, and euery apprentice of the ſaid artes, and boyes not aboue ii. d. by the day with meate and drinke, and without meate and drinke not aboue vi. d.
               Item, a payre of Sawyers to take by the day with meate and drinke not aboue xii. d. and without meate and drinke ii. s. for euery hundreth foote of ſuch as ſaw by Taſke, as they can agree.
            
            God ſaue the Queene.

                  August. 30. 1595.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Chriſtopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie.
            
         
      
   