
      
         
            
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            ¶By the King.
            A Proclamation for transplantation of the Greames.
            
               
                  FOrasmuch as all our Subiects in the North parts, who haue
felt the smart of the spoyles and outrages done vpon them at our first entry into
this Kingdome by diuers Borderers, but specially by the Greames, cannot be
ignorant what care wee haue had that punishment should be done vpon the
offenders, hauing for that purpose to our great charge, mainteined both Forces
to apprehend them, and Commissioners to try them according to the Law, by
whose trauell, namely of our cousen the Earle of Cumberland our Lieutenant

                  •
               here, with assistance of other Commissioners, things are brought to that point,
that the Offenders 
                  〈…〉
               r Mercy, and doe all (but specially the Greames) confesse themselues to bee no
meete persons to liue in those Countreys, And therefore haue humbly besought vs that they might bee remoued
to some other Parts, where with our gracious fauour, they hope to liue to become new men, and deserue
our Mercy. Although we do confesse that wee haue rather inclined to this course of Mercy, as a thing more
agreeable to our Nature, then the taking of so much blood as would be shed if we should leaue them to the iust
censure of the Law: Neuerthelesse, lest our good Subiects seeing no such execution presently follow of our
said Commission, should make other construction thereof, then is cause; Wee haue thought good to make
knowen to them, that this course for the present proceedeth from no alteration of our former detestation of such
iniury, or want of care and affection to our good Subiects, oppressed by such heynous Offenders; but onely for
lacke of meanes to prouide presently for the Transplantation of these Greames elsewhere, to the intent their
lands may be inhabited by others of good and honest conuersation. Wee haue thought it not amisse for better
effecting hereof, and for ease of the Prisons, to dismisse the vulgar sort of them, retaining their Heads and Principals
for Pledges, not onely to be answerable for their foorthcomming when they shall be called for, but for
their good behauiour also in the meane season. Of all which our resolution, we require all persons to take
notice, and to comfort themselues with full assurance, that they shall finde the effects at all times of our Promises
in all things tending to the weale of our people.
            
               Giuen at Wilton, the fourth day of December, in the first yeere of our Reigne of England,
France and Ireland, and of Scotland the seuen and thirtieth.
               
God saue the King.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧Imprinted at London by Robert Barker,
Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Maiestie. Anno 1603.
         
      
   