
      
         
            
            By the King.
            A Proclamation declaring at what values certaine
Moneys of Scotland shalbe currant
within England.
            
               
                  FOrasmuch as both the Realmes of England and Scotland are
amongst others by the prouidence of God Almighty, & lawfull right
of descent vnited and incorporated together vnder the Imperiall
Crowne of the high and mightie Prince Iames by the grace of God
King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, &c. And his most Excellent Maiestie in his Princely wisedome
knowing howe necessary it is, for Commerce and Trade betweene
his louing Subiects of both his sayd Kingdomes, That the
true value at which certaine pieces of his Maiesties Quoyne of Scotland shall bee Currant
within his Kingdome of England, should certainely be made knowne and published to all his
louing Subiects of both Nations: And finding vpon triall and certificate by his Maiesties
Officers of the Mynte within his Towre of London (vpon Commandement giuen vnto them
in that behalfe) That the Quoyne of Scotland called the Sixe lib. piece, of golde, is of the finenesse
of Twentie and two Carrects, and that sixe of those pieces do make an ownce: And also
that the Quoyne of Scotland called the Marke piece of siluer, is of the value of Thirteene pence
halfe-peny Sterling: Hath therefore published and declared, and by these presents doeth publish
and declare, That the sayde Quoyne of golde called the Sixe lib. piece, shall bee from
hencefoorth Currant within his Maiesties Kingdome of England, at the value of Tenne shillings
Sterling, And that the sayde Quoyne of siluer called the Marke piece, shall be from
hencefoorth Currant within the sayde Kingdome of England at the value of Thirteene pence
halfe-peny. And his Maiestie doth hereby specially Charge and Command, that the Rates and
values before expressed, be from hencefoorth accepted and allowed of by all his louing Subiects
whatsoeuer within the said Realme of England.
            
               Giuen at his Maiesties pallace of Whitehall, the eight of Aprill, in the first yeere of his Maiesties Reigne.
               
God saue the King.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by Robert Barker,
Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie.
ANNO DOM. 1603.
         
      
   