
      
         
            
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            
               ❧ By the King.
            
               
                  THE ſpreading of the Infection in our Citie of London, and in the places next about it, doeth giue vs iuſt cauſe to be as prouident as a carefull Prince can bee, to take away all occaſion of increaſing the ſame. And if ſuch directions as We gaue, and our Councell, at our firſt approching to the Citie, had bene obeyed, it is like that (with Gods fauour) the Sickeneſſe had neither growen to that height, nor ſpread ſo farre as now it is. But that hauing bene omitted by the negligence of ſuch whom it moſt concerned to haue had it performed, The ſame care of our peoples welfare, mooueth vs as much as we may, to prouide for the time to come. And foraſmuch as there are at hand two notable Faires, vnto which there is vſually extraordinary reſort out of all parts of the Kingdome, one in Smithfield neere our City of London, commonly called Bartlemew Faire, and the other neere Cambridge commonly called Sturbridge Faire, which if they ſhould be held at the vſual times, would in all likelyhood be the occaſion both of the increaſe, and of diſperſing of the Contagion into all the parts of our Realme: We haue thought good by open declaration of our pleaſure, not onely to admoniſh, and to require all our louing Subiects, to forbeare to reſort at this time to any of the ſaid two Faires, of Bartlemew neere London, and of Sturbridge, but alſo to enioyne to the Lords of the ſaid Faires, and others intereſſed therein, and of al other Faires within fiftie miles of our City of London, that they ſhall not holde the ſaide Faires, nor any thing appertayning to them, at the times accuſtomed, nor any time till they ſhall be licenſed by Vs, vpon paine of ſuch puniſhment, as for a contempt ſo much concerning the vniuerſall ſafetie of our people, they ſhalbe adiudged to deſerue, Which they ſhall be aſſured that Wee will cauſe to be inflicted vpon them with all ſeueritie. For ſuch is our deſire to preuent an vniuerſall Contagion among our people, which this Infection threatneth, as We will not ſpare any one who ſhalbe cauſe of diſperſing ſuch an euil among them. And we do further charge and enioyne vnder like penaltie, to all Citizens and inhabitants of our City of London, that none of them ſhall repaire to any Faires held within any part of this Realme, vntill it ſhall pleaſe God to ceaſe the Infection now reigning amongſt them.
            
               Giuen at our Honour of Hampton Court the viij. day of Auguſt, in the first yeere of our Reigne of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland, the ſeuen and thirtieth.
               
               God ſaue the King.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie. Anno 1603.
         
      
   