
      
         
            
            ❀ By the King.
            
               
                  THE care wee haue to preuent all occaſions of diſperſing the Infection amongſt our people, doeth ſufficiently appeare by our former Proclamations, and that for that cauſe Wee are contented to forbeare at our Coronation all ſuch Ceremonies of honour and pompe vſed by our Progenitors, as may draw ouer great confluence of people to our Citie. For which cauſe alſo being informed that vſually about the day of our Coronation intended, and for ſome dayes after, a Faire hath bene vſed to bee kept in the fieldes neere our houſe of S. Iames, and Citie of Weſtminſter, commonly called S. Iames Faire, which if it ſhould holde at the time accuſtomed, being the very inſtant of our Coronation, could not but draw reſort of people to that place, much more vnfit to bee neere our Court and Traine, then ſuch as by former Proclamations are reſtrained. Wherefore Wee haue thought it neceſſary to put off the keeping of that Faire for ſome few dayes: And to the ende that all men may take notice thereof, doe publiſh the ſame to all mens knowledge, Requiring thoſe who are Lords of the Faire, or otherwiſe intereſſed therein, That according to this our pleaſure, they doe forbeare to holde the ſayde Faire, and to reſort thither, for the ſpace of eight or ten dayes after the firſt day of the vſuall holding thereof: Licenſing them after that time to keepe the ſame, as they haue vſed to doe.
            Furthermore, to auoyd ouer great reſort to our Cities of London and Weſtminſter at that time, for the cauſe of our Coronation, Wee haue thought good to limit the Traines of Noblemen and Gentlemen, hauing neceſſarie Seruice or Attendance there, to a number certaine, Viz. Earles to ſixteene, Biſhops and Barons to ten, Knights to ſixe, and Gentlemen to foure: which numbers we require each of them to obſerue, and not to exceed, as they tender our fauour.
            
               
                  Giuen at our Caſtle of Windſor, 
                  the xj. day of July, 1603.
                     
                   
                  in the first yeere of our Reigne of England, France and Jreland, and of Scotland, the ſixe and thirtieth.
               
               God ſaue the King.
            
         
      
      
         
            ❀ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie. Anno 1603.
         
      
   