
      
         
            
            
               ❧ By the King.
            
               
                  WHereas ſome of the meaner ſort of our people did of late aſſemble themſelues in riotous and tumultuous maner within our Countie of Northampton, ſometimes in the night, and ſometimes in the day, vnder pretence of laying open encloſed grounds of late yeeres taken in, to their dammage, as they ſay; The repreſſing whereof we did firſt referre only to the due courſe of Iuſtice, and the ordinary proceedings of the Commiſſioners of the Peace, and other our Miniſters in ſuch caſes: Foraſmuch as Wee haue perceiued ſince, that lenitie hath bred in them, rather encouragement then obedience, and that they haue preſumed to gather themſelues in greater multitudes, as well in that Countie, as in ſome others adioyning, We find it now very neceſſary to vſe ſharper remedies.
            Wherefore, We will and command all Lieutenants, deputy Lieutenants, Sheriffs, Iuſtices of Peace, Maiors, Bailiffes, Headboroughs, Conſtables, and all other our Officers and Miniſters to whom it may appertaine, if the ſaid perſons ſhall continue ſo aſſembled, after Proclamation made, or any ſuch new Aſſemblies bee gathered in thoſe, or any other parts of our Realme, immediatly to ſuppreſſe them by whatſoeuer meanes they may, be it by force of Armes, if admonitions and other lawfull meanes doe not ſerue to reduce them to their dueties. For Wee cannot but be iuſtly moued to ſuch ſeueritie againſt thoſe, who vniuſtly throw a ſlaunder vpon our Gouernment, by taking that pretence for their diſobedience: Seeing it is manifeſt by Acte of Parliament, paſſed ſince our comming to this Crowne, that we haue been careful to preuent ſuch Encloſures, and Depopulations, & that it hath been an ordinary charge giuen by Us to our Iuſtices of Aſſiſes, when they went to their Circuits, to enquire of all vnlawfull Depopulations and Encloſures, and to take order to remedie the ſame, and to puniſh the Offenders therein according to the due courſe of Lawe. And it is well knowen to many, that We were now alſo in hand with ſome courſe to bee taken by aduiſe of our Counſell for the performance thereof: From which our good purpoſe and intent, this their preſumptuous and vndutifull proceeding, might rather giue Us cause to deſiſt, then increaſe in Us any affection to relieue ſuch diſordered perſons, ſo farre attempting againſt our Crowne and Dignitie, who chuſe rather to truſt to their owne pride and raſhnes, then to the care and prouidence of their Souereigne. Willing and commanding all our ſaid Lieutenants, Deputie Lieutenants, Shiriffes, and other our Officers and Miniſters aboue mentioned, to attend diligently to the execution of this our pleaſure, and all other our louing Subiects to be obedient to them in the performance thereof, as they will answere the contrarie at their perill.
            
               Giuen at our Palace of Weſtminſter the thirtieth day of May, in the fifth yeere of our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland.
               
               God ſaue the King.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maieſtie. ANNO DOM. 1607.
         
      
   