
      
         
            
            
            THE
PRISONERS
PLAINT,
A SERMON PREACHED BY
GVALTER ASHTON, Maſter of Arts,
Priſoner in the Kings Bench for Debt,
before the Impriſoned and others
in that place, vpon the 25. of
Auguſt. 1622.
            1. SAM. 2. 6, 7.
            
               The Lord killeth, and maketh aliue, bringeth downe to the
graue, and raiſeth vp.
               The Lord maketh poore and maketh rich, bringeth low, and
exalteth.
            
            LONDON,
Printed by Augustine Mathewes.
1623.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE COVRTEOVS
READER.
            
               CHriſtian READER, this
Sermon was preached for
the comfort of the Impriſoned,
and now Printed as
a Card and Poleſtar for
thy direction, when the ſame Lot ſhall fall
into thy Lap; expect not in it Philareta verba,
pickt words, or matter of tranſcendent
conſequence; Onely Items to ſuſtaine thee,
when the Lord ſhall hedge vp thy
way,
               Lament. 3. 
               and compaſſe thee about with
Gall and Wormwood. I freely acknowledge,
that when I firſt thought vpon this
Text, it was not in my thoughts to expoſe his
Context to publique view, for I know my
Infirmities, and my Countrey my grieuances,
which haue well nigh made a diuorce

betwixt me and my Studies. The Authors
ayme is to encreaſe thy patience, againſt thou
come to mourne in Dauids Deepes. The
winde may change, though it long haue kept
his quarter; and he that ſtands may fall, although
moſt watchfull. Reade, traduce not,
ſhauings may haue their weight, ſo well
as greater Wedges. Thus referring theſe
Lines to thy peruſall, and Thee to thy Maker,
I rest
            
               From my diſtracted ſtudies
in the Kings Bench,

                     Jan. 26. Anno 1622.
               
               Thine in the Lord,
GVALTER ASHTON.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE CVRIOVS
READER.
            
               THough others haue trodden
this Tract, and diſcuſt theſe
words, yet it is Saint Pauls
Rule, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
That euerie man ſhould abound in
his owne Senſe.
            
               Thine,
G. A.
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE.
            
               WHen the people of God were captiuated
by the Babylonians, they
requested them to ſing ſome of
the Songs of Sion: to which they
anſwered, How can wee ſing the
Lords Song, being in a ſtrange land, and full of
heauineſſe? Pſal. 127. 3. 4. Mutato nomine de
me narretur hiſtoria: change but the name, and
the caſe is mine owne; They captiuated, I impriſoned;
they ſuited to ſing ſome of Sions Notes and
Ditties, I requeſted (not to ſing I muſt confeſſe)
but to ſay, to ſpeake ſome word of Exhortation;
They anſwered, How can we ſing the Lords Song
being in a ſtrange land, and full of heauineſſe? I
might haue replyed, How can a man Preach in a
ſtrange place, a houſe of mourning? But calling
to minde, that Saint Paul, and Sylas, when they
were confined, did not intermit to pray and praiſe
the name of the Lord their God, Acts 16. v. 25.
Hence haue I reſolued to make their Patterne my
Practiſe, and at this time to vndertake this
dayes Taske.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE PRISONERS
PLAINT.
            
               PSAL. 130. VER. 1.
               Out of the Deepe places haue I called to thee
O Lord, &c.
            
            
               THe Text is one of Dauids
Petitions, when he was in his
Proſunditatibus, as Iunius, and
Tremellius read the words, in
the depth of deepes, diſtreſſed
in body, diſtracted in ſoule,
perſecuted in perſon, wounded in ſpirit. Diſtracted,
wounded both in ſoule and conſcience,
with the feare of Gods wrath for his
ſinnes committed, which many times euen
in this life, breakes forth into due ſtrokes of
vengeance, againſt all ſuch as trade in ſinne,
and goe on in the workes of their owne inuention:
yet herein the Prophet Dauid bewraies
a wonderfull meaſure of faith, in giuing

the Lord no reſt, nor himſelfe any eaſe,
but prefers Petition after Petition, requeſt
vpon requeſt, and ſtill is not ſatisfied, like an
importunate Suitor, vntill the eares of his
God be poſſeſt with the voyce of his complaint,
and hee in mercy haue obtained the
deſires of his heart; which is not vſuall with
many in their daies of triall, and houre of
temptations, who are ſo farre from wreſtling
with God by deuout ſupplications for deliuerance,
that they either fall off, from their
affiance and truſt in God, or elſe faint vnder
the weight of the Croſſe, thinking that God
hath forgotten to be gracious, and that hee
will be no more intreated, if one poore libera
nos Domine, doe not produce the effect of
their longing and languiſhing deſires; which
is to bee marked, as a direction for vs the impriſoned,
that ſeeing the Lord hath written bitter
things againſt vs, and hemb'd vs in on
euery ſide, with wants, oppreſsions, reproches,
and the like, therefore wee ſhould not
ſuffer our eyes to ſleepe, nor the lids thereof
to ſlumber, vntill wee haue made our peace
with God, by true conuerſion and godly ſorrow,
for all thoſe ſinnes, which haue brought
vpon vs this bondage and immuerement;
which being done, the Lord hee cannot but
grant vs his gracious liberate, I meane diſcharge
from this houſe of Teares, the common

Inne of all the Oppreſſed.
            The Epigraphe or Title of my Text, with
the reſt of the context, is a Song of Degrees,
and ſo called as Arius Montanus giues the
reaſon, becauſe the Prieſts and the Leuites
(as they aſcended from that place of the
Temple, which was called the great Court
into a higher roome, named the inner Court
of the houſe of the Lord) did at ſolemne
feaſt daies, ſing this Pſalme, with others of the
like Inſcription, vpon euery ſtaire once; Teaching
vs, as in a Ceremony, that all thoſe who
ſerue God muſt doe it with lifted vp hearts,
and ſpirituall affections, according as wee are
called vpon, with the words of Surſum corda,
in the ſuffrages of our Church 
                  
                     •••
                  hurgie,
and Engliſh ſeruice Booke.
            Others be of another minde as Apolinarius
in his Metaphraſis, who ſaith, that becauſe
the voice was more lifted vp, and ſtrained in
the ſinging of this Pſalme, then it was in others,
hence had it this denomination of A
Song of Degrees.
            
            Well, to paſſe by coniectures, our later expoſitors
as Iunius and the reſt, thinke that nothing
is meant, but that a certaine excellency
lies hid in this Pſalme aboue the reſt, as
being a choiſe and heauenly Epigrame, and
therefore called a Song of Degrees, as the Canticles
a Song of Songs; The ten Commandements,

               a Doctrine of Doctrines, the Creed,
a Hiſtory of Hiſtories; the Lords prayer a
Prayer of Prayers, onely to ſhew the eminency
and excellency thereof.
            To conclude then, we are not to be too inquiſitiue
and curious, in ſearching out the
reaſon of each particular, ſed quaedam ignorare,
non tantum eſt boni Chriſtiani, ſed etiam &
docti Theologi: not onely a good Chriſtian,
but a learned Diuine may (without diſparagement
to his profeſsion bee ignorant of
ſome things.
            In the Text theſe parts be remarkeable.
            
                1. The party Suiting.
            
                2. The party ſuited.
            
                3. The ſubiect or matter of the ſuite.
            
                4. The manner thereof, with the condition of
the time.
            
                Laſtly, the (Vbi) or the place where the Prophet
Dauid was, when hee does thus plant and
ſupplicate.
            
               
               The party ſuiting, is expreſt in the vowel I.
being Dauid by name.
            
               
               The party ſuited, is the Lord, and more pathetically,
O Lord.
            
            
               
               The matter of his ſuite, is for Audience, or
that the Lord would heare his voyce. Lord
heare my voyce.
            
            
               
               The manner of his ſuite, is expreſt in the
word (called) or as ſome tranſlate it, cried; I

haue cried; to note Dauids feruency, and
earneſtneſſe in this his ſuite, together with
the Condition of time expreſt in the word
(haue) which being a note of the Preterperfect
tenſe, argues his continued and conſtant
ſuite, as the learned well obſerue vpon this
place.
            
                Laſtly the Vbi, or the place where the Prophet
Dauid was, when he thus called and cried;
and that is in Profundis, in the deepe places:
vnder the name whereof the Prophet Dauid,
Sanctified Ieremie, and other the Penmen
of the Holy Scriptures doe by a Tropicall, or
a borrowed kinde of ſpeech, ſignifie great afflictions
and diſtreſſes; which often are reſembled
to deepe waters, and ſo is the phraſe
taken in the. 69. Pſalm. verſ. 2. as alſo in the
124. Pſalm. 4. And the Iewes hauing vpon
them the perfection of miſery, finde not how
to expreſſe their wofull condition, but by
this kinde and propriety of ſpeech. Lament.
3. 54.
            Moreouer, this phraſe is vſed in the ſame
ſence among heathen writers, as Aeneas eſcaping
the danger of warre, and other manifold
troubles, is ſaid to bee deliuered from
the Deluge, or▪ ouer-flowing of waters,
as Virgil hath it in the 7. of his Aeneads, Diluuio
ex illo tot vaſta per aequora vectus. And
Pindar, writing of a great Battell, betweene

the Perſians, and the Grecians calls it

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : The deſtroying ſhower of Iupiter;
and this ſeemes to be the reaſon of this Tranſlation,
becauſe diſtreſſes holde a certaine
Analogie, or correſpondencie with waters,
and that in diuers reſpects, according to the
properties of water.
            Firſt, other dangers aſſault the body but in
one part, either ſhouldering, or ſiding, or affronting
vs; but water in reſpect of his liquid
nature, in a moment of time, doeth encloſe vs
in on all ſides, leauing vs no ordinary meanes
of eſcape; So I appeale to the experience of
vs all, who can witneſſe that we neuer haue
been ouertaken with one only trouble alone,
but vpon the inſtant a ſecond, or a third calamitie,
like Iobs Meſſengers, hath come poſting
one in the necke of another vpon vs, & ſicut
vnda, vndam trudit; and as euery waue ſhoues
forward his fellow, ſo the ending of one miſery,
is but the beginning of another.
            Secondly, water hath a ſwallowing & ſtifeling
qualitie, witnes the people that periſhed
in the riuer Kiſon, and the riuer Kiſon ſwept
them away, Iudg. 5. 21. as alſo the forefathers
of the Egyptians, who tooke a ſurfet of the
Red Sea, and gaue vp the ghoſt: So afflictions
they drowne our ſpirituall enemies, our
vices, our vanities; and while we be vnder the
Croſſe, our ſinnes they become ſicke, and

languiſh in vs, and wee in ſome meaſure eaſed
from the tyrannie and commanding power
therof, He that ſuffers in the fleſh, ceaſeth from
ſinne, 1. Pet. 4. 1.
            Laſtly, as water is an allay, for the tempering
of our ſtrong and fuming Wines; ſo
tribulations they moderate our earthly pleaſures,
leaſt we ſhould be drunke with the delights
thereof, and grow exorbitant, extra
orbem, exceeding the liſtes of Sobrietie and
Temperance; and as wine will ſoone infatuate
and beſot the braine, if it bee not mixt
with his quantitie of water: ſo our pleaſures
and proſperitie, our wealth and wit, will
ſoone turne to our owne decay, if we be not
put in minde to recollect our ſelues, to walke
wiſely and diſcreetly in the vſe thereof, by
ſome diuine whip, ſome nip, ſome ſcourge.
            But to returne to the mentioned poynts:
and firſt of the firſt, as namely of the partie
ſuiting, which is Dauid by name, implyed in
the vowell I. A man highly in the fauour of
God, nay, Gods fauourite, as I may ſo tearme
him, his aduauncement will teſtifie no leſſe:
from a Shepheard he is raiſed to bee a King;
from a Subiect, to a Soueraigne; yet this glorious
bud is blaſted, his honour is eclipſed,
and his pompe inueloped in the greatneſſe of
diſtreſſe, he is totus in Profundis, deepe in the
ſhare of miſery.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               
The Concluſion is obuious, that God out
of his vnſearchable wiſedome, doeth often
plunge his deareſt and neareſt children in extreame
miſeries and calamities; in miſeries
which attend their perſons, as wants, oppreſsions,
reproaches, and the like; in miſeries
which attend their Soules, as fits of
deſpaire, ſpirituall deſertion, doubting of
their ſaluation: ſo that if they had not hope
of another life after this, they were of all
Creatures moſt miſerable, as Saint Paul concludes,
diſcourſing of the ſame ſubiect, in the
1. Cor. 15. 19.
            The Sonne of the morning, CRIST
IESVS, the brightneſſe of his Father, Qui
licet intrauit mundum ſine peccato, tamen non
exiuit ſine flagello, who although he was ſpotleſſe
and without exception, yet was hee
ſpotted with the ſpittle of the Iewes, diſgraced,
contemned, tormented, and laſtly, put to
death, and hauing thus ſuffered, hee is entred
into glory, Luke 24. 26. and wee his members
muſt tread in the ſame ſteps, not expecting
heere in this valley of teares, Halcionis dies agere,
to liue a life of delicacie or delight, for
neuer haue any of Gods Saints enioyed ſuch
a Priuiledge or libertie. Come wee to great
Eliah, whoſe tongue was 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the bridle
of heauen, in regard that by his prayers
he could binde or looſe, the influence of the

heauens, procure raine, or make a ſtayall therof;
yet this great Saint hath his diuident in
the Croſſe, hee is perſecuted by Iezabel, becomes
a man of ſorrowes, and bewayles himſelfe,
ſitting vnder a Iuniper tree, 1. Kings 19.
4. Come wee to Iohn Baptiſt, the ſecond Eliah,
who was Eliah in ſpirit, though not in
perſon, and behold (his) ſufferings, which be
no leſſe then the loſſe of his blood, the loſſe
of his head; which being cut off, it's made
a recompence for a dauncing, vaulting Damſell,
and a ſatisfaction for an inceſtuous bloody
minded mother. Who more beloued of
God, then Lazarus the beggar? for being
dead, he is attended of Angels, and placed in
Abrahams boſome, Luke 16. 22. ſo that wee
may remember him, with Lazarus non est
mortuus, ſed miſeria mortua est, Lazarus is not
dead, his miſery onely is dead and buryed:
And yet who more miſerable then Lazarus
while he liued? who more beggarly? who
more pincht with famine, and cleanneſſe of
teeth? not obtaining a few crummes for his
reliefe, at the rich gluttons doore, nor any
mercy ſaue of his dogges onely, that licked
his ſores. Whereby it appeares how the eſtate
of Gods children, hath beene alwayes
full of woes, and wants; the temptation
whereof hath almoſt ſhaken the faith of the
ſtrongeſt Saints: for the Prophet Ieremie,
               
though ſanctified from the wombe, complaines
that hee cannot ſound the depth of
this Iudgement, Ier. 2. 1. 2. and illuminate Dauid,
from the 2. of the 73. Pſalm. vnto the

                  •
               3. doth acknowledge that he could not obtaine,
the vnderſtanding of this ſo deepe a
myſterie, ſcilicet, why the Lord ſhould thus
clap vp his children in the houſes of correction,
and giue vnto the wicked Countries
of liberty, and Kingdomes of treaſure; in ſo
much that the eye of fleſh and reaſon would
ſeeme to conclude, that they are the onely
happy men, and the Lords beloued; and that
others who be afflicted, how they be reiected
and caſheered of him. And although no
man is able to diue into the depth of Gods
counſell, nor yet to clime vp into heauen to
ſearch the cauſe, why God ſhould thus afflict
thoſe, whom hee doth affect; yet I will
propound ſome arguments, ſuch as humane
frailty will affoord, both to manifeſt Gods
wiſdome and Iuſtice, in thus correcting and
humbling vs, as alſo to preuent our repyning
and murmuring againſt him for the
ſame.
            
               First the cauſe is in man, that brings God
thus vpon his backe to ſcourge him, and that
is his ſinne, man ſuffers for ſinne, Lamen. 3. 4.
and there being in each man 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the
Sullage of Adams clay, and the reliques of

ſinne, which are encreaſed by our dayly vncleann
                  •
               ſſe,
and actuall offences, therefore that
wee may reforme our ſelues, and that others
may tak
                  •
                vs for an example, God doth waſh
the beſt of the ſonnes of men, in the bitter
waters of Marah, in the ſea of affliction. Manaſſes,
Dau
                     •
                  d, Ioſias, haue drunke deepe of this
tart cuppe▪ there being no exemption with
him from puniſhment if men take liberty for
to ſinne. Sed quicunque ſtultus est in culpa,
ſapiens erit in paena, whoſoeuer will ieſt with
ſinne, may in time grow wiſe when he comes
to ſmart for h
                  •
               s folly; therefore the Prophet
Micha do
                  •
               h confeſſe in the 7. of his
Prophecy, verſ. 9. That he will beare the wrath
of the Lord, becauſe hee had ſinned against him;
and this wrath of the Lord towards his
Saints, is not like the ſword of a Iudge prepared
for deſtruction, but rather the rod of
father ordained for correction. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                ſaith
the Apoſtle 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                wee are
chaſtned of the Lord, that we ſhould not bee
condemned with the world. Corthin. Epiſt. 1.
11. 32.
            
               
               The next cauſe is in the Deuill, whoſe malice
is boundleſſe toward mankinde, who like a
common Informer cannot endure to bee out
of practiſe, but muſt bee alwaies nibling at
our heeles, ſlaundering and accuſing of vs vnto
God, that hee may get a Commiſsion to

meddle with vs, as hee did with the holy
man Iob, and to perſecute vs, as hee d
                  ••
               h the
woman in the wilderneſſe, Reu. 12. 
                  •
               . and
therefore no maruell if that wee be 
                  ••
               flicted,
diſtreſſed, and lodged in a Labyrin
                  •
               h of miſeries,
hauing ſuch a vigilant aduer
                  •
               ary, who
is fit at euery turne, to giue vs the grand laſh
and to ierck vs for each ſlip, if the Lord chiefe
Iuſtice of heauen and earth, 
                  •
               ill ſay but
Amen to his wiſhes and deſires.
            
               
               Thirdly, the Lord doth this plunge vs, to
awake vs out of the dead ſlee
                  •
               e of ſinne, and
to open our eyes, that wee may ſee our naturall
wretchedneſſe and n
                  •
               kedneſſe, in reſpect
of Grace and Purity, which hauing
once eſpied, it ſhould ma
                  •
               e vs, runne to God
to petition him, that wee may ſhare in that
long white Robe, the rightuouſneſſe of his
Sonne, the Ornament and couering of all his
Saints. Ariſtotle tels vs in the 3. of his Meteorologicks,
that, Omne animal, fulmine percuſſum,
vertit faciem ad fulmen. Euery creature,
ſtrucke with a Thunderbolt, preſently
affronts it. Beloued theſe that haue not an
eare to heare God, when hee calls for amendement
of life, ſaying, Returne, O Shulamite,
returne, returne. Cant. 6. 13. 1. For thoſe the
Lord hath a ſmiting hand, with the which he
will either awake them, if they doe belong
vnto him, or breake them in peeces like a Potters

veſſell. The Horſe, that hee may ſpring
forwards in his pace, muſt bee remembred
eyther with Spurre or Switch; The ſluggiſh
or carnall Chriſtian, following his voyage
and pilgrimage vnto heauen, Neceſſe eſt prematur,
vt ad Deum ire compelletur, ſaith Saint
Gregorie, hee muſt bee laſht with the rodde
of affliction, that ſo hee may learne to haſten
to the happineſſe of all the glorified
Saints. This is prefigured in Ioab, in the ſecond
of Samuel 14. 29. who being ſent for
by Abſolon, once and againe, yet refuſed
to goe; but when Abſolon ſet fire on his
fieldes of Corne, then Ioab aroſe and went
to the houſe of Abſalon: So the Lord inuites
vs to repentance, not once but often
by the mouth of his Miniſters, by the knocke
of his Spirit, by the charme of his mercies;
and if wee neglect theſe bleſſed Calles and
Summons, as Ioab did the inuitement of Abſolon,
the Lord hee will then ſet fire vpon
our Corne fieldes, hee will make the Heauens
as braſſe, that they ſhall deny vs their
deawe, or elſe the land ſhall ſurfet with a
ſurplage of Showers, and bring foorth nothing
but crude and rawe fruites, as of late
this Kingdome hath had a ſhare in this
Iudgement; and all to awake vs out of the
ſlumber of our crueltie, vncleanneſſe, with
other our wickedneſſe, that ſo wee may ariſe

and ſeeke him while hee may bee found,
leſt hee being not opened to, while he knocks
at the doore of our hearts, by the hammer of
his Iudgements, he depart and leaue vs to a reprobate
ſenſe, ſo ſhall our laſt end bee worſe
then our beginning.
            
               
               Fourthly, the Lord doth thus plunge vs,
that hee may trie our faith and patience, kindle
our prayers, and prouoke vs to the practiſe
of all holy duties: for what graces ſoeuer
lye hidd in the ſoules of his Saints, in
the Summer of their Proſperitie, will breake
foorth and ſhewe themſelues in the Winter
of Aduerſitie: That faith which was faint in
their dayes of wealth and peace, will grow
ſtrong in the houre of tryall and trouble, not
parting with GOD, no more then Iacob
would doe with the Angell, vntill the Lord
haue graciouſly anſwered the wiſhes and deſires
of their hearts; that prayer which was
weake while the world ſmiled vpon them,
come once but trouble, it will grow ſtrong,
like the Sunne in the Firmament, when hee
comes to his Verticall, or Noone poynt. Indeed
our Prayers they bee moſt potent with
God, when wee begin to fall off from the
world, and decline from the height of ſinne.
The Romane Captaine Scipio by name, would
ſay of his Souldiers, that their eſtate ſtood
in the worſt tearmes, when they had the moſt

peace. Want of exerciſe maketh both body
and ſoule ruſtie. And Saint Ierome well obſerueth,
that Salomon fell ſo foule, becauſe
hee liued in delights; for proſperitie is the
Step-mother of all holy vertues; the Starres
ſhewe brighteſt in the darkeſt night; ſweete
Spices ſmell moſt pleaſantly, when they
are cruſht and pounded; and Chriſtian vertues
are moſt apparant vnder the Croſſe:
Therefore wee reioyce in tribulation, ſaith the
Apoſtle, Rom. 5. 3. 4.
            
               
               Fifthly, the Lord does thus afflict vs for a
double ſubordinate end: Firſt, to teſtifie the
reſpectiue care that he hath of his owne glory.
Secondly, to manifeſt his prouidence and
care ouer vs.
            
                His owne glory is preſerued when he frees
vs out of hopeleſſe dangers, out of ſuch
dangers, as all the Arte, skill, and power of
man is able to doe nothing at; witneſſe the
deliuerance of his Iſrael at the Red Sea, who
being inter mare & hoſtes, inter gladios & vndas,
hauing the Sea before them, their enemies
behind them; the ſword purſuing them,
the waues affronting them, the mountaines
on both ſides encloſing them, and in the eye
of fleſh, without all meanes or hope of helpe,
yet ſee, ſaith Philo Iudens, that vbi deſinit humanum
auxilium, ibi incipit Diuinum: That
euen when men be moſt in miſery, that then

is Gods fitteſt time to ſhew his mercy that
euen then the Lord diuides the Sea, making a
Lane, or paſſage for his people to walk in, and
ſo preſerues them, ſhewing that hee is our
hope beyond hope, and a preſent remedie in
needfull time of trouble, manifeſting his
ſtrength in our weakeneſſe, and his infinitie in
our infirmity.
            
                Secondly, the Lord doth thus ſtraight vs, to
manifeſt his care ouer vs, and therefore is it,
that in our preſent wants hee doth raiſe vs
friends to beſtead vs, at whoſe hands we haue
demerited no ſuch bounty, or of whom wee
haue expected no ſuch courteſie; or elſe by
ſending ſome Rauen miraculouſly to releeue
and feed vs, as hee did the Prophet Eliah:
1. Kings 17, 4, 9. and all to ſhew his mighty
protection and prouidence ouer vs, which
neuer more ſhewes it ſelfe, then when his
people bee in greateſt ſtraites, and ſtrangeſt
exigents.
            
               
               Laſtly, the Lord doth thus afflict vs, leaſt
when wee heare of Eliahs perſecutions, or
Iobs diſtreſſes, or other of the Saints calamities,
wee ſhould account them to bee but fables;
therefore he brings vpon (Vs) daies of
mourning and nights of ſorrow, that we may
haue experience in our ſelues of their ſufferings;
& to this purpoſe Saint Gregory ſpeakes
fitly, Deus electis iter aſperum facit in via, ne

obliuiſcantur eorum, qui ſunt patria, the Lord
paues our way with thornes, leſt wee ſhould
ſuppoſe our forefathers walked vpon pillowes.
To conclude, ſeeing there is in the
Croſſe occultae qualitates, hidden vertues,
powerfull for the curing of our ſoule infirmities;
Let vs therefore ſubmit our ſelues vnto
Gods hand, as Saint Peter doth aduiſe vs in his
firſt Epiſtle, Chap. 5. v. 6. Dauid of his owne
experience doth acknowledge a Soueraigne
benefit therein, when he ſaid, It is good for mee
that I was afflicted, for thereby haue I learned
to keepe thy Commandements; and an
ancient Writer gloſsing vpon theſe words,
tells vs that there is in the Croſſe a double
vertue, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
a preſeruatiue power and a ſauatiue power:
The Preſeruatiue power is like Ionas Whale,
which although it ſeemed to ſwallow vp and
deuoure him; yet the Whale was the meanes
of his life and ſafety; ſo the Croſſe although
it make ſhew to cruſh and curſe vs, yet thereby
are wee bleſſed; Bleſſed is the man that is
corrected. Iob. 5. 17. And as for the Sauatiue
power, it is like the Poole of Betheſda, which
did not heale vnleſſe it were ſtirred and moued
by the Angel: So except we be rack't of the
lees of ſinne, by ſome ſharpe handling of vs,
our hearts will grow ſo hard, that it is vnpoſſible
wee ſhould take out the leſſon of Repentance,

motion is a ſteppe to diſſolution; exerciſe
of the body, rarefies and thinnes the
bloud, as alſo cheeres the ſpirits. So trialls
and temptations, make the affections more
ſpirituall, and our hearts leſſe earthly minded,
Therefore thinke it not ſtrange (ſaith Saint
Peter) in his 1. Epist. at the 13. verſ. of his 4.
Chap. for the fiery troubles which light vpon
you, and a fitter word could not haue beene
deuiſed, then to reſemble them to Fier.
            
            
                1 Fier, is of a light aſcending nature; ſo
afflictions, make vs ſpirituall minded, and aſcend
by holy afflictions, and diuine meditations
into Sions Mountaine the Church Triumphant,
which like a hill is exalted aboue the
Church Militant.
            
            
                2 Fier, is of a hot and heating nature; So
afflictions make vs hot ſuitors for reliefe, impatient
of the Lords delaying vs, giuing him
no reſt, nor our ſelues any eaſe, vntill he grant
and wee enioy whatſoeuer wee ſhall become
ſuitors to him for.
            
                3. Fier, ſhineth and giueth light; So trouble
openeth the eyes, Schola Crucis, ſchola
Lucis, ſaith Saint Bernard; and Manaſſes who
forgat the Lord while he was at liberty in his
pallace, could pray vnto him when hee was in
priſon, and humble himſelfe greatly; And
Manaſſes being in tribulations, called vpon the
God of his Fathers, 2. Chr. 33. 10.
            
               
                4 Fier, ſortneth the hardeſt iron: So there
is no heart ſo ſtony, but it will yeeld and
melt with tribulations, euen Pharao the cruell
will yeeld for a time, while he and his people
bee vnder the ten plagues, though after hee
turne Apoſtata, fall off, and aske, who is the
Lord, that hee ſhould let the people goe, Exod.
8. verſ. 9.
            
                5 Fier, workes according to his obiect; it
burniſheth gold, but it annihilats droſſe; it
melts waxe, but it hardens clay; ſo the godly
and the godleſſe are both ſufferers, but in
this ſimilitudine paſsionum, there is diſsimilitudo
patientium, though they bee both burdened
alike, yet they differ in their carriage:
The wicked in their ſufferings, they murmure
againſt the Lord; and ſeeke to helpe
themſelues by the deuills Emiſſaries, his
Witches, and Wizards; whereas the godly
are patiently obedient, remembring their
Maſters Motto, Father not my will, but thy will
be done, and if it pleaſe thee, let this bitter cup
of impriſonment, and other diſtreſſes paſſe
from mee, yet not my will, but thy will bee
done, Therefore let vs reioyce though now for
a ſeaſon we be in heauineſſe, 1. Pet. 1. 6, 7.
            The Inferences follow. Firſt, wee are put
in minde, to bee Chriſtianly conceited of all
thoſe whom wee ſee to be exerciſed with this
angry and ſmyting hand of the Lord, as alſo

to comfort our ſelues if the ſame be laid vpon
vs, not conceiuing that either they or wee be
out of Gods fauour; for

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, although the rod be ſharpe, yet
the hand that ſmites is ſweet and full of refreſhment;
therefore ſuffer afflictions, and
ſay with the holy man Iob, Though the Lord
kill me, yet ſtill will I put my truſt in him.
            
            
                Secondly, ſeeing reformation, the renewing
of repentance, the examination of our
ſpirituall eſtate, a breaking off from all our
perſonal and predominant ſinnes, which haue
prouoked the Lord to deale thus roughly
with vs, ſhould be the vſe that we are to make
of our corrections and afflictions; hence many
Chriſtians are iuſtly taxed, who are ſo far
from profiting thereby, that inſtead of ſhaking
hands, and bidding adieu to ſinne and
ſinfull courſes, that they fold their hands like
Salomons Sluggard, and make new leagues
with iniquitie; And whereas before, they
were but bunglers and dullards in acting of
ſinne, O, now they are Maſters of the ſinning
Arte, as we haue wofull experience in all the
Priſons of the Kingdome, into which many
Priſoners at their firſt entrance haue been ciuilly
demeaned, but within a ſmall continuance
after, I cannot expreſſe how they haue
been Metamorphoſed, and growne more ſtupid
then Cypariſſus, and altogether vnſenſible

of that diuine ſtroke which was vpon them,
by giuing themſelues ouer to all vncleanneſſe
and intemperance, the high road way to hell.
It is recorded in the ſecond of the Chron. 28▪
22. that Ahaz is noted for a ſpeciall Monſter,
becauſe in the time of his tribulation, hee did
treſpaſſe more and more; This is Ahaz, ſayth
the Text, which is a remarkeable Item of his
groſſe ſinning: So theſe are monſters in religion,
who follow their ſinfull Byas, when
the Lord is dealing with them, to breake off
their ſinnes. For when the hand of the Lord
is vpon vs, it ſhould ſpan, and weane vs from
our ſinfull courſes, and abridge vs of our former
pleaſures and delights, making vs Votaries
to his worſhip and ſeruice, and for euer
obſeruant of his Lawes and Edicts, not turning
away like a ſtubburne generation, nor
ſtarting aſide like a broken Bowe.
            
                The third, is made to our hands in theſe
cond of Sam. 15. 25, 26, &c. where Dauid being
purſued by Abſalon, and in danger of no
leſſe then the loſſe of his Kingdome, flyes
to God, and thus vnfoldes himſelfe, O
Lord, if I ſhall finde fauour with thee, reſtore
mee; if not, heere I am, doe with mee as it
ſeemeth good in thy ſight. Beloued, wee are
perſecuted by our cruell and mercileſſe Creditours,
and heere immured, depriued, not
of a Kingdome I confeſſe, but of our Lands,

Liuings, Liberties: Let Dauids patterne
bee our practiſe, and let vs all ioyne in one,
and ſay, O God, if wee haue found fauour in
thy ſight, number the dayes of our trouble,
enlarge vs, reſtore vs to our former habitations;
if not, heere wee are,
diſpoſe of vs as it ſeemes
good in thy ſight.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   