
      
         
            
            
            ELIZABETHA TRIVMPHANS. Conteyning
The
Damned practizes, that the diuelish
Popes of Rome haue vsed euer sithence her
Highnesse first comming to the Crowne, by
mouing her wicked and traiterous subiects to
Rebellion and conspiracies, thereby
to bereaue her Maiestie both of her lawfull
seate, and happy life. VVith a declaration of the manner how her excellency
was entertained by her Souldyers into her
Campe Royall at Tilbery in Essex: and of the
ouerthrow had against the Spanish Fleete: briefly,
truly, and effectually set foorth.
Declared, and handled
by I. A.
            
               Post victoriam gloria.
            
            AT LONDON
Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Gubbin,
and Thomas Newman.
1588.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Worshipfull, indued
with all singularitie, Iulius Caesar, Doctor of
the Ciuill Law, chiefe Iudge of her Highnesse
honorable Court of the Admiraltie,
and one of the Maisters of the Requests
to the Queenes most excellent
Maiestie.
            
               
                  THE remembrance
(Right VVorshipfull) of
the great courtesies I haue
receiued at your euer boū
               tifull
hands, makes me ashamed
(seeing my happe
hath been so bad) as that I could in no time, sithence
I first tasted of the aboundance thereof,
gratifie your VVorship with some token of my
not-vngratefull heart.
            Some, while they are too curious (or rather
careles) in making choyse of duetifull requitals,
purchase the crime of vngratfulnes deseruedly
for their labour. And many nothing at all esteeming
of benefites, or otherwise thinking them to
come of course, cast the remembrance of the giuers
courtesie at their heeles.
            Misliking therefore the ouer-curiousnes of
the former, and altogether condemning the vngratefulnes

of the latters forgetfulnesse, least I
should make my selfe suspected to be of both sex,
I present to your VVorships liking the first fruit
that my barren wit yeelded. No gift (I confesse)
because so vnworthie by reason of the ruffe and
vnskilfull handling of the matter therein conteyned:
but a Pamphlet greatly standing in need
of your VVorships patrocinie, that by the protexion
of so learned a Maecenas, it may be defended
from the biting iawes of snatching Carpers.
VVhich, if of your VVorships wonted bountie
and neuer-ouer shadowed clemencie, you shall
voutchsafe; my studie shalbe how to prepare
presents which may bee more be seeming your
VVorships seruice, and my prayers to the Almightie
for the continuance of this your obtayned
happines, with the daylie increase of all
worldly commodities, and in the end
to graunt you eternall faelicitie.
            
               Your Woorships in all
humblenes, Ia. Aske.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ To the gentle Reader.
            
               VVHen I considered with my
selfe (Gentle Reader) of the
sundry kinds of delights; of
the fine wits yeelding, most
pleasant conceipts: of the diuersitie
of inuentions, with
the profunditie of euerye
mans iudgement, I find that
(thereby) this is the hardest world that might happen
to grosse heads and greene wits. The redoubling of
phrases running with words beginning all with one
letter, in the amorous discourses of young Gallants,
iointly with the liues of their inamoured Mistrisses:
in Histories liuely desciphering foolish dotage ordinarily
in old men and stale widdowes, with the inconueniencie
of matching crooked old age, and wilie
youth together are so commonly vsed; as they who
spend their time, dull their heads, and bestowe their
trauell in penning such bookes, are either thought to
steale their inuention from othermens labours, or
else accounted of as wittals, for spending their studies
about such common deuises. But if any man write
louing Songs, and amiable Sonnets, they, as foolish
toyes nothing profitable, are of euery one misliked,
if of famous mens actes done long agoe, they are tearmed
lyes, and therefore to be reiected, if of things
hapned in our dayes, the euents of those but now performed
practises, neede no discourses to cause remembrance.
What shall I say, the Booke-hinders shops,
and euery Printers presse are so cloyed and clogged
with Bookes of these and such-like matters, that they

are good for nothing (as they say) but to make wast-paper,
whereby it falleth out, that through the misprising
of the Authors minds, and misconstruing of their
meanings, with the innumerable swarme of Momus
followers, that a man were better to go to plough one
whole yeare, then to toyle his head but one moneth
about publishing any of his studyes. The consideration
whereof, hath been such an impediment to the
printing of this my Pamphlet (I tearme it so, not in respect
of the matter there-in handled, but of the handling
thereof,) that when it was (at the earnest request
of one that might haue commaunded) both begun
and finished very neere with-in the space of one whole
moneth, I was after-wards three long moneths studying,
whether it were better for me to burne it, or to
giue it to the Presse: which the rather happened, for
that my proceedings were crost by diuers backward
euents. For first of all (after the finishing of it) when I
had gone through with the Printer, so that within
two dayes it should haue been ready for his trade,
there fell out a crosse matter, whereby it was dasht for
the space of tenne weekes, then hauing intelligence of
the commonnesse of Ballads, with Bookes to this
purpose, I resolued my selfe to bestowe this my
Pamphlet on the fire. But crabbed Fortune (who euer
hinders willing enterprises) through the intreatie of
diuers of my deerest friends, stayed my determinate
purpose, by perswading me that those Bookes and
Ballads did very little touch the matter my Booke intreateth
of, which caused me rather to publish this
my worke (intituled Elizabetha Triumphans) truely
and effectually declaring the wicked attempts of the

diuelish Pope, with his damned adherents practised to
the praise or dispraise of me it Author, then to let
such broken tales, told in plaine Ballets, expresse the
vnspeakeable actes, and wondrous ouerthrowes had
against the Pope by this our royall Queene and her
(by this made famous) Island. Committing therefore
both this Booke my first worke, with my selfe a yong
versefier to your liking, I desire nothing of you
for my paynes, but that you will not condemne
the beginning, vntill you haue read to the
ending, and then of Gods name be
free with your censure.
Fare you well.
            
               Yours, as he would wish you his,
Ia. Aske.
            
         
         
            
            
               E Elizabeth sole rectrix of this Land,
               
               L Long time with thee hath raigned happy Peace:
               
               I In all thy deedes assisteth Pallas hand,
               Z Zenobia-like thy Fame shall neuer cease.
               A All other Soyles throughout the wondrous world
               B Behold and see thy sweete prosperitie:
               E Euen by thy force of late they soone were thrald,
               T That falsly bragged of their dietie.
               H Honor, with Peace, Prosperitie, and Fame
               
               A Accord with thee, and highly praise thy name.
            
            
               T Triumph (O English people) leap for ioy,
               R Redouble oft the lawding song ye sing,
               I In prayse of her, who banisheth Anoy.
               
               V Vnto Iehouahs alters offerings bring,
               M Mir, Franckinscence, with euery sweetest flower:
               P Play on your Timbrels, let your Cornets sound;
               H Heaue vp your hands to him that giueth power,
               A And did of late your threatning foes confound.
               N No Traytors be but honor still her name,
               S Sithence for her sake Iehouah wrought the same.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ELIZABETHA
triumphans.
            
               
                  I Write not of the labours (passing strange,)
               Which Ioues base sonne with wondrous fame atchiu'd:
               He of the actes, the neuer dying actes,
               That English Kings haue done long time agoe.
               But all my drift is to declare the deedes,
               The famous deedes that this our sacred Queene
               Performed hath, sithence Sol hath pass'd the Signes
               
               Iust thirtie times, with those his shining lights.
               Then mightie Ioue, who guides each mouing thing,
               Direct my Muse to that thy flowing streame,
               Whence flowe amaine both swéete and thundring words,
               That with those words she may set downe both peace,
               And warlike déedes this maiden Quéene hath done.
               The royall state of famous English soile,
               
               (Right happy made by this their noble Quéene,)
               Declares the vertues of a heauenly mind,
               Adorn'd with all the gifts which Nature can
               Bestowe, on any of her déerest Nimphes,
               
               So deare a darling is Elizabeth,
               
               Renowned Queene of this renowned land,
               Renowned land, because a fruitfull soile:
               Renowned land through people of the same:
               And thrise renown'd by this her Uirgin Queene,
               A maiden Queene, and yet of courage stout,
               Through Wisedome, rare, for Learning, passing all,
               Her mother toong is not her only speach,
               For Spanish, Greeke, Italian, and French,
               
               With Romans toong, she vnderstands and speakes,
               He are these all, though more then may be found
               
                  In female sex, except her stately selfe:
               For other Vertues are (no lesse of force)
               Within her royall brest and outward parts.
               Her comely stature doth not Beautie want,
               Ne Beautie is from séemely fauour barr'd,
               But both of them do (in the hyest-degree,
               Conioyn'd together) beautefie her port.
               Among the rest, this must not be forgot,
               (No lesse praise-worthy then the other are,)
               Which is. Although she be by Nature weake,
               Because her sex no otherwise can be:
               Yet wants she not the courage of her Sire,
               Whose valour wanne this Island great renowne,
               So great renowne as neuer Island had.
               Which high renowne, as yet hath not bin lost,
               But farre inlarg'd through wonders passing strange,
               Which haue bin done next vnder God of heauen,
               By rectrix of these famous Westerne parts.
            
            
               FOr first of all (which is not least in force)
               When by the space of sixe whole winter times,In the yeare 1558. began our gratious Soueraigne to raigne.
               
               The glittering Starres of heauen did nere appeare,
               Ne Luna bright, for dimme and duskie cloudes
               Could shew her lights from out the Firmament:
               When Darkenes ruled Queene of all the earth,
               Then did a Wolfe (the Pope, a rauenous Wolfe)
               
               By stealth breake in among a flock of Sheepe,
               And there did slay, and hauing slaine, did glut
               His greedie paunch, with their most guiltlesse bloud.
               But when Auror' had sent abroade her lights,
               And Phebus bright begun to spread his beames,
               This Wolfe then feared longer there to stay,
               But theeuishly did haste vnto his denne.
               This rauening Wolfe, this foule deceiptfull Pope,
               
               He hates the light because his deedes are nought.
               
                  But England ioy,The true preaching of the Gospell vpholden by her Maiestie. O England thankefull be,
               The Night is gone, and now the Day appeares:
               The God of heauen, who knoweth euery thought,
               And ruleth them by his eternall power:
               The God of Gods, who is the morning Starre,
               
               Which giueth light in euery creatures heart,
               That God (I say) did see his wickednesse,
               And seeing, would not let it longer last,
               For by the Sunne, Elizabeth our Queene,
               Whose vertues shine as bright as Sol it selfe,
               By that same Sunne the Wolfe is put to flight,
               And by that Sunne Gods flocke doth liue in rest.
               From that bright Sunne, Religion hath her beames,
               Which lightens those who did in darkenesse sit:
               By that same Sunne, Sinceritie is plast,
               Where heeretofore false Error ruled Lord,
               Through that same Sunne Gods word is truly preacht,
               And by that Sunne all Popish reliques burnt.
            
            
               VVHich happy change did cause the Pope to rage,Paulus Quartus
Pope of
Rome.
               
               And put him sore vnto his shifting tricks,
               He studies now how to renue againe
               His credit crackt through this so foule a foile,
               He beates his braines, he craues his Counsels aide,
               And yet in all he striues against the streame,
               But that his father Sathan (King of Hell)
               
               His deerest friend, and wisest counseller,
               Will haue him try, and see to what euent
               His fond deuises will by practise come.
               Wherefore the Pope, much like a crauin curre,
               Who quarrell will with euery passenger,
               But hauing had a knock for that his fault,
               He seekes vnto his neighbour curres for aide,
               Them once in fight (though speeding too too bad)
               H'il leaue alone, and standing thence aloofe,
               
                  Will euer barke, but neuer come to bite.
               So doth the Pope, for chased by our Queene,
               Whose valiant heart can not abide his brags,
               From this her land, vnto his seate at Rome.
               
               He sitting there,1560 doth barke, and barking sends
               In all post haste vnto the land of Fraunce,
               
               (Because he thinks the French-men soonest will
               Be drawne to thinke that euery tale is true,)
               With this Ambassage to the young french King.
               Salute King Frauncis,
                  This Popes Ambassage was to the King of Fraunce to this effect. second of that name,
               And let him wit, that by the contract made
               Twixt him and Mary Queene of Scottish land,
               His rightfull heire vnto the English Crowne.
               And furthermore, we will he vnderstand,
               That she who now by force vsurps the same,
               Can lay no claime vnto that land by right.
               Which forged tale did please the King so well,
               Because he was of young and tender yeares,
               And therewithall the counsell of the Guise,
               
               His faithlesse friend, which prickt him forward still,
               Did so preuaile, as that the french King sent
               To Scotland diuers forces day by day.
               Where landed, they do sore torment the Scots,
               
               They rule like Kings, who do but aske and haue,
               They waste their countrey, lauish out their goods,
               Their houses burne, their liues bereaue with sword.
               But when our Quéene (a full of mercie Queene,)
               Had knowledge of their treason full of baine,The Duke of
Norfolke sent
toward Scotland
against
the French.
The Lord
Gray of Wilton
fought a
battell with
the French in
Scotland.
               
               She readie made within a little space,
               A companie of braue and valiant men.
               The Duke of Norfolke was their generall,
               Who did remaine at famous Barwick towne:
               And worthie Gray of Wilton noble Lord,
               Lieutenant was. He into Scotland went,
               And with his power did on the French-men set,
               Where worthy Gray did so their forces quaile,
               
                  As wearie soone they weare of handie blowes.
               There did the French (who so triumph'd before)
               Like scatterd sheepe, for feare runne fast away.
               There might you sée great streames of French-mens blood,
               And heapes of bodies, which by vs were slaine.
               There men lament for losse of faithfull friends,
               And women houle, who there were widowes made.
               The children weepe, to see their mothers sad:
               And seruants grieue because the children crie.
               These with their teares a running riuer make:
               These with their sighes do fill the ayre with smoake.
               These with their noyse do cause an Eccho sound,
               And make the Earth to quake and shake therewith.
               Our gracious Quéene, who neuer thurst for blood,
               (When thus the French-men once had felt her force)
               Did vse a meane which nearer was to Peace.
               
               For why: she sent Sir William Cicill Knight,
               Her Maiesties chiefe Secretarie then:
               But now by his desarts and worthie deedes,
               Lord Treasorer of all this worthie land,
               Accompanied with wise and learned men,
               To parle with the French-men which were there.
               Whose wisedome did therein so much preuaile,A peace concluded
betweene
the
French-men
and vs, by the
Lord high
Treasorer, thē
chiefe Secretarie.
               
               As at that time concluded was a Peace:
               Whereby the warres of late fire-hote did end,
               And nought at all redoun'd to Fraunce but shame.
               This enterprise so peaceably perform'd,
               In what I pray now doth the Pope triumph?
               His hope quite frustrate soone agaynst his will
               Makes him neglect to be at morning Masse.
               He raues as mad, he curseth Bookes and Beades,
               All Pater-nosters quite are layd aside:
               His Images do want their wonted due
               Of honor now, because so ill he sped.
               Not any Pardons are dispers'd abroade,
               Nor merie lookes on any of his Monkes:
               
               
                  But dolefully (or rather doultishly)
               He keepes his Chamber, free from any mirth.
               Thus liues the Pope still mourning for his losse:
               Thus mournes the Pope for want of better lucke:
               Thus want of luck doth make him wish to dye:
               Thus with his wish his death is come at last.
            
            
               HE being dead,Pius quartus
installed Pope. and for his soule a Masse
               Next morning sung within his Chappell Church,
               His Popedomship with Myter,
                  1561. 
                  Crowns & Crosse,
               
               Are all bestow'd on Pius quintus grace.
               A man (I wish) not lesse with enuie frought,
               (Although the daies wherein he liu'd were fewe)
               Then was the man, which last before him raign'd.
               For when he was installed in his seate,
               He straight was troubled with the Popish pippe:
               He cannot quench his thirst he is so drie:
               But iudge for what: For English Martyrs blood.
               He seekes thy bane, O England, thine he seekes:
               He starues because h'is barred from thy flock,
               (This English flock, Christs deare and sacred flock)
               Where are his sheepe within a strong kept hold,
               Where feede his sheepe of his most heauenly word,
               Of that same Manna which did fall from heauen.
               Where sheepheards are, who carefully them keepe,
               As nere a Wolfe can hurt the poorest sheepe:
               Though this new Pope doth now reuiue againe
               Of Trent the Counsell,The Counsell
of Trent reuiued by this Pope this yere. to that damned end,
               By Legats sent to diuers forraigne Coasts.
               Fiue Cardinalls with many Bishops are
               To go about this worke, by Pius chos'de
               To this intent, least that the glorious light
               Which shines most bright among vs English-men:
               
               Least that same light, Christ with his sacred word
               Should cleerely shine throughout his placed globe.
               
                  Whereby the Pope withall his damned deedes,
               His paynted Gods, his senceles stocks and stones
               Should be forlorn'd, foreseene of euery one,
               To let this good, and further that too bad.
               These Cattel were from Rome dispers'd abroad:
               But God of heauen, agaynst whose holy will
               The Pope did call this Counsell wickedly:
               That God did laugh to scorne his fond deuise,
               And made it frustrate, and of none effect.
               His Legats sent, are home agayne return'd
               (To Rome I meane) but with as bad successe,
               As had the French-men in their former deede.
            
            
               THe Quéen of Scots (who late was Quéen of France)
                  The Queene
of Scots found
in England.
               
               Consenting to the death of Iames the King
               Of Scotland late, her husband too too true:
               Was faine to flie for that vnnaturall deede
               From that her natiue and long-holden land.
               From whence escap'd, she tooke her passage thence
               To this our land (to happie English land)
               
               Where happely she was descri'd by chaunce,
               But basely clad and with a simple traine:
               And till the cause of this her landing here
               Was truely knowne, she closely here was kept.
               Yet had she all things for a Princesse meete,
               For where of late she had no trayne at all,
               But like a simple gentell did remayne:
               Now hath she men with women at her call,
               To runne, to ride, to do her any worke;
               Now hath she sommes, great sommes of English quoyne,
               To serue her turne at euery needfull time.
               And yet for all these too too good deedes done
               To her so bad, quite banish'd from all good:
               By this Popes meane, she doth perswade the Duke
               Of Norfolke to rebell agaynst his Queene.
               
                  He drawne thereto,The Duke of Norfolke perswaded by this Pope to rebell. doth go about to bring
               Great forraigne powers vnto his natiue soyle:
               He seekes the death of his dread Soueraigne,
               Whereby he may enioy her royall seate.
               But (thankes to God) in steade of that he had
               A Scaffold made, whereon he lost his head.
               And now for this the Popes so bad successe,
               He perished as had done all the rest.
            
            
               ANd for although these Pecocks tayles were puld:Pius quintus
Pope.
               
               Yet doth succeede a bird of that same brood,
               Who will not let to iet and braue it out.
               He will not moue the King of Fraunce or Spayne
               
               With forraigne forces, to inuade this land:
               But butcher-like he sends abroad his Bulles,
               
               So grace within a straungers fertill land.1569.
               
               This Pope affirmes:Doctor Morton
sent into
the North
parts of this
Realme with
a commission
to the like effect. The Queene of English soyle
               Hath lost the right of this her lawfull seate:
               And by his power he will absolue from oath
               Her Subiects, who agaynst her will rebell.
               This this the Pope, and thus he stirres his stumps:
               He thirsts for blood, and blood h'ile haue to drinke:
               He will not send vnto his neighbour coasts,
               For to reuiue a Counsell once againe:
               But traytor-like he will his Pardons giue
               To Rebells,Rebellion in
the North. rising in their natiue soyle.
               This Pope doth send Magitians to her land
               To seeke her death,Pastral and
Pliar, with D.
Storie. by that their deuillish arte:
               Yea which is more, h'il cause a deuillish doult
               Of Fraunce,
                  Parry alias vp Harry was pardoned by the Queene, condemned for a violent vprore against Hare. a Doctor (Parry I do meane)
               With smiling face for to discharge a Dagge
               At her kind heart, who saued had his life.
               See here the fruite of kindnes ill bestow'd:
               See here a wight, worse then the doggest beast;
               Ungratefull wretch, to Nature farre unlike:
               
                  For Nature wil's we loue for loue should giue:
               But thou (alas) by Nature neuer taught,
               Didst seeke the death of this thy happie Queene,
               Whose sacred life did saue thy dying death.
               O damned villaine fostred by a Wolfe,
               
               Borne of a Tiger, nursed by a Beare.
               
               Nay worse then these, did nourish this foule impe:
               For Belzabub by blacke Proserpina,
               
               Could ne're haue had a deuill halfe so bad.
               But what ensued thereof: but this of right:
               The God of heauen, who searcheth euery heart,
               And hath regard vnto the innocent,
               Reueil'd their thoughts, their treasons did display,
               Before they were by them in practise put,
               And they who sought to spill her guiltles blood,
               Did lose their blood, and Parry gain'd a rope.
               These were the deedes of Pius quintus Pope,
               
               Wherein the deuill had no little share:
               But tooke great paynes, and for his paynes he ha
                     •
                  
               
               The Pope himselfe, with all his Instruments.
            
            
               NOw seeing Paulus nothing could atchieue
               By Francis meanes:Gregorie 13.
Pope. And also seeing that
               The Northerne power got nought in Pius tune:
               An other Pope (Pope Gregorie forsooth)
               He needes must shoote as haue the others done,
               But yet will haue his bowe and arrowes newe.
               His marke is that,Rebellion in
Ireland. whereat the other shot,
               But takes his aime from Ireland thereto.
               
                  Fitzmorises, with wretched Desmons Earle,
               Were chiefest shafts which in his quiuer were.
               With these same shafts he thought to hit the white,
               And therefore plac'd them first within his bowe:
               But ere he could vnlose the string thereof
               And let them flie, whereat they leuel'd were:
               
                  The mightie God did cause the warlike Gray
               
               To blow a blast, yea such a boysterous blast,
               As arrowes brake, and bowe in peeces flew,
               And Pope himselfe constrayn'd to leaue his stand.
            
            
               THis Pope though foyl'd, yet will not leaue off so,
               But since that this his purpose will not fadge,
               H'il practise now, as haue the other done,
               By priuate traytors to reuenge his foyle.
               And like a Foxe who takes his Cubbes abroad
               Unto a place, where Pullen are at feede:
               He thether come, will not go in himselfe,
               But sendeth them, and sayes h'il keepe the watch.
               Go, spare no blood (saith he) there is ynough,
               Behead the Geese, destroy both Cocke and Hennes,
               Leaue ne're a Chicke but shalbe motherles.
               Which done, returne that we may all reioyce,
               And glut our selues with their desired blood:
               You for your hire shall haue your share therein.
               The simple Cubbes lesse guilie then the Foxe,
               
               Do straight beleeue their Sire is sure a God,
               And thinke at least they shalbe Kings or Lords:
               But as they went about their purpose meant,
               In certaine trappes (which th'owner of that place
               Had set, to catch the Cattell of that kind)
               They fast were caught (a straunge and sodaine chaunge)
               They call for ayde vnto their craftie Sire:
               But he (forsooth) when as he heard the clappe,
               Did runne away post-hast vnto his denne,
               And leaues his Cubbes to shift to saue their liues.
               Thus deales the Pope,
                  1580. a subtile dealing Foxe:
               
               For when he hath with Popish Pardons sent
               The Priests (his Cubbes) vnto this happie land,Edmond Campion and others, Priests.
               
               Where is the foule whereat he aimeth still.
               These Iewes-like Cubbes do seeke by all their shifts
               
                  To mooue rebellion here agaynst our Queene.Francis Throgmorton and the Earle of Northumberland moued to rebellion.
               
               These Catterpillers, persons traytors borne
               Incourage then to kill her Maiestie.
               These seeke to bring in straunge and forraigne powers,
               Which should destroy their natiue Counterie.
               These publisht tayles and lyes in euery place,Sommerfield moued to kill the Queene.
               
               And blas'd abroad that this our Soueraigne
               A tyrant is, (O damned enterprise)
               When they them-selues forsaken of their Sire,
               By law condemn'd, haue openly confes'd,
               That nought they sought, nor ought they could looke for,
               Except the Queene did mercie to them shew.
            
            
               ABout this time did Phillip King of Spayne,
                  Don Iohn died
which preuented
the King of
Spayne his purpose.
               
               By this Popes meanes prepare a mightie power,
               
                  England therewith he would haue ouer-runne:
               But Don Iohn died who should haue meruels done,
               Whereby he was debarr'd from that his course.
               The Pope so grieues for this so bad successe,1583.
               
               As h'is halfe mad with finding out new meanes,
               Which once may quench his neuer-ceasing thirst.
               H'il now leaue of his warlike kind of shifts,
               And play a while the Grasier in his deedes.
               He sends abroad his Seminarie Priests
               To driue his Bulls vnto the English soyle.
               They being there within a fruitfull land,
               Do fat apace, and too too lustie grow:
               They cannot liue vnlesse they haue some Kowes,
               By whom their courage may abated bée.
               They bull them oft, and bulling get fayre Calues
               Like to them-selues, within a little space
               Which grow so fast, as within twise-three yeares
               They able are to draw the Popish wayne.
            
            
               
               THe Queene of Scots is chiefest instrument1586.
               
               This Pope doth vse soone after he doth raigne:
               For by her meanes there were a companie
               Of forward gallants brought vnto their ends.
               Fourteene braue youths, with diuers other are
               By her intised to conspire the death
               Of their thrise sacred and renowned Queene.
               Proud Babbington with all his wretched crue,Babbington &
his companie
perswaded by
the Queene of
Scots to rebellion.
               
               Do seeke the spoyle of this their natiue soyle.
               These with their friends will ayde such forraigne powers,
               As shall to dare to land within this Realme.
               These Catholikes (nay Catterpillers then)
               Will set this Pope within his former seate
               In England here, or els thei'l dye the death.
               These by their oathes haue bound themselues thereto:
               Oh Heauens: O Earth: O neuer-dying Fame:
               
               Lament with me for Englands haples lucke:
               Her haples lucke through these vnnaturall sonnes
               Who seeke to ruine her their mother deare,
               And lay in wait to slay their carefull Nurse
               
                  Elizabeth, their Quéene and royall Nurse,
               Whose milke her lawes (her sacred life-full lawes)
               Was for them food, if that they would haue suckt:
               Whose sacred lawes a cradle (none so sure)
               Was for their ease, would they haue lien therein.
               And last whose lawes did carefully them warne
               Least they should fall, by payne which long'd thereto.
               But these fond youthes (as wayward Children) did
               Despise the counsell of their carefull Nurse,
               And for the same they seeke her death (alas)
               With the confusion of their mother deare.
               These moued were for sacred Conscience sake
               To do these deedes (a Deuill sure they were)
               When they themselues did at their ends confesse,
               For this their facts promotion they should haue.
               I that's the Conscience which hath mooued them
               
                  To séeke an alteration in this land.
               The Pope he thinks he so deserues the place,
               As nere he shall it get by iust desarts.
               The youthfull Sirs so well estéeme of Fame,
               
               As if they may attaine vnto her Court,
               Thei'l spare no meanes how to obtaine that place.
               The Queene of Scots desires to rule this Realme
               With such whoate zeale, as that she doth not care
               How many soules vnto Elizium
               
               Are sent, so she the English Crowne may weare.
               But marke the end which did ensue thereof.
               As foolish Flies, which cannot rest at night
               If that they sée a light within their sight,
               But still will flie vnto the flame thereof,
               Untill they haue themselues consum'd therewith:
               So little power haue they how to resist
               The burning flames which do ensue there-fro.
               Or as a Bird, which being set to rest
               Within a bush, when as he sees the light
               The which the Fowler carieth in his hand,
               Doth straight approach vnto the flame thereof,
               Whereby h'is catched in his limed bush.
               These foolish flies, these fond faceted birds,
               These witlesse youths, these thursting paragons
               Can not abide to see so cleere a light,
               As be the beames which glide from this our Queene,
               But still they storme, and enuie at the same,
               And neuer cease till they consumed are
               By those the fire-like burning flames thereof.
               For Babbington with all his companie
               Attained were with these their traiterous actes,Babbington
with his company
executed.
               
               And had the hire which is to Traitors due.
               The Queene of Scots was guiltie found by lawe,The Queene
of Scots beheaded.
               
               And suffered death for this conspiracie.
            
            
               
               THe raging Panther so abhorres to see1588
               
               The maiestie the which a man presents,
               As at the sight thereof he frets and fumes,
               And tryes all meanes how to destroy the same.
               Yea which is more, if happely he spies
               A painted man, he so enuyes thereat,
               As nere h'il leaue till he defaced hath
               The fained face which in the picture is.
               This diuelish Pope a Panther borne by birth,
               No lesse abhorreth our dread Soueraigne,
               Her Maiestie doth so offend his sight,
               As all his thoughts are how it to disgrace.
               The King of Spayne who as you heard before,
               Debarred was from comming hitherwards,
               Hath euer sithence enlarged that his power,
               Untill this yeare wherein it complet is:
               In this same yeare of eighty eight, the King
               Catholique hath (vnto the end he may,
               In England héere the credit of the Pope
               
               Renewe againe) had from his holinesse
               Both money, men, with many of his Bulls.
               
               In which he sings the Coockoes song (all one)
               
               Except this clause, He hath both disposs'd
               
               Our royall Queene of this her happy seate,A clause of the
Popes last Bull.
               
               And all her Nobles with graue Counsellers
               Which shall alliant be vnto our Queene.
               Eke all her Subiects who shall her defend
               Gainst Spanish King (the King of Catholiques:)
               And also doth his Holinesse giue power,
               That this our Queene with all her subiects true,
               Should euery one be put vnto the sword:
               And all their Lands with liuings he bestowes
               On vanquishers, which come to execute
               
                  His holy will, and diuelish purposes.
               Sée these the works of Christs Uicker on earth,
               Who doth forsake his charge (the cure of soules)
               
                  And practiseth how to destroy both soules
               And bodies of Christs deare and sacred flocke
               Through this his damned doome in that his Bull.
               
               Through which his Bull (much like the horned beast
               Which sent the same:) the King of Spayne naught feares
               But that he shall receiue his former seate,
               In England heere, ere end of eighty eight,
               
               And therefore hath imbarqued all his men
               Within a sort of huge and warlike Ships.
               Seauenscore and tenne of the best fighting Ships,
               Which could prouided be within seauen yeares,
               With all his men which able are to fight,
               Are ready now to sayle to England-ward.
               But when the Ruler of this little Isle,
               
               (A famous Isle through this her Gouernour,)
               Did vnderstand of this their whole pretence,
               She was not flacke in mustrings of her men:
               For lesse then in the space of two whole moneths,
               She mustered had out of all her Shires,
               A hundred thousand able fighting men.
               The Lord Haward her worthy Admirall,
                  The Lord
high Admirall
sent to Sea.
               
               Sir Frauncis Drake Vize-Admirall vnder him,
               Lord Thomas Howard and the Sheffild Lord,
               
               With diuers other forward Gentlemen:
               To Sea were sent with all her royall Fléete,
               To guard the Streights, and méete with that his Fléete.
            
            
               BUt least they should perhaps escape their hands,
               And land their forces on her aim'd-at land,
               A Campe of fiftie thousand able men,A Campe on
top of Tilbery
hill in Essex.
               
               Appointed should haue layne on Tilbery hill,
               
               Where Leicesters thrise made renowned Earle
               
               
                  Lieutenant was vnto our royall Quéene.
               And Sir Iohn Norris honor'd for his deedes,
               Lord Marshall was among that companie.
               
                  Eake Deuorax of Essex famous Earle,
                  The names of the Officers of the field belonging to the Campe.
               
               Whose forwardnesse hath made his house renown'd,
               Was Generall of braue fiue thousand horse,
               Which should haue come vnto that royall Campe.
               Sir Thomas Laiton chiefest Colloner
               
               Of all the footemen which should thether come.
               Sir Francis Knowles of the great Ordinance,
               Was Mayster there (a place of great accompt.)
               And Nicholas Dawterie (Captaine long agoe
               For former deedes) her Seriant maior was,
               Sir Roger Williams had the second chardge
               
               Of Complet horsse, which armed Launcers bore,
               And Robert Sidney Knight had equall chardge
               
               Of braue light Horsse belonging to that Campe.
               There Captaine Edward Yorke obtain'd the place
               Of quarter-Mayster to the placed Campe,
               And Captaine Crispe, her Prouish-mershall now,
               Did beare that office in the royall place.
               The regiments which out of euery Shire
               Elected were, for this most famous Campe,
               Except those Shires next neighbours to the Sea,
               Did dayly marche by companyes thereto.
               Now mightie Mars a stranger heere-tofore,
               In armour bright with neuer-yeelding sword,
               Commes brauely mounted on a foming Steede,
               Whose trampling causeth such a fearefull noise,
               As all the world is shaked with his power.
               Now might you see the field late pasture greene,
               Wherein the beasts did take their foode and rest,
               Become a place for braue and worthie men.
               Heere noble men, who stately houses haue,
               Do leaue them voide, to liue within their Tents.
               Heere worth' Esquires, who lay on beds of doune,
               Do Cabben now vpon a coutch of strawe:
               In stead of houses strong, with timber built
               They Cabbins make of powles, and thinne greene bowes:
               
                  And where of late their Tables costly were,
               They now do dine but at an earthie banke:
               Ne do they gréeue at this so hard a chainge,
               But thinke them-selues thereby thrise happy made:
               For when there were a twentie thousand come
               Of braue footemen vnto this placed Campe,
               And twise-tenne hundred well appointed Horsse,
               To serue with Launce, and Demilances there,
               They all on heapes do make so braue a showe,
               As it was thought that then there were ynowe,
               For to encounter with their look'd-for foes:
               Wherefore there went commaundement from the Lords,
               Who of her honorable Counsell are,
               That those which were as yet not thether come,
               Should stay from thence within their seuerall Shires,
               Untill there came some newes of farther neede.
               They thereby stai'd, do greatly greeue thereat,
               And often say for that their hap is bad.
               Yea which is more,A regiment of a thousand footemen of Dorset shire offered fiue hundred pounds that they might go forward to the Campe. An Essex-man a souldier, able to keepe in pay three moneths 500. men▪
                   there was a regiment
               But of one thousand men of Dorset-shire
               
               Which offered fiue hundred pounds that they
               Might forward goe vnto the royall Campe.
               And further marke. (I tell a right strange tale,
               I hard of one who was of great regard
               In Tilb'ry Campe,) There serued with the rest
               An Essex-man, who was a Muskater,
               Who being met by one which néere him dwelt,
               Was asked why he serued with a gunne,
               The souldier sayd, my friend you are deceiu'd,
               This is no gunne, a Musket we it call.
               The other said, but sir you haue enow
               Of seruants who are very able men,
               And might haue had performed this your charge
               In better sort then can your weakely selfe.
               It is right true (replied the souldier then,)
               I haue some store of seruants at my house,
               
                  And (thanks to God) I able am and will
               (If that our Quéene shall stand in any néede,)
               Prouide fiue hundred well appointed men,
               To serue where-as her Highnesse shall thinke good:
               And they euen there at mine owne cost shall serue
               Iust three whole months, and yet will I my selfe
               There like-wise be (as now a Muskater.)
               The fame of this her Subiects forwardnesse,
               Did please so well our sacred Soueraigne,
               As she desires to sée her placed Campe,
               There-fore there was by her a downe-set day,
               Where-in she would fullfill her purpose meant.
            
            
               NOw came the day,The Queene
came to the
Campe. the happy blisse-full day,
               Where-in Aurora putting foorth hir head,
               Hir curled head with wirey hanging locks
               Of brightest Siluer, whence did newlie shine
               Hir clearest streames, and neuer-darkened lights.
               The morning gray, wher-in the houering Larks,
               (Whose sweete shrill notes recording hermonie
               Resound with-in the heauenly creatures eares,)
               Did notise giue to wretched Phaetons Sire,
               To harnesse vp his fierce and furious Streeds,
               To drawe him thence vnto his Westerne home.
               
               From whose cleare beames once in his Chariot plast,
               Did gladsome glimps as bright as burnisht Gold,
               Shine all displai'd vpon the Waightie Globe.
               On this same day, a faire and glorious day,
               Came this our Queene, (a Queene most like her selfe)
               Unto her Campe, (now made a royall Campe,)
               With all her troupe, (her Court-like stately troupe,)
               Not like to those who coutch on stately Doune,
               But like to Mars, the God of fearefull warre,
               And heauing oft to Skies her war-like hands,
               Did make her selfe Bellona-like renown'd.
               
                  The Lord Lieutenant notice had there-of,
               Who did forth-with prepare to entertaine
               The sacred Goddesse of this English soyle,
               
               The order how,The order of
the Queenes
entertainement
into the
Campe. thus presently ensues.
               On euery side of that directest way
               From Block-house where she should be set on land
               Unto the outward quarter of the Campe,
               There rancked were both armed men and shot,
               With Captaines, who of them had taken charge,
               To entertaine their sacred Generall.
               
               The other Captaines with their companies,
               Still resident were at their Corps du guard,
               
               Where-as they ranked all their arm'd-men first:
               Behinde them were the shot in seuerall ranks,
               With equall distance twixt the placed rowes,
               Which made a passing braue and war-like showe.
               The Earle of Leicester with those Officers
               Which chosen were to gouerne in the field,
               At water-side within the Block-house stayd
               In readinesse there to receiue our Queene.
               Who landed now, doth passe along her way,
               She thence some-way still marching kinglike-on,
               The Canons at the Block-house were discharg'd:
               The Drums do sound, the Phiphes do yeeld their notes,
               And Ensignes are displayd through-out the Campe.
               Our peerelesse Queene doth by her Souldiers passe,
               And shewes her selfe vnto her Subiects there:
               She thanks them oft for their (of dutie) paines,
               And they againe on knees do pray for her.
               They coutch their Pikes, and bowe their Ensignes downe
               When as their sacred royall Queene past by,
               In token of their loyall beared hearts
               To her alone, and none but only she.
               A troupe of braue and warre-like Horssemen did
               (Conducted by Sir Roger Williams Knight,)
               Meete with the Queene amid the way she came,
               
                  The halfe whereof, which was fiue hundred Horsse,
               Most stately Stéedes,A thousand
Horsse march
behinde and
before her
Maiestie. made complete for the field,
               With neighing sounds, and fomed champing bitts,
               Betrampling sore the ground whereas they stoode
               Attended on her sacred selfe. The rest
               Fiue hundred more (in nought to them vnlike)
               Before her traine in stately order marcht,
               These ioyntly did with twentie hundred men
               Which footemen were,Two thousand
footmen
garded her
person to her
lodging. our gratious Soueraigne guard,
               Unto the house whereas she lay all night.
               Whether once come, the horse-men turned backe,
               But all the rest with her great Seriant did
               Watch there all night aloofe her royall Court.
               The souldyers which placed were farre off
               From that same way through which she past along,
               Did hollow oft, the Lord preserue our Queene.
               
               He happy was that could but see hir Coatch,
               The sides whereof beset with Emmerods,
               
               And Diomonds with sparkling Rubies red
               In Checker-wise by strange inuention,
               With curious knots embrodered with golde
               Cast such a glimse as if the heauenly place
               Of Phebus were by those his foming Steedes
               On foure round wheeles drawne all along that way.
               Thrise happy they who sawe her stately selfe,
               Who Iuno-like drawne with her proudest birds,
               Whose tayles do hold her Heard-mans hundred eyes,
               Passed along through quarters of the Campe.
               Thus all along her Highnesse like her selfe
               Hath passed by her subiects (ioyfull made
               Through this her louing and renowned déede)
               From out the Campe vnto her lodging then,
               Full three miles distant from that warlike place
               Prepared for her to Maister Ritche his house,
               With purpose meant for to returne next day
               That way againe, the better it to view.
            
            
               
               NOw when Bright-day was to her pallace gon,
               And by that time had locked vp her lights
               Within their place strong walled with cleere glasse,
               To take their rest vntill the morning tide:
               By this same time our sacred Generall
               
               Was come vnto her new prepared Court.
               There entred once and in their lodgings plast,
               The Courtiers talke is of the warlike show
               They sawe that day within the royall Campe.
               Some praise the place whereas they camped are:
               Some praise the discipline is vs'd therein:
               And othersome the passing forwardnesse
               Of Noble men, and Gentels lying there:
               But all of them do say, the Souldiers are
               Most comely men appoynted well thereto.
               Thus with this talke, Time hasted fast away,
               And wish'd-for Rest did come among them then,
               Who bids them all vnto his loued house:
               They willingly do yeeld to her request,
               And euery one is come vnto her place:
               The doore whereof was called Wearines,
               
               And Drowsines bore name of her first roume:
               The other were term'd Slumbers (passing sweete)
               A Sound-sleepe was the name of that her house.
               Her seruants who did entertaine her guestes
               Were these, A mind free from all worldly care,
               
               
                  An earnest will, with A conuenient place.
               
               The guests thus come at this their welcome ioy,
               And there do finde all things they could desire.
               But Enuie, who doth ioy in nought but warres,
               Doth helpe to end this their so pleasant mirth:
               For fearefull Dreames, with foolish phantasies,
               
               The formost foes that quiet Rest torments,
               Come first to make an hurly-burly there.
               Then brightest Day the others Generall,
               
               
                  Doth banish Rest quite from her late-held house,
               And leaues her guests vnto their day-ment deedes.
            
            
               NOw by the time that Phaebus had beyok'd
               His foming Steedes within their harnesses
               To draw his bright and neuer-darkned lights:
               The Captaines of the Campe with all their men
               Did from their quarters with their seuerall charge
               Come marching to the place prepar'd for Armes.
               When thether come was euery officer,
               A royall battell royally was set
               With two most strong and braue Battallians.
               The Vangard whereof by the Lord Marshall:
                  A Battell set with two Battallians against her Maiestie came agayne to the Campe.
               
               The Reerward by Sir William Knowles was set:
               And last the Seriant Maior Generall
               The Battell set in like most war-like sort.
               Twixt euery fight their seuerall troopes of horse,
               And two braue troopes did guard the outward Flankes.
               
               The Battells set do match in braue aray
               Both too and fro the stately Generall,
               
               Who now was come vnto the place of Armes
               
               With all her noble and renowned trayne.
               Where glittering harnesse giues such gleaming lights,
               And from those lights reflecteth such a heate,
               As Heauen and Earth with Planets greatly feare,
               Least Phaeton agayne to Heauen was come,
               And had obtain'd to guide his fathers lights.
               The trampling horses with their mist-like breath,
               Do fill the Ayre with such a sodaine smoake,
               As Iupiter did feare least Terra was
               New set on fire by that fore-named heate.
               The Drommes, the Phiphes, the Trumpets passing-shrill,
               Do sounded yeeld such marching forward notes,
               As Mars himselfe with all his train'd-vp men,
               In Armes are prest, as if the Goddesse Peace
               
               Were comming now to banish him the field.
               
                  Which war-like showe with that Mars thundring noyse,
               So rauished our princely Soueraigne,
               (Addicted only then to Marshall prowes)
               As that she doth (her trayne forbid therefro)
               Most brauely mounted on a stately Steede
               With Trunchion in her hand (not vs'd thereto)
               And with her none,The Queen
                        •
                     
leaueth her
traine to go to
see her battels. except her Liutenant,
               
               Accompaned with the Lord Chamberlaine,
               
               Come marching towards this her marching fight.
               In nought vnlike the Amazonian Queene,
               
               Who beating downe amaine the bloodie Greekes,
               
               Thereby to grapple with Achillis stout,
               Euen at the time when Troy was sore besieg'd.
               He had that wight (that thrise puissant wight)
               Who well perform'd twelue labors passing straunge,
               A brauer grace encountring with his foes,
               Then this our Queene in that her marching pace.
               Thus comes our Queene (our thrise renowned Queene)
               A Generall beseeming such a Campe:
               Thus comes our guide, a princely carefull guide,
               In war-like sorte to see her warring men,
               Who couched had their strong defensiue Pikes,
               As if they were to fight at push thereof.
               She nigh them come, they pitch their fore-couch'd Pikes,
               And she stands still to see the Battell set,
               With ioy to see her men to keepe their rankes.
               Now Voada once Englands happie Queene,
               Through Romans flight by her constrain'd to flie:
               Who making way amidst the slaughtered corps,
               Pursued her foes with horror of the day
               With Vodice her daughter (her too like,
               Who vrging wounds with constant courage died)
               Are now reuiu'd, their vertues liue (I say)
               Through this our Quéene, now Englands happie Quéene.
               For they no more did in those actuall deedes,
               Thrise famous deedes through Cactes fatall fall,
               
                  With losse which there the valiant Planch'us lost
               Their Prowes shew, then did our sacred Queene
               Here signes display of courage wonderfull.
               For when our Queene (an Amazonian Queene)
               Most carefully the Vauward had beheld,
               She thence doth go the Reerward for to see,
               And takes a view of it two strong set Flankes:
               
               At whose by passing,Homage done
to her Highnes
by the Souldiers. Launce with Pike are bow'd,
               And all yeeld reuerence to her sacred selfe.
               Her officers with all her Souldiers there,
               Do tokens shew of their made-ioyfull hearts.
               She giues them thankes as had she done before:
               Who nought haue done but what their dueties bid.
               Her statelines was so with loue-show'd ioyn'd,
               As all there then did ioyntly ioy and feare.
               They ioy'd in that they see their rulers loue:
               But fear'd least that in ought they should offend
               Agaynst her selfe, the Goddesse of this land.
               Thus causing ioy and feare, she passed thence
               With cherefull heart for this her late viewed sight
               Unto the Tent of her Liuetenant there:
               Were readie were in readines each thing,
               Which could be fit to entertayne a Queene.
               The Battell set,The Battell
broke vp. is soone agayne broke vp:
               Where foming Steedes, right fearce and raging Steedes,
               Now marching raise the loose and scatterd dust:
               As Sols bright beames, ne Ayre-much Azure-like
               Within a space could be discern'd, so thicke
               This raysed dust obsuscated the light.
               The companies asunder parted once,
               Do now returne to whence they first were brought,
               Where nought is heard among the Souldiers,
               But how the Queene did lately shew her selfe
               The only Empresse that on earth hath liu'd.
            
            
               
               WHen Phaebus lights were in the middle part
               Twixt East and West fast hasting to his home:The Queene
went out of
the Campe.
               
               Our Soueraigne (our sacred blisfull Queene)
               Was readie to depart from out her Campe.
               Agaynst whose comming, euery Captaine was
               There prost to shew themselues in readines,
               To do the will of their high Generall.
               
               There might you see most braue and gallant men,
               Who lately were beclad in Mars his cloathes,
               Inranked then in Court-like costly suites.
               Through whom did passe our Queene most Dido-like,
               (Whose stately heart doth so abound with loue,
               As thousand thanks it yeelds vnto them all)
               To water-side to take her royall Barge.
               Amidst the way (which was the outward Ward
               
               Of that her Campe) her Seriant Maior stood
               Among those Squadrans which there then did ward.
               Her eyes were set so earnestly to view,
               As him vnseene she would not passe along,
               But calls him to her rich-built Couches sides,The Queene
called her Seriant
Maior vnto
her, and deliuered
a message.
               
               And thanking him (as oft before she had)
               Did will him do this message from her mouth,
               Deliuered with full of wisedome words.
               Which that it may not altogether be
               (Through vnfit words hew'd from a stonie wit)
               Obliterated to my vtter shame:
               Ye sacred Dames, ye seauen-fold Nimphes (I meane)
               Whose thickie groues resound your heauenly words:
               Whence euery Arte had first their seuerall names)
               Be-bathe my temples with those peerl-like droppes
               Which fall amaine from that your siluer streame:
               That through your ayde my wit now dulled sore,
               May quickned be with that your flowing Arte.
               
               Then shall I write in these my lines too rude
               Her royall speech (though nothing like her speech)
               Which in effect was it that here ensues.
               
                  We will them know that now by proofe we see
               Their loyall hearts to vs their lawfull Queene.The effect of
the Queenes
speach.
               
               For sure we are that none beneath the Heauens
               
               Haue readier Subiects to defend their right:
               Which happines we coumpt to vs as cheefe.
               And though of loue their dueties craue no lesse,
               Yet say to them that we in like regarde,
               And estimate of this their dearest zeale,
               (If time of neede shall euer call them foorth
               To dare in field their fearce and cruell foes)
               Wilbe our selfe their noted Generall.
               
               Ne deare at all to vs shalbe our life,
               Ne Pallaces or Castles huge of stone
               Shall hold as then our presence from their view:
               But in the midst and very heart of them,
               
                  Bellona-like we meane as then to march;
               On common lot of gayne or losse to both,
               They well shall see we recke shall then betide.
               And as for honor with most large rewards,
               Let them not care they common there shalbe:
               The meanest man who shall deserue a might,
               A mountaine shall for his desart receiue.
               And this our speach, and this our solemne vowe,
               In feruent loue to those our Subiects deare,
               Say Seriant Maior, tell them from our selfe,
               On Kingly faith we will performe it there.
               Which sayd, she bow'd her princely bodie downe,
               And passed thence vnto the water-side:
               Where once imbarg'd the roring Cannons were
               Discharg'd, both those which were on Tilb'rie hill,
               
               And also those which at the Block-house were:
               And there euen then the fore-white mant'led Ayre,
               
               From whence the Sunne shed foorth his brightest beames,
               Did cloathe it selfe with darke and duskie hue,
               And with thick Clowdes bar'd Phaebus gladsome streames
               From lightning then the Earth with glorious shew.
               
                  It powres foorth showers in great and often droppes,
               Signes of the griefe for her departure thence.
               And Terra now her Highnesse foot-stoole late,
               Refuseth quite those drops desir'd before,
               To moysten her dri'd vp and parched parts,
               And of her selfe euen then she yéelded foorth
               Great store of waters from her late-dri'd heart,
               Now deeply droun'd for this the parted losse
               Of that her sacred and renowned Queene.
               But happie Thames (thrise happie at this time)
               Turnes backe with speede his lately ebbing course:
               He calmes his billowes raging sore before,
               And makes it flow with a swift running streame.
               And Aeolus to him a friendly King,
               Recals his boysterous Boreas to his den,
               Sent late abroad with such sore thundring blasts
               As be the cracks which come, when angrie Ioue
               
               Throwes from his seate his hurtfull Thunder-hoults.
               Him he tyes vp within an hollow caue,
               With three link'd chaines with huge and strong-made locks
               Least that he should annoy her sacred selfe,
               Who now was caried on the riuer Thames.
               
            
            
               THese ioyntly thus conuay our royall Queene
               Unto her Pallace by S. Iames his fields:Diuers troupes
of horsse
shewed by her
Noble men
at S. Iames
her Pallace.
               
               Where resident her forward Noble men
               Do orderly their forwardnes her shew.
               There by her gates do euery day passe by
               Diuers braue troopes of well appoynted horse:
               They thether come, triumphant triumphs make,
               And brauely runne at Tilt and Turny then,
               To shew their prowes to our Goddesse there.
            
            
               THus they at home, thus they in Campe who lie
               With those who coast vpon the narrow Seas,
               
               
                  Do daylie looke, when those our look'd for foes
               Will dare to tread,The Fleete of
Spayne first
descried by
Captaine
Flemming.
               
               Who now perchaunce by Captaine Flemmings happe
               Descried were, fast sayling hether-ward
               With such a Fleete, as neuer bore the Seas
               
               So hugh a Fleete (except this Spanish-fleete.)
               
               Now worthie Haward lodg'd in Plimmouth sound,
               Most of the Fleete within the Hauen then,
               (By his great care with much inquirie made,)
               Receiuing notise by the fore-nam'd man,
               Brought out the Fleete the same next following night
               Into the sound by his incessant toyle.
               Although the winde (the hurtfull Sotherne-winde)
               
               Did blow amaine into the Hauens mouth:
               A wondrous thing, and worthie right to note.
               Which done (Aurora puttting foorth his head
               With wirie lockes, the glimpsing light whereof
               Did chase blacke Night vnto his darksome caue)
               The Generall with all his war-like power
               Did hoyst vp sayles (yea all their helping sayles)
               To meete with that the Spanish late-seene Fleete.
               
               Thus arrow-like they scouring on the Seas,
               
               Are within sight of that long look'd-for Fleete,
               
               Now do they see the Spanyards Shippes on heapes,
               In al things like a huge and pop'ler towne:
               Their bigge-made Barkes with huge and mightie Masses,
               Like Churches are with steeples very high:
               Their lesser Shippes like stately Pallaces
               Which Princes build to keepe their braue-kept traine:
               Their Gallies small, like smaller houses stand,
               Inhabited by those which meaner are:
               In briefe, they all in nothing are vnlike
               Unto the Troians stately new-built towne,
               Which nought did feare the Greekes bewrong'd by them.
               Thus ride these shippes, the Spanish strong-made shippes,
               Which nothing daunt our neuer-yeelding men,
               
                  But makes their hearts (before halfe dead for feare,
               Least they would not fulfill the rumor nois'd)
               To leape within their bodies new reuiu'd
               By this the sight of that discerned Fleete.
               
            
            
               THence swift Disdayne,
                  The pinnesse
Disdaine went to call for the Queene of England. (disdaining Englands foes)
               With worthy Ionas Captaine of her men,
               By his thrée times made famous Generall,
               To cry to them for Englands royall Queene,
               
               Was sent forth-with vnto the Spanish Fleete.
               
               Where strong Disdayne performed so her part
               In that charge late giuen to her care,
               As all her foes her now attein'd-to foes,
               Were halfe strooke dead at that her Captaines tale.
               Although for shame they made no show thereof,
               But in a brauery by the braue Disdayne,
               
               Do offer fight vnto our readie Fleete.
               
               And maruell not why they so forward were,
               For Aeolus (a full of pitie King)
               Perceiuing well their dismall comming doome,
               Kept in his Winds within their dwelling caue,
               The dore thereof fast locked by him-selfe:
               And quiet Calme was ouer all the Seas
               To helpe their strength abated very much,
               Whereby the Spanyards Gallyes safely might
               Rowe too and fro t'indanger vs by fight,
               The greatest helps they possibly might haue
               Next God of heauen, who rules and guides both these.
               And yet although their strength is twise as great
               As is the Fleete which must withstand their blowes,
               For that their Ships with chaines together linckt
               Did seeme much like a faire and strong-built Towne,
               But (as they sayd) ours were but Fisher-boasts:
               And lastly though King Aeolus him-selfe,
               With Neptunes Calme did aide their monstrous Fleete,
               
               
                  Yet (thanks to thee, ô euer-liuing God,
               
               The God of Gods, a carefull helping God
               To those thy Saincts, thy well beloued flocke,
               Who put their trust in none, but only thee:)
               Thy seruant Haward through thy mightie power
               (The Generall thereof, but too-too bold
               In forwardnesse to finish dangerous actes,)
               With those his Ships (with them but Fisher-boates)
               Be battered the thicke bombasted sides
               Of their most strong and tall at fighting Ships,Certaine of the
Spanyards
Ships sunke.
               
               As most of them did carry messengers
               Unto King Neptune ruler of the Seas.
               
               The smaller part which made the greater haste,
               Did Triton meete, his thundring Trumpetter,
               Who bids them welcome towards his Kings Court,
               And asketh them where all their fellowes are.
               They like so well of this his Court-like speach,
               As rauished they are with these his words,
               Which make them turne to fetch their companie,
               Who some-what slowe in that their warrant meant,
               Were forward sent by Lord high Admirall
               
               And Noble men, made Noble through their déedes.
               There might you see the Arke by Rawley built,
               With her defender, Generall of the Fleete,
               
               Put in amaine amongst his thickest foes,
               And there and then performed worthily
               Such enterprises as he tooke in hand.
               And after him for his more safe a-gard,
               Came noble Howard then a forward Lord,
               In charging there his late triumphing foes:
               
                  Lord Sheffild eke though but of tender yeares,
               Gaue place to none for forwardnesse to fight,
               Nor worthie Drake, (no stranger to the Ships
               Which Spayne doth owe) was quailed with their sight.
               Ne Suthwell sterne, with valiant Frobisher,
               
               Did there stand still to looke vpon the fight.
               
                  But ioyntly these, with all them present there,
               Do prease so sore their now sore weakened foes
               (Through fiue houres fight) as fayne they are to rest
               The battered sides of their bombasted Ships
               For space of one whole houre, and some-what more.
            
            
               THat time expir'd they fight afresh againe,The fight
renewed before
the Ile
of Wight.
               
               And ioyntly meete before the Isle of Wight,
               
               Where then began a fierce and greater fight.
               There Musket-shot discharg'd of either Fleete,
               
               Did fall like haile into the raging Seas.
               
               There Crosse-barres flew most liberally bestowed,
               Which brake the sides of their late battered Ships:
               And there was cast against each others foe,
               A thousand balles of wild-fire mercilesse,
               By which were sent great store of Spanish Ships,
               To follow those that were to Neptune gone.
               And least the first should troubled be too sore,
               In comming backe to fetch this late-sent traine,
               These meete with them halfe-way (their look'd-for friends)
               Whence all make hast vnto King Neptunes Court,
               
               Where they do finde such pleasant pleasing friends,
               As neare they'l to King Phillips Pallace turne.
               A world it is to see what messengers
               They send to shew in what estate they stand,
               For Spanish-felts with Spanyards dearest bloud
               Becheckereth the Sea with black and red,
               As there no white could possibly be seene.
               
                  Don Pedro with his Ship and company
               Did like so ill (the cause I know not why)
               Of that the newes these messengers did bring,Don Pedro
taken prisoner.
               
               As they do better Englands bondage like,
               Then Neptunes Court from whence these lately came.
               The other Ships in better case then his,
               Do neither like their state, ne yet his choise,
               
                  But thinke it best to trust vnto to their heeses.
               Wherefore they hoise vp all their Sayles at once,
               And take their way to Callice Hauen, whereas
               They lye at Rode, with often wishes that
               They were againe in Spayne from whence they came.
               Ours not farre off, do rest their toyled corps
               Sore ouerchargd by too-too forwardnes
               In prosequting their late quailed foes.
               Where for their déedes, their well-perfourmed déedes,
               Lord Thomas Haward, with the Sheffild Lord,
                  Certaine of our
Fleete Knighted.
               
               And Roger Towns-end forward in those warres,
               With Martin Frobisher (not a little knowne,)
               Most worthie Gentelles newly entertain'd,
               By mighty Mauors, from Bellona Quéene,
               Receiu'd from her the gift of Knighthood there.
            
            
               VVHich deede performed, England was not slacke
               In trying meanes which might anoy her foes.
               For presently a wondrous Stratageme
               
               Did then ensue,English Ships
set on fire by
the Lord
Charles Hawards
commaundement.
by her in practise put.
               For certaine Ships of our worst English-Ships,
               By Lord Charles Haward worthy Generall
               
               Commanded, were forth-with then set on fire:
               Which driuen thence through a swift running streame
               Did fall among the Spanyards roding-Ships.
               At which strange sight they so astonied were,
               As they reioic'd that could the Cables cut,
               Which fastned were vnto their Anchors cast.
               This sudden maze which nothing setled wits,
               Were chiefest cause of this their second baine:
               For then each Ship on others cables foule,
               And runne on rocks to their ensuing losse:
               They hoist vp Sailes, and as they thether came
               So hye they fast vnto the Northerne Seas.
               
               These thus in flight are chased very sore
               
                  By Generall of this our conquering Fleete:
               
               Who Lion-like (sufficed nere ynough
               With Honors lawd) pursues his flying foes.
               And Comberland a wondrous forward Earle
               
               But new imbarkt, attayning to this flight
               Did shew himselfe, and shewing made them feele
               His power, not felt before of Spanyards.
               
               What shall I say, or what could that her Fleete
               
               Performe in better sorte then there was done.
               Their Spanish foes with all that conquered Fleete
               
               (Although they sayd that English-land was theirs:
               And therefore when they first receiued word
               That then but thirtie little English Boates
               Could be descri'd, cried oft Victoria)
               
               Are sunke, are drown'd, are burnt with Englands fire,
               And grounded lye before the French-townes Hauen.
               The rest (euen then remayning weakly) fayle
               They know not whether, guided by their Fate,
               
               Now chased farre beyond this Islands bounds.
               Our little Fleete, our famous Generall
               
               Doth shame to follow them that will not fight,
               And therefore turnes his course vnto his charge,
               Still sayling with an happie Sotherne-winde
               Attaines vnto the same the Narrow Seas:
               
               Where setting euery thing in needfull sort,The Lord
high Admirall
goeth to the
Court.
               
               Left then the Fleete and hasted to the Court
               
               Of his thrise sacred Soueraigne our Queene:
               Whose welcome thether was as his desarts
               And famous deedes performed, had deseru'd.
            
            
               OUr gracious Queene (for this Gods mercie shew'd
               To her, her land, through conquest ouer them,
               Who came to seeke her death, and death of those
               Who stedfast are vnto his holie word)
               Doth yeeld him thankes deuoutly on her knees,
               
                  And wills her Subiects throughout all her land
               To fast and pray for this his prouidence.
               But Sixtus quintus Pope of whorish Rome,
                  Sixtus Quintus
now Pope
of Rome.
               
               Hath lost his Bulls, and hath his Souldiers lost
               With credit crackt, and all in eighty eight.
               
               And well I wit, what was the cause thereof,
               Belike his Saints, him-selfe, and Cardinals,
               
               With Friers, Monks, and Seminarie Priests,
               
               Were all at Dice for Englands peoples goodes,
               And quite forgot to fall to morning Masse.
               
               Or otherwise, they told their Beades so oft,
               And said so many Mattins to their gods,
               
               (Their wodden gods,) as that they fell asléepe,
               And so left off to perseuere in prayers;
               Whereby their Saints at that time sléepie too,
               Did like-wise nod, and sued not to their gods.
               
               Or lastly thus (which likest is of all,)
               His Siluer scant, where-by his Crosses few,
               And holy-water niggardly bestowed,
               Did scarsly blesse his Souldyers going forth:
               For which hard dearth the God of heauen (our God)
               Did wash them all with-in his hallowed Seas,
               Where plentie is of water like the Popes.
               
               By which, (as by his goodnesse euer shewed
               To England, where his little flocke remaines,
               With alwayes losse vnto the haplesse Pope)
               
               His holynesse, with all deceiu'd by him,
               Or instruments he to that end hath sent,
               May now confesse with sore repenting heart,
               That long ynough they all prouoked haue
               Our louing God, to neuer ceasing ire.
               But if his Father Belzebub that féend
               Hath bound the Pope so to his damned lore,
               As that he cannot turne vnto the Lord:
               Yet English-men Recusants, (ah I greeue
               To tearme ye so because my Countrey-men,)
               
                  Despise his déedes, (his méere deceiptfull deedes,)
               And turne your hearts vnto your sacred Queene:
               And with your Queene beloued of our God,
               Turne to Gods word, and shunne the diuelish Pope.
               
               So God will ioy in this his little flocke,
               And blesse this Land with still increasing store,
               Where-as he now like to a naturall Sire
               Weeps ouer it, as once he shedded teares,
               When that he sawe Ierusalem he lou'd.
               Which (heauenly God) with three-fold Nestors yeares
               Giuen to our Queene, to Englands euer ioy,
               Fullfill (I pray) with such conuenient speede,
               As shall seeme good vnto thy holy will.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   