
      
         
            
               
               
               
            
            
               ❧ Reioyse Englande, be gladde and merie,
            
               TROTHE ouercōmmeth thyne enemyes all,
            The Scot, the Frencheman, the Pope, and heresie,
            
               OVERCOMMED by Trothe, haue had a fall;
            Sticke to the Trothe, and euermore thou shall
            Through Christ, King Henry, the Boke and the Bowe
            All maner of enemies, quite ouerthrowe.
         
         
            
            
               Gualterus Haddonus Cantabrigien.
            
            Mittere qui celeres summa uelit arte sagittas,
            Ars erit ex isto summa profecta libro.
            Quicquid habent arcus rigidi, nerui
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                rotundi,
            Sumere fi libet, hoc sumere fonte licet.
            Aschamus est author, magnū quē fecit Apollo
            Arte sua, magnum Pallas & arte sua.
            Docta manꝰ dedit hūc, dedit hūc mēs doct a libellū:
            Quae ui det Ars Vsus uisa, parata facit.
            Optimus haec author quia tradidit optima scripta,
            Conuenit bec uobis optima uelle sequi.
         
         
            
            To the moste graciouse, and our most drad Soueraigne lord,
Kyng Henrie the .viii. by the grace of God, kyng
of Englande, Fraunce and Irelande. Defender
of the faythe, and of the churche
of Englande & also of Irelande
in earth supreme head, next vnder
Christ, be al health
victorie, and felicitie.
            
               WHAT tyme as, moste gracious
Prince, your highnes this
last year past, tooke that your
moost honorable and victorious
iourney into Fraunce, accompanied
vvith such a porte
of the Nobilitie and yeomanrie of Englande,
as neyther hath bene lyke knovven by experience,
nor yet red of in Historie: accompanied
also vvith the daylie prayers, good hartes, and
vvilles of all and euery one your graces subiectes,
lefte behinde you here at home in Englande:
the same tyme, I beinge at my booke
in Cambrige, sorie that my litle habilitie could
stretche out no better, to helpe forvvard so noble
an enterprice, yet vvith my good vvylle,
prayer, and harte, nothinge behynde hym that
vvas formoste of all, conceyued a vvonderful

desire, bi the praier, vvishing, talking, & communicatiō
that vvas in euery mās mouth, for
your Graces moost victoriouse retourne, to
offer vp sumthinge, at your home cumming to
your Highnesse, vvhich shuld both be a token
of mi loue and deutie tovvard your Maiestie,
& also a signe of my good minde and zeale tovvarde
mi countrie.
            This occasion geuen to me at that time, caused
me to take in hand againe, this litle purpose
of shoting, begon of me before, yet not ended
thā, for other studies more mete for that trade
of liuinge, vvhiche God and mi frendes had set
me vnto. But vvhen your Graces moste ioifull
& happie victorie preuēted mi dailie and spedie
diligencie to performe this matter, I vvas
compelled to vvaite an other time to prepare
& offer vp this litle boke vnto your Maiestie.
And vvhan it hath pleased youre Highenesse
of your infinit goodnesse, & also your most honorable
Counsel to knovv and pervse ouer the
contentes, & some parte of this boke, and so to
alovv it, that other mē might rede it, throughe
the furderaunce and setting forthe of the right
vvorshipfull and mi Singuler good Master sir
Vvilliam Pagette Knight, moost vvorthie Secretarie

to your highnes, & most open & redie
succoure to al poore honest learned mēs sutes,
I moost humblie beseche your Grace to take in
good vvorthe this litle treatise purposed, begō,
and ended of me onelie for this intent, that Labour,
Honest pastime & Vertu, might recouer
againe that place and right, that Idlenesse, Vnthriftie
gamning and Vice hath put them fro.
            And althoughe to haue vvritten this boke
either in latin or Greke (vvhich thing I vvold
be verie glad yet to do, if I might surelie knovv
your Graces pleasure there in) had bene more
easier & fit for mi trade in study, yet neuerthelesse,
I supposinge it no point of honestie, that
mi commodite should stop & hinder ani parte
either of the pleasure or profite of manie, haue
vvritten this Englishe matter in the Englishe
tongue, for Englishe men: vvhere in this I trust
that your Grace (if it shall please your Highnesse
to rede it) shal perceaue it to be a thinge
Honeste for me to vvrite, pleasaunt for some to
rede, and profitable for manie to folow, conte
ning a pastime, honest for the minde, holsome
for the body, fit for eueri man, vile for no man,
vsing the day & opēplace for Honestie to rule
it, not lurking in corners for misorder to abuse
it. Therfore I trust it shal apere, to be bothe

a sure token of my zeele to set forvvarde shootinge,
and some signe of my minde, tovvardes
honestie and learninge.
            Thus I vvil trouble your crace no longer, but
vvith my daylie praier, I vvil beseche God to
preserue your Grace, in al health and felicitie:
to the feare and ouerthrovve
of all your ennemies: to the
pleasure, ioyfulnesse and
succour of al your subiectes:
to the vtter
destruction
of papistrie
and heresie: to the continuall
setting forth of
Goddes vvorde
and his glorye.
            
               Your Graces most
bounden Scholer,
Roger Ascham.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ TO ALL GENTLE MEN AND YOMEN OF
ENGLANDE.
            
               BIas the wyse man came to Cresus the ryche
kyng, on a tyme, when he was makynge newe
shyppes, purposyng to haue subdued by water
the out yles lying betwixt Grece and Asia minor:
What newes now in Grece, saith the king
to Bias? None other newes, but these, sayeth
Bias: that the yles of Grece haue prepared a wonderful companye
of horsemen, to ouerrun Lydia withall. There is nothyng
vnder heauen, sayth the kynge, that I woulde so soone
wisshe, as that they durst be so bolde, to mete vs on the lande
with horse. And thinke you sayeth Bias, that there is anye
thyng which they wolde sooner wysshe, then that you shulde
be so fonde, to mete them on the water with shyppes? And so
Cresus hearyng not the true newes, but perceyuyng the wise
mannes mynde and counsell, both gaue then ouer makyng of
his shyppes, and left also behynde him a wonderful example
for all commune wealthes to folowe: that is euermore to regarde
and set most by that thing whervnto nature hath made
them moost apt, and vse hath made them moost fitte.
            By this matter I meane the shotyng in the long bowe, for
English men: which thyng with all my hert I do wysh, and if
I were of authoritie, I wolde counsel all the gentlemen and
yomen of Englande, not to chaunge it with any other thyng,
how good soeuer it seme to be: but that styll, accordyng to the
oulde wont of England, youth shulde vse it for the moost honest
pastyme in peace, that men myght handle it as a mooste
sure weapon in warre. Other stronge weapons whiche bothe
experience doth proue to be good, and the wysdom of the kinges
Maiestie & his counsel prouydes to be had, are not ordeyned
to take away shotyng: but yt both, not compared togither,
whether shuld be better then the other, but so ioyned togither
that the one shoulde be alwayes an ayde and helpe for the other,
myght so strengthen the Realme on all sydes, that no
kynde of enemy in any kynde of weapon, myght passe and go
beyonde vs.
            For this purpose I, partelye prouoked by the counsell of
some gentlemen, partly moued by the loue whiche I haue alwayes
borne towarde shotyng, haue wrytten this lytle treatise,

wherin if I haue not satisfyed any man, I 
                  〈…〉
                he wyll
the rather be content wt my doyng, bycause I am (I suppose)
the firste, whiche hath sayde any thynge in this matter (and
fewe begynnynges be perfect, sayth wyse men) And also bycause
yf I haue sayed a misse, I am content that any man amende
it, or yf I haue sayd to lytle, any man that wyl to adde
what hym pleaseth to it.
            My minde is, in profitynge and pleasynge euery man, to
hurte or displease no man, intendyng none other purpose, but
that youthe myght be styrred to labour, honest pastyme, and
vertue, and as much as laye in me, plucked from ydlenes, vnthriftie
games, and vice: whyche thing I haue laboured onlye
in this booke, she wynge howe fit shootyng is for all kyndes
of men, howe honest a pastyme for the mynde, howe holsome
an excercise for the bodye, not vile for great men to vse,
not costlye for poore men to susteyne, not lurking in holes and
corners for ill men at theyr pleasure, to misvse it, but abiding
in the open sight & face of the worlde, for good men if it fault
by theyr wisdome to correct it.
            And here I woulde desire all gentlemen and yomen, to vse
this pastime in suche a mean, that the outragiousnes of great
gamyng, shuld not hurte the honestie of shotyng, which of his
owne nature is alwayes ioyned with honestie: yet for mennes
faultes oftentymes blamed vnworthely, as all good thynges
haue ben, and euermore shall be.
            If any man woulde blame me, eyther for takynge such a
matter in hande, orels for writing it in the Englyshe tongue,
this answere I maye make hym, that whan the beste of the
realme thinke it honest for them to vse, I one of the meanest
sorte, ought not to suppose it vile for me to write: And though
to haue written it in an other tonge, had bene bothe more profitable
for my study, and also more honest for my name, yet I
can thinke my labour wel bestowed, yf wt a litle hynderaunce
of my profyt and name, maye come any fourtheraunce, to the
pleasure or commoditie, of the gentlemen and yeomen of Englande,
for whose sake I tooke this matter in hande. And as
for ye Latin or greke tonge, euery thyng is so excellently done
in them, that none can do better: In the Englysh tonge contrary,
euery thinge in a maner so meanly, bothe for the matter
and handelynge, that no man can do worse. For therin the
least learned for the moste parte, haue ben alwayes moost redye

to wryte. And they whiche had leaste hope in latin, haue
bene moste boulde in englyshe: when surelye euery man that
is moste ready to taulke, is not moost able to wryte. He that
wyll wryte well in any tongue, muste folowe thys councel of
Aristotle, to speake as the cōmon people do, to thinke as wise
men do: and so shoulde euery man vnderstande hym, and the
iudgement of wyse men alowe hym. Many English writers
haue not done so, but vsinge straunge wordes as latin, french
and Italian, do make all thinges darke and harde. Ones I
communed with a man whiche reasoned the englyshe tongue
to be enryched and encreased therby, sayinge: Who wyll not
prayse that feaste, where a man shall drinke at a diner, bothe
wyne, ale and beere? Truely quod I, they be all good, euery
one taken by hym selfe alone, but if you putte Maluesye and
sacke, read wyne and white, ale and beere, and al in one pot,
you shall make a drynke, neyther easie to be knowen, nor yet
holsom for the bodye. Cicero in folowyng I focrates, Plato
and Demosthenes, increased the latine tounge after an other
sorte. This waye, bycause dyuers men yt write, do not know,
they can neyther folowe it, bycause of theyr ignorauncie, nor
yet will prayse it, for verye arrogauncie, ii. faultes, seldome
the one out of the others companye.
            Englysh writers by diuersitie of tyme, haue taken diuerse
matters in hande. In our fathers tyme nothing was red, but
bookes of fayned cheualrie, wherin a man by redinge, shuld
be led to none other ende, but onely to manslaughter and baudrye.
Yf any man suppose they were good ynough to passe the
time with al, he is deceyued. For surelye vayne woordes doo
woorke no smal thinge in vayne, ignoraunt, and younge mindes,
specially yf they be gyuen any thynge thervnto of theyr
owne nature. These bokes (as I haue heard say) were made
the moste parte in Abbayes, and Monasteries, a very lickely
and fit fruite of suche an ydle and blynde kinde of lyuynge.
            In our tyme nowe, whan euery manne is gyuen to knowe
muche rather than to liue wel, very many do write, but after
suche a fashion, as very many do shoote. Some shooters take
in hande stronger bowes, than they be able to mayntayne.
            This thyng maketh them sūmtyme, to outshoote the marke,
sūmtyme to shote far wyde, and perchaunce hurte sūme that
looke on. Other that neuer learned to shote, nor yet knoweth
good shafte nor bowe, wyll be as busie as the best, but suche

one cōmonly plucketh do
                  •
               ne a syde, and crafty archers which
be agaynst him, will be bothe glad of hym, and also euer ready
to laye and bet with him: it were better for suche one to sit
doune than shote. Other there be, whiche haue verye good
bowe and shaftes, and good knowlege in shootinge, but they
haue bene brought vp in suche euyl fauoured shootynge, that
they can neyther shoore fayre, nor yet nere. Yf any man wyll
applye these thynges togyther, shal not se the one farre differ
from the other.
            And I also amonges all other, in writinge this lytle treatise,
haue folowed sūme yonge shooters, whiche bothe wyll
begyn to shoote, for a lytle moneye, and also wyll vse to shote
ones or twise about the marke for nought, afore they beginne
a good. And therfore did I take this litle matter in hande, to
assaye my selfe, and hereafter by the grace of God, if the iudgement
of wyse men, that looke on, thinke that I can do any
good, I maye perchaunce caste my shafte amonge other, for
better game.
            Yet in writing this booke, some man wyll maruayle perchaunce,
why that I beyng an vnperfyte shoter, shoulde take
in hande to write of makyng a perfyte archer: the same man
peraduenture wyll maruayle, howe a whettestone whiche is
blunte, can make the edge of a knife sharpe: I woulde ye same
man shulde consider also, that in goyng about anye matter▪
there be .iiii. thinges to be considered, doyng, saying, thinking
and perfectnesse: Firste there is no man that doth so wel, but
he can saye better, or elles summe men, whiche be now starke
nought, shuld be to good: Agayne no man can vtter wyth his
tong, so wel as he is able to imagin with his minde, & yet perfectnesse
it selfe is farre aboue all thinking. Than seing that
saying is one steppe nerer perfectenesse than doyng, let euery
man leue maruaylyng why my woorde shall rather expresse,
than my dede shall perfourme perfecte shootinge.
            I truste no man will be offended with this litle booke excepte
it be sūme fletchers and bowiers, thinking hereby that
manye that loue shootynge shall be taughte to refuse suche
noughtie wares as they woulde vtter. Honest fletchers and
bowyers do not so, and they that be vnhonest, oughte rather
to amende them selues for doinge ill, than be angrie with me

                  •
               o: sayinge wel. 
                  •
                fletcher hath euen as good a quarell to be
angry wt a
                  •
                archer that refuseth an ill shaft, as a bladesmith

hath to a fletcher yt forsaketh to bye of him a noughtie knyfe:
For as an archer must be content that a fletcher know a good
shafte in euery poynte for the perfecter makynge of it, So an
honeste fletcher will also be content that a shooter knowe a
good shafte in euery poynt for the perfiter vsing of it: bicause
the one knoweth like a fletcher how to make it, the other knoweth
lyke an archer howe to vse it. And seyng the knowlege
is one in them bothe, yet the ende diuerse, surely that fletcher
is an enemye to archers and artillery, whiche can not be content
that an archer knowe a shafte as well for his vse in shotynge,
as he hym selfe shoulde knowe a shafte, for hys aduauntage
in sellynge. And the rather bycause shaftes be not
made so muche to be solde, but chefely to be vsed. And seynge
that vse and occupiyng is the ende why a shafte is made, the
making as it were a meane for occupying, surely the knowelege
in euery poynte of a good shafte, is more to be required in
a shooter than a fletcher.
            Yet as I sayde before no honest fletcher wil be angry with
me, seinge I do not teache howe to make a shafte whiche belongeth
onelye to a good fletcher, but to knowe and handle a
shafte, which belongeth to an archer. And this lytle booke I
truste, shall please and profite both partes: For good bowes
and shaftes shall be better knowen to the cōmoditie of al shoters,
and good shotyng may perchaunce be the more occupied
to the profite of all bowyers and fletchers. And thus I praye
God that all fletchers getting theyr lyuynge truly, and al archers
vsynge shootynge honestly, and all maner of men
that fauour artillery, maye lyue continuallye in
healthe and merinesse, obeying theyr
prince as they shulde, and louing
God as they ought, to whom
for al thinges be al honour
and glorye for
euer. Amen
❧
            
         
         
            
            
            TOXOPHILVS,
The schole of shootinge
conteyned in tvvo
bookes.
            
               To all Gentlemen and yomen of Englande,
pleasaunte for theyr pastyme to rede,
and profitable for theyr use
to folow, both in war
and peace.
            
            
               The contentes of the first booke.
               
                  ❧ Earnest businesse ought to be refreshed wyth honeste
pastyme. Fol. 1.
               Shootyng moost honest pastyme. 3.
               The inuention of shootinge. 5.
               Shootynge fit for princes and greate men. 5.
               Shootyng, fit for Scholers and studentes. 8.
               
                  
Shootynge fitter for studentes than any musike
or Instrumentes. 9.
               Youthe ought to learne to singe. 11.
               No maner of man doth or can vse to muche shootynge. 14.
               Agaynste vnlawfull gammes and namelye cardes
and dise. 16.
               Shootyng in war. 24.
               Obedience the best propertie of a Souldyar. 25.
               Reasons and authorites agaynste shootynge in
war with the confutacion of the same. 26.
               God is pleased with stronge wepons and valyaunt
feates of war. 28.
               The commoditie of Shootyng in war throughe
the Histories Greke and Latin, & all nations Christen
and Herhen. 29.
               Use of shootynge at home causethe stronge shootinge
in warre. 41.
               Use of shootynge at home, except men be apte by
nature, and connynge by teachyng, doth litle good
at all. 43.
               Lacke of learnynge to shoote causethe Englande
lacke many a good archer. 46.
               In learnyng any thyng, a man must couete to be
best, or els he shal neuer attayne to be meane. 47
            
         
         
            
            A Table con̄teyning
the seconde booke.
            Hitting the marke, by 
                  Shotyng areyght.
                  Kepyng a length.
                Both come partly. 
                  By knowing thinges belō
                     ging to shootyng.
                        Proper for euerye sere mānes vse.
                              Braser
                              Shotingloue
                              Strynge
                              Bowe
                              Shaftes
                           
                        
                        General to all men.
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 ether
                              Marke.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  By handelinge thynges belōging to shotyng.
                        without a man.
                              Standinge
                              Nockynge
                              Drawinge
                              Holdynge
                              Lowsinge.
                           
                        
                        within a man.
                              Bolde corage.
                              Auoydynge all affection.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            TOXOPHILVS,
A,
            The first boke of the schole of shoting.
            Philologus. Toxophilus.
            
               
                  PHILOLOGVS.
               You 
studie to sore Toxophile.
            
            
               TOX.
               I wil not hurt my self
ouermoche I warraūt you.
            
            
               PHI.
               Take hede you do not,
for we Physicions saye, that
it is nether good for the eyes
in so cleare a Sunne, nor yet
holsome for ye bodie, 
                     •
                  o soone
after meate, to looke vpon a
mans boke.
            
            
               TOX.
               In eatinge and studyinge I will
neuer folowe anye Physike, for yf I dyd, I am sure
I shoulde haue small pleasure in the one, and lesse
courage in the other. But what newes draue you
hyther I praye you?
            
            
               PHI.
               Small newes trulie, but
that as I came on walkynge, I fortuned to come wt
thre or foure that went to shote at the pryckes: And
when I sawe not you amonges them, but at the last
espyed you lokynge on your booke here so sadlye, I
thought to come and holde you with some communication,
lest your boke shoulde runne awaye with
you. For me thought by your waueryng pace & earnest
lokyng, your boke led you, not you it.
            
            
               TOX.
               In
dede as it chaunced, my mynde went faster then my

feete, for I happened here to reade in Phedro Platonis,
a place that entretes wonderfullie of the nature
of soules,In Phedro. which place (whether it were for the passynge
eloquence of Plato, and the Greke tongue, or
for the hyghe and godlie description of the matter,
kept my mynde so occupied, that it had no leisure to
loke to my feete. For I was reding howe some soules
being well fethered, flewe alwayes about heauē
and heauenlie matters, other some hauinge their fethers
mowted awaye, and droupinge, sanke downe
into earthlie thinges.
            
            
               PHI.
               I remēbre the place verie
wel, and it is wonderfullie sayd of Plato, & now
I se it was no maruell though your fete fayled you,
seing your minde flewe so fast.
            
            
               TOX.
               I am gladde
now that you letted me, for my head akes wt loking
on it, and bycause you tell me so, I am verye sorie yt
I was not wt those good feloes you spake vpon, for
it is a verie faire day for a mā to shote in.
            
            
               PHI.
               And
me thinke you were a great dele better occupied & in
better cōpanie, for it is a very faire daye for a mā to
go to his boke in.
            
            
               TOX.
               Al dayes and wethers wil
serue for that purpose, and surelie this occasiō was
ill lost.
            
            
               PHI.
               Yea but clere wether maketh clere mindes,
and it is best as I suppose, to spend y• best time
vpon the best thinges: And me thought you shot verie
wel, and at that marke, at which euery good scoler
shoulde moste busilie shote at. And I suppose it
be a great dele more pleasure also, to se a soule flye
in Plato, then a shafte flye at the prickes. I graunte
you, shoting is not the worst thing in the world, yet
if we shote, and time shote, we ar not like to be great
winners at the length. And you know also we scholers

haue more ernest & weightie matters in hand,
nor we be not borne to pastime & pley, as you know
wel ynough who sayth.
            
            
               TOX.
               Yet the same man in
the same place Philologe,
                  M. Cic. 1 
                        〈…〉
                     . by your leue, doth admitte
holsome, honest and manerlie pastimes to be as necessarie
to be mīgled with sad matters of the minde,
as eating & sleping is for the health of the body, and
yet we be borne for neither of bothe. And Aristotle
him selfe sayth,Arist. de moribus. 10. 6. y• although it were a fonde & a chyldish
thing to be to ernest in pastime & play, yet doth
he affirme by the authoritie of the oulde Poet Epicharmus,
that a man may vse play for ernest matter
sake. And in an other place,Arist. Pol, 8. 3. y• as rest is for labour, &
medicines for helth, so is pastime at tymes for sad &
weightie studie.
            
            
               PHI.
               How moche in this matter is
to be giuen to y• auctoritie either of Aristotle or Tul
lie, I cā not tel, seing sad mē may wel ynough speke
merily for a merie matter, this I am sure, whiche
thing this faire wheat (god saue it) maketh me remē
                  bre,
y• those husbādmen which rise erliest, and come
latest home, and are content to haue their diner and
other drinckinges, broughte into the fielde to them,
for feare of losing of time, haue fatter barnes in har
uest, than they whiche will either slepe at none time
of the daye, or els make merie wt their neighbours
at the ale. And so a scholer yt purposeth to be a good
husband, and desireth to repe and enioy much fruite,
of learninge, muste tylle and sowe thereafter. Our
beste seede tyme, whiche be scholers, as it is verie
tymelye, and whan we be yonge: so it endureth
not ouerlonge, and therfore it maye not be let slippe

one houre, oure grounde is verye harde, and full of
wedes, our horse wherwt we be drawen very wylde
as Plato sayth.In Phedro. And infinite other mo lettes whiche
wil make a thriftie scholer take hede how he spēdeth
his tyme in sporte and pleye.
            
            
               TOX.
               That Aristotle
and Tullie spake ernestlie, and as they thought, the
ernest matter which they entreate vpon, doth plainlye
proue. And as for your husbandrie, it was more
probablie tolde with apt wordes propre to ye thing,
then throughly proued with reasons belongynge to
our matter. For contrariwise I herd my selfe a good
husbande at his boke ones saye, that to omit studie
somtime of the daye, and sometime of the yere, made
asmoche for the encrease of learning, as to let the lād
lye sometime falloe, maketh for the better encrease
of corne. This we se, yf the lande be plowed euerye
yere, the corne commeth thinne vp: the eare is short,
the grayne is small, and when it is brought into the
barne and threshed, gyueth very euill faul. So those
which neuer leaue poring on their bokes, haue oftē
                  times
as thinne inuention, as other poore mē haue,
and as smal wit and weight in it as in other mens.
And thus youre husbandrie me thinke, is more like
the life of a couetouse s
                     ••
                  dge that oft very euill preues,
then the labour of a good husbād that knoweth
wel what he doth. And surelie the best wittes to lerning
must nedes haue moche recreation and ceasing
from their boke, or els they marre them selues, whē
base and dompys
                     •
                  he wittes can neuer be hurte with
continuall studie, as ye se in luting, that a treble mi
                  
                     ••
                  kin
string must alwayes be let down, but at suche

time as when a man must nedes playe: when ye base
and dull stryng nedeth neuer to be moued out of his
place. The same reason I finde true in two bowes
that I haue, wherof the one is quicke of cast, tricke,
and trime both for pleasure and profyte: the other is
a lugge slowe of cast, folowing the string, more sure
for to last, then pleasaunt for to vse. Now sir it chaū
                  ced
this other night, one in my chābre wolde nedes
bende them to proue their strength, but I can not tel
how, they were both left bente tyll the nexte daye at
after dyner: and when I came to them, purposing to
haue gone on shoting, I found my good bowe clene
cast on the one side, and as weake as water, that surelie
(if I were a riche man) I had rather haue spent
a crowne: and as for my lugge, it was not one why
                     •
                  
the worse: but shotte by and by as wel and as farre
as euer it dyd. And euen so I am sure that good wittes,
except they be let downe like a treble string, and
vnbent like a good casting bowe, they wil neuer last
and be able to cōtinue in studie. And I know where
I speake this Philologe, for I wolde not saye thus
moche afore yong men, for they wil take soone occasion
to studie litle ynough. But I saye it therfore bicause
I knowe, as litle studie getteth litle learninge
or none at all, so the moost studie getteth not y• moost
learning of all. For a mans witte sore occupied in ernest
studie, must be as wel recreated with some honest
pastime, as the body sore laboured, must be refreshed
with slepe and quietnesse, or els it can not endure
very longe, as the noble poete sayeth.
VVhat th
                        •
                     g wāt
                        •
                      quiet & meri rest endures but a smal while▪
                     Ouid.
                  
               
               
                  
                   And I promise you shoting by my iudgement, is ye
moost honest pastime of al, & suche one I am sure, of
all other, that hindreth learning litle or nothing at
all, whatsoeuer you & some other saye, whiche are a
gret dele sorer against it alwaies thā you nede to be.
            
            
               PHI.
               Hindereth learninge litle or nothinge at all?
that were a meruayle to me truelie, and I am sure
seing you saye so, you haue some reason wherewith
you can defende shooting wtall, and as for wyl (for
the loue that you beare towarde shotinge) I thinke
there shall lacke none in you. Therfore seinge we
haue so good leysure bothe, and no bodie by to trouble
vs: and you so willinge & able to defende it, and
I so redy and glad to heare what may be sayde of it
I suppose we canne not passe the tyme better ouer,
neyther you for ye honestie of your shoting, nor I for
myne owne mindsake, than to se what can be sayed
with it, or agaynste it, and speciallie in these dayes,
whan so many doeth vse it, and euerie man in a maner
doeth common of it.
            
            
               TOX.
               To speake of shootinge
Philologe, trulye I woulde I were so able,
either as I my selfe am willing or yet as the matter
deserueth, but seing with wisshing we can not haue
one nowe worthie, whiche so worthie a thinge can
worthilie praise, and although I had rather haue
anie other to do it than my selfe, yet my selfe rather
then no other. I wil not fail to saye in it what I can
wherin if I saye litle, laye that of my litle habilitie,
not of the matter it selfe whiche deserueth no lyttle
thinge to be sayde of it.
            
            
               PHI.
               If it deserue no little
thinge to be sayd of it Toxophile, I maruell howe

                  
                     •
                  t chaunceth than, that no man hitherto, hath written
any thinge of it: wherin you must graunte me,
that eyther the matter is noughte, vnworthye, and
barren to be written vppon, or els some men are to
blame, whiche both loue it and vse it, and yet could
neuer finde in theyr heart, to saye one good woorde
of it, seinge that very triflinge matters hath not lacked
great learned men to sette them out, as gnattes
and nuttes, & many other mo like thinges, wherfore
eyther you maye honestlie laye verie great faut vpō
men bycause they neuer yet praysed it, or els I may
iustlie take awaye no litle thinge from shooting, bycause
it neuer yet deserued it.
            
            
               TOX.
               Trulye herein
Philologe, you take not so muche from it, as you
giue to it. For great and commodious thynges are
neuer greatlie praysed, not bycause they be not worthie,
but bicause their excellencie nedeth no man hys
prayse, hauinge all theyr cōmendation of them selfe
not borowed of other men his lippes, which rather
prayse them selfe, in spekynge much of a litle thynge
than that matter whiche they entreat vpon. Great
& good thinges be not praysed. For who euer praysed
Hercules (sayeth the Greke prouerbe) And that
no man hitherto hath written any booke of shoting
the fault is not to be layed in the thyng whiche was
worthie to be written vpon, but of men which were
negligent in doyng it, and this was the cause therof
as I suppose. Men
                     •
                  e that vsed shootyng moste
and knewe it best, were not learned: men that were
lerned, vsed litle shooting, and were ignorant in the
nature of the thynge, and so fewe menne hath bene

that hithetto were able to wryte vpon it. Yet howe
longe shotyng hath continued, what common wealthes
hath moste vsed it, howe honeste a thynge it is
for all men, what kynde of liuing so euer they folow
what pleasure and profit cōmeth of it, both in peace
and warre, all maner of tongues & writers, Hebrue,
Greke and Latine, hath so plentifullie spoken of it,
as of fewe other thinges like. So what shooting is
howe many kindes there is of it, what goodnesse is
ioyned with it, is tolde: onelye howe it is to be learned
and brought to a perfectnesse amonges men, is
not toulde.
            
            
               PHI.
               Than Toxophile, if it be so as you
do saye, let vs go forwarde and examin howe plentifullie
this is done that you speke, and firste of the
inuention of it, than what honestie & profit is in the
vse of it, bothe for warre & peace, more than in other
pastimes, laste of all howe it ought to be learned amonges
men for the encrease of it, whiche thinge if
you do, not onelye I nowe for youre cōmunication
but many other mo, when they shall knowe of it, for
your labour, & shotyng it selfe also (if it coulde speke)
for your kyndnesse, wyll can you very moche thanke
            
            
               TOXOPH.
               What good thynges mē speake of shoting
& what good thinges shooting bringes to men
as my wit & knowlege will serue me, gladly shall I
say my mind. But how the thing is to be learned I
will surely leue to some other which bothe for greater
experience in it, & also for their lerninge, can set it
out better than I.
            
            
               PHI.
               Well as for that I knowe
both what you can do in shooting by experience, & y•
you cā also speke well ynough of shooting, for youre

learning, but go on with the first part. And I do not
doubt, but what my desyre, what your loue toward
it, the honestie of shoting, the profite that may come
therby to many other, shall get the seconde parte out
of you at the last.
            
            
               TOXOPH.
               Of the first finders out of shoting, di
                  
                     •
                  ers 
men diuerslye doo wryte.Clandianus in histri. Claudiane the poete
sayth that nature gaue example of shotyng first, by
the Porpentine, whiche doth shote his prickes, and
will hitte any thinge that fightes with it: whereby
men learned afterwarde to immitate the same in findyng
out both bowe and shaftes.Plin. 7. 56. Plinie referreth it
to Schythes the sonne of Iupiter. Better and more
noble wryters bringe shoting from a more noble inuentour:
as Plato,In sympo. Calimachus,In hym. and Galene from
Apollo.Apol
                        •
                     . Yet longe afore those dayes do we reade in
the bible of shotinge expreslye.Gen. 21. And also if we shall
beleue Nicholas de Lyra,Nic. de lyra. Lamech killed Cain with
a shafte. So this great continuaunce of shoting doth
not a lytle praise shotinge: nor that neither doth not
a litle set it oute, that it is referred to thinuention of
Apollo,Galen in e
                        •
                     
                     hor. ad bon
                        ••
                      art
                        ••
                     . for the which poynt shoting is highlye praised
of Galene: where he sayth, y• mean craftes befirst
foūd out by men or beastes, as weauing by a spider,
and suche other: but high and cōmendable sciences
by goddes, as shotinge and musicke by Apollo. And
thus shotynge for the necessitie of it vsed in Adams
dayes, for the noblenesse of it referred to Apollo,
hath not ben onelie cōmended in all tunges and writers,
but also had in greate price, both in the best cō
                  mune
wealthes in warre tyme for the defēce of their

& lawes for it,
                     
                        •
                     crod. I clio. as the Persians which vnder Cyrus
cōquered in a maner all the worlde, had a lawe that
their children shulde learne thre thinges, onelie from
v. yeare oulde vnto .xx. to ryde an horse well, to shote
well,
                     
                        ••
                     o de stra
                     
                        ••
                     g. 20. to speake truthe alwayes & neuer lye. The Romaines
(as Leo themperour in his boke of sleightes
of warre telleth) had a lawe that euery man shoulde
vse shoting in peace tyme, while he was .xl. yere olde
and that euerye house shoulde haue a bowe, and .xl.
shaftes ready for all nedes, the omittinge of whiche
lawe (sayth Leo) amonges the youthe, hath ben the
onely occasion why the Romaynes lost a great dele
of their empire. But more of this I wil speake whē
I come to the profite of shoting in warre. If I shuld
rehearse the statutes made of noble princes of Englande
in parliamentes for the settyng forwarde of
shoting, through this realme, and specially that acte
made for shoting the thyrde yere of the reygne of our
moost drad soueraygne lorde king Henry the .viii. I
could be very long. But these fewe exāples specially
of so great men & noble cōmon wealthes, shall stand
in stede of many.
            
            
               PHI.
               That suche princes and suche
cōmune welthes haue moche regarded shoting, you
haue well declared. But why shotinge ought so of it
selfe to be regarded, you haue scarcelye yet proued.
            
            
               TOX.
               Examples I graunt out of histories do shew
a thing to be so, not proue a thing why it shuld be so
Yet this I suppose, y• neither great mens qualities
being cōmēdable be without great authoritie, for other
men honestly to folow them: nor yet those great
learned men that wrote suche thinges, lacke good

ceasō iustly at al tymes for any other to approue thē.
Princes beinge children oughte to be brought vp in
shoting: both bycause it is an exercise moost holsom,
and also a pastyme moost honest: wherin labour prepareth
the body to hardnesse, the minde to couragiousnesse,
sufferyng neither the one to be marde with
tendernesse, nor yet the other to be hurte with ydlenesse:
as we reade how Sardanapalus and suche other
were, bycause they were not brought vp wt outwarde
honest payneful pastymes to be men: but cockerde
vp with inwarde noughtie ydle wantonnesse
to be women. For how fit labour is for al youth, Iupiter
or els Minos amonges them of Grece,Ci
                        •
                     . 2. 
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     . Qu. and Lycurgus
amonges the Lacedemonians, do shewe by
their lawes, which neuer ordeyned any thing for y•
bringyng vp of youth that was not ioyned with labour.
And the labour which is in shoting of al other
is best, both bycause it encreaseth strength, and preserueth
health moost, beinge not vehement, but moderate,
not ouerlaying any one part with werysomnesse,
but softly exercisynge euery parte with equalnesse,
as the armes and breastes with drawinge, the
other parties with going, being not so paynfull for
the labour as pleasaunt for the pastyme, which exercise
by the iudgement of the best physicions, is most
alowable.Gal. 2. de san. tu
                        ••
                     d. By shoting also is the mynde honestly exercised
where a mā alwaies desireth to be best (which
is a worde of honestie) and that by the same waye,
that vertue it selfe doeth, couetinge to come nighest
a moost perfite ende or meane standing betwixte .ii.
extremes, eschewinge shorte, or gone, or eithersyde

wide,Ari
                        ••
                      .1. de morib. for the which causes Aristotle him selfe sayth
that shoting and vertue be very like. Moreouer that
shoting of all other is the moost honest pastyme, and
hath leest occasion to noughtinesse ioyned with it .ii.
thinges very playnelye do proue, which be as a man
wolde saye, the tutours and ouerseers to shotinge:
Daye light and open place where euerye man doeth
come, the maynteyners and kepers of shoting, from
all vnhonest doing. If shotinge faulte at any tyme, it
hydes it not, it lurkes not in corners and huddermother:
but openly accuseth & bewrayeth it selfe, which
is the nexte waye to amendement, as wyse men do
saye. And these thinges I suppose be signes, not of
noughtinesse, for any man to disalowe it: but rather
verye playne tokens of honestie, for euerye man to
prayse it.
               The vse of shotinge also in greate mennes chyldren
shall greatlye encrease the loue aud vse of shotinge
in all the residue of youth. For meane mennes
myndes loue to be lyke greate menne, as Plato and
Isocrates do saye.Iso. in ni
                        •
                     . And that euerye bodye shoulde
learne to shote when they be yonge, defence of the cō
                  mune
wealth, doth require whē they be olde, which
thing can not be done mightelye when they be men,
excepte they learne it perfitelye when they be boyes.
And therfore shotinge of all pastymes is moost fitte
to be vsed in childhode: bycause it is an imitation of
moost ernest thinges to be done in manhode.
               Wherfore, shoting is fitte for great mens children,
both bycause it strengthneth the body with holsome
labour, and pleaseth the mynde with honest pastime

and also encourageth all other youth ernestlye to folowe
the same. And these reasons (as I suppose)
stirred vp both great men to bring vp their chyldren
in shotinge, and also noble commune wealthes so
straytelye to commaunde shoting. Therfore seinge
Princes moued by honest occasions, hath in al commune
wealthes vsed shotynge, I suppose there is
none other degree of men, neither lowe nor hye, learned
nor leude, yonge nor oulde
            
            
               PHIL.
               You shal nede 
wade no further in this matter Toxophile, but if you
can proue me that scholers and men gyuen to learning
maye honestlie vse shoting, I wyll soone graūt
you that all other sortes of men maye not onelye lelullie,
but ought of dutie to vse it. But I thinke you
can not proue but that all these examples of shotinge
brought from so longe a tyme, vsed of so noble princes,
confirmed by so wyse mennes lawes and iudgementes,
are sette afore temporall men, onelye to followe
them: whereby they may the better and strōglyer
defende the commune wealth withall. And nothing
belongeth to scholers and learned men, which
haue an other parte of the commune wealth, quiete
and peaceable put to their cure and charge, whose
ende as it is diuerse frō the other, so there is no one
waye that leadeth to them both.
            
            
               TOXO.
               I graunte
Philologe, that scholers and lay men haue diuerse offices
and charges in the cōmune wealth, whiche requires
diuerse brīging vp in their youth, if they shal
do them as they ought to do in their age. Yet as temporall
men of necessitie are compelled to take somewhat
of learning to do their office the better withal:

So scholers maye the boldlyer borowe somewhat
of laye mennes pastimes, to maynteyne their health
in studie withall. And surelie of al other thinges shoting
is necessary for both sortes to learne. Whiche
thing, when it hath ben euermore vsed in Englande
how moche good it hath done, both oulde men and
Chronicles doo tell: and also our enemies can beare
vs recorde. For if it be true (as I haue hearde saye)
when the kynge of Englande hath ben in Fraunce,
the preestes at home bicause they were archers, haue
ben able to ouerthrowe all Scotlande. Agayne ther
is an other thing which aboue all other doeth moue
me, not onely to loue shotinge, to prayse shoting, to
exhorte all other to shotinge, but also to vse shoting
my selfe: and that is our kyng his moost royall purpose
and wyll, whiche in all his statutes generallye
doth commaunde men, and with his owne mouthe
moost gentlie doeth exhortemen, and by his greate
gyftes and rewardes, greatly doth encourage men,
and with his moost princelie example very oft doth
prouoke all other mē to the same. But here you wyll
come in wt tēporal man and scholer: I tell you plainlye,
scholer or vnscholer, yea if I were .xx. scholers,
I wolde thinke it were my dutie, bothe with exhortinge
men to shote, and also with shoting my selfe to
helpe to set forwarde that thing which the kinge his
wisdome, and his counsell, so greatlye laboureth to
go forwarde: whiche thinge surelye they do, bycause
they knowe it to be in warre, the defence and wal of
our countrie, in peace, an exercise moost holsome for
the body, a pastime moost honest for the mynde, and

as I am able to proue my selfe, of al other moste fit
and agreable with learninge and learned men.
            
            
               PHI.
               If you can proue this thing so playnly, as you
speake it ernestly, thē wil I, not only thinke as you
do, but become a shooter and do as you do. But yet
beware I saye, lest you for the great loue you bear
towarde shootinge, blindlie iudge of shootinge. For
loue & al other to ernest affections be not for nought
paynted blinde. Take hede (I saye) least you prefer
shootinge afore other pastimes, as one Balbinus
through blinde affection, preferred his louer before
all other wemen, although she were deformed with
a polypus in her nose. And although shooting maye
be mete sometyme for some scholers, and so forthe:
yet the fittest alwayes is to be preferred. Therefore
if you will nedes graunt scholers pastime and recre
ation of their mindes, let them vse (as many of thē
doth) Musyke, and playing on instrumentes, thinges
moste semely for all scholers, and moste regarded
alwayes of Apollo & the Muses.
            
            
               TOX.
               Euen
as I can not deny, but some musike is fit for lerning
so I trust you can not chose but graunt, that shoting
is fit also, as Calimachꝰ doth signifie in this verse.
Both merie songes and good shoting deliteth Appoll
                        •
                     .Cal. hym. 
                           •
                        
                     
                  
               
               Butas concerning whether of them is moste fit
for learning, and scholers to vse, you may saye what 
you will for your pleasure, this I am sure that Plato
and Aristotle bothe, in their bookes entreatinge
of the cōmon welthe, where they shew howe youthe
shoulde be brought vp in .ii
                     •
                  i. thinges, in redinge, in

writing, in excercise of bodye, and singing, do make
mention of Musicke & all kindes of it, wherin they
both agre, that Musike vsed amonges the Lydians
is verie ill for yong men, which be studentes for vertue
and learning, for a certain nice, softe, and smoth
swetnesse of it, whiche woulde rather entice thē to
noughtines, than stirre them to honestie.
               An other kinde of Musicke inuented by the Dorians,
they both wonderfully prayse, alowing it to be
verie fyt for the studie of vertue & learning, because
of a manlye, rough and stoute sounde in it, whyche
shulde encourage yong stomakes, to attempte manlye
matters. Nowe whether these balades & roundes,
these galiardes, pauanes and daunces, so nicelye
fingered, so swetely tuned, be lyker the Musike
of the Lydians or the Dorians, you that be learned
iudge. And what so euer ye iudge, this I am sure, yt
lutes, harpes, all maner of pypes, barbitons, sambukes,
with other instrumentes euery one, whyche
standeth by fine and quicke fingeringe be cōdemned
of Aristotle,Aristot. pol. 
                        •
                     . 6. as not to be brought in & vsed amonge
them, whiche studie for learning and vertue.
               Pallas when she had inuented a pipe, cast it away,
not so muche sayeth Aristotle, because it deformed
her face, but muche rather bycause suche an Instrumente
belonged nothing to learnynge. Howe suche
Instrumentes agree with learning, the goodlye agrement
betwixt Apollo god of learninge, & Marsyas
the Satyr, defender of pipinge, doth well declare,
where Marsyas had his skine quite pulled ouer
his head for his labour.
               
                  
Muche musike marreth mennes maners, sayth Galen,
although some man wil saye that it doth not so,
but rather recreateth and maketh quycke a mannes
mynde, yet me thinke by reason it doth as hony doth
to a mannes stomacke, whiche at the first receyueth
it well, but afterwarde it maketh it vnfit, to abyde
any good stronge norishynge meate, 
                     •
                  rels anye holsome
sharp
                     •
                   and quicke drinke. And euen so in a maner
these Instrumentes make a mannes wit so softe
and smoothe so tender and quaisie, that they be lesse
able to brooke, stronge and tough studie. Wittes be
not sharpened, but rather dulled, and made blunte,
wyth suche sweete softenesse, euen as good edges
be blonter, whiche menne whette vpon softe chalke
stones.
               And these thinges to be true, not onely Plato Aristotle
& Galen, proue by authoritie of reason,Herodotus in Clio. but
also Herodotus and other writers, shewe by playne
and euident example, as that of Cyrus, whiche after
he had ouercome the Lydians, and taken their
kinge Cresus prisoner, yet after by the meane of one
Pactyas a verye headie manne amonges the Lydians,
they rebelled agaynste Cyrus agayne, then
Cyrus had by an by, broughte them to vtter destruction,
yf Cresus being in good fauour with Cyrus
had not hertelie desyred him, not to reuenge Pactyas
faulte, in shedynge theyr blood. But if he would
folowe his counsell, he myght brynge to passe, that
they shoulde neuer more rebel agaynst hym, And y•
was this, to make them weare lōg kyrtils, to y• foot
lyke woomen, and that euerye one of them shoulde

haue a harpe or a lute, and learne to playe and sing
whyche thinge if you do sayth Cresus (as he dyd in
dede) you shall se them quickelye of men, made women.
And thus lutinge and singinge take awaye a
manlye stomake, whiche shulde enter & pearce depe
and harde studye.
               Euen suche an other storie doeth Nymphodorus an
olde greke Historiographer write,Nymphod. of one Sesostris
kinge of Egypte, whiche storie because it is somewhat
longe, and very lyke in al poyntes to the other
and also you do well ynoughe remembre it, seynge
you read it so late in Sophoclis commentaries,Comment. in Antig. I
wyll nowe passe ouer. Therefore eyther Aristotle
and Plato knowe notwhat was good and euyll
for learninge and vertue, and the example of wyse
histories be vainlie set afore vs or els the minstrelsie
of lutes, pipes, harpes, and all other that standeth
by suche nice, fine, minikin finge
                     •
                  ing (suche as
the mooste parte of scholers whom I knowe vse, if
they vse any) is farre more fitte for the womannishn
                     •
                  sse
of it to dwell in the courte among ladies, than
for any great thing in it, whiche shoulde helpe good
and sad studie, to abide in the vniuersitie amonges
scholers. But perhaps you knowe some great good
nesse of suche musicke and suche instrumentes, wher
vnto Plato & Aristotle his brayne coulde neuer attayne,
and therfore I will saye no more agaynst it.
            
            
               PHI.
               well Toxophile is it not ynoughe for you to
rayle vpon Musike, excepte you mocke me to? but
to say the truth I neuer thought my selfe these kindes
of musicke fit for learninge, but that whyche I

sayde was rather to proue you, than to defende the
matter. But yet as I woulde haue this sorte of musicke
decaye amonge scholers, euen so do I wysshe
from the bottome of my heart, that the laudable custome
of Englande to teache chyldren their plainesong
and priksong, were not so decayed throughout
all the realme as it is. Whiche thing howe profitable
it was for all sortes of men, those knewe not so
wel than whiche had it most, as they do nowe whiche
lacke it moste. And therfore it is true that Teucer
sayeth in Sophocles.

                     Seldome at all good thinges be knowen how good to be
                     Before a man suche thinges do misse out of his handes.Sophocle
                              •
                            in A
                              •
                           ac
                              •
                           .
                     
                  
               
               That milke is no fitter nor more naturall for the
bringing vp of children than musike is, both Gallen
proueth by authoritie, and dayly vse teacheth by experience.
For euen the litle babes lacking the vse of
reason, are scarse so well stilled in suckyng theyr mo
thers pap, as in hearynge theyr mother syng.
               Agayne how fit youth is made, by learning to sing,
for grammar and other sciences, bothe we dayly do
see, and Plutarch learnedly doth proue, and Plato
wiselie did alowe, whiche receyued no scholer in to
his schole, that had not learned his songe before.
               The godlie vse of praysing God, by singinge in the
churche, nedeth not my prayse, seing it is so praysed
through al the scripture, therfore nowe I wil speke
nothing of it, rather than I shuld speke to litle of it.
               Besyde al these commodities, truly .ii. degrees of
mēne, which haue the highest offices vnder the king

in all this realme, shal greatly lacke the vse of Singinge,
preachers and lawiers, bycause they shalnot
without this, be able to rule their brestes, for euery
purpose. For where is no distinction in telling glad
thinges and fearfull thinges, gentilnes & cruelnes,
softenes and vehement
                     •
                  es, and suche lyke matters,
there can be no great perswasion.
               For the hearers, as Tullie sayeth, be muche affectioned,
as he is that speaketh. At his wordes be they
drawen, yf he stande still in one facion, their mindes
stande still with hym: If he thundre, they quake: If
he chyde, they feare: If he cōplayne, they sory with
hym: and finally, where a matter is spoken, with an
apte voyce, for euerye affection, the hearers for the
moste parte, are moued as the speaker woulde. But
when a man is alwaye in one tune, lyke an Humble
bee, or els nowe vp in the top of the churche, nowe
downe that no manne knoweth where to haue hym:
or piping lyke a reede, or roring lyke a bull, as some
lawyers do, whiche thinke they do best, when they
crye lowdest, these shall neuer greatly mooue, as I
haue knowen many wel learned, haue done, bicause
theyr voyce was not stayed afore, with learnyng to
synge. For all voyces, great and small, base & shril,
weke or softe, may be holpen and brought to a good
poynt, by learnyng to synge.
               Whether this be true or not, they that stand mooste
in nede, can tell best, whereof some I haue knowen,
whiche, because they learned not to sing, whan they
were boyes, were fayne to take peyne in it, whā they
were men. If any man shulde heare me Toxophile,

that woulde thinke I did but fondly, to suppose that
a voice were so necessarie to be loked vpon, I would
aske him if he thought not nature a foole, for makīg
such goodly instrumentes in a man, for wel vttring
his woordes, orels if the .ii. noble orators Demosthenes
& Cicero were not fooles, wherof the one dyd
not onelie learne to sing of a man: But also was not
ashamed to learne howe he shoulde vtter his soūdes
aptly of a dogge, the other setteth oute no poynte of
thetorike, so full
                     •
                  e in all his bookes, as howe a man
shoulde order his voyce for all kynde of matters.
               Therfore seinge men by speaking, differ and be better
than beastes, by speakyng wel, better than other
men, and that singing is an helpe towarde the same
as dayly experiēce doth teache, example of wysemē
doth alowe, authoritie of learned men doth approue
wherwith the foundacion of youth in all good common
wealthes alwayes hath bene tempe
                     •
                  ed: surelye
if I were one of the parliament house, I woulde
not fayle, to put vp a bill for the amendment of this
thynge, but because I am lyke to be none this yeare,
I wil speake no more of it, at this time.
            
            
               TOX.
               It
were pitie truly Philologe, that the thinge shoulde be
neglected, but I trust it is not as you say.
            
            
               PHI.
               The
thing is to true, for of them that come daylye to y• vniuersitie,
where one hath learned to singe, vi. hath
not. But nowe to oure shotinge Toxophile agayne,
wherin I suppose you can not say so muche for shotyng
to be 
                     •
                  itte for learninge, as you haue spoken agaynste
Musicke for the same.
               Therfore as concerning Musike, I can be content

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
to graunt you your mynde: But as for shooting, surely
I suppose that you can not perswade me, by no
meanes, that a man can be earnest in it, and earnest
at his booke to: but rather I thynke that a man wt
a bowe on his backe, and shaftes vnder hys girdell,
is more fit to wayte vpon Robin Hoode, than vpon
Apollo or the Muses.
            
            
               TOX.
               Ouer ernest shooting
surely I will not ouer ernestlye defende, for I euer
thought shooting shoulde be a wayter vpon lerning
not a mastres ouer learning. Yet this I maruell not
a litle at, that ye thinke a man with a bowe on hys
backe is more like Robin Hoode seruaūt, than Apollose,
seing that Apollo him selfe in Alcestis of Euripides,
whiche tragidie you red openly not long ago,
in a maner glorieth saying this verse.
It is my wont alwaies my bowe with me to beare
               
               Therfore a learned man ought not to much to be
ashamed to beare that some tyme,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   whiche Apollo
god of lerning him selfe was not ashamed always
to beare. And bycause ye woulde haue a man wayt
vpon the Muses, and not at all medle with shotyng
I maruell that you do not remembre howe that the
ix. muses their selfe as sone as they were borne, wer
put to norse to a lady called Euphemis whiche had
a son named E
                     •
                  otus with whome the nine Muses
for his excellent shootinge, kepte euer more companie
wall, & vsed dayly to shoote togither in y• mount
Pernasus: and at last it chaūced this Erotus to dye,
whose death the Muses lamented greatly, and fell
all vpon theyr knees afore Iupiter theyr father, and
at theyr request, E
                     •
                  otus for shooting with the Muses

in earth was made a signe, and called Sagittarius
in heauen. Therfore you se, that if Apollo and
the Muses either were examples in dede, or onelye
fayned of wise men to be examples of learninge, honest
shoting maye well ynough be companion with
honest studie.
            
            
               PHI.
               Well Toxophile, if you haue no
stronger defence of shotinge then Poetes, I feare yf
your companions which loue shotinge, hearde you,
they wolde thinke you made it but a triflyng and fabling
matter, rather then any other man that loueth
not shotinge coulde be persuaded by this reason to
loue it.
            
            
               TOXO.
               Euen as I am not so fonde but I
knowe that these be fables, so I am sure you be not
so ignoraunt, but you knowe what suche noble wittes
as the Poetes had, ment by such matters: which
oftentymes vnder the couering of a fable, do hyde &
wrappe in goodlie preceptes of philosophie, with the
true iudgement of thinges. Whiche to be true speciallye
in Homer and Euripides, Plato, Aristotle and
Galene playnelye do shewe: when through all their
workes (in a maner) they determine all cōtrouersies,
by these .ii. Poetes and suche lyke authorities. Therfore
if in this matter I seme to fable, and nothynge
proue, I am content you iudge so on me: seinge the
same iudgement shal condemne with me Plato, Aristotle,
and Galene, whom in that errour I am wel
content to folowe. If these oulde examples proue no
thing for shoting, what saye you to this▪ that the best
learned and sagest men in this Realme, whiche be
nowe alyue, both loue shoting and vse shoting, as the
best learned bisshoppes that be: amonges whome

                  Philologe▪
                   you your selfe knowe .iiii. or .v. which as in
all good learning, vertue and sagenesse they gyue other
men example what thing they shoulde do, euen
so by their shoting, they playnely shewe what honest
pastime, other mē giuē to learning, may honestly vse.
That ernest studie must be recreated with honest pastime
sufficientlye I haue proued afore, both by reason
and authoritie of the best learned men that euer
wrote. Then seing pastymes be lefull, the moost fittest
for learning, is to be sought for. A pastyme, saith
Aristotle,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   must be lyke a medicine. Medicines staude
by contraries, therfore the nature of studying considered,
the fittest pastyine shal soone appeare. In studie
euery parte of the body is ydle, which thing causeth
grosse and colde humours, to gather togyther &

                     •
                  ere scholers verye moche, the mynde is altogyther
bent and set on worke. A pastyme then must be had
where euery parte of the bodye must be laboured to
separate and lessen suche humours withal: the mind
must be vnbent, to gather & fetche againe his quicknesse
withall. Thus pastymes for the mynde onelye,
be nothing fit for studentes, bycause the body which
is moost hurte by studie, shulde take no profyte at all
thereat. This knewe Erasmus verye well, when he
was here in Cambrige: which when he had ben sore
at his boke (as Garret our bookebynder hath verye
ofte tolde me) for lacke of better exercise, wolde take
his horse, and ryde about the markette hill, and come
agayne. If a scholer shoulde vse bowles or tennies,
the laboure is to vehement and vuequall, whiche is
cōdempned of Galene: the example very ill for other

men, when by so manye actes they be made vnlawfull.
               Running, leaping, and coyting be to vile for scholers,
and so not fit by Aristotle his iudgement: walking
alone into the felde,Aristot. pol. 7. 17. hath no token of courage in
it, a pastyme lyke a simple man which is neither flesh
nor fisshe. Therfore if a man woulde haue a pastyme
holesome and equall for euerye parte of the bodye,
pleasaunt and full of courage for the mynde, not vile
and vnhoneste to gyue ill example to laye men, not
kepte in gardynes and corners, not lurkynge on the
nyght and in holes, but euermore in the face of men,
either to rebuke it when it doeth ill, or els to testifye
on it when it doth well: let him seke chefelye of all other
for shotynge.
            
            
               PHILOL.
               Suche comm
                     •
                  ne pastymes
as men commenlye do vse, I wyll not greatlye
allowe to be fit for scholers: seinge they maye vse
suche exercises verye well (I suppose) as Galene
him selfe doth allowe.
            
            
               TOXOPH.
               
                  Gal. de 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Those exercises I
remembre verye well, for I read them within these
two dayes, of the whiche, some be these: to runne vp
and downe an hyll, to clyme vp a longe powle, or a
tope, and there hange a while, to holde a man by his
armes and waue with his heeles, moche lyke the pastyme
that boyes vse in the churche whē their master
is awaye, to swinge and totter in a belrope: to make
a fiste, and stretche out both his armes, and so stande
lyke a roode. To go on a man his tiptoes, stretching
out thone of his armes forwarde, the other backewarde,
which if he blered out his tunge also, myght
be thought to dannce A
                     •
                  ticke verye properlye.
               
                  
To tūble ouer and ouer, to toppe ouer tayle: To set
backe to backe, and se who cā heaue an other his heles
highest, wi
                     •
                  h other moche like: whiche exercises
surelye muste nedes be naturall, bycause they be so
childisshe, and they may be also holesome for the body:
but surely as for pleasure to the minde or honestie
in the doinge of them, they be as lyke shotinge as
Yorke is foule Sutton. Therfore to loke on al pastymes
and exercises holsome for the bodye, pleasaunt
for the mynde, comlye for euery man to do, honest for
all other to loke on, profitable to be sette by of euerye
man, worthie to be rebuked of no man, fit for al ages
persōs and places, onely shoting shal appeare, wherin
all these commodities maye be founde.
            
            
               PHIL.
               To graunt Toxophile, that studentes may at
tymes conuenient vse shoting as moost holsome and
honest pastyme: yet to do as some do, to shote hourly
daylie, wekelye, and in a maner the hole yere, neither
I can prayse, nor any wyse man wyl alowe, nor you
your selfe can honestlye defende.
            
            
               TOXOPH.
               Surelye
Philologe, I am very glad to se you come to that
poynt that moost lieth in your stomake, and greueth
you and other so moche. But I truste after I haue
sayd my mynde in this matter, you shal cōfesse your
sel
                     •
                  fe that you do rebuke this thing more thā ye nede,
rather then you shal fynde that any man may spende
by anye possibilittie, more tyme in shotinge then he
ought. For first and formoost the hole tyme is deuyded
into .ii. partes, the daye and the night: whereof
the night maye be both occupyed in many honest businesses,
and also spent in moche vnthriftinesse, but in

no wise it can be applyed to shoting. And here you se
that halfe oure tyme, graunted to all other thinges
in a maner both good and ill, is at one swappe quite
taken awaye from shoting. Now let vs go forward,
and se how moche of halfe this tyme of ours is spēt
in shoting. The hole yere is deuided into .iiii. partes,
Spring tyme, Somer, faule of the leafe, and winter
wherof the whole winter, for the roughnesse of it, is
cleane taken away from shoting: except it be one day
amonges .xx. or one yeare amonges .xl. In Somer,
for the feruent heate, a man maye saye likewyse: except
it be somtyme agaynst night. Now then spring
tyme and faule of the leafe be those which we abuse
in shoting. But if we consider how mutable & chaungeable
the wether is in those seasons, and howe that
Aristotle him selfe sayth, that mooste parte of rayne
fauleth in these two tymes: we shall well perceyue,
that where a man wolde shote one daye, he shall be
fayne to leaue of .iiii. Now when tyme it selfe graū
                  teth
vs but a litle space to shote in, lette vs se if shoting
be not hindered amonges all kyndes of men as
moche otherwayes. First, yong childrē vse not, yong
men for feare of them whom they be vnder tomoche
dare not: sage men for other greater businesses, wyll
not: aged men for lacke of strengthe, can not: Ryche
men for couetousnesse sake, care not: poore men for
cost and charge, may not: masters for their housholde
keping, hede not: seruaūtes kept in by their maisters
very oft, shall not: craftes men for getting of their lyuing,
verye moche leysure haue not: and many there
be that oft beginnes, but for vnaptnesse proues not:

and moost of all, whiche when they be shoters gyue
it ouer and lyste not, so that generallye men euerye
where for one or other consideration moche shoting
vse not. Therfore these two thinges, straytenesse of
tyme, and euery man his trade of liuing, are the causes
that so fewe men shotes: as you maye se in this
greate towne, where as there be a thousande good
mens bodies, yet scarse .x. y• vseth any great shoting.
And those whome you se shote the moost, with how
many thinges are the drawen, or rather driuen, frō
shoting. For first, as it is many a yere or they begyn
to be greate shoters, euen so the greate heate of shotinge
is gone within a yere or two: as you knowe diuerse
Philologe your selfe, which were sometyme the
best shoters, and now they be the best studentes.
               If a man faule sycke, farewell shoting, maye fortune
as long as he lyueth. If he haue a wrentche, or haue
takē colde in his arme, he may hang vp his bowe (I
warraunt you) for one season. A litle blayne, a small
cutte, yea a silie poore worme in his finger, may kepe
him from shoting wel ynough. Breaking and ill luck
in bowes I wyll passe ouer, with an hūdred mo sere
thinges, whiche chaunceth euerye daye to them that
shote moost, wherof the leest of them may compell a
man to leaue shoting. And these thinges be so trewe
and euident, that it is impossible either for me craftelye
to fayne them, or els for you iustly to deny thē.
Thā seing how many hundred thinges are required
altogyther to giue a man leaue to shote, and any one
of thē denied, a mā can not shote: and seing euery one
of them maye chaunce, and doth chaunce euery day,

I meruayle anye wyse man wyll thynke it possible,
that any greate tyme can be spent in shoting at all.
            
            
               PHI.
               I
                     •
                   this be true that you saye Toxophile, and 
in very dede I can denye nothinge of it, I meruayle
greatly how it chaunceth, that those, whiche vse shoting
be so moche marked of men, and ofttymes blamed
for it, and y• in a maner as moche as those which
pleye at cardes and dise.Cardes and dyse. And I shal tell you what I
hearde spoken of the same matter. A man no shoter,
(not longe agoo) wolde defende playing at cardes &
dise, if it were honestly vsed, to be as honest a pastime
as youre shotinge: For he layed for him, that a man
might pleye for a litle at cardes and dyse, and also a
man might shote away all that euer he had. He sayd
a payre of cardes cost not past .ii.d. and that they neded
not so moche reparation as bowe and shaftes,
they wolde neuer hurte a man his hande, nor neuer
weare his gere. A man shulde neuer slee a man with
shoting▪ wyde at the cardes. In wete and drye, hote
and coulde, they woulde neuer forsake a man, he shewed
what great varietie there is in them for euerye
mans capacitie: if one game were harde, he myght
easelye learne an other: if a man haue a good game,
there is greate pleasure in it: if he haue an ill game,
the payne is shorte, for he maye soone gyue it ouer,
and hope for a better: with many other mo reasons.
               But at the last he concluded, that betwixt playinge
and shoting, well vsed or ill vsed, there was no dif
                     •
                  erence:
but that there was lesse coste and trouble, and
a greate deale more pleasure in playing, then in shotynge.
            
            
               
               TOX.
               I can not deny, but shoting (as all other good
thinges) may be abused. And good thinges vngoodlye
vsed, are not good, sayeth an honorable bishoppe
in an ernester matter then this is: yet we muste beware
that we laye not mennes faultes vpō the thing
which is not worthie, for so nothing shulde be good.
And as for shoting, it is blamed and marked of men
for that thing (as I sayde before) which shoulde be
rather a token of honestie to prayse it, then any signe
of noughtinesse to disalowe it, and that is bycause it
is in euerye man his sight, it seketh no corners, it hydeth
it not: if there be neuer so litle fault in it, euerye
man seeth it, it accuseth it selfe. For one houre spente
in shoting is more sene and further talked of, then .xx
nightes spent in dysing, euen as a litle white stone is
sene amonges .iii. hundred blacke. Of those that
blame shotinge and shoters, I wyll saye nomore at
this tyme but this, that beside that they stoppe and
hinder shoting, which the kinges grace wolde haue
forwarde, they be not moche vnlyke in this poynt to
Wyl
                     •
                   Somer the king his foole, which smiteth him
that standeth alwayes before his face, be he neuer so
worshipfull a man, and neuer greatly lokes for him
whiche lurkes behinde an other man his backe, that
hurte him in dede.
               But to him that compared gamning with shoting
somewhat wyll I answere, and bycause he went afore
me in a cōparison: and comparisons sayth learned
men, make playne matters: I wyl surely folowe
him in the same.In 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ▪
                   Honest thynges (sayeth Plato) be
knowen from vnhonest thinges, by this difference,

vnhonestie hath euer present pleasure in it, hauing
neyther good pretence going before, nor yet any profit
folowing after: which saying descrybeth general
lye, bothe the nature of shooting & gamning whiche
is good, and which is euyl, verie well.
               Gamninge hath ioyned with it, a vayne presente
pleasure, but there foloweth, losse of name, losse of
goodes, and winning of an hundred gowtie, dropsy
diseases, as euery man can tell. Shoting is a peynfull
pastime, wherof foloweth health of body quiknes
of witte, habilitie to defende oure countrye, as
our enemies can beare recorde.
               Loth I am to compare these thinges togyther, &
yet I do it not bicause there is any comparison at al
betwixte them, but therby a man shal se how good
the one is, howe euil the other. For I thinke ther is
scarse so muche contrariousnes, betwixte hotte and
colde, vertue & vice, as is betwixte these .ii. thinges:
For what so euer is in the one, the cleane contrarye
is in the other, as shall playnlye appere, if we consider,
bothe theyr beginnynges, theyr encreasynges,
theyr fructes, and theyr endes, whiche I wyl soone
rydde ouer.
               ¶The fyrste brynger in to the worlde of shootynge,Pla. 
                        〈…〉
                     .
was Apollo, whiche for his wisdome, & great commodities,
brought amonges men by him, was estemed
worthie, to be counted as a God in heauen.
               Disyng surely is a bastarde borne, because it is said
to haue .ii. fathers, and yet bothe noughte: The one
was an vngracious God, called Theuth,
                  Plato In Phedro. which for
his noughtines, came neuer in other goddes companyes,

and therfore Homer doth despise onse to nam
                     •
                  
him, in all his workes. The other father was a Lydian
borne, whiche people for suche gamnes,
                     
                        ••
                     rodot. in 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   and other
vuthriftines, as boowlyng and hauntyng of tauernes,
haue bene euer had in most vile reputation,
in all storyes and writers.
               The Fosterer vp of shoting is Labour, y• companion
of vertue, the maynteyner of honestie, the encreaser
of health and welthinesse, whiche admytteth nothinge
in a maner in to his companye, that standeth
not, with vertue and honestie, and therefore sayeth
the oulde poete Epicharmus very pretelye in Xenophon,
                     
                        •
                     en. de dict. 
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . So
                        •
                     .
that God selleth vertue, & all other good thinges
to men for labour. The Nource of dise and cardes,
is werisom Ydlenesse, enemy of vertue, y• drowner
of yo
                     •
                  the, that tarieth in it, and as Chauser doth
saye verie well in the Parsons tale, the gree
                     •
                  e path
waye to hel, hauinge this thing appropriat vnto it,
that where as other vices haue some cloke of honestie,
onely ydlenes can neyther do wel, nor yet thinke
wel. Agayne, shooting hath two Tutours to looke
vpon it, out of whose companie, shooting neuer stirreth,
the one called Daye light, y• other Open place,
whyche .ii. keepe shooting from euyl companye, and
suffers it not to haue to much swinge, but euermore
kepes it vnder awe, that it darre do nothyng in the
open face of the worlde, but that which is good and
honest. Lykewyse, dysinge and cardynge, haue .ii.
Tutours, the one named Solitariousenes, whyche
lurketh in holes and corners, the other called Night
an vngratiouse couer of noughtynesse, whyche two

thynges be very In
                     ••
                  pers & receyuers of all noughtynesse
and noughtye thinges, and therto they be in
a maner, ordeyned by Nature. For on the nighte
tyme & in corners, Spirites and theues, rattes and
mise, toodes and oules, nyghtecrowes and poulcattes,
foxes and foumerdes, with all other vermine,
and noysome beastes, vse mooste styrringe, when in
the daye lyght, and in open places whiche be ordeyned
of God for honeste thynges▪ they darre not ones
come, whiche thinge Euripides noted verye well,
sayenge.
I
                        •
                      thinges the night, good thinges the daye doth haunt & vse.
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
               
               Companions of shoting, be prouidens, good heed
giuing, true meatinge, honest comparison, whyche
thinges agree with vertue very well. Ca
                     •
                  dinge and
dysinge, haue a sorte of good felowes also, goynge
commonly in theyr companye, as blynde Fortune,
stumbling chaunce, spittle lucke, false dealyng crafty
conueyaunce, braynlesse brawlynge, false forswerynge,
whiche good feloes wyll sone take a man by
the ste
                     •
                  e, and cause him take his Inne, some wt beggerye,
some wyth goute & dropsie, some with thefte
and robbery, & seldome they wyl leaue a man before
he comme eyther to hangyng or els somme other extreme
misery. To make an ende, howe shoting by al
mennes lawes hath bene alowed, cardyng and dysing
by al mennes iudgementes condemned, I nede
not shewe the matter is so playne.
               Therfore, whan the Lydians shall inuent better

thinges than Apollo, when slothe and ydlenes shall
encrease vertue more than labour, whan the nyghte
and lurking corners, giueth lesse occasion to vnthriftinesse,
than lyght daye and opennes, than shal shotynge
and suche gamninge, be in sūme comparison
lyke. Yet euen as I do not shewe all the goodnes,
whiche is in shotynge, whan I proue it standeth by
the same thinges that vertue it selfe standeth by, as
brought in by God, or Godlyelyke men, fostered by
labour, committed to the sauegarde of lyght and opennes,
accompanied with prouision and diligens,
loued and allowed by euery good mannes sentence,
Euen lykewyse do I not open halfe the noughtines
whiche is in cardyng & dising, whan I shewe howe
they are borne of a desperate mother, norished in ydlenes,
encresed by licence of nyght and corners, accompanied
wyth Fortune, chaunce, deceyte, & craftines:
condemned and banished, by all lawes & iudgementes.
               For if I woulde enter, to descrybe the monstruousenes
of it, I shoulde rather wander in it, it is so
brode, than haue any readye passage to the ende of
the matter: whose horriblenes is so large, that it passed
the eloquence of oure Englyshe Homer, to compasse
it: yet because I euer thought hys sayinges to
haue as muche authoritie, as eyther Sophocles or
Euripides in Greke, therfore gladly do I remembre
these verses of hys.
               
                  
                     Hasardry is Very mother of lesinges,
                     And of deceyte, and cursed sweringes,
                     
                        
Blasphem
                           •
                        e of Chist, manslaughter, and vvaste also,
                     Of catel of tyme, of other thynges mo.
                  
               
               ¶Mother of lesinges) trulye it maye well be called
so, if a man consydre howe manye wayes, and how
many thinges, he loseth thereby, for firste he loseth
his goodes, he loseth his tyme, he loseth quycknes
of wyt, and all good lust to other thinges, he loseth
honest companye, he loseth his good name and estimation,
and at laste, yf he leaue it not, loseth God,
& heauen and all: and in stede of these thinges winneth
at length, eyther hangyng or hell.
               ¶And of deceyte) I trowe if I shoulde not lye, there
is not halfe so muche crafte vsed in no one thinge in
the worlde, as in this cursed thynge. What false
dise vse they? as dise stopped with quicksiluer and
heares, dise of a vauntage, flattes, gourdes to chop
and chaunge whan they lyste, to lette the trewe dise
fall vnder the table, & so take vp the false, and if they
be true dise, what shyfte wil they make to set y• one
of them with slyding, with cogging, with foysting,
with coytinge as they call it. Howe wyll they vse
these shiftes, whan they get a playne man that can
no skyll of them? Howe will they go about, yf they
perceyue an honest man haue money, which list not
playe, to prouoke him to playe? They wyl seke his
company, they wil let hym paye nought, yea and as
I hearde a man ones saye that he dyd, they wil send
for hym to some house, & spend perchaunce, a crown
on him, and at last wyll one begin to saye: what my
masters, what shall we do? shall euerye man playe

his .xii.d. whyles an apple coste in the fyre, and than
we wyll drinke & departe: Naye wyl an other 
                     •
                  aye,
as false as he, you can not leaue whan you begyn,
and therfore I wyll not playe: but yet yf you wyll
gage, that euery man as he hath lost his .xii.d. shall
sit downe, I am content, for surely I woulde wine
no mannes money here, but euen as much as wolde
paye for my supper. Than speketh the thyrde, to the
honest man that thought not to playe, what wyll
                     •
                  
you playe your .xii. pence if he excuse hym, tush man
wyll the other saye, sticke not in honest company for
xii.d. I wyll beare your halfe, and here is my mony
               Nowe al this is to make him to beginne, for they
knowe if he be ones in, and be a looser, y• he wyl not
sticke at his .xii.d. but hopeth euer to gette it agayne,
whiles perhaps, he loose all. Than euery one of thē
setteth his shiftes abroche, some wt false dise, some
wyth settynge of dyse, some with hauinge outelandishe
syluer coynes guylded, to put away at a tyme
for good gold. Than yf ther come a thing in controuersie,
muste you be iudged by the table, and than
farewell the honest man hys parte, for he is borne
downe on euerye syde.
               Nowe sir, besyde all these thinges they haue certayne
termes, as a man woulde saye, appropriate to
to theyr playing: wherby they wyl drawe a mannes
money, but paye none, whiche they cal barres, that
surely he that knoweth them not, maye soone be debarred
of all that euer he hath, afore he lerne them.
Yf a playne man lose, as he shall do euer, or els it is
a wonder, than the game is so deuilysh, that he can

neuer leaue: For vayn hope (which hope sayth Euripides,
destroyeth many a man and Citie) dryueth
hym on so farre,In supp
                        ••
                     . that he can neuer retourne backe,
vntyl he be so lyght, that he nede feare no theues by
the waye. Nowe if a simple man happen onse in his
lyfe, to win of suche players, than will they eyther
entreate him to kepe them company whyles he hath
lost all agayne, or els they will vse the moste dyuelyshe
fashion of all, For one of the players that standeth
nexte him, shall haue a payre of false dise, and
cast them out vpon the bourde, the honest man shall
take them & cast them, as he did the other, the thirde
shall espye them to be false dise, and shall crye oute,
har
                     •
                  e, wyth all the othes vnder God, that he hath
falselye wonne theyr moneye, and than there is nothynge
but houlde thy throte from my dagger, than
euery man layeth hande on the simple man, and taketh
all theyr moneye from him, and his owne also,
thinking him selfe wel, that he scapeth wt his lyfe.
               
                  Cursed sweryng, blasphemie of Christe) These halfe
verses Chaucer in an other place, more at large doth
well set out, and verye liuely expresse, sayinge.
               
                  
                     Ey by goddes precious hert and his nayles
                     And by the blood of Christe, that is in Hales,
                     Seuen is my chaunce, and thine is sinke and treye,
                     Ey goddes armes, if thou falsly playe,
                     This dagger shall thorough thine herte go
                     This frute commeth of the 
                           •
                        eched boones two
                           •
                        
                     
                     Fors
                           •
                        eringe, Ire, falsnes and Homicide. &c,
                  
               
               
                  
Thoughe these verses be very ernestlie 
                     〈…〉
                  
yet they do not halfe so grisely sette out the hor
                     •
                  blenes
of blasphemy, which suche gamne
                     •
                  s vse, as it is
in dede, and as I haue hearde my selfe. For no man
can wryte a thing so earnestlye, as whan it is spokē
wyth 
                     •
                  esture, as learned men you knowe do saye.
               Howe will you thinke that suche furiousenes wyth
woode countenaunces, and brenning eyes, with staringe
and bragging, with heart redie to leape out of
the 
                     •
                  elly for dwelling, can be expressed y• tenth part,
to the vttermost. Two men I herd my selfe, whose
sayinges be far more grisely, than Chaucers verses
One, whan he had lost his moneye, sware me God,
from top to toe with, one breath, that he had lost al
his money for lacke of sweringe: The other, losyng
his money, and heaping othes vpon othes, one in a
nothers necke, moost horrible & not spekeable, was
rebuked of an honest man whiche stode, by for so do
doynge, he by and by starynge him in the face, and
clappyng his fiste with all his moneye he had, vpon
the boorde, sware me by the flesshe of God, that yf
sweryng woulde helpe him but one ace, he woulde
not leue one pece of god vnsworne, neyther wythin
nor without. The remembraūce of this blasphemy
Philologe, doth make me quake at the hart, & therefore
I wyll speake no more of it.
               And so to conclude wyth suche gamnyng, I thynke
there is no vngraciousenes in all thys worlde, that
carieth a man so far from god, as thys faulte doth.
And yf there were anye so desperate a persone, that

woulde begynne his hell here in earth, I trowe he
shoulde not fynde hell more lyke hell it selfe, then the
lyfe of those men is which dayly haunt and vse suche
vngracious games.
            
            
               PHIL.
               You handle this gere in
dede: And I suppose if ye had ben a prentice at suche
games, you coulde not haue sayd more of them then
you haue done, and by lyke you haue had somwhat
to do with them.
            
            
               TOX.
               In dede, you may honestlye
gather that I hate them greatly, in that I speake agaynst
them: not that I haue vsed them greatlye, in
that I speake of them. For thynges be knowen dyuerse
wayes, as Socrates (you knowe) doeth proue
in Alcibiades. And if euery man shulde be that, that
he speaketh or wryteth vpō, then shulde Homer haue
bene the best capitayne, moost cowarde, hardye, hasty,
wyse and woode, sage and simple: And Terence
an ouldeman & a yong, an honest man and a bawde:
with suche lyke. Surelye euerye man ought to praye
to God dayly, to kepe them frō suche vnthriftynesse,
and speciallye all the youth of Englande: for what
youth doth begynne, a man wyll folowe cōmonlye,
euen to his dyinge daye: whiche thinge Adrastus in
Euripides pretelye doth expresse,Euripides in suppl
                        •
                     . sayinge.
               
                  
                     VVhat thing a man in tender age hath moost in vre
                     That same to death alwayes to kepe he shal be sure
                     Therfore in age who greatly longes good frute to mowe
                     In youth he must him selfe aplye good seede to sowe.
                  
               
               For the foundation of youth well sette (as Plato
doth saye) the whole bodye of the commune wealth
shal floryshe therafter. If the yonge tree grow
                     •
                   croked,

when it is oulde, a man shal rather breake it thā
streyght it. And I thinke there is no one thinge y• crokes
youth more then suche vnlefull games. Nor let
no mā say, if they be honestly vsed they do no harme.
For how can that pastyme whiche neither exerciseth
the bodye with any honest labour, nor yet the minde
with any honest thinking, haue any honestie ioyned
with it. Nor let noman assure hym selfe that he can
vse it honestlye: for if he stande therein, he maye fortune
haue a faule, the thing is more slipperye then he
knoweth of. A man maye (I graunt) syt on a brante
hyll syde, but if he gyue neuer so lytle forwarde, he
can not stoppe though he woulde neuer so fayne, but
he must nedes runne heedling, he knoweth not how
farre. What honest pretences, vayne pleasure layeth
dayly (as it were entisemētes or baytes, to pull men
forwarde withall) Homer doeth well shewe, by the
Sirenes, and Circes. And amonges all in that shyp
there was but one Ulysses, and yet he hadde done to
as the other dyd, yf a goddesse had not taught hym:
And so lykewyse I thinke, they be easye to numbre,
whiche passe by playing honestlye, excepte the grace
of God saue and kepe them. Therfore they that wyll
not go to farre in playing, let them folowe this coū
                  sell
of the Poete.
               
                   
                     ❧Stoppe the begynninges.
               
            
            
               PHILOLO.
               Well, or you go any further, I pray
you tell me this one thing: Doo ye speake agaynste
meane mennes playinge onelye, or agaynste greate

mennes playinge to, or put you anye difference betwixte
them?
            
            
               TOXOPHI.
               If I shulde excuse my
selfe herein, and saye that I spake of the one, and not
of the other, I feare leaste I shoulde as fondlye excuse
my selfe, as a certayne preacher dyd, whome I
hearde vpon a tyme speake agaynste manye abuses,
(as he sayde) and at last he spake agaynst candelles,
and then he fearynge, least some men woulde haue
bene angrye and offended with him, naye sayeth he,
you must take me as I meane: I speake not agaynst
greate candelles, but agaynst lytle candels, for they
be not all one (ꝙ he) I promyse you: And so euerye
man laughed him to scorne.
               In dede as for greate men, and greate mennes
matters, I lyft not greatlye to meddle. Yet this I
woulde wysshe that all great men in Englande had
red ouer diligentlye the Pardoners tale in Chaucer,
and there they shoulde perceyue and se, howe moche
suche games stande with theyr worshyppe, howe
great soeuer they be. What great men do, be it good
or yll, meane men communelye loue to followe, as
many learned men in many places do saye, and daylye
experience doth playnelye shewe, in costlye apparell
and other lyke matters.
               Therfore, seing that Lordes be lanternes to leade
the lyfe of meane men, by their example, eyther to
goodnesse or badnesse, to whether soeuer they liste:
and seinge also they haue libertie to lyste what they
wiil, I pray God they haue will to list that which is
good, and as for their playing, I wyll make an ende
with this saying of Chaucer.
               
                  
                     
                     Lordes might finde them other maner of playe
                     Honest ynough to driue the daye awaye.
                  
               
               But to be shorte, the best medicine for all sortes of
men both high and lowe, yonge and oulde, to put awaye
suche vnlawfull games is by the contrarye,
lykewyse as all physicions do alowe in physike. So
let youthe in steade of suche vnlefull games, whiche
stande by ydlenesse, by solitarinesse, and corners, by
night and darkenesse, by fortune & chaunce, by crafte
and subtiltie, vse suche pastimes as stand by labour:
vpon the daye light, in open syght of men, hauynge
suche an ende as is come to by cōning, rather then by
crafte: and so shulde vertue encrease, and vice decaye.
For contrarye pastimes, must nedes worke contrary
mindes in men, as all other contrary thinges doo.
               And thus we se Philologe, that shoting is not onely
the moost holesome exercise for the bodye, the moost
honest pastime for the mynde, and that for all sortes
of men: But also it is a moost redy medicine, to purge
the hole realme of suche pestilent gamning, wher wt
many tymes: it is sore troubled and ill at ease.
            
            
               PHI.
               The more honestie you haue proued by shoting
Toxophile, and the more you haue perswaded me to
loue it, so moche truly the soryer haue you made me
with this last sentence of yours, wherby you plainly
proue that a man maye not greatly vse it. For if shoting
be a medicine (as you saye that it is) it maye not
be vsed very oft, lest a man shuld hurt him selfe withall,
as medicines moche occupyed doo. For Aristotle
him selfe sayeth, that medicines be no meate to lyue
withall: and thus shoting by the same reason, maye

not
                     •••
                   moche occupyed.
            
            
               TOX.
               You playe your oulde
wontes Philologe, in dalying with other mens wittes,
not so moche to proue youre owne matter, as to
proue what other mē can say. But where you thinke
that I take awaye moche vse of shoting, in lykening
it to a medicine: bycause men vse not medicines euery
daye, for so shoulde their bodyes be hurt: I rather
proue daylye vse of shoting therby. For although Atistotle
sayeth that some medicines be no meate to
lyue withall,Hip
                        •
                     o. d
                        •
                      med. purg. whiche is true: yet Hippocrates sayth
that our daylye meates be medicines, to withstande
euyll withall, whiche is as true. For he maketh two
kyndes of medicines, one our meate that we vse dailye,
whiche purgeth softlye and slowlye, and in this
similitude maye shoting be called a medicine, wherwith
dayly a man maye purge and take a way al vnlefull
desyres to other vnlefull pastymes, as I proued
before. The other is a quicke purging medicine,
and seldomer to be occupyed, excepte the matter be
greater, and I coulde describe the nature of a quicke
medicine, which shoulde within a whyle purge and
plucke oute all the vnthriftie games in the Realme,
through which the commune wealth oftentymes is
sycke. For not onely good quicke wittes to learnyng
be thereby brought out of frame, and quite marred:
but also manlye wittes, either to attempt matters of
high courage in warre tyme, or els to atcheue matters
of weyght and wisdome in peace tyme, be made
therby very quaisie and faynt. For loke throughoute
all histories written in Greke, Latyne, or other language,
and you shal neuer finde that realme prosper

in the whiche s
                     •
                  che ydle pastymes are vsed. As concerning
the medicyne, although some wolde be miscontent,
if they hearde me meddle anye thynge with
it: Yet betwixte you and me here alone, I maye the
boldlyer saye my fantasie, and the rather bycause I
wyll onelye wysh for it, whiche standeth with honestie,
not determyne of it which belongeth to authoritie.
The medicine is this, that wolde to God and the
kynge, all these vnthriftie ydle pastymes, whiche be
very bugges, that the Psalme meaneth on, walking
on the nyght and in corners, were made felonye,Psalm. 
                        〈…〉
                     . and
some of that punyshment ordeyned for them, which
is appoynted for the forgers and falsifyers of the
kynges coyne. Which punishment is not by me now
inuented,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   but longe agoo, by the mooste noble oratour
Demosthenes: which meruayleth greatly that
deathe is appoynted for falsifyers and forgers of the
coyne, and not as greate punyshmente ordeyned for
them, whiche by theyr meanes forges and falsifyes
the commune wealthe. And I suppose that there is
no one thyng that chaungeth sooner the golden and
syluer wyttes of men into copperye & brassye wayes
then dising and suche vnlefull pastymes.
               And this quicke medicine I beleue wolde so throwlye
pourge them, that the daylye medicines, as shoting
and other pastymes ioyned with honest labour
shoulde easelyer withstande them.
            
            
               PHIL.
               The excellent
commodityes of shotynge in peace tyme, Toxophile,
you haue very wel and sufficiently declared.
               Wherby you haue so persuaded me, that God wyl
                  
                     •
                  ng
hereafter I wyll both loue it the better, and also

so vse it the ofter. For as moche as I can gather of
all this communication of ours, the tunge, the nose,
the handes and the feete be no fytter membres, or
instrumentes for the body of a man, then is shotinge
for the hole bodye of the realme. God hath made the
partes of men which be best and moost necessarye, to
serue, not for one purpose onelye, but for manye: as
the tungue for speaking and tasting, the nose forsmelling,
and also for auoyding of all excremētes, which
faule oute of the heed, the handes for receyuynge of
good thinges, and for puttyng of all harmefull thinges,
from the bodye. So shotinge is an exercyse of
healthe, a pastyme of honest pleasure, and suche one
also that stoppeth or auoydeth all noysome games
gathered and encreased by ill rule, as noughtye humours
be, whiche hurte and corrupte sore that parte
of the realme, wherin they do remayne.
               But now if you can shewe but halfe so moche profyte
in warre of shotynge, as you haue proued pleasure
in peace, then wyll I surelye iudge that there be
fewe thinges that haue so manifolde commodities,
and vses ioyned vnto them as it hath.
            
            
               TOX.
               The vpperhande in warre, nexte the goodnesse 
of God (of whome al victorie commeth,Mach. 1. 
                        •
                     . as scripture
sayth) standeth chefelye in thre thinges: in the
wysedome of the Prince, in the sleyghtes and pollicies
of the capitaynes, and in the strength and cherefull
forwardnesse of the souldyers. A Prince in his
herte must be full of mercy and peace, a vertue moost
pleasaunt to Christ, moost agreable to mans nature,
moost profytable for ryche and poore.
               
                  
For thā the riche man enioyeth with great pleasure
that which he hath: the poore may obtayne with his
labour, that which he lacketh. And although there is
nothing worse then war, wherof it taketh his name,
through the which great men be in daunger, meane
men without succoure, ryche men in feare, bycause
they haue somwhat: poore men in care, bycause they
haue nothing: And so euery man in thought and miserie:
Yet it is a ciuill medicine, wherewith a prince
maye from the bodye of his commune wealth, put of
that daunger whiche maye faule: or elles recouer agayne,
                     
                        •
                     d Ni
                        •
                     o.
whatsoeuer it hath lost. And therfore as Isocrates
doth saye, a prince must be a warriour in two
thinges, in conninge and knowledge of all sleyghtes
and feates of warre, and in hauing al necessarye habilimentes
belongyng to the same. Whiche matter
to entreate at large, were ouerlonge at this tyme to
declare, & ouermoche for my learning to perfourme.
               After the wisdome of the prince, are valiaunt capitaynes
moost necessary in warre, whose office and
dutye is to knowe all sleightes and pollicies for all
kyndes of warre, which they maye learne .ii. wayes,
either in daylye folowing and haunting the warres
or els bicause wisdome bought with strypes, is many
tymes ouercostlye: they maye bestowe sometyme
in Uegetius, which entreateth suche matters in Latin
metelye well, or rather in Poly
                     •
                  nus, and Leo the
Emperour, which setteth out al pollicies and duties
of capitaynes in the Greke tunge very excellentlye.
               But chefely I wolde wisshe (and if I were of authoritie)
I wolde counsel al the yong gentlemen of this

realme, neuer to lay out of theyr handes .ii. authors
Xenophon in Greke, and Caesar in Latyn, where in
they shulde folowe noble Scipio Africanus,D
                        •
                     . S
                        ••
                     . as Tullie
doeth saye: In whiche .ii. authours, besydes eloquence
a thing moste necessary of all other, for a captayne,
they shulde learne the hole course of warre,
whiche those .ii. noble menne dyd not more wyselye
wryte for other men to learne, than they dyd manfully
excercise in the fyelde, for other men to folowe.
               The strengthe of war lyeth in the souldier, whose

                     •
                  hyefe prayse and vertue,
is obedienceObedience. towarde his
captayne, sayth Plato.Plat. leg. 1
                        •
                     
                   And Xenophon being a gentyle
authour,Xen. Ages. moste christianlye doeth saye, euen by
these woordes, that that souldyer whiche firste serueth
god, & than obeyeth hys captayne, maye boldelie
with all courage, hope to ouerthrowe his enemy
Agayne, wtout obedience, neither valiant man, stout
horse,Xe
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     ipp
                        ••
                     
                   nor goodly harnes doth any good at al. which
obedience of y• souldier toward his captane, brought
the hole empyre of y• worlde, into the Romanes hā
                  des,
& whan it was brought, kepte it lenger, than euer
it was kept in any cōmon welth before or after.
               And this to be true,Plu
                        •
                     arch
                        ••
                     
                   Scipio Africanus, the moste
noble captayne that euer was amonge the Romaynes,
shewed very playnly, what tyme as he went in
to Afryke, to destroye Cartage. For he restinge hys
hooste by the waye in Sicilie, a daye or twoo, and
at a tyme standing with a great man of Sicilie, and
looking on his souldiers howe they excercised them
selues in kepyng of araye, and other feates, the gentleman
of Sicilie asked Scipio, wherein laye hys

chyefe hope to ouercome Cartage: He an swered, in
yonder feloes of myne, whom you se play: And why
sayth the other, bycause sayeth Scipio, that if I cō
                  maunded
them to runne in to the toppe of this high
castel, and cast them selues doune backeward vpon
these rockes, I am sure the woulde do it.
               Salust also doth write,Sal. 
                        •
                     . Cat. yt there were mo Romanes
put to death of theyr captaynes for setting on theyr
enemyes before they had licence, than were for running
away out of the fyelde, before they had foughten.
These two e
                     •
                  amples do proue, that amonges
the Romaynes, the obedience of the souldyer was
wonderfull great, and the seueritie of the Captaynes,
to se the same kepte wonderfull strayte. For
they wel perceyued that an hoste full of obedyence,
falleth as seldome into the handes of theyr enemies
as that bodye fawleth into Ieoperdye, the whiche
is ruled by reason. Reason and Rulers beynge lyke
in offyce, (for the one ruleth the body of man, the other
ruleth the bodye of the cōmon wealthe) ought
to be lyke of condicions, and oughte to be obeyed in
all maner of matters. Obedience is nourysshed by
feare and loue, Feare is kepte in by true iustice and equitie,
Loue is gotten by wisdome, ioyned wt liberalitie:
For where a souldyer seeth ryghteousenesse so
rule, that a man can neyther do wronge nor yet take
wronge, and that his capitayne for his wysedome,
can mayntayne hym, & for his liberalitie will maintayne
him, he must nedes both loue him & feare him,
of the whiche procedeth true & vnfayned obedience.
After this inwarde vertue, the nexte good poynt in

a souldier, is to haue and to handle his weapō wel,
whereof the one must be at the appoyntment of the
captayne, the other lyeth in the courage and exercise
of the souldier: yet of al weapōs the best is,In Her
                        •
                     . 
                        〈…〉
                     . as Euripides
doth say, wherwt with leest daūger of our self
we maye hurt our enemye moost. And that is (as I
suppose) artillarie. Artillarie now a dayes is taken
for .ii. thinges: Gunnes & Bowes, which how moch
they do in war, both dayly experience doeth teache,
and also Peter Nānius a learned man of Louayn,
in a certayne dialoge doth very well set out, wherin
this is most notable, that when he hath shewed excedyng
commodities of both, and some discōmodities
of gunnes, as infinite cost and charge, combersome
cariage: and yf they be greate, the vncertayne
leuelyng, the peryll of them that stand by them, the
esyer auoydyng by them that stande far of: & yf they
be lytle, the lesse both feare and ieoperdy is in them,
besyde all contrary wether and wynde, whiche hyndereth
them not a lytle: yet of all shotyng he can not
reherse one discommoditie.
            
            
               PHI.
               That I meruayle
greatly at, seing Nannius is so wel learned, & so excercised
in the authours of both the tūges: for I my
selfe do remembre, that shotyng in war is but smally
praysed, and that of diuers captaynes in dyuers
authors. For first in Euripides (whom you so highly
prayse) and very well, for Tullie thynketh euerye
verse in him to be an authoritie, what I praye you,
doth Lycus that ouercame Thebes, say as concernyng
shotyng? whose wordes as farre as I remembre,

                     •
                  e these, or not muche vnlyke.
               
                  
                     
                     VVhat prayse hath he at al, whiche neuer durst abide,
                     The dint of à speares poynt thrust against his side
                     Nor neuer bouldlie buckeler bare yet in his lefte hande
                     Face to face his enemies bront stiffelie to wythstande,Eurip. in 
                              •
                           er
                              •
                           . furent.
                     
                     But alwaye trusteth to a bowe and to a fethered sticke
                     Harnes euer most fit for him which to flie is quicke,
                     Bowe and shafte is Armoure metest for a cowarde
                     
                        
                           •
                        hich dare not ones abide the bronte of battel sharpe & harde.
                     But he a man of manhode most is by mine assent
                     VVhich with harte and corage boulde, fullie hath him bent,
                     His enemies looke in euery stoure stoutelie to a bide,
                     Face to face, and fote to fote, tide what maye be tide.
                  
               
               Agayne Teucer the best Archer amonges all the
Grecians,Sop
                        •
                      in 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   in Sophocles is called of Menelaus, a
boweman, & a shooter as in villaynie & reproche, to
be a thing of no price in warre. Moreouer Pandarꝰ the
best shooter in the worlde, whome Apollo hym
selfe taught to shoote, bothe he and his shotynge is
quyte contemned in Homer,Iliad 
                        •
                     
                   in so much that Homer
(which vnder a made fable doth alwayes hyde hys
iudgement of thinges) doeth make Pandarus him
selfe crye out of shooting, and cast his bowe awaye,
and take him to a speare, makynge a vowe that if euer
he came home, he woulde breake his shaftes, &
burne his bowe, lamentyng greatly, that he was so
fonde to leaue at home his horse and charyot wyth
other weapons, for the trust yt he had in his bowe.
Homer signifieng therby, that men shoulde leue shoting
out of warre, and take them to other wepons
more fitte and able for the same, and I trowe Pandarus
woordes be muche what after thys sorte.
               
                  
                     
                     Ill chaunce ill lucke me hyther broughte
                     Ill fortune me that daye befell,
                     VVhan first my bowe fro the pynne I roughte
                     For Hectors sake, the Grekes to quell.
                     But yf that God so for me shap
                     That home agayne I maye ones come,
                     Let me neuer inioye that hap,
                     Nor euer twyse looke on the sonne,
                     If bowe and shaftes I do not burne
                     VVhyche nowe so euel doth serue my turne.
                  
               
               But to let passe al Poetes,Xen. 
                        •
                     yri I
                        •
                     st. 6. what can be sorer said
agaynst any thing, than the iudgement of Cyrus is
agaynst shotynge, whiche doth cause his Persians
beyng the best shooters to laye awaye theyr bowes
and take them to sweardes and buckelers, speares
and dartes, and other lyke hande weapons. The
which thing Xenophon so wyse a philosopher, so experte
a captayne in warre hym selfe, woulde neuer
haue written, and specially in that booke wherin he
purposed to shewe,Epist. 1 a
                        •
                      Q Fra as Tullie sayeth in dede, not the
true historie, but the example of a perfite wise prince
and cōmon welthe, excepte that iudgement of chaū
                  gyng
Artillerie, in to other wepons, he had alwayes
thought best to be folowed, in all warre. Whose
counsell the Parthians dyd folowe,Plutarch M. 
                        〈…〉
                     . whan they chased
Antonie ouer the moūtaines of Media, whiche
being the best shoters of the worlde, lefte theyr bowes,
and toke them to speares and morispikes.
               And these 
                     •
                  ewe examples I trowe, of the best shooters,
do well proue that the best shotinge is not the

best thinge as you call it in warre.
            
            
               TOX.
               As concernynge
your first example, taken oute of Euripides,
I maruayle you wyl bring it for y• disprayse of shotyng,
seyng Euripides doth make those verses, not
bicause he thinketh thē true, but bicause he thinketh
them fit for the person that spake them. For in dede
his true iudgement of shoting, he doth expresse by &
by after in the oratiō of the noble captaine Amphytrio
agaynste Lycus, wherein a man maye doubte,
whether he hath more eloquentlye confuted Lycus
sayenge, or more worthelye sette oute the prayse of
shootynge. And as I am aduised, his woordes be
muche hereafter as I shall saye.
               
                  
                     Against the wittie gifte of shotinge in a bowe
                     Fonde and leude woordes thou leudlie doest out throwe,
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                        
                     
                     VVhiche, if thou wilte heare of me a woorde or twayne
                     Quicklie thou mayst learne howe fondlie thou doest blame,
                     Firste he that vvith his harneis him selfe doth vval about,
                     That scarce is lefte one hole through vvhich he may 
                           •
                        epe 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     Such bondmen to their harneis to fight are nothinge mete
                     But sonest of al other are troden vnder fete.
                     Yf he be stronge, his felovves faynt, in whome he
putteth his trust,
                     Soloded with his harneis must nedes lie in the dust,
                     Nor yet frō death he can not starte, if ones his weapon breke,
                     Howe stoute, howe strong, howe great, howe longe,
                     so euer be suche a 
                           •
                        reke.
                     
                        
But who so euer can handle a bowe
                     sturdie stiffe and stronge
                     VVherwith lyke hayle manie shaftes he shootes
                     into the thickest thronge:
                     This profite he takes, that standing a far
                     his enemie he maye spill
                     VVhan he and his full safe shall stande
                     out of all daunger and ill.
                     And this in war is wisedome moste, which
                     workes our enemies woo.
                     VVhan we shal be far from all feare
                     and ieoperdie of our foo.
                  
               
               Secondarily euen as I do not greatlye regarde
what Menelaus doth say in Sophocles to Teucer,
bycause he spake it bothe in anger, and also to hym
that he hated, euen so doo I remembre very well in
Homer, that when Hector and the Troians woulde
haue set fyre on the greke shippes,Iliad. 
                        •
                     . Teucer with his
bowe made them recule backe agayne, when Menelaus
tooke hym to his feete, and ranne awaye.
               Thirdlye as concerning Pandarus, Homer doth
not disprayse the noble gyfte of shotynge, but therby
euery man is taught, that whatsoeuer, and how
good soeuer a weapon a man doth vse in war,Ho
                        •
                     . Ili. 5. yf he
be hym selfe a couetouse wretche, a foole wythoute
counsell, a peacebreaker as Pandarus was, at last
he shall throughe the punishment of God fall into
his enemyes handes, as Pandarus dydde, whome
Diomedes throughe the helpe of Minerua miserablye
slue.
               
                  
And bycause you make mencion of Homer, & Troye
matters, what can be more prayse for anye thynge,
I praye you, than that is for shootyng, that Troye
coulde neuer be destroyed without the helpe of Hercules
shaftes, whiche thinge doeth signifie, that although
al the worlde were gathered in an army togyther,
yet without shotinge they can neuer come to
theyr purpose, as Ulysses in Sophocles very plainlye
doth saye vnto Pyrrhus, as concernyng Hercules
shaftes to be caried vnto Troye.
Nor you without them, nor without you they do ought.
                        
                           •
                        oph. phil.
                  
               
               Fourthlye where as Cyrus dyd chaunge parte of
his bowemen,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   wherof he had plentie, into other mē
of warre, wherof he lacked, I will not greatlye dispute
whether Cyrus did well in that poynt in those
dayes or no, bycause it is not playne in Xenophon
howe strong shooters the Persians were, what bowes
they had, what shaftes and heades they occupyed,
what kynde of warre theyr enemies vsed.
               But trulye as for the Parthians, it is playne,
in Plutarche,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   that in chaungyng theyr bowes in to
speares, they brought theyr selfe into vtter destruction.
For when they had chased the Romaynes many
a myle, through reason of theyr bowes, at the last
the Romaynes ashamed of their fleing, and remembrynge
theyr owide noblenesse and courage, ymagined
thys waye, that they woulde kneele downe on
theyr knees, and so couer all theyr body wyth theyr
shyldes and targattes, that the Parthians shaftes

might slyde ouer them, & do them no harme, whiche
thing when the Partiās perceyued, thinking that y•
Romaynes were forweryed wt laboure, watche, and
hūgre: they layed downe their bowes, and toke speres
in their handes, and so ranne vpon them: but the
Romaynes perceyuinge them without their bowes,
rose vp manfully, and slewe them euery mother son,
saue a fewe that saued them selues with runnyng awaye.
And herein our archers of Englande far passe
the Parthians, which for suche a purpose, whē they
shall come to hande strokes, hath euer redy, eyther at
his backe hangyng, or els in his next felowes hande
a leadē maule, or suche lyke weapon, to beate d
                     •
                  wne
his enemyes withall.
            
            
               PHI.
               Well Toxophi
                        ••
                     
                   
                  
                     ••
                  inge
that those examples whiche I had thought to haue
ben cleane agaynst shoting, you haue thus turned to
the hygh prayse of shotinge: and all this prayse that
you haue now sayd on it, is rather come in by me thā
sought for of you: let me heare I praye you nowe,
those examples whiche you haue marked of shotyng
your selfe: whereby you are, and thinke to persuade
other, y• shoting is so good in warre.
            
            
               TOX.
               Exāples
surely I haue marked very many: frō the begynning
of tyme had in memorie of wrytyng, throughout all
cōmune wealthes, & Empires of the worlde: wherof
the mooste parte I wyll passe ouer, lest I shoulde
be tediouse: yet some I wyll touche, bycause they be
notable, both for me to tell and you to heare.
               And bycause the storye of the Iewes is for the
tyme moost auncient, for the truthe mooste credible,
it shalbe moost fitte to begynne with them. And although

I knowe that God is the onely gyuer of victorie,
and not the weapons, for all strength and victorie
(sayth Iudas Machabeus) cōmeth from heauen:Ma
                        •
                     h 1. 3.
Yet surely strong weapons be the instrumentes
 wherwith god doth ouercome y• parte, which he wil
haue ouerthrowen. For God is well pleased wyth
wyse and wittie feates of warre: As in metinge of enemies,
for truse takyng, to haue priuilye in a bushment
harnest men layd for feare of treason, as Iudas
Machabeus dyd wyth Nicanor Demetrius capitayne:Ma
                        •
                     h. 2. 14.
And to haue engines of warre to beat downe
cities with all: and to haue scoutwatche amōges our
enemyes to knowe their counsayles, as the noble captaine
Ionathas brother to Iudas Machabeus did
in the countrie of Amathie against the mighty hoste
of Demetrius.Ma
                        •
                     h. 1. 12. And besyde al this, god is pleased to
haue goodly tombes for them which do noble feates
in warre, and to haue their ymages made, and also
their cote Armours to be set aboue theyr tombes, to
their perpetual laude and memorie:Ma
                        •
                     h. 1. 13. as the valiaunt
capitayne Symon, dyd cause to be made for his brethren
Iudas Machabeus and Ionathas, whē they
were slayne of the Gētiles. And thus of what authoritie
feates of warre, and strong weapons be, shortly
and playnelye we maye learne: But amonges the
Iewes as I began to tell, I am sure there was nothing
so occupyed, or dydde so moche good as bowes
dyd▪ insomoche that when the Iewes had any great
vpperhande ouer the Gentiles, the fyrste thinge alwayes
that the captayne dyd, was to exhort the people
to gyue all the thankes to God for the victorye, &

not to theyr bowes, wherwith they had slayne their
enemyes: as it is playne that the noble IosueIosu
                        •
                     . 13▪
                   dyd
after so many kynges thrust downe by hym.
               God, when he promyseth helpe to the Iewes, he
vseth no kynde of speakyng so moche as this, that he
wyll bende his bowe,Deut
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     . 3
                        •
                     . and die his shaftes in the Gentiles
blood: whereby it is manifest, that eyther God
wyll make the Iewes shoote stronge shotes to ouerthrowe
their enemies: or at leeste that shotinge is a
wōderful mightie thing in warre, whervnto y• hygh
power of God is lykened.Psal. 7.63. 75. Dauid in the Psalmes
calleth bowes the vessels of death, a bytter thinge, &
in an other place a myghty power, and other wayes
mo, which I wyll let passe, bycause euerye man readeth
them daylye: But yet one place of scripture I
must nedes remembre, which is more notable for y•
prayse of shoting, then any y• euer I red in any other
storie, and that is, when Saul was slayne of y• Philistians
being mightie bowmen,Regu
                        •
                     . 1. 31. and Ionathas his
sonne with him, that was so good a shoter, as y• scripture
sayth, that he neuer shot shafte in vayne, and y•
the kyngdome after Saules deathe came vnto Dauid:
the first statute &Regum. 2. 1. lawe thateuer Dauid made after
he was king, was this, that al y• children of Israel
shulde learne to shote, according to a lawe made many
a daye before y• tyme for the setting out of shoting
as it is written (sayeth Scripture) in libro lustorum,
whiche booke we haue not nowe: And thus we se
plainelye what greate vse of shoting, and what prouision
euen from the begynnynge of the worlde for
shotyng, was amonge the Iewes.
               
                  
The Ethiopians which inhabite the furthest part
South in the worlde, were wonderfull bowmen: insomoche
that when Cambyses king of Persie being
in Egipt,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   sent certayne ambassadours into Ethiope
to the kynge there, with many great gyftes: the king
of Ethiop perceyuinge them to be espyes, toke them
vp sharpely, and blamed Cambyses greatly for such
vniust enterprises: but after that he had princely entertayned
them, he sent for a bowe, and bente it and
drewe it, and then vnbent it agayne, and sayde vnto
the ambassadours, you shall cōmende me to Cambyses,
and gyue him this bowe fro me, and byd him
when any Persian can shote in this bowe, let him set
vpon the Ethiopians: In the meane whyle let hym
gyue thankes vnto God, whiche doth not put in the
Ethiopiās mynde to cōquere any other mans lande.
This bowe, when it came amonge the Persians, neuer
one man in suche an infinite host (as Herodotus
doth saye) could styrre the stryng, saue onely Smerdis
the brother of Cambyses, whiche styrred it two
fingers, and no further: for the which act Cambyses
had suche enuy at him, that he afterward slewe him:
as doth appeare in the storye.
               Sesostris the moost mightie king that euer was
in Egipt, ouercame a great parte of the worlde, and
that by archers: he subdued the Arabians, the Iues,
the Assyrians: he wēt farther into Scythia then any
man els: he ouercame Thracia, euen to the borders
of Germanie. And in token how he ouercame al men
he set vp in many places great ymages to his owne
lykenesse, hauynge in the one hande a bowe, in the other

a sharpe heeded shafte: that men myght knowe,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     .
what weapon his hooste vsed, in conqueryng so manye
people.
               Cyrus, counted as a god amonges the Gentyles,
for his noblenesse and felicitie in warre:Herod 
                        〈…〉
                     . yet at the last
when he set vpon the Massage
                     •
                  anes (which people
neuer went without their bowe nor their quiuer, nether
in warre nor peace) he and all his were slayne,
and that by shotyng, as appeareth in the storye.
               Polycrates the prince of Samos (a very litle yle)
was lorde ouer all the Greke sees, and withstode the
power of the Persians,Herod. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   onely by the helpe of a thousande
archers.
               The people of Scythia, of all other men loued,
and vsed moost shotyng, the hole rychesse and househoulde
stuffe of a man in Scythia, was a yocke of
oxen, a plough, his nagge and his dogge, his bowe
and his quiuer: which quiuer was couered with the
skynne of a man, which he toke or slewe fyrste in battayle.
The Scythians to be inuincible by reason of
their shotyng, the greate voyages of so manye noble
conquerours spent in that countrie in vayne, doeth
well proue: But specially that of Darius the myghtie
kyng of Persie, which when he had taryed there
a great space, and done no good, but had forweryed
his hoste with trauayle and hunger:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   At last the men
of Scythia sent an ambassadour with .iiii. gyftes: a
byrde, a frogge, a mouse, and .v. shaftes. Darius meruaylyng
at the straungenesse of the gyftes, asked the
messenger what they signifyed: the messenger answered,
that he had no further cōmaundement, but onely

to delyuer his gyftes, and retourne agayne with all
spede: but I am sure (sayeth he) you Persians for
your great wysdome, can soone bo
                     •
                  lt out what they
meane. When the messenger was gone, euery man
began to saye his verdite. Darius Iudgement was
this, that y• Scythians gaue ouer into the Persians
handes, their lyues, theyr hole power, both by lande
and see, signifyinge by the mouse the earthe, by the
frogge the water, in which they both liue, by y• birde
their lyues which lyue in the ayer, by the shaft their
hole power and Empire, that was maynteyned alwayes
by shotinge. Gobryas a noble and wyse captayne
amonges the Persians, was of a cleane cōtrary
minde, saying, nay not so, but the Sythiās meane
thus by their gyftes, that except we get vs wynges,
and flye into the ayer lyke birdes, or run into y• holes
of the earth lyke myse, or els lye lurkyng in fennes &
marisses lyke frogges, we shall neuer returne home
agayne, before we be vtterly vndone with their shaftes:
which sentence sanke so sore into their hertes, y•
Darius with all spede possible, brake vp his campe,
and gat hym selfe homewarde. Yet howe moche the
Persians them selues set by shotinge, wherby they
encreased their empire so moche, doth appeare by .iii
manifest reasons:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   first that they brought vppe theyr
youth in the schole of shoting, vnto .xx. yere of age, as
dyuerse noble Greke authours do saye.
               Agayne, bycause the noble kyng Darius thought
hym selfe to be praysed by nothyng so moch, as to be
counted a good shoter, as doth appeare by his sepulchre,
wherin he caused to be written this sentence:

                     
                     Darius the king lieth buried here
                     That in shoting and riding had neuer pere.S
                              •
                           rab. 15.
                     
                  
               
               Thirdlye the coyne of the Persians, both golde &
siluer had the Armes of Pers
                     •
                  e vpon it,Plutarch. in Ages
                        ••
                     a. as is customably
vsed in other realmes, and that was bow and
arowes: by the which feate they declared, how moch
they set by them.
               The Grecians also,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   but specially the noble Athenienses,
had all their strength lyinge in Artillarie: and
for y• purpose the citie of Athēs had a M. men which
were onely archers, in dayly wages, to watche and
kepe the citie frō al ieoperdie & sodein daūger: which
archers also shuld cary to prisō & warde any misdoer
at y• cōmaundemēt of the hygh officers, as playnlye
doth appeare in Plato.Plato in 
                        〈…〉
                     . And surely the bowmen of Athens
did wōderful feates in many battels, but specially
when Demosthenes the valiaūt captayne slue
and toke prisoners all the Lacedemonians besyde y•
citie of Pylos, where Nestor somtyme was lord: the
shaftes went so thicke that daye (sayth Thucydides)Thucydid. 
                        •
                     
                  
that no man could se theyr enemies. A Lacedemonian
taken prisoner, was asked of one at Athens, whether
they were stoute fellowes that were slayne or
no, of the Lacedemonians: he answered nothing els
but this: make moche of those shaftes of youres, for
they knowe neyther stoute nor vnstoute: meanynge
therby, that no man (though he were neuer so stout)
came in their walke, that escaped without death.
               Herodotus descrybing the mighty hoost of Xerxes
especially doth marke out,Herod. in Polym. what bowes and shaftes
they vsed, signifying yt therin lay their chefe strēgth

And at the same tyme Attossa, mother of Xerxes,
wyfe to Darius, and doughter of Cyrus,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   doeth enquire
(as Aeschylus sheweth in a Tragedie) of a certayne
messenger that came from Xerxes hoste, what
stronge and fearfull bowes the Grecians vsed: wherby
it is playne, that Artillarie 
                     〈…〉
                   thing, wherin
both Europe and Asia
                     •
                   those dayes trusted moost
vppon.
               The best parte of Alexanders hoste were archers
as playnelye doth appeare by Arianus, and other y•
wrote his life: and those so stronge archers, that they
onely,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   sundrye tymes ouercame their enemies, afore
any other neded to fyght: as was sene in the battayl
which Nearchus one of Alexanders capitaynes had
besyde the ryuer of Thomeron. And therfore as concerning
all these kyngdomes and cōmune wealthes,
I maye cōclude with this sentence of Plinie,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   whose
wordes be, as I suppose thus: If any man woulde
remēbre the Ethiopians, Egyptians, Arabians, the
men of Inde, of Scythia, so many people in y• east of
the Sarmatianes, and all the kyngdomes of the
Parthians, he shall well perceyue halfe the parte of
the worlde, to lyue in subiection, ouercome by the
myght and power of shotinge.
               In the commune wealth of Rome, which exceded
all other in vertue, noblenesse, and dominion litle mē
                  tion
is made of shoting, not bycause it was litle vsed
amonges them, but rather bycause it was bothe so
necessarye and cōmune, that it was thought a thing
not necessarye or requyred of anye man to be spoken
vpon, as if a man shoulde describe a greate feaste, he

woulde not ones name bread, although it be mooste
common and necessarye of all: but surely yf a feaste
beynge neuer so great, lacked bread, or had fewsty
and noughty bread, all the other daynties shulde be
vnsauery, and litle regarded, and than woulde men
talke of the commodity of bread, whan they lacke it,
that would not ones name it afore, whan they had
it: And euen so dyd the Romaynes as concernynge
shootyng. Seldome is shootinge named, and yet it
dyd the moste good in warre, as didde appere, verye
playnlye in that battell, whiche Scipio Aphricanꝰ
had with the Numantines in Spayne, whome he
coulde neuer ouercome, before he sette bowemen amonges
his horse men, by whose myght they were
clean vanquished.
               Agayne,Cor. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Tiberius fyghtynge with Armenius and
Inguiomerus princis of Germanie, had one wing
of archers on horseback, an other of archers on foot,
by whose might the Germanes were slayne downe
ryghte, and so scattered and beate oute of the feelde,
that the chase lasted .
                     •
                  . myles, the Germanes clame
vp in to trees for feare, but the Romanes dyd fetche
them downe with theyr shaftes as they had bē birdes,
in whyche battell the Romaynes loste fewe or
none, as dothe appeare in the historie.
               But as I began to saye, the Romaynes dyd not
so muche prayse the goodnesse of shootinge, whan
they had it, as they dyd lament the lacke of it, whan
they wanted it, as Leo the .v. the noble Emperour
doth playnly testifie in sundrie places in those bokes
whiche he wrote in Greke, of the sleyghtes and pol
                  
                     •
                  ies

of warre.
            
            
               PHIL.
               Surelie of that booke I haue
not heard before, and howe came you to the syghte
of it.
            
            
               TOX.
               The booke is rare trulie, but this laste
yeare when master Cheke translated the sayd booke
out of greke in to Latin, to y• kinges maiestie, he of
his gentlenesse, wolde haue me very ofte in hys chā
                  ber,
and for the familiaritie that I had wyth hym,
more than manye other, woulde suffer me to reade of
it, whan I woulde, the whiche thinge to do, surelye
I was very desirous and glad, because of the excellent
handelynge of all thynges, that euer he taketh
in hande. And verily Philologe, as ofte as I remembre
the departynge of that man from the vniuersitie,
(whiche thinge I do not seldome) so ofte do I well
perceyue our moste helpe and furtheraunce to learnynge,
to haue gon awaye with him. For by y• great
cōmoditie y• we toke in hearyng hym reade priuatly
in his chambre, all Homer, Sophocles, and Euripides,
Herodotus, Thurydides, Xenophon, Isocrates
and Plato, we feele the great discommoditie in not
hearynge of hym, Aristotle & Demosthenes, whiche
ii. authours with all diligence last of all he thought
to haue redde vnto vs. And when I consider howe
manye men he succoured with his helpe, & hys ayde
to abyde here for learninge, and howe all men were
prouoked and styrred vp, by his councell and daylye
example, howe they shulde come to learning, surely
I perceyue that sentence of Plato to be true, which
sayeth that there is nothyng better in any common
wealthe, than that there shoulde be alwayes one or
other, excellent passyng man, whose lyfe and vertue,

shoulde plucke forwarde the will, diligence, laboure
and hope of all other, that folowyng his footesteppes,
they myght comme to the same ende, wherevnto
labour, lerning & vertue, had cōueied him before.
The great hinderance of learning, in lackinge thys
man greatly I shulde lament, if this discōmoditie of
oures, were not ioyned with the cōmoditie & welth,
of y• hole realme, for which purpose, our noble king
full of wysedome hath called vp this excellent man
full of learnynge, to teache noble prince Edwarde,
an office ful of hope, comforte & solace to al true hertes
of England: For whome al England dayly doth
praye, yt he passing his Tutour in learnyng & knowledge,
folowynge his father in wisedome & felicitie,
accordyng to yt example which is set afore his eyes,
may so set out and mayntayne goddes worde to the
abolishment of al papistry, the confusion of al heresie,
that therby he feared of his ennemies, loued of al
his subiectes, maye bring to his own glory, immortal
fame & memorie, to this realme, welthe, honour
& felicitie, to true and vnfayned religion perpetuall
peace, concorde and vnitie.
               But to retourne to shootynge agayne, what Leo
sayeth of shootynge amonges the Romaynes, hys
woordes, be so muche for the prayse of shootynge,
and the booke also so rare to be gotten,Leo. 6. 5. that I learned
the places by harte, whyche be as I suppose, euen
thus. Fyrste in his sixte booke, as concerning
what harneys is best: Lette all the youth of Rome
be compelled to vse shootyng, eyther more or lesse, &
alwayes to bear theyr bowe & theyr quiuer aboute
with them, vntyll they be .xl. yeares oulde.
               
                  
For sithens shootynge was necglected and decayed
among the Romaynes, many a battayle and fyelde
hath ben loste.Lco. 11. 50. Agayne in the .11. booke and .50. chapiter,
(I call that by bookes and chapiters, whyche
the greke booke deuideth by chapiters and paragraphes)
Let your souldyers haue theyr weapons wel
appoynted and trimmed, but ab
                     •
                  ue all other thynges
regarde moste shootinge, and therfore lette men
when there is no warre, vse shootinge at home: For
the leauynge of, onely of shotynge, hath broughte in

                     •
                  uyne and decaye, the hole Empire of Rome. Afterwarde
he commaundeth agayne, hys capitayne by
these wordes:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . 11 Arme your hoste as I haue appoynted
you, but specially with bowe and arrowes plentie.
For shootynge is a thinge of muche myghte and
power in warre, and chyefely agaynst the Sarracenes
and Turkes, whiche people hath all their hope
of victorie in theyr bowe and shaftes: Besydes all
this, in an other place, he wryteth thus to his Captayne:
Artillerie is easie to be prepared, and in time
of great nede, a thing moste profitable, therfore we
straytlye commaunde you to make proclamation to
al men vnder our dominion, which be eyther in war
or peace, to all cities, borowes and townes, and fynally
to all maner of men,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   that euerye seare persone
haue bowe and shaftes of his owne, & euerye house
besyde this, to haue a standing bearyng bowe, and
xl. shaftes for all nedes, and that they excercise them
selues in holtes, hilles, and dales, playnes and wodes,
for all maner of chaunces in warre.
               Howe muche shooting was vsed among the olde

Romanes and what meanes noble captaynes and
Emperous made, to haue it encrease amonge them,
and what hurte came by the decaye of it, these wordes,
of Leo the emperour, which in a maner I haue
rehersed woorde for woorde, playnly doth declare.
And yet shotynge, although they set neuer so muche
by it, was neuer so good than, as it is nowe in Englande,
whiche thing to be true, is very probable, in
that Leo doth saye, that he woulde haue his souldiers
take of theyr arrowe heades,Leo. 7. 18. and one shote at an
other, for theyr excercise, whiche playe yf Englyshe
archers vsed, I thinke they shoulde fynde smal play
and lesse pleasure in it at all.
               The great vpperhande maynteyned alwayes in
warre by artillery, doeth appeare verye playnlye by
this reason also, that whan the spanyardes, franchmen,
and germanes, grekes, macedonians and egyptians,
eche contry vsing one singuler weapon, for
whyche they were greatelye feared in warre, as the
Spanyarde Lancea, the Francheman Gesa, the German
Framea, the Grecian Machera, the Macedonian
Sarissa, yet coulde they not escape, but be subiectes to
the empire of Rome, whan the Parthians hauyng
all theyr hope in artillerie, gaue no place to thē, but
ouercame the Romanes, ofter than the Romaynes
them, and kepte battel with them, many an hundred
yeare,Plutarch. 
                        •
                      M. 
                        •
                     rass. 
                        〈…〉
                      Spart. and s
                     •
                  ue the ryche Crassus and his son wyth
many a stoute Romayne more, with theyr bowes.
They draue Marcus Antonius ouer the hylles of
Media & Armenia, to his great shame and reproch.
They s
                     •
                  ue Iulianus Apostata, and Autoninus Caracalla,

they helde in perpetual pryson, y• most noble
emperour Ualerian in despite of all the Romaynes
and many other princes, whiche wrote for his delyueraunce,
as Bel solis called kynge of kynges, Ualerius
kynge of Cadusia, Arthabesdes kyng of Armenia,
and many other princes more, whom y• Parthians
by reason of theyr artillerie, regarded neuer
one whitte, and thus with the Romaynes, I maye
conclude, that the borders of theyr empyre were not
at the sunne rysinge and sunne settynge, as Tullye
sayeth: but so farre they went, as artillarie woulde
gyue them leaue. For I thinke all the grounde that
they had, eyther northewarde, farther than the borders
of Scythia, or Eastewarde, farther than the
borders of Parthia, a man myght haue boughte wt
a small deale of money, of whiche thynge surely sho
tyng was the cause.
               From the same contrie of Scythia the Gothians
Hunues,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      Dia
                        •
                     . and Wandalians came wyth the same we
pons of artillarie, as Paulus Diaconus doth saye,
& so berafte Rome of her empyre wyth fyre, spoyle,
& waste, so y• in suche a learned citie was lefte scarce
one man behynde, that had learnynge or leysoure to
leue in writinge to them whiche shoulde come after
howe so noble an Empyre, in so shorte a whyle, by
a rable of banyshed bondemen, wythoute all order
and pollicie, saue onelye theyr naturalle and daylye
excercise in artillarye, was broughte to suche thraldome
and ruine.
               
                  
After them the 
                     •
                  urkes hauing an other name,
but yet the same people,P. Mela. 
                        •
                     . borne in Scythia, brought
bp onely in artillarie, by the same weapon haue subdued
and beraft from the Christen men all Asia and
Aphrike (to speake vpon,) and the moost noble countries
of Europe, to the greate diminishing of Christe
his religion, to the great reproche of cowardyse of al
christianitie, a manifest token of gods high wrath &
displeasure ouer the synne of the worlde, but speciallye
amonges Christen men, which be on slepe made
drunke with the frutes of the flesh, as infidelitie, disobedience
to Goddes worde, and heresie, grudge, euel
wyll, stryfe, contention, and priuie enuye, coueytousnesse,
oppression, vnmercifulnesse, with innumerable
sortes of vnspeakeable daylye bawdrye: which
thinges surely, yf God hold not his holy hande ouer
vs, and plucke vs from them, wyl bryng vs to a more
Turkishnesse and more beastlye blynde barbarousnesse:
as callyng ill thinges good, and good thynges
ill, contemnyng of knowledge & learnynge, settynge
at nought, and hauyng for a fable, God and his high
prouidence, wyll bring vs (I say) to a more vngracious
Turkishnesse (if more Turkishnesse can be then
this) thā if the Turkes had sworne, to bring al Turkye
agaynst vs. For these frutes surelye must neades
sprynge of suche seede, and suche effect nedes folowe
of suche a cause: if reason, truthe, and God, be not altered,
but as they are wont to be. For surely no Turkyshe
power can ouerthrowe vs, if Turkysshe lyfe
do not cast vs downe before.
               
                  
If god were wyth vs, it buted 
                     •
                  ot the turke to be agaynst
vs, but our vnfaythful sinfull lyuyng, which
is the Turkes moder, and hath brought hym vp hitherto,
muste nedes turne god from vs, because syn
and he hath no felowshyp togither. If we banished
ill liuyng out of christendome, I am sure the Turke
shulde not onelye, not ouercome vs, but scarce haue
an hole to runne in to, in his owne countrye.
               But Christendome nowe I may tell you Philologe
is muche lyke a man that hath an ytche on him, and
lyeth drōke also in his bed, and though a thefe come
to the dore, and heaueth at it, to come in, and sleye
hym, yet he lyeth in his bed, hauinge more pleasure
to lye in a slumber and scratche him selfe wher it ytcheth
euen to the harde bone, than he hath redynes
to ryse vp lustelye, & dryue him awaye that woulde
robbe hym and sleye hym. But I truste Christe wyl
so lyghten and lyfte vp Christen mennes eyes, that
they shall not slepe to death, nor that the turke Christes
open enemy, shall euer boste that he hath quyte
ouerthrowen vs. But as I began to tell you, shootynge
is the chefe thinge, wherewith God suffereth
the turke to punysh our noughtie liuinge wyth all:

                     
                        〈…〉
                     . The youthe there is brought vp in shotyng, his priuie
garde for his own person, is bowmen, the might
of theyr shootynge is wel knowen of the Spanyardes,
whiche at the towne called Newecastell in Illirica,
were quyte slayne vp, of the turkes arrowes:
whan the Spanyardes had no vse of theyr gunnes,
by reason of the rayne. I
                     •
                  d nowe last of all, the emperour
his maiestie him selfe, at the Citie of Argier

in Aphricke had 
                     〈…〉
                   hooste sore handeled wyth the
Turkes arrowes, when his gonnes were quite dispatched
and stode him in no seruice, bycause of the
raine that fell, where as in suche a chaune of raine,
yf he had had bowmen, surelye there shoote myghte
peraduenture haue bene a litle hindred, but quite dispatched
and marde, it coulde neuer haue bene.
               But as for the Turkes I am werie to talke of them
partlye because I hate them, and partlye bycause I
am now affectioned euen as it were a man that had
bene longe wanderyng in straūge contries & would
fayne be at home to se howe well his owne frendes
prosper and leade theyr lyfe, and surely me thincke I
am verie merye at my harte to remember how I shal
finde at home in Englande amonges Englysh men,
partlye by hystories, of them that haue gone afore
vs, agayne by experience of thē whych we knowe, &
lyue with vs as greate noble feates of warre doone
by Artillarye, as euer was done at any tyme in any
other common welthe. And here I must nedes remē
                  ber
a certaine Frēchman called Textor, that writeth
a boke which he nameth Officina,Te
                        •
                     to
                        •
                     . wherin he weueth
vp many brokenended matters and settes out much
rifraffe, pelfery, trumpery, baggage & beggerie ware
clamparde vp of one that would seme to be fitter for
a shop in dede than to write any boke. And amonges
all other yll packed vp matters, he thrustes vp in a
hepe togyther all the good shoters that euer hathe
bene in the worlde as he saythe hymselfe, and yet I
trow Philologe that of all the examples whiche I
now by chaūce haue rehersed out of the best Authors

both in greke and latin, Textor 
                     〈…〉
                   but .ii. of them,
which .ii. surely yf they were to rekē agayne, I wold
not ones name thē, partly bycause they were noughtie
persons, and shoting somoche the worse, bycause
they loued it, as Domitian and Commodus the emperours:
partelye bycause Textor hath them in his
boke, on whome I loked on bychaunce in the bookebynders
shoppe, thinkynge of no suche matter. And
one thing I wyl say to you Philologe, that if I were
disposed to do it, and you hadde leysure to heare it, I
coulde soone do as Textor doth, and reken vp suche a
rable of shoters that be named here and there in poetes,
as wolde holde vs talkyng whyles tomorowe:
but my purpose was not to make mention of those
which were feyned of Poetes for theyr pleasure, but
of suche as were proued in histories for a truthe: but
why I bringe in Textor was this: At laste when he
hath rekened all shoters that he can,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   he sayeth thus,
Petrus Crinitus wryteth, that the Scottes whiche
dwell beyonde Englande be verye excellent shoters,
and the best bowmen in warre. This sentence whether
Crinitus wrote it more leudly of ignoraunce, or
Textor confirmeth it more piuyshlye of enuye, may
be called in question and doubte: but this surelye do
I knowe very well that Textor hath both red in Gagu
                     •
                  us
the Frenche hystorie, and also hath hearde
his father or graundfather taulke (except perchaūce
he was borne and bred in a Cloyster) after that sort
of the shotynge of Englisshe men, that Textor neded
not to haue gone so piuishlye beyonde Englande for
shoting, but myght very soone, euē in the first towne

of kent, haue founde suche plentie of shotinge, as is
not in al the realme of Scotland agayne. The Scottes
surely be good men of warre in theyr owne feate
as can be: but as for shotinge, they neyther can vse it
for any profyte, nor yet wil chalēge it for any prayse,
although master Textor of his gētlenesse wold gyue
it them. Textor neaded not to haue fylled vppe his
booke with suche lyes, if he hadde read the storye of
Scotlande,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . M
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   whiche Ioannes Maior doeth wryte:
wherein he myghte haue learned, that when Iames
Stewart fyrst kyng of that name, at the Parliamēt
holden at Saynt Iohnnes towne or Perthie, commaunded
vnder payne of a great forfyte, that euerye
Scotte shoulde learne to shote: yet neyther the loue
of theyr coūtrie, the feare of their enemies, the auoydyng
of punishment, nor the receyuinge of anye profyte
that myght come by it, coulde make them to be
good Archers: whiche be vnapte and vnfytte thervnto
by Gods prouidence and nature.
               Therfore the Scottes them selues proue Textor a
lyer, bothe with authoritie and also daily experience,
and by a certayne Prouerbe that they haue amonges
them in theyr cōmunication, wherby they gyue
the whole prayse of shotynge honestlye to Englysihe
men, saying thus: that euery Englysihe Archer beareth
vnder his gyrdle .xxiiii. Scottes.
               But to lette Textor and the Scottes go: yet one
thynge woulde I wysshe for the Scottes, and that
is this, that seinge one God, one faythe, one compasse
of the see, one lande and countrie, one tungue
in speakynge, one maner and trade in lyuynge,

lyke courage and stomake in war, lyke quicknesse of
witte to learning, hath made Englande and Scotlande
bothe one, they wolde suffre them no longer to
be two: but cleane gyueouer the Pope, which seketh
none other thinge (as many a noble and wyse Scottish
man doth knowe) but to fede vp dissention & parties
betwixt them & vs, procuryng that thynge to be
two, which God, nature, and reason, wold haue one.
               Howe profytable suche an attonement were for
Scotlande,Iohn 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   both Iohānes Maior, and Ector Boetius
which wrote the Scottes Chronicles do tell, &
also all the gentlemen of Scotlande with the poore
cōmunaltie, do wel knowe: So that there is nothing
that stoppeth this matter, saue onelye a fewe freers,
and suche lyke, whiche, with the dregges of our Englysh
Papi strie lurkyng now amonges them, study
nothing els but to brewe battell and stryfe betwixte
both the people: Wherby onely they hope to maynetayne
theyr Papisticall kyngdome, to the destrution
of the noble blood of Scotlande, that then they
maye with authoritie do that, whiche neither noble
man nor poore man in Scotlande yet doeth knowe.
And as for Scottishe men and Englishe men be not
enemyes by nature, but by custome: not by our good
wyll, but by theyr owne follye: whiche shoulde take
more honour in being coupled Englande, then we
shulde take profite in being ioyned to Scotlande.
               Wales being headye, and rebelling many yeares agaynst
vs, laye wylde, vntylled, vnhabited, without
lawe, iustice, ciuilitie and ordre: and then was amō
                  ges
them more stealing thā true dealing, more suretie

for them that studyed to be noughte, then quyetnesse
for them that laboured to be good: when nowe
thanked be God, and noble Englande, there is no
countrie better inhabited, more ciuile, more diligent
in honest craftes, to get bothe true and plentifull lyuynge
withall. And this felicitie (my mynde gyueth
me) within these few dayes shal chaūce also to Scotlande,
by the godly wysedome of oure mooste noble
Prince kynge Henrye the .viii. by whome God hath
wrought more wonderfull thynges then euer by any
prince before: as banishing the byshop of Rome and
herisie, bringyng to light god his worde and veritie,
establishing suche iustice and equitie, through euery
parte of this his realme, as neuer was sene afore.
               To suche a Prince of suche a wysdome, God hath
reserued this mooste noble attonement: wherby neither
we shalbe any more troubled, nor the S
                     •
                  ottes
with their best countries any more destroyed, nor y•
see, whiche God ordeyneth profytable for both, shall
from eyther be any more stopped: to the great quietnesse,
wealth & felicitie of all the people dwellynge in
this Ile, to the high renoume & prayse of our moost
noble kyng, to the feare of all maner of nacions that
owe ill wyll to either countrie, to the hygh pleasure
of God, which as he is one, and hateth al diuision, so
is he best of all pleased, to se thinges which be wyde
and amysse, brought to peace and attonement. But
Textor (I beshrowe him) hath almooste broughte
vs from our cōmunicatiō of shoting. Now sir by my
iudgement, the Artillarie of Englande farre excedeth
all other realmes: but yet one thing I doubt & longe

haue surely in that point doubted, whē, or by whom,
shotyng was first brought in to Englande, & for the
same purpose as I was ones in companye wyth syr
Thomas Eliot knight, which surelie for his lerning
in all kynde of knowlege bringeth much worshyp to
all the nobilite of Englande, I was so bould to aske
hym, yf he at any tyme, had marked any thing, as cō
                  cernynge
the bryngynge in of shootynge in to Englande:
he aunswered me gentlye agayne, that he had
a worcke in hand which he nameth, De rebus memora
bilibus Anglie, which I trust we shal se in print shortlye,
and for the accomplyshmente of that boke, he had
read & perused ouer many olde monumētes of Englande,
and in sekyng for that purpose, he marked this
of shootynge in an excedyng olde cronicle, the which
had no name, that what tyme as the Saxons came
first into this realme in kyng Uortigers dayes, whē
they had bene here a whyle and at last began to faull
out with the Brittons, they troubled and subdewed
the Brittons wyth nothynge so much, as with theyr
bowe and shaftes, whiche wepon beynge straunge &
not sene here before, was wonderfull terrible vnto
them, and this beginninge I can thynke verie well
to be true. But nowas concerning many exāples for
the prayse of English archers in warre, surely I wil
not belong in a matter y• no mā doubteth in, & those
few y• I wil name, shal either be proued by y• histories
of our enemies, or els done by men that now liue.
               Kynge Edward the thirde at the battel of Cressie
ageinst Philip y• Frēche king as 
                     •
                  aguinus the frēch
Historiographer plainlye doeth tell, slewe that daye

all the nobilite of Fraunce onlye wyth hys archers.
               Such lyke battel also fought y• noble black prince
Edward beside Poeters, where Iohn y• french king
 wt hys sonne & in a maner al y• peres of Fraūce were
taken beside .xxx.M. which that daye were 
                     •
                  layue, &
verie few Englyshe men, by reason of theyr bowes.
               Kynge Henrie the fifte a prince pereles and moste
vyctoriouse conqueroure of all that euer dyed yet in
this parte of the world, at the battel of Dagin court
with .vii.M. fyghtynge men, and yet many of them
sycke, beynge suche Archers as the Cronycle sayeth
that mooste parte of them drewe a yarde, slewe all
the Cheualrie of Fraunce to the nomber of. XL. M.
and moo, and lost not paste .xxvi. Englysshe men.
               The bloudye Ciuil warre of England betwixt
the house of Yorke and Lancaster, where shaftes
flewe of bothe sydes to the destruction of mannye a
yoman of Englande, whome foreine battell coulde
neuer haue subdewed bothe I wyll passe ouer for
the pyttyefulnesse of it, and yet maye we hyghelye
prayse GOD in the remembraunce of it, seynge he
of hys prouydence hathe so knytte to gether those .ii.
noble houses, with so noble and pleasunte a flowre.
               The excellent prince Thomas Hawarde nowe
Duke of Northfolk, for whose good prosperite wt al
his noble familie al English hertes dayly doth pray
 wt bowmē of England slew kyng Iamie wt many a
noble Scot euē brāt agēst Flodō hil, in which battel
y• stoute archers of Cheshire & Lanchasshire for one
day bestowed to y• death for their price & coūtry sake,
hath gotten immortall name and prayse for euer.
               
                  
The feare onely of Englysh Archers hathe done
more wonderfull thinges than euer I redde in anye
historye greke or latin, and moost wonderfull of all
now of late beside Carlile betwixt Eske and Leuen
at Sandy sikes, where the hoole nobilite of Scotlande
for fere of the Archers of Englonde (next the
stroke of God) as both Englysh men and Scotyshe
men that were present hath toulde me were drowened
and taken prisoners.
               Nor that noble acte also, whyche althoughe it be
almost iost by tyme, commeth not behynd in worthinesse
whyc
                     •
                  e my synguler good frende and Master
Sir William 
                     •
                  algraue and Sir George Somerset
dyd with a few Archers to y• number as it is sayd
of .xvi. at the Turne pike besyde Hāmes where they
turned with so fewe Archers, so many Frenchemen
to flight, and turned so many oute of theyr Iackes,
whych turne turned all fraunce to shame & reproche
and those .ii. noble Knightes to perpetuall prayse &
fame.
               And thus you se Philologe, in al contries Asia, Aphrike
and Europe, in Inde, Aethiop, Aegypt & Iurie,
Parthia, Persia, Grece, and Italie, Schythia,
Turkey, and Englande, from the begynninge of the
world euen to thys daye, that shotynge hath had the
cheife stroke in warre.
            
            
               PHI.
               These examples surelye
apte for the prayse of shotynge,I not feyned by poetes,
but proued by trewe histories, distinct by tyme
and order, hath delyted me excedyng muche, but yet
me thynke that all thys prayse belongeth to stronge
shootynge and drawynge of myghtye bowes not to

prickyng and nere shotinge, for which cause you and
many other bothe loue & vse shootyng.
            
            
               TOX.
               Euer
more Philologe you wyl haue some ouertwhart reson
to drawe forthe more communication wt all, but
neuerthelesse you shall perceaue if you wyl, that vse
of prickyng, and desyre of nere shootynge at home,
are the onelye causes of stronge shootyng in warre,
and why? for you se, that the strongest men, do not
drawe alwayes the strongest shoote, whiche thyng
prouethe that drawinge stronge, liethe not so muche
in the strength of man, as in the vse of shotyng. And
experience teacheth the same in other thynges, for
you shal se a weake smithe, whiche wyl wyth a lipe
and turnyng of his arme, take vp a barre of yron, y•
another man thrise as stronge, can not stirre. And a
strong man not vsed to shote, hath his armes breste
and shoulders, and other partes wherwith he shuld
drawe stronglye, one hindering and stoppinge an other,
euen as a dosen stronge horses not vsed to the
carte, lettes & troubles one another. And so the more
stronge man not vsed to shoote, shootes moost vnhā
                  sumlye,
but yet if a strong man with vse of shooting
coulde applye all the partes of hys bodye togyther
to theyr moost strengthe, than should he both drawe
stronger than other, and also shoote better than other.
But nowe a stronge man not vsed to shoote, at
a girde, can heue vp & plucke in sūder many a good
bowe, as wild horses at a brunte doth race & pluck
in peces many a stronge carte. And thus strong mē,
without vse, can do nothynge in shoting to any purpose,
neither in warre nor peace, but if they happen

to shoote, yet they haue done within a shoote or two
when a weake man that is vsed to shoote, shal serue
for all tymes and purposes, and shall shoote .x. shaftes,
agaynst the others .iiii. & drawe them vp to the
poynte, euerye tyme, and shoote them to the mooste
aduauntage, drawyng and withdrawing his shafte
when he list, marky 
                     •
                  ge at one man, yet let driuyng
at an other man: whiche thynges in a set battayle,
although a man, shal not alwayes vse, yet in bickerynges,
and at ouerthwarte meatinges, when fewe
archers be togyther, they do moste good of all.
               Agayne he that is not vsed to shoote, shall euermore
with vntowardnesse of houldynge his bowe, & nockynge
his shafte, not lookyng to his stryng betyme,
put his bowe alwayes in ieoperdy of breakynge, &
than he were better to be at home, moreouer he shal
shoote very fewe shaftes, and those full vnhandsum
lye, some not halfe drawen, some to hygh and some
to lowe, nor he can not driue a shoote at a tyme, nor
stoppe a shoote at a neede, but oute muste it, and verye
ofte to euel profe.
            
            
               PHI.
               And that is best I trow
in war, to let it go, and not to stoppe it.
            
            
               TOX.
               No
not so, but somtyme to houlde a shafte at the heade,
whyche if they be but few archers, doth more good
with the feare of it, than it shoulde do if it were shot,
with the stroke of it.
            
            
               PHI.
               That is a wonder to me,
y• the feare of a displeasure, shoulde do more harme
than the displeasure it selfe.
            
            
               TOX.
               Yes, ye knowe
that a man whiche fereth to be banyshed, out of hys
cuntrye, can neyther be mery, eate, drynke nor sleape
for feare, yet when he is banished in dede, he slepeth

and eateth, as well as any other. And many menne
doubtyng and fearyng whether they shoulde dye or
no, euen for verye feare of deathe, preuenteth them
selfe with a more bytter deathe then the other death
shoulde haue bene in deade. And thus feare is euer
worse than the thynge feared,
                     
                        •
                     irl. p
                        •
                     d. 3. as is pratelye proued,
by the communication of Cyrus and Tigranes, the
kynges sunne of Armenie, in Xenophou.
            
            
               PHI.
               I grante Toxophile, that vse of shotyng maketh
a man drawe strong, to shoote at most aduauntage,
to kepe his gere, whiche is no small thinge in
war, but yet me thinke, that the customable shoting
at home, speciallye at buttes and prickes, make nothynge
at all for stronge shooting which doch moste
good in war. Therfore I suppose yf men shulde vse
to goo into the feyldes, and learne to shote myghty
stronge shootes, and neuer care for any marke at al,
they shulde do muche better.
            
            
               TOX.
               The trouthe is,
that fashion muche vsed, would do muche good, but
this is to be feared, least that waye coulde not prouoke
men to vse muche shotyng, bycause ther shulde
be lytle pleasure in it. And that in shoting is beste, y•
prouoketh a man to vse shotinge moste: For muche
vse maketh men shoote, bothe strong & well, whiche
two thinges in shootinge, euery man doeth desyre.
And the chyefe mayntayner of vse, in any thyng, is
comparyson, and honeste contention. For whan a
manne stryueth to be better than an other, he wyll
gladly vse that thing, though it be neuer so paynful
wherein he woulde excell, whiche thynge Aristotle
verye pratelye doth note, sayenge.
               
                  
Where is comparison,
                     
                        •
                     rist. theto. 
                        〈…〉
                      Th
                        •
                     od. there is victorie: where is
victorie, there is pleasure: And where is pleasure,
no man careth what labour or payne he taketh, bycause
of the prayse, and pleasure, that he shal haue,
in doynge better than other men.
               Agayne,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . you knowe Hesiodus wryteth to hys brother
Perses, y• al craftes men, by contending one honestly
 wt an other, do encrease theyr cūnyng wt theyr
substance. And therfore in London, and other great
Cities, men of one crafte, moste commonly, dwelle
togyther, bycause in honest stryuyng togyther, who
shall do best, euery one maye waxe bothe cunninger
and rycher, so lykewyse in shootynge, to make matches
to assemble archers togyther, to contende who
shall shoote best, and winne the game, encreaseth y•
vse of shotynge wonderfully amonges men.
            
            
               PHI.
               Of Use you speake very much Toxophile but
I am sure in al other matters, Use can do nothing,
wythoute two other thinges be ioyned wyth it, one
is a natural Aptnesse to a thinge, the other is a true
waye or Knowlege, howe to do the thing, to which
ii. yf Use be ioyned, as thirde felowe, of them thre,
procedeth perfectnesse and excellencie: If a manne
lacke the first two, Aptnesse and Cunnyng, Use can
do lytle good, at all. For he yt woulde be an oratour
and is nothinge naturallye fitte for it, that is to saye
lacketh a good wytte and memorie, lacketh a good
voyce, countenaunce and body, and other suche like,
ye yf he had all these thinges, and knewe not what,
howe, where, when nor to whome he shulde speake,
surelye the vse of spekynge, woulde brynge out none

other frute but playne follye and bablyng, so y• Use
is the laste and the least necessarye, of all thre, yet no
thing can be done excellently without them al thre.
And therfore Toxophile I my selfe bicause I neuer
knewe, whether I was apte for shooting or no, nor
neuer knewe waye, howe I shulde learne to shoote
I haue not vsed to shoote: and so I thinke fiue hundred
more in Englande do besyde me. And surely yf
I knewe that I were apte, and y• you woulde teach
me howe to shoote, I woulde become an archer, and
the rather, bycause of the good communication, the
whiche I haue had with you this daye, of shotyng.
            
            
               TOX.
               Aptnesse, Knowlege, and Use, euen as you
saye, make all thinges perfecte. Aptnesse is the fyrst
and chyefest thinge, without whiche the other two
do no good at all. Knowledge doeth encrease al maner
of Aptnesse, bothe lesse and more. Use sayth Cicero,
is farre aboue all teachinge. And thus they all
three muste be had, to do any thinge very well, and
yf anye one be awaye, what so euer is done, is done
verye meanly. Aptnesse is y• gyfte of nature, Knowlege,
is gotten by y• helpe of other: Use lyeth in our
owne diligence & labour. So that Aptnesse & vse be
ours and wt in vs, through nature & labour: Knowledge
not ours, but cōmynge by other: and therfore
moost diligently, of all men to be sought for. Howe
these three thinges stande with the artillery of Englande,
a woorde or twoo I will saye.
               All Englishe men generally, be apte for shotyng,
and howe? Lyke as that grounde is plentifull and
frutefull, whiche withoute anye tyllynge, bryngeth

out corne, as for example, yf a man shoulde go to the
myll or market with corne, and happen to spyl some
in the waye, yet it wolde take roote and growe, bycause
y• soyle is so good: so Englād may be thought
very frutefull and apt to brynge oute shoters, where
children euen from the cradell, loue it: and yong men
without any teachyng so diligentlye vse it. Agayne,
lykewyse as a good grounde, well tylled, and well
husbanded, bringeth out great plentie of byg 
                     •
                  ared
corne, and good to the faule: so if the youthe of Englande
being apte of it selfe to shote, were taught and
learned how to shote, the Archers of England shuld
not be only a great deale rāker, and mo then they be:
but also a good deale bygger and stronger Archers
then they be. This cōmoditie shoulde folowe also y
                     •
                  
the youth of Englande were taught to shote, that euen
as plowing of a good grounde for wheate, doth
not onely make it mete for the seede, but also riueth
and plucketh vp by the rootes, all thistles, brambles
and weedes, which growe of theyr owne accorde, to
the destruction of bothe corne and grounde: Euen so
shulde the teaching of youth to shote, not only make
them shote well, but also plucke awaye by the rootes
all other desyre to noughtye pastymes, as disynge▪
cardyng, and boouling, which without any teaching
are vsed euery where, to the great harme of all youth
of this realme. And lykewise as burnyng of thistles
and diligent weding them out of the corne, doth not
halfe somocheryd them, as whē y• ground is falloed
and tilled for good grayne, as I haue hearde many
a good hus
                     •
                  andman say: euen so, neither hote punishment,

nor yet diligent searching out of suche vnthriftinesse
by the officers, shal so throwly wede these vngracious
games out of the realme, as occupying and
bringyng vp youth in shotynge, and other honest pastyme.
Thirdly, as a grounde which is apt for corne
and also wel tilled for corne: yet if a man let it lye stil
and do not occupye it .iii. or .iiii. yeare: but then wyll
sow it, if it be wheate (sayth Columella) it wil turne
into rye: so if a man be neuer so apte to shote, nor neuer
so wel taught in his youth to shote, yet if he giue
it ouer, and not vse to shote, truly when he shalbe eyther
cōpelled in warre tyme for his countrye sake, or
els prouoked at home for his pleasure sake, to faule
to his bowe: he shalbe come of a fayre archer, a stark
squyrter and dribber. Therefore in shotynge, as in
all other thinges, there can neyther be many in number,
nor excellent in dede: excepte these .iii. thynges,
Aptnesse, Knowledge, and Use goo togyther.
            
            
               PHIL.
               Uery well sayde Toxophile, and I promyse
you, I agree to this iudgement of yours altogyther
and therefore I can not a lytle maruayle, why Englysshe
men brynge nomore helpe to shotynge, then
nature it selfe gyueth them. For you se that euen children
be put to theyr owne shiftes in shotyng, hauing
nothynge taughte them: but that they maye chose,
and chaunce to shoote ill, rather then well, vnaptlye
soner then fitlye, vnto wardlye, more easely then wel
fauouredlye, whiche thynge causeth manye neuer
begynne to shoote: and moo to leaue it of when they
haue begone, and moost of all to shote both worse &
weaker, then they might shote, if they were taught.
               
                  
But peraduenture some men wyll saye, that wyth
vse of shootynge a man shall learne to shoote, true it
is he shall learne, but what shal he learne? marye to
shoote noughtly. For all Use, in all thynges, yf it be
not stayed with Cunnyng, wyll verie easely brynge
a man to do y• thynge, what so euer he goeth aboute
with muche ill fauorednes and deformitie.
               Which thinge how much harme it doth in learning
both Crassus excellencie dothe proue in Tullie, and
I my selfe haue experiens in my lytle shootyng.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . And
therfore Toxophile, you must nedes graunt me that
ether Englishe men do il, in not ioynyng Knowlege
of shooting to Use, or els there is no knowlege or cū
                  ninge,
which can be gathered of shooting.
            
            
               TOX.
               Learnyng
to shoote is lytle regarded in England, for this
consideration, bycause men be so apte by nature they
haue a greate redy forwardnesse and wil to vse it, al
though no man teache them, al thoughe no man byd
them, & so of theyr owne corage they rūne hedlynge
on it, and shoote they ill, shote they well, greate hede
they take not. And in verie dede Aptnesse wt Use may
do sumwhat without Knowlege, but not the tenthe
parte, if so be they were ioyned with knowlege.
               Whyche thre thynges be seperate as you se, not of
theyr owne kynde, but through the negligence of mē
whyche coupleth them not to gyther. And where ye
doubte whether there can be gadered any knowlege
or arte in shootyng or no, surely I thynke that a mā
being wel exercised in it and sumwhat honestly learned
with all, myght soone with diligent obseruynge
and markynge the hole nature of shootynge, find out

                  
                     •
                  s it were an Arte of it, as Artes in other matters
haue bene founde out afore, seynge that shootyng stā
                  deth
by those thinges, which maye both be thorowlye
perceued, and perfitly knowen, and suche that neuer
failes, but be euer certayne, belongynge to one
moost perfect ende, as shootyng streight, and keping
of a lenght bring a man to hit the marke, y• chefe end
in shootyng: which two thynges a man may attaine
vnto, by diligent vsynge, and well handlynge those
instrumentes, which belong vnto them. Therfore I
can not see, but there lieth hyd in the nature of Shooty
                     •
                  ge,
an Arte, whiche by notynge, and obseruynge
of him, that is exercised in it, yf he be any thyng learned
at al, maye be taught, to the greate forderaunce
of Artillarie through out al this Realme. And trew
lye I meruell gretelye, that Englysshe men woulde
neuer yet, s
                     •
                  ke for the Arte of shootynge, seinge they
be so apte vnto it, so praysed of there frendes, so feared
of there ennemyes for it.Ueg
                        ••••
                     s. Uegetius woulde haue
maysters appointed, whyche shoulde teache youthe
to shoote faire. Leo the Emperour of Rome, sheweth
the same custome,Leo. 6. 5. to haue bene alwayes amongest y•
olde Romaynes: whych custome of teachyng youth
to shoote (saythe he) after it was omitted, and litle
hede taken of,Strabo. 11. brought the hole Empire of Rome, to
grete Ruine. Schola Persica, that is the Scole of the
Persians, appoynted to brynge vp youthe, whiles
they were .xx. yeare olde in shooting, is as notably
knowne in Histories as the Impire of y• Persians:
whych schole,
                     
                        •
                     or. Ta. 
                        •
                     
                   as doth apere in Cornelius Tacitus,
as sone as they gaue ouer and fell to other idle pastimes,

brought bothe them and y• Parthians vnder y•
subiection of the Romaines.
                     
                        ••
                     l
                        •
                     g. 7. Plato would haue common
maisters and stipendes, for to teache youthe to
shoote, & for the same purpose he would haue abrode
feylde nere euery Citie, made common for men to vse
shotyng in, whyche sayeng the more reasonably it is
spoken of Plato, the more vnresonable is theyr dede
whiche woulde ditche vp those feeldes priuatly for
ther owne profyt, whyche lyeth open generallye for
the commō vse: men by suche goodes be made ryther
not honester sayth Tullie. Yf men can be perswaded
to haue shootynge taughte,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   this aucthorite whyche
foloweth will perswade them, or els none, and that
is as I haue ones sayde before, of Kynge Dauyd,
whose fyrste acte and ordinaunce was after he was
kynge that all Iudea should learne to shoote. Yf shotyng
could speake, she would accuse England of vnkyndnesse
and slouthfulnesse, of vnkyndnesse toward
her bycause she beyng left to a lytle blynd vse, lackes
her best maintener which is cunnynge: of shouthfulnesse
towarde theyr owne selfe, bycause they are content
wyth that whych aptnesse and vse doth graunt
them in shootynge, and wyl seke for no knowlege as
other noble cōmon welthes haue done: and the iustlier
shootynge myght make thys complaynt, seynge
that of fence and weapons there is made an Arte, a
thynge in no wyse to be compared to shootynge.
               For of fence all mooste in euerye towne, there is not
onely Masters to teache it, wyth his Prouostes Usshers
Scholers and othernames of arte & Schole,
but there hath not fayled also, whyche hathe diligently

and well fauouredly written it and is s
                     •
                  t ou
                     •
                  
in Priute that euery man maye rede it.
               What discommoditie doeth comme by the lacke
of knowlege, in shootynge, it were ouer longe to 
                     〈…〉
                  
hearce. For manye that haue bene apte, and loue
                     •
                  
shootynge, bycause they knewe not whyche way to
houlde to comme to shootynge, haue cleane tourned
them selues from shootynge.
               And I maye telle you Philologe, the lacke of teachynge
to shoote in Englande, causeth very manye
men, to playe with the kynges Actes, as a man dyd
ones eyther with the Mayre of London or yorke I
can not tel whether, whiche dyd commaund by proclamation,
euerye man in the Citie, to hange a lan
                  
                     •
                  erne
wyth a candell, afore his dore: whiche thynge
the man dyd, but he dyd not lyght it: And so many
bye bowes bicause of the acte, but yet they shote not:
not of euyll wyll, but bycause they knowe not howe
to shoote. But to conclude of this matter, in shoting
as in all other thynges,Aptnesse Aptenesse is the fyrste, and
chyefe thynge, whiche if it be awaye, neyther Cunnynge
or Use, doeth anye good at all, as the Scottes
and Fraunce men, wyth knowledge and Use of
shootynge, shall become good Archers, whan a cū
                  nynge
shypwright shall make a stronge shyppe, of a
Salowe tree: or whan a husbandman shall becom
ryche, wyth sowyng wheat on New markscunnyng, et heath.
Cunnynge muste be had,Cunnyn
                        ••
                     . bothe to set out, & amend
                     •
                  
Nature, and also to ouersee, and correcte vse: which
vse yf it be not led, & gouerned wyth cunnyng, shall

                     •
                  oo
                     •
                  er go amisse, than strayght.
               
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   maketh perfitnesse, in doinge that thynge, 
                     〈…〉
                  
vnto nature maketh a man apte, and knowlege maketh
a man cunninge before. So y• it is not so doubtful,
which of them three hath moost stroke in shoting
as it is playne & euident, that all thre must be had, in
excellent shootynge.
            
            
               PHI.
               For this communicaciō
Toxophile I am very glad, and y• for myn ownesak
                     •
                  
bicause I trust now, to become a shoter, And in dede
I thought a fore, English mē most apte for shoting,
and I sawe them dayelye vse shotyng, but yet I neuer
founde none, that woulde talke of anye knowlege
whereby a man might come to shotynge. Therfore
I trust that you, by the vse you haue had in shoting,
haue so thorowly marked and noted the nature
of it, that you can teache me as it were by a trade or
waye how to come to it.
            
            
               TOX.
               I graunte, I haue
vsed shootinge meetly well, that I might haue marked
it wel ynoughe, yf I had bene diligent. But my
much shootynge, hath caused me studie litle, so that
thereby I lacke learnynge, whych shulde set out the
Arte or waye in any thynge. And you knowe that I
was neuer so well sene, in the Posteriorums of Aristotle
as to inuent and searche out general Demonstrations
for the setting forth of any newe Science.
Yet by my trothe yf you wyll, I wyll goe with you
into the fealdes at any tyme and tel you as much as
I can, or els you maye stande some tyme at the prickes
and looke on thē which shoote best and so learne
            
            
               PHI.
               Howe lytle you haue looked of Aristotle, and
how muche learnynge, you haue lost by shotynge I
can not tell, but this I woulde saye and yf I loued

you neuer so 
                     〈…〉
                  , that you haue bene occupyed in sumwhat
els besyde shotynge. But to our purpose, as I
wyll not requyre a trade in shotinge to be taught me
after the sutteltye of Aristotle, euen so do I not agre
with you in this poynt, that you wold haue me learne
to shoote with lokyng on them which shoote best,
for so I knowe I should neuer come to shote meanelye.
For in shotyng as in all other thynges which be
gotten by 
                     •
                  eachynge, there must be shewed a waye &
a path which shal leade a man to y• best and cheiffest
point whiche is in shootynge, whiche you do marke
youre selfe well ynough, and vttered it also in youre
communication, when you sayde there laye hyd in y•
nature of shootyng a certayne waye whych wel perceyued
and thorowlye knowen, woulde bring a mā
wythout any wanderyng to y• beste ende in shotyng
whych you called hitting of the pricke. Therfore I
would refer all my shootinge to that ende whiche is
best, and so shuld I come the soner to some meane.
               That whiche is best hath no faulte, nor can not be amended.
So shew me beste shootynge, not the beste
shoter, which yf he be neuer so good, yet hath he many
a faulte easelye of any man to be espyed. And therfore
meruell not yf I requyre to folowe that example
whych is without faulte, rather than that which
hath so manye faultes. And thys waye euerye wyse
man doth folow in teachynge any maner of thynge.
As Aristotle when he teacheth a man to be good he
settes not before hym Socrates lyfe whyche was y•
best man, but chiefe goodnesse it selfe accordynge to
whych he would haue a man directe his lyfe.
            
            
               TOX.
               
                  
This waye which you requyre of me Philologe, is to
hard for me, and to hye for a shooter to taulke on, &
takē as I suppose out of the middes of Philosophie▪
to serche out the perfite ende of any thyng, y• which
perfite ende to fynde out, sayth Tullie, is the hardest
thynge in the worlde,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      B
                        •
                     u the onely occasyon and cause,
why so many sectes of Philosophers hathe bene alwayse
in learnynge. And althoughe as Cicero saith
a man maye ymagine and dreame in his mynde of 
                     •
                  
perfite ende in any thynge, yet there is no experience
nor vse of it, nor was neuer sene yet amonges men,
as alwayes to heale the sycke, euer more to leade 
                     •
                  
shyppe without daunger, at al times to hit the prick:
shall no Physicion, no shyp master, no shoter euer do.
And Aristotle saith that in all deades there are two
pointes to be marked,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . pol. 8. 6 possibilitie & excelēcie, but chefely
a wise mā must folow & laye hand on possibilitie
for feare he lease bothe. Therfore seyng that which
is moost perfect and best in shootyng as alwayes to
hit y• pricke, was neuer sene nor hard tel on yet amō
                  ges
men, but onelye ymagined and thought vpon in
a man his mynde, me thinck this is the wisest coūsel
& best for vs to folow rather that which a man maye
come to, than y• whyche is vnpossible to be attained
to, leste iustely that sayeng of y• wyse mayde Ismens
in Sophocles maye be verifyed on vs.
A foole he is that takes in hande he can not ende.
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PHI.
               Well yf the perfite ende of other matters,
had bene as perfitlye knowne, as the perfite ende of
shotynge is, there had neuer bene so manye sectes of

Philosophers as there be, for in shoting both man &
boye is in one opinion, that alwayes to hit the pryck
is mooste perfecte end that can be imagyned, so that
we shal not nede gretly contend in this matter. But
now sir, whereas you thynke y• a man in learning to
shoote or any thyng els, shuld rather wyselye folow
possibilitie, thā vainly seke for perfite excellencie, surelye
I wyl proue y• euery wyse man, y• wisely wold
learne any thyng, shal chiefly go aboute y• whervnto
he knoweth wel he shal neuer come. And you youre
selfe I suppose shal confesse y• same to be y• best way
in teachyng, yf you wyl answere me to those thinges
whych I wyl aske of you.
            
            
               TOX.
               And y• I wyl gladlye,
both bycause I thynke it is vnpossible for you to
proue it, & also bycause I desire to here what you cā
saye in it.
            
            
               PHI.
               The studie of a good Physiciō Toxophile,
I trow be to know al diseases & al medicines
fit for them.
            
            
               TOX.
               It is so in dede.
            
            
               PHI.
               Bicause I
suppose he would gladly at al tymes heale al diseases
of al men.
            
            
               TOX.
               Ye truely.
            
            
               PHI.
               A good purpose
surely, but was ther euer physiciō yet among so many
whyche hath laboured in thys study, that at al times
coulde heale all diseases?
            
            
               TOX.
               No trewly: nor
I thyncke neuer shalbe.
            
            
               PHI.
               Than Physicions by
lyke, studie for y•, whiche none of them cōmeth vnto.
But in learning of fence I pray you what is y• which
men moost labor for?
            
            
               TOX.
               That they may hit a nother.
I trow & neuer take blow theyr selfe.
            
            
               PHI.
               You
say trothe, & I am sure euery one of thē would faine
do so whē so euer he playethe. But was there euer
any of thē so conning yet, which at one tyme or oth
                     •
                  r

hath not be touched?
            
            
               TOX.
               The best of them all is
glad somtyme to escape with a blowe.
            
            
               PHIL.
               Thā
in fence also, men are taught to go aboute that thing,
whiche the best of them all knowethe he shall neuer
attayne vnto. Moreouer you that be shoters, I pray
you, what meane you, whan ye take so greate heade,
to kepe youre standynge, to shoote compasse, to looke
on your marke so diligently, to cast vp grasse diuerse
tymes and other thinges more, you know better thā
I. What would you do thā I pray you?
            
            
               TOX.
               Hit
y• marke yf we could.
            
            
               PHIL.
               And doth euery mā go
about to hit the marke at euery shoote?
            
            
               TOX.
               By my
trothe I trow so, and as for my selfe I am sure I do.
            
            
               PHIL.
               But al men do not hit it at al tymes.
            
            
               TOX.
               No trewlye for that were a wonder.
            
            
               PHIL.
               Can any
man hit it at all tymes?
            
            
               TOX.
               No man verilie.
            
            
               PHIL.
               Than by likely to hit the pricke alwayes, is
vnpossible. For that is called vnpossible whych is in
no man his power to do.
            
            
               TOX.
               Unpossible in dede.
            
            
               PHIL.
               But to shoote wyde and far of the marke is
a thynge possyble.
            
            
               TOX.
               No man wyll denie that.
            
            
               PHIL.
               But yet to hit the marke alwayse were an
excellent thyng.
            
            
               TOX.
               Excellent surelie.
            
            
               PHIL.
               thā
I am sure those be wiser men, which couete to shote
wyde than those whiche couete to hit the prycke.
            
            
               TOX.
               Why so I pray you.
            
            
               PHIL.
               Because to shot
                     •
                  
wyde is a thynge possyble, and therfore as you saye
youre selfe, of euery wyse mā to be folowed. And as
for hittinge y• prick, bycause it is vnpossible, it were
a vaine thynge to go aboute it: but in good sadnesse
Toxophise thus you se that a man might go throghe

all craftes and sciences, and proue that anye man in
his science coueteth that which he shal neuer gette.
            
            
               TOX.
               By my trouth (as you saye) I can not denye,
but they do so: but why and wherfore they shulde do
so, I can not learne.
            
            
               PHILO.
               I wyll tell you, euerye
crafte and science standeth in two thynges: in Knowing
of his crafte, & Working of his crafte: For per
fyte knowledge bringeth a man to perfyte workyng
This knowe Paynters, karuers, Taylours, shomakers,
and all other craftes men, to be true. Nowe, in
euery crafte, there 
                     〈…〉
                   a perfite excellencie, which may
be better knowen in a mannes mynde, then folowed
in a mannes dede. This perfytenesse, bycause it is generally
layed as a brode wyde example afore al mē,
no one particuler man is able to compasse it: and as
it is generall to al men, so it is perpetuall for al time
whiche proueth it a thynge for man vnpossible: although
not for the capacitie of our thinkyng whiche
is heauenly, yet surelye for the habilitie of our workyng
whyche is worldlye.
               God gyueth not full perfytenesse to one man (sayth
Tullie) lest if one man had all in any one science,D
                        •
                     . Inu
                        ••
                     . 8 ther
shoulde be nothyng lefte for an other. Yet God suffereth
vs to haue the perfyt knowledge of it, that such
a knowledge diligently folowed, might bring forth
accordyng as a man doth labour, perfyte woorkyng
And who is he, that in learnynge to wryte, woulde
forsake an excellent example, and folowe a worse?
               Therfore seing perfytenesse it selfe is an example for
vs, let euerye man studye howe he maye come nye it,
which is a poynt of wysdome, not reason with God

why he may not attaine vnto it, which is vayne 
                     •
                  uriosite.
            
            
               TOX.
               Surely this is gaily said Philologe, but
yet this one thynge I am a fraide of, lest this perfitnesse
which you speke on wil discourage men to take
any thynge in hande, bycause afore they begin, they
know, they shal neuer come to an ende. And thus dispayre
shall dispatche, euen at the fyrste entrynge in,
many a good man his purpose and intente. And I
thinke both you your selfe, & al other men to, would
counte it mere folie for a man to tell hym whome he
teacheth, that he shal neuer optaine that, whyche he
would fainest learne. And therfore this same hyghe
and perfite waye of teachyng let vs leue it to hygher
matters, and as for shootynge it shal be content with
a meaner waye well ynoughe.
            
            
               PHI.
               Where as you
say y• this hye perfitnesse will discorage mē, bycause
they knowe, they shall neuer attayne vnto it, I am
sure cleane contrarie there is nothynge in the world
shall incourage men more than it. And whye? For
where a man seith, that though a nother man be neuer
so excellente, yet it is possible for hym selfe to be
better, what payne or labour wyl that man refuse to
take? yf the game be onse wonne, no mā wyl set forth
hys foote to ronne. And thus perfitnesse beynge so
hyghe a thynge that men maye looke at it, not come
to it, and beynge so plentifull and indifferent to euerye
bodye that the plentifulnesse of it maye prouoke
all men to labor, bycause it hath ynoughe for all mē,
the indifferencye of it shall encourage euerye one to
take more paine than hys fellowe, bycause euerye
man is rewarded accordyng to his nye cōmyng, and

yet whych is moste meruel of al, y• more men take of
it, the more they leue behynd for other, as Socrates
dyd in wysdome, and Cicero in eloquens, whereby
other hath not lacked, but hathe fared a greate deele
y• better. And thus perfitnesse it selfe bycause it is neuer
obteyned, euen therfore only doth it cause so many
men to be so well sene & per
                     •
                  ite in many matters,
as they be. But where as you thynke y• it were fondnesse
to teache a man to shoote, in lokyng at the most
perfitnesse in it, but rather woulde haue a manne go
some other way to worke, I trust no wyse man wyl
discomend that way, except he thincke himselfe wyser
than Tullye,De Orat. 3. whiche doeth playnlye saye, that yf
he teached any maner of crafte as he dyd Rhetorike
he would labor to bringe a man to the knowlege of
the moost perfitnesse of it, whyche knowlege should
euer more leade and gyde a manne to do that thynge
well whiche he went abonte. Whych waye in al maner
of learnyng to be best, Plato dothe also declare
in Euthydemus, of whome Tullie learned it as he
dyd many other thynges mo. And thus you se Toxophile
by what reasons and by whose authorite I do
require of you this waye in teachynge me to shoote,
which waye I praye you withoute any more delaye
shew me as farforth as you haue noted and marked.
            
            
               TOX.
               You cal me to a thyng Philologe which I am
lothe to do. And yet yf I do it not beinge but a smale
matter as you thynke, you wyll lacke frendeshyp in
me, yf I take it in hande and not bring it to passe as
you woulde haue it, you myghte thyncke great wāt
of wysdome in me.
               
                  
But aduyse you, seing ye wyll nedes haue it so, the
blame shal be yours, as well as myne: yours for puttynge
vpon me so instauntlye, myne in receyuynge so
fondly a greater burthen then I am able to beare.
Therfore I, more wyllynge to fulfyll your mynde,
than hopyng to accomplysh that which you loke for,
shall speake of it, not as a master of shotynge, but as
one not altogyther ignoraunt in shotynge. And one
thynge I am glad of, the sunne drawinge downe so
fast into the west, shall compell me to drawe a pace
to the ende of our matter, so that his darkenesse shall
somethyng cloke myne ignoraunce. And bycause
you knowe the orderynge of a matter better
then I: Aske me generallye of it, and I
shall particularly answere to it.
            
            
               PHI.
               Uery gladly Toxophile: for so
by ordre, those thynges
whiche I woulde
knowe, you shal
tell the better:
and
those
thynges
whiche you shal tell, I
shall remembre
the better.
            
         
         
            
            TOXOPHILVS.
B.
            ¶THE SECONDE BOOKE OF
the schole of shotyng.
            
               PHILOL.
               What is the cheyfe
poynte in shootynge, that euerye
manne laboureth to come to?
            
            
               TOX.
               To hyt the marke.
            
            
               PHI.
               Howe manye thynges are required
to make a man euer more hyt
the marke?
            
            
               TOX.
               Twoo.
            
            
               PHI.
               Whiche twoo?
            
            
               TOX.
               Shotinge streyght and kepynge
of a lengthe.
            
            
               PHIL.
               Howe shoulde a manne
shoote strayght, & howe shulde a man kepe a length?
            
            
               TOX.
               In knowynge and hauynge thinges, belongynge
to shootyng▪ and whan they be knowen and
had, in well handlynge of them: whereof some belong
to shotyng strayght, some to keping of a lēgth,
some commonly to them bothe, as shall be tolde seuerally
of them, in place conuenient.
            
            
               PHI.
               Thynges
belongyng to shotyng, whyche be they?
            
            
               TOX.
               All
thinges be outwarde, and some be instrumentes for
euery sere archer to brynge with him, proper for his
owne vse: other thynges be generall to euery man,
as the place and tyme 
                     •
                  erueth.
            
            
               PHI.
               Which be instrumētes?
            
            
               
               TOX.
               Bracer, shotynggloue, stryng, bowe &
shafte.
            
            
               PHI.
               Whiche be general to all men?
            
            
               TOX.
               The wether and the marke, yet the marke is euer
vnder the rule of the wether.
            
            
               PHI.
               wherin standeth
well handlynge of thynges?
            
            
               TOX.
               All togyther
wythin a man him selfe, some handlynge is proper
to instrumentes, some to the wether, somme to the
marke, some is within a man hym selfe.
            
            
               PHI.
               what
handlyng is proper to the Instrumentes.
            
            
               TOX.
               Standynge, nockyng, drawyng, holdyng, lowsing,
wherby cōmeth fayre shotynge, whiche neyther belong
to wynde nor wether, nor yet to the marke, for
in a rayne and at no marke, a man may shote a fayre
shoote.
            
            
               PHIL.
               well sayde, what handlynge belongeth
to the wether?
            
            
               TOX.
               Knowyng of his wynde,
with him, agaynst hym, syde wynd, ful syde wind,
syde wynde quarter with him, syde wynde quarter
agaynste hym, and so forthe.
            
            
               PHI.
               well than go to,
what handlynge belongeth to the marke?
            
            
               TOX.
               To marke his standyng, to shote compasse, to draw
euermore lyke, to lowse euermore lyke, to consyder
the nature of the pricke, in hylles & dales, in strayte
planes and winding places, & also to espy his marke
            
            
               PHI.
               Uery well done. And what is onely within a
man hym selfe?
            
            
               TOX.
               Good heede gyuynge, and auoydynge
all affections: whiche thynges oftentymes
do marre and make all. And these thynges spoken
of me generally and brefely, yf they be wel knowen,
had, and handled, shall brynge a man to suche
shootynge, as fewe or none euer yet came vnto, but
surely yf he misse in any one of thē, he can neuer hyt

the marke, and in the more he doth misse, the farther
he shoteth from his marke. But as in all other matters
the fyrst sleppe or stayre to be good, is to know
a mannes faulte, and than to amende it, and he that
wyl not knowe his faulte, shall neuer amende it.
            
            
               PHI.
               You speake nowe Toxophile, euen as I wold
haue you to speake: But lette vs r
                     •
                  turne agayne vnto
our matter, and those thynges whyche you haue
packed vp, in so shorte a roume, we wyll lowse thē
forthe, and take euery pyece as it were in our hande
and looke more narowlye vpon it.
            
            
               TOX.
               I am content,
but we wyll rydde them as fast as we can, bycause
the sunne goeth so faste downe, and yet somewhat
muste needes be sayde of euerye one of them.
            
            
               PHI.
               well sayde, and I trowe we beganne wyth
those thynges whiche be instrumentes, whereof the
fyrste, as I suppose, was the Braser.Brac
                        •
                     r▪
                  
               
            
            
               TOX.
               Litle
is to be sayd of the braser. A bracer serueth for two
causes, one to saue his arme from the strype of the
strynge, and his doublet from wearynge, and the other
is, that the strynge glydynge sharpelye & quicklye
of the bracer, maye make the sharper shoote. For
if the strynge shoulde lyght vpon the bare fleue, the
strengthe of the shoote shoulde stoppe and dye there.
But it is best by my iudgemente, to gyue the bowe
so muche bent, that the strynge neede neuer touche a
mannes arme, and so shoulde a man nede no bracer
as I knowe manye good Archers, whiche occupye
none. In a bracer a man muste take hede of .iii. thinges,
y• it haue no nayles in it, that it haue no bucles,
that it be fast on with laces wythout agglettes.
               
                  
For the nayles wyll shere in sunder, a mānes string,
before he be ware, and so put his bowe in ieoperdy:
Buckles and agglettes at vnwares, shall race hys
bowe, a thinge bothe euyll to the syghte, & perilous
for freatynge. And thus a Bracer, is onelye had for
this purpose, that the strynge maye haue redye passage.
            
            
               PHI.
               In my Bracer I am cunnyng ynough,
but what saye you of the shootyng gloue.
            
            
               TOX.
               A shootynge Gloue is chieflye, for to saue a
mannes fyngers from hurtynge, that he maye be able
to beare the sharpe stryng to the vttermost of his
strengthe. And whan a man shooteth, the might of
his shoote lyeth on the formooste fynger, and on the
Ringman, for the myddle fynger whiche is the longest,
lyke a lubber starteth backe, and beareth no
weyght of the strynge in a maner at all, therfore the
two other fyngers, muste haue thicker lether, & that
muste haue thickest of all, where on a man lowseth
moste, and for sure lowsyng, the formoste fynger is
moste apte, bycause it holdeth best, & for y• purpose
nature hath as a man woulde saye, yocked it wt the
thoumbe. Ledder, if it be nexte a mans skynne, wyl
sweat, waxe hard and chafe, therefore scarlet for the
softnes of it and thicknesse wyth all, is good to sewe
wythin a mānes gloue. If that wylle not serue, but
yet youre fynger hurteth, you muste take a searynge
cloth made of fine virgin waxe, and Deres sewet, &
put nexte your fynger, and so on wyth youre gloue.
If yet you fele your fynger pinched, leaue shootyng
both because than you shall shoote nought, & agayn
by litle & lytle, hurtynge your finger, ye shall make

it longe and longe to or you shoote agayne. A newe
gloue pluckes many shootes bycause the stringe goeth
not freelye of, and therefore the fingers muste be
cut sho
                     ••
                  , and trimmed with some ointment, that the
string maye glyd wel awaye. Some with holdynge
in the nocke of theyr shafte to harde, rub the skyn of
there fingers. For this there be .ii. remedyes, one to
haue a goose quyll splettyd and sewed againste the
nockynge, betwixt the lining and the ledder, whyche
shall helpe the shoote muche to, the other waye is to
haue some roule of ledder sewed betwixt his fingers
at the setting on of the fingers, which shall kepe his
fingers so in sunder, that they shal not hold the nock
so fast as they did. The shootyng gloue hath a purse
whych shall serue to put fine linen cloth and wax in,
twoo necessary thynges for a shooter, some men vse
gloues or other suche lyke thyng on their bow hād
for chafyng, bycause they houlde so harde. But that
commeth commonlye, when a bowe is not rounde,
but somwhat square, fine waxe shall do verye well
in such a case to laye where a man holdeth his bow:
and thus muche as concernynge your gloue. And
these thynges althoughe they be trifles, yet bycause
you be but a yonge shoter, I woulde not leue them
out.
            
            
               PHI.
               And so you shal do me moost pleasure: The
string I trow be the next.
            
            
               TOX.
               
                  String
                        •
                     . The next in dede.
A thing though it be lytle, yet not a litle to be regarded.
But here in you muste be contente to put youre
trust in honest stringers. And surely stringers ought
more diligently to be looked vpon by the officers thā
                  
                     •
                  ther bower or fletcher, bycause they maye deceyue a

simple man the more easelyer. An ill stringe brekethe
many a good bowe, nor no other thynge halfe so many.
In warre if a string breke the man is loste and is
no man, for his weapon is gone, and althoughe he
haue two stringes put one at once, yet he shall haue
smal leasure & lesse roume to bend his bow, therfore
god send vs g
                     •
                  od stringers both for war and peace.
Now what a stringe ought to be made on, whether
of good hempe as they do nowe a dayes, or of flaxe
or of sylke, I leue that to the iugemente of stringers,
of whome we muste bye them on. Eustathius
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . apon
this verse of homere
Twāg 
                        •
                      the bow, & twāg q the string,
                        
                           〈…〉
                         4. out quicklie the shaft f
                        •
                     ue
doeth tel, that in oulde tyme they made theyr bowe
strynges of bullox thermes, whiche they twyned to
gither as they do ropes, & therfore they made a great
twange. Bowe strynges also hath bene made of the
heare of an horse tayle called for the matter of them
Hippias as dothe appeare in manye good authors
of the Greke tongue.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . Great stringes, and lytle strynges
be for diuerse purposes: the great string is more
surer for the bowe, more stable to pricke wythal, but
slower for the cast, the lytle stringe is cleane contrarye,
not so sure, therfore to be taken hede of, lesse with
longe tarienge on, it breake youre bowe, more fit to
shoote farre, than apte to pricke nere, therfore when
you knowe the nature of bothe bigge and lytle, you
must fit your bow, according to the occasion of your
shootinge. In stringinge of your bow (though this

place belong rather to the hādlyng than to the thyng
it selfe, yet bycause the thynge, and the handlynge of
the thynge, be so ioyned together, I must nede some
tyme couple the one wyth the other,) you must mark
the fit length of youre bowe. For yf the stringe be to
short, the bending wyll gyue, and at the last slyp and
so put the bowe in ieopardye. Yf it be longe, the bendynge
must nedes be in the smal of the string, which
beynge sore twined muste nedes knap in sunder to y•
distruction of manye good bowes. Moreouer you
must looke that youre bowe be well nocked for fere
the sharpnesse of the horne shere a sunder the strynge
And that chaunceth ofte when in bending, the string
hath but one wap to strengthe it wyth all. You must
marke also to set youre stringe streygte on, or elles
the one ende shall wriethe contrary to the other, and
so breke your bowe. When the stringe begynnethe
neuer so lytle to were, trust it not, but a waye with it
for it is an yl saued halpeny y• costes a man a crowne
Thus you se howe many ieopardyes hangethe ouer
the selye poore bowe, by reason onlye of the strynge.
As when the stringe is shorte, when it is longe, whē
eyther of the nockes be nought, when it hath but one
wap, and when it taryethe ouer longe on.
            
            
               PHI.
               I se
wel it is no meruell, though so many bowes be broken.
            
            
               TOX.
               Bowes be broken twise as many wayes
besyde these. But a gayne in stringynge your bowe,
you must loke for much bende or lytle bende for they
be cleane contrarye.
               
                  
The lytle bende hath but one commoditie, whyche
is in shootyng faster and farther shoote, and y• cause
therof is, bycause the strynge hath so far a passage,
or it parte wyth the shafte. The greate bende hath
many commodities: for it maketh easyer shootynge
the bowe beyng halfe drawen afore. It needeth no
bra
                     •
                  er, for the strynge stoppeth before it come at the
arme. It wyl not so sone hit a mannes sleue or other
geare, by the same reason: It hurteth not the shaft
fedder, as the lowe bende doeth. It suffereth a man
better to espye his marke. Therfore lette your bowe
haue good byg bend, a shaftemente and .ii. fyngers
at the least, for these which I haue spoken of.
            
            
               PHI.
               The braser, g
                     •
                  oue, and strynge, be done, nowe you
muste come to the bowe, the chefe instrument of all.
            
            
               TOX.
               
                  Bowe. Dyuers countryes and tymes haue vsed alwayes
dyuers bowes, and of dyuers fashions.
               Horne bowes are vsed in some places nowe, & were
vsed also in Homerus dayes, for Pandarus bowe,
the best shocter among al the Troianes,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      4 was made
of two Goete hornes ioyned togyther, the lengthe
wherof sayth Homer, was .xvi handbredes, not far
differing from the lengthe of our bowes.
               Scripture maketh mention of brasse bowes.Psalm. 17. Irō
bowes, and style bowes, haue bene of longe tyme,
and also nowe are vsed among the Turkes, but yet
they must nedes be vnprofitable. For yf brasse, yron
or style, haue theyr owne strength and pith in them,
they be farre aboue mānes strength: yf they be made
meete for mannes strengthe, theyr pithe is nothyng
worth to shoote any shoote wyth all.
               
                  
The Ethiopians had bowes of palme tre,Hero. 
                        •
                     n 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   which
seemed to be very stronge, but we haue none experience
of them. The lengthe of them was .iiii. cubites
The men of Inde had theyr bowes made of a rede,
whiche was of a great strengthe. And no maruayle
though bowe and shaftes were made therof, for the
redes be so great in Inde,In 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   as Herodotus sayth, that
of euery ioynte of a rede, a man may make a fyshers
bote. These bowes,Arrianus. 8. sayeth Arrianus in Alexanders
lyfe, gaue so great a stroke, that no harneys or buckler
though it were neuer so strong, could wythstand
it. The length of suche a bowe, was euen wyth the
length of hym,In Po
                        •••
                     
                   that vsed it. The Lycians vsed bowes
made of a tree, called in Latyn Cornus, (as concernyng
the name of it in English, I can souer proue
that other men call it false, than I can tell the right
name of it my selfe) this wood is as harde as horne
and very fit for shaftes, as shall be toulde after.
               Ouid sheweth that Syringa the Nymphe,Metamo
                        •
                     . 1. and one
of the maydens of Diana, had a bowe of this wood
wherby the poete meaneth, that it was verye excellent
to make bowes of
               As for brasell, Elme, Wych, and Asshe, experience
doth proue them to be but meane for bowes, and so
to conclude Ewe of all other thynges, is that, wherof
perfite shootynge woulde haue a bowe made.
               Thys woode as it is nowe generall and common amonges
Englyshe men, so hath it continewed from
longe tyme and had in mooste price for bowes, amō
                  ges
the Romaynes, as doth apere in this halfe verse
of Uyrgill.
               
                  
                     
                     Taxi torquentur in arcus.Uirgslius. G
                              •
                           org. 2.
                        
                           •
                        .
                     Ewe fit for a bowe to be made on.
                  
               
               Nowe as I saye, a bowe of Ewe must be hadde
for perfecte shootinge at the prickes, whiche marke,
bycause it is certayne, & moste certaine rules may be
gyuen of it, shall serue for our cōmunication, at this
time. A good bowe is knowen, much what as good
counsayle is knowen, by the ende and proofe of it, &
yet bothe a bowe and good counsell, maye be made
bothe better and worse, by well or yll handlynge of
them: as oftentymes chaūceth. And as a man both
muste and wyll take counsell, of a wyse and honeste
man, though he se not the ende of it, so must a shooter
of necessitie, truste an honest and good bowyer
for a bowe, afore he knowe the proofe of it. And as
a wyse man wyll take plentye of counsel afore hand
what soeuer need, so a shooter shulde haue alwayes
iii. or .iiii. bowes, in store, what so euer chaunce.
            
            
               PHI.
               But if I truste bowyers alwayes, sometyme
I am lyke to be deceyued.
            
            
               TOX.
               Therefore shall I
tell you some tokens in a bowe, that you shal be the
seeldomer deceyued. If you come into a shoppe, and
fynde a bowe that is small, long, heauy and strong,
lyinge steyght, not windyng, not marred with knot
gauie, wyndeshake, wem, freat or pynche, by
                     •
                   that
bowe of my warrant. The beste colour of a bowe y•
I fynde, is whan the backe and the bellye in woorkynge,
be muche what after one maner, for such oftentymes

in wearyng, do proue lyke virgin wax or
golde, hauynge a fine longe grayne, euen from the
one ende of the bowe, to the other: the short graine
although suche proue well somtyme, are for y• most
parte, very brittle. Of the makynge of the bowe,
I wyll not greatly meddle, leste I shoulde seeme to
enter into an other mannes occupation, whyche I
can no skyll of. Yet I woulde desyre all bowyers to
season theyr staues well, to woorke them and synke
them well, to gyue thē heetes conuenient, and tyllerynges
plentye. For thereby they shoulde bothe get
them selues a good name, (And a good name encreseth
a mannes profyt muche) and also do greate cō
                  modite
to the hole Realme. If any men do offend in
this poynte, I am afrayde they be those iourny mē
whiche labour more spedily to make manye bowes
for theyr owne monye sake, than they woorke diligently
to make good bowes, for the common welth
sake, not layinge before theyr eyes, this wyse prouerbe.
               
                  Sone ynough, if wel ynough.
               
               Wherwyth euere honest handye craftes man shuld
measure, as it were wyth a rule, his worke withal.
He that is a iourney man, and rydeth vpon an other
mannes horse, yf he ryde an honest pace, no manne
wyll dysalowe hym: But yf he make Poste haste,
bothe he that oweth the horse, and he peraduenture
also that afterwarde shal bye the horse, may chaūce
to curse hym.
               
                  
Suche hastinesse I am afrayde, maye also be found
amonges some of thē, whych through out y• Realme
in diuerse places worke y• kinges Artillarie for war,
thinkynke yf they get a bowe or a sheafe of arrowes
to some fashion, they be good ynough for bearynge
gere. And thus that weapon whiche is the chiefe defence
of the Realme, verye ofte doth lytle seruyce to
hym that shoulde vse it, bycause it is so negligentlye
wrought of him that shuld make it, when trewlye I
suppose that nether y• bowe can be to good and chefe
woode, nor yet to wel seasoned or truly made, wyth
hetynges and tillerynges, nether that shafte to good
wood or to thorowely wrought, with the best pinion
fedders that can be gotten, wherwith a man shal
serue his prince, defende his countrie, and saue hym
selfe frome his enemye. And I trust no man wyll be
angrye wyth me for spekynge thus, but those which
finde them selfe touched therin: which ought rather
to be angrye wyth them selfe for doynge so, than to
be miscontent wyth me for saynge so. And in no case
they ought to be displeased wyth me, seinge this is
spoken also after that sorte, not for the notynge of anye
person seuerallye, but for the amendynge of euerye
one generallye. But turne we agayne to knowe
a good shootynge bowe for oure purpose.
               Euerye bowe is made eyther of a boughe, of a
plante or of the boole of the tree. The boughe cōmon
lye is verye knotty, and full of pinnes, weak, of small
pithe, and soue wyll folowe the stringe, and seldome
werith to any fayre coloure, yet for chyldren & yonge
beginners it maye serue well ynoughe. The plante

proueth many times wel, yf it be of a good and clene
groweth, and for the pith of it is quicke ynoughe of
cast, it wyl plye and bow far afore it breake, as al other
yōge thinges do. The boole of y• tree is clenest wt
out knot or pin, hauinge a faste and harde woode by
reasonne of hys full groweth, stronge and myghtye
of cast, and best for a bow, yf the staues be euen clouen,
and be afterwarde wroughte not ouerwharte
the woode, but as the graine and streyght growyng
of the woode leadethe a man, or elles by all reason it
must sone breake, & that in many shiuers. This must
be considered in the roughe woode, & when the bow
staues be ouerwrought and facioned. For in dressing
and pikynge it vp for a bow, it is to late to loke for it
But yet in these poyntes as I sayd before you muste
truste an honest bowyer, to put a good bow in youre
hand, somewhat lookinge your selfe to those tokens
whyche I shewed you. And you muste not sticke for
a grote or .xii.d. more than a nother man would giue
yf it be a good bowe. For a good bow twise paide for
is better than an ill bowe once broken.
               Thus a shooter muste begyn not at the makynge
of hys bowe lyke a bower, but at the byinge of hys
bow lyke an Archere. And when his bow is bought
and brought home, afore he truste muche vpon it, let
hym trye and trym it after thys sorte.
               Take your bow in to the feeld, shote in hym, sinke
hym wyth deade heauye shaftes, looke where he cō
                  methe
moost, prouyde for that place betymes, leste it
pinche and so freate: whē you haue thus shot in him,
and perceyued good shootynge woode in hym, you

must haue hym agayne to a good cunnynge, and trustie
woorkeman, whyche shall cut hym shorter, and
pike hym and dresse hym fytter, make hym comme
rounde compace euery where, and whippyng at the
endes, but with discretion, lest he whyp in sunder or
els freete, soner than he is ware of, he must also lay
him streght, if he be caste or otherwise nede require,
and if he be flatte made, gather hym rounde, and so
shall he bothe shoote the faster, for farre shootynge,
and also the surer for nere pryckynge.
            
            
               PHI.
               What
yf I come into a shoppe, and spye oute a bow, which
shal both than please me very wel whan I by him,
and be also very fit and meete for me whan I shote
in hym: so that he be both weake ynoughe for easye
shootynge, and also quycke and spedye ynoughe for
farre castynge, than I woulde thynke I shall nede
no more businesse wyth him, but be contente wyth
hym, and vse hym well ynoughe, and so by that meanes,
auoyde bothe great trouble, and also some cost
whiche yo cunnynge archers very often put your
selues vnto, bey
                     •
                  ge verye Englyshe men, neuer ceasynge
piddelynge about your bowe & shaftes whan
they be well, but eyther with shorting and pikynge
your bowes, or els with newe fetheryng, peecynge
and headinge your shaftes, can neuer haue done vntyll
they be starke nought.
            
            
               TOX.
               Wel Philologe, surelye
if I haue any iudgement at all in shootyng, it
is no very great good token in a bowe, whereof nothyng
whan it is newe and fresshe, nede be cutte awaye,
euen as Cicero sayeth of a yonge mānes wit
and style, which you knowe better that I. For euery

newe thynge muste alwayes haue more than it
neadeth, or elles it wyll not waxe better and better,
but euer decaye, and be worse and worse. Newe ale
if it runne not ouer the barrell whan it is newe tunned,
wil sone lease his pith, and his head afore he be
longe drawen on.
               And lyke wyse as that col
                     •
                  e whyche at the fyrste takynge
vp, nedeth lytle breakyng and handlyng, but
is fitte and gentle ynoughe for the saddle, seeldome
or neuer proueth well, euen so that bowe whyche at
the fyrste byinge, wythout any more proofe & trimmynge,
is fit and easie to shoote in, shall neyther be
profitable to laste longe, nor yet pleasaunt to shoote
well. And therfore as a younge horse full of corage,
wyth handlynge and breakinge, is brought vnto a
sute pace and goynge, so shall a newe bowe fresshe
and quicke of caste, by sinking & cuttyng, be brought
to a stedfast shootyng. And an easie and gentle bow
whan it is newe, is not muche vnlyke a 
                     •
                  ofte spirited
boye when he is younge. But yet as of an vnrulie
boye with right handlyng, proueth oftenest of al
a well ordered man: so of an vnfit and staffysh bow
with good trimming, muste nedes folowe alwayes
a stedfast shotynge bowe.
               And suche a perfite bowe, whiche neuer wyll deceyue
a man, excepte a man deceyue it, muste be had
for that perfecte ende, whyche you looke for in shootinge.
            
            
               PHI.
               Well Toxophile, I see wel you be cunninger
in this gere than I: but put case that I haue
thre or fower suche good bowes, pyked and dressed,
as you nowe speke of, yet I do remembre y• manye

learned men do saye, that it is easier to gette a good
thynge, than to saue and keepe a good thyng, wherfore
if you can teache me as concernyng that poynte,
you haue satisfyed me plentifullye, as concernynge
a bowe.
            
            
               TOX.
               Trulye it was the nexte thyng that
I woulde haue come vnto, for so the matter laye.
               Whan you haue broughte youre bowe to suche a
poynte, as I spake of, than you must haue an herdē
or wullen cloth waxed. wherwt euery day you must
rubbe and chafe your bowe, tyll it shyne and glytter
withall. Whyche thynge shall cause it bothe to be
cleane, well fauoured, goodlye of coloure, and shall
also bryng as it were a cruste, ouer it, that is to say,
shall make it euery where on the outsyde, so slyppery
and harde, that neyther any weete or wether can
enter to hurte it, nor yet any freat or pynche, be able
to byte vpon it: but that you shal do it great wrong
before you breake it. This must be done oftentimes
but specially when you come from shootynge.
               Beware also whan you shoote, of youre shaft hedes,
dagger, knyues or agglettes, lest they race your
bowe, a thing as I sayde before, bothe vnsemely to
looke on, and also daūgerous for freates. Take hede
also of mistie and dankyshe dayes, which shal hurte
a bowe, more than any rayne. For then you muste
eyther alway rub it, or els leaue shootynge.
               Your bowecase (this I dyd not promise to speake
of,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   bycause it is without the nature of shootynge, or
els I shoulde truble me wyth other thinges infinite
more: yet seing it is a saue garde for the bowe, somthynge
I wyll saye of it) youre bowecase I saye, yf

you ryde for the, muste neyther be to wyde for youre
bowes, for so shall one clap vpon an other, and hurt
them, nor yet so strayte that scarse they can be thrust
in, for that woulde laye them on syde & wynde them
A bowecase of ledder, is not the best, for that is ofttymes
moyste which hurteth the bowes very much.
Therfore I haue sene good shooters which would
haue for euerye bowe, a sere case made of wollen
clothe, and than you maye putte .iii. or .iiii. of them
so cased, in to a ledder case if you wyll. This wollen
case shall bothe kepe them in sunder, and also wylle
kepe a bowe in his full strengthe, that it neuer gyue
for any wether. At home these wood cases be verye
good for bowes to stande in. But take hede yt youre
bowe stande not to nere a stone wall, for that wyll
make hym moyste and weke, nor yet to nere any fier
for that wyll make him shorte and brittle. And thus
muche as concernyng the sauyng and keping of our
bowe: nowe you shall heare what thynges ye must
auoyde, for feare of breakyng your bowe.
               A shooter chaunseth to breake his bowe common
ly .iiii. wayes, by the strynge, by the shafte, by drawyng
to far, & by freates: By the stryng as I sayde
afore, whan the strynge is eyther to shorte, to long,
not surely put on, wyth one wap, or put croked on,
or shorne in sundre wyth an euell nocke, or suffered
to tarye ouer longe on. Whan the stryng fayles the
bowe muste nedes breake, and specially in the myddes:
because bothe the endes haue nothyng to stop
them: but whippes so far backe, that the belly must
nedes violentlye rise vp, the whyche you shall well

perreyue in bendyng of a bowe backward. Therfore
a bowe that foloweth the strynge is least hurt with
breakyng of stringes By the shafte a bowe is brokē
ether when it is to short, and so you set it in your bow
or when the nocke breakes for lytlenesse, or when the
strynge slyppes wythoute the nocke for wydenesse,
than you poule it to your care and lettes it go, which
must nedes breake the shafte at the leaste, and putte
strunge and bow & al in ieopardy, bycause the strēgth
of the bowe hath nothynge in it to stop the violence
of it.
               Thys kynde of breakynge is mooste perilouse
for the standers by, for in such a case you shall se some
tyme the ende of a bow flye a hoole score from a mā,
and that moost commonly, as I haue marked oft the
vpper ende of the bowe. The bow is drawne to far
.ii. wayes. Eyther when you take a longer shafte thē
your owne, or els when you shyfte your hand to low
or to hye for shootynge far. Thys waye pouleth the
backe in sunder, and then the bowe fleethe in manye
peces.
               So when you se a bowe broken, hauynge the
bellye risen vp both wayes or toue, the stringe brake
it. When it is broken in twoo peces in a maner euen
of and specyallye in the vpper ende, the shafte nocke
brake it.
               When the backe is pouled a sunder in manye peeces
to farre drawynge, brake it.
               These tokens eyther alwayes be trewe or els verye
seldome mysse.
               
                  
The fourthe thyng that breketh a bowe is fretes,Freates.
whych make a bowe redye and apte to breake by any
of the .iii. wayes afore sayde. Freetes be in a shaft as
well as in a bowe, and they be muche lyke a Canker,
crepynge and encreasynge in those places in a bowe,
whyche be weaker then other. And for thys purpose
must your bowe be well trymmed and piked of a cō
                  ning
man that it may come rounde in trew compasse
euery where. For freetes you must beware, yf youre

                     •
                  ow haue a knot in the backe, lest the places whyche
be nexte it, be not alowed strong ynoughe to bere wt
the knotte, or elles the stronge knotte shall freate the
weake places nexte it. Freates be fyrst litle pinchese,
the whych whē you perceaue, pike the places a bout
the pinches, to make them somewhat weker, and as
well commynge as where it pinched, and so the pinches
shall dye, and neuer encrease farther in to great
freates.
               Freates begynne many tymes in a pin, for there
the good woode is corrupted, that it muste nedes be
weke, and bycause it is weake, therfore it freates.
               Good bowyers therfore do rayse euery py
                     •
                   & alowe
it moore woode for feare of freatynge.
               Agayne bowes moost commonlye freate vnder
the hande, not so muche as some men suppose for the
moistnesse of the hande, as for the heete of the hand:
the nature of heate sayeth Aristotle is to lowse, and
not to knyt fast, and the more lowser the more weaker,
the weaker, the redier to freate.
               
                  
bowe is not well made, whych hath not wood plentye
in the hand. For yf the endes of the bowe be staffysshe,
or a mans hande any thynge hoote the bellye
must nedes sone frete. Remedie for fretes to any purpose
I neuer hard tell of any, but onelye to make the
freated place a stronge or stronger then any other.
               To fill vp the freate with lytle sheuers of a quill and
glewe (as some saye wyll do wel) by reason must be
starke nought.
               For, put case the freete dyd cease then, yet the cause
whiche made it freate a fore (and that is weakenesse
of the place) bicause it is not taken away must nedes
make it freate agayne. As for cuttyng out of freates
wythe all maner of pecynge of bowes I wyll cleane
exclude from perfite shootynge. For peced bowes be
muche lyke owlde housen, whyche be more chargeable
to repayre, than commodiouse to dwell in. Agayne
to swadle a bowe much about wyth bandes,
verye seldome dothe anye good, excepte it be to kepe
downe a spel in the backe, otherwyse bandes ether
nede not when the bow is any thinge worthe, or els
boote not whē it is marde & past best. And although
I knowe meane and poore shooters, wyll vse peced
and banded bowes sometyme bycause they are not
able to get better when they woulde, yet I am sure
yf they consyder it well, they shall fynde it, bothe lesse
charge and more pleasure to ware at any tyme a couple
of shyllynges of a new bowe than to bestowe .x.d
of peacynge an olde bowe. For better is coste vpon
somewhat worth, than spence vpon nothing worth.
And thys I speke also bycause you woulde haue me

referre all to perfitnesse in shootynge.
               Moreouer there is 
                     〈…〉
                   other thynge, whyche wyl
sone cause a bowe be broken by one of the .iii. wayes
whych be first spoken of, and that is shotyng in winter,
when there is any froste. Froste is wheresoeuer
is any waterish humour, as is in al woodes, eyther
more or lesse, and you knowe that al thynges frosen
and Isie, wyl rather breke than bende. Yet if a man
must nedes shoote at any suche tyme, lette hym take
hys bowe, and brynge it to the fyer, and there by litle
and litle, rubbe and chafe it with a waxed clothe,
whiche shall bring it to that poynt, y• he maye shote
safelye ynough in it. This rubbyng with waxe, as
I sayde before, is a great succour, agaynst all wete
and moystnesse.
               In the fyeldes also, in goyng betwyxt the pricks
eyther wyth your hande, or elles wyth a clothe you
muste keepe your bowe in suche a temper. And thus
muche as concernynge youre bowe, howe fyrste to
knowe what wood is best for a bowe, than to chose
a bowe, after to trim a bowe, agayne to keepe it in
goodnesse, laste of al, howe to saue it from al harm
and euylnesse.
               And although many men can saye more of a bow
yet I trust these thynges be true, and almoste sufficient
for the knowlege of a perfecte bowe.
            
            
               PHI.
               Surelye
I beleue so, and yet I coulde haue hearde you
talke longer on it: althogh I can not se, what maye
be sayd more of it. Therfore excepte you wyll pause
a whyle, you may go forwarde to a shafte.
            
            
               TOX.
               What shaftes were made of, in oulde tyme

authours do not so manifestlye shewe, as of bowes.
Herodotus doth tel,Hero. eutep. that in the flood of Nilus, ther
was a beast, called a water horse, of whose skinne
after it was dried, the Egyptians made shaftes.
and dartes on. The tree called Cornus was so common
to make shaftes of,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   that in good authours of y•
latyn tongue, Cornus is taken for a shafte, as in Seneca,
and that place of Uirgill,
Volat Itala Cornus.
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                  
               
               Yet of all thynges that euer I warked of olde authours,
either greke or latin, for shaftes to be made
of,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   there is nothing so cōmon as reedes. Herodotus
in describynge the mightie hoost of Xerxes doth tell
that thre great contries vsed shaftes made of a rede,
the Aeth
                     •
                  opians, the Lycians (whose shaftes lacked
fethers, where at I maruayle moste of all) and
the men of Inde.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   The shaftes in Inde were verye
longe,O. Lurt. 
                        •
                     . a yarde and an halfe, as Arrianus doth saye,
or at the least a yarde. as Q. Curtius doth saye, and
therfore they gaue y• greater strype, but yet bycause
they were so long, they were the more vnhansome,
and lesse profitable to the men of Inde, as Curtius
doeth tell.
               In Crete and Italie, they vsed to haue their shaftes
of rede also. The best reede for shaftes grewe in
Inde,Pli 16. 3 6. and in Rhenus a flood of Italy.
               But bycause suche shaftes be neyther easie for Englishe
men to get, and yf they were gotten scarse profitable
for them to vse, I wyll lette them passe, and
speake of those shaftes whyche Englysh men at this
daye moste cōmonly do approue and allowe.
               
                  
A shaft hath three principall partes, the stele, the

                     •
                  ethers, and the head: whereof euerye one muste be
seuerallye spoken of.
               ¶
                     •
                   Steles be made of dyuerse woodes. as.

                     Brasell.
                     Turkie wood.
                     Fusticke.
                     Sugercheste.
                     Hardbeame.
                     Byrche.
                     Asshe.
                     Doke.
                     Seruis tree.
                     Hulder.
                     Blackthorne
                     Beche.
                     Elder.
                     Aspe.
                     Salow.
                  
               
               These wooddes as they be most commonly vsed,
so they be mooste fit to be vsed: yet some one fytter
then an other for diuers mennes shotinge, as shalbe
toulde afterwarde. And in this pointe as in a bowe
you muste truste an honest fletcher. Neuerthelesse al
thoughe I can not teache you to make a bowe or a
shafte, whiche belongeth to a bowyer and a fletcher
to cōme to theyr lyuyng, yet wyll I shewe you some
tokens to knowe a bowe & a shafte, whiche pertayneth
to an Archer to come to good shootynge.
               
                  
A stele muste be well seasoned for Castinge, and it
must be made as the grayne lieth & as it groweth or
els it wyl neuer flye clene, as clothe cut ouertwhart
and agaynste the wulle, can neuer hoose a manne
cleane. A knottye stele maye be suffered in a bygge

                     •
                  haste, but for a lytle shafte it is nothynge fit, bothe
bycause it wyll neuer flye far, and besydes that it is
euer in danger of breakynge, it flieth not far bycause
the strengthe of the shoote is hindred and stopped at
the knotte, euen as a stone cast in to a plaine euen stil
water, wyll make the water moue a greate space, yet
yf there be any whirlynge plat in the water, the mouynge
ceasethe when it commethe at the whyrlynge
plat, whyche is not muche vnlyke a knotte in a shafte
yf it be cōsidered wel. So euery thyng as it is plaine
and streight of hys owne nature so is it fittest for far
mouynge. Therfore a stele whyche is harde to stāde
in a bowe, without knotte, and streighte (I meane
not artificiallye streyghte as the fletcher dothe make
it, but naturally streyght as it groweth in the wood)
is best to make a shaft of, eyther to go cleane, fly far
or stand surely in any wedder. Now howe big, how
small, how heuye, how lyght, how longe, how short,
a shafte shoulde be particularlye for euerye man (seynge
we must taulke of the generall nature of shootyng)
can not be toulde no more than you Rhethoricians
can appoynt any one kynde of wordes, of sentences,
of fygures fyt for euery matter, but euen as
the man and the matter requyreth so the fyttest to be
vsed. Therfore as concernynge those contraryes in
a shafte, euery man muste auoyde them and draw to

the meane of them, whyche meane is best in al thynges.
Yet yf a man happen to offende in any of the extremes
it is better to offend in want and scantnesse,
than in to muche and outragiouse excedynge. As it
is better to haue a shafte a lytle to shorte than ouer
longe, somewhat to lyght, than ouer lumpysshe, a lytle
to small, than a greate deale to big, whiche thyng
is not onely trewlye sayde in shootynge, but in all other
thynges that euer man goeth aboute, as in eatynge,
taulkynge, and all other thynges lyke, whych
matter was onse excellentlye disputed vpon, in the
Scooles, you knowe when.
               And to offend, in these contraryes cōmeth much yf
men take not hede, throughe the kynd of wood, wher
of the shaft is made: For somme wood belōges to y•
excedyng part, some to y• scāt part, some to y• meane,
as Brasell, Turkiewood, Fusticke, Sugar cheste, &
such lyke, make deade, heuy lūpish, hobblyng shaftes
Againe Hulder, blacke thorne, Serues tree, Beche,
Elder, Aspe, and Salowe, eyther for theyr wekenes
or lyghtenesse, make holow, starting, studding, gaddynge
shaftes. But Birche, Hardbeme, some Doke,
and some Asshe, beynge bothe stronge ynoughe to
stande in a bowe, and also lyght ynoughe to flye far,
are best for a meane, whiche is to be soughte oute in
euery thinge. And althoughe I knowe that some mē
shoote so stronge, that the deade woodes be lyghte
ynoughe for them, and other some so weeke, that the
lowse woodes be lykewyse for them bigge ynoughe
yet generally for the moost parte of men, the meane
is the best. And so to conclude that, is alwayes beste

for a man, whiche is metest for him. Thus no wood
of his owne nature, is eyther to lyght or to heuy, but
as the shooter is him selfe whyche dothe vse it. For
that shafte whiche one yeare for a man is to lyghte &
scuddinge, for the same selfe man the next yeare may
chaunce be to heuy and hobblynge. Therfore can not
I expresse, excepte generally, what is best wood for
a shaft, but let euery mā when he knoweth his owne
strength and the nature of euery wood, prouyde and
fyt himselfe thereafter. Yet as concerning sheaffe Arcouse
for war (as I suppose) it were better to make
them of good Asshe, and not of Aspe, as they be now
a dayes. For of all other woodes that euer I proued
Asshe being big is swiftest and agayne heuy to giue
a greate stripe with all, whyche Aspe shall not doo.
               What heuynes doth in a stripe euery man by experience
can tell, therfore Asshe being both swyfter and
heuier is more fit for sheafe Arroes thē Aspe, & thus
muche for the best wood for shaftes.
               Agayne lykewyse as no one wood can be greatlye
meet for all kynde of shaftes, no more can one facion
of the stele be fit for euery shooter. For those that be
lytle brested and big toward the hede called by theyr
lykenesse taperfashiō, reshe growne, and of some merye
fellowes bobtayles, be fit for them whiche shote
vnder hande bycause they shoote wyth a softe lowse,
and stresses not a shaft muche in the breste where the
weyghte of the bowe lyethe as you maye perceyue
by the werynge of euery shafte.
               Agayne the bygge brested shafte is fytte for hym,
which shoteth right afore him, or els the brest being

weke shoulde neuer wythstande that strong piththy
kynde of shootynge, thus the vnderhande must haue
a small breste, to go cleane awaye oute of the bowe,
the forehande muste haue a bigge breste to bere the
great myghte of the bowe. The shafte must be made
rounde nothynge flat wyth oute gal or wemme, for
thys purpose. For bycause roundnesse (whether you
take example in heauen or in earthe) is fittest shappe
and forme both for fast mouing and also for sone per
cynge of any thynge. And therfore Aristotle saythe
that nature hath made the raine to be round, bycause
it shoulde the easelyer enter throughe the ayre.
               The nocke of the shafte is dyuersly made, for some
be greate and full, some hansome & lytle, some wyde
some narow, some depe, some shalowe, some round,
some longe, some wyth one nocke, some wyth a double
nocke, wherof euery one hathe hys propertye.
               The greate and full nocke, maye be well felte, and
many wayes they saue a shafte from brekynge. The
hansome and lytle nocke wyll go clene awaye frome
the hand, the wyde nocke is noughte, both for breakyng
of the shafte and also for soden slyppynge oute
of the strynge when the narrowe nocke doth auoyde
bothe those harmes. The depe and longe nocke is
good in warre for sure kepyng in of the strynge. The
shalow, and rownde nocke is best for our purpose in
prickyng for cleane delyueraunce of a shoote. And
double nockyng is vsed for double suerty of the shaft
And thus far as concernynge a hoole stele.
               
                  
Peecynge of a shafte with brasell and holie, or other
heauy woodes, is to make y• ende compasse heauy
with the fethers in fliyng, for the stedfaster shotyng.
For if the ende were plumpe heauy wyth lead
and the wood nexte it lyghte, the head ende woulde
euer be downwardes, and neuer flye strayght.
               Two poyntes in peecing be ynough, lest the moystnes
of the earthe enter to moche into the peecinge, &
so leuse the glue. Therfore many poyntes be more
plesaunt to the eye, than profitable for the vse.
               Sūme vse to peece theyr shaftes in the nocke wyth
brasel, or holye, to counterwey, with the head, and
I haue seue sūme for the same purpose, bore an hole
a lytle bineth the nocke, and put leade in it. But yet
none of these wayes be anye thing needful at al, for
y• nature of a fether in flying, if a man marke it wel,
is able to bear vp a wonderful weyght: and I thike
suche peecing came vp first, thus: whan a good Archer
hath broken a good shafte, in the fethers, & for
the fantasie he hath had to it, he is lothe to leese it, &
therfore doeth he peece it. And than by and by other
eyther bycause it is gaye, or elles because they wyll
haue a shafte lyke a good archer, cutteth theyre hole
shaftes, and peeceth them agayne: A thynge by my
iudgement, more costlye than nedefull.
               And thus haue you heard what wood, what fasshion,
what nockynge, what peecynge a stele muste
haue: Nowe foloweth the fetherynge.
            
            
               PHI.
               I woulde neuer haue thought you could haue
sayd halfe so muche of a stele, and I thynke as concernyng
the litle fether and the playne head, there is

but lytle to saye.
            
            
               TOX.
               Lytle, yes trulye: for there is
no one thing, in al shoting, somoche to be lokedon as
the fether. For fyrste a question maye be asked, whether
any other thing besyde a fether, be fit for a shaft
or no if a fether onelye be fit, whether a goose fether
onely, or no? yf a goose fether be best, then whether
there be any difference, as concernynge the fether of
an oulde goose, and a younge goose: a gander, or a
goose: a fennye goose, or an vplandish goose. Againe
which is best fether in any goose, the ryght wing or
the left wing, the pinion fether, or any other fether:
a whyte, blacke, or greye fether? Thirdly, in settyng
on of your fether, whether it be pared or drawen wt
a thicke rybbe, or a thinne rybbe (the rybbe is y• hard
quill whiche deuydeth the fether) a long fether better
or a shorte, set on nere the nocke, or farre from the
nocke, set on streight, or somwhat bowyng & whether
one or two fethers runne on the bowe. Fourthly
in couling or sheryng, whether high or lowe, whether
somewhat swyne backed (I muste vse shoters
wordes) or sadle backed, whether rounde, or square
shorne. And whether a shaft at any tyme ought to be
plucked, and how to be plucked.
            
            
               PHI.
               Surely Torophile,
I thynke manye fletchers (although daylye
they haue these thinges in vse) if they were asked sodeynly,
what they coulde saye of a fether, they could
not saye so moch. But I praye you let me heare you
more at large, expresse those thynges in a fether, the
whiche you packed vp in so narrowe a rowme. And
fyrst whether any other thyng may be vsed for a fether
or not.
            
            
               TOX.
               That was y• fyrst poynte in dede,

and bycause there foloweth many after, I wyll hye
apace ouer them, as one that had manye a myle to
ride.Pl. 16. 36. Shaftes to haue had alwayes fethers Plinius
in Latin,I Pol. 1. 10. and Iulius Pollux in Greke, do playnlye
shewe,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      Polym. yet onely the Lycians I reade in Herodotus
to haue vsed shaftes without fedders. Onelye a fedder
is fit for a shafte for .ii. causes, fyrste bycause it is
leathe weake to giue place to the bowe, than bycause
it is of that nature, that it wyll starte vp after y• bow
So, Plate, wood or horne can not serue, bycause the
wil not gyue place. Againe, Cloth, Paper or Parchment
can not serue, bycause they wyll not ryse after
the bowe, therfore a fedder is onely mete, bycause it
onelye wyl do bothe. Nowe to looke on the fedders
of all maner of birdes, you shal se some so lowe weke
and shorte, some so course, stoore and harde, and the
rib so brickle, thin and narrow, that it can nether be
drawen, pared, nor yet well set on, that except it be a
swan for a dead shafte (as I knowe some good Archers
haue vsed) or a ducke for a flyghte whiche lastes
but one shoote, there is no fether but onelye of a
goose that hath all commodities in it. And trewelye
at a short but, which some mā doth vse, y• Pecock fether
doth seldome kepe vp y• shaft eyther ryght or leuel,
it is so roughe and heuy, so that many mē which
haue taken them vp for gayenesse, hathe layde them
downe agayne for profyte, thus for our purpose, the
Goose is best fether, for the best shoter.
            
            
               PHI.
               No that
is not so, for the best shoter that euer was vsed other
fethers.
            
            
               TOX.
               Ye are you so cunninge in shootynge
I praye you who was that.
            
            
               PHI.
               Hercules whyche

had hys shaftes fethered with Egles fethers as Hefiodus
dothe saye.Heslod. in Scuto. Her.
               
            
            
               TOX.
               Well as for Hercules, seynge
nether water nor lande, heauen nor hell, coulde
scarse contente hym to abyde in, it was no meruell
thoughe a sely poore gouse fether could not plese him
to shoote wythal, and agayne as for Egles they flye
so hye and builde so far of, y• they be very hard to cōe
by.3 Gouse. Yet welfare the gentle gouse which bringeth to a
man euen to hys doore so manye excedynge commodities.
For the gouse is mās cōforte in war & in peace
slepynge and wakynge. What prayse so euer is gyuen
to shootynge the gouse maye chalenge the beste
parte in it. Howe well dothe she make a man fare at
his table. Howe easelye dothe she make a man lye in
hys bed? How fit euen as her fethers be onelye for
shootynge, so be her quylles fytte onely for wrytyng
            
            
               PHILO.
               In deade Toxophyle that is the beste
prayse you gaue to a gouse yet, and surelye I would
haue sayde you had bene to blame yf you had ouerskypte
it.
            
            
               TOX.
               The Romaynes I trowe Philologe
not so muche bycause a gouse wyth tryinge saued
theyr Capitoliū and head toure wyth their golden
Iupiter as Propertius doth say very pretely in
thys verse.
               
                  
                     Anseris & tutum uoce fuisse Iouem.
Id est.Propertius
                     
                     Theues on a night had stolen Iupiter, had a gouse not a 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                  
               
               Dyd make a golden gouse and set hir in the top of
y• Capitoliū,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   & appoynted also the Censores to alow
out of y• cōmon butche yearly stipedes for y• finding

of certayne Geese, y• Romaynes did not I saye giue
al thys honor to a gouse for y• good dede onely, but
for other infinit mo which cōme daylye to a man by
Geese, and surely yf I should declame in y• prayse of
any maner of be
                     •
                  st lyuyng, I would chose a gouse,
But the goose hath made vs flee to farre from oure
matter. Now sir ye haue hearde howe a fether must
be had, and that a goose fether onely. It foloweth of
a yong gose and an oulde, and the residue bēlonging
to a fether: which thing I wyll shortlye course ouer:
wherof, when you knowe the properties, you maye
fitte your shaftes accordyng to your shotyng, which
rule you must obserue in all other thynges too, bycause
no one fashion or quantitie can be fitte for euery
man, nomore then a shooe or a cote can be. The
oulde goose fether is styffe and stronge, good for a
wynde, and fyttest for a deed shaft: the yonge goose
fether is weake and fyne, best for a swyfte shaft, and
it must be couled at the first shering, somewhat hye,
for with shoting, it wyll sattle and faule very moche.
The same thing (although not so moche) is to be cō
                  sydered
in a goose and a gander. A fenny goose, euen
as her flesh is blacker, stoorer, vnholsomer, so is her
fether for the same cause courser stoorer & rougher, &
therfore I haue heard very good fletchers saye, that
the seconde fether in some place is better then the pimon
in other some. Betwixt the winges is lytle differēce
but that you must haue diuerse shaftes of one
flight, fethered with diuerse winges, for diuerse windes:
for if the wynde and the fether go both one way
the shaft wyl be caryed to moche. The pinion fether

as it hath the firste place in the winge, so it hath the
fyrst place in good fetheringe. You maye knowe it afore
it be pared, by a bought whiche is in it, and agayne
when it is colde, by the thinnesse aboue, and
the thicknesse at the grounde, and also by the stifnes
and finesse which wyll cary a shaft better, faster and
further, euen as a fine sayle cloth doth a shyppe.
               The coulour of the fether is leste to be regarded,
yet som what to be looked on: lest for a good whyte
you haue sometyme an yll greye. Yet surelye it standeth
with good reasō to haue the cocke fether black
or greye, as it were to gyue a man warning to nocke
ryght. The cocke fether is called that which stādeth
aboue in right nocking, which if you do not obserue
the other fethers must nedes run on the bowe, and
so marre your shote. And thus farre of the goodnesse
and choyse of your fether: now foloweth the setting
on. Wherin you must looke that your fethers be not
drawen for hastinesse, but pared euen and streyghte
with diligence. The fletcher draweth a fether when
he hath but one swappe at it with his knyfe, and
then playneth it a lytle, with rubbynge it ouer his
knyfe. He pareth it when he taketh leysure and hede
to make euery parte of the ryb apt to stand streight,
and euen on vpon the stele. This thing if a mā take
not heede on, he maye chaunce haue cause to saye so
of his fletcher, as in dressinge of meate is cōmunelye
spoken of Cookes: and that is, that God sendeth vs
good fethers, but the deuyll noughtie Fletchers. Yf
any fletchers heard me saye thus, they wolde not be
angrye with me, except they were yll fletchers: and

yet by reason, those fletchers too, ought rather to amend
them selues for doing yll, then be angry with
me for saying truth. The ribbe in a styffe fether may
be thinner, for so it wyll stande cleaner on: but in a
weake fether you must leaue a thicker ribbe, or els yf
the ryb which is the foundacion and grounde, wher
in nature hath set euerye clefte of the fether, be taken
to nere the fether, it muste nedes folowe, that the fether
shall faule, & droupe downe, euen as any herbe
doeth whyche hath his roote to nere taken on with
a spade. The lengthe and shortnesse of the fether,
serueth for diuers shaftes, as a long fether for a long
heauy, or byg shafte, the shorte fether for the contrary.
Agayne the shorte maye stande farther, the longe
nerer the nocke. Youre fether muste stande almooste
streyght on, but yet after that sorte, yt it maye turne
rounde in flyinge. And here I consider the wonderfull
nature of shootynge, whiche standeth all togyther
by that fashion, which is moste apte for quicke
mouynge, and that is by roundenesse. For firste the
bowe must be gathered rounde, in drawyng it must
come rounde compasse, the strynge muste be rounde
the stele rounde, the beste nocke rounde, the feather
shorne somwhat rounde, the shafte in slyenge, muste
turne rounde, and if it flye far, it flyeth a round compace.
For eyther aboue or benethe a rounde cōpace,
hyndereth the flyinge. Moreouer bothe the fletcher
in makynge your shafte, and you in nockynge your
shafte, muste take heede that two fethers equallye
runne on the bowe. For yf one fether runne alone on
the bowe, it shal quickely be worne, and shall not be

able to matche with the other fethers, and agayne
at the lowse, yf the shafte be lyght, it wyl starte, if it
be heuye, it wil hoble. And thus as concernyng settyng
on of your fether. Nowe of coulynge.
               To she
                     •
                  e a shafte hyghe or lowe, muste be as the
shafte is, heauy or lyght, great or lytle, long or short
The swyne backed fashion, maketh the shaft deader,
for it gathereth more ayer than the saddle backed, &
therfore the saddle backe is surer for daunger of wether,
& fitter for smothe fliing. Agayn to shere a shaft
rounde, as they were wount somtime to do, or after
the triangle fashion, whyche is muche vsed nowe a
dayes, bothe be good. For roundnesse is apte for fliynge
of his owne nature, and all maner of triangle
fashion, (the sharpe poynte goyng before) is also naturally
apte for quicke entrynge,De nat. 
                        〈…〉
                     . and therfore sayth
Cicero, that cranes taught by nature, obserue in flyinge
a triangle fashion alwayes, bycause it is so apt
to perce and go thorowe the ayer wythall. Laste of
all pluckynge of fethers is noughte, for there is no
suerty in it, therfore let euery archer haue such shaftes,
that he maye bothe knowe them and trust them
at euery chaunge of wether. Yet if they must nedes
be plucked, plucke them as litle as can be, for so shal
they be the lesse vnconstante. And thus I haue knit
vp in as shorte a roume as I coulde, the best fethers
fetheringe and coulinge of a shafte.
            
            
               PHI.
               I thynke
surelye you haue so taken vp the matter wyth you,
y• you haue lefte nothynge behinde you. Nowe you
haue brought a shafte to the head, whiche if it were
on, we had done as concernyng all instrumentes belongyng

to shootynge.
            
            
               TOX.
               Necessitie, the inuentour of all goodnesse
(as all authours in a maner, doo saye) amonges all
other thinges inuented a shaft heed, firste to saue the
ende from breakyng, then it made it sharpe to stycke
better, after it made it of strōg matter, to last better:
Last of all experience and wysedome of men, hathe
brought it to suche a perfitnesse, that there is no one
thing so profitable, belongyng to artillarie, either to
stryke a mannes enemye sorer in warre, or to shoote
nerer the marke at home, then is a fitte heed for both
purposes. For if a shaft lacke a heed, it is worth nothynge
for neither vse. Therfore seinge heedes be so
necessary, they must of necessitie, be wel looked vpon
Heedes for warre, of longe tyme haue ben made, not
onely of diuers matters, but also of diuers fashions
The Troians had heedes of yron, as this verse spoken
of Pandarus, sheweth:
               
                  Vp to the pappe his string did he pull,Illado 
                           •
                        . 4. his shaft to the harde yron
               
               The Grecians had heedes of brasse, as Ulysses
shaftes were heeded, when he slewe Antinous, and
the other wowers of Penolepe.
               
                  Quite through a dore,Odysse. 21. flewe a shafte with a brasse heed.
               
               It is playne in Homer, where Menelaus was
wounded of Pandarus shafte, ye the hedes were not
glewed on,Iliados. 4. but tyed on with a string, as the cōmentartes
in Greke playnelye tell. And therfore shoters

at that tyme to cary their shaftes withoute heedes,
vntill they occupyed them, and than set on an heade
as it apereth in Homer the. xxi. booke Odyssei, where
Penelope brought Ulixes bowe downe amonges
the gentlemen, whiche came on wowing to her, that
he whiche was able to bende it and drawe it, might
inioye her, and after her folowed a mayde sayth Homer,Odysse. 21.
carienge a bagge full of heades, bothe of iron
and brasse.
               The men of Scythia, vsed heades of brasse. The
men of Inde vsed heades of yron The Ethiopians
vsed heades of a harde sharpe stone,Hero 
                        〈…〉
                      Polym as bothe Herodotus
and Pollux do tel. The Germanes as Cornelius
Tacitus doeth saye, had theyr shaftes headed
with bone, and many countryes bothe of olde tyme
and nowe, vse heades of horne, but of all other yrō
and style muste nedes be the fittest for heades.
               Iulius Pollux calleth otherwyse than we doe,
where the fethers be the head,I. Pol. 
                        •
                     : 1
                        •
                     . and that whyche we
call the head, he calleth the poynte.
               Fashion of heades is diuers and that of olde tyme:
two maner of arrowe heades sayeth Pollux, was
vsed in olde tyme. The one he calleth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , descrybynge
it thus, hauyng two poyntes or barbes, lookyng
backewarde to the stele and the fethers, which
surely we call in Englishe a brode arrowe head or a
swalowe tayle. The other he calleth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , hauing
ii. poyntes stretchyng forwarde, and this Englysh
men do call a forkehead: bothe these two kyndes of
heades, were vsed in Homers dayes, for Teucer vsed
forked heades, sayinge thus to Agamemnon.
               
                  
Eighte good shaftes haue I shot sithe I came,Illa
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . eche one wyth 
                     •
                  
forke heade.
               Pandarus heades and Ulysses heades were
broode arrow heades, as a man maye learne in Homer
that woulde be curiouse in knowyng that matter.
Hercules vsed forked heades, but yet they had
thre pointes or forkes, when other mennes had but
twoo.
                     
                        •
                     intarchus in Cr
                        ••
                     o. The Parthyans at that great battell where
they slewe ritche Crassus and his sonne vsed brode
Arrowe heades, whyche stacke so sore that the Romaynes
could not poule them out agayne. Commod
                     •
                  s
the Emperoure vsed forked heades,D
                        ••
                     odia. 1. whose facion
Herodiane doeth lyuely and naturally describe,
sa
                     •
                  inge that they were lyke the shap of a new mone
wherewyth he would smite of the heade of a birde
and neuer misse, other facion of heades haue not I
red on. Our Englyshe heades be better in war than
eyther forked heades, or brode arrowe heades. For
firste the ende beynge lyghter they flee a great deele
the faster, and by the same reason gyueth a far sorer
stripe. Yea & I suppose if y• same lytle barbes which
they haue, were clene put away, they shuld be far beter.
For thys euery mā doth graunt, y• a shaft as lōg
as it flyeth, turnes, and whā it leueth turnyng it leueth
goyng any farther. And euery thynge that enters
by a turnynge and boring facion, the more flatter
it is, the worse it enters, as a knife thoughe it be
sharpe yet bycause of the edges, wil not bore so wel
as a bodkin, for euery rounde thynge enters beste &
therefore nature, sayeth Aristotle, made the rayne
droppes rounde for quicke percynge the ayre,
               
                  
Thus, eyther shaftes turne not in flyeng, or els our
flatte arrowe heades stoppe the shafte in entrynge.
            
            
               PHI.
               But yet Toxophile to holde your communication
a lytle I suppose the 
                     •
                  lat heade is better, bothe
bycause it maketh a greter hoole, and also bycause it
stickes faster in.
            
            
               TOX.
               These two reasons as they
be bothe trewe, so they be both nought. For fyrst the
lesse hoole, yf it be depe, is the worse to heale agayne:
whē a man shoteth at hys enemy, he desyreth rather
yt it should enter far, than stick fast. For what remedye
is it I praye you for hym whych is smitten wt a
depe wounde to poull out the shaft quickely, except
it be to haste his death spedely? thus heades whyche
make alytle hole & depe, be vetter in war, than those
which make a great hole and sticke fast in.
               Iulius Pollux maketh mencion of certayne kindes
of heades for war which bear fyre in them,Posl
                        ••
                     . 7. Psal. 7. and scripture
also speaketh somwhat of the same.He
                        •
                     o Uran Herodotus
doth tell a wonderfull pollicy to be done by Xerxses
what tyme he beseged the great Toure in Athenes:
He made his Archers binde there shafte heades aboute
wyth towe, and than set it on fyre and shoote
thē, whych thyng done by many Archers set all the
places on fyre, whych were of matter to burne: and
besydes that dased the men wythin, so y• they knewe
not whyther to turne them. But to make an ende of
all heades for warre I woulde wyshe that the head
makers of Englande shoulde make their sheafe arrowe
heades more harder poynted then they be:

for I my selfe haue sene of late suche heades set vpō
sheafe Arrowes, as y• officers yf they had sene them
woulde not haue bene content wyth all.
               Now as concernyng heades for pryckyng, which
is oure purpose, there be dyuerse kyndes, some be
blonte heades, some sharpe, some bothe blonte and
sharpe. The blont heades men vse bycause they perceaue
them to be good, to kepe a lengthe wyth all,
they kepe a good lengthe, bycause a man poulethe
them no ferder at one tyme than at another. For in
felynge the plompe ende alwayes equallye he maye
lowse them. Yet in a winde, and agaynste the wynd
the wether hath so much power on the brode end, y•
no man can kepe no sure lengthe, wyth such a heade.
Therfore a blont hede in a caulme or downe a wind
is very good, otherwyse none worse.
               Sharpe heades at the ende wythout anye shoulders
(I call that the shoulder in a heade whyche a
mans finger shall feele afore it come to the poynte)
wyll perche quycklye throughe a wynde, but yet it
hath .ii. discommodities, the one that it wyll kepe no
lengthe, it kepeth no lengthe, bycause no manne can
poule it certaynly as far one tyme as at an other: it
is not drawen certaynlye so far one tyme as at an other,
bycause it lackethe shouldrynge wherwyth as
wyth a sure token a man myghte be warned when
to lowse, and also bycause menne are afrayde of the
sharpe poynt for settyng it in y• bow. The seconde in
cōmoditie is when it is lyghted on y• ground, y• smal
poynte shall at euerye tyme be in ieopardye of hurrynge,
whyche thynge of all other wyll sones make

the shafte lese the lengthe. Now when blonte heades
be good to kepe a lengthe wythall, yet noughte
for a wynde, sharpe heades good to perche the wether
wyth al, yet nought for a length, certayne heade
makers dwellyng in London perceyuynge the commoditie
of both kynde of heades ioyned wyth a discommoditie,
inuented newe files and other instrumentes
where wyth he broughte heades for pryckynge
to such a perfitnesse, that all the commodities
of the twoo other heades should be put in one heade
wyth out anye discommoditie at all. They made a
certayne kynde of heades whyche men call hie rigged,
creased, or shouldred heades, or syluer spone
heades, for a certayne lykenesse that suche heades
haue wyth the knob ende of some syluer spones.
               These heades be good both to kepe a length withal
and also to perche a wynde wythal, to kepe a length
wythall bycause a man maye certaynly poule it to
the shouldrynge euery shoote & no farther, to perche
a wynde wythall bycause the pointe from the shoulder
forwarde, breketh the wether as al other sharpe
thynges doo. So the blonte shoulder seruethe for a
sure lengthe kepynge, the poynte also is euerfit, for a
roughe and greate wether percyng. And thus much
as shortlye as I could, as concernyng heades both
for war & peace
            
            
               PHI.
               But is there no cūning as con
cerning setting on of y• head?
            
            
               TOX.
               Wel remēbred
But that poynt belongeth to fletchers, yet you may
desyre hym to set youre heade, full on, and close on.
Ful on is whan the wood is bet hard vp to the ende
or stoppynge of the heade, close on, is when there is

lefte wood on euerye syde the shafte, ynoughe to fyll
the head withall, or when it is neyther to little nor
yet to greate. If there be any faulte in anye of these
poyntes, y• head whan it lyghteth on any hard stone
or grounde wil be in ieoperdy, eyther of breakynge,
or els otherwyse hurtynge. Stoppynge of heades
eyther wyth leade, or any thynge els, shall not nede
now, bycause euery siluer spone, or showldred head
is stopped of it selfe. Shorte heades be better than
longe: For firste the longe head is worse for the maker
to fyle strayght compace euery waye: agayne it
is worse for the fletcher to set strayght on: thyrdlye
it is alwayes in more ieoperdie of breakinge, whan
it is on. And nowe I trowe Philologe, we haue
done as concernynge all Instrumentes belongyng
to shootynge, whiche euery sere archer ought, to prouyde
for hym selfe. And there remayneth .ii thynges
behinde, whiche be generall or cōmon to euery man
the Wether & the Barke, but bicause they be so knit
wyth shootynge strayght, or kepynge of a lengthe,
I wyll deferre them to that place, and now we will
come (God wyllyng) to handle oure instrumentes,
the thing that euery man desireth to do wel.
            
            
               PHI.
               If
you can teache me so well to handle these instrumē
                  tes
as you haue described them, I suppose I shalbe
an archer good ynough.
            
            
               TOX.
               To learne any thing
(as you knowe better than I Philologe) & speciallye
to do a thing wt a mannes handes, must be done
if a man woulde be excellent, in his youthe. Yonge
trees in gardens, which lacke al senses, and beastes
 wtout reson, when they be yong, may with handling

and teaching, be brought to wonderfull thynges.
               And this is not onely true in natural thinges, but in
artificiall thinges to, as the potter most connyngly
doth cast his pottes whan his claye is softe & workable,
and waxe taketh printe whan it is warme, &
leathie weke, not whan claye and waxe be hard and
oulde: and euen so, euerye man in his youthe, bothe
with witte and body is moste apte and pliable to receyue
any cunnyng that shulde be taught hym.
               This cōmunication of teaching youthe, maketh me
to remembre the right worshipfull and my singuler
good mayster, Sir Humfrey Wingfelde, to who
                     •
                  
nexte God, I ought to refer for his manifolde benefites
bestowed on me, the poore talent of learnyng,
which god hath lent me: & For his sake do I owe my
seruice to all other of the name & noble house of the
Wyngfeldes, bothe in woord and dede. Thys worshypfull
man hath euer loued and vsed, to haue many
children brought vp in learnynge in his house amonges
whome I my selfe was one. For whom at
terme tymes he woulde bryng downe from Londō
both bowe and shaftes. And when they shuld playe
he woulde go with them him selfe in to the fyelde, &
se them shoote, and he that shot fayrest, shulde haue
the best bowe and shaftes, and he that shot ilfauouredlye,
shulde be mocked of his felowes, till he shot
better.
               Woulde to god all Englande had vsed or wolde vse
to lay the foundacion of youth, after the example of
this worshipful man in bringyng vp chyldren in the

Booke and the Bowe: by whiche two thynges, the
hole common welth both in peace and warre is chefelye
ruled and defended wythall.
               But to our purpose, he that muste come to this high
perfectnes in shootyng whiche we speake of, muste
nedes begin to learne it in hys youthe, the omitting
of whiche thinge in Englande, bothe maketh fewer
shooters, and also euery man that is a shoter, shote
warse than he myght, if he were taught.
            
            
               PHI.
               Euen
as I knowe that this is true, whiche you saye, euen
so Toxophile, haue you quyte discouraged me, and
drawen my minde cleane from shootynge, seinge by
this reason, no man y• hath not vsed it in his youthe
can be excellent in it. And I suppose the same reson
woulde discourage many other mo, yf they hearde
you talke after this sorte.
            
            
               TOX.
               This thyng Philologe,
shall discourage no man that is wyse. For I
wyll proue yt wisdome maye worke the same thinge
in a man, that nature doth in a chylde.
               A chylde by thre thinges, is brought to excellencie.
By Aptnesse, Desire, and Feare: Aptnesse maketh
hym pliable lyke waxe to be formed and fashioned,
euen as a man woulde haue hym. Desyre to be
as good or better, than his felowes: and Feare of
them whome he is vnder, wyl cause hym take great
labour and payne with diligent hede, in learnynge
any thinge, wherof procedeth at the laste excellency
and perfectnesse.
               A man maye by wisdome in learnyng any thing,
and specially to shoote, haue thre lyke commodities
also, wherby he maye, as it were become younge agayne,

and so attayne to excellencie. For as a childe
is apte by naturall youth, so a man by vsyng at the
first weake bowes, far vnderneth his strength, shal
be as pliable and readye to be taught fayre shotyng
as any chylde: and daylye vse of the same, shal both
kepe hym in fayer shotyng, and also at y• last bryng
hym to stronge shootynge.
               And in stede of the feruente desyre, which prouoketh
a chylde to be better than hys felowe, lette a man be
as muche stirred vp with shamefastnes to be worse
than all other. And the same place that feare hathe
in a chylde, to compell him to take peyne, the same
hath loue of shotyng in a man, to cause hym forsake
no labour, withoute whiche no man nor chylde can
be excellent. And thus whatsoeuer a chylde may be
taught by Aptnesse, Desire, & Feare, the same thing
in shootynge, maye a man be taughte by weake bowes,
Shamefastnesse and Loue.
               And hereby you maye se that that is true whiche
Cicero sayeth, that a man by vse, may be broughte
to a newe nature. And this I dare be bould to saye,
that any man whiche will wisely begynne, and constantlye
perseuer in this trade of learnyng to shote,
shall attayne to perfectnesse therin.
            
            
               PHI.
               This communication
Toxophile, doeth please me verye well,
and nowe I perceyue that moste generally & chefly
youthe muste be taughte to shoote, and secondarilye
no man is debarred therfrom excepte it be more thorough
his owne negligence for bicause he wyll not
learne, than any disabilitie, bicause he can not lerne.
               
                  
Therfore seyng I wyll be glad to folowe your coū
                  sell
in chosynge my bowe and other instrumentes,
and also am ashamed that I can shote no better thā
I can, moreouer hauynge suche a loue toward shotynge
by your good reasons to day, that I wyl forsake
no labour in the exercise of the same, I beseche
you imagyn that we had bothe bowe and shaftes
here, and teache me how I should handle them, and
one thynge I desyre you, make me as fayre an Archer
as you can.
               For thys I am sure in learnynge all other matters,
nothynge is broughte to the moost profytable
vse, which is not handled after the moost cumlye fasiō.
As masters of fēce haue no stroke fit ether to hit
an other or els to defende hym selfe, whyche is not
ioyned wyth a wonderfull cumlinesse. A Cooke cā
not chop hys herbes neither quickelye nor hansomlye
excepte he kepe suche a mesure wyth hys choppynge
kniues as woulde delyte a manne bothe to se
hym and heare hym.
               Euerye hand craft man that workes best for hys
owne profyte, workes most semelye to other mens
sight. Agayne in buyldynge a house, in makynge a
shyppe, euery parte the more hansomely, they be ioyned
for profyt and laste, the more cumlye they be fashioned
to euery mans syght and eye. Nature it selfe
taught men to ioyne alwayes welfauourednesse wt
profytablenesse. As in man, that ioynt or pece which
is by anye chaunce depriued of hys cumlynesse the
same is also debarred of hys vse and profytablenesse.
               
                  
As he that is gogle eyde and lokes a squinte hath
both hys countenaunce clene marred, and hys sight
sore blemmyshed, and so in all other members lyke.
Moreouer what tyme of the yeare bryngeth mooste
profyte wyth it for mans vse, the same also couereth
and dekketh bothe earthe and trees wyth moost cū
                  lynesse
for mans pleasure. And that tyme whych takethe
awaye the pleasure of the grounde, carieth wt
hym also the profyt of the grounde, as euery man by
experience knoweth in harde and roughe winters.
Some thynges there be whych haue no other ende,
but onely cumlynesse, as payntyng, and Daunsing.
And vertue it selfe is nothynge eles but cumlynesse,
as al Philosophers do agree in opinion, therfore seynge
that whych is best do
                     •
                  e in anye matters, is alwayes
moost cumlye done as both Plato and Cicero
in manye places do proue, and daylye experience
dothe teache in other thynges, I pr
                     •
                  ye you as I
sayde before teatche me to shoote as f
                     •
                  yre, and welfauouredly
as you can imagen.
            
            
               TOX.
               Trewlye Philologe as you proue verye
well in other matters, the best shootynge, is alwayes
the moost cumlye shootynge but thys you know
as well as I that Crassus shewethe in Cicero that
as cumlinesse is the chefe poynt, & most to be sought
for in all thynges, so cumlynesse onlye, can neuer be
taught by any Arte or craft. But may be perceyued
well whē it is done, not described wel how it should
be done.
               Yet neuerthelesse to comme to it there be manye
waye whych wayes men haue assayde in other

matters, as yf a man would folowe in learnynge to
shoote faire, the noble paynter Zeuxes in payntyng
Helena, whyche to make his Image bewtifull dyd
chose out .v. of the fayrest maydes in al the countrie
aboute, and in beholdynge them conceyued & drewe
out suche an Image that it far exceded al other, bycause
the comelinesse of them al was broughte in to
one moost perfyte comelinesse: So lykewyse in shotynge
yf a man, woulde set before hys eyes .v. or .vi.
of the fayreste Archers that euer he saw shoote, and
of one learue to stande, of a nother to drawe, of an
other tolowse, and so take of euery man, what euery
man coulde do best, I dare saye he shoulde come
to suche a comlynesse as neuer man came to yet. As
for an example, if the moost comely poynte in shootynge
that Hewe Prophete the Kynges seruaunte
hath and as my frendes Thomas and Raufe Cantrell
doth vse wt the moost semelye facyons that .iii.
or iiii. excellent Archers haue beside, were al ioyned
in one, I am sure all men woulde wonder at y• excellencie
of it. And this is one waye to learne to shoote
fayre.
            
            
               PHI.
               This is very wel truly, but I praye you
teache me somewhat of shootyng fayre youre selfe.
            
            
               TOX.
               I can teache you to shoote fayre, euen as So
trates taught a man ones to knowe God, for when
he axed hym what was God: naye sayeth he I can
tell you better what God is not, as God is not yll,
God is vnspeakeable, vnsearcheable and so forth:
Euen lykewyse can I saye of fayre shootyng, it hath
not this discommodite with it nor that discommoditie,
and at last a man maye so shifte all the discommodities

from shootynge that there shall be left no
thynge behynde but fayre shootynge. And to do this
the better you must remember howe that I toulde
you when I descrybed generally the hole nature of
shootyng that fayre shotyng came of these thynges,
of standynge, nockynge, drawynge, hewldynge and
lowsynge, the whych I wyll go ouer as shortly as
I can, describynge the discommodities that men cō
                  monlye
vse in all partes of theyr bodies, that you yf
you faulte in any such maye knowe it & so go about
to am end it. Faultes in Archers do excede the number
of Archers, whyche come wyth vse of shootynge
wythoute teachynge. Use and custome separated
from knowlege and learnynge, doth not onely hurt
shootynge, but the moost weyghtye thynges in the
worlde beside: And therfore I maruayle moche at
those people whyche be the mayneteners of vses wt
oute knowledge hauynge no other worde in theyr
mouthe but thys vse, vse, custome, custome. Suche
men more wylful than wyse, beside other discommo
ties, take all place and occasion from al amendmēt.
And thys I speake generally of vse and custome.
               Whych thynge yf a learned man had it in hande y•
woulde applye it to any one matter, he myght handle
it wonderfullye. But as for shootyng, vse is the
onely cause of all fautes in it and therfore chylderne
more easly and soner maye be taught to shote excellentlye
then men, bycause chylderne may be taught
to shoote well at the fyrste, men haue more payne to
vnlearne theyr yll vses, than they haue laboure afterwarde
to come to good shootynge.
               
                  
All the discommodities whiche ill custome hath
graffed in archers, can neyther be quycklye poulled
out, nor yet sone reckened of me, they be so manye.
               Some shooteth, his head forwarde as though he
woulde byte the marke: an other stareth wyth hys
eyes, as though they shulde flye out: An other win
keth with one eye, and loketh with the other: Some
make a face with writhing theyr mouthe and countenaunce
so, as though they were doyng you wotte
what: An other blereth out his tonge: An other byteth
his lyppes: An other holdeth his necke a wrye.
In drawyng some fet suche a compasse, as thoughe
they woulde tourne about, and blysse all the feelde:
Other heaue theyr hand nowe vp now downe, that
a man can not decerne wherat they wolde shote, an
other waggeth the vpper ende of his bow one way,
the neyther ende an other waye. An other wil stand
poyntinge his shafte at the marke a good whyle and
by and by he wyli gyue hym a whip, and awaye or a
man wite. An other maketh suche a wrestling with
his gere, as thoughe he were able to shoote no more
as longe as he lyned. An other draweth foftly to y•
middes, and by and by it is gon, you can not knowe
howe.
               An other draweth his shafte lowe at the breaste,
as thoughe he woulde shoote at a rouynge marke,
and by and by he lifteth his arme vp pricke heyghte.
An other maketh a wrynchinge with hys backe, as
though a manne pynched hym behynde.
               An other coureth downe, and layeth out his buttockes,
as though he shoulde shoote at crowes.
               
                  
An other setteth forwarde hys lefte legge, and draweth
backe wyth head and showlders, as thou ghe
he pouled at a rope, orels were afrayed of y• marke.
An other draweth his shafte well, vntyll wythin .ii.
fyngers of the head, and than he stayeth a lyttle, to
looke at hys marke, and that done, pouleth it vp to
the head, and lowseth: whych waye although sume
excellent shooters do vse, yet surely it is a faulte, and
good mennes faultes are not to be folowed.
               Summe men drawe to farre, summe to shorte, sūme
to slwolye, summe to quickely, summe holde ouer
longe, summe lette go ouer sone.
               Summe sette theyr shafte on the grounde, and fetcheth
him vpwarde. An other poynteth vp to warde
the skye, and so bryngeth hym downewardes.
               Ones I sawe a manne whyche vsed a brasar on
his cheke, or elles he had scratched all the skynne of
the one syde, of his face, with his drawynge hand.
An other I sawe, whiche at euerye shoote, after the
loose, lyfted vp his ryght legge so far, that he was
euer in ieoperdye of faulyng.
               Summe stampe forwarde, and summe leape backwarde.
All these faultes be eyther in the drawynge,
or at the loose: wt many other mo whiche you may
easelye perceyue, and so go about to auoyde them.
               Nowe afterwarde whan the shafte is gone, men
haue manye faultes, whyche euell Custome hath
broughte them to, and specially in cryinge after the
shafte, & speakynge woordes scarce honest for suche
an honest pastyme.
               
                  
Suche woordes be verye tokens of an ill mynde,
and manifeste 
                     •
                  gnes of a man that is subiecte to inmesurable
affections. Good mennes eares do abhor
them, and an houest man therfore wyl auoyde them.
And besydes those whiche muste nedes haue theyr
tongue thus walkynge, other men vse other fautes
as some will take theyr bowe and writhe & wrinche
it, to poule in his shafte, when it flyeth wyde, as yf
he draue a carte. Some wyl gyue two or .iii. strydes
forwarde, daunsing and hoppynge after his shafte,
as long as it flyeth, as though he were a mad man.
Some which feare to be to farre gone, runne backewarde
as it were to poule his shafte backe. Another
tunneth forwarde, whan he feareth to be short, heauynge
after his armes, as though he woulde helpe
his shafte to flye. An other writhes or runneth a
syde, to poule in his shafte strayght. One lifteth vp
his heele, and so holdeth his foote still, as longe as
his shafte flyeth. An other casteth his arme backewarde
after the lowse. And an other swynges hys
bowe aboute hym, as it were a man with a staffe to
make roume in a game place. And manye other
faultes there be, which nowe come not to my remē
                  braunce.
Thus as you haue hearde, many archers
wyth marrynge theyr face and countenaunce, wyth
other partes, of theyr bodye, as it were menne that
shoulde daunce antiques, be farre from the comelye
porte in shootynge, whiche he that woulde be excellent
muste looke for.
               Of these faultes I haue verie many my selfe, but
I talke not of my shootynge, but of the generall nature

of shootynge. Nowe ymagin an Archer that is
cleane wythout al these faultes & I am sure euerye
man would be delyted to se hym shoote.
               And althoughe suche a perfyte cumlynesse can
not be expressed wyth any precepte of teachyng, as
Cicero and other learned menne do saye, yet I wyll
speake (according to my lytle knowlege) that thing
in it, whych yf you folowe, althoughe you shall not
be wythout fault, yet your fault shal neyther quickly
be perceued, nor yet greatly rebuked of them that
stande by. Standyng, nockyng, drawyng, holdyng,
lowsyng, done as they shoulde be done, make fayre
shootynge.
               The fyrste poynte is when a man shoulde shote,Standy
                        •
                     ge.
to take suche footyng and standyng as shal be both
cumlye to the eye and profytable to hys vse, settyng
hys countenaunce and al the other partes of his bodye
after suche a behauiour and porte, that bothe al
hys strengthe may be employed to hys owne moost
auaūtage, and hys shoot made and handled to other
mens pleasure and delyte. A man must not go to hastely
to it, for that is rashnesse, nor yet make to much
to do about it, for y• is curiosit
                     •
                  e, y• one fote must not
stande to far fro the other, leste he stoupe to muche
whyche is vnsemelye, nor yet to nere to gether, leste
he stande to streyght vp, for so a man shall neyther
vse hys strengthe well, nor yet stande stedfastlye.
               The meane betwyxt bothe must be kept, a thing
more pleasaunte to behoulde when it is done, than
rasie to be taught howe it shoulde be done.
               To nocke well is the easiest poynte of all,Nochyn
                        ••
                     
                   and

there in is no cunninge, but onelye dylygente hede
gyuyng, to set hys shaft neyther to hye nor to lowe,
but euen streyght ouertwharte hys bowe, Unconstaute
nockynge maketh a man leese hys lengthe.
               And besydes that, yf the shafte hande be hye and the
bowe hand lowe, or contrarie, bothe the bowe is in
ieopardye of brekynge, and the shafte, yf it be lytle,
wyll start: yf it be great it wyll hobble. Nocke the
cocke fether vpward alwayes as I toulde you whē
I described the fether. And be sure alwayes y• your
stringe slip not out of the nocke, for than al is in 
                     •
                  eopardye
of breakynge.
               DrawyngeD
                        •
                     awynge. well is the best parte of shootyng.
Men in oulde tyme vsed other maner of drawynge
than we do. They vsed to drawe low at the brest, to
the ryght pap and no farther, and this to be trew is
playne in Homer, where he descrybeth Pandarus
shootynge.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  Vp to the pap his stringe dyd he pul, his shafte to the hard heed.
               
               The noble women of Scythia vsed the same fashyon
of shootyng low at the brest, and bicause their
lefte pap hindred theyr shootynge at the lowse they
cut it of when they were yonge, and therfore be they
called in lackynge theyr pap Amazones. Nowe a
dayes contrarye wyse we drawe to the ryghte eare
and not to the pap. Whether the olde way in drawynge
low to the pap,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   or the new way to draw a loft
to the eare be better, an excellente wryter in Greke
called Procopius doth saye hys mynde, shewyng y•
                  
the oulde fashion in drawing to y• pap was nought,
of no pithe, and therfore saith Procopius: is Artylla

                     •
                  ye dispraysed in Homer whych calleth it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
1. Weake and able to do no good. Drawyng to the
eare he prayseth greatly, whereby men shoote both
stronger and longer: drawynge therfore to the eare
is better than to drawe at the breste. And one thyng
commeth into my remembraunce nowe Philologe
when I speake of drawyng, that I neuer red of other
kynde of shootyng, than drawing wyth a mās
hand ether to the breste or eare: This thyng haue I
sought for in Homer Herodotus and Plutarch, and
therfore I meruayle how crosbowesCrosbowes. came fyrst vp,
of the which I am sure a man shall finde lytle mention
made on in any good Authour. Leo the Emperoure
woulde haue hys souldyers drawe quycklye
in warre, for that maketh a shaft flie a pace. In
shootynge at the pryckes, hasty and quicke drawing
is neyther sure nor yet cumlye. Therfore to drawe
easely and vniformely, that is for to saye not waggyng
your hand, now vpwarde, now downe warde,
but alwayes after one fashion vntil you come to the
rig or shouldring of y• head, is best both for profit &
semelinesse. HoldyngeHolding. must not be longe, for it bothe
putteth a bowe in ieopardy, & also marreth a mans
shoote, it must be so lytle y• it maye be perceyued better
in a mans mynde when it is done, than seene wt
a mans eyes when it is in doyng.
               LowsyngeLowsynge. muste be muche lyke. So quycke and
hard y• it 
                     •
                  e wyth oute all girdes, so softe and gentle

that the shafte flye not as it were sente out of a bow
case. The meane betwixt bothe, whyche is perfyts
lowsynge is not so hard to be folowed inshootynge
as it is to be descrybed in teachyng. For cleane lowsynge
you must take hede of hyttynge any thynge a
boute you. And for the same purpose Leo the Emperour
would haue al Archers in war to haue both
theyr heades pouled, and there berdes shauen leste
the heare of theyr heades shuld stop the syght of the
eye, the heere of theyr berdes hinder the course of the
strynge.
               And these preceptes I am sure Philologe yf you
folowe in standyng, nockyng, drawynge, holdynge,
and lowsynge, shal bryng you at the last to excellent
fayre shootynge.
            
            
               PHI.
               All these thynges Toxohile
althoughe I bothe nowe perceyue them thorowlye,
and also wyll remember them diligently: yet to
morowe or some other day whē you haue leasure we
wyll go to the pryckes, and put them by lytle and lytle
in experience. For teachynge not folowed, doeth
euen as muche good as bookes neuer looked vpon.
But nowe seing you haue taught me to shote fayre,
I praye you tel me somwhat, how I should shoote
nere leste that prouerbe myght be sayd iustlye of me
sometyme. He shootes lyke a gentle man fayre & far
of.
            
            
               TOX.
               He that can shoote fayre, lacketh nothyng
but shootyng streyght and kepyng of a length wher
of commeth hyttynge of the marke, the ende both of
shootyng and also of thys our communication. The
handlyng of y• wether & the mark bicause they belōg
to shootyng streyghte, and kepynge of a lengthe, I

wyll ioyne them togyther, shewinge what thinges
belonge to kepynge of a lengthe, and what to shootynge
streyght.
               The greatest enemy of shootyng is the wynde and
the wether,wynde 
                        •
                     nd wether. wherby true kepyng a lengthe is chefely
hindered. If this thing were not, men by teaching
might be brought to wonderful neare shootynge.
It is no maruayle if the litle poore shafte being sent
alone, so high in to the ayer, into a great rage of wether,
one wynde tossinge it that waye, an other thys
waye, it is no maruayle I saye, thoughe it leese the
lengthe, and misse that place, where the shooter had
thought to haue founde it. Greter matters than sho
tynge are vnder the rule and wyll of the wether, as
saylynge on the sea. And lykewise as in sayling, the

                     •
                  he chefe poynt of a good master, is to knowe the tokens
of chaunge of wether, the course of the wyndes,
that therby he maye the better come to the Hauen:
euen so the best propertie of a good shooter, is
to knowe the nature of the wyndes, with hym and
agaynste hym, that thereby he maye the nerer shote
at hys marke. Wyse maysters whan they canne not
winne the beste hauen, they are gladde of the nexte:
Good shooters also, y• can not whan they would hit
the marke, wil labour to come as nigh as they can.
All thinges in this worlde be vnperfite and vnconstant,
therfore let euery man acknowlege hys owne
weakenesse, in all matters great and smal, weyght
                  
                     •
                  ye
and merye, and glorifie him, in whome only p
                     ••
                  
                  fyte
perfitnesse is. But nowe sir, he that wyll at all
aduentures vse the seas knowinge no more what is

to be done in a tempest than in a caulme, shall soone
becumme a marchaunt of Eele skinnes: so that shoter
whiche putteth no difference, but shooteth in all
lyke, in rough wether and fayre, shall alwayes put
his wynninges in his eyes.
               Ly
                     •
                  le botes and thinne boordes, can not endure
the rage of a tempest. Weake bowes, & lyght shaftes
can not stande in a rough wynde. And lyke wyse
as a blynde man which shoulde go to a place where
he had neuer ben afore, that hath but one strayghte
waye to it, and of eyther syde hooles and pyttes to
faule into, nowe falleth in to this hole and than into
that hole, and neuer cōmeth to his iourney ende, but
wandereth alwaies here and there, farther and farther
of: So that archer which ignorauntly shoteth
considering neyther fayer nor foule, standynge nor
nockynge, fether nor head, drawynge nor lowsyng,
nor yet any compace, shall alwayes shote shorte and
gone, wyde and farre of, and neuer cumme nere, excepte
perchaunce he stumble sumtyme on the marke
For ignoraunce is nothynge elles but mere blyndenesse.
               A mayster of a shippe first learneth to knowe the
cum myng of a tempest, the nature of it, and howe
to behaue hym selfe in it, eyther with chaungynge
his course, or poullynge downe his hye toppes and
brode sayles, beyng glad to eschue as muche of the
wether as he can: Euen so a good archer wyl fyrste
wyth diligent vse and markynge the wether, learne
to knowe the nature of the wynde, and with wysedome,
wyll measure in hys mynde, howe muche it

wyll alter his shoote, eyther in lengthe kepynge, or
els in streyght shotynge, and so with chaunging his
standynge, or takynge an other shafte, the whiche he
knoweth perfytlye to be fitter for his pourpose, eyther
bycause it is lower fethered, orels bycause it is
of a better wyng, wyll so handle wt discretion hys
shoote, that he shall seeme rather to haue the wether
vnder hys rule, by good hede gyuynge, than the wether
to rule hys shafte by any sodayne chaungyng.
               Therefore in shootynge there is as muche difference
betwixt an archer that is a good wether man,
and an other that knoweth and marketh nothynge,
as is betwixte a blynde man, and he that can se.
               Thus, as concernynge the wether, a perfyte archer
muste firste learne to knowe the sure flyghte of
his shaftes, that he may be boulde alwayes, to trust
them, than muste he learne by daylye experience all
maner of kyndes of wether, the tokens of it, whan
it wyll cumme, the nature of it whan it is cūme, the
diuersitie and alteryng of it, whan it chaungeth, the
decrease & diminishing of it, whā it ceaseth. Thirdly
these thinges knowen, and euery shoote diligentlye
marked, than must a man cōpare alwayes, the wether
and his footyng togyther, and with discretion
measure them so, that what so euer the roughe wether
shall take awaye from hys shoote the same shal
luste footynge restore agayne to hys shoote.
               Thys thynge well knowen, and discretelye handeled
in shootynge, bryngeth more profite and commendation
and prayse to an Archer, than any other
thynge besydes.
               
                  
He that woulde knowe perfectly the winde and wether,
muste put differences betwixte tymes. For diuersitie
of tyme causeth diuersitie of wether, as in
the whole yeare, Sprynge tyme, Somer, Faule of
the leafe, and Winter: Lykewyse in one day Mornynge,
Noonetyme, After noone, and Euentyde,
bothe alter the wether, and chaunge a mā
                  
                     •
                  es bowe
wyth the strength of man also. And to knowe that
this is so, is ynough for a shoter & artillerie, and not
to serche the cause, why it shoulde be so: whiche belongeth
to a learned man and Philosophie.
               In consydering the tyme of the yeare, a wyse Archer
wyll folowe a good Shipman. In Winter &
rough wether, smal bootes and lytle pinkes forsake
the seas: And at one tyme of the yeare, no Gallies
come abrode: So lykewyse weake Archers, vsyng
small and holowe shaftes, with bowes of litle pith,
muste be content to gyue place for a tyme.
               And this I do not saye, eyther to discōmende or discourage
any weake shooter: For lykewyse, as there
is no shippe better than Gallies be, in a softe and a
caulme sea, so no man shooteth cumlier or nerer hys
marke, than some weake archers doo, in a fayre and
cleare daye.
               Thus euery archer must knowe, not onely what
bowe and shafte is fittest for him to shoote withall,
but also what tyme & season is best for hym to shote
in. And surely, in al other matters to, amonge al degrees
of men, there is no man which doth any thing
eyther more discretely for his commendation, or yet
more profitable for his aduauntage, than he which

wyll knowe perfitly for what matter and for what
tyme he is moost apte and fit. Yf men woulde go aboute
matters whych they should do and be fit for,
not suche thynges whyche wylfullye they desyre &
yet be vnfit for, verely greater matters in the cōmon
welthe than shootyng shoulde be in better case than
they be. This ignorauncie in men whyche know not
for what tyme, and to what thynge they be fit, causeth
some wyshe to be riche, for whome it were better
a greate deale to be poore: other to be medlynge
in euery mans matter, for whome it were more honestie
to be quiete and styll. Some to desire to be in
the Courte, whiche be borne and be fitter rather for
the carte. Somme to be maysters and rule other,
whiche neuer yet began to rule them selfe: some alwayes
to iangle and taulke, whych rather shoulde
heare and kepe silēce. Some to teache, which rather
should learne. Some to be prestes, whiche were fy
                     •
                  
                  ter
to be clerkes. And thys peruerse iudgement of y•
worlde, when men mesure them selfe a misse, bringeth
muche mysorder and greate vnsemelynesse to
the hole body of the common wealth, as yf a manne
should were his hoose vpon his heade, or a woman
go wyth a sworde and a buckeler euery man would
take it as a greate vncumlynesse although it be but
a tryfle in respecte of the other.
               Thys peruerse iudgement of men hindreth no
thynge so much as learuynge, bycause commonlye
those whych be vnfittest for learnyng, be cheyfly set
to learnynge.
               As yf a man nowe a dayes haue two sonnes, the

one impotent, weke, s
                     •
                  ckly, lispynge, stuttynge, and
stamerynge, or hauynge any misshape in his bodye:
what doth the father of suche one commonlye saye?
This boye is fit for nothynge els, but to set to lernyng
and make a prest of, as who would say, y• outcastes
of the worlde, hauyng neyther countenaūce
tounge nor wit (for of a peruerse bodye cūmeth commonly
a peruerse mynde) be good ynough to make
those men of, whiche shall be appoynted to preache
Goddes holye woorde, and minister hys blessed sacramentes,
besydes other moost weyghtye matters
in the common welthe put ofte tymes, and worthelye
to learned mennes discretion and charge: whan
rather suche an offyce so hygh in dignitie, so godlye
in administration, shulde be committed to no man,
whiche shulde not haue a countenaunce full of cumlynesse
to allure good menne, a bodye ful of manlye
authoritie to feare ill men, a witte apte for al learnynge
with tongue and voyce, able to perswade all
men. And although fewe suche men as these can be
founde in a common wealthe, yet surely a godly dis
posed man, will bothe in his mynde thyncke fit, and
with al his studie labour to get such men as I speke
of, or rather better, if better can be gotten for suche
an hie administration, whiche is most properlye appoynted
to goddes owne matters and businesses.
               This peruerse iugement of fathers as concernynge
the fitnesse and vnfitnesse of theyr chyldren causeth
the cōmon wealthe haue many vnfit ministers: And
seyng that ministers be, as a man woulde say, instrumentes
wherwt the cōmon wealthe doeth worke all

her matters wtall, I maruayle bowe it chaūteth y• a
pore shomaker hath so much wit, y• he will prepare
no instrument for his science neither knyfe nor aule,
nor nothing els whiche is not very fitte for him: the
cōmon wealthe can be content to take at a fonde fathers
hande, the rifraffe of the worlde, to make those
instrumentes of, wherwtal she shoulde worke y• hiest
matters vnder heauen. And surely an aule of lead is
not so vnprofitable in a shomakers shop, as an vnfit
minister, made of grosse metal, is vnsemely in y• cō
                  mō
welth. Fathers in olde time among y• noble Persians
might not do wt theyr childrē as they thought
good, but as the iudgement of the cōmon wealth alwayes
thought best. This fault of fathers bringeth
many a blot wt it, to the great deformitie of the common
wealthe: & here surely I can prayse gentlewomen
which haue alwayes at hande theyr glasses, to
se if any thinge be amisse, & so will amende it, yet the
cōmon wealth hauing y• glasse of knowlege in euery
mans hand, doth se such vncumlines in it: & yet win
keth at it. This faulte & many suche lyke, myght be
sone wyped awaye, yf fathers woulde bestow their
children on y• thing alwayes, whervnto nature hath
ordeined them moste apte & fit. For if youth be grafted
streyght, & not awrye, the hole cōmon welth wil
florish therafter. Whan this is done, than muste euery
man beginne to be more ready to amende hym
selfe, than to checke an other, measuryng their matters
with that wise prouerbe of Apollo, Knowe thy
selfe: that is tosaye, learne to knowe what thou arte
able, fitte, and apte vnto, and folowe that.
               
                  
This thinge shulde be bothe cuml
                     •
                  e to the cōmon
wealthe, and moost profitable for euery one, as doth
appere very well in all wise mennes deades, & specially
to turne to our communication agayne in shootynge,
where wise archers haue alwayes theyr instrumentes
fit for theyr strength, & wayte euermore
suche tyme and wether, as is most agreable to their
gere. Therfore if the wether be to sore, and vnfit for
your shootynge, leaue of for that daye, and wayte a
better season. For he is a foole y• wyl not go, whome
necessitie driueth.
            
            
               PHI.
               This cōmunication of yours
pleased me so well Corophile, that surelye I was
not hastie to calle you, to descrybe forthe the wether
but with all my harte woulde haue suffered you yet
to haue stande longer in this matter. For these thinges
touched of you by chaunse, and by the waye, be
farre aboue the matter it selfe, by whose occasion y•
other were broughte in.
            
            
               TOX.
               Weyghtye matters
they be in dede, and fit bothe in an other place to be
spoken: & of an other man than I am, to be handled.
And bycause meane men must meddle wyth meane
matters, I wyl go for warde in descrybyng the wether,
as concernynge shooting: and as I toulde you
before, In the hole yere, Spring tyme, Somer, Fal
of the leafe, and Winter: and in one day, Morning,
Noone tyme, After noone, and Euentyde, altereth
the course of the wether, the pith of the bowe, the
strength of the man. And in euery one of these times
the wether altereth, as sumtyme wyndie, sumtyme
caulme, sumtyme cloudie, sumtyme clere, sumtyme

                     •
                  ote, sumtyme coulde, the wynde sumtyme mo
                     •
                  stye

and thicke, sumtyme drye and smothe. A litle winde
in a moystie day, stoppeth a shafte more than a good
whiskynge wynde in a clere daye. Yea, and I haue
sene whan there hath bene no winde at all, the ayer
so mistie and thicke, that both the markes haue ben
wonderfull great. And ones, whan the Plage was
in Cambrige, the downe winde twelue score marke
for the space of .iii. weekes, was .xiii. score, and an
halfe, and into the wynde, beynge not very great, a
great deale aboue .xiiii. score.
               The winde is sumtyme playne vp and downe,
whiche is commonly moste certayne, and requireth
least knowlege, wherin a meane shoter with meane
geare, if he can shoote home, maye make best shifte.
A syde wynde tryeth an archer and good gere verye
muche. Sumtyme it bloweth a lofte, sumtyme hard
by the grounde: Sumtyme it bloweth by blastes, &
sumtyme it continueth al in one: Sumtyme ful side
wynde, sumtyme quarter with hym and more, and
lykewyse agaynst hym, as a man with castynge vp
lyght grasse, orels if he take good hede, shall sensibly
learne by experience. To se the wynde, with a man
his eyes, it is vnpossible, the nature of it is so fyne,
and subtile, yet this experience of the wynde had I
ones my selfe, and that was in the great snowe that
fell .iiii. yeares agoo: I rode in the hye waye betwirt
Topcliffe vpon Swale, and Borowe bridge, the
waye beyng sumwhat trodden afore, by waye fay,
rynge men. The feeldes on bothe sides were playne
and laye almost yearde depe with snowe, the nyght
afore had ben a litle froste, so y• the snowe was hard

& crusted aboue. That morning the sun shone brigh
                     •
                  
and clere, the winde was whistelinge a lofte, and
sharpe accordynge to the tyme of the yeare. The
snowe in the hye waye laye lowse and troden wyth
horse feete: so as the wynde blewe, it toke the lowse
snow with it, and made it so slide vpon the snowe in
the felde whyche was harde and crusted by reason
of the frost ouer nyght, that therby I myght se verye
wel, the hole nature of the wynde as it blewe y•
daye. And I had a great delyte & pleasure to marke
it, whyche maketh me now far better to remember
it. Sometyme the wynd would be not past .ii. yeardes
brode, and so it would carie the snowe as far as
I coulde se. An other tyme the snow woulde blowe
ouer halfe the felde at ones. Sometyme the snowe
woulde tomble softly, by and by it would flye wonderfull
fast. And thys I perceyued also that y• wind
goeth by streames & not hole togither. For I should
se one streame wyth in a Score on me, thā the space
of .ii. score no snow would stirre, but after so muche
quātitie of grounde, an other streame of snow at the
same very tyme should be caryed lykewyse, but not
equally. For the one would stande styll when the other
flew a pace, and so contynewe somtyme swiftlyer
sometime slowlyer, sometimebroder, sometime
narrower, as far as I coulde se. Nor it flewe not
streight, but sometyme it crooked thys waye sometyme
that waye, and somtyme it ran round aboute
in a compase. And somtyme the snowe wold be lyft
clene from the ground vp in to the ayre, and by & by
it would be al clapt to the grounde as though there

had bene no winde at all, streightway it woulde rise
and flye agayne.
               And that whych was the moost meruayle of al,
at one tyme .ii. driftes of snowe flewe, the one out of
the West into y• East, the other out of the North in
to y• East: And I saw .ii. windes by reasō of y• snow
the one crosse ouer the other, as it had bene two hye
wayes. And agayne I shoulde here the wynd blow
in the ayre, when nothing was stirred at the groūd.
And when all was still where I rode, not verye far
frō me the snow should be lifted wonderfully. This
experiēce made me more meruaile at y• nature of the
wynde, than it made me conning in y• knowlege of y•
wynd: but yet therby I learned perfitly that it is no
meruayle at al thoughe men in a wynde lease theyr
length in shooting, seyng so many wayes the wynde
is so variable in blowynge.
               But seynge that a Mayster of a shyp, be he neue
                     •
                  
so cunnynge, by the vncertayntye of the wynde, leeseth
many tymes both lyfe and goodes, surelye it is
no wonder, though a ryght good Archer, by the self
same wynde so variable in hys owne nature, so vnsensyble
to oure nature, leese manye a shoote and
game.
               The more vncertaine and disceyuable the wynd
is, the more hede must a wyse Archer gyue to know
the gyles of it.
               He y• doth mistrust is seldome begiled. For although
therby he shall not attayne to that which is best, yet
by these meanes he shall at leaste auoyde y• whyche
is worst Besyde al these kindes of windes you must

                  
                     •
                  ake hede yf you se anye cloude apere and gather by
lytle and litle agaynst you, or els yf a showre of raine
belyke to come vpon you: for than both the dryuing
of the wether and the thyckynge of the ayre increaseth
the marke, when after y• showre al thynges are
contrary clere and caulme, & the marke for the most
parte new to begyn agayne. You must take hede also
yf euer you shote where one of the markes or both
stondes a lytle short of a hye wall, for there you may
be easlye begyled. Yf you take grasse and caste it vp
to se howe the wynde standes, manye tymes you
shal suppose to shoote downe the wynde, when you
shote cleane agaynste the wynde. And a good reasō
why. For the wynd whych commeth in dede against
you, redoundeth bake agayne at the wal, and whyrleth
backe to the prycke and a lytle farther and than
turneth agayne, euen as a vehement water doeth agaynste
a rocke or an hye braye whyche example of
water as it is more sensible to a mās eyes, so it is neuer
a whyt the trewer than this of the wynde. So
that the grasse caste vp shall flee that waye whyche
in dede is the longer marke and disceyue quycklye a
shooter that is not ware of it.
               This experience had I ones my selfe at Norwytch
in the chapel felde wythin the waulles. And
thys waye I vsed in shootynge at those markes.
               When I was in the myd way betwixt the markes
whyche was an open place, there I toke a fether or
a lytle lyght grasse and so as well as I coulde, learned
how the wynd stoode, that done I wente to the

                     •
                  rycke as faste as I coulde, and according as I had

foūde y• wynde when I was in the mid waye, so I
was fayne than to be content to make the best of my
shoote that I coulde. Euen suche an other experiēce
had I in a maner at Yorke, at the pri
                     •
                  kes, lying betwixte
the castell and Ouse syde. And although you
smile Philologe, to heare me tell myne owne fondenes:
yet seing you wil nedes haue me teach you somwhat
in shotyng, I must nedes somtyme tel you of
myne owne experience, & the better I may do so, bycause
Hippocrates in teachynge phylike,Nippo. 
                        〈…〉
                      morb. vulg. vseth verye
muche the same waye. Take heede also when you
shoote nere the sea cost, although you be .ii. or .iii. miles
from the sea, for there diligent markinge shall espie
in the moste clere daye wonderfull chaunginge.
The same is to be cōsidered lykewyse by a riuer side
speciallie if it ebbe & flowe, where he y• taketh diligent
hede of y• tide & wether, shal lightly take a way
al y• he shooteth for. And thus of y• nature of windes
& wether according to my marking you haue hearde
Philologe: & hereafter you shal marke farre mo your
selfe, if you take hede. And the wether thus marked
as I tolde you afore, you muste take hede, of youre
stāding, y• therby you may win as much as you shal
loose by the wether.
            
            
               PHI.
               I se well it is no maruell
though a man misse many tymes in shootyng, seing
y• wether is so vnconstant in blowing, but yet there
is one thing whiche many archers vse, y• shall cause
a man haue lesse nede to marke the wether, & that is
Ame gyuing.
            
            
               TOX.
               Of gyuyng Ame, I can not tel
wel, what I shuld say. For in a straunge place it taketh
away al occasion of foule game, which is y• only

prayse of it, yet by my iudgemēt, it hidreth y• knowlege
of shotyng, & maketh men more negligente: y•
which is a disprayse. Though Ame be giuē, yet take
hede, for at an other mās shote you can not wel take
Ame, nor at your owne neither, bycause the wether
wil alter, euen in a minute, & at the one marke & not
at the other, & trouble your shafte in the ayer, when
you shal perceyue no wynde at the ground, as I my
selfe haue sene shaftes tumble a lofte, in a very fayer
daye. There may be a fault also, in drawing or lowsynge,
and many thynges mo, whiche all togyther,
are required to kepe a iust length. But to go forward
the nexte poynte after the markyng of your wether,
is the takyng of your standyng. And in a side winde
you must stand sumwhat crosse in to the wynde, for
so shall you shoote the surer. Whan you haue taken
good footing, than must you looke at your shafte, y•
no earthe, nor weete be lefte vpon it, for so should is
leese the lengthe. You must loke at the head also, lest
it haue had any strype, at the laste shoote. A stripe vpon
a stone, many tymes will bothe marre the head,
croke the shafte, and hurte the fether, wherof the lest
of them all, wyll cause a man lease his lengthe. For
suche thinges which chaunce euery shoote, many archers
vse to haue sūme place made in theyr cote, fitte
for a litle fyle, a stone, a Hunfyshskin, and a cloth to
dresse the shaft fit agayne at all nedes. Thys must a
man looke to euer when he taketh vp his shaft. And
the heade maye be made to smothe, which wil cause
it flye to far: when youre shafte is fit, than must you
take your bow euen in the middes or elles you shall

both lease your lengthe, and put youre bowe in 
                     •
                  eopardye
of breakynge. Nockynge iuste is next, which
is muche of the same nature. Than drawe equallye,
lowse equallye, wyth houldynge your hande euer of
one heighte to kepe trew compasse. To looke at your
shafte hede at the lowse, is the greatest helpe to kepe
a lengthe that can be, whych thyng yet hindreth excellent
shotyng, bicause a man can not shote streight
perfitlye excepte he looke at his marke, yf I should
shoote at a line and not at the marke, I woulde alwayes
loke at my shaft ende, but of thys thyng some
what afterwarde. Nowe if you marke the wether
diligentlye, kepe your standynge iustely, houlde and
nocke trewlye, drawe and lowse equallye, and kepe
youre compace certaynelye, you shall neuer misse of
your lengthe.
            
            
               PHI.
               Then there is nothyng behinde
to make me hit y• marke but onely shooting streight.
            
            
               TOX.
               No trewlye. And fyrste I wyll tel you what
shyftes Archers haue founde to shoote streyght, thā
what is the best waye to shoote streyght. As the wether
belongeth specially to kepe a lengthe (yet a side
winde belongeth also to shote streight) euen so the
nature of the pricke is to shote streight. The lengthe
or shortnesse of the marke is alwayes vnder the rule
of the wether, yet sumwhat there is in y• marke, wor
thye to be marked of an Archer. Yf the prickes stand
of a streyght playne groūd they be y• best to shote at.
Yf y• marke stād on a hyl syde or y• groūd be vnequal
 wt pittes & turninge wayes betwyxte the markes, a
mans eye shall thynke that to be streight whyche is
croked: The experience of this thing is sene in pay
                     •
                  
                  tynge,
the cause of it is knowen by learnynge.
               
                  
And it is ynoughe for an archer to marke it and take
hede of it. The cheife cause why men can not shoote
streight, is bicause they loke at theyr shaft: and this
fault commeth bycause a mā is not taught to shote
when he is yong. Yf he learne to shoote by himselfe
he is a frayde to pull the shafte throughe the bowe,
and therfore looketh alwayes at hys shafte: yll vse
confirmeth thys faulte as it doth many mo.
               And men continewe the longer in thys faulte
bycause it is so good to kepe a lengthe wyth al, and
yet to shote streight, they haue inuēted some waies.
to espie a tree or a hill beyonde the marke, or elles to
haue sūme notable thing betwixt y• markes: & ones
I sawe a good archer whiche did caste of his gere, &
layd his quiuer wt it, euen in the midway betwixt y•
prickes. Sūme thought he dyd so, for sauegarde of
his gere: I suppose he did it, to shoote streyght wtall.
Other men vse to espie sūme marke almoost a bow
wide of y• pricke, and than go about to kepe him selfe
on y• hande that the prycke is on, which thing howe
muche good it doth, a man wil not beleue, that doth
not proue it. Other & those very good archers in drawyng,
loke at the marke vntill they come almost to
y• head, than they looke at theyr shafte, but at y• very
lowse, wt a seconde sight they fynde theyr marke agayne.
This way & al other afore of me rehersed are
but shiftes & not to be folowed in shotyng streyght.
For hauyng a mans eye alwaye on his marke, is the
only waye to shote streght, yea & I suppose so redye
& easy a way yf it be learned in youth & confirmed wt
vse, y• a man shal neuer misse therin. Men doubt yet ī
                  
lokig at y• mark what way is best whether betwixt
the bowe & the stringe, aboue or beneth hys hand,
& many wayes moo: yet it maketh no great matter
which way a man looke at his marke yf it be ioyned
 wt comly shotynge. The diuersite of mens standyng
and drawing causeth diuerse mē loke at theyr marke
diuerse wayes: yet they al lede a mās hand to shoote
streight yf nothyng els stoppe. So that cumlynesse
is the only iudge of best lokyng at the marke. Some
men wonder why in casting a mans eye at y• marke,
the hande should go streyght. Surely yf he consydered
the nature of a mans eye, he wolde not wonder
at it: For this I am cerrayne of, that no seruaunt to
hys mayster, no chylde to hys father is so obedient,
as euery ioynte and pece of the body is to do what
soeuer the eye biddes. The eye is the guide, the ruler
& the succourer of al the other partes. The hāde, the
foote & other members dare do nothynge wtout the
eye, as doth appere on the night and darke corners.
The eye is the very tonge wherwt wyt & reasō doth
speke to euery parte of the body, & the wyt doth not
so sone signifye a thynge by the eye, as euery part is
redye to folow, or rather preuent the byddyng of the
eye. Thys is playne in many thinges, but most euident
in fence and feyghtynge, as I haue heard men
saye. There euery part standynge in feare to haue a
blowe, runnes to the eye for helpe, as yonge chyldrē
do to y• mother: the foote, the hand, & al wayteth vpō
the eye. Yf the eye byd y• hād either beare of, or sinite,
or the foote ether go forward, or backeward, it doth
so: And that whyche is moost wonder of all the one

man lookynge stedfastly at the other mans eye and
not at his hand, wyl, euē as it were, rede in his eye
where he purposeth to smyte next, for the eye is nothyng
els but a certayne wyndowe for wit to shote
oute hir hede at.
               Thys wonderfull worke of god in makynge all
the members so obedient to the eye, is a pleasaunte
thynge to remember and loke vpon: therfore an Archer
maye be sure in learnyng to looke at hys marke
when he is yong, alwayes to shoote streyghte. The
thynges that hynder a man whyche looketh at hys
marke, to shoote streyght, be these: A syde wynde, a
bowe either to stronge, or els to weake, an ill arme,
whan a fether runneth on the bowe to much, a byg
brested shafte, for hym that shoteth vnder hande, bycause
it wyll hobble: a litle brested shafte for hym y•
shoteth aboue y• hande, bicause it myl starte: a payre
of windynge prickes, and many other thinges mo,
which you shal marke your selfe, & as ye knowe thē,
so learne to amend them. If a man woulde leaue to
looke at his shafte, and learne to loke at his marke,
he maye vse this waye, whiche a good shooter tolde
me ones that he did. Let him take his bowe on the
nyght, and shoote at .ii. lightes, and there he shall be
compelled to looke alwayes at his marke, & neuer at
his shafte: This thing ones or twyse vsed wyl cause
hym forsake lokynge at hys shafte. Yet let hym take
hede of settynge his shaft in the bowe.
               Thus Philologe to shoote streyght is the leaste
maysterie of all, yf a manne order hym selfe thereafter,
in hys youthe. And as for kepynge a lengthe, I

am sure the rules whiche I gaue you, wil neuer disceyue
you, so that there shal lacke nothynge, eyther
of hittinge the marke alwayes, or elles verye nere
shotynge, excepte the faulte be onely in youre owne
selfe, whiche maye come .ii. wayes, eyther in hauing
a faynt harte or courage, or elles in sufferynge your
selfe ouer muche to be led with affection: yf a mans
mynde fayle hym, the bodye whiche is ruled by the
mynde, can neuer doe his duetie, yf lacke of courage
were not, men myght do mo mastries than they do,
as doeth appere in leapynge and vaultinge.
               All affections and specially anger, hurteth bothe
mynde and bodye. The mynde is blynde therby: and
yf the mynde be blynde, it can not rule the bodye aright.
The body both blood and bone, as they say, is
brought out of his ryght course by anger: Wherby
a man lacketh his right strengthe, and therfore can
not shoote wel. Yf these thynges be auoyded (wher
of I wyll speake no more, both bycause they belong
not properly to shoting, & also you can teache me better,
in them, than I you) & al the preceptes which I
haue gyuen you, diligently marked, no doubt ye shal
shoote as well as euer man dyd yet, by the grace of
God. Thys communication handled of me Philologe,
as I knowe wel not perfytly, yet as I suppose
truelye you must take in good worthe, wherin if diuers
thinges do not all togyther please you, thanke
youre selfe, whiche woulde haue me rather faulte in
me
                     •
                  e follye, to take that thynge in hande whyche I
was not able for to perfourme, than by any honeste

shame fastnes with say your request & minde, which
I knowe well I haue not satisfied. But yet I wyl
thinke this labour of mine the better bestowed, if to
morow or some other daye when you haue leysour,
you wyl spende as much tyme with me here in this
same place, in entreatinge the question De origine
anime, and the ioynyng of it with the bodye, that I
maye knowe howe far Plato, Aristotle, & the Stoi
                  
                     •
                  cians
haue waded in it.
            
            
               PHI.
               How you haue handeled this matter Toxoph.
I may not well tel you my selfe nowe, but for your
gentlenesse and good wyll towarde learnyng & shotyng,
I wyll be content to shewe you any pleasure
whensoeuer you wyll: and nowe the sunne is doune
therfore if it plese you, we wil go home and drynke
in my chambre, and there I wyll tell you playnelye
what I thinke of this cōmunication and also, what
daye we will appoynt at your request for the other
matter, to mete here agayne.
            
            Deo gratias.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ LONDINI. ☞
            In aedibus Edouardi VVhytchurch.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum
solum.
1545.
            
         
      
   