
      
         
            
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            
               ❧By the King.
            
               
                  IN calling to our Princely remembrance, that in the late Rebellion vpon pretence of Depopulation and vnlawfull Incloſures, the greateſt number of the offenders haue not beene proceeded with according to Juſtice and their traiterous deſeruings, no nor ſo much as apprehended or touched for the ſame, although they bee in no better caſe or degree, then thoſe few which haue ſuffered or beene called in queſtion: There want not ſome reaſons and circumſtances which (if wee would conſult onely with policie or paſſion) mought induce vs to further ſeueritie, and a more generall execution of the Law vpon the ſame offenders. For wee are not ignorant, that of all other ſeditions and rebellions, none doth bring ſuch infinite waſte and deſolation vpon a Kingdome or State, as theſe popular Inſurrections, which though they doe ſeldome ſhake or indanger a Crowne, yet they doe bring a heape of calamities vpon multitudes of innocent Subiects, and chiefly vpon the Authors and Acters themſelues.
            And againe, Wee doe obſerue, that there was not ſo much as any neceſſitie of famine or dearth of corne, or any other extraordinary accident, that might ſtirre or prouoke them in that maner to offend; but that it may be thought to proceede of a kinde of inſolencie and contempt of our milde and gracious Gouernment, which mought (in ſome Prince) turne the ſame into more heauy wrath and diſpleaſure. But We neuertheleſſe hauing at the very entrance of our Raigne, in the higheſt treaſons againſt our owne Perſon, intermingled Mercie with iuſtice, are much more inclined in this caſe, which concerneth a number of poore & ſimple people, to extend our naturall clemencie to wards them. Whereupon we haue reſolued to ſet wide open the gate of our Mercie vnto them, and to beſtowe vpon them our free Grace and Pardon, without further Suite or Supplication.
            And therefore we doe hereby take and receiue all the ſayd Offenders, and euery of them, to our Mercie, and of our Grace and meere motion, freely pardon vnto them their ſayd Offences, and all paines of Death or other puniſhment due for the ſame, and promiſe vnto them, in the word of their naturall Liege Lord and King, that they ſhall not be in any wiſe moleſted or impeached, in Life, Member, Lands or Goods for their ſayd Offences, or any of them. So as neuertheleſſe, that before Michaelmas next they doe ſubmit themſelues, and acknowledge their ſayd Offences before our Lieutenant, Deputie Lieutenant, or Sheriffe in the Countie where they ſhall remaine, whereof Wee will and command a Note or Entrie to be made and kept.
            And We are further graciouſly pleaſed, that if any of them ſeuerally or iointly ſhal deſire for their better aſſurance, to haue our Pardon vnder our great Seale, that our Chancellor ſhal make the ſame vnto them without further warrant in that behalfe. Not intending neuertheleſſe to preiudice any our Subiects priuate Suite or Action, but ſo much as in Us is, abſolutely to acquite & diſcharge them againſt Us, our Heires & Succeſſors.
            
               Giuen at our Caſtle of Windſor the 24. day of Iuly, in the fifth yeere of our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland.
               
God ſaue the King.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie. ANNO DOM▪ 1607.
         
      
   