
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ By the King.
            
               WHere vpon our firſt comming to the ſucceſſion of this Kingdome, at the ſute of diuers perſons, who had or pretended to haue from the Queene of famous memory our Siſter deceaſed, Commiſſions as annexed of courſe to ſeuerall offices which they helde, for the taking vp of Hounds, Greyhounds, Spaniels, and Dogges of other ſorts accuſtomed for Venerie, Faulconry or other ſports of Princes, We did renew vnto them their ſaid Commiſſions, and grant the like to ſome others who had no offices, vpon diuers ſuggeſtions made vnto vs, which Commiſſions wee haue ſince beene informed from diuers partes of our Realme, that inferiour Officers who haue bene truſted with them, haue abuſed and do dayly abuſe, contrary to the meaning of the ſame, which was to bee executed no further forth then the neceſſity of our ſeruice ſhould require: And foraſmuch alſo as we haue had good proofe that Gentlemen and others, who delight in the like paſtime of hunting and hanking, haue and will be ready at all times of their owne good will and reſpect to our recreations, to furniſh vs of ſufficient number of Dogges of all ſorts, which wee ſhall haue cauſe to vſe, when they ſhall be informed that we haue need of them:
            Wee haue therefore found it vnneceſſary to continue the execution of any our Commiſſions heretofore giuen for that purpoſe, And doe hereby notifie the ſame to all our Subiects, and expreſſely charge and command all thoſe, who haue any ſuch Commiſſions or Warrants from vs vnder our great Scale, or any other our Scales, that they doe not onely forbeare to put the ſame in execution from henceforth, but alſo do bring in and deliuer vp the ſayd Commiſſions and Warrants, into our Chancerie, or any other Office, where they haue bene ſealed, within the ſpace of Twentie dayes after the publiſhing hereof, as they will anſwere the contrary at their perill. Willing alſo and commanding our Attourney generall, and all other of our Counſell learned, that whenſoeuer they ſhall receiue information, that any perſon, who hath had ſuch Commiſſion from vs, ſhall after the time aboue limitted execute the ſame, that they doe proſecute their offence therein as in caſe of contempt by all ſuch wayes and meanes, as in like caſe is vſuall.
            
               Giuen at our Honour of Hampton Court, the xxvij. day of September, 1605. in the third yeere of our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland.
                  
               
               
               God ſaue the King.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie. ANNO DOM. 1605.
         
      
   