
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧Letters to restraine carrying of
Packets by Shippers, &c.
            
               AFter our hearty commendations. Whereas
it hath pleased his Maiestie, by his Proclamation, bearing
date the fifteenth of May, 1609. to expresse his Royall
pleasure, for the orderly going and comming of such Carriers
and Posts, as are in due maner established by the Post-Masters
reciprocally, both on this side, and on the parts beyond
the Seas; and likewise his Maiesties intention in the
said Proclamation, hath for diuers important reasons, beene
further explaned and enlarged, by the Lords of his Maiesties most honorable Priuy
Councell, wherewith wee doubt not but you are throughly acquainted.
            Now, forasmuch as speciall complaint hath beene made by the said Postmasters,
and the Posts imployed vnder them, that they suffer great wrong and detriment, by
the ouermuch carrying, and bringing into this Realme of Letters and Packets, by
Shipers, and Masters of Ships, besides their fraight Letters, especially to, and from
the Ports of Zeland and Flanders, contrary to his Maiesties said Proclamation, and
the order of his Maiesties Priuie Councell aforesaide. For redresse whereof, and
for the reliefe of the said Posts, whereby they may be the better enabled to performe
their duties and seruice to his Maiestie: These are to will and require you, and euery
of you, whom it may concerne, That you doe henceforth, not onely see his Maiesties
said Proclamation and order, in all points duely obserued and performed; but that
further you doe make diligent search for all Letters and Packets, that shall bee so
brought in, and carried forth, especially by any the said Shippers of Zeland, and the
Ports of Flanders. And in case you shall finde any Letters or Packets, either in
the charge of any Shippers, or Masters of Ships, besides their fraight Letters, or in
the hands of any other passengers, not thereunto by good warrant authorised; We
doe heereby in his Maiesties name straightly charge and commaund you, to take
them into your possession, and thereof to make present deliuery into the handes of
Matthew de Quester, his Maiesties Post-Master for forraine seruices; for so it is his
Maiesties pleasure and command. And heereof you may not faile, as you will answere
the contrary at your perils.
            
               From White-Hall the sixth of February, 1618.
               
               Your louing Friends,
THO. LAKE. ROBERT NAVNTON.
To our louing friends, the Searchers of the Port of London, Grauesend and Douer,
and to the Searchers of all other his Maiesties Ports, and other Officers to
whom it may appertaine.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and IOHN BILL,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. 1618.
         
      
   