
      
         
            
            
               
                  HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            
               ❧By the King.
            ¶A Proclamation concerning Ale-houses.
            
               
                  WHereas for the suppressing of the great disorders daylie vsed in Ale-houses
and Uictual-houses, many good and wholesome Lawes and
Orders haue beene deuised, which haue not taken such effect as Wee desired,
because the same haue not beene so duely executed as they ought
to be. Wee haue therefore appointed certaine Patentees to take knowledge
thereof, and to compell the Ale-house-keepers Licensed, to keepe
good Orders, by pressing them vpon the penalties of their Recognizances,
taken to Our vse; In the proceeding wherein Wee are also
informed that the Recognizances taken for that purpose, in most Counties of Our Realme (being
the onely Tye Wee haue vpon that Lawlesse kinde of people) are either altogether defectiue, or not
duelie certified, so that these vnruly persons still remaine at libertie: And that there are diuers
of them that take authoritie to themselues to keepe Ale-houses, as though they were Licensed, and
yet are not: Both which sorts wee are desirous to drawe into better Order, and to that purpose
Wee haue caused certaine Articles of direction (bearing the Date hereof) to bee published, which
hereby Wee streitly Will and Commaund to bee executed by such as the same shall any wayes concerne,
and as they will giue an accompt vnto Us when Wee shall require it. And because Wee
would not haue Our Subiects that dwell in parts remote from Our City of London to bee ouertrauelled
hereabout, and all to bee drawne hither to Our sayd Citie: Wee haue giuen Order to the
Pattentees, taking the allowance of Our Chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench, to appoint Committees
from time to time, such as shalbee knowne to bee of experience and integrity to prosecute
in those more remote Counties, such forfeitures as shall growe due vnto Us by the sayd Recognizances.
            
               Giuen at Newmarket the nineteenth day of Ianuary in the sixteenth yeere of Our Raigne of
Great Brittaine, France and Ireland: Anno Dom. 1618.
               
            
         
         
            ¶By the King.
            ¶Articles of direction, touching Ale-houses.
            
               FIrst, That the Iustices of Peace of euery County, Citie, or Towne Corporate
within this Kingdome, and the Dominion of Wales, Doe once euery
yeere in the Moneths of April and May, assemble themselues, either at a speciall
Sessions, or such other meeting as they shall appoint for that purpose (respecting
the ease and conueniencie of the people of the Countrey) and there
call before them or any two of them (whereof one to be of the Quorum) all such
persons as doe sell Ale or Beere by retayle in any place (aswell within Libertie
as without) within such County, Citie, or Towne Corporate▪ and then and
there taking true Certificate, and Information from men of Trust; who be
persons of honest Conuersation, and who not. And to giue Licence to such persons,
as they in their discretions shall thinke meet, to keepe Common Ale-houses, or Uictualling-houses,
within the places where such persons dwell.
            
               THat in the Licensing of the sayd Uictualers, and Ale-house-keepers the forme of the Recognizance,
hereafter following, and the Condition thereunto annexed be vsed and none other.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Memorandum, Quod Anno Regni Dom. nostri IACOBI, Dei gratia Regis Angliae,
Franciae, & Hiberniae fidei defensor. &c. & Scotiae Coram
Iusticiarijs dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Comitat. praedict. conseruand. &c. manuceperunt pro
Victular. viz. vterque manucaptor. praedict. sub poena quin
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            librar. & praedict. assumpsit pro seipso sub poena
x. li. Quas Concesserunt, &c. Sub Conditione sequent.
                        THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, that whereas the aboue bounden is admitted
and allowed by the said Iustices to keepe a Common Ale-house, and Victualling-house, vntill the first of
April next ensuing the date hereof, and no longer, in the house wherein hee now dwelleth, at
in the sayd County of and not elsewhere in the sayd County. If therefore the sayd
shall not, during the time aforesayd, permit or suffer, or haue any playing at Dice, Cardes, Tables,
Quoits, Loggets, Bowles, or any other vnlawfull Game or Games in his House, Yard, Garden, or Backside; Nor shall
suffer to bee or remaine in his house any person or persons (not being his ordinary houshold seruant) vpon
any Sabbath day, or Holy day, during the time of Diuine Seruice or Sermon: Nor shall suffer any person to
lodge or stay in his house aboue one day and one night, but such whose true Name and Surname he shall deliuer to
some one of the Constables, or in his absence to some of the Officers of the same Parish the next day following, vnlesse
they be such person or persons as hee or shee very well knoweth, and will answere for his or their forth-comming▪ nor
suffer any person to remaine in his or her house, Tipling or drinking, contrary to the Law; nor yet to be there Tipling or
drinking after nine of the clocke in the night time, nor buy or take to pawne any stollen goods; nor willingly harbour
in his sayd House, or in his Barnes, Stables or other-where, any Rogues, Vagabonds, Sturdy beggers, Masterlesse
men, or other notorious offendors whatsoeuer: Nor suffer any person or persons to sell or vtter any Beere or
Ale, or other victuall by Deputation, or by colour of his or her License. And also if he shall keepe the true assise and
measure in his Pots, Bread, and otherwise, in his vttering of his Ale, Beere and Bread; and the same Beere and Ale to
sell by scaled measure, and according to the assise, and not otherwise. And shall not vtter or sell any strong Beere
or strong Ale aboue the peny the quart, and small Beere or small Ale aboue a halfe-peny the quart, and so after the
same rates. And also shall not vtter nor willingly suffer to be vttered, drunke, taken, and tipled any Tobacco within
his said House, Shop, Cellar, or other place thereunto belonging, that then, &c.
                     
                  
               
            
            That euery Alehouse-keeper and Uictualler so to be Licensed, doe enter into Recognizance with
two able sureties to be bound in fiue pounds a peece, & the principall ten pound at the least for the performance
of the Condition of the said Recognizance, which shall endure but for one whole yeare, and
then to determine, vnlesse it shall seeme fit to the Iustices of Peace to renew 
                  •
               he same againe by taking
a new Recognizance of the same Condition: And whatsoeuer Date the Recognizance shall
haue, it is to indure but vntill the said Monthes of Aprill and May, or one of them.
            That the Clerkes of the Peace, Towne Clerkes, or their Deputies respectiuely bee called to attend
the Iustices of Peace at such their meetings or assemblies, and that they doe there take the Recognizances
aforesaid of euery Uictualler or Alehouse-keeper Licensed, and doe duely enter them
amongst the Records of the Sessions of the Peace in their charge, whereby his Maiestie may bee
duely answered of the forfeitures that shalbe made of the parties so bound.
            That the Clerkes of the Peace and Towne-clerkes aforesaid, or their Deputies shall within some
conuenient time after the taking of the said Recognizances, faire engrosse the Recognizance and
Condition in Parchment, which they shall keepe as the Originall, and send a true Copie of the said
Recognizance examined with the said Originall, to euery Alehouse-keeper allowed, whereby he may
the better enforme himselfe what he and his sureties are bound to obserue.
            That the Clerkes of the Peace, and Towne-clerkes or their deputies doe write out and bring
with them to euery Sessions of the Peace, or other meeting of the Iustices, a Register Booke conteyning
the true names, surnames and places where euery Alehouse-keeper or Uictualler that is Licensed
doth dwell, to the end it may appeare to the Iustices of the Peace who be Licensed, and by
whom, and who be not, and what other alterations haue beene from time to time for the placing of
men of honest and good conuersation, and displacing others of ill behauiour.
            That the Clerkes of the Peace and Towne clerkes, and their Deputies may take of euery Alehouse-keeper
for their fee, for performing of the seruices aforesaid at the time of the acknowledgement
of the said Recognizances, the fee of eighteene pence and no more, ouer and aboue the fee of
twelue pence allowed for the Iustices clerkes by the Statute, which shalbe paide to the said Iustices
clerkes.
            
               That in case the Alehouse-keeper not knowing of the Iustices meeting, or being hindred by sicknesse
or other such like impediment shall faile of admittance at the generall or publike assemblies,
and shall notwithstanding bee admitted or Licensed by two Iustices of the Peace (whereof one to
be of the Quorum) The Recognizance with condition faire engrossed in Parchment in the forme prescribed
as aforesaid shall forthwith or at the next Sessions at the furthest be returned to the clerkes
of the Peace, or the Towne-clerkes respectiuely vnder the hands of the Iustices, before whom
such Recognizance was taken, together also with the said Fee of eighteene pence for the entring, registring,
making and deliuering of a copie vnder his hand to the Alehouse-keeper as aforesaid.
            That none be Licensed or allowed to keepe an Alehouse that hath not one conuenient lodging
at least in his or their houses, for the lodging of any passenger or traueller, and to haue alwaies in her
or their houses good and wholesome small Beere or Ale of two quarts for a peny, for the reliefe of
the Laborer, Trauailer or others that call for the same.
            That the Iustices of Peace within their seuerall Precincts, doe not permit or suffer any vnlicensed
Alehouse-keeper, or Uictualer, to sell Beere or Ale, but that they proceed against them, by
all due and lawfull meanes whatsoeuer: And that they be very carefull, from time to time, to cause
the Brewers to be proceeded against, in their generall and Quarter Sessions, for deliuering Beere,
or Ale, to such vnlicenced persons, according to the Statute in that case prouided.
            That the Clerkes of the Peace, and Towne-Clerkes respectiuely doe once euery yeere, in Trinitie
Terme, make and bring in a Briefe, of all such Recognizances, as shall be taken within euery
County, Citie, and Towne corporate, into the Office of the Patentees (appointed by them
for that purpose) to the end all concealements of Recognizances, taken in that behalfe, may be discouered;
and the benefit accruing vnto his Maiestie, by such as wilfully breake the same, may bee
more duely prosecuted: Of which, that his Highnesse be not defrauded, Order is giuen to the
Patentees that with the allowance of the chiefe Iustice of the Kings Bench, there be appointed
Committees in euery Countie, for the recouerie thereof, from time to time.
            That the Iustices of Assise in their Circuits, and Iustices of Peace, at their generall Sessions
of the Peace, doe from time to time, enquire of the due execution of these presents, and of all other
abuses, disorders, and misdemeanors whatsoeuer, committed, or suffered, against the prouisions
aforesaid, and the true meaning of them.
            
               Giuen at Newmarket the ninteenth day of Ianuary, in the sixteenth yeere of Our
Reigne of Great Brittaine, France and Ireland. 1618.
               
God saue the King.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton
and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie.
ANNO. M.DC.XVIII.
         
      
   