
      
         
            
            BY THE KING.
            ¶A Proclamation for the adjournement of part
of Michaelmas Terme.
            
               THE King our Soueraigne Lord considering the great and generall infection of the
Plague which at this present is in the Cities of London and Westminster, and other places
neere adioyning, and how perilous it might bee to His louing Subiects, if they should
bee enforced to repaire thither for their suites and causes before such time as it shall
please Almighty God of his goodnesse and mercy to remooue or ease that heauy visitation.
His Maiestie therefore of His especiall grace and fauour to His people: and
for their better safety and preseruation, is pleased to adiourne part of the Tearme of
Saint Michael now next comming: That is to say, from the Vtas thereof vnto the
fourth Returne of the same Tearme called Mense Michaelis, which His Maiestie signifieth
to all and singular His louing Subiects of this His Realme, to the intent that they and euery of them
which hath cause or Commandement to appeare in any of His Highnesse Courts at Westminster, in, or at any
day or time, from and after the said Vtas of Saint Michael, may tarry at their dwellings, or where their businesse
otherwise shall lye, without resorting to any of the said Courts for that cause, before the said Mense Michaelis
next comming, and that without danger of forfeiture, penalty, or contempt to incurre towards His Highnesse
in that behalfe. And neuerthelesse His Maiesties pleasure is, that two of His Iustices, That is to say, of either
Bench one, shall the first day of Michaelmas Tearme next, called Octabis Michaelis, according to the ancient order
of the Lawes, keepe the Essoines of the said Octabis Michaelis, at which Vtas of Saint Michael, Writs of adiournament
(which His Maiestie hereby Commandeth the Lord Keeper of the Great Seale of England to make
foorth, shall bee directed to the said Iustices, giuing them authority to adiourne the said Tearme of Saint Michael,
(That is to say) from the Vtas thereof, vntill the fourth Returne, as before is said: And the said adiournament
shall bee made in the first day of the said Vtas, commonly called the day of Essoines. And further His
Maiesties pleasure is, That all Matters, Causes, and Suites depending in any of His other Courts betweene party
and party, as in his Highnesse Courts of Chauncery, Star-chamber, and Exchequer, Courts of Wardes and
Liueries, Dutchie of Lancaster, and Court of Requests shall haue continuance, and the parties shall haue day
from the da
                  •
               e of these presents, vntill the said fourth Returne as before is said. Prouided alwayes, and His
Maiesties pleasure and Commandement is▪ That all Collectours, Receiuers, Sheriffes, and other Accomptants,
and all other persons that should, or ought to accompt, or pay any summe, or summes of money in any of His
Maiesties Courts of Exchequer, Courts of Wardes and Liueries, and of His Dutchie of Lancaster, or in any of
them, or to 
                  •
               nter into any accompt in any of the said Courts, shall repaire vnto His Maiesties House of Richmond,
where His Highnesse hath appointed such Officers and Ministers, as for that purpose His Maiestie hath
thought expedient, and there to pay and doe in euery behalfe, as though no such Proclamation of adiournement
had beene had or made. And His Maiesties further pleasure and Commandement is, that all Sheriffes
shall returne their Writs and Proces against all such Accomptants and Debtors, at the dayes therein appointed.
And if any person, or persons, who ought to accompt, or pay any summe, or summes of money to His Maiestie
in any of the Courts and places afore-said doe make default therein, that then His Highnesse Writs and Proces
shall bee awarded and sent foorth against euery such person and persons, and the same to bee duly and orderly
serued, and returned by the Sheriffes and Officers thereunto appointed in such like manner and forme as the
same should haue beene if this present Proclamantion had not beene made. And if any Sheriffe or other
Officer shall make default, or bee negligent in seruing, executing, or returning of any the Writs and Proces aforesaid,
that then euery such Sheriffe and other Officer shall incurre such paines and penalties as by the said
Courts, or any of them shall bee taxed and assessed, Willing and Commanding all and euery His Maiesties
Sheriffes, Officers, Ministers and Subiects, to whom it doeth, or shall appertaine to obserue and keepe their
assemblies and apparances with all their Returnes and Certificats in His Highnesse said Courts at Westminster in
Mense Michaelis next comming, then and there to be holden and kept, and there to doe their Offices and duties
in euery behalfe in like manner and forme as they should, or ought to haue done if this present Proclamation
had not beene had or made, as they will answere to the contrary at their perils.
            
               Giuen at the Court at 
                     Tichfeld
                   
                  the fourth day of September, and in the first yeere of His
Maiesties Reigne of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland.
                  
               
               God saue the King.
            
         
      
      
         
            Printed at Oxford by I. L. and W. T. for BONHAM NORTON, and IOHN BILL,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. ANN. M.DC.XXV.
         
      
   