
      
         
            
            BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for remouing the Receipt of his Maieſties Exchequer from Weſtminſter to Richmond.
            
               THE Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie taking into his Princely conſideration the great and dangerous increaſe of the Plague in and about the Citty of Weſtminſter, where his Maieſties Receit of Exchequer hath beene hitherto kept, and willing as much as is poſſible to prevent the further danger, which might enſue as well to his owne Officers, which are neceſſarily to attend the ſame Receit, as to other his louing Subiects who ſhall haue occaſion either for receit, or payment of monies to repaire thither: hath therefore taken order for the preſent remoue of the receit of his ſaid Exchequer from thence to his Maieſties houſe at Richmond in the Countie of Surrey: and hath thought fit by this his Proclamation to publiſh the ſame, to the ende, that all perſons whom the ſame may concerne, may take notice whither to repaire vpon all occaſions concerning the bringing in, or iſſuing of his Maieſties Treaſure at the receit of his Exchequer. Willing and requiring all Sheriffes, Bailiffes, Collectors, and all other officers, Accomptants, and perſons whatſoeuer, who are to pay in any monies into the ſaid receit of his Maieſties Exchequer, or otherwiſe to attend the ſame, to keepe their daies and times at Richmond aforeſaid, and there to doe, pay, and performe in all things as they ſhould, or ought to haue done at Weſtminſter, if the ſaid receit of Exchequer had continued there. And this to bee done and obſerued vntill his Maieſtie ſhall publiſh and declare his further pleaſure to the contrary.
            
               Given at the Court at Ricot the one and thirtieth day of Iulie in the firſt yeare of his Maieſties Raigne of great Brittaine, France, and Ireland.
               
            
            God ſaue the King.
         
      
      
         
            Printed at Oxford by I. L. and W.T. for Bonham Norton and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie. 1625.
         
      
   