
      
         
            
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
¶By the King.
            ¶A Proclamation to declare His Maieſties pleaſure, that a former reſtraint
inioyned to the Citizens of London, for repairing to Faires for a
time, is now ſet at libertie.
            
               WHereas the Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie, out of His Princely and
Chriſtian care of His louing Subiects, by His Royall Proclamation, bearing
date the fourth day of Auguſt laſt, to preuent the further ſpreading of the
great Infection of the Plague, as much as by all good meanes Hee might,
did, by the aduice of His Maieſties Priuie Councell, forbid the holding and
reſorting vnto the two great Faires of ſpeciall note, then by courſe of time
neere approching, the one vſually kept in Smithfield, neere the Citie of London,
called Bartholomew Faire, and the other neere Cambridge, called Sturbridge
Faire; and did thereby alſo further charge and enioyne, all Citizens and Inhabitants
of the ſaid Citie of London, that none of them ſhould repaire to any Faire, held within
any part of this Kingdome, vntill it ſhould pleaſe God to ceaſe the Infection then reigning amongſt
them: Now, ſeeing it hath pleaſed Almighty God, of his great mercy and goodneſſe,
to ſtay his hand from further puniſhing that Citie, and the places adiacent, and that, that Contagion
and dangerous Sickneſſe is now ceaſed there, His Maieſtie, taking into His Princely conſideration,
that in the mutuall Commerce of His Subiects ſtandeth their very ſubſiſtence, at leaſt,
their well-being; by the like aduice of His Maieſties Priuie Councell, doth hereby publiſh and declare
His Will and Pleaſure to be, That ſeeing God, of his mercy, hath graciouſly remooued the
Cauſe of the former reſtraint, that now the Citizens, and Inhabitants of the Cities of London
and Weſtminſter, and places adioyning, may freely repaire to any Faire, hereafter to be held in this
Kingdome, and that any other of His Highneſſe louing Subiects, may freely buy of them, any
Wares or Merchandize, comming from thoſe Cities or places, the ſaid Proclamation, bearing
date the ſaid fourth day of Auguſt, and one other Proclamation, bearing date the eleuenth day of
October now laſt paſt, or any other Proclamation or Reſtraint whatſoeuer to the contrary. And
His Maieſtie, doth hereby ſtraitly charge and command, that no Maiors, Bailifes, Iuſtices of
Peace, or any other of His Maieſties Officers, Miniſters, or louing Subiects whatſoeuer, doe
preſume, vnder colour of the ſaid former Proclamations, or of any other Reſtraint whatſoeuer,
to interrupt or hinder the Citizens or Inhabitants of the ſaid Cities of London or Weſtminſter, or
places neere adioyning, to repaire to any Faires, and to vtter, ſell, barter, or diſpoſe of their Wares
or Merchandize there, at their free will and pleaſure.
            
               Giuen at Our Honour of Hampton Court, the 30. of December. 1625.
               
God ſaue the King.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON, and IOHN BILL,
Printers to the Kings moſt Excellent Maieſtie.
ANNO DOM. M.DC.XXV.
         
      
   