
      
         
            
            THese are to certifie you that the Bearer hereof, by name Angelus Iacobi, a Merchant of Cyprus, sayling out of Egypt into Creet, fell most vnfortunately into the hands of Turkish Pirats, who not only robbed and spoyled him of his Goods and Merchandises, but also tooke from him his Wife and Children, and as yet keepe them in Slauerie and bondage, not to be redeemed till the said Angelus Iacobi pay their seuerall Ransomes. Wherefore, We out of our Princely compassion, taking pittie o
                  •
                the miserable estate and condition of this poore Christian, as also being moued thereunto by the example of other Princes, who by their Letters witnessed vnto vs the truth hereof, which cause we deferred vnto the Right Reuerend Father in God, George, Lord Archbishop of Canterburie, Metropolitan of all England, who did approue of the same, hauing granted and permitted him by Our Letttrs Pattents, to aske, collect, and gather the charitable Almes and Beneuolence of Our well disposed Subiects, during the time of his continuance in these Our Realmes. And for that hee now desireth to returne into Cyprus, his owne Countrey, Wee haue granted him these Our Letters for his safe conduct in his Iourney both by Sea and Land, as shall be most conuenient, as also that you by whom he shall passe, might the rather bee moued to relieue him by your Christian Charitie: So shall you lay vp your Treasure in heauen, and binde this poore man to pray for your safetie continually.
            
               Giuen at Our Palace at Westminster, the thirteenth day of September.
                
               God saue the King.
            
            
               HAuing perused of late his Maiesties Letters Patents, on the behalfe of this Bearer, Angelus Iacobi: These are to desire, as well the Prebendaries, Residensaries at Yorke, vpon some Sunday in the Metropoliticall Church there: As also to require all Parsons, Vicars, Curates and Church-wardens throughout my Diocesse of Yorke, to be ayding and assisting vnto him, in receiuing the free and Charitable beneuolence of all well affected Subiects, in their seuerall Chruches and Chappels, according to the tenor of the said Letters Patents, signified in that behalfe.
               
                  At Bishopthorpe the eleuenth of Aprill 1625.
                  
                  Tobias Eboracen.
and
in our Diocesse of Peterborough. 28. October. 1625.
                  
                  
                     
                        Tho. Peterbor. 
                        Fr. Heref.
                        Miles Glocester.
                        Iohn Wigorn.
                        Tho. Couen. and Lichf.
                        Theophilus Landauensis
                        Ric. Assaphen.
                        Sa. Noruicen.
                        Tho. Parke Procan. Cantrbrig.
                        Gu. Peirs Uicecan. Oxon.
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
   