
      
         
            
            BY THE KING.
            A Proclamation for the avoyding of all intercourse betweene His Maiesties Royall Court, and the Cities of London and VVestminster, and places adioyning.
            
               HIS Maiesty hauing taken a resolution that Himselfe and His Royall Consort the Queene and their Courts shall very shortly remoue first to His Castle of VVindsor, and after to his Honour of Hampton-Court, and there to settle: and foreseeing that the vicinity of those places to the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, and the Borough of Southwarke & Towne of Lambeth, which long haue been, and yet are so grievously infected with the Plague, is apt to draw an intercourse betweene those Cities and places & the Court, which may bring extreame perill to the sacred Persons of their Royall Maiesties, vnlesse it be very carefully avoyded. For the preventing therfore of so great & so apparant a danger, wherin all his Maiesties good and louing Subiects haue so large an interest. His Maiesty doth straitly charge and command, That no person or persons of what degree or quality soeuer doe presume to goe or repaire directly or indirectly from the said Citie of London or Westminster, or either of them, or the suburbs of them, or the Borrough of Southwarke or Towne of Lambeth vnto the Court, or to goe from the Court vnto the said cities of London or Westminster, or the Suburbs of them, or the said Borrough of Southwarke, or Towne of Lambeth, or either, or any of them, and returne backe to the Court againe vpon paine of his Maiesties heavy displeasure, and of such further punishment as can by Law or by his Maiesties prerogatiue Royall be inflicted vpon them for so high a contempt. And if any Servant to his Maiesty, or to the Queene his Royall consort in any office or place whatsoeuer, shall offend herein, and either in their owne person haue recourse to and fro, or wittingly suffer any other to haue recourse or accesse vnto them from those cities or suburbs thereof, or places aforesaid, His Maiesty doth hereby signifie and publish his determinate purpose and resolution, That euery such offender shall not onely ipso facto forfeit and loose the Office or place he holdeth, without any hope or expectation of favour now or at any time hereafter, but shall also incurre the heaviest and severest punishment which can be inflicted vpon them. And his Maiesty doth straitly charge and command all his louing Subiects to be carefull in the due execution of his Royall will and pleasure herein, not onely in their owne persons, but in all others as much as in them lieth, and this to be strictly observed and continued vntill his Maiesty shall see cause to inlarge this restraint againe, 
            
               
                  Giuen at our Court at Salisbury 
                     the seuenteenth day of October, in the first yeare of our raigne of Great Brittaine, France, and Ireland.
               
God saue the King.
         
      
      
         
            
               Printed at Oxford by I. L. and W. T. for Bonham Norton and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. 1625.
         
      
   