
      
         
            
               
               
THE DISCOVERIE AND CONFVTATION OF A TRAGICAL FICTION, DEVYSED AND PLAYED BY Edward Squyer yeoman ſoldiar, hanged at Tyburne the 23. of Nouemb. 1598.
            Wherein the argument and fable is, that he ſhould be ſent from Spaine by William Walpole Ieſuit, to poyſon the Queen and the Earle of Eſſex, but the meaning and moralization therof was, to make odious the Ieſuites, and by them all Catholiques.
            
               Matth. 5. verſ. 11.
            
               Beati eſtis cum dixerint omne malum aduerſum vos, mentientes propter me.
            
            Happie are you when they ſay all euil againſt you, belying you for my ſake.
            
               VVritten for the only loue and zeale of truth againſt forgerie, by M. A. Preeſt, that knew and dealt with Squyer in Spayne.
            
            Imprinted vvith Licence.
            ANNO M, D. XCIX.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE DISCOVERIE AND CONFVTATION OF A TRAGICAL FICTION, DEVYſed and played by Edward Squyer yeoman ſoldiar, hanged at Tyburne the 23. of Nouemb. 1598.
            
               AS he ſayd not amiſſe in ſome ſenſe; who ſayd, homo homini Deus, man to man is a kynde of God, in reſpect of the many-benefytes which ſome men (though few) do procure to others: ſo with no leſſe truthe is it thought, that an other wrote on the contrarie part, homo homini lupus, one man is a wolfe to an other, in that he deuoureth, deſtroyeth, and rageth often tymes moſt rauenouſly againſt thoſe, that be of his owne kynde and condition. Of which ſubiect and argument, if we will beleeue the large and lamentable diſcourſes of fondrie credible authors, we ſhal fynde the accompt made, that all the diſaſters, miſeries, and calamities, inſewing to man from all other creatures of the world, either in heauen, earth, ſea, or ayer, or from the foure elementes together with their diſtemperatures or violence, doth not equal the number of hurtes receyued by man from man. Wherunto we if lay on the other ſyde, the oppoſite rule of Chriſtian religion, founded vpon loue of one man towardes an other, and bynding each one to do as he would be donn vnto: we ſhal eaſely

diſcouer the roote and reaſon, why ſo many do periſh, and ſo few are ſaued, of thoſe that profeſſe the Chriſtian name, for that ſo few do perform the obligation to that name annexed. For if hell were raked, and all faultes rared, for which the inhabitantes of that miſerable dongeon are damned to thoſe eternall tormentes, I nothing doubt, but that of thowſandes or millions, ſcarſe few would be found. at leaſt-wiſe of Chriſtians, that receyued not their woful ſentence, for ſome abuſe or wickednes practiſed towardes their euen brethren and neighbours.
            And this may be preface ſufficient for the breef diſcouerie and reproofe that here I am to make, of a no torious iniquitie, practiſed of late in our countrie, (where now we are wolues eating one an other by malice of hereſie, though England haue no wolues by nature of ſoyle) againſt certain innocent and eminent men in catholique profeſſion, named Ieſuites, to whoſe impugnation and general aſſault by all kynde of meanes, and by all ſortes of euil affected people, is ſeemeth that the diuel and his angels, and all his inſtruments at once, haue made a compact to conſpire together, by drawing all that is odious in the world vpon them: but eſpecially the practiſes of princes deathes and murders, wherof in my conſcience and knowlege (that haue knowen them, and dealt alſo with them very intrinſecally for a good part of theſe thirtie yeares, and haue noted their deſignementes, actions, and deſyres not vndiligently) no one ſort of people liuing are more free and further of from ſuch cogitations then they, who deteſt ſuch bloody meanes in all their ſpeeches, doctryne, and proceedinges, leauing them to the aduerſary ſpirit of Proteſtantes, Puritanes, and ſuch other lyke teachers, who both preach, and practiſe ſuch attempes, as appeareth by the actes and monumentes of Luther in Germany, Zuinglius in Swizer-land, Beza in France,

Knokes in Scotland, and others els where, who haue rayſed the turmoiles and tragedies that all men know, and haue brought many a iuſt and peaceable prince to deſtruction, deſolation, and affliction; which no man can truely auouch of the Ieſuites, notwithſtanding their zeale and feruour in Godes cauſe be not vnknowen, which is the fountayne of all this hatred, complaynt, & conſpiracie againſt them.
            Cicero ſayd in his ſecond Philippica againſt Antonie, that by his particular deſteny it came to paſſe, that no man for many yeares had becomen an enemie to the Roman comonwealth, but that preſently he had byd warre to him alſo, as a cheef defendour therof. But this may be much more truely ſayd of the Ieſuites, in reſpect of Chriſtes comonwealth in our dayes, againſt whoſe churche & kingdome there is none lightly that ryſeth or ſtirreth, ether by hereſie, atheiſme, wicked lyfe, or factious humours, but that ioyntly he becometh an enemy to Ieſuites, and it is a comon note, and their crowne, and Godes ſpecial prouidence towardes them for their good.
            But let vs ſee in the particular point of killing princes, what deſyre there is of bringing them in queſtion, aboue other men. There was a king of France not many yeares gone, moſt ſtrangely ſlayne by a religious man, but no Ieſuit. Was his order infamed, perſecuted, or afflicted for the ſame? no, nor ought it to be, he being but a particular man, whoſe fault in no right could be layde vpon a multitude. Some yeares after, the king that now is, was aſſaulted by a yong man, that had ſtudied in the Ieſuites ſchooles only, but now did not, nor was he euer of them, nor appertayned any way to them; yet were all Ieſuites driuen out of France, and purſued for this fact as murderers of princes, notwithſtanding by publique ſentēce of the Pariſian magiſtrate, they were cleered of all participatiō, councel, or knowlege

of the yong mans fault. What is the cauſe of this difference? that which Cicero before mentioned, his zeale and fidelitie to his common-wealth.
            Of late there were publiſhed diuers pamphletes, of an intent that one Peter Panne a flemiſh cooper ſhould haue, to kill the Counte Moriſſe, gouernour of thee rebelled ſtates of Holland and Zeland for which alſo the ſayd Peter Panne was beheaded; and to the end there ſhould not want the ordinary ſolemnitie of hauing a Ieſuit in one end of the tale, it was faygned and ſet downe in print, how that one father Oliuerius Manaraeus prouincial of the Ieſuites in flanders (a very graue old man) with the prefect of the ſtudies, and Rector of Doway, ſhould be the deuiſers and ſticklers in this acte at Doway, vpon ſuch a day and tyme, with ſuch & ſuch circumſtances, which might make the matter probable to ſimple people, that cannot imagin the malice of heretiques. All which circumſtances, with the principal ſubiect it ſelf, were proued afterwardes to be moſt falſe, by publique examination, and teſtimonies of magiſtrates, in diuers citties of flanders. And among other poyntes it was proued, that the forefayd father Oliuerius, was more then 60. or 70. myles of from Doway (to wit at Bruſſels) at the very tyme that he was ſayd to deale with Peter Panne in Doway) & that Peter Panne had neuer to deale with him in his lyfe, nor had any doing with the Ieſuites, and that he was an heretiqoe, and had neuer receyued penny of money of Ieſuites, nor by their meanes, as was forged in his pretended confeſſions. And many other moſt euident falſhoodes are declared in diuers bookes written about this matter, and approued by the aſſeuerations of publique magiſtrates, in diuers townes and prouinces, ſince that tyme. So as the impudence of this heretical deuiſe is made notorious to all the world.
            And yet now leaſt England ſhould be behinde France

and Holland, and other places, in deuyſing ſome notable practiſe of Ieſuites, wherby not only to auert mēnes hartes from them, but euen to rayſe the hayre of mens heades againſt them; there hath byn brought in of late the tragical comedie of one Edward Squyer ſoldiar, ſent from Spayne (as is pretended) by one William Walpole a Ieſuit, to poyſon the Queen and Earle of Eſſex, with poyſon in a dooble blader, deliuered him by the ſayd William, and diuers imbraſinges at his departure, as alſo ſondry exhortations ſayd to be made out of holy ſcriptures to the ſayd poyſoner by William Walpole, for proſecuting of his purpoſe. All which circumſtances we ſhall examin afterwardes, to diſcouer therby the faſhood of this fiction. For albeit I meane not in this place to take vpon me to auerre, that all the whole narration touching Squyer is faygned, or that Squyer was innocent in all poyntes that he was accuſed of, or hanged for (notwithſtanding his denyals at his death) yet dout I not, but to ſhew moſt euidently, that all and euery thing that concerneth the Ieſuites, and William Walpole by name, condemned in this action, by a wrong name (for his true name is Richard) is a meer fable & malitious deuiſe of Squyer, or thoſe that ſet him a worke, to make Spayne odious, and to ſlander the Ieſuites.
            Well it may be that Squyer, after his returne from Spayne (whence he eſcaped by flight and not by miſſion as ſhalbe proued) hauing gone abrode with my L. of Eſſex to ſea, and that in his owne ſhippe, vnder pretence to diſcouer great matters of Spayne, not fynding ſuch comeditie or preferment afterwardes as he looked for; might begin to caſt out ſome wordes of diſcontentmēt, and ſay for his better credit (not fore ſeeing the danger that might inſew therof) that in Spayne he might haue byn imployed by principal men, in great matters; and in this ſpeech it may be alſo, that

father Walpole being a Ieſuit, and the man that was beſt knowen vnto him, and had done moſt for him; for relief of his miſeries, after father Perſons departure from Seuil; he might I ſay, perhaps make mention of his name though he knew it not aright, as hath byn ſayd: and that therin being taken at the aduantage, and preſſed to go forward partly by fayre promiſſes, & partly by torture (as at the barre he affirmed that he had byn fyue houres vpon the torture) he might happen ſtanding thus between feares of condemnation if he drew back, and hopes of pardon if he accuſed others, to begin to frame the tale that in his confeſſion is ſet downe. And when he would haue denyed it agayne (as he did at his arraynment) it would not be taken or admitted. It may be alſo that Munday, and Stanley, or other ſome ſuch compaignions (for I know or remember them not) coming after him out of Spayne into England, and deſirous to get creditt, might (as the faſhion of ſuch folke is) being poore and beggarly, begin vpon emulation to appeach, and call Squyer in queſtion, as was obiected in the arraynement that they did, and as it fell out diuers yeares paſt, between Doctor Parry and Mayſter Neuil, that called himſelf Lord Latimer. The ſtorie of which two frendes and compaignions, for that it ſeemeth not much vnlyke to this, both in the matter it ſelf, and in ſome particular circumſtances, I ſhall heare repeate with great breuitie.
            William Parry, after he had ſerued the ſtate of England, ſome ſix or ſeauen yeares by ſpierie in Italie, and other places (as himſelf confeſſed) he waxed weary, and to repayre his credit againe on the catholique ſyde, he went to confeſſion in Lions to a Scottiſh Ieſuit, named father Critton; and then hearing that the Lord Paget was comen out of England to Paris for his conſcience, and that Doctor Allen (afterward Cardinal) and father Perſons were come alſo to Paris to ſee him, he

came thither in the yeare 84. and vſed all meanes poſſible, both by himſelf and his frendes in that place, to enter into credit with the ſayd Doctor and father; and when he ſaw that in no caſe they would deale with him in matter of ſecreſie or moment (though otherwiſe they vſed hun courteouſly, and were glad of his conuerſion to be a catholique) he was greatly offended therat, and one euening being led by a certayne frend and countriman of his, to the biſhop of Rimini, Nuntius at that tyme for Pope Gregorie the thirteenth in France, he deliuered him a letter written by himſelf in Italian to the Pope; wherin he ſhewed firſt and confeſſed, that he had done great hurtes to the catholique cauſe and churche, by his former ſeruices of the ſtate of England, and that now he was to go thither to make recompence for the ſame, and to do great ſeruices in fauour of the ſea Apoſtolique, deſiring his Holines approbation and benediction, without ſpecifying any particularitie what he meant to do, as by the ſaid letter of his, yet heer in Rome to be ſeen, is manifeſt. And to this letter did Cardinal Como anſwere, and his anſwere was deliuered by Parry himſelf to the Queen, and the ſame produced againſt him afterward at his araygnment: but to go forward. The Doctor hauing donn this act with the Nuntius, he got himſelf away ſecretly from Paris towards England without taking his leaue, either of Doctor Allen, or father Perſons, and paſſing by Roan towards Diep in Normandy, he tolde on maiſter Wattes a Prieſt there, that his diſſignement was in England, to raiſe a faction againſt the Ieſuites, from which maiſter Wattes diſſuaded him, but he paſſed on, and as ſoon as he came to Diep, before he would imbarque, he wrote a letter to the Lord Burleigh for a paſſeporte and order, to ſpeak with the Queen at his firſt ariual in England, for that he had great matters to vtter: and ſo the order came, and he by ſecret wayes was brought to her Maieſtie,

and had long talke with her, and told her among other pointes, that he was ſent by Ieſuites and their frendes to kil her. And to confirme this the more, he ſhewed her alſo the anſwere of Cardinal Como when it came, as I haue ſayd: and well knowing that it was no treaſon when himſelf vttered the ſame, he inlarged himſelf in many particulers, about the manner and order how it ſhould be donne, as her maieſtie can remember, hoping therby to get great credit, which yet afterward turned to his deſtruction.
            There was ſent ouer vnto Roan at the ſame time, or very ſoon after, the forſayd maiſter Neuil to exerciſe the ſame office of ſpiarie, which maiſter Parry had donne before in Italy, and waxing alſo wearie of his occupation, for that rewardes came out of England but ſlowly, he made great meanes in like manner to ſpeak with father Perſons, who by chaunce lay for a time in that towne, but ſecretly, and in the end obteining the ſame, and propoſing his miſerie and affliction of minde, he receiued the ſame anſwere and counſel that Doctor Parry had donn before: to wit, that the beſt way of remedie, was to leaue that trade of life, & to returne to a vertuous & peaceable Catholique courſe, & to haue patience if for a time he were not truſted by Catholiques, being knowen to haue bin imployd againſt them, and that as his credit had bin crazed by woorkes, ſo muſt his reputation be reſtored by deeds alſo, and by time. Wherto maiſter Neuil anſwered, that he could not liue without credit, and rather then he would liue ſo: or ſee men crow ouer him, he would aduenture far, and ſo they parted: and maiſter Neuil returned into England, and there meeting with Doctor Parry, who was now growen diſcontented again for miſſing of diuers ſuites (but eſpecially the hedſhip of Saint Catherins, which he pretended as I haue bin informed) they two fel into new diſcourſes about that, which in my opinion neither

of them euer ment indeed, I meane the murdering of her Maieſtie, but the one preuenting the other in accuſation, it was the Doctors euil luck to be hanged, who yet tooke himſelf for the more conning man. And the lyke hath happened to this our Squyer, that ſtood not a litle vpon his owne wit in Spayne, and hoped perhaps to inioy the labours therof in England; but dealing doubly, and diſſembling with God and man (as Parry did) was taken as it ſeemeth in the ſame net of his owne deuyſes, as by the ſequel of this narration ſhal more appeare.
            And I haue taken vpon me the rather to wryte this breef diſcouerie of his falſe and treacherous dealing againſt Ieſuites, for that I knew him, and conuerſed with him in Spayne, and with his fellow maiſter Rolles alſo, both before and after their apprehenſion by the Inquiſition, and knew the ſpetial obligation they had to theſe kynde of men, whome Squyer now hath ſlandered ſo lewdly, as many others do, that receyue help & benefytes by them. And I haue heard afterward being in Rome, by ſundry letters from Spayne, of the manner of their departure from thence by ſtealth, which was ſuch, as doth euidently ouerthrow all this whole fiction of poyſon geuen by father Walpole. And albeit I dout not, but that when the ſtorie of this tragical fable ſhal come to Seuil, they will ſend many authentical proofes from thence, of the malitious falſhood of ſo fond an inuention, yet could I not omit in this meane whyle to preuent their further diligence, with ſo much as I my ſelf knew, and am able to ſay therof, as alſo two other reuerend preeſtes beſydes that came with me to Rome from Spayne, and knew both the ſayd men and matter, to wit, father William Med. and father Iohn Wor. who were with me in Seuil and haue dealt with the parties. We all three together can and do teſtifie and proteſt vpon our conſciences, that in our iudgementes it is a

meer fiction, for ſo much as concerneth F. Walpole, and his ſetting Squyer a worke, to kill the Queen & Earle of Eſſex, or geuing him poyſon for that end, and other lyke pointes mentioned in Squyers moſt ridiculous arraynement. And this teſtification of ours, wilbe ſufficient (I doubt not) to ſatisfie the iudgemētes of all ſober catholique men, as we beſeech them that it may; and as for others alſo, if they be vnpaſſionate, and will admit reaſon or truthe for their ſatisfaction, I referre them to the argumentes and demonſtrations ſett downe in this diſcouerie. Wherin firſt of all I will lay forth the true hiſtorie of Squyer and Rolles his compaignion, their being in Spayne, and then of their departure or flight from thence, and laſtly by the ſame declare moſt euidently, the ſottiſh forgerie of this faygned calumniation.
            In the yeare 96. when Sir Francis Drake and Sir Iohn Hawkins made their vnfortunate voyage to the weſt Indies, there was ſent from Seuil a noble yong Gentleman, named Don Petro Tellio (that had byn priſoner before with our Lord Admiral of England, & ſpeaketh great good of him euerie where, for his honorable treatie) and he was ſent with ſix or ſeauen light litle gallions (called Sabras in ſpaniſh) to wafte home certayne millions of gold, that were remayning in Porto ricco, in the great gallion of Don Sançho Pardo, retyred thither vpon tempeſt out of the Indian fleet, a litle before.
            This Don Petro drawing neer to Porto-ricco fell vpon a litle ſhippe or pinnace of Sir Francis company, wherin among others were taken the foreſayd two Engliſh men, M. Rolles gentleman (as he ſayd) and Edward Squyer a ſoldiar, who being brought priſoners to Seuil, found there by their good happe F. Perſons, who preſently (according to his cuſtome for all Engliſh in that caſe) began to deale with Don Petro for their

libertie, and obtayned the ſame, after ſome dayes without ranſome, or any other lett or moleſtation in the world. And hauing done this, he procured alſo ſome temporal helpe for them, and for their apparayling, to returne home into England, and this he did, though he knew them to be Proteſtantes in religion, vpon diuers conferences had with them, both before and after their deliuerie by don Petro. In one of which conferences, I do well remember, and cannot forget, how Squyer was ſo hote and earneſt in defending of his religion, within the Engliſh College of Seuil, and that in the hearing of diuers Engliſh ſchollers, as he ſayd and ſtood to it, that he knew for certayne, that he had the holie ghoſt within him, for the true vnderſtanding of ſcriptures, wherat the ſayd ſchollers laughed hartely, and ſo did F. Perſons alſo.
            Wherefore both Rolles and he being redy now for their departure towardes England, they tooke their iourney together downe by water to the porte of ſaint Lucars (ſome fourtie myles from Seuil) in the company of one Captayne North. And ſtaying there ſome dayes, whether it were by indiſcreet behaueour of their owne, or that ſome of their company accuſed them (as they ſuſpected) they were taken in that place by the inquiſition, and brought back priſoners to Seuil, where F. Perſons yet remayning, he procured for them all kynde of curteous dealing at the Inquiſitors hādes, and at his departure from thence (which was in May after) he left the matter much recommended to the foreſayd F. Richard Walpole Ieſuit, and prefect of the ſtudies in the Engliſh College, as alſo vnto me, and others of our nation there remayning, that we ſhould help and fauour what poſſibly we could theſe two poore men, for that all their compaignions or the moſt were now gone, being let ſlippe away by the fauour of the ſayd father. And ſo about Auguſt or

September next inſewing, M. Rolles was firſt let out of the priſon of Inquiſition, and placed in the Ieſuites college named of S. Herminigildo, prince in olde tyme and Martyr of Spayne, and there he was moſt courteouſly vſed by the ſayd fathers, and I and others viſited him there, and made a common purſe to helpe to apparayle him, and at my departure towardes Rome (which was in October after) I do well remember in particular, and he cannot forget, that of my ſmale abilitie I lefte him ſome fyue and twentie ſhillinges to aſſiſt his neceſſities, and others did perhaps more, as they were able. And of this he being at this preſent in England may be examined, and I doubt not but he will tell the truth, and whether any euil word or meaning, was euer vttered vnto him by any there againſt her Maieſtie.
            As for Squyer, though he were detayned in the Inquiſition ſome moneth after Rolles was let forth, (for that he was taken to be more obſtinate in his errors) yet at length he was let forth alſo, and placed for his further inſtruction in Catholique fayth as priſoner ſtill, in a certayne monaſterie neer to the Engliſh colege, which I take to be of the Carmelites, if I remember well, vnto which place as alſo to Rolles, the foreſayd F. Walpole was permitted to haue acceſſe, both for their inſtruction, and further help and comfort, and ſo he did. And this indured vntill the moneth of May next inſewing, in the yeare 97. at what tyme they both conſpiring together fled away, and left both F. Walpole, and other Engliſh that had geuen their wordes for them in the bryars. Wherof themſelues being aſhamed, and hauing ſome ſcruple when they were in ſaftie, they excuſed themſelues by a comō letter written with Squyers hand, but ſubſcrybed by them both, and ſent to Seuil, wherin, they aſked pardon very effectually of the ſayd father, and of all their

countrimen, for their flight, and for the hurt or diſcredit which therby might happen to their ſayd frendes in Seuil, proteſting that it was only for the loue they did beare to their wyues and children, and the deſyre they had to ſee and ſuccour them in England, and not falſhood or ingratitude, or other diſhoneſt meaning.
            This letter F. Walpole ſhewed firſt in Seuil for his better excuſe, and then ſent the ſame to F. Perſons in Rome, where it was read one day in publique recreation at the college, among ſome fourtie or fiftie Engliſh together, who all iudged it a trayterous pranke, but yet had compaſſion of them, and laughed at certayne phraſes of Squyers Puritanical vayne in Wryting, among which, was this: that they luſted not after their wyues in the fleſh, but rather thirſted after them in the Lord. And of theſe fourtie or fiftie Engliſh, that then were preſent at the reading of this letter; ſome nyne perhaps or ten are now in England. By all which, Catholique men may be certified of the truth, and Proteſtantes alſo, both by Rolles himſelf that is priſoner, as alſo by ſome of the other that be in lyke manner vnder their cuſtody. So as of this poynt of theſe mennes running away from Seuil, without F. Walpole his knowlege or conſent, and without ſeeing him at their departure, there can no dout be made at all; for that it may and wilbe proued by euident demonſtrations, and irrefragable witneſſes, both from Spayne, Hence, and in England.
            Which being ſo, let euery man conſider the malitious falſhood of this tragical forgerie. For if Edward Squyer ranne away from Seuil out of the monaſterie where he was priſoner, & that he departed in company of Rolles his fellow, who hauing more libertie, then the other, is thought to haue plotted and procured principally that flight; and if they ſaw not F. Walpole, nor ſpoke with him at their departure, but rather deceaued

him, and put him in diſgrace by this their running away, as much as lay in them, and that they haue confeſſed and teſtified the ſame, and aſked him pardon for it vnder their owne handes, how then can it be true, that F. Walpole preached vnto Squyer at his departure, exhorting him to this fact of poyſoning the Queen and the Earle of Eſſex, as was auowed at his arraygnement? How did he lay his lefte hand vpon his ſhoulder, ſaying Dominus only, and then making the ſigne of the croſſe vpon his for head with his right hand, ſayd: God bleſſe the my ſonne, and geue the courage and ſtrength, and I ſhal pray for thee both alyue and dead, and other lyke wordes, and circumſtances, publiſhed in Squyers forged and forced confeſſion.
            Moreouer, how can it ſtand with any probabilitie, that Squyer ſhould vow to F. Walpole to do this act of poyſoning, and receyue the bleſſed ſacrament there vpon? How did he receyue the poyſon redy made and mingled by F. Walpole in a dooble bladder (as the tale is told) and make experience therof vpon a dogge, that died preſently? and finally how dyd he carie it with him ſo long a iourney, and yet his compagnion Rolles to ſee nor know nothing therof, as he did not, nor is it ſo much as feigned or obiected in the indightment?
            Certayne crymes and accuſations there be ſayth Cicero, that are ſo improbable of themſelues, and ſo euil fitting to the perſons vpō whome they are feigned, that albeit no man ſhould refute them, yet do they fall of their owne nature, and neceſſarie circumſtances therunto incident. As for example, if a man ſhould accuſe M. Toplife the halter-maiſter of England, and boweller of Catholique Preeſtes in our dayes, of to much ſcrupuloſitie in matters of conſcience, which might ſmel of papiſtrie. Or els our new maried Engliſh Miniſters, of to much faſting, wearing hayreclothes,

or ouer much puniſhing their bodies, that are offences tending to the ſame error, no man I ſuppoſe would eaſelie beleeue them, though they ſhould neuer ſo ſtoutly or cuningly be auerred, knowing the perſons well, and how far their diſpoſition and whole courſe of lyfe is, from ſuch exceſſes in that kynde. And euen ſo, he that knoweth F. Richard Walpole as I do; and firſt how learned a man he is, being Prefect of the ſtudies in the Engliſh Seuilian college, and then how ſpiritual and myld a religious man, both by nature and condition, & how far of from all wordlie practiſes and politique deuyſes as theſe are, he will clearlie perceyue at the firſt ſight, the abſurdities of theſe imputations layd againſt him; to wit, that either he ſhould be ſo fond, as to vſe thoſe ſcriptures to Squyer for killing the Queen & the Earle of Eſſex, which were alleaged at Squyers arraygnment: or ſo baſe, as to go and buy or mingle poyſon for ſuch an effect, and to bring it to him in a dooble bladder, call a dogge and make the proofe, with other lyke fooliſh, incredible, and abſurd circumſtances. But aboue all other, that F. Walpole ſhould imploy diuers men at once about this foule acte, and lyke a right Macheuillian or impious atheiſt, ſend in Stanley and Munday after Squyer, to diſcouer him to the Councel, for that himſelf had perſwaded him to this attempt, which were ſcarſe credible to ſome, of Toplife himſelf, or any other as bloody and conſcienceles as he, and if Stanley and Munday were of Squyer and Rolles their firſt company, taken with them by ſea, they neuer ſpoke then with F. Walpole, but were gone from Seuil before Squyer & Rolles came in trouble, or knew alſo the ſayd father.
            But for the ſcriptures mentioned, vnum eſt neceſſarium, one thing is neceſſarie; and, quid prodeſt homini, ſi vniuerſum mundum lucretur, animae verò ſuae detrimentum patiatur? What profiteth it a man if he gayne the whole world, and leeſe his owne ſoule? It is very lykly that F. Walpole

vſed ſometymes thoſe woordes of Chriſt, among others, to Squyer. For I well remember that they were often in his mouth to ſuch as Squyer was, of our nation, who dealing about matters of religion, concerning his ſoule and eternal ſaluation, would often alleage humane and worldly reſpectes for impedimentes, as his wyfe and children in England, how he ſhould lyue if he became a catholique, that all his frendes at home would forſake him, that he durſt not ſhew his face any more among them, that his enemies would laugh at him, triumph ouer him, lay him in priſon, and the lyke: for moderating of which wordly reſpects, in ſo great a cauſe as is religion, it is probable, that F. Walpole vſed diuers tymes the former ſpeeches of ſcripture to him. Which Squyer remembring in England, when he was to make his tale, applyed them as ſpoken to the other effect of poyſoning, wherwith as euery man ſeeth, they haue no coherence at all.
            If F. Walpole had byn diſpoſed to haue treated vpon any ſuch theme, he was not ſo ſimple or vnlearned, but that he could haue alleaged other places and examples of ſcripture, far more fit and effectual to ſuch a purpoſe, ſeing that the queſtion in general is handled largely, by many learned men, to and fro, how it may be lawfull or vnlawful in certayne caſes, for particular men to offer violence to princes by priuate authoritie. Where yet no man maketh it either ſo neceſſarie to ſaluation, or ſo ſafe or meritorious, as Squyers fiction conteyneth. And if vpon thoſe groundes, or other, F. Walpole would haue byn ſo idle or euil diſpoſed, as to enter into the cogitation or treatie of any ſuch enterpryſe (from which in my conſcience I hold him moſt free) yet would he neuer haue made choiſe of Squyer, whome he thought ſtill inwardly to be a Proteſtant (and ſo he dyed) notwithſtanding ſome tymes he would make ſhew in Spayne

of his conuerſion. F. Walpole knew him alſo to be a poor hungrie ſoldiar, deſirous to liue, and to get ſomething in the world, which was far from him that ſhould enterpryſe ſuch a matter, who muſt be content to aduenture both lyfe & all that therof dependeth, which no man will do, but either of pure zeale in religion, or of hope of gayne and preferment. As for zeale, it is knowne Squyer had none to the catholique religion, as hath byn noted, but rather the contrarie. And as for gayne and preferment, F. Walpole had none to geue him: nor did Squyer ſay that he was promiſſed any, from any other partie. What then ſhould moue him to take ſo dangerous and difficult an enterpryſe vpon him, or the other to truſt him therein. Of lyke improbabilitie is it, or rather much more, that the ſame father ſhould remit Squyer for his directions in theſe affayres, to Doctor Bagſhaw, priſoner in Wiſbich caſtle, and to no more, as was read out of Squyers confeſsion at his arraygnment, which euery man that knoweth the perſons, will ſee euidently to be moſt abſurdly faigned, for that F. Walpole neuer had any frendſhip, familiaritie, or acquayntance with Doctor Bagſhaw, the Doctor hauing lefte the Roman College before the other came to ſtudie there, nor euer had they letter or meſſage between them in their lyues: nor had the direction of Doctor Bagſhaw, that was priſoner ſo far of from London (where this attempt was to be made) byn any way fit for this effect, ſeing it was not a matter to be treated by letters, and ſome other cauſes alſo are well knowen to diuers men, why the ſayd Doctors concurrence in matters of ſuch moment with F. Walpole, can no wayes be thought probable. Wherefore this fiction hath no ſhew or ſhadow of probabilitie at all.
            And truly it ſeemeth to wyſe men in theſe partes here, that if it had byn thought expedient for the preſent

tyme in England, that ſome ſuch tragedie as this ſhould be moued about killing her Maieſtie, for holding catholiques in hatred and ſuſpition, and for better continuing of our breache with Spayne (for it is obſerued, that ſtill within certayne diſtances of tyme, this affayre of killing the Queen hath byn renewed, and more men executed or called in queſtion therabout, then for all other Princes in Chriſtendome beſydes) and if for the ſame, or other lyke conſiderations, it were iudged alſo expedient, that ſome Ieſuite muſt enter in lyke manner into ſome part of the pageant (for that lightly none goeth without them in theſe dayes) yet might the matter more fitly haue byn layed vpon ſome other of that order, as F. Creſwel F. Holt, or F. Perſons, who for their yeares and experience ſhould haue had more authoritie to perſwade ſuch an action, then vpon F. Walpole, who being their punee, and attending only to matters of ſtudy, is very vnprobably brought into this treatie. But as for F. Perſons, it is well knowen, that he hath had many occaſions to imploy much more fitter and reſolute men in ſuch affaires then Squyer, if he had lyſted, or byn of that iudgement or humor. For he hath cauſed many Engliſh to be deliuered out of diuers portes and priſons in Spayne, and to returne home free. And at one tyme almoſt a hundreth, out of the porte and gallies of S. Marie in Andaluzia, and this laſt yeare aboue thirtie out of the porte and gallies of Naples, which were taken in the ſhip of Paulo Gundelo the Raguſean, and I ſaw them my ſelf in chaynes at the oare, and were only deliuered by the earneſt ſute and credit of the ſayd father. And all theſe being obliged to him, both by the benefyt of their libertie, and the loue of religion (for that all or many are commonly wont to returne well affected to the catholique fayth, by that they haue ſeen and heard in forayne nations, and in ſo

good a ſchoole as tribulation is wont to be) of theſe men I ſay, he might haue made choiſe of far fitter inſtruments then Edward Squyer, in ſo many yeares, to haue effectuated ſuch an enterpryſe, if he had lyked therof, which yet hitherto hath neuer byn found. And perhaps no perſons ſo fit as preeſtes themſelues, who go directlie into England to dy, if they were ſo perſuaded of the matter as Squyers tale doth preſuppoſe: to wit, that it is a worke of ſo high perfection, merit, and godlineſſe, yea of neceſsitie to their ſaluation, as in his arraygnement is ſet downe.
            Other meanes alſo more effectuall would haue byn thought vpon, for the accompliſhing of the work, if euer any ſuch had byn intended, then is the poyſonning of the Queens ſadle pomel, or the chayre of my Lord of Eſſex, wherin it ſeemeth that both his lordſhip hath ſitten, and her Maieſtie ridden, ſince that tyme, and yet neither of them, God be thanked, hath miſcaried. And truly, hauing conferred with the learnedeſt phiſitions and Simpliciſtes of this cittie, about the probabilitie of this poyſon, they do all laugh at the deuyſe, and ſay that it is a meer fiction, that any ſuch poyſon can be found in this world, or made by art; that being layd in ſuch places & in ſuch māner as this is deſcrybed, can hurt the ſitter or ryder, in the ſuppoſed chaire or ſadle. which they proue by theſe reaſons that do enſew, of their arte. Firſt, for that all poyſon muſt needes worke his effect by one of theſe foure meanes and wayes, to wit, by being receyued into our bodies, or by one of the ſenſes of ſeeing, ſmelling, or touching.
            As for the firſt meane (which is the principal and moſt ordinary) it is here excluded in our caſe, for that this poyſon was not ment to be receaued within the body of her Maieſtie or of the Earle.
            As for the ſecond, all phiſitians do agree, that no poyſon hath euer byn recorded to hurt by ſight, but

only that of the baſiliſke according to the opinion of ſome olde wryters, wherof yet it is doubted by later authors, whether that infection came by the ſight or no, but all do agree (howſoeuer this was) that no humane art can reach to imitate this ſecret of nature. And thoſe that handle of this matter, as Cardan in his ſubtilities, Matheolus vpon Dioſcorides, and ſome others, do adde diuers conditions, and neceſſarie circumſtances beſydes the poyſon it ſelf, to worke this effect by ſight, as for example, the ſpirit and heate of the lyue ſerpent, the feare of the partie that be holdeth her, and other lyke, and that no dead or cold poyſon made by any art can infect this way, all do agree. As neither by the ſenſe of ſmelling except it ſhould be very ſtrong and much vſed, ſo as it might infect the very ayer that entereth into vs, and then ſay they, would it be diſcouered alſo, by the vngratefulnes of the very ſent it ſelf.
            There remayneth then the fourth way only, which is by touching, wherin the moſt learned alſo do agree, that they haue only the ſaying of Gallen, who affirmeth that the ſpitle of a mad dogge, being touched, entereth of it ſelf into the fleſh and infecteth, yet is there no certayne experience either of this, or of any other poyſon, that killeth in ſuch ſort, by only touching, but if it be true, yet confeſſe they all, that this touching muſt be vpon the bare fleſh, and that with tyme, and continuance, and calefaction it muſt enter, and not otherwiſe, but if there be any thing interiected between the poyſon and the fleſh it ſelf (as it is probable in our caſe, where her Maieſties gloue or ſleeue vpon the pomel of her ſadle, and my Lord of Eſſex his apparayle vpon his chayre, muſt needes haue place) then do all agree, that by al probabilitie, it could do no hurt at all, though poyſon had byn put there. For ſay theſe men, if by poyſoning only ſtooles,

chayres, ſadles, or apparayle, that toucheth not the fleſh, or by ſight only, princes may be poyſoned, who ſhould be ſafe? And why would men aduenture to attempt any other wayes, that are more dangerous to the attempter? yet do they ſtill except the infectiō of the plague, which may be imparted by a cloth or veſtment infected, which phiſitians hold to be a ſecret only of nature, not imitable by any arte of man, as is not alſo the wonderful ſecret force of the fiſh named Torpedo in latin, for that being in the fiſhers nette, before they touch him they feel torporem, to wit, a numnes in their handes, by his being there, which effect no arte poſsible can euer arryue to worke or imitate.
            Agayne they ſay, that if any ſuch poyſon could be made to worke ſuch ſtrange effectes, ſo far of as here is faigned, it had bin impoſsible for Squyer himſelf to haue caried it ſo many myles, and to haue put it forth from his dooble bladder, into his red botle ſtopped with corke (as he ſayd he did, when he went to ſea with my lord of Eſſex) without poyſoning him ſelf alſo, and the lyke difficultie would haue byn for him that made and ſold the poyſon. Wherefore theſe learned men ſay, that all this, of the effect of this poyſon, vpon the pomel of her Maieſties ſadle, and the Earles chaire, is a very ridiculous thing. And greatly did they laugh when they heard tell, how the Queens Atturney with weeping teares did congratulate her Maieſties ſo dangerous eſcape, applying thoſe wordes of the pſalme to her Maieſtie, that were of Chriſt and his power: Super aſpidem & Baſiliſcum ambulabis, Thou ſhalt walk vpon the ſnake and baſiliſk without hurt. And M. Soliciter and others geuing vnto her Maieſtie the priuilege of Saynt Paule, that ſhooke of the venemous vyper from his hand without danger, and that this vvas a miracle if euer their vvere a miracle. All

which was attributed here, either to groſſe ignorance, or deep flatterie, in theſe orators, ſeing that no danger at all was neer vnto her Maieſtie in any reaſon, though any ſuch touching of the ſadle pomel with Squyers bladder, had bin true. And they do think, that the inchantment which he vſed in crying: God ſaue the Queen, when he touched the pomel with the ſayd bladder, was a ſufficient preſeruatiue agaynſt the force of this kinde of poyſon: eſpecially conſidering the great probabilitie, that this act alſo of his touching the ſadle pomel with his bladders and lethers, was fained in like manner. For ſo it ſeemeth, that the poore caitife began to make his tale with this at the beginning, vpon the reaſons before put downe, thinking that either it would not haue bin ſo daungerous vnto him, but that either he might haue gon back again whē he would, or at leaſtwiſe haue diſtinguiſhed the matter, confeſſing onely ſo much agaynſt Spayn and Ieſuites, as might ſerue for the tyme and preſent turne, and deny the reſt, that touched himſelf, and ſo we ſee he did, when he came to his arraygnement, pleading not guiltie, with many ſolemne othes and proteſtations, argumentes, and reaſons, to ſhew that he attempted nothing after his coming into England, though he were content to let the reſt ſtand, which he had ſayd of F. Walpole and of Spayne. And in this he ſtood ſtifly all the tyme of his arraygnemēt, vntill he vnderſtood firſt by the cheef Iudge, that he laboured in vayne, for that the very conceyling of the matter treated in Spayne, for ſo many monethes, was treaſon of itſelf, though it had neuer byn attempted to be put in execution within England. And ſecondly that he perceyued by diuers ſpeeches and large diſcourſes made vnto him by ſondrie Counſelours, but eſpecially by Secretarie Cecil, exhorting him to confeſſe the whole, that except he yealded to all, as it lay in his firſt tale, there was no hope

of fauour and mercy. And then he falling downe vpon his knees, confeſſed all agayne. But yet afterward, when he found alſo by experience, that this would not ſaue his lyfe, nor keep him from execution (wherof it is lykely that he had hope, if not ful promeſſe) he denied the matter agayne at his death, as they can witneſſe that were preſent at the ſame and heard him, whereof ſome alſo haue written the ſame hither.
            Wherfore to end this narration, the miſerable fellow is now hanged, & whether his corporal or ghoſtly miſery were greater, God knoweth, the men that did moſt for him, to the releef of the one & the other in Spayne, are moſt wronged by him. The fictiō of his treatie with F. Walpole in Seuil for killing of the perſons before named, as alſo of the poyſon geuen, & other circumſtāces, are fond, & flatly falſe, & moſt apparantly forged: & to this I will ſtand, & bynd myſelf to proue it. Whether after his comming in to England, & diſcontentment, he might enter into any malignitie of cogitations, wordes, or factes to this effect, as Doctor Pary was ſayd to do that toucheth not me now to diſcuſſe. The tragical ſeſsion of ſo many noble men, Councelours, & Iudges together, made vpon his feigned confeſsion, their orations, congratulations, admirations, exclamations their bitter inuectiues agaynſt leſuites, & the king of Spayne, vpon ſo ſmale and weak groundes, & eſpecially the repetition therof agayne at Paules croſſe the next ſonday after, is ridiculous, & maketh men ween abrode, that eares and lippes are more ſought for, then iudgements, and populer outcries, before ſage inquyrie of the truth, and that whyle theſe matters are in talking to fill mennes heades, ſome other plottes are in deliberation, tending to other deſignementes. Tyme will tell all, and to that, and to Gods holie prouidence, that ouerreacheth mans diuiſes, I remit me. Rome this firſt of March, 1599.
         
      
      
         
            
            AN ADDITION, TO THE READER.
            MEANE whyle the precedent confutation was on the printers preſſe, there came out of Englād a printed pamphlet of Squyres forged conſpiracie, as a letter addreſſed vnto a gentleman at Padua. And albeit Maiſter M. A. in this his confutation hath well and ſufficiently confuted that fiction, yet is it not vnneceſſary to ad a few lynes in conſideration of this pamphlet.
            Firſt it is therefore conſiderable, that whereas this fiction of Squyers, beeing with ſuch aſſeueration plotted & purſued, & himſelf condemned and executed: and the odiouſneſſe of the pretended cryme ſo much ſounded out, both from the Bench, and the Pulpit, why yet after all this there ſhould need any pamphlet, to giue new credit to the matter? Hereof the reaſon forſooth is no other, but that the forgers in this mint were afrayd leaſt els their coyne would be the more ſuſpected to be counterfait and ſo the leſſe go for good payment.
            And the rather for that Squyre himſelf when he came to the concluſion of the matter, to wit, when he was to be hanged, did there die a true proteſtant, & vtterly denied the acting of any ſuch thing, and ſuch proteſtations, and at ſuch tymes, do comonly make ſtrong impreſſions in the myndes of the people, who generally are giuen to belieue, that at the very laſt inſtant of lyf, men are lykelyeſt to declare the truth of their cauſes.
            And more-ouer ſeeing many of the wyſer ſorte beeing enured to the noting of ſuch packings (as this might eaſely ſeeme vnto them to bee) do vſe narrowly to watch & obſerue, how thinges paſſe at arraignements, and might well ſee that the courſe & manner of this ſeemed rather ſome ſuch matche as Kemp and his compagnions do handle on the ſtage, then the lyuely managing of a matter of truth in deede, which neuer would haue needed ſuch a playerlyke coreſpondence in the actors, for euen as Kemp and his fellowes hauing before-hand ſtudied to con their partes by roate, and each knowes to keepe his cu, and to frame his ſpeech and manners according to his fayned function, euen ſo was this fore-ſtudied tragedy

acted in Weſtminſter hall. Where firſt one playd the prologue, and told a long and lamentable tale of the horribleneſſe of the fayned fact. Another burſt out in teares, and very pittifully wept at it. An other fell in to admiration of the greatnes of the miracle, making it in effect, as very a miracle, as euer Chriſte wrought any: and Squyer himſelf that was to make good earneſt of all the ieſt, was held in a tale whyle ſome good parte of his indightment was red, to the end he ſhould heede it the leſſe, and ſo the leſſe reply againſt it. This then beeing eaſely to bee noted, and that Squyer in the end prooued the foole that mard the play, by denying the acte at his death (as aforeſaid) and ſo conſequently the great miracle yf euer there vvene a miracle. No maruel then is it that a ſmooth penned pamphlet is now come abrode, to reuyue the decaying credit of this late-made-matter, rather then that it ſhould be holpen vp, by the rymings of ſome od pot-poet or idle balletmaker.
            The wryter whereof (yf it bee M. Smokey-ſvvynes. fleſh, at the inſtance of Sir R. C.) preſumes ſo much vpon the faith of the reader, who he hopeth will beleeue him, that he telleth him ſo direct and redy a tale, as though himſelf had bene in euery place, at euery tyme; when, and where, the matter was delt in, or ſpoken of: or els that he hath had his intelligence by eſpetiall reuelation, for that he ſeemes to knowe all, ſo preciſely, and ſo perfectly, yea he knowes now to call the Ieſuyte in Spaine, Richard Walpole, that ſo often in the indightment was William Walpole. And moreouer he knowes that the ſaid Richard Walpole is a man of principall credit in Spaine, and as Vicar generall to Perſons in his abſence, which is a point in deede that muſt argue the mānes knowledge to be ſupernaturall, becauſe he knowes that, that no man els knowes: but yet to knowe it better (as alſo ſome pointes and circumſtances in relating actes of Catholique religion) he were better to employ ſome one ſpie more ſufficient then it ſeemes he hath any: Vnum eſt neceſſarium, by which ſentence (by himſelf repeated) he may correct his ignorances and ſo make his pamphlets hereafter to be the leſſe laughted at, If withall he leaue out ſuch bald notes, as that Squyer ſqueezed out the poyſon out of his dooble bladder in the ſight and preſence of diuers, and

therewithal did ſay God ſaue the Queene, for this alſo makes the matter ſmell further of then the poiſon could infect.
            Further it is to be noted (as the indyghtement, & this pamphleter both teſtifie) the poiſon was deliuered vnto Squyer in a dooble bladder, that is, in one bladder within another, and this he pricked with holes, and ſqueezed on the pomel of the Queenes ſadle, and the ſadle as the pamphleter ſayth, being on the back of the horſe, and the horſe ſtanding in the ſtable yard (for that the Queen was redy to ride abroad) it would be knowen how Squyer did, to auoyd his owne harme by the poiſon, that now by the ſqueezing of the bladder, and ſtraining it through, muſt needs be left ſticking on the outſide: and this marueil is the greater, for that Squyer muſt of neceſſity, haue donne it with a tryce, and therfore could haue no leaſure (for fear of being noted by the lookers on) to put it into a new bladder or veſſell (for that he was to reſerue the remainder of this poyſon for the Earle of Eſſex chaire) and therefore thruſting the bladder all wet on the outſide into his pocket on the ſudden, and yet to get no parte of the poyſon, vpon himſelf or his clothes, is a great merueil, and to get parte vpon him and to haue no harme, may be deemed a miracle, but to auoyd this queſtion, if the pamphleter had remembred ſo much, he ſhould either haue ſayd that Squyer had had ſkill in iugling, and could deceaue their ſightes that looked on, or els that the ſadle was in a corner in the ſtable where he was alone by him ſelf, and not on the horſes back in the open yeard, and the ſight of many, for now a miracle may bee preſuppoſed to be wrought vpon the horſe alſo, yf any of the poyſon ſqueezed out on the ſadle pomell did light vpon him, as very lykely it muſt, becauſe the pomell is round and ſuch a ſubſtance as may be ſtrayned through holes pricked with a pin in a bladder will eaſely run downe a ſadle pomell. And by this reaſon muſt enſew, miracle vpon miracle (fowre at the leaſt) yf all be well remembred. And it is alſo a maruell (though no miracle) that neither the Queenes ſadle, nor the Earles chaire, were preſented at the bar, becauſe in all lykelyhood the ſtayn or ſigne of ſo forcible a poiſon ſhould be found to remaine vpon the one or the other, at leaſt to grace the matter ſome aqua fortis or alcumiſticall diſtillation might haue bene wyped

on both, or one, in ſteede of a pretended poiſon, and ſo might the ſadle and chaire haue bene reſerued for remembrance of ſo many great miracles, and well woorthy: yf this had bene remembred, as in good earneſt it would haue bene, yf it had bene a true donne thing in deede, or that the proſecuters of this matter had belieued it themſelues, or had better fayned, to haue belieued it.
            But to leaue theſe ouerſightes to ſuch as muſt take better heede to them heerafter, I will heer draw to an end, and tell the pamphleter, that he doth ſerue his Paduan frend but by peecemeal: for ſeeming to go roundly to woork with him, & to tel him a full tale without ſtop, and yet to leaue out the later and chief parte of all, which was played by the principall actor Squyer himſelf, to wit, in not telling how he ended the matter at Tiburne, and how he there made two denials, the one of Catholique religion, declaring himſelf a perfect proteſtant, and the other of his practiſment of poyſon, all which I ſay to be left behinde ſticking in his pen, muſt needes be but a ſly trik of his, and howſoeuer his frend do accept therof, or of his excuſe therof, likely it is that he wil be ſo wiſe, as not once to tel-the contentes of his ſaid letter ſo any of the Italians, leaſt he be well laughed at for his labour, for they are to wiſe for him to delude with flimflammes, and to wel acquainted with the ridiculous rumors of Engliſh Queen-killinges. Some poore fooles in England that know nothing, may do them the pleaſure to beleeue it for them.
            They can tel him, and tel him truly, of the cruel and accuſtomarie killing that is vſed in England, which now a dayes (for the bloodineſſe thereof) is become the moſt ſad ſpectacle of the vniverſal world.
            They can tel him, how when by the open force of malyce they liſt not to take away mennes liues, that then they can do it by ſleight, deceit, and cooſinage, and yet ſtil with exterior face and ſhew of Iuſtice, and for proof of this, we need not ſeek ouer our hiſtories of former ages.
            They can tell of the great numbers of innocent prieſtes, and Catholique men, that for old faith and religion, vnder pretence of new treaſon, are made ſubiect to ſo many and ſo great afflictions, and laſtly to moſt cruell death: and this both by Italians

and ſundry other nations is publiſhed to the world in their ſeuerall languages.
            And who knoweth not, and ſeeth not, that it is a comon cuſtome, before any new ſtorme is raiſed vp of perſecuting Catholiques, more violently then ordinary, that then ſome pretence is made of the diſcouery of ſome great treaſon, againſt the Queenes perſon.
            Valentyn Tomſon his matter of Queene-killing had preuented Squyres, yf he had come aſwell from Spaine as he did from Scotland, and that he could haue ſaid that he had ſeene and ſpoken with a Ieſuite, though he knewe him not ſo familiarly, as to know his name.
            This world is now growne ouer well acquainted with theſe tales of Queen-killings, as alſo that thoſe brutes are inductions to the killing of ſuch innocent ſeruants of God as lighte into the hands and power of the blood-thirſty and are by them alloted to the ſlaughter, whoſe glorie both in heauen and earth wilbe the greater, in that their paynes are inflicted with dooble wrong. And when the Notorious actes of the iniuſtice of England, ſhal come to be publiſhed in a large volume, to the view of the world, and to the admiration of after-coming poſteritie (the haſtening Whereof the cruelty of the perſecuter may enforce) then ſhal ſundry fraudulent practiſes, and many bloody tragedies, be reuealed, and thoſe not altogether free from ſecret murthers, and with ſufficient proofes and arguments for the vtterance of truth, and far different from that which cogging pamphleters and fond baletmakers do divulge in the meane tyme whyle truth keepeth ſylence.
            
         
      
   