
      
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
            ¶Orders taken the
x. day of October, in the thirde yere
of the raigne of our Soueraigne Ladye,
Elizabeth Quene of Englande, Fraunce
and Irelande, defender of the fayth. &c.
By vertue of her Maiesties letters addressed
to her hyghnesse Commissioners
for causes Ecclesiasticall
as foloweth.
            
               INprimis, for the auoyding of
muche stryfe and contencion,
that hath heretofore rysen among
the Quenes Subiectes
in diuers partes of the Realm,
for the vsyng or transposynge
of the Roode loftes, Fontes and Steppes,
within the Queers and Chauncels in euery
parryshe Churche. It is thus decreed and
ordeyned, that the Roode loftes, as yet, being
at this daye aforesayde vntransposed, shalbe
so altered, that the vpper parte of the same,
with the Soller be quite taken downe, vnto
the vpper partes of the vautes, and beame
runnyng in length ouer the sayde vautes, by
puttyng some conuenient crest vpon the said
beame towardes the Churche, with leauyng
the situation of the seates (aswell in the
Quere as in the Churche) as heretofore hath
ben vsed.
            Prouided yet, that where anye Parryshe,

of theyr owne costes and charges by common
consent, wyll pull downe the whole frame,
and reedifying agayne the same in Ioyners
worke (as in diuers Churches within the
Citie of London doth appeare) that they may
do as they thynke agreable, so it be to the
heyght of the vpper beame aforesayde.
            Prouided also, that where in any Parrish
Churche the sayde Roode loftes be alreadye
transposed, so that there remayne a comely
particion betwixte the Chauncell and the
Churche, that no alteracion be otherwyse attempted
in them, but be suffered in quiete.
And where no particion is standyng, there to
be one appoynted.
            Also that the Steppes which be as yet at
this day remaynyng in any Cathedrall, Collegiat,
or Parryshe Church, be not styrred nor
altered: but be suffered to continue, with the
Tombes of anye noble or worshypfull personage,
where it so chaunceth to be aswell in
Chauncell, Churche, or Chappell. And yf
in any Chauncel the Steppes be transposed,
that they be not erected agayne, but that the
place be decently paued, where the Communion
table shall stande out of the tymes of receyuyng
the Communion, hauyng theron a
fayre lynnen cloth, with some couerynge of
Sylke, Buckram, or other such lyke, for the
cleane keping of the sayde cloth on the Communion
borde, at the cost of the Parryshe.
            And further, that there be fixed vpon the
walle, ouer the sayde Communion borde, the

Tables of Gods preceptes Imprinted for the
sayde purpose.
            Prouided yet, that in Cathedral Churches
the Cables of the sayde preceptes be more
largely and costly paynted out, to the better
shewe of the same.
            Item that all Chauncels be cleane kepte
and repayred within as without, in the windowes
and other where as appertayneth.
            Item that the Font be not remoued from
the accustomed place: And that in Parryshe
Churches the Curates take not vppon them
to conferre Baptisme in Basens: but in the
Font customablye vsed.
            Item that there be no destruction or alienacion
of the Belles, Steple, or Portche belongyng
to anye Parryshe Churche, by the
priuate aucthoritie of any person or persons,
without sufficient matter shewed to the Arch
byshopp of the prouince, of his and theyr doinges,
and by them allowed: Except it be for
cause of repayryng the same.
            Item that neither the Curates, nor the
parentes of the chyldren, alter the common
vsed maner for Godfathers and Godmothers
to aunswere for the chyldren, nor shall condemne
the accustomable vsage in the same.
            Item that it shall not be lawfull to anye
Ordinary to assigne or enioyne the Parishes
to buye any bookes of Sermons or expositions,
in any other sorte, then is alreadye, or
shalbe hereafter appoynted by Publike aucthoritie.
            
               Item that there be none other dayes obserued
for holy dayes, or fastyng dayes, as of
dutie and commaundement: But only suche
holy dayes, as be expressed for holye dayes in
the Kalender late set foorth by the Quenes
aucthoritie. And none other fasting dayes (to
be so commaunded) but as the lawes & Proclamacions
by the Quenes Maiestie prouided
in the same, do appoynt.
            Item that the Parson, Uicar, or Curate,
with the Churchwardens, shal yearely make
and exhibite vnto the Regesters of the Ordenarye,
the names and surnames of all persons
maryed, Christened, and buryed, within
theyr sayde parryshes, by byll indented, with
the subscription of theyr handes: Noting the
day and yeare of the said Christeninges, mariages
and buryalles, out of theyr oryginall
regester kept in custodye, as is appoynted by
the Quenes Maiesties Iniunctions.
            Item that no Parson, Uicar, or Curate, of
anye exempte Churches, or otherwyse called
lawlesse Churches, do attempt to conioyne by
solemnizacion of Matrimonie, any persons
not beyng of his parryshe, without sufficient
testymony of the banes askynge in the Churches
where they dwell: or otherwyse be
aucthorised lawfully to mary.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London in Powles Church
yarde by Richarde Iugge, Printer
to the Quenes Maiestie.
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
      
   