
      
         
            
            
            ¶An admonicion or warnyng, to
all the Kynges Maieſties Iuſtices of Peace,
in the name of the Lorde Protector, and the reſt of the Kynges Maieſties
counſaill, ſpoken in the Sterre Chamber, by the Lorde
Cha
                  •
               ncelor of Englande, the fourth of Maie, in the ſecond
yere of the reigne of our ſouereigne lorde
Kyng Edwarde the ſixte. &c.
            
               IT hath been vſed
and accuſtomed
before this
tyme, to call at
certayne tymes
the Iuſtices of
peace, before the
Kynges Maieſties
counſail, to
geue vnto theim
admonicion and
warnyng, diligentely
as their
duetie is, to loke to the obſeruyng of ſuche thynges,
as be committed to their charges, according
to the truſte, whiche the Kynges maieſtie hath in
theim. How bee it, now at this tyme, wee call you
before vs, not onely of cuſtome, but rather of neceſſitie:
For hearyng daily and perceiuyng as we
do, the greate negligence, and the litle hede whiche
is taken and geuen, to the obſeruyng of the
good and wholſome Lawes, and orders in this
realme, whereupon muche diſordre dooth daily
enſue, and the Kynges Maieſties Proclamacions
and orders, taken by the counſaill (as we are

aduertiſed) not executed, the people brought to
a diſobedience, and in maner all his Maieſties
ſtudie and oures, in ſettyng a good and moſte
Godly ſtaie, to the honor of God, and the quiet
of the relame, ſpent in vain, and come to nothing.
The whiche, as wee haue greate hope and truſt,
not to bee altogether ſo, yet ſo muche as it is, and
ſo muche as it lacketh, of kepyng the realme in a
moſte Godly ordre and ſtate: we muſte nedes impute,
and laie the faulte therof in you, whiche are
the Iuſtices of Peace in euery Shire: to whom,
we are wont to directe our writynges, & to whoſe
truſt and charge, the Kynges maieſtie hath committed,
the execucion of all his Proclamacions,
of his Actes, of Parliament, of his Lawes.
            We are infourmed that many of you, be ſo negligent
and ſo ſlacke, in that, that it doth appere,
that you doo rather loke, as it wer through your
fingers, then diligently to ſe, for the execucion of
theſaied Lawes and Proclamacions: For if you
would accordyng to your dueties, to your othe,
to the truſte, whiche the Kynges maieſtie hath in
you, geue your diligence and care, toward thexecucion
of theſame, moſt Godly Statutes and
Iniunccions, there ſhould no diſobedience, no
diſordre, nor euill rule, bee begon, or ariſe in any
part of the realme, but it ſhould by and by be repreſſed,
kepte doune, and reformed.
            Mary it is feared, and the thyng it ſelf geueth
occaſion thereto, that diuerſe of you, do not onely
ſet furthe, but rather hynder, ſo muche as lieth in

you, the kynges maieſties procedynges: and are
content that there ſhould ariſe ſome diſobedience
and that menne ſhould repine againſt Godly orders,
ſet furthe by his Maieſtie, you do ſo ſlackly
looke to the execucion of theſame. So that in
ſome Shires, whiche bee further of, it maie appere
that the people hath neuer hard, of diuerſe of
his maieſties Proclamaciōs, or if thei haue hard
that you are content to wincke at it, and to neglecte
it, ſo that it is all one, as though it wer neuer
commaunded. But if you doo conſidre, and
remembre your dueties, firſte, to almightie God,
and then to the kynges Maieſtie, the wealthe of
the whole Realme, the ſafegarde and ſuretie of
your awne ſelfes, you muſt nedes ſe, that excepte
ſuche ordres, as the kynges Maieſtie hath ſette,
and ſhall herafter appoynt to be kept, neither the
realme can bee defended, if the enemie ſhould inuade,
nor in peace it cannot ſtande, but vpon the
contempt of good and wholſome lawes, all diſordre
and inconueniences ſhould come, the people
ſhould be wilde and ſauage, and no man ſure of
his awne. And if at any tyme there was occaſion
and cauſe, to be circumſpect and diligent aboute
theſame, there was neuer more tyme then now:
How wee ſtande in Scotlande you knowe, and
that other forrein power maketh great preparacion
to aide them, and in deede doth come to their
aide, we are ſurely informed and certified. Wherfore,
if there ſhould not be good ordre, and obedience
kepte in the realme, the realme were like vtterly

to be deſtroyed. Neuer forrein power could
yet hurte, or in any parte preuaile in this realme,
but by diſobedience and miſordre within out ſelfes,
that is the waies wherewith God will plague
vs, if he mynde to puniſh vs: and ſo long as
we do agree within our ſelfes, and be obedient to
our Prince, and to his Godly ordres and lawes,
wee maie bee ſure that God is with vs, and that
forrein power, ſhall not preuaile againſt vs nor
hurte vs. Wherfore once again, and ſtil we muſt
and doo laie this charge vpon you, that are the
better of the Shire▪ and Iuſtices of Peace: that
with ſo conuenient ſpede as you can, you doo repaire
doune into your countreys. And you ſhall
alſo gaue warnyng, to the Gentle menne of the
Shire, whiche haue not neceſſarie buſines here,
that thei repaire doune eche man into his countrey,
and there bothe you and thei, who be reconed
the ſtaie of euery Shire, to ſe good ordre and
rule kepte. You, that your Seſſions of Gaole deliuery,
and quarter Seſſions, bee well kepte, and
therein your metynges, to bee ſuche, that Iuſtice
might be well and truly miniſtered, the offendors
and malefactors puniſhed, accordyng to the Lawes
of the realme, without any teare of any man,
or that for fauoure, you ſhould ſuffre thoſe to eſcape▪
whiche with their euill exāple, might bryng
other to like miſhappe, and that all Vacaboundes,
al lewde and light tale tellers, and ſedicious
berers of falſe newes of the Kynges Maieſtie, or
of his counſaill, or ſuche as will preache without

licenſe, be immediatly by you repreſte and puniſhed.
And if there ſhould chaunce, any lewde and
light fellowes, to make any routes or riottes, or
vnlawfull aſſembles, any ſedicious metynges,
vprors, or vpriſynges, in any place, by the ſedicious
and deuiliſhe mociō, of ſome priuie traitors,
that you and thei appeaſe theim at the firſte, and
apprehende the firſte aucthors and cauſers therof,
and certifie vs with ſpede.
            The lightnes of the rude and ignoraunt people,
muſt be repreſte and ordered, by your grauitie
and wiſedome: And here you maie not (if any
ſuche thyng chaunce) diſſemble, with thoſe ſuche
lewde men, and hide your ſelfes. For it ſhalbe required
of you, if ſuche miſordre bee: and ſurely
without your aide and help, or your diſſemblyng
ſuche miſordre cannot bee. Nor we dooe not ſaie
this, that wee feare any ſuche thyng, or that there
is any ſuch thyng likely to chaunce, but we geue
you warning before, leaſt it ſhould chaunce. We
haue had to muche experience in this Realme,
what inconuenience commeth of ſuche mattiers,
and though ſome light perſones, doo not in their
rage conſider it, yet wee doo not doubte but that
you weigh it, and knowe it well inough. And if it
ſhould chaunce our enemie (who is mainteined,
by other forrein powers, and the Buſhoppe of
Rome) ſhould ſodainly arriue, in ſome place of
Englande, either driuen by tempeſte, or of purpoſe,
to do hurte, ye ſhould ſe ſuche ordres kepte,
by fieryng of Beacons, as hath all ready been

written vnto you by our letters, to repulſe theſame,
in ſo good arraie as you can, as we do not
doubte but you will, for the ſaufegarde of
your countrey: ſo that the enemie ſhall
haue litle ioye of his commyng.
And for that purpoſe, you
ſhall ſe diligently, that
menne haue Horſe
Harneis, and
other
furniture of weapon
redy, accordyng to
the Statutes, and good
orders of the realme,
and the Kynges
Maieſties
commaundementes.
            God ſaue the Kyng.
         
      
      
         
            Excuſum Londini, in aedibus Richardi Graftoni,
Regij Impreſſoris.
            Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum
ſolum.
            
         
      
   