
      
         
            
            
            A DECLARATION OF THE CAVSES, WHICH MOOVED THE chiefe Commanders of the Nauie of her moſt excellent Maieſtie the Queene of England, in their voyage and expedition for Portingal, to take and arreſt in the mouth of the Riuer of Lisbone, certaine Shippes of corne and other prouiſions of warre bound for the ſaid Citie: Prepared for the ſeruices of the King of Spaine, in the Ports and Prouinces within and about the Sownde, the 30. day of Iune, in the yeere of our Lord 1589. and of her Maiesties raigne the one and thirtie.
            Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Chriſtopher Barker, printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie. 1589.
         
         
            
            
               
                  HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
                  DIEV ET MON DROIT
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A DECLARATION OF THE CAVSES, WHICH MOued the chiefe Commaunders of the Nauie of her moſt excellent Maieſtie the Queene of England, in their voyage and expedition for Portingall, to take and arrest in the mouth of the riuer of Lisbone, certaine ſhippes of Corne, and other prouiſions of warre bounde for the ſaid Citie, prepared for the ſeruices of the King of Spaine, in the ports and Prouinces within and about the Sownde, the 30. day of Iune, in the yeere of our Lord 1589. and of her Maiesties raigne the 31.  
            
            
               WHereas it is a thing out of cōtrouerſie, that certaine Marchaunts reſiant and inhabiting within and neere vnto the Sownde in the kingdome of Denmarke, cō
               monly called the Marchants of the Hanſe townes, wil grieuouſly exclaime among forreine Nations, againſt the chiefe Commanders of the Fleete of the moſt excellent Queene of England, as infringers of the law of Nations, and of the ancient contracts made betwixt the Kings of England, and the Hanſe marchants, and as contemners of the Newtralitie which the ſaid Hanſe marchants doe chalenge to themſelues, whereby they thinke and hold it lawfull for them to exerciſe the trafique of all marchandiſes whatſoeuer, with all people whoſoeuer, euen in the times of greateſt hoſtilitie

betweene whatſoeuer kings and Princes, by reaſon of the intercepting & arreſting of certaine of their ſhips, paſſing to the ayde and furniſhing of the king of Spaine with corne, and prouiſions of warre: it ſeemed good vnto her foreſaid excellent Maieſtie, in reſpect of her good will, together with ſingular affection and loue to the ſacred Empire, the Emperours Maieſtie himſelfe, the noble Princes of Germanie, and to all & ſingular the Eſtates of the Empire, in this publike ſort to make it manifeſt for what cauſes the aforeſaid Hanſe ſhips were ſtayed by the officers of her Fleete, and as lawfull priſes taken and confiſcated. Which is done to no other end or purpoſe, but to make it euident that the ſame action doth ſtand & agree with equitie and iuſtice, and to be a thing moſt probable, that other Princes whoſoeuer, their ſeruants and Officers in the like caſe, and vpon the like occaſion, woulde not haue failed to take the like courſe.
            For it is a thing notorious & ſufficiently knowen, not onely to the fewe Hanſe townes, but alſo to all Chriſtendome, that the king of Spaine is tranſported with a mortall hatred againſt the Queenes Maieſtie of England: a witnes whereof is the intended but not performed inuaſion of the kingdome, and Dominions of England by the ſaide king the yeere laſt paſt, furthered by him with all his force, but by the mercie of God vtterly diſappointed.
            Which exulcerate malice of the Kings minde, not lately ſprong vp, but of long time lurking in the cloſet of his heart, yet foreſeene and ſtill preuented by the Queenes Maieſtie, ſhe often by her meſſengers ſent to him for that purpoſe, as with moſt

gentle medicines indeuoured to aſſwage, to reduce him to a newe minde meeter for a Prince, and ſo great a king as himſelfe: to the ende that remouing out of both their mindes not onely the ſtaine, but alſo the ſuſpition of the ſtaine of diſcontentments, they might diſpoſe themſelues to enter and conclude a firme peace and durable friendſhip, according to the ancient leagues betweene their progenitours and fathers, and their kingdomes, for the ſpace of many yeeres happily continued.
            The king as a man bewitched by the biſhop of Rome, the very firebrand and bellowes of all the ciuill warres in Chriſtendome, neglecteth the remedies and conditions of peace that haue bene offred, and perſeuereth according to his beginning, in his hoſtile intēdement againſt her Maieſtie, not otherwiſe contentable or ſatisfiable then with her deſtruction, the ſlaughter and bloodſhed of her people moſt obedient vnto her, and to bee ſhort, with the conqueſt of the whole kingdome.
            And for the better effecting hereof, hee hath oftentimes ſent his meſſengers (you woulde rather ſay his fireflingers) into England, & of lateſt yeeres, two ſpeciall perſons, of all the reſt moſt eger and furious, Gyrald Deſpes, and Bernardine Mendoza, who ceaſed not to ſound and perſwade the mindes of all thoſe whome they coulde growe in acquaintance with, and were men giuen ouer to al miſchiefes and diabolical practiſes: promiſing them, and beſtowing vpon them extraordinarie rewards, of purpoſe to ſtirre them vp to moue domeſtical conſpiracies againſt her Maieſtie.
            And how much they preuailed in their attempts,

it is not materiall in this place particularly to diſcuſſe, for ſo this worke woulde growe large. The 3. principall conſpiracies, the one of the Earles of Northumberland and Weſtmerland, and of their partizans, the ſecond of the Duke of Norfolke, the third of the two Pagets brethren, as alſo of the two Throckmortons and of their confederats, whereof ſome were condemned and executed, for their intended ouerthrow of the Queenes Maieſtie, and of the ſtate of the Common wealth, and the reſt that are fled, and wander vp and downe in vncertaine places, and are to this day mainteined at the charge and by the purſe of the Spaniſh King, are in this matter very ſufficient witneſſes.
            But the Patrons and complotters of theſe rebellious, being ſubtile and cautelous in their actions, howſoeuer apparant the factes of their ſeditious miniſters ſeeme to bee, yet peraduenture the Spaniard himſelf wil denie them to be his precepts, and directions. Did he then chaſtiſe thoſe his miniſters being returned into Spaine, as tranſgreſſers of his pleaſures? Did hee detaine from them all rewards and preferments, as hauing ill deſerued them? hath he blamed the auctours of ſuch facts, and excuſed himſelfe to the Queene? I would to God it were ſo.
            But goe to, let theſe witneſſes paſſe. May hee be taken for a man of a good ſpirit, & of no poyſoned minde againſt her Maieſtie? Let then Guilielmus Cataneus, the Popes Secretarie that nowe is be produced: let his worke of the life of Pius Quintus ſometime biſhop of Rome be read. The ſaide Cataneus in that booke of his reporteth, that Philip the king of Spaine complained bitterly and with great griefe

to the Cardinall of Alexandria, ſent vnto him into Spaine in the yeere 1572. becauſe the conſpired The conſpiracie of the King of Spaine againſt the kingdoms of England and Ireland 1570. practiſe, as wel againſt England as Ireland, not long before entred vpon by his authoritie and aduiſe, had not that ſucceſſe that he looked for.
            Adde hereunto the ſhips and forces ſent twiſe Ships and forces twiſe ſent into Ireland by the King of Spaine. out of Spaine into Ireland vnder the pretext of the Popes name. As for the late treatie of peace with the Duke of Parma in Flanders, entred into vpon the mediation, and requeſt of the good prince the King of Denmarke, how ſmoothe & how ſlie a tuche was that? for her Maieſtie, being wholy bent to that treatie, with a ſincere minde and vnfayned deſire, beholde as then at her doores, that huge & mightie Fleete of Spaine, beholde a ſort of Armies brought out of Italie, and Germanie into Flanders, labouring and prouiding for nothing els but the deſolation of the kingdome of England, and the deſtruction of the Queene: for the Conſpiratours had as it were with their fingers, appointed euery one of vs to the ſlaughter: they had diſtributed our houſes and lands, and a newe Prince, a forrener was already ordeyned & created to enioy the kingdome.
            If the Spaniards ſeeme to obiect againſt theſe ſo grieuous, ſo deadly, and ſo ſtrange deuiſes, the ſuccours which her Maieſtie hath yeelded to the lowe Countreys, let them conſider well, and they ſhall finde, that moſt of theſe practiſes haue in time preceded the tranſporting of any ayde to them: let them denie (if they can) that they ſollicited many Engliſh Subiects to rebell, before her Maieſtie, ſo much as thought, of the relieuing of her auncient confederats, by her honeſt and iuſt meanes.
            
               
She appealeth to the King him ſelfe, and to his Vice Royes in Flanders, how often, and what meſſengers she ſent before that into Spaine, and Flanders, for breeding a concord and agreement betwixt the King, and the Nether-landers, not with hard, but with honourable and equall conditions: againſt which aduiſoes and requeſtes, when the King began to be obdurate, and the auncient contracts of amitie betwixt the Nether-landers, and the Kings of England could not ſuffer them to be depriued of their lawes and libertie, and be expoſed as a pray to Strangers, ſhe at the laſt receiued them, being too much oppreſſed into her protection, onely of a deſire to releeue the poore afflicted people, and not to offer the ſmalleſt iniurie to the King.
            For if ſhe had bene diſpoſed to regard her owne cōmoditie, ſhe might haue taken another courſe, but ſhe did not ſo: ſeeking rather as yet, earneſtly, and diligently with any conditions, if not too vnreaſonable, and ſuch as may ſtand with her honor, and the profite of the ſtate of Chriſtianitie, howe a cōmodious and ſecure pacification may be made betwixt the King, and the States of the lowe Countreys.
            In vaine, and contrary to reaſon, hath ſhe maintayned with great charge, that honorable Ambaſſage to the Duke of Parma the laſt yeere: in vaine was ſhee aduertiſed of the monſtrous Nauie of Spaine, and the miraculous ſwarmes offorces with Parma in Flanders, deſtinated & prepared for her ruine, and the ſpoile of her kingdome: ſhe remained ſtil without all intention or diſpoſition to ſend any further forces into Flanders, and was after a

ſort negligent, both of defending herſelfe, and of extending the limits of her gouernement beyonde the Seas, with purpoſe to liue in quietneſſe without feare, and in peace without ambitious deſire of rule.
            And howſoeuer ſhe may be thought greedie of Her Maieſties Ambaſſadors ſent into Flanders to intreate of a peace. other mens Dominions, ſhe ſent to Parma very noble and excellent Ambaſſadours, who being delayed from day to day, from moneth to moneth, without any thing accompliſhed, ſhe notwithſtanding tooke it patiently, and ſuffered ſo farre theſe dangerous delayes, that the Spaniſh Souldiers panting with haſte and greedineſſe for the blood and butcherie of her Maieſtie, and people moſt deare vnto her, were come vpon her coaſtes, and before her doores. In this ſort was her hope deluded, and her opinion fruſtrated by him, contrary to the royall dignitie of both the Kingdomes of England and of Denmarke.
            And if the victorious hand of God had not herein derided the cunning deuiſes and purpoſes of the Spaniards, if it had not ſcattered ſo great a terrour to all Chriſtendome, and drenched their carkaſes in the Sea, what ſhould the ſtate of the ſaid Hanſe marchants haue bene, ſo buſily and ſo contrary to al equitie and iuſtice, haſtening to furniſh him with corne & prouiſion for the warres? whither ſhould the long and ſacred quiet of the Romane Empire haue gone to hide it ſelfe? where ſhould all other Nations that profeſſe the trueth of Chriſtianitie, thinke that they might haue ſhrowded themſelues to be free from his tyrannie, and ſafe from his murderers and cruel executioners? If they ſaw not that

their owne deſtruction was ioyned with the ruine of the Queene of England, either it muſt be ſaide that they woulde denie Chriſt, or that they were blinded to their owne miſerie by the vengeance of God, for their ſecret ſinnes. For where the cauſe of hoſtilitie is all one, the like effect and iſſue is to be looked for at the hands of a cruell and raging enemie of the trueth: for in a maner, all the inhabitants of the Hanſe Townes are very good fauourers of the reformed Religion, and mortall enemies to the Romiſh errors. And would any man then beleeue, that men ſo well inſtructed, coulde more reſpect their priuate gaine, I will not ſay their filthie lucre, then their owne ſecuritie, the preſeruation of their Countrey, and the propagation of true Religion?
            But what? will the inhabitants of the Hanſe Townes pretend that they knewe not the Queene of Englands pleaſure? The Citie of Hamborough by their letters written vnto the Queenes Maieſtie, The Citie of Hamboroughs letters to the Queenes Maieſtie. the 21. of September, in the yeere 1585. hauing beſought her, that their ſhips might paſſe quietly vnto Spaine and Portugal, without ſtop or hindrance either in their paſſage or repaſſage, by her Maieſties Captaines at Sea, receiued not they anſwere to this effect?
            
               We doubt not, but you haue heard what occaſions of diſcorde are lately fallen out betweene vs and the king of 
               The Queenes Maieſties letters to the Hamburgers. 
               Spaine, whereof wee cannot throughly coniecture what troubles are like to enſue. If peace ariſe, we meane to deny you nothing, being our ancient confederates: but if it grow to a warre, we wiſh you aduiſedly to conſider, that it ſtandeth not with the ſafetie of our kingdome, to ſuffer our enemies to bee ayded with corne, and prouiſions for warre,
               
               thereby to be armed againſt vs. Which things, according to your accuſtomed wiſedomes you calling to minde, wee hope you will demaunde nothing at our handes, which may be hurtfull to our ſtate: as for the tranſporting of other ſortes of marchandiſe into thoſe partes, whereby our enemies may neither bee ayded with victuals, nor neceſſaries of warre, we will not hinder you, but will permit your ſhippes to ride on our coaſtes, and to paſſe along with all fauour for the performance of their intended nauigatiō: with which our anſwere, we hope you will be fully ſatisfied and contented; the preſent ſtate of things conſidered.
            
            Secondly, whereas two yeeres after that, to wit, The Hamburgers petitorie meſſage to the Queenes Maieſtie. the laſt yeere the ſaide Burgomaſters of Hamburrough ſent Sebaſtian Berghen their Secretarie and Agent with letters vnto the Queene of England, deſiring that vnder the colour and title of Newtralitie, they might freely paſſe into Spaine and Portingal, and repaſſe againe with al kind of marchandiſe whatſoeuer, was not the ſaid Sebaſtian anſwered in this wiſe by the Lordes of her Maieſties Counſaile?
            
               Whereas the King of Spaine, hauing ſent out his Nauie to inuade this Realme, to roote out the Chriſtian Religion, 
               The anſwere to the petition of yt Hamburge meſſenger. 
               & to worke the ruine & deſtruction of the Queenes Maiestie, hath declared more clearely then the light it ſelf, what he would haue the Queene of England to thinke of him, ſhe deemeth it not reaſonable vpon any colour to graunt either to the Hambourgers, or to any other the Haunſe Townes whoſoeuer, to carry corne, gunnepowder, and other appurtenances for the warre to ſo obstinate and manifest enemie of the true Chriſtian Religion. That ſuch as preſumptuouſly durſt attempt the contrary, ſhould ſuffer the puniſhment of their vnbrideled licenſiouſneſſe, if they
               
               fell into the handes of the Captaines, or other Subiects of the Queene of Englande, their goods and marchandiſes whatſoeuer thus tranſported againſt her Maieſties will to be made good priſes to any man that can take them, no excuſe of Newtralitie preuailing to the contrary.
            
            Moreouer it is not to be omitted, that the Lords of her Maieſties Counſell aforeſaid, hauing called for Maurice Tymberman reſident in London, and The Alderman of the Stilliard in London, commanded to aduiſe the Hanſe Townes. Alderman (as they call him) of the Stilliard, commanded him to giue warning to all the Haunſe Townes that her Maieſtie willed, and according to her Soueraigne auctoritie in her Dominions, commanded that they ſhoulde forbeare from thenceforth, from the beginning of the moneth of Ianuarie laſt paſt from carying of corne, and generally of all prouiſion of warre, cables, maſtes, and like marchandiſe into Spaine and Portingall, whereby the enemie of her Kingdome might be the better furniſhed, vnder the paine of loſſe both of ſhips and goods, to be inflicted vpon ſuch, as ſhould violate this her princely commandement.
            That the Haunſe Townes were not ignorant of this inhibition, appeareth by the letters of the Cities of Lubecke, and Hamborough, written afterwarde The letters of the Lubeckers, Hamburgers, and Dantiskers. to the Queenes Maieſtie, the 26. of March, and from Dantiske, the 13. of the ſaide moneth, before thoſe ſhips ſet out from home, which are now taken. The ſame in like maner is apparant, by many bils of the hiring, and freyghting of their ſhips, wherein among others, this one thing is worth the noting, which was there found, that they couenanted in plaine words, with the ſhipmaſters, that they ſhould not paſſe into Spaine & Portingall through

the Engliſh Chanel & vſuall way, but on the backe ſide of the Kingdomes of Scotland, and Ireland, a newe and ſtrange, and without doubt, a dangerous courſe: by which their intention and deede, they declared howe litle they cared for good meaning, and how carefull they were to arme and furniſh the common and knowen enemie of the Queene of England. But as alwayes for the moſt part it falleth out, deceite doeth neuer thriue with any man, and when men thinke moſt to deceiue, they are deceiued, and ſuffer the penaltie of their guile: for falling into the handes of her Maieſties armie vpon the coaſt of Portugall, and euen in the entrance of the hauen of Lisbone, they were brought backe into England, and by the lawe of Nations, are become priſes to him which tooke them.
            Here now they cry out, that the Commaunders of our Fleete haue delt iniuriouſly with them, they exclaime that the leagues are broken, that their old priuiledges in England are violated, which they chalenge to belong to their Cities, and ought to be kept and mainteined. As though that any man were ſo madde, ſo farre from the trueth of things, ſo careleſſe of his owne ſafetie, ſo great an enemie to publike ſecuritie, that with all his might and indeuour, would not preuent the miſchiefe and deſtruction hanging ouer the Commonwealth. He that withſtandeth not wrong when hee is able, is in as great fault, as if he deſtroyed the Common wealth. The preſeruation of the people hath bene euer accompted among all nations, for the very ſupreame Law. Are not the Hanſe townes aſhamed to maintaine and pretend a priuiledge, that is to ſay, a priuate

lawe againſt a publike and ſoueraigne lawe? Did euer any king or Prince witting and waring, ſuffer ſuch a kinde of trafike which ſhould make his enemie ouer mightie, and though hee did not diſfurniſh himſelfe, yet ſhoulde leaue himſelfe more open vnto his furie, which otherwiſe were like to be vnarmed and vnable to wage warre againſt him?
            In the yeere 1545. at which time the warres grew hotte betwixt the kingdomes of England and The Engliſh and French enemies: Charles the fift a confederate. Fraunce, when the ſubiects of Charles the Emperour the fift of that name of noble memorie, would needes haue had free libertie of paſſage with all commodities into Fraunce, vnder pretext of their Newtralitie, What was the Emperours anſwere being a Prince of great equitie? Did he not openly pronounce that courſe of theirs altogether vnlawfull? let the Contract it ſelfe concluded the 6. day of April be lookt into.
            When the Kings of Denmarke, and of Swethlande were at difference one with another, was it The Danes and Swethens enemies: the Hanſe men confederats. permitted to theſe Hanſemen to conuay freely any thing into one of their kingdomes, which was not in deede ceaſed vpon & confiſcated, if it fel into the laps of the other, not hauing firſt obtained ſpeciall libertie for the ſame? Was this ſtately, & ſo much priuiledged name of Newtralitie at that time, of ſuch force, that without vſing of any mediatour, it could recouer againe their goods out of the hands of the Danes & Swethens, & coūtenance the ſame in ſafetie, & ſecuritie? Let them acknowledge that, whereof they are not ignorant, that although the Emperour Ferdinande and other Princes of the Empire dealt in their behalfe by way of intreatie and

mediation, and that from the ſolemne aſſemblie of the ſaid Empire, yet they in this caſe preuailed nothing at all with Ericke, the king of Swethland.
            And further in the time of hoſtilitie betwene the Empire, wherewith as then the king of Poland ioyned againſt the great Duke of Muſcouie, went The Emperour and the King of Poland enemies to the Moſcouite: the Engliſh and Hanſe men friends. theſe matters otherwiſe then? Could either the Engliſh marchants, or anie other frequent the Narue in Liuonia, or any other partes of the Dukes dominions freely, and without daunger? Did the Hanſe men which then were for their king and Emperor, deliuer and reſtore againe the ſhippes which they had intercepted and taken, from thoſe which made ſuch attempts? Many mens goods ſurpriſed by the Hanſe men and others, as then intertained againſt the Moſcouite, and by them ſtill detained, without anie precedent prohibitiō of paſſing to the ſaid Moſcouite, are hereof very good witneſſes.
            It is alſo a thing well knowen, that the noble Prince of Orange, and the States, exerciſed the like iuſtice, as well againſt the Hanſe men, as others in times paſt.
            And verely the foreſaid Princes in theſe arreſtes did that which was according to the tenour, and preſcription of the lawes of the equitie of nations. For that ſame priuiledge of Newtralitie, is in ſuch ſort to bee vſed and inioyed, that in helping one of our confederates, we hurt not another: ſo that hee which helpeth one, & thereby damnifieth another, falleth from his priuiledge and contract: not becauſe he helpeth one of his confederates, but becauſe he doeth preiudice another, and by that fact of his, makes himſelfe an enemie, as offering the firſt

iniurie, and therefore in ſo doing, he is to bee taken and reputed for an Adherent, and Aſſiſtant to the enemie, and a very enemy himſelfe.
            This then beeing the ſtate of theſe thinges, what lawe, what reaſon, or example may be obiected to the contrary, but that it is lawfull for the Queene of Englād, whoſe ſcepter, diademe, kingdome, liuing, and life, are greedily thirſted after by the Spaniard, ſo potent and ſo malicious an enemie, to doe that againſt his fautors and fauourers ſo often premoniſhed, which was lawful for the Emperour, for the Empire, for the king of Swethen, for the king of Denmarke, for the Prince of Orange, for the States of Netherland, yea for the Hanſe men themſelues to doe in the like cauſe, but not in the like danger, and extremitie as this is.
            Nay, if wee thought it requiſite to alleadge any thing out of the priuiledges themſelues, whereof they haue ſo often, and ſo much complained, as being many yeeres withheld from them by iniuſtice, wee might offer the charter of Edward the firſt king Anno Do. 1302. of England, to be peruſed, granted in the third yere of his raigne: in which charter wee reade theſe expreſſe wordes.
            
               That all the aforeſaide Marchants may at any time carrie, or cauſe to bee carried into or out of the kingdome of 
               An exception in the priuiledge. 
               England, their marchandizes, which they ſhall bring with them, or buy here or otherwiſe come by, excepting to the countreyes of the manifeſt and notorious enemies of this kingdome.
            
            So that either they muſt denie, that the king of Spaine hauing practiſed ſuch cruell and horrible things (I would to God we might not ſay ſtil practiſing

the ſame) is an enemie to the Queene of England, or els by the wordes of the aforeſaide charter, they muſt confeſſe that they are included within thoſe boundes and limites, which they may not paſſe, if they deſire to bee called and accompted friendes.
            We may adde to all this, that it is a thing able to be ſhewed and proued in the Courts of Records of the kings of England, that heretofore the warres ariſing, and continuing betwixt the kinges of England and of Fraunce, the goods of theſe Hanſe men were ſo ſubiect here in England to arreſtes, as now they are, vntill they grew more warie, and had put in ſufficient Sureties, that they woulde not from that time tranſport any part of their goods into the prouinces and dominions of the French king.
            By theſe reaſons we take it plainely, and fully demonſtrated, that her Maieſties Captaines by Sea, in the preſent arreſt of the Hanſe mens goods, haue committed no iniuſtice againſt their pretēded priuiledges, but rather that they haue vtterly loſt them for this pranke of theirs, in cauſing victualles and martiall furnitures to bee conuayed to the countries of her manifeſt and notorious enemies, directly contrary to the wordes ſpecified in the priuiledges. Although her Maieſtie is not purpoſed, notwithſtanding all preſent extremities, and this moſt vile and moſt barbarous part of the Hanſe marchants, to proceede in dealing with them, according to that ſeueritie of law which iuſtly ſhe might execute, but is nowe thus farre onely reſolued, to confiſcate all the corne and prouiſions of warre: and as for the ſhippes themſelues, and other ſortes

of marchandiſe in them, ſhee is content to diſmiſſe them for the preſent.
            But nowe touching the matter of their priuiledges, for which they keepe ſuch a ſtirre, in complayning to the Emperour, the ſtates of the Empire, and al other princes els, which neuertheleſſe are cleerely found to haue beene broken, and forfeited in the time of Edward the ſixt, that moſt noble and famous prince. The Queene of Englande can ſufficiently proue, that theſe Hanſe men haue deſerued no benefite or fauour at her hands, euen by the lawes of the Empire it ſelfe, if her Maieſtie thought the argument neceſſary to ſtande vpon. It is a very apparant thing, that her Maieſtie neglecting and not regarding the vniuſt pretenſes and forged ſuggeſtions, wherewith theſe Hanſe men haue charged her among ſtrangers, hath yeelded to them no leſſe a benefit of free negotiation, then to her owne ſubiects, without any other reſtraint but this, that in liewe The fauour and liberalitie of the Queene of Englande, no leſſe to the Haunſe men, then to the Engliſh themſelues. and memorie of ſo ſingular a fauour, they alſo on their parts ſhould graunt the like freedome in their portes, and cities to her ſubiects, and marchantes: and yet like vnkinde people, and without reſpect to this fauour, they returne to their olde byas, & ceaſe not to attempt thinges dangerous to her Maieſtie, and by the opinions of all princes in no caſe to bee ſuffered.
            Theſe Hanſe men were at the like controuerſie ſometimes with the kings of Denmarke & Swethen, by reaſon of certaine like priuileges in the kingdomes of Norway and Swethland, and the matter grew ſo hot that it brake out to an open warre: but with what fruite or gaine to the ſtate of the Haunſe
               
men? This was the iſſue: they were forced to accept ſuch conditions of priuiledges, not as they challenged but as the foreſaid kings thought iuſt, & equal. By which preſident they might learne if they were wiſe, not to accept only, but moſt gladly & thankefully to accept the conditions offered by her Maieſtie, as proceeding from ſuch a kind of liberalitie, that may make them in this caſe ſuperiouts to all other Strangers, equall and alike with her owne Subiects. But if they continue in this their ſtubberneſſe and ingratitude, let them take heede leaſt they plucke vpon themſelues that moſt iuſt reward of their moſt peruerſe behauiours, whereof they haue felt the ſmart before this, both in Swethlande, Norway and Liuonia alſo.
            Seeing then theſe Hanſe men haue receiued from her Maieſtie many great benefits, but no ill deſerts at any time, ſhee deſireth the Emperours Maieſtie, and the reſt of the Princes and States of the Empire, to giue no credite to the rumours ſpread abroad by them, or by the friendes of the Romiſh Church, or by ſuch as are corrupted with Spaniſh penſions, men ſuborned of purpoſe to ſcatter theſe falſe ſurmiſes, to the ende that we being drawen to a mutual diſlike and hatred, they in the meane time may the ſooner and the more eaſily bring vs, and the Religion which we profeſſe (if it were poſſible) vnderfoote.
            And further her Maieſtie intreateth, that this heauie warre entred into with the Spaniard, for the mainteinance whereof no ſmall but huge ſummes are of neceſſitie required, and wherein the quarrell is not in her owne behalfe onely, but for the ſafetie

of all the Kings, Kingdoms, and Dominions of Europe that profeſſe the ſinceritie of true Religion, and for that cauſe are as much hated of this Spaniſh enemie and his Romiſh Confederats, as her Maieſtie is, may at the leaſt in this one thing ſeeme more tollerable, and leſſe difficult and labourious to bee continued, in not ſuffering the foreſaid Hanſe men, to tranſport to the forenamed common enemie, out of their Kingdomes, Dukedomes, Ports and Straights, any victuals or inſtruments of warre, by ordeyning ſeuere corrections vpon the rebellious and diſobedient, and ſuch as ſhall dare to attempt the contrary, and to thinke of her Maieſtie and her actions, as of a Prince moſt careful, both of the vniuerſall peace of Religion, and of the ſafetie of all and ſingular Princes her Confederats, & that they would by ioyning their Counſels & forces in one, vſe all their power and abilitie to extinguiſh the practiſes of the Romiſh prieſthod, that ſo a ſincere, The deſire of the Queenes Maieſtie for a peace through Chriſtendome. holy, and largely extending peace, free from treacheries, may be entred, concluded and eſtabliſhed throughout all Chriſtianitie, to the honour of Almightie God, and the tranquilitie of all Kings, Princes and Eſtates, with all increaſe of happines. In which cogitation, her Maieſtie moſt ſincerely and conſtantly abideth, and will not ceaſe (God bleſſing her) to remooue all impediments for her part, to procure this good effect according to her honourable deſire.
            But nowe hauing hitherto ſpoken of the open violence of the Spaniſh King, and the Biſhop of Rome, giue vs leaue to vſe a fewe wordes alſo of another The Biſhop of Romes inuaſion of England by his Ieſuites. matter not leſſe odious then the former,

conſiſting in the ſubtiltie of the litle foxe: which is a thing ſo much the more diligently to be lookt vnto, by how much the more cloſe and ſecret it is, and a thing that creepes farre without many mens knowledge. It is that ſame priuie legation and ſending as it were in corners of certaine falſly termed Ieſuites and Seminaries into this kingdome, to withdrawe the mindes of the ſimple and ignorant people, from their duetifull obedience to the Queenes Maieſtie and the Realme. But as theſe kind of men doe ſpring of certaine runnagates, and fugitiues naturally borne Subiects, who at home, either for pouertie growe deſperate, or by reaſon of their vicious liues, could not longlie hid: ſo being nowe ſent home againe by the Pope, ceaſe not vnder the habite of their ſuperſtitious profeſſion to runne from houſe to houſe, frō Towne to Towne, ſtirring vp the people by their whiſperings to rebellion, and ſcattering certaine popiſh Buls, made and ſent for that purpoſe, teaching the people out of them, vnder the paine of excōmunication, and of a curſe, that there is no hope of ſaluation remaining them, except they change their affections, and caſt off their due obedience to her Maieſtie.
            Thoſe of her Maieſties Subiects, which being taken with theſe Buls, and called in queſtion for the ſame, haue reuealed their practiſes: and being moued with a conſcience of their offence, doe returne to a better minde, and doe forſake that filthie ſinke or dunghill of the companie and opinions of Ieſuites and Seminaries: are pardoned of their former tranſgreſſions, and paſſe without puniſhment: but as for thoſe that are rooted in their wickedneſſe,

and remaine ſtifnecked in their offence, they being demaūded, whether if an inuaſion of the kingdome ſhould be made by the Biſhop of Rome or the Spaniſh King, they would (as good Subiects ought to do) ſtand for the Queene or no, they anſwere ſtoutly and proudly, that they are bound whenſoeuer it ſhould ſeeme good to the ſaid Biſhop of Rome, to The manifeſt treaſon of the Ieſuites, againſt the Queenes Maieſtie, & the kingdome of England. make any ſuch innaſion of the Kingdome, and Dominions of her Maieſtie, to aſſiſt and further the ſaid inuaſion, by al the wayes and meanes they can.
            I aske nowe of you, what Prince ſoeuer you be, hauing the authoritie of a Prince, what you would doe with ſuch monſters as theſe are, giuen ouer after this ſort to ſuch diueliſhnes? would you ſuffer the cloke of popiſh religion and obedience, to exempt ſuch traytors from the ſeueritie of Iuſtice? woulde you ſuffer them to liue, that woulde you ſhould not liue? ſurely no Prince or Monarche ought or may tollerate ſuch monſtrous creatures, except he purpoſeth voluntarily to neglect good lawes, his people, kingdome, and life; and ſinne grieuouſly againſt God himſelfe. And theſe are the monſters that are in England committed to execution; howſoeuer the companions of their treaſons, by their infamous libels ſpread amongſt the people crie out, and ſay, they ſuffer for the cauſe of Religion onely, and for their conſciences.
            Many of her ſubiects, and they no obſcure men, but ſome of the Nobilitie, and ſome others of the degree of knights are witneſſes, that howſoeuer they ſtand catholikely affected, yet as long as they conteine themſelues within the compaſſe of their duetie, & obedience to her Maieſtie and the State,

are neither committed to priſon, nor in any ill ſort vſed, only for breaking the lawes of frequenting the Churches, are peraduenture rated at ſome pecuniarie fine.
            The ende and purpoſe why wee ſpeake and publiſh theſe things, is to let all good Princes and Magiſtrates, and others deſirous to know the trueth of things, vnderſtande howe and by what meanes, as openly, priuily, by force of armes, and practiſes of treacherie, the ſtate of her Maieſtie and of her kingdome is aſſaulted by the biſhop of Rome, and the Spaniſh King: and therefore howe conueniently and neceſſarily her Maieſtie is drawen to reſiſt this force and to auoyde theſe frauds, and with what iniurious allegations the execution of lawes and iuſtice, is as it were torne and rent in pieces, not only by malitious imprinted Libels, but alſo by painted tables and pictures, ſignifying I knowe not what monſtrous things, reſemblances of ſome barbarous crueltie, as they falſely calumniate and exclaime, to be vſed againſt the foreſaid Ieſuites, and Seminarie Prieſts, that is to ſay, againſt men guiltie of high and horrible treaſon.
            But as for her Maieſtie, ſhe deſireth to ſtand as a perſon voide of all trueth and credite with good Princes, if ſhe euer puniſhed any of theſe men with any ſtrange or newe kinde of torment, then is appointed by the preſcript of the ancient lawes of this Realme prouided againſt ſuch perſons, as ſhall be found and conuicted for Rebels and Traytors.
            FINIS.
         
      
   