
      
         
            
            
            
               ARTICLES
DEVISID
by the holle consent of the kynges
moste honourable counsayle,
his gracis licence opteined
therto, not only
to exhorte,
but also
to
enfourme his louynge
subiectis of the
trouthe.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶The kynges moste honourable
counsayle to the residue of
his louynge subiectes.
            
               SIns it is the parte of all
honourable and elect persons
chosen by the prince,
when they do declare and
vtter matters of weight, to obserue
an equitie and trouthe in vtteryng of
them, and to shew beneuolence to the
people, whiche be vnder theyr prince,
in admonysshinge them of thinges,
which are necessarie for thē to know:
We therfore the kyng our souerayns
most faithful counsaillours and subiectes,
with hole assent and by his licence
haue thought most conuenient
and necessarie to intimate vnto you
(the reste of his subiectes) these articles
folowyng, for your better erudicion
and knowledge, and to open
vnto you truly the manifold iniuries
done vnto oure kynge and souerayn,

whiche (we beyng his true and feithful
subiectes) may in no wyse susteine
or suffer: But study and endeuoyr our
selfes by all wayes to vs possible, to
redoube and requite the same, and to
take the iniuries and wronges done
to his person (in whome is all oure
wealthe and ioye) more ernestly, than
if it were doone to vs alone. And so
shall we do according to our duties,
and therby deserue merite of god, to
whome most humbly we praye, that
he wyll vouchesafe to haue, supporte,
defende, and kepe vnder his wynge
and tuicyon oure most noble prince,
the quene, now being his wyfe,
with theyr issue, and all vs
his true and louynge
subiectes.
            Quia in te domine speramus.
            
               
               The fyrst Article.
               
                  FIrste the mere truthe is,
that no lyuinge creature,
of what astate, degree, or
dignytie so euer he be,
hath power gyuen hym
by god, to dispense with goddes lawes,
or lawe of nature. Which thing
is confirmed and determined in oure
princis case, by an infinite nombre of
well lerned men straungers, by the
most part also of al the moste famous
vniuersities of Christendome: And
speciallye, and aboue all (to our estimations)
the hole clergie of this realme.
Whervpon and in discharge
also of his conscience, beinge auctorysed
by acte of parlyament our Metropolytane
Archebyshoppe of Canturbury,
hath adiudged the first matrimonye,
to be contrarie to goddis
lawes, & therby not laufull, & this present
matrimonie nowe enioyed, laufulle
and perfyte. Wherfore we all
(that be oure princis true subiectes)

oughte in this his iuste & true matrimonie,
to lyue and dye with him, and
his, of this venter come, or cōmyng
            
            
               The .ij. Article.
               SEcondly, the counsayles of Nyce,
Melyuence, and Aphricane, with
others also, haue determyned, that
causes of stryfe or controuersie, being
ones begon in any region, shal there,
and in the sayde region, be finally determined,
and none other where, expressely
denienge the courtes of beyonde
the see, to oblige any manne to
appere at them for dyuers weightie
considerations in them expressed, whiche
notwithstandynge the byshop of
Rome by some men called Pope, the
vsurper of goddes lawe, and infringer
of general counsels, hath hytherto
wrongfully deteined at Rome, and
wolde do stylle, except otherwise our
prince and his parlyament had prouided,
his gret and weightie cause, contrary
to all righte and conscience, to

the vtter vndoinge of this realme.
Whiche thynges the prince and his
holle parlyamente considerynge, and
takinge some lyght vpon the forsaide
generall counsailes, and waying also
other wyse and politike reasons, thinkynge
verily this amongest other cō
                  sideratiōs,
that it were not mete that
the inheritance of this realme shulde
depende vpon the bysshop of Rome,
or any other straungiers wyll & plesure,
whiche other by affection, mede
or feare, might and wolde order it after
his worldly affections and appetites,
as it wel appereth this holy byshoppe
of Rome wolde: haue made a
commodious and welthy law lately,
both for vs & him, By which, good peple
(liuing within the limittes of true
matrimonie within this realme) shal
not by malyce, or euyl wyl be so longe
deteyned and interrupted from theyr
ryghte, as in tymes passed, they haue
ben, Nor iniuste matrymonye shall

haue his vnlauful and incestuous demoure,
as by delays to Rome, it was
wont to haue, whiche may euidently
apere now, by that, that our Princes
weightie and longe protracted cause
of Matrimonie, hath nowe here his
final and prosperous ende, with brefe
successe of issue all redy had, and other
lyke to folowe, laudes be vnto
god, thonly werker of the same: with
whiche issue bothe you and we, muste
both lyue and dye, accordynge to our
allegeaunce.
            
            
               The .iij. Article.
               THirdly, it is to be takē for a truth
& equitie agreing with lerning,
that an excusatour in any bysshoppes
court of the worlde, the partie eyther
not beinge bounde personally to appere
there (as bi al lerning our prince
is not at Rome) or being impedite by
any other lauful causes, whiche they
by their own law haue limited, shuld
be admitted to answer for the parte,

ageinst whiche equitie, the byshop of
Rome hathe also reiected our princis
excusatour, whiche iniurie although
it be not yet put in execution ageinste
any other persone (sauyng our prince
and kyng) yet that example shall remayne
for a president, in preiudice of
al princis and potestates. Wherfore,
we wolde aduyse them briefly to loke
vpon it, and we and ye the rest of his
subiectes, so to deteste this greate iniurie
done to oure prince, and consequentely
to vs, that the bysshoppe of
Rome, and all his, shall se, that excepte
it and all other iniuries done to
our prince and souerayne, be shortly
redoubed, we wyll reuenge it to the
vttermost of our power, and in so doing,
we do but oure dutie, yet surely
we doubte not but it shall be very acceptably
takē bi our prince and king.
            
            
               The fourthe Article.
               FOurthely the ryght beleue of all
true christien people is, that the

general counsel (laufully gathered) is
superiour and hath power ouer al byshoppes
and spiritualle powers, not
exceptynge the byshoppe of Rome.
In confirmation of whiche opinion
the approbate conseyle of Basil sayth
these wordes: Who so euer opponeth
him self obstinatly ageinst this truth,
is to be taken by all true christen people,
as an heritike. Wherfore, louing
frendes, lette vs so handell oure selfe
bothe in wordes & dedes, that we be
not taken, for ani fōde scruple in this
trap, and let not herein our eies be so
blynded, nor our eares made so defe
with the sayingis or prechinges of any
papystes, that we ron heedlonge
ageynste the true beleue of all righte
Christen people.
            
            
               The fyfte Article.
               FIftly, by the lawe of nature it is
graūted and admitted for lauful,
that a man beinge greued, vexed, or
troubled iniustely, may appele frome

the bysshop of Rome, to the generall
counsel, whiche so beinge, then specyally
suche libertie is moste conuenient
for princis, and they not to be reiected
therfro, nor it is not a thynge
by them to be neglected or omytted,
whiche haue but two wayes principally
where none other can preuayle,
to atteyne ryght the one agaynste the
other, that is to sey, in causes concernynge
the soule and mere spirituall,
appellation to the general counseyle,
In temporall, the sword only, except
by mediacyon of frendes, the maters
may be compounded, so that who so
euer wolde go about to take away any
of these naturelle defenses frome
them, is to be manly withstande both
by the prince and his subiectes. And
therto, we be animate by oure ryght
father, which redemed vs, our lorde
Iesu Christe, in that he seyth, Obeye
ye princes aboue all, and then their
deputies, not gyuynge power to any

other within theyr rules and dominions.
            
            
               The .vi. article.
               SIxtly after that appellatiōs be laufully
made frō the bishop of Rome
(whiche calleth hym selfe pope) vnto
the generall counsell, he is bounde by
the lawe neither to do, ne attempt any
further proces, in preiudice of the
appellant, whiche, if he do, by the
forsayde lawes, his doinges can not
preiudice the appellante, and also it
standeth voyde, The effecte of whiche
lawe must nowe take his strēgth
in the benefite of our prince, except to
great iniurie be ministred vnto him.
For our prince and kynge, according
to the libertie of nature and constitucions
of generall counsailles (as
afore) hath bothe prouoked and appeled
to the general counsayle nexte ensuinge,
rightfully congregate, from
the vsurper of goddes lawes, and infringer
of generall counsailles, whiche

callethe hym selfe Pope. In the
whiche our princis doinges, all iuste
and true christen men, I doubte not,
wyll supporte and meynteyne hym,
whiche prouocations & appellations
also standyng in force, and being intimate
to the person of the saide vsurper
(as in dede they be) sequestreth
hym rightfully from all maner of proces
belongynge or in any wise apperteinyng
to our princis facte and mater,
in any of his courtes. Other diabolike
actes & statutes by some of his
predecessours made, as hereafter shal
appere, not withstandynge. Wherfore,
what censures, interdictions, or
other his cursed inuentions, what so
euer they be, ought to be dispised and
mannefullye withstande, for they be
noughte in dede, and we (so doinge)
shall haue for our buckeler, the latter
and better part of this verse ensuing,
And the maligners, the fore parte of
the same,Psal. 36. whiche is, Quoniam qui

malignantur exterminabuntur, sustinētes
autē dominū, ipsi here ditabunt
terram.
               
            
            
               The .vii. Article.
               SEuenthely the sentence of excommunication,
ought not to be executed
by any minister of Christes
churche, agaynst any creature, except
it be for deedly syn prohibite by goddes
lawe and scripture, nor yet then,
excepte the partie stande in contumacie
or be heddye: howe sklenderly
shuld we then esteme his censures
and curses, which extendeth them vpon
vs chefly, bicause we haue made
holsome lawes, for the commoditie
and welthe of our prince and realme,
secondly, bycause they do preiudicate
his worldly appetites and profyte,
Thirdely bycause our prince wyl not
(contrarie to his conscience, directed
by goddis lawe, and thoppinions of
the moste parte of all the beste lerned
men in christendome, as afore is rehersed)

lyue an incestuous lyfe & abhomynable?
These thinges be so contrarious
to equitie, reson and iustice,
that by his doinges it maye appere,
what maner a man he is, accordynge
to a texte of scripture, whiche saith:
Ex operibus eorum cognoscetis eos.
                  Mat. 7. Wherfore,
we al (our princis true subiectis)
oughte to recken, as reason and lernynge
leadeth vs, besides the due obedience
to our prince, that the curse
of hym, whiche ministrethe hit iniustly,
as this is ministred, thoughe
it were within his iurisdiction, as it
is not: shall redounde to hym selfe,
and hurte no man elles. Wherfore in
this, lette vs all shewe our selfes like
true and obedient subiectes, not estemynge
or hangyng vpon any lyuing
creature, saue onely oure prince and
king, accordynge to an olde prouerbe
here in England, of olde tyme paste,
moche wont to be set by, & ofte tymes
by true men rehersed, which is, One

god and one kyng, myndynge therby,
that al other folkis doinges shuld
be despysed, which in any poynt may
be contrarie to them, in confirmation
wherof the prophete Dauid sayeth
these wordes,Psal. 36. 
                  Inimici uero domini
mox honorificati fuerint et exaltati,
deficientes quemadmodum fumus
deficient.
               
            
            
               The .viij. Article.
               EIghtly, it is the office of all maner
of bysshoppes, and a graunt
also indifferentely made to theym
all by God, that they shoulde fyrste
frendely admonysshe, and secretelye
reproue. Secondely, afore recorde
charitably to refourme (if they can)
all maner of offenders of goddis lawes
within their dioces, not vsynge
any compulsories, except the parties
persiste obstinate and in contumacie,
whiche happenyng, then is it laufull
for them to vse censures and excommunications.

And this manier of
wayes onely, ought euery byshoppe
to vse, all thoughe the bysshoppe of
Rome, wolde them to do neuer so moche
to the contrary, for they be bound
more to obey god, then man, Whiche
office and wayes, (accordynge to his
duetie) oure good byshoppe of Canturbury
(nowe lyuynge) hath begon
to shew and folowe. For fyrst he apperceyuinge
when he came to his dignitye,
that his prince and soueraine
lyued in vnlaufull and vnsytting matrimonie
(accordynge to his duetie)
mekely dydde admonyshe hym, and
therin also reproued hym, exhortyng
hym to leaue it, or els he wold do further
his duetie in it, So that at the
laste, accordynge to goddes lawes, he
did separate his prince from that vnlaufull
matrimonie. In whiche doinge,
we thinke that euery trewe subiecte
shoulde moche the better esteme
hym, bycause he wold execute goddis

commaundement, and sette this realme
in the waye of true heyres. And
howe God herewith is pleased, we
thynke it doeth euidentely appere by
many thynges. First so briefly vpon
this latter and lawfull matrimonie,
so soone issue hadde: Secondely, so
fayre wether, with greatte plentie of
corne and cattal: Thirdly peace and
amitie lately sought by dyuers princis
and potentatis, of oure Prince:
Fourthely the purenes of ayre without
anye pestilenciall or contagious
disease, by so longe tyme during, whiche
thynges we ought to thanke god
for, and to take them for demonstracions,
that he is pleased, bothe with
our prince and his doinges. Wherfore,
let vs all that be his true subiectes,
bothe reioyce in it, and applye
vs accordyngly to serue bothe god,
hym and his in it, accordynge to our
bounden dueties.
            
            
               The .ix. article.
               
               NInthely, that where in dede by
scripture, there is none auctoritie
ne iurisdiction graunted more to
the bysshoppe of Rome, then to anye
other, Extra prouinciam, yet bicause that
sufferance of people, and blyndenes
of Princis with theyr supportacyon
hitherto, hath susteined the same, doinge
them selfes therby to greate iniurie,
it is thought nowe conuenient,
and more then necessarie, to open the
same to the worlde, to the intente it
esteme not, ne honour hym as a god,
for feare of idolatrie, he beinge but a
man, and what maner a man, a man
neyther in lyfe nor lernynge, Christis
disciple, a man also, thoughe the
see apostolike were of neuer so highe
auctoritie, contrarious, vnlaufulle
also by their owne decrees, to occupy
and enioye his vsurped place. For
fyrste he is both baste and cam to his
dignitie by Symony, and now in denieng
the prouocation and appele of

our soueraygne lorde the kynge, and
supportinge the diabolike decree of
his predecessour Pius, is determined
by a generall counsaile Vere haereticus,
that is to saye, an Heretycke.
               Wherfore, all we (beinge trewe christen
people, he thus contynuynge)
oughte to despyce bothe hym and his
factes, and be no lenger blinded with
hym, but gyue our selfes holly to the
obseruance of Christis lawe, in whiche
is all swetnes and truthe, adioyninge
with it the lawes of this realme,
vtterly relynquyshynge the other,
in whiche is nothynge elles, but
pompe, pride, ambition, and wayes
to make them selfes ryche, whiche is
moche contrarious to his profession,
our lorde amende hym, and giue vs
grace no lenger to be blynded with
hym. Amen.
            
            Finis.
         
      
      
         
            
            LONDINI IN AEDIBVS
THOMAE BERTHELETI.
M.D.XXXIII.
CVM PRIVILEGIO.
         
      
   