
      
         
            
               
               
The Summarie
of certaine reasons,
which haue moued
the Quenes Maiestie to
procede in reformations
of her base and course
monies, and to reduce
them to their values,
in sorte as they
maye be turned
to fine
monies,
appointed to be declared by her
Maiestie, by order of her
Proclamacion, in her
Citie of London.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               FIrst of all it is knowen that the honour
and reputacion of the singuler
wealth that this Realme was wont
to haue aboue at other Realmes, was
partely in that it had no currant monies
but golde and syluer, whereas contrary all
other countreys, as Almayn, Fraunce, Spaine,
Flaunders, Scotland, and the rest of Christendom
haue hadde, and styll haue certayne base monies,
nowe of late dayes, by turnyng of fine monies
into base, muche decayed and dayly growen into
infamie and reproche, and therfore is thought necessary
to be recouered. Wherin lyke as her Maiestie
for her part meaneth to be at great charges,
so euery good Englishe subiecte ought to be content,
though it seme some smal losse at the fyrst.
            Also by continuing of the base monies, diuers
persons both in forreine partes, and within the
Realme, haue counterfayted from tyme to tyme
no smal quantitie, and brought to porte townes,
and vttered the same at the fyrste after the rate of
xii. pence a Teston, and after that, for .vi. pence:
where the same was not in dede worth much aboue
two pence: And caried out of the Realme for
those base monies, the riche commodities of the
same, as Wolle, Cloth, Lead, Tinne, Leather,
Tallowe, yea and all kynde of victual, as Corne,
Malt, Beere, Butter, Cheese, and suche lyke, so
as counterfaicters and suche lyke haue for small
summe of monies counterfaicted, caried out sixe
times the value in commodities of the Realme.
            By the meanes also that these base monies
were currant, diuers subtyll people haue chaunged

the same for the golde and fine syluer monies
of this Realne, and haue transported and caryed
out the same golde & syluer, so as although there
hath ben coyned both in the later end of the raign
of kyng Edward, & in the tyme of Quene Mary,
& nowe also sence the Quenes Maiesties raigne,
great quantities of golde and syluer, yet to part
therof is sene cōmonly currant: but as it may be
thought, some part therof is caryed hence, & some
percase by the wyser sort of people, kepte in store,
as it were to be wyshed that the whole were.
            Also by continuaunce of this sorte of base monies,
although almyghtie God hath geuen nowe
of late yeares plentyfull increase by the earth, for
the which he is to be thanked, without any uche
plages of scarcitie as in our forefathers tyme
hath ben read, when many hundrethes and thousandes
of people haue dyed for famine, yet the
prices of all thynges growyng or commyng from
the earth, hath inmeasurably and dayly rysen, as
all maner of grayne, fruite, cattell, bestiall, victtuell,
wolle, leather, and such lyke, and no remedy
could be deuysed to amende the same, but to cause
that the same base monies shuld be currant for no
more then they were in iust value. For euery man
of the least vnderstandyng, by one meanes or other
knew that a Testō was not worth six pence,
nor the peece of two pence was woorth so much,
& therfore no man woulde geue gladly that thing
which was and euer had ben worth sixe pence, for
a Teston, but would rather require two Testons:
& so a thyng being worth sixe pence, was bought
and solde eyther for two Testons, or one and a

halfe, which was in reckenyng .xii. pence, or .ix.
pence, and nowe euery Teston being brought to
the iust value, it must nedes folowe that one shal
bye of another hereafter that for .iiii. pence halfpeny,
whiche was wont to coste .vi. pence. And
when the Teston shalbe brought into fine syluer.
then shall all men be as desyrous to sell any ware
for suche fine monies, as they haue of late ben
loth and vnwyllynge to sell anye thynge for the
base monies, except they myght haue had twyce
as much of the base monies, as they were wonte
to haue of the fine, or els that for necessitie they
were dryuen to sell the same.
            By this meanes also now that the base monies
are brought to the iust value, and that euery man
shall haue fine monies for them, all poore people
that lyued of theyr hand labour, as well artificers
in cities or townes, as labourers in husbandrye,
or men that toke dayetall wages, eyther by land,
by sea, or by freshe waters, and all meane gentlemen
that liued but vpon pensions and stipendes,
and all souldiours and seruyng men, that lyued
vpon solde and wages, shall haue theyr pencions,
stipendes, soldes, and wages, now payde in good
and fine monies, & therwith shal bye more necessaries
for theyr sustentacion, then coulde afore be
bought: who surely hauyng heretofore after the
rate of .xx.s. xxvi.s. viii.d. .v. nobles .xl.s. iiii.
markes .v. markes .iiii. poundes .v. poundes .xx.
nobles, & so vpward by the yere payde to them in
these base monies, could not haue so much victual,
apparel, weapon, armure, horses, or such lyke,
with the said stipend, by more then a fourth part,
as they shall now haue, because indede the saide

base monies were of thēselues no more worth.
            By this reformacion also of base monies, shall
necessarely folowe a more profitable accoumpte
betwixt the monies of this Realme, and of other
countries, and thereby the accoumpte which by
marchauntes is called the eschaunge, shall also
aryse in estimation of the monies of Englande in
suche sorte as in former tymes hath ben, and the
forreine commodities thereby also be bought for
easyer pryses, to the benefite of all suche as shall
vse the same.
            So as the matter well considered, the greatest
numbre, and specially the poorest shall haue most
commoditie hereby, yea and such others as haue
moste gayned by excessiue prices, shall haue also,
(yf they wyll consider them selues) no small profyte
and helpe. And fynally, no maner of person
in the whole Realme shall haue after one to two
monethes hurt hereby, except onely the traytour
which hath lyued by counterfaictyng. And therfore
it is to be allowed and imbraced of al people,
and euerye man to thinke, that although at the
first he maye suppose that he hath lesse monie in
his purse, yet shall he haue for the same metal, as
much as that was worth, eyther in ware, or at
her Maiesties mint in fine monies. And when
soeuer he shal vtter that base monies, whiche at
the tyme of the Proclamation he hadde, the next
that he shall gette, eyther be his hande labour, or
for his wages, shalbe eyther fine monies, or such
as he may haue as much fine monies in the mint
for it. And consequently euery man ought to
thanke almyghtye God, that he may liue to se the
honour of his countrey thus partely recouered:

Syiuer to come in place of copper, pryces of
thynges amende, all people to be more hable to
lyue of theyr wages, euery mans purse of coffer
made free from the priuie thefe, whiche was the
counterfaytour. And fynally, the treasure of this
Realme to be of syluer and golde, as was wonte
in our forefathers time, and not of brasse and copper,
besydes manye other greate commodities
that hereof muste needes ensue, whiche but for
length myght be declared, and for all the same, no
losse to any, otherwise but in opinion at the begynnyng,
not much vnlyke to them, that beyng
sicke receiue a medicine, and in the takyng feele
some bytternes, but yet thereby recouer health
and strength, and saue theyr lyues.
            And because it is sene by experience, that many
tymes when good thynges be deuysed and attempted,
the Deuyll sleapeth not, to hynder the
same, but causeth them either to be defeated, or to
be defamyd and mistaken: Therefore it is meete
that no maner of person gyue any credite to such
as shall caste abrode any mistrust of amendment
of the money, or shall pretende thys decree to bee
greater or more burdenous then it is. For truely
this amendement is so fully purposed by her Maiestie,
as beside that, experience shal trie it within
one moneth or .vi. weekes, within which times
necessarie thinges for the mint must be prouyded.
It is sene, that her Maiestie may refourme these
monyes, according to her proclamation, without
anye suche great losse as myght moue her to forbeare
it: and on the other syde, the monyes bee so
iustly valued, as in dede the base Testons beynge

set at .ii.d. farthyng, and her Maiestie geuyng at
her minte, for euery pounde of them .xx.s. & .iii.d.
in rewarde, shall thereby gyue rather more than
they shalbe worth beynge melted, than lesse.
            So that her Maiestie, who since she came to
this Croune, neuer gained any thing by any coynage,
nor yet euer coyned any maner of base monies
for this Realme, will not now determine to
lease the honour & fame that she shal with small
losse or gayne recouer by this noble acte, to benefite
her Realme and people.
            And as to the opinion of the burden of the
losse, where ye base Testons be valued but at .ii.d
farthing, whereby such as haue them shall seme
to haue the greatest losse, it is to be well and reasonably
construed and taken of all men, for that
there hath not by good accompt which hath bene
made and well proued, bene aboue a sixth parte
compared to the other base monies of the same
sort of Testons coined in ye mints of this Realme.
And at the coynage of ye same base Testons now
valued at two pence farthing, which was done in
the time of the warres heretofore, there were set
therto certayn markes, as a Lion, a rose, a floure
deluce, or a harp, called the priuie markes of such
as weare then masters of the mint, which also be
specified in the Proclamation. For the better vnderstanding
wherof, here be in the ende of this declaration
set certayne stampes or printes, of euery
kinde of the same base Testons with their said
seueral markes, to thintent that euery person loking
& beholding the same printes, may the better
iudge and discerne the same from the other, that

be valued at .iiii. pence halfpenye, although if the
same be well considered, the colour of the sayde
base Teston wyll shewe the basenes thereof: And
because her Maiestie meaneth to ease her Subiectes
as muche as possible may be, she is pleased
to cōmaunde her officers in her mint, that where
there be many counterfaict Testons, which were
made by coūterfaictours, when the Testons were
at the value of .xii. pence a peece, and synce also
that thei wer decreed to .vi. pence, and by estimation
were so made, as they dyd contayne aboute
two pence farthinge or there aboutes in syluer:
they shall doe their indeuour to receaue and trye
such counterfaites, and shal geue to the Subiects
eyther for euery such counterfaict two pence farthing,
or so muche good fine monies, as the same
counterfaictes shall contayne in siluer, whereby
the people shalbe releued of such losse in som part
for counterfaictes, as in no Realme any Prynce
either hath or ought to do. And for this and for al
the rest of the commodities hereof likely to insue:
her Maiestie trusteth her mooste honorable good
meaning shalbe imbrased of all her good louinge
Subiectes, and euery person with good will, wil
yelde to beare a smal burden for a time, to auoide
a perpetuall and endlesse oppressyon, not onely of
them selues and their posteritie, but also of the
whole common weale.
            Yeuen vnder the Quenes Maiesties Signet
at her honour of Hampton court the xxix. of September
the second yeare of her Maiesties raigne,
M.D.LX▪
            
            
               
               
                  The Teston marked with the Lion.
               
               
                  The Teston marked with the Rose.
               
               
               
                  The Teston marked with the Floure deluce.
               
               
                  The Teston marked with the Harpe.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶Imprinted at London
in Powles Church yarde, by
Rycharde Iugge and Iohn Cawood,
Printers to the
Quenes Maiestie.
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
      
   