
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ORDERS,
thought meete by his Maieſtie,
and his Priuie Counſell, to be
executed throughout the Counties of this
Realme, in ſuch Townes, Villages, and other
places, as are, or may be hereafter infected
with the Plague, for the
ſtay of further increaſe
of the ſame. Alſo, an Aduiſe ſet downe by the beſt
learned in Phyſicke within this Realme,
containing ſundry good Rules and eaſie Medicines,
without charge to the meaner ſort of people,
aſwel for the preſeruation of his good Subiects
from the plague before Infection,
as for the curing and ordering
of them after they
ſhalbe infected.
            ¶Jmprinted at London by ROBERT
BARKER, Printer to the Kings
most Excellent Maieſtie.
ANNO 1603.
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶Orders, thought meete by
his Maieſtie and his Priuie Counſell,
to be executed throughout the Counties of
this Realme, in ſuch Townes, Villages, and other
places as are, or may be hereafter infected
with the plague, for the ſtay of further
increaſe of the ſame.
            
               
                  AS the moſt louing and
gracious care of his MAIESTIE
for the preſeruation
of his people, hath already
bene earneſtly ſhewed
and declared by ſuch
meanes and wayes as were thought expedient
to ſuppreſſe the grieuous Infection of the
Plague, and to preuent the increaſe thereof,
within the City of London, and parts about it;
ſo whatſoeuer other good meanes may be yet
remayning which may extend and proue behouefull
to the Countrey abroad (where his
MAIESTIE is ſory to vnderſtand that the
Contagion is alſo in many places diſperſed)
it is likewiſe his gracious pleaſure that the

ſame bee carefully prouided and put in practiſe.
And therefore hauing taken knowledge
of certaine good Orders that were vpon
like occaſion publiſhed in times paſt; together
with certaine rules and Medicines preſcribed
by the beſt and moſt learned Phyſicians;
and finding both of them, to ſerue well
for the preſent time, his Maieſtie is pleaſed
that the ſame ſhal be renewed and publiſhed:
And withall ſtraightly commandeth all Iuſtices
of the Peace & others to whom it may appertaine,
to ſee the ſaid Orders duely executed.
               
                  At the Court at Hampton Court this 30.
of Iuly. 1603.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     IN primis, All the Iuſtices in euery
Countie, aſwell within the Liberties
as without, immediatly vpon
knowledge to them giuen, ſhall
aſſemble themſelues together at
ſome one generall place accuſtomed, being cleare
from Infection of the Plague, to conſult howe
theſe Orders following may bee duely put in execution,
not meaning that any Iuſtices dwelling
in or neere places infected, ſhall come thither,
whiles their comming may be doubtfull. And after
their firſt generall aſſembly, they ſhall make a
diſtribution of themſelues to ſundry limits and
diuiſions, as in other common ſeruices of the
Countie they are accuſtomed to doe, for the proſecution
thereof.
               
                  
2 Firſt they ſhall inquire, and preſently informe
themſelues by all good meanes, what
Townes and Villages are at the time of ſuch aſſemblie
infected within euery their Counties,
and in what Hundred or other diuiſion, the ſayde
Townes and Villages are, and how many of the
ſame places ſo Infected are corporate Townes,
market Townes and Villages, and ſhall conſider
of what wealth the inhabitants of the ſame
Townes and Pariſhes are, to bee able to relieue
the poore that are or ſhall be infected, and to be reſtrained
in their houſes.
               3 Item, thereupon after conference vſed according
to the neceſſitie of the cauſe, they ſhall deuiſe
and make a generall taxation, either by charging
the Towne infected with one ſumme in
groſſe, or by charging the ſpeciall perſōs of wealth
within the ſame, to be forthwith collected for the
rate of one moneth at the firſt, and ſo if the ſickeneſſe
ſhal continue, the collection of ye like ſumme,
or of more or of leſſe, as time and cauſe ſhall require,
and the ſame to be euery firſt, ſecond, third,
or fourth weeke employed to and for the execution
of the ſayd orders. And in caſe ſome of the ſaid
Townes infected ſhall manifeſtly appeare not to
be of ſufficient abilitie to contribute ſufficient for
the charges requiſite, then the taxation or collection
ſhall bee made or further extended to other
parts, or in any other further limits, as by them
ſhall be thought requiſite where there ſhall bee any
ſuch Townes or villages ſo infected, and vnable
to relieue themſelues. And if the ſaid Townes
be ſcituated in the borders and confines of any other

ſhire, then as the Iuſtices ſhall ſee cauſe and
neede for the greatneſſe of the charge requiſite,
that the parts of the ſhire ioyning to the Townes
infected be not able, they ſhall write their letters
to the next Iuſtices of the other Shire ſo confining,
to procure by collection ſome reliefe, as in
like caſes they are to relieue them, in reſpect of
neere neighbourhood of the place, and for that
the ſame infection may bee the better ſtayed from
the ſayd adioyning places, though they be ſeparated
by name of the Countie.
               4 Item, they ſhall cauſe to be appointed in euery
Pariſh aſwell infected as not infected, certaine
perſons to viewe the bodies of all ſuch as
ſhall die, before they be ſuffered to be buried, and
to certifie the miniſter of the Church and Church-warden,
or other principall officers, or their ſubſtitutes
of what probable diſeaſe the ſayd perſons
died: and the ſaid viewers, to haue weekely ſome
allowance, & the more large allowance where the
Townes or Pariſhes bee infected, during the infection,
towards their maintenance, to the ende
they which ſhall bee in places infected, may forbeare
to reſort into the company of others that
are ſound: and thoſe perſons to bee ſworne to
make true report according to their knowledge,
and the choiſe of them to be made by direction of
the Curate of the Church, with three or foure ſubſtantiall
men of the pariſh. And in caſe the ſayde
viewers either through fauor or corruption, ſhall
giue wrong certificate, or ſhall refuſe to ſerue being
thereunto appointed, then to cauſe them to be

puniſhed by impriſonment, in ſuch ſort as may
ſerue for a terrour to others.
               5 Item, the houſes of ſuch perſons out of the
which there ſhall die any of the plague, being ſo
certified by the viewers, or otherwiſe knowen, or
where it ſhall bee vnderſtood, that any perſon remaineth
ſicke of the plague, to be cloſed vp on all
parts during the time of reſtraint, viz. ſixe weeks,
after the ſickneſſe be ceaſed in the ſame houſe, in
caſe the ſaid houſes ſo infected ſhall be within any
Towne hauing houſes neere adioyning to the
ſame. And if the infection happen in houſes diſperſed
in Villages, and ſeperated from other houſes,
and that of neceſſitie, for the ſeruing of their
cattell, and manuring of their ground, the ſaide
perſons cannot continue in their houſes, then
they to be neuertheleſſe reſtrained from reſorting
into company of others, either publikely or priuately
during the ſaide time of reſtraint, and to
weare ſome marke in their vppermoſt garments,
or beare white rods in their handes at ſuch time
as they ſhall goe abroad, and if there be any doubt
that the maſters and owners of the houſes infected,
will not duely obſerue the directions of ſhutting
vp their doores, ſpecially in the night, then
ſhal there be appointed two or three watchmen by
turnes, which ſhalbe ſworne to attend and watch
the houſe, and to apprehend any perſon that ſhall
come out of the houſe contrary to the order, and
the ſame perſons by order of the Iuſtices, ſhall be
a competent time impriſoned in the ſtockes in the
high way next to the houſe infected: and furthermore,
ſome ſpeciall marke ſhall be made and fixed

to the doores of euery of the infected houſes, and
where any ſuch houſes ſhall be Iunes or Alehouſes,
the ſignes ſhall be taken downe for the time of
the reſtraint, and ſome croſſe or other mark ſet vpon
the place thereof to be a token of the ſickeneſſe.
               6 Item, they ſhall haue good regard to chuſe
honeſt perſons that either ſhal collect the ſummes
aſſeſſed, or ſhall haue the cuſtodie thereof, and
out of the ſaid collection to allot a weekely proportion
for the finding of victuall, or fire, or medicines
for the poorer ſort, during the time of their
reſtraint. And whereas ſome perſons being wel
diſpoſed to yeeld almes and reliefe, will be more
willing to giue ſome portions of victual, as corne,
bread, or other meate, the ſame ſhall be committed
to the charge of ſome ſpecial perſons, that wil
honeſtly and truely preſerue the ſame, to bee diſtributed
as they ſhall be appointed for the poore
that are infected.
               7 Item, to appoint certain perſons dwelling
within the townes infected, to prouide and deliuer
all neceſſaries of victuals, or any matter of
watching or other attendance, to keepe ſuch as
are of good wealth being reſtrained, at their own
proper coſts and charges, and the poore at the
common charges: and the ſayde perſons ſo appointed
to be ordered, not to reſort to any publike
aſſembly during the time of ſuch their attēdance,
as alſo to weare ſome marke on their vpper garment,
or to beare a white rod in their hand, to the
end others may auoide their company.
               
                  
8 Item, that in the Shire towne in euery
Countie, and in other great townes meete for
that purpoſe, there may bee prouiſion beſpoken
and made, of ſuch preſeruatiues and other remedies,
which otherwiſe in meaner townes cannot
be readily had, as by the Phyſicians ſhall be preſcribed,
and is at this preſent reduced into an Aduiſe
made by the Phyſicians, and nowe printed
and ſent with the ſayd Orders, which may bee
fixed in market places, vpon places vſuall for
ſuch publique matters, and in other townes in
the bodies of the pariſh Churches, and Chappels,
in which aduiſe onely ſuch things are preſcribed,
as vſually are to bee had and found in all Countreys
without great charge or coſt.
               9 Item, the Miniſters and Curates, and
the Churchwardens in euery Pariſh, ſhall in
writing certifie weekely to ſome of the Iuſtices,
reſiding within the Hundred or other limit where
they ſerue, the number of ſuch perſons as are infected
and do not die, and alſo of all ſuch as ſhal die
within their Pariſhes, and their diſeaſes probable
wherof they died, and the ſame to be certified to
the reſt of the Iuſtices at their aſſemblies, which
during ſome conuenient time would be euery one
and twenty dayes, and thereof a particular booke
kept by the Clerke of the Peace or ſome ſuch like.
               10 Item, to appoint ſome place apart in each
Pariſh for the buriall of ſuch perſons as ſhall die
of the plague, as alſo to giue order that they bee
buried after Sunne ſetting, and yet neuertheles
by day light, ſo as the Curate bee preſent for the

obſeruation of the Rites and Ceremonies preſcribed
by the Law, foreſeeing as much as conueniently
he may, to be diſtant from the danger of infection
of the perſon dead, or of the company that
ſhall bring the corpſe to the graue.
               11 Item, the Iuſtices of the whole Countie to
aſſemble once in one & twenty dayes, to examine
whether thoſe orders bee duely executed, and to
certifie to the Lords of the priuie Councell their
proceedings in that behalfe, what Townes and
Villages be infected, as alſo the numbers of the
dead, and the diſeaſes whereof they died, and
what ſummes of money are taxed and collected
to this purpoſe, and how the ſame are diſtributed.
               12 Item, the Iuſtices of the hundred, where
any ſuch infection is, or the Iuſtices next adioyning
thereunto, to aſſemble once a weeke, to take
accompt of the execution of the ſaid Orders, & as
they finde any lacke or diſorder, either to reforme
it themſelues, or to report it at the generall aſſemblie
there, to bee by a more common conſent reformed.
               13 Item, for that the contagion of the plague
groweth and encreaſeth no way more, then by
the vſe and handling of ſuch clothes, bedding and
other ſtuffe as hath been worne and occupied by
the infected of this diſeaſe, during the time of
their diſeaſe: the ſayd Iuſtices ſhall in the places
infected take ſuch order, that all the ſaid clothes
and other ſtuffe, ſo occupied by the diſeaſed, ſo
ſoone as the parties diſeaſed of the plague are all

of them either well recouered or dead, be either
burnt and cleane conſumed with fire, or els ayred
in ſuch ſort as is preſcribed in an eſpeciall article
conteined in the Aduiſe ſet downe by the Phiſicians.
And for that peraduenture the loſſe of ſuch
apparel, bedding and other ſtuffe to be burnt, may
be greater then the poore eſtate of the owners of
the ſame may well beare: it is thought very good
and expedient, if it be thought meete it ſhall bee
burnt, that then the ſayd Iuſtices, out of ſuch
collections as are to be made within their Counties
for the reliefe of the poorer ſort that bee infected,
allow alſo to them ſuch ſumme or ſums as to
them ſhall be thought reaſonable, in recompenſe
of the loſſe of their ſayd ſtuffe.
               14 Item, the ſayd Iuſtices may put in execution
any other Orders that by them at their generall
aſſembly ſhalbe deuiſed and thought meet,
tending to the preſeruation of his Maieſties ſubiects
from the infection: and to the end their care
and diligence may the better appeare, they ſhall
certifie in writing the ſaid Orders newly deuiſed:
and if any ſhall wilfully breake and contemne the
ſame or any of the orders herein ſpecified, they ſhal
either preſently puniſh them by impriſonment, or
if the perſons ſo contemning them, ſhall be of ſuch
countenance as the Iuſtices ſhall thinke meete to
haue their faults knowen to his Maieſtie, or to
the Councell, they ſhall charge and bind them to
appeare before vs, and the contempt duely certified,
that there may be a more notorious ſharpe example▪
made by puniſhment of the ſame by order
of his Maieſtie.
               
                  
15 Item, if there be lacke of Iuſtices in ſome
parts of the Shire, or if they which are Iuſtices
there ſhall be for the time abſent, in that caſe the
more number of the Iuſtices at their aſſembly
ſhall make choice of ſome conuenient perſons to
ſupplie thoſe places for the better executiō hereof.
               16 Item, if there be any perſon Eccleſiaſticall
or Laye, that ſhall hold and publiſh any opinions
(as in ſome places report is made) that it is a vain
thing to forbeare to reſort to the Infected, or that
it is not charitable to forbid the ſame, pretending
that no perſon ſhall die but at their time prefixed,
ſuch perſons ſhall be not onely reprehended, but
by order of the Biſhop, if they bee Eccleſiaſticall,
ſhall be forbidden to preach, and being Lay, ſhall
be alſo enioyned to forbeare to vtter ſuch dangerous
opiniōs vpon paine of impriſonment, which
ſhall be executed, if they ſhall perſeuere in that errour.
And yet it ſhall appeare manifeſtly by theſe
Orders, that according to Chriſtian charity, no
perſons of the meaneſt degree ſhal be left without
ſuccour and reliefe.
               17 And of theſe things aboue mentioned, the
Iuſtices ſhall take great care, as of a matter ſpecially
directed and commaunded by his Maieſtie
vpon the princely and naturall care hee hath conceiued
towards the preſeruation of his ſubiects,
who by very diſorder, and for lacke of direction do
in many parts wilfully procure the increaſe of
this generall contagion.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧An aduiſe ſet downe by
the beſt learned in Phyſicke within
this Realme:
Conteining ſundry good Rules and eaſie
Medicines, without charge to the meaner ſort
of people, as well for the preſeruation of his good
Subiects from the Plague before infection, as for
the curing and ordering of them after
they ſhalbe infected.
            
               Preſeruatiue by correcting the aire in houſes.
               
                  TAke Roſemarie dried, or Iuniper,
Bay-leaues, or Frankincenſe, caſt
the ſame on a Chafendiſh, and
receiue the fume or ſmoke therof:
ſome aduiſe to be added Lauander,
or Sage.
               
               Alſo to make fires rather in
Pannes, to remooue about the Chamber, then
in Chimneys, ſhall better correct the ayre of the
Houſes.
               Take a quantity of Vineger very ſtrong, and put
to it ſome ſmall quantitie of Roſewater, ten braunches
of Roſemarie, put them all into a Baſen, then
take fiue or ſixe Flintſtones, heated in the fire till
they be burning hote, caſt them into the ſame Vineger,
and ſo let the fumes be receiued from place
to place of your houſe.
               
                  Perfuming of Apparell.
                  SUch apparell as you ſhall commonly weare, let
it bee very cleane, and perfume it ofen either

with ſome redde Saunders burned, or with Iuniper.
And if any ſhall happen to be with them that are
viſited, let ſuch perſons as ſoone as they ſhal come
home, ſhift themſelues, and aire their clothes, in
open aire for a time.
               
               
                  Preſeruation by way of defence in open aire, and
common aſſemblies to be vſed outwardly.
                  IT is good in going abroad into the open aire in
the ſtreets, to hold ſome things of ſweet ſauour
in their hands, or in the corner of an handkerchife,
as a ſponge dipped in Vineger and Roſewater mixed,
or in Vineger, wherein Wormewood, or Rue called
alſo Herbegrace, hath bene boyled.
               
               
                  Preſeruatiue by way of inward medicine.
                  TAke a quantitie of Rue, or Wormewood, or of
both, and put it into a pot of vſuall drink, cloſe
ſtopped, let it lie ſo in ſteepe a whole night, and
drinke thereof in the morning faſting.
                  In all Sommer plagues, it ſhall be good to vſe
Sorrel ſauce to be eaten in the morning with bread.
And in the fall of the leafe to vſe the iuyce of Barberies
with bread alſo.
                  Mens bodies
are apt
to take infection,
either

                        By the conſtitution of the heart, the
vital ſpirits being weake, and the
naturall heate feeble, in which caſe
things Cordial are to be vſed.
                        By repletion,
the body being
filled with humors,
either

                              Good, and then is
the party to be let
blood.
                              Euil, and then is he
to be cured wt medicine
purgatiue.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Preſeruatiues Cordials.
               
                  Mithridates Medicine.
                  
                     TAke of good Figges not wormeaten, cleane
waſhed, of Walnuts the kernels cleane picked,
of either of them an hundred, of the
leaues of green Rue, otherwiſe called Herbegrace,
the weight of ii. s. of common Salt the weight of
iii. d. cut the Figs in pieces, and ſtampe them & the
Walnut kernels together in a morter of marble or
wood a good ſpace, vntill they be very ſmall, and
then put the Rue leaues vnto them, ſtampe and
ſtirre them well together with the reſt, laſt put in
the Salt and ſtampe and ſtirre theſe things together,
vntill they be incorporated and made of one
ſubſtance. Of the which take the quantitie of ii. or
iii. Figges euery morning faſting, to children the
halfe will ſerue, and hee that liſteth to increaſe or
diminiſh the ſubſtance of this medicine, ſhall eaſily
doe it, by taking of a greater or leſſe quantity of
the ſimples according to a due proportion.
               
               
                  A well approoued Medicine to preſerue.
                  TAke of the fineſt cleare Aloes you can buy, in
colour like to a Liuer, & therfore called Hepatica,
of Cinamon, of Myrrhe, of ech of theſe the weight
of iii. French crownes, or of xxii. d. of our money,
of Cloues, Maces, Lignum Aloes, of Maſtick, of Bole Oriental,
of ech of theſe halfe an ounce: mingle them
together and beate them into a very fine powder.
Of the which take euery morning faſting the

weight of a groate of this in white wine delayed
with water, and by the grace of God you ſhall be
ſafe from the Plague. No man which is learned,
if he examine the ſimples of this medicine whereof
it conſiſteth, and the nature and power of them,
can deny but that it is a medicine of great efficacy
againſt the Plague, and the ſimples whereof it is
made, are eaſily to be had in any good Apothecaries
ſhop, except Bole Oriental, which is vſed in the
ſtead of true Bolus Armenus.
                  
                  Take a drie Figge and open it, and put the kernell
of a Walnut into the ſame beeing cut very
ſmall, three or foure leaues of Rue commonly called
Herbegrace, a corne of Salt, then roſt the Figge
and eate it warme, faſt iii. or iiii. houres after it,
and vſe this twiſe in the weeke.
                  Take the powder of Turmentil, the weight of vipence
with Sorrel or Scabious water in Sommer,
and in Winter with the water of Valerian or common
drinke.
                  Or elſe in one day they may take a little Wormwood,
and Valerian with a graine of Salt. In another
day they may take vii. or viii. berries of Iuniper,
dryed and put in powder, and taking the ſame
with common drinke, or with drinke in which
Wormewood & Rue hath ben ſteeped all the night.
                  Alſo the triacle called Dieteſſearoum, which is
made but of 4. things of light price eaſie to be had.
                  Alſo the roote of Enula Campana, either taken in
powder with drinke, or hanged about the breſt.
                  Likewiſe a piece of Arras root kept in the mouth
as men paſſe in the ſtreetes, is very good Cordiall.
                  
                  Take ſixe leaues of Sorrell, waſh them with water
and Vineger, let them lie to ſteepe in the ſaid

water and Vineger a while, then eate them faſting,
and keepe in your mouth and chewe now or
then either Stewall, or the roote of Angelica, or a
little Cinamon.
                  
                  Take the roote of Enula Campana being layde
and ſteeped in Vineger, and groſſe beaten, put a
little of it in a handkerchiefe, and ſmell to it if you
reſort to any that is infected.
               
               
                  ¶For women with child, or ſuch as be delicate and tender,
and cannot away with taking of Medicines.
                  MAke a toſt of white or of the ſecond breade
as you thinke good, and ſprinkle on it being
hotte a litle good wine Vineger, made with Roſe
leaues, and for want of it, any good common or
vſed Vineger, and ſpread on the toſt a little butter,
and caſt thereon a little powder of Cinamon,
and eate it in the morning faſting. The poore
which cannot get Vineger nor buy Cinamon, may
eate bread and butter alone: for butter is not onely
a preſeruatiue againſt the Plague, but againſt
all maner of poyſons.
                  When one muſt come into the place where infectious
perſons are, it is good to ſmell to the
roote of Angelica, Gentian, or Valerian, and to chew
any of theſe in his mouth.
               
               
                  Another preſeruatiue for the poore.
                  IT ſhalbe good to take an handfull of Rue, and as
much common Wormewood, and bruſe them a
little: and put them into a pot of earth or tinne,
with ſo much Vineger as ſhall couer the herdes:
keepe this pot cloſe couered or ſtopt, and when
you feare any infection, dippe into this Vineger a
piece of a ſponge, and cary it in your hand & ſmell
to it, or elſe put it into a round ball of Yuorie or Iuniper
                     
made full of holes of the one ſide, carying it
in your hand vſe to ſmell thereunto, renewing it
once in a day.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧To be vſed after Infection taken.
               
                  FOr as much as the cauſe of the Plague
ſtandeth rather in poyſon, then in any
putrifaction of humours as other agues
doe, the chiefeſt way is to mooue ſweatings, and
to defend the heart by ſome cordiall thing.
               
                  Suppoſitarie.
                  IF the patient bee coſtiue and bound in his bodie,
let him take a Suppoſitarie made with a litle boyled
Honie, and a little fine powder of Salt, and ſo
taken in at the Fundament, and kept till it moue
a ſtoole.
               
               
                  An excellent Medicine made without charges.
                  TAke of the powder of good Bayberies, the huſke
taken away from them, before they be dried, a
ſpoonefull: Let the Patient drinke this, well
mingled in a draught of good ſtale Ale or Beere,
which is neither ſowre nor deade, or with a
draught of white Wine, and goe to bed and caſt
himſelfe into a ſweate, and forbeare ſleepe as is
aforeſaid.
               
               
                  An other ſoueraigne remedie, that is a
ſtilled water.
                  TAke the inward bark of the Aſhe tree, a pound,
of Walnuts with the greene outward ſhelles,
to the number of fiftie, cut theſe ſmal, of Scabious,
of Veruen, of Petimorel, of Houſleeke, of euery one
a handfull, of Saffron halfe an ounce, powre vpon
theſe the ſtrongeſt Vineger you can get foure

pintes, let them a little boyle together vpon a very
ſoft fire, and then ſtand in a very cloſe pot well
ſtopt all a night vpon the embers, afterward diſtill
them with a ſoft fire, and receiue the water
cloſe kept. Giue vnto the Patient laide in bed and
well couered with clothes, two ounces of this
water to drinke, & let him be prouoked to ſweate,
and euery ſixe houres, during the ſpace of twentie
foure houres, giue him the ſame quantitie to
drinke. This Medicine for the worthineſſe thereof,
and becauſe it will ſtand the maker thereof in
little charge, it ſhall be very well done to diſtill it
in Summer when the Walnuts hang greene on
the tree, that it may be ready againſt the time that
occaſion ſerueth to vſe it.
               
            
            
               1. Bloodletting.
               
                  IF the Patient be ful of humours which
be good, let him immediatly be let blood
vpon the Liuer veine in the right arme,
or in the Median veine of the ſame arme
(if no ſore appeare) in the firſt day.
               
                  2. Medicine purgatiue.
                  FOr the Poore take Aloes the weight of ſixe
pence, put in the pappe of an Apple: and for the
richer Pilles of Rufus to bee had in euery good Apothecaries
ſhop. After letting of blood and purging
(as ſhall bee needfull) ſome of the forenamed Cordials
are to be vſed.
                  Theſe preparations thus vſed the firſt day that
the Patient ſhall fall ſicke, as cauſe ſhall be to vſe
the one or the other (no ſore appearing) in which
caſe if the ſore ſhall appeare, they are both to bee

forborne, the next is to vſe all meanes to expel the
poyſon, and to defend the heart by Cordials.
               
               
                  3. Medicament expulſiue.
                  THe poyſon is expelled beſt by ſweatings prouoked
by poſſet Ale, made with Fenel and Marigolds
in Winter, and with Sorrel, Bugloſſe and
Borage in Summer, with the which in both
times they muſt mixe the Triacle of Diateſſaroum,
the weight of ix. d. & ſo to lay themſelues with all
quietneſſe to ſweat one halfe houre, or an houre if
they he ſtrong. For they that be neither full of humours
nor corrupt in humours, neede neither
purging nor letting of blood, but at the firſt
plunge may mooue themſelues to ſweate with
Cordiall things mixt with ſuch things as mooue
ſweate, and are before declared.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧What is to be done when there is any
riſing or ſwelling in any part.
               
                  THen if by theſe three meanes the poyſon
be expelled outward by botches,
carbuncles or markes, called Gods
markes, according as nature doth expell,
ſo muſt the further proceedings
be, prouiding ſtill, that they continue ſtill in the
vſe of the cordiall and moderate ſweating now
and then, all the time that the ſores be in healing,
which muſt by the Surgion bee handled with
great diſcretion.
               
                  Medicines to be vſed in ordinary diet.
                  IT is thought that the powder of Harts horne
hath a ſpeciall prerogatiue, to be vſed all the

time of their ſicknes in their broths, and ſupping,
which in Sommer muſt euer haue Sorrell, Borage,
Buglaſſe, and in winter, Betony, and Scabious, or
Morſus Diaboli, and if their habilities do not ſerue,
let them vſe it with Aleburies made with a little
Nutmegge, or one Cloue, or with Cawdels in like
maner made with Cloues, Maces, Nutmegs, Sanders
or ſuch like.
               
               
                  Both to preſerue and cure the ſickneſſe.
                  TAke an egge and make a hole in the toppe of it,
take out the white and yelke, fill the ſhell with
the weight of two french crownes of Saffron, roſt
the ſaid egge thus filled with Saffron vnder the
embres, vntil the ſhell begin to waxe yellow, then
take it from the fire, and beate the ſhell and Saffron
in a morter together, with halfe a ſpoonefull of
Muſtard ſeed, take of this powder a french crown
weight, and as ſoone as you ſuſpect your ſelfe infected,
diſſolue it into ten ſpoonefuls of poſſet ale,
and drinke it luke warme, then goe to bed and prouoke
your ſelfe to ſweating.
               
               
                  To be vſed in the firſt time of the ſickneſſe.
                  ANother is to take fiue or ſixe handfull of Sorell,
that groweth in the field, or a greater
quantity according as you will diſtill more or leſſe
of the water thereof, and let it lie infriſed or ſteeped
in good Vineger the ſpace of foure and twentie
houres, then take it off and drie it with a linen
cloth put into a Limbecke, and diſtill the water
thereof: And aſſoone as you finde your ſelfe touched
with the ſickneſſe, drinke foure ſpoonefuls of
the ſaid water with a little ſugar, and if you be

able, walke vpon it vntill you doe ſweate, if not,
keepe your bed, and being well couered, prouoke
your ſelfe to ſweating, and the next day to take as
much againe of it a little before ſupper.
                  Item, to prouoke vomit with two ounces of
ranke oyle, or walnut oyle, a ſpoonefull of the
iuice of Celendine & halfe a ſpoonefull of the iuice
of radice root, ſo that the party Infected do walke
and not ſleepe, is better then any letting of blood,
or any purging. For the diſeaſe neither can ſuffer
agitation of humors, nor when one is infected,
hath no time to bleede or to purge.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧Outwrrd Medicines for to be applied
to the ſore.
               
                  The firſt▪
                  
                  
                     TAke of Scabious two handfuls, ſtampe it
in a ſtone morter with a peſtell of ſtone if
you can get any ſuch, then put vnto it of
olde ſwines greaſe ſalted, two ounces,
and the yelke of an egge, ſtampe them well together,
and lay part of this warme to the ſore.
               
               
                  The ſecond.
                  TAke of the leaues of Mallowes, of Camomill
flowers, of either of them an handfull, of Linſeede
beaten into powder two ounces, boyle the
Mallow leaues firſt cut, and the flowers of the Camomill
in faire water, ſtanding aboue a fingers
breadth, boyle all them together, vntill all the
water almoſt be ſpent: then put thereunto the
Linſeede, of Wheate flower halfe an handfull, of

ſwines greaſe the ſkins taken away three ounces,
of oyle of Roſes two ounces, ſtirre them ſtill with
a ſticke, and let them all boyle together on a ſoft
fire without ſmoke, vntill the water be vtterly
ſpent, beate them all together in a morter, vntill
they be well encorporated together, and in feeling
ſmooth, and not rough: then make part thereof
hot in a diſh ſet vpon a chafindiſh of coales, and lay
it thicke vpon a linnen cloth applying it to the
ſore.
               
               
                  Another excellent Medicine to ripen and
bring out the ſore.
                  TAke a white Onion cut in pieces, of freſh butter
iii. ounces, of Leuen the weight of xii. d.
of Mallowes one handfull, of Scabious if it may
be had one handfull, of Cloues of Garlicke the
weight of xx. d. boyle them on the fire in ſufficient
water, and make a pulteſſe of it, and lay it warme
to the ſore.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TO the ſore it ſelfe doe thus. Take two handfull
of Valerian, three rootes of Danewort, a
handfull of Smalledge, or Louage, if you can get it,
ſeethe them all in butter and water, and a fewe
crummes of bread, and make a pulteſſe thereof,
and lay it warme to the ſore vntill it breake.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  IF you cannot haue theſe herbes, it is good to lay
a loafe of bread to it hot as it commeth out of the
ouen (which afterward ſhalbe burnt or buried in
the earth) or the leaues of Scabious or Sorrell roſted,
or two or three Lillie rootes roſted vnder embers,
beaten and applied.
               
               
                  
                  A generall m
                        •
                     dicine for all ſortes of people taken
with the plague to be had without coſt.
                  TAke of the roote of butter burre, otherwiſe
called p
                        •••••
                     ent wort, one ounce, of the roote
of great Valerian a 
                        ••
                     arter of an ounce, of Sorrell
an handfull, boyle all theſe in a quart of water to
a pint, then ſtraine it and put there to two ſpoonefuls
of Vineger two ounces of good Sugar, boyle all
theſe together vntill they be well mingled, let the
infected drinke of this ſo hotte as he may ſuffer it
a good draught, and if hee chance to caſt it vp againe,
let him take the ſame quantitie ſtraightway
vpon it, and prouoke himſelfe to ſweate, and
he ſhall find great helpe.
               
               
                  Time of continuance apart from common
aſſemblies.
                  SUch as haue beene infected, ſhould keepe their
houſe without being conuerſant with ye whole,
vntill the ſores 
                        〈◊〉
                      haue 
                        〈…〉
                      and be perfectly
whole and ſound, which in ſanguine and
cholericke perſons will bee healed ſooner, then in
melancho
                        ••
                     ke and flegmatike complexions.
                  SUch perſons may not well be conuerſant with
them which are not infected, for the ſpace of
one mo
                        ••
                     th.
               
               
                  Infected clothes.
                  THe Contagion ſuſpected to remaine in cloths,
either wollen or linnen, cannot wel be auoided
by 
                        〈◊〉
                      meanes, then by fire and water, by
often 
                        ••••
                     ing and ai
                        •
                     ing the ſame in froſtes, and
ſonne ſhine, with good diſcretion, and b
                        ••
                     ning
the clothes o
                        •
                      ſmall val
                        ••
                     .
               
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   