
      
         
            
            
               
SAINT AVGVSTINE his Enchiridion to LAVRENCE: OR, THE CHIEFE AND principall heads of all Chriſtian religion.
            
               A moſt profitable booke to all thoſe which deſire to haue a moſt compendious briefe of Auguſtines doctrine, out of Auguſtine himſelfe, when he was old; being repurged, by the old manuſcript, of many faults and vnuſuall wordes, wherewith it formerly flowed.
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for Thomas Clarke. 1607.
         
         
            
            
            
               EGREGIO viro, D. Doctori MOVNTAGVE, Regiae Capellae Decano digniſsimo, Antonius Alcock omnem optat ſanitatem & felicitatem.
            
            
               CVm primùm (erudite vir) opuſculum hoc diui Auguſtini in ſermonem vulgarem vertere ſuſceperim, illud quidem transtuli, aulici cuiuſdam amici rogatu; qui, operis encomio, illud intelligendi, magno animi deſiderio inflammatus, nec ad

id Latinis literis ſatis imbutus, mecum egit facilem
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                inuenit, lumen intellectus ſui de meo lumine accendere. In amicitia enim non minor eſt charitas (mea certè opinione) illiterati, quàm indigentis amici ſupplere inopiam. Temerè tamen & inconſultò hoc onus primitus ſubiui, grauitate eiuſdem non priùs tentata: in quo ferendo, pondere eiuſdem vehementer preſſus, in medio itinere penè defeciſſē; niſi me, locis aliquot intricatis, quaſi nocte tenebrarum inuolutum, egregius ille theologus, D. Doctor Field, è tenebris illis, face ingenij ſui edux iſſet. Quod quidē fateri non erubeſco: quantū enim merito

meo detrahit illa agnitio, tātū addit operis opinioni, tanti viri auxiliū, ſiue concurrens iudiciū. Trāſlationis verò ſuſceptae licet primo mepoenituit, aifficultate eiuſdē ſtupefactū; ca tamē peracta, labor meus in illo colendo agro multiplicē reportauit ſacrae ſcientiae fructum. Quem denuò, bono publico proferre, prelo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                committere ſatius eſſe putaui, quám priuato meo commodo clauſum tenere. Non enim nobis, parentibus, & amicis, verùm etiam patris, communi omnium parenti, nati ſumus. Vt igitur aliorum mentes, ad amandum & legendum enchiridium hoc á me conuerſum, incitarem,

operaepretium eſſe duxi, obſeruationes meas in vniuerſū hunc tractatū breuiter enarrare. Corpus autem iſtius operis, doctrinae chriſtianae, fundamenta praecipua complectitur: in quo perlegendo, tria obſeruatione digna, notaui; Doctrinarum, nimirum, & queſtionum theologicarum, varietatem, & veritatem inconcuſſam: In diſtributione earundem, methodum ſingularem: Omnium
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                narratione, breuitatem quandam, pugno dialectico conſimilem. Primò enim, praecipua quaedam capita diſcutienda ſubijcit, ea
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                maximi momenti, quoad Dei cultum, fidem & ſpem, Errorem & mendacium, Cauſas

boni & mali, Adami peccatum, Angelorum ruinam & tranſgreſsionem, Hominis liberum arbitrium, Chriſtum mediatorem, Eius incarnationem, Regenerationem & eiuſdem partes, originale & actuale peccatum, Mortem, paſsionem, reſurrectionem, & aſcenſionem Chriſti, fructum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                eorum omnium, Spiritum ſanctum & Eccleſiam, Bonos angelos & eum illis reconciliationem, & pacem noſtram, Remiſsionem peccatorum, & iuſtificationem, Peccatorum varietatem, Peccatū inſpiritum ſanctum, Mortuorum reſurrectionem, Vitam aeternam, Dei omnipotentiam, Sanctorum gratiam &

praedeſtinationem, Voluntatem Dei, Eius praeſcientiam, Humanam voluntatem, Animaelocum & statū poſt mortem, &c. Vnumquod
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                caput ita depoſitum, ſuum habet corpus & membra benè cohaerentia, tota fabricaiſtius operis, humano corpori, eiuſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                partibus, ſiue arborifacundae eiuſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ramis germinantibus, ritè aſſimilanda. Rerum denique omnium medulla (manu gerenda) compēdiosè comprehenditur: Vnde, Enchiridian ſiue manuale, propriè nuncupatur. Siverò finem ipſius operis reſpicias, illud praecipuè, ad inſtructionem Laurentij diſcipuli ſui, compoſitum fuit, haereticorum impugnationibus

conflictati, graſſanti vndique prauitate haeretica, numeróque & viribus indies creſcenti: quae, tanquam peſtis, latè diſperſa, vniuerſam perniciem minabatur, ſi primitiuae Eccleſiae patres, quaſi medici vigilantes, morbidae Eccleſiae ſanitatem, lucubrationibus ſuis pijſque laboribus, non curaſſent, & contagionem illam auertiſſent Militabant etiā reuerendi illi patres aduerſus hoſtilitatē tyrannorum, fidem Catholicam radicitus euellere conantium; ſeſéque non ſolum periculis expoſuerūt, ſacrifoeder is ductri nam propagantes, Euāgelij
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                profeſſores lucrātes, verūentiā Eccleſiaemilitātos martyres,

vigilijs ſuis, in fide confirmarunt. Quorum egregia merita, ſi noſtrae aetatis homines oculis ſuis praeponerent, tum, maiori animorum ſtudio volumina ſua legerent, tum etiā memoriam tantorum virorū reuerentia condigniori colerent. Inter huiuſmodi catholicae fidei propugnatores, divum Auguſtinum nemini poſtponendum eſſe puto, qui in meſſe illa dominica operarius extitit, omnium illuſtriſſimus, & in hoc Enchiridij ſui libro, verbum vexitatis, omni ferè lolio impurae doctrinae perpurgatū, priori illi ſeculo, & poſteritati etiam tradidit. Prodeatigitur libellus iſte in lucem, qui non niſi Latinis

priùs notus, nunc Anglis anglicè loquens, poſsit proficere, ſi tuo etiam ſaniori iudicio viſus fuerit vtilis; tibi
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                placuerit patrocinium praebere homini humanioribus literis tantum verſato, nec in retheologica priùs exercitato. In hoc opere publicando, illud tibi dedicandū eſſe deſtinaui, quem inter Eccleſiae noſtrae praelatos, non ſolum diuinis, ſed generoſis etiam animi virtutibus ornatum eſſe video, generoſae proſapiae tuae congruentibus. Spero
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Deum opt. max. vitaemeae filum protracturum, donecte aſpiciam (quod maximè intueri cupio) celſiori loco poſitum, adclauē ſcilicet nauis, aliquo noſtrae

Eccleſiae pelago, ſedentem: In te enim, & promotione tua, ſpes maxima mea. Nunc verò in tenebris vitae priuatae neglect us iaceo, donec in apricum vitae eminētior is, melior protulerit occaſio. Praebeo interim demonſtrationem hanc obſeruantiae, in te, meae; cupioque in catalogo eorum inſcribi, quos fauor is tui patrocinio, fouere dignaris. Sed ne tibi faſtidium pariat epiſtolae meae prolixitas, verte (quaeſo) oculos ad libri à me conuerſi, lectionem: quem, ſi prelo dignum fore dijudices, ſententia tua in ea parte lata, animabit ad omnem alieni iudicij euentum, fortiori animo ferēdum. Sin minus, ſententia tua trāſibit

in rem vtcunque à te iudicatam, nec alium patronum appellabo. Sic vale, vir ornatiſsime, te que longaevum, felicem, & incolumen faciat omnipotentia diuina.
            
               
                  FEBRVARII PENVLTIMO. 1606.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            TOVCHING Chriſtian Diuinitie, to which kinde of Wiſdom it may be directed vnto.
            
               CHAP. 1.
               
                  The Proeme: wherin is contained both a commendation of the worke, and declaration alſo, that no wiſedome is perfect, but that onely which is giuen by God, the light thereof, and deriued alſo from his word.
               
               
                  IT cannot be expreſſed, my beſt beloued ſon Laurence, what ſingular comfort I take in thy knowledge, and how earneſtly I deſire to haue thee wiſe; howbeit, not in the number of

them, of whom it is ſaid, Where is the wiſe mā, where is the ſcribe, and where the ſearcher or diſputer of this world? For, did not God make the wiſdome of the world meere fooliſhnes? But of the number of thoſe, of whom it is ſaid, The number of the wiſe is the worlds health and preſeruation: & alſo of that quality which the Apoſtle deſireth to be in men, to whom he ſaith, Verely, I would haue you wiſe in that which is good and ſimple in that which is euill. For, as no man can bee his owne maker; ſo can hee not be wiſe of himſelfe, but by the illumination of him, of whom it is written, A
                        •
                      wiſdom is from God.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 2.
               
                  Pietie to be true wiſedome, which is more aptly called in Greeke 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , than 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               
                  
PIetie therefore, or religion, is the wiſdome of man. Which thing is verified in the booke of holy Iob: for there is read, that Wiſdom her ſelfe ſaith to man, Behold, Pietie is wiſdome. Now, if you aske what Pietie he meaneth in that place, you ſhall find it more diſtinctly in the Greeke worde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which is the worſhip or ſeruice of God. For in Greeke it is called Pietie: and otherwiſe alſo in the ſame tongue, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , by which name is meant true worſhip; albeit alſo, that worſhip is chiefly referred to the ſeruice of God. But there is no name more ſignificant than that whereby the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of God is 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   preſſed; as namely, when it is ſignified thereby what ſhould be the wiſdome of man. Seekeſt thou to haue anything more briefly deliuered, who requireſt at my bāds a compendious narration of weighty matters? Or doeſt thou (perhapps) deſire

that this one point may be briefly laid open, and gathered into a ſhort ſpeech, declaring in what manner God is to bee worſhipped.
            
            
               CHAP. 3.
               
                  Of the worſhip of God & the parts thereof, and what the matter and obiect of true Pietie.
                  That the worſhip of God is comprehended in theſe three things; namely, Faith, Hope, and Charitie.
               
               HEre if I ſhould anſwer, that God is to be worſhipped by Faith, Hope, and Charitie; no doubt you would ſay, That the anſwer were ſhorter than you would haue it: And then againe, you would preſſe mee farther, with a briefe explication of all things which pertained to the ſenſe and vnderſtanding of euery of theſe three words; namely, what that is which is to be beleeued,

to be hoped for, and to bee loued. Which, when I haue performed, then are you anſwered to all the queſtions propoſed in your Letter. The copie whereof, if you haue lying by you, it is an eaſie matter to reuolue and read it againe. And, if you haue it not, you may reduce it to memorie by the helpe of this my remembrance.
            
            
               CHAP. 4.
               
                  By the explication or definition of Faith, Hope, and Charity, wee learne what is to be followed in Chriſtian religion, and what is to bee eſchewed. The vnderſtanding whereof, is partly to be apprehended by humane reaſon, and partly by faith alone.
               
               WIll you therefore that I make a Booke for you, as you write, which may be an Enchiridion vnto you, as it is called; and neuer be out of your hands,

containing in it your deſires; that 
                     •
                  s to ſay, What is chiefly to be followed, and what againe in reſpect of diuers hereſies retained, is principally to bee ſhunned: How farre-forth reaſon fighteth for religion, or wherein reaſon and faith bee repugnant: What first, and what laſt to bee embraced and held: 
                        •
                     hat is the ſumme of the totall definition: and what the ſumme and proper foundation of Catholike faith. All theſe things which you require, you ſhall vndoubtedly knowe, by learning diligently what is to be beleeued, hoped for, and loued. For all theſe be chiefly, nay ſolely, to be ſought 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ed in the courſe of religion. Which things, whoſo doth contradict or denie, is either not to bee called by the name of a Chriſtian, or elſe is a flatte Heretique. And theſe things be alſo to be maintained by reaſon, as beeing either deriued from the ſenſes of the bodie,

or elſe found out and conceiued by the light of the mind. And thoſe things which we neither can perceiue by the ſenſe of the body, nor yet vnderſtand by the light of the mind, then are they without all doubt to be bē
                  leeued, in reſpect of thoſe witneſſes, by whom that which deſerueth to be called holy ſcripture, is written; who were able either to ſee, or foreſee thoſe myſteries, either corporally, or ſpiritually, beeing therein aſsiſted by the ſpirit or reuelation of God.
            
         
         
            
               Of Faith and Hope what they are, and what difference & agreement there is betweene them.
            
               
                  CHAP. 5.
               
                  The firſt thing in Chriſtian religion is Faith: and the laſt is the full ſight of Gods preſence, Ieſus Chriſt beeing the end of Faith.
               
               
                  
WHen the minde is firſt of al ſeaſoned with faith, which worketh by charity, it proceedeth by good life at length to come to a viſible knowledge and ſight of God; in which place, to the godly and pure in heart, there is a knowen and vnſpeakable beauty; the full ſight and contemplation whereof, is accounted the higheſt happineſſe. And this is that indeede which may ſatisfie you in your deſire to know, What is the firſt, and what the last in religion, which hath his beginning in faith, and conſummation in Chriſt. This is alſo the ſumme and effect of the generall definition of religion. And to know Chriſt, is the true and proper foundation of Catholike faith. For an other foundation, ſaith the Apoſtle, No mā can lay, other then that which is already laid, which is Chriſt Ieſus. Neither is this therefore to be denied to be the proper and onely foundation of Catholike

faith, becauſe ſome heretiques are deemed to holde vpon the ſame ground that we doe. For, if thoſe things which pertaine to Chriſt, bee diligently conſidered, Chriſt is to bee found in all Heretickes but onely in name, who would bee called Chriſtiās, though Chriſt indeed dwelleth not in them. Which to demonſtrate, is too long a worke, becauſe all kinds of hereſies were then to be ſpecified; either thoſe that were, they which now bee, or elſe might bee vnder the title of a chriſtian: And ſo ſhould it be alſo tedious to diſcourſe of the truth it ſelfe particularly, and in all points thereof. Which diſputation, would make ſo many volumes, as it would ſeeme infinite and endleſſe.
            
            
               CHAP. 6.
               
                  Sound doctrine may with more facility and breuity be deliuered, than hereſies confuted.
               
               
                  
THou therefore deſireſt at my hands an Enchiridion, that is to ſay, a thing which may bee comprehended in your hands, and not load a Librarie. To returne therefore to theſe three things; namely, Faith, Hope, and Charitie, by which we affirmed that God was to be worſhipped; it is eaſily declared, what it is wee muſt beleeue, what wee muſt hope for, and what wee are to affect or loue. But how it may bee defended againſt the detractions and ſlaunders of thoſe which hold varietie of opinions, that is a doctrine of greater labour and circumſtance. For the accompliſhment whereof, the hand muſt be filled, not with a ſhort Enchiridion, but the breaſt inflamed with a vehement affection.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 7.
               
                  In the Apostles Creed and the Lords Praier, thoſe three principall poſitions touching the ſeruice of God; namely, Faith, Hope, and Charitie, be contained, and most briefly deliuered.
               
               FOr this matter looke vpon the Creede, and the Lords praier: Then the which, what is there to bee heard or read, of greater breuitie, or what more eaſily committed to memorie? Becauſe therefore, mankinde in reſpect of ſin, was preſſed down with the heauy burthen of miſerie, and ſtood in neede of Gods mercie; and that the Prophet foreſeeing the time of Gods fauour, ſaith, And euery one which calleth vpon the name of God, ſhall beſaued: for this cauſe was the Lords praier vſed. Howbeit, the Apoſtle after hee had cited that Propheticall teſtimony, to ſet

forth the mercy of God; hee forth-with laieth down this alſo, ſaying, How can they call vpon him, of whom they haue not beleeued? For which cauſe the Creed was deuiſed. In which two wordes, looke vpon theſe three things: Faith beleeueth, and Hope and Charitie bee our Orators. But, without faith, theſe two cannot be; by which reaſon faith alſo is a partie in our petitions. Whereupon it is ſaid, How ſhall they call vpon him, of whom they haue not beleeued?
               
            
            
               CHAP. 8.
               
                  What difference there is betweene Hope and Faith: of what things Faith doth conſiſt, and of what alſo Hope: Alſo what Chriſtian Faith did properly apprehēd. Finally, that the knot and bond of theſe three vertues, namely. Faith, Hope, and Charity, was not to be ſeuered or diuided amongſt themſelues.
               
               
                  
NOw what can be hoped for, which is not beleeued? But yet on the contrary, ſomething may bee beleeued, which is not hoped for. For which of the faithfull doe not beleeue that there be puniſhments ordained for the wicked? yet doth he not hope to taſte therof. Which puniſhments who ſo beleeueth may fall vpon himſelfe, and is inwardly troubled with the horror thereof, in the vaniſhing cō
                  ceit of his own minde; that man is more rightly ſaid to feare, in this caſe, then to hope. Which two wordes, Lucan diſtinguiſhing, doeth thus deſcribe them;

                     The feareful man may yet haue hope.
                  
Howbeit, on the other ſide, it is not ſo properly ſpoken by an other Poet, though he be the better in reputation:

                     If I could hope for no more griefe but this.
                  
Finally, diuers in the rules of Grammar doe borrow this word

for an example, to ſhewe how improperly it is vſed; who ſay, he vſed that word ſperare (which is to hope) for, or in ſtead of timere, which is to fear. Ther is a faith therefore, both of euill things & of good; becauſe both good and bad be beleeued, and that with a cheerefull, and not a fearefull faith. There is a faith alſo of things paſt, things preſent, and things to come. For, we beleeue that Chriſt died, which is already paſt. We beleeue that he ſitteth at the right hand of his father, which is at this inſtant. We beleeue that he ſhall come to iudge; a thing that ſhall be. A. faith, likewiſe, of things appertaining to our ſelues, and alſo of things concerning other men. For euery man beleeueth that he had a beginning, and therefore that hee was not from euerlaſting; whereof there bee many ſemblable inſtances. Neither do we onely beleeue many, things! touching other men in matter

of religion, but likewiſe alſo of Angels. Hope alſo is not but of good euents; and not alſo, but of things to come: properly likewiſe concerning him, who is thought to put a truſt and confidence in the ſame. Which being ſo, Faith is to bee diſtinguiſhed from Hope, as well by a difference agreeing with reaſon, as with the ſenſe of the word. For, as touching thoſe wordes, non videre, that is to ſay, not to ſee; in that ſenſe, Faith and Hope be all one. For in the epiſtle to the Hebrewes, which teſtimony the famous defenders of the Catholique doctrine haue vſed, Faith is ſaid to be a knowledge of things which be not ſeene. Although on the other ſide, when any man ſhall ſay, that he beleeued not, either wordes, witneſſes, or any reaſons; but things preſent, which he plainely ſaw (that is to ſay, grounded his faith thereupon) ſeemeth not to be ſo abſurd, 
                     •
                  s that he may be rightly reprehēded

in the ſenſe of the Word; out of the which, it may be ſaid vnto him, Thou didſt ſee, therefore thou didſt not beleeue. Wherupon may be gathered, that it is no conſequence, that the thing is not to be ſeene, which is to be beleeued. But indeede, wee doe more properly call that faith, which, as the ſacred ſcriptures haue taught vs, is of things inuiſible. Touching Hope alſo, the Apoſtle ſaith, that that hope is no hope at all, which is of things viſible. For to what ende doth a man hope in thoſe things which he ſeeth? But, if wee hope for thoſe things which wee ſee not, we patiently tarry in expectance thereof. Whereas the godly doe beleeue, that good things ſhall fall vnto their portion: it is as much to ſay, as they bee hoped for of the good. But now, what ſhall I ſay of Loue, without which, Faith is of no force? for indeed, Hope cannot bee without Loue. Finally, as the Apoſtle

                  Iames ſaith, The very Diuels doe beleeue, and tremble: howebe it, they neither hope, nor yet loue; but rather feare, in belieuing that the ſame ſhall come to paſſe hereafter, which wee doe hope for, and affect. For which cauſe, the Apoſtle Paul doth allow of that faith, which worketh by loue, and which alſo cannot bee without hope. To conclude therefore, neither loue can bee without hope, nor hope without loue; nor either of them without faith.
            
            
               CHAP. 9.
               
                  For the vnderſtanding of Chriſtian Faith, the tedious and darke knowledge of naturall cauſes is not needfull; but only the knowledge of that cauſe, which is the efficient of all things, the ſame beeing God, that trinitie; that is to ſay, the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghoſt.
               
               WHen the queſtion is therefore,

What we ought to beleeue in matter of religion; in this caſe, the nature of things is not ſo curiouſly to be looked into, as it is of them, whom the Greekes call Naturall Philoſophers. Neither let it be fearefull to any Chriſtian, if hee bee ignorant in ſome thing, touching the force and number of the elemēts, the motion, order, and effects of the planets, the celeſtiall globe, the kinds and natures of liuing creatures, hearbs, ſtones, ſprings, riuers, mountaines; as alſo of the diſtances betvveene places and times, the ſignes of imminent ſtormes, and ſixe hundred the like matters, which they haue found out, or elſe doe impute to their ovvne inuention: Becauſe they haue not been the Authors of theſe things, albeit they vvere inducd vvith excellent vvits, feruent in deſire, full of leaſure, diſcouering ſome things by humane coniecture, and other things againe, by hiſtoricall obſeruation;

and in thoſe things alſo, which they do appropriate to their owne inuention, they do in moſt matters rather gueſſe at them, then knovv them certainly. It is enough for a Chriſtian to beleeue, that the cauſe of all things which bee created, either in heauen, or vpon earth, viſible or inuiſible, is not othervviſe then of the goodneſſe of the Creator, which is the onely and true God: and that there is no nature, which either hee himſelfe is not, or elſe is not deriued from him: himſelfe beeing the Trinitie; that is to ſay, the father, and the ſonne begottē of the father; and the Holy Ghoſt proceeding from the ſame father; hovvebeit one and the ſelfe ſame ſpirit, as vvell of the father, as of the ſonne.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 10.
               
                  All things were created good of God, howbeit not without their mutation or change, ne yet abſolute, nor of one correſpondencie amongſt themſelues.
               
               OF this abſolute, correſpondent, & vnchangeable good Trinitie, all things vvere created, beeing yet in themſelues, neither abſolutely, ſemblably, or vnchangeably good; hovvbeit, euery one of them particularly good, and beeing alſo vnited, they are likevviſe in that vniuerſall body, or maſſe of all-together, exceeding good: Becauſe of this generalitie and all-together, that vvonderfull beauty of the vvorld is compoſed.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 11.
               
                  The reaſon why God doth ſuffer euils to raigne in the world. That euill is none other thing then a priuation of naturall goodneſſe, which priuation is not a thing of it ſelfe.
               
               IN which matter, that alſo which is called euill, beeing vvell marſhalled, and rightly placed, doth more viſibly commend thoſe things which be called good, to the end they might be more plauſible and commendable, beeing compared vvith thoſe things which be euill. For neither vvould the omnipotent God (which the infidels alſo doe confeſſe) in as much as himſelfe is vniuerſally good, by any meanes ſuffer any euill to bee in his ovvne vvorkes; but that alſo his omnipotency and goodneſſe is ſuch, as that he maketh that eeuill to be beneficiall vnto vs.

For God, either in reforming, or in puniſhing of the integritie of nature, beeing corrupted and vitious, doeth turne it to the good of man. By which meanes conſequently that which is euill, ſhall not be a perpetuall blemiſh; becauſe it is not any thing when it is purged & remooued. For, what other thing is that which is called euill, than a priuacion of that which is tearmed good? For it fareth, as it is in the bodies of liuing creatures, wherein to be infected vvith diſeaſes, and hurtes, is nothing els, but to vvāt health: Neither doeth it fall out, when there is a remedie applied, that thoſe euils which had gotten poſſeſſion of the bodie (that is to ſay, diſeaſes and hurts) ſhould remooue from thence, and remain or be elſe-where; but rather that they ſhould haue no beeing at all. For, that which is called a diſeaſe or hurt, is not any ſubſtance or matter of it ſelfe, but rather a corruption or infection of a carnall

ſubſtance. Seeing therefore fleſh is onely that which is called ſubſtance, certainely there is ſome good whereunto thoſe euils be accidentall; that is to ſay, priuations of that good, which is called health. Euen ſo, whatſoeuer faults be in the minde, they bee the priuations of naturall goodneſſes. Which, when they be cured, they be not tranſlated to any other place: but they which had a locall beeing, haue now no beeing at all, ſeeing they ſhall not haue any place or abode in that which is cured and made whole.
            
            
               CHAP. 12.
               
                  Albeit all creatures, as they be natures, be made good by God; yet, becauſe they be not immutably good, certain of them may bee corrupted. And that their corruption or vice, is nothing els, but a loſſe, or depriuation of that good which God did graft

in them: inſomuch, is whereſoeuer there is left no ſparke of naturall goodneſſe, there likewiſe is there abiding no corruption, neither is ſin or vice predominant & ſolely remaining.
               
               ALl natures therefore, becauſe God their creator is abſolutely good and perfect, bee alſo good. Howbeit, becauſe they be not like as their maker is, abſolutely and vnchangeably good; therefore may that good which is in them, be both decreaſed & increaſed. But that diminution of good, is that which is called euill: although notwithſtāding, howſoeuer it bee diminiſhed, ſomething conſequently remaineth and is abiding ſtill, if nature be not vtterly extinguiſhed, whereof it hath a beeing, and is nature ſtill. For howſoeuer, and in what quantitie or meaſure ſoeuer nature is yet liuing, that good which is called nature, cā
                  not be vtterly conſumed, vnleſſe

nature her ſelfe be vtterly extinguiſhed and conſumed: & therefore is nature worthily commended. Further, if that be incorruptible, then without all queſtion, is ſhee much more praiſe-worthy. Now, when it is corrupted, that corruption therof maketh it therefore euill, becauſe it depriueth and ſpoileth it of all goodneſſe whatſoeuer. For, if it bereaue it not of any good, it is not conſequently obnoxious or hurtful: but it is hurtfull in depriuing it of that which is good. As long therefore, as nature is corrupted, ſo long is it poſſeſſed of a good, whereof it is againe diſpoſſeſſed. By which reaſon, if there bee a dramme of good remaining, which cannot be cleane put out; then without all doubt is nature alſo incorruptible. And againe, if it be ſubiect to continuall corruption, there is alſo a permanent good, whereof that corruption hath a power to depriue it. Which naturall

facultie, if that which is called euill, ſhall vtterly and wholy conſume; by that reaſon, there ſhall bee no good at all abiding, becauſe nature alſo is dead and extinguiſhed. Corruption therefore cannot vtterly aboliſhe and conſume that which is good, but by the conſumption alſo of nature. All that which is called nature therefore, is good; beeing great and diuine, if it canot be polluted: and on the other ſide, little and weake, if it be ſubiect to infection: and yet can it not be abſolutely denied to be good without note of folly and ignorance. Which thing, called nature, i
                     •
                  ut bee vtterly extinguiſhed by corruption, neither can that corruption alſo haue any continuance, as hauing no being where no nature is left to harbour or entertaine the ſame.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 13.
               
                  Two ſtrange poſitions maintained contrary to the vulgar opinion: the one, that there can bee no euill ſaid to be there, where there is not any good: and the other, that good is called euill; that is to ſay, one and the ſelfe ſame thing is both good and bad.
               
               BY this agument, there is not any euill, if there be not any good. But good which is void of euill, is abſolutely good. On the other ſide, in whom euill hath gotten a poſſeſſion, in that perſon, good is either more or leſſe polluted: neither can there bee by any means, any euill, where ther is no good at all. There is a great myſterie therefore herein: as wherein, becauſe all nature, in as much as it is nature, is of it ſelfe good, it can haue none other meaning or conſtruction, beeing ſaid to be a nature that is

polluted and euil, but that which is good, is alſo euill: and that cō
                  uertibly it cannot be euill, which is not likewiſe good. Becauſe all which is called by the name of nature, is good: neither ſhould any thing become euill, if the thing it ſelfe which is euill, had not an eſſence, nature, or being. There can therefore bee none euill, if there be no good. Which aſſertion, though it may ſeeme abſurd, yet the coherence of this argument, doth as it were without euaſion, driue vs to this concluſion. And we muſt take heed, leſt we ſtumble vpon that ſaying of the Prophet, where we reade, Woe be vnto them which ſay that good is euill, and that euill is good: who ſay that ſweet is ſower, and ſower ſweet: who call darkeneſſe light, and light darkeneſſe. But yet God doth ſay, that an euill man out of the treaſure of his owne heart, doth bring forth euils. Now what is an euill man, but an euill nature, becauſe mā is that which

we call nature? And if man bee in ſome meaſure good, or a kind of good, becauſe hee is nature; what other thing is an euil man, but an euill good? Howbeit, when wee ſeparate and diſtinguiſh theſe two properties, wee doe alſo find, that he is not therfore euill, becauſe he is a man: nor therefore good, becauſe hee is ſinfull: but good, in as much as he is a man and euill becauſe he is a ſinner. Whoſoeuer therefore affirmeth, that man, as he is man is euill, or ſaith that that which is called good, is euil, he incurreth the ſētece of the Prophet ſaying, Woe vnto thē which ſay that good is euill. For he doth depraue the work of God, which is mā; & cō
                  mendeth the fault of man, which is ſinne. For all nature, although it is vitious, is good, in as much as it is nature: & euill, in as much as it is polluted and corrupted.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 14.
               
                  Good and euill, which be in themſelues repugnant, may (contrary to the rules of Logicke) ſtand together, and be in one and the ſelfe ſame thing; yea and euill may ſpring out of that which is good.
               
               WHerefore in theſe contraries which be called good and euill, that rule of Logicke faileth; affirming, that two cotraries cannot stand together in any one thing. For there is no firmament clowdy and cleere at one inſtant: no meat or drinke ſweet and ſower together: no mans body white and blacke in one & the ſelfe ſame place: no beauty & deformity in one face at once. Which thing is obſerued in many and almoſt in all contraries, that they cannot be in any one thing together. Now, ſeeing no man doubteth that good & euill be contraries, ſo may they not

onely be together; but alſo euils cannot ſimply be without good things, or but in things which be good: although on the contrary, things which be good may bee without euils. For a man, or an angel, may bee not vnrighteous, becauſe vnrighteouſnes cannot be in any but either in a man, or in an angel. And theſe two contraries be ſo combined, as if ther were not good, wherein euill might dwell, euill ſhould haue no beeing at all. Becauſe corruption ſhould not haue any ſubiect, not onely where to abide, but alſo from whence it may ſpring, and haue a beginning, except there were ſomething that might be corrupted. For, if good were not, neither ſhould there be corruptiō, which is none other thing than a baniſhmēt of that which is good. Euils therfore take their roote frō goodneſſes, and bee not at all but in things that be good; neither hath any nature of euil any other foudatiō
                  
For, if it ſhould conſiſt of it ſelfe, no doubt it ſhould be good, as it is a nature; and beeing an vncorrupted nature, ſhould becom either a notable good, or elſe could not poſſibly bee a nature ſubiect to corruption, except it were alſo good in ſome meaſure, and that good in like ſort blemiſhed with corruption.
            
            
               CHAP. 15.
               
                  He doth meete with a double obiection: the one drawne from the words of Chriſt, the other from the obſeruation of nature it ſelfe.
               
               NOw, when we ſay, that euils doe ſpring originally from things that be good, let it not be taken to be repugnant to the ſaying of Chriſt, affirming, that a good tree cannot bring forth euill fruits: for, as it is truely ſaid, a Grape cannot be gathered from thornes, becauſe a grape cannot

ſpring out of them; And ſo by the ſelfe ſame reaſon, as an euill tree cannot yield good fruits: no more can an euill wil or diſpoſition, yield good workes. Howbeit, good ground may, as wee ſee, beare both grapes, and alſo thornes. In like maner, from the nature of man which is good, may ſpring both a will that is good, and a will that is badde. Neither hath that will, which is euill and vitious, any other roote originally, but from the good nature of an angell, or of a man. Which thing, Chriſt himſelfe, in that place where he ſpeaketh of a tree and fruits, moſt plainely ſheweth. For, he ſaith, Either make the tree good, and the fruit thereof good; or make the tree had and the fruit bad. Giuing vs therby a ſufficient caueat, or example, that euill fruits grow not of a good tree, nor good of an euil: and yet both theſe trees may grow in that ground, to which 
                     •
                  e directed his ſpeech.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 16.
               
                  How farre forth the knowledge of naturall things is neceſſarie for vs, to the obtaining of true felicitie.
               
               WHich matters ſtanding thus as they doe although that verſe of Vi
                        •
                     gill doth like vs very well, ſaying:
               
                  Right happy doe I, co
                        •
                     nt that man,
                  Of things the reaſons giue that can;
               
               Yet doe we not, think it enough and ſufficient for the attainment of felicitie, to know the cauſes of the wonderfull corporall motions of the world (namely, the motions of the planets, and the reuolutions of the celeſtiall globes and ſpheres) which cauſes lie hidden in the inſcrutable bowels of nature namely,
               
                  What makes the earth to quake,
                  What ſwels the Ocean maine,
                  
                     
Where of the bowels beeing broke,
                  Do fall into their ioynts again:
               
               With many other things of like nature; but rather we ought to ſearch out the cauſes of good & euill: and that alſo, ſo farre-forth as it is in mans power and facultie in this life, beeing full of errors and miſeries. For, we are to direct our courſe to that marke of felicity, where no miſerie ſhal afflict vs, nor any error intrappe vs. For, if the cauſes of corporall motions were ſo needfull for our inſtruction, then ought there none to bee preferred before the reaſons of the health of our own bodies. Wherein beeing ignorant our ſelues, ſeeing wee ſeeke vnto Phyſicians to knowe the ſame, who then doth not ſee a reaſon, how patiently to content himſelfe with his owne blindeneſſe and ignorance in that, which to mortal creatures is vnſeene, as touching the ſecrets of heauen and earth?
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING ERROR and lying. CHAP. 17.
            
               
                  Here he meeteth with with an obiection, teaching vs, that neither euery one which is ignorat in ſomething, doth therefore erre: nor yet that euery error is damnable.
               
               ALbeit, error therefore is with all diligēce to be eſchewed, not onely in greater, but alſo in leſſer matters; and that error alſo cannot bee without ignorance: yet doth it not follow
                     •
                  , that hee ſhould euermore erre, who is ignorant in ſome particular thing; but rather hee which thinketh hee vnderſtandeth that, which (indeed) hee knoweth not. For, ſuch a kinde of perſon alloweth that for veritie, which is falſe, being alwaies the propertie of error. Howbeit, the matter wherein

euery one erreth, maketh all the difference. For, in one & the ſelfe ſame matter, both the man that vnderſtandeth, is to be preferred before the ignorant perſon; and he that erreth not, before him that erreth, and that by the rule of reaſon. Againe, in diuers things (that is to ſay) wheras this man knoweth theſe things, another other things; and this man is ſeene in matters of greater vtilitie, and another in things of leſſe vtilitie, or rather which be hurtfull; who will not in theſe differences, account him in better caſe, that knoweth thē not, than him that is skilfull therein? For there be ſome things, which were better vnknowen then knowen. Alſo to many it hath beene ſometimes good to haue erred, and gone aſtray; howbeit in the way of their worldly iourneys, and not in the courſe of their life and cō
                  uerſation. For, it happened vnto 
                     ••
                  r ſelues, that wee were deceiued

by a double way, whereby wee went not that way, where the armed forces of the Donatiſts lay in wait for vs to ſhut vp the paſſages. By which accident it fell out, that we came to the place whither wee trauailed, though wee went about out of the way: hauing cauſe to bee glad, and thanke full vnto God, in that we erred and went out of the right way, knowing the traines which were laied for vs. Who therefore will be afraid, to prefer ſuch a wandring trauailer, before a theefe that neuer goeth out of his courſes? For confirmation whereof, that forlorne louer is fained by that excellent Poet, to ſay,

                     How was her ſight my bane, how did blinde error me miſ-lead?
                  
               
               Becauſe that error is good, which not onely hurteth not at all, but alſo is in ſome ſort profitable. To ſet downe the truth therefore herein, for as much as error is nothing elſe, but to think that to be

true, which is falſe; & that againe to be falſe, which is true; or to hold that for certaine, which is vncertaine: or on the contrary, to take that for vncertaine, which is certaine, whether it be falſe, or whether it be true: Which miſtaking, beeing a great deformitie and blemiſh to the minde, how beautifull then and ſeemly may we account it to bee, when either in our aſſertion wee deale plainely and ſay, either yea, yea, or no, no, to any queſtiō propoū
                  ded. In reſpect whereof, truely our life in this world wherin we liue, is moſt wretched, becauſe error is oftētimes needfull in the courſe thereof, for the preſeruation of the ſame. God forbid thē, that ſuch ſhould be the eſtate of that life to come, where onely truth is the life of the ſoule, and where neither any man doth deceiue, nor is deceiued. But, in this world, men both deceiue, & be deceiued; being the more 
                     •
                  amentable, when as they rather

beguile by lying, than be beguiled themſelues by beleeuing lyars. Howbeit, our nature beeing indued with reaſon, doth by all meanes ſo eſchewe the ſnare of deceipt, and as much as it may, ſhun error; that euen they which loue to deceiue others, will not themſelues willingly bee deceiued. For, he which lyeth, will not perſwade himſelfe that hee erreth therein, but rather that hee ſeduceth him thereby who doth beleeue him. Neither doth that man erre in that matter, which he cloaketh with a lie, in caſe himſelfe did vnderſtand the truth: But he is deceiued in this, that he thinketh that hee woundeth not himſelfe by lying; whereas euery ſinne in it ſelfe is more hurtfull to the agent, than to the patient.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 18.
               
                  Albeit it is not the part of an honest and godly man to lie; yet in lies, one is greater than another in reſpect of the minde and intention: and ſo alſo in reſpect of the matters about which we doe lie, one is more dangerous and pernicious than another.
               
               BVt now out of this matter there riſeth a moſt intricate and darke queſtion, whereof we did write a great booke, at ſuch time as we were neceſſarily inforced to anſwer, Whether 
                        〈◊〉
                      were the part of a iuſt man, to lie or diſſemble at any time. Truely, I am of opinion, that any kind of lie is a ſinne. Wherein, notwithſtanding there is a great alteration of the caſe, in reſpect of the quality of the minde, and alſo of the cauſes moouing any man to lie. For, he doth not commit ſo great a ſinne, which lieth in aduiſing

or directing another mā, as he which lieth with an intent to doe hurt thereby. As for example, that mā doth not ſo much hurt, which ſetteth a trauailer into a wrong way by lying, as hee which corrupteth the way of mans life, by deceiuing him with vntruths. And againe, no man is to bee held a liar, who affirmeth a falſhood, taking it for a trueth; becauſe, in as much as in him is, he hath no meaning to deceiue, but is rather deceiued himſelfe. Hee is not therefore to bee condemned for a liar, but to be cenſured either for temerity & raſhnes, who inconſiderately beleeuing vntruthes, entertaineth thē for truthes: But rather on the cō
                  trarie, that man, as much as in him is, doth he indeede, who affirmeth that to be true, which he thinketh in his conſcience to be falſe. For, as touching his minde and inward motion; becauſe his tongue declareth not that which his heart thinketh, hee ſaith not

the trueth, although in examination, it fall out to be true which he affirmeth. Neither is he by any meanes to be freed from the guilt of a lie, which with his mouth ignorantly vttereth a truth, and yet wittingly lieth in his heart. Setting apart therefore things themſelues, by occaſion whereof, any thing is auouched, and onely ſetting before our eies the intention of the ſpeaker, that man is better of the two, which through want of knowledge and capacitie, affirmeth an vntrueth, becauſe hee taketh it for a veritie; than hee which contrary to his conſcience, carrieth a minde to lie and deceiue, although indeede hee cannot truely iudge of that to be truth which hee affirmeth. For, the firſt of theſe 2. hath not one thing in his heart, and another in his mouth: But the ſecond (no doubt) howſoeuer it bee falſe or true which hee ſaith,

yet hath hee, notwithſtanding, one thing ſhut vp in his breaſt, and another thing in his tongue, which euill is a propertie incident to the liar. And now to come to the conſideration of things which be held and maintained, there is as great a difference in the matter wherein any man is deceiued, or doth lie: albeit, that to bee deceiued is a leſſe euill than to lie, weighing therein, the intention of the inward man, yet is it much more tolerable, in matters out of the compaſſe of religion, to lie and diſſemble, than to bee deceiued and miſled in thoſe things, without the beleefe and knowledge whereof, God cannot bee worſhipped: as in many particularities it may more cleerely bee found out by him that will ſeeke after the truth. Which to demonſtrate by ſome examples, let vs ſee what difference there is betweene him, who in lying, reporteth that a man is liuing,

who is dead; and another, who beeing deceiued, beleeueth that Chriſt after many ages to come, ſhall ſuffer a ſecond death. In which two things, is it not without all compariſon, a leſſer matter in that ſort to be a liar, than in this ſort to be deceiued? and it is a leſſe euill, to induce any man to that error, than by any man to be induced into this.
            
            
               CHAP. 19.
               
                  Although wee are diuerſly deceiued and miſled, in reſpect of the euent; yet is it alwaies an euill in it ſelfe, to be deceiued and miſledd.
               
               IN ſome particular matters therefore, wee are ſeduced to our great hurt; in certaine again, to our leſſe hurt; in ſome alſo without any hurt at all; and in ſome againe, to our great good. As for example, that man is deceiued to his great hurt, which

beleeueth not that which bringeth him to his ſaluation. Hee againe is ſeduced with little hu
                     •
                  t to himſelfe, who entertaining error for trueth, falleth thereby into ſome worldly troubles; and yet bearing the ſame with faithfull patience, maketh good vſe thereof: As for example, if any man by holding another man to be honeſt and iuſt, who indeed is a bad man, doth ſuſtaine ſome hurt by him. Thirdly, hee which ſo farre-forth beleeueth an euill man to bee good, as that hee ſuffereth no hurt by him at all, is not thereby ſeduced to any hurt to himſelfe, neither doeth that deteſtation of the Prophet fall vpon him, pronouncing a woe vnto thoſe who affirme, that euill is good. For that ſaying is to bee vnderſtood of the things wherein men do offend, or commit euill, and not of the perſons themſelues. And therefore, he which ſaith that adulterie is good, is rightly taxed by

that ſaying of the Prophet: but he who pronounceth that man to be honeſt, whom he taketh to be chaſte, not knowing him to be an adulterer, that man is deceiued, not in the true ſenſe of that doctrine of things that bee good and euill, but is deceiued by the cloſe carriage of men in their manners; calling him a good man, whom he thinketh to be indued with that which hee knoweth to be good, and yet affirming ſtill, that an adulterous perſon is euill, and a continent perſon good: howbeit, ſaying that this man is good, not knowing that he is an adulterer, and that man to be euill, not knowing that hee is an honeſt liuer. Furthermore, if any man doe eſcape miſchief by error, as it hapned to vs in our iorney which we formerly remembred, by that it may appear, that ſome good cō
                  meth vnto a man by error. But whē I ſay that any man is deceiued, either without any hurt to

himſelfe, or elſe to his particular good, I doe not therein affirme, that error is no euill, or that it is a good after a ſort: but I ſpeake of that euill, whereinto a man falleth not; or of that good whervnto a man attaineth by erring, expreſſing what doth fall out, or not fall out vpon precedent error. For error, ſimply by it ſelfe, beeing either a great euill in a great matter, or a little euill in a little matter, is alwaies notwithſtanding an euill. For, who but a man that is ignorant, will denie that it is an euill, to allowe of vntruths for truths, or adiudge truths to be vntruths, embracing incertainties for certainties, and certainties for incertainties? But, it is one thing to thinke a man to be good that is bad, whereof error is the occaſion; and another thing, by this euill not to bee endammaged, or not to incurre another euill, although wee receiue no detriment by an euill man, who is deemed good. Alſo,

it is one thing to thinke that to be the way, which is not the way: and another thing by this euill of ignorance, to get ſome good; as namely, to eſcape the conſpiracies of euill perſons.
            
            
               CHAP. 20.
               
                  That euery kind of error is not ſinne: neither becauſe we often erre in ſome things, all aſſent in matters is to be abrogated and taken away, as the Academical Philoſophers would haue it.
               
               YEt can I not certainely ſet downe, whether it may bee called an error, when a man holdeth a good opinion of an euill man, not knowing what he is in manners and conuerſation: or elſe when, in ſtead of thoſe things which wee diſcerne by our corporall ſenſes, the like are preſented vnto vs, beeing either ſpiritually perceiued, as it were, with the body; or bodily perceiued, as it were in the ſpirit.

Much like vnto that which the Apoſtle Peter beleeued to be ſor indeed, when he thought he ſaw a ſight, beeing ſuddainely deliuered out of priſon and fetters by the angel: or in corporall things, when that which is hard, is accounted eaſic; or that ſweet, which is ſower: or that which is vnſauourie, to be pleasāt in ſmel: or elſe that it thundreth, when a chariot runneth: or when one man is taken for another, two beeing alike; which oftentimes happeneth in twins; whereupon the Poet affirmeth, that miſtaking in ſuch caſes, is an acceptable error in Parents. And ſo whether many other things of like condition, be to be pronounced ſinnes. This queſtion, though it be moſt knottie and intangled, hauing troubled the heads of the ſubt
                     〈…〉
                  t Academiees, yet haue I vndertaken to vnfould it; that is to ſay, Whether a wife man ought to giue his approbatiō of any thing to 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      he should allow

of falſhood for truth; ſeeing all things, as they do affirm, lie either hidden in the ſecrets of nature, or els be ambiguous & vncertaine. Whereupon I compoſed three Books, when I was firſt conuerted, to take away thoſe ſtūbling blocks, which ſtood in the dore (as it were) to withſtand me. Alſo the deſpaire of finding out the truth, was to be remooued, the ſame beeing fortified by their reaſons & arguments. With thē therefore, all error is accounted ſin: which they defend to be ineuitable, 
                     •
                  nles euery mans particular approbation in any thing, be vtterly ſuſpēded. For, they do hold that mā to be in error, whoſoeuer aſſenteth vnto things vncertaine, affirming that nothing ſubiect vnto the eie of mā
                  
                     •
                  s certain & infallible; becauſe ther is no ſenſible difference betweene falſhoode and truth in outward appearance; although ſometimes, that falleth out to bee truth, which ſeemeth to bee the ſame, a poſitiō maintained with

moſt impudent, though ingenious arguments. Howbeit, with vs in diuinitie, it is ſaid, that the righteous man liueth by faith. But, if aſſent and approbation be taken away, faith alſo is deſtroyed. Becauſe, without approbation or allowance, wee beleeue in nothing. And thoſe inuiſible things concerning our ſaluation, bee moſt true and certaine, though they be vnſeene; which, if they be not beleeued, it is impoſſible to come to euerlaſting life, which is not otherwiſe but eternall. I know not therefore, whether we may ſay as they ſay, who bee ſo farre from thinking that they ſhall liue for euer, as they know not whether they do liue while they be in this world: wherein they doe plead ignorance, although it bee a thing which they cannot but know. For, there is no man admitted in reaſon to ſay, that hee knoweth not whether hee liueth or not; becauſe, if hee bee not a liuing

creature, hee hath no ſenſe or vnderſtanding at all: becauſe, not onely to know, but alſo not to know, be properties incident onely to the liuing. Howebeit, in denying that they doe liue, they would ſeeme to preuent error: when as in very deede, by that matter of error, they are cō
                  uinced as by a conſequence, that they beleeue hee cannot erre which liueth not. As therefore, it is not onely true, but alſo very certaine, that wee liue; ſo likewiſe bee many things true and very certaine, whereof for vs to giue allowance and approbation, God forbid but that it ſhould bee rather accounted wiſdom, than madneſſe in vs.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 21.
               
                  Although to erre, is not alwaies a ſinne, yet is it a perpetuall effect and note of mans infirmity and wretchednes.
               
               IN certaine things therefore, it is not materiall to ſaluation, whether they bee beleeued, or not; as whether they be belieued indeed, or reputed 
                     •
                  o to be, or els be deemed falſe. In which things to be deceiued, that is to ſay, to miſtake, or take one for another, is not to bee adiudged a ſin: or if it be, it is the leaſt & lighteſt ſin. Finally, let it be of what quality ſoeuer, it is no part of that way which bringeth vs to God: which way is faith in Chriſt, working by loue and charitie. Out of this way were not thoſe parents miſled in that acceptable error, and miſtaking of their twinnes. Neither did the Apoſtle Peter wander out of this path, when as, ſuppoſing

he ſawe a viſion, he tooke one thing for another in ſuch ſort, as through the ſhadow of thoſe bodies wherin he thought he was, he did not know the true bodies wherein he walked, vntil ſuch time as the angel parted from him, by whom hee was ſe
                     •
                   at libertie, being a priſoner: Neither did Iacob the Patriarke wā
                  der out of this way, in ſuppoſing that his ſon was ſ
                     •
                  aine by a wild beaſt, when as he was yet liuing. In theſe and ſuch like falſities we be deceiued, without ſhipwrack of our 
                     •
                  aith in God; and goe alſo amiſſe, althogh we leaue not the way which leadeth vs vnto him. Which errors, or miſtakings, although they bee no ſins, yet are they to bee accounted in the number of the euils of this life, which is ſo prone to vanity, as in this world vntruths bee entertained for trueths, trueths diſcarded for lies, and things vncertaine retained for certaine. For, although theſe things be

ſet apart from that faith which bringeth vs to the true, vndoubted, and eternall felilicitie; yet be they not ſeparated from that miſerie wherein we liue, beeing in the fleſh. For, we ſhall in no ſort be deceiued, either in any ſenſe of the mind or body, if we were once inueſted in that perfect ſtate of felicity.
            
            
               CHAP. 22.
               
                  That euery lie is a ſinne, yea euen that which is called an officious lie; that is to ſay, a lie made for, the ſafetie of another, albeit it is not ſo hainous as that lie which is made with an intent to doe hurt.
               
               MOreouer, euery lie is therefore ſaid to be a ſinne, becauſe euery man, not onely when himſelfe knoweth what is true; but alſo, if at any time hee erre, and is deceiued as a man, ought to ſpeake as he thinketh

in his heart, whether it bee the truth indeed, or a reputed veritie, and yet not the ſame. For, euery one that lieth in any thing which his conſcience telleth him to bee otherwiſe, that man ſpeaketh with (a will to deceiue. Words therefore were deuiſed, not as meanes for men to beguile one another, but whereby they might open their thoughts each to other. To make therefore wordes the inſtruments of deceipt, beeing not ordained to that ende, is a ſinne. Neither is any kinde of lie not to bee deemed a ſinne, for that wee may thereby perhaps pleaſure one another. For we may happily do good to ſome, by ſtealing from others: as in caſe the poore man, to whom that is openly giuen, which we haue ſtolne, 
                     •
                  eele benefit thereby; and the rich man whom we haue priuily robbed, feeleth not the loſſe hee hath ſuſtained. Let therefore no man hold, that ſuch a theft is not a

ſinne. Wee may in like manner; by committing adulterie, make ſhewe of a good turne done vnto her, who beeing in caſe to die for loue, if a man doe not cōſent to her deſire, howſoeuer ſhee may be purged by repentance, if ſhee happen afterwards to recouer and liue. Neither by that reaſon, ſhall any ſuch ſinne bee denied to bee adulterie. For, if chaſtitie doeth pleaſe vs in the ſtrict obſeruation thereof, what doeth then that word truth, I pray you imply, that chaſtitie ſhould not be broken by fornication beeing done for the good of another; and that truth on the contrary, ſhould bee violated by lying, in reſpect of any like ſequel of profit to others? A lie therefore, cannot at any time deſerue praiſe or allowance, although wee lie ſometimes for other mens ſafetie. It is therefore a ſinne, although a veniall ſinne, beeing on the one ſide excuſable by reaſon of our affection

to doe good, & condemned on the other ſide, becauſe it is fraudulent. For, it cannot be denied, but that men doe greatly further other mens profit and good who do not lie but for the preſeruation of ſome other body. Howbeit, in that their actiō, their kindnes and affection, and not the fraude or deceipt vſed therein, is vnworthily commended in reſpect of the fact, or elſe is recompenced in this world: which, to bee remitted and pardoned, is ſufficient and enough, although alſo it bee not made common, eſpecially to the heirs of the new Teſtament; to whom it is ſaid, Let yea, yea, & no, no, bee in your mouthes. For, whatſoeuer is beyond the limitation therof, proceedeth from the motion of euil. In reſpect of which euil, neuer ceaſing to vndermine vs while wee liue in the fleſh, the co-heires of Chriſt doe therefore vſe this ſaying, Forgiue vs our treſpaſſes.
               
            
         
         
            
            OF THE CAVSES OF good and euill.
            
               CHAP. 23.
               
                  The chiefe and onely cauſe of good is Gods goodneſſe; defection or falling from God, beeing alſo the originall cauſe of euill.
               
               THeſe matters therefore beeing thus handled, according to that brru
                     •
                  tie whereunto I am tied; forſomuch alſo, as the cauſes of good and euill are to bee vnderſtood and learned, as alſo our ſelues ſo farre forth inſtructed touching the way it ſelfe, as may ſuffice to lead vs to that kingdome (where there is life without death, truth without error, and felicitie without interruption) we ought not to doubt, that the cauſe of good effects or things pertaining vnto vs, doth growe out of any other ground, than of the goodneſſe of God;

and that the reuolting will, firſt of angels, and afterwards of men, reiecting an immortall good, and imbracing the contrarie, was the originall cauſe of euill or ſinne.
            
            
               CHAP. 24.
               
                  There be foure ſecondarie cauſes of euill, namely, Ignorance, Concupiſcence, Sorrow, and Pleaſure.
               
               THe firſt and originall euill which happeneth vnto man, beeing a reaſonable creature, is, his priuation of good: Afterwards alſo, ignorance in the actions of this life did creepe in, whether man would or no; as alſo a concupiſcence, or feruent deſire of things hurtfull and pernicious, with whom as companions, be brought in priuily, error, and griefe or ſorrow. Which two euils, after they be ſenſibly perceiued to hang ouer our

heads, that motion of the minde which mooueth vs to ſhun thē is called feare. Moreouer, the mind after it hath obtained the things it earneſtly deſireth, although they bee hurtfull and friuolous; yet the ſame beeing voide of ſenſe and vnderſtanding therof, by reaſon of error wherewith it is blinded; or elſe beeing bewitched with a contagious delight and pleaſure therein, it is carried as it were, this way, and that way, with a falſe conceit of ioy. From which fountaines (as it were) of corruption, not of fulneſſe, but of enptineſſe, all mans miſerie and wretchedneſſe doth ſpring.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE SINNE OF Adam.
            
               CHAP. 25.
               
                  That the damnation, both of angels and men, becauſe they ſinned, was iuſt; howbeit their puniſhment not alike, or the ſelfe ſame. Alſo, what was the condition or ſtate of man before he fell into ſinne.
               
               WHich nature notwithſtanding, amidſt his miſeries, could not leeſe his deſire to obtaine eternal life: Howbeit, theſe euils were generall, both to mē and angels, who were damned in reſpect of their malice, by the iuſtice of God. But man hath his peculiar puniſhment in the death of his body. For the Lord did threaten death vnto him, in caſe hee ſinned. And God ſo induing him with free-will, as that yet hee would haue him ſubiect to his will, and

kept in awe to fall for feare of deſtruction, did alſo place him in the bliſſe of Paradiſe, as it were in the ſhadow of life; from which he ſhould haue beene aduanced to greater felicities, if hee had kept himſelfe righteous.
            
            
               CHAP. 26.
               
                  The ſinne of the firſt man, and his puniſhment, fell not onely vpon Adam; but flowed alſo to all his poſteritie. And ſo by one man, ſinne came into the world.
               
               HEreupon Adam, after he had ſinned, beeing a baniſhed man, did binde ouer vnto death and deſtruction, his whole poſteritie and off-ſpring; whom by ſinning hee did pollute in himſelfe, as in the roote: inſomuch, as whatſoeuer iſſue was begotten in the concupiſcence of the fleſh, (in which, a puniſhment of quality like to diſobedience was inflicted) by Adam and his wife,

who was the cauſe of his tranſgreſſion, being ioyntly damned, ſhould draw original ſinne from them; by which alſo, they ſhould be drawen by errors and many agonies, into thoſe endleſſe puniſhments, with the reuolting Angels, the corrupters of mankind, the poſſeſſors of that infernall place, and with their conſorts & companions. Thus came ſinne into the world by one mā, and death by ſinne; and ſo it is conuaied into all mankinde, all hauing ſinned in, and through one. For, the Apoſtle in that place, calleth the world, All mankinde.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 27.
               
                  It was wrought by the onely and great mercy of God, that onely men, of ſinnefull nature, ſhould hope for reformation; that is to ſay, redemption: which hope is not, either in the angels that ſinned, or in the diuels.
               
               
                  
IT followeth therefore, that the whole maſſe and lump of mā
                  kind, lay damned in ſinnes, or rather wallowed therein, and ran head long from vices to vices: and beeing combined with the angels that ſinned, receiued moſt condigne puniſhment for their wicked reuolting. Whatſoeuer therefore, the wicked doe wittingly commit in their blinde and vnbridled concupiſcence, & whatſoeuer puniſhments they do outwardly ſuffer in the face of the world, againſt their wils, is to bee imputed to the iuſtice of Gods wrath; neither doeth the iuſtice of God ceaſe to giue life and ſtrong cō
                  ſtitution to the wicked angels, who die if his diuine helpe bee withdrawen: And likewiſe, to giue forme and life vnto the 
                     •
                  eedes of men, in what progenie or ſtocke ſoeuer, beeing either defiled or damned, faſhioning the limbes and parts of the body betweene times, quickening the ſenſes by degrees,

and in their places, as they lie in the body, and giuing them inward nutriment. For, hee thought it better to drawe goodneſſe out of euils, rather than not to tolerate any euills to be at all. And in caſe it had beene his will, not to haue had any reformation in man, to make him better (as it was in wicked angels, in whome there is no amendment) might it not very condignely haue comne to paſſe, that that nature which hee hath ſpurned vnder his feete by abuſing the power or will hee had giuen him, the commandement of his Creator, and tranſgreſſed the ſame, (which he might very eaſily haue obſerued) which hath blemiſhed the image of his Creator, being in him, by a contemptuous turning away from the light thereof, which wickedly violated by the power of free-wil, the wholſom ſeruitude that hee ſhould

haue performed to his lawes, ſhould vniuerſally therefore bee forſaken of him, and ſuſtaine an euerlaſting puniſhment by due deſert? Truely thus hee ſhould haue done, if he had beene onely iuſt, and not mercifull alſo, and had not giuen more euident demonſtration of his mercie, which he was no waies bound by promiſe, or duty to haue performed; eſpecially, in the redemption of ſuch as were vnworthy thereof.
            
         
         
            OF THE FALL AND ſinne of the Angels.
            
                CHAP. 28.
               
                  The reuolting and wicked angels, did all of them ſinne together & dwell together perpetually damned. But the good angels, and ſuch as cleaned vnto God, doe inioy eternall felicitie.
               
               CErtaine therefore of the angels, which left God by

their ſinfull pride, were throwen downe from the high habitation of heauen, to the vttermoſt darkenes of the ayre or element belowe; and the number of angels which remained, had their dwelling with God in euerlaſting happineſſe and holineſſe. For, neither were the reſt of the angels begotten of that one angell which fell and was damned, whereby originall ſin did binde them, as it did mortall creatures in the chaines of guiltie poſteritie, drawing the whole multitude into the puniſhments due to the offenders, But that one Angell who exalted himſelfe with his aſſociates impitie, and is therefore made a diuel, by that his pride and exaltation is caſt downe with them; the reſt which cleaued vnto God in godly obedience, receiuing a certaine light and knowledge, which the others had not, wherby they reſted aſſured of their eternall and permanent eſtate.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 29.
               
                  To ſupply the places of the Angels that fell, certaine are choſen by God, out of the number of mortall ſinners vpon earth, to inioy euerlasting life and heauen.
               
               IT pleaſed therefore the Creator of the whole world, and moderator thereof, Almighty God; that, becauſe the whole company of the angels did not ſinne by forſaking God, that the number of them which periſhed, ſhould remaine in euerlaſting deſtruction: And that the number of them which ſtood firmely vnto God, ſhould dwell in ſecuritie of their moſt certaine, knowen, and euerlaſting felicitie: and that the other reaſonable creature, which was man, becauſe hee was generally in the ſtate of perdition

by reaſon of ſinnes and puniſhments, as well originall, as perſonall, by that part of mankinde which was reſtored, that which the fall of the diuell had diminiſhed from the ſocietie of angels, might be ſupplied againe. For, ſo it was promiſed to the Saints at their reſurrection, that they ſhould be equals with the angels of God. That heauenly Hieruſalem therefore, beeing our mother, and Gods citie, ſhal not be deſtitute of the full number of 
                     〈◊〉
                   citizens, but rather ſhall be more populous in her kingdome. For, we knowe not either the number of holy men, or of theſe fowle fiendes that fell; in whoſe places, the ſucceeding ſone of the Church, that holy mother, who ſeemed to be barren vpon carth, ſhall haue their perpetuall habitations, in that peace and tranquillitie, from whence they fell; and that without either terme, or limitation of time.

But the number of thoſe citizens, which either now is, or hereafter ſhall bee, is inwardly ſeene to their maker and workman; who calleth thoſe which yet are not, as wel as thoſe which now bee: diſpoſing of all things in meaſure, number, and weight.
            
         
         
            OF MANS FREE-will.
            
               CHAP. 30.
               
                  That ſinnefull men cannot be redeemed nor ſaued, other by the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of their owne works, or on the free-with of their owne minde.
               
               BVt may that part of mankind to whom God hath promiſed freedome & fruition of his kingdome, be redeemed by the merits of their own workes. God forbid. For what good can a reprobate worke vnto himſelfe, except he be deliuered from the

ſtate of perdition? Can his free-will performe that worke? God alſo forbid that. For, man abuſing the libertie of his free-will, loſt both himſelfe, and the benefit of his free-will. For, euen as he which killeth himſelfe, doth that facte while he is in life, but is no more a liuing creature after hee hath murdered himſelfe, wanting power to reuiue himſelfe after hee is ſlaine, euen ſo, when man did ſinne in his free-will, he loſt the ſame after ſinne had got the victorie. For, if any man be ſubdued, he is a vaſſaile and ſlaue to him that vanquiſheth him. This ſaying is out of Peter the Apoſtle: which, ſeeing it is true, what other libertie (I pray you) hath ſuch a bondſlaue, except it be to take his pleaſure in ſinning? For, hee is a dutifull ſeruant, which willingly doth his maſters will. By which reaſon, hee hath free libertie and ſcope to ſinne, that is the ſeruant of ſinne. Whereupon alſo

it followeth, that no man ſhall haue freedome to doe well, except he be freed from ſinne, and become the ſeruant of righteouſnes. For, to reioyce in wel doing is true freedome; as alſo to obey the commandement of God, is godly 
                     •
                  eruitude. Which libertie to doe well, how can it be in man, that is a ſlaue, & ſolde to 
                     〈◊〉
                  ? except he be redeemed by him, whoſe ſaying i
                     •
                   is; If the ſonne ſhall make you free, then ſhal yee be free indeede. Which thing, before it beginne to be in man, how may any creature boaſt of free-will in any good action, 
                     〈…〉
                  ch hath not ye
                     •
                   a libertie giuen him to doe well? except a man, being puffed vp with vaine pride, will arrogate that vnto himſelfe, which the Apoſtle forbiddeth; ſaying, By grace are yee ſaued through faith.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. 31.
               
                  That we 
                        •
                     e not ſ
                        •
                     ued by the merit or worthineſſe of our owne faith.
               
               ANd 
                     〈◊〉
                   not men ſo farre-forth arrogate this faith vnto themſelues, as they will not knowe that it is giuen of God: according to the ſaying of the ſame Apoſtle in another place, who confeſſeth that himſelfe obtained the mercy of God to make him beleeue: who addeth further in that place, ſaying, And that alſo, not of your ſelues, but it is the gift of God; not of works, leſt any man ſhould boaſt of himſelfe. And leſt there ſhould bee deemed any defect of good workes in the faithfull, hee ſaith againe; For wee are his workemanſhip created in Chriſt Ieſus vnto good workes, which God hath ordained that wee ſhould walke in. Then are wee therefore

truely made free, when as God hath made vs anewe; that is to ſay, doeth faſhion, or alter, and create vs againe, not as wee are men, which is already done; but that we may become good men, which now hee accompliſheth by his grace: that wee may bee made a new creature in Chriſt Ieſus, according as it is ſaid by Dauid, Create in me, O Lord, a new heart. For, God had already created his heart, as much as pertaineth to the naturall perfection of the heart of man.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 32.
               
                  That wee are not in any part or ſort, the cauſe of our own ſaluation, and of that will which is in vs to doe wel; but that the ſame only and ſolely conſisteth of the mercy of God.
               
               NOw, leſt any man ſhould boaſt of that liberty or freedome of his own will, albeit he will not brag of works, as thogh merit were deriued from free-will, and that the libertie or facultie to doe well were to be aſcribed therevnto, as a rewarde due vnto the ſame: Let him liſtē vnto the ſame Preacher of grace, ſaying, For it is God which worketh in you both the will and the deed, euen of his good pleaſure. And in another place, So then it is not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but in God that ſheweth mercy. Whereby it appeareth without all doubt, that

although a man be of that ripeneſſe of yeares, as his own reaſon may direct him; yet can hee not belieue, hope, or loue, except he wil himſelfe: nor yet come to the crowne of that high calling of God, except hee runne by his owne will. How is it therefore ſaid, Not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but in God that ſheweth mercie; but becauſe that the will it ſelfe, as it is formerly written, is prepared by God or elſe perhaps that this ſaying, Not in him that will
                        〈…〉
                     , nor in him that runneth, is ſo written, becauſe it conſiſteth of both; that is to ſay, of the will of man, and of the mercy of God: to the ende, that we may ſo vnderſtand that ſaying of Not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but in God that ſheweth mercy; as thogh he ſaid, The will of man is not ſufficient of it ſelfe, and alone, if alſo Gods mercy doe not accō
                  pany it, & that therfore the mercie

of God by it ſelfe, and alone, doth not ſuffice, if alſo mans will goe not with it. By which reasō, if it be truly ſaid, that it is not in him that willeth, but in God that ſheweth mercy, becauſe the wil of man doth not ſimply and alone accompliſh that worke; why is it not of the contrary truely inferred, that it is not in God that ſheweth mercy, but in mā that willeth; becauſe Gods mercy doeth not ſolely performe that action? Furthermore, if no Chriſtiā dare affirme, that it is not in God that ſheweth mercy, but in man that willeth, leſt hee ſhould moſt plainly gaineſay the Apoſtle; it followeth thē, that we take this his ſaying, (Viz. That it is not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but in God that ſheweth mercy) to be true, in as much as the whole work is to be attributed vnto God, who both prepareth that good will which is in man, as ſtanding in neede of his aſſiſtance; and afterwards alſo helpeth the ſame, beeing ſo

prepared. For, the good will, or will to doe good in man, goeth before many of Gods gifts, but it is not precedent to all. And when it followeth & commeth after Gods gifts, yet is it a companion amongſt them. For it is both waies read in holy ſcripture; viz. Both his mercy ſhall goe before me, & alſo his mercy ſhall follow me. It preuenteth or goeth before him that is backward, to make him willing; and followeth him that is forward and willing, leſt his will become fruſtrate. For why are we admoniſhed to pray for our enemies, beeing of themſelues vnwilling to liue vertuouſly, but onely that God would worke a will in thē to doe well? Wherefore alſo, are we willed to ask at Gods hands, to the end we may obtaine, but that our petition may bee performed by him, to whom we are petitioners? By whom alſo it is wrought, that we will or deſire that which wee pray for. We

pray therefore for our enemies, that Gods mercy may preuent and goe before them, as it hath done before vs. We pray alſo for our ſelues, that his mercy may attend vpon vs.
            
         
         
            OF CHRIST THE MEdiator.
            
               CHAP. 33.
               
                  That Chriſt is our Mediator & peace-maker with God, becauſe he maketh him our friend by the oblation of that ſole ſacrifice, which is himſelfe.
               
               MAnkinde therefore was detained in the ſtate of iuſt damnation, and all were the children of wrath; of which wrath it is written, Becauſe all our daies are in declination, and we our ſelues are fallen into thy diſpleaſure, our yeares are folded vp as a Spiders webbe. Of which wrath, Io
                        •
                     
                   alſo ſaith, For man

which is borne of woman, is ſhort of life, and his daies full of ſorrow. Of which wrath alſo, our Lord Ieſus ſaith, He that beleeueth in the ſonne, he ſhall inioy euerlaſting life, but he which doth not beleeue in him, is not in the state of ſaluation, but Gods wrath and indignation abideth vpon him. Hee ſaieth not, It ſhall come vpon him; but, it abideth vpō him. With this euery mortall creature is borne. Whereupon the Apoſtle ſaith, For wee were alſo by nature the children of Gods wrath, euen as others were. Seeing therefore, all mortall creatures were by originall ſinne in this diſpleaſure of God, the ſame lying ſo much the more heauily vpon vs, by how much our own ſins, added therunto, did alſo aggrauate the ſame by their greatneſſe and aboundance; a mediator in this caſe was behoouefull and neceſſarie, that is to ſay, a reconciler, who pacified Gods wrath, by the oblation of that ſole ſacrifice,

whereof all the ſacrifices of the Law and Prophets were but ſhadows. Wherupon the Apoſtle ſaith; For, if when wee were enemies, we were recōciled to God by the death of his ſon, much more now beeing reconciled, ſhall himſelf by his blood-ſhedding be a protection vnto vs againſt his wrath and indignation. For, when God is angry, the perturbation which is in him, is not ſuch as is in the minde of a man when hee is offended; But the word being borrowed from the paſſion which is in mortall creatures, Gods reuēge which of it ſelf is neuer but iuſt, putteth on the appellatiō of anger or wrath. Inaſmuch therefore, as we are reconciled vnto God by a Mediatour, receiuing the holy Ghoſt, whereby we are made friēds of foEs (for that how many ſoeuer be ſanctified by the ſpirit of God, become the ſonns of God) this recōciliatiō cōmeth of the meere mercy of God, thorough Ieſus Chriſt our Lord.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 34.
               
                  That Chriſt (who is the word of God) to the end he might be our mediator & peace-maker with God, did take fleſh and was incarnate of the virgin, Marie.
                  
               
               OF which Mediator, to ſpeak in that ample manner, as the matter it ſelfe doeth deſerue, would aske a long diſcourſe, & yet could not worthily bee expreſſed by the pen of any man. For, who could with fit words ſet forth this onely thing, namely, that the word was made fleſh and dwelled in vs, to the ende we ſhould beleeue in the onely ſonne of God the father, beeing omnipotent, borne of the holy Ghoſt, and the virgin Marie? and that the word was ſo made fleſh, as, although the fleſh was begotten by his diuinitie or deitie, yet was there not any mutation or change of his diuinitie or

deitie into the fleſh. Moreouer, in this place we are to take this word Caro, which is fleſh, to bee homo, that is, man; the ſpeech figuratiuely ſignifying the whole, by the part: which, for example, this ſaying doeth demonſtrate; namely, Becauſe by the workes of the lawe, all fleſh, that is to ſay, euery man, ſhall not be ſaued. For, we may lawfully ſay, that in this ſuſception, or incarnation, there was no defect in the humane nature: the ſame nature beeing yet voide of all ſinnefull copulation, & not ſuch as is begotten betweene man and woman in carnall concupiſcence, wrapping vs in the bond of ſinne, the ſtaine of which originall guilt is waſhed away by regeneration; but ſuch as was fit to bee borne of a virgin, beeing a thing conceiued in the faith, & not in the luſt or ſinnefull appetite of the mother. For, if in the birth of him that was borne, her integritie had beene blemiſhed, then

ſhould he not haue beene borne of a pure virgin: and the whole Church ſhould alſo vntruly confeſſe (which God forbid) that hee was borne of a virgin: which Church, following the example of Chriſts mother, doth daiely bring forth members of that myſticall body, and yet notwithſtanding is a virgin ſtill. Read (if you liſt) my Letters touching the virginity of Saint Mary, writtē to that renowmed man Voluſianus, of whome I doe here make mention with all reuerence and loue.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 35.
               
                  That Chriſt, who conſiſteth of two natures, namely diuine and humane, is notwithſtanding but one in ſubſistence.
               
               CHriſt Ieſus therefore, the ſon of God, is both God and man. God before all worlds, and man in this age or world wherin we liue. God, becauſe hee is the word, (for God was the word) and man; becauſe, to make an vnitie of the perſon, a reaſonable ſoule and the fleſh were adioyned to the word. Wherfore, as he is God, he and the father be one: and, as he is man, the father greater than he. For, beeing the onely ſonne of God, and that not of grace, but by nature, to the end therefore, that he might be replete with grace, he is alſo made the ſonne of man; and the ſelfe ſame hee, beeing both of both, is yet but one Chriſt,

becauſe, when he was in the figure of his deitie, hee thought it to be no robberie vnto God, for that it was his naturall eſſence, which was to bee equall with God the father. But hee afterwards debaſed himſelfe, taking vpon him the habite of a ſeruant, and yet not leeſing or diminiſhing the habite of his godhead. By reaſon whereof, both he became an inferiour, and remained alſo an equall with God the father; beeing yet but one, though, as is before affirmed, of two natures. Howbeit, one in reſpect of the worde, whereby is meant his godhead, and another in reſpect of his manhood. For, in reſpect of the word, or his deitie, hee is equall with his father; and in reſpect of his manhood, inferior to the father. The onely ſonne of God, and yet alſo the ſonne of man: the onely ſonne of man, and yet the ſame alſo the ſonne of God: beeing not two ſonnes vnto God, as he

is God and man, but the ſole &c onely ſonne of God, our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, beeing God without all beginning, and man with a beginning.
            
            
               CHAP. 36.
               
                  It was not vpon any merit of mā, no not of the manhood which was in Christ himſelfe, that he was made man.
               
               THe mercy of God, in this Chapter, is by it ſelfe moſt highly and euidently extolled. For, what deſerued the humane nature which was in the man Chriſt, that it ſhould be ſpecially choſen to bee vnited in the perſon of the onely begotten ſonne of God? What will to doe well, what deuotion or zeale to any good intent, or what precedencie of good works whereby this man deſerued to be vnited to the perſon of God? And, was he firſt a man, and this ſingular benefit ordained for him,

that hee ſhould of himſelfe tie God vnto him by ſome ſpeciall deſert? For, from the time that hee was made man by the aſſumption of the fleſh, he began to be none other thing, than the onely ſonne of God; and that alſo in reſpect of the Godhead, which was the worde, by the aſſumption whereof he was made fleſh; that is to ſay, man as well as he was God: that euen as euery man is but one in perſon, though hee conſiſt of two parts, that is to ſay, the reaſonable ſoule, and the fleſh: ſo was Chriſt but one perſon, beeing both the worde, and alſo man. To what other ende then was this ſo great glory, freely (no doubt) beſtowed vpon mākind, without any merits precedent▪ but onely to giue euident demonſtration and teſtimony of Gods great and only mercy in this vnion, to ſuch as looke into the ſame truely, and with good conſideration: that all mortall

creatures may vnderſtand, they be iuſtified from their ſins, by the ſame mercy & fauour, by which it was wrought and came to paſſe, that the man Chriſt could not bee polluted with ſinne. In which manner, the angell ſaluted his mother, when hee brought her tidings of this birth which followed; ſaying. Haile, full of grace. And a little after he ſaith, Thou haſt found fauour in Gods ſight. Which two ſayings, of beeing filled with grace, and finding fauour in Gods ſight, doe import, that ſhe ſhould not only become the mother of him that was her Lord and Sauiour, but alſo of the Lord and Sauiour of all mankinde. And of Chriſt himſelfe, Iohn the Euangeliſt ſaith, And the worde was made fleſh, and dwelled in vs: and we ſawe, ſaid he, his glory, beeing the glory of the only begottē of his father, full of grace & verity. Wherin it is to be obſerued, that where hee ſaith, that the word

was made fleſh, that was to ſay, full of grace. And wher he ſaith, the glory of the onely begotten of the Father; that is to ſay, fulneſſe of veritie or truth. For truth it was, that he was the only ſonne of God, not by grace, but by nature. And, of meere fauour and grace hee tooke vpon him the manhood, and that in ſuch an vnitie or coniunction of the perſon, as he himſelfe alſo became the ſonne of man.
            
         
         
            TOVCHING CHRISTS Incarnation. CHAP. 37.
            
               CHAP. 37.
               
                  Now, by the manner of his conception, wee are to vnderſtand, that the word did through grace onely, and not through any merit of his humanitie, aſſume and put vpon him the body of man, vniting the ſame vnto him.
               
               
                  
NOw therfore, the ſelfe ſame Ieſus Chriſt, the onely begotten ſonne of God, that is to ſay, our onely Lord, was borne of the holy Ghoſt, and the virgin Marie. And on the other ſide, the holy Ghoſt is of the gift of God; which gift alſo, is equall with the giuer. By which reaſon, the holy Ghoſt is God, not inferior either to the father, or to the ſonne. Whereupon it is to be inferred, that ſeeing the birth of Chriſt touching his man-kinde, is to be imputed to the influence of the holy ghoſt, what other thing is demonſtrated therin, than the meere grace of God? For, when the virgin demanded of the Angel, how it ſhould come to paſſe which hee told her, becauſe ſhee did not carnally knowe any man? the Angel anſwered, The holy ghoſt ſhall repleniſh thee, and the power of the higheſt ſhall ouerſhadowe thee: and therefore that holy one which ſhall be borne of thee, ſhall

be called the ſonne of God. And, whereas Ioſeph would haue put her away, accounting her to bee an adultereſſe, becauſe he knew ſhee was not with child by him, hee receiued this anſwer from the angell, Bee not afraid to retaine Marie as thy wife ſtill: for, that which is borne or conceiued in her (that is to ſay, that which thou ſuſpecteſt to bee begotten by another body) is of the holy Ghoſt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 38.
               
                  That Chriſt is neither the ſonne of the holy Ghoſt, no yet begotten or conceiued by him, as by a naturall father.
               
               ARe wee yet therefore to affirme, that the holy Ghoſt is father vnto Chriſt, as he is man, as namely, that God the father begot the word, and the holy Ghoſt his humanity; of which ſubſtances, Chriſt beeing vnited & made one, is by that reasō on the one ſide, the ſon of the father,

in that he is the word, and on the other ſide, the ſonne of the holy Ghoſt, as he is man; as though the holy Ghoſt, as it were his father, did beget him of the virgin his mother? Who dare be ſo bold, as to auouch this? neither is it needful by argument or diſputation to declare, what other abſurdities doe followe hereof; ſeeing this one aſſertion is ſo abſurd in it ſelfe, as the eares of the faithfull cannot indure to heare it. Therefore, as it is in the Creed, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt beeing God of God, and man begottē of Mary the virgin and the holy Ghost, conſisting of either ſubstance, that is to ſay, both diuine and humane, is notwithstanding, the onely begotten ſon of God the father, from whome the holy. Ghoſt doth proceed. How then doe we ſay that Chriſt was borne of the H. ghoſt, if the holy Ghoſt did not beget him? or is it ſo ſaid, becauſe he made him? The reaſon is, becauſe as Ieſus

Chriſt is God, all things were of his creation; but, as hee was man, he himſelfe was created & made, according to the ſaying of the Apoſtle, For, he was made of the ſeed of Dauid according to the fleſh. But, ſeeing the whole Trinitie did create and make that creature, which the virgin did conceiue and bring forth, tho appertaining and adioyned to the perſon of the ſonne (for the workes of the Trinitie be inſeparable) why is the holy ghoſt onely named in the making of this creature? Is it becauſe, whē one of theſe three bee named in any one worke, that the whole Trinitie is aſſiſtant in that work? It is euen ſo, and may be made plaine vnto vs by example or demonſtration. Howbeit, wee muſt no
                     •
                   any longer ſtand vpon this point. For, it remaineth, that wee declare how it is ſaid, that he was borne of the holy Ghoſt, beeing no way the ſonne of one ſame holy Ghoſt. For, no more

may the world, without impietie, be called the ſonne of God, becauſe God made the ſame; neither elſe, that it was borne of him: but rather, wee may rightly ſay, that it was made, or created, or builded, or ordained by him; or vſe wordes of the like ſenſe. Seeing therefore wee doe confeſſe, that hee was borne of the holy Ghoſt, and the virgin Marie, it is a matter of great difficultie to diſcuſſe, how he ſhould not bee the ſonne of the holy Ghoſt, but the ſonne of the virgin Mary; notwithſtanding, that hee was begotten both of the one, and of the other. Without all doubt he was not borne of him, as of a father, though hee were ſo of her, as of a mother.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 39.
               
                  Not euery thing that is ſaid to be borne of any thing, may properly be called the ſonne of that it is ſaid to be borne of.
               
               IT is not therefore to be granted, that whatſoeuer is borne of any thing, it ſhould ſtraightway bee called the ſonne of the ſelfe ſame thing. For, to omit other inſtances, the begetting of a ſonne by a man, is after one manner, and the growing of the haire of a mans head, the breeding of a lowſe, and of a worme in mans body, is after another ſort; not any of which kinds is to be tearmed a ſonne. Therfore, to ſpeak no more of theſe (becauſe it is vnſeemly to compare them with a thing of ſo diuine a nature) they verely, which be born of water, and the holy Ghoſt, no man can properly call them the ſonnes of the water, but be truely

called the ſonns of God, & of the Church their mother. In like manner therefore is Chriſt, beeing begotten of the holy Ghoſt, the ſonne of God the father, and not of the holy Ghoſt. For that alſo, which we haue ſpoken touching the haire of the head, and the reſt, maketh onely for this purpoſe, to let vs to vnderſtand, that not euery thing begotten of any mās body, may conſequētly bee called the ſonne of him, of whom hee is ſo borne, no more than it followeth, that all they which be called the ſons of any perſon, muſt therefore of neceſſitie be begottē of the ſame perſon, whoſe ſonns they be called; ſuch as be they which be adopted ſonnes. Againe, ſome be called the ſons of Gehenna, or hell, not becauſe hell was their father, or begot them; but becauſe they be prepared for that place: Much like to them which be called the ſons of Gods kingdome, becauſe they are prepared for the ſame.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 40.
               
                  In that Christ is ſaid to be borne of the holy Ghoſt, is meant, that man in like manner, by the meere grace of God (which is called the holy Ghoſt) and the word of God, is partaker of the diuine nature, and vnited or ingrafted into the perſon of Chriſt.
               
               SEing therefore, ſomething may bee borne of any creature, and yet not ſo, as it needs muſt bee his ſonne: Neither on the other ſide, euery one which is called a ſonne, muſt neceſſarily be the naturall childe of that perſon, whoſe ſonne hee is called; Then, without all doubt, this maner of generation, wherby Chriſt was borne of the holy Ghoſt, not as it were his ſonne, and yet as it were the ſonne of the virgin Mary, doth couertly conuaie into vs the grace of

God, whereby man, without any workes or merits precedent, in his firſt conception or generation, whereby he had his beeing, is ſo vnited to the word, and the diuine nature, in the vnitie of the perſon of Chriſt, as that conſequently one and the ſame creature ſhould be the ſonne of God, which was the ſonne of man; and likewiſe the ſonne of man, beeing Gods childe. By which incarnation or aſſumption of humane nature in Chriſt, the grace of God ſhould be after a ſort naturall to that man which was the childe of God, the ſame being incapable of ſinne: which grace, was in that regard to bee expreſſed vnder the name or title of the holy Ghoſt; Becauſe he is ſo properly God, that alſo hee may bee called the gift of God. Whereof to ſpeake ſufficiently, were too tedious in diſcourſe.
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING REGEneration, and the parts thereof.
            
               CHAP. 41.
               
                  That Chriſt was without original ſinne, and that he was that ſacrifice for our ſinnes, by the which wee were reconciled to God.
               
               HEe therefore, beeing not ingendred or conceiued by any pleaſure of carnall concupiſcence, (and therefore not infected with any originall ſinne) & alſo by the grace of God beeing, in reſpect of the vnitie of his perſon, by a wonderfull and vnſpeakable meanes annexed and conioyned to the worde, which was the onely begotten ſonne of God, not by grace, but by nature (and therefore no actuall ſinner himſelfe) yet was hee notwithſtanding, in reſpect of the

ſimilitude of ſinfull fleſh wherin he came, called a ſinner, or ſin, beeing to become a ſacrifice for ſatisfaction of ſinnes: Which ſacrifice or oblation he truely became, whereof other ſacrifices, performed in the old law, were but ſhadowes. Hereupon, after the Apoſtle had ſaid, Let vs beg reconciliation or attonement with God, for his Christs ſake; he forth-with addeth this, affirming, That God, for our ſakes, made him to become ſinne, who was of himſelfe blameleſſe, and without ſin, that through him we ſhould be righteous in Gods ſight. He ſaith not, as it is reade in certaine vitious books, He that knew no ſinne, becam ſinful for our ſakes; as thogh Chriſt in regard of vs, ſhould commit ſin: But he ſaith, That man which knew no ſinne, which was Chriſt, was made ſin by God, to whome wee were to be reconciled: that is to ſay, was made an oblation or ſacrifice for ſinnes, wherby that attonement

ſhould be wrought. He therfore was made a ſinner, that wee might be righteous. Yet is hee not our righteouſnes, but Gods: neither yet righteouſnes in regard of vs, but in reſpect of himſelfe: like as he gaue demonſtration that he was ſinne, not of his owne nature, but of ours: not in himſelfe, but in reſpect of vs, put vpon him in the ſimilitude of ſinnefull fleſh, wherein he ſuffered, and was crucified. That although there dwell no ſinne in him, yet ſhould hee after a ſort die vnto ſinne, in that death which hee ſuffered of the fleſh, wherein there was a reſemblāce of ſin. And, for that hee was not an ancient tranſgreſſor with Adam, hee doth by his new reſurrection, declare or prefigure our reſtitution to life, from that olde death, wherein wee were dead through ſinne.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 42.
               
                  That our death and reſurrection by Chriſt, is ſealed in the ſacrament of Baptiſme.
               
               THis is that great ſacrament of Baptiſme, which is celebrated in vs, to the ende that all they which be capable of grace, are made dead vnto ſinne; becauſe his fleſh beeing the ſimilitude of ſinne, ſuffered the death: and ſo ſhall they alſo be renewed in their liues by baptiſme, euen as Chriſt was raiſed from death to life, out of the ſepulchre, of whatſoeuer age they ſhall happen to bee at the time of their baptiſme.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 43.
               
                  That all ſinnes, as well of infants as olde men, which be baptized, be waſhed away in baptiſme.
               
               AS no man therefore, from the new borne babe, to the moſt aged creature, is to be excluded from baptiſme; ſo is none again which dieth not vnto ſinne through baptiſme. Howbeit, infants doe onely die vnto originall ſinne; and they which bee olde, doe die vnto all ſuch ſinnes as by euill life they haue added to originall ſinne, deriued from Adam in their natiuitie.
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING ORIGInall and actuall ſinne.
            
               CHAP. 44.
               
                  Vnder the name of that word Sin in the ſingular number, many ſinnes be many times included: and ſo againe, vnder the appellation of many ſinnes, one particular ſinne is comprehended.
               
               THey be therefore moſt commonly ſaid to bee dead vnto ſinne, when as yet without all queſtion, they be dead to many, nay to all manner of ſins which they haue particularly committed, either in thought, word, or deed: Becauſe the ſingular number doth moſt commonly imply the plurall; As for example, it is ſaid of that verſe of Virgil touching the horſe of wood broght into Troy;
               
               
                  
                  Vterum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      armato milite complent,
                  With Souldier arm'd they fill'd his belly full;
               
               Albeit the ſame was repleate with many ſouldiers. And in the Booke of Numbers it is written, Beſeech therefore the Lord that he will take from vs the Serpent, he ſaith not the Serpents, wherewith the people were afflicted; meaning by one, infinit ſerpents like vnto that one. And ſo on the other ſide, is that one originall ſinne included in the plurall number (when wee ſay that infants be baptized to the remiſſion of ſinnes, and not to the remiſſion of ſinne) wherein the ſpeech is inuerted or contrarily vſed; as whereby the ſingular number is ſignified by the plurall: Like as it is ſpoken at Herod in the Goſpel, when he was dead, they are dead which ſought the life of the childe; It was not ſaid, he is dead. So likewiſe in Exodus, they made (ſaid he) vnto

themſelues golden gods: whereas indeed they made but one calfe alone, whereof it is ſpoken, O Iſrael theſe bee thy gods, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. In which place the plurall is put for the ſingular.
            
            
               CHAP. 45.
               
                  That in the firſt ſinne of man, which is called Originall, there be diuers kindes of ſinne included, and not one alone.
               
               HOwbeit, in that one ſinne, which by one man entred into the world, and paſſed thorough all mankind, & for which alſo infants be baptized, many ſinnes may be vnderſtood, if the ſame were ſeuered and diuided (as it were) into his members. For pride is there alſo to bee found; becauſe man loued rather to bee ſubiect to himſelfe, than to the will of God. Sacriledge alſo, is to be aſcribed vnto

man becauſe he beleeued not. And homicide alſo, becauſe hee threw humſelfe downe vnto death. As alſo ſpirituall fornication, becauſe the integritie of mans will was corrupted by the perſwaſion of the ſerpent. And likewiſe theft, becauſe hee did eate of the forbidden meate. Auarice alſo, becauſe hee deſired more thā might haue contented him. And ſo of any ſin beſides: which, vpon more diligent examination, may be found or gathered out of this actuall or committed ſinne.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 46.
               
                  That infants be not onely guiltie of the ſinnes of their gift father's, that is to ſay, Adam and Eue; but of their owne, and the ſinnes of their immediate parents added to originall ſinne. That therefore regeneration is neceſſarie for them, becauſe that generation or of
                        〈…〉
                      is 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               IT is alſo not impropably ſaid, that ininfants ſtand-found for their fathers faults, not onely of the firſt parents Adam & Eue, but alſo of their owne fathers, from whom they did naturally deſcend. For, that text of holy ſcripture, where it is ſaid, I will lay the ſinnes of the fathers vpon the children, doth make them liable to that 
                     〈◊〉
                   alwaies, before ſuch time as by regeneration they beginne to haue a
                     •
                   neereſt in the new Teſtamēt:

which Teſtament was propheſied in the ſaying of Ezechiel, that children ſhould not beare the burthen of their fathers iniquities, Neither yet, that that Proverbe ſhould bee more vſed in Iſrael affirming, the fathers haue eaten ſower grapes, and the childrens 
                        •
                     ecth were ſet on edge. Euery one therfore is to be borne anew, whether he may be freed from that ſinne, wherein he was borne. For, the ſinnes which hee afterwards committed by euill life, may be ſalued by repentāce, whereof we haue viſible examples after baptiſme. By which reaſon recreation was ordained for none other coūſel, but becauſe our generation is vicious; inſomuch as the man which is borne in pure wedlooke may ſay, I am conceived in iniquities, and my mother hath borne 
                        〈◊〉
                      with my ſinne while I was 
                        〈◊〉
                      wombe. In which place hee hath not ſay, I was conceiued in iniquitie and ſinne, which hee might

very well haue ſaid: but hee had rather ſay, in iniquities and ſinns; becauſe, both in that one ſinne, which hath infected all mankinde (and is ſo great, as thereby the whole nature of man was conſequently changed, & made ſubiect vnto death, as I haue formerly maintained by reaſon) Many other be included, and other alſo committed by parents: which albeit they cannot alter or confound nature, as originall (ſin doth; yet do they by imputation make the childrē anſwerable for the ſame, except the free mercy & grace of God do helpe to make ſatisfaction.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 47.
               
                  It is a matter left vncertaine, whether all the ſinnes of forefathers, as well actuall as originall, be extended to poſteritie, and to how many deſcents they be conuaied.
               
               BVt now as touching the ſins of the Parents, wherein (from Adam, to euery mans own father, beeing their progenetors) euery child doth ſucceed his father: It is a diſputable queſtiō, & that not without cauſe, whether the childe that is borne, ſhall be guiltie both of actuall and originall ſinnes of all his anceſtors, whereby euery one, the later he is borne, the greater ſinner hee ſhall be borne? or, whether God doth therefore threaten poſteritie with reuenge for the ſinnes of their parents, vnto the third and fourth generation, becauſe hee doeth not extend his wrath

any further vpon the children for their fathers faults), ſtaying his proceedings therein by his owne mercy loſt they vpon whom the benefit or grace of regeneration is not beſtowed, ſhould bee preſſed downe with too heauie a burthen in their euerlaſting damnation, if or neceſſitie they ſhould be capable, euen from their cradle, or their forefathers ſinnes originally, and puniſhable alſo for the ſame: or whether any other concluſion 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſo great controuerſie, vpon 
                     •
                  ector 
                     〈◊〉
                   and conference of holy ſcriptures, may be found out, or not found out, 
                     〈◊〉
                   not raſhly giue my definitiue ſentence, or reſolute opinion therein.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 48.
               
                  Originall ſinne is by Christ onely aboliſhed.
               
               HOwbeit that one ſin, which beeing 
                     〈…〉
                  ainous in reſpect of the place and ſtate of ſo great felicitie wherein it was committed, as that in offence of one man originally; and (as I may ſay radically, all mankinde was in the ſtate of damnation, is not ſatisfied nor 
                     〈◊〉
                  , but onely by the mediator of God and man, Chriſt Ieſus, who onely was o
                     〈…〉
                   to be borne, as that he had an neede of regeneration or new birth.
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING THE baptizing of Iohn Baptiſt.
            
            
               CHAP. 49.
               
                  That Iohns baptiſme did not waſh away ſins, but was onely a preparatiue to Chriſts baptiſme: & why Chriſt would bee baptized by Iohn.
               
               THey were not therefore regenerate, who were baptized by Iohns baptiſme, wherein 
                     •
                  e himſelfe was alſo baptized: But, they which receiued baptiſme at his hands, were prepared by his fore-running miniſtry, it were, who ſaid, Prepare the way of the Lord, to him onely, by whom onely they bee regenerate. For, his baptiſme was not in water onely, as Iohns was, but alſo in the holy Ghoſt; that by the ſame holy Ghoſt, euery one might be regenerated

which beleeued in Chriſt; of which holy Ghoſt, Chriſt being borne, needed no regeneration. Whereupon, the ſpeech of God the Father vſed vnto him that was baptised, thou art my ſonne, this day haue I begotten thee, doth not only point at that particular day wherein he was baptised, but hath relation alſo to the time of his immutable eternitie, thereby to giue demonſtration that the man Chriſt appertained to the perſon of the onely begotten ſonne. For, whereas that day, neither taketh his beginning from the end of yeſterday, nor endeth at the beginning of to morrow, it is therefore alwaies to day. Hee would therefore be baptized by Iohn in the water, not becauſe any iniquitie that was in him ſhould be therby waſhed away; but that his humility might 
                     〈…〉
                  . So therefore 
                     〈◊〉
                   to paſſe, that baptiſm
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   him that

needed waſhing, no more then death found any cauſe in him worthy puniſhment: that the diuell beeing oppreſſed &c. vanquiſhed by the veritie of his righteouſnes, and not by the force of his power (becauſe hee had moſt vniuſtly ſlaine him, without any deſert of ſinne) hee might iuſtly loſe the intereſt & poſſeſſion, which he had of thoſe which he held as priſoners, for the debt of ſinne. Hee therefore was partaker of both, (that is to ſay, of baptiſme & of death) and that cruely, in regard of Gods fauourable decree, or diſpoſition, it ſhould be ſo, and not vpon any vrgent cauſe to bee pittl
                     •
                  d; but other vpon his pittifull will and diſpoſition to vndergoe the ſame, that que mā might free the worlde of ſinne, euen as one mā brought ſinne into the world; that is to ſay, vpon all mankinde.
            
            
               
               TOVCHING THE death, crucifying, reſurrection, and aſcenſion of Chriſt: is alſo of the fruit following all theſe. CHAP. 50.
               
                  By Chriſt, not onely originall ſin is aboliſhed, but alſo all other ſinnes forgiuen.
               
               ONely this beeing the difference, that one man had brought one ſinne vpon the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and this one man hath taken away, not onely that one ſinne, but alſo all other ſinnes which he found added thereunto. Wherupon the Apoſtle faith, The hurt done by one hauing ſinnes, is not comparable with the benefit
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      which came by one. For, one ſinne pulled vpon vs the iuſtice of God to our condemnation; but his grace or fauour

Iuſtifieth vs from many ſinnes; Becauſe, verely, that one ſinne wherewith wee bee originally ſtained, although, it bee 
                     〈◊〉
                   and but one, maketh euery one ſubiect to damnation; and the grace or mercy of God, on the other ſide, iuſtifieth a man from many ſinnes, who beſides that one, whereof generally and originally hee is Partaker with all mankinde, hath manifoldly ſinned by his owne tranſgreſſion.
            
            
               CHAP. 51.
               
                  All in Adam were damned: but all 
                        〈◊〉
                      Christ, be fraud from this damnation.
               
               HOwbeit, inaſmuch as a little after he ſaith, As 
                     〈◊〉
                   mans tranſgression 
                     〈◊〉
                   the condem
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of all 
                     〈◊〉
                   the righteouſneſſe of one man was wrought the 
                     ••
                  ſtificatione of all, It doth plainly declare, that there were none

of Adam 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , but ſonnes of damnation: and none on the other ſide deliuered from damnation except he were borne againe with Chriſt.
            
            
               CHAP. 52.
               
                  That baptiſme beeing in or the ſimilitude both of Chriſt death, and his reſurrection, doth euidently declare, that all which be baptized, as well infants, as they which bee at mans eſate, doe die to ſinne in Christ, and in him alſo doe riſe againe to newneſſe and holineſſe of life.
               
               AFter he had ſaid as much as he thought ſufficient for his Epiſtle, touching the puniſhment brought vpon vs by one man, and the fauour by another, he doth conſequently commād vnto vs the wonderful myſterie or holy baptiſme therby to make vs kn
                     •
                  w, that baptiſme in Chriſt is none other thing, than a ſimilitude

of Chriſts death, and on the other ſide, that the death of Chriſt, is nothing elſe but a reſemblance of the remiſſion of ſinne, that, as he died indeed, ſo are our ſinnes truely forgiuen: & as his reſurrection was certaine, ſo is our iùſtification. For hee ſaith, What therefore ſhall we ſay? ſhall we remaine in ſin that grace may abound? For he had ſaid before, where ſinne did abound grace did ſuper abound. Whereupon hee propounded vnto himſelfe this queſtion, Whether in reſpect of the aboundance of grace to bee expected; we are to abide in ſinne Whereunto he anſwereth, God forbid. And hee laieth downe a reaſon, ſaying, If wee be dead to ſinne, howe ſhall we liue therein? Afterwardes, to ſhewe that we were dead to ſinne, he ſaith, Doe yee not knowe the ſame, in as much as: all wee which bee baptized in Chriſt Ieſu, 
                        〈◊〉
                      baptized in his death? One of which text, if wee bee taught, that wee

are dead vnto ſin, becauſe we are baptized in Chriſts death; then vndoubtedly bee infants dead vnto ſinne, which be baptized in Chriſt, becauſe they be baptized in his death. For, it is ſpoken without exception of any, Whoſoeuer therefore wee be which bee baptized in Chriſt, wee are baptized in his death. For, to what ſinne doe infants die by regeneration, but to that which they conceiued in their birth and generation? By which reaſon, that which followeth doeth belong alſo vnto infants, where it is ſaid, Wee are buried with him by baptiſme, into his death, that 
                        〈◊〉
                      Chriſt choſe from the dead by the glory of the f
                        〈…〉
                     n, ſo wee ſhould walke in newneſſe of 
                        〈◊〉
                     . For, if we be fellow plants in the reſemblance of his death, euen ſo ſhould we bee in the like cale of his reſurrection; beeing aſſured thereof, becauſe the old man in
                     〈…〉
                   with Chriſt, that the bo
                     〈…〉
                   ſinne might be

extinguiſhed, whereby wee might bee no longer the ſet
                     ••
                  ts of ſinne. For, hee that dead, is iuſtified from ſinne, or 
                     〈◊〉
                   no ſinne. And, in caſe wee 
                     〈◊〉
                   with Chriſt, we beleeue we 
                     〈◊〉
                   alſo liue with him; beeing aſſulred thereof, becauſe, Chriſt, riſing from death, doeth not now die for euer, and that death alſo had no further power ouer him. For, in that he died to ſinne, hee died but once; and in that he liueth, hee liueth vnto God. In like manner, thinke you that you are dead to ſinne, and yet liuing to God in Chriſt Ieſus. Out of this doctrine he began to proue that wee ought not to perſiſt in ſinne, that grace might abound, ſaying, If wee bee dead to ſinne, how ſhall we liue in it? And to ſhew that we are dead to ſinne, he addeth, ſaying, Doe yee not know, that whoſoeuer we be which be baptized in Chriſt Ieſu, we be baptized in his death? He therefore concluded that place as hee

began: for in ſuch ſord he ſpecifieth the death of Chriſt, that he pronounceth Chriſt died vnto ſinne. And to what other ſinne did he 
                     〈◊〉
                  , but to ſinne of the fleſh, wherein 
                     〈◊〉
                   as no ſinne, but a ſimilitude onely or 
                     〈◊〉
                   and therfore he calleth it by the name of ſinne? Hee ſaith therefore vnto thoſe which be baptized in Chriſt death (wherein not onely men, but alſo infants me baptized) for alſo we yowe that is to ſon, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Chriſt; ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                   alſo to thinke, than yee art dead vnto ſinne, liuing alſo vnto God in Chriſt Ieſu.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 53.
               
                  That the crucifying of Christ, his buriall, reſurrection, aſcenſion into heauen, and ſitting at the right hand of his father, doe demonſtrate what the life of a Chriſtian ought to bee in this world.
               
               WHat ſoeuer therefore was actually performed in the crucifying of Chriſt, in his buriall, reſurrection the third day, aſcenſion into heauen, and ſitting at the right hand of his father, was done to that ende, that the life of a Chriſtian, acted vpon this terreſtriall ſtage, ſhould reſemble theſe actions of Chriſt, which were not myſtically performed, onely by relation, but actually indeede ſuffered. For, as touching his croſſe, it is ſaide to thoſe which will follow him therein, They which be Chriſts, haue crucified their fleſh with their ſins & concupiſcences.
                  
And, as touching his buriall it is ſaid, Wee are alſo buried with Chriſt, by Baptiſme, into his death. Alſo, concerning his reſurrection, That, as Chriſt did riſe againe from the dead by the glory of his father, euen ſo wee ſhould liue in neweneſſe of life. And, as touching his aſcenſion into heauen, and ſitting at the right hand of his father, If ye be riſen againe with Chriſt, ſeeke thoſe things which bee aboue, where Chriſt is ſitting on the right hand of God. Seeke after celeſtiall things, and not terreſtriall. For, ye are already dead, and your life laid vp with Chriſt in God.
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING THE laſt day of Iudgement.
            
               CHAP. 54.
               
                  That article touching the ſecond comming of Chriſt, and the day of iudgement, concerneth euerlaſting life and ſaluation.
               
               NOw, as touching that part of our Creede, which concerneth Chriſt, inaſmuch as hee is to come downe from heauen, to iudge both the quicke & the dead, that matter is not pertinent to our life in this world, becauſe it was no part of his actions formerly done, but of things to be performed in the ende of the world. For, it doth concerne vs ſo 
                     •
                  arre, as it agreeth with that ſaying vſed by the Apoſtle afterwards, When Chriſt your life ſhall appeare, then ſhall ye alſo appeare with him in glory.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. 55.
               
                  The ſignification of theſe wordes, Liuing, and Dead.
               
               CHriſts Comming, to iudge the quicke and dead, may be taken two waies; as namely, whether we will vnderſtand the liuing to be thoſe, whom his ſecond comming ſhall find in this world, not then dead, but ſtill liuing in the fleſh: As alſo, that the dead ſignifie thoſe which either are dead, or ſhall die before his comming▪ or els, that the righteous are thoſe liuing, and the vnrighteous thoſe dead; becauſe the vnrighteous ſhall alſo be iudged. For, ſometimes Gods iudgements are taken in y• worſt ſenſe. Whereupon it is ſaid, Becauſe they haue liued wickedly, they ſhall riſe to their condemnation. And ſometimes againe, it is taken in good part, according to that ſaying, Saue me, O God,

for thy names ſake, and iudge me in thy ſtrength. For, through that iudgement of God, there is a ſeparation of the good from the euill; that the good, being to be diuided from the euil and the deſtruction incident to thē, may bee ſelected to ſit at the right hand of God. For which cauſe Dauid cryed out, Giue ſentence with me O God: and in the ſame verſ. to expound himſelf he ſaith, and defend my cauſe againſt the vngodly people.
               
            
         
         
            TOVCHING THE Holy Ghoſt and the Church.
            
               CHAP. 56.
               
                  That the Trinitie might be compleat, that article in the Creede is added, touching the H. ghoſt: after which conſequently & in a moſt conuen
                        •
                     ent order, is remembred the Church: becauſe, that is the Temple and houſe of

the Trinitie, that is to ſay of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt.
               
               NOw that wee haue ſpoken of Ieſus Chriſt, the onely ſonne of God, our Lord and Sauiour, as it is briefly laide down in our Creede; Wee are conſequently ſo to beleeue in the holy Ghoſt, that thereby the Trinitie may be complete, which is God. Afterwardes, the holy Church is to bee ſpoken of. Whereby we are to vnderſtand, that the reaſonable Creature, being a Citizen of that free Citie Ieruſalem, after commemoration of the Creator, which is the eternall Trinitie, ſhould bee put downe. Becauſe, whatſoeuer hath beene ſaid of the man
                     •
                   Chriſt doth appertaine to the vnitie of the perſon of the onely begotten. Therefore, to follow the direct rule of the Creede, it requireth, that the Trinitie may haue a Church, as an inhabitant

his houſe, God his Temple, and the builder his owne Citie. All which laied together, is in this place to be vnderſtood, not onely of that part which wandreth in this world, from the Sunne riſing, till the ſetting of the ſame, prayſing the name of the Lord, as alſo after this worldly peregrination is finiſhed, which ſingeth that newe ſong mentioned in the Apocalips: But alſo is meant of that Church, which, ſithence the fabrication thereof, cleaued alwayes vnto God, and neuer felt the puniſhment of her falling from God. This part, conſiſting of the holy Angels, remaineth happie, and is aſſiſtant to that part, which is militant vpon earth, as it ought to do: Becauſe both parts, ſhall be one in that eternall coniunction: and is now one in the Bonde of charitie; All being ordained to worſhip God. And therefore, neither this vniuerſall Church, not any part thereof, will generally

or particularly be worſhipped for, or as a God; neither yet bee a God vnto any perſon which is a member of Gods Church: the ſame being compoſed of the Gods, which the God (not made) doth make. By which reaſon the holy Ghoſt, if it were a Creature, and not a Creatour; ſhould, no doubt, haue beene a Creature indued with reaſon. For, hee ſhould haue beene the chiefeſt Creature; & by that reaſon he ſhould not haue beene preferred before the Church in that Article of our faith: Becauſe hee ſhould haue beene a branch of that Church, in reſpect of that part thereof, which inhabiteth the heauens. Neither ſhould he bee prouided of a Temple or Church, but rather ſhould haue been a Church himſelfe. But he hath a Church; wherof the Apoſtle made mention: ſaying, Are yee ignorant, that your bodies be the Temple of 
                        ••
                     e holy Ghoſt which is in you,

being giuen vnto you by God? Of whome hee ſpake in another place: ſaying, Knowe yee not, that your bodies are the members of Chriſt? How then commeth it to paſſe, that he ſhould not be a God, or inferiour to Chriſt, whoſe members that Church cōtaineth, who in this ſort hath his Temple? For, neither is his Church one thing, and Gods Church another; when as the ſelfe ſame Apoſtle ſaith, Knowe yee not that yee are the Temple of the Lord? For confirmation whereof hee further affirmeth; and the ſpirit of God dwelleth in vs. God therefore dwelleth in his Church: and not the holy Ghoſt alone, but the father alſo, and the Sonne, who ſaith of his bodie (by which he is made the head of the church inſtituted amongſt men vpon earth, wherby he houldeth the pri
                     〈…〉
                  acie ouer all) Destroy this temple, and I will builde it vp againe in three dayes. Gods Temple therefore,

is none other than the holy Church ordained for the whole and higheſt Trinitie, being that vniuerſall Church which is both in heauen and on earth.
            
         
         
            TOVCHING GOOD ANGELS.
            
               CHAP. 57.
               
                  That the ſtate of the Church in Heauen is permanent and certaine.
               
               BVt as touching that Church which is in heauen, what may we ſay of it? otherwiſe, then that there is not any one bad member therein: and that, there neither hath beene any that 
                     •
                  ell, or was like to fall from the ſame ſithence that time that God ſpared not the Angells that treſpaſſed, as Peter, the Apoſtle writeth; but caſting thē into chaines of infernall darkeneſſe, deliuered

them to be kept to receiue puniſhment in the day of Iudgement.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 58.
               
                  It is vncertaine whether there be be any ſuperioritie or differēces amongſt the Angels. Alſo, ſome things there be which may breede argument and queſtion concerning the Stars and Planets.
               
               HOw it is in that bleſſed and heauenly ſocietie, and what differences of perſons there bee there, as wherein albeit all of that number are called as it were by that generall name of Angels (according as wee reade in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, For to whom of the Angels hath God at any time ſaid, Sit on my right hand? whereby, hee comprehended all vnder that vniuerſall name of Angels) yet notwithſtanding that there ſhould bee ſome in that place that were called Arch-angels: and whether

thoſe Arch-angels were called powers, whereupon that ſaying was grounded where it is ſaid, Praiſe him all his Angels, prayſe him all his Powers: as though hee ſhould haue ſaide, Prayſe him all his Angels, prayſe him all his Arch-angels: As alſo what difference there is amongſt thoſe fower appellatiōs, vnder which the Apoſtle ſeemeth to comprehend that vniuerſal ſocietie in heauen (ſaying, Whether the Thrones, whether the Kingdomes, whether the principalities, whether the Powers) Let them ſay that can, if yet they proue that which they ſay: yet wil I acknowledge mine ignorance in all theſe things. Neither can I certainly ſay, whether the Sunne, the Moone, and al the Planets may be ſaid to be of that heauenly ſocietie, albeit they ſeeme vnto ſome to bee onely lightſome bodies, voyd of ſenſe and vnderſtanding.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 59.
               
                  It is a matter without perill, to be ignoraunt how, and in what manner the bleſſed Angels doe ſpeake vnto vs, or appeare vnto vs, either in our ſleepe, or waking.
               
               AGaine, who can expreſſe in what ſhapes or formes of bodies, Angels do appeare vnto mortal Creatures; whereby they are not onely ſeene, but touched and felt: and likewiſe how, not by any ſolide Corpulencie or firme ſubſtance, but rather ſpirituall power, they do preſent, not to our bodily eyes, but to our ſpirits and mindes, certaine viſions and apparitions: or whether they ſpeake any thing, not to the outward eare, but rather inwardly; thēſelues hauing inward poſſeſſion in the minde of man: as it is written in the booke of the Prophets; And the Angell

tould me, which ſpake in me: hee doth not ſay, that ſpake vnto me, but in me; Or whether they do appeare in dreames, & ſpeake vnto vs, (for wee haue in the Goſpell, this text; Behould, the Angell of the Lord appeared vnto him in his dreame, ſaying): By theſe meanes, Angells, do as it were, themſelues declare, that they haue no bodies that are to be felt: Making thereby a verie doubtfull queſtion, how the fathers of olde time waſhed their feete, and in what manner Iacob wreſtled with the Angell, grappling with him ſo hard as he did. When theſe laſt and firſt queſtions bee propounded, euery one coniecturing thereof according to his reach and capacitie; mens wittes bee therein not vnprofitably exerciſed, if theſe queſtions be ſoberly diſputed, and the erroneous iudgements of ſuch ſuſpended, which ſuppoſe they knowe that which they vnderſtand not. For, what neceſſitie

is there, that theſe, and ſuch like things ſhould either be affirmed or denied, or yet diſcuſſed with daunger? ſeeing, without perill, they may be vnknowen.
            
            
               CHAP. 60.
               
                  Wee are chiefly to take heede, leaſt Satan deceiue vs, who putteth on the ſimilitude of an Angell of light.
               
               VVE haue more neede, to iudge and diſcern when Satan doth transforme himſelfe into an Angell of light: leaſt, by deceiuing vs, hee ſeduce vs to ſome pernicious errors. For, when hee deceiueth the bodily ſenſes, and doth not peruert the minde in matter of truth, and veritie, thē is there no daunger for matter of religion. Or when, in the coū
                  terfeit ſhew of goodneſſe, hee doth, or ſpeaketh thoſe thinges, which are correſpondent with

good Angels, although in this caſe hee is beleeued to be good: yet is this errour nothing pernicious to Chriſtian faith. But, when by theſe ſhewes of good borrowed from others, hee beginneth to drawe vs to thoſe euills, which are his owne; then, and in ſuch caſe to deſcry him, and not to follow him, is a matter greatly, and needfully, to bee looked vnto. But, how is euery man apt of himſelfe, to eſchue all his deadly eleceipts, except God be his guide, & protectour? The difficultie whereof is profitable to this ende, leſt any man preſume too much of himſelfe, or one man depend too much vpon another; but that euerie one ſhould repoſe his hope and helpe in God. Which to do, none of the godly, certainely, make any doubt, but that it is our better courſe by much.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 61.
               
                  That the Church militant vpon the earth, conſiſteth of the faithfull liuing in this world: which alſo is redeemed by Chriſtes blood, and vnder his protection.
               
               THis part of the Church therfore, conſiſting of the Angels, and powers of God, ſhall then, as it is, be knowen vnto vs when wee are vnited thereunto, in the laten day, to dwell together in eternall felicitie. Wherfore, this Church, which is farre diſtant from that by reaſon of her peregrmation vpon earth, is the better knowen vnto vs, in that wee be in the ſame; and becauſe alſo, it conſiſteth of mortall Creatures, which wee are. And this Church is freed from al ſinne, by the blood of the Mediator, who was without ſinne; and therefore ſhe vſeth this confident

ſpeach; If God bee with vs, who can bee againſt vs? Which God, ſpared not his onely ſonne, but gaue him for vs generally. For, Chriſt ſuffered not for Angels: Howbeit, whatſoeuer freedome, and deliuerie from deſtruction mankinde receiued by his death, is therefore auaileable for Angels alſo; becauſe hee is likewiſe after a ſort reconciled vnto them after thoſe differences, whereof ſinne was the cauſe, between men and holy Angels: as alſo, for that the number that was impaired by the fall of the Angels, was repaired by the redemption of mankind.
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING OVR Reconciliation and Peace with the holy Angells.
            
               CHAP. 62.
               
                  That all things bee reſtored by the blood and death of Chriſt: and that thereby, the bleſſed Angels, and faithfull amongſt men, be reconciled.
               
               IN like manner, the holy Angels doe knowe, being taught by God (through the eternall contemplation of whoſe truth, they are made happie) what an infinite ſupply the ſanctitie of that Citie exſpecteth from mankinde. Whereupon, the Apoſtle ſaith, All things are repaired in Chriſt, which were decayed, either in heauen, or in earth. For, as touching the ruine in heauenly things, all was made whole againe by Chriſt: in as much,

as whatſoeuer member was wā
                  ting in heauen, by the fall of the Angels, was reſtored out of the inhabitants vpon earth. And, on the other ſide, they which liue vpon the earth, are reſtored to integritie: whereas mortall creatures, predeſtinate to eternall ſaluation, be renewed, hauing put off their auncient corruption. And ſo, by that ſole ſacrifice, wherein the Mediator was offered vp, (whereof, the manifold ſacrifices vſed in the old lawe were but figures) there was an attonement made betweene celeſtiall and terreſtiall; earthly and heauenly things, or creatures; Becauſe, as the ſame Apoſtle ſaith, In him it pleaſed the fulneſſe of the Trinitie to dwell, and through him to reconcile all things to himſelfe, by his bloodſhed vniting whatſoeuer either in heauen, or vpon earth, in the bond of peace.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. 63.
               
                  That peace, is the fruit of this reconciliation; which peace with God, is alwayes aboue our vnderſtanding: and that alſo which we haue with the good Angels, is a thing whereof wee are not capable in this life; although in that to come, wee ſhall vnderſtand the ſame.
               
               THis peace paſſeth (as it is written) all vnderſtanding: neither can it be knowen of vs vntill wee come where it is. For, peace is alwayes in that place & ioyntly amongſt all intellectuall Creatures, as alſo with the Creator therof. Which peace paſſeth (as is ſaid) all vnderſtanding, particularly ours, not theirs which alwayes ſee the face of the Father. For, wee mortall Creatures, notwithſtanding we haue all the vnderſtanding that man can haue, yet do we know

but in parte: our ſight in this world being obſcurely by a glaſſe. But, when wee ſhall bee aſſociates to the Angels of God; Then, euen as they, ſhall we alſo behould thoſe things face to face, and beare as charitable an affection towards them as they do to vs, becauſe we ſhall loue them as much as they do vs. And ſo ſhall their loue towards vs be made knowne vnto vs, becauſe ours ſhall bee ſuch, and as great towards them: Neither, ſhall it then paſſe our vnderſtanding. But the peace, or loue of God which is in heauen towards thē, ſhall, without all doubt, exceede both theirs, and our vnderſtanding. For, by God, the reaſonable Creature which is bleſſed, is made happie: and not God by the Creature. Which being ſo, it followeth vpon that which hath beene ſaid, that that ſaying, The peace of God, which paſſeth all vnderſtanding, is taken in the better ſenſe; when, in that

hee ſaith, all, no, not the vnderſtanding of the holy Angells, may bee exempted, but onely Gods. For, his owne peace, or loue paſſeth not his owne vnderſtanding.
            
         
         
            TOVCHING REMISſion of ſinnes and Iuſtification.
            
               CHAP. 64.
               
                  That remiſsion of ſinnes is neceſſarie to all the godly: becauſe, although many of them liue without fault in action, yet not without ſinne.
               
               NOw, when as our ſinnes be pardoned, then be the holy Angels reconciled vnto vs, and at peace with vs. Therfore, after memorie made of the Church, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes followeth the ſame, as it is ſet downe in the order of the Creede. For, vpon this foundation ſtandeth

the Church, which is vpō earth. By this alſo that is not loſt, which was loſt and found againe. For, ſet a-part the gift of Baptiſme; which was beſtowed to redeeme originall ſinne (whereby, that which was vitious in our firſt birth, might bee taken away by our ſecond birth or regeneration, freeing vs alſo from al offences cōmitted in thought, word, or deede, which it meeteth with) This great indulgencie therefore, I ſay, excepted (from whence mans renouation hath his beginning) and by which indulgencie
                     •
                  al guiltineſſe or imputation of ſinne, as well originall as actuall, is ſatisfied: yet the reſt of mans life, after ſuch time as hee hath vſe or reaſon, howſoeuer it excell in fruitfulneſſe of good workes, cannot run on his courſe in this world, without remiſſion of ſinnes; becauſe the children of GOD, ſo long as theyliue in the fleſh, haue conflict with death. And, albeit,

it is truely ſaid of them, that as many as be led by the ſpirit of God, be the ſonnes of God: yet, are they ſo prouoked by the ſpirit of God, and as the children of God learne to become his, as that alſo, (chiefly through the burthen of the bodie, being corrupted) euen by the weakeneſſe of their owne ſpirit, and as they are the children of men, are they imperfect in themſelues & ſinnefull, by reaſon of certaine humane motions: wherin there is a difference, as hath beene ſufficiently ſaid thereof. For, it followeth not, that becauſe euerie crime is a ſinne; therefore euery ſinne ſhould be a crime. Wherfore we ſay, that the life of godly men in this world, wherein they liue, may bee found to bee without crime; but, if we ſhould ſay, without ſinne, wee deceiue our ſelues, and there is no truth in vs, as the holy Apoſtle ſaith.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 65.
               
                  Wee are not to deſpaire of any ſinner in the Church, in reſpect of the benefitte of penance left thereunto: Howbeit, the ſolemne and ſet times, appointed for thoſe which are to do open penance in the Church, were ordained to a good ende.
               
               NEither are they to deſpaire of the mercie of God in the remiſſion of their ſinnes, be they neuer ſo great, in his holy Church, which performe penance according to the qualitie of the ſin, which euery one particularly committeth. And, in the dooing of penance, when the fact committed, is of that qualitie as the offender is cut off from the body of Chriſt; in ſuch a caſe, the meaſure or limitation of time is not ſo much to be reſpected, as the ſorrow and griefe of the offender. For, God doth

notdeſpiſe an heart that is contrite and humbled. But becauſe, for the moſt part, one man doth not knowe the ſorrowe of another mans heart, the ſame not being made apparant to other men, either by wordes or other kind of demonſtration, becauſe it is onely knowen to him to whom it is ſaid, My mourning is not hidden from thee; Times therefore of penance were well appointed by thoſe which beare authoritie in the Church, that the Church might be ſatisfied, in the which ſuch ſinnes are committed. For, out of the Church there is no remiſſion of ſins: Becauſe the Church moſt properly retaineth the holy Ghoſt for an earneſt, without whome no ſinnes be forgiuen: in ſo much, as whoſoeuer be abſolued therby, ſuch be made partakers of euerlaſting life.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 66.
               
                  That the force and effect of remiſſion of ſinnes, as alſo the puniſhment of our ſins, is rather found and felt in the world to come, then in this world.
               
               FOr, Remiſſion of ſinnes is ordained chiefly in reſpect of the day of iudgement which is to come. For, in this life that ſaying of Eccleſiaſticus, falleth out to bee true; That there is an heauie yoak vpon the ſonnes of Adam, from the day of their comming out of their mothers woombe, vntill the day of their burial into the earth, the mother of all mankind; inſomuch, as wee ſee that infants, after their baptiſme, bee tormented with the affliction of many euills. Whereby we may learne, that whatſoeuer is accompliſhed by the ſacraments for our ſaluation, is rather to giue vs hope of future

ioyes, then hould or adeption of preſent felicities. For, in this life many ſinnes ſeeme to be pardoned and not reuenged by any correction, but their puniſhments reſerued till the later day (which is not vainely as it is properly called the day of iudgement, wherein the iudge of the quicke and the dead, ſhall appeare): Euen as on the contrary, many ſins bee reuenged in this world, and not withſtanding they be here not forgiuen, ſhal not ſtand vp againſt vs in the world to come. Wherfore touching certaine of thoſe temporall puniſhments which bee inflicted in this life vpō ſinners, to thoſe whoſe faults are forgiuen, the Apoſtle ſaith, For, if we would iudge our ſelues, wee ſhould not be iudged by God. But, when wee are indged, wee are chaſtned of the Lord, becauſe we ſhould not be cō
                     demned with the world.
               
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING PVRGArie Fire.
            
               CHAP. 67.
               
                  To thoſe that liue wickedly in this world, neither faith doth auaile any thing, neither doth there remaine for them any fier of purgatorie to purifie them from their ſinnes after this life.
               
               CErtaine there be which beleeue, that they which renounce not the name of Chriſt, & are baptized in his baptiſme in the Church, being not cut off from the Church by any ſchiſme or hereſie, ſhall be ſaued by fier, whatſoeuer ſinnes they commit in this life, although they neither put them away by repentance, nor yet redeeme them by almes deedes, but obſtinately continue in them vntill the laſt day of their life vpō earth: Howbeit, that, in reſpect of the greatneſſe

of ſuch horrible and execrable ſinnes they ſhall not bee puniſhed with an euerlaſting fier, but with a fier that laſteth long. But they which be of this beleefe, and yet beare the name of Catholickes, bee deceiued in mine opinion, through a kinde of humane charitie or good will. For, if wee aske counſell of the holy ſcripture in that point, it giueth an other reſolution thereof. And, for mine owne part, I haue written a booke touching this queſtion, intitled, Of faith, and workes: Wherein I did demonſtrate, according to the holy ſcriptures, ſo well as I could by Gods aſſiſtance, that that faith did worke ſaluation. Which Paul the Apoſtle moſt plainly expreſſeth ſaying, For in Ieſus Chriſt, neither circumciſion auaileth any thing neither vncircumciſion, but faith; which worketh by loue. Againe, in in caſe it worke wickedly and not well, truely according to

                  Iames the Apoſtle, that faith is dead in it ſelf; who ſaith againe, If any ſayth hee hath faith, when hee hath no workes, can the faith ſaue him? Now, if a wicked man ſhall bee ſaued by fier through faith alone, & that it is to be taken on that ſort which the bleſſed Apoſtle Paul ſaith, But hee ſhall be ſafe himſelfe; neuertheleſſe yet as it were by fier: then conſequently may faith ſaue without workes, and that bee falſe which his fellow Apoſtle Iames formerly affirmed. And that alſo ſhall bee vntrue which Paul alſo himſelfe deliuereth in an other place, ſaying, Be not deceiued: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor theeues, nor couetous perſons, nor railers, nor drunkards, nor extortioners, ſhall inherite the kingdome of God. For, in caſe they ſhall bee ſaued, by faith, notwithſtanding their perſeuerance in theſe ſinnes, how then ſhall

they not bee partakers of the kingdome of God?
            
            
               CHAP. 68.
               
                  What theſe words of Paul do ſignifie, that the fier ſhall trie the qualitie of euery mans worke.
               
               BVt foraſmuch, as theſe moſt manifeſt & euident teſtimonies of the Apoſtle cannot bee falſe, that which is darkely ſpoken of them which build vpon that foundation (which is Chriſt) not goulde, nor ſiluer, nor pretious ſtones; but wood, graſſe, and ſtubble (for of thoſe it is ſaide, that they ſhall bee ſaued by fire, becauſe they ſhall not periſh euerlaſtingly by reaſon of the merit of Chriſt their foundation) is ſo to bee vnderſtoode, as theſe thinges precedent, being apparantly ſo in the letter, there bee not any thing contradictorie to the ſame.

For, wood, graſſe, and ſtubble may not abſurdly bee taken for ſuch loue of worldly things, although lawfully giuen vs to vſe, as that wee cannot yet loſe thē without anguiſh of minde. For, when as ſorrow is a fier which inwardely burneth: if then Chriſt be layde as a foundation in our heart, that is to ſay, that nothing bee preferred by vs, before the loue of him, and that the man burning inwardly with ſuch ſorrowe, had rather want the thinges hee ſo much affecteth, than Chriſt, this man is ſaued by the fier. But on the contrarie, If hee had rather houlde theſe temporall and earthly things in time of temptation, then Chriſt, then had hee not him for his foundation, in as much as hee preferred them before Chriſt; the foundation being the firſt thing that is to bee layed in any building. For, fier, whereof Paul the Apoſtle ſpake in that

place, ought to be taken for ſuch a thing, as thorow which, both theſe parties which are to bee tried, muſt paſſe: that is to ſay, as well as he which buildeth gold, ſiluer & pretious ſtones vpō this foundation, as hee which buildeth wood, graſſe, and ſtubble vpon the ſame. For, after hee had deliuered this doctrine, he addeth thereunto this ſaying, The fier ſhall trie euerie mans worke of what ſort it is. If any mans worke, that hee hath built vpon, abide, hee ſhall receiue wages. If any mans worke burne, hee ſhall loſe, but hee ſhall bee ſafe himſelfe: nouertheleſſe yet as it were by the fier. The fier therefore ſhall trie, not one, but both their works. For fier is the touchſtone of tribulation: whereof in another place it is plainely ſayd, That the fornace tryeth the potters veſſell, and tribulation tryeth the righteous. This fier while wee are in the fleſh, hath this effect which the Apoſtle ſpake of:

ſaying, If it happē vnto two which be faithfull, the one whereof hath his minde fixed vppon celeſtiall things, thinking how to pleaſe God, that is to ſay building vpon Chriſt his foundation, golde, ſiluer, and pretious ſtones: and the other hath his thoughts vpon worldly things, ſtudying how to pleaſe his wife, that is to ſay building vppon the ſame foundation wodde, graſſe, & ſtubble; The firſt mans labour burneth not, becauſe hee ſet not his fancie vpon thoſe things, the loſſe wherof might grieue him. But the other mans labour burneth, becauſe the loſſe of thoſe things is greeuous, which are poſſeſſed with pleaſure and delectation. Howbeit, in either of theſe two caſes, foraſmuch as, the partie thus tried, had rather loſe worldly delectation then Chriſt, and doth not forſake Chriſt vppon any feare to loſe thoſe tranſitorie things albeit it grieue him to part with them, hee ſaueth himſelfe no

doubt therein, and yet as it were by fier: Becauſe the griefe of the loſſe of things which he loued, doth burne him, but it doth not ouerthrowe or conſume him, being fortified with a foundation that is permanent and euerlaſting.
            
            
               CHAP. 69.
               
                  That all this diſputation of purgatorie fier, is doubtfull, and the fier it ſelfe auaileable to fewe.
               
               THat ſuch a thing may bee after this life, is not incredible; the matter being queſtionable whether it be ſo indeed: as alſo that it may bee found out, or concealed, how diuers of the faithfull bee ſo much the later, or ſooner ſaued by a certaine purgatorie fier, by how much the more or leſſe they loue theſe tranſitorie goods: beeing notwithſtandinge not of that ſorte of whome it is

written, that they ſhall not inherit the kingdome of God, vnleſſe their ſinnes be forgiuen, as competent petitioners: I ſay competent, meaning that they ſhould not be barren in almes deedes; Wherevnto the Scripture doth attribute ſo much honor, as the Lord affirmeth, that he will impute the fruitfulneſſe therof onely to thoſe which ſtand on his right hand: vpbraiding them with barrenneſſe of ſuch fruite, which ſtand on his left hand, When he ſhall ſay vnto the firſt ſort, Come ye bleſſed of my father and receiue the Kingdome of God; and to the ſecond ſort, Goe yee into euerlaſting fier.
               
               
                  
                  Animaduerſions vpon the 69. Chap.
                  
                     That ſuch a thing may be after this life, is not incredible: the matter being queſtionable, whether it be ſo indeed, &c.
                  
                  
                     BIſhop Iewell, in his apologie alleageth this place, and diuers others out of Saint Auguſtine, ſhewing that ſometime hee ſaieth, there is ſuch a certain place; ſometime denieth not, but there may be ſuch a one: ſometime he doubteth; ſometime againe he vtterly denyeth there is any at all, & thinketh that men are therein deceiued by a certaine naturall good will they beare their friends departed. Out of which variable aſſertions, hee gathereth verie concludently, that Saint Auguſtine tooke this matter of Purgatorie fier, neither for an Article of the Chriſtian faith (for thereof it had not beene lawfull for him to doubt) nor for

any tradition of the Apoſtles. Let no man therefore bee led by this place to beleeue any ſuch fabulous doctrine.
                  
               
            
         
         
            TOVCHING ALMES DEEDES.
            
               CHAP. 70.
               
                  Wee may not take a libertie to ſin, preſuming of almes deedes.
               
               TRuely, wee muſt take heede leaſt any man do thinke, that thoſe enormious crimes, the doers whereof ſhall not inherite the kingdome of heauen, may bee dayly committed, and dayly redeemed with almes deedes. For, our life is to be amended, and God to be made propitious vnto vs for our ſinnes paſt in regard of almes deedes, and not as it were hired therunto, wherby wee may purchaſe a libertie to ſinne without puniſhment. For God hath not giuen to anie

man the raines to ſin (although in this worlde hee pardoneth ſinnes alreadie done through his owne mercie) in caſe there bee a neglect of conuenient ſatisfaction.
            
            
               CHAP. 71.
               
                  That light or ſmall ſinnes obtaine pardon at Gods hands by ſaying of the Lords prayer 
                        ••
                     ds alſo that it is an almes deede, if any man forgiue his brothers offence.
               
               THe dayly prayer of the faithfull maketh ſatisfaction for dayly and ſmall ſinnes, without which this life is not ledde. Wherfore it properly belongeth to them to ſay, Our father which art in heauen, which are regenerated to ſuch a father by water and the holy Ghoſt. This prayer doth whollye procure remiſſion of ſmall and daylye ſinnes: and it blotteth out

all thoſe treſpaſſes, which the life of the faithfull, wickedly ſpent, but reformed by repentance, doth forſake; in caſe, as it is truely ſaid, forgiue vs our ſins (becauſe there is no want of ſins in vs to be forgiuen) ſo, on the other ſide it be as truely and vnfainedly ſaid, as we forgiue them which treſpaſſe againſt vs, that is to ſay, that that bee fulfilled which is deſired: Becauſe it is almes to forgiue a man that aſketh pardon.
               
                  Animaduerſions vpon the 71. Chap.
                  
                     The dayly prayer of the faithful, maketh ſatisfaction for dayly and ſmall ſinnes, &c.
                  
                  
                     THis Chapter ſeemeth a little to leane vnto the doctrine of Ueniall ſins: But, Danaeus (commenting vpon this very place) doth diſcuſſe and clear that doubt: ſaying, that by a figuratiue kinde of

ſpeaking, that thing is attributed here, to the effect of prayer, which belongeth onely to the paſſion of Chriſt; whoſe blood is the expiation, and cauſe of remiſſion, both of light and heauy ſinnes. For, praier is the waie and meanes, directed by Chriſt himſelfe, to obteine our petitions of God, ſaying in the ſeauenth of Mathew, Ask and it ſhall be giuen you. Which attribute of prayer, is much like vnto the Merchant, who, if hee haue made a proſperous voyage, or aduenture, vſeth to ſaie, that he hath been enriched by that his voyage or aduenture. Finally, Danaeus doth cite a comparatiue ſpeech of auntient Fathers, who affirmed that great ſinnes were to bee done away by penance, and ſmall offences by iteration or daily ſaying of the Lords Praier: leſt any man ſhould take a liberty to ſinne, hearing that enormious ſinnes might be redeemed by penance; or on the other ſide, ſhould bee terrified and driuen to deſpair

if he were inioyned penance for euery ſmall fault and inſirmitie. Prayer therefore maketh way to the remiſſion of both theſe degrees of ſinnes, by the blood of Chriſt alone, howſoeuer the diſcipline of the Church teacheth vs to knowe, how to obtaine forgiueneſſe in either kinde. Let not therefore this Chapter preiudice Saint Auguſtine, in that point of doctrine, nor peruert any other therein.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. 72.
               
                  There bee many kindes of almes: howbeit that beſt, whereby we pardon our brother whē he hath offended vs.
               
               BY this it appeareth, that that ſaying vttered by the Lord, Giue almes, and all things ſhall bee cleane vnto you, reacheth to all good actions done out

or mercie and compaſſion that is profitable. For, not onelie hee which giueth meate vnto the hungrie, drinke vnto the thirſtie, apparell vnto the naked, harbour vnto the harbourleſſe, a place of refuge to the perſecuted, to the ſicke or priſoner viſitation, helpe to the weak, conduct to the blinde, comfort to the mourner, phyſicke to the ſicke, direct
                     •
                  ō to him that is out of the way, counſaile to him that doubteth, and to euery one in want that which he needeth; But alſo hee which forgiueth him who hath offended him, giueth almes: yea, and hee who by ſtripes amendeth him ouer whom hee hath authoritie, or reformeth him by any diſcipline, and yet notwithſtanding forgiueth him with all his heart the treſpaſſe of him, whereby he was either damaged, or offended, or els praieth that it may be forgiue him, He doth not onely perform an almes deed in y• he pardoneth

and prayeth withall, but alſo in that he correcteth, or inflicteth ſome puniſhmēt that reformeth, becauſe therein he doth a deede of mercy. For, there bee many good offices done vnto men againſt their wills, where their good is ſought, and their owne liking not regarded, becauſe they are found to bee their own enemies. And they in verie deed become rather their friendes, whom they take to be their enemies. Through which errour they render euil for good: wheras a Chriſtian ought not to render euill for euill. There be therfore many kinds of almes, the performance whereof helpeth vs in the remiſſion of our owne ſinnes.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 73.
               
                  That euerie Chriſtian ought to be ſuch a proficient, as that he can frame himſelfe to loue his very enemies.
               
               BVt, there is nothing of greater excellencie than that charitie, whereby wee forgiue from out hart that treſpaſſe which any other man hath done vnto vs. For it is not ſo great a matter to bee kinde or liberall towardes him who hath done thee no harme; But it is a more notable thing and effect of an heroicall diſpoſition, to loue thine enemie alſo, and for thine owne part alwayes to wiſh well and to do wel, when thou maiſt, to him which wiſheth euill vnto thee, and would harme thee if hee could; giuing eare vnto Chriſtes ſaying, Loue your enemies, bee good vnto them which hate you, and pray for them which

perſecute you. But becauſe theſe things be onely in the power of the perfect ſonnes of God to performe (to the attainement of which perfection euerie faithful perſon ought to extend his vttermoſt indeuour, and by praying vnto God, ſtriuing with himſelf, & perſwaſion to bring his minde to that affection) yet, becauſe this ſo great a vertue, is not intertained by ſo great a multitude, as wee may beleeue are heard in that part of the Lords prayer, where it is ſaide, Forgiue vs our treſpaſſes, as wee alſo forgiue our debters: without all doubt the words of this promiſe bee fulfilled, if a man which is not as yet of that perfection, as he can vpon the ſodain loue his enemy; yet, when hee is intreated by one that hath treſpaſſed againſt him to forgiue him, doth vnfainedly and from his heart forgiue him, being led by the ſame reaſon that hee would in like manner bee forgiuen himſelfe

being a petitioner to God when hee prayeth and ſayth, Euē as we forgiue our debters: That is to ſay, So forgiue vs our debts, when wee our ſelues do aske remiſſion thereof, as wee forgiue our debters, when they deſire the ſame.
            
            
               CHAP. 74.
               
                  They which forgiue not other men the treſpaſſes done vnto them, do not obtaine pardon at Gods hand in the like caſe.
               
               NOw againe he that prayeth that man to forgiue him whom hee hath offended, being inwardly ſtirred vp to that motion vpon a remorſe of the offence or wrong he hath done him, ſuch a perſon is not now to bee accounted for an enemy, ſo as it ſhould bee as harde a matter to loue him in this caſe as it was whē he was a profeſſed

enemie: And whoſoeuer doth not vnfainedly forgiue another man, which ſeeketh peace, the iniurie he hath done him, being penitēt for the ſame, let him not think by any meanes to find remiſſion of his owne ſinnes at Gods hands; becauſe truth cannot lie. For, how can it be vnknowne vnto any that heareth, or readeth the Goſpell, who it is that pronounceth this ſaying, I am the truth? who, after that he had taught vs a forme of prayer, doth exceedingly cōmend that ſentence in the ſame prayer, ſaying; For, if you doe forgiue men their treſpaſſes, your heauenly father will alſo forgiue you your offenſes. Hee that is not awaked with ſo great a thunderclap, is not aſleepe, but rather dead and yet is it able to raiſe vp the dead.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 75.
               
                  That almes doth neither profite infidels, nor thoſe which obſtinately continue in ſinfull life.
               
               TRuely, they which liue moſt wickedly, & will not amend ſuch a life and ſo bad conditions, and in the midſt of their higheſt offences and execrable ſinnes, ceaſe not to multiply their almes deedes, they do vainely flatter themſelues, preſuming of that which the lord ſpeaketh, ſaying, Giue almes; & behould, all things ſhall be made cleane vnto you. For they do not vnderſtand how far this ſaying is to bee extended. But, to the end they may vnderſtand it, let thē harken to whom it was ſpoken. For, it is written in the Goſpell, that a phariſie deſired Chriſt as hee was ſpeaking, that hee would dine with him: and Chriſt, being within his houſe, ſet him down to dinner.

Now the Phariſie began to ſay within himſelfe, wherfore did hee not waſh before dinner? And the Lord ſaid vnto him, Yee Phariſies doe make cleane the outſide of the Cuppe and diſh, but that which is within you, is full of rapine and iniquitie. Yee fooles, did not hee which made the outſide, make the inſide alſo? Howbeit, of your ſuperfluitie giue almes, & all things ſhall be made cleane vnto you. Are we ſo to vnderſtand this ſaying, as that all things were cleane vnto the Phariſies becauſe they gaue almes, as theſe ſinnefull perſons before ſpoken of, thinke they are to do, albeit the Phariſies beleeued not in the Goſpell, nor in Chriſt, neither were regenerate by water, and the holy Ghoſt? And ſeeing all creatures bee vncleane, whom the faith of Chriſt doth not purifie, thereupon was that ſaying, Purifying their harts by faith. Alſo the Apoſtle ſaith, Ther is nothing pure to them that

are defiled and vnbeleeuing, but euen their minde and conſciences are defiled. How therfore ſhould all things be pure vnto the Phariſies, though they gaue almes, and were without faith? Or how could they haue faith, if they refuſed to beleeue in Chriſt, and to be borne anewe by his ſpirit? And yet is it true which they haue heard, Giue almes, and all thinges ſhall be made cleane vnto you.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 76.
               
                  That is the beſt almes amongſt all others, if any man haue compaſsion of his own ſinnefull life, to the ende hee may amend the ſame, and pleaſe God.
               
               NOw, he that will giue almes according to the rule of Gods word, muſt begin at himſelfe, and beſtowe the ſame firſt vpon himſelfe. For, almes is a worke of mercie, that ſaying being

agreeable to that definition, Thou that ſeekeſt to pleaſe God, haue pity vpō thine owne ſoule. For this cauſe are we regenerate, to the end wee might pleaſe God; that ſin worthily diſpleaſing him, where with we were infected in our firſt birth. This is the firſt kind of almes, which we beſtow vpō ourſelues, in as much as we haue reclaimed our ſelues being ſinners by the mercy of God, hauing pity vpon vs; acknowledging the iuſtice of his iudgement wherby wee were become miſerable: of whom the Apoſtle meāt ſaying, The iudgement of one was on al to condēnation: yeelding him thāks for his exceeding loue, whereof he ſpeaketh himſelfe being the trumpet of his own mercy, God himſelf cōmending his loue towards vs; becauſe whē we were ſinners, Chriſt died for vs; that alſo we, truly ſentecing our miſerable eſtate, & honouring Gods mercy towards vs, might leade a godly and vertuous life. Which

iudgmēt & loue of God becauſe the Phariſies regarded not (yet had they tithes of the leaſt kind of fruits in reſpect of the almes which they gaue) Therefore gaue they not almes, beginning therwith at thēſelues, towards whom they ſhould firſt of al haue beene mercifull: in regard of which order of affectiō it is ſaid, thou ſhalt loue thy neighbor as thy ſelf. Whē therfore he had reproued thē becauſe they waſhed themſelues in the outward part, & were inward ly ful of rapine & iniquity, giuing them to vnderſtād that ther was a kinde of almes firſt to be miniſtred to themſelues, & that they ought to purifie the inward man howbeit ſaith he, giue almes & behold, al things ſhall be pure to you: afterwards, to declare vnto them what he exhorted and what they neglected to do, leaſt they ſhuld thinke that their almes was vnknowen vnto him, hee ſayeth, Woe bee vnto yee Phariſies: as though hee ſhould haue ſayde, I

did exhort yee indeede to giue almes whereby all things ſhould bee made cleane vnto you. But woe bee vnto you which tythe mynte and anniſeedes and euery kinde of herbe; for I know theſe almes which yee giue (whereunto I would not haue yee to thinke that mine exhortation tended): But ye vtterly neglect the iudgement & mercy of God, by which kinde of almes ye might be purified of all inwarde pollution, your bodies alſo made clean, which yee waſh outwardly. For, this is the meaning of all things, that is to ſay, both things inwarde and outwarde as it is written in other places, Make cleane thoſe things which be within, and thoſe things which be outward ſhall be alſo cleane. But leaſt hee ſhould ſeeme to refuſe theſe almes which are yeelded out of the fruites of the earth; theſe things, ſaith hee, which I haue formerly mentioned ought yee to do, and yet not to omit the others:

that is to ſay, the tythes and the fruites of the earth.
            
            
               CHAP. 77.
               
                  This true almes which wee giue to our ſelues in amending our wicked liues, & that which we giue to others, be not of our ſelues, but of Gods gift.
               
               LEt them not therfore deceiue thēſelues, which, by the moſt liberall almes giuen either out of their fruites or out of their purſe, doe thinke to purchaſe impunity of themſelues, continuing ſtill in the ſauage crueltie of heynous offences and wickedneſſe of enormious crimes. For, they doe not onely commit theſe ſinnes, but take ſuch delite therein, as they wiſh alwayes to continue in the ſame, if they could, without puniſhment. But hee that loueth iniquitie hateth his owne ſoule: and he that hateth his own ſoule, is not mercifull, but cruell.

For, in louing the ſame as concerning the world, hee hateth it as touching God. If therefore he would giue almes vnto himſelfe, whereby all things might be cleane to himſelfe, he ſhould hate the ſame as touching the world, and loue it according to God. No man therefore giueth any kinde of almes, but to enable himſelfe to giue, hee firſt receiueth it from him that wanteth not: and therefore it is ſaid, His mercie ſhall pardon me.
               
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING THE varietie of ſinnes.
            
               CHAP. 78.
               
                  That certaine things ſeeme little in reſpect of the kinde and qualitie thereof: which are ſinnes notwithſtanding, albeit reputed in the number of leſſer ſinnes.
               
               IT reſteth in the iudgement of God, and not of man, to determin of ſins, which of them be little, & which be great. For we ſee that certain things were permitted by the Apoſtles thēſelues by way of pardō; as was that which venerable Paul ſaith vnto man and wife, Defraude not one another except it be with conſent for a time, that ye may giue your ſelues to prayer, & againe come togither that Satan tempt you not for your incontinencie. It might be thought not to be a ſin for a man

to haue carnall knowledge with his wife vpon any other motion then to beget children (which is the good of matrimonie) but for carnall pleaſure, that therby the weakeneſſe of thoſe which cannot liue chaſtly might auoyd the deadly ſin of fornication, adulterie, or any other kinde of vncleā
                  neſſes (too filthie to bee vttered, and whereunto luſt may inforce vs through the tentatîon of Sathan) therfore might be thought not to be a ſinne as I ſaide, but that he addeth afterwardes, This I ſay of fauour and not of commā
                     dement. Who now denieth it to be a ſinne, when as the authority of the Apoſtle confeſſeth that they are to haue toleratiō which do the ſame? It is alſo of the like nature where it is ſaid, Dare any of you hauing buſineſſe with an other, be in aged vnder the vniuſt, & not rather vnder the Saints? And a little afterwards, If then yee haue iudgement of things pertaining to this life, ſet vp them to

iudge which are leaſt eſteemed in the Church. I ſpeake it to your ſhame; Is, it ſo that there is not a wiſe man among you, no not one that ſhall be able to iudge between his brethren? But brother goeth to lawe with brother, and that vnder the vnbeleeuers? For, there it may be thought, that to haue ſued one againſt another, were no ſinne: but becauſe hee would haue his cauſe iudged out of the Church, therfore in the proſecution of that matter, he ſaith further, Now, therfore there is vtterly a fault amongſt you, becauſe yee goe to lawe one with another. And, leſt any man ſhould excuſe this ſinne in this ſort: ſaying, that he hath iuſt occaſion to goe in law in ſuffering a wrong which hee ſeeketh to auoide by the ſentence of ſuch as ſet in place of authoritie; by and by hee meeteth with ſuch ſurmiſes, and excuſes: ſaying, Why rather ſufferre not wrong? Why rather ſuffer yee not barned? To come to

that again which the Lord ſpeaketh, ſaying, If any man will ſue thee at the law to take away thy cloake, let him haue thy coat alſo. And in another place hee ſayeth, Hee that taketh from thee thoſe things which be thine, doe not ſeek them againe. Hee therefore forbad thoſe which were his, to goe to law with other men for worldly things. Out of which doctrin the Apoſtle ſaith that it is ſin to ſue: Howbeit, when hee ſuffreth ſuch trials of lawe to paſſe betweene brethren, brethren being iudges, but vehemently forbiddeth the ſame out of the Church; It appeareth here, what by leaue may be granted to the weak. In reſpect whereof, and of the like ſins, with others though leſſe then theſe committed through offences growing out of our owne words or thoughts (The Apoſtle Iames ſaying and confeſſing for in many thinges wee all affend) It is neceſſarie that wee dayly and often pray (vnto

the Lord, ſaying, Forgiue vs our treſpaſſes: not lying in that which followeth, as wee forgiue them which treſpaſſe againſt vs.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 79.
               
                  The ſcripture condemneth many thinges, which men would not thinke to bee ſinnes, but that the word of God doth admoniſh vs thereof.
               
               THere be certain ſinnes, which might be thoughtto be of no regard, but that by the ſciptures they are denounced to be greater then the world taketh them to bee. For, who would thinke that a man which calleth his brother Foole, ſhould be guiltie of hell fier, but that the Trueth it ſelfe affirmeth as much? Howbeit, preſently afterwardes hee giueth a ſalue for that ſore, giuing there with a

precept howe to reconcile thy ſelfe to thy brother. For, by and by afterwards he ſaith, If therfore thou doſt make oblation of thy gift vnto the Altar, and thy ſelfe there remembring that thy brother haue ought againſt thee, &c. Or, who would thinke it ſo great a ſinne to obſerue daies & months and yeares and times, as they do which will or will not begin any thing vpon certain dayes or monenthes, or in certain yeares (becauſe according to the vaine and ſuperſtitious doctrine of ſome, times be held to be luckie or vnlucky) vnleſſe the feare of the Apoſtle made vs dreadfull of the greatneſſe of this euill, ſaying to ſuch perſons, I feare lest I haue laboured in vaine amongſt you.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. 80.
               
                  Certaine ſinnes againe, which bee verie great and fearefull, are, through vſe and cuſtome, helde light.
               
               HEreupō it commeth to paſſe, that ſinnes, although they be great and horrible, yet through a cuſtome of committing them, they are taken to bee verie ſmall ones, or nothing at all: in ſo much as men are ſo farre from concealing them, as it is their glorie to make them knowen, & memorable to the world; Becauſe as it is written, The ſinner is commended in the wicked deſires of his owne heart: and he that dot
                        〈…〉
                      ill, doth therein bleſſe himſelfe. Such a kinde of ſinne is called in holy ſcripture by the title of iniquitie and clamor; according to that place of Iſa
                        •
                     , the Prophet 
                     •
                  ouching the barraine vyneyard, I 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                  
                     •
                  aith he, that it ſhould

haue done iuſtice, but it did iniuſtice: and did not that which was right, but that which gaue cauſe of clamor and exclamation. W
                     •
                  ereunto that which is ſaid in Geneſis, doth agree. The complaint or cry of the people of Sodom and Gomorah is increaſed, becauſe not onely thoſe heinous ſinnes which raigned amongſt them, were vnpuniſhed, but alſo were openly and vſually committed, as though they had a warrant therein by law. Euen ſo in theſe our times, as many euils, though not of like qualitie, are grow
                     •
                  n to bee as viſible and common; in ſo much, as wee neither dare excommunicate any of the Laitie, nor yet degrade a clergy man for the ſame. Whereupon, when I did certaine yeares paſt, expound the Epiſtle to the Galatians in that place, where the Apoſtle ſaith, I feare leſt that I haue laboured in vain amongſt you, I was by that occaſion forced to cry
                     •
                   o
                     •
                  t, Woe to thoſe ſinnes amongst

men which are ſimply of thēſelues moſt fearefull vnto vs before wee ſee them in exāple; yet afterwards being vulgar and vſuall (for the purgation whereof the blood of the ſonne of God was ſhed) although they become ſo great and heynous, as they cauſe the kingdome of God to be viterly ſhut vp against thē, yet are we inforced by ſeeing them often, to tolerate them generally, and by oft toleration, to become ſinners alſo our ſelues in many of them. But would to God, O Lord, wee were not tranſgreſſors our ſelues in all thoſe ſinnes which we cannot reſtraine in others. But now wil I weigh my words whether the vehemencie of my griefe hath drawen me to ſay ſomething that may bring me into queſtion.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 81.
               
                  There be two cauſes of ſinne, that is to ſay, ignorance and weakeneſſe, or frailtie as he calleth it, or rather obſtinacie. Of the firſt, which is ignorance, we are called ſinners: of the other (called weakeneſſe or obſtinacie) wee are ſaid to be trangreſſors.
               
               I will now, or in this place, affirme that, which, no doubt, I haue often deliuered in other places of my workes, that wee ſinne two wayes: As, either in not ſeeing what we ſhould do, or elſe in omitting to doe that which we ſee ought to be done. Of which two ſorts of ſinning, the firſt is imputed to the euill of ignorance, the ſecond to the euill of weakeneſſe or frailtie of our nature. Againſt which euils, we ought indeede to ſtriue; howbeit we are no doubt ſubdued & vanquiſhed except the grace of

God do aſſiſt vs, that we do not onely ſee what we ought to do, but alſo through the recouerie of our affection loſt, our delite in righteouſneſſe may ouercome the delites of thoſe things, wherin wittingly and ſeeingly wee ſinne, either by deſiring to haue them, or fearing to loſe them: whereby wee are not onely ſinners (which wee were before, when wee ſinned through ignorance) but alſo tranſgreſſors of the law, in as much as we do not that which we knowe we ought to doe, or doe that which wee knowe wee ought not to doe. Wherefore, if wee haue ſinned, wee not onely ſay, for remiſſion of our ſinnes, Forgine vs our treſpaſſes, as wee forgiue them that treſpaſſe againſt vs: But alſo further, for our aſſiſtance and helpe, leſt wee ſhould fall into ſinne, wee ſay in that reſpect, Lead vs not into temptation: Hee being therefore to bee prayed vnto, of whom it is ſaide in the Pſalme,

                  God is my light, and my ſaluation; To the ende his illumination might diſperſe the cloud of our naturall ignorance, and his ſaluation ſupply our infirmitie and weakeneſſe.
            
            
               CHAP. 82.
               
                  That our repentance commeth from God, as well in reſpect of the inward motion thereunto, as of the effect and open confeſſion of our fault.
               
               FOr, repentance it ſelf, when it is to bee performed vpon an vrgent cauſe, according to the maner or cuſtom of the Church, is for the moſt part pretermitted through our own defalt & weaknes; Becauſe, ſhame maketh vs fearefull to bee a ſcorne vnto the world, whileſt we more regarde our reputation amongſt men, than our duetie to God. The conſideration wherof ſhuld humble vs to the performāce of penance.

By which reaſon the mercie of God, is requiſit, not onely in the action of repentance, but alſo to incite and ſtir vs vp therunto. Els would not the Apoſtle haue ſaid of ſome, leaſt perhaps God did not giue them repentance. And the Euangeliſt, foretelling the occaſion why Peter wept ſo bitterly, ſaith, The Lord looked back vpon him.
               
            
         
         
            TOVCHING SINNE againſt the holy Ghoſt.
            
               CHAP. 83.
               
                  That is ſin againſt the holy Ghoſt, when any man doth obſtinately deny, that ther can be no remiſſiō of ſins in the Church of God.
               
               WHoſoeuer therfore, in not beleeuing that ſins are forgiuen in the Church, doth contēn ſo great a liberalitie of Gods gift and endeth his life in that obſtinate minde, is guiltie of that

vnpardonable ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt. Of which intricate queſtion, I haue diſcourſed as conſpicuouſly as I could, in a Booke purpoſely compoſed of that matter.
            
         
         
            TOVCHING THE Reſurrection of the dead.
            
               CHAP. 84.
               
                  All and ſingular perſons of mankinde, which now are borne, or hereafter ſhall be borne, ſhal riſe againe at the later day.
               
               NOw verely touching the reſurrectiō of the fleſh (which is not to be raiſed from death to life againe, as ſome haue beene, and to die againe, but to bemoū
                  ted to eternall life as the fleſh of Chriſt did riſe) is a matter beyond my reach how to handle it briefly, and to diſcuſſe all queſtions

vſually propounded therein. Howbeit, no Chriſtian ought to make doubt of the reſurrection of the fleſh of all men, either liuing, or to be borne, now dead, or hereafter to die.
            
            
               CHAP. 85.
               
                  Touching Children borne before their time, whether they ſhall riſe againe.
               
               HEereupon firſt of all their riſeth a queſtiō touching children borne before their time, which at this preſent are borne in their mothers wombe, howbeit, not in that ripeneſſe and perfection as that they come to a ſecond birth. For, if wee ſhall affirme that they are to riſe againe; then, whatſoeuer is ſaid of thoſe which are complete in forme, may be admitted. But, as touching children borne before their naturall time, and thoſe

without forme or faſhion, who thinketh not that ſuch doe moſt quickly periſh and dye euen as the ſeeds which neuer took root being ſowen? Howbeit, who dare deny (although none dare on the contrary affirme) that the reſurrection will bring to paſſe that whatſoeuer wanted forme ſhall be at that time fulfilled? By which meanes there ſhall not want any perfectiō which might haue growen in time; euen as there ſhall not be on the contratrary any deformities which happened to any by proceſſe of time: ſo as Nature ſhould neither bee defrauded of that which fulneſſe of time might accompliſh in all parts: nor yet bee blemiſhed in that which time had made defectiue or deformed; but that made perfect which was imperfect, & that amended which was deformed or monſtrous.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 86.
               
                  At what time infants beginne to quicken and haue life in their mothers wombe.
               
               BY this occaſion it may be verie doubtfully queſtioned and diſputed amongſt the learned (and yet can I not tell, whether any man can diſcuſſe the trueth therin) at what time a man doth quicken in his mothers wombe? and whether he ſecretly liueth in the ſame, althogh that life which is in him, doth not appeare by any motions or ſtirrings of the creature ſo liuing. For, to denie that infants be deliuered, ſuch as bee cut out by peace meale and caſt foorth of their mothers woombe, leaſt their mothers ſhould alſo periſh if they were left dead in their bodies, it ſeemeth to bee a matter of great impudencie and bouldneſſe. For, at what time ſoeuer a

man beginneth to liue, after that time alſo may he in like manner die. And now being dead, I ſee not in my conceit why he ſhuld not bee included in the number of thoſe which riſe at the later day.
            
            
               CHAP. 87.
               
                  Touching men which be monſters, how they ſhall riſe in the later day.
               
               FOr neither may it be denied that monſters which are ſo borne and do liue afterwards (although they dye preſently after they are borne) ſhall riſe againe; Nor yet are we to beleeue, that they ſhall riſe againe in that deformity they dyed, but rather reformed and amended in that naturall defect. For, farre be it from vs to beleeue, that the Centaure lately borne in the Eaſt parts (of whom both our faithful brethren which ſawe him made report,

and Ierome the Prieſt, memorable for piety, left a record in writing) God forbid I ſay we ſhould thinke, that one man; being in ſhape two, and not rather two (which ſhould haue been, if they had beene twinnes) ſhall riſe againe in thoſe ſeuerall deformities. In like man her, all other humane things (which be called monſters; by reaſon euerie creature ſo borne, haue more or leſſe, or bee more deformed in their creation then they ſhould haue beene) ſhall in the day of their refurrection, bee reduced to the ſhape of humane nature in perfection: in ſo much as all ſoules, particularly, ſhall inioy their proper bodies, no ſuch thinges cleauing vnto them as were coherent and borne with them in their natiuitie; but contrariwiſe euery one particularly being furniſhed with his proper parts and members, whereby the bodie of man may be complete in all perfection.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 88.
               
                  That it is an eaſie matter with God to reſtore vnto vs our fleſh againe, howſoeuer it be conſumed.
               
               THis earthly matter whereof the fleſh of man is created, is not loſt with God: but, into what ſoeuer duſt or aſhes it is reſolued, into whatſoeuer vapors or coaſts it is carryed, into whatſoeuer ſubſtance of other bodies, or the elements themſelues it bee turned, into the fleſh of whatſoeuer beaſts or men it is incorporated and changed; It returneth again in a moment of time to the ſame ſoule of man which at firſt breathed life into it, whereby it was made man, increaſed, and liued.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 89.
               
                  In the Reſurrection of the dead, the queſtion is, whether the whole ſubſtance of the fleſh ſhal be reſtored: or that euerie particular part & member therof, ſhall come together again, as, & where it was at the firſt: and whether the excrements, ſhall be in like ſort reſtored.
               
               THat ſame earthly matter therefore which becommeth a dead carcaſſe when the ſoule is gone out of it, ſhall not ſo and in ſuch ſort bee renewed in the reſurrection thereof, as that thoſe things which periſh with the bodie and bee turned into theſe and theſe ſhapes and formes of other thinges (although they doe returne to the bodie againe, from whence they fell) ſhould of neceſſitie turne vnto the ſame parts and members of the bodie againe where they were placed at

the firſt. Otherwiſe, in caſe that which often powling had cut away, ſhould bee reſtored to the haires of the head againe, and that alſo to the nayles of our fingers which often cutting had taken away; the exceſſiue and vncomely imperfection that wold follow thereof, doth breede an impoſſibilitie of reſtitution in all thoſe that enter into the conſideration thereof, and therefore beleeue not in the reſurrection at al. But euē as in any image made of any ſoluble matter, if it bee melted, or beaten to powder, or elſe wrought into one lumpe or maſſe, if that a workman would make the ſame again of the ſubſtance and matter thus reſolued, Is it materall for the perfection thereof, which part of the ſubſtance thus reſolued, ſhould bee vſed againe in the making of any part or member of the ſame image, ſo as the ſame being made a-newe, doe reſume the whole ſubſtance of that wherof

it was at the firſt compoſed? In like ſort, God being the workemaſter of man, after a maruailous and vnſpeakeable manner, ſhall of that whole conſiſtence whereof our fleſh was originally made, repaire the ſame againe, with wonderfull and vnſpeakeable ſpeede. Neither is it material to perfection in the new making thereof, whether the haires that were before, become haires againe, or the nailes returne to be nailes againe: or whatſoeuer thereof did periſh, bee changed into fleſh, or vſed to bee other parts of the body, ſo as the chiefe workmaſter in that newe worke do foreſee that nothing bee made vndecently therein.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 90.
               
                  Touching the ſtature, the ſimilitude or diſsimilitude of forme which ſhall bee in the bodies of the godly that ſhall riſe.
               
               NEither doth it followe, that there ſhould bee difference in the ſtature of euery particular perſon that riſeth againe, becauſe they differed when they liued: or that they which were ſpare and leane, ſhould be reuiued in the ſame leaneneſſe; nor they which were fat, in the ſame fatneſſe. But, if this be a matter of ſecrecie and counſaile in the creatour, that as touching the forme of euerie man, the propertie and knowen ſimilitude of euerie one ſhould bee retained, but yet all alike in the participation of the reſt of the bodies felicities: then doth it follow that there ſhall bee a meaſure obſerued in the ordering of this matter

in euery one whereof he was made, ſo as neither any part therof do periſh, and be loſt; and if there be any thing wanting in any man, it may bee ſupplyed by him, who of nothing was able to make al things that he wold. Now then, if in the bodies of them that ſhall riſe at the later day there ſhall bee a reaſonable difference and inequalitie (ſuch as is in voyces, making perfect harmonie) that ſhall be effected to euery one out of the matter and ſubſtance of his own body, making man equall to the companie of Angels, and yet bringing nothing with it that may be vnfitting to the view of thoſe heauenly creatures. For, there ſhal be nothing there that is vnſeemely: but whatſoeuer ſhall bee hereafter, ſhall be comely, becauſe it ſhall not be at all, if it be not decent.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 91.
               
                  That the bodies of the Elect, and godly ſhall riſe againe in their bodily ſubſtance, but not with their former faults and deformities.
               
               THe bodies therefore of the godly ſhall riſe againe without any fault or deformity of bodie, as alſo without any corruption, burthen of fleſh, or difficultie. Of which ſort their facilitie in riſing, ſhall be aunſwerable to their felicitie after their reſurrection. For which cauſe they bee called ſpirituall, albeit no doubt they ſhall become bodies and not ſpirits. But, euen as now in this life the bodie is ſaid to bee naturall, being not withſtanding yet a body and not a ſoule: Euen ſo at that time the body ſhal bee ſpirituall, howbeit a body and not a ſpirit. Yet, as touching that corruption which

in our life time doth oppreſſe the ſoule, as alſo concerning the ſinnes wherewith our fleſh fighteth againſt the ſpirit, at that time it ſhall not become fleſh, but a body, becauſe they ſhal be reputed for celeſtiall bodies. By reaſon whereof it is ſaid, that fleſh and blood ſhall not inherit the kingdome of God. And therefore as it were interpreting his owne ſaying, hee affirmeth, Neither ſhall corruption enioy incorruption. That which before hee called fleſh & blood, he afterwards called corruption. And that which formerly he called the kingdome of God, he afterwards called incorruption. Now, as touching that which concerneth the ſubſtance, that ſame alſo ſhall bee fleſh at that time. For which reaſon, the body of Ieſus Chriſt after his reſurrection, is called fleſh. Therupon doth the Apoſtle ſay, The body is put into the ground in naturall ſubſtance, but it ſhall ſhall riſe a ſpirituall bodie;
                  
becauſe of the great agreement and concord which ſhall be between the fleſh and the ſpirit; the ſpirit hauing a vitall power ouer the fleſh, which then ſhall not rebell, and that without the help of any manner of ſupportation: in ſo much as nothing pertaining to our owne bodies ſhal reſiſtive; but, as outwardly we ſhal finde none, ſo inwardly we ſhall haue no enemies of our ſelues.
            
            
               CHAP. 92.
               
                  Of what ſort or forme the bodies of the damned ſhal be in the reſurrection.
               
               WHoſoeuer verily being of that maſſe of perdition which the firſt man made, and are not redeemed by the onely mediatour of God and man, ſhal generally alſo riſe in the later day, euery man in his own fleſh, howbeit to bee puniſhed with the diuell and his Angels. Now,

whether they ſhall riſe againe with the faults and deformities of their former bodies, whoſoeuer of that number were miſſhapen or deformed in their limmes, to what purpoſe ſhould wee ſpend our labour, to informe our ſelues therein? Neither indeede ought the vncertaine forme or feature of thoſe perſons to wearie vs, whoſe damnation ſhall bee certaine and euerlaſting. Neither let it trouble vs to thinke, how in them the bodie ſhall bee incorruptible, if it bee ſubject to anguiſh; or elſe how it may be corruptible, if it cannot die. For, it is noe true life, but there where it liueth in all felicitie and happineſſe: nor no true inccorruption but there where the health is impeached with no manner of griefe. Nowe, therefore in that place, where the perſon that is forlorne and vnhappie, is not ſuffered to dye (as I maye ſaye) there Death,

it ſelfe doth not dye: and where perpetuall paine doth not kill, but doth afflict, corruption it ſelf hath no ende or determination. This in the holy ſcripture is called the ſecond death.
            
            
               CHAP. 93.
               
                  Which ſort of the damned ſhall receiue the eaſieſt puniſhment after the reſurrection.
               
               NEither yet the firſt death whereby the ſoule is compelled to forſake his body, nor the ſecond death whereby the ſoule is not ſuffred to depart out of the body that ſhall bee puniſhed, ſhould euer haue happened to man; if no man had ſinned. And truely the puniſhment of ſuch perſons, ſhall be moſt eaſie, who, beſides the guilt of originall ſinne haue not added more thereunto of themſelues: and amongſt thoſe additionall ſinnes,

euerie mans damnation ſhall be the more tolerable by how much the leſſe hee hath ſinned in the firſt life.
            
         
         
            TOVCHING ETERnall life.
            
               CHAP. 94.
               
                  That the bleſſed in the ſtate of eternall life, which by Gods mercie they ſhall obtaine, ſhall moſt fully perceiue the force of Gods grace.
               
               WHen the reprobate of Angells and men, ſhall remaine and haue their being in the place of euerlaſting puniſhment, then ſhal the bleſſed more ſenſibly feele and vnderſtand what the fauour and grace of God hath voutſafed vpon them. Then ſhall appeare in the euidence of things themſelues, that

which is written in the Pſalmes, To thee O Lord ſhall I ſing mercie and iudgement; Becauſe no man is deliuered from euerlaſting deſtruction, but by a mercie not due vnto vs by any ſpecialtie of debt; nor any againe condemned to eternall death, but by a iudgement duely inflicted vpon him.
            
            
               CHAP. 95.
               
                  In the life eternall wee ſhall knowe, why rather they, then the other were the choſen of God.
               
               AT that day it ſhall bee reuealed (which now is concealed) as touching the two infants, whereof the one through the mercie of God, was to bee choſen, the other in his ſecret iudgement to bee refuſed (in which iudgement hee that ſhall bee elected ſhall vnderſtand what in iuſtice was due vnto

him vnleſſe mercy had holpen him) why he rather then the other was elected, whē the cauſe was alike to both: Why miracles or ſtrange works were not done amongſt ſome; which if they had beene done, ſuch perſons ſhould haue repented: and yet were done amongſt thoſe concerning whom God did know that they would not beleeue. For, the Lord doth plainely affirme, Woe to thee Corazin, Wo to thee Bethſaida: for, if in Tyre and Sidon thoſe great workes had been done, which were do
                        •
                     e amongſt you, they had long ſithence repented in ſacke-cloath and aſhes. Neither, therefore would not God vniuſtly haue them to bee ſaued, when as they might haue beene ſaued if they woulde. Then ſhall that appeare in the cleareſt light of wiſedome, which the godly in this world doe apprehend by faith: That is to ſay, howe certaine, immutable, and moſt effectuall

the will of God is: how much he can do and yet will not: and that he willeth not that thing which he cannot performe: as alſo how truely it is ſung in the Pſalme, Our God which is in heauen aboue hath done all things in heauen & earth which hee would. Which aſſertion is not true, if hee would haue had ſomthings yet did thē not, and (which had been more derogatorie) did not therfore accompliſh it, by reaſon the wil of man did hinder the performance of that which the omnipotent would haue done. And therfore there is not any thing acted, vnleſſe the omnipotent would haue it ſo, either in ſuffering it to be done, or effecting it himſelfe.
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING GODS. Omnipotencie.
            
               CHAP. 96.
               
                  That God is ſaid to be omnipotent, becauſe all thinges that bee, are by his wil or permiſsion, neither can hee bee croſſed by any creature.
               
               NEither ought wee to doubt that God doth well in ſuffering of euills whatſoeuer to bee done. For, his permiſsion thereof is not without a iuſt iudgement. And no doubt but that euerie thing is good which is iuſt. Although therefore theſe thinges which be euill in that they are euill, cannot be alſo good; yet is it good, that there be not onely good, but euill actions alſo. For, if this were not good, that there ſhould be alſo euils, the Almightie, who is good, would not by any meanes ſuffer the ſame. To

which Almightie, as it is, no doubt, eaſie to doe what hee will: ſo is it as eaſie for him, not to permitte that which hee will not haue done. Which vnleſſe wee doe beleeue, it ſhaketh the verie foundation and beginning of the confeſſion of our faith: whereby wee doe confeſſe that we do beleeue in God the father almightie. Neither, is he truely called omnipotent for any other cauſe, but becauſe he can doe whatſoeuer hee will: Neither is the will of the Almightie interrupted by the will of any creature.
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING GRACE, and Predeſtination of the Saints.
            
               CHAP. 97.
               
                  The queſtion is, whether certaine things which God would haue done, may bee croſſed by men, that they cannot take effect.
               
               WHērefore wee are to conſider how it is ſaid of God in that which the Apoſtle moſt truely affirmed, Foraſmuch as God would that al ſhould be ſaued. For, ſeeing not all, but the moſt part, or greater number is not ſaued, it ſeemeth therefore that that which God wold haue done, is not done; mans will forſooth reſiſting Gods will. For, when the cauſe is examined, why all bee not ſaued, it is wont to

be aunſwered, becauſe they themſelues will not haue it ſo. Which ſaying, cannot bee extended to infants, in whom ther is no power to will or nill. For, that which infants do by inſtinct of nature, if the ſame were aſcribed to their wil, when in baptiſme they reſiſt and ſhrinke from that water as much as they can, by that reaſon wee ſhould affirme, that they were ſaued againſt their wils. But the Lord ſpeaketh more plainely in his Goſpel talking with the wicked Citie. How often, ſayth he, would I haue gathered together thy children, euen as the henne doth her chickens, and thou wouldeſt not? as though Gods will were ouerruled by mans will, and that men being moſt weake of all creatures, by their vnwillingnes hindering the ſame, the moſt mightie could not accompliſh that which hee deſired. Where then is that his omnipotencie, whereby hee did all things in

heauen and in earth which hee would, if hee would haue brought home the loſt children of Iſraell, and did it not? Or rather would not that Citie that hee ſhould bringe home her Children, and yet notwithſtānding whether ſhee would or noe, did not the Lorde reduce ſuch of them as hee would? for aſ much as both in heauen and in earth, hee did not will certaine thinges and doe them, not dooing ſome other things which hee would haue done, but hee did whatſoeuer hee would.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 98.
               
                  Albeit God can, when hee will, conuert the euill diſpoſitions of men, yet doth hee iuſtly although hee doe not reforme the ſame: and when hee turneth them vnto him, hee doth it of his owne meere grace and mercie.
               
               WHo moreouer is ſo wickedly vnwiſe, as that hee will affirme, that God cannot make good when hee will the euill diſpoſitions of men, which of them hee will, when he will, and where hee will? Howbeit, when hee doth it, hee doth it of his owne mercy: and when hee doth it not, he doth it not, by reaſon of iuſtice; becauſe he taketh mercie on whom hee will, and hardeneth whome hee will. Which when the Apoſtle did ſpeake, hee therein extolled grace; for the commendation

whereof hee was forthwith to ſpeake of thoſe Twinnes in Rebeccaes woomb: which being vnborne and doing nothing that was either good or euill, to the ende yet that Gods decree touching election might ſtand immutable, it was ſaide vnto him that was elected, beeing not choſen in reſpect of his workes but by the mercie of him that called, Becauſe the elder ſhall ſerue the yonger. For confirmation whereof hee addeth another ſaying of the Prophet where it is written, Iacob haue I loued, but Eſau haue I hated. Hee therefore perceiuing how this which hee had ſpoken might worke in thoſe which were not of capacitie to reach vnto the height of this doctrine of grace, What therefore ſhall 
                        •
                     ee ſay? ſayth hee: is there any iniuſtice with GOD? Far bee it from vs to thinke ſo. For it ſeemeth to ſauour ſomewhat of iniuſtice, that without

any merits of good or euil works, God ſhould elect the one, and hate the o
                     ••
                  er. In which matter if GOD had meant of 
                     •
                  uture workes, either good in Iacob, or bad in Eſau (both which God did fore knowe) hee would not haue ſaid, Not by workes: but he would haue ſaid, by futureworks, and by that meanes would hee haue diſcuſ
                     •
                  ed this controuerſie; nay, rather haue made it no queſtion at all neceſſary to bee ſatiſfied. Now, in that he anſwered, God forbid, that is to ſay, God forbid that there ſhould bee any iniuſtice with God, preſently thereupon to prooue that this matter came not to paſſe throgh any iniuſtice in God, hee ſayth, For hee ſaide to Moſes, I will haue mercie on whom I will haue mercie, and I will ſhewe mercie to whom I will ſhewe mercy. Who therefore but hee that is vnwiſe will think God to be iniuſt, whether he do inflict any penal iudgment vpon the worthy, or ſhewe

mercie vnto the vnworthie? Finally, he inferreth ſaying, Therfore is it not in him that willeth, nor in him that rūneth, but in God which taketh mercie. For, both the Twinnes were borne by nature the children of wrath, not by any of their owne workes, but being originally tyed in the bonde of damnation through Adams fault. But, hee which ſayde, I will ſhowe mercie to whome I will ſhewe mercie, did loue Iacob through a mercie freely proceeding out of himſelfe, and hated Eſau through a fatall iudgement. Which iudgement ſeeing it was due to both, hee that was choſen did acknowledge in that which happened to the other that was refuſed, That hee was not to boaſt of the difference of their ſeuerall works, in that the ſame puniſhment did not fall vpon him, beeing in the ſelfe ſame Predicament of damnation, but to reioyce

in the liberalitie of Gods grace and mercie, becauſe it was of Gods mercie, and not of him that willed, or of him that runned. For, the vniuerſall face and countenaunce (as I may ſo ſaye) of the holy Scriptures, is obſerued by a moſt highe and profitable myſterie, to admoniſh all the behoulders thereof, that hee which glorieth ſhould glorie in the Lord.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. 99.
               
                  Although certaine bee reiected by God, yet they which bee damned, may neither complaine of Gods iniuſtice, nor are they therefore to be helde excuſable for their tranſgreſſions. For, the reaſon of Gods ſecret decree and counſaile, is beyonde our vnderſtanding.
               
               VVHen as the Apoſtle had commended the mercie of God in that which he ſayth, Therefore it is not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but in the Lord that taketh mercie: afterwards alſo, to commend his iuſtice (for, towards whom mercy is not extended, it is not iniuſtice but iuſtice; for there is no iniuſtice with God) hee by and by addeth ſaying, For the ſcripture

ſaith to Pharao, Becauſe I haue ſtirred thee vp to this action, that I might ſhewe my power in thee, and that my name might bee knowen throughout all the World. By which ſayings iuſtifying both his aſſertions both of mercie and iuſtice, hee ſayth, Therefore doth the Lord take mercie on whome hee will, and harden the hearts of whome hee will. Hee is, no doubt, mercifull in all goodneſſe, and bardeneth whome hee will without imputation of iniuſtice: to the ende that neither the perſon pardoned ſhould boaſt of his owne merites, nor the partie damned, complaine but of his owne deſerts. For, by his mercies onely hee maketh knowen the redeemed from the reprobate: both which the generall occaſion drawen from ADAM originally, had conioyned in one maſſe or lumpe of perdition. Which ſaying who ſo doth

heare in that ſort as that hee ſayth, What cauſe is there of further complaint? for who can reſiſt his owne will? as though therefore the ſinner were not to bee blamed, becauſe God taketh mercie on whome hee wil, and (againe) hardeneth whom hee will. GOD forbidde that wee ſhould bee aſhamed to aunſwere heereunto, as wee ſee the Apoſtle hath aunſwered it already: ſaying, O thou man, what art thou that makeſt this aunſwere vnto God? Dare the veſſell ſay vnto him that made it, Why didſt thou make mee ſo? Is it not in the power of the Potter, of one and the ſelfe ſame maſſe or lump of clay, to make one veſſel to honour, and another to diſhonour? For, in this place certaine fooliſh perſons do ſuppoſe that the Apoſtle was wanting in his aunſwere, checking the boldneſſe of the partie oppoſite to ſupplye the

want of reaſon to maintaine that which hee had affirmed. Howbeit, that ſaying, O man what art thou? is of greate waight and efficacie. By which queſtion, hee reduceth man briefly, in one worde, to a conſideration of his owne capacitie, howbeit rendering indeed a notable reaſon thereof. For, if hee bee incapable of theſe aſſertions, what is hee that dare aunſwere GOD therein? And if hee bee of vnderſtanding to apprehende the doctrine, hee wanteth matter to make any further replie. For, hee plainely ſeeth, if hee vnderſtand it rightly, that all mankinde generally by the iuſt iudgement of GOD, is originally damned in the Apoſtaſie of ADAM. In ſo much as, if noe man thereby bee freede from perdition, no man canne take exception to the iuſtice of GOD, or they on the contrarie ought to

be pardoned which inioy Gods fauour and mercie therein: to the ende it might appeare out of the multitude of perſons vnpardoned, and left in the ſtate of deſerued damnation, what the vniuerſall pollution of mankinde did merite, and whether the iuſt iudgement of GOD would haue brought all men, if his vndeſerued mercie had not aſſiſted vs; That the mouth of euerie one which would glorie in his owne merits, might bee ſtopped, and that he that gloried ſhould glorie in the Lord.
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING THE Will of God.
            
               CHAP. 100.
               
                  That nothing happeneth without the will of God. For, when men doe ſinne, Gods will hath a part therein.
               
               SVch be the wonderful works of the Lorde, being moſt exquiſite in all things which hee will haue accompliſhed, and ſo wiſely alſo contriued, as when as both the nature of Angells and man had ſinned, that is to ſay had done that, which not God, but their owne nature willed: yet did hee effect that which himſelfe would haue done, by the will of the Creature (whereby that was done which the Creatour was againſt) making thereby a good vſe of euilles as himſelfe is abſolutely good, to the condēnation of thoſe whom

he hath iuſtly predeſtinated to eternall puniſhment, and to the ſaluation of thoſe whom in mercy hee hath predeſtinated to grace and fauour. For, in reſpect of their owne natures they did that which was againſt the will of God: But, as touching the omnipotencie of GOD, they would by no meanes haue done the ſame. In which acte done againſt the will of God, his will was wrought by themſelues and their owne meanes. And therefore bee the workes of the Lorde exceeding great and inſcrutable in the accompliſhment of all thinges which hee will haue done: in ſo much as by a maruailous and vnſpeakable meane, that commeth not to paſſe beſides his will, which is cleane contrary to his will; Becauſe it ſhould not bee done but by his permiſſion: neither yet doth he permit the ſame, to bee done vnwillingly, but with his will. Neither would,

he, being God, ſuffer that which is euill to be done, but that in reſpect of his omnipotencie, hee could make that which is euill, to become good.
            
            
               CHAP. 101.
               
                  That the good will or diſpoſition which is in man, doth many times diſſent from the will of God. And many times the euill will and diſpoſition of man agreeth with GODS will.
               
               SOmetimes, out of a good diſpoſitiō, mā willeth that which is repugnant to Gods will, although the ſame bee better by many degrees, and more infallible then mans will (for Gods will cannot be euill): As for example, If a good ſonne deſireth the life of his father, whoſe death alſo God in a good diſpoſition doth deſire. On the contrarie, it

may bee, that man is willing to haue another thing come to paſſe in an euill affection, which God deſireth alſo, in a good diſpoſition: As for example, if an euill ſonne deſire the death of his father, and God would haue the ſame alſo; in the firſt of theſe two examples, man would that which God would not: but in the ſecond man wold that, which God alſo would: and yet notwithſtanding the godly diſpoſition of the firſt man doth better agree with the good wil of God, albeit his will was contrarie to Gods; then the impietie of the ſecond man, although hee willed the ſame which GOD alſo willed. The onely difference therefore in this caſe is, what it is which man willeth, and what may agree with the will of God, and to what ende euerie mans will tendeth, wherby it is either to bee approued or diſallowed. For, God doth accompliſh certaine of his wills being good, or

to a good ende, by the euill deſiers of euill men: as namely, in that action wherein Chriſt was ſlaine for vs by the malicious Iewes, through the good will of the father. Which fact was helde to be of that conſequence for goodnes, as that the Apoſtle Peter being in his will againſt the ſuffering of Chriſt, was therupon called Satan by him which came to be ſlaine. Againe, how good and charitable ſeeme the diſpoſitions of the godly faithful to be, which would not haue had Paule the Apoſtle to haue gone to Ieruſalem, to ſuffer iniurious dealings in that place, according to the predictions of the Prophet Agabus, albeit God vvould that hee ſhould ſuffer the ſame for a teſtimonie of the faith of Chriſt, being therin the Martyr of Chriſt: In which action he did not execute his good will and pleaſure by means of theſe good diſpoſitions appearing in the Chriſtians, but by the maleuolent

wills of the Iewes: wherin they, which vvere againſt his will, were rather Gods, than they by whoſe willingueſſe that was done which was deſired; becauſe they did it out of an euill diſpoſition being Gods agents, who performed it by them out of his gracious and good diſpoſition or vvil.
            
            
               CHAP. 102.
               
                  That nothing commeth to paſſe, or is done without the will of God which is alſo iuſt, how diuers ſoeuer.
               
               BVt the wils of Angels or men good or euill, hovve diuerſe ſoeuer they happen to be, vvhether they vvill the ſame that GOD vvil, or the contrary,

yet is the will of the Almightie neuer hindered, but alwayes hath his effect; which can neuer bee euill in it ſelfe, becauſe alſo when it doth inflict euils vpon any perſons, it is iuſt and right: which being iuſt, is by conſequence not euill. Almightie God therefore, whether out of his owne commiſeration hee hath mercie on whom hee will haue mercie, or in his iudgement doth obdurate whome hee will haue ſo, doth not any thing that is vniuſt, neither doth hee any thing againſt his owne will, but all things which he will.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 103.
               
                  How this ſaying of Paul is to bee vnderſtood, namely, God would haue all men to be ſaued.
               
               ANd when by this ſaying of Paule, wee heare and likewiſe reade in holy ſcriptures that hee would haue all men ſaued, albeit wee certainely knowe all men bee not ſaued yet ought we not therefore to derogate any thing from the moſt omnipotēt will of God, but ſo to vnderſtand that which is written, Who will haue all men to bee ſaued, as though he ſhould ſay, that no man is ſaued but whome hee will haue ſaued: Not becauſe there is not any one of mankind but ſuch as he wold haue ſaued, but rather that there is not any man ſaued but whome hee will haue ſaued: and therefore hee is to be prayed vnto that he would ſaue vs; becauſe if hee will haue

it ſo, it muſt bee ſo of neceſſitie. For the Apoſtle treated of prayer to bee made vnto God, wherupon hee grounded this former ſpeech. For in the ſame ſenſe wee vnderſtande that ſayinge which is written in the Goſpel, Hee which enlightneth all creatures: not becauſe there is not any man that is not illuminated; but becauſe there is not any man illuminated. Or elſe it is is taken in this ſenſe, Which would haue all men to bee ſaued, not becauſe there was not any that hee would not haue ſaued, which refuſed to performe the vertue of miracles amongſt ſuch as hee ſ
                     •
                  eth would haue beene brought to repentance, if that worke had beene performed: But that by al men, we ſhuld vnderſtand all ſorts of men, of what differēces or: diſtinctions ſoeuer; As, kings and priuate perſons, noble and vnnoble, highe and lowe, learned and vnlearned, ſtronge and weake, and the wittie,

dullards and fooles: the rich, the poore, and perſons of meane degree: men and women, infants, children: youths betweene 12. & 21. years, yong men, elder perſōs, and olde men, men of all languages, conditions, arts and profeſſions, or whoſoeuer being in the innumerable varietie & differences of diſpoſitions and conſciences, or knowen by anyother differēces amongſt mortall creatures. For, what is there amongſt them, out of which God wil not by his onely ſon our Lord & redeemer haue to be ſaued thrughout al nations? and therfore doth whatſoeuer he will; becauſe the deſire on will of the omnipotent cannot bee friuolous or vaine. For the Apoſtle hereupon willed prayers and interceſſions to bee made for al mē, but ſpecially for kings and ſuch as were in hig
                     •
                  e place of calling; who by reaſo of honor & ſecular pride, might be thought to deſpiſe the humilitie of Chriſtian faith. For, it is good in the ſight of God

our ſauiour, that is, that wepray for ſuch, adding preſently or forth with thereupon (to preuent deſperation) Becauſe hee would haue all men to bee ſaued, and to come to the knowledge of ſaluation. For, God thought it good that by the mediation of the humble and poore hee might vouchſafe ſaluation vpon the high and rich: which thing wee ſee performed accordingly. The like manner of ſpeach the Lord doth alſo vſe in his Goſpel; wher he ſaith vnto the Phariſees; Yee t
                        ••
                     he mynte
                        •
                     , 
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     , and oueri
                        •
                      p
                        •
                     tt
                        •
                      hearbe. Neither yet did the Phariſees take tythes of all other kinds whatſoeuer, or all the po
                     •
                  
                  hearbes of all ſtrangers throughout the world. As therefore in this place euerie pothearbe is taken for euery kinde of pothearb: ſo in the other place where all men be named, we may vnderſtand all ſorts of men. And it may be taken in any other ſenſe whatſouer, ſo as wee be not inforced

to beleeue that Almighty God would haue had any thing done which was not done: who without all ambiguitie, if he did both in heauen and vpon earth all thinges which hee would as the ſcripture reporteth of him; then without all doubt, whatſoeuer he did not, he would not do it.
            
         
         
            TOVCHING GODS Foreknowledge.
            
               CHAP. 104.
               
                  That the firſt man had not ſinned, if God had foreknowen that hee ſhould not haue ſinned. For, the foreknowledge of God cannot erre or be deceiued.
               
               WHerfore alſo, God would haue preſerued man in that ſtate and happineſſe (where in he was firſt made) and in conuenient

time, after he had had children, haue brought him without mortalitie or death, vnto greater bleſſinges (where hee ſhould neither haue ſinned actually, nor had any will to haue ſinned) if God had foreknowen that he ſhould haue had conſtā
                  cie of will to haue remained without ſinne, as hee was firſt of all made. But, becauſe hee did foreknowe that he would abuſe his free will, that is to ſay, that hee would commit ſinne, he did the rather prepare his will thereunto; that hee might doe good by that euill which man ſhould do, and ſo the good will of the omnipotent ſhould not be made fruſtrate by the euill will of man, but rather be fulfilled.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 105.
               
                  That both the conditions of man were well ordained of God: as well the firſt wherein hee was ſubiect to ſinne, as the laſt wherein hee could noe longer ſinne.
               
               IT was neceſſarie that man ſhould be made in that ſort at the firſt, as that hee had power both to do well and ill, though afterwardes ſuch ſhall bee his eſtate as that hee cannot will that which is euill: and yet notwithſtanding ſhall hee not bee without free will; which ſhall bee of greater libertie and freedome, becauſe it cannot at all be ſubiect vnto ſinne. For there is no man that will blame that will, or deny it to be a will, or a freewil, whereby we ſo deſire to be happie, as that not onely wee doe not will that which may make vs miſerable, but our will

is ſo ſettled, that wee cannot will any ſuch thing. Therefore as in this life our ſoule retaineth a propertie of not willing infel
                     ••
                  tie, ſo in the life to come it willeth not any iniquitie or ſinne. Howbeit, order in this caſe was not to be pretermitted, wherein God would ſhewe how good a bleſſing it was to bee a reaſonable creature, though ſubiect to ſinne; albeit it were better he could not ſinne at all: euen as it was a leſſer immortalitie, though yet in immortalitie, wherein hee might haue dyed, although that other ſhal be greater, wherin it ſhall not be poſſible for him to die at all.
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING MANS Will.
            
               CHAP. 106.
               
                  Mans will at this day is a ſeruāt to ſinne, and is not freed from that thraldom but by the grace and mercie of God. The firſt will of man before hee fell by ſinne, was free: howbeit it could not retaine originall righteouſneſſe without the helpe of God.
               
               MAns nature loſt originall righteouſneſſe by free will, being now made capable thereof through grace, which (if he had not ſinned) he had by merite or deſert, albeit euen in his firſt eſtate he could not haue done anything that was meritorious, without grace. Becauſe, albeit free will was the onely cauſe of ſinne, yet was not free will of power to retaine righteouſneſſe

without the help of God by the participation of his vnchangeable goodneſſe. For, as it is in the power of man to dye when hee will (for there is no man but may kill himſelfe by forbearing to eate, to ſpeake of no other thing) yet mans will is not enough to maintaine life in man, if the helpe of meates and other preſeruatiues bee wanting. Euen ſo man being in paradiſe, had power by his will to worke his owne deſtruction, by forſaking righteouſnes: But, for him to haue liued in righteouſnes, his wil vvas inſufficient, vnles God, who made him, had giuen him aſſiſtance. Howbeit, after his fall, the mercy of God is of greater efficacie, in as much as free-will it ſelfe was to be freed from bondage, being ſubiect to the power of ſinne and death. Neither doth it obtaine freedome ſolie by it ſelfe, but by the onely grace of God (apprehended by 
                     •
                  aith in Chriſt) whereby the will

of man, as it is written, is prepared by the Lord, and wee made capaple of other gifts of God, bringing vs to the reward which is repoſed for vs in in heauen.
            
            
               CHAP. 107.
               
                  Man ſinned through free wil, & therefore death was his reward and deſeruedly inflicted vpon him. But, life euerlaſting was from the beginning, that is to ſay, freely beſtowed both vpon the firſt man, and alſo vpon vs by Gods mercy.
               
               VVHereupon the Apoſtle calleth life euerlaſting which is the reward of good works the mercie of God. For, ſaith he, death is the reward of ſinne, and the mercie of God is euerlaſting life in Chriſt Ieſu our Lord. Reward for militarie ſeruice is a matter of debt and not of gift. And therfore

hee ſaid, that death was the reward of ſinne; thereby to demonſtrate vnto vs, that death was not vnworthyly inflicted, but was a debt and due recompence. But, mercy or grace, except it come freely, is not mercie or grace indeede. Wee are therefore to learne hereby, that the good workes in man, be the very gifts of God: which good workes being rewarded with eternall life, what is rēdred in this caſe but grace for grace? Man therfore was in ſuch ſort created righteous, that hee might haue continued in that righteouſneſſe, though not without diuine helpe and aſſiſtance, and might leaue it and depart from it vpon the onely motion of his owne will: yet ſo, that which ſoeuer of theſe he ſhould chooſe, Gods will ſhould bee fulfilled, either by him, if man choſe the better, or vpon him if hee choſe the worſe. Whether of theſe two hee is to make choyſe, reſteth

in Gods will, comming certainly either from, or of God. Therfore, becauſe man would rather fulfill his owne will then Gods; God did in like ſort execute his will vpon him: who of the ſelfe ſame Maſſe of perdition deriued from his own ſtocke and progenie, doth make one veſſell to honour, and another to diſhonour; that, to honour, by his mermercie: the other, to diſhonour through his iudgemente; to the ende that no man might make too great eſtimate of the condition of man, or thereby conſequently of himſelfe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 108.
               
                  Our ſaluation is ſo certainely of God, as that we could not haue beene ſaued by Chriſt, vnleſſe, as hee was made man, ſo alſo hee had beene God.
               
               FOr, neither ſhould wee haue been redeemed by that onely Mediatour betweene God and man the man Chriſt Ieſus, vnleſſe alſo he had been God. When Adam was created (that is, man in his righteouſnes) at that time he needed no mediatour. But when ſinnes had made a ſeparation between God and man, wee ſtood in need of the helpe of a Mediatour to reconcile vs to God (being ſuch an one as was ſolely born without ſin, and ſo liued & was ſlaine) vntil the day of reſurrection of the fleſh to life euerlaſting, to the ende that the pride of man might bee reprooued by the humilitie of God, and therby

made whole, as alſo to make man knowe how farre hee was departed from God, when as he was to be brought backe againe by God incarnate: and that diſobedient man muſt be taught obedience by the exāple of God being made man; As alſo that the fountaine of mercie ſhould be opened by the onely begotten taking vpon him the forme of a ſeruant, who had not by any former action deſerued ſuch indignitie; And that alſo the redeemer himſelfe ſhould goe before and ſhew vnto vs in his own perſon, the reſurrection promiſed to the redeemed; And that the Diuell ſhould be ſubdued by the ſame nature which he reioyced that he had deceiued: Notwithſtanding al which, man was not to boaſt, leaſt pride ſhould be eftſoones reuiued in him: and if any thing elſe can be inwardly conceiued or ſaid concerning ſo great a myſtery of the Mediator by ſuch as growe and increaſe

with the increaſings of God: or onely may bee conceiued in thought, if it cannot be vttered in ſpeech.
            
         
         
            TOVCHING THE Place and State wherin our ſoules remaine after this life.
            
               CHAP. Cix.
               
                  That the ſoules of men, preſently after death, remaine in certaine receptacles, vntill the later day.
               
               THe time that is betweene the death of man and the reſurrection, doth containe the ſoules of the deceaſed in certaine ſecret and vnſeene receptacles, accordingly as euerie of them haue deſerued reſt or paine, by the deeds of the fleſh whil'ſt they liued.
               
                  
                  Animaduerſions vpon the Cix. Chapter.
                  
                     That the ſoules of men, preſently after death, remaine in certaine receptacles, vntill the later day.
                  
                  
                     HOwſoeuer Auguſtine, in this Chapter, affirmeth that the ſoules of men after death, remain in certaine receptacles, vntill the day of doome, being drawen to that opinion, as is thought, by Irenaeus, a moſt auncient writer, who (as Danaeus ſetteth downe in his Comment vpon this Chapter) ſayeth plainely, That the ſoules of Chriſtes Diſciples, for whome hee had wrought theſe happineſſes or eternall bleſſinges, ſhould depart away into an inuiſible place appointed

vnto them by God, where they ſhould remaine vntill the reſurrection; and that being done, ſhould afterwardes put on their bodies againe, and riſe in greater perfection: Yet afterwards in an other place, Auguſtine doth make a queſtion thereof, being doubtfull of that doctrine, and thinketh it may be for certaine affirmed, that the ſoules of the godly be tranſported, preſently after death, into that place which is more glorious and excellent, than mortall bodies, or any ſhapes of bodies; that place being aboue all the heauens, and that heauen, where Chriſt is dwelling. Afterwards, writing vpon S. Iohn. Tract. 49. vpon better iudgement, hee would haue the ſoules of the godly, after they be out of this body, as touching the place, to be with Christ, according to that of Iohn, Cap. 17. ver. 24. Father, I will, that they which thou haſt giuen me, be with me, euen where I am, &c. And Luk. 23. v. 43. This day ſhalt thou bee

with me in Paradiſe. And more plainely Auguſtine in his fift Sermon touching Saints, ſaith, that the ſoules of the holy, are to be beleeued to be with Chriſt. And afterwards, diſcourſing of Paradiſe, whether it were locall or ſpirituall, hee ſaith, That the Lotte ordained for the godly, is called Abrahams boſome. Which his opinions being laid together, lot the later and better, bee preferred before the worſe, looking into Saint Auguſtines booke of Retractations, wherunto Danaeus dot brefer thoſe who would be better ſatisfied of him, in matters wherein he was either ledor miſled by the error of himſelfe, or of that Age.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. Cx.
               
                  How farre-forth the godly workes of men, while they liue, bee auaileable.
               
               NEither is it to be denied, that the ſoules of the deceaſed are releeued by the godlineſſe of their liuing friendes, when as either the ſacrifice of the Mediatour is offered for them or almes diſtributed in the Church. But theſe thinges bee auaileable but onelie to ſuch, who when they liued, did meritorious workes to make them auailcable vnto thē. For, there is a kinde of life, neither ſo good, but that it needeth theſe helpes, after death; neither ſo euill, but that it may bee benefited by them. And there is a kinde of liuing ſo good as needeth not theſe helpes: and there is a kinde of liuing ſo euill, that it can receiue no helpe or

benefit by theſe, when the courſe of this life is finiſhed. Wherefore in this life man procureth a poſſibilitie of being releeued after this life, or ſubiecteth himſelfe to a neceſſitie of greeuous and helpeleſſe puniſhment. For, let no man hope when hee is dead, by any after-merite to redeeme his neglect of well dooing while he liued, with God. Therfore theſe, deuotions, which the Church, doth ſooftē vſe in praying for the dead, bee not repugnant to that ſentence or aſſertion of the Apoſtle, wherin it is ſaid, for we ſhal al appear before the tribunal of Chriſt to receiue iudgement according to our deedes in the fleſh, as they haue beene either good or euill; Becauſe euery man while hee liued in the fleſh did ſuch thinges as deſerued this fauour of God, that the prayers of the Church might bee effectuall for him after his departure & death. For, they are not auaileable for all.

And wherefore are they not auaileable for all, but in reſpect of the diuerſitie of euery mans action in this life? When as therefore either the ſacrifices of the altar, or of any ſort of almes be offered for all ſuch as bee baptized and dead, they become actions of thankes-giuing for ſuch as were exceeding good, and peace offrings for ſuch as were not exceeding euill: albeit for ſuch as bee exceeding euil, theſe helpes preuail not at al after they are dead: howſoeuer they which be liuing do take comfort thereby. And to whom ſoeuer theſe things ſhall bee auaileable, they bee either auaileable to the full remiſſion of their ſinnes: or elſe that thereby their damnation may be the more eaſie and tolerable.
               
                  
                  Animaduerſions vpon the 110. Chapter.
                  
                     How far forth the godly workes of the liuing, doe releeue the dead.
                     Neither is it to be denyed, that the ſoules of the dead, &c.
                  
                  
                     SAint Auguſtines greateſt blemiſh in all this booke, is contained in this Chapter, as Danaeus ſaith; this error of his growing out of the doctrine of Purgatorie, which of a little ſparke, grewe to a great fier, the opinion of that time being, that the ſoules of men, being not reprobats, were after death releeued and purged from their ſinnes, by the charitable prayers of the godly that liued. Which opinion was rather deſtroyed, then founded out of the word of God. Howbeit, hereupon afterwardes grewe praiers for the dead, Maſſes, Anniuerſaries,

and indulgences: the cauſe thereof being imputed to a booke which Auguſtine did write, touching the care that was to bee had of the dead, the ſame being 
                           •
                        reduced by the fau
                           •
                        tors of that error of praying for the dead; that his book being writtē to thoſe onely and chiefly, who were deſirous to knowe, whether it were auaileable to a chriſtian after death, that his body ſhould be buried, apud ſanctial
                        •
                     cu
                        •
                     us memoriam, his meaning therein being corrupted by other mens interpretations. And howſoeuer hee thinketh in this Chapter, yet Auguſtine was not permanent in that opinion. For, he writeth in other places, That there can bee no helpe of mercy performed, by the 
                        •
                     uſt, to the ſoules of the deceaſed, although the godly were neuer ſo much inclined to mercy in that caſe: becauſe the ſentence of GOD, is immu
                        〈…〉
                      being alreadie pronounced of them at their death, For, ſaith hee in an other place,
                     
Gods iudgement hangeth not in ſuſpence touching the ſoules of the dead, but is inſtantly giuen and certainely ſet downe: Becauſe, as hee affirmeth, as euery man dyeth, ſo is hee iudged of God: neither can Gods ſentence be altered, corrected or diminiſhed.
                  
                     Seeing therefore Auguſtine is not conſtant herein himſelfe, wee ought not to bee mooued by his aſſertion, becauſe it wanteth the true leuain of Gods word and aſſurance or warrant of faith Danoeus moreouer affirmeth, that in the celebration of the Lords ſupper, at the firſt there was a commemoration of the dead Martyrs of God, who dyed memorablie and triumphantly for the name of CHRIST, to incourage others to bee reſolute and conſtant in the profeſs on of the Goſpell. Afterwards, in time, the memorie of them beganne to be celebrated in that 
                           〈◊〉
                         of

the L. ſupper, which were no martyrs at all; but dying, deſired that they might bee remembred in the celebration of the ſame: And ſo at length, euery one that was baptized, was remembred therein, as Auſtin writeth in this place, wher he calleth the Lords ſupper a ſacrifice, becauſe, as hee ſaith in his 10. booke, De ciuitate Dei, and 20. Chapter, It is the Sacrament of the ſacrifice of Chriſt. For it is the commemoration of Chriſt his death, and our thanſgiuing, for ſo great a benefit, at Gods hand. Anſelmus alſo ſaith, that which men call a ſacrafice, is a ſigne of the true ſacrifice. In which ſenſe the auncient writers called the Lords Supper a Sacrifice, not becauſe Chriſt himſelf ſhould again be offered vp by any mortall Creature. This appellation therfore doth nothing at all releeue either the Papiſts, or their Maſſe.
                  
                  
                     Beſides, it appeareth in many of Saint Auguſtines writings, what hee calleth a Sacrifice, that is to

ſay, either workes of mercy towards our ſelues, or towards our neighbours, which bee rendred vnto God; as alſo the prayſes & celebration of Gods name. In other places of ſcripture, and of his owne workes, hee ſheweth by what reaſon euerie Chriſtian is a Pr
                           •
                        est.
                  
                  
                     The frequent deuotions vſed in the Church, is the principall reaſon mouing Saint Auguſtine, to thinke, the ſoules of the godly deceaſed, to bee releeued by the almes and prayers of the liuing, becauſe they began to be commonly and vſually performed in the Church for the dead. Howbeit, M. Caluin asketh how, or by what warrant out of Gods word, or example, men dare do this. Againſt whom if it bee replyed, that in the 2. Maccabees, 23. v. 44. it is written, That it is godly to pray for the dead; I aunſwere, that the excuſe of the author is to be read, appearing in the 15. Chapter. From thenceforth it is not ſaid,

that Iudas did ſacrifice for the dead: And theſe words, Pium eſt ergo, it is godly therefore, be contained in the gloſſe, and are no part of the text The ancient writers vſed fower reaſons or arguments chiefely, to make them beleeue that theſe things were truely obſerued in the Church for the dead.
                  
                  
                     The firſt was drawen from that which Luke doth write touching Lazarus, and the rich glutton. To which I aunſwere, that, that whole ſtorie, or narration, was but a parable: and, if any the like reaſon be collected from that place, for reliefe of mens ſoules, by the liuing after death, I may as well gather out of the ſame that ſoules haue teeth, a tongue, and an hand: Auguſtine himſelfe affirming, that this argument is weake and noddeth.
                  
                  
                     The ſecond argument is this, Why, ſay they doe men that dye, make wills, if they can receiue no helpe or reliefe by the liuing? This matter is aunſwered againe by
                     
Auguſtine, writing vppon the hundred and eigh
                           •
                        th Pſalme: Becauſe there is, ſaith hee, a naturall care of poſteritie, ingrafted in all the godly while they liue, vſing no wayes the crewell and profane ſpeach of Nero, ſaying, When I am dead, Let there be a confuſion of heauen and earth.
                  
                     The thirde argument is this, why, ſay they, ſhuld the ſoules of the godly being dead, appeare vnto the liuing, if they felt not an effect of the workes of the liuing, or that the liuing againe, had none affinitie with them? or did not belong vnto them? I aunſwere to this, that the ſoules themſelues are not ſent; but that theſe viſions, if GOD will ſo haue them appeare, are preſented vnto them by the diſpenſation of his prouidence, for the comfort of the godly, and terrour of the wicked, being done by the operation of Angels, and ſometimes alſo by the power of Satan.

And where Auguſtine ſaith in his booke, De cura pro mortuis, cap. 15. that certaine which were dead, we ſet vnto thoſe which were liuing, namely Samuel, And on the contrarie amongſt the liuing, Paule was taken vp to Paradiſe, I ſay plainely, ſaith hee, that this reaſon is weake and reeleth.
                  
                  
                     Their fourth and laſt reaſon is this, The godly be taken out of this world, before thoſe euils, which God meant to ſend amongſt them, were comne to paſſe: as for example, King Ezechias. To this I aunſwere, that this their own reaſon doth teach, that thinges done heere vpon earth, or in this world, doe not belong at all vnto thoſe which be dead, nor be felt by them. For, to what purpoſe ſhould this prouidence for them bee made by death, if they ſhould be partakers of them after death? and how ſhould they become quiet and happie indeede, if the vnquiet life of the liuing, ſhould trouble them,

ſayth Auguſtine? But the godly are happie and quiet, as it is in the Apocalipſe, cap. 14. v. 13.
                  
                     Finally, if no man can perform that office of repentance for the dead, as the ſchoolmen themſelues confeſſe, how can he mitigate their puniſhment?
                  
                  All this collected out of Danaus Comment.
               
            
            
               CHAP. Cxi.
               
                  There ſhall be two companies vniuerſally after the day of iudgement: the one of the godly, as well Angels as men: the other of the wicked, conſiſting of both the others.
               
               NOw after the reſurrection, the generall iudgement being done and finiſhed, the two Cities ſhal be ſetled in their final or laſt eſtate: the one being of

God, the other of the diuell: the one repleniſhed with the good, the other with the bad; howbeit, both conſiſting of Angels and men: wherein the good ſhall haue no will at all, nor the euil any power to ſinne or to die in any ſort: the good, liuing indeed and ioyfully in that euerlaſting life, & the wicked being cōtinued with al vnhappines in eternal death without dying; becauſe both their ſtates are perpetuall. But, in this bleſſedneſſe allotted to the good, the conditiō or ſtate of the one, ſhall be better then the other: and in the miſerie orordained for the bad, one ſhall haue leſſe torment then another.
            
         
         
            
            TOVCHING THE puniſhments of the damned.
            
               CHAP. Cxii.
               
                  That the puniſhments of the damned be euerlaſting and the leaſt of them are exceeding great & fearefull, in reſpect of the weaknes of our nature.
               
               DIuers therefore, nay, verie many, doe vainely (out of humane affection) lament the euerlaſting paine of the damned, and their perpetuall torment, without intermiſſion; and doe beleeue that it ſhall not be ſo indeed: wherein though they wil not contradict the ſcriptures, yet doe they priuately in their owne conceipts mitigate the ſeueritie therof & drawe God to a more merciful ſentence, ſuppoſing that the report therof in the

holy ſcriptures, is more terrible, then true. For, ſay they, God will not forget to be merciful, or ſhut vp his louing kindnes in diſpleaſure. This ſaying is indeed contained in a godly Pſalme; but it is meant, without all doubt, of ſuch as be called the veſſels of Gods mercie: Becauſe they are deliuered out of their calamitie & miſerie, nor in reſpect of their own merites, but of God who hath commiſeration of them. Or, if this may be thought to be generally ſpoken, it followeth not therefore that they ſhould think there may bee an ende of theit damnation, of whome it is ſpoken, And they ſhal goe to eternall puniſhment: leſt by this means the felicitie alſo of them might be thought to hau an ende and determination in time, to whom it is alſo ſaide, The iuſt ſhall go to life euerlaſting. But let them ſuppoſe, if that may content them, that the puniſhmōts of the damned bee mitigated in ſome meaſure

betweene whiles. For, ſo it may bee vnderſtood that Gods anger remaineth ſtil vpon them, that is to ſay, their damnation is euerlaſting. For, this damnation, is called the anger of God, and not a perturbation of Gods minde; So that in his anger, or during the continuance thereof, his mercies ſhould neuertheleſſe not bee ſhut vp, howbeit the ſame ſhould not make an end of eternall puniſhment, but onely giue an intermiſſion or ſome eaſe of their torments, Becauſe the Pſalme ſayeth not, to make an ende of his anger, or after his anger was paſt, but during his anger. The which his anger if it were alone and by itſelfe, or howſoeuer it may bee thought to be the leaſt and ſmalleſt puniſhment, to leeſe the kingdome of God, to bee exiled from that Citie, to bee a ſtraunger from the life of God, & to want the infinite choice of loyes with God, which he hideth

from ſuch as deſpiſe him, and affordeth to all ſuch as put their truſt in him: yet is it ſo great a puniſhment, as no torments, which wee haue knowen, may equall the ſame, in caſe Gods anger bee eternall, and theſe torments doe laſt but for certain ages, how long ſoeuer.
            
            
               CHAP. Cxiii.
               
                  That in the world to come, neither the feticitie of the godly, not the puniſhment of the damned afterwards ſhall be equall.
               
               THe death of the damned ſhal bee euerlaſting, and haue none ende. That is, They ſhall bee eſtraunged for euer from the life of God, and this miſerie ſhall bee common to them an, whatſoeuer men imagine being led by their humane affections

touching the difference of their puniſhments, the mitigating or intermiſſion of their paines: As alſo the happie life of the Saints ſhall likewiſe indure for euer. In which conſideration they ſhal be all equall howſoeuer they ſhine and glitter in great varietie and difference of degrees, in happineſſe, yet with abſolute peace and ſweet agreement amongſt themſelues.
            
         
         
            OF THE LORDES Prayer.
            
               CHAP. Cxiiii.
               
                  That the Lords Prayer containeth all thoſe things which wee are to hope for, and to deſire of God.
               
               OVt of the Confeſſion of faith which is briefly comprized in the Creede and which, being imperfectly vnderſtood, is milke

for babes, but more fully and ſpiritually conceiued, & expreſſed, is meate for ſtronge men, ſpringeth and groweth that good and happy hope of the faithful, which is alwayes accompanied with holy loue. But, among all thoſe things which the faithfull muſt beleeue, they onely appertaine vnto hope, which are contained in the Lords prayer. For, curſed is euery one, as the Diuine oracles doe teſtifie, which putteth his truſt in man: & ſo euerie one is wrapped vp in this curſe, which putteth his truſt in himſelf. Wherfore we muſt not ſeeke but at the hands of our Lord God, any thing which wee hope we ſhall well performe, or for which well performed, wee looke for any prayſe or reward.
            
            
               
               CHAP. Cxv.
               
                  That the Lords prayer conſiſteth of ſeauen petitions: and what the meaning and ſcope of them is.
               
               VVHerefore the Lords prayer, as it is deliuered by Mathewe the Euangeliſt, ſeemeth to containe ſeauen petitions: in three of the which wee aske for things eternal; in the other fower for things temporall: which yet notwithſtanding are neceſſary for the attaining of things eternall. For, whereas we ſay, Hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy wilbe done, in earth as it is in heauen, which ſome men haue not vnfitly vnderſtood, that Gods wil ſhould be done both in our ſpirit and in our body, all theſe things are ſuch as muſt be cōtinued for euer; &, being here begun, by dayly proceeding are increaſed in vs: which

being perfected, which thing wee hope ſhall bee performed in the other life, wee ſhall poſſeſſe and inioy them for euer. But where wee ſay, Giue vs this day our dayly bread, and forgiue vs our treſpaſſes, as we forgiue them that treſpaſſe againſt vs, and leade vs not into temption, but deliuer vs from euill; who doth not ſee, that al theſe things reſpect the wants and neceſſities of this preſent life. In that euerlaſting life therefore in which wee hope to liue for euer, the ſanctiſication of Gods name, his kingdome, and the fulfilling of his will, ſhal remaine euerlaſtingly in great perfection in our ſpirit, and in our bodies. But the bread which we aske, is therefore called dayly bread becauſe in the ſtate of this life it is neceſſarie; being a ſupply of the want, either of ſoule, or body, whether wee vnderſtand thereby, either carnall, or ſpirituall food, or both. Heere is vſe of that remiſſion of ſinnes, which we deſire;

Becauſe heere thoſe ſinnes bee committed, the remiſſion whereof wee pray for. Heere are thoſe temptations which allure and drawe vs vnto ſinne. To conclude, Here is that euill, from which we deſire to be deliuered. But there, that is to ſay in heauen, and the ſtate of the other life, there is none of theſe things.
            
            
               CHAP. Cxvi.
               
                  That the Euangelistes, Mathewe and Luke, doe differ in ſetting downe the petitions of the Lords Prayer.
               
               
                  LVke the Euangeliſt comprehendeth in the Lords prayer, not ſeauen, but fiue petitions, and yet doth not hee farre from Mathewe: but, by expreſſing thē more briefly, put vs in mind, how thoſe ſeauen are to bee vnderſtood. For, the name of God is hallowed in ſpirit. But

his kingdome ſhall come when the fleſh ſhall riſe againe. Luke therefore ſhewing that the third petition is in ſome ſort a repetition; by omitting it, makes vs the better to vnderſtand it. Thē doth hee adde the other three concerning dayly bread, the remiſſion of ſinnes, the auoyding of temptation. But, wheras hee addeth in the firſt place, But deliuer vs from euill, this Euangeliſt hath it not: That therby we might vnderſtand, that it pertaineth to that which formerly was expreſſed concerning temptation. For, therefore it is hee ſayth, But deliuer vs; and not, And deliuer vs, Thereby ſhewing vs that they are but one petition. For he ſaith Let not this be, that wee bee led into temptation, but deliuer; That euerle one may knowe he is deliuered from euill, in that he is not led into temptation.
            
         
         
            
            OF CHRIST.
            
               CHAP. Cxvli.
               
                  That true Charitie is an effect of true faith and hope: and that there is not true faith, but that, that doth worke by loue.
               
               NOw, for Charitie, which the Apoſtle pronounceth to be greater then theſe two, that is, faith and hope; by how much the greater it is in any man, by ſo much hee is the better in whome it is. For, when wee aske whether a man bee good or not, Wee aske not, what hee beleeues or hopes for, but what hee loueth. For, hee that loues aright, doubtleſſe beleeues and hopes aright. But hee which loues not, beleeues in vaine, though the thinges bee true hee doth beleeue: and hopes

in vaine, though the things hee hope for, pertaine to true felicitie: vnleſſe he beleeue and hope for this alſo: That God, at his humble ſuite, both can and will giue vnto him, the affection of loue. For, although no man can hope without loue, yet it may and doth ſometimes fal out, that a man loues not that, without which hee cannot attaine the thing hee hopeth for. As, if a man hope for eternall life, and yet neither hath, nor loueth righteouſneſſe, without which no man attaineth eternall life. This is that faith of Chriſt which the Apoſtle commendes, which works by loue: and what it findes defectiue in loue, it asketh, that it may receiue, and ſeeketh that it may finde, and knocketh that it may bee opened vnto it. For, faith obtaineth what the lawe commandeth. For, without the gift of God; That is, without the holy Ghoſt, by which the loue of God is ſhed abroade in

our hearts, the lawe may require obedience, but worketh no obedience, but rather maketh a man a more greenous tranſgreſſor, becauſe it taketh from him the excuſe of ignorance. For, there, doubtleſſe, carnall concupiſcēce ſwayeth all, where the loue of God hath no place.
            
            
               CHAP. Cxvlii.
               
                  That, as of the whole Church, ſo of euerie faithfull man, there are fower ages and degrees, by which they goe forwarde and growe to perfection.
               
               WHen as a man liueth and abideth in palpable darkneſſe of ignorance, following thoſe things the fleſh moſt deſireth reaſon making no re
                     〈…〉
                  , This is the firſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the condition of a man. Afterwardes, when by the lawe hee getteth the knowledge of ſinne, it the

ſpirit of God aſſiſt him not, endeuouring to liue according to the Lawe, hee is ouercommen of ſinne, ſinneth wittingly, becomes the ſeruant of ſinne, (for of whom ſoeuer a man is ouercommen, his ſeruant hee is) the knowledge of the commandement being an occaſion that ſin worketh in man all manner of concupiſcence, the tranſgreſſion of the law now knowen being added to the heap of former ſins (and ſo is that fulfilled which is written, the lawe entred, that ſin might abound) this is the ſecond eſtate or condition of man. But, if GOD looke ſo gratiouſly vpon man, that hee helpe him to performe thoſe things he requireth, and man beginne to bee ledde by the ſpirite of God, his deſires and endeuours againſt the fleſh are ſtrengthened with the ſtrength of loue; So that although as yet there be in man that reſiſts, in his beſt endeuours, the whole infirmitie

of ſinne being not healed, yet the iuſt doth liue by faith, and liues righteouſly, in that hee yeeldeth not to euill concupiſcence, the loue of righteouſnes preuailing in him. This is the third eſtate of man. In which cauſes if with happy continuance hee goe forward, the laſt part remaineth, the complement whereof ſhall bee after this life: firſt, in the happie reſt of the ſoule or ſpirit, and afterwards in the reſurrection of the body. Of theſe 
                     •
                  ower different eſtates, the firſt was before the Lawe: The ſecond vnder the Lawe: The thirde vnder grace: The fourth, in full and perfect peace. So was the eſtate of GODS people ordered in the ſeuerall diuerſities of times, accordingly as it pleaſed him, which diſpoſeth all thinges in meaſure, number and weight. For, the people of God was firſt before the Law. Secondly, vnder

the Lawe which was giuen by Moyſes. Thirdly, vnder Grace which was reuealed by the firſt comming of the Mediatour: which grace notwithſtanding was not wanting before to them vpon whom God wold beſtowe it, although it were vailed and hid in obſcurities, according to the diſpenſation of time. For, there was none of the righteous in olde time, that could obtaine ſaluation without the faith of Chriſt. And, vnleſſe hee had beene knowen of them, they could not haue prophecied vnto vs of him, ſometimes more plainely, ſometimes more obſcurely, as they did.
            
         
         
            
            OF BAPTISME.
            
               CHAP. Cxix.
               
                  That Baptiſme doth profit vs, in which ſoeuer of theſe former ages or degrees wee be in.
               
               IN which ſoeuer of theſe fower ages or conditions the grace of regeneration findeth each man, there are all his ſinnes paſt remitted vnto him; and the guilt, contracted by the firſt birth, is diſſolued by the ſecond. And of ſo great force is that the ſpirit breatheth where it wil, that there bee ſome which neuer enter into that ſecond eſtate of ſeruitude vnder the lawe; but in the firſt receiuing of the commandemēt haue the hands of Gods helping grace reached forth vnto them.
            
            
               
               CHAP. Cxx.
               
                  That they which die immediately after baptiſme, are happie.
               
               BEfore a man can receiue commandement, it is of neceſſity that he muſt firſt liue, according to the fleſh. But if, being initiated with the ſacrament of regeneration, hee preſently departe out of this life, death ſhall not hurt him, becauſe Chriſt therefore died and roſe againe, that he might haue dominion ouer the liuing and the dead. Neither ſhall the kingdome of death hould him, for whom he died that was free among the dead.
            
            
               
               CHAP. Cxxi.
               
                  That Charitie is the Law and the Goſpell, which now hath her dayly increaſes; but, in the world to come ſhall haue her abſolute perfection.
               
               THat all the diuine precepts are referred vnto Charitie whereof the Apoſtle ſayth, The ende of the commandement is charitie out of a pure heart, a good conſcience, and faith vnfained; The ende therfore of euerie precept, is charitie. That is, euery precept is referred vnto charitie. But whatſoeuer is ſo done, either for feare of puniſhment, or any other carnall reſpect, that it is not referred to charitie, which the holye Ghoſt doth ſhedde abroade in our hearts, it is not done as it ſhould bee done, though it ſeeme to bee done. For,

charitie reacheth both to God and our neighbour. And truely in theſe two precepts hangeth all the Lawe and the Prophets: Whereunto wee may adde the Goſpell and the Apoſtles alſo. For, whēce haue we that ſaying, The ende of the Lawe is charitie, and God is charitie, but out of their writings What-euer things therefore God commandeth, of which one is, Thou ſhalt not commit adulterie, and what-euer things are not commanded, but men are aduiſed thereunto by ſpeciall counſaile, of which one is, It is good for a man not to touch a woman, both theſe kindes of things are then well performed when they are referred to the loue of God, and of our neighbour for God both in this world and the worlde to come: The loue of God, I ſay, whome now wee behould through faith, but then ſhall ſee him face to face: And our neighbour alſo now we knowe but by faith. For, wee

mortall men, know not the harts of mortall men: But then God ſhall enlighten the hid things of darkeneſſe, and manifeſt the thoughts of our harts. Then ſhal euerie one haue prayſe of God, becauſe each neighbour ſhall prayſe and loue that in other, which diuine illumination will not ſuffer to be hid in them, but will preſent it to the viewe of each other. Now concupiſcence is diminiſhed and weakned, charitie increaſing till it come, euen in this world, to ſuch a greatnes, as greater it cannot be. No greater loue then this can any man haue, than that a man ſhould giue his life for his friends. But, who ſhall bee able to expreſſe what height of loue ſhall bee there, where there ſhall bee no concupiſcence nor no inordinate deſire to be repreſſed? how whole & ſound all things ſhal be there, where there ſhall be no ſtriuing
                     •
                   of direfull death.
            
            
               
               CHAP. Cxxii.
               
                  What name is moſt fitly to be giuen to this worke.
               
               BVt let vs now at the laſt make an end of this worke, which chuſe you, whether you will call or vſe in the nature of an Enchiridion. But, I truely not thinking your ſtudies and endeuours in Chriſt Ieſus to be ſuch as ſhould be deſpiſed, and promiſing my ſelfe all good of you; truſting & hoping in the help of our redeemer, and louing you moſt dearly in the ſweete fellowſhip of his members, I haue written and dedicated vnto you (endeuouring my ſelf to the vttermoſt) a Book of faith, hope and charitie: Which, God grant bee as pleaſing & profitable vnto you, as it is large.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   