
      
         
            
            Twelue Sermons of Saynt Auguſtine, now lately Tranſlated into Engliſh by Tho. Paynel.
            
            
               AT LONDON.
            
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum
            
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the mooſt vertuous Mighty and mooſt gratious Queene Marye, daughter vnto the mooſt victorious and mooſte noble prynce, kinge Henry the viii. kynge of Englande, Fraunce and Ireland Thomas Paynell wyſheth moſt proſperous helth and felicitie.
            
               
                  ALthough oure ſauiour chriſte Jeſus doothe affyrme yt the yoke and cares of man & ſayntes to be ſwete, and eaſy to bee obſerued and borne: yet howe many (moſt excellent Ladye) do at this preſent alow, or admit yt ſaying? ye, howe manye do admyt & affyrme ye contrary

and yet ſay they not that it is for anye man or woman impoſſible to lyue chaſt? to loue theyr enemies, to lyue ſoberlye & Chriſtianlye? O God, how is vſury and Symony cloked? how is intemperate lyuynge vſed and eſtemed? Howe do men kepe the chaſtitie of Matrimonye? How do men paye vnto God and his miniſters theyr tythes? what charitable dedes, what dolefull penaunce, yea, what murder, adultery, and fornicacion, what bybbynge, and wandering, clene contrary to doing yt commandements yt we re vſed: For nowe to Lynke ſunder ſnoeuen is a virtue, to kepe a concubyne, is not muche blamed, to ſeke vpon 
                  •
               aulkers and diuiners

is comenly vſed, to be proud, is accepted for clenlynes, to be auaritious, for prouidēce, to be crafty and deceytful, for policye, to ſpende and waſte, for good felowſhyp, to ſkoffe and ieſte, for a poynt of ciuilitie, to flatter, is taken for intier loue and amitie. O lorde ſhall theſe men come to the euerlaſtynge beatitude? ſhal they ſe the kinge in his eſtate and maieſte? no verely. Who then? He that lyueth iuſtlye, and ſpeaketh the trueth: he Eſai. that abhorreth to do iniuries couetouſly, and remoueth awaye hys handes from gyftes, he y• ſtoppeth his eares, leaſt he heare the deceytefull oppreſſion of the innocente bloude, and that ſhutteth his eyes, leſt he ſe euyll: this man

ſhal inhabit places, and ſe the kynge in his glorious eſtate. Why do not men folowe the ſayinges and wordes of the prophete? Whye do they not enſue the doctrine of famous doctours and preachers?
            There was neuer more ſincere and true preachynge, than is nowe of late, nor the worde of God more ſpoken of, thē is in theſe oure dayes. But ſo muche preachynge, & ſo lytle folowynge, ſo muche exhortation to charite, and ſo feable & weake loue, ſo much perſwaſion to ſuccoure and ayde the poore, and ſo greate pouertie, ſo much good counſel geuen to enſue vertu, and ſo litle apprehended & vſed, was neuer ſene. Why ſo? For euery man (as now ye worlde

is faſhioned) be he neuer ſo rude and vnlearned, wyll be his owne doctour, his owne interpreter of ſcripture, and folowe his owne ſenſe and opinion, his owne maner of liuyng and pleaſure, cleane cō
               trary to all wyſedome, reaſō, and good learnyng. The old aunciente fathers, and true interpreters of Gods holye worde, the maſters of vertuous and godly conuerſation, are amonge many lytle or no thing regarded. What were they (ſay thei) but men as we be? Truth it is: but yet farre more excellente both in learnynge and vertuous operations thā we be: bleſſed martyrs, holy confeſſors, the choſen ſeruauntes and veſſels of God, the enſuers of his ſteps

and ſtatutes, the reprouers of vyce, men of moſte perfecte lyfe, & the ſincere preachers and expounders of the word of God. For who is he liuing that (as for an enſample) in ſubtilite of wyt, in profounde learnyng, in cleare declaration of ſcripture, or in godly example, that may be compared vnto S. Auguſtine? Whoſe workes are incomparable, & ſinguler in al kindes of good learninge: and to reduce mā from vice to vertue, from the actiue, to the contemplatyue lyfe moſt excellente. Oute of whoſe ſermons, to admoniſh and reuoke the people frome theyr diſſolute and vitious lyuinge, and to put them in remembraunce of theyr duetye, and vnthankefulnes towardes

god: I haue ſelected and tranſlated theſe twelue ſermones, the whych in mine opinion and mynde, are moſt worthy, and moſt neceſſarye to be knowen and had in memorye, but to be folowed, muche more neceſſary. Deſirynge your hyghnes thankfully to accepte this my rude tranſlation. Rude it is (I cō
               feſſe) and barbarous, becauſe I woulde be playne vnto the playne and ſimple people, the whiche thynge (as I coniecture) is not far amis, nor yet greatlye to be blamed.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ Of a Chriſten name. And what he ought to do and obſerue Ser 215 that bereth a chriſten name. i. Ser.
            
               I Pray you my moſte dearely and welbeloued brethren, that with all oure ſtudye & diligence, we call to oure remembraunce, why and wher fore we be named and called Chriſtians, and why we bear the croſſe of Chriſt in our forheades. For truly we ought to know, that it is not ſufficiente to receaue the name of Chriſten men, excepte we do the workes of Chriſtians.
            For what doth it auayl (ſaith the lorde) to call me lord, lord

yf ye fulfyll not my commaū
               dementes? yf thou name thy Luke. 6. ſelfe a Chriſten ſouldear, and continuallye doſte bleſſe thy ſelf with the croſſe of Chriſt, and after thyne habilitie and ſubſtaunce, doeſte no almes dedes, nor regardeſt not charitie, iuſtice, nor chaſtitie, thy chriſten name ſhall nothynge auayle the. The ſygne and croſſe of Chriſte, is a thynge moſte excellent, and therfore with this moſte pretious ſignacle and ſeale, that thynge whiche is mooſte pretious, ought to be ſealed. For what doth it auayle or profyte the, to make a ſeale of a rynge of golde, yf thou cloſe putrified and rotten ſtrawe therein.
            Or what doth it auauntage vs to weare, or to haue the

croſſe of Chriſte in oure foreheades and mouthes, and in wardly in our ſoules to haue and hyde ſynne? he that thin keth euel, ſpeaketh euel, and yf he that bleſſeth hym ſelfe, 
                  〈…〉
                amende, his ſynnes 
                  〈…〉
                not, but rather augment and increace. There be that when they goo aboute thefte, or aduſtery, if they ſtū ble neuer ſo lytle, they doe bleſſe thē ſelues, but yet they ſtaye not them ſelues frome theyr euel workes and purpoſes. Nor the wretches per ceaue not yt in ſo doyng, they do rather include the deuyll then that they exclude hym. But he whiche throughe the ayde of God doth reiecte and repell all vitious and ſynfull lyuynge: and ſtriueth dothe

to thynke vpon that is good, and to do good, he doth well and iuſtelye bleſſe his mouth with the ſygne and token of the croſſe, & endeuereth hym ſelfe to do ſuche workes, as ſhall deſerue and merite to haue, and to receaue ye ſygne and token of the croſſe. For it is wrytten. The kingedome 1. Cor. 4 of heauen is not in wordes, but in power, and good workes. And agayne, fayth with Jam, 2, out good workes is dead in itſelfe. Therefore leaſte that paraduenture we haue not this Chriſten name to oure ayde and amendment, but to our vtter damnation and deſtruction: let vs (whiles that we haue remedy, and help in oure owne handes) retourne vnto good workes. And to

the entent ye may (throughe the helpe of God) accompliſh and doe thoſe thinges, loke that there be peace and concorde amonge you: and that ye reduce and brynge thoſe that are at ſtryfe and debate, to peace and vnitie. Auoyde and flye all leſynges. Exchue periury as perpetuall & mortal death. And aboue al thinges loke that after youre habilitie (as is aforeſayd) ye exhibit & geue your charitie to the poore and nedy: and that ye offer vp your oblations to be conſecrated vpon the aulter. Loke that ye canne ſaye youre beleife, and the lordes prayer, and that ye teache your chyldren the ſame. For I maruell very muche, howe they dare be ſo bolde, as once

to name them ſelues chriſtians, that do diſſemble to ſaye a fewe verſes onely of theyr crede, or of the lordes praier. Likewiſe ye ſhal vnderſtād, that for thoſe chyldren the which ye do Chriſten, ye are as ſuerties vnto God: and therefore be cyrcumſpecte to correcte and chaſten aſwell thoſe whiche ye do Chriſten, as your owne naturall chyldrē, that they may liue chaſtly, ſobe rly, and iu
                  •
               tly. And be ware that youre lyfe be ſuche that your chyldren (yf they wyll folow you) burne not in the eternal fier, but that they may approche and comewith you to the perpetuall blyſſe of heauen. Take you heede that doe here, & iudge mens cauſes, that ye iudge righteouſly,

and that ye take no giftes of the poore. For gyftes Pſa. 14 Exod. 23 doe blynde wyſe mens hartes, and do chaunge & alter Eccl. 20. the wordes of the prudent & wyſe, leſt peraduenture, whiles ye get and heape vp monye, ye leſe your ſoules. For no man can gette vnlawfull gayne without lawful payne and dammage, for where is luker, there is loſſe, luker in the cheſte, and dammage in cōſcience. Let no man drinke to be droncken, nor compell anye other at his table to drinke more than nedeth, leſt that throughe ebriette & drō
               kennes, he leſe both his own ſoule, and theyrs alſo. Loke that ye come together to the churche vpon the ſunday, for yf the wretched Jewes doe

kepe and ſanctifye theyr ſabboth day, with ſuch deuotion as on that day, they wyll doe no earthly worke at all: how muche more ſhulde we chriſten men on the ſunday, geue & apply our mindes to Gods ſeruice, & to come to ye church for the ſalute & ſaluation of our owne ſoules. And when ye come together, praye for the remiſſion of your ſinnes. Make no ſtryfe there, nor no debate, for who ſo commyng to the church, doth ſo, he thorowe debate, doth wounde & hurte hym ſelfe there, where he myght haue healed, & holpen him ſelfe by prayer. And beyng in the church, beware and loke that ye braule not, but that ye paciently do liſtē and take good hede to youre

diuine ſeruyce. For he yt doth iangle or bable in the church, ſhall geue an acountes and rekenynge, aſwell for other, as for him ſelfe, becauſe he wolde nether here Goddes worde, nor yet ſuffer other men to here the ſame. Loke that ye truly pay your tithes to the churche. And let hym that was proude, waxe humble, that was lecherous, wax chaſt, that was wont to ſtele, or to inuade other mens goodes, geue his charitie to the poore. Let hym that hathe bene enuious, be beneuolent and gentle, & that hath done iniurie, be readie and quycke to aſke for geuenes: and that he to whō iniurye was done vnto, be preſte and readye to forgeue, As ofte as any infirmitie

or ſickenes doth chaūce amonge you, let hym that is diſeaſed receaue the holy cō
               munion of the verye bodye and bloude of Chriſt, and afterwardes be aneled, that ſcripture may be fulfylled in in hym, ſayinge: yf anye man be ſycke, let the preiſt be ſente Jam. 5. for to anoynt hym, & to pray ouer hym, and the prayer of fayth ſhal ſaue the ſycke, and God ſhall rayſe hym vp, and yf he be in ſynne, they ſhall be forgeuen hym. Take heede, and marke nowe good brethren, that he, the whiche in his ſycknes wyll reſort vnto the churche, may obtayn bodely health, and receaue the forgeuenes of ſynnes. Seynge then that double goodnes and benefite may be foūd

and obtayned in the churche, why do theſe wretches labor Deu. 18, by inchaunters, by fountaynes, by trees, by diuiliſh philaters, be caracters, by dyuiners, and ſothſayers, to induce muche miſcheife among the people? But as I haue ſayde vnto you before, looke that ye do admonyſh & warn your chyldren, and all youre houſholde to liue chaſtly, and ryghteouſly, prouokynge & ſturrynge them to good workes, not only by wordes, but by your godly and good exā
               ple. But principally wherſoeuer ye be, whether ye be at home, or in your iourneye, or at the table, or amonge company, take hede ye ſpeake no fylthye, no luxurious, nor no lyghte wordes: but that ye

admonyſh your neighbours, and kynſfolke, continually to end euer thē ſelues to ſpeake the thynge that is good and honeſt, leſt that throughe detraction, or daunſynge vpon the holy dayes, or by babling and recitinge of luxurious & fylthye communication, they with theyr tounges (wherewith they ſhulde laude and honour God) do wound and hurte thē ſelues. For yf theſe wretched and miſerable perſons, which are not aſhamed to daunce before ye churches of holy ſaintes, come thether good chriſtians, they depart from thence as infideles, for this vſe and cuſtome of daunſynge doth yet remayne of the obſeruaunces, and infide litie of the gentyles. And pō
               der

with youre ſelues what maner a chriſtiane that he is, the whiche comminge to the churche to praye, and forgettynge the ſame, is not aſhamed to ſpeake the ſacrilegius wordes of paganes. Conſider my dearely beloued brethren, whether it be ſemynge or conuenient, that ſuch luxurious and lyghte wordes, y• very poyſen of y• deuyl, ſhuld procede or come forth of chriſten mens mouthes, into the whiche the ſacramente of the very body and bloud of chriſt doth enter and is receyued. And aboue all thynges, take Tobi. 4. hede that ye doe vnto other, as ye wold be done vnto: and math. 7. that ye woulde other menne ſhould not do vnto you, that ye do it not vnto theym, the

whiche thynge yf ye woulde truely & faythfullye obſerue and fulfyll: ye ſhulde eaſelye delyuer your ſoules from all ſinne: for he that hath no lernynge at all, and hath theſe two ſentences in mynde and memorye, maye by Goddes helpe and grace, in dede fulfyll them. And notwithſtandynge, I doe beleue that the aforeſayde euell and noughty cuſtome, procedyng of the obſeruaunces of paganes, be through my wordes, & gods inſpiration, cleane auoyded: yet yf ye knowe any that obſerue and kepe that moſt abhominable fylthynes of the fawne, and ye harte, loke that ye ſo chaſten, and ſo correcte them, that they may repente theim that euer they commit

ted ſuche a ſacrilegius, and ſo abhominable a dede. And yf ye know anye ſuche as doe crye out, yf the moone at any ſeaſon, through anye eclypſe doth waxe obſcure and dark: warne them therof, and ſhew them, that they ſynne and offende greuouſly, yf they doe truſte, that throughe theyr clamours & ſacrilegius boldnes, they maye defend them ſelues from the Moone (the whiche by Gods commaundement and ordinaūce at certayne and appoynted tymes doth waxe darke) or fromany other ſorcerye or wytchecrafte. And yf ye ſee or perceaue any that offer vp theyr vowes vnto trees, or vnto any foūtaynes, or that hange aboute them or any of theyrs

any diabolicall philaters, or caracters, herbes or the ioyſe of anye herbe, or that (as I haue ſayde) do ſeeke vppon ſothſayers, diuiners: or inchaunters: correcte them ſharpelye, and ſay vnto them that al that ſo doe, do loſe the ſacrament of baptyſme. And inaſmuche as we haue harde ſay, that Sathan hath ſo deceyued both men and womē, that they wyll not worke vpon the thurſdaye: I proteſt both before God, and his holy aungels, that excepte they which obſerue thoſe thinges amende and redeme ſuch ſacrilege with longe and ſharp pennaunce, that they ſhall be dampned for euer. Nor I doubte not but yt ſuche wretches, the which as in the honoure

of Jupiter, wyll not worke vpon the thurſdayes, wyl not be aſhamed at al, nor yet fear to worke and labour vpon the ſunday. And there fore take hede, that ye earneſtly do chaſten as many as ye knowe that doe ſo. And yf they wyll not amende, ſuffer them nother to ſpeake, nor to eate, nor yet once to dryncke in your cōpany. And yf they be belongynge vnto you, or of your familie, ſkorge theim that they at the leaſte, which remember not theyr ſoules health, maye feare the punyſhmēt of their bodies. I (my deare brethren) remembring your manifolde perilles and daungers, do thus tenderly warne and admoniſhe you, yf ye then wyllyngelye do herken

vnto me, ye ſhall come to perpetuall ioye and lyfe euer laſtyng, the which he vouchſafe to graunt you, that with the father and the holy goſte doth liue eternally. Sobeit.
         
         
            ¶ Of a Chriſten name, and Ser 
                     •
                  1
                     •
                  
                that a Chriſtian ſhulde often tymes thynke, whye he is named a Chriſten man, and why he beareth the croſſe of Chriſt in his forehead. Ser. ii.
            
               I Do reioyce mi mooſt derelye beloued brethren, and do thanke God, that I haue deſerued to fynd you in good

helth. And truly my brethrē, a father doth ryghteouſly, & not without a great cauſe reioyce, as ofte as he doth fynd hys chyldren healthfull in body, and deuout in the feare of God. And inaſmuche as the goodnes of God hath graunted me double gladnes, aſwell of youres, as of myne owne health: I muſt now open and declare vnto you the thynge whiche pertayneth, and is for the vtilitie & helth of your ſoules. It is very neceſſary dere brethren, that wt all our intention and mynde, we ſhould ſtudye to enquyre and vnderſtande, whye and wherefore we be Chriſtians, and why we beare the croſſe of Chryſte in oure foreheaddes. Ye muſte vnderſtande

and perceaue good brethren, that we are not made Chriſtians to be carefull for thys lyfe. For (as ſayth ye apoſtle) 1. cor. 15 yf we in this lyfe onelye doe beleue and truſt in god, then are we of all other the moſte wretched and miſerable. For he that doeth thynke onelye vppon this lyfe, is compared and likened vnto a beaſt. For what other thynge doe beaſtes care for, but onelye to eate, to drincke, to ſlepe, and to lyue voluptuouſlye? And euen ſuche are all they that thynke moore vppon theyr bodyes, then vppon theyre ſoules: that loue glottouye and lecherye, more then iuſtyce or chaſtitie. Therefore my dearelye beloued, ye muſte vnderſtand, and know

that we are made chriſtians, to thynke continually vppon the eternall world, & reward that is to come: and to labor more for the ſoule, then for ye bodye. Our fleſhe ſhal continue but for a fewe yeares in this worlde: but oure ſoules (yf we lyue and do well) ſhall inherite heauen wtout ende. But yf we do euyll workes, (that God forbyd) and labor more for bodelye pleaſure, then for the helth or ſaluation of oure ſoules, I feare me that when good men ſhall be receyued with the aungelles vnto eternall lyfe, that we (that god forbyd) ſhalbe caſte headling into helfyer. Good brethren, it is not ynoughe that we haue receyued a chriſten name, excepte that therwith,

we do good chriſtēmēs workes. To hym it is ryght profitable to be called a chriſtiane, that loueth chaſtitie, that exchueth ebriete, that abhorreth pride, and that as very poiſon doth reiect enui. He is a righte good Chriſten man, that ſtealeth not, that beareth no falſe witnes, that lyeth not, that vſeth no periury, that committeth no adultery, that doth frequente the churche, that doeth not taſte of his fruytes, vntyll he fyrſt haue offered part of thē vnto God, that doth pay his tythes yearelye, to be deſtributed amonge the nedy, that doth loue his curate, and honoureth preiſtes, that loueth euery man as hym ſelfe, and hateth no man. Uerelye he is

not onely a chriſten man that doth feare and exchewe as the ſwearde of Satan deceit full weyghtes & double meaſures, but chriſt him ſelf doth alſo dwell in hym. He is a good chriſtiane, that cōming to the churche, doth exhibite and offereth vp his offering and that after his poſſibilitie and ſubſtaunce, doth geue a peny, or a morſell of bread to ſome poore man: that receiueth the pore into his houſe: that waſſheth the pore mens fete: that doth not only make no debate, but reduceth ſuch as are at diſcorde and ſtryfe, to vnitie and concorde: that doth ſhew reuerence, and the loue of vnfayned charitie vnto his frendes & elders: that doth lyue chaſt, and admoniniſheth

his chyldren, and his neighboures with word and dede, in ſobriete and chaſtite. He is a good Chriſten man, that as ofte as the holye and ſolemne feaſtes drawe nere, doth certayne dayes before, abſtayne and keepe chaſtitie with his wyfe, that the more conueniently, & with a more ſincere and ſure conſcience, a chaſte body, and a clean hart, he may come vnto the Lordes borde and table. And he lykewyſe that can the lordes praier, and his crede by rote, & that faythfully doth teache his chyldren the ſame. Now good brethren ye haue herde who be good chriſtians, and therefore let vs with Gods ayde and helpe, do the beſte we can or may, that this chriſten

name be not wrongfully and vaynelye in vs, and that Chriſtes ſacramentes ſuffer no iniury in vs: but in hearte let vs continually thinke vppon good Chriſten workes, and in dede fulfyll them. For I praye you, what maner a Chriſtian cal ye him, yt ſcarcely commeth once to the churche, and yet when he cometh, doth not ſtande vp to praye for his ſinnes and miſdedes, but to prate & bable, to cauſe ſtryfe and debate, or elles to drynke (if he may fynd a conuenient place) tyll he vomit agayne? & after that he hath well droncken, ryſeth vp like a madde man, to leape and daunce, and to ſynge luxurious and fylthye ſonges of loue. Suche a one doeth not

feare nother to ſteale, nor yet to commit adulterye, to geue falſe wytnes, to curſe, nor yet to commit periury. But whether they be men or women that exerciſe and doe ſuche vngodly workes, thei nether receaue the name of a Chriſtian, nor yet the ſacramente of baptyſme, to theyr ayde and conſolation, but to theyr iudgement and damnatiō. And without they repente theym and doe penaunce, they ſhall peryſhe for euer. Now good brethren I haue opened vnto you, who be good, and who be euyl Chriſtians. And therfore folow thoſe that ye ſe and perceaue to be good: & chaſten, chyde, and correcte thoſe ye know to be nought, yt through your owne vtilite,

and theyr amendemente, ye may haue and optayne doble rewarde. For they that are good, chaſte, ſober, hūble, and gentle, wyll by the grace of God, continue in theyr good and godly workes: and the myſlyuers, quickelye or euer they departe from henſe, amend them ſelues: for yf they die without repentaūce, they ſhall not come to ioye, but to perpetuall and euerlaſtynge death, from the whiche God voucheſafe to delyuer vs. So be it.
         
         
            ¶ Of the miſtery, frute, and manner of faſtynge in Ser. 46. Lent. iii. Ser.
            
               
               WE oughte to eſteme & ſuppoſe ye whole tyme of oure lyfe, to be a place to exerciſe vertue in, and with al vertue to ſtryue to come to the celeſtiall rewarde. But that muſt and oughte moſt ſpecially to be done and fulfilled in this holy tyme and dayes of Lent, the whiche dayes beyng halowed with abſtinēce and faſtyng, do adde ſo much to the vertue of ye ſoule, how muche they diminiſhe of the voluptuous pleaſure of the body. This is alawfull number of faſting dayes, the whiche are celebrated in holy examples. Moyſes when he ſhoulde receaue the lawe of

God did faſt forty dayes and forty nightes without other meate or dryncke: by ſuch abſtinence and faſtyng, he was prepared and ordeyned to receaue the wyll and the commaundementes of God. Helias after he had faſted fortye dayes, was tranſlated and caried out of the world in a charet of fire to the hieſt place of heauē. Our lord and ſauiour through faſtinge of. xl. dayes did triumphe, and ouercame the temptations of the deuil and as victorious came to ye predication and declaration of the goſpell. And we in like maner oughte to faſte, and to obſrrue theſe dayes▪ the whiche we do reade to be conſecrated and halowed by ſuche examples. Let vs therefore

conſecrate and honour theſe dayes with al alacrite & ioyfulnes of heart and minde, & prefer them aboue al wordly bankets, and bodely debate. For in theſe dayes we are moſt kindled and inflamed to fulfil the wil and the cōmaun dements of god, for through abſtinence the pleaſure of the body is much ſwaged and debated. Truly the pure minde doth then make moſt haſte to God, and to do and fulfil hys commaundementes, when it is not miſtempered wyth ſurfettynge, nor wyth the ſacietie of meates and drynkes. Where of oure Sauioure in hys Goſpell dothe ſaye. Take hede to youre ſelues, leſte youre heartes be ouercomme with ſurfets,

with dronckennes, and with worldelye cares and cogitations: Luk. 21. leſte that ſodayne daye come on you vnwares: for it ſhall come as a ſnare vpon y• vniuerſall worlde, and no mā ſhall ſcape it. Alſo this great vtilitie and profyt is in theſe hungery and faſtinge dayes, for through ſuche abſtinence, and abſtayninge from lawful thynges, we are moniſhed & muche exhorted to abſtayne frō that, which is vnlawfull. We abſtayne from fleſhe, the whiche vpon other dayes we may vſe lawfully. We abſtain from wyne, the whiche we maye vſe moderatelye. Let vs therfore which do exchue and auoyde the thynge that is lawfull, flye and aboue all thynges auoyde ſynne, that

can neuer be well and lawfullye vſed. And if we intende & purpoſe to faſt from meat, let vs aboue all thinges faſt and abſtayne frō ſynne. For what doth it auayle vs to abſtayn, or to voyd the body of meat, if we repleniſh the ſoule with vyce and ſynne? What doeth it profytte the to be pale and wanne with faſtynge, if thou be blowen and pufte vp with hatred and enuy? What doth it auayle vs to abſtaine from wyne, yf we be droncken and full of the poyſen of anger? What auauntageth it the to abſtayne from fleſh ordeyned to be eaten, yf thou backbyte and ſpeake malitiouſly of thy neyghbour? What doth it auayle vs to abſtayne frome thoſe thynges whiche are at

ſometimes lawefull, if we do thoſe thinges, which are neuer lawfull? Therfore let vs (as I haue ſayd) faſt and abſtayne from meat, but muche more frō vice, that we maye be repleniſhed with the abundance of good & holy conuerſation, and in time to come deſerue & merite through gods grace and fauor, to be ſatiſfied with the reward of good workes. For they (as we do read in the goſpel) are bleſſed that hūger and thirſt iuſtice, for they ſhalbe ſatiſfied. In trueth we oughte to chooſe thys cōpenſation, that is to geue & to diſtribute ſuch meates as we do abſtayne fro, to the poore & neadye. For it is written: Bleſſed be they that are content to ſuffer, that in

another place they may be refreſhed. For that gyft is acceptable vnto God, when the neadye is fed and refreſhed, when the bare is clothed, when anger is not perfourmed nor finiſhed, whē ye time of anger is not kept, and whē euil is not done for euil. Our faſtinges are then thankeful and acceptable vnto God, when we do refreſhe and cō
               fort thoſe that faſte for verye nede & neceſſite: for then we ſhal heare this ſentence: Uerely I ſay vnto you, inaſmuche as ye haue done it vnto one of ye leaſt of theſe, ye haue done it to me. O the great be nignitie and goodnes of god, the which to repreſſe and aſſwage the couetouſneſſe of man, ſaith, yt whatſoeuer is

geuen to the leaſt poore man that is, is geuen vnto himſelfe. The goodnes of God graunte you my brethren, that ye may ſo ſerue & pleaſe hym with your abſtinence, almes dedes, & good workes, that he, the whiche doth lyue eternallye, maye brynge you to the eternall and true lyfe. So be it.
         
         
            ¶ Of faſtynge in Lent, and almes dedes. Ser. 62. iiii. Ser.
            
               I Praye you, & in lyke maner I admonyſhe you my derely beloued brethren, ye none of you do preſume to dyne in

this lawfull and moſte holye tyme of Lent, except it be vpon the ſundaye, or that paraduenture ye be in ſuche care and weakeneſſe, that your in firm tie and ſicknes doth not ſuffer you to faſt. For why, to faſt vppon other dayes, is other a remedye, or elles a rewarde: but not to abſtaine in dent, is ſynne. He that at any other tyme doeth faſte, ſhall haue pardon and remiſſion, but he that doth not faſt and abſtayne in Lente, ſhall fele payne. And yet let hym, that through feblenes cannot faſt prepare ſomewhat as ſecretlye as maye be, for hym ſelfe and other (if there be any modiſeaſed than hym ſelfe) that they maye eate it together. But he ſhall inuite nor call

none ſuch to his repaſt & dinner, that may faſt: For if he do both god and man ſhal eaſely perceaue, that his infirmitie is not the cauſe that he faſteth not, but that throughe gluttony he wil not faſt. Let him yt can not faſt, be content, & eate his meate with ſorowfulnes, that he when other men do abſteyne and faſt, abſtayneth not. Let him cauſe the thynge that ſhalbe neceſſary for the ſicke, to be ſecretly prepared for him ſelfe and ſome other. For it beſemeth him not to call any whole mā vnto his table, leſte that he, through otherinēs gluttony, encreaſe and augmente hys owne ſynne. And yet for aſmuche as he faſteth not, hys charitie and almoſe ought to

be the more larger to the poore, ſo to redeme thoſe ſinnes by almoſe dedes, the whiche he coulde not cure nor heale, by abſtinence and faſtynge. It is my good brethren a very good and a profitable thyng to faſt, but yet much better to geue almoſe. Yf a man may or can do both, they are two good thinges: but if he can not, better it is to geue almoſe. Yf thou be not able to faſt, almoſe dedes withoute faſting ſhalbe ſufficient: but to faſt without doyng of charitable and almoſe dedes, is not ſufficiente.
            Therfore yf a manne can not faſt, almoſe wythoute faſting is good: but yf a manne may faſte, and alſo do hys almoſe, they are two good thynges,

but to faſte without doyng of almes, is nother good, nor profitable, except a manne be ſo very nedy and poore, that he haue nothynge at all to geue, and then the good wyll of hym that hath nothyng to geue, is ſufficiente. For it is wrytten, Glorye to God an hyghe, and peace be on the Luke. 2. earth to thoſe that be wel willynge. But who can excuſe hym, when the lord hath promyſed to geue vs a rewarde Mat. 10 for a cuppe of colde water? And why doth he ſay of cold water? leaſte paraduenture ſome poore man wold excuſe him ſelfe by penury and lack of woode, and ſaye that he hath nother potte nor panne to warme any water withal. Finally my dearelye beloued

brethren, the lorde doth ſo exhorte, and ſo admoniſh vs by the holy prophet to do almes dedes, that there is in a maner no man ſo pore and nedy, that can excuſe hym ſelfe. He ſayth thus, This is the faſte (ſayth the Lord) that I haue Eſay. 58 choſen, breake thy breade to hym that is an hungred. He ſayth not, geue hym a whole loafe, for perchaunce the pore man hath it not to geue, but he ſayth, breake it, that is to ſaye, yf thou be ſo nedye and pore, yt thou haſt but one lofe of bread, yet breake of a pece therof, & geue it to the poore. Alſo he ſayth, leade the pore mā that is without lodging, Eſay. 58 home to thy houſe. Nowe yf a man be ſo poore and nedye, that he haue not where with

al to fede the poore, yet at leſt wiſe, lette him prepare him a bedde in ſome corner of hys houſe. O my deare brethren, what ſhal we ſay to theſe thinges, or what excuſe ſhall we make, that haue great & wide houſes? and yet ſcarcely voucheſafe at any time to receaue the poore pilgrim, beynge ignoraunt, yea not beleuyng that chryſte (as he doth ſaye) is receaued in his pilgrimes, I was aſtraunger, and ye receaued me, and inaſmuche as math. 25, ye haue done it vnto one of the leſt of theſe, ye haue done it vnto me. It is tedious and laboriouſe vnto vs, to receaue Chriſt in poore and neadye menne, into oure countreye, but I feare me he will requite vs, & not receaue vs

into his heauenly kingdom. We deſpiſe him here in thys world, I feare me he wil deſpiſe vs in heauē. As he hi ſelf doth ſaye, I was a hungred, and ye gaue me no meate, I Eſay. 58 was a ſtraunger, and ye dyd not receaue me. Inaſmuche then as ye did it not to one of Ezec. 18 the leſte of theſe, ye did it not to me. But I beſeche GOD mi good brethrē, that he may remoue from vs, the thynge that doth enſue and folowe: for afterwardes he ſayeth: Gette ye from me ye wicked & dāned perſons into ye eternall matth, 25 & euerlaſting fire, ye whiche is prepared for ſatā & his angels. Therfore my brethrē let vs not heare theſe things ſlightly, or wt our bodely ears only, but faithfully hearing it

let vs ſo teache it with word & dede, that other men maye vnderſtande it, & accomplyſh the ſame. Our Lorde Chriſt Jeſu grauntinge it, the whiche liueth and reigneth with the father and the holy goſt. So be it.
         
         
            ¶ Of confeſſion and penaunce. v. Ser. Ser. 66.
            
            
               HOly ſcripture doth often times exhorte vs to flye to the remedye, and medecine of confeſſiō: not that becauſe that God hath anye nede of oure confeſſion, vnto whome all that we thynke, ſpeake, or do, is cleare and at hand: but

becauſe we can not be otherwiſe ſaued, except yt we being penitent, do penitentlye confeſſe, that we negligentlye haue cōmitted. Sathan ſhal not accuſe him agayne at domes daye, that doth heare of his ſinfull dedes, and vngodly life, accuſe him ſelfe: ſo that he be confeſt, and penitentlye doth leaue and forſake them, & renueth them not agayne. Confeſſe your ſinnes (ſayeth S. James) one to another, Jacob. 5 and praye one for another, yt ye may be ſaued. And the Apoſtle Rom. 10 Paule ſayeth, Confeſſion with the mouth is to our ſaluation. And Salomon ſayeth thus of the confeſſion of ſinnes: he that doth hyde and cloke his ſinnes ſhall ſorowe: but he that doth confeſſe Prou. 
                     ••
                  
               
               
his fautes, and forſaketh them, ſhal obtayne mercy. It is a ryght good medecine of ſaluation, not to renewe our olde miſdedes, nor to refreſh the ſkarres of our old woundes. For S. John ſayeth: yf we confeſſe oure ſynnes, God 
                  
                     •
                  , Jo. 1, is faythful and iuſt to forgeue vs, and to clenſe vs from all iniquitie. Dauid ſayeth lykewiſe, I ſayd that I wold confeſſe mine iniquitie and vnrighteweſneſſe Pſal, 31 agaynſte my ſelfe, and thou didſte remitte the wyckedneſſe of my ſinne. Lette the ſinner confeſſe hys ſinnes whileſte he lyueth, for hereafter is no fruyteful confeſſion, Eccle. 17 nor no penaunce that ſhall profyte to ſaluation. Se nowe is the time of healthe, nowe is the acceptable time, 
                  
                     •
                  , cor. 6,
               
nowe is the tyme of remiſſion, for thoſe that are penitente. For why? after death ſhall be the tyme of punyſſhemente for thoſe that were negligente to confeſſe them of theyr iniquities. All wycked and ſinnefull perſonnes haue bitter penaunce in payne and tormente: but yet it doth profyte them nothynge vnto remiſſion, for theyr conſcience doth wrynge them to the encreaſe and augmentation of the paine that they do ſuffre. They myghte by confeſſion haue eſcaped the bitternes of theyr tormentes and payne, but they did not regarde it. And therfore as they are out wardly troubled with fire, ſo they are inwardly vexed wt ye remorſe of conſciēce. How cā
               
ſurgion heale the wound, the which the pacient is aſhamed to ſhewe? God doth deſire our confeſſion, that there by he might haue a ful and a perfect knowledge of our miſdedes. He that is aſhamed to diſcloſe and to confeſſe his ſinnes, ſhall haue God both his iudge, and his puniſher. A man ſhal do beſt to iudge him ſelfe in this worlde, leſte that God here after iudge him to 1. cor. 11 perpetual payne and tormēt. Euery ſinful man oughte to haue double ſorowe in penaunce: firſte, that throughe his negligēce he did no good, and agayne, that throughe a certayne boldnes he committed y• thing whiche was euil. That he ſhuld not haue done he did, & yt he ſhuld haue done

he did not. Confeſſion doth iuſtitie, confeſſion doth geue Confeſſion. remiſſion of ſinne. Al hope of forgeuenes doth reſt in confeſſion, confeſſion is a worke of mercy, the verye health of thoſe that be ſicke, and wyth penaunce our only helpe and comfort, whoſe laude & praiſe the Lord doth declare in the matt. 4. goſpel, ſaying: Do penannce, for why? the kingdom of god doth drawe nyghe. And S. matth. 3. John the baptiſte doth ſaye: Do ye worthy workes of penaunce. Worthye workes of penaunce are, to bewayle the ſinnes that are paſt, and to renewe them no more. As it is Eccle. 5. written, loke thou adde, nor heape not ſinne to ſinne. And our Lorde by the Prophete Eſaias doth ſaye: Waſhe ye Eſay. 1.
               
and be cleane. He is waſſhed & cleane, that doth bewayle yt is paſt, & approcheth no more vnto them. He is waſſhed & not cleane, that doth lamente his miſdedes, and afterward renueth that he lamēted. Of theſe menne S. Peter doth ſpeake moſt terribly ſayinge: 
                  
                     •
                  , Pet, 2, A dogge returning to his vomite. O my child (ſayth holy Eccl. 21, ſcripture) haſt thou cōmitted ſinne? do no more ſo, but pray that the olde may be forgeuē thee. True penaunce is not iudged by the nūber of years, but by the bitternes and heauines of the minde. S. Peter matth. 26 by and by obtayned of God the forgeuenes of his ſinnes, becauſe he lamented moſt bitterlye that he had thryſe denied him. And notwithſtanding

a mans penaunce be but ſhort, yet if it be done with y• inward bitternes of ye mind, God the righteous iudge, cō
               ſidering the ſecretnes of mās hearte, will not deſpiſe it. For god doth not ſomuch require the continuaunce of time, as he doeth ponder the will and the ſincere minde of him that repenteth & doeth penaunce. For he that with al his heart & mind doth truſt in Chriſte, althoughe he depart and dye with much ſinne yet his faith ſhall lyue for euer, as GOD in his holye Goſpell doeth ſaye, I am the reſurrection Joau, 11 and lyfe, whoſoeuer beleueth on me, thoughe he were deade, yet ſhall he 
                  •
               yue, and whoſoeuer lyueth

and beleueth on me, ſhal neuer dye. He doth ſpeake of ye death of the ſoule, the which ſhal happen and chaunce vnto man, through the infirmities and fraylenes of ſynne. God of his nature is merciful, and ready to ſaue al thoſe by mercye, the whiche he can not fynde to ſaue by iuſtice. He woulde that euerye man 1. Ti. 2. ſhoulde be ſaued, and that no man ſhould periſhe, ſaying by the Prophet that whanſoeuer a ſinner dothe conuerte him ſelfe, that he ſhall lyue, & Ezec. 33 not dye. And not withſtandynge we are all wicked ſynners, yet if we turne to penaunce, let vs not dowte, but that throughe the mercye of God, we ſhal obtayne the remiſſion of all our iniquities &

ſinnes, The mercye of God doth helpe and ſuccour thoſe that in this world be penitēt & do penaunce. For penaunce in the world that is to come, (where euery man ſhall geue an accoūtes of his owne workes) doth not preuayle. Penaunce muſt be done in thys worlde, for after our death is none amendement.
         
         
            ¶ Of auriculare confeſſion. Ser, 3
                     •
                  
                vi. Ser.
            
               MEn are wonte to ſaye moſte dearlye beloued brethren, that God knoweth al thinges, and that with god there is nether time paſt, nor tyme Heb 13.
               
to come, for he ſeyth al thin
                  •
                and pondereth all thinge, a
                  ••
                
               Heb. 4, thinges are bare & open vnto god: why will God the
                  •
                (ſaye they) that we ſhould cō
               feſſe our ſinnes to man? we
                  ••
                it not better not to manifeſt and diſcloſe ſuche euil dedes then to open them abroade▪ for who is he that wold gladlye ſaye, I haue treſpaſſed aboue all other▪ And if I ſhul
                  •
                ſhewe al thinge vnto manne I ſhuld be eſtemed the worſ
                  •
                of al other, & many through
                  •
                mine example wold do much euil. Why ſhould a man the
                  •
                cōfeſſe him ſelf to any other? O thou man, doeſte thou no
                  •
                know that we are al ſinners? for if we ſay, that we be with out ſynne, we deceaue our
                  •
                
               1. Joa. 1,
               
ſelues, and the trueth is not in vs. We do all ſinne, we are all borne in ſinne, we are all drowned in ſynne, yea & the chylde to, whyche is but one Job, 15 daye olde. Wherfore then do we feare to be confeſſed? And yet we muſte nedes be confeſſed vnto God, for he is good Pſal, 99, and gratious, and hys mercy endureth for euer. God wold that we ſhould be confeſt, nor that neyther, becauſe he knoweth not oure miſeddes and fawtes, but becauſe the deuill ſhould heare and knowe, that we are confeſſed, and ſorye for oure iniquities. For after that we haue once wept, and be truelye confeſſed: he hathe not where withall, he maye anye more accuſe vs.

Marcke and ſee then good brethren, Sathan wold that we ſhoulde kepe ſcilence and holde oure peace. And God woulde we ſhould be confeſt, vnto whome ſhoulde we ſoneſte obeye? Uerelye vnto God, the whiche doth euermore commaunde that good is. Nor it is not ſufficiente, ye we abſtayne from euil, except we do ſorowfully confeſſe the euil that we haue done. Nor it is not ynoughe to be confeſt to God only, but in lyke maner we muſt confeſſe oure ſynnes and treſpaſſes to mā, Therfore thou ſhalt not lynger to confeſſe thy ſelfe, and returne vnto GOD. Nor thou ſhalte not differ it from time to time. For why? the anger of God ſhal come ſodē
               ly

and deſtroy thee. O my brethren that haue ſlepte hyther to, awake and retourne vnto your Lorde GOD wyth all Ecele, 5. your heartes, wyth faſtynge, wepynge, and waylyng. And inaſmuch as he ſeyth within all your heartes, the Prophet doth teache vs, that the fontayne Johel, 2, of penaunce is in the hearte, and that wepynge is referde vnto the eye, ſobbing vnto the mouth, and faſtinge vnto the whole body. O man linger not to returne agayne vnto the Lorde thy God, examen thy conſcience. Loke vpon the ſecretes of thy heart, and conſider or euer thou go to confeſſion, that thy hearte hath ſynned, deſiring and couetynge the thyng that was naughtes, thy eyes in beholdynge

of vanities, thy mouth by ſpeakynge the thynge that was falſe, thy eares through hearinge of lyes, thy handes with ſmiting and cōmittinge of murder, if not in very dede yet peraduēture in will. Who can excuſe him ſelfe? our fete alſo are very quicke & ſpedye to euill. Therfore as ye haue geuen your membres ſeruaū
               tes to vnclennes and iniquitie, from iniquitie to iniquitie, euen ſo nowe geue your members Roma. 6 ſeruauntes vnto righte weſnes, that ye may be ſanctified. And firſt let the heart be penitente and ſorowfull for all ſuche vngodlye thynges, as it hath at any tyme thought vpon or deſired, lette the eye wepe, lette the mouthe praye continuailye, lette the

eare heare the worde of God, let the handes geue and be doinge of charitable and almoſe dedes, receaue the poore pilgrime, fede the ſycke and hongry, and cloth the naked, lette youre fete be goynge to the churche, & your knees labour to bowe downe vnto God, for as there was no member, but that through ſynne hath diſpleaſed God, ſo let there be no member without ſufferaunce of ſemblable and lyke payne, for God hathe geuen vs oure members to ſerue him withal and not to ſerue the worlde. But alas my brethren, the citezens of heauen, and Gods familiare frendes, are made the ſeruauntes of the worlde, embraſyng & leaning a great deal more to earthly thinges

then to eternal, to theyr own ſubſtance, then to themſelues. But good brethren, ye ſhould not do ſo, for why? the time is at hande, and it doeth threten vs. Ryſe ye vp therfore that do eate the bread of pſal, 126 heauines. Let vs haſte vs to the churche, and with ſorowfull teares confeſſe oure ſynnes. But firſt this order muſt be takē and kept. We (or euer we go to cōfeſſion) muſt think vpon our ſinnes and treſpaſſes, and in opening of them, ſo confeſſe to god and to his miniſter the prieſte the maner & circumſtaunces of them, that we maye departe from theyr fete not burdened, but exone rated & lightened. And good brethren, looke ye prolongue not the time, to confeſſe your

ſinnes, for he that doeth prolongue or procraſtinate the time vnto the laſt day of lent, or of his life to cōfeſſe his miſdedes, he geueth good euidence, that he doth it not willynglye, nor gratiouſlye, nor with a pure heart, but againſt his will. Marke and conſider howe ſuche conſtrayned and vnwyllynge ſeruice doth pleaſe ether god or mā. And therfore let vs not delaye frō daye to daye to confeſſe and to opē the ſecretes of oure heartes: for God hath promiſed forgeuenes to thoſe that are penitent, and not to thoſe that delaye theyr confeſſion or penaunce vntil to morowe: therfore let vs not prolonge nor delaye oure confeſſion. But yet when thou man or womā
               
goeſte to confeſſion, loke thou laughe not, nor that thou be gorgeouſlye nor wel apparelled, nor that thou beginne not to vtter and ſhewe fables, but that with al humilitye and tokens of repentaunce, ye do cō
               feſſe Jaco. 5. your ſynnes one to another. And I praye thee not to feare to be confeſt. But howe ſhall I confeſſe this and that? O thou man, as ofte as thou doeſt feele and perceaue that, doubte not but that it is the very temptation of the deuil, the whiche deſireth ſo to inwrappe & intangle thee, that thou, beynge already in ſinne, might do without any greate temptation, that ſhulde pleaſe hym. And therefore my brethren, feare ye not to confeſſe youre ſynnes, for I knowe

that thynge leſſe, the whyche I knowe by confeſſion, then that, whiche I knowe not. Why do ye then feare to confeſſe your ſinnes? he is a wretched ſinner as ye are, and perchaunce a more wretched ſinner then ye are, that doeth heare your confeſſion. He is a manne, he differeth nothinge from you, he is but as ye are. Why doſt thou then thou ſinful man feare thee to confeſſe to a ſynner? Chooſe what ye wyll, but yf ye lurke vnconfeſſed, ye ſhalbe condemned withoute confeſſion. GOD doeth require confeſſion too acquite and delyuer him that is humble, and to condemne him eternallye, that is prowde. Be confeſte my brethren and delaye it not, haſte you

to come to the holy harueſt of confeſſion, for cōfeſſion is the helth of the ſoule, the deſtroier Confeſſion. of vyce, the reſtorer of vertue, the victor and ouercomer of frendes, the feare of hell, the obſtacke of ſatan, the cote and garment of aungels, the hope of the churche, the helth, the gyde, the light, the eſperaunce and hope of all faythfull people. O wonderful and holy confeſſiō, thou doſt cloſe vp the mouth of hel, and openeſt heauen gates. O confeſſion, without thee, the iuſt man is eſtemed vnthankefull, and the ſynner ſhalbe reputed as deade. O the lyfe of all iuſte men, the glorye of al ſinners. Thou art onely neceſſary for ſynners, and yet he that wilbe eſtemed iuſte, muſte oftentimes

viſite the. Finally ther ſhal nothing remayne in iudgement that was auoyded & diſcloſed by confeſſion. Clean and pure confeſſion is ſo pondered and wayde, and God dothe ſet ſo muche and ſuche ſtore ther by, that the theues confeſſion hanginge vpon the croſſe, was aſwell accepted, as thoughe he had died for gods cauſe: beholde howe muche y• ſynners ſhort confeſſion dyd auauntage him? But we prieſtes (woulde to god we were good prieſte▪ ſhoulde ſo diligently, and with ſuche moderatiō watche to faſten ye word of feare, & of contrition in the heartes of ſynners, that we feare them not from confeſſiō, and ſo to opē theyre heartes, that they nother ſhut vp, nor

clooſe theyr mouthes from the ſame. Nor we ſhould not abſolue the penitent excepte we ſawe and perceaued that he were confeſte. For the beliefe of the hearte iuſtifieth & the confeſſion of the mouth Rom. 10 maketh a manne ſafe. And therefore he that hathe the worde of confeſſion in hys mouth, and not in hys hearte is other crafty, or elles falſe. And he that hathe it in hys hearte, and not in hys mouth is other prowde or fearefull. Therefore it behoueth prieſtes to bee ſuche as do knowe what maner of medecine and howe muche therof they ſhoulde miniſter to euerye ſycke manne. The Lorde whyche lyueth and reygneth for euer, beynge his ayde and

comfort.
            Amen.
         
         
            ¶ Of Penaunce. Ser. 57. Ser. vij.
            
               I Praye you my dearelye beloued brethren, that if anye of you after ye courſe and fraileneſſe of man, be ouerthrowen through the ſubtile craftines of ſatā, or inwrapped in deadlye ſynne, and hath (as ſayeth the Apoſtle) deſtroyed in him ſelf the temple of god. I pray him that he deſpere not of the 2. cor. 3. mercy of God, but that he ariſe vp quicklye from his iniquitie and ſinne, leſte y• by the cōtinuaunce & cuſtom therof,

he drowne him ſelfe in hys owne ruine, for he ſhal not be odious nor abhominable vnto god, that hath done & committed ſinne, but he that doth reſte and continue in ſynne. And becauſe no man ſhoulde miſtruſt the mercy of god, the Lorde by his prophete doeth comforte vs ſayinge: I deſire not the death of any ſynner, but that he ſhould returne frō ſinne and liue. And agayne: Ezec, 33 Whenſoeuer the wicked ſinner, ſhal returne from his wickednes, yt ſhall not hynder Ezec, 18, nor hurte him. But this hys greate mercy doth then profite vs, when we ſlacke not to returne vnto him, nor ioyne nor accumulate ſynne vpon ſinne. Furthermore we maye knowe the woundes and fractures

of ye body, by the woundes and fractures of the ſoule For if a mans legge, or hande be once broken, it is wonte to be hardely brought and reſtored to hys olde vſe agayne: but yet if they breake twiſe or thryſe: or oftener in one place, your charitie may eaſely vnderſtande and perceaue, with what dolor and payne ſuche woundes and fractures are healed agayne: and yet after longe payne & tormente, ſcarcely they can be reſtored and brought to theyr former and olde eſtate. And lyke reaſon is thought to be in the fractures and wondes of the ſoule: for if a man do commit ſinne once or twyſe, and without any diſſimulation doth flye vnto the remedy of penaunce, he

ſhal without any let, and peraduentur without any ſhame recouer his helth againe. But if ſynne begynne to be ioyned to ſinne, and that the woundes of the ſoule, throughe the clokyng and defending of iniquitie do rather putrify, thē by confeſſion and penaunce do heale and amende, it is to be fearde, leſte the ſayinge of the Apoſtle be verified in him. Doſt thou not knowe, that ye kindnes of God doth lead the Rom. 2, to repentaunce: but thou after thine hard heart that can not repente, doſte hepe together the treaſure of wrathe agaynſt the day of vengeaunce and reuelation of the true iudgement of GOD. But perchaunce ſome one man maye think, that he hath ſo greuouſlye

offended, that nowe he cā not merite to haue and to obtayne the mercy of God. But God forbid that anye ſinner ſhould thinke ſo. O thou man that doſte conſider and waye the multitude of thy ſinnes, why in lyke maner doſt thou not conſider the great power of the celeſtiall phiſition? And conſideryng that God of hys mere goodnes wyll haue mercy vpon vs, and that by hys myghtye power, he maye be mercifull vnto vs. He doeth clooſe vp the gate of hys diuine mercy agaynſt hym ſelfe, that doth beleue that GOD wyl not, or that he can not be merciful vnto hym, or that miſtruſteth him to be good & om nipotent. And therfore let no man nother after a hundred,

yet a thouſand ſinnes and crimes committed, deſpere of Gods mercy, but make al the haſte he can, that God withoute any ſtoppe or let maye be merciful vnto him, leſt that he perchaunce do ſo accuſtome him ſelfe to ſinne, that though he woulde, he can not be delyuered from the ſnares & craftye deceytes of the deuyl Dauid (the whiche was both by the ayde and gyfte of God) a 2. Regū, 11. 12. kynge and a Prophete was ſo preuented, that he committed not only adultery, but alſo murder, and yet he reſerued not him ſelfe, nor protracted nor taried not to do penaunce in his olde age, but by and by, lyinge in a ſhurte of heare, and ouerſprinckled wt aſſhes, did ſorowfull & greate

penaunce, and fulfylled that he ſayde in his Pſalmes: I Pſalm, 6 wyll waſſhe and water my couche euerye night with my teares. And agayne: I dyd Pſa, 101 eate aſhes as breade, and watered my drinck with teares. And becauſe that with mortiferous vncarefulnes, he dyd not delaye to do frutefull penaunce, he immediatly ſo ſtird vp and reuoked the mercy of God, that alonely he loſte not his kingdome, but alſo deſerued to receaue and to haue ye gift of the holy cōforter. But peraduenture there be yet yt wil ſay, I am occupied in warfare, or I haue a wyfe, howe can I then do penaunce? As thoughe that I (when I counſel you to do penannce) wolde ſay, that ye ſhoulde rather go

about to plucke oute the heares of your heades, then that ye ſhould leaue youre ſynnes & wretchednes: or vnthrede youre gownes, then to refuſe your euyll conuerſation & maners. But let him whiche goeth about by ſuch diſſimulation more to deceaue, then to excuſe hym ſelfe, take hede, & marke, that nether the honor of his kingdome, nor yet the dignitie of his apparel, coulde refrayne or let kynge Dauid from doinge of penaunce. Alſo the ſacrilegius king Achab (of whome Scripture 3. reg, 21 ſayeth, that there was neuer none ſuche ſolde to do euill agaynſte God) after y• Jezabel his wife ha
                  •
                depraued him, & had made him abhominable in the ſight of God: Naboth

being ſtoned to death, becauſe he wold not yelde vp his vine yard, yet after yt the Prophet Heli had ſpoken vnto him, he put on a ſhyrt of heare, and bowed downe his heade vnto god, & did penaunce. Whervpon God ſayd vnto Heli, haſte thou not ſeene, howe y• Achab hath humiliated him ſelfe vnto me? Foraſmuch as he (ſaith the lord) hathe buxomed and bowde him ſelfe vnto me for my ſake, I wil not (as long as he ſhall lyue) puniſh nor trouble the people. Now conſider good brethren, that although this Achab was ſacrilegius & naughtes, yet he prolonged not the time to do penaunce, but incontinently offerde vnto GOD the ſacrifice of an hūble and of a contrite heart.

And if afterwardes he hadde continued in his humylitye, the mercye of GOD had neuer forſaken him. Alſo kyng Manaſſes was ſo wicked. 4. re. 21. (as it is wrytten of him) that he repleniſhed the whole citie of Hieruſalem with al iniquitie. yet after yt he was takē & put in priſon, he through greate penaunce and muche humilitie, did ſo obtayne the grace and fauour of god, that he merited to be numbred & accepted amōg the frendes & good louers of god. And after yt the ſinneful Magdalene (the whiche waſhed Chriſtes Luc. 7. fete with her teares, & wypte them with her heare) knewe that the heauenlye Phiſition was come, ſhe went into Symons houſe vndeſired: & ſhe

that before was bold, prompt & ſhameles vnto all vnthriftines, was nowe more bolde to be ſaued, and therfore ſhe deſerued to heare, that all her ſynnes were forgeuen her. Nor this woman prolonged not to do penaunce, but whyleſt ſhe might ſynne, ſhe did ſo leaue of to ſinne, that no neceſſitie, but her owne voluntary will withdrue her from her miſliuyng. We might find manye mo in holye ſcripture, the whych through doynge of penaunce after their infinite & innumerable crymes prouoked and cauſed god to be mercifull and gratious Lord vnto them, the which did not only returne to their firſt eſtate and condition, but to a muche better. But foraſmuche as it

were a very longe thynge to ſpeake of al, theſe fowre whiche we haue recited and ſpokē of, are ſufficient to know, that the lorde (the whiche forgaue Dauid after ſo great a ſynne, and the ſacrilegius kinge Achab, and that after ſo innumerable iniquities reputed penitent Manaſſes to be hys frende, and forgaue the ſinfull Magdalene (which did waſſh his fete with her teares, and did wipe thē with her heare) al her ſynnes) is ready not only to forgeue vs oure miſdedes and treſpaſſes, yf we returne vnto him, but alſo to geue vs eternall beatitude, & reſt euerlaſting. Therfore my good brethren, lette vs (thynkyng vpon thoſe thynges) laboure wyth Gods helpe as

much as we may poſſible, that no deadly ſinne crepe in amōg vs, but yf ſo be there be anye, yt throughe ye deceytfulnes of the deuil are ouerthrowen or caſt into this euil, let him or euer any ſuche crimes by a continuall cuſtome, do encreaſe, ſeke for remedye, and laboure with greate ſorowefulnes of heart, to be reconciled, and to winne the fauour of almighty God agayne. Nor let him not be aſhamed to do penaunce, yt was not aſhamed to ſinne, but ſtryue incontinently thorough godlye operation to amende hym ſelfe, that he may be knowen, and accepted of the father amonge his chyldren, leſte that he exclude hym from the eternall bleſſe

and eiecte hym from the heauenly banket, and bound both hande and foote, caſte him into the exterioure darkeneſſe, where is waylyng and gnaſſhyng of teeth: and that he reuoked, math, 22, and throughe the medecines of penaunce, humilitie, and compunction, reſtored to hys olde eſtate and helthe agayne, and adourned wyth the peryls of good workes, maye meryte to heare theſe wordes. O my good and faythfull ſeruant, enter and come into the ioye of thy lord
            Amen.
         
         
            ¶ Of almoſe dedes, Ser. viii. Ser 127
            
            
               
               I My moſt dearly beloued brethren haue moniſhed you and preſumed too geue you counfell to do and to geue almoſe. And althoughe my admoniti on hath (God wyllyng) profyted manye a one, yet I feare me, leſte there be, that do leſſe then they may, or els nothing at all. But ſome wyll ſaye vnto me, I am a poore man, and not able to do any almoſe dedes. But becauſe yt no poore man ſhoulde excuſe hym ſelfe from doinge of almoſe dedes, our Sauiour hathe promiſed to rewarde vs for a cuppe of matt. 10, could water. Seyſt thou thē, that thou arte poore? Yf thou haue in ſubſtaunce no

more then wil reaſonably find thee, then thy only good wyll is ſufficiente. But I pray the exactly to examine thy conſcience, whether that at tymes peraduenture thou haſte not loſt through ſuper fluous drin king, that thou mighteſt haue geuen in almoſe, or leſt that in earthe thou haſte conſumed through gluttony, yt thou ſhuldeſt with almoſe and charitable dedes haue layde and treaſured up in heauen: or leſte by preparynge of delicate welfare, and byinge of ſuperfluous araye and apparell, thou haſt not nowe the thyng that thou ſhuldeſt haue to geue vn to the poore for the ſaluation and redemption of thy ſoule. And notwythſtandynge our galaunte and pretious araye

is wonte to be conſumed and mothe eaten, yet the neadye can not obtayne nor gette the thynge that is mooſt vileſte. Yf all theſe impediments thē, do not aggrauate nor burden our ſoules, or yf we haue the thynge, whyche onelye ſuffiſeth vs and oures, we ſhall not then appeare to be in faut and giltye, although we geue nothynge to the poore, but yf luxuriouſneſſe and ſuper fluitye (as I haue ſayde) do deuoure and conſume, that charitye and mercy myghte haue treaſured vp in heauen, let vs then whyle tyme is, amende oureſelues, and ſtudye to recompence, and with all oure myght to fulfyll that we haue not done, or perchaunce that

we haue done, but farre other wyſe and leſſe then we ſhuld haue done. And therfore help thy ſelfe (O thou chriſten mā) that doeſte reade and heare theſe thynges, with Daniels Dani. 4. moſt holy counſell. Accept my counſel (ſayth he) and redeme thy ſoule with almoſe and charitable dedes. The whyche counſell, yf thou wylte not liſten to and heare, thou ſhalte call vpon God, but in vayne. O thou ſoule that doſte inhabite and dwell wythin theſe carnal & fraile walles, watche matth. 7. praye, aſke, ſeke, and knocke. I ſay watche aſkinge, praye ſe kynge, and knocke workyng. The Lorde ſhall aunſwere thee, that doeſte watche and aſke, ſayinge, beholde here I am. If thou wylte pearce and

go thorowe the fire, thy Lord Eſay. 43 God is with thee, & the flame ſhall not burne the. For why? as water doth quenche fire, euē ſo doth almoſe dede quenche ſynne. Therfore yf thou wylte open thy hande to the poore, Chriſte ſhall open hys gates vnto thee, that as a poſſeſſioner of heauen thou maiſt enter & come in. And yf thou thynke that the ende of the world be longe a commynge, loke onlye vpon thyne owne ende, and beholde howe the worlde by a lytell and a lytle doth conſume and vanyſh. Al thynges whyche were good, are gone and taken awaye, & ſuch euyll as neuer was, doth approche. The thing that the worde of God dyd pronoſticate, is dayly accomplyſhed &

fulfilled, and yet that notwith ſtandynge, man doth nother chaunge nor amende. Therfore take counſel whileſt that thou haſt thy redemption in thyne owne hande, geue and diſtribute vnto thy ſelfe that is thyne, whyleſte it is thyne. For the thynge that thou doeſt poſſeſſe and holde is but frayle and bryttle, and other mens that thou doeſte loke for. Conſider what maner of pryce the Lorde payde for thee, he ſhedde his pretious bloude for thee, he loued thee intierlye, that ſo dearely bought thee. O good brother auoyde and flye the example of the riche man, whoſe dogges the poore man Lazarus Luc. 19. did feede and nuriſh with his woundes, and yet they gaue

him not ſo much, as the crummes which fel from the riche mās table: but this thing not long after was cleane altered for the pore bought his ſaluation with pouertie, & the riche man his payne and tormente with y• aboundance of riches. The poore man was exalted vp with aungels into Abrahams boſome, and the ryche man thruſte downe into the profounde depeneſſe of hell, from whence he ſaw the pore manne, yea the poore manne the ryche man, he that denied a crome of breade, deſired a droppe of water. Lette them therefore that be ryche and aboundaunte (the whyche wyll not helpe nor redeme them ſelues with their owne goods and ſubſtaunce) think

vpon theſe thynges, leſt they ſuffer and come to lyke puniſhmente. He was ryche that we do ſpeake of, & likewyſe there be rich men here, vnto whom we do ſpeake, they are all after a name, but lette them beware, that they be not of one condition, but theſe thynges were chaunged betwene the ryche man, clothed in purple, and the poore man full of byles and botches. For the riche man loſt that he hadde, & pore Lazarus began to be that he was not. Tht ryche man lefte in thys world his warehouſes and ſhoppes full of goodes and great ſubſtaunce, and in hell, he deſired but a droppe of water, and coulde not obtayne it. Take heed good brethren, the whole body of the

ryche man is troubled with the flames and fire of hell, & yet his tonge, (becauſe wyth prowde wordes he deſpiſed the poore man) is moſt vehemently tormēted. The tong which wold not counſell him to geue the poore manne his almoſe, is mooſt greuouſlye burnte and punyſhed with the fire and flames of hell. He cryde out and ſayde: Father Abraham, ſende Lazarus that he maye dyppe hys fynger in water, and cole my tounge. O thou ryche man, with what audacitie & boldneſſe dareſte thou require a droppe of water, that wouldeſte profer a crome of bread? Thou ſhouldeſt now euen of ryght haue demaunded and aſked it, if thou haddeſt

geuen it. O theſe worldly goodes, the whiche in hell are greuous & euill. To this riche mans ſeruice came fire and torment. He doth ſuffer the cruel and harde tormentes of hell. He is wronge, and crieth out, and ſayth: O moſt pure and ryghteous iudge, other let my paines be recompenſed, accordynge to myne iniquities, or els lette me receaue condigne punyſhmente and payne for the tyme, that I was in welthe, or double payne, or foure times more payne. Why doeſt thou commaunde me to be kepte theſe many. M. yeares in this flamyng fire? I am ſo bound wt the bowndes of my ſinnes, yt I can not eſcape. I am euery momente of an houre, paynefullye

tormented and puniſhed. The fier doth cruellye vexe me, nor it doth not ſpare me, it both tormenteth me, and reſerueth me. To theſe lamentable and dolorous complayntes, he myghte thus without boubt haue aunſwered hym: What ſhall I do vnto thee? Thou dyddeſt no almoſe dedes, the which might haue quinched the tormentes Eccle, 3. & paines, that thou doeſt nowe abyde and ſuffre for thy ſynnes and iniquities. Scripture did call vpon the, but thou wouldeſt not hear. The prophets hold not their peace. The apoſtles preached The goſpel gaue out his ſoūd The tormentes and paynes prepared for the ſynneful

were declared vnto thee. And the rewarde of the righteouſe was promiſed thee, but thou truſtinge and hauing affiaunce in theſe world lye goodes and poſſeſſions, dyddeſt reiect and contemne Gods preceptes and ſtatutes as tryflynge and vayne fables. Let the poore praye for the, and whatſoeuer thou doeſte aſke, I do graunte it thee. But yet I do handle & vſe thee but iuſtlye: for there ſhalbe iudgemente merciles Jaco. 2. to him, that ſheweth no mercy. My iuſtice can geue thee nothing els, but that thy workes do deſerue and merite. And therefore thou, beynge nowe deade, and in another mans powre and dominion, doeſte call vpon me but in

vayne. For when thou mighteſt and diddeſt ſee me in the poore, then thou waſt blynde and wouldeſt not ſee me. O my brethren made by ye hand of God, & boughte as I was full dearely, herken vnto the Lordes counſell. Obeye and fulfyll the deſire of youre biſſhop, that wyth hym ye may take and receaue your inheritance in your fathers kingdome, Of a bonde man thou art made a frende. Deſpyſe that thou art borne, and do vnto Chriſte, as he doth vnto thee. Why ſhoulde he not take parte of thy ſubſtaunce that hathe prepared for thee rewardes euerlaſting? Why ſhould he not haue the tenth of thy goodes, that hath geuen the all? for this earthlye

patrimony, God dothe offer vs heauen, he ſayeth thus: Come ye bleſſed children, and inherite the kingdome, for I matt. 25, was an hungred, and ye gaue me meate. Then may ye ſaye luckely, (if ſo be ye were large and faythfull in doing of your almoſe) when ſawe we the an hungred, and did fede thee? what a thyng is this my brethren. The true and faythful detter confeſſeth his dette, and the creditours excuſe it. Then ſhall your ſather, your LORDE, and your frende, with whome ye haue made a celeſtiall conuention and bargene, aunſwere you thus. In aſmuch as ye haue done it vn to one of theſe leaſt of my brethren, ye haue done it to me. I ſhall therfore geue you celeſtiall

and eternal rewardes and a kingedome vpon my ryght hande. Nor that, becauſe ye haue not treſpaſſed, but becauſe ye haue redemed and raunſomed your ſinnes, with almoſe and charitable dedes. I praye you good brethren to remēber theſe thinges, and that it maye ſo profite the poore and neady, that I for my gentle admonition maye obtayne forgeueneſſe before the ſeate of the eternal iudge: and ye for your liberal contribulation and almoſe de des, eternall glory, our Saui our Jeſus Chriſt, graunting the ſame, to whome with the father and the holy gooſte be honor for euer and euer.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            ¶ Of the chaſtitie that Ser 243 oughte and ſhoulde be betwene man and wife. Ser. ix.
            
               WHEN ſoeuer my welbeloued brethren we do commend chaſtitye as it ought and is expedient it ſhuld be commended: younge men and ſuche as are in the floure of their age do ſay thus. We are younge men, we can not lyue chaſte. To whome we may and ought to geue thys aunſwere, that they can not lyue chaſte and vndefiled, be cauſe they eate more then is expedient, and drynke more wyne then neadeth, nor wyl

not flye nor exchue the familiaritye of women, nor yet feare, nor be aſhamed to hont and to haue their ſuſpect cō
               panye: but let al ſuche lyſten to the Apoſtle, ſayinge: flye fornicacion. And this: be not 1. cor. 9, droncken with wyne, wherin Ephe. 5, is exceſſe. And Salomon ſayeth: wyne and women do reproue and cauſe wiſe men to do amyſſe. Let thoſe that ſaye that they can not kepe chaſtitie, aunſwere me, whether they haue wyues or no: yf they haue wyues, why do they not take hede to Gods ſayinge in his Goſpell, What matth. 7. ſoeuer ye wyll that men do vnto you, do lykewyſe vnto them. And why do they not kepe their fidelitye and promiſe made vnto their wiues,

the whiche they woulde, yea and deſire that their wyues ſhuld kepe with them? And ſeing that a man called uir, doth take his name of this worde, uirtus: and a woman called muliser, of thys worde mollities, that is, of ſoftneſſe and frayltye, why would manne, that hys wife ſhoulde ouercome thys mooſt cruell letcherye, when that he him ſelfe at the firſte ſtroke & motion therof dothe yelde and fall. But here perchaunce all ſuche as be vnma ried ſhall ſaye vnto me, that they maye be well excuſed, becauſe they haue no wines to kepe promyſe withall, and therfore they canne not lyue pure and chaſte. To theſe that pretende thys falſe and wretched excuſe, a manne

may and ought to make this iuſte aunſwere: No manne oughte more to auoyde vnlawfull thynges, then they that do reiecte the thynges, whych are lawfull. Conſiderynge then, that it is lawfull for manne to take and to marye a wyfe, and that it is agaynſte the aucthoritye of all Scrypture, nor neuer lawfull to committe adulterye: why doeſte thou not then with Goddes fauoure mary a wyfe, the whiche is lawfull, but doſt preſume with Gods diſpleaſure to do the thynge, that is not lawfull. Yet I wold fayne knowe, whether yt they, the which haue no wiues, nor were not aſhamed, nor in feare to cōmit adultry, or euer they were maryed,

that they
                  •
                ſpowſes ſhould be defyled or corrupted, or they were maried vnto thē? but ſeyng that there is no man y• with pacience could abyde or ſuffer yt, why do not they thē kepe ye ſelf promiſe with their wiues, y• which they do deſir yt their wiues ſhuld kepe thē? And why dothe he deſire to be maried vnto a virgin that is none hym ſelfe? Why doth he deſire to be coupled with her that is alyue, when that he hym ſelfe, through adultery is deade in ſoule, for it is written, The ſoule that doth ſynne, ſhall dye. And the Apoſtle Ezec. 18 ſayeth full terriblye. God wyll iudge adulterers. Heb. 13, And againe: Adulterers ſhal not poſſeſſe the kingdome of 1, cor, 6, heauen. But peraduenture

there are that thynke it lawfull for men or euer they be maried to committe fornication, but not for wemen. Many there are, the whyche not fearynge God, do committe theſe crymes, moſt greuous and moſt worthy to be puniſſhed, becauſe they are common, and euſtomablye vſed, and ſo litle eſtemed, that men nowe a dayes do not reken them to be enorme and wycked treſpaſſes. But yet in the catholyke fayth, whatſoeuer is vnlawfull for women, is vtterlye vnlawful for men. For why? both men and women are redemed wyth one pryce, that is, with the precious bloude of Chriſte. They are called to one fayth, & are gathered together in one miſtical

body of the church, they receaue the ſacrament of baptime together, they come to gether vnto the aulter to receaue the holy communion of the body and bloud of Chriſt, and the commaundementes are geuen equally vnto them both. Seynge then that it is ſo, wyth what boldenes, or cō ſcience do men beleue, yt they onely may do that thyng vnpuniſhed, the which is nether lawful for man to do, nor yet for woman. But I wold that al ſuch as preſume to do ſuch deteſtable thynges, ſhoulde wel and perfectly know, that yf they do not forthwith amende them ſelues, and do the fruytefull workes of penaunce, but dye ſodenly, that withoute doubte or remedy,

they ſhall be troubled wyth perpetual fire. But what a thyng is this, for many there be, whyche are not aſhamed, or euer they be maryed too kepe concubynes, the whiche they forſake wythin feawe yeares after, and be maryed. Firſte they do muſe and caſte with themſelues, howe that throughe deceytfulneſſe and thefte, they maye come to ryches and vnlawful gayne, & afterwardes agaynſt all reaſon, they do marye wemen of more nobilitie and ſubſtance, thē they thēſelues be. Mark with nowe many euyls they that not only vnluckedlye do deſire to do ſeruice vnto letcherye, but alſo to couetouſnes do intangle thē ſelues wt
               al. Therfore I do cōteſt & de|

here before God and his aungels, yt he hath alwayes forboden theſe crimes, and that they neuer pleaſed hym. For ſence ye time of Chriſtes law, it was neuer lawfull for man to kepe a concubine, nor neuer ſhalbe. But yet there be that do it by the law of man, but not by Gods lawe, nor yet by iuſtice commaunding, but by the only pleaſure of ye body rulynge them. When the Apoſtle ſayeth to thoſe that be maried, that the time which remaineth is but ſhort and that they whiche haue 1, cor, 7, wyues, ſhould be aſthoughe they had none. And agayne, wythdrawe your ſelfes for a while, that ye may geue your ſelues to prayer. Howe doth he ſuffer men to haue concubines

that doth commaunde them to kepe chaſtitie that are maried? And therfore I agayne and agayne do ſaye vnto you, that he, the whiche before he be lawfully maried doth preſume to kepe a concubine, doth greatly ſynne and treſpaſſe, and more greater ſynne then he, whiche committeth adultery, for the adulterer doth it ſecretly, and feareth, and is aſhamed to do it openly: but he that kepeth a concubyne openlye, dothe thynke that withoute ſhame he maye do in the preſence of all the worlde, ſuche an execrable thynge moſt lawfully. But they peraduēture whiche are not defyled nor beſpotted with thys ſynne, do ſaye, why be not they that cō
               mitte

and do ſuche enormities remoued then frō Gods boorde: Prieſtes verely punyſhe not ſuche enorme and great crymes, becauſe that many men do vſe them: but if a feawe in number woulde preſume to do ſuche euil, they might and ought not onelye to be remoued from Gods boord, but alſo frō the ſpeche and familiaritie of al chriſten people, as ſayeth the Apoſtle: Wyth ſuche a man thou ſhalt 1, cor, 5, nother eate nor drynke. But yet (as I haue ſayd) the multitude of miſdoers doth let ye prieſte to punyſhe them: althoughe good prieſtes doo what they may or can, & with continuall and perfect charitye do both ſyghe and praye, that at the left wayes, they

myght by their admonitions and prayers prouoke and induce them to penaunce, the whyche (becauſe of the infinite multitude of them) they coulde nother correct nor punyſhe. And therfore I praye you agayne and agayne, yea and lykewyſe I deſire you, that as he whyche would be maryed, dothe couet and deſire to fynd hys ſpowſe a virgine, ſo in like maner, let him (vntil he be maried) kepe his virginitye, for yf he do not, he ſhal not accepte nor receaue the benediction with hys ſpouſe. And ſo the ſcripture ſhalbe fulfylled in hym, whiche Pſa, 107 ſayeth, he would haue no benediction, & it ſhalbe farre from hym. Nowe then yf penaunce do not helpe, what

ſhall become of thys manne? Or what ſhalbe hys iudgement in tyme to come, that in thys worlde was not worthy to receaue the benediction, and to be bleſſed wyth his ſpouſe? And note this my brethren, yf they whych haue no wyues, throughe kepyng of concubines, or medling with other mens wyues be in ſo greate daunger, what ſhall they mooſte vnfortunates thynke of them ſelues, that perchaunce haue wiues, and yet committe adultery, and through a certayne madnes do deſpere of the iudgement of GOD, nor feare not the paynes of hell, nor deſire not the eternall reward. Uerely yf they were in true and perfect fayth, they would beleue

in God, and feare the iudgement that is to come. And this may wel be proued, that all ſuche do beleue and truſte more in man, then they do in God: for where they do ſee & perceaue that men be, there they do feare to committe adultery, but to do it ſecretlye (where God doth ſee it) they feare not. But yf they had neuer ſo lytle a ſparke of true fayth, as they ſuffer not their ſeruantes to treſpas in their owne ſyghte and preſence: ſo woulde they not preſume to do and committe adulterye in the preſence and ſyght of the Lorde their God. But of theſe ſpeaketh the holy gooſt by the Prophet, The vnwiſe man ſayde in hys hearte and pſal, 13, &, 52, mynde, there is no God. For

thys is wythout peraduenture, that he beleueth not, ye there is a God, whych ſecret lye dothe thoſe thinges in gods ſyght and preſence, the which he feareth to do in the preſence and ſight of manne. But ye wretche knoweth not that the face and anger of God is vpon al thoſe that do Pſal, 33, euyll, to deſtroye them for euermore. But perchaunce ſome do ſaye thus, howe can I, that throughe my greate buſyneſſe, or by the kynges commaundement am abſent from my wyfe ſo manye monethes or yeares kepe chaſti tye? Unto thys I may geue thys aunſwere, that he retourne home vnto hys wife. But when I aunſwere the merchaunt ſo, he ſayeth, that

yf he leaue of the feate of merchaundiſe, he ſhall not be able to lyue. The man of warre doth ſaye, yf I departe from the hooſte, the kynges maieſtie wyll be diſcontente wyth me. But vnto theſe a manne may ſaye, that yf he feare the kynge and vpon that occaſion retourneth not home to his owne wyfe, he oughte ſo to feare God, that he teache nor cōpanye with none other mans: for as the kynge maye put hym to death that returneth home from the hooſt to hys wyfe, without licence, ſo maye God punyſhe hym perpetuallye, that beynge farre from hys wyfe, committeth adulterye. I praye you good brethren, yf ſo be that any of you through your neceſſary

buſynes, or by the kinges commaundement be at ſome tymes farre from your wyues, why ſhoulde ye not lyue ſo longe in chaſtitye for the loue of God, and ye welth and ſaluatiō of your ſoules. Doe thy buſyneſſe, and the Kynges commaundemente, inforce the for ſo many dayes not once to touche thy wyfe, and the loue and precepte of God ſhall not perſwade thee to touche none other mans? but I would that all they, y• whyche for lucre ſake onelye and riches, and at the kinges commaundement do obſerue and kepe theſe thynges and diſſemble to kepe them for Gods ſake, ſhould knowe, yt yf penaunce do not ayde and helpe them, that, they (when

they ſhall ſtande in iudgemēt before GOD) can not eſcape frō hearing of heauye & dolorous wordes, for theſe wordes ſhalbe ſayde vnto them: Gette you hence from me ye wycked and curſed people matt. 25, into eternall fyre. And what a thynge is this, that a bolde champion goyng to battayle ſhall at ſome tymes peraduē ture ſleye no leſſe then tenne of hys enemyes, and commit tynge of adultery with ſome mayd taken in warfare, doth murder his owne ſoule with the ſworde of ſynne? Conſider howe great an euyll it is that man ſhould be more cruell to hymſelfe, murderynge hys owne ſoule through letcherye, then to the bodyes of hys enmyes by victory. Forſothe,

it is a dolorous and alamentable thyng, that he (as I haue ſayde) who hathe victoriouſlye ouerthrowen ten of hys enemyes, ſhoulde be ouercome by a woman, or that he, which hath ouerthrowen ſo many of hys enemies bodies, ſhoulde in hearte and ſoule be ouercome by a woman. Surelye it is to greuous a thyng, that he which can not be ouercome with no weapon, ſhoulde be ſubdued through bodely luſt and pleaſure, or that ſwete and pleaſaunt wordes ſhoulde ouerturne hym, whome no hardnes could ouerturne, or that he which diſdayned to be the bondman of man, ſhoulde me rite to be the bondemanne of ſynne, when that it is a more

vnworthye thynge, to ſerue in mynde, then in body, as it is wrytten. For of whomeſoeuer a man be ouercome, vnto 2, Pet, 1, the ſame is he in bondage. Good brethren, yf I ſhoulde not ſhewe you theſe thinges I ſhould aunſwere for your ſoules at the daye of iudgemente. But whoſoeuer he be, that is more deſirous to be greued or angrye with me then to amende hymſelfe, he can not nowe throughe ignoraunce excuſe hym, ſayinge: that he was not moniſhed of theſe thinges, nor forbydden to do euyll, nor prouoked by oft caſtigation and admonition vnto all ſuche thynges as ſhoulde pleaſe God. But I beleue, that the mercy of god ſhall ſo inſpire euerye negligente

perſon, that they ſhall be muche more wrothe and angrye wyth them ſelues, then wyth the prieſtes good medecines and admonitions And as the ſycke and weake perſons do require bodelye helth of the carnall phiſition, ſo ſhall they require and demaunde ſoule helth of the ſpirituall and gooſtlye Phiſition. But I do hope and truſt that throughe the mercye of God, they ſhall ſo ſtudye to comforte & chere vs by theyr good amendemente, that they ſhall come moſte proſpe rouſlye, God willyng, to the eternall rewarde, and lyfe euerlaſtyng.
            Amen.
         
         
            ¶ Of the true paymente of Ser 219 tithes. Ser. x.
            
               
               GOd my dearly beloued brethren, beinge mercifull vnto vs, ye tyme approcheth & draweth on together in oure harueſte. And therfore wyth thankes vnto God that hath geuen vs all, let vs thynke vpon our offeringes, and true payment of our tythes. For ca. decimae. 16. quest. 2. God which hath voucheſafed to geue vs all, doth alſo voucheſafe to reape, and to aſke vs tithes, nor that for hys owne gayne and vſe, but for our gaine and profite. For he doth promiſe vs by the Prophete, ſaying: Bring in (ſayth Mala, 3 he) all youre tithes into my barnes, that there maye be meate in my houſe, and proue

me (ſayeth the Lord) in theſe thynges, whether I ſhal not open vnto you, the caractes and the cloudes of the ſkye, & geue you fruyte aboundantlye. See now, I haue proued howe that tithes do profite vs more, then they do profite the Lorde. O ye imprudente and vnwiſe people, what euil thing doth God commaunde, that he ſhould not be worthy to be hearde? he ſayeth thus: Thou ſhalte not delaye to offer vp vnto me the tithes of Exo, 22, ca. deci. 16. que. 1 thy barne, and of thy winepreſſe. Y fit be ſinne to be tardius and ſlowe in offring vp, and paying thy tithes, howe great a treſpaſſe is it, to offer none at all? He ſayth agayne, Honor and worſhip thy lorde God, with the frute & gayne

of thy true and iuſt laboure. Do ſacrifice and offer vnto him of the firſt and chiefeſt of al thine increaſe, that thy barnes may be repleniſhed wyth corne, and that thy winepreſſes may redounde and flowe ouer with wine. Thou doſte not geue that thing frely, nor yet without gayne, that ſone after thou ſhalte receaue agayne with great lucre. Per aduenture thou doſt demaūd to whome ſhal that thing be profitable, that God doth receaue to reſtore againe? And agayne thou doſt aſke me, to whoſe profite it redoundeth, that is geuen vnto the pore. If thou beleue wel, it is thine owne vtilitie and profite, but yf thou wauer & be in doubt, thou haſt loſt it. Tithes good

brethren are the tribute of ye iudgement and pore people: ca decim. 16. que, 1. therfore geue the poore their tribute, and the prieſtes their offeringes. And if perchaūce thou haue no tithe corne, as hath the huſbandman, then thy witte and thy hādy craft wherwith thou doſt ſuſtayne thy ſelfe, is Gods, and of that thing thou doeſt gayne & get thy liuing withal, he doeth aſke & require tithes. Geue him the tithes of thy wages, and lucre, which thou doeſte gayne in warfare, the tithes of thy merchaundiſe, and of thy handy craft. For why? it is a diuerſe thing yt we geue and paye for the earthe, then that we geue for the vſe of our life. Therfore o thou mā, geue it, becauſe thou doſt poſſeſſe

it, geue it, becauſe thou haſt deſerued to be borne, for the Lord ſayth thus: Euery man ſhall redeme his ſoule, & there ſhall be no ſicknes, nor no miſaduenture among thē. Thus thou haſt in holy ſcripture, Gods owne writynge, wherwith he doth promiſe ye, yt if yu paye thy thites, yu ſhalt not only haue aboundance of fruite & corne, but alſo ye helth of body. Thy barnes (ſayeth he) ſhalbe ful of corne, & thy Pro, 33 winepreſſes ſhall redounde with wine, and there ſhalbe no ſicknes amonge you. Seinge then, that by the true payinge of tithes thou mayſt merite both the earthlye and the heauenly rewarde: why doſt thou through couetouſnes defraude thy ſelfe of ſuch

double benediction? Herken therfore vnto me thou vndeuoute man. Thou knoweſte well, that all that thou doſte receaue, is Gods, and wilte thou then not lende the maker and geuer of all thynges part of his owne? The Lord hath no neade, he doeth aſke no rewarde, but honour vnlye, nor he doth not require, yt thou 
                  •
               eue him any thinge, that is thine. He voucheſafe to aſke the tithes of all thinges, and doſt thou o thou couetous man, ſaye him naye? What wouldeſte thou do, yf he had kept nine partes vnto him ſelfe, and had left the only the tenth part? the whiche thinge verely is ſo chaunſed nowe, when that thy corne for lacke of rayne is thinne, &

naughtes, thy vines, beaten with hayle, & deſtroyed with froſte and colde. O thou couetous man, what doſt thou reken vpon? nine partes are taken from thee, becauſe thou woldeſt not paye the tenthe. It is cleare that thou neuer payeſt it, and yet God dothe demaunde it and require it. This is gods mooſt righteous cuſtome and vſe, yt if thou do not paye him his tenthe, thou ſhalt be reuoked and reduced to the tenthe. For it is written: The Lord ſayth, I ca. deci. 16. que, 
                     •
                  
                ſaweit, and ye thought to begile me, but youre treaſure & youre houſes ſhalbe ſpoyled, thou ſhalte geue the wicked ſouldier, that thou wouldeſt not geue the prieſt. Returne vnto me (ſayth the Lord om

nipotente, yt I maye open the cloudes for you, & ſprede my benediction vpon you, I wil mala. 3, not deſtroye ye frutes of your poſſeſſions, nor youre wines ſhal not widder, nor conſume awaye, & al nations ſhal ſaye, that ye are bleſſed. God is alwayes ready to do well, but the malitiouſnes of man will not ſuffer him. For man taketh, that god ſhuld geue him al thinge, and yet he offreth not thoſe thinges vnto him, the whiche he ſemeth to poſſeſſe. But what & God ſhulde ſaye, man whome I created and made, is mine, the earthe yt thou doſt inhabite, is mine, the ſeede that thou doſt ſowe is mine, the beaſtes whiche thou doeſt wery, are mine, ye dewes, & the rayne are mine,

and the heate of the ſame is mine. Conſidering then that al the elementes, wherby mā doth liue, are mine, thou that doſt only beſtowe thy labour doſt deſerue the tenthe only. But inaſmuch as ye lord omnipotent doth mekely nouryſh vs and fede vs, he hathe geuen a righte greate rewarde to ye laborer. For he, reſeruing only vnto him ſelfe ye tenthe, hath geuen vs ye reſt. O thou vnkind deceauer, & vnfaythful man, I ſpeake vnto the wt the wordes of god. Behold & ſee, the yeare is gone & paſte, geue the lord, that doth ſend raine, his reward. O man redeme thy ſelfe whileſte thou haſt thy redēption in thy hād whileſt thou art aliue, & whileſt thou mayſt. Redeme thy

ſelfe, ye couetous death do not ſo preuent thee, yt thou leaue doth life and rewarde. Thou doſt cōmitte that thing vnto thy wife but in vayne, yt whiche perchaunce wil haue another huſband. Nor thou womā doſt leaue it but in vayne vnto thy huſband, for he coueteth to haue another wyfe. Nor thou doſt cōmitte ye care of thy ſoule but in vayn vnto thy kinſfolke, for there ſhal no manne faithfully redeme nor ayde the, after thou be departed, becauſe that thou beyng in proſperitie, woldeſt not redeme nor helpe thy ſelfe. Caſt now o thou couetous manne this burden of auaritiouſnes frō thy ſhoulders, deſpiſe this moſt cruel miſtres, that doth thus hardlye yoke thee, nor

will not ſuffer thee to accepte and take the yoke of Chriſte vpon thee. For as the yoke of auarice is wonte to thruſte and to leade men to the paynes of hell: ſo the yoke of Chriſt is wōt to lift men vp, & to bring thē to ye ioyes of heauē. Tithes are required of dutie, & he that denieth to paye thē, doth inuade & occupie other mens goodes. And loke how many poore men die and periſh there for hūger, where he yt will not paye his tithes doth dwel, he before the ſeate of the eternall iudge, ſhall appeare gyltye of all theyr deathes, for aſmuche as he kepte that to hys owne vſe & ſtore, whiche God had prepared for ye pore. Therfore who ſo coueceth to obtayne a re|

or the forgeuenes of his ſynnes, let him paye his tithes, & geue of the other nine partes his charitie to the poore: & beware, yt whatſoeuer remayneth aboue a meane & a reaſonable liuing be not hurded vp to luxurious & volup tuous vſes, but yt it by doinge of good & charitable dedes, be layd vp in the celeſtial treaſure. For whatſoeuer God doth geue vs more then neadeth, he geueth it not ſpecially vnto vs, but willeth vs to diſtribute & to geue the ſame vnto other: for if we geue it not, we inuade & occupie other mens goodes.
         
         
            ¶ Of ſorcery & witchecrafte Ser. xi. Ser 231
            
            IT is not vnknowen vnto you good brethren,

that I haue oftentimes prayed you, and with al fatherly ſollicitude admoniſhed you, yt in no maner of wiſe ye ſhould obſerue & kepe theſe ſacrilegius cuſtomer of paganes. But yet as farforth as I do heare, my admonition hathe profited ſome of you but very ſlenderly & litle. But yet if I ſhould not ſhewe you theſe thinges, at ye day of iudgemēt I ſhuld geue but a ſlender & an heauy rekening, bothe for my ſelfe & you. But I excuſe & cleare my ſelfe before God, when yt oftentimes I do admoniſh & warne you, that ye ſhuld not ſeke vpō theſe diuiners & calkers, nor queſten wt thē of any cauſe, or of anye diſeaſe. Ye ſhal medle wt no inchaūters, Deut. 18 for whoſoeuer doth

that euil, loſeth his chriſtianite, & becometh a pagane, and without he ſuccur & ayde him ſelfe with almoſe dedes, and with hard & longe penaunce, he ſhalbe loſt for euer. In like maner, looke that ye take no hede to witche craft, And whē ye be in your iorneye, regard not the ſyngynge and chatterynge of byrdes, nor preſume not vpon theyr ſonges, to denunce or ſhewe any deuilliſhe inchauntment or ſorcery. Ye ſhall not obſerue nor marke vpon what daye ye go for the of your houſe, nor when ye ſhall returne home agayne. For (as ſcripture doth ſaye) God made al the dayes. The firſt day is made, & the ſecond and the thirde, likewiſe the fourth, the fift, the ſixte, & the

Sabboth. And god made all thinges verye good. Take Gene. 1. hede alſo, that ye obſerue not thoſe ſacrilegius & foliſhe neſinges. But as oft as ye muſt nedes goo anye where, bleſſe your ſelfe in ye name of Chriſt Jeſus, & ſaying your crede, or els the lordes prayer wt good belefe take your iorney, being well aſſured, yt god ſhall helpe & proſpere you. And when yt ye ſhall beginne (god willing) to contemne & deſpiſe al theſe forſayd ſorceries and ſacrilegius 2, Pr, 2
                     •
                  
                faſhions, with ſuch other wycked thynges, as Satan hathe deceaued you withall. then ſhal he take it greuouſly perceauing yt ye departe from hys familiarytye and felouſhyppe, and ſhall worke you ſome dyſpleaſure. For other

he ſhal vexe you wt infirmities & ſicknes, or els cauſe you by ſome diſeaſes, or through wandering & ſtraing abroad, to loſe part of your goodes & cattel. And god to proue you & to knowe, whether ye come faithfullye vnto him or no, or whether yt ye wt al your heartes do deſpiſe the craftines of the deuill, or ſet more by hys loue, or by ye loſſe of your cattel, doth ſuffer al this to chaū
               ce & happen. But if ye would with heart & perfecte fayth, once or twyſe deſpyſe ſuche wickednes & miſfortunes as ſatan doth trouble you withal: god wold voucheſafe ſo to repel & withdrawe him from troubling & vexing of you, yt he wt al his craft and ſubteltie, ſhould neuer deceaue you, yf

negligent and lite perſons of weake deſires, & of ſlouthfull & cold fayth begin perchaūce to do wel, they do not yet lōg cōtinue therin. For after that they haue abſtained frō ye fore ſaid inchauntmēts, & witchecraftes, by & by they repente thē ſelues, ye euer they returned to god, & that they at any time forſoke the crafty ſuttelnes of the deuil: & ſo returne agayne to their ſorceres and witchecraftes, as a dogge vnto his vomite. But deſpyſe 2, Pe, 2
                     •
                  
                you, vnto whome god hathe geuen wiſdom & fayth, al his deceytfulnes, & returne faith fully agayne vnto the Lorde your god, & whatſoeuer ſatā doth ſend you, beare it paciētly & ſtrōgly, yt ye may ſay with the bleſſed mā Job: god gaue

it, & toke it, as it pleaſed the Joh. 1. lord, ſo it is. And yt in like maner ye may ſaye with a ferme & a whole heart with the Apoſtle: Who ſhall ſeparate or deuide vs frō the charite & loue of god? ſhal tribulation or anguiſhe, or perſecution, or hunger, Rom. 1. other nakednes, or peril, or ſweard? Good chriſten mē can not be ſeparated by no torment frō god. But ſuch as be negligēt, are now & then thoroughe ydle fables & wordes only ſeparated & diuided frō god. And if they only ſuffer neuer ſo litle dāmage or loſſe, incōtinēt thei are ſlaūdred, & preſume to murmur againſt god, returning againe to their wicked & deteſtable witchecraft. But perchaūce ſom of you wil ſay, what ſhal we do, cōſiderīg yt ſuch calkers through theyr

knowledge, do oftētimes tel & ſhew vs ye truth? Of this thīg Deut 13 ſcript ur doth moniſh & warne vs ſaying: Yea notwithſtanding yt they do ſhewe you the truth, yet beleue thē not. For ye Lord doth proue you, whether ye feare him or no. But a gayne yu doſt ſay: If there wer not inchaunters, nor no ſouth ſayers many a man, yt is byttē wt ſerpentes, or troubled with ſome other ſore diſeaſe, ſhulde otherwhyles dye and peryſh. Trueth it is deare brethren, for god (as I haue ſaid before) doeth ſuffer the deuill to do ſuche thynges, to proue good chriſtē men withal, yt yf at any time or ſeaſō they do by ſuche ſorcerye and wytchecrafte amende of their infyrmityes & diſeaſes, or come to ye know|

of any truth, they may thereby ye ſoner geue credence, & beleue the deuill. But he yt doth deſire to obſerue & kepe chriſtes religiō, muſt nedes with his whole heart & minde depiſe al thoſe thinges, fearing the ſaying of the Apoſtle chiding vs: ye obſerue (ſaith he) Gala, 4 ye dayes, monethes, times, & yeres. I feare me, leſt I haue beſtowed on you laboure in vayne. See now, the Apoſtle ſaith, yt who ſo hath vſed witchecraft, ſhal receaue his doctrine in vaine. And therfore flye & auoyd aſmuch as ye cā or may, ye circūuentions & the deceitfulnes of ye deuil. And a boue al thinges I woulde ye ſhoulde knowe, that Satan canne nother hurt you, none of youres, youre cattell, nor

yet the leaſt part of your ſubſtaunce, but as farforth as he hath powre & licence of God. Nor he durſte not deſtroye Jobs ſubſtaūce, nor yet once Job. 1. touche it, but that God dyd licence & ſuffer hym. And we reade, that when the euel ſpirits & deuilles were expulſte math, 8. and caſt out of men, that thei beſought chriſt that he wold ſuffer them to enter into the hearde of ſwyne, yf the company of deuilles durſt not enter into the ſwyne without ye leue and ſufferaunce of God, who wyll be ſo vnfaithfull to beleue that they can or maye hurte good Chriſtians, with oute his diſpenſation and ſufferaunce. God both ſuffer it for two diuers cauſes, other to proue whether we be

good, or els to amende vs, yf we be ſynful. But he that wil paciently ſuffer gods diſpenſation, and ſay whan he hath loſte anye thinge (as I haue tolde you) God gaue it, and god hath taken it, as it hathe pleaſed him, ſo it is, bleſſed be Job. 1, the name of God. He for this his patience moſt pleaſaunte and acceptable vnto the lord, ſhall receyue (yf he be a good man) the crowne of glory, or yf he be ſynfull indulgence & pardon of his ſynnes. Take hede of this good brethren, that whā Satan had deſtroted al Jobs ſubſtaunce, he ſaid not God gaue it, and the deuyll hath taken it. For the bleſſed man wold not aſcribe ne geue no ſuche glorye nor power to Sathan, that he

coulde take any thinge from man, that God ſuffered hym not to take. Conſiderynge than that Satan coulde not hurte Jobs chyldren, his camels nor yet his aſſes, vntyll it pleaſed god to ſuffer hym: why do we chriſtians beleue that he may do any more vnto vs, than that the diuine powre by his godly & ſecrete iudgement doeth ſuffer hym to doe? And therefore let vs ſurly beleue, that we can loſe no more than God doeth ſuffer to be taken from vs. Let vs with all oure hartes ther fore go vnto his mercie, and forſakinge theſe ſacrilegius obſeruations, let vs truſt cō
               tinually vpon hys ayde and comfort, for he that beleueth in theſe foreſayde euylles,

that is, in diuinations, ſorſaries, philaters, or in anye other maner of wytchecrafte, notwithſtanding he faſt, pray go continually to the church, geue large almoſe, & puniſhe his body with all affliction & payne, yet ſo longe as he leueth not theſe ſorceries, it ſhall nothinge auaile him, for ſuche wicked and ſacrile gius obſeruations, do ouerturne and deſtroye all theſe good & vertuous operations. Nor it can not auayle them, that with theſe euylles, doe that good is. For it is true that ye Apoſtle ſayeth: a litle leuen 1. cor. 5, ſowreth the whole lompe of dowe. And this: ye can not dryncke of the cuppe of God, 1, cor, 10, and of the cup of the deuilles, ye can not be partakers of

Gods table, and of the table of deuilles. And he ſaith. No man can ſerue two maſters. math, 6, Therfore if chriſten men doe loke thoroughe the grace of God to be ſaued, they muſte make no vowes to no trees, nor praye to no fountaynes, yf any man therfore haue in his feildes, in his houſe, or ny vnto his houſe, trees, alters, or any other vayne thynge, where the poore, wretched, & ſymple people are wonte to make theyr vowes, and doth not hewe them downe, and deſtroye them, he is and ſhal be partaker of al ſuch witchcraftes and ſorcery as is and ſhalbe committed there. And what a thinge is this, that whan anye ſuche tree, vnto ye which they were wonte and

accuſtomed to do ſacrifice, do fall, that no man dare gether it, to make them fyer withal. I pray you to behold & mark the wretchednes, and the folyſhnes of man, the whych doyng honor to dede trees, deſpiſe gods cōmaundements. They dare not burne ye braū
               ches of trees, & yet throughe inchauntmentes they caſte themſelues hedlyng into hel fyer. And therefore let hym which hetherto hath not don this euell, reioyce, be gladde, thanke god therefore, & ſtriue to continu faithfully in good workes. But let him that hetherto hath deliuered hym ſelfe vp to be entangled and taken with ſuche deuelyſhe & enorme faſhions, lette him (I ſay) do penaunce, fly, & withal

feare deſpiſe thoſe foreſayde wytchcraftes, that god may forgeue hym, and for the glory of his name, cauſe hym to come to the euerlaſting bleſſe of heauen. And foraſmuch as it is come to my knowledge, that as yet there are ſome, ye whiche throughe ſimplicitie and ignoraunce, or els thoroughe glutteny (the which thinge is mooſte to be beleued) feare not, nor are not aſhamed to eate of ſuch ſacrilegius meates as are yet after the vſe & cuſtom of Paganes offered vp & bewitched: I denunce and ſtreightly cō
               maund you before god & his aungels, yt ye haunt nor com no more to no ſuch diabolical dinners made in any temple, or at any fountayne, or tree.

And likewiſe yf any thing be ſent you from thens, feare it, and as though you ſawe the deuyll, refuſe it, and ſo refuſe it, that ye ſuffer no maner of parte of ſuch ſacrilegius banke
                  •
               s to be exhibited or broughte into your houſes, & that becauſe of this ſayeng of the Apoſtle: ye cannot (ſayth he) drynke of the cup of God, and of the cuppe of deuylles: ye 1, cor, 10, can not be partakers of gods table, and of the table of Deuylles. And becauſe ſome are waye, or euer I eate therof, I do bleſſe me. Let no man preſume to doe ſoo, for howe doth he that eateth of ſuche ſacrilegius and wicked meates bleſſe his mouth, that putteth a ſwearde to his owne hearte? For as the bodye is

ſlayne with the ſweard, ſo is the ſoule ſlaine with ſuch deuelyſhe and wycked meates. But we truſte in the mercye and goodnes of God, that he wyll voucheſafe ſo to inſpyre and inflame you to goodnes, that the wickednes of the deuyl, nether in other thinges, nor yet in theſe ſacrilegius obſeruations and ſorceries ſhal not come among you, but that ye ſhall faſten and fet all your hope in God, nor neuer returne agayne to their wicked abhominations, our lord Jeſus Chriſt, whoſe empyre and honour is infinite, graū
               tynge the ſame. So be it.
         
         
            ¶ Of exchuynge and auoydyng of ebrietie and dronkennes. 
                  
                     •••
                   23
                     •
                  , Ser. xii.
            
               
               ALthogh dere brethren, I do beleue ye thorough ye mercy of God, ye doo feare the vice of drunkennes, euen as ye do feare the depe pytte of hell: and that ye youre ſelues wyll not drinke intemperatly nor ouer much: nor compel no nother man to drink more than nedeth: yet it can not be but that there be ſome negligent perſons, whiche wil not be ſober. But yet I pray you that do lyue ſoberly not to be miſcontent, nor yet to blame vs, for nedes we muſt blame and accuſe all ſuche drunkardes. For notwithſtandynge my wel beloued brethren that drunkennes be a greauous

vyce, and muche odious before God, yet amonge manye it is throughout al the world ſo cuſtomably and commenly vſed, that they which wil not know gods commaundemē
               tes, thinke and beleue it to be no ſynne. Inſomuche that at all theyr bankettes, they doe laugh them to ſkorne, that cā
               not drynke and quaft al out. And thoroughe an enuious loue and amitie, they are not aſhamed to adiure & inforce men to drinck more then ſuffiſeth. Trulye it were a leſſe faut for hym that maketh a man drunken, to wound him, and to cutte his fleſhe with a ſworde, than to kyl and murder his ſoule with ſuperfluitie of drynke. And foraſmuch as oure bodyes are made

of earth, and that the earth, by longe and to muche continuaunce of rayne, is made moyſte, and ſo reſolued into myre and durte, that it can not be tylde nor ſowen: ſo in lykewyſe, whan our fleſſhe is to muche moyſted wt drincke, it cannot receaue ſpirituall culture nor tyllage, nor bring forth the neceſſarye frutes of the ſoule. And therfore as all men do deſire ſufficient raine for theyr feildes, to exercyſe tyllage withal, and to reioyce in the aboundaunce of fruyte and corne, ſo in the feild of the body, men oughte to drynke that behoueth only, leſt that by the ſuperfluitie and aboū
               daunce of dryncke, the earth of the body beyng reduced & broughte as into a plaſhe of

myre, be more apte to brynge forth the wormes and ſerpē
               tes of vice, than the fruytes of good workes. All drunkardes are lykened vnto fennes and plaſſhes, for your charitie doth knowe, that al ſuche thinges as growe in maras groundes, do bryng forth no fruite, nor nothinge els but ſerpentes, todes, and other dyuers kyndes of wormes, more apt to feare man withall, than to brynge forth anyethyng that ſhould profit hym or his liuing. For al ſuch herbes and trees as do grow in fennes and plaſhes, or about the bankes of ſuche places, ſeme to haue no maner of vtilitie or profyt in them, inſomuche that euery yeare once men do burne them. Take

good hede, for the thyng whiche cometh of drunkennes is prepared for the fyer. And euen ſuch (as I haue ſayde) be al drunkardes, whoſe diners indure and continue all the day longe, and theyr ſuppers vntil the mornyng. The whiche whē they ſeme to be moſt ſober, can ſcaſely ſtand, whoſe ſenſes are ſlowe, ponderous, dull, and in a maner buryed. Finally in their vſual and cuſtomable drunkennes, they nother knowe them ſelues, nor yet no nother man, they can nother walke nor ſtande nor heare, nor ſay any thinge that doth pertayne or ſtand with reaſō Nor they are not aſhamed to drink, & to fyl thē ſelues tyl they vomit agayn, and to dryncke by meaſure,

without meaſure. They prouide for greate goddardes, & ſtryue, as by a certayne law, how they ſhould drynke, and he that can out drynke, or ouercome his fellow, ſhalbe for his euel doyng greatly exalted & prayſed. Of this thinge doth growe and enſue ſtryfe and debate, and diuers horible lepes, wherby the body is much troubled. Of this doth chaunce and follow adultery and ſomtymes murder. And as oft as they do take exceſſe of drynke, theyr ſtinking and fylthye bodies (as thoughe they were ſmytten with the paiſeye, hauynge not the vſe of theyr feete) are fayne to be borne, and caryed to bed, with other mennes handes, theyr ſyghte waxethe

dimme, they are pained with the ſwymmyng of the heade, and with the head ache, their countenaūce is drouſy, their members quake & tremble, they are aſtonnied and dulie, both in ſoule and bodye. In theſe men is fulfylled that is writtē. Where is wo? where is ſtryfe and debate? where 
                  
                     •
                  ro, 31, are ſnares and deceitfulnes? Wher are woundes without cauſe? where be theſe blouddy eyes? Are not theſe amōg thoſe yt be cuppy, & that ſtudy to drynke all oute? But yet they that wyll be ſuche, go aboute to excuſe them ſelues ful wretchedly, ſaying: Iloue not my frende (ſayth he) yf I as ofte as I do call hym to dynner, do not geue hym as muche as he luſteth to drink.

Let hym not be thy frende, that wil make the gods enemy, for he is an ennemie to the, and alſo vnto him ſelf yf thou make thy ſelfe and thy frend druncken, he ſhalbe thy frend, and God thine enemy. Therefore take good heade whether it be wel done or no, to leue God, and to applye, & ioyne thy ſelf to a drunkard. But yet cauſe him not to 
                  •
               weare, nor compell him not, but leaue it to his owne free wyll, to drinke aſmuche as it ſhall pleaſe hym, and if he will ouer drinke him ſelfe, that he peryſh alone, rather than ye ſhuld peryſh together. O the infelicitie of mankinde, howe many are there found that in force theſe drunkardes, and luxurious perſons to drinke

more than 
                  •
               e adeth? and yet before theyr doores they doe diſſemble to geue the poore man any thynge at al, aſking him only a cuppe of colde water. Nor they take no hede that Chriſt ſhould haue that for the nedye and poore, that they geue to the luxurious, ſayeng: That ye haue doone math. 25 to the leaſt of myne, ye haue done it vnto me. But al ſuch whan they drowne other mē with drincke, do ſaye to the poore man aſking his almes, go henſe go, god ſhall ſende you. And trulye, as longe as men walke. God wyll ſende them. Then what other thig is it, that he ſayth, gette you henſe, god ſhall ſend you, but go to him that hath God, for God wil geue him. And ſo he confeſſeth with his owne

mouth, that God is not with hym, by whoſe inſpiration he ſhould geue ſomewhat to the pore and nedye. I praye you derely beloued brethren, diligently to take hede & marke, that after that the brute beaſtes, beynge ledde and broughte to the water, haue once ſatiſfied and quenched theyr thyrſte, ſtande they neuer ſo longe in the water, yet theiwil drink no more, no nor they can drink no more. Let now theſe drunkardes conſider, wether they be not to be iudged worſe than beaſtes? The beaſt wyl drink no more thā nedeth, but theſe bibbers take double & trible more thā euer ſhal do them good. And the thyng which might haue ſerued thē well, thre or foure

dayes, for very enuy, or elles for very dronkennes they wt great ſynne go about rather to leſe and conſume it all vpō one daye, then liberallye and vertuouſly to ſpende it. And wolde to god that they loſte theyr drynk only, ſo that thei loſt not them ſelues withall. O what euil is in ebriete and drunkennes? Kyng Pharao other vpon enuy, or els thorow Gen, 40, ebrietie, cauſed his maiſter baker to be truſt vp, and hanged. The Jewes (of whō it is written) ſat down to eat and to dryncke, and ſtode vp agayne to playe: after they had drunken more thē neded they cauſed idols to be made, and in the worſhip of them, Exd. 32, they daunſed, and lyke mad men troubled them ſelues wt
               
diuers ſortes of gamboldes. And Herode after yt he was welheted wt wyne, for the pleſaunt daunſynge of a mayde, commaunded John Baptyſt math, 14 to be ſiayne. What other vitious thinges do riſe & ſpring of drunkennes, the holy goſt doth witneſſe by Salomon, ſayinge: Wyne and women Eccl, 19. reproue wyſe men, and cauſe them to leaue, and to forſake God. And agayne: Beholde not wine whan it ſparckleth Pro, 23, and ſhyneth thorow ye glaſſe, for it goeth downe very gentely, but at the laſt it ſhall bite the lyke a ſerpent, and ſtinge yt lyke an adder. Thine eyes ſhall behold other mens wiues, and thy hert ſhall thinke wyckedly. And the Apoſtle ſ. Paule doth likewyſe monyſh

and warne vs of the euell of drunkennes, ſaying: Be not drunken with wyne, wherin Ephe. 5. is exceſſe. We do ſhew you euen euidentlye by ſcripture, that loue to be drūken, what euel is cōpryſed therin. Who ſo deliteth in wyne and fat Prou. 21 morſelles, ſhall not be ryche. And agayne. Neither geue thou to muche wyne to kynges, for there is no ſecretnes Prou. 31 where drunkennes doeth reygn, leſt that they through drunkenes forget iudgemēt, executyng the law vniuſtlye vpon the pore. Alſo he ſayth. That a drunken workeman ſhall neuer be riche. And agayne: Eccle. 19 yf ye drinke wine meſurably, thou ſhalte be ſober. Item, wine at the beginning was created in ioyfulnes, &

not in drunkennes. Wyne ſo verly receaued and taken, is the pleaſure both of bodye & Eecl. 31. foule, but wyne vnmeſurably vſed and taken, is the ſetting forth of drunkennes, the offention and hurte of wyſe men, and the feble ſhynge of mans force & ſtrength. But whan we motion and make mentiō of theſe things, theſe bybbers & drunkardes paraduenture are angery withall, and do murmur agaynſte vs. But althoughe there be whiche are moued, and angrye withall, yet good willynge, there be that hear and receaue this good counſell, & yt ſhal through gods mercye, be deliuered from this horrible & wycked ſinne of ebrietie. Yet ſuche as be moued

with vs, ſpeakinge agaynſte theyr familiar frende drunkennes, ſhall heare this one thyng of vs, that whoſoeuer he be that penitentlye doeth not bewayle his ebrietie, but continueth therein vntyll he die, without doubte he ſhalbe loſt for euer. For ye holy gooſt ſeyng this by the holye Apoſtle, cannot lye. Nether drunkardes ſhal inherit the kingdome 1, Cor, 6, of god. And therefore it were better for them to be angry and woued with them ſelues, then with vs, and ſo be yng, they ſhall throughe the grace of God, ſoone deliuer them ſelues from the fylthye and dyrty cannell of drunkennes. And therefore whiles they haue time, let them thorowe the helpe and ayde of

God, aryſe with all haſt, and beſechynge God with theyr hole heartes, ſay thus wyth the Prophet: Plucke me out Pſal, 6
                     •
                  
                of this dyrt, that I ſtycke not faſt in it. And thus: And that the tempeſt of the water doe not drowne me, nor the depenes ſwalow me. For whoſoeuer that drunkennes, the very pytte of hell, doth once receaue and embrace, doeth ſo chalenge them, that without penaunce and good amendement do enſue and folowe, it ſhall neuer ſuffer them to returne from the obſcurite and darkenes thereof, vnto the light of charitie & ſobernes. But aboue all other thinges we muſt vnderſtand & know that it is not one daye alone that maketh drunkards, but

the daily renuynge and multipliynge of cuppes, our moſt enemies, rather than our frē
               des, adiurynge & compelling vs vnto the ſame, but after they haue once put it in vſe & cuſtome, the heate of drunkennes doth ſo kidle, and inuade them that it inforſythe thē to be alwaies thriſtye. But he that doth deſyre to be deliuered from this vice, euen as he aproched & came to ye darckenes, and vice therof through the encrecement of drinke: ſo by the diminition of the ſame, he may by litle & lytle returne to the light, and vertue of ſobernes. For yf he ſhould with drawe at once his exceſſe of drinking he euēwith heuines whan he is moſt feruentlye athriſte, would crye out & ſaye,

that he had rather be deade, thā to forſake his cuſtomable drinking, and dronkennes, no thing cōſidering, that it were farre more tollerable, that the body ſhould die, than that the ſoule through ebriete, and exceſſe of drinke ſhould peryſhe for euer. And therefore to auoide the ſufferaunce & paine of ſuche hete, and to be deliuered from ſuch tormētes, as he ſuffereth: let him (as I haue ſaid) daily diminiſhe ſomwhat of that exceſſe, & ſuperfluitie, vntil he become to a reſonable wayes and cuſtome of drinckynge. For he that wyll (as I haue ſaied) diminyſhe and debate this thinge, ſhalbe delyuered of hys darkenes, nor ſhall nomore ſuffre ſuche intollerable payne. Now good

brethren I declaring and ſhe wyng you theſe thinges, doe quite & vnburden my ſelf before God. And whoſoeuer he be, that is inclined to ye exces of drinke, & deſpiſeth to here me, or that his table wyll adiure & compel men to drinke, he ſhall at the daye of iudgement geue a rekeninge both for hym ſelfe and them. And becauſe there be certayn preiſtes (the which ſhuld prohibit and forbydde ſuch thynges) that enforce and compel men to drynke more than nedeth, let them from henſeforth begyn to correct and to amend them ſelues, and ſo to chaſtē other, that they whan they ſhal appeare before god, ſuffer not for theyr owne drunkennes, and other mens to:

but that through their owne amendment, and the correction of other, they may merit to come to the eternal & euer laſting reward. And of this I do deſire you aboue al thinges, yea & adiure you by the feareful day of iudgemente, yt ye, (as ofte as ye do bankette one another) auoyd and flye as poyſen, that haynous and fylthy cuſtome, by the which ye other willingly, or againſt youre willes, are wonte to drinke by great meſure with out meſure. For this vnhappy cuſtome doth yet continu and remayn of the cuſtome & vſage of Paganes. And who ſoeuer he be that conſenteth that this cuſtom of drinking & quafcing, other at his own table, or at anye other mans,

be vſed, lette hym not doubte but that he doth ſacrifice to ye deuil. By the which bybbing and quafting, the ſoul of man doth not onelye peryſhe, but alſo the body is greatlye and muche fe bliſhed with al. But I hope that God of his tender mercy, ſhal voucheſafe ſo to inſpire you with grace, yt this moſt ſhameful and lamē
               table vice ſhal ſo abhorre you that you ſhall neuer ſuffer it to be vſed more: but that all ſuche thinges as ſhoulde be ſpent in ſuch drunken ſuperfluite, ſhalbe ſpente and go to the releife and refreſſhynge of the pore, our Lord Chriſt Jeſu grauntingthe ſame, the whiche doth lyue and reigne with the father and the holy goſt for euermore.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Powles churche yarde at the ſygne of the holye gooſt by Ihon Cawood, Prynter to the Quenes Maieſtie.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   