
      
         
            
            
            ¶ Godly Meditations made in the forme of prayers, by S. Auguſtine.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A prayer wherein through commemoration of Chriſtes paſſion, we deſire pardon of our ſinnes, and continuance in vertue & godlines.
            
               BEholde (O pitifull father) thy moſt pitifull ſon, which ſuffered for mee beyng ſo wicked. Beholde (O moſt mercifull kyng) who ſuffreth, and remember (as thou art louyng and kynde) for

whome he ſuffred. Is not this (O my Lorde) innocent, whō although he were thy ſonne, thou didſt deliuer to redeeme and raunſom a ſeruant? Is not this the author and beginner of lyfe, which beyng ledde as a ſheepe to be killed, and beyng made obedient to thee, euen vnto death, was not afrayde to take vpon him ye moſt cruel & ſharpe kynde of death? Call to remēbraunce (O

thou diſtributour of all health) that this is he whome (although thou didſt begette him by thy power, yet notwythſtanding) thou wouldeſt haue to be made partaker of myne infirmitie and weakeneſſe.
            Truely thys ſame is thy Godhead which did take vppon hym my nature, which was hanged vppon the gibbet of torment or croſſe, which in the fleſhe which he

had taken vpon him, did ſuffer ſorrowful puniſhment. Turne the eyes of thy maieſtie (O lord my God) toward the worke of thine vnſpeakable pitie. Loke vpon thy deare ſonne, whoſe whole bodye is ſtretched forth. Marke the harmeles & pure handes, which do drop, & diſtill downe innocent bloud. And I beſeeche thee, be pacified & pardon ye wicked dedes which my handes haue

committed. Cōſider his bare and naked ſide, being thruſt thorow cruelly with a ſpeare, and renue & waſh me with thy holy fountayne or well, which I beleue did flow from thence. Marke the vnſpotted feete which haue not ſtand in ye way of ſinners, but alway haue walked in thy law, how they ar perſed thorow with ſharp nailes, and make perfecte my ſteppes in thy pathes,

and make me (of thy louing kindnes) to hate all the wayes of iniquitie. Remoue frō me the way of iniquitie, & make me of thy mercye) to chuſe the way of truth. I beſech thee (O king of holy men) by this holy one of all holy ones, and by thys my redemer: to make me runne the way of thy cōmaundements, that I may be vnited & knit vnto him in ſpirit, which did not diſdayue

to be clad in my fleſhe. Doeſt thou not looke vpon and marke (O pitifull father) the head of thy moſt dearely beloued ſoune, a yong man, how it leaned vpon hys ſhoulder when he was paſt the moſt precious death? Beholde (O my moſt gentle creator) the humanitie, & gentlenes of thy beloued ſonne, & haue compaſſion vpon the febleues of me thy weake and feble handy

worke. Behold (O moſt glorious parent) ye torne and rent members of thy moſt kynde and louing chylde, and remember gently what ſubſtaunce I am of. Beholde the paines of God and man, and releaſe and looſe man (which is thy creature) out of miſery and bondage of ſinne. Beholde the puniſhment of hym, that did redeme and pardon, the offence of them that

be redemed. This is he O Lord, whome thou didſt ſtrike for the ſinnes of thy people, although he be thy welbeloued, in whome was founde no guile, and yet neuertheles was he reckoned amongſt them that were full of iniquitie.
         
         
            ¶ A prayer wherein man confeſſeth himſelfe to be the cauſe of Chriſtes paſſion.
            WHat haſt thou committed (O Lorde)

that thou ſhouldeſt be ſo iudged? what haſt thou offeded that thou ſhouldeſt be ſo cruelly handled and ordered? what was thy faulte? what was thyne offēce? what was the cauſe of thy death? what was the occaſion of thy condemnation? I (Lord) I am the cauſe of thy ſorrow, the faulte is in me, that thou was killed for, I haue deſerued thy death, I committed the offences

that were auenged vpon thee. Oh merueilous kinde of iudgemēt, and vnſpeakable diſpoſition or ordering of miſteries. The vninſt man offendeth: and ye righteous is puniſhed. The giltie doth euill, and the innocent is beaten. The euill doth treſpaſſe, and the good is condemned. That which the euill man deſerueth, the ſame doth ye iuſt ſuffer. That which the ſeruaunt doth

amiſſe, ye maiſter makes amendes. That which man treſpaſſeth, God ſuffereth it. O (thou which art the ſonne of God) how low did thine humilitie deſcend? How greatly did thy charitie euen as it were waxe hotte & burne towarde vs. How farre did thy pitie proceede? whither did thy benignitie and gentlenes grow and extend? how farre did thy loue ſtretch? how farre

came thy compaſſion? for I did wrongfully, and thou waſt puniſhed. I cōmitted ye miſchieuous deedes, and they were auenged vppon thee. I did the fault, & thou ſubmittedſt thy ſelf to ye tormentes. I was proude and thou waſt humble & meeke, I was ſwelled & puft vp, thou waſt extenuated, and appaired. I was diſobedient, neuertheles thou being obedient, bareſt the paines &

puniſhmentes of diſobedience. I obeyed and was as it were a ſeruaunt to all exceſſe and gluttony, and thou waſt puniſhed wyth ſcar
                  •
               itie and lacke of foode. The tr
                  •
               e did draw me violētly vnto vnlawfull concupiſcence and deſires, but perfect charitie led thee vnto puniſhmēt. I preſumed beyng forbidden: but thou didſt ſmart therefore, I tooke my pleaſure wyth delicateneſſe:

thou waſt vexed with the croſſe. I aboūd and haue plentye of all pleaſures, thou art all to torne with nayles. I do caſt the pleaſaunt ſweetnes of the apple: & ehou the bitterneſſe of Baull. Behold (o king of glory) mine iniquitie & vngodduies▪ and thy pietie, and goodnes is manifeſt. Be hold mine vnrighteouſnes; & thy iuſtice is plainly declared.
            What thing (O my

king and my God) ſhall I render vnto thee, for all thoſe thinges which thou haſt beſtowed vpō me? for nothyng can be found in yt hart of man, that may worthely recompence ſuch, rewards. Can mās wit excogitate or imagine any thing yt is worthy to be cōpared vnto thy diuine mercy? Neither is it yt office of a creature to goe about to recōpēce fully & iuſtly yt aide & helpe of a Creator.

There is truly O ſonne of God in this thy merueilous diſpēſation, and apointmentes ſomwhat in which my frailenes may helpe a little, if ſo be that my minde once pricked and ſtirred by thy viſitation do puniſhe the fleſhe, with the vices alſo and euill concupiſcences thereof: and thys thyng if thou wilt graunt, and geue me grace to doe, then ſhal it beginne as it were to ſuffer & ſuſtaine

ſorrowes & griefes, becauſe that thou alſo didſt voucheſafe to die for my ſinne. And ſo by the victory of the inward man, it ſhalbe armed (thou beyng a Captaine) for the externall and outwarde victorye, foraſmuche as (the ſpirituall perſecution once ouercom) it ſhal not bee afrayde, for thy ſake to be obedient vnto the materiall ſword, and croſſe of this world. And ſo the ſlendernes of my

ſtate and condition (if it pleaſe thy goodnes) ſhal be able accordyng to the little power thereof, to aunſwer vnto the greatnes, and excellency of my creator. And this is the heauenly medicine (O good Jeſu) this is (as it were a preſeruatiue of thy loue. Thys I beſeech thee, by thine accuſtomed & auncient mercies, to poure into my woundes, (the ſoule and filthy matter of the venemous

contagion, and infection once caſt away, which may refreſh, and reſtore me to my former puritie & cleannes, that when I haue taſted of the pleaſaunt ſweetenes which is to abide in thee it may make mee to deſpiſe, & vtterly ſet nought by the enticementes of this world, and to feare (for thy ſake) none aduerſities therof, & that I (remēbring thine euerlaſting nobilitie and excellencie)

may alwayes abhorre, and diſdaine the troubles of this tranſitory world. Let nothing (I beſeech thee) be delectable vnto me, nor pleaſe me without thee. Let no precious, nor beautifull thing be acceptable vnto me but thee: Let all thinges (I beſeech thee) be coūted as vile, and of no eſtimatiō vnto me, without thee. That which is againſt thy nature, let it be irckſome, and greuous

alſo vnto me, and that which pleaſeth thee, let it be continually deſired of me. Let it i
                  •
               ke me to reioyce without thee, & let it delight me to be ſad for thy ſake. Let thy name be an hartening vnto me, and the remembrance of thee, a conſolatiō & comforte. Let my teares be made vnto me as bread both day and night, ſearching thy inſtifications. Let ye law of thy mouth be better vnto me, then

thouſands of golde & ſiluer. Geue me an ardēt de ſire & loue to obey thee, and an extreme hatred to reſiſt thee. I require thee (O my hope) for all thy pitty & goodnes ſake to haue mercy vpon my impietye and wickedneſſe. Make open mine eares to thy cōmaundements, and let not mine hart be inclined (I beſech thee by thy holy name) to any euill thing, to be minded as ye vngodly or wicked

men. I require thee alſo by the merucilous humility, that I be not moued with pride, nor yet wyth ſinners.
         
         
            ☞ Here doth man declare vnto God the Father, that the Paſſion of his ſonne, was for his reconciliation & attonement with God.
            BEholde O almighty God, Father of my Lorde, I beſeech thee of thy benignitie & gentlenes to haue mercy vpon

me, becauſe of the moſt precious thing yt I could find, the ſame haue I offred deuoutly vnto thee, the thing of moſt eſtimation, yt I could imagine, I haue preſēted humbly vnto thee: I haue left nothing, but I haue declared it to thy maieſtye. There is nothing remayning yt I may adde more becauſe I haue cōmitted and betaken my whole hope vnto thee. I haue ſent vnto thee my aduocatè

and ſpokeſman, euen thy welbeloned ſonne. I haue ſente thy glorious child to be a mediator betwixt me & thee. I haue ſet (I ſay) an interceſſor, by whome I truſt to get pardon & forgeneneſſe of my ſinnes. I haue ſente worde vnto worde, that is, God vnto God, according to yt which S. John hath in the beginning of his goſpell, where he calleth God the worde, ſaying: In the beginning

was the woorde, and the worde was with God, & God was the worde. &c. which worde (as I haue ſayd) was ſēt for my miſdeedes. And I haue reherſed vnto thee the paſſion of thy moſt holy ſon, which paſſion I beleeue was ſuffced for me. I beleeue, that the Godhead which was ſeate of thee did take vpō him my humanitie, and nature, in y• which he thought not ſcorne to ſuffer buffertes,

bonds, ſpittings, mocks, yea, he tooke vppon him to ſuffer the cros, nailes, and dart. I beleue alſo, yt his manhoode being in this my nature, during his infācy was troubled with creping and ſcraulings, and was wrapt in clothes after the manner of other children, was vexed in his youth wyth laboures, made leane wt waking and faſtinges, weryed with iorneying, afterward whipped, and

all to torne and rent with diuers kindes of puniſhments, reckoned amōgſt the dead, and whē it was endued with the glory of reſurrection, he caryed it into the ioyes of heauen, and placed it vppon the righthand of thy maieſty, (this I ſay) he is my mā
               hode, way, and meanes of pacifying & appeaſing thee, and thy way and meanes of hauing mercy vppon me. Mercifullye looke vppon, heare thy

ſonne which thou didſt beger, and the boude ſeruaūt which he redeemed. Behold here a Creator, & do not deſpiſe a creature. Receiue the ſhephearde welcommed with a gentle & louing coūtenance, and mercifully looke vppon the ſheepe which he hath brought home vpon hys owue ſhoulders. This is that moſt faythfull ſhepheard, which by many & diuers labours, and trauailcs ouer ſteepe

hilles, and through headlong and deepe vallies, did ſearch for his owne ſheepe that was ſtrayed away, which alſo when he had found it faint, and almoſt dead through lōg wandring, gat himſelfe vnder it with great reioycing, & making it faſt vnto him with a merueilous bond of charitie, lifted it vp out of the depth of confuſion, & brought it home to the ninety and nine. Beholde (O Lord)

my king & God almightie, behold a good ſheepheard, which rendreth to thee, that which thou cō
               mittedſt to his charge. He tooke vpon him thorow thine ordinaunce to ſaue man, whom he hath deliuered vnto thee clean and pure from al ſpottes through the waſhing in his bloud. Loe, thy moſt dearly beloued Sonne hath reconciled vnto thee thy handiworke, whiche was gone far out of the

way. Loe, a gentle ſhepheard bringeth againe to thy flocke, him that yt violent pirate, and robber had driuen away. Hee hath broughte vnto thy ſight the ſeruaunt whom his owne conſcience had made to run away: that he which by himſelfe had deſerued puniſhment, by thy ſonne beyng his ſolicitour, hath deſerued forgeuenes, vnto whom alſo for his offences euerlaſting fire was due: neuertheles

being a ſouldiour vnder ſuch a Captaine, he doth hope to be brought home to his owne contrey. I was able (O holy Father) by my ſelfe to offende thee, but I was not able of my ſelf to pacifie and appeaſe thee. Thy welbeloued Sonne (O my God) was made my helper, by taking vppon him mine humanitie, to the entent he might cure mine infirmitie, that whereof the

firſt occaſion of thy wrath did ſpring of the ſame, he might offer vp to thee a ſacrifice of prayſe, & that he might render, & make me alſo well pleaſing to thy goodnes by yt thing, in the which he ſitting now on thy right hande, did alwaies ſhew and declare himſelfe to be equal with my ſubſtaunce, and as it were felow with the ſame. Loe, my hope, beehold in whome is all my truſt. If thou deſpiſe me

(as it were right) formy iniquitie: yet looke vpon me (at the leaſt wiſe) mercifully for the charitie of thy beloued Sou. Beue heed to thy ſonne wherby thou mayſt haue mercy vpon thy bōdſeruant. Looke vppon the ſacrament of fleſhe, & pardon the offences of the fleſhe. How oft ſoeuer thou doeſt remember the woundes of thy bleſſed ſonne: ſo oft I beſeech thee let mine iniquities be hid.

And becauſe fleſhe hath ſtirred thee to anger: let fleſh I beſech thee moue thee to mercy, that like as fleſh hath ſeduced, and led me to ſinne, ſo fleſhe may get and obtaine for me remiſſion. For certaynly it is muche, that mine iniquitie hath deſerued, but much more it is, that the goodnes of my redemer may euen of right require. Mine vnrighteouſnes is great, but his righteouſnes is

bigger. For looke howe much God is ſuperiour vnto man: euen ſo much is my malice and euil inferior vnto his goodnes both in qualitie & quantitie. For what haue I ſinned being a man, that the ſonne of God being man hath not redeemed? what pride coulde be in me ſo exceeding hie, but ſuch humilitie as was in him, ſhoulde bring it downe? what power of death was there in me ſo

great, but the puniſhmēt which the ſonne of God ſuffred vppon the croſſe, might deface it, and vtter ly deſtroy it? Trueiy my God, if the ſinnes of ſinfull man ſhould be wayed in a iuſt and equall balance, with the loue & fauour that was in our redeemer towarde vs: the Eaſt is not ſo far diſtant from the weſt, nor the in nermoſt part of the earth ſo much ſeperated from the vppermoſt part of y•
               
heauen: as they ſhoulde be vnlike, ſo muche leſſe ſhould mine iniquitie be then is his goodneſſe. Now (O moſtnoble creator of light) now pardō mine offences for the vnmeſurable trauailes, and paynes that thy beloued ſonne did ſuſtaine. Now (I beſeech thee) let his goodnes be ſette againſt my wickednes, his modeſty and temperance, againſt mine vngracious frowardnes: & his mecknes,

againſt my fierce crueltie. Let his humilitie recompence my pride: his patience, mine impatiēce: his gentlenes, mine vnkinde churliſhnes: his obedience, my diſobediēce: his quietnes, mine vnquietnes: his pleaſant to wardnes, my bitter frowardnes: his ſweet facilitie and gentlenes, mine anger & fretting fumes: to conclude, let his charitie, make amends for my haynous & deteſtable crueltie.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            ¶ A deuout prayer to the Holy Ghoſt.
            NOw (O ahmighty, and holy Ghoſt) which art the loue of the diuine power, the holy participator & partener, with ye almighty Father, & his moſt bleſſed ſonne, the moſt mercifull comforter of the ſorrowfull. I beſeech thee to ſlide by thy mighty power into the inwarde partes of mine hart, y• thou dwelling

there, mayſt make glad, and as it were lighten euery darcke corner of the neglect and forletten cottage, wt the bright ſhining of thy light, and that in viſiting the ſame, thou wouldſt ornate and deck with the plenteouſnes of thy dew, the lothſom places therof, which be corrupted with filthines. Kindle the priuye wounded parts of the inner man, with thy holeſome flames, and with

pearſing y• inward parts of my foul entrailes with the dart of thy loue. Feed all the inner partes both of my minde and bodie, by the illuminating and lightening with the fire of thy holy and feruente loue. Geue me to driuke of thy moſt pleaſaunt riuer, to the entent I may haue no luſt to taſte any worldly things which be mixed with poiſor. Geue ſentence wt me (O Lord) and defende my cauſe againſt

the vngodly nation. Teach me to do thy will becauſe thou art my God. For I beleue that in whome ſo euer thou doeſt dwell: thou buildeſt an houſe in him for the father alſo, and the ſonne. Bleſſed is that man that getteth ſuch a gheſt, becauſe that by thee, the father and the Sonne alſo will dwell & abide with him. Come now (o moſt louing conforter of my ſo rowfull ſoule) which art

a protector in all neceſſities, and an helpe in troubles & aduerſities. Come O purger of ſinnes, healer & curer of woundes. Come the ſtrength of the frayle and feble, the relieuer and raiſer vp of them that ſlide. Come the inſtructer & teacher of the humble and make, the deſtroyer & plucker downe of the proud & ſtubberne. Come the good and kind Father of the fatherles, the gentle Judge of widowes.

Com thou which art a guide vnto them yt are toſſed in the waues of this tēpeſtions world, like as a bright and notable ſtarre is to them that ſayle on the ſea, an hauen vnto thē that are affrayd of ſhipwracke. Come the worſhip and honor of all them that liue, the onely health of the dead. Come moſt holy Ghoſt, come, & haue mercy on me, make me meet for thee, & mercifully graunte vnto me

according to the multitude of thy great mercies yt my baſenes may pleaſe thy maieſty, & my weaknes, thy almighty power for Jeſu Chriſt my ſauiors ſake, which with the Father, and thine vnitie, liueth & raigneth worlde without end.
            Amen.
         
         
            ¶ A prayer to the holy Trinitie.
            
            WIth all my harte and mouth do I confeſſe, praiſe, and bleſſe thee, O

God the father vnbegotten, and thee O God the Sonne onely begotten, alſo thee O holy ghoſt & comforter, to thee be glory in the worlde of worldes.
            Amen.
         
         
            ¶ An acknowledging of almightis God in his Maieſtie.
            
            
               O Moſt high Trinitie, one onely power and vndefiled maieſtie, our God, God almightie, I the abiect, and hinmoſt of

all thy ſeruantes confeſſe and acknowledge thee, and being the leaſt member of the church, I worſhip thee with a due ſacrifice of prayſe, as much as I am able, and according to that which thou haſt vouchſafed to endue me withall. And for aſmuch as I am deſtitute of outward giftes to offer vnto thee: Thoſe vowes of prayſe which I haue of the gift of thy mercy, behold willingly and gladlie

I offer them to thee, whiche bee an vnfayned fayth, and a pure conſcience. I beleue therefore with all my hart (O king of heauen, and Lorde of the earth) and with my mouth do I confeſſe thee the Father, the Sonne, and the holy ghoſt, to be three perſons, and one in ſubſtance, the true and very God almighty, of one ſimple, incorporall, and inuincible nature, incomprehenſible, and of ſuch a

nature, as is not in a place, as other natures be & that thou haſt nothing ſuperiour or aboue thy ſelfe, or lower, or any thing bigger thē thy ſelf. But in all manner of meanes perfect without all ſpot of deformitie, and that thou art great without quantity, good without qualitie, euerlaſting wtout time, life without death, ſtrong without infirmity or weaknes, true without lying, preſent in

euery place without any ſituation, or being placed in any place, to be alleuery where without place, fulfilling all things with out ſtretching foorth thy hand: going euery where without any contradiction or gaineſaying, paſſing ouer all things with out mouing: abiding within all things, without any kinde of proportion: making all thinges hauing need of nothing: gouerning all thinges,

without labour: geuing all thinges their beginning, hauing no beginning thy ſelf: making all thinges mutable and variable, thy ſelfe being wt
               out all kinde of mutabilitie: in greatnes without meaſure: in power, almighty: in goodnes, the chief & beſt: in wiſedom, ineſtimable: in counſels, ententes, and purpoſes, terrible, and fearfull: in iudgementes, moſt vpright and iuſt: in cogitations

& thoughtes moſt ſecret: in wordes true: in workes holy: in mercies aboundant & plentifull: towarde offenders moſt patient: toward the penitent, and thoſe that be ſorye for their ſinnes, moſt gentle and louing: alwayes the ſame euerlaſting, and continually continuing immortall, & incommutable, impoſſible to be changed or altered: whome neither the amplitude or largenes

of places doth make bigger, nor the ſhortneſſe, or litleneſſe of places leſſer, nor any places or corners cā cōtem or pres together: neither doth thy wil or entent vary, or alter: nor familiaritie or acquaintance corrupt thee: nor ſorowfull thinges, trouble or amaze the: nor glad thinges make thee pleaſant or frolike (as a man woulde ſay:) from thee cā forgetfulnes take norbing, nor mindefulnes

or remembrāce geue any thing: neyther are thinges paſſed vnto vs, paſſed alſo vnto thee: nor thinges which to vs are come, come toward thee: for neyther beginning doth geue any beginning to thee, nor time any encreaſe, nor yet chaunce geueth thee any ende: but before all worldes, and in worldes, & by worlds, into euerlaſting, thou doeſt liue, and thou haſt continuall prayſe, & perpetuall

glory, moſt high power, and ſinguler honour, euerlaſting kingdome, and rule, and imperie without ende, thorow the infinite, and vnweery, and immortall world of worldes.
         
         
            ¶ After what ſort God the father vouchſafed to helpe mankinde, & of the incarnation of the word which is Chriſt, and of the geuing of thanks.
            HItherto (O almighty God, the beholder

and ſercher of mine hart) haue I acknowledged the almightifulnes of thy maieſtie, and the maieſtie of thine almightifulnes. But now like as wt hart I beleue (which is counted righteouſnes vnto me:) ſo with mouth do I coufes before thee (which is to my ſaluation,) after what ſorte, and manner thou diddeſt vouchſafe in the ende of the worlde, to ſuccour & ayd mankinde. Thou indeede onely (O

God the father) art not redy at any time, or in any place to be ſente. But of thy Sonne the Apoſtle writeth: when that the time was fulfilled, God ſent his Sonne. In that he ſayth, he ſent, hee doth ſufficiently declare, that he being ſente, came into this world, when as he being borne a very, and perfect man of bleſſed Mary a pure virgin) did appeare, and ſhew himſelfe in the fleſh. But

what is that, which he that is the chiefe of the euangeliſtes doth ſay? He was in the worlde, and the worlde was made by him. Thether truly was he ſent by his humanitie, where he alway is, and alway hath bene by his diuinitie. The which ſending or embaſſage, I beleeue with all my hart, & confeſſe with my mouth, to be the conſent & worke of al the whole Trinitie. Oh holy and good Father,

how didſt thou loue vs? How great fauour didſt thou beare toward vs, moſt mercifull creator? which haſt not ſpared thine owne ſonne, but for vs wretched ſinners haſt deliuered him. He was obediente vnto thee vntill death, yea, death vpon a croſſe, taking the obligation, or handwriting of our ſins, which was his fleſh, and faſtning it vnto the cros, he crucified ſinne, and

led death. He alone, is amongſt the dead fre from death, hauing power to lay downe his ſoule for vs, and to take it againe for vs. Therfore was he both a vanquiſher, and a ſacrifice, and therefore was he an ouercommer, becauſe he was a ſacrifice for vs. He was both the prieſt and ſacrifice vnto thee: and therefore was he a Prieſt, becauſe hee was a ſacrifice. Notwt
               out a cauſe haue I great

hope in him, for aſmuch as thou wilt make whole all my diſeaſes, for his ſake, that ſitteth on thy right hand, and doth continually make interceſſion for vs, for my diſeaſes (O Lord) are great and many: oh, they are many in number, and great: for the prince of this worlde (as I very well knowe, and confeſſe) hath many thinges in me. But I beſech thee deliuer me thorow our redemer which

ſitteth on thy right hand, in whome the ſaid prince of this world could finde none euill, that was his, of his owne commiting. By him do thou iuſtifie me, whome his ſelfe did not ſinne, neyther was there any deceit, or guile found in his mouth. By him which is our head, in whome there is not one ſpot of euill, deliuer me which am one of his mē
               bers, though I be but a litle member, and feeble,

and weake. Deliuer me (I beſeech thee) from my ſinnes, offences, faultes, and ignorances. Fulfill mee with thy holy vertues, and make me to ſhine in good manners, make me (I beſeech thee) for thy holy names ſake, to continue in holy workes vntill the ende, according to thy will, and pleaſure.
         
         
            ¶ Of the truſt which a ſoule ought to haue in our Lord Jeſu, and in his paſſion.
            
               
I Might diſpaire verely becauſe of my manifold ſinnes and negligences without number, if it were not that thy word O God was made fleſh, and dwelt amongſt vs. But I can not now diſpayre, becauſe that ſeeing (when we were enemies) we were reconciled by the death of thy ſonne: how much more are we (now reconciled) ſaued by him, for all the hope, and the certitude,

& ſurenes of all my truſt, is in his precious bloud, which was ſhed for vs, & for our ſaluation. In him do I take hartening, & truſting in him I haue a deſire to com vnto the. not hauing mine owne righteouſnes, but that whiche I haue throughe thy ſonne our Lorde Jeſu Chriſt: for the whiche (O moſt mercifull God, and moſt gentle louer of mankinde) we geue thee thankes, which through

Jeſus Chriſt thy ſonne, our Lord, when we were not, didſt mightely make vs, and when we were loſt through our ſinnes, moſt marueilouſly didſt deliuer, and recouer vs againe. To thy goodnes (I ſay) do I geue thankes, and manifold prayſes do I ſhew forth vnto thee, with all my hart, & mind, which through the vnſpeakable loue, wherwith thou haſt vouchſafed of thy maruuylous

goodnes to loue vs wretches, and vnworthy to be loued) diddeſt ſende that ſame thiue onely begotten ſonne from thy boſome, vnto our common weale, to ſaue vs ſinners which were at that time, the children of perdition and damnation. I render vnto thee thanks for his holy incarnation and natiuitie, and for his bleſſed mother, vpon whom he did vouchſafe to take fleſhe for vs, and for our

ſaluation: to the entent, that like as he is very God of God, ſo he might be very man of man. I geue thee thankes for his paſſion and croſſe, for his death, and reſurrection, for his aſcenſion into heauen, and his ſeate of his maieſty on thy right hād. For he the forty day after his reſurrection, aſceuding vp aboue al the heauens (his diſciples ſeing it) & ſitting on thy right hande, did poure out his

holy ſpirite aboundantly according to his promiſe vpon them whom he had choſen to be his children. I geue thee thanckes for that moſt ſacred ſheding foorth of his precious bloud, wherwith we are redemed, and alſo for the moſt holy and quickning ſacrifice of his body, and bloud, which daily in thy churche wee feede of, and drincke of, wherwith we are waſhed, and ſanctified, and are made partakers

of the only high diuinitie. I geue thee thankes for thy marueilous, and vnſpeakable charitie and loue, wherwith thou didſt loue vs vnworthy perſons, & didſt ſaue vs, by thine onely and beloued Sonne: for ſo thou did
                  ••
                loue the world, that thou gaueſt thine onely begotten ſonne, to the entent that none which beleeued in him ſhould periſh, but haue euerlaſting life. This thing truly is

euerlaſting life, to know thee, & alſo Jeſus Chriſt, whome thou ſenteſt to be very God, by an vpright fayth, and workes worthy for fayth.
         
         
            Of the exceeding loue of the euerlaſting Father towarde mankinde,
            OH vnmeaſurable pitie and fatherly loue, oh ineſtimable charitie, that thou ſhouldeſt delyuer thy ſonne to ſuffer death, to the entent thou mighteſt

redeme and ranſome a ſeruaunte: God was made man, to the entent yt man, being loſt might be plucked out of yt power of deuils. How gentle and kinde a louer of man was thy ſonne our God, who thought it not enough to humble himſelf to bee made man, of the virgiue Mary: but alſo toke vpō him the paines of the croſſe, in ſhedding his bloud for vs, and for our ſaluation. He came a

pitifull God, he came for his pitie, and goodneſſes ſake, he came to ſearch, & to ſaue that whiche was loſt. He ſought the ſtraye ſheep, he ſought & found, and he being a good lord and truely a very good, and plentifull ſhepheard, brought him home vpon his ſhoulders vnto the foldes of the flocke. Oh charitie, oh pitie, who heard any ſuch thinges? who is not aſtonied to conſider the bowels of ſo

great mercy? who would not marued? who would not honour, and worſhip thee for thy great charity wherewith thou louedſt vs? Thou didſt ſend thy ſonne into the ſimilitude of fleſh, ſubiect to ſinne, that we might condemne ſinne for ſinne, that wee might be made thy righteouſnes in him. For hee was the very lamb without ſporte, which tooke awaye the ſinnes of the worlde, whiche deſtroyed

our death, by dying himſelfe. But what may we render vnto thee (our God) for ſo great benefites of thy mercie? what prayſes, or what thankes? Uerely if wee ſhoulde haue that ſame knowledge and power, that bleſſed angels haue, yet ſhould we not be able to requi
                  ••
                thy ſo great pitie and goodnes, with any thing of valure. No if all our mēbers were turned into tongues, to repay

vnto thee due prayſes: yet were not our flē
               dernes ſufficient. There is one thing that exceedeth all knowledge, euen thine ineſtimable charitie which thou diddeſt ſhew vnto vs vnworthy perſons, for thy goodnes, & pities ſake. Thy Sonne (our God) did take vpon him to be the ſeede of Abraham, not of Angels, yea, & he was made like vnto vs in all thinges, ſinne onely excepted. He

therefore taking mans nature not Angels, and glorifying it wt the ſtole of holy reſurrection, and immortalitie, caryed it aboue the heauens, and aboue all the melodious companies of angels, aboue Cherubin and Seraphin, placing it vppon thy right hand. This humane nature do Angels prayſe: all the powers of heauen do tremble to ſee a man to bee God ouer them This truely is all

my hope, all my truſt. And this ſame humaine nature is in Jeſu Chriſt our Lord, who is the portion of euery one of vs, the fleſh & bloud. Therfore wheras my portion raigneth, there do I beleue to raigne: whereas my fleſh is glorified, ther do I beleue to be glorified: where my bloud ruleth, there do I perceiue me to bear rule: although I be a ſinner, ye
                  •
                do
                  •
                I not iniſtruſt, nor diſpeire

of the communion and partaking of fauour. Although my ſinnes do hinder me, and in a manner forbid me, neuertheles my ſubſtance requireth it. And albeit that mine offences do exclude me, yet the communion of our nature doth not expell me: for God is not ſo vngentle, as to forget man, and not to remember that thing which himſelf beareth, and yt which for my ſake he toke vpon

him, and that which for my ſake he requireth. But truly the Lord our God is lowly and meek and wonderfull gentle, and loueth his fleſh, his members, and his bowels. In the very ſame God our Lorde Jeſus Chriſt, who is moſt gentle, louing, and merciful; in whome we are riſen from death, that is to ſay, from the ſtate of pernition, and eternall damnation, and euen nowe by

him we aſccude into the heauens, and now ſit in the heauens (in him I ſay) our fleſh loueth vs. For we haue in him, and by him a prerogatiue, & as it were a prefermence of our bloud: for we are his members, and his fleſh: and he is our head, of the which dependeth the whole body (as it is written) a bone of my bones, and fleſh of my fleſh, & they ſhall be two in one fleſh, and no man

at any time hateth his owne fleſhe, but rather cheriſheth, and loueth it. This is a great miſtery, I ſpeak in Chriſt, and in the church (ſayth the Apoſtle.)
         
         
            ¶ Of the double nature of Chriſt, which hath mercy vpon vs▪ and maketh interceſſion for vs.
            WHerefore with my lips and hart, and with al the might that I may, I render thankes

vnto thine infinite mercy (O Lord our God) for all thy mercy, wherwith marueilouſly thou haſt vouchſafed to helpe, and ſuccour vs that were loſt by the ſame thy ſonne our ſauiour and recouerer, which dyed for our ſinnes, and roſe againe for our iuſtification and liuing, without ende ſitteth on thy right hande, and entreateth for vs, & together with the taketh pitie & mercy vpon vs,

becauſe he is God thorow thee (O father) euer laſting, and of one ſubſtance with thee in all thinges: wherby alway he may ſaue vs, but foraſmuch as he is man, in which thing he is leſſe, & inferiour vnto thee, all power both in heauen, & in earth, was geuen vnto him, that in ye name of Jeſu, euery knee ſhould bowe, both of celeſtiall, and earthlye creatures, and alſo of infernall, that

all tongues may confeſſe that oure Lorde Jeſus Chriſt is in thy glory (O Father almighty.) Hee verely was conſtituted of thee, and ordayned to be a iudge of the quicke, and dead, for thou truely iudgeſt no man, but haſt geuen all thy iudgement to thy Sonne, in whoſe breſt al treaſures of wiſdome and knowledge ar hid. He truely is both a witnes, and a Judge, a Judge, and a witneſſe,

whome no ſinneful conſcience can flye or auoyd: for all things be they neuer ſo ſecret, are open, & euen naked, and vncouered vnto him. He verily which was vnrighteouſly iudged himſelfe, ſhall iudge the whole worlde in equitie, and the people in righteouſnes, and according to iuſtice. Therfore do I bleſſe thy name euerlaſting, and glorifie the ſame with al my hart (O almighty and mercifull

Lord) for yt vnſpeakable and maruellous coniunction of Godhead, & manhood together in the vnitie of a perſon, and not after this ſort, that y• one ſhould be God, and the other man: but one & the ſame was both God and man, man and God. Neuertheleſſe, although by thy marueilous will, the word was made fleſh yet neither of both the natures was chainged into others ſubſtance. In the

miſterie of the Trinitie, there is not a fourth perſon added: for y• ſubſtance of the word of God, and of man, was vnited, and knitte together, but not confuſed and mixed, that that thing which was taken of vs, ſhould be turned into God, and that whiche neuer had bene before that time, that his fleſh & manhoode, ſhould be the ſame that had bene euer without any beginning, that is, his Godhead.

Oh marueilous miſtery. Oh vnſpekable felowſhip. Oh marueilous meeknes of thy heauēly mercifulnes, which is euer worthy marueiling, and euer to be loued we were but vile ſeruantes, and beholde, we are made the ſonnes of God: yea, and heyres of God together wt Chriſt. From whence came this goodnes? & who brought vs vnto this ſtate? But I require thee (O moſt

mercifull father) by thine ineſtimable pitie, goodnes, and charity, to make vs worthy of theſe many and great promiſes of the ſame, thy ſonne our Lord Jeſu Chriſt. Send forth thy ſtrength (O God) & eſtabliſh the thing, that thou haſt wrought in vs. Make perfect that, which thou haſt begun, that we may be able to come vnto the fulneſſe & perfectnes of thy pitie. Make vs through y• holy ghoſt, to

vnderſtand, and through thy Sonne to deſerue, & with due honor alway to worſhip this great miſterie of thy pitic, whiche is manifeſt in our fleſhe: iuſtified in the ſpirite: did appeare vnto Angels: was preached vnto nations: was beleeued to be in the world, was taken vp into heauen.
            Amen.
         
         
            ¶ Of the thankes which man ought to geue vnto God for the benefite of his redemption.
            
               
LOoke how much (O Lord our God) we ar in debt vnto thee, euen for ſo great a price were we redeemed, with ſuch a great gift were we ſaued, and with ſo great a benefite helped. Howe much ought we wretehes to loue, dread, bles, praiſe honour, and glorifie thee which haſt ſo loued vs, after ſuch faſhion ſaued vs, after ſuch a ſort ſanctified vs, to ſet vs on hie. To thee truly do we owe

and are bound, as much as we are able, euen our life, and all our ſtudy and endeuour. But who hath any thing yt is not thine? But do thou (O Lorde our God) from whom al goodnes procedeth, euen for thy holy names ſake, geue vs of thy goodnes, that we may ſerue thee of thine owne goodes, and giftes, and that we may pleaſe thee in truth, and repay vnto thee daily due prayſes for ſo great benifites

of thy mercie. For by none other meanes rā we ſerue the, but by thine owne giftes, that thou haſt lent vs, while we be in this world. For euery good gift, and euery perfect gift is from aboue, & commeth down from the father of light, wt whome there is none alteration, or variablenes, neyther yet is hee chainged vnto darcknes. O Lorde our God, and a pitifull God. a good God, and almighty

God, an vnſpeakable God, and incomprēſible, of ſuch a nature, that can not be contayned as in a place. O God which art the beginner of all thinges, and the father of our Lord Jeſu Chriſt, which diddeſt ſend the ſame thy beloued ſonne our Lord, foorth of thy boſome, to our common profite, to take vpon him our life to the entent he might geue vs his life, and that hee might be perfect, and very

God of thee his father and very perfect man of his mother, a whole, and a perfect God, & a whole and perfect man, and yet but onely Chriſt, both euerlaſting, and enduring but for a ſpace, both immortal and mortall, both a creator and a creature, ſtrong and weake, an ouercommer, and one ouercommed, a nurſe, and one that was nurſed him ſelfe, a ſhepheard, and a ſheepe, dead for a time,

and liuing with the euerlaſting, promiſing to thē that loued him, the freedome of life: who ſayd to his diſciples, what thing ſoeuer ye aſke the Father in my name, he will geue it vnto you. For that hie prieſtes ſake, which was alſo a Biſhop indeede, & a good ſhephearde, that offred himſelfe in a ſacrifice to thee, putting his life in ieoperdie for his flock: for his ſake (I ſay) I beſech thee, which ſitteth

on thy right hand, & maketh interceſſion for vs, being our redeemer, and our aduocate, that thou wouldeſt graunte vnto me, that together wt thy Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt, I may in all thinges bleſſe, & glorifie thee, with much contrition of hart, and a fountaine of teares, with much reuerence and feare: For the gift of them that be all of one ſubſtance, is all one. But becauſe a bodie that

is corrupted doth aggranate, & burden the ſoule: ſtir vp, and awake (I beſeech thee) my ſluggiſhnes with thy prickes and prouokinges, and make me boldly to perſeuer, & continue in thy cōmanndements and lawes day and night. Graunt mee that my harte may waxe warme within me, and that many meditation, & prayer I may be feruent. And for as much as thy onely ſonne ſayd: No mā
               
can come to me, excepte my Father that ſente me, ſhall draw him: & again, No man commeth to the Father but by me. I 
                  ••
               
               quire, and humbly beſech thee, drawe me alwayes vnto him, that he at the length may bring me to thee: thether (I meane) whereas he is ſitting on thy right hand, whereas is euerlaſting life, & continuall bleſſednes, wheras is perfect loue, wtout all kinde of feare: wheras

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
is one day euerlaſting and one ſpirite of al men: whereas is moſt ſure ſecuritie & ſafety, ſure quiet
                  •
               es, and quiet pleſantnes, pleaſant felicitie and happines, happy eternitie, continuall, and eternall ſeeing, & praiſing of thee without end, wheras thou with him, and he with thee, in the communion and vnity of the holy Ghoſt euerlaſtingly, & continuallye liueſt and raigneſt throughout all

worldes of worldes.
            Amen.
         
         
            ¶ A deuout prayer vnto Chriſt
            
               O Chriſt & God which art my hope, and the true and gentle louer of mankinde, the light, the way, the life, the health, the honour, and worſhip of them that be thine, I beſech thee call to thy remembraunce all thinges that thou willingly didſt ſuffer for thē, both bands

croſſe, woundes, death, and ſepulcher: which after three dayes, death being ouercommed, diddeſt riſe, waſt ſeene of thy diſciples, reforming theyr hartes, and eſtabliſhing them that were almoſt declining from thee: the fortie day after didſt aſcend vp to heauen, which liueſt euerlaſtinly now, and raigneſt throughout worldes. Thou art my God both louing & true, my father, and my God,

both holy and pitiful, my mighty king, my good ſhepheard, mine onely maiſter, my beſt helper, one whome I am moſt bound to loue, my liuing bread, mine euerlaſting prieſt, my guide vnto my coutry, my true light, my holy ſweetnes, my right, and ſtraight way, mine excellent wiſedome, my ſure and vnfayned ſimplicitie, my peaceable cō
               cord, my ſafe gariſon, my good portion, mine euer

laſting health, my great mercy, my ſtrongeſt patience, mine vnſpotted ſacrifice, my holy redemption, my ſure and ſtedfaſt hope, my perfect charitie, my very and true reſurrection, mine euerlaſting life, my ioy, & moſt bleſſed viſion, and continual wt
               out ende: I humbly beſeech thee, I deſire and pray thee, yt I may walke by thee, that I may come to thee, that I may reſt in thee, which art the way,

the truth, and the life, wt
               out the which no man cā come vnto the Father. Thee do I deſire and couet (O good Lord) which art the brightneſſe of thy Fathers glory, which ſitteſt aboue the angell called Cherubin, and doeſt behold the low and deep places, which art the true light, the light that lighteneth all things, ye light that neuer falleth, nor goeth out, which the angels haue deſire to beholde.

Loe, my harte is before thee in thy ſight, put away the darcknes from it, that it may fully be repleniſhed with the clearnes of thy loue. Geue vnto me Lord thy ſelfe, beholde I do loue thee, and if that be but a thing of ſmall valure, make me to loue thee more ſtrongly, and earneſtly. I can not meaſure to knowe how much I lacke of thy loue, neyther can I tell, howe much ſhould be ſufficient

for me, that my life may fulfill, his courſe in thy loue, and not turne backe vntill it be hid in the ſecrets of thy countenance. Neuertheleſſe, this I know, that it were euell with me, if it were not for thee (O Lord) & that not onely with the outward things that belong vnto me: but alſo with the inward thinges. For all my riches (God except) is but mere pouertie: but thou onely art a

treaſure and a parcell of riches, that canſt neither be chainged into better nor worſe. Thou art he to whome it is not one thing to liue, and an other thing to liue happely, becauſe thou are thy bleſſedues, thy happines and thou art all one. But I which am thy creature to whome it is not one thing to liue, & an other thing to liue bleſſedly & happely: all, both in that I liue, and in that I liue

happely, I ought not to attribute nor referre it, to be receiued of any body, but of thy fauour: & therfore haue we need of the, but not yu of vs, becauſe if were not at al, yet ſhouldeſt thou lack nothing of thy goodnes. Therefore (O Lord) it is neceſſary for vs to ſticke and cleane vnto thee, that by thy continuall helpe we may be able to liue holily, vertuouſly, and as we ought to liue: for wt the waight

of our frailueſſe, we are drawn euen downward, but by thy gift we are ſtirred & caried vpward: we ſeruētly deſire to aſcend, we make certain aſcenſiōs in our harts lifting thē vpward, & ſing the ſong of ſtarres, with the fire of thy loue (I ſay) are wee kindled, & moued to goe with thee. Whether goe we now vpwarde, vnto the peace of Jeruſalem? becauſe I was glad, and did reioyee in thoſe thinges

which were ſpoken vnto me: we will go into the houſe of our Lord, there hath he placed vs: we will haue good thinthat we may will or deſire nothing els, but to tary, and remaine there for euer. But for aſmuch as whileſt we be clad with this body, wer do (as it were goe aſtray, and are ſtraingers vnto thee: we haue not here an abiding place for euer, but wee ſeek for one yt is to come.

Our abiding place is in heauen: therefore thy fauour and grace being my guide, I enter into the chamber of my hart, and ſing vnto thee ſonges of loue my king & my God, mourning with merueilous ſighinges in this place of my peregrination, whereas thy iuſtices are made my ſonges, and when. I remember Jeru ſalem, I extende & ſtrerch forth toward it the ſenſes of my hart: Jeruſalem, I

ſay, which is my contrey, Jeruſalem, which is my mother, and toward thee whiche art a king ouer her, her light, her father, her defender, her patron, her gouernor, her keper, her chaſt and ſtrong delight, her only and whole pleaſure, & all her goodnes come of thee, becauſe thou art the chiefe good, and the true good, and I will neuer turne backe, vntill yu bring me home from this pilgrimage (in

whiche I am deformedly ſcattred abroad) vnto the peace of my dearely beloued mother, whereas be the firſt fruits of my ſpirite; and vntill thou (O God) which art my mercy, faſion me, and confirme me for euer.
         
         
            ¶A prayer declaring with how great miſeries this 
                  〈◊〉
                is repleniſhed.
            I Am wonderful wery (O Lord) of this life;

& of this carefull, & painful pilgrimage. This life is a wretched life, a life that will ſonefade away, an vncertain life, a painfull life, an vncleane life, a life that worthely may be called the maiſtres of all euilles, the queene of pride, full of miſeries and errors, which is not wor thy to be called a life, but rather a deathe, in the which euery houre, wee dye by diuers defectes, & failinges of nature by

mutabilities, alterations & diuers kinds of deaths How can we therfore cal this that wee liue in this world, a life which is puf fed vp, and ſwollen often with humoures, made leane and feeble with for rowes, dried wt angers, and whot haſty furies of the minde, the ayre filleth it full of diſeaſes, meates do infect it, faſting doth extenuate, and make it leane, paſtimes make it to diſſolute and rechles,

penſiuenes doth ſhorten and leſſen it, ſecuritie and too much caſe maketh it dull and nothing luſtie, riches ſetteth it a flote, & puffeth it vp into pride, pouertie diſmayeth and diſcourageth it, youth extolleth it, age lameth it, infirmitie breaketh it, for rowe oppreſſeth it. And immediatly after theſe euils, as though it were by ſucceſſion, commeth death & maketh an ende of al the ioyes of this miſerable

life, after ſuche a ſort, that a man woulde not thinke (when he leaueth this life) to haue liued at all. This liuing death, and dying life, although it be ſprinckled & mixte with theſe, & other ſorrowes and miſeries, yet (oh good Lord) how many men doe it catch, & entangle with her entiſing ſnares? and how ma ny doth ſhe deceiue with her deceitfull, & falſe promiſes? and al for that ſhe

of her ſelfe is ſo falſe and bitter that her blinde louers can not bee kepte long ſecret, nor cloſe vnknown, yet doth ſhe daily cauſe an infinite number of fooles to drinke of the goldē cup, which ſhe beareth in her hand: yea, and maketh them vtterly drunken with the loue of her. Happy are they, but very few of them is there that refuſe her acquaintance and familiaritie, or yt diſpiſe to vſe her ioyes,

or that neglect her frendſhip, and felowſhip, leaſt when their deceiuer periſheth, that they ſhoulde periſh alſo.
         
         
            ¶ Of the bleſſednes of that life, which God hath prepared for them that loue him.
            BUt thou heauenly life thou art ſhe whome God hath ordayned, and prepared for them that loue him, thou art the heuenly life, the bleſſed life,

the ſure life, the quiet life, the fayre life, the clean life the chaſt life, the holy life, the life that knoweſt no death, knoweſt no ſadnes or penſiuenes, a life without ſpot, without do lour, without vexation, without corruptiō, without trouble, without variety or mutabilitie, a life moſt full of pleaſure, and dignitie, wheras is none aduerſarie, to ſtriue againſt a man, no inticements of ſinnes, wheras

is perfect loue, without all maner of feare, wheras is day continually, & one ſpirite of all men: wheras God is ſene face to face, and the minde is fed with this meat of life without ende. I haue a very good minde and deſire to marke and geue heed to thy clearneſſe, wt thy goods the deſire and appetite of my hart is delighted. Loke how much I am able to conſider wt my ſelfe in muſing, and

thinking of thy commodities: euen ſo much am I rauiſhed, & rapte with thy loue, with the ardent deſire of thee, & the ſweet and comfortable remembrance of thee, am I wō
               derfully delited. I haue a pleaſure therefore ſurely, to lift vp the eyes of my harte vnto thee, to erecte the ſtate of my mind, and conforme or faſhion the affects of my minde vnto thee. It pleaſeth me to talke of thee, to heare of

thee, to write of thee, to conferre and meditate of thee, to read euery day of thy bleſſednes and glory, and to muſe oftentimes in my minde of yt things I haue read concerning thee, that at the leaſt by ſuch meanes I being vnder the ſweet refreſſhing & comforting of thy liuely ayre, may paſſe from the vexatiōs, ieoperdies, laboures, and trauels of this mortall life that wil ſoone periſh, and that in

paſſing I may lay my wery head in thy boſome to ſleepe, or to reſt a litle. For this cauſe do I enter into the pleaſant medow of ye holy ſcriptures, and in plowing. I pluck the goodlieſt greene herbes of ſentences, and in reading I do eate them, and in frequenting I do meditate, and as it were, cut them, & in gathering them together, at the laſt I laſt them vp in my memory, yt by ſuch meanes

whē I haue taſted of thy ſweetnes, I may ſomewhat leſſe feel the bitternes of this moſt wretched life. O thou moſt happy life, oh kingdome which art bleſſed in deed, which lackeſt deth, which art without end, no time doth ſucceſſiuely paſſe at any time to thee, wheras continuall day without night knoweth no time, whereas that capitaine & conqueror is accompanied with thoſe quires of

Angels, ſinging of himnes, & ſonges, they ſing vnto God without ceaſing, the ballet of ballets of Sion. Oh moſt noble head which art cōpaſſed about with a perpetuall crowne, oh that pardon, and forgeuenes of my ſinnes were graunted vnto me, & then immediatly this burden of my fleſhe layde away, that I might enter into thy ioy, to haue true reſt, & that I might get wt in the goodly

and beutifull walles of thy citie to receiue a crown of life at the hand of our lord, that I might bee amongeſt thoſe moſt holy quires, yt I mighte ſtand with the moſt bleſſed ſpirites of the creator of glory, that I might ſee preſently the coūtenance of Chriſt, that I might beholde alwayes yt moſt hie & vnſpeakable light, incomprehenſible, which can not be cōtayned as in a place. And ſo I ſhould

not only be out of al feare of death: but alſo I might reioyce alwayes at the gift of the euerlaſting incorruption.
            Amen.
         
         
            ¶ Here do we complaine that wee be not moued, nor pricked in our contē
               plation & prayer, like as the Angels be, which tremble at the ſight of God.
            PArdon me O Lorde, pardon me, mercifully forgeue me, and haue mercy vppon me, ſpare

mine ignoraunce and my great vnperfectnes, do not reproue me as a raſh fellow, becauſe I dare be be ſo bolde which am but thy ſeruaunt, but would to God I were eyther a good ſeruant, or none vn profitable, nor euill ſeruant. And therfore am I an euill man, becauſe I prayſe, bleſſe, & worſhip thee, which art our God almighty, terrible, & very much to be feared. I worſhip thee, I ſay, with

out contritiō of hart, and without a well of teares. For if ſo be that the Angels when they worſhip, and prayſe thee, do tremble, being fulfilled with merueilous gladnes: I which am a ſinner, whileſt I ſtande before thee, ſaying prayſes, & offring ſacrifice, why am I not afrayd in my hart? why am I not pale in my coū
               tenance? why do not my lips quake and tremble? why is not all my body

afrayd? & why do I not mourne and bewayle before thee after ſuch a ſort, that teares might ſpring out of mine eies? I wold faine, but I am not able, becauſe I can not do that whiche I deſire to doo. This maketh me truely wonderfully to marueill that I am no more moued when I ſee with the eyes of my fayth, thee which art ſo fearful. But who can do any thing wt
               out the help of thy grace,

except thou make our ſtony hartes to relent, wee of our ſelues are not able to mollifie them, but all our health dependeth vpon thy great mercy. O wretch that I am, how is my ſoule made without any feeling or perſeuerance? that it is not afraid with ouermuche feare, whileſt it ſtandeth before God, and ſingeth to him his owne prayſes? Alas how is my hart ſo hardened, that mine eyes do

not guſh out gret flouds of teares without ceaſing when I which am but a ſeruaunt or bondman do common and talke in my Lorde, and maiſters preſence? Yea, a man with God, a creature wt a creator. I that am made of the ſhine of the earth do ſpeake with him yt made all thinges of nothing? Put me before thee (O Lord) & whatſoeuer I perceiue of my ſelfe in ye ſecrets of my hart, I do

not keep it cloſe from thy brotherly ears. Thou art rich in mercy, & liberal in rewards, geue me of thy goods that with them I may ſerue thee. For with nothing els can we ſerue or pleaſe thee, but with thine owne giftes which thou haſt vouchſafed to beſtow vpon vs. Faſten I beſeech thee thy feare in my fleſh: let my harte reioyce, & be glad to feare thy name. Woulde God my ſinfull ſoule feared

thee ſo much, as that holy man which ſayd: I alwayes feared God, as though it wer great ſwelling floudes ſhould come and tumble vpon me. O God ye geuer of all good things geue me amongſt thy praiſes a wel of teres with the purenes of hart, and reioyeing of minde, that I louing thee perfitly and worthely praiſing thee, may feele, taſte, and ſauour, in the pallace of my hart, how ſweet, and

pleaſant thou art O lord, as it is written: Do ye taſt and ſee how ſweet, & delectable the Lorde is. Bleſſed is the man that putteth his truſt in him. Bleſſed is yt people which knoweth glad and ioyful prayſing. Bleſſed is the man whoſe ſtrength is in thee, in whoſe harte are thy wayes, which going through ye vale of miſery, vſe it for a well. Bleſſed are the cleane in hart, becauſe they ſhall ſee God.

Bleſſed ar they that dwel in the houſe of the Lord, they ſhall prayſe thee, world without end.
         
         
            ¶ A very deuout prayer for the geuing of thanks.
            O Lorde Chriſt, whiche art the worde of the Father, which came into this worlde to ſaue ſinners. I beſech thee by the moſt louing bowels of thy mercy, to amend and repayre my life, make better my deedes, take thou

the ordering of my manners, take from me that which noyeth, & hurteth me, and diſpleaſeth thee: and geue me that whiche thou knoweſt will pleaſe thee, and profit me. who can make cleane y• which is conceyued of an vncleane ſeede, but thou alone? Thou art the God almighty, of infinite pietie, which doeſt iuſtifie, & make righteous euen thoſe that were wicked men, and rayſeſt again to

life them that were dead in ſinne, thou chaingeſt ſinners, and they are no ſinners. Take away therefore from me whatſoeuer is in me that pleaſeth not thee: for thine eyes do ſee much vnperfectnes in me. Lay thy hand I beſech thee of thy pitie on me, and whatſoeuer offendeth the eyes of thy pitie, remoue it frō me. In thy ſight is both my health & my diſeaſe: the one I beſeech thee to

preſerue, thother to cure: do thou heal me O Lord, and I ſhall be healed: do thou make me ſafe, and I ſhall be ſaued: Thou I meane which doeſt make whole them that be diſeſed, & doeſt preſerue them that be cured, which only with a becke doeſt reſtore and repayre thinges that be decayd, and fallen into ruine. For if thou wilte vouchſafe to ſowe any good ſeed in the fielde of my hart, of neceſſitie thou

muſt plucke vp firſt with the hande of thy pitie, the thornes of vices whiche be in it. Put in my hart I beſech thee, ſo great plenty of delectation in thee, yt I may deſire no earthly or carnal thing, nor yet thincke vpon them, but yt I may loue thee alone: that I may haue thee only in my hart, and in my mouth. Write with thy finger in my breſt, the delectable remembrance of thy ſweet name, ſo that it

may be blotted out with no forgetfulnes. Write thy will in the tables of mine hart, and alſo thy iuſtifications, that I may alwaies & in euery place haue thee (o Lord) before mine eyes in my ſighte. Enflame my minde with that fire, which thou didſt ſend into the earth, and willedſt it to be kindled, that I mighte offer vnto thee daily with teares, a ſacrifice of a troubled ſpirite, & a repentant harte.

O ſweet Chriſt, O good Jeſu, euē according vnto my deſire, and euen as I hartely require thee with my whole minde, geue me thy holy & chaſt loue, which may repleniſh and keepe me, and alſo fully poſſēſſe me. Geue me an euident ſigne and token of thy loue, & a flowing well of teares, which wil continually runne, that thoſe teares (may ſomewhat teſtifie thy loue) in me, that they may ſhewe

foorth, that they may declare how much my ſoule loueth thee, whileſt for yt great delectation it hath in the ſweetneſſe of thy loue, it may not refraine from teares. I call to my remembrance ſometimes (good Lord) that vertuous woman Anne which came to the tabernacle to pray that thou wouldeſt ſend her a ſon: of whome the ſcripture maketh mē
               that her countenance after her teares and prayers)

was not againe chainged or altered. But when I thinke vpon ſo great vertue, conſtante, & ſtedfaſtnes: I am vexed with ſorrow, and confounded with ſhame, becauſe I a wretch do perceiue my ſelfe to be fallen ouermuch from thee. For if a woman did weep after ſuch a ſort, and continued ſo in weping, which did ſearch for nothing els but a ſonne: how ought my ſoule to mourne and

to perſiſt and abide in weping, that ſeeketh and loueth God, and hath a deſire to come vnto him? how ought ſuch a ſoule to mourne & weep which ſeeketh God day & night, which will loue nothing but Chriſt? My teares now truely ſhoulde bee made vnto me, meat day and night. Looke vpon me therfore, O Lord, and take pitie on me becauſe the dolours and ſorowes of my harte are many in

number. Geue me thy heauenly conſolatiō and do not deſpiſe nor caſt away a ſinful ſoule, for the which thou diddeſt die. Geue me inward teares, I beſeech thee from the bottome of mine harte, which may waſhe away the ſpottes of my ſinnes. Repleniſh my ſoule alwayes with heauenly delectation and heauenlye mirth, that I may obtain ſome litle portion or part in thy kingdom, althogh

not amongeſt the perfect men, whoſe ſteps I can not folow, yet at the leaſt wiſe amongſt the inferior ſort. The marueilous deuotion of another woman commeth now vnto my minde, which with a vertuous loue did ſeeke thee lying in ye ſepulchre, which when thy diſciples went away, & departed from thee, did remaine with thee her ſelfe, which ſate there ſad and ſorowfully weeping, long and

very much, and when ſhe did ariſe, ſhe ſerched with a diligent eye, and with many teares the corners of the ſepulcher, whiche was lefte emptye, if ſhee might eſpy thee out in any place, whom ſhe with a feruent deſire ſoughte: yea, and moreouer ſhee went againe, and againe to the ſepulchre, but that was not enoughe vnto her, neither did it ſatiſfie her deſire: for the grace of a good worke is to perſeuer

and continue in the ſame: and becauſe ſhe did loue more then other and that in louing ſhe wept, and in weeping ſhe ſearched, and in ſeaching ſhe continued, therfore was it thy pleaſure that ſhee ſhould firſt finde thee, ſee thee, and talke with thee, before all other: and not onely this, but alſo ſhe was a 
                  ••
               dinges bearer of thy glorious reſurection vnto thy diſciples, when thou diddeſt commaunde

her, and bid her, goe, and tell my brethren that they goe vnto Galilie, there they ſhall ſee me. &c. Seing therefore that a woman did weep, after ſuch a ſorte, and continued in weping, which did ſeeke him yt was aliue among the dead: which touched thee with the hand other fayth: how ought a ſoule to mourne, and to continue in mourning, which beleeueth in thee, & with his mouth doth acknow

ledge thee to be his redemer, that ſitteſt now in heauen, and raigneſt euery where? how muche therefore ought ſuche a ſoule to mourne & weep, whiche loueth thee with all his hart, and with his whole deſire doth couet to ſee thee? Oh onely refuge, the onely hope of wretches, vnto whome no man needeth at any time to pray without hope of mercy, graunte vnto me this grace for

thy ſake, and for thy holy names ſake, that as ofte as I think vpon thee, as oft as I ſpeake of thee, write of thee, read of thee confer of thee: as oft as euer I remember thee, ſtand before thee, offer vp prayſes, prayers, and ſacrifice vnto thee, ſo oft I may weep aboundantly with teares in thy ſight, ſo that my teares may be to me in ſteade of bread, day and night. Thou truly king of glory, & maiſter

of all vertue, haſt taught vs with thy word and with thine enſample to mourne and weepe, wheras thou ſaieſt: Bleſſed be they that mourne, for they ſhall be comforted. Thou didſt weep for thy frend that was dead, and didſt let teares fall down plenteouſly for the city which ſhould periſh. I beſeech thee (O good Jeſu) by thoſe moſt precious teares, and by all thy inercies and pities,

wherewith thou diddeſt vouchſafe marueilouſlie to helpe and ſuccour vs that were loſt: gene mee the grace to weep, and to be earneſtly repentant for my ſinnes, which grace my ſoule deſireth, & coueteth very mutch, and except it come of thy gift, I can not haue it, but by the holy ghoſt, which doth molifie the hard harts of ſinners, and prouoketh them to weeping. Geue me the grace of teares,

like as thou gaueſt to our forefathers, whoſe examples we ought to folow, that I may bewayle my ſelfe in all my life, like as they did bewayle themſelues day & night: geue me the dew of thy grace from abone, and alſo a dew of teares beneath, yt my teares may bee vnto me in ſtead of bread day and night, & that I may be made in thy ſight (O Lord my God) by the fire of thy prouocation, a far

and acceptable ſacrifice. Make me to be mortified and killed vpon the aultar of mine hart, and that I may be receiued of thee as a fat and a ſweet ſmelling ſacrifice. Geue vnto me (O good Lord) a plentifull flowing and cleare well of teares, in yt which I may waſh continually this foule and ſpotted ſacrifice: for although I haue offered vp my ſelfe wholy vnto thee, by the help of thy grace. Yet neuertheles,

in many thinges I offende thee daily, becauſe of my great fragilitie & weaknes. Geue me therefore the grace of teares (O bleſſed God) & moſt eſpecially through the great ſweetnes of thy loue, & the remembrance of thy great mercies, prepare this table for thy ſeruaunt in thy ſight, and geue me power that as oft as I liſt, I may be ſatiſfied of it. Graunt vnto me for thy goodnes and

pitie, yt this thy cup repleniſhed & filled full, may ſatiſfie my thirſt, that my ſpirite may couet the, and that my minde may burn in thy loue, forgetting all vanitie & miſery. Heare (my God) heare, thou that art the ſturrer vp & quickner of my dul cares heare what I deſire and aſke: and geue me grace to aſke that which thou heareſt. O pitifull Lord which art woute to bee eaſily entreated, be not

hard to bee entreated of me, becauſe of my ſinnes, but for thy goodnes receiue the prayers of thy ſeruant, and graunt me the effect of my petition and deſire.
         
         
            ¶ In this prayer mans mynde is very much and plenteouſly ſtirred and moued, if it be ſayd in quietnes.
            
               O Lord Jeſu, O gentle and louing Jeſu, O good Jeſu which didſt vouchſafe to dye for our

ſinnes, and didſt ryſeagayne for our iuſtification, I beſeche thee by thy glorious reſurrection, to raiſe me vp out of the ſepulcher of vices and all my ſinnes, and geue me dayly part in thy firſt reſurrection, to the entent I may receiue ſome part in the latter reſurrection. O moſt mighty king which didſt aſcend into heauen, wyth ye triumph of thy glory, and ſitteſt on the right hand of thy

father, draw me vpward towardes thee, that I may runne after thee in the ſwete ſauour of thine anointmentes. Let me runne and not faint whē thou draweſt me & leadeſt me running: drawe the mouth of the ſoule that thirſteth after thee, vnto the high floudes and ſtreames of thine eternall aboundance and ſocietie, ye draw me wholy vnto thy ſelfe, which art the liuing well, to the

intent I may according to my capacitie, drinke of that wherupon I do liue. O my God, my life thou didſt ſay wyth thy holy, and bleſſed mouth. If any man thirſt, let him come vnto me and drinke. O well of lyfe, graunt vnto my thirſtie ſoule alway to drinke of thee, that according to thy holy & true promiſe, waters of life may flow out of my belly. O well of life repleniſhe and fill

my minde full of ye riuer of thy pleſure. Make my hart to be druncken, as it were in thy loue, that after the manner of them yt be druncken with wine, which forget all thinges ſaue that cup, ſo I may forget all vaine & earthly thinges, and continually haue nothing els in my cemembraunce, but thee onely, according as it is written: I remembred God, and was delighted. Geue me the holy ghoſt,

whome thoſe waters did ſignifie, which thou didſt promiſe to geue to them that thyrſted after thee. Graunt (I beſeech thee) that I may aſſay to goe with my whole deſire, & all my ſtudy toward that place, vnto the which we beleue thou didſt aſcende the forty day after thy reſurrection, that in this preſent miſery, I may be onelye in bodye: but in thought & deſire alwaies with thee, that my harte

may be there, whereas yu art which art my treaſure worthy to be coueted, & much to be loued, wherwith no treaſure is worthy to be compared. In this great floud of this life, whereas we are toſſed with ſtormes on euery ſide, there is no ſted faſt ſtanding, or place hie enough aboue yt waters, no not for the foot of a doue to reſt vpon, in this (I ſay) there is no ſafe or quiet peace, no where any

ſure reſt, euery where battayle and ſtrife, euery where enemies and fightings without dores and feare at home within dores. And foraſmuch as the one part of vs is heauenly, & the other earthly: our body which is corrupted, doth loden and is burdenous vnto ye ſoule: therfore my mind which is my fellow, and frende, being weery with wandring forth of the way, is ſicke, & lyeth all to torne,

and rent, of thoſe things which it hath paſſed by. It hungreth & thirſteth greatly after vanities, & I haue nothing to ſet afore it, becauſe I am pore and a begger. Thou (O Lord my God) art rich in all good thinges, and the moſt plenteous geuer of the daiuties of heauenly ſocietie, geue meate vnto the weery: not ſuch as it luſteth after, but ſuche as is conueient for it. Gather together the diſperſed,

renue and refreſh the corne, loe, he ſtandeth at the dore and knocketh. I beſeech thee by the bowels of thy mercy, wherewith thou being the dayſpring from an high haſt viſited vs, open the hand of thy pitie to a wretche that knocketh, & vouchſafe mercifully to bid him enter into thee, and that he may reſt with thee, & be refreſhed of the, which art the liuing and heauē
               ly bread, wherwith whē
               
he is once fedde, and that his ſtrength is come to him againe: he may aſcēd vnto more high thinges. And being lifted vp out of this vale of miſery & teares, with the winges of his godly deſire, he may flie vnto the heauē
               ly kingdom. Let my ſpirite (O Lorde I beſeech thee) take winges as an Egle, and flye without fainting, let it flye, and come to ye beutifulnes of thy houſe, & to the place

where thy glory dwelleth, where as vpon the meat tables of thy ſupernall citezens, it may bee fed of thy ſecretes, in the place of thy paſture, by the moſt pleutifull riuers ſides. Let my hart reſt in thee my God, my hart I ſay, which is as though it were a great ſea ſwelling with waues. Thou which diddeſt rebuke the windes and the ſea, and there was made ſtraight way a great calme: come

& walke vpon the flouds of mine hart, that all thinges which belong vnto me, may be made calme and cleare, that I may embrace thee which art mine only God, and that I may behold the which art ye ſweet light of mine eyes, without any blinde darknes of troubleſome cogitations & thoughts. Let my minde flye (O Lord) vnder the ſhadow of thy winges from heat, that it being concred wt
               
the temperatnes of thy pleaſant coolnes, may ſing ioyfully, and ſay: I will lay me downe, and reſt in peace. Let my memory ſleepe (O my God I beſeech thee) from all euils, make it to hate iniquitie, and to loue righteouſnes. For what can be better or more delectable, then in the middeſt of the darkueſſe of this life and amongeſt the manifolde and bitter miſeries of the ſame, to deſire feruently

heauenly ſweetnes? to co uet euerlaſting bleſſednes? a mans mind to behold euer there, whereas he may be moſt ſure to haue infallible, and true ioyes. O Lord which for thy louing kindneſſe art moſt worthy to be deſiered & coueted of all thinges, whē ſhal I ſee thee? when ſhall I appeare before thy face? when ſhal I be ſatiſfied of thy glory? whē wilt thou bring me foorth of this darcke

priſon, that I may confeſſe thy name, ſo that afterwarde I bee no more pricked? when ſhall I paſſe and goe to that merueilous & beutifull houſe of thine, whereas ye voyce of gladnes and reioyſing doth ſound in the tabernacles of iuſt men. Bleſſed are they that dwell in thy houſe (O Lord) they ſhall prayſe thee euer, world wtout ende. Bleſſed are they, yea, bleſſed in deed, whom thou haſt

choſen, & taken into that heauenlye inheritaunce. Beholde (O Lorde) thy ſaints floriſh before thee, like vnto lillies, for they are repleniſhed with the plēteouſnes of thy houſe and thou doeſt geue them to drinke of the flowing riuer of thy pleaſure, becauſe thou art the well of life, and in thy light and brightneſſe they do ſee light, ſo greatly that they them ſelues which are a light, which was made

brighte by thee O God, which doeſt geue them light, do ſhine like vnto the ſunne in thy ſight. O how marueilous, how fayre and beutifull, howe acceptable ar thy manſions and dwelling places of thy houſe, O Lorde of powers. My ſinfull ſoule doth couet to enter into them. O Lord I haue loued the comlineſſe of thy houſe, & the place where thy glory dwelleth, I aſked one petition of thee,

(Lord,) and the ſame wil I require, that I may dwell in the houſe of the Lord all the dayes of my life. Like as the hart coueteth to go vnto the water brookes, euen ſo doth my ſoule deſire to come vnto thee. O God when ſhall I come and appear before yt face of my Lord? when ſhall I ſee God, after whome my ſoule longeth very ſore? when ſhal I ſee him in the land of the liuing? For in this

land of the dead, he cānot bee ſeene with mortall eyes: what ſhall I do wretch that I am, which am fettered with the heauy giues of mortalitie? what ſhall I do? Whileſt we continue in this body we goe aſtray from the Lord: wee haue here no abiding place for euer, but we labor for one that is to come. Our free citie is in heauen. Woe is me, mee thincke I dwell amongeſt the barbarous

nations and infidels: & not amongſt the faithfull Iſraelites, I led my life in the tentes of Cedar. My ſoule hath dwelt too long with them that hare peace and quietnes. Who will geue me winges as a doue, that I may flye, and reſt me. There is no thing that I deſire or delight ſo much in, as is to be in my Lords cōpany: it is good for me to clene vnto God. Oh graunte me (O Lord,) whileſt I

am in this frayle members, to ſticke vnto thee, as it is written: He that cleaueth vnto the Lorde, is all one ſpirite with him. Geue me therefore I beſech thee, the wings of contemplation, wherwith when I am appare led, I may flye vpward. And foraſmuch as euery vnlucky and infortunate thing lyeth beneath: do thou O Lord hold vp my mind, leſt it fal headlong into the loweſt bottoms

of the darke valley: & leſt the ſhadow of the earthe ſhould come betwene, & ſeperate it from thee, that art ye bright ſonne of righteouſnes: and leſt it once hid with the cloudes of darknes ſhould not haue libertie, but be letted to loke for heauenly things which be aboue. Therefore I do aſſay to go vpwarde vnto the ioyes of quietnes and peace, and vnto the delectable and pleaſant ſtate of light. O

holde my hart with thy hande, becauſe it cānot be drawn vnto high things without thee. Thether do I make haſt, whereas moſt chief and principall peace raigneth, and continuall quiemes ſhineth forth. Hold and gouerne my ſpirite, and take it according to thy will, that thou being a guide vnto it, it may aſcende into the region & contrey of plentifulnes, whereas thou feedeſt Iſraell euerlaſtingly,

with the food of truth, to the entent that there at ye leaſt wiſe with my ſwift cogitation and thought, I may come nie thy wiſedome, which remaineth aboue al things ouerpaſſeth all thinges, & gouerneth all thinges. But alas there be many thinges, which when my ſoule woulde flye vnto thee, do cry out vpon it. Commaund them all (O Lord) to hold their peace and ſpeake not vnto me:

as for my ſoule it ſelfe, let it gene neuer a worde to aunſwer: let it paſſe by all things: let it clune aboue al things that be created, and come vnto thee, and that it may faſtē the eyes of fayth vpon thee which art the onely creator of al thinges: let it couet vnto thee, & be bent towardes thee: let it thinke vpon thee by meditation and contēplatiō: let it lay thee before his eyes for it ſelf: let it role and toſſe thee

in his hart: thee (I ſay) which art the true & chief goodnes, & the ioy that will remaine euer without ending. There is ſurely many contemplations, in the which mans ſoule is marueilouſly 
                  •••
                of thee, but in none of them my ſoule is ſo much delighted, nor yet hath ſo good reſt in, as in thee: And when as it thinketh vpon thee, and hath thee onely in contemplation: Oh howe mutch is thy

ſweetnes, O Lord? how marueilouſly doeſt thou enſpire the harts of them that loue thee? how delectable is thy loue? the fruition whereof they haue yt loue nothing but thee: they ſeek for nothing els: they couete to thincke of nothing els. Happy are they whoſe onely hope thou art, which haue no truſt but in thee onely, & all theyr whole worke is prayer. Bleſſed is he that ſitteth ſolitarely alone, &

holdeth his peace, & ſtandeth vpon his ward that he is ſet to keep continually day and night, that yet while he is in this fraile body, he may be able to taſte ſomwhat thy pleaſantnes. I require thee by thoſe thy wounds which bring health vnto vs, which wounds thou ſuffredſt vpon the croſſe, for our health, out of the which thy precious bloud wherewith thou redeemedſt vs, did diſtill and

drop downe: wound this my ſinnefull ſoule, for the whiche alſo thou diddeſt vouchſafe to die. Wound it (I ſay) with the fiery & mighty dart of thy great charitie: for the worde of God is liuely and effectuous, and more pearcing, and ſharpe, then any two edged ſworde. Thou O choſen dart & moſt ſharp ſword, which art able by thy power to pearce thorough the hard ſhielde or buckler of mans hart, faſten

and ſtick the ſhaft of thy loue in my hart, that my ſoule may ſay vnto thee. I am wounded wt thy charitie, ſo that forth of that ſame woūd of thy loue, teares may flowe moſt plēteouſly both day & night. Strike (o Lord) ſtrike I befech thee, this moſt indurated and hardened mynde of myne, with the ſharpe dart of thy loue, and pearce it deper and deper, into the innermoſt partes thereof,

by thy mightie power, and ſo bring out of my head, aboundance of water, and out of myne eyes, a very well of teares, continually running thorowe the great affect & merueilous deſire to ſee thy glory, that I may mourne day and night, without taking any comfort in this lyfe, vntill (in thy heauenly weddyng chamber) I may ſee thee my weldeloued & beutifull ſpouſe,

my God and my Lorde. And that there when I ſee thy glorious, merueilous, and beutifull face, full of all ſwetenes, together with them which thou haſt choſen: then I ſay, I may worſhippe humbly thy maieſty, and there at the laſt being repleniſhed with heauenly and vnſpeakable reioyſing of euerlaſting gladnes, I may euen cry out with them that loue thee (ſaying). Beholde that

which I haue long deſired, now I haue obteined. For I am ioyned in heauen vnto hym, whom, when I was in earth, I loued with all my ſtrength: with all my charitie I embraced him vnto whom with all my loue I did ſtick & cleaue. Him do I praiſe, bleſſe, & worſhip, that liueth and raigneth GOD world without end.
            Amen.
         
         
            ☞ A prayer in tyme of tribulation.
            
               
HAue mercy on me (o lord) haue mercy on me a moſt wretched ſinner, which do commit wickedly, and do ſuffer therfore worthely, which do ſinne continually, and ſuffer thy ſcourge therefore dayly. If thou take my dayly tribulation as a recompēce for the euils which I haue committed: thē it is not ſo much that I ſuffer. For it is a great deale more grieuous which I haue treſpaſſed,

then that which I do ſuffer. Thou art iuſt, O Lord, and thy iudgement is according to right. Yea, all thy iudgements are iuſt and true, and thou (O Lord our God) art iuſt & righteous: for there is no iniquitie in thee. Thou dooſt not vniuſtly, nor yet cruelly ſcourge and puniſhe ſinners. O almightye and mercyfull God, which when we had no being at all, didſt

mightily create & make vs. And when we were loſt by our owne faulte, thou by thy pitie & goodnes marueilouſly did deſt recouer vs. I know and am very certain and ſure that our life is not led by ſodeine motions, but it is diſpoſed and gouerned of thee O Lord our God. Whereby I knowe thou takeſt care for all men, & moſt chieflye for thy ſeruauntes which haue put their whole hope in thine

onely mercy: Therefore do I beſech and humbly require thee, that thou wouldeſt not deale with me according to my ſins, wherwith I haue deſerued thine anger, but according to thy great mercifulnes, which exceedeth the ſinnes of the whole worlde. Thou O Lorde, which outwardly doeſt puniſh & ſcourge, graunt me inwardly a patience, that will neuer fayle, ſo that thy prayſe neuer departe

away from my mouth. Haue mercy on me (O Lord,) haue mercy on me, and helpe me, as thou thinckeſt beſt to be moſt neceſſary for my body and ſoule. Thou knoweſt all things, thou cauſt doo all thinges, which liueſt for euer and euer.
         
         
            ¶ A very deuout prayer to the Sonne.
            O Lord Jeſu Chriſt ſon of the liuing God,

whiche being vppon the croſſe, with thy handes ſpread abroad, for the redemption of all mankind didſt drinke the moſt bitter cup of thy paſſion: I beſech thee yt thou wouldeſt vouchſafe, to geue me helpe this day and euer. Lo, I a poore wretch come vnto thee which art ritch: a ſinner, vnto thee that art mercifull. Let me not returne home contē
               ned and deſpiſed with nothing. I begin an hungred

Let me not leaue of faſting: I come vnto thee as though I were famiſhed, let me not go away vnfed. Although before I eat, I ſigh and ſorow: yet after my ſorow gene me ſomwhat to eat. Firſt of all good Jeſu, I acknowledge before thy maieſtie mine vnrighteouſnes toward thee. Beholde (O Lorde) I was conceiued in ſinne, and borne in the ſame: & thou didſt waſh them of from

mee, and ſanctified mee: but I afterwarde defiled my ſelfe with bigger and more greeuous ſinnes. For I was born in ſinne of neceſſitie, becauſe I coulde bee borne none otherwiſe: but afterward I rolled my ſelf willingly in ſinnes. Neuertheles thou (O Lord) being mindful of thy pitie, didſt take me out of the houſe of my carnall father, and out of the tentes of the vngodly, and haſt enſpired

me & put me in mind, to follow thee, with the generation of them that ſeeke thy face, of thē that walke in the right path of them that abide and continue amongſt the lilies of chaſtetie, and of them that ſit downe together with thee at ſupper of moſt ſcarcitie, and leſſe exceſſe. But I an vnkind perſon, forgetting ſo many great benefites, after that I was entred into religion and holines, did

commit many vnlawfull thinges. I did offend wonderfull vngraciouſly: and where I ſhould of right haue amended mine euill life, & left my ſinnes: I heaped ſinnes vpon ſinnes, and theſe be the euils (O Lord) wherwith I haue diſhonoured thee, and haue ſpotted and defiled my ſelfe (whom thou didſt create after the ſimilitude & likenes of thine owne ſelfe) with pride, vaineglory,

and other many euils, wherewith myne vnlucky ſoule is vexed, puniſhed, torne, and deſtroyed. Beholde (O Lorde) myne vnrighteouſnes is gone ouer my heade, and are lyke a ſore burthen, ouer heauy for me to beare. And except thou whoſe propertie is euer to haue mercy and to forgeue, doe lay vnder me the right hand of thy maieſtye: I ſhall be conſtrayned miſerablye to

ſinke into the deepe, and be drowned.
            Geue heede O Lord God and behold, becauſe thou art holy, loke how myne enemy aſſaulteth me ſaying, God hath forſaken him, I will perſecute him and catch hym, becauſe there is no man that wyll deliuer hym. But thou Lorde how longe? Turne agayne & deliuer my ſoule, ſaue me for thy mercies ſake. Haue mercy vpon thy

ſonne, whom thou haſt brought forth wyth no ſmall ſorrow and payne: and be not ſo ententife vnto myne euilnes, that thou forget thyne owne goodnes: what father is there but he will deliuer his ſonne? yea, and what father is there that will not correct hys ſonne and chaſten hym? but with the rod of pitie. Therefore, O father and Lord, although I be a ſinner, yet can I not

chuſe but be thy ſonne, becauſe thou haſt made me, and made me againe whē I was marde with ſinne. Repayre and amēde me now (O Lord) but fyrſt of all, I being mended & chaſtiſed wyth thy ſcourge, deliuer me to thy ſonne. Can a mother forget the childe ſhe bare of her wombe: and ſurelye, although ſhee ſometymes be ſorowful, yet thou (O father) haſt promiſed not to forgette

vs. Beholde I crye, and thou dooſt not heare me, I am vexed with ſorrow, and thou comforteſt me not. What ſhall I ſay? or what ſhall I do, moſt wretched caitife that I am? I beyng deſolate of ſo great comfort, and caſt out from the ſight of thyne eyes. Wo be vnto me, frō how great goodnes into how great a miſchiefe am I fallen? whether purpoſed I to goe, and whether

am I come? where am I? and where am I not? whom did I ſtudy to attayne vnto? and what euils haue I obteined? I ſought for good thinges, and beholde I haue found trouble and care. Behold now I am in ye ſtate of death, & Jeſus is not with me. And ſurely it were better for me to haue nothing at al, yea no being at all, thē to be wtout Jeſu. It is better not to liue, thē to liue

without life. And thou O Lord Jeſu, where be thine old mercies? wilt thou be angry towardes me for euer? Be pacified I beſeche thee, and haue mercy vpon me, & turne not thy face away from me, which to the entent thou mighteſt redeeme me, didſt not turne away thy face from them that rebuked thee, and ſpitted vpō thee. I confeſſe and acknowledge that I haue ſinned, and

my conſcience deſerueth damnation, and the penaunce that I am able to do, is not ſufficient to make amendes for mine iniquities. But ſure and certayne I am that thy mercy excedeth all offences that a man can do. Oh do not (I beſech thee moſt pitifull Lord) write my haynous ſinnes agaynſt me, that yu ſhouldeſt enter into iudgemēt with thy ſeruaunt. But according to ye multitude

of thy mercies, croſſe & blot out mine iniquities. woe be vnto me wretch that I am, when the day of iudgement commeth, & the bokes of cōſciences ſhall be layd wide open, whē it ſhalbe ſayd of me: Lo, loke vpō this felow, and his workes: what ſhall I do then, O Lord my God, when the heauens ſhall reuele & ſhew forth myne iniquitie, and the earth ſhall ariſe vp & reſtifie myne iniquitie,

againſt me? Beholde I ſhall be able to geue neuer one worde to aunſwer, but to ſtande in thy preſence trembling, quaking, vtterly confounded and holding downe my head for ſhame. Alas wretch that I am, what ſhall I ſay? I cry vnto thee O Lord my God. Why am I conſumed & fretted with holding my peace? But if I ſhoulde ſpeake, my griefe would not ceaſe: And if I holde

my peace, I ſhall be moſt bitterly vexed within me Mourn O my ſoule, and lament as a widowe for her firſt huſband that ſhe had in her young age. Houle wretch, and crye out wt weping, becauſe thy ſpouſe Chriſt hath forſaken thee. O God almighty, let not thine anger fall vpon me: becauſe that if thou lay ſo much to my charge, as is due for my ſins, it is ſo much that I can not receaue it.

Surely my power is not able for to ſuffer or beare it. Haue mercy vpon me, leaſt I diſpaire: but in diſpairing I will take hart to me, and be ſomewhat comforted. For although I haue committed ſo much that thou mayſt cōdemne me worthely: yet thou haſt not loſt that wherwyth thou waſt wont to ſaue ſinners, neyther dooſt thou reioyce at the deſtruction and loſſe of thē that die:

yea, to the entent ye dead men might line, thou thy ſelfe didſt die, and thy death did kill the death of ſinnes. And if they were reuiued agayne, & did liue by thy death: I beſeche thee, let not me die, now that thou lineſt. Sende downe thy hand and power from hye, and deliuer me out of the handes of myne enemyes, that they reioyce not ouer me, and ſay: let vs deuour hym.

who euer (O good Jeſu) needed to miſtruſt of thy mercy? which when wee were thine enemies, diddeſt redems vs with thy bloud, and reconciled vs vnto God. Beholde, I being hid vnder the ſhadowe of thy mercy, do come vnto the throne of thine glory, requiring, and I do runne crying, and knocking, vntil thou take pitie vpon me. For if thou diddeſt call vs to pardon and forgeuenes.

before wee laboured for pardon, how ſoone ſhall we obtayne forgeuenes, when we aſke it? Do not remember (O moſt bountifull Jeſu) thy iuſtice toward a ſinner? but thinke vpon thy liberalitie and gentlenes towarde thy creature. Do not remember thine anger towarde the giltie, but remember thy pitie & mercy toward a wretch. Forget me in that I proudly did prouoke and moue thee to

wrath, and looke vpon a wretch that calleth vpon thee. For what is Jeſus but a ſauiour? Therefore good Jeſu, for thine own ſake, ariſe, and helpe me, and ſay vnto my ſoule: I am thy health, & thy ſafegarde. I preſume mutch and am very bolde of thy goodnes (O Lorde,) becauſe thou doeſt teach vs to aſke, to ſeeke, and to knocke: wherfore, I being admoniſhed by thy word, do aſke, ſeeke, and

knocke. And thou (O Lord) that commaundeſt vs to aſke, make me able to receiue: thou that geueſt counſel to ſeek, graūt that I may finde: thou that teacheſt vs to knock, open to mee when I knocke, and confirme me which am vnſtable and wanering: reſtore mee that am loſt: rayſe me vp that am dead: and vouch ſafe to direct and gouern in thy fauour all my ſenſes, my thoughtes, and

doings, that from hencefoorth I may ſerue thee, I may liue toward thee, and that I may commit my ſelfe vnto thee. I know (O my Lord) that through this that thou haſt made me, I owe and am in debt vnto thee, euē mine owne ſelfe: and becauſe thou haſt redeemed me, and waſt made man for my ſake: for this (I ſay) I owe vnto thee more then my ſelf. Lo, I haue no more: neyther

can I geue that which I haue vnto thee, without thee. But do thou take me, and drawe me vnto thee, that I may be thine in following and louing thee: like as I am thine in condition & creation: which liueſt and raigneſt world without ende.
            Amen.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               IMPRINTED at London by Iohn Daye, dwelling ouer Alderſgate beneath S. Martyne.
            
         
         
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis per decennium. (†)
            
         
      
   