
      
         
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            
               STatuta bonū publicum concernēcia edita in parliamento tento apud weſtmoneſterium xiiij die Octobris Anno regni Illuſtriſſimi Domini noſtri Regis Henrici ſeptimi
            
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶The ſtatutes concernyng the comyn weele made in the parliament holdē atte weſtmeſtre the fourtenth day of Octobre. In the reygne of our ſouerayne lorde the king. kyng henri the leuenth. the enleuenth yere.
            ¶The table of euery chapitre or acte folowynge / 

                  ¶That men gooyng to bataylle wyth ye prynce &c̄. ſhall not be atteynted Capitulo. primo.
                  ¶For punyſhment of vagabundes & beggers Capitulo. .ii.
                  ¶That actes afore made agaynſt vnlawfull reteynours. ryottes &c̄ ſhulde be putte in excucyon Capitulo. .iii.
                  ¶That one weyght and one meſure ſhall be vſyd. thorugh all this reame Capitulo. .iiii.
                  ¶The names of townes lymytted for ye ſauf cuſtodie of weyghtes & meſures accordyng to the kynges ſtandarde Capitulo .iiii.
                  ¶For puttyng away weares in the porte of Southampton Capitulo. .v.
                  ¶For packyng & payen cuſtumes of wullen clothes Capitulo. .vi.
                  ¶For punyſhment of ryottes Capitulo. .vii.
                  ¶For punyſhemente of vſurers Capitulo. .viii.
                  ¶An acte concernynge the Inhabitauntes of Northe & Southe Tyndale Capitulo. .ix.
                  ¶For leuyenge of the arrerages of the benyuolence laſte graunted Capytulo .x.
                  ¶An acte concernynge takynge of apprentyſes in the cyte of Norwyche Capitulo. .xi.
                  ¶For writtes to be geuen and lerned counſeylle to be aſſygned to the poore peple wt out payen ony mony therfore Capytulo. .xii.
                  ¶That horſes ſhall not be conueyed out of the londe without ye kynges lycence nother mares ouer the pryce of ſyxe ſhelynges and eyght pence Capitulo. xiii.
                  ¶That ſtraungers made deynezyns ſhall paye cuſtume & ſubſydies as ſtraungers Capitulo. .xiiii.
                  ¶Ayenſt vntrue demeaynge of Shirefs and theyr offycers in holdynge theyr Countees Capitulo. .xv.
                  ¶For kepynge of the watche in Calyce Capitulo. .xvi.
                  ¶Ayenſt dyſtroyenge of pertryches & feſauntes with vnlawfull gynnes Capytulo .xvii.
                  ¶Not being with the kynge intyme of nede &c̄. Shall leſe fees & annewytees to theym graunted Capitulo. .xviii.
                  ¶Ayenſt vnlawfull makynge of fether beddes. pylowes and matreſſes Capitulo .xix.
                  ¶Ayenſt wȳmen couert makynge alienacōn of londes moued by the fyrſt barō Capitulo. .xx.
                  ¶For enqueſte hereafter to becharged within London Capitulo. xxi.
                  ¶For wages of hȳys in huſbandry & of Artyfycers & labourers Capitulo. .xxii.
                  
                     ¶For gawgynge and packyng of Salmon Elys and hearying Capitulo .xxiii.
                  ¶For punyſſhing of periury & leſſyng the penalytee in atteint Capitulo .xxiiii.
                  ¶For punyſſynge of periowrie by examynacion of the Chaſiceler Treſorer Capitulo .xxv.
                  ¶For holdynge the Shyrefs Tournes within Countees of Suth̄. Surt and Suſſex. Capitulo. .xxvi.
                  ¶For fuſtians to be ſhorne with the brode Shere Capitulo. xxvii.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The kynge our ſouereyne lorde Henry the vij after the conqueſt by the grace of god kynge of Englond and of Fraunce & lorde of Irlond. Atte his parliamente holden at Weſtm̄. ye .xiiii day of October in the .xi. yere of his reigne to the honoure of god and holy chyrche. And for the comyn prouffite of the reame by the aſſent of the lordes ſpyrytuell and temporell and the comīs in the ſayd parliament aſſembled and by auctoryte of the ſame parliament hath do to be made certayne ſtatutes & ordenaunces in maner & fourme folowynge.
            
               That men goynge to batayll with the prynce &c: ſhal not be atteyned Capitulo Primo
               
                  THe kynge our ſouereyne lord callynge to hys remembraūce the duety of alligeaūce of his ſubgettes of this his reame. & that they bi reaſon of the ſame are bounde to ſerue theyr prynce & ſouereyne lord for the tyme beyng in his warres for the defence of him & the londe ayenſt euery rebellyon power and myght reared ayēſt him. and with him to entre & abyde in ſeruyſe in batayll yf caas ſo requyre / And that for the ſame ſeruyſe what fortune euer fall by chaunce in ye ſame batayll agaynſt the mynde and wyll of the prynce. as in this londe ſomtyme paſſed hath be ſeen / That it is not reſonable but ayenſt al lawes reaſon and good conſyence that the ſayd ſubgettes goyng with theyr ſouerayne lorde in werres attendȳg vpon hȳ in his perſone. or beyng in other places by his commaū
                  dement within thys londe or wythout. ony thynge ſholde leſe or forfeyte for doyng theyr true dute & ſeruyſe of alligeaunce. It be therfore ordeyned enacted and eſtablyſſhed by the kynge our ſouereyne lorde. by aduyſe and aſſente of the lordes ſpyrytuell and temporell and comyns in this preſent parlyament aſſembled. & by auctorite of the ſame that from henſforth no maner of perſon ne perſones what ſo euer he or they be that attende vpon the kynge & ſouerayne lord of this londe for the tyme beyng in his parſone. and do hym true and faythfull ſeruyce of alligeaunce in the ſame. or be in other places by his commaundemente in his werres within this lond or without. that for the ſame dede and true ſeruyce of allygeaunce he or they be in no wyſe conuycte or atteyne of hygh treaſon ne of other offences for that cauſe by acte of parliament or otherwyſe by ony proſes of lawe wherby he or ony of them ſhal mow forfeyt lyf londes tenementis rē
                  tes poſſeſſyons heredytamentes goodes cataylles or ony other thynges but to be for that dede & ſeruyſe vtterly diſcharged of ony vexacyō trouble or loſſe / ¶And yf ony acte or actes or other proſeſſes of ye lawe herafter thervpon for ye ſame happ to be made contrary to this or denaunce / that thenn̄ ye acte or actes or other proceſſe of the lawe whatſoeuer they ſhal be. ſtonde & be vtterly voyd / Prouyded alway that no parſone ne perſones ſhall take ony benefice or auauntage by this acte whiche ſhall herafter declyne from his or theyr ſayd allygeaunce.
            
            
               
               For punyſſhment of vagabondes & beggers Caplō ij
               FOr aſmoche as the kyngis grace mooſt entyerly deſyreth amonge all erthly thynges the proſperyte & reſtfulnes of this his lond & his ſubgettis of ye ſame to lyue quietly & ſurely to ye playſure of god & according to his lawes wyllynge alway of his pyte intendyng to reduce them therunto by ſofter meanes than by extreme rygour therfore purueyed in a ſtatute made in the tyme of kynge Rychard the ſeconde. conſyderyng alſo ye grete charges that ſhulde grow to his ſubgettes for bryngyng of vagabundes to the gaoles acordyng to ye ſame ſtatute and the longe abydynge of theym therin. wherby by lyklehede many of them ſhuld leſe theyr lyues. In modryng of the ſayd eſtatute his highnes wyll by thauctoryte of this preſent parlyament it be ordeyned & enacted. that where ſuche myſdoers ſhuld be by examynacyon cōmytted to the comyn gaole there to remayne as is aforſayd. that ye Shyrefs / Mayres / Bayllifs hygh̄ Conſtables & pety Conſtables and all other gouernours & offycers of Cytees Burghs Townes townſhyp̄s villages & other places. within thre dayes after this acte proclamyd. make due ſerche and take or cauſe to be take all ſuche vagabundes ydle & ſuſpecte perſones lyuynge ſuſpecyouſly. and theym ſo taken to ſytte in ſtockes there to remayne by the ſpace of thre dayes & thre nyghtes. and there to haue none other ſuſtenaunce but brede & water. and after ye ſayd thre dayes & thre nyghtes to be had out and ſette at large and thenne to be commaunded to auoyde ye towne / And yf eftſones he be take in ſuche defaute in the ſame towne or towneſhyp thenne he be ſette in lyke wyſe in ſtockes by the ſpace of .vj. dayes with lyke dyete as is before reherced. & yf ony perſone or perſones yeue ony other mete or drynke to the ſayd myſdoers beyng in ſtockes in fourm afore ſaid or the ſame pryſoners fauour in theyr miſdoyng. that thenn̄ they forfeit for euery tyme ſo doyng .xij. d / ¶And alſo it is ordeyned by the ſayd auctoryte. that all maner of beggers not able to werke within .vj. wekes nexte after proclamacyon made of this acte goo reſte and abyde in his hundred where he laſt dwelled. or there where he is beſt knowen or borne. there to remayne or abyde without beggȳg out of the ſayd hundred vpon payn to be punyſſhed as is before ſayd / And yt no man be excuſed by that he is a clerke of one Vnyuerſyte or of other without he ſhewe the letters of the Chaunceler of the Vnyuerſyte from whens he ſayth he comyth / nor none other callynge hymſelfe a Souldeour Shypman / or Trauelynge man wythout he brynge a letter from his cappytayne or from the towne where he londed. and that he thenne to be commaunded to goo the ſtreyght hygh way in to his countree / ¶And ouer this it is ordeyned by auctotoryte aboueſayd. that yf ony Shyreff or other offycer afore reherced execute not the premyſſes as is aboueſayd of euery vagabunde· heremyte or begger able to laboure or clerke Pylgreme or ſhypman as ofte as ony ſuch comyth in his ſyghte or that he hath therof knowlege wythin the Towne where he hath

auctorite rule or gouernaūce. that as often as ony ſuche of the ſayd myſdoers abydinge there by the ſpace of a day departen vnexamyned and vnpunyſſhed as is aboue ſayd. for eueri myſdoer ſoo deparded. he to leſe .xx. d / ¶And that the lorde of euery Lete within this realme and the Shyref in his Tourne. haue auctoryte to enquire thereof in his Lete and Tourne. and the lorde of the Lete to haue for euery defaute founde as is aboue ſayd .xx. d / and the Shyref to enquyre in his Tourne of ſuche eſcapes within the Iuriſdiccōn of his Tourne / And to haue .xx. d. for euery ſuche defawte founde in his Tourne / and that the penaltee lymytted by this ordynaunce to be forfeyted by ony offycer or ony other perſone for none punyſſhment of vagabundes & other myſruled perſones within euery Cyte where Mayre and aldermen ben / yt ye ꝓfite of euery ſuche penalte be vnto the alderman of euery warde where ſuche forfeyture is had or made to his owne ¶And alſo it is ordeyned & enacted by the ſayd auctoryte yt it ſhall be lawfull to eueri man Intytled to haue the ſayd penalte dyſtreyne for it in lyke wyſe as the lorde of ony Lete may do for amerciamentes & fines had aſſeſſed in the ſame Lete and ferdermore it is ordeyned & enacted by the ſayd auctoryte that none apprentyſe ne ſeruaunt of huſbondri ladourer ne ſeruaunt artyfycer play at the tables from the tenth day of Ienuary next comyng but on̄ly for mete & drynke ne at the tenys cloſſh dyſe cardes bowles nor ony other vnlawfull game in no wyſe oute of Cryſtmas. and in Cryſtmas to play only in ye dweling hous of his mayſter or where the mayſter of ony of ye ſayd ſeruauntes is preſent vppon paī of empreſomentee by ye ſpace of a day in the ſtockes openly And yt the houſhold where diſing cardynge tenis playenge bowles cloſſhe or ony other vnlawful gā afore reherſid ſhall be vſed otherwyſe than is afore reherſyd. and that lawfully be preſented before Iuſtices of the peas. the mayr ſhiref in his tourne or ſteward in his lete or by examynacōn had afore ye ſayd Iuſtices of peas yt proces be made vpon the ſame as vpon enditement of treſpas ayenſt ye kynges peas. And yt the ſayd myſdoer be admytted to noo fine vnder the ſomme of .vi. ſ. viii. d. And that it be lawfull to .ij. of the Iuſtices of the peas wherof one ſhall be of the Quo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   wtī their auctorite to reiect & put away comen ale ſellynge in townes & places where they ſhall thȳke conuenient & to take ſurete of the kepars of ale houſes of theyr goodbehauyng by the. dyſcrecōn of the ſayd Iuſtices. and in the ſame to be aduyſed & aggreed at the tyme of theyr ſeſſions / ¶Prouyded alwaye that dymynycōn of punyſhmēte of vagabundes and beggers aforeſayd may and ſhall be had for wymmen greate wt chylde and men and wymmen in extreme ſeknes bi hym that hath auctorite to doo the ſayd punyſſhementes this acte notwythſtondynge / 
            
            
               That actes made ayenſt vnlawfull reteynours: riottes & cetera ſhold be put in excucōn Capitulo: :iij:
               
                  THe kynge our ſouerayn lorde callyng to his remembraunce that many good ſtatutes and ordenaunces be made for the punyſſhment of riottes vnlawfull aſſembles reteyndours and yeuyng & receyuyng of lyuerees ſygnes & tokenes vnlawfully. extorciones mayntenaunces imbracery exſeſyue takyng of wages contrary to the ſtatute of laboreres and artyficers. the vſe of vnlawfull games inordinate apperayll and many other grete enormytees & of fences which ben commytted and done dayly contrary to the good ſtatutes for many & dyuers behofull conſederacyon. ſeuerly made and ordeyned to the hyghe dyſpleyſure of almyghty god and the grete lette of ye comyn lawe weele of this londe. notwitſtondynge that generally by the Iuſtyces of ye peas in euery Shyre within this realme in the open Seſſyons is geuen in charge to enquyre of many offences commytted contrary to dyuers of the ſayd ſtatutes & dyuers enqueſtes thervpon there ſtraytly ſworne and charged byfore ye ſayd Iuſtyces to enquyre of the premyſſes & therin to preſent the truth whiche are letted to be found by imbracery mayntenaūce corrupcion and fauour by occaſyon wherof the ſayd eſtatutes be nor can not be putte in dewe execucyon / For reformacyon wherof for ſomoche that before this tyme the ſayd offences extorcyons contēptes and other ye premyſſes myght not nor as yet may be conuenyently punyſhed by the dewe ordre of ye lawe except it were fyrſte founde and preſented by the vdyte of: xij. men therto dewly ſworne. Whiche for the cauſes afore reherced wyll not fynde nor preſent the treuth. Wherfore be it by ye aduyſe and aſſent of ye lordes ſpyrytuall. and temporall and the comins in this preſent parlyament aſſē
                  bled and by auctoryte of the ſame enacted ordeyned and eſtabliſſhed. that from henſforth aſwell the Iuſtyces of Aſſyſe in ye open Seſſyons to be holden afore them and euery of theym. as the Iuſtices of the peas in euery Countee of ye ſayde realme vpon Informacyon for the kynge to fore theym to be made. haue ful power and auctoryte by theyr diſcrecyon to here & determyne all offences and contemptes commyted & done by ony perſone or perſones ayenſt the fourme ordynaunce and effecte of ony ſtatute made and not repellyd. And that the ſayde Iuſtyces vpon the ſayd Informacyon haue full power and auctoryte to awarde and make lyke proceſſe ayenſte the ſayd offenders & euery of theym as they ſhold or myght make ayenſt ſuche perſone or perſones as ben preſented and indyted before theym of treſpace done to the kynges peas. and the ſayd offender / or offenders duely to punyſſh̄e acordinge to the purporte fourme and effecte of the ſayd eſtatutes. ¶And alſo be it enacted by the ſayd auctoryte. that the perſone whiche ſhall gyue the ſayd Informacyon for the kynge / ſhall by the dyſcreſcrecyon of the ſayd Iuſtyces contente and paye to the ſayd perſone or perſones ayenſt whome the ſayde Informacyon ſhall be ſoo geuen. his reſonable coſtes and damages in that behalfe ſuſteyned yf that it be tryed or founde ageinſt hym that ſoo gyueth or marketh ony ſuche Informacyon. ¶Prouyded alway that ony ſuche Informacyon extende not to treaſon murder or felony nor to ony other offence wherfore ony perſone ſhalle leſe lyfe or Membre. nor to leſe by ner vpon the ſame Informacion

ony londes tenementes goodes catelles to the partie makynge the ſame Informacyon / ¶Prouyded alſo that the ſayd Informacyon ſhall not extende to ony perſone dwelyng in a nother Shyre than there as the ſayd Informacyon ſhall be gyuē or made. Sauyng to euery perſone & perſones Cytees & Townes all theyr lybertees & fraunchyces to theym & eueri of theim of ryght belonginge and apperteynynge / 
            
            
               That one weyght & one meſure ſhall be vſed thorugh all this realme Capitulo:: iiij:
               PRayen the comyns in this preſent parlyament aſſembled where dyuers actes ſtatutes and ordinaunces in the tymes of the noble progenytours and predeſeſſours of our now ſouereyne lorde ye kynge haue bē made ye one meſure & one weyght ſholde be vſed thrugh out this noble realme / and alſo that in euery Cyte Burgh and towne within the ſame realme vppon certayne & ſeuerall paynes in the ſayd ſtatutes and ordynaunces lymytted / ſholde be comyn balaunce wyth comyn weyghtes and comen meſures marked acording to the eſtandarde of the Eſchequer. by the whiche and other lyke balaunces weyghtes & meſures marked acordynge to ye ſayd eſtandarde. all men ſholde bye & ſell in auoyndynge of all frawde & diſcorde in that. behalfe to be vſed whiche actes ſtatutes & ordynaunces haue not be obſerued & kepte as now in this preſent parlyamente it hathe be opēly by dyuerſe perſones of dyuers parties of this realme remēbred to the great hurte & vexacō of dyuers and many of the kynges ſubgett of this his realme. For remedy whereof be it of your habundant grace & charge our mooſt gracious ſouerayne lorde bi thaſſent of the lordes ſpūall & tē
                  porall & by the comyns in this preſente parlyamēt aſſēbled & by auctoryte of ye ſame enacted & eſtabliſſhed That vnto the knyghtes & citezins of euery ſhire and cyte aſſembled in this preſent parlyament. barons of the .v. portes & certain burgeyſes of Burgh townes or they frō depart this p̄ſēt. parlyamēt be deliuered of euery weighe & meſure whiche now our ſoueraȳe lord hath cauſed to be made of braſſe for ye comȳ weele of all his ſubgett & lyeges withī this his realme Englōd acordȳg to ye kȳg our ſouereyne lordis ſtandard of his Echequer of weyght and meſures as they ben in the eſchequer of our ſayd ſouerayne lorde and that the ſayd knightes Cytezyns and Burgeyſes to whom the ſayd weyghtes & meſures ſhull be delyuered as is afore ſayd ſurely conuey or cauſe ye ſame to be conueyed on this half the feſte of Eſter nexte comyng by the ſayd Citeyzins to theyr Cytees and by the ſayd knyghtes vnto ſuche Burgh or towne corporate / or market Towne within the ſhyre for whiche they ben elected as is ſpecifyed & conteined in a ſedule vnto this preſent byll annexid. there to remayne for euer in the kepinge of the Mayre Baylly or other heed Offycer for the tyme beinge of the ſame Cytee Burgh or towne as the kynges ſtandarde of weyght and meſure / And that thinhabytauntes of all Cytees Burghs

and market Townes within eueri of the ſayd Shyres. ſhall on this halfe the feſt of ye Natyuite of ſaynt Ikn Baptiſt nexte comynge make or cauſe to be made comin meſures and weyghtes acordyng to ye weyghtes & meſures aboue ſaid to remayne within the ſayd Cytees Burghs & market townes / & euery of theȳ and the weyghtes and meſures to be vewed examined printed ſigned and marked by the Mayre Baylly or other heed officer in whoſe poſſeſſion the aforeſaid haue auctorite & power to make ſygne and printe vnder the ſigne & print for ye ſame with a letter. H. crowned to be printed to aſſigne and printe lyke weyghtes and meſures vnto euery the kynges leyges and ſubgettes duly requiring the ſame. takynge for markinge of euery buſhell .i. d. and from the ſayd feeſt of the Natiuyte of ſaynt. Ihōn Baptiſt noo marchaūte neother perſone ne perſōes withī ony Cytee or market towne bye ne ſell with ony weyght or meſure excepte it be markid ſygned or prynted in manere and fourme afore ſayd. ne ony other perſon or perſones out of the ſayd Cyttes Burghs and marked townes except it be lyke and egall with the ſayd eſtandarde / and that euery perſone aſwell withoute Cytees burghs & market townes as within. bye and ſell with a buſſhell ſealed ſygned or marked after the fourme aforeſayd and none otherwiſe. and that all the Mayres Bayllyes and other heed offycers of euery cytee Burgh or market Towne ſhall cauſe twyes in the yere or oftener as they ſhall thynk neſeſſary. all weyghtes and meſures within the ſayd Cytees Burghs and market townes to be brought afore theym and to be duely vewed and examyned and ſuche as they ſhall vpon the ſayd examynacōn fynde defectife. immedyatly to be broken and brent and the partie or partyes whiche in that behalfe hath offended and be foū
                  de defectyf. ſhall forfeyte for the fyrſt tyme .vi. ſ. viii. d. the forfeyture therof to be vnto the ſayd Mayre Bayly or ony other hauyng Iuriſdiccōn and correcōn in that behalf and at the ſeconde tyme the ſayd offender lyke wyſe to forfeyt .xiii. ſ. iiii. d. and at the third tyme lyke wiſe to forfeyte .xx. ſ. and for ferther punyſſhēt to be ſet vpon ye pillori to the enſample of other. And two Iuſtyces of peas wherof one ſhall be of the Quorum haue auctoryte aſwell by examynacyon as by enqere to here and determyne the defawtes of the ſaid Mayres Bayllyes and other heed offycers in that behalf. and alſo of all byers and ſelers doyng contrary to this preſent acte and ordinaunce / and to ſette fine and mercement vpon the offenders by theyr dyſcrecion And the ſayd weyghtes & meſures ſo founde defectif to be forfeyted & brente Be it alſo enacted that there be but onnely .viii. buſſhelles rayſed and ſtryken to the quarter of corne. and .xiiii.li. to the ſtone of woll and xxvi. ſtone to the Sacke / ¶Be it alſo ordeynyd by thauctoryte aboue ſayd that the Iuſtices of peas aboue ſayd haue auctoryte to make lyke proceſſe ayenſte all perſones founden as is aboue ſayd defectyf / and for ſuche fynes and amerciamentes as vpon theym ſhall be ſeſſed as yf they were endited afore theiym brekyng of the

kynges peas / And that wherby other ſtatutes and ordenaunces afore lymytted. it is ordeyned that euery Cyte Burgh & towne that hath a Conſtable ſhulde haue comyn weyghtes and meſures. ſealed vpon penalties in the ſame lymytted. that thoſe penalties in yt behalfe extend not to ony towne whiche is no Cyte Burgh nor market towne. ¶Prouyded alway that this acte ſhall not extend nor be preiudiciall to ony perſone ſellyng or byenge by water meſure with in the ſhyppe borde / And that it be by thauctoryte aboueſayd enacted ye premiſſes or ony other ordynaunce afore made notwithſtandyng / that the ſayd water meſure within the ſhyp̄ bord· ſhall only conteyne: v. peckes after the ſayd ſtandarde raſed and ſtreken. Prouyded alſo that the examynacyon of defawtes aboueſayd and punyſſhment to the offenders of euery offence commyted hereafter within ony of the ſayd .v. portes / ſhall be had done & admyſtred by the lorde wardeyn of the ſayd .v. portes or by his lyeutenaunt of the ſame for the tyme beynge & none other the premyſſes notwithſtondynge / Prouyded alway ȳ this acte of weyghtes and meſures extende not nor be in no wyſe hurtfull or preiudiciall to the prynce within the duchye of Corneu all for ony weyghtes apperteynȳ
                  ge to the Cunage of tynne wythin the Countees of Cornewall & Deuonſhyre / but that all ſuche weyghtes be vſed ordred demeaned and corrected as it hath ben vſed & accuſtumed before this tyme / ye ſayd act & ordynaūces notwithſtōdīg
               
                  The names of the Townes lymytted for the ſauf cuſtody of weyghtes and meſures accordynge to the kynges eſtandarde for the ſhyres folowynge as pertyculerly apperyth
                  ¶Weſtm̄l
                  
                  the towne. of Appulby
                  ¶Northumbc̄
                  
                  the towne. of newcaſtell
                  ¶Cumbr̄
                  
                  the cyte of Carleof
                  ¶Lanc.
                  the towne of Lancaſter
                  ¶Ebo
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                     .
                  the cyte of Yorke
                  ¶Lincoln̄.
                  the cyte of Lincoln̄.
                  ¶Derb̄.
                  the towne of Derby.
                  ¶Notingh̄.
                  the towne of Notingham
                  ¶Leyc.
                  the towne of Leyceter.
                  ¶Warr̄.
                  the cyte of Couentre
                  ¶Rotel.
                  the towne of vppyngham / 
                  ¶North̄.
                  the towne of Northamptō
                  
                  ¶Bed.
                  
                  the towne of Bedford
                  
                  ¶Buk.
                  the towne of Bukyngham
                  ¶Canterbr̄
                  
                  the towne of Cambryge
                  ¶Hunt:
                  the towne of Huntyngdon
                  ¶Norff.
                  the cyte of Norwych̄
                  
                  ¶Suff.
                  the towne of ſaynt Edmondes bury
                  ¶Eſſex.
                  the towne of Chelmeſford.
                  
                     ¶Hertſ.
                  the towne of hertford
                  
                  ¶Mydd.
                  In Weſtmyneſter
                  ¶Kanc.
                  the towne of maydeſtone.
                  ¶Surr̄
                  
                  the towne of Gulford
                  
                  ¶Suſſex.
                  the towne of Lewes.
                  ¶Oxon̄.
                  the towne of Oxenford
                  
                  ¶Berk.
                  the towne of Redyng
                  ¶Salop̄.
                  the towne of Shreweſburi
                  ¶Staff.
                  the towne of Stafford
                  
                  ¶Hereford
                  
                  the cyte of hereford.
                  ¶Glouc.
                  the towne of Glouceſtre.
                  ¶Wigorn̄.
                  the cyte of Worceter.
                  ¶Wiltes.
                  the cyte of new Saleſbury.
                  ¶Suth̄.
                  the cyte of Wyncheſter.
                  ¶Som̄s.
                  the towne of Ilcheſtr̄.
                  ¶Dors.
                  the towne of Dorcheſtre
                  ¶Deuon̄.
                  the cyte of Exceſtre.
                  ¶Cornub̄.
                  the towne of Luſtudyell
                  ¶Lodon̄.
                  the ſame cyte
                  ¶Briſtoll.
                  the ſame towne
                  ¶Quin
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      portus
                  the caſtell of Douer.
                  ¶Cuntas Couentr̄.
                  the ſame cyte.
                  ¶Suthampton.
                  the ſame towne.
                  ¶Cuntas Ceſtr̄
                  
                  the ſame towne.
               
            
            
               For puttīg away weares in the port of ſouthāptō 
                  Caplo v
               FOr aſmoche as the portes hauens ryuers crekes and aryuell of ſhyppes within this realme of Englond. and the coſtes of the ſame ben now of late greatly anoyed and hurte & decayed / and in eſpecyall the porte of Southampton the whiche byfore this tyme hath ben the greteſt hauen ſocour and reſceyte aſwell for marchauntes & ſhyppes of this reame of Englonde. as of Carrikes Galeys & other ſhyppes and marchauntes of other regyons and countrees there aryuyng and reſortyng to the profyte of oure ſouerayne lorde the kynge the greate encreaſe of the marchauntes of this londe and the comyn weele and comforte al the countre therto adioynyng the whiche is now latly greatly decayed / and is lyke ſhortely more to decaye by reaſon and occaſyon of dyuers and many weares and other engynes for fyſſhynge there made leuyed fyred and hadd bytwene a certayn place in the ſayd hauen called calſhord & another place in ye ſaide hauen called Redbrydge dyrectly / So yt by reaſon by ye ſayd weares & engȳs wtin few yeres. no ſhyp of grete burdō ſhall mow come or aryue in ye ſayd hauē wtout due & haſty remedy be purueyed in this behalf / For remedy wherof & for ye comyn wele of this reame of Englond & thencreaſe of the marchaūtes of ye ſame

The kȳge our ſoueraȳe lord bi thaſſēt of his lordes ſpyrituall & tēporall & ye cōȳs
                     •
                   thys preſent perl yament aſſembled and by auctoryte of ye ſame ordeyneth eſtablyſſheth & enacteth yt it be lawfull to euery man to abate plucke & take away alle and euery of the ſayd weares & engynnes and euery of theym at all tymes at thyr pleyſure being in the ſayd hauen bitwene the ſayd places called Calſhorde & Redbryge dyrectly wythout trouble lette or vexacōn of ony man and that noo man lette trowble vex hurte or ſue the pluckers vp takers away of the ſayd weares and engynnes or theym vpon payne of forfeiture of xl.li. of euery of theim that ſoo lettyth trowblyth ſueth vexith or hurtyth / And that yf ony perſone or perſones from henſforth make leuy fyxe or ſette ony weares or engynes for fyſſhynge ſtone tymber or erthe in the ſayd hauen dyrectly bytwene the ſayd places thenne he or they that ſo doo. ſhall forfeyte .C.li. the one halfe of eyther of the ſayd ſommes to be to the kynge oure ſouerayne lorde and that other halfe to hym or theym that wyll ſue in that behalfe by accōn of dette playnt or byll or in formacion in the kynges Eſchequer / And that the defendaunt in ſuche accōn playnt byll of informacyon be not eſſoyned nor ony proteccyon be alowed for hym nor be admitted to wage his lawe in that behalfe / And this acte to endure the ſpace of .xx. yeres nowe nexte enſuynge / 
            
            
               For packynge and payenge cuſtumes of wullen clothes Capitulo .vi.
               WHere as in the parlyament holden at weſtmyſter the twelfyth yere of ye reyne of kynge Edwarde the forthe late kynge of Englōde amōg other thinges it was ordeyned eſtabliſſhed and enacted that where ony wullen clothes were or ſhulde be packed in ony porte wythin this realme of Englonde and thenne to be caryed from thens to ony porte within this realme to be caried ouer the ſee. that thenne the ſame clothes ſo to be packed & caryed. ſhuld be packed in the preſence of the cuſtumers & countrollers of the porte where ye ſame clothes ſholde be ſoo packed / And that the cuſtumes and ſubſidies of the ſayd clothes due to the kynge ſholde be payed and content vnto the Collectours of the cuſtume within the ſame porte as in the ſayd acte playnly apperith. whiche acte for dyuers and many cauſes and cōſideracōns is thoughte hurtfull & preiudiciall aſwell vnto the kynge our ſouerayne lorde as to the marchauntes In conſideracōn wherof be it ordeined eſtabliſſhed & enacted by ye kynge our ſouereine lorde bi ye aſſēt of ye lordes ſpirituall & tēporall & ye Comȳs of this preſēt parliamēt aſſēblid & by auctorite of ye ſame. yt frō henſforth ye cuſtume and ſubſydee of alle wullen cloches to be ſhippyd or caryed ouer the ſee where ſoo euer they ben packed. ſhall be payed to the Cuſtumers of the porte or portes where ony ſuche clothes ſhall be lade or ſhypped or to theyr deputes. this acte or ony other acte here before made to the contrary notwythſtondynge.
            
            
               
               For punyſhment of ryottes Capitulo vii
               Prayen the comyns of this your londe in this preſent parliament aſſemblid that where for the grete ſurete reſt peas and tranqyllyte of your ſayd comyns true lyege men and ſubgettes enhabyted in this your realme dyuerſe and many good ſtatues actes & ordinaunces haue ben made in tymes paſt ordeyned and ſtablyſſhed to ſubdue and punyſſhe riottes for the vnlawfull reyſinge & ledinge of your people riottes routes and other vnlawfull aſſembles. wherby many euyll dedes Ieopardees perilles fere & drede to your ſubgettes haue growē and there vpon greate penaltees ſette vpon the ſayd ryottours and offenders as in dyuers remembred ſtatutes actes & ordinaunces in the dayes of your noble progenytours at ſeuerall tymes made ordeyned and prouyded more at large dooth and may appere / yet the ſame actes notwithſtondinge. ſome perſones not dredynge god. theyr ſouerayne lord ne ye punyſſhment of ye lawes made & had in this beal
                     •
                  e. oftymes aſwell by colour of ſuche offyces as they haue obteyned. as Receynours Stuardes and Bayllyfs of lordſhyps and other offyces. as by preuy reteynders by other promyſe couenaunt & otherwiſe and clamynge alſo dutie of theyr tenauntes & ſeruantes where none ſuche dutie is to goo with theym whan ſuche aſſemble ryotte or route ſhall be. And after the ſame dyuers of the ſayd ſeruauntes and perſones oft tymes retret and abſent theimſelfe by the agrement couyne and counſell of the ſayde mayſters and of the ſayd pryncipall ryottours Soo that they maye not be takē ne brought to anſwere to ye lawe as the lawes requyre / And yf ony inditementes be had. it ſhall be made vpon ſuche perſones as ſo retret and abſent themſelfe and no thynge founden ayenſt the ſayd pryncypall riottours in dyſceyte and frawde of the ſayd gode ſtatutes actes and ordinaūces thereof made to the grete courage and boldneſſe and comfort of the ſayd euyll doers. mooſt daunger Ieopardie and perill of your ſayd wel diſpoſyd ſubgettes and to the werſt enſample that therby maye enſue yf haſti remedy therin be not prouyded. It may therfore playſe your hyghnes of your mooſt louynge dyſpoſiciōn that ye bere & owe to the comen weele of this your londe and to the grete ſurete of your ſubgettes of the ſame. by the aduiſe of the lordes ſpirytuall and temporall and the comens in this preſent parliament aſſembled and by auctoryte of the ſame to do ordyne enacte & ſtabliſſh̄. that what ſo euer ꝑſōe or perſones wythin this your realme of what eſtate degree or condicōn he be. that hereafter vnlawfully reyſe aſſemble or lede youre people wythin this your realme wythoute your cōmaūdemēt or auctoryte of your lawe and cōmitte ony riott that thēne yf the party greued or ony other ꝑſōe in the kyngis behalfe cōplayne to the Iuſtices of the peas within the Coūtre where ſuche riotte is done or to oni of theim hauinge auctoryte to enquire of the ſame where ſuche ryotte and vnlawfull aſſemble ſhall be made by bylle cōteininge the riotte & the circumſtaunce of theſame and of what Towne Shyre. myſtery or condycyon euery of the perſones ayenſte whome the ſame complaynte be made / ys dwellynge. or elles.

yf the ſayd ryottours be endyted therof. thenne theru vpon the ſayd Iuſtices and euery of them haue auctoryte & power in the nexte generall Seſſyons of the peas within ye ſame Counte to be holden after the complaint ſo to them made or inditememt therof had afore the ſame iuſtice to doo make proclamacyon that the ſayd mayſter or mayſters pryncypall or princypalls leder or leders that vnlawfull cauſe the ſayd people to gader or ryſe. that they appere perſonelly at the next generall Seſſyons of ye peas after the ſayd proclamacyon ſoo made. & euery other perſone or perſones that were preſent and attendaunt vpon him or them by his or their commaundement procuryng or aſſent conteyned in ye ſayde proclamacyon at the ſayd ryotte rout and aſſemble and euery of them perſonelly to appere at the ſayd next Seſſyons of the peas next after ye ſayd proclamacyon to be holden within the ſayd Countye / At whiche day yf the ſayd mayſter or mayſters pryncipall or pryncypalles leder or leders or ony other or the forſaide offenders appere. then̄e he or they to be put to anſwere thereunto yf it ſeme the ſayd Iuſtyces reſonable and be putte to 
                     •
                  uffycient bayl by reconyſaunce before the ſayd Iuſtyces to appere perſonelly from leſſyons to Seſſyons vnto ye tyme that the complaynt he diſcuſſed. And yf he or they refuſe ſo to do then he or they be commytted to ward there to remayne tyll they wyll / And yf ony of ye perſones ayenſt whom ſuche complaynt or indytement is had or made dwellīg other Countee than in the ſame Countee where ſuche ryotte rout and aſſemble is made / That thenne the Iuſtyces to or a fore whome the ſame complaynt or indytementes is had or made / do ſend a tranſcrypte of the ſame complaynt or ī
                  dytement to ſome Iuſtyce of ye peas in ye Countye where ſuch perſone is dwellyng deſyrynge hym to cauſe proclamacyon to be made in ye next generall ſeſſyons of ye peas in that countee to be holden yt the ſame perſone or perſones appere at the next generall ſeſſyons of the peas in ye thyre where the ſayd ryotte is done next after the ſame proclamacyon to be holden. And yf the ſame perſone or perſones dwellyng in a forayne ſhyre appere. thenne lyke ordre to be had for hȳ or them ſoo apperyng as is afore ſpecyfyed for & to theym that ben dwellyng in the ſayd ſhyre where ye ſayd ryotte is ſuppoſed to be done or made / And yf the ſame perſone or perſones or ony of thē ayenſt whom ſuch proclamacōn is made in the Countye where the ſayd ryot is ſuppoſed to be done and they be dwellynge at the tyme of the ſame proclamacion makyng in the ſame County make defawte and appere not at the ſayd generall ſeſſyons to hym or them lymytted in the ſayd proclamacōn and eftſones after that make defaut and appere not at the nexte generall Seſſyons after that / Soo that lyke proclamacyon be made as is aforeſayd. ¶And yf ony of the ſayde ryottours ageynſte whome proclamacyon is made in a Foreyne ſhyre where they be dwellynge make defawte at the daye and place in the ſayd proclamacyon to theym lymytted thenne he or they in whether of he ſayd Shyres they dwelle that ſoo make defawte / to ſtō
                  de and be adiuged and conuycte vpon the ſame defawte of the ſayd ryotte and vnlawfull aſſemble yf he or they were therof conuycte by the due ordre of the

lawe / without he or they canne make ſuche lawfull excuſe as the ſayd Iuſtyces ſhall thynke reſonable by theyr dycreſcyon. And thereupon ſuche proceſſe to be awarded ayenſt them as is acuſtumed vpon condempnacōns of treſpace in your comen benche at the ſute of the partye. And that the ſayd Iuſtices of ye peaſe haue auctoryte and power to here & determyne ye reherced cauſes as well vpō byll before them as by enditementes and vpon the ſame byll or indytementes to procede & determyne ye ſame bi inqueſtes accordynge to the courſe of the comyn lawe. And the partye therby and therupon to ſtonde conuycte as perfytly as yf they were therupon conuycte by due proceſſe of the lawe. And yf ye ſayd mayſter or mayſters pryncypall or princypalles leder or leders or ony other afore reherced offender be conuycte vpon the premyſſes thenne he or they be commytted to pryſon. there to remayne and abyde without bayll or maynpryſe by ſuche tyme and ſpace as ſhall be thoughte reſonable by dyeſcrecion of ye ſayd Iuſtices. And then he or they departe out of pryſon / to pay theyr fyne ſeſſed after the dyſcrecyon of the ſayd Iuſtices his or their haueour & offences conſidered ¶And that it be enacted by the ſayd auctoryte that by the dyſcrecyon of ye ſayd Iuſtices and as they ſe nede euery of the ſayd mayſter or mayſters pryncipall or princypalles leder or leders and other the ſayd offenders ſo couicte be bound to ye kynges peaſe from henſforth in ſuche ſōme or ſōmes of money as ſhall be conſydered by the ſayd iuſtices / And the ſayd ſurete to ſtonde by the diſcrecion of the ſayd Iuſtyces And yf it be ſoo that the ſayd ryotte & vnlawfull aſſemble be committed wt the nomber of xl. perſones or aboue or with leſſe nomber thanne .xl. and that by the diſcrecyon of the ſayd Iuſtyce it be thought haynous. yt thenne yf the ſayde mayſter or mayſters pryncipall or princypalles. leder or leders yt haue appered and ſoo therof be conuycte. that thenne they remayne in pryſon vnto the tyme that they haue found ſuffycyent ſurety to appere afore the kynge and his counſell at a certayne day by the ſayd Iuſtyces to be lymytted at the whyche day or afore the keper of the gaol rolles of the ſayd recordes ſhall doo to be ſent vnder his ſeale the ſayd hole recorde of the conuyction to the kynge our ſouerayn lorde and his counſeyll to thentente that his hyghnes and his Counſell may awarde ſuche empryſonement and fines of the ſayd mayſter or mayſters pryncypall or pryncypalles leder or leders as by his highnes and by his ſayd Counſeyl ſhal be thought conuenyent / And yf the partye complaynaunt as is aforſayd can not proue the matter of his ſayd byll to be true then he to pay reſonable coſtes and damages of the partye vexed as ſhall be thoughte reſanable by dyſcrecyon of the ſame Iuſtyces / and they to make ayenſt the ſame complaynaunt not prouī
                  ge the matere of his ſayd byll to be true. ſuche proceſſe ayenſt hym for the ſayde coſtes and damages as is afore lymytted ayenſt the ſayd ryotours conuycte of the ſayd ryotte for the payment of theyr ſayd fynes. And yf the ſayd complaynaunt or complaynauntes haue not ſuffycyent wherof to reſtore the partye and partyes ſoo vexed or trowbled in fourme aforeſayd / that thenne he ymmedyatly be rommytted to ye comen gaole by ye ſayd Iuſtices there to remayn ye ſpace &

tyme as ſhall be thoughte by the ſayd Iuſtices conuenyent and reſonable. And yt this acte endure but vnto the nexte parliament / 
            
            
               For punyſhment of Vſurers Capitulo viij
               PRayēge ye comyns in this preſēt parliament aſſēbled yt wher in the parlyament holdenat weſtmyſtre the thrid yere of your mooſt noble reygne It was enacted ordeyned and eſtablyſſhed that of for and vpon bargeynes grounded in vſury colored by the meanes of newe cheueſaunce or eſchaunge contrary to the lawe of naturall Iuſtices to the greate diſpleſure of god and of our ſayd ſoueraine lorde and the comyn hurte of this his londe. that certayn puniſſhmentes and penaltees ſholde renne vpon the offenders in that behalfe as in the ſayd acte more at large is conteyned whiche acte was and is ſo obſcured derke & defuſe. that the true entente of the makers therof can not perfitly be vnderſtonde wherfore and for the playne explanacōn and declaracōn of vſury and penaltees to be hereafter excuted vpon thoffenders in the ſame / The kynge our ſoueraine lord by thaſſent and aduice of the lordes ſpirituall & temporall and the comyns in this preſent parlyamen aſſembled & by auctorite of the ſame ordeineth enactyth and eſtablyſſhth that all manere of perſone or perſones lenynge money to and for a tyme takynge for the ſame lone ony thinge more beſides or aboue ye money lente by way of contracte of couenaunt at the tyme of the ſame lone. Sauynge lawfull penaltees for none payment of the ſame money lent: and that all manere of perſone and perſones whiche hereafter ſel oni goodes catelles or marchaundyſes to ony perſone or perſones beinge in neceſſite. and the ſeller himſelfe or by his brokar or factour in that behalfe agayne bye the ſame goodes catelles or marchaundyſes of the ſame perſone to whom they were ſolde beynge in neceſſite of his brokar or factour in that behalfe within thre monethes after they ben ſolde fore a leſſe ſomme of money than they were ſolde for knowynge the ſame goodes ſoo bought ayen / afore by the ſame byer or byers to be ſolde after the fourme afore ſayd / And that euery perſone & perſones lenynge or takynge ony money to ony perſone or perſones to a certayne tyme and takyth londes renementes or ony hereditamentes or other boundes for ſurete perfyte and ſure repayment of his or theyr money lent at the tyme aſſygned wythout condycōn or auenture / and alſo at the tyme of the ſame lone or takynge of the ſayd money couenauntyth appoyntyth or contractyh couenaunten appoynten or contracten that he or they that ſoo lene or take moneye / ſhall haue the reuenues and profytes of the londes tenementes or hereditamentes of hym that ſoo boroweth or takyth money by a certayn tyme that thenne euery perſone hereafter vpon ony of the promyſſes conuycted. forfeyt the moyte of the value in money of the ſayd money goodes catalles marchaundyſes as is aboue ſayd ſoo ſolde or lente after ſuche value as they ben ſolde or lente for after ony fourme aforſayd. wherof the kynge ſhall haue the one moyte of the ſame forfeyture / and the partye that wyl ſue the other moyte / And yf noo man wyll ſue. thenne the kynge

haue the hole / And this ſute for the ſayd penalte and forfeyture to be aſwell at the kyngis ſute as ony other yt wyll ſue by informacōn in ony of the kynges Courtes of recorde. And ſuche proces to be had in the ſame. as is vſed in other acciōs of de
                     •
                  te at the comen law in the ſame Courtes. ¶Prouyded alway that in the courtes of Chauncery & Eſchequer they ſhall make ſuche proces as hath be vſed afore tyme Informacions afore theym cōmenced wherin the defendaunt ſhall not wage his lawe nor proteccyon ne eſſoine de ſeruyce le roy in the ſame alowable / And that the ſame acte and ordinaunce made the ſayd thirde yere and all thynge ther in conteyned be from henforth vtterly voyde and of none effecte Reſeruynge alweye to the ſpirituall Iuriſdiccōn theyr lawfull punyſſhmētes in euery cauſe of Vſury / 
            
            
               An acte concernyng thinhabitantes of North and South Tyndale Capitulo ix
               FOr aſmoche as thinhabytantes & dwellers within the lorde ſhypp̄ and boundes of North Tindale and South Tindale not on̄ly in theyr owne perſones but alſo often tymes accompanyed and confedred with Scottis auncyent enmyes to this realme. haue at many ſeaſons in tymes paſte commytted & doon and yet dayly and nyghtly committed and doo grete and hanoyous murdres treaſons robberies felonies depredacōns riottes and other grete treſpaces vpon the kynge our ſouerayne lordis true and faithfull lyege people and ſubgettes inhabitours and dwellers within the ſhires of Northumbrelonde Cumbre londe weſtmerlonde Examſhire the biſſhipriſhe of Duram & in a parte of York ſhire whyche treaſons murdres robberies felonies and other the promyſſes. haue not in time paſt in ony manere of fourme be punyſſhed after thorder & courſe of the comen lawe by reaſon of ſuche fraunchiſes as was vſed within the ſame while it was in the poſſeſſion of ony other lord or lordes. than our ſouerayne lordis. and thus for lacke of punyſſhment of the ſayd treaſons murders robberies felonies and other the premiſſes. the kyngis true and faythfull liege people and ſubgettes inhabiters and dwellers within ſhyres and places before reherced. can not be in ony manere of ſuretie of theyr bodies or goodes nother yet lye in their owne howſes but eyther to be murdred or take or caryed in to Scotlonde and there raunſonned to their greate diſtruccōn of body and goodes and vtter empoueriſſhynge for euer on leſſe due & haſti remedi be had & foūde in ye premiſ-Inconſideracōn wherof ye kynge our ſouerayne lorde for very zele & gracious fauour yt he berith to ye comē wele of thꝭ his realme not willīg his true & faithful lyege people ſubgettes to fayl of remedi ī ye p̄myſſes. hath ordeyned eſtablyſſhid & enacted by thaſſent of his lordes ſpūall and temporall and the comens of the ſame his realme ī thꝭ p̄ſēt ꝑliamēt aſſēbled & bi auctorite of ye ſame yt ye ſaid lordſhip & boūdes of north & ſouth tīdale now beīg ī his hōdes & allōdes & tenemētes wt ī ye ſam̄ ī whos poſſeſſiō ſo euer thei be & eueri ꝑte yer of ſtōd & be frō hēſforth gildable

and parte of the ſhyre of northhumbrelonde aforeſayd and no fraunchyſe ne fraunchyſed but that all manere of the kinges wryttes ſhall renne & all his offycers. as well the wardeyne or wardeyns of the Eſte and mydyll Marches of Englonde towardes Scotlonde theyr lietenaunde or lieutenauntes the Iuſtices of peas ſhyref Eſchetour Coroners Bayllyes and other officers and theyr deputies and euery of theym of and wythin the Countie of Northumbrelonde afore ſayd and all there warraūtes and preceptes ſhall be obeyed & of greate auctoryte in the lawe by reaſon of this acte within the ſayd lordeſhype and boundes of North and South Tyndale and in euery part therof as in oni other partie of ye ſayd ſhyre of Northumbrelonde. and ouer this yt no perſone or perſones of what eſtate degree or condicōn he or they be of that now hath or that hereafter ſhall haue auctorite or power ī his or theyr owne right or ony other mannis to dimitte or lete to ferme for yere or yeres terme of lyfe or at wyll ony londes or tenement within the lordſhip̄ & boundes of North & South Tyndale aforſayd. lete or dimitte to ferme for yere or yeres terme of lyfe at wyll ony londes or tenementes withī the ſayd lordſhip̄ & boundes aforſayd but that the leſſe or leſſes before he or they take or occupye beforce of ony ſuche leas ony ſuche londes and tenementes fynde gode and ſuficient ſurete atte the ieeſt two perſones hauyng londes and tenementes within the ſayd ſhyre of Northumbrelonde not beinge within the ſayd lordſhip and boundes of North & South Tindale to ye full yerely value of fourty ſhelynges ouer and aboue alle manere charges and repryces / by reconyſaunce to the kynge our ſouerayne lorde in .xx.li. before two at the leeſt of the Iuſtyces of the peas of the ſayd Shire of Northumbrelonde for the tyme beynge wherof one ſhall be of the Quo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . vpon this condicion that yf the ſayd leſſe or leſſees within .viii. dayes warnynge to theym or ony of theym perſonally or openly at his or their owne hous or in his or thyr paryſſh chirche yeuen by ony of the ſayd Iuſtices of the peas. the Shyref of the ſayd Countie of Northumbrelond and warden of ye Eeſt & myddell Marches for ayenſt ſcotlonde or his lietenaūt perſonally appere not before the ſame Iuſtices of the peas wardē or lietenaunte at ony ſeſſeſſion or ſeſſyons gaole delyuere warden court at ſuche place and dai within the ſayd ſhyre of Northumbrelonde. or day or dayes of trues wherſoeuer it. ſhall fortune theym to be aſſygned and as they or ony of theym ſhalbe therun to as before is rehercyd warned. there and thenne to anſwere alle ſuche treeſons felonyes murdres and treſpacers or attemptates contrary to the trues from henſforth by theym or ony of theym to be done / that thenne the ſayd ſomme of .xx.li. ſhall be forfeyted the one halfe therof to the kynge our ſouerayne lorde and ye other halfe to hym or theim yt wil ſue therfore yeuynge therof to ye Iuſtices before whom the reconyſaunce is or ſhall be taken after thexecucyon therof he had of is ſayd parte ſoo recouered .xl. ſhelynges. And that the ſayd Iuſtyers of peas afore whom the ſayd reconyſaunce is or ſhall be takē as befor is rehercyd and all other Iuſtyces of the peas within the ſayd ſhyre of Northumbrelonde for tyme beyn̄ge ſhall by reaſon of thys ſayd acte hauefull auctorite to enquire ther

of & to take preſentementes and Informacōns therupon & to awarde proces & execucōn of and for the ſame ſōme vpon ony preſentement or Informacōn made theron in lyke and as ample fourme as the kynges Iuſtices of his Benche ſhall or may doo of or for ony reconyſaunce taken afore theym forfeyted for the kepeynge of the kynges peas / And yf ony perſone or perſones after the feeſt of Eſter nexte comynge take vpon hym or theym to let or dymytte as before is reherced ony londes or tenementes within the ſayd lordſhyp or boundes of North and South Tyndale where noo ſuche ſuretie is before had and founde as before is reherced. that perſone & perſones that ſo letten or dimitten ſhall by this ſame acte for euery acar of grounde and euery meſe and manſyon or dwellynge place wythin the ſayd lordſhyppe and boundes aforeſayd by hym or theym ſoo letten or dymitte forfeyte .xl. ſhelynges. the one halfe to the kynge and the other to hym or theym that wyll ſue therfore / And that ye Iuſtyces of the peas of the ſayd Shire of Northumbrelonde for the tyme beynge / ſhall haue lyke auctoryte in all thinges concernynge this forfeyture as by this acte & ordynaunce is gyuen to they ym in reconyſaunce afore expreſſed. and that all manere of leaſſes dinuſſions made or to be made of ony londes or tenementes wythin the ſayd lordſhip and boū
                  des of North & South Tyndale for the whyche noo ſuche ſurete ſhall be had & founde at the ſayd feeſt of Eſter. and ſo forth as tofore is rehercid. be and ſtonde from thens forthwarde voyde & of none effect And yf ony perſone or perſones of what eſtate degree or condicōn he or they be of / take vpon hym or theim after the ſayd feeſt of Eſter to entre occupie dwell holde or inhite ony lōdes tentes or grounde whiche the ſayd lordeſhip and boundes of North and South Tyndale not beyng his owne inherytaunce in fee ſymple or in fee tayll without vnlawful or ſuffycient auctoryte and ſufficient ſuretie by hym or theym founde as before is reherced except he be a lorde ſpirituall or temporall of this realme / that he & they ſo doynge haue ympryſonement by the ſpace of a yere wythout bayll or maynpryſe and ſo to contynue tyll he haue founde ſuffycient ſurete to the kyng by reconyſaunce afore the Iuſtyces of peas of the ſayd Countie to be of good berī
                  ge ayenſt the kynge and all his liege people / 
            
            
               For leuyenge of the arrerages of the beneuolence laſte graū
                  ted Capitulo x:
               PRayen the comyns in thys preſent parlyament aſſembled that where dyuers and many of your ſubgetes ſeuerally graunted to your hyghnes dyuers ſommes of moneye of theyr free wylles and beneuolence for the deffence of this your realme towarde the charge and greate expences that your hyghnes ſuſteyned and bare for the ſayd deffence aſwell in your ſayd viage royall in the parties of Fraunce beyonde the ſee as on this ſyde in and for abowte the ſame whyche viage your ſayd hyghnes toke vpon you in your mooſt royall perſonne 
                     •
                  o the grete Ieoperdye and labour of the ſame aſwell for ye ſayd defence of thys

your ſayd realme as for the ſuerty profyte weele & commodite of vs all youre true lyege men and ſubgettes enhabited in the ſame / of which ſommes of money dyuers your ſayd ſubgettes inhabyted in the ſame of which ſommes of money dyuers your ſayd ſubgettes full louyngly haue made to you true payment accordyng to theyr grauntes and other many ſeuerall ſummes of money by dyuers your ſubgettes to you in that partye graunted as yet remayn not content ne payed. part wherof reſte in the hondes of the ſayd grauntours and parte in the hondes of the Commyſſyoners Collectours & receyuours in that party aſſignyd for the leuy rerynge and kepynge of the ſame whiche is not only to the damage loſſe and hurte of your ſayd hyghnes / but alſo to the murmure grudge & myſcontentynge of ſuche your ſayd ſubgettes as hauen made their ſayd paymentes in that behalfe / Wherfore may it pleaſe youre ſayd hyghnes by the aduyſe and aſſent of your lordes ſpyrytuall and temporall and the Comyns in this preſent parlyament aſſembled and by autoryte of the ſame / to ordeyne enacte and eſtablyſſh that proclamacyon be made in euery Shyre towne and hundred within this your reame / that euery perſone & perſones whiche haue not cō
                  tente and payed the ſommes of money by them graunted to your hyghnes for the cauſes remembred / That ſuche Commyſſyoners Collectours Receyuours & other perſones deputed to receyue the ſame that they do make payment therof within thre monethes nexte after the ſayd proclamacyon made to the ſayde Commyſſyoners Collectours Receyuours or other perſones that herafter ſhall be therunto deputed or aſſyngned by your highnes by your letters patentes vnder your greate ſeale in lyke wyſe to be proclamed / And that the ſayd Commiſſyoners haue auctoryte and power to make proceſſe to take euery ſuch perſone or perſones as ſoo ſhall make defaute of payment by his body. and the ſame to commyt to the comyn gaole there to remayne and abyde without bayll or maȳ
                  npryſe vnto the tyme he hath payed his ſayd dutyes or ellys-fynde ſuffycyent ſuerty for the payment of the ſame to the ſayd Cōmyſſioners agreable / And yf ony ſuche perſone that hath made payment of his ſayd duty graunted. be deceſſed. that thenne the goodes and catayles of hym deceſſed beyng in the hondes of his executures of admiſtratours not admynyſtred be charged and chargeable to the ſayd payment / And that the ſayd Commyſſyoners haue lyke auctoryte & power to doo ordeyne and awarde proceſſe for the leuy of the ſame / as the Barons of the kinges Eſchequer doo and may doo for the kynges dutyes reſtynge afore theym of recorde in the ſayd Eſchequer ¶And the ſayd Commyſſyoners Collectoures or Receyuours afore this tyme therunto deputed or that hereafter for and to the ſame ſhall be deputed hauyng and takynge the Recept of the ſame your money or ony perell therof. be ſeuerally countable for the porcyons by theym ſeuerall receyued before your Treſorer of your warres that was by you aſſygned in your ſayd vyage royall or ony other perſone or perſones that herafter by your hyghneſſe ſhalbe therunto deputed and aſſygned of and for all ſuche ſommes of money as they ſeuerly haue receyued or ſhall come to theyr hondes before ſuche

Auditours as by your hyghnes ſhall be aſſygned in that partye. And yf ony of the ſayd Commyſſyoners Collectours or Receyuours come not to make theyr accomptes att ſuche daye and place as ſhall be lymytted in your pryue ſeale to theym dyrected in that partye that thenne vpon Certyfycat of the delyuere of ye ſayd wryttes or pryue ſeales made by hym that the ſame delyuered vpon his othe vnto the Chaunceller of Englond for the tyme beyng. the ſayd Chaunceller for the ſame tyme beyng haue auctoryte and power to make Commyſſyons vnder your greate ſeale to certayne perſones by his diſcrecyon to be lymytted and choſen to take the bodyes of the ſayd perſones that ſoo ſhall make defawte and theym to commyte to warde on leſſe thenne he make before the ſayd Treſorers or Commyſſioners ſuch excuſe as to them ſhall ſeme reſonable. there to remayne tyll they haue made theyr accomtes of and for the premyſſes and ſatyſfyed content and payed the dutie by theim dewe vpon theyr ſayd accomptes Treſorer of your warres or to ſuche other perſone or perſones to your vſe as your grace ſhall depute and aſſygne in that partye to receyue the ſame / ¶And 
                     •
                  uer this be it enacted by the ſayd auctoryte. that yf ony trauers fortune to be 
                     •
                  ytwene the ſayd Commyſſyoners afore this tyme aſſigned to receyue the kyn
                  
                     •
                  es ſayd duties collectours and the ſayd grauntoures of and for payeng & not 
                     ••
                  yenge receyuynge or not receyuynge of the ſayd ſomme or ſommes of money or ony parte therof that thenne yf the ſayd grauntours ſhewe acquytaunce writynges bylles or byllettes wherby it may appere afore the Commyſſyoners hereafter to be aſſygned the Commyſſyoners or Collectours afore this tyme aſſygned in fourme reherced haue receyued the ſomme or ſommes of money or ony parte therof that ſhall be in trauers / or that the ſayd grauntours offre to brȳ
                  ge two wytneſſe or mo that wyll wytneſſe and teſtefye the ſayd payment or that ony grauntour or grauntours denye the graunte of ony ſuche ſomme or ſōmes of money or ony part therof of theym demaunded. that therupon the ſayd commyſſyoners herafter to be aſſygned. haue auctoryte and power to here the hole matere euydence wrytynges witneſſe and proues concernynge the ſayd trauers and denyenge of the ſayd grauntes and thenne to charge and diſcharge euery of the ſayd perſones by theyr dyſcrecyons as they ſhall ſeme beſt / and the ſame charge or dyſcharge to binde and diſcharge euery of the ſayd partyes ayenſt ye kynges highnes as yf it were adiuged before ye Auditours aſſygned by due oryginal in ony of ye kȳges courtes of record bytwene party & partye in accyon of accomptes or ellis that the kynge were playntyf in the ſayde accyon of accōpte ¶Be it alſo ordeyned by the ſayd auctoryte that the ſayd Commyſſyoners he
                  
                     •
                  eafter to be aſſygned by ye kyngs hyghnes / ſhal by theyr dyſcrecyon vpō their accompte and full payment made of all ſommes of money by theym receyued or to be receyued by the Collectour or receyuours of the ſayd ſōmes of beneuolence ſhal by theyr-dyſcrecyōs alow vnto ye ſayd receyuours & Collectours / ſuch theyr reſonable coſtes & rewardes as they for ye gaderȳg of ye ſaid ſōmes haue ſuſtened / Prouyded alway yt this act ſhal not extēd to charge ony heyre of ony man that hath afore tyme graūted ony ſomme of mony by way of his beneunlence
            
            
               
               An acte concernynge takynge of apprentyſes in the Cyte of Norwyche Capitulo Vndecimo
               PRayen the comens in this preſent parliament aſſembled that where the Cyte of Norwyche whiche is an auncyent Cyte. is greatly decayed. the eſpecyall cauſe wherof is for aſmoche as there is a ſtatute made at weſtmeſtre the ſeuenth yere of the regne of kynge Herry the fourth conteynynge amonge other thynges. that noo man nor woman ſhall putt ſone or doughter to be apprentyſe within ony Cyte or towne within the realme but yf they haue londes or rentes to the value of .xx. ſ. at the leeſte by the yere and that to be teſtyfyed vnder the Seales of two Iuſtices of peas where the ſayd childe was borne. by force of whiche ſtatute many and dyuers greate vexacions trowbles & loſſes haue be done to the Cyteyzins of the ſayd Cyte aſwell for the receyuynge of theyr owne children as other to be theyr apprentyſes wherby the mooſt ſubſtancial crafte in the ſayd Cite callyd wortedeweuers & Clothyers by whiche craftes ye weele of the ſayd Cyte hath and ſholde be mayntened ſupported and contynued amōge other dyuers craftes there vſed ben greately decayed. by reaſon whereof the yonge people of the ſayd Cyte ben gyuen to ydylneſſe vyces and other dyuers myſgouernaunce. And yf noo remedy herein be had / it is lyke to be the vtter dyſtruccōn of the ſayd Cyte. wherfore pleas it your hyghnes of your mooſt benynge grace in conſideracō of the premiſſes bi thaſſent of the lordes ſpirituall & temporall & the comyns in this preſent parlyament aſſembled & by auctorryte of the ſame / to enacte / ordeyned & eſtablyſſhed that the ſayd Citeyzyns & euery of theym for euer from henſforth ſhall be at theyr lybertees to receyue and to take to theyr apprentyſes the ſone or doughter of ony perſone or perſones whiche woll put theyr ſayd ſones or doughters to be apprentyſes in ye ſayd Cyte the ſtatute aforſayd and the paynes in the ſame conteyned not withſtonddyng. And that they and euery of theym for euer from henſforth ſhall be forpriſed and excepte out of euery punyſſhment and hurte conteyned in the ſayd ſtatute / ¶Moreouer where in the ſayd Cyte in tyme paſte hath of longe tyme be vſed. that there ſholde no mā take vppō hym to ſhere worſtedes called tēyerdes Stamyns ne other worſtedes but yf he had be apprentyſe to thoccupacyon or ſherynge of worſtedes by the ſpace of .vij. yeres. So that he myght haue the knowlege and cunnynge in yt crafte how be it now of late many and dyuers perſones aſwell alyence ſtraungers as other foreyns not dwellyng nor inhabyted haue within your ſayd Cyte by ſuportacyon and mayntenaunce of dyuers perſones inhabitauntes in the ſayd Cyte for theyr ſynguler lucre. take vpon theym the occupacyon of ſheryng of worſtedes and ſtamyns which haue not the ſyght nor connynge in that occupacyon nor haue be apprentyſe to the ſame by whome grete hurtes and dyuers loſſes haue be for the defawte of cunnynge by cuttyng and other wyſe of the ſayd worſtedes / to the owners and other your ſubgettes in this your realme. infamy alſo and ſclaunder aſwell to thoccupacyons

of worſtedes and worſtede ſhermen / as to the marchauntes whiche put theym ſo hurt and kytte in the ſheryng to ſale / And yf redy remedy be not had in thyſe premyſſes and reformacyon bothe the ſayd occupacyon of worſted makyng and alſo of worſted ſheryng whiche god forbyd / is lykely to be diſtroyed for lacke of good polycy and ordre / Wherfore it may pleas your highnes by thauctoryte aforeſayd for the comyn wele of your marchauntes and other your ſubgettes of this your realme / and for the conſeruacyon and ſuſteynyng of the ſayd occupacyon of worſtedes and worſted ſheryng to enacte ordeyne and eſtablyſſhe. that from henſforth no man ſhall take vpon hym to ſhere worſtedes wythin the ſayd Cyte but yf he hath be apprentyſe to the ſayd occupacion of worſtede ſheryng by the ſpace of .vii. yere or ſuche as the mayſters of the ſayd occupacyon wt
                  in the ſayd Cyte for the tyme beyng approuyng theyr cunnyng with the aduyſe of the Mayre for the tyme beyng wyll admytte. And they that take vpon them the contrary & the mayntenours of hym or them ſoo myſdoyng as afore is ſayd eche of them to forfeyt for euery defawt .xx. ſhelynges halfe to you gracyous and ſouerayn lorde. and halfe to the ſayd Mayre and mayſters of the ſayd occupacyon of worſtede ſheryng for that tyme beyng / And yt noo man inhabitaunt in the ſayd cyte cytezyn or other beyng no ſhereman kepe ony ſherman of worſtedes wythin his hous after the feſte of Eſter next comyng vnder the payne of xl. ſ. as oft as he be in defaute in ye ſame / thone half to. be enployed to you our ſouerayn lorde / and thother halfe to the ſayd mayre & mayſters of the ſayd occupacyon of ſheryng of worſted And that the ſayd mayſters of the ſayd occupacyon of ſherynge of worſted haue fre ſerche of the ſayd crafte of worſted ſherynge in euery place aſwell wythin the dwellyng places of ſhermen dies and calenderers of the. ſame worſtedes & other inhabitauntes in the ſayd cyte & precyncte of the ſame. and yf ony cytezin or inhabitaunt of the ſayd cyte. denye the ſayde wardens of worſted ſheryng due ſerch or go contrary to this prouyſyon & ordinaunce / ſhall forfayte ye ſomme. of .xl. ſ. for euery defawte / the moyte therof to you ſouerayn lord and thother moyte to the forſayd Mayre and mayſters of the ſayd ocupacyon / The ſayd paynes to be leuyed after the fourme and ordynaū
                  ce purueyed for the correction of the crafte & occupacyon of worſted weuers wt
                  in the ſayd Cyte / Prouyded alway that the ſayd occupacyon of worſted ſherȳg ſhall make or do to be made none ordynaunce concernyng the ſayd occupacyon among themſelf but ſuche as the mayre for that tyme being with his brederne aldermen ſhall thynke neceſſery and proufytable to the kynges ſubgettes.
            
            
               For wryttes to be gyuen & lerned counſeyl to be aſſigned to the pore peple without payēg ony mony therfore Caplo xij
               PRayen the comens in this preſent parlianient aſſembled that where the kynge oure ſouerayn lorde of his moſte gracyous dyſpoſycyon wylleth and entendeth indyfferente Iuſtyce to be had

and mynyſtred accordyng to his comen lawes to all his true ſubgettes as well to the pore as ryche which pore ſubgettes be not of habylyte ne power to ſue accordynge to the lawes of this londe / For the redreſſe of Iniuries and wronges to them dayly done aſwell concernynge theyr perſones theyr Inherytaunces as other cauſes. For remedy wherof in the behalfe of the pore perſones of this londe not able to ſue for theyr remedy after the cours of the comyn lawe / Be it ordeyned and enacted by your hyghnes and by the lordes ſpyritual & temporal and the comyns in thys preſent parlyament aſſembled and by auctoryte of the ſame / that euery pore perſone or perſones whiche haue or herafter ſhall haue cauſe of accōn or accōns ayenſt ony perſone or perſones wythin this realme. ſhal haue by the dyſcrecōn of the Chaunceler of this realme for ye tyme beyng wrytt or wryttes orygynal & wryttes of (ſub pena) accordynge to the nature of theyr cauſe therfore noo thinge payeng to your hyghnes for the ſeales of the ſame nor to ony perſone for the wrytyng of the ſame wrytte or wryttes to be herafter ſued. And that the ſayd Chaunceler for the ſame tyme beyng ſhall aſſygne ſuche of ye clerkes whiche ſhall do and vſe the makyng & wrytyng of ye ſame wryttes to wryte theſame redy to be ſealed / And alſo lerned counſeyll & attorneys for ye ſame without ony rewarde takyng therfore / And yf the ſayd wrytte or wryttes be retourned / yf it be afore the kynge in his benche / the Iuſtyces there ſhall aſſygne to the ſame pore perſone or perſones counſell lerned by theyr dyſcrecyons whiche ſhall geue theyr counſeyls no thynge takynge for the ſame and in lykewiſe theſame Iuſtyces ſhall appoynt attourney & atturneys for the ſame pore perſone or perſones & all other offycers requylyte and neceſſary to be had for ye ſpede of the ſayd ſutes to be had & made whiche ſhall doo theyr dutyes withoute ony rewarde for theyr counſeyls helpe and beſynes in the ſame and the ſame lawe and ordre ſhall be obſerued and kept of all ſuche ſutes to be made afore ye kinges Iuſtyce of his comen place and barons of his Eſchequer / And all other Iuſtices in courtes of recorde where ony ſuche ſutes ſhalbe.
            
            
               That horſes ſhal not be cōueyd out of the lōd without the kīges lycēce: nor maares ouer the pryce of vi ſhelynges viij pence: Capitulo xiiij
               FOr aſmoch as many horſes & mares of ye brede of this lōde now of late haue be caried & cōueyd out of ye ſame ī to ye parties of beyōd yeſe which cauſeth not only ye ſmaler nōbre of gode horſes to be wtī this realm for ye defēce therof but alſo ye grete & good plēte of ye ſam̄ to be ī ye ſayd ꝑties beyōde ye ſe yt in tymes paſte were wont to be withī this lond / & ouer yt the pryce of euery of them to be gretly enhaūced hereto ye loſſe & noyaūce of al ye kȳgꝭ ſubgettes wtī ye ſam̄. For remedy wherof it be ordeyned enacted & eſtabliſſhed by ye kȳg our ſouerayn lord by ye aduyſe of ye lordꝭ ſpūal & tēporal & ye comīs ī thꝭ p̄ſēt ꝑliamēt aſſēbled & bi auctoryte

of the ſame / that from henſforth noo manere of perſone ne perſones cary or conuey ony hors out of this londe without the kynges ſpeciall licence vpon paine of forfeyture of the ſame / Or ony maare aboue ye value of .vi ſhelynges .viii. pence without the kynges ſpecyall lycence vppon the ſayd payne of forfeyture of the ſame maare / the owner therof or his deputie receyuynge for the ſame maare .vi. ſhelynges .viii pence at the tyme of the ſeaſire vpon the ſayd forfeiture or elles it to be not forfeite and at ye tyme of ſeaſire of the ſayd maare or maares they ſhall be praiſed by ye heed officers of the towne where ony ſuche maare is taken and there openly to be ſolde to the beſte price / and the halfe deale of ye ouer pryce of her beynge aboue .vi. ſhelynges .viii pence / to be to ye kynge and the other halfe to hym that ſoo ſeiſeth. and the kynges parte therof to be delyuered to the Cuſtumer of the ſayd porte / And yt no manere perſone ne perſones hereafter ca
                  
                     •
                  y or conuey ony maare or maares out of this londe except euery of the ſayd maares ſoo caried be of the aege of iii yeres at ye leeſt and not ouer the price of .vi. ſhelynges .viii. pence payenge to the kynge for euery of theym not aboue ye value of .vi ſhelynges .viii. pence ſoo to be caryed or conueyed in the ſame porte. ſuche cuſtumes as hath be for maares before vſed. And that for euery maare of more 
                     •
                  alue hereafter by ye kynges lycence after the fourme aforeſayd conueyd or ca
                  
                     •
                  ed beyonde the ſee / the owner therof or his deputie aſſygne or ſeruaunte ſhall paye .vi. ſhelynges .viii. pence for the cuſtume of the ſame before it be ſhipped vnder ye payne of forfeyture of euery maare ſo ſhypped or they bē cuſtumed / ¶And ouer yt be it enacted yt yf ony perſone at the porte wyll geue for ony of the maares ſoo to be caryed .vii. ſhelynges. yt it be lawfull to hym ſoo geuynge and payenge the ſayd .vii. ſhelynges to take the ſayd maare yf ſhe be not afore taken by the kynges offycer nor the kynges lycence be not in the behalfe aforſayd for the ſame maare to be caryed obteyned / ¶Prouided alway yt it ſhall be lefull to euery perſone or perſones beynge Deynezyns hereafter to cary hors beyonde ye ſee ye kinges lycence in yt behalf not obteyned for their owne vſes not in tendynge at the tyme of the ſhyppynge of the ſame nor thenne fully purpoſed to ſelle hym and that entente to be knowen by the othe of hym that ſhall do ſhyppe the ſame horſe taken before ye cuſtumer or ſercher of ye ſame porte this acte notwithſtōding
            
            
               That ſtraungers made deynezens ſhall paye cuſtume & ſubſidiees as ſtraungers Capitulo xiiii
               WHere the kynge our ſouerayne lorde is greatly dyſceued in his cuſtumes and ſubſidies bi marchauntes ſtraungers ſuche as the kynge our ſouerayne lorde hath grauntyd by his letters patentes to be deynezyns and to paye none other cuſtumes ne ſubſidies for theyre marchaundyſe Inwarde & outward but as a deinezinge vnder colour where of thei cuſtume not all oōli their owne marchaundyſe vnder the fourme aforeſayd but alſo they colorably entre in to the Cuſtumers bokes the marchaundyſe of other

ſtraungers callynge & ſayenge the ſayd godes of other marchauntes to be the godes of theym ſo made deneſins / to the grete loſſe & defraude to ye kyng our ſouerayne lorde / wherfore be it enacted by ye kynge our ſouerayne lorde the lordes ſpūall & temporall & the comyns of this preſente parlyamente aſſēbled & by auctorite of the ſame that all marchauntes ſtraungers & other yt be made deynezins the kyngys letters patentes or otherwiſe / peye from henſforth ſuche cuſtumes & ſubſidees for theyr godes & marchaundyſe Inwarde and outwarde as they ſholde haue payed yf ſuche letters patētes & graūtes had neuer to theim be made.
            
            
               Ayenſt vntru demeanyng of Shyrefs & their offycers in holdyng theyr countes Capitulo xv:
               WHere as grete extorcōn is yerely vſed and had within dyuers Countes within this realme of Englonde by the ſubtyltee & vntrue demeanoure of Shyrefs vnderſhyrefs Shyre clerkes or ony other offycers holdynge or kepynge the Countees in the name of a Shyref. that is to ſaye yf ony man afferme a playnt before the ſhyrefs in the coūties / ye ſayd ſhyrefs vnderſhirifs or his ſhyre clerke or byfore ony other of the ſayd offycers wyll entre or cauſe to be entre in to theyr bokes in the ſame playntyfs name dyuers and many plaintes both of dette treſpace and couenaunte at theyr playſure and vnknowyng to the ſayd playntif in whoos name the ſayd playntes ben affermed / to thentente that yf the defendaunte appere not at euery ſhire daye or courte hauynge the ſame playnt he ſhall leſe for his defawte made at euery playnt .iiij. d / where dyuers tymes by couyne bytwene the ſayd Shyrefs vnderſhirefs ſhire clerkes and the other forſayd offycers / the ſayd defendauntes beynge neuer attatched ſūmone nor warned accordinge to the due fourme of the comen lawe / wherfore the ſame parties ſo put in ſuyte haue no knowlege of ony ſuche ſute had agayn them and ouer that the ſame ſhyrefs vnderſhyrefs ſhire clerkes wyll cauſe dyuers playntes to be take in the names of ſuche perſones that are not in playne lyf / where the ſayd defendaunt ſhall haue lyke loſſe as is before reherced / So that by the vnlawfull demeanour of the ſayd ſhirefs vnderſhyrefs ſhyre clerkes for tyme beynge & the bayllyfs of the hundredes for theyr defawte and neclygence in theyr ofices and couyne bytwene the ſayd ſhyrefs vnderſhyrefs ſhyre clerkes and other of the forſayd offycers cauſeth the amercyamentes to be in one yere after the bokes be ingroced to a monute to greate and importunable ſōmes of money whiche ſōmes of money ben yerely leuyed of the poore comens in the ſayd Counties by the ſhyrefs vnderſhyrefs & ſhyre clerkes and other deputies beyng of none ſubſtaunce neyther of haucour / whiche deputees takyth and leuyeth more bi extorcōn than is conteyned to theyr eſtrettes to the expreſſe pyllage and empoueryſſhinge of the ſayd Comens / ¶Be it therfore enacted ordeyned & eſtablyſſhed by the kynge our ſouereyne lorde & by thaſſent of ye lordes ſpirituall and tēporall & the comens in this preſēt parliamēt aſſēbled & bi auctorite of ye ſame yt
                  
no ſhyrefs vnderſhyrefs ſhire clerkes hereafter nother ony perſone in theyr names nor by theyr cōmaundemēt ſhall take & entre no playntes in to theyr bokes in no mannes name / on leſſe the parti plaintif be in his proper perſone preſente in the courtes or elles by a ſuffycient attorney or deputie yt is knowen to be of good name & dyſpoſicion and that the ſame parti plaintif ſhall fynde pledges to purſue his ſayd playnt ſuche perſones as. are knowen there in that counties / and that the parti playntif ſhall haue but one playnt for one treſpace or contracte / And yf the ſayd ſhyrefes vnderſhirefs ſhire clerkes take & entre or cauſe to be entre ony moo playntes than the playntif ſuppoſith yt he hath cauſe of accōn ayenſt the defendaunt / yt thenne the ſayd ſhyrefs vndſhirefs ſhire clerkes yt dooth entre or cauſe to be entre ony ſuche playntes contrary to the ſayd prouyſion & ordinaunce / ſhall forfeit for euery defawte .xl. ſ. the one halfe therof to be had to the vſe of our ſayd ſouerayne lorde the kynge / and the other parte to hym or theym that woll ſue and proue the ſame matere by accion of dette or Informacōn in the Eſchequer / And ouer that the Iuſtice of peas in the ſame Coū
                  ties and euery of them ſhall haue auctorite vpon complaynte made by the partie ſoo vnlawfully greuyd to examyne the ſayd ſhirefs vnderſhirefs or ſhire clerkes and playntifs. And yf ye ſayd Iuſtices of peas or one of theym fynde by theyr examynacion defawte in the ſayd ſhirefs vndſhirefs or other ſhire clerkes in entryng of the ſayd playntes dyſceyfully for his or their auauntage as is before reherced contrari to this preſent acte / yt thenne ye ſayd ſhirefs vndſhirefs & ſhire clerkes ſhall be conuicte & atteint of the ſame offence without ferder enquerre or examinacion and that he ſhall forfeit vpon the ſame examynacōn .xl. ſ. to ye vſe of our ſouerayne lorde the kynge for euery defawte / And ye ſayd Iuſtyces of peas that ſo / ſhall take the examynacion ſhall certefie the ſame examinacion within a quarter of a yere in to the kynges Eſchequer vpon payne of .xl. ſ. And ferdermore that the ſayd ſhirefs and vndſhirefs and ſhire clerkes make or cauſe to be made a ſufficient preſept to the bayllyfs of the hundredes to attache ſummone or warne the defendauntes that are ſo in ſute to appere and anſwere to the ſayd playntes / And yf there be ony defawte in the ſayd bayllyfs of ye hundredes in warnynge of the ſayd defendaunce to appere and anſwere to the ſayd playntes commended agayne theym theyr Courtes in executinge their ſayd offyce / that thenne the ſame bayllyfs ſhall forfeyt for euery defawte vnto our ſouerayne lorde the kynge .xl. ſ. and to be atteynt and conuicte therof by lyke examynacion of ye Iuſtices of peas or euery of theym as before is reherced / And that the ſame ſhirefs vnderſhyrefs ſhyre clarkes and theyr deputies for the time beynge ſhall make none eſtrettes to leuy the ſayd ſhyrefs lamercyamentes vntyll ſuche tyme that two Iuſtyces of peas wherof one ſhall be of the Quo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   haue had the vew and ouerſyght of theyr bokes / And that the eſtrettes be endē
                  ted betwyx the ſayd Iuſtyces of peas and the ſayd ſheirefs and vnderſhyrefs and ſealed wyth theyr ſeales / the one part to remayne wyth the ſayd Iuſtyces and the other part wyth the ſayd. Shyrefs or vnderſhyrefs to the entente vnderſtonde yf ony dyſceyte be or vntrue demeanynge in

theym in makynge of theyr bokes. And that thoſe perſones ſhalbe gaderers of the ſame amercyamentes as bayllyfs or other offycers be ſworne by the ſayde Iuſtices that they take nomore money than is forfeyted & conteyned in the oſtreytes ſealed with the ſeales of the ſayd Iuſtyces of peas vpon the ſame payne of forfeyture as before is reherced. thereof the ſame gaderers to be conuicte by examynacōn of ye Iuſtices of peas ſhal be appoȳted / & named at the general Seſſyons after the feeſt of ſaynt Mychell tharchaungel by hym that is Cuſtos Roculo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   of the ſayd Countees or els by the eldeſt of the Quo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   in his abſence to haue the ouerſyght and countrollement of the ſayd Shyrefs vnderſherefs & ſhyre clerkes and other of the ſayd offycers and of the ſayd Shirefs amerciamē
                  tis / and the ſayd Iuſtices of peas vpon ſubgeſtyon or Informacon of the parti ſo greuyd ſhall make lyke proces as in an accyon of treſpace agayne the ſayde Shirefs vnderſhyrefs or ſhyre clerkes and other yt forſayd offycers myſdemeanyng as before is reherced for to appere before them to anſwere to the ſayd ſuggeſtyon or informacyon.
            
            
               For kepynge the watche in Caleys Capitulo xvi
               WHere kyng Edwarde the thyrde vpon the wynnȳg of ye towne of Caleys eſtablyſſhed & made dyuers good ſtatutes ordynaunces and lawes wt in the ſame towne for the ſure & ſaaf kepyng of ye ſame. & ther vpon for the ſame entente gaue dyuers tenementis and fayr places buylded there / to dyuers lordes & noble men of his army frely to theym and theyr heyres without ony rentes or charges yeldyng for the ſame. ſaue only the fyndynge of certayne watches limytted to euery of the ſayd places for the ſure kepyng of the ſame towne to thentent ſpecyally that the ſayd watches the ſayd lordes & honorable men ſhulde ye better & more ſure & fermly be kepte and mayntened / And ſoo it is now yt the owners of the premyſſes cōſyder not theyr ſayd charges ne doo not bere ye ſayd watche by theym due as is aforſayd by meane wherof the Burgeyſes of the ſayd towne for the ſuerty of the ſame haue ben many yeres and yet nyghtly ben fore charged to theyr greate importable loſſe whyche they canne nor may contyue & ſuſteyne without the kynge our ſouerayn lorde prouyde for the releif of the ſame towne. For the remedy wherof the kyng or ſouerayne lord by thaſſent thaduyſe of the lordes ſpyrytual and temporall and the comens of this preſent parlyament aſſembled & by auctoryte of the ſame ordeyneth and enactith that who that hath ony fre holde within the town of Calays out of the whyche ony yerly charge is goynge for the ſure kepynge of the ſayd town for watche or otherwyſe / that hereafter ceaſſes in doynge of the ſayde charge by the ſpace of a yere and a day / that then the ſayd fre hold be ſeyſed in to the kynges hōdes he to haue it to hym and his heyres and duryng the tyme it be in the hondes of ye kynges hyghnes The Treſorer of Calays take the proufytes therof to the kȳ
                  ges vſe and bere the charges yerely goynge out of the ſayd free holde towardes the ſayd kepynge of the ſayd towne as be fore that tyme it was accuſtumed

to be are yf the ſayde free holde wylle bere the ſayde charge. ¶And in lyke wyſe be charged the kynges Cōmyttes or hys patentis for the kepynge of the ſayd town as afore is ſayd / And for defaute of the doyng of the ſame by the ſpace of a yere & a day the ſayd tenementis ettſones to be ſeaſſed as is aforſayd. & ſo from tyme as oft as the ſayde charge is not content ne payed by the ſayd tyme / and duryng the tyme the ſayd tenementes be in the hondes of the kyngys highnes (And yf the ſayd Treſorer of Calays paye not the ſayd charge within a yere and a day / that then the ſayd Treſorer forfeyt the dowble value of the ſame to the kyngys hyghneſſe yf the reneues be able to fynde the ſayd watche
            
            
               A yenſte dyſtroyenge of pertryches and feſauntes wyth vnlawfull engynes Capitulo xvii
               ITem for aſmoche as dyuers perſones hauyng lytyll ſubſtaūce to lyue vpon vſe many tymes as well by nettes ſnares and other engynes to take & diſtroy feſauntes & pertryches vpon that lordſhyppes maners lond
                     •
                  s tenementys of dyuers owners poſſeſſioners of the ſame wtout lycence conſent or a grenent of the ſame owners or poſſeſſiones / by the whiche the ſame owners and poſſeſſyoners leſe not only theyr pleaſure & diſporte yt theyr frendes and ſeruaū
                  tes ſhuld haue about tha wkyng and huntyng and takynge of the ſame / but alſo they leſe the prouffyte & auayle that by thoccacyon ſhold growe to theyr houſholde to the grete hurt of all lordes and gentylmen and other hauynge ony grete lyuelode within this realm / Wherfore it is ordeyned & enacted by the auctoryte of this preſent parlyament that it ſhall not be lefull to ony perſone of what cō
                  dycion he be to take or cauſe to be taken ony feſauntes or partryches by nettes ſnares or other engynes out of his owne waren vpon the fre hold of ony other perſone without thaſſent aggrement and ſpecyall lycence of the owner or poſſeſſyoner of the ſame vpon payn of forfeyture of .x.li. the one half therof to be to the party that wyll ſue for the ſame by accyon of dette or by byll or otherwyſe And the other therof to the owner or poſſeſſyoner of the ſayd grounde vpon yt which the ſayd feſauntes and pertryches be ſo taken / ¶Alſo it is ordeyned by the ſayd auctoryte / that no manere of perſone of what condicyon or degre he be take or cauſe to be taken be it vpon his owne ground or ony other mannis. the egges of ony fawcon goſhaukes laners or ſwannes out of the neſte vpon payne of impryſonement of a yere and a day and fyne at kyngys wyll / the one half therof to the kynge and the other halfe to the owner of the ground where the egges were ſo taken and that Iuſtyces of the peas haue auctoryte by this preſent acte / to here & determyne ſuche matere aſ well by inquyſicōn as Informacōn & proues / ¶Alſo it is ordeyned by ye ſayd autoryte-yt no man fro the feſt of Paſnext comȳg. bere ony hawke of ye brede of Eng
                     •
                  ond called an Nyeſſe goſhawke Taſſel Laner Laneret or Fawcon vppon payn of forfeyture of his hawke to ye kyng and the ſayd hawke to be at the kynges playſure. And yt all ſuche perſones

that brynge ony Nyeſſe hawke or hawkes from ony of the partyes beyond the ſee brynge a Certyfycat vnder the Cuſtumers ſeale of the Porte where he fyrſte londed with the ſayd hawke or hawkes. Or yf he come out of Scotlond. then vnder the ſeale of the wardeyn or lyeutenaunt of that Marche that he comyth thorough teſtefyenge that the ſame hawke or hawkes be of the partyes beyond ſhe ſee or of Scotlonde vpon the ſame payne. And that perſone that bryngeth ony ſuche hawke or hawkes to the kynge / ſhall haue a reſonable rewarde of the kynge or els the ſame hawke or hawkes for theyr laboure / ¶Alſo it is ordeyned by the ſame auctoryte that noo man take ony ayrer fawcon goſhawke ta
                     •
                  ſell or laner or lanerettes in theyr waron or wodes or in other place / nor purpoſely dryue theym out of theyr couertes accuſtumed to brede in to cauſe them to go to other couertes to brede. nor ſle them for ony hurte by theym done / but ſuffre thē to paſſe at theyr lybertees vpon payn of .x.li. the one halfe therof to the party yt wyll ſue for the ſame by accyon of dette examynacyon before Iuſtyces of the peas informacōn or otherwyſe / and the other halfe to the kynge / ¶Prouyded al way that the moyte of the forfeyte aboue ſayd geuen to the owner of the grounde for takynge of ſwannes egges / be vnto the owner of the ſayd ſwannes and not to the owner of the grounde.
            
            
               Not beynge wyth the Kynge in tyme of nede et cetera ſhall lete fees and annuytees to hym graunted Caplo xviij
               WHere euery ſubgette by the dutye of his allygeaunce is bounden to ſerue and aſſyſt his prynce and ſouerayn lord at al ſeaſons whan nede ſhal requyre. And mooſt ſpecyally ſuche perſones as haue by hym promocyon or auauncement as grauntes and gyftes of offyces fees and annuitees. whiche owe and verely be bounden of reaſon to gyue theyr attendaunce vpon hys royall perſone to defend the ſame whan he ſhall fortune to goo in hys perſone in warres for the defence of the realme or agaynſt his rebellys and enmyes for the ſubduyng and repreſſyng of theym and theyr malycyous purpoos / Wherfore it be enacted and eſtablyſſhed by the kyng our ſouerayn lord by the aduyſe of hys lordes ſperytuall and temporall and the Comyns in thys preſente parlyamente aſſembledde and by auctoryte of the ſame / ¶That yf ony perſone or perſones beyng within this realme of Englond or Wales hauynge ſuche offyces fees or annuytees by ony of his reherced gyftes and grauntes / do not geue theyr attendaunce vpon hym whan he ſhall fortune to go in warres in his perſone. in theyr ſayd ꝑſones as theyr duty byndeth them / that then they and euery of theym makynge therof defawte / the kynges ſpecyall lycence not had or elles he haue ſuche vfayned ſykneſſe lettyng or dyſeaſe that he may not in his perſone come to doo his perſonall attendaunce and ſeruyce after the fourme aforſayd / & that duely proued That thenne euery ſuche perſone or perſones forfeyt and loſe

theyr ſayd offyces fees and annuytees and ſtonde voyde at ye kynges pleaſure / ony acte ordinaunce or ſtatute to the contrary afore this tyme had or made / in ony wyſe notwithſtondynge. Prouyded that this acte extende not to no ſpyrytuell perſone Mayſter of ye Rolles ne to none other offycer and clerkes of the Chaū
                  cery. Iuſtyces of ether benches Barons of the kinges Eſchequer & other offycers and clerkes of the ſayd places. the kynges Attourneyes & Solicitour and the Sergauntes of the lawe / Prouyded alway that this acte ſhall not extende to ony perſone hauyng ony ſuche offyces of the kynges hyghnes and beynge in his ſeruyce within his townes & fortalyces of Berwyk & Carlyle ne to the Clerke of the kynges Counſell for the tyme beynge / 
            
            
               Ayenſt unlawfull makynge of Federbeddes pyllowes & Matraſſes Capitulo xix
               TO the ryght worſhypfull comens in this preſent parlyament aſſembled Sheweth vnto your diſcrete wyſdomes ye Wardeyns of the felyſhyp of the crafte of Vpholders within the Cyte of London / that where as dyuers perſones within the realme of Englonde out of the ſayd Cyte maketh and doth to be made vnlawfull and fals wares and marchaundyſes to the grete rebuke and diſclaunder of the ſayd crafte and alſo grete Ieoperdy loſſe and diſceyte to the kynges ſubgettes. Wherfore there is noo ſuffycyent remedy purueyed for ſo moche as the ſame Wardeyns haue no power nor aucturyte to make due ſerche of ſuche fals dyſceyuable wares and marchaundiſes put to ſale out of the ſayd Cyte / as they haue power and auctoryte within the ſame Cyte / as in fedbeddes bolſters and pyllowes made of two maner of corrupte ſtuffes / That is to ſay of ſcalded feders and dry pulled feders togyder and of lockes and feder togyder whyche is contagyous for mannes body to lye on / And allo in quyltes materas and cuſſhons ſtuffed with hors here. fenne downe neetes here deres here and gotes here whiche is wrought in lyme fattes / and by the hete of mannes body the ſauour and taſt is ſo abhominable and contagyous that many of the kynges ſubgettes therby ben dyſtroyed / Whiche dyſceyfull makyng of the for ſayd cyrrupt and vnlawfull ſtuffe is to the grete loſſe and empoueryſſhynge of the kynges lyege people and alſo grete rebuke and dyſclaunder to the ſayd crafte of Vpholders / Therfore it may pleas the kynges hyghnes by thaduyſe of of the lordis ſpyrytuall and temporall and his comens in this preſent parlyament aſſembled and by auctoryte of the ſame / to eſtablyſſh ordeyne and enacte that from henſforth noo perſone ne perſones ſhall make ordeyne vtter ne put to ſale / in feyrs nor in markettes wthin this his ſayd ream ny federbedes bolſters or pyllowes excepte they ben ſtuffed with one maner of ſtuffe / that is to ſay wt dry pulled fethers or els wt clene down alon̄. And wt no ſcalded fethers nor fen̄ downe nor none other vnlawful & corrupte ſtuffes as is afore reherced / but vttly to be dāpned for euer / Except yf ony perſon̄ or perſon̄s for theyr own ꝓper vſe

in theyr houſes make or doo be made ony of the forſayd corrupte and vnlawfull ſtuffe and wares / So they ben not offred to be ſolde in fayres and markettes vpon payn of forfeyture / And alſo in lyke wyſe quiltes matraſſes and cuſſons be ſtuffed with one manere of ſtuffe / yt is to ſay with clene wulle or clene flockes alone / and with none ſuche vnlawfull afore reherced vpon payn of loſſe and for feyture of all ſuche vnlawfull wares and marchandyſes / 
            
            
               Ayenſt wymen couert makynge alienacōn of londes mouyd bi the fyrſt baron Capitulo: xx
               FOr certayn reſonable conſideracōns. be it ordeyned enacted and eſtabliſſhed by the kynge our ſouerayne lorde and by thaſſent of the lordes ſpirituall and temporall and the comens in this preſent parlyament aſſembled and by auctorite of the ſame / that yf ony woman whiche hath had or hereafter ſhall haue ony aſtate in dower or for terme of lyfe or in taylle Ioyntly with her huſbō
                  de or only to herſelf or to her vſe / ony maneres londes tenementes or other hereditamentes of thenherytaunce or purchace of her huſbonde or geuen to the ſayd huſbonde and wif in tayll or for terme of lyf by ony of the aunceſtres of ye ſayd huſbonde or by ony other perſone ſeaſed to thuſe of the ſayd huſbonde or of his aunceſtres and haue or ſhall hereafter beinge ſole or with ony other after taken huſbonde / dyſcontinued or dyſcontinue alyened releaſſed or confermed aliene releas or conferme with warantie or by couyne ſuffred or ſuffre ony recouer of the ſame agayn theym or ony of theym or ony other ſeaſed to their vſe or to ye vſe of eyther of them after the fourme aforſayd / That all ſuche recouerees diſcontynaunce alienacōns releaſſes confermacōns and warantees ſo had and made / and from henforth to be had and made / be vtterly voyd and of none effecte / And that it ſhall be lefull to euery perſone & perſones to whom the intereſt title or inherytaunce after ye deceaſſe of the ſayd wymen of the ſayd maners londes & tenementes or other hereditamentes being diſcontinued alyened or ſuffred to be recouered after the fyrſt daye of Decembre nexte comynge in ye fourme aforſayd ſhold apperteyne to entre in to all & euery of the premyſſes / and peaſible to poſſede & enioye the ſame in ſuche manere & fourme as he or they ſhold haue done / yf none ſuche diſcontinaūce warantie nor recouer had be had nor made / and ouer this be it ordeyned & enacted by the ſaide auctorite / yt if ony of the ſayd huſbondes & wȳmen or ony other ſeaſed or yt ſhall be ſeiſed to the vſe of theim of the eſtate afore ſpecified after the ſayd fyrſt day of Decembre do make or cauſe to be made or ſuffre oni ſuche diſcontynuaunce alienacōns warantes or recouers in fourme aforſaid yt thenne it ſhall be lefull to ye perſone or perſones to whom ye ſayd maners londes ten̄tes ſhold or ought to belonge after the deceas of the ſayd woman / to entre in to the ſame and them to poſſede and enioye accordȳnge to ſuche tytle & ētereſt as they ſhold haue had ī ye ſame if ye ſame womā had be deed noo diſcōtinuaūce warātie nor recouerees had as ayēſt ye ſaid huſbōde duryng

his lyf / yf the ſayd diſcontinuaunce alienacōn waranties and recouerees be hereafter had by or ayenſt the ſame huſbondes & wymen durynge the couerture & e
                     •
                  poſell betwyx them / Prouided alway yt the ſayd wymen after the deceas of theyr ſayd huſbonde may reentre in to the maners londes & ten̄tes & them to enioye accordynge to theyr firſt eſtate in the ſame / ¶And ouer this it be ordened & enacted by the ſayd auctorite yt yf the ſayd woman at the time of ſuche diſcontynuaunce alyenacōns recouerees waranties after the ſayd day of Decembre in fourme aforeſayd to be had & made of ony of the premyſſes be ſolde that thenne ſhe ſhall be berred & excluded of her tytle & interes in the ſame from henſforth / And that the perſone & perſones to whom the tytle interſt & poſſeſſyon of the ſame ſholde belonge after the deceas of the ſayd woman ſhall ymmediatly after the ſayd dyſcontynuaunce alyenacōns waranties and recouerees. entre in to the ſame maners londes ten̄tes & other hereditamens and them to poſſede & enioye accordynge to his or ther tytle in the ſame / Prouyded alſo that this acte extende not to auoyde ony recouere dyſcontinuaunce or warantie after the fourme aforſayd afore this time had made or ſuffred but on̄ly where the ſayd huſbōd and woman or eyther of them now beynge alyue or ony other to theyr vſe now haue entres & tytle to the ſayd maneres londes ten̄tes or other hereditamentes alyened dyſcontinued or ſuffred to be recouered after the fourme aforſayd and therof now takynge thiſſues & proffites or ony other perſone or perſones to theyr vſe▪ Prouyded alſo yt this acte extende not to ony ſuche recouere or diſcontinuaunce to be had with the heyres nexte in heritable to the ſayd woman or he or they ye nexte after the dethe of the ſame woman ſhold haue of aſtate of inheritaūce in ye ſame maners londes or ten̄tes be aſſentynge or agreable to the ſayde recouerees where the ſame aſſent & aggrement be of recorde or in rolled / Prouided alſo that it ſhall be lefull to euery ſuche woman beyng ſole or maried after the deth of her fyrſt huſbonde / to geue ſell or make dyſcontinuance of ony ſuche londes terme of her lyf oonly after the courſe and vſe of the comen lawe before the makyng of thys preſente acte / 
            
            
               For enqueſtes hereafter to be charged wythyn London Capitulo: xxi
               WHere as periury is moche and cuſtumably vſed within ye cyte of Londō amonge ſuche perſones as paſſen & ben impanelled vpon iſſues Ioined betwene partye & parti ī ye courtes of ye ſame cyte to ye grete dyſpleſure of almyghty god and alſo to the dyſherytaunce & many folde wronges of the kinges ſubgettes for aſmoche as there is impanelled in the ſame enqueſtes perſones of lytill ſubſtaunce diſcrecōn & reputacōn / & alſo none atteynt ne other ſufficient punyſſhment is for ſuche periured perſones before this tyme purueyed and ordeyned within the ſame cyte Therfore it may pleas the kynges highnes by thaduyſe & aſſēt of ye lordes ſpiritual & tēporall & and yt comēs in this preſent

parlyament aſſembled and by auctorite of the ſame to eſtablyſſhe ordeyne and enacte / that no perſone ne perſones hereafter be impanelled ſūmonde or ſworne in ony Iuri or enqueſtes in courtes within the ſame cyte / excepte he be of londes ten̄tes or goodes & catalles to the value of .xl. marc̄ / And yt noo perſone nor perſones hereafter be impanelled ſōmoned nor ſworne in Iury or enqueſt in ony court within the ſayd cyte for londes or ten̄tes or accōn perſonell wherin the dette or damages amountyth to the ſōme of .xl. marc̄ or aboue. excepte he be in londes ten̄tes godes or catalles to the value of .C. marc̄ and the ſame matere and cauſe alledged by ony of the ſayd parties by way of chalenge & ſo founden / ſhal be admitted and taken in euery of the ſame courtes as principall chalenge / And yt euery ſuche perſone hereafter to be impanelled or ſōmoned to appere in ony Iury or enqueſte before ony of the ſayd Iuges of ye ſame cyte makynge defawte at fyrſt ſōmons leſe & forfeyte in yſſues .xii. d. and at ſeconde defawte .ij. ſ. and ſoo at euery ſuche defawte after yt / the yſſues & penalties to be dowbled / and all ſuche yſſues lefte in the mayres courte / ſhall be forfeyted leuyed & perceyued to thuſe & behofe of the mayre & coīaltie of the ſayd cyte / And all ſuche yſſues loſte in the ſhyrefs courte or courtes / ſhall be forfeyted leuyed and perceyued to thuſe of the ſhyrefs of the ſame cyte for ye tyme beynge towardis their feeferm̄. And alſo be it enacted by lyke auctorite that the partie greued by ony vntrue or fals verdite hereafter to be geuen in ony of the courtes of the ſayd cyte ſhall and maye haue and ſue atteynt by byll in the huſtynges of london holden for comen plees before the mayr and aldermen of the ſame cyte for the tyme beynge & therupō a preſepte to be awarded and made by the ſame mayr to euery alderman of the ſayd cyte or his deputie in his abſence to preſent and certiefie the names of .iiij. indefferent and dyſcrete perſones of gode fame and euery of theym of ſubſtaunce of .C li. or more cyteizyns of the ſame cyte dwellynge in his warde to the mayr and aldermen of the ſayd cyte for the tyme beyng at the Huſtynges of coen̄ plees wythin the ſame cyte than nexte enſuenge to be holde / of whiche perſones ſoo preſented and certyfyed the ſayd Mayr and vi aldermen or moo holdyng the ſame courte of Huſtynges / ſhall take name and impanell .xlviij. bi their diſcrecōn thought mooſt able ſufficient and indeferent / And the mayr and his ſucceſſours mayres of the ſayd cyte ſhall do to be ſūmoned the ſayd .xlviij. perſones ſoo by the ſayd mayr and aldermen named and impanelled and alſo the Iuryours of the petie Iury and the partie or parties named as tenauntes or defendauntes in the ſaid byll of atteynt to appere before the mayr and aldermen of the ſame cyte at the Huſtynges of comen plees than next to be holde in the ſame cyte / And yf the ſame atteynt thenne or ony other tyme happe to remayne vntaken for or by defawte of Iuriours by chalenge or otherwiſe / that vppon euery tales graunted the ſayd Mayr and aldermen ſhall impanell the ſayd perſones whiche were certified by the ſayd aldermen or theyr deputyes and omytted out of the ſayd panell or putte theryn other perſone or perſones beynge cytezyns of the ſayd cyte and of the ſubſtaunce of .C.li. or more. And alſo that all the plee and plees to be alledged or pleded bi or for the tenaunt or defendaunt tenaūts or

defendauntes or by ony of the Iuriours of the pety Iury in the ſame atteynte & triable by oni Iuri or enqueſt / ſhall be tried within the ſame cyte and by thenqueſtes of the ſame & in none other place ne countie / And yt none of the ſayd peti Iury ne other partyes named in ony ſuche byll of atteynte / ſhall or maye haue ony chalenge to tharraye or to ony perſone or poll therin beynge impanelled for lacke of ſufficiens of godes or of londes / Ouer yt be it prouyded & enacted yt the iugemente in ony ſuche atteynt ſhall not extende to ony londes or ten̄tes ne to other punyſſhment of the pety Iury ne other proces to be in the ſame atteynt than is lymytted & appoynted in this preſent acte / And yf the .xxiiii. perſones of the ſayd .xlviii. perſones ſworn̄ in the ſame atteint fynde yt the Iuriours named in the pety Iury haue made & yeuen an vntrue verdyte / that thenne the Iugement ſhall ayenſte the partie defendaunte in ye ſame atteynte as is vſed in atteynte ſued by writte at comen lawe And ferthermore ye Iugement in the ſame atteynt ſhallbe agayn the pety Iury yt euery of the Iurours of ye ſam pety Iuri ſhall forfeyt & leſe: xx.li. or more by the dyſcrecion of the mayre & aldmen of ye ſayd cyte kepynge the ſame Huſtynges or ony other Huſtynges of comen plees to ſuche vſe & behof as other yſſues & penalties ben forfeyted & loſte in ony accion or playnte cōmenced before ye mayre & aldermen of the ſame cyte & his body to be ympreſoned there to remayn wythout bayll or maynpriſe .vi. monthes or leſſe by the dyſcrecōn of the mayre & aldermen of the ſame cite for the tyme beynge and to be dyſabled for euer to be ſworne in ony Iury before ony temporall Iuge / ¶And ouer yt it be enacted by the ſame auctorite / that yf it be founden by the graunde Iury in the ſame atteynt that petit Iuri haue gyuen a true verdite that thenne the graunde Iuri ſhall haue auctorite and power to enquyre yf ony of the pety Iury toke or perceyued ony ſomme of money or other rewarde or promyſe of money or other rewarde of them named defendauntes or tenauntes in the ſame atteynt / or yf ony other perſone or perſones by the cōmaundement couine or aſſent of ony of theym to or for thentent of their verdite geuyng wherupon the ſame atteynt is grounded / And after ony ſuche corrupcōn by the ſayd graunde Iuri is founden that thenne the Iurour or Iurours of the ſayd pety Iury that ys founde ſo defectyf in takyng and perceyuynge ony ſommes of money or other rewarde or promyſe of rewarde / ſhall loſe forfeyt and pay to the playntyf or plantifs named in the ſayd atteynt .x. tymes the value of that ſomme / other rewarde ſo taken perceyued or promyſed in fourme aboueſayd & to ſuffre ympreſonement wyth out baill or maynpryſe .vi. monthes or leſſe bi the diſcrecyon of the ſayd Mayre & aldermen. and to be diſabled for euer to be ſworne in ony Iuri before ony temporall Iuge. ¶And ouer yt be it enacted yt ſuche defendaunte or tenaunte defendaundes or tenauntes in the ſame atteynt ſhall loſe forfeyte and pay to ſuche vſe and behof as other penalties ben forfeyted within the ſame cyte .x. times the value of that ſomme of monei or other rewarde bi hȳ or theym ſo yeuen to ony of the ſayd pety Iuri / And the ſame defendaunte or tenaunt defendauntes or tenauntes to be ympreſoned there to remayne without bayll or maynpriſe durynge .vi. monthes or leſſe by the dyſcrecyon of the ſayd

mayr & aldmē
                   / And yf ony dettes damages or coſtes be recouered in ony accōn whervpon ſuche atteȳt is groūded & bu ye ſam̄ atteȳt yt foūde yt ye pety Iury haue geuē a falſ ſeremēt / yt thē for ye recouer & reſtytutiō of ye ſame dette damages & coſtes / the playntyf or playntyfs in euery atteynt ſhall & may ſue an accyon of dette ayenſt the ſame defendaunt or tenaunt by wrytte byll or playnte in euery of the kynges courtes wherin the ſame defendaunt or tenaunt & euery of theim ſhall not be receyued to do his law / And ouer that be it enacted that yf ony plaȳ
                  tyf or playntyfs in ony ſuche atteynt cōmenced before the ſayd mayr and aldermen vpon ony recorde remaynyng within the ſame cyte and therin be none ſuyyte / or yf the fyrſt ſerement therin be affermed / that thenne he or they ſhall haue ympryſonement and make fyne by the dyſcrecyon of the mayr & aldermen of the ſayd cyte for the tyme beynge / And that fyne to be and goo to the Mayre & comynaltye of the ſayd cyte / & yf there be two or mo playntyfs in ony ſuche atteynt ordeyned by this eſtatute / & ony of theym dey or be nonſuyte / the other by this acte ſhall be enhabled to ſue for the procedynge in the ſame atteynt / and notwtſtondȳge the dethe of ye defendaunt or tenaunt defendauntes or tenaūtes or ony of the pety Iury named in the ſame atteynt ſo that there be two of the ſame pety Iury on lyue / the ſame atteynt ſhal not abate / And alſo be it ordeyned by the ſame autoryte / that yf ony of the Iuryours of the ſayd graund Iury impanelled & ſūmoned in fourme aforſayd at the ſūmons make defaut ſo that the ateynt remayneth to be taken for defaut of Iurours / that thenne euery of the ſame Iurous ſo makyng defawte / loſe & forfeyte for the fyrſt defawte .xl. ſ. and at the ſecond defawte .v.li / And at euery defawte after that .x.l / And lyke proces to be made & ſued therayenſt the graund Iury and the pety Iury / And the party and partyes / as is to be made and ſued in atteynt ſued at the comen lawe / And that the ſame proces to be retornable at euery Huſtynges of comen plees and that the atteynte remayne not to be taken after the fyrſt ſūmons retorned for or by the defawte of the defendante or tenaunt defendaunt or tenaūtes / or of ony of the pety Iury named in the ſame atteynt by this acte ordeyned. And that the ſayd yſſues or penalties forfeited by ony of the ſayd graunde Iuri / be forfeyt leuyed and perceyued to thuſe of the wayr and coīaltie of the ſayd cyte And that no proteccōn nor eſſoyne be alowed in this atteynt by this acte purueyed / Prouyded alway that vpon all atteyntes hereafter to be cōmenced wythyn the ſayd cyte vpon only recorde wherin the tryall and enqueſt was by halfe tōge That the ſayd mayr and aldermen ſhall impanell ye graundez Iuri in the ſame atteynt / the tone half of ſtraungers of good fame / and of the ſubſtaunce of goodes to the value of .C.li. and more inhabytynge wythyn the ſame cyte at large And the reſidue of the ſame graunde Iury to be of lyke value and ſubſtaunce of goodes impanelled of citeyzins as is aforſayd / And ouer this be it enacted bi the ſayd auctoryte that no acte of atteynt of the pety Iury made in this preſent parliament nor no thinge therin ronteyned other than thys preſent acte nor none other penaltye or punyſſhment in oni other acte than is afore conteyned in this preſent acte / be hurtfull nor extende to ony

Iury or enqueſt herafter to be taken before ony Iuge of & within ye ſame Cyte
            
            
               For wagys of hynes in huſbondrye and artyfycers and laborers Capitulo xxii
               WHere dyuers eſtatutes before this tyme haue ben made and ordeyned for ſeruauntes of huſbondrye & alſo for laborers and artyfycers by diuers and many ryall and noble ꝓgenytours vnto oure ſouerayn lord ye kynge now beyng / & in eſpecyall a ſtatute made by the ryght noble cryſten prȳ
                  ce of blyſſed memory kynge Henry ye .vi. vncle vnto our ſayd ſouerayn lord ye .xxiii. yere of his of his reyne / which notwtſtondyng grete & many defawtes dayly encreaſe reſt and contynue amonge laborers & artyfycers / ſome by cauſe the ſayd eſtatutes be not executed & ſome by cauſe the remedy by ye ſayd eſtatutes is not very perfyte nor yeuith certayn ne haſty remedy ſo yt dayly by theyr ſubtyll ymagynacyon in defraude of the ſayd eſtatutes many of the kyng our ſouerayn lordꝭ ſubgettys ben hurt diſceyued lette and damaged in theyr buyldyng & huſbondry ¶Be it therfore eſtablyſſhed enacted & ardeyned by auctoryte of this p̄
                  ſent parlyament / Fyrſt that no baylyf of huſbondry ſhall take for his wages by ye yere aboue .xxvi. ſ. viiijd. & for his clothing .v. ſ. with mete and drynke. No cheyf hyue as a carter or cheyf ſhepherd aboue .xx. ſ. by the yere / & for his clothing .vi. wt mete and drynke. No comen ſeruaunt of huſbōdry aboue .xvi. ſ. viij. d by ye yere. and for his clothyng .iiij. ſ. wt mete and drynke / No woman ſeruaunt aboue .x. ſ. by the yere / & for her clothing .iiij. ſ. with mete & drynke / No chylde wt
                  in thage of .xiiij. yeres aboue .vi. ſ. viii. d. by the yere. & for his clothyng .iiij. ſ. with mete & drynke / And that no artyfycer ne laborer herafter named take nomore ne gretter wagis than in this eſtatute is lymytted vpon the payn aſſeſſed aſwell vnto the taker as to the yeuer / that is to ſay A fremaſon mayſter carpynter rough maſon brykleyer mayſter tyler plūmer glaſyer keruer nor Ioyner fro Eſter vnto Mychelmas euery of thyſe artifycers aforſayd .vi. d. by the daye withoute mete or drynke / & wt mete and drynke .iiij. d. And fro Mychelmas vnto Eſter .v d. without mete or drȳk / & wt mete & drȳke .iij. d / & yt ye wages of a ſhypwright fro ye feſt of Candelmas to ye feſt of ſaynt mychel charchāgel ſhall not excede ye forme enſuyng. That is to ſay a maſterſhip carpȳter takȳg ye charge of ye werke hauȳg men vnd hȳ by ye day .v. d. wt mete & drȳke & wtout mete & drynke .vij. d And other ſhypcarpenter called an hewer / by the day .iiij. d. with mete and drynke / without mete and drynke .vi. d. An able clyncher by the day .iij. d / with mete and drynke / & without mete & drynke .v. d / An holder by the day .ij. d with mete and drynke / and without mete and drynke .iiij. d / A mayſter calker by the day iiij. d with mete & drynke / and without mete and drynke .vi. d / Another meane calker by ye day .iij. d with mete & drynke & without mete & drynk .v. d / A calker laboryng by ye tyde for aſlong tyme as he may aboue ye water & bineth ye water. ſhal not excede for his wages for euery tyde .iiij. d wt mete & drȳk. And frō ye feſt

of mychelmes to Cādelmas the wages of a mayſter ſhypwryght by ye day .iiij d with mete and drynke / and without mete and drynke .vj. d. An hewer by ye day iij. d. with mete and drynke / & without mete and drynke .v. d. An able clyncher by the day .ij. d. ob̄ wt mete and drynke. & without mete & drynk .iiij. d. ob̄. An holder by the day .j. d. ob̄ with mete and drynke. and without mete and drynke .iij. d A mayſter calker by the day .iij. d. with mete and drynke. and without mete and drynke .v. d. An other meane calker by the day .ij. d. ob̄ with mete and drynke. & without mete and drynke .iiij. d. ob̄. ¶Be it alſo enacted that in ſuche ſhyres & countrees that where it hath be and is now vſed to geue laſſe wages that in thoſe ſhyres and countrees they ſhall ſo geue ¶And the taker of wages be compelled accordīg as they haue leſſe vſed to take this acte notwtſtondȳg / And yt yu mayſter maſon and mayſter carpynter whyche ſhall take the charge of the werke hauyng vnder ony of theym .vi. men / ſhall haue .vij. d. without mete & drynke. & v. d. by the day with mete and drynke / And yt euery perſone and artifycer ſpecyfied in this eſtatute beyng not reteyned in ony ſeruyce for ony werke be compelled to ſerue euery other perſone for ſuche wages as in this eſtatute before is lymytted / And not artyfycer reteyned in ſeruyce to werke with the kynges highnes or ony perſone departe not from his ſayd highnes or from the ſayd other perſone tyll ſuche tyme as the werke be fynyſſhed yf the perſone ſo reteynynge thartyfycer ſo long wyll haue & pay his wages vpon payne of impryſonement of ony perſone ſo departyng by the ſpace of a month & to make fyne of .xx. ſ. alwayes prouyded & forſeen yt yf the ſame artyfycer be deſyred vnto the kynges ſeruyce & werke that then he may lawfuly depart. So yt entre & be in the kynges ſeruyſe and werke. And it is fether ordeyned be the ſayd auctoryte / that other laborer & artyfycer not afore named. ſhall take from Eſter tyll Mychelmas for euery day yt he ſo laboreth excepte the ſeaſon of herueſt .iiij. d. without mete or drinke / and .ij. d. with mete and drynke / And from Mychelmas to Eſter .iij. d. wyth without mete or drynke and .i. d. ob̄ with mete and drynke. And in the ſayd time of harueſt euery mower ſhall take by the day .iiij. d. with mete and drynke / and without mete and drynke .vi. d. A repar & carter euery of theym ·iij. d. by ye daye with mete and drynke and without mete and drynke .v. d. A woman laborar & other laborers euery of theym .ij. d. ob̄ by the day with mete and drynke and wt out mete or drynke .iiij. d. ob̄ / And that no artifycer nor laborer werkynge but the halfe daye / take no wages but for the half day & nothyng for the hole day / And yf ony bailly of huſbondry hyne carter ſhepeherde comyn ſeruaunt or chylde ſeruaunt aboue ſpecyfyed not reteyned in ony ſeruyce or werke refuſe to ſerue accordynge to thordynaunce aboue ſpecyfyed / Thenne the ſame perſone to be commytted to warde by the Coneſtable or ther hede offycer wythin the cyte Towne or Vyllage where the partye ſoo refuſynge is / at complaynt of hym that wyll reteyne ſuche ſeruaunte there to remayne tyll he haue founde ſuerty to ſerue accordynge to the ſayd ordynaunce / ¶Ferthermore yf ony artifycer or laborer beyng not reteyned in ony ſeruyſe or werke refuſe to ſerue after the rate

of this eſtatute or take gretter or more wages than therin is lymytted for the ſame artyfycers & laborers / or yf ony artyfycer or loborer take wages for the hole day where he werketh but the halfe day / that thenne euery artyfycer and laborer offendynge in ony of ye ſorſayd artycles / forfeyte for euery defawte as oft as they offende .xx. ſ. and they to be conuycted for euery ſuche defaute by preſentment afore ye Iuſtyces of peas in the ſeſſyons accordynge to the comyn lawe or by examynacōn of the ſame Iuſtyces in the ſame ſeſſyons / or by examynacōn of ij. Iuſtyces of the peas out of the ſeſſyons in ony place within the ſhyre where they ben Iuſtyces / and where ſuche defawte ſhal be made / and that the ſayd for feyture of .xx. ſ. be leuyed of theyr londes goodes and catayles ſo offendynge. And ferthermore where dyuers artyfycers & laborers reteyned to werke and ſerue waſte moche parte of the day and deſerue not theyr wages / ſomtyme in late comyng vnto theyr werke / erly departyng therfro long ſyttyng at theyr brekefaſt at theyr dyner & nonmete / and long tyme of ſlepyng at after none to the loſſe and hurte of ſuche perſones as the ſayd artyficers and laborers ben reteyned within ſeruyce / It is therfore eſtablyſſhed enacted and ordeyned by auctoryte aforſayde euery artifycer and laborer be at hys werke bytwene the myddes of the moneth of Marche and the myddes of the moneth of September byfore fyue of the clocke in the mornynge / And that he haue but halfe an houre for his brekfaſt and an houre and an halfe for his dyner at ſuche tyme as he hath ſeaſon for ſlepyng to hym appoynted by this ſayd eſtatute / And at ſuche tyme as is here appoynted / that he ſhall not ſlepe / thenne he to haue but one houre for his dyner and halfe an houre for his noonmete / And that he depart not from his werke bytwene the myddes of the ſayd monethes of Marche & September tyll bytwene .vij. & .viij. of the clocke in the euenynge / And yf they or ony of thē offende in ony of thyſe artycles / that thenne theyr defawtes be marked by hym or his deputie that ſhall pay theyr wages / and at wekes end theyr wages be abated for ſuche rate of tyme as they haue offended contrarye to this eſtatute / And that fro myddes of September to the myddes of Marche / euery artyfyand laborer be at theyr werke in the ſpryngynge of the day and departe not til nyght of the ſame day / And that the ſayd artifycers and laborers ſlepe not by daye / but only from the myddes of the moneth of May / vnto the myddyl of the moneth of Auguſt / ¶And alſo it is enacted by the ſayd auctoryte that no perſone from henſforth yeue no more wages to ony bayly of huſbondrye hyne ſhepeherde or other afore named nor to ony artyfycer or loborar in this eſtatute ſpefycyed than in the ſame eſtatute is lymytted & aſſigned vpon peyne of forfeyture for euery ſuche defaute xl. ſ. And that the party ſo offendynge / be conuicte therof afore the Iuſtyces of peas aſwell by preſentment in the ſeſſions as by examynacyon of .ij. Iuſtyces of peas out of the ſeſſyons in lyke wyſe as is before reherced of laborers & artyficers / Alſo it is eſtablyſſhed & enacted that by ye ſayd auctoryte / that yf ony artyfycer or laborer reteyned in ſeruyſe wyth ony perſone for byldyng or reparcayon make or cauſe to be made ony aſſemble to aſſaut harme or hurte ony perſone aſſygned to comptroll and ouer ſee theym in theyr

werkyng / that he or they ſo offendyng haue ympryſonement for a yere without lettyng to bayl or mayn pryſe / and fetther to make fyne at kyngys wyll / This acte to begyn and take effecte at ſaynt Gregoryes day next comyng and in the meane tyme the ſame to be proclamed in euery good Cyte burgh and Town of this realme.
            
            
               For Gawgyng and packyng of ſalmon Elys and heryng Capitulo xxiij
               WHere at a parlyament holden at weſtmynſter in the .xxij. yere of the reyne of kyng Edward ye .iiij. among other thynges / it was enacted ordeyned and eſtablyſſed that no marchaunt ſtranger nor deynezyn after the ieeſt of ſaynt Mychell tharchaungell than next comyng / ſhold ſell nor put to ſale ony ſalmon by but barel half barel or on other veſſel / afore it ſhuld be ſee but yf the ſame but ſhold hold & conteyn .lxxxiiij. galons / the barell .xlij. galons. the half barell .xxi. galons well and truly packed vpon payn of forfeyture for euery but barell & half barell ſo lackyng theyr ſayd meſure .vi. s. viij. d / Alſo that no ſuche marchaūt beyng vnder ye ſayd kynges obeyſaunce after ye feſt of ſaynt Mychell ſhuld ſell nor put to ſale / ony maner ſalmon by but barel or other veſſel but yf it ſhold be well & truly packed / yt is to ſay ye gret ſalmon by it ſelfe wtout medlyng of ony grylles or broken belyed ſalmon wt ye ſame / & that al ſmal fyſſh called griſlꝭ ſhuld be packed by themſelf on̄ly wtout ony medlyng vpon payn of for feyture & leſyng of ·vi. s. viij. d. for euery but barell or demy barell contrary to ye ſayd acte medled packed & put to ſale / And that no ſuche matchaunt nor other perſone ſhuld put ony heryng to ſale / by barell demy barell or fyrkyn / but yf ye ſame barell conteyne .xxxij. galons the half barell & fyrkyn after the ſame rate / And that ye ſame herynges ſhold be well truly & iuſtly layed annd packed / and ſhold be of one tyme takyng and ſaltyng / And that the ſame heryng ſhuld be as good & aſwell packed in the myddes and euery part of the ſame barel & other veſſell as it ſhuld be at ony of the endes of the ſame barell and veſſell vpon payne for forfeytyng and loſyng of .iij. ſ .iiij. d for euery barell half barel and fyrkyn ſo lackyng theyr ſayd meſure. and alſo vpon payn of forfeytur, & loſyng of .iij. ſ .viij d. for euery barell half barell and fyrkyn of heryng contrary to the ſayd act ſorted layed or packed / Alſo that no ſuche marchaunt nor palyng man ſhold ſel or or put to ſale ony etysby barell half barel or fyrkyn. but yf the barel ſhold conteyne .xlij. galons the half barell and fyrkyn after the ſame rate. Nor that ony ſuch marchaunt nor palyng man ſhold medle ony gall bytten 
                     ••
                  oruen or pylyd 
                     ••
                  es wt good elys / but that the ſame good elys ſhold be well & iuſtly packed and ſolde by themſelf / nor ſhold medle with the ſayd good elys nor put to ſale ony red elys by on payne of forfryture and leſſynge of vi ſhelynges for euery barell half barell and fyrkyn ſo lackyng theyr ſayd meſure. and vpon payn of leſyng 
                     〈…〉
                   euery barell halfe barell and fyrkynne ſoo as is aforeſayd medeled and contra
                     •
                  
                  
to the ſayd acte packed or putte to ſale / ¶Alſo that noo marchaunt after ye ſayd feſte ſholde ſell / nor put to ſae ony barelled fyſſhe. but yf the ſame fyſſhe ſhold well and truely packed. that is to ſay the tale fyſſhe by themſelf and the ſmale fyſſhe called gulles by themſelf wythout ony medlyng of the ſayd ſmale fyſſhe with the grete fyſſhe and wythout medlynge and packynge of Thokis or brokē belyed fyſſhe with the ſayd tale fyſſhe or ſmale fyſſhe. And that neyther the tale fyſſhe nor ſmale fyſſhe ſhold be layed dowble in packynge / And that euery tale fyſſhe ſholde conteyne in length from the bone of the fynne to the thyrde Ioint of the tale .xxvi ynches at the leeſt / And yt the napes of all ſuche barelled fyſſhe ſholde be no lenger than the lytyll bone that ſyttyth vpon the grete fynne / And that the bone of euery ſuche ſalt fyſſhe ſholde be take away vnto the nauill of the ſame fyſſhe / And that euery ſuche fyſſhe ſholde be platted downe to an handfull of the tayll vpon payne of forfeyture of leſynge of .iij. ſ .iiij. d. for euery barell of fyſſhe whiche from henforth ſholde be founde packed ſorted & medled naped layed dowble or not boned nor ſplatted accordynge to the ſayd acte. And alſo in eſchewyng of the comen hurtes and diſceytes aboue reherced / the ſayd late kīge ordeyned and enacted by the ſayd auctoryte that all Mayres Bayllyfs and gouernours of cytees townes burghs mark
                     •
                  ttis and all other places of this realme for the tyme bryng where they ſhold be Mayres Bayllyfs and gouernours ſhold haue power and auctorite to name and choſe a diſcrete & experte perſone or perſones dewly to ſerche and gawge all ſuche veſſelles as ben aboue reherced yt they hold be truely packed and kepe theyr true meſure & aſſyſe accordynge to th
                     •
                   ordynaunce aboue ſayd as in the forſayd acte therof made more playnly appereth and for aſmoche as in the ſayd acte is noo certent appoynted how moche euery ſuche gawger packer and ſercher ſhold take for his labour in executynge of theyr ſayd offyce / they ben theyr owne Iuges and at theyr pleſures take for the ſame gawgynge packyng & ſerchynge by way of extorcion ſuche grete ſōmes of money as theym lyketh / wherby ye kynges true ſubgettes are gretly ēpoueriſſhed & wronged / That it myght therfor pleas the kynges hyghnes bi thaduyſe of the lordes ſpirituall and temporall and the comyns in this preſent parlyamēt aſſembled and bi auctorite of the ſame to conferme ratifie and eſtablyſſh the ſayd acte & euery thynge therin compriſed / And ouer that by the ſame auctoryte to ordeyne and eſtablyſſh that euery ſuche gawger packer and ſercher take nomore for gawgyng of a barell ſamon barell heryng barell fyſſhe barell elys half barell and fyrkyn for euery pece ſo gawged but a ferthyng / and for his labour for ſe
                     •
                  chyng and packyng yf it be nede of a barell ſamon from heed to heed .i. d. and for his labour for bonyng napyng and packyng of a barell fyſſhe yf it be nede. i. d and for his labour in ſerchyng and packing of a barell heeryng from heed to heed yf it be nedefull .ij. d. and for ſerchynge and packyng of euery barell of elis .ij. d. And for ſerchyng and packyng of euery half barell of heeryng from heed to heed .i. d / and for euery half barell elys ſerchyng and packyng i d / And for ſerchyng and packyng of euery fyrkyn of heeryng yf it be nedefull ob̄ / and ouer ye that all and euery ſuche gawger ſercher and packer that myſbehauen or offende

in ony thynge concernynge the ſayd offyces of gawger ſercher & packer contrary to this acte and ſo proued before ony of the ſayd mayres bayllyfes or gouernours of ony cyte towne burgh market or ony other place wtin this realme where he or they ſo be gawgers packers or ſerchers gawger packer or ſercher ſhall loſe and forfeyt his ſayd offyce & the ſame from thenſforth no lenger to enioye / Any leaſe graunte or grauntes therof made notwtſtondynge / & for ferder punyſſhement to haue and ſuffre ympryſonement by the ſpace of .xl. dayes with out bayll or maynpryſe / Prouyded alway yt the ſayd ſercher & packer or ony of theym / ſhall no thynge receyue of ye ſayd fees by colour of theyr offyce but only for ſuche buttes barels half barels & fyrkyns as by them ſhall herafter be ſuffyciently ſerched & packed & be not afore ſuffycyently packed / This preſent acte to begyn̄ and take effecte at the feſte of Eſter next comyng and not before / 
            
            
               For punyſſhynge of periury and leſſynge the penaltye in atteynt Capitulo xxiiij
               THe kyng our ſouerayn lord of his mooſt goodly and gracyous dyſpoſycyon callyng to his remembraunce how that periury in this londe is in manyfold cauſes by vnreſonable menes detaſtly vſed to ye dyſherytaū
                  ce & grete damage of many & grete nomber of his ſubgettes well dyſpoſed / & to the mooſt hygh̄ dyſpleaſure of almyghty god / the good ſtatutes ayenſt all offycers hauynge retorne of wrytt & and theyr deputyes makyng panelles percyally for rewardes to theym yeuen ayenſt vnlawfull mayntenours imbraſours and Iurrours / and ayenſt iurrours vntruly lyeuyng ther verdyte notwithſtondyng For reformacyon of the ſame by the kynge our ſouerayn lorde & the lordes ſpuall and temporall and the comens in this preſent parlyament aſſembled and by auctoryte of the ſame. be it enacted ordeyned and eſtablyſſhed that vpon eueri vntrue verdyte herafter yeuen betwyx party and partye in ony ſuyte playnt or demaund before Iuſtyces of recorde where the thynge or demaunde & verdyte thervpon geued extendeth the value of .xl.li. & concerneth not ye Ieoperdy of mā
                  nis lyf. the party greued by the ſame verdyte ſhall haue a wryte of atteynt agaȳ
                  ſte euery perſone herafter ſo yeuyng an vntrue verdyte and euery of them and ayenſt the party whiche ſhall haue iugement vpon the ſame verdyte / And yt in the ſame atteynt ther̄ ſhal be awarded ayenſt the petyte Iury. the party & ye graū
                  de Iury Som̄ reſom̄ & dyſtreſſe infynyte whyche graund Iury ſhall be of lyke nomber as ye graund Iury is now in atteynt & euery of them yt ſhall paſſe in ye ſame ſhall haue londes & ten̄ementis to ye value of .xx. marc. by ye yere of fre holde out of aūcient demeane & vpon ye dyſtres which ſhalbe deliuered of record vpon ye ſame opē ꝓclamacōn to be made in ye court there ye dyſtres ſhalbe awarded more thā .xv. days afore ye retourn̄ of ye ſam̄ diſtres / euery ſuch diſtres ſhal be made vpon ye lond of euery of ye ſayd graūd iury as in other diſtres is & hath be vſed And yf ye ſayd party defēdaūt or ye pety Iurours or ony of thē apere not vpon ye
                  
diſtres then the graund Iury to be taken ageynſt theym & euery of them yt ſhall ſo make defaute / And yf ony of the ſayd petyte Iury appere / then ye party complaynaunt in ye behalf ſhall aſſygne the fals ſerement of the fyrſt verdite vntruly yeuen / wherunto they of the petyte Iury ſhal haue none anſwere yf they be the ſame perſones / and the wryt proceſſe retourn & aſſygnement good and law full / except yt the demaundaunt or playntyf in theſame atteynt / hath afore by nonſuyte or diſcontynued his ſute of atteynt taken for theſame verdite / or hath for the ſame verdyte in a wrytte of atteynt had iugement ageynſt the ſayd pety Iury / but only yt they made true verdite / whiche yſſue ſhall be tryed by .xxiiij. of the ſayd graund Iury / and ye party ſhall plede yt they gaue true verdyte or oni other matere whiche ſhall be a ſuffycyent barre of the ſayd atteynt / and yt plee notwithſtondynge the graund Iury to be taken without delay to enquyre whether ye fyrſt Iury gaue true verdyte or no / & yf they fynd yt ye ſayd petite Iury gaaf an vntrue verdyte / then euery of the ſayd petyte Iury to forfeyt .xx.li. wherof the one half ſhall be to the kynge our ſouerayn lord & the other half to the party yt ſucth / And ouer that that euery of the ſayd petyte Iury ſhall ſeueralll make fyne and raunſonne by the dyſcrecyon of the Iuſtices before whome the ſayde falſe ſerement ſhall be found after theyr ſeuerall offences defawtes & ſuffyciencie / of euery of the ſayd petyte Iury And after that yt thoſe of the ſayd petyte Iury ſo atteynted / ſhal neuer after be of no credence nor theyr othe accepte in ony court / And yf ſuche ple as the party pledeth which is abarre of the ſayd atteynt be found or demed ayenſt hym that ſo pledeth thenne ye party yt ſo ſueth ſhall haue Iugement to be reſtored to that he loſte with his reſonable coſtes and damages. For een alway that ony outlawre in ony accōn or cauſe perſonel or excomengement pleded or aleyed in the party playntyf or demaundant ſhall be taken but as a voyd plee. & to that he ſhal not be put to anſwer. And that in al tha foreſayd proces ſuch day ſhall be yeuen as is in a wryte of dower and none aſſoyne or proteccyon to ly nor to be alowed in ye ſame / And yf the ſayd graund Iury appere not vpon the fyrſte dyſtres had ageynſt theym. ſoo that the Iury fortheyr defawte do remayn he that ſoo maketh defawte ſhall forfeyt to the kyng xx. ſ. / And vpon the ſecond dyſtres .xl. ſ. And after makyng defawt for eueri ſuche defawt .v.li. And lyke penaltyes and forfeytures to be ayenſt them and euery of theym that ſhall be named named in the tales as is afore expreſſed ayenſt euery of the ſayd graunde Iury aforſayd / And that for and by the deth of the ꝑcy of ony of the ſayd petyte Iury the ſayd atteynt ſhall not abate nor be deferred ayenſt the remenaunt as longe as two of the ſayd petyte Iury be alyue / And yf herafter ony fals verdyte be geuen in on ony accyon ſute or demaund afore ony Iuſtyce or recorde of ony thyng perſonell as dette treſpace and other lyke which ſhall be vnder the value of .xl.li. that then̄e the party greued ſhal haue atteynt with ſuche proces and plees as is afore reherced / And delayes to be taken away as afore is remembred / except that in this caſe of atteynt / euery perſone of the graund Iury that may dyſpend .v. mare. by the yere of frehold out of auncyent demeane

or is worth .C. marc̄. of godes and catalles. ſhall be able to paſſe in the ſame atteynt / And yf the petyte Iury be atteynted / yt thenne they ſhall in this caſe of atteynt euery of theym in forfeyt. but .v.li. wherof one halfe ſhall be to the kynge & thother half to the partie after the fourme afore reherced / and ouer that to make fyne and raunſonne by the diſcrecōn of the Iuſtices as is aforſayd / And yf there be not perſones of ſuche ſufficiencie within the ſhyre where ony of the ſayd atteyntes ſhal be taken as may paſſe in the ſame / be it ordeyned by the auctorite aboue ſayd / that thenne the tales ſhall be awarded in the Shire nexte adioininge by the diſcreſion of the Iuſtices afore whome the ſame atteyntes ſhall be taken whiche ſhall be warned to appere vpon lyke paynes as is aforſayd and enabled to paſſe in the ſayd atteyntes as yf they were dwellyng in the ſhire where the ſame atteynt ſhall be taken and that the ſame lawes accōn & remedy ordeined by this preſent acte / be kepte for and to all theim that ſhall be greued by ſuche vntrue verdites of ony inheritaunce in diſcent reuercion or remayndre or of ony fre holde in reuercion or remayndre / And yf the partie in atteynt geuen by this acte be nonſuyt of the ſame diſcontinue / that thenne the parti ſo mōſute or ſo diſcontinuenge the ſayd atteynt / make fyne and raunſonne by ye diſcrecōn of the Iuſtices afore whom the ſayd atteynt ſhall be taken and dependynge / And that all atteyntes hereafter to be taken ſhall be taken afore the kynge in his benche or afore the Iuſtices of ye comen place & none in other courtes / And that (Niſi prius) ſhall be graunted by diſcrecōn of the Iuſtices vpon the diſtres And euery of the ſayd petite Iury may appere and anſwere by attourney in the ſayd atteynt / and yt the moyte of the ſayd forfeyture of the petite Iury ſhall be leuied to thuſe of our ſoueraīe lorde bi Capias ad ſatiſfaciend) or (Fieri fac) or Elegit) or by accōn of dette ayenſt euery perſone of the petite Iury ſo forfeitynge and ayenſt his executours and adminiſtratours hauyng thenne ſufficient goodes of theyr ſayd teſtatour not adminiſtred / And thother moyt ſhall by lyke proces be leuied to thuſe of the partye that ſueth ony atteynt geuen by this acte ayenſt euery of the ſayd petite Iury and his executours or adminyſtratours hauyng thenne ſufficiencie of goodes as is aforſayd not adminiſtred / And ye iugement of reſtitucōn to the partie greued ſuynge this acte & execucōn of the ſame to be had and lyke Iugement for the partie defendaunte or tenaunte to be diſcharged of reſtitucion as afore this preſent acte in caſe of a graunde atteynt hath be vſed / Be it alſo ordeyned and enacted by thactorite aboueſaid that in euery writte of atteīte hereafter to be takē by or vpō this acte / yt whiche ſhall be ſuche as other writtes of atteȳt bē & aft ye Teſte of ye ſame write ſhall be writtē thyſe wordes in latyn (per ſtatutum anno vndecimo henrici ſeptimi editum) ¶Be it alſo ordeyned & enacted by the ſame auctorite / that all penalles hereafter to be retorned whiche ben not atte the ſuyte of ony partie that ſhall be made & putte in afore ony Iuſtices of Gaole deliuere or Iuſtices of peas in theyr open Seſſyons to enquyre for the kynge ſhall hereafter be refourmed bi addiciōs and takynge out of names of perſones by diſcrecōn of the ſame Iuſtyces before (whom ſuche panell ſhall be retorned / And that the ſame Iuſtyces ſhall

hereafter cōmaunde the Shiref or his miniſtres in his abſence to putte other perſones in the ſame panell by theyr dyſcrecions. and that panell ſoo hereafter to be made to be goode and lawfull / This acte to endure oonly to the nexte parlyament / 
            
            
               For punyſſhment of periury by examinacōn of the Chaunceller Treſorer &c Capitulo xxv
               THe kyng our ſouerayne lorde well vnderſtondyng the haynous and deteſtable periuries dayly cōmitted within this realme in enqueſtis and Iuries taken aſwell betwix his highnes and other his ſubgettes. and parti and parti as in enqueſtes of office to the hygh dyſpleſur of almyghty god and lettynge of adminiſtracōn of Iuſtice the whyche ꝑiury growyth by vnlawfull reteyndours mayntenaunce embracyng champart
                     •
                  e and corupcōn of good aſwell of the Shirefs as of other officers Notwithſtondyng ony lawes before this time made for the punyſſhment of ſuche offendours / wherfore the kyng our ſouerayne lorde by the aduyce and aſſent of his lordes ſpirituall and temporall and of the comens in this preſent parlyament aſſembled and by auctoryte of ye ſame enacteth eſtablyſſhy
                     •
                  h wylleth and cōmaundyth that all the ſayd lawes be duely putte in excucōn / And it be ordeyned by the ſayd auctoryte that the Iuſtyces of peas wythin thys realme in ony enqueſtes of offyce before theym or ony of theym to be taken Admitte nor take ony panell of ſuche enqueſtes to be retorned afore theym but yf the ſame panell be fyrſt ſeen / before theym and they to refourme it by theyr dyſcrecion yf cauſe be / and that euery panell otherwyſe receyued be voyd and of none effect / And ferthermore be it enacted by the ſayd auctoryte as for ony periuri cōmitted by ony enqueſtis betwene the kynge and the partie. partye and partye / wherupon iugement is herafter geuen that the partye greued or ony other that wyll complayne of ony vnlawfull maintenaunce ymbracynge corrupcōn of ony offycers wherby ye ſayd periury was induced and of periury by the ſayd enqueſtes comytted / may complayne by by
                     •
                  l to be preſented afore the Iuſtyce or Iuſtices be whom iugement ſhall be geu
                     •
                  n Whyche Iuſtice or Iuſt
                     •
                  ces ſhall be bounde to receyue it ſoo that ye cōplainaūt preſent the ſame byll before the ſame Iuſtice or Iuſtices within .vi. dayes after the iugement geuen and fynde ſufficient ſuretie before the ſame Iuſtice or Iuſtyces by his diſcrecōn to be admitted yt wyll bynde them by recogniſaunce or otherwiſe in ſuche ſōme or ſōmes of money ſhall be lymytted by the diſcrecōn of the ſame Iuſtyce or Iuſtices to the ſeuerall partie vpon whom he ſhall complaine vpon condycōn that yf the partye complaynaunt preue not ſuffycyently the matere of his complaynt to be true / that thenne the ſayd complaynaunt to paie ſuche coſtes and damages to the ſeuerall parties greued / and at ſuche tyme. as ſhall be conſidred and awarded by the diſcrecōn of the ſayd perſones that haue power by thys preſent acte to examyne the ſame / And that the

ſayd Iuſtyce or Iuſtyces after the receyte of the ſayd byll of complaynt in fourme reherced / certyfye the ſayd byll vnder his or theyr ſeale or ſeales vnto the Chaunceller of Englonde for the tyme beynge / And thenne the ſame Chaūceller ſhall cauſe by wrytte att the ſuyt and coſtes of the partie complaynaūt all ſuche perſone or perſones ayenſt whom the ſayd complayntis ſoo made to come afore the ſame Chaunceller and Treſorer of Englonde the chyef Iuſtyce of eyther bē
                  che and the clerke of the Rolles for ye tyme beynge. whyche ſhall haue full power and auctoryte by thys preſent acte by theyr dyſcrecyon to examyne all ſuche perſone or perſones apperyng before theym of all thynges compryſed in the bylle of complaynt and to punyſſh̄ al and euery ſuche perſone or perſones as by that examynacōn ſhall be founde offend
                     •
                  r or offendours aſwell of periury as other after theyr dyſcrecyon / And ouer that be it enacted that yf the partye complaynaunt purſue not or proue not his byll of complaynt / thenne he to yelde to euery perſone by hym wrongfully vexed his coſtys and damages and make fyne to the kynge atter the dyſcrecyon of theym before whome the examynacōn is ſoo had / And it is ferder ordeyned that thys acte extende not to the anyntiſement nother vndoyng of the verdyte and iugement yeuen / but that the ſayd verdyte and iugement ſtond in his ſtrength to the tyme it be vndone or auoyde by writte of errour or atteynt or otherwyſe after ſuche order as the comen lawe was afore the tyme of makyng of this ſtatute this preſent acte notwythſtondynge / ¶ And ouer that be it ordeyned by the ſayd auctoryte that yf periury be cōmitted by proues in the kynges courte of the Chauncery or before the kynges honorable Counſeylle or elles where / that thēne the fore named Chaunſeller vpō a bylle to hym putte wyth lyke ſuretye as is afore reherced / make lyke proces to call in the ſuppoſed periured perſones afore the ſayd Chaunceller Treſorer Iuſtyces and clerke of the Rolles and they to haue power to here and examyne the ſayd perſones and yf the ſayd perſones of the periury or other myſbehauing before reherced ſoo be conuycte / that thenne they to be punyſſhed vnder lyke fourme as is afore reherced / Prouyded alway that this acte begyn to take his effect at the feeſt of the Natiuite of our lorde nexte comynge and no lenger to endure but vnto the nexte parlyament / 
            
            
               For holdynge the Shyrefs Tournes wythin the Countees of Suth. Surr. and Suſſex Capitulo xxvi
               PRayen the comens in this preſent parlyament aſſembled that where it was eſtablyſſhed and enacted the fyrſt yere of the reyne of kynge Richarde the thyrde late in dede and not of ryght kynge of Englonde / that noo Bailly nor other offycer ſhold retourne or lawday ony perſone but ſuche as be of good name and fame and haue londes and tenementes of free holde within the ſame countee where they ben enhabytaunt of the yerely value of .xx. ſhelynges / at leeſt

or elles londes and tenementes holden by the cuſtume of the Maner̄ called copiholde within the ſayd Countie of the yerely value of: xxvi. ſhelynges .viii. pence ouer all charges at leſt as in the ſayd ſtature more playnly it appereth / And that all inditementes and preſentementes taken afore ony Shyref in his Torne otherwiſe / be voyde and of none effecte. By reaſon of whyche ſtatute many Shyrefs of the Countees of Suth̄ 
                  Surt and Suſſex intending truely / haue loſte the proffite of many of his or theyr Tornes and many grete myſſantes and offences not preſented nor the offendours and treſpaſſours ī the ſame puniſſhid to the greate hurte of thinhabitauntes of the ſame for within ſome hunders there There ben not ſoo many perſones of ſuche londes and tenementes dwelling out of Fraunchyſes / and though they were of that hauyour / they wolde not appere for the loſſe of two pence or foure pence atte the daye of the Tourne whyche ſmall amerciament is of olde time vſed / wherby the kynges ſayd courtes in dyuers parties of the ſayd Counties ben loſt / In conſideracōn wherof it maye be ſtablyſſhed and enacted by the aduyſe and aſſent of the lordes ſpirituall and temporall and the comyns in this preſent parlyament aſſembled and by auctorite of the ſame / that it ſhall be lefull to euery Shyref of ony of the ſayd Countes to impanell and ſūmon .xxiiij. lawfull men of ſuche Inhabytauntes within the precyncte of euery of his or theyr Tournes / as owe ſute to the ſame Tourne or Tornes / And wherof euery of the ſayd .xxiiij. men haue londes and tenementes of free holde to the yerely value of x. ſhelynges ouer all charges / or londes and tenementes of Copy holde to the yerely value of .xiii. ſhelynges .iiii. pence ouer all charges within ony of the ſayd Counties where ſuche Tourne or Tournes is or to be kepte / And ſoo many there to appere at the day of the Tourne before the ſayd ſhyref vnderſhiref or clerke to enquire of the articles of the ſayd Tourne / And that euery of the ſayd .xxiiii. men ſo beynge impanelled & ſōmoned not apperynge be amerced in the ſayd Shirefs Tourne or Tournes for not doinge of theyr ſuyte to the ſame .xii. pence / Prouyded alway that yf there be .xii. of ye ſayd Inhabitauntes ſoo impanelled within the precyncte of euery Tourne appere Soo that in euery Tourne there be a lawfull Iury of theym ſworne / that thenne alle the remanaunte of theym ſoo impanelled that make defawte be not. amerced for that defawte but oonly for their ſuyt / And as it was lawfully vſed afore the makyng of the ſayd ſtatute / And ouer that be it enacted that after dewe and lawfull ſōmons had of the Inhabitauntes as is aforſayd / yf that there appere not .xii men in euery of the ſayd Shyrefs Tournes of the ſayd Inhabitauntes hauyng londe and tenementes of the yerely value of .x. ſhelynges or .xiii. ſhelynges .iiij. pence. as is aboue ſayd / And yf there be not .xxiiij. ſuche Inhabitauntes whiche maye be ympanelled & ſōmoned ī manere & fourme aboue ſayd in ony of the ſayd tournes That thenne it ſhall be lefull to euery ſhyref vnderſhiref clerke baylly or other mynyſtre to charge and ſwere ony other perſone or perſones in ony of the ſayd ſhirefs tournes where ſuche none ſuffycient and defawte of Inhabytauntes and apparaunce

is hadde / ſuche as be of good name and fame and the beſt by his or theyr dyſcrecion yt appere afore him or theym and none offycer nor ſeruaunt to the ſayd ſhyſhyrefs vnd
                        •
                     ſhy
                        •
                     s clerkes bayllyfs or mynyſters / And that all inditements & p̄
                  ſentmentis other than felony ſo taken concernyng the ſayd ſhyryfs tournes / be good & effectuell notwithſtondyng the ſayd acte made in the fyrſte yere of kynge Rychard aforſayd / And yt the ſhyryfs vndſhyrefs clerkes nor bayllyfs of ony of the ſayd countyes nor none of theym doyng accordynge to this preſent acte / forfeyt ony thyng or be in ony wyſe preiudiſed for doyng ony thynge contrary to the ſayd ſtatute made in the fyrſt yere of the ſayd kynge Rychard / And yt euery ſhyref vnder ſhyref clerk baylly or mynyſter that do contrary to this ordynaunce in ony poynt forfeyt the ſōme of C. ſ at euery tyme that they or ony of theym do the contary of the ſame in ony poynt of the ſame / Sauynge to euery perſone & perſones theyr lawfull lybertyes and fraunchyſes and tenaun
                     •
                  es & ī habytantes of the ſame / This acte to endure vnto the next parlyament. /
            
            
               For fuſtyans to be ſhorne with the brode ſheare Capitulo xxvij
               PRayen the comens in this preſent parlyament aſſembled yt where as fuſtyans brought from the partyes of b
                     •
                  yond theſe vnſhorne in to this realme / haue be & ſhold be ye moſte profytableſt cloth for doublets & for other weryng clothes gretly vſed among the comen people of this realme & lengeſt haue endured of ony thyng that hath comen in to the ſame realme from the ſayd partyes as to ye entent / wherof the cauſe hath ben that ſuch fuſtyans afore this tyme haue be truely wrought & ſhorne wt ye brode ſhere & wyth none other inſtrument or other duceyfull meane occupyed vpon ye ſame / Now ſo it is ye dyuers ꝑſones by ſubtylte & vndue ſleyghtes & meanes haue dyſceyuably ymagyned & contryued inſtrumentes of Iron / wt the whych yrens in the moſt hygheſt & ſecrete places of theyr houſes they ſtryke and draw ye ſayd yrons on the ſayd fuſtiās vnſhorne / by meanes wherof they plucke of both the noppe and the cotton of the the ſame fuſtyans and breke comynly both the ground and thredes in ſunder / & after by crafty ſlykyng they make the ſame fuſtyans to appere to the comen people fyne hole and ſound / And alſo they reyſe vp the cotton of ſuch fuſtyās / and then take a lyght candell and ſet in the fuſtyan brēnyng whyche ſengeth & brē
                  nyth a way the cotton of the ſame fuſtyan from the tone end to that other down to ye hard thredes in ſtede of ſheryng & after that put them in colour and ſo ſubtylly dreſſe theym / that theyr fals werke can not be eſpyed wythout it be by werkmen ſherers of ſuche fuſtyans or by the werers of the ſame / And that by ſuch ſubtyltees where as fuſtyans made in doublettes or put to ony other vſe were wont and myght endure the ſpace of two yeres or more wyll not endure now hole by ye ſpace of .iiij. monethes ſcarcely to ye grete hurt of ye pore comens & ſeruȳg men of this reame to ye grete damage loſſe & diſceyt of ye kȳges true ſubgetꝭ byers

& werers of ſuche fuſtyan / for remedy wherof be it enacted ordeyned and eſtablyſſhed by the kynge our ſouerayne lorde & ye lordes ſpyrytual and temporall and the comyns in this preſent parlyament aſſembled and by auctoryte of the ſame / that none ſuche yren or inſtrumentys nor ony other vntrue ſubtyll mene of ſleyght be from henſforth vſed vpon ony fyſtyan within this reame but only by the brode ſheres vpon forfeyture of .xx. ſ. to be leuyed for euery defawte of euery ſuche perſone or perſones herafter offendyng and vſyng ony ſuche dyſceyuable Inſtrumentis or ſleyghtes as is aforſayd / The tone half of the forfeytures to be to the kynge our ſouerayn lord and that other half to hym or theym that wyll ſue for the ſame forfeytures by accyon of dette byll or Informacyon in ony of the kynges courtes of recorde where the ſame may be determyned after the courſe of the comen law and that the defendaunt in ſuche behalf / in noo wyſe be admytted to wage his law nor that ony proteccyon or eſſoyne be in the ſame alowable / And ouer this be it ordeyned by the ſayd auctoryte / that the mayr and wardeyns of ſhermen of the Cyte of London for the tyme beyng haue auctoryte to entre and ſerche the werkmenſhyp of all manere perſones occupyeng the brode ſhere as wel fuſtyans as cloth and the execucyon of this preſent acte to aſwell of deynezyns as of forens and ſtraungers / 
            
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
      
   