
      
         
            
            
            
               An Introduction to
the loue of God.
(⸫)
            Accompted among the workes of
S. Auguſtine, and ſet forth in his
name, very profitable to moue
all men to loue God for his
benefits receaued
            
               MATH. 22.
               ¶Thou ſhalte loue the Lorde thy God
with al thy harte, wyth al thy ſoule, and
with al thy mynd. This is the greateſt
and the firſt commaundement. The ſecond
is lyke to this. Thou ſhalte loue
thy neighboure as thy ſelfe. In theſe
two commaundementes hange all the
law and the Prophets.
            
            
               1 IOHN. 2.
               Loue not the world, neither the things
that are in the worlde. If a man loue
the world, the loue of the Father is
not in hym.
            
            Seene and alowed accordinge to the
Quenes Maieſties Iniunctions.
Anno, 1574.
            
            
               
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶TO THE MOST
vertuous and noble Princes
Queene Elizabeth, by the grace
of God, Queene of England, Fraunce,
and Ireland, defender of the
fayth. &c.
            
               AMong all other benefites,
moſt gracious
ſoueraigne Ladie,
which God in
mercie hath beſtowed
vpon your roial
perſon▪ the knowledge
of GOD is
moſt ſinguler, & for the which we your
humble Subiectes haue moſte cauſe to
prayſe God. But I meane not the knowledge
of hys eſſence or beyng, whych
none of the Angels or heauenly powers
are able to comprehend: Neyther yet
that general knowledge of God which
is gotten by his creatures and workes
from the creation of the world. Which
although it bee of no force to chaunge
the mynde, & regenerate to true godlynes,
yet are all men by it made inexcuſeable

before God, in as muche as
when they knewe God,Roma. 1. they glorified
him not as God. But I mean the chiefe
and ſinguler knowledge of God, wherby
not onely his vniuerſall power, and
infinite mercy repleniſhing the whole
earth, but alſo his vnſearchable counſel
in ſauing vs by Chriſt, hidden from the
world, is well perceiued and knowen.
This knowledge of God hath eternall
lyfe annexed vnto it,Iohn. 17. as ſayth Chriſt:
Thys is lyfe eternall, that they myght
know thee the onely true God, & Ieſus
Chriſt whom thou haſt ſent. And as this
knowledge of God doth comprehende
in it the counſell of God to ſaue vs by
Chriſt: ſo it doth renue the whole mā,
& vrgeth hym to apprehend that good
thing which it ſheweth, accordyng to
the ſaying of Chriſt: you ſhall knowe
the truth, and the truth ſhall make you
free.
            That this knowledge of God, by hys
good ſpirite, already planted in your
Maieſties hart, might dayly encreaſe, &
more and more bee confirmed, I haue
choſen out a litle ſhort treatiſe, ſtirryng

and mouing verye much to the loue of
God, through the conſideration of hys
benefites: Accompted amonge the
workes of ſaint Auguſtine, & ſet forth
in hys name, to dedicate the ſame to
your Highnes. The diligent vewe and
conſideration whereof, I knowe ryght
well, wyll not a litle enflame and ſet on
fire thoſe ſparkes of the knowledge &
loue of God, already by Gods good ſpirite
kindled in your royall hart. For I
am not ignorant, moſt gracious ſoueraigne,
of your good and gracious nature,
and how muche your Maieſtye is
enclined to loue and mercy, to pity the
poore & miſerable, to reſpect the cauſes
of ſuch as are in diſtreſſe, to help the
oppreſſed, to pardon offences, to doo
good to all men, which all are nothing
els but fruites of that knowledge and
loue of God, whych by the woorde of
God, and Goſpell of Chriſt you haue
conceaued. And as the ſame hath alredy
brought forth theſe fruites, ſo I nothing
doubt, but the continuall meditation
of Gods infinite loue, and innumerable
benefits, wyl bring forth more

loue of God, to ſolace and comfort her
ſelfe onely in his loue, in reſpect whereof,
all pleaſure, ioy, & loue of this world
waxeth vyle, and chuſeth rather wyth
him to beare afflictions, and ſuffer hard
thinges, then with the world to enioye
the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon. For
ſurely ſuche is the nature of the loue of
God, that as it nothing forceth of, or
regardeth not the afflictiōs of thys life,
ſo it vtterlye contemneth and treadeth
vnder foote the vanities & loue of this
world, as nothing, in reſpect of his loue,
who firſt hath loued vs.
            To the furtherance whereof, the diligent
reading of this litle treatiſe, wyll
very much helpe. Wherein the Author,
euen of ſenſe and feeling, and as one all
together rauiſhed with the loue of god
ſetteth forth how diuerſly, by his benefites
and loue, we are mooued to loue
him, and that his vnſpeakeable loue towards
vs, can no waies better be recompenced,
then by loue againe. Wherein
if it ſhall pleaſe your Maieſty to beſtow
ſome ſhort tyme, I know the more it is
read, the more comfortable delight wil

be conceiued therein. And though paraduenture
this myght bee thought of
ſome a trauaile altogether ſuperfluous,
to tranſlate the ſame out of Lattin, in
which tong it was firſt wrytten, and to
dedicate the ſame to your highnes, conſidering
the excellencie of your knowledge
in the ſame tounge, wherein you
might vvith more delectation & pleaſure
haue ſolaced your ſelfe: yet to me
it ſhould not ſeeme ſuperfluous, beyng
ſet foorth in a language that moſte of
your Subiectes do vnderſtand, & therfore
like to redounde to the profite of
the moe. And beſides forth, that vvhich
is ſet foorth vnder the protection and
priuiledge of Princes, is of all men the
more diligently read.
            And to vvhom myght I more aptlye
dedicate the introduction to the loue
of God, then to ſo godly and vertuous
a Prince, out of vvhoſe breſt ther flovveth
ſuch ſtreames of mercy, and flames
of loue tovvard her ſubiectes, that ſhee
ſeemeth an apt & meete ſoyle of God,
vvherein the loue of God myght profitablye
be planted. The God of loue

therefore, enflame your moſt royal hart
vvith his loue, and vvith his holy ſpirit
direct you in the ryght courſe to eternall
lyfe: That in this life your Maieſty
may haue ſuch ſence and feeling of hys
loue, that in tyme to come you may
haue the full fruition therof in
his eternall glorye.
Amen.
            
               Your Maieſties moſt humble
Subiect and faithful ſeruaunt,
                  Edmund Roffen.
               
            
            Viuat Regina.
         
         
            
            Ad ſereniſsimam D. D.
Elizabetham Angliae, Franciae, &
Hiberniae Reginam, fidei
defenſ. &c.
            
               ¶EPIGRAMMATA.
               Neſcia virgo viri, regni Regina potentis,
               Nobilibus multum ſollicitata procis
               Non ſociata tamen: quia non mortalevidetur
               Coniugium mentem tangere poſſe tuam.
               Accipe diuini coeleſtia pignora ſcripti,
               Vnde tuum flagret pectus amore Dei.
               Qui pius, in Chriſto te tam redamab it Ieſu,
               Quam fuerit Chriſtus totus amore tuus.
               Sed tuus ille quidem manet, aeternū
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   manebit
               Illius in ſtudio tu quia fixa manes.
               Nil opus eſt igitur noſtro, Regina, libello
               Qui doc
                     •
                  t vt facias quod prior ipſa facis.
               Nil opus eſt fateor: forſan tamen iſta legendo
               Eſſe tuus poterit multiplicatus amor.
            
            
               Ad eandem Principem.
               Sacra deo Princeps, et ſacro nomine virgo,
               Accipe quae ſacro pignora fonte fluunt:
               Omni digna quidē, ſed te digniſsima (prīceps)
               Principe, ſacrato nomine, corde, fide,
               
                  
                  
                     •…
                  en ab Hebraeis ſacrati foederis index:
               Mens venit a ſummo numine ſancta tibi.
               Atqui ſanctā ſacra decent, tibi cōſecro ſacra,
               Principibus multis vix bene nota viris.
            
            
               Ad eandem Principem.
               Chara deo Princeps, diuinum dilige numen:
               Viue Deo, et viues, Elizabetha diu.
               Et patriae perchara tuae, perchara Britannis,
               Quae nacta es, recta ſceptra tuere manu.
               Grata
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tum muſis gratas amplectere muſas:
               Maximus at tibi ſit rel
                     •
                  igionis amor.
               Quae facis, et facies, ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tā monuiſſe iuuabit,
               Quam feciſſe iuuat ſingula ſponte tua.
            
            
               Ad eandem Principem.
               Summa laus regum fuit inclytorum,
               Fortiter fines patriae tueri:
               Quod tamen non praeſtitit vlla regum
               Regia virtus▪
               
               Extulit quoſdam Deus ipſe reges:
               Depulit quoſdam Deus ille reges:
               Praeſtiterunt omnia ſola diui
               Sceptra potentis.
               
                  
Ergo diuinum reuerere numen:
               Numinis tanti celebrato nomen:
               Vnius laudem tua vota ſpectent
               Fuſa per auras.
            
            
               Ad Librum.
               Faelix marmoreas migrato in aedes:
               Intra limina clarioris Aulae:
               Si noui dominam palatij huius,
               Vltro purpureum petet libellum.
            
            
               ¶DE MODO DILIGENdi
Deum diſtichon.
               Dilige mente deum tota, ratione modo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  ,
               Omnem qui ſuperet cum ratione modum.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               FOR as muche as that famous
Clarke Eraſmus, and
profounde Cenſor, both of
wyt and skill, letteth not
firſt to confeſſe that thys
treatiſe following, taſteth of
good learning, though the ſtile, phraſe, and order
differ from the workes of S. Auguſtine, in
the number of the which it hath bene accompted:
And next, that it deſcryeth or bewraieth
a very diligent Reader of that holy father
his volumes, out of whoſe confeſsions eſpecially
hee hath inſerted into this Pamphlet manye
wholeſome and proper ſentences, as well teaching
and prouing that S. Auſtine doth ſo often
inculcate: namely that nothing was create
without the word of God, as mouing and ſtyrring
vs to ghoſtly loue and affection, from the
right feeling of the which it ſeemeth to haue
flowen: I am the bolder to preſume that to thee
(good Reader) it ſhall be both the more leefe
and acceptable: And the rather becauſe that
I haue endeuoured my ſelfe to the vttermoſt of
my power, in the tranſlatyng hereof, ſo to expreſſe
the copye vſed by the Author, as no obſcuritie
(I truſt) may ſeme to remaine, and ſo

with him to haue iterated one thyng or matter,
that it may rather ſerue as a drop by oft falling
to pearce more deepelye, then to breede or
induce any lothſomnes or ſacietie. For albeit
that thinges earthlye, vayne, and tranſitorie
may iuſtly bring with them a certaine tedious
diſdaine, when they are to often or commonly
repeated, or lacke the releefe of pleaſant varietie,
yet am I perſwaded, and ſo would I haue
thee, that thinges heauenly, euerlaſting, endles
and durable, and verely repleate wyth blyſſe
and felicitie, ſo worthely deſerue the Poet hys
teſtimonie, that the oftener they be inculcate,
the more they ſhall double their pleaſure wyth
profit. Take this therefore in gree and good
worth, how ſoeuer for want of good methode
it ſeeme to be confuſed, as a wholeſome meditation,
and no leſſe needefull then fruitfull for
this tyme and ſeaſon, in the whyche ſelfe loue,
friēding of the fleſh, and vanity of the world ſo
vniuerſally rage and raigne, as I pity to ſee, &
am ſorry to report. For herein thou mayſt by
contemplation and vew of thy duty to God, &
his loue to thee, learne to abandon whatſoeuer
to thy ſoule health is repugnant or aduerſant,
without the interlacing of ſuperſtitious vanities
or feare of infection proceding frō popery.

For in auoyding thereof, I confeſſe me plainly
that I haue euen wittingly vſed in this trāſlation
a certain fredome and libertie, and reduced
the ſenſe of the Author, to the conſonancy,
and Canon of the holy ſcripture.
            For as I acknowledge it to be great and preſumptuous
impiety, to racke or vſe force in diuine
teſtimonies, ſuche I meane as are included
within the compaſſe of both Teſtaments,
as holden & allowed for canonical ſcriptures:
beyng by God his own mouth prohibited anye
way to wreſt or to wring them: ſo I thinke it
not vnlawfull, but rather requiſite and neceſſarie,
in tranſlating or readyng the bookes of
Interpretours, be they olde, be they newe, or
what ſoeuer they be, ſithens they cannot well
be without ſome wartes of errour, eſpeciallye
when they are conceaued & written in mood
and affection, or reſt in the preiudicate opinions
of humane infirmitie, or willingly followe
the iniquitie of their time: to vſe ſuch moderation,
diſcretion and iudgement grounded vp
on holy writ, as by diminiſhing, adding, altering,
or raſing, they may reaſonably be amended,
and as in part, ſo in all made fruitfull to
the Reader. This if any man either of ſpiced
conſcience, or wayward mynde, diſlike or controle,

I wiſh him more wyt, then fantaſtically
to deſire to haue hurtfull thinges ioyned to the
wholeſome as of neceſsity, eſpecially when they
maye conuenientlye either be taken awaye, or
chaunged, without preiudice done to God his
word, or offence geuen to good men. For I hold
him an vnwiſeman, and more then franticke
in folly, that wil haue any ſuch opinion of any
Phiſicion, how learned or skilful ſo euer he be,
that bccauſe hee hath receaued at his handes
many wholeſome drugs, and comfortable confections,
which at ſundry times turned to hys
eaſe, health and ſanitie: that a poyſon by the
ſame Phiſition in the ende or among them ſo
miniſtred, ſhall not be able to annoy or to hurt
him: eſpecially when the drugs or confections
before geuen, had neyther qualitie, quantitie,
nor operation in them to qualifie, reſiſt, or expell
the poiſon. And yet is there no earthly poiſon
ſo peſtilent to the body, as the poyſon of errour
is noyſome to the ſoule. And therfore to
fantaſie any earthly man ſo muche in the dyſcourſe
of anye peece of doctrine (conſidering
that as he may both deceiue and be deceiued,
ſo he may therin couertly conuey into the eares
of his hearer, as many damnable paradoxes
as Chriſtian articles) that not onely the care

ſhall bee taken awaye from vs to eſchewe hys
hereſies, but alſo a deſire faire kindled to lyke
and to learne them, where nothing is infarced
to their confutation, I holde it ſo incurable a
peece of frenſie, as all the pollicies in the world
are not able to tame.
            Thus truſtyng that I haue not onelye acquaynted
thee with the profit and cōmoditie
which this treatiſe ſhall yeld thee, but that I
haue alſo rendred a ſufficient reaſon of my libertie
in tranſlation, and of alteryng the ſenſe
where it tended any way to the derogation of
Gods glory by attributing to much to man his
merites and deſeruinges, and aduertiſing thee
to eſteeme no man his workes, opinions, doctrine,
or counſail, further then they ſhall agree
with the touchſtone of all truth and veritie: I
wiſh thee the grace of God his holye ſpirite to
conduct & leade thee into all ſuch thinges
as ſhall ſtand with thine own dutie,
and tend to the glorie of the
whole Trinitie.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            IF good to learne be thine entent,
            And not to plain of tyme yll ſpent:
            But ſo temploy thy preſent payne,
            As endles fruit may be thy gayne:
            This Treatiſe reade, and herein vew
            Al duties to thy Sauiour dew.
            For this doth teache for thy behoue,
            The lord thy god how thou ſhalt loue
            For loue of thee him ſelfe that gaue
            To death, frō death thy ſoule to ſaue.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶An introduction to the
loue of God.
            
               ¶The firſt Chapter.
               That the loue of God and thy neighbour
cannot be ſeperated.
               
                  WIth wakefull heede, and
diligent mynde, earneſt
endeuour, and continual
carefulnes, it becommeth
& behoueth vs, to ſearche
and to learne, how, and
what way, we may eſcape hell torment,
and purchace heauens ioy: Sithens neither
that torment may be auoyded, nor
that ioy procured, except the meanes be
knowen, how that one may be ſhunned,
& that other attained. Let vs therfore the
more willingly heare, and the more diligently
conſider, the wordes of the Apoſtle,
in the which he propoſeth theſe two
thinges, to were, that heauens ioy is vnſpeakeable:
and which is the waye that
leadeth vnto life:1. Cori. 2. For he ſaith, that neyther
eye hath ſeene, nor eare hath heard,
nor the hart of man conceiued the things
which God hath prepared for them that

loue him. Loe now, euen by thys that
the Apoſtel ſaith, that GOD hathe prepared
good thinges for them that loue
him, it appereath, that loue is both the
way, and the meane by the which we aſpire
vnto them. But the loue of God,
without the loue of thy neighbour cānot
be had, as witneſſeth ſ. Iohn, who ſaith:
He that loueth not his brother whom he
ſeeth,1. Iohn. 4 how can he loue God whom he ſeeth
not? And this cōmaundement haue
we from God, that whoſo loueth God,
ſhall alſo loue his neighbour. And thus
in theeſe two loues conſiſteth that true
loue which thapoſtle ſpeaketh of ſaying:
And yet ſhew I vnto you a more excellent
waye.1▪ Cor. 12. This more excellent way is
loue, which leadeth to that heauenly coū
                  trie,
and without the which no man can
come vnto it.
               But who is in this way? or who knoweth
it? Forſoth he that loueth both God
and his neighbour. Howe then is God
firſt, and next the neighbour to be loued?
We muſt loue God more thē our ſelues,
and our neighbour as our ſelues. We

loue God more then our ſelues, when we
in all thinges preferre his pleaſure and
cōmaundementes before our own wyls.
But our neighbour we are not cōmaunded
to loue aboue our ſelues, but as our
ſelues, that is: to will, and to wiſh vnto
him all the goodnes which we ought to
wyll or wiſh to our ſelues, and ſpecially
the euerlaſting ioy and blyſſe, and to the
attainment thereof to aſſiſt, and to helpe
him both with bodely & ſpiritual goodes,
as reaſon requireth, and abilitie permitteth.
In conſideration whereof the Lord
ſayth in the Goſpell:Math. 8. Whatſoeuer ye
would that men ſhould do vnto you, doo
ye euen the ſame vnto them alſo. And
ſ. Iohn ſaith:1. Iohn. 3. Let vs not loue in word,
neither in tong, but in deede and veritie.
But who are thoſe neyghbours whom
we ought thus to loue? Truly all Chriſtian
men, Iewes, and Heathen, friendes
and enemies.
            
            
               ¶The ſecond Chapter.
               ¶Why and how God is to be loued.
               
                  
                  SIthens al our ſoule health then
conſiſteth in loue, why, & how
the Lord is to be loued, let vs
diligently weigh and conſider
But to excite, nooriſh, and increaſe the
loue of God in vs, nothing is ſo forceble,
as the often remembrance, and diligent
conſideration of his benefites. So great
thinges hath he geuen vs, heaped and beſtowed
vpon vs, that our ſoule vtterlye
fainteth in the viewe of his bountie and
goodnes. But in this caſe though we be
not able to yelde vnto him ſo many, and
ſo great thankes, as beſeemeth our loue,
and becommeth our ſeruice: yet muſt we
not faile, to render him ſo many, and ſo
great as we can. And ſee wherefore: to
wete, for his benefites, which for his great
loue, and free beneuolence, our merites or
deſertes requiring none ſuche, the Lord
hath moſte graciouſlye beſtowed vpon
vs, he is entirelye of vs to bee beloued.
But how, or in what ſort God is to be loued,
that his commaundement, which he
ſo ſtraightly preſcribed, and ſo preciſelye
wyl haue kept and obſerued on our part,

doth manifeſtly ſhew and declare.
               Geue care therefore, O Man, to that
commaundement, which of all other is
greateſt, and chiefeſt. Geue eare I ſay,
and heare it diligentlye, print it in memory,
thinke on it continuallye, and to
thy power fulfyll it dayly and hourelye.
That commaundement is this:Deut. 6. Thou
ſhalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy
hart, that is, with al thine vnderſtāding,
and with all thy ſoule, that is, with al thy
will, and with al thy minde, that is, with
al thy memory, that thou mayeſt reſerue
& keepe all thy thoughtes, al thy lyfe, and
all thy ſkill and knowledge, to yeld vnto
him thine obedience and ſeruice. But
peraduenture, becauſe thou deemeſt thy
ſelfe to be loued of God but a litle, therefore
thou art not afeard to loue hym againe
but lightly. Search therfore, and
weigh with thy ſelfe in thy minde, with
what giftes and benefits he hath endued
thee already, and what he hath promiſed
to beſtowe on thee hereafter: And thou
ſhalt forthwith finde, that thou art boūde
to loue him beyond all might, & meaſure.

But to the end that the loue of God may
in thee be quickned, & augment the mor
                     •
                  
aboundantlye: weighe and conſider by
whom, why, and to what end mankinde
was firſt created, and what thinges▪ God
made for the vſe, and eaſe of man. For
this is to be gathered, that of the thinges
created, whether they be heauenly or terreſtriall,
viſible or inuiſible, ther is none
other cauſe, but the mere goodnes of the
Creator, which is the Lord God onelye
one, and alone. Whoſe goodnes is of ſuch
greatnes, that of that bliſſefulnes, by the
which he is moſt highlie happy, & bleſſed
for euer, he willeth other to be partners,
becauſe he ſeeth it may be imparted, but
not diminiſhed. That goodnes therfore
which him ſelfe is, and by the which him
ſelfe is bleſſed, onely of his free goodnes,
and not of neceſſitie, woulde he impart
and communicate vnto others, becauſe it
appertaineth to the chiefe good, to haue
will to be profitable, and beſeemeth the
moſt mightie, not to be hurtfull. But becauſe
no man is able to bee partaker of
his bliſſefulnes, but by vnderſtanding,

(for the more it is vnderſtanded, the
more fully it is had) God made a reaſonable
creature, which might not onelye
vnderſtand the chiefe good, but that by
vnderſtanding might alſo loue it, and by
louyng, myght poſſeſſe it, and by poſſeſſing,
might vſe it: and ſo diſtinguiſhed
that creature, that part might remaine in
the purity of him ſelfe, and not be ioyned
with a bodye, as the Aungell, and parte
might be coupled to a body, as the ſoule.
The reaſonable creature therfore, is deuided
into that whiche hath not, and to
that which hath a bodye? That which is
voyde of body is called an Aungel. And
that which hath bodye, is called a Man,
conſiſtinge of the fleſhe, and a reaſonable
ſoule.
               The principall cauſe therfore, why the
reaſonable creature was ordeyned, is ye
goodnes of God. So that both man, and
Aungell, were made bycauſe of Gods
goodnes, for by reaſon that god is good
we are, & in as much as we are, we are
good alſo. But to what ende, was the
reaſonable creature created? To praiſe

God, to ſerue him, and to vſe and enioy
him. In the which the creature him ſelfe
profiteth, and not God. For God is euer
perfit and fulfilled of all ſoueraine bounty,
and goodnes, & can neither be increaſed,
nor diminiſhed. And therefore that
reaſonable creature was created of god,
is to bee referred to the goodnes of the
Creator, and the profyt of the creature.
In ſo muche that as oft as this queſtion
is aſked, why or to what ende, the reaſonable
creature was made? The aunſwer
muſt be, for the goodnes of the Creator,
& the profit of the creature. For it auayleth
the creature to ſerue God, and both
to haue and enioy him.
            
            
               ¶The third Chapter.
               ¶The cauſe of the creation of Angels
men, and all other creatures.
               
                  BOth Aungell therefore, and
Man are ſayd to be made for
God, not bycauſe God the
Creatour, and moſt blyſfull,
hath nede of the ſeruice either of Angell
or Man, for hee hath no want of our

goods, but that both Man and Angell,
might ſerue and vſe him, whom to ſerue
is to raygne. For in this the ſeruant receiueth
the profit, and not he to whom it
is done. And as man was made for god,
ſo the world was made for man, that it
might ſerue hym. Man therefore was
placed in ſuch ſtate and degree, both that
he ſhoulde be ſerued, and that he ſhould
ſerue: that on eche ſyde, all the goodnes
might redound to hym ſelfe, as well of
the ſeruice which he receiueth, as of that
which he doth. For ſo God would that
Man ſhuld ſerue him, that not God, but
Man myght bee profited by the ſeruice.
And he alſo would that the world ſhuld
ſo ſerue Man, as Man thereby might in
like ſort be holpen. Al the goodnes therfore
redoūded to man, both of that which
was made for hym, and of that alſo, for
the which him ſelfe was made. For all
thynges are ours ſayth the Apoſtle,1. Cor. 3. the
thynges aboue vs, the thynges equall
with vs, and the thinges inferiour vnto
vs: The thinges aboue vs are ours, to
vſe and enioy, as God in Trinitie, & trinitie
in vnitie. The thinges equall with

vs, are ours to agree wyth all: as the
Angels, who albeit at this preſent they
be aboue vs, ſhall in time to come notwithſtanding
be our Mates, and our equals.
The thinges inferiour vnto vs,
are alſo ours, to ſtand vs in ſtede, and to
ſerue our neceſſities. As the thynges
which pertaine to the Lord and Maſter,
are alſo the Seruauntes, not by takyng
from the Lord or Mayſter hys ryght or
title, but becauſe they alſo ſerue to the
vſe of the ſeruant. It is therfore ſaid in
certain places of the ſcriptures, that Angels
doo ſerue vs, becauſe they for our
ſakes, are ſent forth to miniſter. In conſideration
wherof the Apoſtle hath theſe
wordes: Are they not all miniſtring ſpirites,Heb. 1.
that are ſent to miniſter for theyr
ſakes which ſhal be heiers of ſaluation?
Neither let this ſeeme incredible to man
in as muche as the creator him ſelfe, and
Kyng of aungels came not to be ſerued,
but to ſerue, & to geue his lyfe for many.
And the aungels are ſayde to offer oure
prayers, and vowes vnto God, not bycauſe
they teache or inſtruct God of our
deſires or meaninges, who knoweth all

things before they come to paſſe, as well
hee knoweth them after they are done,
but bycauſe they craue to vnderſtande
Gods pleaſure and will touchinge theſe
thinges, and what they ſhall know to be
diſpoſed, according to Gods heſt, & commaundement,
that they conuey to vs, eyther
openly or in ſecrete:Tobi. 12. Wher vpon the
Angell ſayd vnto men. When ye prayed
I offered your prayers vnto God. In
like manner, euen we alſo, whē we pray
we do not teach god, as if he were ignorant
eyther of our deſire, or of our nede:
but ye reaſonable creature muſt of neceſſity
commit & refer his temporal cauſes
to the eternal verity: eyther by deſiring
that which he could haue, or by conſentinge
and aſking what Gods will is, he
ſhall haue. From the highe habitation of
the heauens therfore, doth the ſouerayne
bountye and loue of God drawe downe
vnto vs the aungels of God, to enquire
Gods will for vs, to viſite and to helpe
vs, for God, for vs, and for themſelues.
For god, bycauſe that as meete is, they
imitate the merciful bowels of his loue,
and pity towards vs, for vs bicauſe that

in vs, they haue their own
                     •
                   image and
lykenes, in great admiration and reuerence,
for them ſelues, becauſe that with
feruent deſire and longing, they awayte
the ſupply of their orders by vs.
            
            
               ¶The fourth Chapter.
               ¶Of the loue of God towards vs.
               
                  THis therfore is moſt nedefull
and neceſſary, that euery
man ſeuerally do conſider
himſelfe, and when he
hath attained the ful perfect knowledge
of his owne worthynes & dignity (leaſt
he do iniury to his creatour) in no wiſe
to loue anye thing, that anye waye is to
him ſelfe inferiour. For the thinges that
in them ſelues conſidered, do ſeeme to be
beutifull, when they are compared with
other, are but homely, and vyle. And as
it is great folly, to ioyn foule thinges, wt
fayre thinges, So is it not vnſemely, of
thoſe thinges which haue a meane and
no counterfayte beutye, to make a compariſon,
and to matche them wyth the
things that are moſt fayre, and beutiful.
Theefore my ſoule vew well thine own

beuty, and therby learne and vnderſtand
what beutye thou ſhalt loue. But if the
ſight of thy ſelfe be ſo duld, duſkt, or darkned,
by thine own negligence, that thou
canſt behold thine owne ſelfe, neither as
it becommeth, nor as it behooueth thee:
Why yet doeſt thou not by the iudgemēt
at the leaſt of ſom other, gather that true
eſtimation of thy ſelf, which thou ſhouldeſt
doo? Thou haſt a Spouſe, but hys
ſoueraigne beuty thou knoweſt not, becauſe
thou neuer yet ſaw his face or coū
                  tenance.
But he ſeeth thee: and if he ſaw
thee not, he would not loue thee. This
Spouſe differryng to ſhewe, or preſent
him ſelfe vnto thee, hath ſent thee giftes,
as pledges and tokens of his loue, wherby
thou mighteſt know his affection towardes
thee. If thou myghteſt ſee hys
face, thou wouldeſt bee nothyng doubtful:
for then ſhouldeſt thou perceiue that
he, who is ſo faire, ſo comelye, ſo beutyfull,
and ſo ſynguler, would not be enamoured
at the ſyght of thee, if ſome ſynguler
beutye in thee, far paſſing the beuty
of euery other creature, dyd not moue
and allure him to that loue and affection,

not becauſe it was thyne, 
                     〈◊〉
                   hys owne
beuty in ther. Therefore what meaneſt
thou? or whereabout goeſt thou: Becauſe
thou canſt not ſee hym preſentlye,
by meanes of his abſence, therefore wilt
thou neyther be afearde nor aſhamed to
do him iniury, and not onelye contemne
his ſynguler loue, but alſo to yelde thy
ſelfe vaſſaile to thyne own luſt and ſenſualiti
                     •
                  ?
Do not ſo my Soule, do not ſo,
for if thou bee not yet able to conceaue
what one he is, that loueth thee, yet conſider
at the leaſt, the earneſt, the pledge,
the gage, and the token whych hee hath
ſent, and geuen thee: for it maye ſo bee,
in and by his gyft which thou haſt wyth
thee, and in thy poſſeſſion, thou mayeſt
learne wyth what affection thou oughteſt
to loue him, and with what zeale and
diligence thou ſhouldeſt reſerue thy ſelfe
for him. His earneſt is notable, his gift
is great, and noble: For it ſtandeth not
with the Maieſty of a great man to geue
ſmall thinges, nor with the diſcretion of
a wyſe man, for a ſmall thyng to geue
great. And yet a great thing is it which
he hath geuen thee. But greater is it,

which he loueth in thee. But what is it
O my Soule, which thy Spouſe in hys
kindnes hath geuen thee? Looke vpon
the worlde, and examine whether there
be any thing therin that doth not ſeruice
vnto thee. Euery creature directeth his
courſe to this ende, to wayte and tende
vpon thee, to do thee ſeruice, to ſupplye
thy neede, and to tender thy profit. And
accompliſheth both thy delight and commoditye,
according to that which eyther
aboundeth in them, or remaineth in thee.
The heauen, the earth, the ayre, the ſea,
and all that in them is, ceaſe not to accompliſh
and to fulfyll the ſame. The
circuite of times alſo, and the annual reuolution,
whych wyth reuiued partes
doth renew, and refreſh the old, repaire
the ruinons, & reſtore the decayed, with
cōtinual ſuſtenance ſerueth thy purpoſe.
Who then thinkeſt thou, hath ordayned
theſe thinges? Who hath geuen that cō
                  maundement,
or preſcribed to Nature,
with her whole reuenewes as it were, to
maintaine thy port? Thou receaueſt a
benefit, and knoweſt not the Author, the
gift is manifeſt, but the geuer is hidden,

and yet thine owne reaſon ſuffereth thee
not to be doubtfull, but inſtructeth thee,
that this is not thine own due, but an other
bodies benefite. Whatſoeuer he be
therfore, he hath done very much for vs.
And hee that coulde fynde in his hart to
geue vs ſo much, hath alſo loued and affectioned
vs as much. The gift therfore
declareth both who loueth, & who muſt
ſo highly be loued.
               And what great folly is it, not to couet
the loue of one ſo mighty: and howe
wicked and peruers not to loue him that
is ſo louing and louelye? Therefore if
thou loue anye thinges contained vnder
heauen, loue them as thine Inferiours,
loue them as thy ſeruauntes, as the tokens
of thy Spouſe, as the giftes of thy
friende, and the benefites of thy Lorde:
and in ſuch ſort yet, as thou may alwaies
remember, that thou art bounde and beholding
vnto hym, and that thou ought
to loue thoſe thinges, not for thē ſelues,
but for him, nor with him, but for and by
him, & finallye, that thou muſt loue him
aboue them, becauſe he both made them,
and gaue them vnto thee.
            
            
               
               ¶The fift Chapter.
               ¶Of the fruition of God.
               
                  NOwe beware my Soule, that
thou (as God forbydde thou
ſhouldeſt) be not accompted a
breaker of thy faith to him, by
louing the giftes of the geuer, more then
the affection or zeale of the Louer. And
yet ſhalt thou do greater iniurye to hys
loue, if thou receyue hys giftes, and doo
not recompence his good wyll. Either
therfore refuſe his giftes, if thou can, or
if thou cannot ſo do, yelde loue for loue,
in due quantitie and meaſure. Loue him
for him ſelfe, loue thy ſelfe for him: loue
him to vſe him, and ſo loue thy ſelfe that
thou may not be hated, but loued of him.
Loue him I ſay in the gifts that he hath
geuen thee, loue him to thy vſe, and loue
thy ſelfe for hym. For this is pure and
chaſte loue, that hath in it neither diſhoneſtie
nor filth, nor any thing els that is
euyll or tranſitorie.
               Conſider therefore (O my Soule)
what thinges thou haſt receiued, cōmon
with all, ſpeciall with ſome, and ſynguler
or proper to thy ſelfe alone. And in

all theſe thynges which hee hath geuen
thee, whether they be common, ſpeciall,
or proper, loue thy ſelfe intirely. For together
wyth all them, before whom hee
hath preferd thee, by ſinguler giftes, hee
hath alſo loued thee. Thou art loued I
ſay, in euerye creature, thou art loued
with all good thynges, and thou art loued
aboue all euyll thinges: And if this
yet ſeeme but ſmall vnto thee, that thou
art loued aboue all euyl thinges, weygh
howe good thoſe thynges are by vertue
of creation, that in euery condicion haue
receiued leſſe goodnes then thou. And
firſt thinke, O my Soule, that the tyme
was when thou were not, and that thou
receiuedſt it by the gift of God, that thou
began to bee,
            
            
               ¶The ſixt Chapter.
               ¶Of the free giftes of creation, and
regeneration.
               
                  IT was therefore the gift of
God that thou were made.
But hadſt thou geuen him
any thing before thou were
made, or before thou were

created, that in reſpect therof he ſhoulde
make or create thee? Verelye nothinge
haddeſt thou giuen, neither couldeſt thou
geue before thou were framed, or faſhioned.
Yf God therfore had giuen thee nothing
els but thy being, yet were he to be
prayſed, and loued of thee for euer. But
truth it is, he hath giuen more, in that he
hath not onely gyuen it thee, to bee: but
alſo to be both beutifull, and fayre. Neither
coulde the bountye of the geuer bee
herein finiſhed. For ouer and aboue this
he hath giuen more, and therby the more
drawen vs to his owne image, and lykenes.
For this was his meaninge, this
was his wyll, and pleaſure, to draw thē
vnto him by likenes, whō he had drawē
to himſelfe by loue. He hath therfore giuen
it vs to bee, and not onely to be, but
alſo to be fayre, and not onely to be faire,
but alſo to liue, ſo as we may paſſe, and
excell ſuch things as haue no being: and
ſuch alſo as be inordinat, maymed, or imperfit,
as neither ſhapened by forme, nor
quickened with lyuing ſpirite. By meanes
wherof thou art mightyly endebted
O my Soule. For thou haſte receiued

much, & of thy ſelfe thou hadſt nothing:
& for all theſe things thou haſt no meane
to make recōpence, but only to loue. For
that which is giuen by loue, no way better
then by loue may againe be requited.
And this by loue thou haſt alſo receiued.
               But now will I begin to tell the how
much this thy Spouſe, who appeared ſo
excellent when he created thee, vouchedſafe
to bee humbled, when hee repayred
thee. And yet notwithſtāding, he that in
creating thee, ſeemed ſo excellent & high,
& that in repayring thee ſemed ſo lowly,
is no leſſe wonderful in the latter worke
then hee was in the former. In the former
he mightely gaue great thinges vnto
thee, and in the latter hee mercifullye
ſuſtſteyned ſharpe thinges for thee. For
to the ende that he myght aduance thee
again to that, from the which thon waſt
fallen, he diſdained not to deſcend hither
where thou art, and that it myght fullye
be reſtored to thee which thon hadſt loſt,
hee was willinge to ſuffer that whiche
thou didſt deſerue. He deſcended therefore
vndertooke, ſuffered, ouercame, and
reſtored. He deſcended to mortallitye, he

toke vpon him freylty: he ſuffered paine
ouercame death, and reſtored man. Behould
theſe thinges, O thou my Soule,
and be aſtoniſhed at theſe ſo great wonders,
and at theſe benefits, exhibited for
thy ſake. Conſider how much he loued
thee, that vouched ſafe to doo ſo much, &
ſo manye thinges for thee. Thou waſt
beutyfull by his gyfte, and thou became
foule through thyne own iniquitie: Againe,
thou were clenſed and purified by
his mercy, his loue yet working on euerye
ſyde to helpe thee. In tymes paſt,
when thou were not, he loued to create
thee, when thou were foule and yl fauored,
he loued to beutyfie thee. And finally,
to ſhew thee of his loue the feruency,
hee woulde delyuer thee from death, by
none other meanes, then by dying for
thee. And all to vtter therin not ſo much
the benefit of his mercy, as the great vehemency
of his charity and loue.
               With great bounty therfore hath this
louing Creator, poured the breath of life
into the firſt Man his creature, but with
muche more loue hath hee, for that ſelfe
Man and creature, geuen and beſtowed

not his goodes, but him ſelfe. Greatly
then doth this ſet forth Gods goodnes
towardes me, that I am his workmanſhip:
but much more doth this cōmende
it, that he made hym ſelfe the price of my
redemption. The rather, bicauſe that my
redemption was wyth ſo royall a price
performed, that man therein might ſeme
a priſoner, not vnfyt by God to be raū
                  ſomed.
O happy fault of myne, for the
purging of the which, while my Soueraigne
Lord is drawen with that loue &
affection, his loue is opened and reuealed
vnto me, greatly longing and coueting
to peruſe the ſame. For I ſhould
neuer haue knowen hys loue ſo fullye,
had not my great peryls, proportioned
myne experience accordingly. O how
happelye therefore fell I: that after my
fall, was rayſed againe more happelye.
Ther is no loue greater, no zeale purer,
no charitie hollyer, no affection feruenter,
then that an Innocent vouched ſafe
to dye for me, finding in me no cauſe to
loue or to fauour me. Tell me therefore
O Lord, what it is that thou haſt ſo loued
in me, and ſo dearelye loued, that

thou wouldeſt needes dye for me? what
haſt thou found in me of that qualitie or
nature, that might make thee to be wylling
to ſuffer for me ſuch crueltie?
            
            
               ¶The ſeuenth Chapter.
               ¶Of the benefite of God in callyng
vs to the fayth.
               
                  ANd thou my Soule, to thend
thou mayeſt behold thys loue
more perfectlye, and ioy in it
more aboundantlye, ponder
with thy ſelfe how many and how worthy
in compariſon of thee, are left, forlorne,
refuſed, and vtterlye caſt awaye,
that coulde neuer attayne to the grace
which thou haſt geuen vnto thee. Surely
thou haſt heard ſay, that from the beginning
of the world to this day, many
generations haue paſſed, all the which
without the knowledge of God, and the
price of their redemption, are fallen into
the lappes of euerlaſtyng deſtruction.
And hereby appeareth that thy redemer
preferred thee before them all, when hee
gaue thee his grace ſo frankly and freelye,
which none of them all could get or

come by: and yet why thou were taken
and choſen before them, or why he dealt
with thee more louingly then wyth thē,
thou canſt finde in thy ſelfe no cauſe, but
onely the mere loue of thy merciful Sauiour.
Thy Spouſe therefore, thy Louer,
thy God and thy Redeemer, hath
both choſen, & forechoſen thee. He hath
choſen thee I ſay in all▪ and hath taken
thee from among all, and hath loued thee
in all, and called thee alſo by hys owne
name, that the remembraunce and memoriall
of him might remaine with thee
for euer. He woold haue thee partaker
of his name, and partaker of the truth of
his name, bycauſe hee hath annoynted
thee with that ſelfe oyle of gladnes, with
the which him ſelfe was annointed, that
of the anointed thou mighteſt be anointed,
bycauſe that of Chriſt thou art called
a Chriſtian.
               But were thou ſtronger, were thou
wyſer, were thou nobler, or were thou
ritcher then they all, in that thou haſt atchiued
this ſpeciall grace ouer, aboue, &
before them all? How manye ſtrong,
how many wyſe, how many noble, how

manye ritch were there, in thoſe dayes,
and yet all they forſaken, haue periſhed
euery one? highly therfore, haſt thou ſtād
in his fauoure, and greate I confeſſe is
the bonntye which he hath extended towardes
thee. For when thou waſt foule
and polluted, deformed alſo, and miſerably
defiled, ragged and torne, ougſome,
and gryſely, and as one that was fulfylled
of lothſomnes, and enormity, ſo God
thy Lord loued thee, yt with all the giftes
of his grace hee vouched ſafe to enritche
thee. Take this therefore for an abſolute
reſolution, that excepte thou endeuour
with great and earneſt ſtudy, to adorne
and decke thy ſelfe, & to recouer thy firſt
comelines and decency, thou ſhalt neuer
be thought meete to be brought into the
Bride chamber of thy ſpouſe, that is glorious
celeſtial and heauenly. Now therfore,
while thou haſt tyme, & opportunity,
trym and dreſſe thy ſelfe O my Soule,
ſleeke vp thy foreheade, facion thy face,
frame thine attyre, fret of thy freckles,
rub of thy warts, waſh away thy ſpots,
ſmoth thy wrinkles, be all hanſome and
cleanlye, amend thy behauiour, and with

all thy might, and mayne, ſet all thinges
in good order, that thou maiſt be accepted
of ſo louinge a Spouſe. Prepare thy
ſelfe I ſay, as becommeth the Bryde of
him that is immortall, and as beſemeth
the Spouſes of a Kyng celeſtial.
            
            
               ¶The eyght Chapter.
               ¶Of the gift of vertues.
               
                  KNow this alſo O my Soule,
that thou haſte wherewith to
decke, and adorne thy ſelfe, &
yet that thou ſhouldeſte not
haue of thy ſelfe, if God did not geeue it
thee. For of him thou haſte receiued the
veſture, and garment of good workes,
with the fruict of almes, faſting and praier,
beſides diuers other vertues, wherewith
thou maiſt be garniſhed, trymd, and
made gorgious, as with a robe of variable,
freſhe, and ſundrye colours. And
leaſte thou ſhouldeſt fayle in any poynt,
he hath bountefully beſtowed vpon thee
what ſo euer is knowen partinent to
health, or refection: And what ſo euer
maye repayre comelines, or increaſe thy
beuty. From the which how plenteous

ſtore, and diſtribution, preſenteth it ſelfe
vnto thee on al ſydes, I pray thee be aduiſed
diligently to thinke on. Thou haddeſt
nothing, and much was geuen thee,
that was geuen thou hadſt loſt, & it was
reſtored vnto thee, whereby thou art aſſured,
that thou ſhalt neuer be left deſtitute,
but in ſuch ſort rather, as thou ſhalt
haue many folde occaſion to know, and
to ſee, how entirely he loueth thee, that
is thy Paramour. He is loth, my Soule
to loſe thee, and that is the cauſe why he
awayteth thy loyalty with ſuch patience
and long ſufferaunce, geuing thee leaue,
and liberty, accordinge to the multitude
of his mercye ſo often to repent thee, as
thou cōmitteſt any folly. And now recorde
& call to memory, how many maye
be foūd which with thee haue receued al
that I haue recited, and yet haue not wt
thee obtained that fauour in thē, to haue
renued what ſoeuer they haue impaire
                     •
                  ,
which beinge conſidered, thou haſte iuſt
cauſe to thinke, that thou art yet loued
more then they al: for that the things by
thee loſt, are ſo beningly reſtored, which
to them, by thē loſt, are ſo ſtrictly denied.

For thou by his grace & bounty wer neuer
denied to worke wel & wiſely. Therfore
if thou redely do great things, thou
art mercyfullye aduaunced, and if thou
hardly do ſmall thinges, thou art worthely
humbled. For he knoweth what is
good for thee, better then thy ſelfe doeſt,
and therefore if thou wylt haue a good &
dutyfull opinion of him, vnderſtand and
conceiue, that whatſoeuer he doth to thee
is both good, and well done. Such is the
loue of God towardes vs, that the infirmitie
of man endureth nothing, but that
by his goodnes is diſpoſed to our profit.
Perhaps thou haſt not the grace of
ſtrength to do vertues, but whileſt thou
art ſhaken with the ſuggeſtion of vyces,
thou art made more ſtrong in thyne humilitie.
For weakenes with humilitye
hath a better ſauour in the preſence of
God, then pride of mynde hath with the
ſtrength of vertue. Be not therefore ſo
bold or malapert, as any wai to preſume
to preiudice Goddes diſpoſition, but alwaies
with feare and reuerence addreſſe
thy praiers to God, that he may vouchſafe
to helpe thee, as he knoweth it moſt

fyt and expedient for thee. And that if as
yet any euyl remain in thee, he may mercifully
redreſſe it, and that if anye goodnes
begun in thee, be not yet finiſhed, he
may bountifully accompliſh it, and finally
conduct and bring thee to him ſelfe, by
ſuch way as he him ſelfe beſt lyketh.
            
            
               ¶The .ix. Chapter.
               ¶Of the gyft of vnderſtanding and
knowledge.
               
                  NOw tel me O my ſoule, what
recompence ſhall we make to
the Lord, for all the goodnes
that we haue receiued of him?
For hee hath not contented hym ſelfe to
geue vs onely thoſe good things which
he hath geuen to others & the reſidue of
his creatures, but he hath alſo prouided
that in our afflictions we may feele and
taſte of his loue towardes vs, and therby
take occaſion ſingularly, and that as
well in all our aduerſities, as proſperities,
to embrace his kyndnes in ye armes
of our loue. Saye we therefore in our
ſelues, & vſe we this meditacion: Lord
thou haſt geuen vs the grace to knowe

thee, and more then to other creatures,
thou haſte diſcloſed and opened thy ſecretes
vnto vs, by framing our vnderſtandyng
to conceaue thy hydden miſteries.
Other our Equals, Mates, and
companions, as well in age, as dignitye,
thou haſt left lyinge in ignoraunce, and
the darknes of infidelity, but to vs thou
haſte ſhowen the lyght of thy grace, veritie
and truth, more then to other of
Adams children. For vnto vs thou haſte
geuen, capable ſence, eaſy vnderſtanding
faſt memory, ſtrength in working, grace
in conuerſion, mayntenaunce in proſperity,
profit in ſtudy, wyt in conceyts, cō
                  fort
in aduerſity, and which way ſouer
we tourne, thy grace and thy mercy doth
preuēt and go before vs. For right often
my Soule, when as to oure ſelues we
ſemed vtterly waſt and conſumed, he did
ſodainly relieue vs, when we wandred
and went aſtray, he brought vs into the
way, when we were ignorant, he taught
vs, when we were ſad, he did comfort
vs, when we were fallen, he did reare vs
vp, and when we ſtoode, he did hold and
ſtay vs from falling. Finally he gaue vs

the grace more verelye to knowe hym,
more purely to loue him, more ſincerely
to beleue in him, and more feruently to
follow him, then he gaue it to any other
of his creatures.
               Therefore O Lord my God, the ſwetenes
of my lyfe, the lyght of myne eyes,
what recompence ſhall I make thee for
all that thou haſt done for me? wilt thou
that I ſhal loue thee, then teach me how,
and how greatly I ſhall do it. For who
am I, that I may loue thee, my ſtrength
my Lord, my ſtedfaſtnes, my refuge, and
my deliuerance: my God, my helper, my
defender, the horne of my ſaluation, and
my maintainer, what ſhall I ſay more?
but my Lord, and my God.
            
            
               ¶The .x. Chapter.
               ¶Of God his prouident care ouer vs.
               
                  FOr manifolde & innumerable
are the good thynges which
thou haſt done for me, O lord
my God, and of them to think
and to ſpeake ſhall it alwaies be ſweete,
and pleaſant vnto me: the rather if thou
Lord ſhalt make me thankfull, that I

may praiſe, and loue thee for all thy benefites.
Loe my Soule, thou haſt nowe
thy pledge, and thy pledge doth manifeſt
& ſhew forth thy Spouſe. Keepe it therfore
vntouched, keepe it vndefiled, keepe
it vnpolluted, kepe it ſafe, kepe it whole,
keepe it cleane, keepe it ſounde. For
albeit thou were ſometime defiled, thou
art nowe made honeſt, and a Virgin againe,
according to the naturall operatiō
of his loue, which wonteth to reſtore puritie
to the corrupted, and in them that
ar pure, to kepe chaſtity vnſpotted. Occupy
therefore thy cogitacion, & alwaies
buſy thy ſelf in thinking how mercifully
he hath dealt with thee, & therin ponder
how greatlye hee loueth thee, in that hee
neither ſuffereth his benefit to be wanting
vnto thee, nor thee to be ignoraunt
how diuerſly thou enioyeſt it. And this
ſay I to thee, becauſe that ſo often as I
note or marke the courſe of his mercy, it
ſeemeth to mee that God doth nothyng
els, (if I may ſo ſaye) but onely prouide
for my ſaluation. For I ſee him ſo wholy
occupied, and buſyed in keping of me,
as if he had forgotten all other thynges,

onely to attende me: ſo continuallye is
God preſent with mee, ſo continuallye
doth he offer him ſelfe ready for me, that
which way ſoeuer I turne me, he neuer
forſaketh me: whereſoeuer I become, he
neuer goeth from me: whatſoeuer I do,
he doth ſtill aſſiſt me. Finally he is the
perpetuall beholder of all my doinges,
and ſo much as may beſeeme, or become
his goodnes, as an vnſeperable workeman
together with me, he ſtādeth by me,
and doth not onely help, and ſet forward
what wanteth in me, but alſo pacientlye
perfiteth theffect of his workemanſhip.
And hereby it appeareth, that albeit hys
face cannot yet be ſene of vs, his preſēce
notwithſtandinge is euermore with vs.
But what is the pleaſāt thing trow you
which while I thinke on hym, is wonte
not onely to touch me, but alſo ſo effectually
and ſweetely to affect me, that euen
preſently me thinkes, I am diſtraitt frō
my ſelf, & both drawen and caried hence,
but God knowes I wot not whether.
Forſooth this it is, that I am altogether
altered, and chaunged into an other, and
a new creature, and feele my ſelfe in ſuch

felicity, as I cannot expreſſe. My conſcience
is cleared with ioy and ſolace, all
the wretchednes and miſeries of my ſorowes
forepaſt, are vtterly forgotten &
blotted out of memory. My mynde reioyceth,
myne vnderſtandyng is made
bryght, my hart alſo is lightned, & with
longing made ioyfull and pleaſant. And
now I know not how I ſee my ſelfe in
an other countrye, and as it were in the
armes and boſome of loue I inwardlye
hold and embrace, but what I wot nere.
And while I labour with all my might
continually to keepe it, and neuer to loſe
it, my Soule wreſtleth after a pleaſaunt
maner, as loth to forgo, that ſo faine it
would haue. And as if it had found ther
in the ende of all deſires, it highly & vnſpeakeablye
aduaunceth it ſelfe for ioye,
ſeeking none other thing, nor deſyring
any more, but alwaies wel willing to be
as it is. And is not this now thinke ye,
that moſt louing and louelye Spouſe?
Yes verelye, this is that my Lord and
God which viſiteth me, and yet cōmeth
vnto me inuiſibly, ſecrete, and incomprehenſible:
This is he, which commeth to

touche me, and not to bee ſeene of mee:
which commeth to admoniſh me, & not
to be comprehended: which cōmeth not
to infuſe him ſelfe wholy into me, but in
part to be aſſayed and taſted of me, and
neither fulfilleth my deſire, nor geueth
the fulnes of his own ſacictie.
               And this is it that chieflye appertayneth
to the earneſt of hys betrothyng,
that he which in the world to come ſhall
geue him ſelfe vnto thee my Soule, for
euer to be ſeene & poſſeſſed of thee: doth
now preſently geue but a ſay or a taſte,
that thou may know here in this world,
how pleaſant thou ſhalt finde hym and
feele him in his kingdome. And therefore
it behoueth thee my Soule, yea and
ſtandeth with thy dutye, highly to loue
thy God, that ſo diuerſly hath benefited
thee.
            
            
               ¶The .xi. Chapter.
               ¶Of the gift of the ſenſes, and of the
preſeruation of lyfe.
               
                  BUt to the end thou mayeſt be
the more kyndled wyth the
fire of loue, diligently conſider
whither thy ſpouſe haue

endued thee with any moe benefits then
thoſe already recited. For if he haue, thou
art the more bounden both for them recited,
and for them that thou ſhalt receue
hereafter, to ſhew thy ſelfe obedient and
dutyfull, and to geue him thankes from
the bottom of thine hart. For I vnderſtand
that my God is dearelye to be loued
of me, for that well vſing the tranſgreſſion
of my Parents, he hath created
me of their fleſh, and hath breathed into
me the ſpirite of lyfe, ſeperating me frō
them whych were borne before theyr
tyme, or that beyng ſuffocated in their
mothers wombe, ſemed to be conceaued
not to lyue in this world, but to dye. I
haue therefore receaued of him, not only
to be, but alſo to be man, and therto haue
alſo attayned the vnderſtauding, what
difference there is betwene me & a beaſt.
I haue I ſaye, receaued the ſhape of my
body, and in my bodye the diſtinction of
ſenſes, myne eyes to ſee, myne eares to
heare, my noſe to ſmell, my handes to
feele, my mouth to taſt, my fete to walk,
and that more is then them al, the health
of them all. And albeit theſe are great

things, yet ſerueth this to augmēt thoſe
benefites, that to the ſeuerall delyght of
euerye ſeuerall ſence, God hath created
thinges conſonant and agreable: as many
thinges brightly ſhining, many melodiouſlye
ſounding, many pleaſantlye
ſauering, many ſwetely taſting, and many
delectable in feeling. For the prouidence
of the Creatour, to this vſe & purpoſe
hath geuen to thinges, ſuch diuers
and variable qualities, that euerye ſenſe
of man might haue wherin to be delighted.
In as much as the ſight conceaueth
one thyng, the hearing an other thing,
the ſmelling an other, the taſte an other,
the feeling an other. The beuty of coulours
feedeth the eye, the harmonye of
muſicke pleaſeth the eare, the fragrancye
of ſauour delighteth the noſe, the ſweete
verder and reales contenteth the taſte.
And who is able to reherſe, or to recken
vp all the delightes of the ſenſes, which
are ſo manyfold, that if any man ſhould
conſider eche one in his kinde, eche one
ſhould ſeeme wonderfull, and ſtraungely
enritched. Now manye pleaſures to
the eyes ſhew we forth in colours, how

many to the eare heare we, in diuerſitie
of ſounds, by the which men cōmunicat
their mindes and meaninges mutually,
tell of thinges paſt, demonſtrate the preſent,
pronoſticate thynges to come, and
reueale things hidden, priuy and ſecret▪
So that if the lyfe of man ſhoulde want
them, it might be compared to the rudenes
and brutiſhnes of beaſtes.
               What neede I tell you of the warbling
of Birdes, the pleaſant melodye of
mens voices, or the harmony of muſicke
in the diuerſitie of tunes: For there are
moe kyndes of conſent and concorde in
Muſicke, then thought can conceaue, or
ſpeeche expreſſe, all the which notwythſtanding
do ſerue the eare, as thynges
create and made to that vſe & purpoſe.
And as I haue examplified the delyght
of the eare, ſo may you conceaue ye pleaſures
of taſte and feeling, being as pleaſant
and as manyfolde as are the other.
This therefore by no meanes maye bee
gaynſaide, but that the goodnes of God
in theſe is exceedyug wonderfull: But
yet is this to be added, ſo much the more
to his glory, as it is our greater benefit,

for my God hath not only made my body,
and beutified the ſame with diuerſitie
ſuch as is before mencioned, but hath
alſo made it healthy and ſounde: that I
might neither be noyſom to my frends,
nor a reproch among ſtraungers. Neyther
is this the whole that I haue receiued,
for I am alſo indued wyth reaſon,
which can vnderſtande and conceaue the
veritie in euerye thing, and can diſcerne
right from wrong, and good from euyll:
and can ſearch for my Creatour, long for
and deſire him, & that finallye can prayſe
him, and be cōtented to abide with hym.
But if I ſhal confeſſe a further truth vnto
ye, nothyng is all thys, in reſpect of
this benefit: namely that it hath pleaſed
my God ſo to diſpoſe of me, that I ſhuld
be borne, bred and foſtered in ſuch a time
and ſeaſon, and in and among ſuch men,
and ſuch people, as profeſſing his fayth,
and vſing his Sacramentes, may teache
and inſtruct me to beleue, and liue accordingly.
For this I ſee denyed to an infinite
ſort of men, which I glory and reioyce
to be graunted vnto me: And yet
with the other by all ryght ſhoulde my

ſtate be all one, alike, and equall. They
are forſaken through God hys iuſtice, &
I am called by Gods mercy and grace.
I wyll yet nowe proceede and go ſomewhat
further, namely in the contemplation
of his further benignitie, in that my
Parentes haue brought me vp in ſuche
ſtate and ſafetye, that the fire hath not
burnt mee, nor the water drowned mee,
nor the Deuil poſſeſſed me, nor Beaſtes
deuoured me, nor any fall or miſchaunce
hath caught or deſtroyed me, but that I
am growen vp to competent age to profeſſe
my faith in Gods loue and fauour.
            
            
               ¶The .xii. Chapter.
               ¶Of the pacience and long ſuffering
of God.
               
                  GReat therefore is the pity, and
infinite is the mercy (O Lord
my God) which thou haſt vſed
towardes me. And albeit
that thou art in all thy workes wonderfull,
yet art thou thought moſt marueylous
in the bowels of thy loue. For thou
deſpiſeſt no man, thou reiecteſt no man,
thou abhorreſt no man, but onelye ſuche

but as madly abhorreth, witleſly lotheth
or dreadfully doth forſake thee. Theſe
are therefore thy giftes, O Lorde, theſe
are thy ritches, theſe are thy treaſures,
with the which thou haſt endued me in
the multitude of thy mercy: namely, that
thou haſt ſundry and often times deliuered
me, when I was in daunger, & that
in my ſynnes thou haſt neyther left nor
forſaken me, but that when I was vnmyndfull,
thou dydſt put me in remembraunce
of thee: when I was turned frō
thee, thou diddeſt call me back vnto theer
& when I came to thee, thou didſt gently
receue me, and when I repented, thou
didſt mercifully pardon me. For not onlye
the ſynnes which I committed, but
thoſe alſo which by thy protection I eſchewed
and eſcaped, within compaſſe of
thy pardon are benignly conteyned. And
as I fel into many ſynnes and offences,
ſo if thou hadſt not ſaued me, into farre
many moe had I fallen and runne head-long.
But I well remember me, that by
three ſpecial meanes thou didſt preſerue
me, from doing the wickednes which otherwiſe
I had done: that is, by withdrawing

the occaſion, in ſtrengthenyng
me in reſiſting, and by keeping and continuing
me in the foundnes of affection.
For if occaſion had bene left at libertye,
manifold are the offences which I ſhuld
haue incurred. But ſo great was the
mercye of my Lord and God towardes
me, that no ſuch oportunitie could arreſt
or hold me. And with much ado had I
bene ſtayed from the doubling of myne
iniquity, the violence of temptation ther
to ſo greuouſlye vrging, as euerye man
hath feeling in his owne frailtie: hadſt
not thou my Lord, with ſtrength aſſiſted
me, not onelye to vanquiſh my luſt and
appetite, & to treade vnder my feete my
fleſhly deſire, but alſo to withdrawe my
conſent from the concupiſcence, whych
would haue forced me to fulfyl the longing
and liking which I felt in my members.
But from certain ſynnes O Lord,
thy fauour and indulgence ſtirred with
pity, dyd ſo far eſtraunge me, that I vtterlye
abhorred them in my hart, and ſo
hated, and loathed the fylth of their iniquitie,
that no ſuggeſtion of the ſame had
might or power to touch me. Neyther is

this O Lord, the leaſt point of thy pity,
nor the meaneſt token of thy goodnes &
bounty: that notwithſtanding the hugenes
of mine iniquity (wretch that I am)
and notwythſtandyng that I haue vnkindly
kindled thee, and by doing euyll
in thy ſight, prouoked thy furye, ſtirred
vp thy mood, and deſerued thy wrath againſt
me: notwithſtanding I ſaye, that
I haue greuouſlye ſynned, thou of thy
mercy haſt paciently ſuffered, & euen yet
doeſt forbeare to puniſh my wyckednes.
               For if I repent, thou pardoneſt me, &
if I retourne, thou receiueſt mee. And
while I differre to repent, by preſumption
or ſecuritye, thou doeſt pawſe in thy
patience, and gently tarieſt for me. When
I wander thou doeſt waifte me into the
way of thy verity: againe when I ſtriue
or reſiſt, thou doeſt vanquiſh, & conqner
me. When I loyter, or linger in the leaſes
of fantaſy, thou doeſt either prick me
forward, or louingly ſtay for me. Whē I
reuert to thy wayes to walke in thy pathes,
and to trace thy foote ſteppes, thou
doeſt forth with receaue, and courteouſly
embrace me. When I am ignorant, yu
                  
doeſt teache, and inſtructe me: when I
mourn or lament, thou doeſt calme & cō
                  fort
me: when I fall or ſtumble, thou doeſt
ſtay and reare me vp: when I am in
decaye, thou doeſt repayre me: When I
craue or aſke, thou geueſt largely: whē I
ſeke thee, I fynde thee: when I knock,
thou openeſt vnto me. Finally thou art
my loadſman to good lyfe, my ſtaffe, and
ſtaye to walke by, ſo as I neither want
wyll nor cunning through thy gyfts and
grace to walke directly in thy way. And
this alſo O Lord is worthy of admiration,
that not onely in my youth, before I
was able to aſke or had diſcretion to deſire
or know, but alſo in myne age, when
I was able throughe thee, to aſke, and

                     ••
                  aue of thee, when I coulde ſeeke thee,
when I could deſire thee, when I could
reſt in thy mercye, and cleaue faſte vnto
thee, of thy free grace and bountye thou
gaueſt me many gifts, & then alſo when
I neither craued, nor ſought, nor deſired
them, but retchleſly, and careleſly ſet all
at naught. But yet I eſteme this as the
greateſt benefite which thou haſte beſtowed
vpō me, that thou gaue to me thine

Angels, to garde and to keepe me from
the daye of my birth, tyll the day of my
death. The contemplation wherof conſtrained
not onely a certaine holy father
to ſay: That great is the dignitie of the
Elect, whych haue for their Gardians
God his holy Angels, but the wyſe man
alſo to confeſſe that the Soules of the
righteous are in the hand of God,Sapi▪ 3,
               
               Neither ceaſe I here to commend thy
pity, ſithens with ſuch patience thou haſt
borne mine offences. For I rather think
my ſelfe bound to double thy prayſe, and
to geue thee thankes with all my might:
For as muche as thou haſt not required
me according to my ſynfulnes, nor ſuffered
the earth to ſwallow me, nor fire frō
heauen to touche me, nor lyghtening to
burne me, nor the riuers to drenche me,
nor any other paine, perill, death, or deſtruction
(as I haue well deſerued) to
trouble or afflict me. For when by ſynne
I went away from thee, I not onely deſerued
thine anger and indignation, but
iuſtlye alſo prouoked eche creature of
thine to maligne me. And no maruayle,
for if any mans thrall or ſeruant do run

from his Maiſter, he doth not onelye exaſperate
his Maiſter againſt him, bnt alſo
all his ſeruantes, friendes, and familye.
Therfore when I diſpleaſed thee O
Lord my God, Creatour of me, and of al
thinges being, I iuſtly for myne offence
moued euery creature to bee offended at
me. So that if the whole world ſhould
for thy ſake conſpire to fight againſt me,
or any way els to moleſt or trouble me,
I haue no cauſe to complaine that I ſuffered
wrong or iniurye. For the earth
might ſay vnto me, I ought not to beare
thee, but rather to ſwallowe thee, in as
muche as thou haſt not bene afearde to
fall from my Creator, and to ioyne with
his aduerſary the Deuil, the authour of
diſobedience, ſynne, and iniquity. The
Sunne alſo might vſe this language: I
ought not to ſhine, nor geue light to thy
health, ſafety or ſaluation, but in reuenge
of my Lordes quarell, who is both light
it ſelfe, and of light the fountaine, vtterlye
to hyde from thee the beames of my
beuty. And thus might euery creature
els, controle and taunt me, & thus might
they wreake thier Creators iniury, if he

who created them, did not alſo reſtraine
them, as not willing the death of a ſynner,
but that he ſhould turne, repent him
and lyue. It behoueth me therefore O
Lord, to be the more humbled vnder thy
mighty hand, and to ſhew my ſelfe vnto
thee ſo much the more thankfull, obedient,
and loyall, as thy great benefites exact
and require I ſhould bee: leaſt that
differring the puniſhment of my tranſgreſſion,
thou chaſten me at thy dreadful
comming ſo much the more greuouſlye,
as thou haſt awaited my dutye with patience.
And thou my Soule, perſwade
thy ſelfe I pray thee, that the long ſuffering
of God hath now long time expected
the effect of the election of his predeſtination,
which he wyl haue fulfilled in
vs, through the exceſſiue loue which hee
hath borne and doth beare vs. For this
is the cauſe why the Lord hath paciently
waited, and enclined vnto mee, and that
he hath turned his eyes from my ſinnes,
as vnwilling to ſee howe often I haue
offended him. This is the cauſe I ſaye,
why hee hath diſſembled, that he myght
commend his patience, and confirme his

loue. For this cauſe, as I well remember
me, he ſtroke my hart, and ſtirred it
vp to beholde the ſcarres of myne owne
ſynnes, and to feele the great griefe and
ſorenes of the ſame. And for this cauſe
he lead and conueyed me to the gates of
hell, and to the paynes and tormentes
prouided for the wicked. And to the end
that no hurtful conſideration of my ſins
might remaine within me, he enſpired into
me a better comfort, and gaue not only
hope of remiſſion, but alſo a full and
perfect pardon. And ſo fully did he pardon
mee, that neither reuenge can condemne
me, nor vpbraiding confoūd me,
nor imputing diminiſh his zeale or loue
towardes me. Yet there be ſome in the
world, and thoſe no ſmall many, that in
ſuch ſort pardon iniurie, as though they
reuenged it not, & yet they caſt it in the
teeth. And other ther be alſo, that albeit
they be ſilent, hold their tounges, and
ſay nought, yet they reſerue the malice
in the bottom of their ſtomake, and vnder
the cloke of ſilence hide ſpite and rancour.
But neither of theſe ſortes pardoneth
according to ye rules of Gods loue

and charitye. And therefore very farre
from theſe differeth the moſt mercyfull
nature of God: which alwaies dealeth
plainly, and pardoneth and forgeueth ſo
fully and freely, that the conſtant fayth
of the ſynners that do repent their ſins,
and forethinke their offences, may wyth
Paules wordes be comforted, that wher
aboundance of ſynne was,Roma. 5. there grace
is more plentifull. Witnes ſaint Peter,
who after he had thriſe denied his Maiſter,Iohn. 18.
by a tripple commaundement was
of Chriſt his Church made a Shepheard
and Paſtor.Iohn. 21. Saint Paule alſo of an enemie
and perſecutor of the Goſpell,Actes. 8. 9. was
made a veſſel of election, and a teacher of
the Heathen.Math. 9. Euen as Mathew of a tole
gatherer was made an Apoſtle, and the
firſt in the new teſtament that wrote any
Goſpell.
            
            
               ¶The .xiii. Chapter.
               ¶Of the gift of continencie.
               
                  BVt after all theeſe thynges
which are right many as you
ſee, God alſo gaue mee the
gift of continencie. Continencie

I meane, not onely from carnalitie,
but alſo from all other vices, whatſoeuer
they be called. So that I, who in
former tyme coulde ſcantlye forbeare a
thyng three dayes together, can nowe
through Gods helpe forbeare it for euer.
And thereby finde occaſion right iuſtlye
to ſay,Luke. 1. that he that is mighty, hath done
great thinges for mee. But ſome man
perhaps thinketh, that continencie is a
matter of eaſe, and light of importance.
But ſo thinke not I, I wyll enſure you,
for I knowe what enemies it hath, and
of what might they be, and therfore how
needeful it is for it to be ſturdy & ſtrong
to reſiſt and withſtand ſuche a broode of
impiety.
               The firſt and chiefe enemy that continency
hath, is our owne fleſh, whileſt it
luſteth and coueteth agaynſt the ſpirite.
And what a familiar enemy is this trow
you? Or how perilous is the conflict that
groweth hereby? Or how ſecrete & how
ſore is the fi
                     •
                  ht like to be, wher the enemy
hath ſuch might and oportunitye to
hurt? Truly my Soule, this foe is moſt
daūgerous, moſt ſterne, moſt cruel, moſt

vnnaturall and tirannous. Neither is
ther any way to flee, or to eſcape her, nor
any meanes or policy to put her to flight
but maugre our heades we muſt beare
her about vs, becauſe ſhe is euer lynked
and tyed vnto vs. And therefore what
is more perilous, wretched or miſerable,
then to be not onelye forced to feede and
ſuſtaine her, but alſo to be prohibited to
do her hurt or harme? Thou ſeeſt then
what neede thou haſt, carefullye to beware
and to kepe thy ſelfe from that foe,
whom thou ſuffereſt to ſleepe in thyne
own lappe and boſome. But well were
thee (my Soule) hadſt thou none other
enemie, or if this one were al, thou were
thriſe happy and fortunate. But alas the
while, ther is one other as ſtout, ſturdy,
cruel, daungerous, & hurtful as ſhe, & as
hard alſo to be eſcaped, wherſoeuer thou
doeſt beſtow thy ſelfe. For he doth enuiron
and compaſſe thee round about. And
which way ſoeuer thou conuert or turne
thee, he is ready and at hand to aſſault &
encounter thee. This enemy is this preſent
wicked world, which by fiue gates,
which are thy fyue ſenſes, woūdeth thee

with his dartes, and ſhifteth in death at
thine own wyndowes.
               The third is that common aduerſarye
ſworne deadlye foe, to all Adams poſteritie,
that old ſubtile Serpent I meane,
which is more crafty and wylye then all
other creatures either ar or can be. This
enemy is he, whom no eye can diſcerne,
& therefore to auoyde him, paſſeth mans
abilitie. For ſometime he aſſaulteth vs
openly, and violently, ſometime he ſtealeth
on vs ſecretlye and guilefullye, and
alwaies continueth his crueltie and malice,
ſeekyng to oppreſſe vs by myght,
ſleight, or pollicie. And who is able to
endure all this? Or who is fyt to encoū
                  ter
this Champion? Verely no man, but
hee that hath loued vs, and that by hys
triumphāt death hath atchiued this victorie
for vs. Thou maieſt therfore know
O my Soule, howe hard & difficult it is
to be continent, and what God geueth to
make it eaſy for vs. And therby the more
entirely to loue him for aſſiſting vs with
his grace, when we ſhoulde otherwyſe
faynt through our own frailty & weakenes.
For onely in the Lord haue we this

power and might, to withſtand the force
of this tripple batterye, mayntayned againſt
vs with ſuche force and violence.
And he it is, and none other but he, that
confoundeth thy foes, and all them that
trouble thee. It is onely God I ſay that
treadeth vnder foote for vs, not onelye
our fleſh, & all our fleſhly concupiſcence,
but alſo the world wyth all worldly vanities:
and finally the Deuil with al his
wicked ſuggeſtions. Haue not I therefore
iuſt cauſe to confeſſe,Luke. 1. that hee that is
mighty hath done great thynges for me?
            
            
               ¶The .xiiii. Chapter.
               ¶Of the gift of hope.
               
                  BVt yet moreouer, our
God and Sauiour hath
geuen mee the grace ſo
to conforme my ſelfe to
hys wyll by obedience,
that I am fully aſſured
through faith in his promiſe, that finally
I ſhall enioy his kyngdome and blyſſe.
And this grace conſiſteth in three eſpeciall
pointes: The deteſtation and hate of
my ſynnes forepaſt, the contempt & diſdaine

of preſent pleaſures, & the deſire &
longing after the ioyes to come, which
to attain he hath geuen me the hope, and
ſupporteth the ſame by three things alſo,
which ſtrengthen and confirme my hart
in marueilous ſort, and ſo animate and
encourage me, as no want of woorkes,
nor lacke of merites, nor conſideration
of priuate commodities, nor deepe eſtimation
of the heauenly bliſſe ſhalbe able
to caſt me downe frō the tower of hope,
but that my Soule therein ſhall be rooted
for euer. And if ye long to knowe
what thynges theſe are, they are theſe
that followe.
               Firſt I conſider the loue of hym that
adopted me: Secondly the truth of him
that dyd promiſe mee: And thirdlye, the
might of him that redeemed me. Now
therfore let my fleſhly thoughtes repine
and murmour as them liſt, and ſay: who
art thou? or how great is heauens ioy?
or by what merites doeſt thou hope to
attaine it? For I wyll confidently aunſwer,
I know in whom I haue beleued,
and am fully aſſured, and wholy reſolued,
that God in hys ſoueraygne loue

hath choſen and adopted me, and that he
is true in his promiſes, and able to performe
them: and that he may do in heauen,
and in earth, whatſoeuer hee wyll.
And for theeſe merites ought I to loue
my God and ſauiour. For it is the working
of great grace and mercy, that whē
I flee frō God, he doth folow me: when
I feare to come nye him, hee doth allure
me: when I deſpaire, hee doth recomfort
mee: when I am vnthankfull, hee
doth ſtyll benefit mee: when I commit
vncleanes, hee doth clenſe me: when I
delight in vanities, hee ſheweth me hys
truthes: whē I lye bound in the bonds
of vnſoluble wickednes, and cuſtome of
euil, he loſeth me frō them, ſetteth me at
libertie, and finally from the world, doth
draw me to his kingdome.
            
            
               ¶The .xv. Chapter.
               ¶Of God his bountie, of our iniquity,
and of thankes geuing.
               BVt yet now (my Soule) behold &
conſider thoſe gifts of gods goodnes,
which are onelye knowen to
thy ſelfe: As wt how gladſome and

comfortable chere Chriſt offereth hym
ſelfe vnto thee, renouncing the world, &
with what delicates hee refreſheth thy
hunger, and with what ſtore of mercy he
doth enritch thy pouertie. What ſecrete
affectious he doth enſpire into thee, and
with how pleaſant a cup of loue he doth
make thee merrye, when thou foloweſt
his pathes, forſaking things tranſitory.
Is it a thing ſmall, troweſt thou, vyle or
contemptible, that of his onelye & mere
mercy he calleth thee a fugitiue, thrall, &
rebell, from thy reſtles gadding, to hys
ſetled home, and plentyfullye refreſheth
thee with ſpirituall conſolation: For if
thou were tempted, he ſuſtained thee: if
thou were in daunger, he relieued thee:
if thou wer ſorowful, he comforted thee:
if thou were wauering, he dyd confirme
thee. How often alſo were thou ready to
wyther away for feare, when he louingly
ſtoode by to cheriſh thee? And when
to quenche thy drouth, hee infuſed hym
ſelfe into thee? Neither canſt thou forget
how often with his ſpirituall lyght
he clered thine vnderſtāding, ſenſe, reaſon,
and feeling, when thou wer ſinging

or reading any ſpiritual thing. And yet
in thy memory it is riſe alſo, how often
when thou were in praier, hee rauiſhed
thee with vnſpeak able deſire from all
thinges that are earthlye, to delight thy
ſelfe in the pleaſure of that euerlaſtyng
and heauenly Paradiſe. I leaue here to
ſpeake of the great woorkes of mercye,
which it pleaſed his Maieſty to doo, and
woorke by mee, leaſt anye part of that
praiſe, honor and glory, which is onelye
his own, ſhould any way ſeeme to be aſcribed
to me. For in the iudgement of
man the grace of the geuer, and the felicitie
of the receauer, ſeeme ſo vnited and
knit together, that he is not onely prayſed,
who is onely prayſe worthye, but he
alſo commended, whom God in hys
workes doth make but his inſtrument.
And the receauer made partner of the
praiſe with the geuer, which to the glory
of God is not a lyttle iniurious. For
what hath any man that he hath not receiued?1. Cor. 4.
Why then is he praiſed that hath
freely receaued, for that in the which hee
hath nothing deſerued? To thee therefore
O my God, be all laud, glory, praiſe

and thankeſgeuing, but to me thy creature
ſhame and confuſiō, that haue done
ſo much euil, and receiued ſo much good.
Se now therfore O my Soule, that not
onely Gods bountye, but alſo our own
iniquitie doth highly commend the loue
of God towards vs. For if this be great
liberalitie, to geue muche to them that
haue deſerued nothing, how greatly ſhal
or ought that goodnes to bee eſteemed,
that requireth thē with good, who haue
merited euil? O what loue is this which
no wickednes or iniquity is able to ouer
come? Some thinges there bee whych
God mercyfully pardoneth, other there
be which he bountifully geueth. For he
pardoneth our vices, and geueth vs his
vertues, alwayes as readye to forgeue,
as to geue: being on the one ſide louing,
and on the other ſyde liberal.
               Let vs therefore confeſſe our ſyns vnto
hym: Let vs I ſaye confeſſe that we
haue our ſinnes from our ſelues, that he
maye pardon them, & our vertues from
him, that he maye continue and encreaſe
them. And let vs endeuour without all
ceaſyng, that wee appeare neyther vnthankfull

for that which he pardoneth,
neither yet vnmyndefull of that which
he geueth. This I ſay let him endeuour
that beleueth in God, or earneſtlye deſyreth
to be his louer. For true loue neyther
hideth nor diſſembleth anye thyng.
What therfore worketh the diligent conſideration
of all theſe thinges, but marueilouſly
to withdraw the mynde of the
louer from all other loue to loue God alone,
who hath geuen all this? But if
any man conceaue that God hath geuen
vnto him what ſoeuer is foreſayde, and
doubteth not yet to loue him but lyghtly,
let him be aſſured that ther is no man
but that if he ſeeke, he may finde occaſiō
why to thinke him ſelfe to God moſt beholding,
and with all his power moſt diligently
to thanke him, whyle lyfe and
breath ſhall prolong his daies. He therfore
who wanteth any thing neceſſary to
further hys ſoule health, ought neyther
to murmour againſt God, nor to accuſe
him. For he doth all thynges vpon iuſt
occaſion, diligent deliberation, and aduiſed
iudgement, & hath mercy on whom
he wyl, iudgeth whom he wyll, and hardeneth

whom hee wyll. And is able not
onely to geue to whom he wyll, but alſo
to take away from whom he wyl, what,
and when beſt ſtandeth with hys pleaſure.
Right good is it then, and alſo fyt
and neceſſary, that he who hath not thoſe
thinges which be needeful for him, ſhuld
not onely be ſad and ſory, but alſo labour
and praye to get and attaine them: And
then when he hath gotten them, to ſhew
him ſelfe grate and thankfull vnto God
for them.
            
            
               ¶The .xvi. Chapter.
               ¶Of the benefit of Chriſt his death
and paſſion.
               
                  GReat therefore and many, nay
rather infinite & innumerable
are the benefites, O Lord my
God, which thou haſt heaped
vpon me: And for them am I bounden
euer more, both to loue and prayſe thee.
For what ſoeuer goodnes I haue preſentlye,
or what ſoeuer I haue had in
times paſt, or what ſoeuer I ſhall haue
in time to come, it commeth from thee
(thou Authour of al goodnes) frō whom
what ſoeuer is good in deede, or ſo accompted,

doth iſſue, flow & procede. But
yet one thyng is there, whych more then
theſe all doth inflame, vrge, and mooue
me, to ſet my whole delight, and all my
loue vpon thee.
               This I ſay ſpecially, O my Lord Ieſu,
makes thee to me both louinge, and
amiable, that thou vouched ſafe of thy
mere mercy, to ſuffer for me moſt ſhame
full and cruell death, in accompliſhinge
the worke of my redemption. This onelye,
this wholly, and this more then all
thinges, doth chalenge vnto it, euen by
ſpeciall deſert, all our lyfe, all our labour
all our ſeruice, and loue. This is yt▪ I
ſay, that better ſtirreth, ſwetelyer ſeketh,
and greatlyer encreaſeth oure deuotion
toward thee, thē all thine other kindnes
or goodnes towardes vs. For in this
worke of our reconſiliation made by the
bytter panges of his paſſion, the vniuerſal
creatour was ſo oppreſſed with pain
and trauayle, that he was nothinge lyke
wearied in the workmāſhip of ye whole
world. For of the world, and of al things
in the world,Pſal. 32. he onely ſayd the worde, and
they were made, he gaue the commaundement,

and they were created. But for
the reſtauration of mau kynd, the paines
and the ſorowes which he ſuffered, are
in all reſpects manifolde, maruailous, &
vnſpeakeable? Behold therfore how he
loued vs, that for no neede or neceſſitye
on his owne behalfe, but onelye for the
loue which he bare to vs, woulde beare,
and ſuſtaine ſuch paines and ſo meruailous.
Iuſtly therefore haue I ſayde, and
may I ſay, that this one thinge excelleth
all other his benefites. For though it be
greatly to be wayed, and alſo to be eſtemed
for no ſmall token of bountye, that
a man contenteth himſelfe, or condeſcendeth
frankly to gyue his goodes to another,
yet is this much more and infinitly
incomparable to geeue, and be ſtowe a
mans own ſelfe for his neighbour. And
thoughe this bee an argument of greate
loue, and charity, to geue a mans lyfe for
his friendes: yet is this a plaine profe of
great affection to dye for foes, and enemyes,
as the ſonne of God did, when he
dyed for vs. For whē we were enemies
to God, we wer recōciled by the death of
his ſōne.Roma. 5. Hardely ſaith Paul dieth a mā
                  
for a iuſt mā, but he neuertheles dyed for
ye wycked, the iuſt for the vniuſt, that he
might preſent vs blameles in the ſyght
of his father. And from heauen became
he exiled and baniſhed, that he might reſtore
vs to the ioyes of that kingdome.
               O how vnſpeakeable therefore is this
loue and charitie? Or what tounge can
expreſſe the ſweetenes of thys affection?
Or how marueilous a mercye was thys
I pray you, that God for man ſhould become
man, or that God for man ſhoulde
dye in the fleſh? and to be tempted in all
thinges belonging to mans infirmitie,Hebr. 4.
ſynne onely excepted: For behold it ſhal
forthwith appeare to the eye of thine vnderſtanding,
with how great a raunſom
man was redeemed: which by reaſon of
his ſynne was iuſtlye enthrauled to the
Deuil, and the moſt dreadfull ſentence of
death and damnation. Neither is it to
be hidden, that if man had not ben raunſomed,
accordyng to gods good mercye
exhibited in his ſonne, with the Deuill &
his aungels hee had beene loſt for ener.
And all this doo I tell thee, that thou
mayeſt haue ſome feeling how much mā
                  
is bounde to bee louyng to God for althinges:
and not onely paciently, but alſo
willinglye, and with all the might of
power and feruencye, to abyde and endure
ſorrow and griefe for him, that ſuffered
for vs ſuch extremitie of griefe and
ſorrow.Actes. 14. For by many tribulations muſt
we enter into the kingdome of god. Let
my Soule therefore (O my Lord Ieſu)
hold and embrace thy bleſſed bodye crucified,
and let it drincke a ſweete draught
of thy moſt precious bloud, by deepe imprintyng
of thy paſſion in my mynde &
memory. Yea let this pleaſant remembraunce
ſo poſſeſſe my memorye, that no
obliuion or forgetfulnes bee able to abſcure
it. But geue me grace to iudge of
my ſelfe as Saynt Paule dyd,1. Cor. 2. namelye,
that I know nothing but Chriſt Ieſu, &
him alſo crucified: ſo that vayne errour
be not ſuffered to withdrawe my knowledge
from the ſoundnes of faith. Finally
let this wonderful loue towardes me
challenge to it ſelfe all my loue to thee?
that no worldlye deſyre haue power to
ſwalow me. For this I know O Lord,
that the hart or mynde that is fulfylled

with the loue of thee, can neyther bee
ſtraightned with feare, nor defiled with
luſt, nor torne with wrath, nor aduaunced
with pride, nor waſted with vayne
glory, nor ſtyrred with madnes, nor vnbowelled
with ambition, nor ſhroonken
with couetouſnes, nor ouerthrowē with
ſadnes, nor conſumed with enuye, neyther
yet corrupted with anye other vice,
while in the ſweetenes of thee it reſteth
conſtant and immoueable. He therfore
that to his Seruauntes geueth ſo great
thinges in this world preſent, how great
trow you, doth he reſerue for them, and
lay vp in ſtore, in the world to come?
               The thinges yet that he preſently geueth,
are temporall, but thoſe which hee
promiſeth to geue hereafter, are eternal,
& incomperably better then all the temporall
goods of the world. For temporal
goods are painfully gotten, and eaſely
waſted. And when we haue them ſureſt,
Lord what a care it is to kepe them,
what ſorow to loſe them, and what endles
payne and trauaile to recouer them
againe? But the ritches of the world to
come, are neuer loſt, neuer diminiſhed,

but alwayes poſſeſſed with ioy & quietnes,
as things euermore longed for, and
neuer hated or loathed. For hee that to
theſe heauenly ritches is once aſpired, &
hath gotten them into hys handes and
poſſeſſion, ſhall bee as well aſſured that
he ſhall neuer loſe them, as he hath earneſt
deſire neuer to forgo them.
            
            
               ¶The .xvii. Chapter.
               ¶Of the benefit of God his promiſe.
               
                  RIght highly therefore is God
to bee loued in his promiſes,
in aſmuch as he hath behight
vs greater thinges, then hetherto
hee hath geuen vs. For hee hath
promiſed vnto vs reſt from paine, libertie
from thraldome, ſecuritie from feare,
comfort from ſorrow, reſurrection from
the dead, and after that our bodyes are
rayſed vp agayne, ſuche full and perfect
blyſſe as neuer ſhall haue ending. Finallye
he hath promiſed him ſelfe vnto vs,
euen as he ſware to our fathers,Luke. 1. that hee
would geue him ſelfe for vs. Great therfore
are the promiſes of God & vnſpeakable,
and for theſe, and in theſe will God

be loued of vs: and in ſuch ſort and maner
as it behoueth vs.
               But if thou wylt know in what ſort it
behoueth vs to loue God, vehementlye
to deſire to haue the promiſe performed,
is onely the maner that in this our loue
is of duty required. The promiſe of God
yet, how ſoeuer it bee deſyred, is muche
leſſe deſired, then it ought for to be. And
howe ſoeuer the Louer of God profiteth,
and increaſeth in louyng hym, hee
ought ſtyll to profite, and to encreaſe to
more. For the earneſt and true longyng
after God in ſome reſpect, hath no mean
nor meaſure, when as it can neuer ſo exceede,
that it maye be thought to muche.
And where as in al other thinges impaciencie
is euer blamed, vehement impaciencie
of the delay in the expectacion of
gods promiſes, that is, to haue and poſſeſſe
God, deſerueth laud and praiſe, as a
thing moſt commendable. For the more
a man loueth God, and the more he longeth
after hym, the impatiencie in that
delaye tormenteth the more, & the hope
which is differred, ſore vexeth the ſoule.
But theſe precious iewels in this world

promiſed, are onelye had and enioyed in
the heauenly palace. And therfore of that
good whych is chiefe of all goodnes,
what it is, and how it is, ſhal firſt be declared.
            
            
               ¶The .xviii. Chapter.
               ¶Of the conſideration of the Deity &
ioyes of heauen.
               
                  LEt vs ſtyrre vp therefore and
aduaunce all our vnderſtanding,
as far forth as the grace
of God may aſſiſt it, to waigh
and confider how great the onelye and
proper ioy of the choſen is there, where
the place is prepared for them. That is
to ſay, that onely high ſoueraigne good,
which is lyfe, lyght, blyſſefulnes, wyſedome,
eternitie, and ſuch other like: and
yet is but onelye one in nature moſt excellent,
and high good, ſufficing to it ſelf
in all thinges, needing or wanting nothing:
and which all haue neede of, not
onely to be, but alſo well to be. Thys
good is God the Father, thys is the
word, that is, the Sonne of the Father,
and this is that one and common loue,

to the Father and the Sonne, namelye
that holy Spirite, which from them both
equally doth iſſue and proceede. And that
which euerye one of theſe is in parſon
particularly, the ſame is the whole Trinitie,
the Father, the Sonne, & the holye
Ghoſt. For euery ſinguler parſon of this
Trinitie, is doubtles nothyng els but
that high ſoueraigne vnitie, of the god-head
I meane,Luke. 10. and the Deitie, which can
neither be multiplied, encreaſed, nor altered.
               Moreouer, this is that onely one thing
which is needefull and neceſſarye. And
that onely is neceſſarye, in the which all
good is, or which of it ſelfe is the onelye
one, and aloue good. For if eche ſeuerall
good thing, be good and delectable, then
thinke with thy ſelfe how delectable that
good is, which containeth in it the pleaſure
and delight of all that is good, and
not ſuche as wee fynde, or taſte in Gods
creatures, but ſo far differing in al kinde
of excellency, as the Creator in worthynes
doth excell the creature. For if lyfe
created be good, howe good is that lyfe
which did create it? If health made, or

geuen be good, how good is that health
that made or gaue it? If the wiſedome
amiable, that conſiſteth in ye knowledge
of thinges yt be made, how amiable is yt
wiſedome that made all thoſe things of
nothing? Finally, if in things delectable
the delight be great and manifold, howe
great is the ſame in him that made, and
ordained what ſoeuer is delectable? O
how happye is that Soule, which maye
haue vſe of that good? What ſhall hee
haue myſſe of, that hath it? or what ſhal
he not want, that lackes it? For who ſo
hath that, ſhall together haue the goodes
both of body and ſoule: and thoſe ſuche
alſo, ſo paſſing and ſo excellent, as neyther
eye hath ſene,1. Cor. 2. nor eare hath heard,
nor the hart of man hath thought or conceaued.
Why then wander we through
ſo manye thinges, to ſeeke the goodes of
our bodie and ſoule?
               Let vs rather loue that one God in
whom is all that good is, and it ſhall be
inoughe and ſufficient for vs. Let vs
longe after that ſimple good, which of it
ſelfe is all good, and we ſhalbe well, and
ſhall nede to ſeeke no further. For what

loueſt thou O my fleſh, or what deſireſt
thou, O my Soule? There and in that
ſame ſelfe good, that is: in thy Soueraigne
Lord God, is doubtles al whatſoeuer
ye loue, or deſire. To ſpeake therefore
of the goods of the heauenlye kingdome,
or to conceaue or vnderſtād them,
no man cloathed in the fleſh, ſuffiſeth, or
is able. For in truth they are much greater
& better, then eyther they are thought
or perceyued to bee. For the kingdome
of God excelleth all fame, paſſeth all
praiſe, ſurmounteth all cunning, & excelleth
what ſoeuer glorye is thought moſt
royall or famous. The kingdome of god
therfore is full of light, and peace, charitye
and patience, woorſhippe and glory,
pleaſure and delight, euerlaſting in ioy,
perpetuall in bliſfulnes, and repleniſhed
with all other goodes, what ſoeuer are
vnpoſſible to bee ſpoken, or comprehended.
And yet ought I not therfore to be
mute or ſilent, but to ſay ſo muche as I
can: Bycauſe I cannot ſaye ſo much as
I woulde. For bycauſe we beleue that
God is vnſpeakable, it is not forth with
reaſon to thincke our ſelues not bounde

to ſpeake of him that we can, or are able.
Neyther is this tollerable, yt we ſhoulde
not beleue of that life euerlaſting, which
God by his promiſe hath ſealed vnto vs
more a great deale, theu is ſette forth in
wryting. For neyther can the toung, nor
the pen expreſſe ſo much, as the hart can
comprehende, and yet the hart which is
of greateſt capacity, and of al things conceaueth
moſt profoundly, and depely, is
farre to light to compriſe the Maieſty of
God, his ioyes and glory. Of the lyfe to
come therefore, we muſt earneſtly beleue
that it is both euerlaſtiug in it ſelfe, and
euerlaſtinglye happy: And that ther is
aſſured ſecurity, and ſecure tranquility,
peaceable pleaſantnes, blyſfull eternity,
and eternall bliſfulnes, wher is perfytte
loue, no feare, no dread, no want of day:
But cherefull motion, and one ſpirite among
all, aſſured of the ſight of God, &
there to abyde in his ioy, where that cytye
is, which is the bleſſed congregation
of all Aungels and Saintes, gliſtering
& ſhyning in the righteouſnes of Chriſt.
There I ſay wher euerlaſting ſaluation
aboundeth, where truth reigneth, where

no man deceaueth, nor can bee deceaued?
where no happye man can bee caſt out or
exiled, nor whither anye wretch may bee
drawen or aduaunced. This is the blyſſefull
contemplatiue life, to the which ſuch
as come by faith fruitfull and charitable,
ſhall be made lyke to the blyſſeful ſpirits,
and raigne in Gods kingdom with them
for euer. For what they beleued here,
that ſhal they ſee there, and beholding the
ſubſtance of their Creatour, wyth pure
hartes, and innocent eyes, ſhall triumphe
in ioy euerlaſting, and through the poſſeſſion
of gods loue in mutuall charitie,
ſhall be eche together with other, & ioyned
with their God in vnitye & concord.
And hauing receiued the priuiledge of the
heauenlye countrye, as perpetuallye enfraunchized
into the ſame, ſhall enioy the
benefit long before promiſed.
               There ſhall be ſuch gladnes, and ſuche
plenty and ſtore of heauenly ſolace, aboū
                  ding
in the fulnes of gods goodnes and
grace, that to their Lord god ſoueraygne
geuer of ſuch giftes, they ſhal inceſſantly
yelde thankes and prayſe wythout anye
kynde of yrkſomnes conceaued, in the vſing,

or hauing of gods ſo manyfold bleſſinges.
For the hartes of euery one ſhall
there be open eche to other, as corporall
thynges are here ſene with the ſyght of
our bodelye eyes. And ſo perfect and ſo
cleane ſhall mens conſciences bee there,
that they ſhall haue continuall cauſe to
thanke God for their puritie, & not bluſh
nor be aſhamed for their former offences,
in as muche as neither ſynner nor ſynne
ſhall be there, wher power is taken from
all men to ſynne any more. Neither ſhall
they which be perfectly bleſſed, bee ignorant
of anye myſterie of ſecrete, for they
ſhall ſee him in whom all ſecretes are opened,1. Cir. 13.
& that face to face, as them ſelues
are ſene. For then ſhall mankynde in all
perfection be made ſo abſolute, that from
thence foorth it ſhall neuer bee altered or
chaunged, but of that ſubſtance of Man,
by glorification tranſformed into the likenes
of his moſt bleſſed Maker, al the naturall
goodes earſt receiued of God, and
diſfugured by mans ſynne in this wretched
worlde, ſhall there in that blyſſe bee
repaired to better, that is to ſay: vnderſtanding
ſhall be without errour, memorye

without obliuion, thought without
wandering, charitie wythout fayning,
ſenſe wythout offence, health wythout
ſicknes, myrth without ſorrow, pleaſure
without paine, life without death, agility
wythout impediment, fulnes wythout
lothſomnes, and ſoundnes without dyſeaſe.
For whatſoeuer in this life, eyther
the violence of beaſtes, or rage of miſfortune
hath impaired in mans body, what
ſoeuer ſycknes hath feebled, or crueltye
waſted, or dyſeaſe putrified, or age in it
ſelfe comberſome hath benummed or cō
                  ſumed,
ſhall all againe in the glorious reſurrection
be renued & reſtored, and the
whole bodies with all their lymmes and
members vnited to their ſoules, ſhall together
be endued with incorruptible nature.
And therefore who ſoeuer in that
blyſſefulnes, is blyſfully poſſeſſed, ſhall
by no diſtance of place, difference of merite,
nor any other meane what ſoeuer it
be, at any tyme bee ſeperated from the
full fruition of God, in the fulnes
of hys glory.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The table of the matters
contained in euery chapter
of this booke.
            
               ¶That the loue of god and thy neighbour
cannot be ſeperated. Chap. 1.
               Why & hovv god is to be loued. 2. cha.
               The cauſe of the creation of Aungels,
men, and all other creatures. 3. chap.
               Of the loue of god towards vs. 4. chap.
               Of the fruition of god. 5. chap.
               Of the free gyftes of creation, and regeneration.
6. chap.
               Of the benefit of god in callyng vs to
the faith 7. chap.
               Of the gift of vertues. 8. chap.
               Of the gyfte of vnderſtandynge and
knowledge. 9. chap.
               Of Gods prouident care ouer vs. 10.
               Of the gift of the ſenſes, and preſeruation
of lyfe. 11. chap.
               Of the patience and long ſufferyng of
God. 12. chap.
               Of the gift of continencie. 13. chap.
               Of the gift of hope. 14. chap.
               Of God his bountie, of our inquitye,
and of thankes geuing. 15. chap.
               
                  
Of the benefit of Chriſt hys d
                     〈…〉
                  
paſſion. 16. chap.
               Of the benefit of God his promiſe. 17
               Of the conſideration of the Deitye and
ioyes of heauen. 18: chap.
            
         
         
            Errata.
            
               In the firſt lyne and the 3 page of the 3
Chapter for as well hee, reade as well
as hee. In the ſame page, for he could,
reade he would. For conſenting, reade
conſultinge.
               In the 4 page of the 4 Chapter, for remayneth
reade wanteth.
               In the 4 page the 2 lyne of the 11 chapter,
for ſounds reade languages.
               In the 5 page of the 16 Chapter, for abſcure
reade obſcure.
               In the 1 page of the 17 chapter for haūe
reade haue.
            
            
               
               
            
            ¶Imprinted at London
by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling
in Paules Church yarde
at the ſigne of the Lucres.
1574.
            
         
      
   