
      
         
            
            
               ❧ The Orders for Swannes, both by the Statutes and by the ancient Orders and Cuſtomes vſed within the Realme of England.
            
               
                  FIrſt, ye ſhall enquire if there be any perſon that doth poſſeſſe any Swan, and hath not compounded with the Kings Maieſty for his marke: that is to ſay, vj. s. viij. d. for his Marke during his life: If you know any ſuch, you ſhall preſent them, that all ſuch Swans and Cignets may be ſeized for the King.
               2 Alſo you ſhall enquire if any perſon doth poſſeſſe any Swan or Cignet, that may not diſpend the cléere yearly value of fiue markes of Frée-hold, except heyre apparant to the crowne: then you ſhal preſent him. 22. Edw. 4.
               
               3 Alſo if any perſon or perſons doe driue away any Swan or Swans, bréeding or prouiding to bréed, be it vpon his own ground or any other mans ground, he or they ſo offending ſhall ſuffer one yeares impriſonment and fine at the Kings pleasure, xiij. s. iiij. d. 11. H. 7.
               
               4 If there be found any Weares vpon the Riuers, not hauing any Grates vpon them, it is lawfull for euery owner, ſwanmaſters or ſwan-heards, to pull vp or cut downe the Birth net or gyn of the ſaid Weare or Weares.
               5 If any perſon or perſons be found carrying any Swan-h
                     ••
                  ke, and the ſame perſon being no Swan-heard, nor accompanied with two Swan-heards: euery ſuch perſon ſhall pay to the King xiij. s. iiij. d. that is to ſay, iij. s. iiij. d. to him that will informe, and the reſt to the King.
               6 The ancient cuſtome of this Realme hath and doth allow to euery owner of ſuch ground there any ſuch Swan ſhall heiry, to take one land bird, and for the ſame the Kings Maieſty muſt haue of him that hath the land bird xij. d. be it vpon his owne ground or any other.
               7 It is ordeyned, that if any perſon or perſons do conuey away, or ſteale away the egge or egges of any Swans, and the ſame being duly proued by two ſufficient witneſſes, that then euery ſuch offendor ſhall pay to the King xiij. s. iiij. d. for euery egge ſo taken out of the neaſt of any Swan.
               8 It is ordeyned that euery owner that hath any ſwans, ſhall pay euery yeare yearely for euery ſwan-mark iiij. d. to the maſter of the game for his fée, and his dinner and ſupper frée on the Upping dayes. And if the ſaid maſter of the game faile of the foure pence, then he ſhall diſtraine the game of euery ſuch owner that ſo doth fayle of payment.
               9 If there be any perſon or perſons that hath Swans that doe heiry vpon any of their ſeuerall waters, and after come to the common riuer they ſhall pay a land-bird to the King, and be obedient to all Swan Lawes: for diuers ſuch perſons doe vſe colluſion to defraud the King of his right.
               10 It is ordeyned that euery perſon, hauing any Swan, ſhall begin yearly to marke, vpon the firſt of Auguſt, and no perſon before; but after, as coueniently may be, ſo that the maſter of the Kings game, or his deputy, be preſent, And if any take vpon him or them to marke any Swan or Cignet, in any other maner, to forfeit to the Kings Maieſty for euery Swan ſo marked, xl. s.
               11 It is ordeyned that no perſon or perſons, being owners, or deputies, or ſeruants to them or other, ſhall goe on marking without the maſter of the game or his deputy be preſent, with other Swan-heards next adioyning, vpon paine to forfeit to the Kings Maieſtie xl. s.
               12 It is ordeyned that no perſon ſhall hunt any Ducke or any other chaſe in the water, or néere the haunt of Swans in Fencetime, with any Dog or Spaniels, viz. from the feaſt of Eaſter to Lammas, vpon paine for euery time ſo found in hunting, to forfeit ſixe ſhillings eight pence.
               13 It is ordeyned, that if any perſon doth ſet any ſnares, or any maner of nets lime or engines, to take Bittorns or Swans, from the feaſt of Eaſter to the Sunday after Lammas day, he or they to forfeit to the K. Maieſtie for euery time ſo ſetting, vj s. viij. d.
               14 It is ordeyned, that no perſon take vp any Cignet vnmarked, or make any ſale of them, but that the Kings Swan-heard, or his deputy be preſent, with other Swan-heards next adioyning, or haue knowledge of the ſame, vpon paine to forfeit to the Kings Maieſty xl. s.
               15 It is ordeyned that the Swan-heards of the Duchy of Lancaſter ſhall vp no Swan, or make any ſale of them, without the Maſter of the Swans or his deputy be preſent, vpon paine to forfeit to the K. Maieſty xl. s.
               16 And in like maner, the Kings Swan-heard ſhal not enter into the Liberty of the Duchy, without the Duchy Swan-heard be there preſent, vpon the like paine to forfeit xl. s.
               17 It is ordeyned, that if any Swans at Cignets be found double marked, they ſhall be ſeized to the Kings vſe, till it be proued to whom the ſame Swans or Cignets doe belong. And if it cannot be proued to whom they doe belong, that then they be ſeized for the King, and his Grace to be anſwered to the value of them.
               18 It is ordeyned, that no perſon make ſale of any white Swans, nor make deliuery of them without the maſter of the game be preſent, or his deputy, with other Swan-heards next adioyning, vpon paine to forfeit xl. s. whereof vj. s. viij. d, to him that will informe, and the reſt to the K Maieſty:
               19 It is ordeyned that no perſon ſhal lay Leapes, ſet any Nets or Drag, within the common ſtreames or riuers vpon the day time, from ye feaſt of the Inuention of the Croſſe to ye feaſt of Lammas, vpon pain ſo oſt as they be found ſo offending, to ſort. xx. s.
               20 It is ordeyned, that if the maſter of the Swans or his deputy, do ſeize or take vp any Swans as ſtrayes, for the K. Maieſty, that he ſhall kéepe them in a pit within xx. foot of the Kings ſtreame, or within xx. foot of the common high way, that the K. ſubiects may haue a ſight of the ſaid Swans ſo ſeized, vpon paine of xl. s.
               21 It is ordeyned, that if any perſon do raze out, counterfeit or alter the marke of any Swan, to the hindering or loſſe of any mans game, that euery ſuch offendor duly proued before the K. Maieſties Comiſſioners of Swans, ſhal ſuffer one years impriſonment, and pay in l vj. s. viij. d. to the King.
               22 It is ordeyned that the commons, that is to ſay, dinner and ſupper ſhall not excéed aboue xij. d. a man at the moſt. If there be any game found where the dinner or ſupper is holden, vpon that riuer, the owner being abſent, and none there for him, the Maſter of the game is to lay out viij. d. for him, and he is to diſtraine the game of him that faileth the payment of it.
               23 It is ordeyned that there ſhalbe no forfeiture of any white Swan or Cignet, but onely to the K. Grace, as well within the Franchiſe & Liberties as without: and if any do deliuer the Swan or Cignet ſo ſeized, to any perſon but only to the Maſter of the Kings Game, or to his deputy, to the K. vſe, he is to forfeit vj. s. viij. d. and the Swans to be reſtored to the maſter of the game.
               24 It is ordeyned, that no perſon ſhall take any gray Swans or Cignets, or white Swans flying, but that he ſhall within foure dayes next after, deliuer it or them to the Maſter of the K. game, and the Taker to haue for his paines viij. d. and if hee faile, and bring him not, he forfeits xl. s. to the King.
               25 It is ordeyned, that no perſon hauing any game of his own, ſhall be Swan-heard for himſelfe, nor kéeper of any other mans Swans, vpon paine to forfeit to the K. Maieſty xl. s.
               26 It is ordeyned, that no Swan-heard, Fiſher or Fowler, ſhall vexe any other Swan-heard, Fiſher or Fowler, by way of action, but only before the K. Maieſties Juſtices of Seſſions of Swan-heards, vpon paine to forfeit xl. s. to the King.
               27 The maſter of the Kings game ſhall not take away any vnmarked Swan coupled with any other mans Swan, for breaking of the brood: and when they doe heiry, the one part of the Cignets to the King, and the other to the owner of the marked Swan.
               28 Alſo, any man whatſoeuer he be, that killeth any Swan with Dogge or Spaniels, ſhall forfeit to the King xl. s. the owner of the Dog to pay it, whether he be there or no. Alſo the Maſter or the Swans is to haue for euery white ſwan and gray vpping j. d. and for euery Cignet ij. d.
               29 It is ordeyned, that if any Heiry be leyed with one ſwan, the ſwan and the Cignets ſhall be ſeized for the King, till due proofe he had whoſe they are, and whoſe was the ſwan that is away, Be it Cobbe or Pen.
               
               30 Laſtly, if there be any miſdemeanour or offence committed or done by any owner of any game, Swan-heard or other person whatſoeuer, contrary to any law, ancient cuſtome or vſage heretofore vſed and allowed, & not before herein particularly mentioned or expreſſed, you ſhall preſent the ſame offence, that reformation may be had, and the offendors puniſhed, according to the quantity and quality of the ſeuerall offences.
            
            GOD SAVE THE KING.
         
      
   