
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A LITLE Pamphlet of Saint Auguſtine entituled the Ladder of Paradiſe. Very woorthy and needful to be read of every Chriſtian that is willing to tread the ſteps which lead to Heauen.
            Imprinted at London for Edward Aggas, dwelling in Paules church yard at the ſigne of ye red Dragon▪ and are there to be ſolde.
         
         
            
            
               
                  NEC TEMERE NEC TIMIDE
               
            
         
         
            
            
               To the right worshipfull Ladye, the L. Fane true felicitie with the increace of God his moſte excellent bleſſings.
            
            
               
                  IT is not rare but vſuall, to ſee gifts brought vnto a ritch mā and many preſents, geuē to him that lacketh not, verifying that in things earthly, vvhich properly is ſpokē of the minde. To him that hath it shall be giuē & he shall haue abundāce, euen ſo the abundance of Gods good gifts, the humblenes of minde, the loue of vertue, and zeale of ſeruing God, vvhich I haue hard and ſeene in your Ladyſhip hath long ſince geuen me great deſire by vvryting ſomvvhat to ad ſome good thing vnto the heap of thoſe good vertues. But finding in my ſelfe nothing, vvhervvith to anſvvere my deſire, as being voide of learning or vviſdome

vvorthy to be heard: I became cleerely reſolued to folovve any purpoſe no further, and to end vvith prayer vnto God, that he vvould bleſſe his gifts in you to the encreace of an hundreth folde: yet ſpending ſome time as my leiſure did ſerue me in turning the leues of that anncient father AVGVSTIN, I ſound this litle Pamphlet, an apt pecco (as me thought) for that purpoſe, and a I evvell vvorthy to be vvorne, not about the neck: but about the hart of the greateſt Lord or Lady in this vvorld, namely a 
                  •••
               aier of ſtayres or a ladder of pure golde, ſo artificially vvrought, that vvho ſo liſteth to goe there on: ſhall be ſure to come ſafely vp into the preſence chamber of Gods euer laſting glory, and in ſo ſmall roume this I uell is cōtriued, that it may vvel be placed in the leaſt of all the chriſtian harts, yea and the leſſe the hart is: the more aptly it may be hidden therin,

vvhich alſo for the antiquitie is, a boue eleuen hundreth yeere olde, and for excelencie the litle vvoorke dooth ſo praiſe it ſelf that a far better pen thē myne adding ſomevvhat to the praiſe therof ſhould rather blemiſh then beutiſie it by ſaying
                  •
                much leſſe, or much vvorſe then the ſame dooth ſay for it ſelfe, hauing therfore (as I haue ſaid) nothing in me to further the loue of vertue ād zeale of chriſtianitie vvich God hath geuen you, I haue thus obtained this olde father ſaint AVGVSTINE to doo it for me, vvhom if it ſhall pleaſe your ladyſhip to hear vvith good affectiō attētiuely: the paine shall ſure be much les thē the profit, and you shall not fail to reap great fruit vvith ſmall trauaile, yea the labour ſhall ſoōe be gone and the profit long remaine. Novv vvhat ſo euer therfore in this litle treatis is ſpoken: I humbly beſeech your ladiship allvvay to remember. It

is not I: but the ancient and excellent father Saint AVGVSTINE that ſpeketh. It is he that ſaith, reading, meditation, Cap. 1. prayer and contemplation are the ſteps of that ladder that leadeth to heauen. It is he that expounding the vvoords of Chriſte ſaith, ſeeke by reading: and ye shall finde by meditation, Cap. 2. knock by praying: and it ſhall be opened vnto you by contemplation. It is he that ſaith, reading dooth as it vvere apply ſubſtāciall meat vnto the mouth, meditatiō dooth chovve it & break it, Ibidem. prater obtaineth the ſvveetnes of it: contemplation is the ſvvetnes it ſelf. Cap. 11. It is Saīt AVGVSTINE that ſaith, reading vvith out meditation is ſaples, & meditation vvith out reading is erronius. And leſt ſome fond body should imagī, that this reding vvhich hee ſo oft ſpeaketh of, should be the reading of any other thing but of Scripture only, and that vvith theſe Cap. 1.
               
vvords: reading (ſaith he) is a looking vpon the ſcripture vvith a diligent entention of the minde, and in the tenth chapter, he ſaith theſe foure Cap. 10. ſteps are ſo linked togither, that they vvhich goe before vvithout them vvhich folovve: can profit litle or no thīg & they vvhich folovv vvithout them that goe before: doo profit ſeldōe or neuer. To conclude, the vvhole ſomme & effect therof: is nothing els but that the reading of Scripture, the meditation vpō the Scripture, prayer to obtain the vnderſtanding of Scripture, and contemplatiō in the ſvveetnes of Gods promiſes cōtained in the Scripture is the onely gate of Heauen, and the vvay to attain eternal life. For the cōfirmatiō vvherof: it vvere no hard matter for a man of mean knovvledge to cōpile a huge volume, and to bring many hundred places out of the auncient fathers. VVherin they

plainly and directly confirm the ſame, that by theſe ſteps onely, & none other vvay: a man muſt goe to heauen. But moſte of all it ought to mooue vs that God him ſelf by his ovvne vvord hath ratified this to be the only vvay to Heauen, and that for all men, vvith out any exception. For vvho can haue Deut. 17. ver. 18. 19. greater priuiledge then a King? or greater occaſion to ſurceaſſe from the continuall excerciſe of this reading, meditation, prayer and cōtemplation?
            And is it not expreſly ſet dovvn by Gods cōmaūdemēt, that a King ought to haue the book of Gods lavves by hī, and ought to read therin all the dayes of his life? vvho should ſooner be exempt frō this diligent excerſiſe of Scripture then a Souldier or Captain, and Joſ. 1. ver. 8 that durīg the vvarres? But dooth not God him ſelf ſpeak vnto the noble Conqueror & captaī, Ioſua in the firſt ētre of his vvarres, and ſtraightly charge

him ſaying? Let not the book of this Joſu. 1. ver. 8. lavve departe out of thy mouth, but occupy thy minde therin day & night. VVhere mark theſe preciſe tearmes, Book, mouth, minde, day, night. For vvho ſeeth not that vpō euery of theſe vvords much might be ſaid if breuitie vvould ſuffer it. VVhen or at vvhat time should any intermiſſion frō the exerciſe of Scripture be graunted to any man, if it be cōuenient for a noble man trauailing by the vvay in his iourney to read the Scriptures? And did Act. 8. ver. 30. not the noble Lord Treſurer of the great Queene Cand ace trauailing by the vvay, ſit in his Chariot treading of Eſayas the Prophet? & vvas not the end therof ſaluation of his ſoule?. Is it not alſo vvrittē by Saint Luke for Act. 19. ver. 11. an euerlaſting commendation vnto thoſe that vvere the nobleſt of birth among them of Theſsalonica, becauſe (vvhen Paule had preached) they ſerched

the Scriptures, and that dayly to ſee vvhether it vvere ſo or not? And by that meanes they vvere brought vnto the faith of Chriſte. Yea and not noble men only, but Ladies alſo by nāe are apoīted of God to tread theſe ſteps, and they ſhall neuer come to heauen other vviſe then by reading the ſcriptures, by meditation of the ſcriptures, by praier to vnderſtand them, & contemplation in the ſvvetnes of them. And therfore Saint Iohn vvriteth 2. Joh. 1. ver. 1. one of his epiſtles vnto a Lady, that Ladies alſo hauing the vvoord of God ſo eſpecially dyrected vnto them, might endeuour thēſelues vvith the greter dyligēce to read it and certēly knovv themſelues not to be excluded frō the exerciſe therof.
            The vviſdome of GOD in the laſt chapter of the Prouerbs, diſcribing and 
                  
                     •
                  ro. 30. as it vvere painting out the properties, not of a mean vvomā: but of a noble

mans vvife and a vertuous Lady, among other excellent qualities that ſuch a vvomā ought to haue. He ſaith. She opēeth her mouth vvith vviſdōe, and in her tung is the lavve of grace. But leſt I should paſſe the competent boūds of an Epiſtle: I vvil breefly note the Book, the Chapter and the Verſe of diuers other places, vvhere God him ſelf by his holy vvord plainly teacheth that all men, yea, men, vvomen and children, ought to be diligently exerciſed in the vvord of God, as the onely vvay to eternall life and the Ladder of Heauen.
            Deut. 6. ver. 6. 7. Deut. 8. ver. 3. Deut. 11. ver. 18, 19. 20. Deut. 31. ver 11. 12. Ioſu. 8 ver. 35. 1. Reg. 22. ver. 5. 2. Reg. 23. ver. 2. 2. Eſd. 8. ver. 3. 18. ibi. 9. ver. 2. 3. Pſa. 1. ver. 3. Pſa. 19. ver. 7. Pſa. 36. ver 31. 32. Pſa. 119. Pro. 1. ver 1. 2. 3. 4. Pro. 2. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9. Pro. 4. ver. 20, 21. 22. Pro. 6.

ver 23. ibi. 7. ver. 1, 2, 3. ibi. 8. ver. 9. ibi. 28. ver. 9. Eſay. 8. ver. 19. 20. Eſay. 29. ver. 19. Eſa. 34. ver. 16. Eſay. 48. ver. 16. Eſa. 59. ver. 21. Eccle. 24. all. Eccle. 39. ver. 1. Mat. 4. Mar. 12. ver. 24. Lu. 16 ver. 29. Iho. 5. ver. 39. 47. Iho. 8. ver. 43. Iho. 15. ver. 3. 7. Act. 11. ver. 1. 14. Act. 13. ve. 26. 46. Act. 26. ver. 2. 3. Rom. 10. ver. 8. 17. Rom. 15. ver. 4. 1. Cor. 10. ver. 11. 2. Cor. 1. ver. 13. Ephe. 3. ver. 1. Theſa. 4. ver. 18. Phil. 2. ver. 16. Collo. 3. ver. 16. 2. Timothe. 3 ver. 15. 16. Ia. 1. ver. 18. 20. 1. Pet. 1. ver 23. 1. Pet. 2. ver. 8. 2. Pet. ver 19. 1. Ioh. 2. ver. 12. 13. 14. Iude. ver. 17. Apoc. 1. ver. 3.
            The very nāe of Gods vvoord ought to ſtrike into our harts, great reuerēce tovvard it, great deſire to haue it, great haſte to hear it, great loue to read it & like care to keep it. If a Kīg or

a Queen should vvrite vnto vs, lord hovv vvould vve shore vp our eares? vvhat haſte should vve make to hear the contents? Beholde God him ſelf hath directed his letters to euery one of vs, his ovvne ſpirite is his Secretary, his Prophets and Apoſtles are Purciuants & meſſengers that bring them vnto vs. Intollerable is the contempt of God that ſen deth thē, if vve doo not humbly read them, hear them and diligently mark and obſerue the ſpeciall points, and contents of them. The dredful vvoords of God doo folovve ſuch contempt, as it is vvrittē.
            O turn you vnto my correction, lo I vvil expreſſe my minde vnto you, and make you vnderſtād my vvoords. Seeing then that I haue called & you refuſed it, I haue ſtretched out my hād and no man regarded it, but all my counſel yee haue deſpiſed, and ſet my corrections at nought: therfore shall I

alſo laugh in your deſtruction &c. VVhat promiſe can be ſvveeter, then to haue God expreſſe his minde vnto vs, and make vs vnderſtand his vvoord? VVhat terror can be greater then to haue God laugh and reioice in our deſtruction. From vvhich dredful deſtruction, I beſeech almighty God deliuer vs, and ſtay vs vppon the ſteps of his holy vvord, til vve come into his happy kingdome.
            
               Your La. euer to commaund.
T. VV.
            
            
               Suorum quiſque Vulnerum remediū
                  ex diuinis Scripturis eligat.
               Chriſoſt. in act. Cap 13. Ho. 29.
               
                  ❧ Let euery man chuſe out of the diuine Scriptures, the remedy of his ovvn vvoūdes.
               Theſe are the vvords of S. Iohn Chriſoſtom, vvriting vpon the 13. Chapter of the acts the 29. Homely.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               IAm not ignorāt that as well this, as many other books which are numbered, reputed and printed among the workes of Auguſtine Biſhop of Hippo are thought of māy not to be his, wherin as I mean not to contend, but regarding more the matter thē the man, and alſo finding the ſame amōg the reſt of his works not only in the later editions but in the prints of ſuch olde tīe as hardly cā be red but of thoſe which are vſed to read antiquities, wherof I my ſelfe haue one to ſhew. I thought it good ther fore (leauing the cenſure to ſuch

as are learned) to make no queſtiō therof, ſpecially ſeeing this Ladder of Paradiſe long be fore the time of Auguſtine was ſet vp by Chriſte Ieſus for his choſen and elected children to aſcend into thoſe mantions which he hath prepared for them, not only in the kingdōe, but alſo in the houſe of God his father.
         
      
      
         
            
            to Paradiſe.
            
               Cap. 1.
               
                  WHen vpon a certain day béeing occupied with the bodily labour of my hands: I had begun to think vpon the exerciſe of that ſpirituall man, foure ſpirituall ſteps ſudenly offred thē ſelf vnto my minde, as I thought theron, namely reading, meditation, prayer and cōtemplation. This is the Ladder of thoſe that be religious, by which they are lifted vp frō the earth in to Heuen. This lader is parted in to fewe ſteps, not withſtanding it is of vnmeſurable and incredible greatnes, whoſe lower part reſting vpon the earth, the vpper end perceth the clowds and ſercheth out the ſecrets of Heauen.
               Theſe degrées as they are in names and number diuers: ſo are they diſtinct in order and woorthines, if any man doo diligently beholde their properties, and their ſeuerall offices, what they woork concerning vs, how they differ and haue the preheminence one of a nother, what ſoeuer labour or ſtudy hee ſhall ſpend therin, they ſhall repute the ſame but

ſhort, and eaſy in compariſō of the great Reading not of fables but of ſcripture. profit and ſwetnes therof.
               Reading is a looking vpon the Scripture with a diligent intention of the minde. Meditation is a ſtudious action of the minde, ſearching out by drift of proper reaſon, the knowledge of hidden Praier is not to ſaints but to God. trueth. Prayer is a deuout bending of the hart vnto God, for the putting away thoſe things that are euil, and obtayning thoſe things that are good. Contemplation is a certain lifting vp of the minde depending vpon God, taſting the Joyes of euerlaſting ſwéetnes.
            
            
               The diſcription of the offices of the foure degrees or ſteps. Cap. 2.
               
                  THe diſcription of the foure degrées, then béeing ſet foorth, There reſteth yt we beholde their offices. Readīg ſeketh, Meditatiō findeth, Prayer requeſteth, Contēplation taketh the taſte, Chriſtes woords expounded by S. Auguſttin. Mach. 7. ver. 7. 8. wherof the Lord him ſelf ſaith: ſéek and yee ſhall finde, knock and it ſhalbe opened vnto you. Seek by reading and you ſhall finde by meditation.
               
                  
Knock by praying. and it ſhall be opened vnto you by contemplation. Reding dooth as it were apply ſubſtātiall meat vnto the mouth, Mediation dooth chaw it and break it, Prayer obtayneth the ſwéetnes of it. Contemplation is the ſwéetnes it ſelf which delighteth and refreſheth. Reading is in the ſkin, Meditacion is the fat, Prayer is the motiō of the deſire, Contemplatiō is the pleaſure of the ſweetnes obtained, whiche thing that yet it may more manifeſtly appéere among many: I wil ſet down one exāple. In reading I heard. Bleſſed are the pure in hert for they ſhall ſee God. Beholde héere a ſhort woord but ſwéet and manifolde in ſence, and giueth vnto the féeding of the ſoule as it were of a Grape, which after the ſoule hath diligently vewed, it ſayeth within it ſelf: I wil return vnto my hart, and I wil prooue if parhaps I can vnderſtand and finde out this puritis.
               This thing no dout is precious, and woorthy to be deſtred, whoſe poſſeſſors are called bleſſed, vnto which the ſight of God, which is eternall life is promyſed, which is ſo greatly cōmended with

ſo many teſtimonies of ye holy ſcripture.
               The hart then deſirous to haue this thing yet more fully to be vnfolded: beginneth to chaw & to break this grape, and putteth it into the preſſe whileſt it ſturreth vp reaſon to ſearch whether it be ſo, and how this precious puritie ſo woorthy to be deſired, may be attayned.
            
            
               The office of meditation. Cap. 3.
               THen diligent meditation drawing néer, ſhe tarieth not without, ſhe hath nothing to doo in the out ſide of the letter, ſhe ſetteth faſt her foot, ſhe perceth the inward partes, ſhée ſeeketh out euery corner attentiuely, ſhe conſidereth that he ſaid not, bleſſed are the clene in body: but ye pure in minde, becauſe it ſuffiſeth not to haue innocent hands frō euil acts, except we be alſo purified in minde from wicked thoughts, which thing is confirmed by the authoritie of the Prophet, ſaying. VVho shall goe vp into the h
                        •
                     l of the Lord? who shall reſt in his holy place? hee that is innocent of his hands and of a clene hart, And doth againe conſider

how greatly the ſame Prophet dooth wiſh for this clenes of hart, praūg thus. Create O Lord a new hart within me. And agaī. If I haue beheld iniquitie in my hart, the Lord wil not hear me. And thīk how carful bleſſed Iob was in this watch, who ſaid. I haue made a couenāt with mine eyes, that I would not once think vpon a Virgin. Beholde how this holy man reſtrayned him ſelf, which cloſed vp his eyes leſt he ſhould beholde vanitie, leſt parhap he ſhould raſhly beholde that which he might after againſt bis wil deſire After meditation hath bandled ſuche things touching the puritie of the hart: then ſhe beginneth to muſe vpon the reward, how glorioꝰ & delectable a thing it is to ſee the deſired face of the Lord, The fare of Chriſte can not be hid as whē his Mother ſought him nor his body vppon earth with out the glory therof. that excellēt face, in fauour far paſſing the children of men, not now abiect and vile, not hauing now the countenance in which his mother clothed him, but hauing on the long garment of immortalitie, crowned with the diadem with which his Father crowned him in the day of his reſurrection, and glory in the day which the Lord hath made. Meditation

thinketh, how in that ſight there ſhall be the fulnes wherof the Prophet ſpeaketh. VVe shalbe ſatiſfied when thy glory shal appeer. Dooſt thou not ſée what abundance of licour hath flowed out of a litle Grape? how great a fire is growen out of this one ſpark? how far this litle lamp (Bleſſed are the pure in hart for they shall ſee God) is ſtretched out in this meditation. But how far think you might the ſame be extended, if ſome man ſhould come in place which had good experience of ſuch mattere? for I perceiue that a very déep wel it is, but I béeing vnſkilful in theſe matters, haue ſcarcely found the bucket to drawe out very few things. The ſoule beeing enflamed with theſe burning torches, and mortified with theſe deſires, the alabaſtar of the ſwéet ointment beeing broken: it beginneth ſwéetly to ſauour, not as by taſte: but as it were by ſmelling at the noſe. Herof the Soule dooth gather, how ſwéet a thing it were to féele the frute of this meditacion. the meditation wherof ſhée findeth to be ſo pleſant. But what ſhall the ſoule doo? ſhe burneth with deſire to obtain, yet ſhe

findeth not with her ſelf how it may be had, & the more ſhe ſercheth: the more ſhe thirſteth, and while ſhe applyeth meditation therunto: ſhe dooth but encreace the pain, becauſe the ſoule feeleth not the ſwéetnes which meditation dooth not giue her, but ſheweth her to be in puritie of the hart, for it lyeth not in him that readeth or meditateth to féele this ſwéetnes: except it be giuen him from aboue, for to read and to meditate is a thing common bothe to good and euil men, for the very philoſophers of the heathen did finde out by drift of reaſō, wherin the effect of the true good thing did conſiſt. But becauſe when they knew God: they did not glorify him as GOD, but preſuming of their owne ſtrength ſaid, our owne tung wil wée magnify, our own lips be of our ſelues, they were not woorthy to feele ye things they could ſee, but waxed ful of vanities in their imaginations, & their wiſdome was conſumed. For that wiſdome, humain ſtudy of learning (but not the ſpirite of wiſdome) had giuen them, which ſpirite onely giueth true wiſdome, I mean the ſwéet knowledge, whiche

when it is in any man as an ineſtimable ſwéetnes, it dooth comfort & refreſh him. And of this wiſdome it is ſaid. VViſdome shall not enter in to a froward ſoule. This cometh of God onely, euen like as the Lord hath graunted the office of baptiſing vnto many, but the power and authoritie in baptiſme, of remitting ſinnes, he hath reſerued vnto him felf alone. Wherupon John 
                  No man can remit ſin. God hath referred it to hiſelf alone. in ſtéed of naming Chriſte, by that propertie, as by way of diſtinguiſhment, pointing to him 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſaith This is hee which baptiſeth in the holy Ghoſte And ſo of bun we may ſay, this is hée that giueth the true taſte of wiſdome, that maketh the pleſant ſauored ſcience of the ſoule, for ſpeech is giuen to many, but wiſdome vnto fewe, which ye Lord deuideth vnto whom he wil, and after what ſorte it pleaſeth him.
            
            
               The office of prayer. Cap. 4.
               
                  NOw ye ſoule ſéeing yt ſhe can not by her ſelf attain the deſired ſwéetnes of knowledge and experience & the more

ſhe approcheth vnto highnes of hart, ſo much the more God is lifted abooue her reach, ſhe humbleth her ſelf and flyeth vnto prayer, ſaying. O Lord thou which maiſt not be ſee but of clene harts. I haue ſought by reading, I haue ſearched Euery chriſtian ſoule may ſay I haue ſought by re ading. by meditating, how the true puritie of hart might be obtained, yt by the means therof I might in part knowe thée. I ſought thy coūtenance (O Lord) euen thy face did I ſéek. I haue long me ditated in my hart, and in my meditation, the fire and longing to knowe thee, is more & more kindled. Whilſt thou Lord dooſt break vnto me the bread of In breaking the bread of holy ſcripture Chriſte is knowne. Lu. 24. ver. 30. holy Scripture, & in breaking of bread: thou art the ſooner knowen, & the more I knowe thée: ye more I deſire to knowe thée, not now in the bark of the letter: but in the féeling of experience. Neither doo I aſk this (O Lord) for my merites: but for thy mercies ſake. For I confeſſe Not for merits ſake that I am an vnworthy & ſinfull ſoule, not withſtanding the whelpes doo eat ye crūmes that fall from the table of their Lords. Giue me (o Lord) ye erneſt of the enheritāce to come, at the leaſt one drop of the heauenly raine, that I might coole

my thirſt, for I burne in loue of thée.
            
            
               The office of contemplation. Cap. 5.
               
                  WIth theſe and ſuch like enflamed ſpéeches, the ſoule kindleth her deſire as ſhe vttereth her affection, wt theſe allurements the ſoule caleth to her ſelfe, the Bridegroom Now the Lord whoſe eyes are ſet vpon the righteous, and his ears not onely open vnto their prayers: but haſtely interrupting the middle courſe of the prayer, and ſpéedely béeing compaſſed with the dew of heauenly grace, he meteth with the deſtring ſoule. And béeing anointed with the beſt ointmēt, he recreateth ye wery ſoule, he refreſheth the hungry & maketh fat the lean ſoule, cauſeth her to forget all worldly thingꝭ, and béeing vnmindeful of him ſelf, by fortifying the ſoule, maketh her aliue, and by making her drunck: cauſeth her to be ſober, and like as in certein carnall duties, the concupiſcence is ſo ouercome, that it looſeth the vſe of reaſō, and is become as it were altogither carnall. So for good cauſe in this heauenly contemplation, the carnall mocions are ſo

conſumed and ſwalowed vp of the ſoule, that the fleſh dooth contrary the ſpirit in no thing, and the man is made as it were altogither ſpirituall.
            
            
               Signes of the holy Ghoſte coming vnto the ſoule. Cap. 6.
               
                  O Lord how dooſt thou appéer when thou woorkeſt theſe thinge? & what token is ther of thy comming? Be ſighes and teares witneſſes and meſſengers of this ioye and conſolation? If it be ſo, this is a new kinde of ſpeech by a contrary meaning, and a ſignification out of vſe. For what felowſhip hath conſolation with ſorowful ſighes? or ioy wc teares? If theſe yet ought to be called teares, and not rather an ouer running abundance of inward dew powred vpon the ſoule, and a token bothe of the inward and outward purging. That like as in the baptiſme of child
                     •
                  en, by the outward waſhing, is ſignified and figured the inward waſhing of the ſoule: ſo hear the inward purging goeth before the outward clenſing. O happy

teares by which the inward blemiſhes of the ſoule are purged, by which ye kindlings of ſin are quenched. Bleſſed are you that ſo mourne, becauſe you ſhall laugh. In teares O ſoule acknowledge thy bridegroom, imbrace thy long deſired one. Now make thy ſelf drunk in the riuer of pleſure, ſuck Milk & Hunny out of the breſt of his conſolation.
               Theſe are the pure gifts & pleaſures which thy Bridegroom hath ſent thée, namely, mourning and teares. With theſe teares he bringeth drink vnto thée by meaſure, theſe teares are thy food night and day, euen the bread that maketh ſtrong the hart of man, which are ſwéeter thē the honye or the hony comb.
               O Lord if theſe teares be ſo excéeding ſweet with the deſire and remembrance of thée: how ſwéet ſhall the ioy be which ſhalbe taken by ye manifeſt ſight of thee? If it be ſo ſweet a thing to weep for thee: how ſweet ſhall it be to reioyce of thee? But what doo wee go about to ſet foorth openly the ſecret ſpeeches of the ſoule? why go we about wt vſuall woords to expreſſe ye ſpirituall affections? Thoſe which haue not the experience therof,

vnderſtād not any ſuch matters, whom the anointing it ſelfe teacheth in ye book of experiēce, or els ye outward letter profiteth nothing to him that readeth. Litle good ſauour hath the reading of the outward letter, except from the harta man take the expoſicion and inward ſence.
            
            
               In what eſtate the ſoule remaineth whilſt the feruencie of the holy Ghoſte departeth. Cap. 7.
               
                  O Soule we haue greatly prolonged this talke, for it was good for vs to bee heer with Peeter and Iohn, to beholde the glory of the Bridegroom, and long to remain with him. But I would there were made heer, not three nor two ſeuerall Tabernacles, but one, in which we might all dwel togither, and Joy togither. But as the Bridegroome ſaieth. Let me go, for now the mornig riſeth. Now thou haſt receiued the viſitation and light of grace which thou diddeſt deſire. Therfore the bleſſing béeing giuen Gen. 32. ver. 26. thee, the ſinow of thy thigh beeing mortified, and thy name beeing chaunged 16. ver. 25. 2
                        •
                     
                  
                  
from Jacob to Iſrael, now for a while goeth aſide ye bridegrome long deſired, and ſoon departed, he withdraweth himſelf as wel from the viſion as from the ſwéetnes of contemplation, yet dooth hée ſtill remain preſent towching ye gouernment, the glory and the vnite.
            
            
               A reſon geuē why the feruentneſſe of the holy ghoſt dooth for a time leaue the ſoule. Cap. 8.
               
                  BVt feare not O ſpouſe, deſpair not, neither thinke thy ſelf to be contemned, though for a while ye bride grōe hide his face frō thée, all theſe things woork togither for thy profit, and thou makeſt a gaine, bothe of his cōming and of his departure, hée cometh for thy profit, and hée alſo departeth for thy profit, hee cōeth to giue thée comfort, and departeth to make thée vigilant, leſt the greatnes of thy conſolation ſhould puffe thée vp, leſt if the bridegrome ſhould alwaies abide with thee: yu ſhouldſt begin to contemne thy felowes, and ſhouldſt now attribute this continuall viſitation, not to grace: but to nature, for this grace, the bridegroom

giueth to whom hée will & when it pleaſeth him, the poſſeſſion therof is not gotten by any right of enheritance. It is a cōmō ſayīg, ouer much familiaritie bréedeth contēpt. The bridegrom therfore departeth from thée, leaſt beeing ouer much conuerſant: hee might be contemned, and that being abſent: he might be the more deſired, and béeing deſired: the more gréedily ſought for, & being long ſought for: hee might be at the laſt more thākfully found. Furthermore, what is this preſent life? what is it in reſpect of the glory to come which ſhall be ſhewed vpon vs? ſurely it is a life like a dark riddell in which wee vnderſtand but a ſmall parte, for heer we haue no continuing Citie but we ſeek for one to come, let vs not then take our baniſhment for our countrie, nor the erneſt penny for the whole price. The Bridegrome cometh & departeth again. Somtime bringing conſolation, ſometime turning our whole eſtate into weaknes. A litle while he ſuffereth vs to taſte how ſweet he is, and before we can fully feele it: hee withdraweth himſelf and as it were flickring ouer vs

with his wings ſpred a brode, bē proueketh vs to fly, as if he ſhould ſay: beholde you haue ſomewhat taſted how ſweet I am, but if you wilbe fully ſatiſfied with this my ſwéetnes: run after me into yt ſwéet ſauour of myne ointments, lifting vp your harts where I am on Cant. 1. ver. 23. the right hand of my Father, where you ſhal ſee me not in a glaſſe or in a riddel, but face to face, and where your hart ſhall fully reioyce and no man ſhall take away your ioy from you.
            
            
               The care & diligence of the ſoule, left she should be forſaken of God. Cap. 9.
               
                  BVt take thou heed O Spouſe how the Bridegroom turneth away him ſelf, he goeth not far of, and although thou ſee not him, yet dooth he ſee thee, beeing ful of eyes bothe behinde and before, thou canſt neuer be hidden from him. Hee Apo. 5. ver. 6. hath alſo about thée his ſpirits, beeing meſſengers and as it were moſte ſharp ſighted Spies, that they may looke how thou behaueſt thy ſelf in ye abſēce of the Bridegroome, & accuſe thée before him,

if they may eſpy any token of wantonnes & ſcurrilitie. For this Bridegroom is ielous, leſt parhap thou ſhouldeſt accept ſome other loouer. For if yu go about to pleaſe any other, hee forſaketh thee and ioyneth him ſelf to other yūg ones.
               This Bridgroom is a daintie felow, he is bothe noble and rich, & of paſſing beautie abooue all the children of men, and therfore he diſdaineth to haue any other but a beawtifull Spouſe. Yea if he ſée in thee but one ſpot or wrinkle: he ſtraight turneth away his eyes, for hee can abide no vnclennes. Bee chaſte therfore, be ſhamefaſt and humble, that ſo thou maiſt be woorthy often to be viſited of thy Bridegroom. I feare leſt this ſpeech hath holden vs ouer long. But the matter both barren and ſweet hath driuen me therunto, which I haue not voluntarily prolonged, but haue béene drawen againſt my wil, with I knowe not what ſweetnes therof.
            
            
               The office and effect of euery ſtall or ſtep by repetiton. Cap. 10.
               THat theſe thinges then which haue been ſpoken more at large, may

the better be ſeene when they are vnited and ioyned togither: let vs collect by reherſall the ſum of the things before ſpoken, as in the former examples it may appeere to haue been noted, how the forſaid ſteps holde togither, and how they go one before another, as frō time to time the one beeing cauſe of th'other. For reading, as it were the foundation, dooth firſt offer it ſelf, and when ſhe hath Reading the foundation. giuen vs the ſubſtance or matter: ſhee ſendeth vs to Meditacion, now Meditation very diligently enquireth what we ought to deſire and as it were deluing or digging, dooth finde and ſhew where as the treſure is. But when by her ſelf ſhe is not able to obtain it: ſhe ſendeth vs vnto Prayer, Prayer lifteth vp her ſelf with all her force whē ſhe hath foūd the deſired treſure, the ſweetnes of Contēplation. This Contemplatiō commig to, dooth fully reward ye labor of thoſe three before nāed, while ſhe maketh the thirſty ſoule drnnken wt the dew of heauenly ſwéetnes. Reading then perteineth to outward exerciſe. Meditation to the inward vnderſtanding. Prayer to the deſire of the minde. Contemplation

is aboue all feeling of humain reaſon. The firſt ſtep is of thoſe that doo begin. The ſecond of thoſe that doo go forward. The third of thoſe that are deuout. The He that wil not ſet his foot vpon ye firſt Step ſhall neuer come vp to the laſt. fourth of thoſe which are bleſſed or happye. Theſe foure ſteps are ſo linckt togither, and doo ſo by courſe ſerue one an others turn yt they which go before with out them that follow can proffit litle or nothing, and they which follow without them that go before doo proffit ſeldom or neuer. For what dooth it vauntage to ſpend the time in continual reading, or by reading to run through the Acts and writinges of holy men, except by chawing and féeding vppon the ſame: wée drink down the ioice therof, and by ſwalowing therof, wée ſend it into the inner moſte parte of the bart, that of thoſe things we may haue diligent conſideration of our owne eſtate, and endeuour our ſelues to doo ye woorks of them whoſe acts we often deſire to read. But how can we conſider of theſe things, or how can we beware leaſt by meditating, ſome falſe and vain things, ſhould paſſe the bounds, conſtituted by thoſe holy Fathers, except firſt we be inſtructed about

ſuch matters, either by reading or by hearing. For hearing doth after a certain maner pertain to reading. Wherof Hearing is included in reading. we vſe to ſay that wée haue not onely read thoſe bookes which we our ſelues doo read vnto our ſelues or to other: but alſo thoſe which we haue heard of our Maiſters.
               Further what dooth it profit if by Meditatiō a man doo ſee what things ought to be doon, except by the help of prayer and the grace of God, we may be made able to obtain ye ſame, For euery good gift (ſaith Saint Iames) and euery perfect 
                  Jam. 1. 17. 
                  gift deſcendeth from aboue from 
                  Without whome we can do nothing ſaith S. Auguſtine, & alſo Chriſte him ſelfe. Joh. 6. v. 5 
                  the father of light. Without whom we can doo nothing, but be in vs dooth woork our woorks, yet not altogither with out vs, for wee are woorkers with God, as the Apoſtle ſaith, God ſurely wil haue vs pray vnto him, and that we doo open vnto him, comming and tarying at the boore, the boſome of our will, and that we conſent vnto him.
               This conſent hée required of the woman God by his grace maketh vs frely to choſe that which is good. of Samaria, when he ſaid, call thy husbād I wil poure grace into thee apply yu frée choice. He required prayer of

her, when he ſaid. If thou kneweſt the 
                  Joh. 4. v. 10 
                  gift of God & who it is that ſaith vnto thee, giue me drink: parhpas thou wouldſt haue deſired of him the water of life. The woman whē ſhe heard this béeing inſtructed as it were of reading: ſhe thought in her hart that it would be good and profitable for her to haue this water. She then béeing kindled with a deſire to obtain it: turned her ſelf vnto Joh. 4. v. 15. prayer ſaying. O Lord giue me this vvater that I may thirſt nomore, neither at any time come hither again to drawe any water.
               
               Beholde the hearing of the woord of the Lord and Meditation folowing ther vpon, haue proucked her vnto prayer. For how could ſhe be carefully bent vn to prayer: except Meditation had firſt kindled her. And what ſhould Meditation going before haue profited her? except prayer folowing had obtained thoſe things, whiche Meditacion did ſhewe woorſhy to be deſired. Therfore that Meditation may be fruteful: it behooueth yt the deuocion of Prayer doo folowe, whoſe frute and as it were the effect, is the ſwéetnes of Contemplation.
            
            
               
               All theſe ſteps or degrees are declared to be ioyned togither that they are inſeperable. Cap. 11.
               
                  BY theſe we maygather that Meditation without reading is erronious. reading without Meditacion is ſaples. Meditacion without reding is erronius. Prayer without Meditation is neither hote nor colde. Meditaciō without Prayer is fruteles. Prayer with deuocion is it that obtaineth Contēplation. The obtayning of Contemplation without Prayer, is either rare or miraculous.
               For GOD of whoſe power there is neither number nor end, and whoſe mercie is a booue all his woorks, ſōetime of ſtones may raiſe vp ſonnes vnto Abraham. While he compelleth thoſe which be hard harted and vnwilling, quietly to agrée and to be willing.
               And ſo like the prodigall ſonne as the common ſaying is. He draweth the Or by the borne, when hee powreth in him ſelf not béeing required. Which thing although ſometime we reade to haue happened vnto ſome, as vnto Paule and certain other, yet ought wee not to

preſume of ſuch diuine things, but rather to doo that which is our dutie, that is to ſay, to read and to meditate in the lawe of God, to pray and to looue him, that it may pleaſe him to beholde our imperfection, and to help our infirmitie, which things he techeth vs to doo, ſaying Ask and yee shall receiue, ſeek and 
                  Mat. 7. v. 7▪
                   
                  yee shall finde, knock and it shall be opened vnto you. For now the Kingdome Mat. 11. 12. of heauen ſuffereth violence, and thoſe that be violent pluck it vnto them.
               Beholde whether the properties of the forſaid ſteps, may be made perfect with conuenient diſtinctions, how faſt they cleue one to the other, and what every one of them dooth woork in vs.
               Bleſſed is the man whoſe minde being void of others affaires, dooth alwayes deſire on theſe ſteps to be conuerſant, which ſelling all that he hath, dooth buy that féeld in which this deſired treaſure lieth hid. For beholde and ſée how ſwéet the Lord is.
               He that in the firſt degrée is exerciſed, in the ſecond circumſpect, in the third deuout, in the fourth lifted vp aboue him ſelf: by theſe aſcenciōs which

he hath diſpoſed in his hart, he dooth riſe from vertue to vertue, vntil the Lord of Lords appéer in Sion. Bleſſed is he to whō it is graunted to remain, but euen Pſa. 84. v. 7 a litle while vpon this higheſt ſtep, for he may truly ſay. beholde I féele the grace of the Lord, beholde with Peeter and Iohn I doo contemplate. Beholde with Iacob I doo often take delight in the embraſing of Rachell, but let this perſon take good heed to him ſelf, leaſt after this Contemplation by which he hath been lifted vp to the heauens, by any inordinate hap he 
                     •
                  all vnto ye depth of bell, and leaſt after the ſight of God he be conuerted vnto the wanton actiōs of the world, and the entiſing pleaſures of the fleſhe, for when the weak ſight of mans minde is not able long to ſuſtaine the brightnes of the true light: let him ſoftly and orderly deſcend vnto ſome one of the three ſteps by which he had aſcended, and by courſe let him ſtay, now vpon one, now vpon another, ſome time vpon ye third as he liſteth him ſelf to choſe, and as time & place ſhall require. And looke how much the higher he moū
                  leth abooue the firſt ſtep: ſo much the

néerer he draweth vnto God. But alas how frayle and miſerable is the condition of man, beholde by diſcourſe of reaſon, and by the Teſtimonies of the holy ſcripture we plainly ſée ye in theſe 
                     •
                  oure ſteps, the perfection of a good life is contained, and in theſe ſpirituall good thīgs a mans exerciſe ought to be contained. But who is he that dooth it and we wil praiſe him. To wil is preſent wt many, but to performe it: with few, and I pray God that we may be of thoſe few.
            
            
               Foure cauſes doo withdrawe vs from theſe foure ſteps. Cap. 12.
               
                  THere are yet foure Cauſes which withdrawe vs often from theſe foure ſteps; that is to ſay, ineuitable neceſſitie, of honeſt action the vtilitie, humayne infirmitie: & worldly vanitie.
               The firſt is excuſable. The ſecond is tollerable, The third miſerable. And the fourth damnable. For it had béene better for them whome ſuch cauſe pulleth away from their holy purpoſe, not to knowe the glory of God then to tourn

backwarde after they haue knowne it. What excuſe can he make of his offēce? for iuſtly the Lord may ſay vnto him.
               
                  VVhat could I more haue doon for thee then I haue door? thou hadſt no being and I created thee, thou diddeſt commit ſinne and madeſt thy ſelf the ſeruaunt of the Deuil and I redeemed thee, thou diddeſt run at randon ouer the world with the wicked, and I elected thee, I gaue thee grace in my ſight and would haue dwelt with thee, but thou haſte deſpiſed me, thou haſte throwne behynde thee (not onely my wordes) but my ſelf alſo, and haſt walked after thine owne luſtes.
               
               But o good, ſwéet, and pitifull GOD, a delectable fréend, aprudent counceller, a mighty helper, how vaine and brainles is he that caſteth thée away, which driueth from his hart ſo mylde & méeke a gueſt? O how vnhappy and hurtfull a chaunge is this, to caſt away his creator, to take in frowarde and noyſome thoughts, and to deliuer vp ye ſecret place of his hart, euen the priuye cloſet of the holy ghoſte, which now erewhile was filled with celeſtiall Joyes, ſo ſuddenly

to be trodden vnder foote with vnclene thoughts and wicked ſinnes, euen yet therin the very ſteps of the bridegrome are warme and now preſētly are intromitted & let in the adulterous deſires, a foule abſurd diſorder, that the eares which euen now haue heard the words which are not lawfull for a man to vtter, ſo ſoone to be enclined to the hearing of ſlaunders and fables, that the eyes which euen now were baptiſed with holy teares, ſuddenly to be turned vnto the beholding of vanities, that the toung which euen now did ſing the pleaſant ſong of the holy bride bed, which reconciled Cau. 1. v. 12. with his enflamed eloquēce of perſwaſion, the bride with the bridegrome and brought her into the Wine ſeller: ſhould againe be conuerted vnto vaine ſpéeches, to filthy ieſting, to the practiſing of decelt, and vnto ſlaunders. Farre be it from vs (o Lord) but if it happen by humane infirmitie that we ſlip in to any ſuch offence, let vs not therfore deſpaire: but let vs run againe vnto the pitifull Phiſition which raiſeth the poore from the earthe, and lifteth vp the néedy from the dūghill, and he that willeth

not the death of a ſinner: ſhall agayne cure and heale vs.
               It is now time to cōclude this Epiſtle. Let vs therfore pray vnto God preſē
                  
                     •
                  ly to mittigate the impediments which doo witholde vs from his Contemplation, and heerafter to take them clene away from vs, whome we deſire to lead vs by the forſaid ſteps from vertue to vertue, til we may ſée the God of Gods in Siō, where the elected (not by drops nor by courſe) ſhall taſte ye ſwéetnes of deuine Contemplation: but ſhall haue the Joy of being filled without ſeaſing with the Riuer of Pleaſure, which no man ſhall take from them, and ſhall enioy vnchaungeable Peace, euen Peace in it ſelf.
            
            The end of S. Auguſtine Bishop of Hippo, his Ladder to Paradiſe.
            
               
               
            
         
      
   