
      
         
            
            
            
               An Introduction to the looue of God.
            ¶ Accoumpted among the workes of S. Auguſtine, and tranſlated into English, by the right reuerend Father in God, Edmund, Biſhop of Norvvitch, that nowe is, and by him Dedicated to the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie, to the glorie of God, and comfort of his choſen.
            ¶ And newlie turned into Englishe Meter, by Robert Fletcher. 1581.
            Mathew. 22.
            Thou shalt looue the Lord thy God alone, with all thy heart, with all thy ſoule and minde, this first commaundement is the greatest one: the ſecond like vnto it, shalt thou finde, to looue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe in deede, theſe two, the Lawe and the Prophetes haue decreede.
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoot, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop without Newgate, ouer againſt Saint Sepulchers Church.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the right Honourable Sir Fraunceſſe Knowles Knight, Maiſter Treaſurer of the Queenes Maieſties houſeholde, and of her Higneſſe moſt honourable priuie Councell. &c.
            
               
                  IT hath beene the vſuall courſe of Writers (right Honourable) to pleade pardon by aucthoritie, when they thinke or knowe them-ſelues farre from intent of offending, either by example of the mightie King of Perſia, for his freendlie accepting a ſmall gift, eſteeming the good will of the giuer: or elſe by comparing their endeuour, by the example of ſome graue Philoſopher. I doo not ſo, but confeſſe my preſumption in two ſortes committed, the one to your Honour, the other to the honourable and reuerend Father in God, my Lorde Biſhop of Norwitch, that now is, beeing the Tranſlator of this Booke, and hauing dedicated the ſame to the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie, beeing called, An Introduction to the looue of God, and ſo it maie right

well be called. My preſumptiō to your Honour is, in preſsing your name in print, before I knew your Honours pleaſure therin, for which, moſt hūbly I craue your honors pardon. My preſumption to his Lordſhip is, in taking vpon me to alter the courſe and nature of to excellent and profitable a proſe, but I hope to haue his good Lordſhips fauour for the ſame, when he ſhal vnderſtand the cauſe of my ſo dooing, conſidering the proſe is ſtill exſtaunt, to the profite of the Readers, and my meter now inſtaunt to the pleaſure of the Readers, for ſo I accoumpt it, hauing therein followed the example of diuers godlie minded, which haue turned into Engliſhe meter many Bookes out of the Bible, beeing ſacred and canonicall, as other pithie Pamphlettes; beeing prophane and Hiſtoricall, yet to good purpoſes, as well appeareth by their writinges, which ſo meant them: the parties with their Pamphlettes, as impertinent to my purpoſe, I omitte to repeate. But as his Lordſhippe did make her Maieſty patroneſſe of the matter,

ſo I thought it my duetie, to make your Honour Patrone of the Meter: aſſuring your Honour not to haue committed any error therein, my preſumption onelie excepted, nor haue not altred the ſence of the matter, more then the nature of the meter muſt of neceſsitie compell me. The cauſes mouing me to ſollicite your Honour with this Introduction to the looue of God, was for that I haue beholden the ſame moſt bountifullie beſtowed, not onelie in your Honours owne perſon, but alſo in your Honours bothe honourable and VVorſhipful off-ſpring and poſteritie, in your owne perſon, the feare and looue of God with ſeueritie in Iuſtice (according to your Honours calling) and preciſe rule, and lawes of God, which I my ſelfe haue not onelie beholden, but alſo beene beholden vnto. In your Honours off-ſpring, that vertuous, Noble, and towardlie young Gentleman, the Earle of Eſſex, dooth ſhewe himſelfe a liuelie graffe and goodlie member of ſo good a Grandfather, which together with your Honour, I

beſeeche God long to bleſſe and continew, he onelie maie ſerue to confirme the looue of God towardes your Honour: although his gracious bleſsings be apparauntlie multiplied in the reſt your Honors, bothe good and godlie Children. For the continuance whereof, I ſhall not ceaſe to beſeeche almightie God, to ſend your Honour long and honourable life, in this life, but after the ſame ended, eternall happineſſe, in the life to come.
            Amen.
            
               ¶ Your Honours moſt humble and duetifull bounden, Robert Fletcher.
            
         
         
            
            To the Chriſtian Readers.
            
            
               
                  WHatſoeuer hath been written before time, was written for our learning, that we through patience & comfort of the ſcriptures, might haue hope. Among which (right courteous Readers) I may inſert this preſent Pamphlet, béeing trāſlated by my Lord Biſhop of Norwitch, to the benefite of our corporall bodyes, and comfort of our ſoules, accoumpted amongſt the workes of S. Auguſtine, and no leſſe commended by that famous and learned Father of godly memorie, Eraſmus of Rotardam, to taſte of good learning: which to peruſe, I referre you to the Preface in the Proſe, written to the Reader, by that honourable and godly Biſhop, who tranſlated the ſame, naming it, An Introduction to the looue of God. Declaring thereby the looue he beareth vnto his Prince & Soueraigne Lady, to whom he Dedicated the ſame: as alſo the good wil to comfort in the looue and mercie of God, his loouing neighbours, and countreymen, following ye example of a true Shéepheard

and faithfull Paſtours, in penning this ſo profitable a Diſcourſe, which diſtinguiſheth vnto you by equal portions, the gratious benefites of our creation, preſeruation, ſanctification, iuſtification, and redemption, by God the Father, through the merites and frée grace of Chriſte Ieſus our Lorde. Which great mercies you maye beholde in this lyttle Booke, euen as if in a glaſſe you were diſpoſed to take viewe of your countenaunce ſhape, and bodilie proportion, but much more to your profite, for that the one is preſentlie forgotten, the other remayneth permanent for euer, if it be ſought in ſingleneſſe of eye, and ſimplicitie of harte.
            Which woorthy worke, according to my ſkilleſſe capacitie, I haue turned into Engliſhe Meter, not thereby to derogate the Proſe, or to arogate the prayſe thereof in any part to my ſelfe, for ſo might I iuſtlie be condempned of preſumption, and arrogant follie: but he which knoweth the ſecret of all hearts, knoweth alſo how far I am from ſéeking vainglorie thereby: onlie this mooued me therevnto, the profite that I ſawe contained in the Proſe, which I hope will be no leſſe pleaſant in the Meter,

béeing plaine, and not much alienated from the former ſence. I hauing ſo good a theame, thought good to meditate therein, following the example of theſe godly minded, with whome I will make no compariſon, but onelie for endeuour, which haue turned many Bookes of the olde Teſtamēt into Engliſhe meter, as ye Pſalmes of Dauid, the life of Dauid, containing the ſecōd booke of Kings, the fiue bookes of Moſes, the Prouerbes of Salomon, and diuers other, as well Canonicall, as Hiſtoricall: according to that ſaying of the Apoſtle Iames, If any be afflicted, let him pray, if merrie let him ſing Pſalmes. So he that is diſpoſed to profit in the proſe, it is an excellent meditatiō, if to pleaſure, in the meter, it is preſent for him that feareth God. Moreouer, I know y• meter is more acceptable to ſome then proſe, & may with leſſe capacitie be cōprehended, as of children, yoūg men & maides, &c. which mooued me alſo to take this paines therein, and the rather to ſuppreſſe that huge heape, & ſuperfluous rable of balde Ballads, Rimes & Ridles, Songs & Sonnets, yea, and whole volumes of vanity, which tend to the nouriſhing of vice, and corrupting of Youth, which be not

written for our learning, but for the confuſion of thoſe that delight therin, to teach vnlawfull luſt, and outragious ribauldry, and to trayne vp in the toyes of vanitie, the vaine, fickle, and fantaſticall youth, yea, and ſome aged, whoſe modeſtie ought to be aſhamed of ſuch immoderate follie. It is not long ſince I happened to ſpeake with a good fréend of mine, concerning the Printing of this Booke in meter: truely (ſayth he) it is woorthy the publiſhing in Print, but Bookes of vanitie be better ſold twentie to one, which is lamentable, that vanitie ſhould be preferred, and Vertue ſupplanted, or at the leaſt, verie much ſuppreſſed. Is that the fruites of our profeſſion (ſayde I) that haue enioyed the cleare light of the Goſpell, now full thrée & twentie yéeres? No (ſayth he) God be thanked, many haue, & doo receyue the glad tydinges of the Goſpell, with reuerence and feare: but there commeth vp ſo many fine heads, newlie pulliſhed for the purpoſe, that profeſſe Poetrie, and commit paltries, for he that can eyther Proſe or Rime wyll be in print, if his Pen can but blotte foorth a Bable, it ſhall be a Ballad, with Finis, &c. at the ende. They be all Chaucers and

               Gowers, Lidgates, and Bocaſes, and he is a foole that is not fiue Skeltons for cunning: theſe write woonders, newes neuer ſéene before, no, nor neuer heard of, but at Billings gate, or in Graueſende Earge. I would to God, theſe wittie writers would take paines in penning profitable Pamphlets, eyther godlie Meditations, or good Prayers, whether in Proſe or in Verſe, that the practiſe of Poperie, which was wunt to be publiſhed in Fables, to delude the ſimple ignorant and vnlearned, might be aboliſhed, with their maiſter the Pope, and newe matters, profeſſing Faith and Religion, publiſhed in place thereof. I ſpeake not of any the commendable works of many woorthy wittes, ſet foorth of late by diuers Worſhipfull Gentlemen, good Schollers, and well experimented Poets, which containe bothe pleaſure and profite: but of thoſe which in déede, their workes ſmell not ſo much as of an honeſt minde, but will make a mans eares ake to heare them, and his face bluſhe to reade them: and becauſe they abounde, I am bolde to bewraie my minde of them, wiſhing you that ſhall reade this my ſimple endeuour,

in ſo woorthy a worke, to eſtéeme the matter as it is, and the meter as it ſhall pleaſe you, and bothe ſo, as God may be glorified, and you certified of his intire looue, if ſo you looue him, as héerein is expreſſed. To whoſe looue, grace, and mercie, I committe you for euer.
            Amen.
            
               Yours, euer in Chriſt, Robert Fletcher.
            
         
         
            
            
               Th. Prat, Gent. to the Reader.
            
               IF thou wilt learne, thy ſoueraigne Lord to looue
               And practiſe how to prayſe his holie name:
               Heere mayſt thou ſee, his mercie dooth thee mooue
               That thou of duetie, ought to doo the ſame.
               Then reade this Booke, and therein ſhalt thou find
               Sweete remedies, to eaſe thy carefull minde.
            
            
               It ſhewes thee howe, thy God did looue thee firſt,
               Yea, long before, thou didſt begin to bee:
               It ſhewes thee howe, for ſinne thou waſt accurſt,
               Yet he in mercie hath redeemed thee.
               The goodes thy Gods, but thine was all the gaines
               The profite thine, but his was all the paines.
            
            
               Th. Prat. Gent.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               Tho. Lee, to the Reader.
            
               IF thou deſire thy God to looue,
               And would the cauſes vnderſtand:
               It ſhall be good for thy behooue,
               This little Booke to take in hand,
               The way to heauen it will thée teach,
               And how to ſhun the paines of hell:
               It to thy ſoule, pure thinges dooth preach,
               Peruſe, and immitate it well.
               
                  Tho. Lee.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            ¶ Io. Breifilde, in the behalfe of this Booke.
            
               THe Proſe is to our profite pend,
               From godlie learned skill:
               The Meter dooth it ſelfe commend,
               For he that hath good will.
               Dooth reade them bothe, he profite ſhall,
               And pleaſure eke attaine:
               Buie bothe the Bookes, the price but ſmall,
               much greater is thy gaine.
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  he Proſe, the power of God diſplayes,
               and thy redemption free:
               
                  
                     •
                  he Meter euen, in minde bewrayes,
               Like comfort vnto thee.
               
                  
                     •
                  mbrace them bothe, thanke God therfore,
               Eſteeme thy grace enioyde:
               Giue thankes to them, to ſalue thy ſore,
               That haue their paines imployde.
               
                  Io. Breifilde.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
¶ An Introduction to the loue of God.
         
         
            That the loue of God and thy Neighbor, cannot be ſeperated, firſt Chapter.
            
               
                  WIth wakeful heed & earneſt mind
               and diligent indeauor eake:
               How to eſcape Hell torments, it
               with care becōmeth vs to ſeeke.
               And for to purchaſe vs the place,
               of ioy in Heauen there to dwell:
               The one we cannot comprehend,
               the other we cannot expell.
               Except the meanes we marke and know,
               to ſhun the worſt and chuſe the beſt:
               The one by prayer to preuent,
               in fayth to purchaſe endleſſe reſt.
               Let vs with willingneſſe therefore,
               the wordes of the Apoſtle way:
               The difference betweene theſe two,
               he doth in order thus bewray.
               The hart of man cannot conceaue, 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               the eye of man hath neuer ſeene:
               The Eare of man did neuer heare,
               What thinges for theſe preparde hath bene.
               
                  
Which looue the Lord & kéepe his Lawes,
               that in his feare their liues doo leade:
               Theſe ioyes expreſſed they poſſeſſe,
               that ſerue the Lord in word and déede.
               Loe, now beholde the preſent place,
               in which th'Apoſtle dooth aſſure:
               Vs of the laſting looue of God,
               if we our looue to him endure.
               But yet the looue of God alone, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 4.
               
               without the looue of neighbours too:
               Can not be had the text dooth tell,
               which giues vs councell ſo to doo.
               He that his Brother dooth not looue,
               with whome he héere hath preſent béene:
               How can he looue the Lord his God,
               which with his eyes he hath not ſéene.
               And this commaundement haue we from
               the Lord our God, that ſo we doo:
               Firſt looue the Lord, our neighbour next,
               for looue conſiſteth in theſe two.
               Th'Apoſtle Paule procéedes againe,
               perſwading looue, and thus dooth ſay: 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 12.
               
               For to confirme you in the ſame,
               I ſhewe a more excellent way.
               The which ſhall ſafelie you conduct,
               and leade vnto that heauenly place:
               Which only is preparde for thoſe,
               whom God dooth gonerne with his grate.
               
                  
But who is in this way, or who
               dooth knowe the ſame? for ſoothe euen hée,
               That firſt dooth looue the Lord his God,
               and next his neighbour by degrée.
               Then looue our God more then our ſelues,
               and as our ſelues, our neighbours then:
               According vnto this our God,
               we rather muſt obay then men.
               And that is done when we prefer,
               his pleaſure and commaundementes:
               Before our willes which be peruerſe,
               as all our councelles and intents.
               But yet our neighbours we are not,
               commaunded for to looue them more:
               But as our ſelues, that is to wiſhe,
               as to our ſelues is ſayd before.
               Eſpeciallie, the ioy and bliſſe,
               that euerlaſting dooth remaine:
               That we with them, and they with vs,
               may at the length the ſame obtaine.
               Them to aſſiſt, and helpe likewiſe,
               with bodilie and ghoſtlie foode:
               As reaſon and habillitie,
               (requireth) ſo to doo them good.
               And as the Goſpell dooth you giue,
               to vnderſtand euen ſo to doo:
               To other men, as you would wiſhe,
               that other ſhould doo to you.
               
                  
For ſo ſayth Iohn, let vs not loue
               neyther in tongue nor yet in worde: 3.
               
               But euen in truth and veritie,
               that loue is liked of the Lorde.
               But now where are thoſe neighbors, whom
               we ought to loue, forſooth euen all:
               Both Chriſtian, Heathen, Iewes & friends,
               and thoſe which Enimies we call.
            
         
         
            ¶ Why, and how, God is to be loued. Cap. 2.
            
               SInce our ſoules health conſiſteth in
               the loue of God, let vs prouide
               To way the cauſe with diligence,
               when, why, and how, our life is tride.
               But to exite and to increaſe
               the loue of God in vs for aye:
               To nouriſhe it not greater force
               then on his prouidence to ſtay.
               Remembering his benefites,
               which he doth heape vpon vs ſtill:
               That in the view thereof our ſoules,
               doe faint as though our liues would ſpill,
               For in this caſe we cannot be
               ſo able as we would deſire:
               To yielde him thankes for all his gifts,
               as loue and ſeruice doth require.
               
                  
Yet muſt we doe what may be done,
               what reſteth in the power of man:
               So many thankes to render him,
               as we by nature render can.
               And ſee wherefore: for benefites
               which we by merites might not haue:
               He hath beſtowed aboundantly,
               that by decerte we could not craue,
               Intirely he of vs therefore,
               is to be loued with true intent:
               But how, and in what ſort, forſooth
               euen keepe his ſtraight commaundement.
               Giue eare therefore O man to that,
               which greateſt is of others cheefe,
               In memory imprint the ſame,
               Day, night and houre it yieldes releefe.
               And this commaundement it is,
               Loue God the Lord with all thy hart, Deu
               
               With all thy ſoule with all thy might,
               With all thy minde, as his deſerte.
               With all thy memory and thoughts,
               With all thy ſkill and knowledge eke:
               Yield vnto him obedience due:
               with humble hart and minde moſt meeke.
               Yet peraduenture thou wilt thinke,
               alas his loue to me is light:
               Therefore I will not be afrayde,
               to aunſwere him with loue more ſlight.
               
                  
Searche all thy thoughts & haue in minde,
               what he ere this hath doone for thée:
               And what héereafter promiſt is,
               to be beſtowed in like degrée.
               Then ſhalt thou finde how much thou art,
               vnto him bound, beyond thy might:
               Yea and beyond all meaſure eke,
               if thou regarde his grace aright.
               But to the end the looue of God,
               may quickned and augmented be:
               Waighe and conſider well the cauſe,
               and looue him more aboundantlie.
               Whom, why, and to what end, mankinde
               was firſt created, and what things
               God made for th'vſe and eaſe of man,
               theſe vnto him, thy ſences brings.
               Whether they heauenly were or not.
               viſible or terreſtriall,
               Inuiſible or in what ſorte,
               till his mercy did them call.
               Our fyrſt creator Lord and God,
               one God and eke one Lord alone:
               Whoſe goodnes of ſuch greatnes is,
               that he dooth bleſſe vs euery one.
               Of which his bleſſings he dooth bid,
               we on our partners ſome beſtowe:
               It cannot be diminiſhed,
               but dooth increaſe and ouerflow.
               
                  
That goodnes therefore which him ſelfe,
               is he to others would extend:
               Onely of his frée goodneſſe, for
               neceſſitie may not contend.
               Becauſe vnto thy goodneſſe chéefe,
               it appertaines, and els to none:
               Our mighty and eternall God,
               he profitable is alone.
               Man of himſelfe vnable is,
               partaker of his bliſſe to be:
               But by the vnderſtanding of
               his mercy, perfect made is he:
               The more that he dooth vnderſtand,
               the more in grace he dooth abound:
               The leſſe that he dooth vnderſtand,
               for that he is more guilty found.
               God made a reaſonable man,
               that he the chéefe might vnderſtand:
               Of goodneſſe which th'immortall God,
               had framed with his mighty hand.
               By vnderſtanding he might looue,
               and loouing might the ſame poſſeſſe:
               And ſo poſſeſſing it might haue,
               vnto his profit nothing leſſe.
               The creature he diſtinguiſhed, The 
                        ••••
                     rence 
                        ••
                     twee
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                     gelles 
                        〈◊〉
                      men.
               
               that parte moſte purely might remaine:
               Vnto himſelfe and not be ioynde,
               with humaine ſhape, the ſame to ſtaine.
               
                  
The Aungell is that perfite part,
               without a body paſſing pure:
               The other is the ſoule of man,
               that with the body doth indure.
               The reaſonable creature is,
               deuided thus as here you ſee:
               Into the thing which it hath not,
               And whith it hath, for both theſe be
               That which no body hath is calde
               an Angell as the word we ſcan:
               That which a body doth poſſeſſe,
               we know doth repreſent a man.
               He doth conſiſt of fleſh and blood,
               his mightie maker to extoll.
               Who by his power did him compact,
               in ſhape with reaſonable ſoule.
               The cheefeſt cauſe Gods goodneſſe is,
               by which both men and aungels were:
               With reaſon and with grace indewed,
               Herein his goodneſſe doth appeare.
               So in as much as God is good,
               ſo are we by his power diuine:
               For goodneſſe his he giues to them,
               that from his grace doe not decline.
               And to this end created were,
               theſe reaſonable creatures then:
               to praiſe their God and him to ſerue,
               as beſt becommeth chriſtyan men.
               
                  
And by the ſame we do poſſeſſe
               all profite to the creature:
               For God himſelfe fulfilled is
               with ſoueraigne bountie perfite pure.
               He neither is deminiſhed
               nor neede encreaſe, hee is all one
               A Creator, the profite is
               the creature his owne alone:
               Therfore to them that will demaunde
               why to what end were creatures made:
               A profytable reaſon ſtraight
               is here ſet downe them to perſwade.
               The goodnes of the Creator,
               for profyt of the creature:
               So that he loue the Lord his God
               and in his ſeruice ſtil indure.
            
            Finis 2. Cap.
         
         
            ¶ The cauſe of the creation of Aungels men, and all other Creatures. 3. cap.
            
               BOth men and angels are therfore
               ſaid to be made for God aboue.
               But not becauſe he needeth them,
               but for becauſe hee doth them loue.
               He needeth not the ſeruice haue
               of Angels or the ſonnes of men.
               
                  
He hath no want of worldlie goodes,
               but that they both might vſe him (whom)
               The ſeruaunt profite dooth receyue,
               not he to whome the ſeruice due:
               Is done him, hath no néede thereof,
               all textes in Scripture prooue it true.
               As for him ſelfe, the Lord made man,
               the world for man he made alſo:
               That it might ſerue at all aſſayes,
               the vſe of man in wealth to flow.
               Where béeing placed in ſuch ſtate,
               and high degrée as wiſhe hee could:
               Bothe that he might be ſeruant there,
               and ſerue his God as reaſon would.
               That all the goodneſſe might redound,
               vnto him ſelfe of that he ſought:
               The ſeruice of the Lord his God,
               which he to paſſe in him hath brought.
               That man might holpen be thereby,
               to ſerue the Lord in godlie trade:
               Bothe in the thing for him ordaind,
               as for the thing that man was made.
               All thinges are ours th'Apoſtle ſayth, 9.
               
               aboue or equall, howe they bée:
               Inferiour, or in what ſort elſe,
               all thinges in highe or lowe degree.
               A highe compariſon he makes,
               for to perſwade vs to the ſame:
               
                  
Is God in Trinitie, ſayth he,
               and Vnitie in one to frame.
               The equall thinges with vs are ours,
               in one conſent with them t'agree:
               As Angels at this preſent, though
               farre diſtant from our ſightes they bee.
               In time ſhall be our equall mates,
               where time in time, no ende ſhall haue:
               That woorthy we may be thereof,
               Lord for thy mercie graunt we craue.
               The thinges inferiour eke are ours,
               and ſtand vs in moſt happy ſteede:
               As neceſſarie inſtrumentes,
               to ſerue our turne in time of néede.
               As thinges pertaining to a Lord,
               or Maiſter of an earthly man:
               May be his ſeruants porcion like,
               not robbing his ſayde Maiſter than.
               But pertinent by tytle due,
               to ſerue the vſe of ſeruant his:
               Heereby the Maiſter hath no wrong,
               the ſeruant hath not done amis.
               In ſundrie ſortes the Scriptures ſaye,
               that Angels for our ſakes be ſent:
               To ſerue and to adminiſter,
               to vs by Gods cōmaundement. Hebr▪
                  
               
               Th'Apoſtle hath theſe wordes likewiſe,
               are they not miniſtring Spirites callde:
               
                  
Sent for their ſakes that fear the lord,
               that they in ſinne ſhould not be thrald.
               Beleeue the ſame, and let it not
               incredible ſeeme vnto you
               That he which king of angels is,
               vs for to ſaue thought good to ſew.
               To ſaue and not be ſaued he came,
               to dye for our redemptions all
               He gaue his life for many ſoules
               them to redeeme from endles thral:
               The angells eke are ſaide for vs,
               to offer vowes and prayers pure
               Vnto the ſeate of mighty Ioue
               therby our pardons to procure:
               But not becauſe they do inſtruct
               or teach the lord our deepe deſires.
               For he himſelfe doth know our thoughtes ſeeth ougnen.
               
               to ſhew the ſame thers none aſpires
               Before that wee do crimes commit
               and afterward to him is knowen:
               Our fond imaginations al
               our ſelues before his face haue ſhowen:
               And they do waite to vnderſtand
               his will and what his pleaſure is
               And do to vs the ſame conuay
               to keepe vs leaſt we walke amiſſe. 12
               
               And for this cauſe the aungel ſayd
               to men at ſuch tymes as you pray.
               
                  
I offred vp the ſame to God
               who ſent you ayde without delay
               In like caſe alſo when you praye,
               take not in hande our God to teache
               As if that ignoraunt he were
               what at his handes wee beſeech
               But man muſt of neceſſitye
               commit his cauſes temporal
               Vnto theternall verity,
               who can redeeme him out of thrall
               Whether he do deſire the thing
               he could by his indeuour haue
               Or by conſenting to the will
               of God, and ſo the thing do craue
               From thabitacion of the heauens
               our ſoueraigne Lord doth angels ſend
               Euen downe to vs, and for our ſakes
               his heauenly pleaſure to attend:
               To viſite and to help vs eke,
               for God, for vs, and for themſelues. for G
               
               For him becauſe moſt meete it is
               they wayte vpon no creature elſe,
               But to reueale his laſting loue
               the bowels of his mercy great
               His pitye and compaſſiou both
               to imitate his mercy ſeate
               For vs becauſe that we in them for v.
               
               and they in vs like image haue:
               
                  
And reuerentlie they doo admire
               his power, the which ſuch likeneſſe gaue.
               Now for themſelues, becauſe that with them s.
               
               deſire, and feruent longing they:
               Doo wayte our comming from this world,
               with them in bliſſe to liue for aye.
            
            Finis. 3. Cap.
         
         
            ¶ Of the looue of God towards vs. 4. Cap.
            
            
               THis therefore is moſt néedefull nowe,
               and neceſſarie to eche man:
               That he conſider with him ſelfe,
               and eke in ſeuerall ſort to ſkan.
               When his owne woorthineſſe is wayde,
               and dignitie, he doo not take
               It from his mightie creatour,
               which him of nothing thus did make.
               Looue him abooue all earthlie thinges,
               of what eſtate, or what degrée:
               Eſtéeme not equall with his might,
               thoſe thinges that his inferiors bée.
               What follie were it to compare,
               the things that beautifulleſt bée:
               With thoſe that vile in ſight doo ſéeme,
               which ſerue in fowle and baſe degrée?
               For ſure it is no ſéemelie ſight,
               where beautie is but counterfeit:
               
                  
To match it with the fayreſt, and
               for beautie with the ſame to ſet.
               Therefore my ſoule peruſe thine owne,
               thy beautie vnderſtand and prooue:
               And by the ſame ſoone ſhalt thou learne,
               whoſe beautie thou art bound to looue.
               But if thy ſight be duſke and dull,
               or darkned by thy negligence:
               That thou thy ſelfe canſt not beholde,
               thou dooſt commit a fowle offence.
               Yet at the leaſt let others iudge,
               and doo thou holde their iudgements true:
               What eſtimation thou art of,
               when they with clearer ſight thee view.
               Thou haſt a Spowſe of beautie ſuch,
               his bounty, fauour and his grace:
               Such Maieſtie, and Mercie great,
               that thou couldſt neuer ſée his face.
               And yet beholde he hath thée ſéene,
               if not, he would not looue thée ſo:
               His gifts may make thée graunt thée ſame,
               and tell if this be true or no.
               The perfect pledges of his looue,
               and tokens of his kindneſſe trie:
               Of this if thou didſt ſée his face,
               thou nothing doubtfull then would bée.
               Then perfectlie thou ſhouldſt perceyue,
               that he in beautie paſſeth all:
               
                  
So ſinguler, ſo comely fayre,
               as neuer ſet the lyke thou ſhall
               And yet enamored is of thee
               ſo much thy beauty doth appeare,
               Aboue all creatures that he made
               that none with thee compared wer
               This beauty yet was not thyne owne
               but hys in thee left for thy welth
               that hauing it thou mightſt perceaue
               it came from him thy ſauing health
               But what meanſt thou becauſe thou canſt.
               not ſee him preſent as he is,
               Art not aſhamde iuinriouſly
               him to abuſe with workes amiſſe
               Not onely in contemning theſe
               his louing graces to thee lent
               But ſeruile to thy ſenſuall luſt
               as vaſſaile thou doſt geue conſent
               But o my ſoule take heed of this
               and do not ſo though able thou
               Be not aſſuredly to conceaue
               whatone he is his grace alow,
               His earneſt and his pledgefot thee
               the gage and token which he gaue
               As leaſſes of his loue iutyre,
               from endles death he did thee ſaue
               In thy poſſeſſion theſe be plaſt
               that thou mayſt learne thy lord to loue
               
                  
With zeale and with affection great▪
               
               thy minde from him not to remooue.
               His gift right noble is and great,
               great mē giue great rewards we know:
               Which doo receiue them at their hand:
               as with his Maieſtie may ſtand.
               A wiſe man for a trifle wyll
               not giue a riche reward we ſée:
               But none can giue ſo great a gift,
               as thy good God hath giuen to thée.
               Yet greater is the gift which he,
               in thée dooth looue, thy ſelfe t'aſſure:
               And eke much greater will he giue,
               if thou thy faith to him indure.
               But O my ſoule, what are theſe gifts?
               Examine, looke, the world beholde?
               If euery thing therein containde.
               To ſerue thy turne be not controlde,
               Behold how euery creature dooth,
               to ſerue thy turne his courſe direct:
               Thy profit to ſupply, and for
               thy wealth to vſe as thy ſubiect.
               For to accompliſh thy delight,
               commodities doo all abound:
               Within the world, for thy wealth,
               or that which in thy ſelfe is found.
               The Heauens, the earth, the aire, the Sea.
               and all that is containde therein:
               
                  
Ceaſe not to accompliſh thy deſire,
               Vnto thy God thy ſelfe to win:
               The ſeaſons and the times likewiſe,
               the reuolucions of the yeare:
               The ſwéete reuiuing ſpring, which dooth
               of humors drie thy body cleare.
               Thy ruines it dooth freſh repaire,
               it dooth reſtore thy ſtate decayde:
               Euen with continuall ſuſtenaunce,
               to ſerue thy turne, as heere is ſayd.
               Who did for thée theſe things ordaine,
               or who preſcribed nature this:
               Whoſe whole reuenue is reſeru'd,
               thée to mainetaine leaſt ought thou mis,
               Theſe benefits thou dooſt receiue,
               the Author is to thée vnknowne:
               Thou of the giuer taketh gifts,
               which héeretofore were not thine owne.
               Theſe gifts therefore, muſt vs perſwade,
               which doo declare who looues vs well:
               And who is to be loou'd againe,
               theſe ſwéete rewards vnto vs tell.
               And what great folly is it then,
               him not to looue that looues vs ſo:
               Euen one ſo mighty worthy looue,
               and but in him, to looue no mo.
               If any worldly thing thou looue,
               that vnder heauen is containde:
               
                  
As thine inferiours looue the ſame,
               and as thy worldly ſeruaunts gainde:
               Or as the tokens of thy Spowſe,
               or benefits beſtowed on thée.
               From faithfull fréend, or from thy Lord,
               that hath this rare reſpect to thée:
               Acknowledging how much thou art,
               bound him to looue, not for the ſame:
               Not with him ſelfe but for him ſelfe,
               and by him ſelfe thy looue to frame.
               Yea finally abooue them all,
               bothe looue and honor to him giue:
               That by his power did make them all,
               and gaue them thée, wherewith to liue.
            
            FINIS. 4. Cap.
         
         
            ¶ Of the fruition of God, the 5. Cap.
            
               ANd now beware my ſoule that thou,
               breake not thy faith as God forbid:
               For theſe his gracious benefits,
               which thus beſtowe on thée he did.
               Abooue the giuer doo not looue,
               the gifts: which are beſtowed on thée:
               Firſt looue the giuer then the gifts,
               with zealous looue in good degrée.
               
                  
Yet ſhalt thou greatly him iniure,
               in ſo receauing of him ſtill
               His gifts, and neuer for the ſame,
               yéelde recompence for his goodwill.
               Eyther refuſe his gifts therefore,
               or if thou like not ſo to doo:
               Yéeld looue for looue in meaſure due:
               tis all the paines he puts thée too.
               So that thou looue him for him ſelfe,
               and looue thy ſelfe for him alſo:
               But in ſuch ſort thy ſelfe for him,
               as that no hatred paſſe him froe
               To thée: but looue him for the gifts,
               that he in looue left for thine vſe:
               So looue thy ſelfe for him likewiſe,
               for in this looue is no abuſe.
               This looue, is holy, pure and chaſte,
               diſhoneſty, nor filthy ſtaine:
               Nor tranſitory toyes of crime,
               within this looue, dooth once remaine.
               Conſider therefore, O my ſoule,
               what things thou haſt receiued now:
               Euen proper to thy ſelfe though ſome,
               like grace enioy aſwell as thou.
               In all theſe things which God thée gaue,
               that common or eſpeciall be:
               Or proper to thy ſelfe alone,
               or howſoeuer in degrée.
               
                  
Intirely looue thy ſelfe with them,
               for looke how much thou art preferd:
               By theſe his precious benefits,
               much more he did thy ſtate regarde.
               In euery creature thou mayſt ſay,
               Beholde how well I am beloou'de:
               Withall the good that I can wiſh,
               all euill is from me remooude.
               If ſmall to thée this thing doo ſéeme,
               that thou abooue all euill art,
               Belooude of him that made them all:
               and that it ſome what gréeue thy hart,
               Conſider well how good theſe things,
               by vertue of Creation be:
               And yet in eache condition haue,
               not béene rewarded like to thée.
               Then O my ſoule, if thou aright,
               doo way thy liberty thus got:
               The time hath béene and euen that time,
               when as apparaunt thou waſt not.
               And what thou haſt thou didſt receaue,
               of thy good God which gaue it thée:
               And that it was his gracious gifte,
               that euer thou began to be.
            
            FINIS. 5. Chap.
         
         
            
            ¶ Of the giftes of Creation and Regeneration. Cap. 6.
            
               IT was therefore the grace of God,
               that euer thou waſt made in déede:
               Thou hadſt not hyred him ſo to doo,
               but ſo his wiſdoome had decréede.
               If he had nothing giuen to thée,
               but thy bare béeing in this place:
               Yet art thou bound to prayſe his name,
               and looue him for his laſting grace.
               But trueth it is much more he hath,
               vnto thy perſon done repaire:
               Not onelie making thée to bée,
               but alſo beautifull and faire.
               Nor could his bountie héere be ſtaide,
               to finiſhe vp his woorthy trade:
               He left vs not vntyll we were,
               lyke to his heauenlie Image made.
               For this in déede, his meaning was,
               his will and pleaſure vs to prooue:
               To drawe by likeneſſe thoſe to him,
               which he before had drawne by looue.
               Therefore he gaue vs for to be,
               and by our béeing for to liue:
               That thoſe we might excell in déede,
               to whome he no ſuch thinges did giue.
               
                  
That haue no béeing, ſuch I meane,
               which maimed are, and out of frame:
               Inordinate miſhapen, or
               for lacke of victall, linis be lame.
               By meanes whereof thou art my ſoule,
               indebted to thy Sauiour deere:
               For ſure thou haſt receiued much,
               yet recompence dooth none appéere.
               That which by looue thou haſt receyu'de,
               by looue deliuer backe againe:
               It is a payment light enough,
               and puts thee vnto little paine.
               But nowe I will begin to tell,
               howe this thy Spowſe moſt excellent:
               Appeard and ſo created thée.
               vouchſaued eke with glad intent.
               Euen to be humble for thy ſake,
               that he thy ruine might repaire:
               In lowlie wiſe theſe latter workes,
               vnto the former equall were.
               For in the former meruailous,
               great thinges thy benefite to bée:
               He did beſtowe, and in the laſt,
               ſharpe ſhowres, he did endure for thée.
               For to the ende he might reſtore,
               thée to thy former ſtate againe:
               Which thou had loſt by Adams fall,
               he to diſcend did not diſdaine.
               
                  
And willingly did ſuffer death,
               which thou by right deſerude for ſinne:
               He vndertooke, he ouercame.
               he did for thée the conqueſt winne.
               Diſcending to mortalitie,
               he frailety tooke vppon him than:
               In torments he did death ſubdue,
               and by that meanes redéemed man.
               Beholde and ſée theſe things my ſoule,
               and be abaſhed at this newes:
               Let theſe his gracious benefits,
               perſwade thy minde on him to muſe.
               Conſider how he looued thée,
               that vouchedſafe ſo much to doo:
               For thée and for thy ſake my ſoule,
               way well what paines thou putſt him to
               By him thou beautifull became,
               that earſt moſt vgly was through ſinne:
               Now in his mercy mayſt thou vaunt,
               as cleane and purified by him.
               Before that thou did him deſire,
               thée to create that thou mightſt be:
               When thou ill fauoured was and foule,
               with beauty he adorned thée.
               And finally thée to redéeme,
               from endleſſe death, himſelfe would dye:
               And in ſo dooing did declare,
               his vehement looue and charity.
               
                  
With bounty great he hath therefore,
               the breath of life in thée, O man:
               
                  
                     •
                  s the firſt creature which he made,
               when by his power thou firſt began.
               For that ſelfe man and creature he,
               hath giuen and himſelfe beſtowde:
               None other goods for thée he gaue,
               to him therefore be laſting lawde:
               Thou art his workemanſhip, and yet
               the price of thy redemption too:
               Becauſe that price moſt precious was,
               it was his mercy ſo to doo.
               Man béeing priſoner thrall to wretche,
               beſet about with filthy ſinne:
               His fréendly fauour thought it fit,
               he ſhould be raunſomed by him.
               O happy faulte of mine therefore,
               for purging of the which my Lorde:
               Was drawne by looue, it to redéeme,
               according to his holy woord.
               I neuer fully ſhould haue knowne,
               his looue and fauour vnto me:
               But that the perrill of my ſtate,
               my preſent true proportions be.
               How fortunate was then my fall,
               that by the ſame more happily:
               I was reſtorde and raiſde againe,
               redéemde from endles miſerie.
               
                  
Then is no looue ſo great as this,
               no zeale ſo pure, no charitie:
               Nor no affection like to that,
               an innocent for me ſhould die.
               He fréendly was, but found no cauſe,
               of looue and fauor which he bare:
               Euen vnto me, deceiuing none,
               therefore O Lord my minde prepare.
               And tell me what remainde in me,
               which thou eſtéemde ſo gratiouſty:
               Why thou ſo déerely did me looue,
               that for my ſake deſirde to die.
               What haſte thou found in me O Lord:
               in nature, or in qualitie:
               The which ſo willing might thée make,
               to ſuffer this great crueltie.
            
            FINIS. 6. Chap.
         
         
            ¶ Of the benefit of God, in calling vs to faithe. 7. cap.
            
               ANd thou my ſoule, to th'end thou maiſt
               beholde this looue, and ioy therein:
               Conſider what compariſons,
               betwéene this looue and thée hath bin.
               How much thy betters be forlorne,
               refuſde and caſt away likewiſe:
               
                  
That neuer to like grace with thée,
               nor to like fauour could ariſe.
               Thou knowſt that ſince the world began,
               whole generations paſſed be:
               Without the knowledge of theyr God,
               and price of theyr redemption frée.
               The which are fallen into the lappes,
               of déepe deſtruction endles dayes:
               Vnleſſe it pleaſe our Sauiour ſwéete,
               of mercie his, them thence to raiſe.
               Héereby it dooth appeare to thée,
               thou waſt preferd before them all:
               Fy thy redéemer, which by grace,
               ſo franck and fréely did thée call.
               No cauſe at all remaindt in thée,
               thereby to claime more then the reſt:
               The meere looue of thy Sauiour déere:
               his mercy more to thee expreſt.
               Thy Spowſe, thy Loouer, and thy Lord,
               thy God and thy redeemer eke:
               Hath choſen and forchoſen thee,
               before all worlds in mercy meeke.
               For his great looue thus borne to thée,
               thy God and Sauiour he became:
               That thy memoriall might remaine,
               he calde thée by his proper name.
               He would thou ſhould partaker be,
               bothe of his name and truthe alſo:
               
                  
Becauſe thou art annointed with,
               the oyle of gladnes which dooth flowe.
               Euen from himſelfe, that with himſelfe,
               he beeing Chriſt the corner ſtone:
               Thou maiſt in him a Chriſtian, ſo
               be called by his name alone.
               But were thou ſtronger then the reſt,
               in noble, ritche, or wiſe degrée:
               Thereby receiuing ſpeciall grace,
               aboue them all to make thée frée.
               How many wiſe, how many ſtrong,
               how many noble, ritch alſo:
               Reiected were? yet choſen thou,
               when they forſaken thence did go.
               They periſhed, thou proſpered,
               and highly dooſt in fauour ſtand:
               Great hath his bounty béene to thée,
               which thou receiued at his hand.
               When thou waſt foule, he made thée faire,
               when thou with ſinne deformed was:
               Yea lotheſome, ragged, rent and torne,
               this mighty woorke he brought to paſſe.
               His grace he gaue to be thy guide,
               his looue for to inritch thée more:
               A reſolution abſolute,
               of mercy his, take this therefore.
               Moſte reſolute in this reſpect,
               perſwade thy ſelfe euen ſo to be:
               
                  
Except thou with indeuor doo,
               as héerein is diſcribed thée.
               That is thy former decencie,
               thy comlines and cleaneneſſe all:
               To comprehend and to retaine,
               which thou enioyde before thy fall.
               Els méete thou neuer ſhalt be thought,
               to enter that Bride Chamber, where
               Thy Spowſe, in heauenly manner ſits,
               thou ſhalt not in that place appeare.
               Trim vp and deck thy ſelfe my ſoule,
               prepare, make ready now in time:
               Let preſent leaſure giue thee leaue,
               for to redreſſe thy former crime.
               Sleeke vp thy forhead from thy face,
               and faſhion fine thy trim attire:
               Fret of thy freckles, rub thy Warts,
               waſh of thy ſpots of foule deſyre.
               Smoothe all thy wrinckles, handſome bee,
               thy rude behauiour now amend:
               With all thy might indeuor thou,
               cleane to continue to the end.
               In order all things ſée thou ſet,
               that thou maiſte be accepted now:
               Of this moſte louing ſpowſe and mate,
               as héeretofore is tolde thée how.
               Prepare thy ſelfe I ſay with ſpéede,
               as beſt becomes the Bride of him:
               
                  
That is immortall euen thy God,
               with whom thou ſhalt remain moſt trim.
               And as beſéemeth ſuch a Spowſe,
               that thée he may his Spowſes call:
               Thy Sauiour and redéemer, euen
               thy mighty King celeſtiall.
            
            FINIS. 7. Cap.
         
         
            ¶ Of the gift of vertues. The 8. Cap.
            
               KNow this alſo my ſoule that thou,
               haſt where withall thy ſelfe to dect:
               As golden Bracelets for thine armes,
               and Chaines to put about thy neck.
               Which of thy ſelfe thou couldſt not haue,
               but that thy God dooth giue them thée:
               For to beſtowe at pleaſure thine,
               if thankfull for the ſame thou be.
               For thou of him receiued haſt,
               thy veſture and thy garments all:
               All thy good woorkes, thy frutes of almes,
               thy faſting, and what dooth be fall.
               To thée, thy prayers powred foorth,
               to him with faith, he héeres the ſaine:
               All other vertues be his gifts,
               and by his grace in thée doo frame.
               
                  
He garniſheth in goodly wiſe,
               with gorgious and with trim attyre:
               As if a robe bothe freſh and faire,
               of ſundry coloures thou deſire.
               Leaſt thou ſhould fayle in any poynt,
               of health and of refection good:
               He bountifully hath beſtowde,
               on thée thy health and dayly foode.
               And whatſoeuer may repayre,
               thy comlineſſe and beauty bothe:
               What els thy credit may conunend,
               that thou ſhould lack it, he is lothe.
               Thinke on the ſame, I pray thee then,
               with diligence aduiſed be:
               That nothing héereof was thine owne,
               till he in grace had giuen it thee.
               That which before thou hadſt receiude,
               of him it ſtoode thée in no coſt:
               Of much which was on thée beſtowde,
               the ſame by negligence thou loſt.
               That which loſt, is thée reſtorde
               againe, whereby thou maiſt be ſure:
               Not deſtitute thou ſhalt be left,
               he ſtill thy profit will procure.
               In ſuch ſort, as thou ſhalt perceiue
               and know, how that intirely he:
               Dooth looue thée like a Parramour,
               moſt loth my ſoule, for to looſe thée.
               
                  
And for this cauſe he dooth attend,
               and paciently the time dooth ſtay:
               Long ſufferaunce and liberty,
               he lets thee haue, him to obay.
               According to his mercy great,
               ſo often as thou art to blame:
               So often he thy faults remits,
               as thou art ſory for the ſame.
               Wherefore record and call to minde,
               how many may be found, which haue
               Receiued like rewarde with thée,
               as heere recited which he gaue.
               Nor yet with the like fauour might,
               finde for to be renewd againe:
               When they defiled had themſelues,
               with foule abuſe theyr ſtate did ſtaine.
               Iuſte cauſe thou haſte, conſidering then,
               thy ſelfe belooued more then all:
               For that the things which thou haſt loſt,
               he thée to aunſwer dooth not call.
               But dooth beningly them reſtore,
               his mercy thou in theſe haſt tride:
               Which others by themſelues haue loſt,
               and are moſt ſtrictly ſtill denyde.
               Thou by his gracious bounty art,
               not once denayde, the truthe to tell:
               His prouidence may thée perſwade,
               thy woorkes for to accompliſh well.
               
                  
If readily great things thou doo,
               thou highly art aduaunſt therefore:
               If hardly thou ſmall things performe,
               thou humbled art ſo much the more.
               Thy God dooth know whats good for thée,
               much better then thy ſelfe canſt tell:
               Haue thou a duetifull regarde,
               that dooth for thée prouide ſo well.
               Such is his mercy vnto man,
               infirmities cannot indure:
               But are by goodneſſe his diſpoſde,
               that they our profits doo procure.
               Perhaps thou haſt not ſtrength and grace,
               in trade of vertue to perſiſt:
               But ſhaken with Suggeſtions arte,
               of vice and vertue hath diſmiſt.
               Yet art thou in humilitie,
               made ſtronger then thou waſt before:
               Humility perſwades thy minde,
               thy life miſſe led for to deplore.
               For weakeneſſe with humilitie.
               hath better fauour in the ſight
               Of God, then vertue with the ſtrength
               and pride of minde, in one complight.
               Be not therefore to mallepart,
               or bolde for to preſume of this:
               Gods ſecret diſpoſition if,
               thou preiudice, thou dooſt amis.
               
                  
But ſtill with reuerence and feare,
               direct thy prayers to his grace:
               That he vouchſafe to helpe thée then,
               as one that knowes thy preſent caſe.
               The euill that in thée remaines,
               he will with mercy it redreſſe:
               If thou in humbleneſſe of minde,
               and faithfull hart doo it confeſſe.
               If goodnes doo begin to grow
               in thée, and thou wouldſt it mainetaine:
               Referre it to the wyll of God,
               who will increaſe it to thy gaine.
               Yea finally conduct and bring
               thée to him ſelfe by ſuch away:
               As beſt he liketh for himſelfe,
               where thou with him ſhalt dwell for aie
            
            FINIS. 8. Chap.
         
         
            ¶ Of the gift of vnderſtanding and knovvledge. 9. Cap.
            
            
               NOw tell me O my ſoule, what we
               in recompence ſhall giue the Lord:
               For all the goodnes which we haue,
               receiu'de of him in déede and woorde.
               He onely not contented is,
               to giue vs thoſe good things which we
               
                  
Receaue with other creatures eke,
               our fellow partners by degrée.
               But alſo hath prouided, that
               in our afflictions we may féele:
               And take and taſte his mercy great,
               and loouing kindneſſe euery deale.
               We ſinguler occaſions heere,
               in our aduerſitie may take:
               And in proſperitie we may,
               imbrace his kindnes for his ſake.
               Within the armes of faithfull looue,
               vnto our ſelues we thus may ſay:
               In all our meditations, Lord
               giue vs thy grace thée to obay.
               And eke to know thee, graunt vs Lord,
               much more then other creatures doo:
               Becauſe thou haſt in ſecret wiſe,
               thy ſelfe diſcloſed vs vnto.
               Our vnderſtanding thou didſt frame,
               thy hidden miſteries to conceiue:
               More then our mates and equalles were,
               in ignoraunce thou didſt them leaue.
               Darkeneſſe of infidelitie,
               as vailes hath ſhadowed theyr face:
               But vnto vs thou haſt declarde,
               thy light and pureneſſe of thy grace.
               
                  
                     •
                  hy veritie and trueth it ſelfe,
               on vs thou didſt beſtowe indéede:
               
                  
On vs much more thou haſte beſtowde,
               then on the reſt of Adams ſéede.
               As ſence and aptnes to conceaue,
               ſtrength to performe good works & eke:
               That which is ill a witte to hate,
               grace in conuerſion for to ſéeke.
               Proſperitie for to conſerue,
               profit by ſtudie to apply:
               Wit in conceyts which turne to good,
               and comfort in aduerſitie.
               Which way ſo euer we doo turne,
               thy grace, thy mercy and good will:
               Our pathe are ready to preuent,
               and thou dooſte rule and guide vs ſtill.
               When vtterly we ſéemed waſte,
               (my ſoule) and quite conſumed were:
               He ſodainly reléeued vs,
               and ſtraight his mercy did appéere.
               When we were ignoraunt and rude,
               when wandering we went aſtray:
               He taught vs for to feare his name,
               and vs directed in the way.
               When we were ſad his comfort came,
               he held vs vp, when downe we fell:
               When that we ſtoode, he was our ſtaye,
               from falling headlong into hell.
               Now finally graunt vs thy grace,
               more verily to know thy name.
               
                  
More ſincerely thée to beléeue,
               more purely for to looue the ſame.
               More feruently to follow thée,
               becauſe that more pertaines vs too:
               For benefits which we receaue,
               more then thy other creatures doo.
               Therefore O Lord my God to thée,
               what recompence ſhall I deuiſe:
               Thou ſwéetenes of my life and eke,
               the Lampe and light of both mine eyes.
               Wilt thou that I ſhall looue thée well?
               then teach me how to doo the ſame:
               How greatly eke thou wilt that I,
               to thée my God, my looue ſhall frame.
               For what am I that ſo may looue,
               the Lord my God, my ſtedfaſtnes?
               My refuge, my deliuerer,
               my helper in my déepe diſtreſſe.
               The horne of my ſaluation, and
               my mainetainer at all aſſayes:
               What ſhall I ſay? my Lord and God,
               O giue me grace thy name to praiſe.
            
            FINIS. 9. Cap.
         
         
            ¶ Of Gods prouident care ouer vs. 10. Cap.
            
            
               FOr manifolde be theſe good things,
               which thou O Lord haſt doone for me:
               
                  
Moſte ſwéete and pleaſaunt to beholde,
               and in no caſe can numbred be.
               To ſpeake thereof great pleaſure is,
               Lorde make me thankfull for the ſame:
               For theſe thy gratious benefits,
               aye bleſſed be thy holy name.
               Loe now my ſoule, thou haſt thy pledge,
               thy pledge thy ſpowſe dooth repreſent:
               Vntouched kéepe the ſame therefore,
               and vndefilde with glad intent.
               Yea vnpolluted kéepe it ſafe,
               yea kéepe it cleane, and perfect ſound:
               Albeit thou once defiled was:
               th'art now an honeſt Virgin found.
               According to his fancie firme,
               and opperation of his looue:
               With purity he dooth reſtore,
               corrupted things, that ſo they prooue.
               In thoſe that pure remaine indéede,
               a chaſte condition to conſerue:
               Vnſpotted to his holy name,
               that in no caſe it cannot ſwarue.
               Apply thy cogitations, ſée
               how mercifully God dooth deale
               With thée, and how his looue is bent,
               all thine infirmities to heale.
               Not ſuffering thee to want at all,
               his benefits, nor yet to be:
               
                  
So ignoraunt, but that thou ſhouldſt,
               remember what is giuen to thée.
               And this I ſay to thée, becauſe
               thou ſhouldeſt marke his mercy great:
               It ſéemes my God dooth nothing els,
               but me with mercy ſtill intreate.
               I ſée him wholy occupied,
               for my ſaluation, and I ſée
               His care ſo great, that nothing els
               he dooth but onely nouriſh me.
               Continually God preſent is
               with me, and that to my behooue:
               He offereth himſelfe for me,
               all this his goodnes I doo prooue.
               Which way ſo euer I me turne,
               he neuer dooth my ſoule forſake:
               And whereſoeuer I become,
               for me he dooth prouiſion make.
               And as a woorkeman which wil be,
               inſeperable to the ſame:
               (His woorks) what wanteth in my forme,
               with precious he a new dooth frame.
               Although his face cannot be ſéene
               with vs, his preſence dooth appeare:
               His Spirit dooth inſpire our harts,
               as though he ſtill among vs were.
               What pleaſaunt thing is it my ſoule,
               which while I thinke on him, dooth oft
               
                  
Euen ſwéetely handle with deſire,
               and touch me with his fingers ſoft.
               And preſently me thinkes I féele,
               my ſelfe euen rauiſhed for ioy:
               I drawne and caried am from hence,
               as one conuayde from all annoy.
               But whether, God dooth know, not I,
               and yet forſoothe euen thus it is:
               A creature now my ſelfe I ſéeme,
               in great felicitie and bliſſe.
               I cannot with my tongue expreſſe,
               what ioy of conſcience I receiue:
               My wretchedneſſe and miſery,
               my ſorrowes paſt I there doo leaue.
               They vtterly forgotten are,
               and blotted out of memory:
               My vnderſtanding is made bright,
               my heart is lightened thereby.
               My ſelfe I féele as though that in,
               another countrey I remainde:
               And as it were I doo imbrace,
               moſte happy looue I there haue gainde,
               I labour then with all my might,
               continually the ſame to kéepe:
               And neuer for to loſe it, why?
               in it my ſoule dooth ſwéetely ſléepe.
               And would in no caſe be remoou'd,
               but there to reſt my ſoule aſpires:
               
                  
In quiet ſort as it had found,
               therein the end of all deſyres.
               Yea highly dooth it ſelfe aduaunce,
               for ioy, and ſéekes none other thing:
               None otherwiſe but as it is,
               not place to chaung, with Prince or king.
               Then is not this that loouing ſpowſe,
               my Lorde and God? yes verily:
               Inuiſible and ſecret ſort,
               he commeth now to viſit me.
               Incomprehenſible, and yet
               he commeth for to touche me now:
               Me to admoniſh yet he dooth,
               that I ſhould ſée him not alowe.
               His meaning is not to infues, This is c
                        ••
                     trary to 
                        〈◊〉
                      deuilliſh doctrine H. N.
               
               himſelfe all wholy into me:
               But euen in part to be aſſurde,
               and likewiſe taſted for to be.
               Not giuing his ſacietie,
               according to my full deſire:
               But more and that a great deale more,
               then I of duty can require.
               And this it is that chéefely dooth,
               to his betrothing appertaine:
               The earneſt of his heauenly will,
               which we in him on earth doo gaine.
               This is a token true my ſoule,
               if héere on earth thou godly be:
               
                  
Aſſured in the world to come,
               his owne ſelfe he will giue to thée.
               For euer thou ſhalt ſee him then,
               and of him full poſſeſſion haſte:
               Whereof now preſently thou dooſt,
               but as it were enioy a taſte.
               That héere thou in this world may know
               how pleaſaunt thou ſhalt finde him then▪
               
               And féele him in his kingdome ſwéete,
               farre diſtaunt from the ſonnes of men.
               Wherefore it dooth my ſoule behooue,
               yea it dooth with thy duty ſtand:
               To looue thy God for theſe his giftes,
               which thou receiued at his hand.
            
            FINIS. 10. Cap.
         
         
            ¶ Of the gifte of the ſences, and preſeruation of life. 11. Cap.
            
            
               BVt to the end thou maiſte the more,
               be kindled with the fire of looue:
               Conſider if with more then theſe,
               his benefits he did thée prooue.
               If ſo he haue, thou art the more
               to him beholding for the ſame:
               Bothe for them paſt, and thoſe to come,
               giue thankes, or els thou art to blame.
               
                  
Euen from the bottom of thy hart,
               he is for to be loou'd of thee:
               For when my Parents did tranſgreſſe,
               he with his mercy made them frée.
               Yea me created of theyr fleſh,
               and breathde in me the ſpirit of life:
               And ſeperating from them ſéede,
               yt was brought foorth with mortall ſtrife.
               I therefore haue receiu'de of him,
               the grace for to become a man:
               And vnderſtanding haue obtainde,
               twixt man and beaſt, the ſcence to ſkan.
               Of body I receiued haue,
               the ſhape, and reaſon to defyne:
               And difference betwixt theſe two,
               my mortall ſence, and grace deuine.
               Mine eyes to ſée, mine eares to heare,
               my noſe to ſmell, my mouthe to taſte:
               My hands to féele my féete to walke,
               nothing in me was framed waſte.
               And that is more, I doo enioy
               all theſe in health and happy reſt:
               Thoſe benifyts, theſe doo augment,
               that ſeuerally each ſence poſſeſt.
               Things conſonant God did create,
               agréeing to the vſe of theſe:
               As ſhining bright, and pleaſaunt ſound,
               or ſwéete in taſte, the ſence to pleaſe.
               
                  
This good prouiſion of our God,
               the creator of euery thing:
               Theſe variable qualities,
               for purpoſe ours to paſſe dooth bring.
               The ſight one ſpeciall thing conceaues,
               the hearing is an other plight:
               The ſmelling, féeling, and the taſte,
               in ſeuerall ſence, findes their delight.
               For beauty, coulours pleaſe the eye,
               ſwéete Muſick moſte the eare contents:
               The fragrant ſmell of ſwéeteſt flowres,
               delights the noſe, with pleaſaunt ſence.
               Thus euery ſence his ſeaſon ſées,
               and euery one in order plaſte:
               The verder and the reals ſwéete,
               are found moſte méeteſt for the taſte.
               And who is able to rehearſe,
               the pleaſures that on vs attend:
               So ſundry ſet, ſo manifolde,
               each in his kinde to comprehend?
               They wounderfull doo ſéeme and ſtraunge,
               and ſtraungely we inritcht thereby:
               How many pleaſures to the eyes,
               doo we in coulours freſh apply?
               What ſundry ſoundes vnto the eare?
               how diuerſly each tune is plaſte?
               Men mutually their minds reſigne,
               and tell what things be gone and paſt.
               
                  
With déepe delight ſome demonſtrate,
               things fit for preſent time, and ſome
               Deuine of hidden ſecrets, and
               prognoſticate of things to come.
               If theſe were miſſing in the life
               of man, he might compared be:
               Vnto the rudenes of a Beaſt,
               moſte bent and vile in baſe degrée.
               What néede I tell you of the Byrds,
               whoſe warbling notes I may compare:
               For pleaſure with the pleaſures paſt,
               which héeretofore expreſſed are?
               And as I héere haue amplifyed,
               the déepe delight our ſences haue:
               As ſéeing, féeling, hearing, taſte,
               and all by grace that nature gaue.
               This may not be gaineſayde therefore,
               but that the goodnes of our God:
               Excéeding is, and wonderfull,
               his glory dooth extend abroade.
               And by how much our benefyts,
               abooue deſert he did beſtowe:
               So much the more his glory ſhines,
               ſo much the more his power dooth ſhow.
               Not onely he our bodyes made,
               but alſo beautifyed the ſame:
               With diuers vertues which he gaue,
               bleſt be therefore his holy name.
               
                  
He made me healthfull, fyrme and ſound,
               my fréends might not me noiſome déeme:
               Not ougly to theyr eyes, nor yet,
               reprochefull vnto ſtraungers ſéeme.
               He me indewd with more then this,
               he did my minde to reaſon bring,
               He vnderſtanding did me giue,
               to iudge the truthe in euery thing.
               I can diſcerne a right from wrong,
               and good from euill can deuide:
               By this I ſearche, I ſue, and long,
               with my Creator to abide.
               But if I ſhall confeſſe the truthe,
               a greater benefyt then this:
               Wherewith the reſt may not compare,
               a bleſſing rare, and that is this.
               Namely that I ſhould heer be borne,
               bred and brought vp, in ſuch a time
               And ſeaſon, and among ſuch men,
               as doo condemne each fylthy crime.
               Such people as profeſſe his faithe,
               his Sacraments in honour holde:
               How I accordingly ſhould liue,
               whereby my ſinnes be all controlde.
               All this I ſée, and this I know,
               denyde to many other men:
               Which precious is to be eſtéemde,
               Lord graunt me to be thankfull then.
               
                  
For theſe thy graces giuen to me,
               in which I glory and reioyce:
               Yet with the other by all right,
               ſhould ſtand my ſtate in equall choyſe.
               That are forſaken of theyr God,
               and in his iuſtice ouerthrowne:
               But I am called by his grace,
               and in his mercy am his owne.
               In contemplation now therefore,
               I will procéede and eke declare:
               His goodneſſe and benignitie,
               that me ſuch parents did prepare.
               Which brought me vp within his feare,
               in ſafetie vnto mans eſtate:
               Deuoide of daunger doone by fyre,
               by water or like mortall fate.
               That I by Beaſts was not deuourde,
               and that the Diuell had no holde
               On me, but that all theſe miſhaps,
               was by the grace of God controlde.
               By meanes whereof I now am growne,
               to competent and ſéemely age:
               To looue my God, him ſerue and feare,
               by faithe in him my ſinnes t'aſſwage.
            
            Finis. 11. Cap.
         
         
            
            ¶ Of the patience and long ſuffering of God. 12. Cap.
            
            
               GReat is thy pittie Lord therefore,
               and infinite thy mercy eke:
               Which thou haſt vſed vnto me,
               when I in faithe the ſame did ſéeke.
               Moſte wonderfull in all thy workes,
               becauſe thou art them all abooue:
               Yea thou dooſt ſéeme moſte maruelous,
               euen in the bowels of thy looue.
               For ſure no man thou dooſt deſpiſe,
               abhorre, nor any man reiect:
               But ſuch as doo forſake the Lord,
               and dreadfully themſelues detect.
               Theſe are thy gifts, therefore O Lord,
               theſe are thy treaſures which thou haſt
               Indewd me with, and by thy grace,
               me in the midſt of mercy plaſte.
               When I in dreadfull daunger was,
               and in the ſinck of filthy ſinne:
               Thou me deliuered from the ſame,
               and left me not to die therein.
               When I vnmindefull was of this,
               thereof thou didſt remember me:
               When from thy preſence I returnde,
               thou callde me home againe to thée.
               
                  
And gentlie did me entertaine,
               with pardon, when I did repent:
               And did with mercie me remit,
               when I deſerued puniſhment.
               Not onely pardon for my ſinnes,
               which I in wicked will did frame:
               But for ſuch ſinnes I did eſchew,
               thy pardon did containe the ſame.
               As into many ſinnes I fell,
               and foule offences did commit:
               My wicked will was bent to more,
               if thou hadſt not withholden it.
               Yet headlong further had I run,
               with raſhe attempt from thée to ſwarue:
               By thy eſpeciall meanes I doo,
               remember, thou didſt me preſerue.
               From dooing of ſuch wicked déedes,
               that otherwiſe I ſhould haue done:
               But onely thy eſpeciall grace,
               I had no meanes the ſame to ſhun.
               But thou occaſions all didſt kill,
               and gaue me ſtrength ſinne to reſiſt:
               By kéeping and continuing me,
               in thine affection ere I wiſt.
               Had I at lybertie beene left,
               my wilfull nature to obay:
               In manifolde offences I
               committing, ſhould haue went on ſtray.
               
                  
But ſo great was the mercie of
               my Lord and God, beſtowed on me:
               Not once ſuch ſinne could me areſt,
               nor finde that oportunitie.
               For much a doo he had to ſtaye,
               me from the doubling of my ſin:
               The violence of temptation great,
               ſo grieuous vnto me haue béen.
               As euerie man hath féeling in,
               his frayle deſyre and fickle minde:
               Had not the Lord of mercie, his
               aſſiſtaunce vnto me aſſignde.
               Whereby I vanquiſhed my luſte,
               my fleſhlie, and my fonde deſire:
               Concupiſcence I kilde thereby,
               which in my members burnt like fire.
               From certaine other ſinnes, O Lord,
               thine indulgence and fauour did:
               So farre eſtraunge and ſtay my minde,
               that from my heart, them quite I rid.
               I did abhorre and hate them ſore,
               and lothe the filth of former time:
               Iniquitie that did ſuggeſt,
               me to commit eche hainous crime.
               Yet, all theſe ſame had not the power,
               to touch or mooue me to conſent:
               Although they made what meanes they could,
               my ſtedfaſt purpoſe to preuent.
               
                  
Not leaſt point of thy pittie Lord,
               nor meaneſt motion of thy grace:
               When as the hugeneſſe of my ſinnes,
               had brought me into wretched caſe.
               When I vnkindlie kindled had,
               by dooing euill in thy ſight:
               Prouokte thy furie, ſtirde thy moode,
               with gréeuous ſins, for which thou might
               Haue puniſhed my peruerſe minde,
               yet patientlie thou didſt forbeare:
               That notwithſtanding, all thinges paſt,
               thou pardonedſt through thy mercy méere.
               If I doo put repentaunce off,
               deferring tyme from day to day▪
               
               And doo ſecurelie ſléepe in ſinne,
               yet thou wilt pauſe and vſe delay.
               Preuenting patientlie the tyme,
               and gentlie tarrieſt tyll I come:
               When I doo wander, thou dooſt haſte,
               me in the race that I ſhall runne.
               Againe, when I reſiſt and ſtriue,
               rebelliouſlie againſt thy grace:
               Thou dooſt vanquiſh, and conquere me,
               and quite from me, my ſinnes dooſt chaſe.
               When in the féeldes of fantaſie,
               I loyter or doo ling ring ſtay:
               Thou eyther forwarde wilt me force,
               or tarrieſt for me in the way.
               
                  
When I diuert from wicked wayes,
               and trie thy footſteps for to trace:
               Foorthwith, thou fréendly me receyues,
               and loouinglie dooth me embrace.
               When I in ignoraunce doo dwell,
               full ſoone I ſhall inſtructed bée:
               When I for gréefe lament and mourne,
               thou commeſt ſtraight to comfort mée.
               I ſtumble, fall, and yet thou dooſt,
               bothe reare me vp, and art my ſtay:
               Thou giueſt what comfort I doo craue,
               thou dooſt redéeme my dire decay.
               That which I ſéeke, in thée I finde,
               I knock, thou openeſt vnto mée:
               Thou art my Loadſtone and my life,
               my ſtaffe and ſtay in eche degrée.
               I neither will nor cunning want,
               to walke directlie in thy way:
               The greater is my daunger then,
               if wandringlie I walke aſtray.
               This alſo woorthy is O Lord,
               (of admiration) that before:
               (I had diſcretion) in my youth,
               what things to aſke, thou gaueſt me ſtore▪
               
               As alſo in mine age, when I
               through thée was able for to craue:
               And aſke for that by goodneſſe thine,
               which I in heart deſirde to haue.
               
                  
Againe, when nothing I requirde,
               nor any thing in mercie ſought:
               But rechleſlie and careleſlie,
               eſtéemed all thy giftes as nought.
               And now I doo eſteeme this grace,
               A great and mighty gifte, that thou
               Didſt ouer me giue Angels charge,
               from birth to kéepe me ſafe tyll now.
               More then tyll now, for euen betwéene,
               my day of birth, and day of death:
               Thou my protector art as long,
               as I enioy this vitall breath.
               In contemplation of which thing,
               a certaine holie Father ſayde:
               Great is the dignitie of thoſe,
               whome God electes, and Angelles ayde.
               As garders ſet, them to defend,
               the Wiſe man in this ſence expreſt:
               The righteous ſoules are in the handes, Sapi. 3.
               
               of God, and there doo ſafelie reſt.
               I ceaſe not heere for to commend,
               thy pittie ioynd with patience:
               But rather double doo thy prayſe,
               that ſo haſt borne my fowle offence.
               And not according to the ſame,
               my due deſarte did me requite:
               Nor that I ſhould for ſinfull life,
               be recompenſt with déepe deſpite.
               
                  
The earth to ſwallowe me, nor fire
               from heauen ſent my corpes to burne
                     •
                  
               
               Not water floods to drowne me, nor
               ſuch pains of death ſhould ſerue this turn.
               That I ſo ſore deſerued had.
               bothe anguiſh and afflictions great:
               I had deſerued for my ſinnes,
               but ſo he did me not intreat.
               For when by ſinne I went away,
               and would no longer with him dwell:
               His creatures did diſdayne me ſore,
               I had deſerude the paines of hell.
               No meruaile is this ſame, for if
               a hyred ſeruaunt run away:
               But from his earthlie Maiſter héere,
               and doo not all his heſtes obay.
               His puniſhment ſhall ſure be great,
               his Maiſter is againſt him ſore:
               His ſeruaunts and familliar fréendes,
               doo ſoone abhorre this wretch therefore.
               Therefore when I diſpleaſed thee,
               O Lord my God, iuſt cauſe I gaue:
               That all thy faithfull creatures ſhould,
               great indignation at me haue.
               As firſt the earth, thy creature great,
               which dooth the world ſo wide containe:
               Againſt me might conſpire and ſtay,
               I thée to nouriſhe doo diſdaine.
               
                  
Ne might I make my mone for this,
               if it moleſt or trouble mée:
               If I complaine, it aunſwere might,
               in trueth I lothe to carrie thée.
               For as I Dathan did deuowre,
               
                  Abiram eke, and Corah caught:
               As they were ſwallowed quicke, euen ſo
               for thine offences die thou ought.
               Which haſt not béene afrayde to fall,
               from thy Creatour, and to ioyne:
               Euen with his mortalſt foe the fiend,
               the Diuell which would thée purloyne.
               The author of iniquitie,
               of diſobedience and of ſin:
               The father of thoſe froward fooles,
               that doo delight to liue therein.
               The Sunne alſo to thée might ſay,
               I ought my beames to thée deny:
               Becauſe vnto thy laſting light,
               thy duetie thou dooſt not applie.
               Thus euerie creature might controwle,
               and vnto thée this ſentence giue:
               But that thy Sauiour them reſtraines,
               who bids thée to repent and liue.
               It me behoues, therefore O Lord,
               more humblie to thy mightie hand:
               More loyall and obedient I,
               before thy mercie ought to ſtand.
               
                  
Leaſt by deferring of the day,
               to puniſhe my tranſgreſſions then:
               Euen in thy dreadfull day, O Lord,
               more gréeuouſlie with ſinfull men.
               And thou my ſoule, thy ſelfe perſwade,
               that this long ſuffering of the Lord:
               Expected hath a great while now,
               what we in faith can him aforde.
               Th'effect of his election free,
               Predeſtination is moſt pure:
               Which he fulfilde in vs will haue,
               by faith for euer to endnre.
               Through his exceſſiue looue likewiſe,
               which he hath borne, and beares vs ſtyll:
               His eyes be turned from our ſinnes,
               according to his holy wyll.
               As once vnwilling to beholde,
               howe often I offended haue:
               His mercie is diſpoſoe I ſée,
               from endleſſe death my ſoule to ſaue.
               This is the cauſe I ſee, why he,
               hath ſtayde ſo long, our hearts to prooue:
               And that thereby he might commend,
               his patience, and confirme his looue.
               My ſelfe I doo remember well,
               he ſtrooke my heart, and ſtirde the ſame:
               For to beholde the ſkarres of ſinne,
               which wicked life in me did frame.
               
                  
Yea, for this cauſe he did conuey,
               and lead me to the gates of hell:
               Deſcribing vnto me what paines,
               they ſuffer that therein doo dwell.
               And to this ende, that I ſhould not,
               diſmay with motions of my ſin:
               Nor that rrmembraunce of the ſame,
               might not remaine my minde within.
               He did inſpire and comfort me,
               that I a full remiſſion had:
               A generall pardon he me gaue,
               for all my lyfe that was ſo bad.
               That neither ſhould reuenge be ſought,
               nor I vpbraided once ſhould be:
               Condempned nor conſounded, for
               ſuch was his looue and zeale to me.
               Though ſome that in the world remaine,
               and no ſmall number God he knowes:
               That pardon crimes committed, yet Men 
                        〈…〉
                      not 
                        〈…〉
                      lie 
                        〈…〉
                      one 
                        〈…〉
                      ther 
                        〈…〉
                      doot 
                        〈…〉
                      giue 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               will caſt the parties in the noſe.
               And other that doo ſilent ſit,
               doo ſtyll in ſtomacke rancour beare:
               Euen in their ſilent ſhadowe dooth,
               reſerued ſpite, and hate appeare.
               But neither of theſe ſortes be ſuch,
               as charitie with hart embrace:
               Nor yet according to the rule,
               and looue of God, which we by grace
               
                  
Doo taſte and féele for comfort ours,
               how plainlie he dooth alwayes deale:
               His pardon fréelie is beſtowde,
               on all that to the ſame appeale,
               According to the text, which ſayth,
               euen where our ſinnes did moſt abound:
               Grace did moſt plentifull appeare, 1. 3.
               
               which benefite Saint Peter found. 
                     
                        •
                     8.
               
               Who hauing thriſe his Lord denide,
               the ſame his Lord, did thriſe commaund▪ 
                  21.
               
               To féede his Shéepe, and of his Church,
               the chéefeſt Paſtour for to ſtand.
               
                  Paule did his Goſpell perſecute, 
                     
                        •
                     .
               
               yet he a Veſſell was elect:
               And teacher of the will of God,
               the Heathens liues for to correct.
               And Mathew was a worldlie man, 
                     
                        •
                     9.
               
               he did receyue the common towle:
               Which Office dooth containe abuſe,
               if Officer doo bribe and powle.
               Yet he was an Apoſtle made,
               the Lord his God ſo gaue conſent:
               And of Apoſtles was the firſt,
               that wrote his Will and Teſtament.
            
            FINIS. 12. Chap.
         
         
            
            ¶ Of the gift of Continencie. 13. Cap.
            
            
               BVt after all theſe thinges which are
               right good, and many as you ſée:
               Of Continencie perfect gift,
               my God did alſo giue to mée.
               Not onelie from all carnall luſt,
               but from each other filthy vice:
               By whatſoeuer they be callde,
               a gifte of rare and woorthy price,
               So that I, who in former time,
               could hardlie any thing forbeare:
               Thrée dayes together, but I did,
               vnto my former faultes repaire.
               Now through the grace and helpe of God,
               I can for euer be content:
               That to forbeare, which dooth intice,
               or vnto ſinne dooth giue conſent.
               By iuſt occaſion I can ſtaye,
               and thereof well aſſured bée:
               Beholde my God of mighties moſt,
               what great thinges he hath done for mée.
               Some man perhaps will thus replie, Luk▪
                  
               
               thou mayſt accompliſhe this with eaſe:
               Of light importaunce is that paine,
               that to forbeare, which dooth thée pleaſe.
               Aſſure your ſelfe, I thinke not ſo,
               I knowe what enimies it hath:
               
                  
How ſtrong and ſturdy ones they be,
               what might they haue ye minde to ſkathe.
               It néedefull is for to reſiſt,
               a broode of ſuch impietie:
               A Nurſe of naughtines, and eke
               a ſincke of all iniquitie.
               The firſt and chéefeſt enemie, 
               that continencie dooth deſpite:
               Is our owne fleſh, whilſt it dooth luſt,
               ſtriue and rebell againſt the ſprite. 
               And what an enemie is this,
               know you, that ſo familiar can:
               Kéepe reſidence, and force conflict, 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               within the ſecret ſhape of man.
               How daungerous is this my ſoule,
               a fearefull fight moſt like to be:
               Thou haſte no meanes to ſkape the hurt: Deuil, 
                        •
                     orld, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               of this thy mortall enemy.
               This foe moſt cruell, ſterne and ſtoute,
               vnnaturall and tyrannous:
               No way thou haſt him to eſcape,
               nor pollicie to flie but thus.
               Mauger our heads we néedes muſt beare,
               this mortall foe, about vs ſtill:
               To vs it tide and lincked is,
               we cannot leaue it when we will.
               And therefore what more wretched is,
               vs miſerable men to charme.
               
                  
To féede and foſter vp this foe,
               béeing forbid to doo it harme?
               Thus maiſt thou ſee what great regarde,
               and care thou haſt thy ſelfe to kéepe:
               From ſuch a foe, as muſt of force,
               within thy boſome lie and ſléepe.
               But yet my ſoule, if this were all,
               thine enimies which doo thée hate:
               And that there were none other, thou
               thriſe happie were, and fortunate.
               For one there is, as bad as this,
               as ſturdy ſtoute, as ſtoute may be:
               As cruell crafty daungerous,
               and eke as hurtfull vnto thée.
               As harde to be eſcaped and,
               where euer thou thy ſelfe beſtowe:
               It dooth inuiron thée about,
               and no way from it canſt thou goe.
               This enimie, the wicked world,
               vnto fiue gates I can compare:
               The which fiue gates for to defyne,
               compact, in thy fiue ſences are,
               This enemy dooth wound thée ſore,
               with dartes, and at thy windowes will▪
               
               Watche time for to procure thy death,
               for he hath ſworne thée for to kill.
               The thyrde is ſworne thy deadly foe,
               and common enimie to all:
               
                  
Of Adams whole poſteritie,
               the ſubtile Serpent men him call.
               More wilie then the Creatures all,
               that in the world euer were:
               No eye his countenaunce can diſcerne,
               he in no likeneſſe will appeare.
               And therefore to auoyde him quite,
               it paſſeth mans habillitie:
               Some time he dooth aſſault vs ſore,
               with violence, euen openlie.
               Some times he ſecretly will ſteale,
               and guilefully he alwayes will:
               Continew in his crueltie, 
               and ſeeketh meanes, our ſoules to kill.
               But who is able to endure,
               all this his miſchéefe to withſtand:
               Or who is fit t'encounter with 
               this chapion, ſtoute to take in hand.
               In verie déede, no earthlie man,
               but he that long hath looued vs:
               And that by his triumphant death,
               this victorie atchieude for vs.
               Now maiſt thou knowe therfore my ſoule,
               how harde and difficult it is:
               Euen to be continent, if that
               the grace of God thereto thou miſſe.
               Great cauſe therefore we haue to looue,
               him moſt intyrelie for the ſame:
               
                  
For onelie in the Lord we haue,
               this power, prayſed be his name.
               Our might he giues vs to withſtand,
               this tryple battrey (all by force)
               Maintaind, againſt vs by theſe foes,
               that would of vs take no remorce.
               It is our God, that dooth therefore,
               tread vnderfoote eche fowle offence:
               Our looue, our luſt, our lauiſhe minde,
               our fleſhlie vile concupiſcence.
               As alſo all the world, and all
               her vile, and worldlie vanities:
               Her trecherous entiſements, and
               of men the wofull myſeries.
               And finally, the Diuell, with
               his crafte and falſe ſuggeſtions vile,
               His ſubtile ſhiftes, whereby he ſought,
               my ſimple ſoule for to beguile.
               Then haue not I iuſt cauſe thinke you,
               of duetie to confeſſe that he:
               Which mightie is, of mighties moſt, Luke.
               
               all theſe great thinges hath done for me.
            
            FINIS. 13. Cap.
         
         
            ¶ Of the gift of Hope. 14. Cap.
            
            
               MOreouer, my good God dooth giue
               me grace, that I my ſelfe perſwade:
               
                  
And to conforme that by his will,
               I am to him obedient made.
               And fullie am aſſured by faith,
               that finally I ſhall not miſſe:
               But by his promiſe ſhall inioye,
               his kingdome and eternall bliſſe.
               In the eſpeciall pointes this grace,
               conſiſteth and continueth too:
               That I contempne, deteſt, and hate,
               my ſinnes forepaſt, of purpoſe doo.
               Diſdayning preſent pleaſures all,
               or fonde delightes, and ſéeke in ſome:
               To frame and force, our fowle deſire,
               to looke and long for thinges to come.
               Which to attaine this hope we haue,
               ſupported by thrée thinges alſo:
               Which ſtrengthen and confirme my heart,
               that from this hope it dooth not goe.
               And ſo dooth animate my minde▪
               
               me ſo incourage and perſwade:
               That lacke of merites, want of workes,
               nor worldly bliſſe, my minde may glad.
               Nor eſtimation of the ioyes,
               which with delight my heart dooth grope:
               Not any of theſe ſhall hable be,
               to hale me from the fort of hope.
               Firſt, I conſider that the looue,
               of him that hath adopted me: 1.
               
               
                  
And ſecondlie, the trueth of him,
               whoſe promiſes performed bée.
               The thirde, his mercie, might and power,
               that in theſe thrée, did me redéeme:
               Haue I not cauſe theſe benefites,
               moſt highlie them for to eſtéeme?
               Now therefore let my fleſhlie thoughtes,
               repine and murmure with diſdaine:
               Euen as they luſt, and aſke me how,
               I can theſe heauenlie ioyes attaine.
               With confidence, I aunſwer will,
               I knowe, whome I beléeued haue:
               His benefites perſwades me ſo,
               which vndeſerued his mercie gaue.
               Moſt condempnable were to doubt,
               I am aſſured of his trueth:
               I fullie am reſolude from hence,
               Grace and adoption bothe enſueth.
               That he his promiſe will performe,
               as one beſt hable to fulfill:
               He may and dooth, bothe heauen and earth,
               commaund, and they obay his will.
               For theſe his merites, I of right,
               my God and Sauiour ought to looue:
               It is the working of his Grace,
               and mercie ſo, my minde to mooue.
               When I doo flée, out from his face,
               me to his preſence, he allures:
               
                  
When I for ſinfull life diſpayre,
               my preſent comfort he procures.
               I am vnthankfull for his giftes,
               yet dooth he benefite me ſtyll:
               When I vncleannes would commit,
               he dooth my carnall humours kyll.
               When I in vanities delight,
               his trueth to me he dooth declare:
               When I lie bound in ſnares of ſinne,
               he dooth my fréedome ſtraight prepare.
               And to conclude, he dooth preſerue,
               and kéepe me from the pit of hell:
               And drawes me from the wicked world,
               within his kingdome for to dwell.
            
            FINIS. 14. Cap.
         
         
            ¶ Of Gods bountie, of our iniquitie, and of thankes giuing. 15. Cap.
            
            
               BVt yet my ſoule beholde and ſée,
               conſider how Gods goodneſſe ſhowne:
               In all his giftes and benefites,
               which thou receyueſt as thine owne.
               What gladſome comfortable chéere,
               if thou thy worldlie will deny:
               Chriſte offereth him ſelfe to thée,
               what delycates he dooth apply.
               
                  
With foode thy hunger to refreſh,
               he ſtore in mercie dooth beſtowe:
               Thy pouertie he dooth enritch,
               All theſe his graces thou dooſt knowe.
               What ſecrete good affections hée,
               euen with the ſame thy heart aſpyres:
               As with a pleaſaunt cuppe of looue,
               he dooth repleniſhe thy deſyres.
               That thou his footſteppes follow doo,
               and tranſitorie thinges forſake:
               Héereby thou mayſt beholde thy God,
               how great accoumpt of thée dooth make.
               This is no ſimple thing thou ſéeſt,
               (or vile) contempned for to bée:
               That thou a gadding fugitiue,
               his mercie more ſhould giue to thée.
               Thou waſt a rechleſſe rebell rude,
               thou to eche treacherie waſt thrall:
               Yet he vnto his ſetled home,
               and heauenlie mancion did thée call.
               And plentifullie did refreſhe,
               with conſolation ſpirituall.
               He harkened to thy miſhappe,
               or euer thou had minde to call.
               He comfortes thy confuſed minde,
               if thou were tempted, he ſuſtaind:
               If he in daunger did thée finde,
               thy lybertie was quicklie gaind.
               
                  
He thée reléeu'de, if ſorrowfull,
               by him thou ſhould comforted bée:
               If wauering in minde thou waſte,
               he did confirme and ſtrengthen thée.
               How often, euen with verie feare,
               thou ſéemed like a withered wight?
               He quicklie did thy ſtate redéeme,
               and thée endude with ſtrength and might.
               When thou in drought did drie away,
               he did himſelfe to thée infuſe:
               And often he with ſpirituall light,
               thine vnderſtanding did peruſe.
               Thy ſence with ſwéetneſſe he perfumde,
               when thou delightſt to reade or ſing:
               To praye or meditate thy minde,
               in any kinde of heauenlie thing.
               He rauiſhed thy déepe delight,
               from déepe delight in worldlie vice:
               That thou mightſt take thy pleaſure in,
               his euerlaſting Paradice.
               I leaue to ſpeake of mightie workes,
               it pleaſde his Maieſtie ſo to doo:
               Of kindneſſe and of mercie more,
               which he reſtorde my ſoule vnto.
               Leaſt any parte of his due prayſe,
               ſhould be aſcribed vnto me:
               And that the giuers graces ſhould,
               with the receipt vnited be.
               
                  
Or knit together with the ſame,
               or ſéeme as equall in conſent:
               Or he lyke praiſes ſhould receyue,
               whome God dooth make his inſtrument.
               For if the creature ſhould preſume,
               to be pertaker of the prayſe:
               Iniuriouſlie, he dealeth with
               his good Creatour diuers wayes.
               For what hath any man a liue,
               that he of God did not receyue?
               Why ſhould he then be prayſde for that,
               which he enioyes not, but by leaue?
               To thée therefore, O Lord my God,
               all honour, prayſe, and glorie be:
               Thankes giuing, laude, dominion, power,
               for theſe thy Graces gouerne me.
               Sée nowe therefore my ſoule, how that
               not onelie bountie dooth commend:
               But our iniquitie likewiſe,
               dooth, with our God, therin contend.
               For if his bountie be ſo great,
               to giue, where we could nothing craue:
               And that we nothing did deſerue,
               of all the goodneſſe which we haue.
               How ought that goodneſſe be eſtéemde,
               that vs with goodneſſe dooth requite:
               That by our manners merite could,
               nought elſe but euill and deſpite?
               
                  
O what great looue is this, I ſay,
               the which our ſinnes can not ſuppreſſe:
               Nor that we may not ouercome,
               with this our wilfull wickedneſſe.
               He pardoneth ſinne, and grace dooth giue,
               in place of vice, dooth Vertue plant:
               So in the one he lyberall is,
               in th'other loouing we muſt graunt.
               Let vs therefore confeſſe that we,
               euen from our ſelues, our ſinnes poſſeſſe:
               That he may pardon them, and eke
               from him, our Vertues ſtyll increaſe:
               And let vs not forget, that we
               be thankfull for his pardon paſt:
               And not vnmindfull be of that,
               which he dooth giue for aye to laſt.
               Thus let him doo that feareth God,
               and dooth deſire to looue him ſtyll:
               For looue can not diſſemble ſure,
               in looue is left no kinde of yll.
               What therefore worketh dilligent
               conſideration of this thing:
               But earneſtlie for to withdrawe,
               thy minde that ſo thy looue dooth bring.
               From all ſuch other ſortes of looue,
               to looue the Lord aboue them all:
               Not forced, but of duetie, for
               his looue to laſting life dooth cal.
               
                  
If lightly we the Lord doo looue,
               not doubting but we ſo may doo:
               Some man perhappes will not conceyue,
               how much he bound is him vnto.
               But if he ſéeke, he ſoone ſhall finde,
               occaſion for to thinke the ſame:
               As all his dayes him to adore,
               whilſt life dooth laſt to praiſe his name.
               For who ſo wanteth any thing,
               that he for his ſoules health would vſe:
               Let him not murmure for the ſame,
               nor yet therfore his God accuſe.
               For he dooth all thinges for the beſt,
               his actions be performde with ſkill:
               In iudgement he is well aduiſed,
               and mercie hath on whome he will.
               And whome he will dooth alſo iudge,
               and whome he will, in hart makes hard:
               To whome he will, his grace he giues,
               from whome he will, it is debard.
               What ſo dooth with his pleaſure ſtand,
               moſt néedefull is, and alſo fit:
               And we that profite muſt thereby,
               moſt néede we haue to call for it.
               Not onelie ſorie be and ſad,
               but alſo labour them to gaine:
               And pray vnto our gracious God,
               that we vnto them may attaine.
               
                  
Which hauing gotten, gratefull bée,
               giue thanks to him, which ſent the ſame:
               No recompence he dooth require,
               but that thou prayſe his holie name.
            
            FINIS. 15. Cap.
         
         
            ¶ Of the benefites of Christes death and Paſſion. 16. Cap.
            
            
               BOthe great and many are therefore,
               thy benefites moſt gracious Lord:
               Innumerable, infinite,
               which we receiue by thine accord.
               That thou haſt heaped vpon me,
               for which I bounden am therefore:
               To looue and prayſe thy holie name,
               which bleſſed be for euermore.
               What euer goodneſſe preſently,
               I haue, or in times paſt haue had:
               Or whatſoeuer I ſhall haue,
               in tyme to come, me for to glad.
               My God the Author is of all,
               from whome, what ſo is good in déede:
               Or ſo accoumpted it dooth flowe,
               yea, iſſue and from him procéede.
               But there is one thing more then this,
               dooth me inflame, yea, vrge and mooue:
               
                  
To ſet my ſoule delight thereon,
               my pleaſure and my perfect looue.
               This dooth eſpeciallie, O Lord,
               ſo fayre and amiable make:
               Euen thée thy ſelfe, that did vouchſafe,
               vile death to ſuffer for my ſake.
               The worke of our Redemption déere▪
               
               a ſhamefull death on thée was done:
               Whereby our life and ſeruice all,
               our looue and labour thou haſt wunne.
               Euen this I ſay, moſt ſwéetlie dooth,
               our déepe deuotion drawe to thée:
               It dooth increaſe my looue much more,
               then all which elſe, thou gaueſt to mée.
               We in this worke were reconcilde,
               thy bitter panges did purchaſe grace:
               Thy ſore oppreſſion made vs pure,
               thy care our comfort in like caſe.
               The vniuerſall Creatour,
               was ſo oppreſt with woe and paine:
               The workmanſhip of all the world,
               dyd not to him like toyle containe.
               When he at firſt, the world did frame,
               he ſpake the word, and it was made:
               He did commaund, all creatures ſtraight, Pſalm
               
               created were, euen as he bade.
               For reſtoration of mankinde,
               the ſorrowes which he ſuffred were:
               
                  
In all reſpectes moſt meruailous,
               and manifolde, as dooth appéere.
               Beholde therefore, he looued vs well,
               not hauing néede, did not diſdaine:
               On this behalfe, but for our ſinnes,
               he ſuffered this mortall paine.
               I therefore truely héere may ſay,
               all benefites before expreſt:
               Which he in bountie did beſtowe,
               this one excelleth all the reſt.
               A man that to his fréend dooth giue,
               his worldlie goodes deſerueth prayſe:
               But he which for his fréend will die,
               ſhalbe remembred many dayes. 
                     
                        ••
                     amon 
                        ••
                     thias.
               
               It is an argument of looue,
               and fewe or none, there be of thoſe:
               That will as our redéemer did,
               die for his freends, and for his foes.
               For ſo we were, yet would he die
               the death, and to be interd in graue:
               That we might reconciled bée,
               to God, thereby our ſoules to ſaue.
               A man will hardlie die, ſayth Paule,
               
               for him that iuſt and righteous is: 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 5.
               
               Our Sauiour for the wicked ſort,
               (did die) and ſuch as liued amis.
               That blameleſſe he might vs preſent,
               before his heauenlie father déere:
               
                  
We béeing baniſht and exilde:
               within his kingdome might appéere.
               O howe vnſpeakeable therefore,
               was this his looue and charitie:
               What tongue is able to expreſſe,
               the comfort of this courteſie.
               That God for man, ſhould man become,
               in humaine fleſhe for man to die:
               And to be tempted in all thinges,
               that toucheth mans infirmitie.
               In him was onely ſinne except,
               whereby beholde, it dooth appeare:
               Howe great a raunſome he did pay,
               before from ſinne thou could be cleare.
               Thou vnto Sathan thralled was,
               (as his) condemnde by ſentence due:
               Eternall death thou hadſt deſerude,
               before he did thy ſtate renue.
               Nor this may not be hidden now,
               that if this raunſome had not béene:
               The Diuell and his Angelles had,
               the ende of all thy labours ſéene.
               And all this trueth I haue thée tolde,
               that thou thereby might vnderſtand:
               How much vnto thy God art bound,
               that wrought thy wealth wt mighty hād.
               And that thou mayſt with all thy might,
               with all thy feruent power abide:
               
                  
Such gréefe and ſorrowe for his ſake,
               as tyme may to thy ſtate prouide. 4.
               
               By many tribulations wée,
               vnto his kingdome muſt attaine:
               Moſt happy to poſſeſſe the ſame,
               with that our loouing Lord to raigne.
               O Lord, now let my ſoule embrace,
               thy bleſſed body crucified:
               And let me drinke, one draught ſo ſwéete,
               of thy moſt precious blood beſide.
               By déepe imprinting of the ſame,
               thy Paſſion in my memorie:
               This Sacrifice moſt ſwéete, by which
               my ſoule ſhall liue eternallie. 
               Yea, let this pure remembraunce,
               into my heart, and minde ſo frame:
               That no obliuion, wealth; nor want,
               be able to obſcure the ſame.
               But giue me grace, that with Saint Paule,
               
               my iudgement may, like his be tride:
               That nothing in this world I knowe, 2.
               
               but Chriſte my ſauiour crucified.
               So that vaine error take no place,
               nor ſuffred be my minde to drawe:
               From this the ſoundneſſe of my faith,
               in which the grace of God dooth growe.
               And finallie, let all this looue,
               beſtowed on me, this tytle claime:
               
                  
Euen all my looue, my hope and faith,
               and what good giftes in me remaine.
               So that deſire of worldly wealth,
               haue not the power to ſwallowe mée:
               For this I knowe, whoſe heart and minde,
               thou filleſt with the looue of thée.
               Can neither frighted be with feare,
               nor yet defilde with filthy luſt:
               Nor torne with wrath, aduanſt with pride,
               nor in vaine Treaſure puts his truſt.
               Vnbowled with ambicion, nor
               ſtirde vp, vile madneſſe to commit:
               Not ſhruncken vp with couetiſe,
               nor dooth conſumde in ſadneſſe ſit.
               Nor enuie hath not worne away,
               nor yet corrupt with other vice:
               Whilſt in the ſweetneſſe of the Lord,
               it reſteth in this Parradiſe.
               He therefore in this world that can,
               good thinges vnto his ſeruaunt giue:
               What thinke you God reſerues for ſuch,
               as laſtingly with him ſhall liue?
               The thinges that preſent he beſtowes,
               as giftes we tearme them temporall:
               Thinges promiſed in the life to come,
               we doo eſtéeme them eternall.
               Much better they, then are the firſt,
               they gotten are with trauaile great:
               
                  
And quicklie are they waſted, for
               the which we long our braines did beate.
               When ſureſt we ſéeme them to enioy, 4
               
               Lord what a care tis them to kéepe:
               What greefe to loſe, that paine procures,
               with ſorrowe we for them doo wéepe.
               The ritches of the world to come,
               are neuer loſt, they not decreaſe:
               But alwayes are poſſeſt with ioy,
               with quiet reſt, and endleſſe peace.
               Theſe thinges are euer longed for,
               they hated, nor once lothed be:
               And who theſe ritches hath obtainde,
               a happy man no doubt is he.
               Which ſhall not loſe theſe benefites,
               that earneſt was them to deſire:
               He neuer them againe forgoes,
               that thus in faith he did require.
            
            FINIS. 16. Cap.
         
         
            ¶ Of the benefite of God his promiſes. 2 17. Cap.
            
            
               RIght highlie therefore is our God,
               in theſe his promiſes ſo pure:
               
                  
For to belooude who hath vs hight,
               that greater thinges he will procure.
               For he hath promiſt reſt from paine,
               from thraldome liberty to giue:
               Securitie, that we from feare
               and ſorrowe, ſhall in ſafety liue.
               And reſurrection from the dead,
               and after that our bodies are.
               Rayſde vp againe to perfect bliſſe,
               which without ende he did prepare:
               And finallie, his promiſe paſt,
               of it we may our ſelues perſwade:
               That he would giue him ſelfe for vs,
               this othe he to our Fathers made.
               Great are the promiſes of God, Luke.
               
               he wyll of vs be looude for theſe:
               And in this ſort it dooth behoue,
               that we the Lord our God doo pleaſe.
               But if thou wilt deſire to knowe,
               in what ſort it behoueth vs:
               To looue thy God euen vehementlie,
               with déepe deſire, I aunſwere thus.
               We craue his promiſe to performe,
               in this our looue required is:
               And duetie-dooth vs ſo perſwade,
               Let vs not then our dueties miſſe.
               How euer we deſire the ſame,
               his gracious promiſe, truely we,
               
                  
So often not, deſyre the ſame,
               as it deſired ought to be.
               And he that profiteth in looue,
               let him inſue the ſame therfore:
               Haue care that looue may ſtyll increaſe,
               that thou mayſt looue thy God the more.
               The earneſt longing after God,
               it hath no meane in ſome reſpect:
               For who that thinkes it dooth excéede,
               dooth of his duetie much neglect.
               And where as in all other things,
               Impatiencie is euer blamde:
               But vſe it to this ende, and it
               thy commendations great hath framde.
               Gods promiſes for to expect,
               that is to haue, and him poſſeſſe:
               The more he dooth his prayſe commend,
               and he commended is no leſſe.
               The more a man our God dooth looue,
               the more he after him dooth haſte:
               Impatientlie vexe and torment,
               tyll he with him his ſoule hath plaſte.
               Theſe precious Iuelles in this world,
               are promiſed, had and enioyde:
               Euen in the heauenlie Pallace, when
               this earthlie manſion is deſtroyde.
               And therfore of that good, which is
               chéefe of all goodneſſe, what it is:
               
                  
And howe it is, ſhalbe declarde,
               the Chapter ſhowes, which foloweth this.
            
            FINIS. 17. Cap.
         
         
            ¶ Of the conſideration of the Deitie, and ioyes of Heauen. 18. Cap.
            
            
               LEt vs therefore our mindes aduance,
               ſo farre as God aſſiſtes the ſame:
               Our vnderſtanding eke prepare,
               that we our iudgements rightly frame,
               How great the pleaſures they poſſeſſe,
               and ioye vnto the choſen there:
               Prepared for the Lordes elect,
               that in his Pallace doo appeare.
               Which is to ſay, not onely high,
               but ſoueraigne good, both Life and Light:
               Eternitie, and Wiſedome great,
               and bliſfull Beautie ſhining bright.
               But yet in Nature, onelie one,
               moſt excellent, moſt good, moſt hie:
               Suffiſing all thinges to it ſelfe,
               not wanting any ones ſupplie.
               
                  
This good is God, the Father great,
               his woorde likewiſe, his onely ſonne:
               This is that one and common looue,
               which we haue in the Father wonne.
               Namelie, that bleſſed ſpirite of lyfe,
               the Father and the Sonne in déede:
               By equall porcions this from bothe,
               in grace dooth iſſue and procéede.
               That which in euerie one of theſe, 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      per
                     
                        •
                     one
               
               we doo diſtinct in perſons three:
               
                  The Father, Sonne, and holie Ghoſt,
               
               one onely God in Trinitie.
               The ſoueraigne vnitie of theſe,
               the Dietie of God declares: 10.
               
               Not altred, multiplied, increaſt,
               but muſt conſiſt in equall ſhares.
               This onely one thing néedefull is,
               with all in one, and one in all:
               Which onelie good is in it ſelfe,
               and we this onely good doo call.
               If euerie ſeuerall good be good,
               that héere amongſt vs dooth remaine:
               How pleaſaunt is that good, which dooth▪
               
               all goodneſſe in it ſelfe containe?
               Not ſuch as we in creatures finde,
               but ſuch as the Creator is:
               Moſt excellent aboue them all,
               no difference is lyke to this.
               
                  
For lyfe was firſt created good,
               how good is then that lyfe, which did
               Create the ſame before it was,
               it in obſcuritie was hid?
               If health be good, which we enioye,
               howe good is that which gaue the ſame?
               If Wiſedome amiable be,
               how faire is yt which wrought the frame.
               If our delightes ſo diuers be,
               and pleaſures paſſing manifolde:
               How delectable, he that dooth,
               the ſum of all our Pleaſures holde?
               How happy is that Soule which may,
               euen all this good at pleaſure haue?
               What ſhall he miſſe or want, that hath
               more in this good, then he can craue?
               What lackes he not, that lacketh this?
               for he that hath, hath all in déede:
               That eyther body or the ſoule,
               at any time doo hap to néede.
               And that ſo paſſing excellent:
               as the eye of man hath neuer ſéene:
               Nor eare hath heard, nor yet conceyue,
               within the heart of man hath béene. 1. C
                        ••
                     
                  
               
               Why wander we and range about,
               and through ſo many things doo trace:
               For ſoule and body goodes to get,
               which reſteth in, this onely grace?
               
                  
Let vs this our God rather looue,
               in whome is all the goodes that is:
               And that ſhalbe inough for vs,
               we ſure ſufficient ſhall not miſſe.
               We ſhall no further néede to ſéeke,
               but for to take that ſimple good:
               (Simple) is onelie ſelfe to be,
               and ſo of vs is vnderſtoode.
               What dooſt thou then deſire my ſoule?
               what is it that my minde dooth mooue?
               Within this good is all contriu'de,
               that comes from God the Lord aboue.
               To ſpeake therefore of all the goodes,
               his heauenly kingdome dooth containe:
               No man that's cloathed in his fleſhe,
               the ſame is able to explaine.
               All Fame, that kingdome dooth excell,
               ſurmounteth cunning, prayſe and ſkill:
               It royall is, and glorious eke,
               according to Gods holie will.
               Tis full of lyght, of charitie,
               of patience, and of endleſſe peace:
               Of worſhip, glorie, and renowne,
               all pleaſures there, doo ſtyll increaſe.
               Delight, and euerlaſting ioye,
               perpetuall eke in bliſfulneſſe:
               Repleniſhed with all the good,
               that heart can thinke, or tongue expreſſe.
               
                  
It can not comprehended be,
               nor meaſured by the wit of man:
               Why ſhould our ſilence this conceale,
               but yéelde it all the prayſe we can?
               Becauſe we can not as we would,
               God is vnſpeakeable we knowe:
               And ſo beléeue, and ſhould we not,
               abroade his power and mercie ſhowe?
               Should we not euerlaſting life,
               which. God to vs by promiſe plight:
               None otherwiſe beléeue, but as
               we finde it written to our ſight?
               His promiſe made to vs is ſealde,
               of laſting looue in greater ſort:
               Then eyther can the tongue declare,
               or elſe the Pen for trueth report.
               The heart much more can comprehend,
               it is of more capacitie:
               And yet it can not ſound the depth,
               of his great power and Maieſtie.
               The ioyes and glorie of the life,
               (to come) therefore beléeue we muſt:
               For euerlaſting in it ſelfe,
               it is, and ſo ſhould be diſcuſt.
               It euerlaſting, happy is,
               and dooth containe tranquilitie:
               All pleaſauntneſſe moſt peaceable,
               and our aſſurde ſecuritie.
               
                  
This perfect looue, no dread, no feare,
               no want of day, no doubt of night:
               But chéerefull motions, and one ſprite,
               amongſt vs all, euen in the ſight
               Of God there to abyde in ioye,
               among his Saintes, and Angelles all:
               Bright ſhining in the righteouſneſſe
               of Chriſt, which hath redéemde our thrall.
               Euen where ſaluation dooth abound:
               where truth dooth raigne, where no deceit
               Is vſed, betwixt man and man,
               where is no meaſure falſe nor weight.
               No happy man can thence be caſt,
               nor may from thence exiled bée:
               No wicked wretch, may there be plaſt,
               nor once aduaunſt to that degrée.
               There is the life contemplatiue,
               which fruitfull Faith, who dooth attaine:
               Shall like the bliſfull ſpirites be made,
               with God in kingdome his to raigne.
               For what they haue beléeued héere,
               there ſhall they it beholde and ſée:
               The ſubſtaunce of theyr Creator,
               in whome all good thinges perfect bée.
               With innocent, and humble eyes,
               with harts moſt pure, they ſhall reioyce:
               And triumphe in this happineſſe,
               of which in God they made their choyce.
               
                  
And dooing thus, poſſeſſe the looue,
               of God our euerlaſting Lord:
               In charitie together they,
               with vnitie and ſwéete concord
               Doo liue, and porcion lyke receiue,
               the priuiledge of heauenlie place:
               Like Cittizens enfraunchized,
               they all enioy the God of grace.
               There ſhall ſuch ioy and gladneſſe be,
               ſuch heauenlie ſollace ſhall abound:
               For there the fulneſſe of his grace,
               and mercie of our God is found.
               Vnto the giuer of the ſame,
               inceſſauntlie they ſhall ſing prayſe:
               Without all kinde of irkſomneſſe,
               yéelde lawde and thanks to him alwayes.
               The hearts of euerie creature there,
               ſhall laye abroade and opened bée:
               As héere we corporall thinges beholde,
               and with our eyes the ſame doo ſée.
               Mens conſciences ſo perfect are,
               ſo pure and cleane without all blame:
               That for theyr former fowle offence,
               they néede not nowe to bluſhe for ſhame.
               No ſinne, nor ſinner, ſhall be there,
               of power they are depriude therefore:
               That meanes is taken from all men,
               they ſhall be ſure to ſinne no more.
               
                  
Neither ſhall they, which perfectly
               are bleſt, be ignoraunt of this:
               Of any ſecrete myſterie,
               the ſame to knowe they ſhall not miſſe.
               For they ſhall him beholde, which hath
               the Author of all ſecretes béene:
               And they ſhall ſée him face to face,
               euen ſo as they of him are ſéene.
               For then ſhall all mankinde be made, 12.
               
               ſo abſolute, and perfect pure:
               It thencefoorth neuer ſhalbe chaungd,
               but ſo for euer ſhall endure.
               And of that ſubſtaunce ſhall remaine,
               although tranſformde, and glorifyde:
               Into his mightie maker, and
               in him moſt bleſſedlie abyde.
               And all the goodes which we receyu'de,
               diſfigured by our filthy ſin:
               Shalbe in bliſſe repayrde againe,
               in happy ſtate, and ſtay therein.
               That is, our vnderſtanding ſhall
               without all error perfect be:
               Without obliuion in that place,
               aſſured is our memorie.
               Thoughtes without wandering likewiſe,
               Charitie, voide of fained ſence:
               Health without ſickneſſe, ſorrowe ſhall
               not vnto any bréede offence.
               
                  
Mirth, Pleaſure, Paſtime, without paine,
               Life, without death, Agilitie
               Without impediment is there,
               where ſafetie ſyts in eche degrée.
               For whatſoeuer in this lyfe,
               the violence of Beaſtes, or rage:
               Or what miſfortune did impayre,
               or what thy ſickneſſe did aſſwage.
               What crueltie had waſted, or
               ſome fowle diſeaſe had putrifide:
               Or age, by nature comborſome,
               had thée benumde, or ſtrength denide.
               Shall all againe, be freſhe reſtorde,
               by Reſurrection all renude:
               In glorious ſort we ſhall receyue,
               moſt perfect lymmes: and to conclude,
               Our bodyes with our members all,
               ſhall to our ſoules vnited be:
               And bothe together be endude,
               with grace and immortalitie.
               And therefore whoſoeuer, that
               in bliſfull ſtate poſſeſſed is:
               Shall by no diſtaunce of the place,
               of this his great preferment miſſe.
               No difference of merites may,
               nor meanes of any other kinde:
               
                  
Once ſeperate vs from this looue,
               which in the Lorde we hope to finde.
               This graunt vs for thy mercie ſake,
               through fulneſſe of thy glorie great:
               Our ſinfull ſoules from hence doo take,
               and place them on thy mercie ſeate.
            
            Amen.
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            
            ¶ A verie fruitefull Prayer to God the Father, for the obtayning of theſe benefites, promiſed in this Booke, and neceſſarie to be vſed at all tymes.
            MOſt holie Lord, the God of the ſpirites of all fleſhe, we giue vnto thée moſt humble thankes, for all thy goodneſſe towardes vs, which thou haſt found in thy ſelfe before the beginning of the world, and haſt declared vnto vs from tyme to tyme, acknowledging our ſelues to be farre leſſe, then the leaſt of thy mercies. Thou arte perfect in thy ſelfe, and haſt no néede of any thing: but it hath pleaſed thée to create all theſe thinges, wherein thy glorie dooth appeare as Angelles and men, and all things elſe for them, that them ſelues might know that they are created onelie for thée: not that any thing by them, could be added vnto thée, but that thy glorie which is perfect in it ſelfe, might be ſéene in them, and they alſo be made pertakers of that happineſſe, which is with thée, the which thou haſt giuen vs in thy belooued.

In whome alſo thou haſt choſen vs before all worlds, for ſo thy wiſedome hath apointed it, that we ſhould paſſe through a world and ſo come vnto thée, and ſee thy glory, and the ritches of thy mercie, and that pleaſure which is with thée for euer. And to this ende haſt thou giuen vs thy moſt holie woorde, and thy ſanctifying ſpirite to attend therevpon: wherby thy elect children might be reformed vnto thée. Holy Father, who is able to comprehend this thy great worke of our ſaluation in Ieſus Chriſte: but thine owne wiſedome which is infinite? as thy mercie is, all goodneſſe, mercie and trueth come from thée, and ende in thée: but the euill & corruption which befalleth thy Creatures commeth of them ſelues. Notwithſtanding, this alſo thou turneſt to good, for euen the wicked thou ſuffereſt for a tyme, that at the length thy iuſtice might be ſéene in them: but to thy chyldren thou ordaineſt all thinges to the beſt, for euen the puniſhmentes for theyr ſinnes, and the afflictions of this life, thou haſt appointed for good: that by thy iuſtice, thy mercie might more appeare, and their own happineſſe which thou haſt prepared for them, in more glory might be reuealed. To this ende haſt thou ſet

them from thée for a tyme in this lyfe, that in the lyfe to come they may know the better, what it is to enioy thy preſence. Thou haſt made them héere mortal, that they may then perceyue, what it is to be immortall with thée, thou giueſt them ouer ſome time to their owne ſinne, that they may knowe how much better it is to be holy with thée in thy kingdom: thou makeſt them taſte of the afflictions of this world, that they may féele in them, howe great thy glorie is, and to be happye and bleſſed, with thy euerlaſting goodneſſe. Lord, in thy great power haſt thou created all thinges, and ordereſt them in thy wiſedome, preſerueſt them in thy goodneſſe, and haſt redéemed vs in thy mercie to thy ſelfe, in thy belooued: but thou knoweſt this vaine and corrupte nature, which is fallen from thée, and can not ryſe againe vnto thée, except it be drawne by thée. Doo away our ſinnes, O Lord, and poſſeſſe vs, ſanctifie vs with thy holy ſpirit, that we may walke before thée, as becommeth thy chyldren, and knowe and féele in déede, that there is no pleaſure nor comfort of it ſelfe, in theſe thinges which are mortall of them ſelues, but onely in thée the euerlaſting goodneſſe in all thinges elſe, in

thée and for thée. Increaſe our faith, that we may walke before thée in obedience of faith: giue vs alſo thoſe things which thou knoweſt good and expedient for vs, in this mortall life: that wée may vſe them to thy glorie, and to the comfort of our ſelues and others, whome thou haſt commaunded vs to looue in thée, that thou béeing our lyfe, in this life, and in the life to come, we may enioy the preſence of thy Maieſtie, and glorifie thy holie name for euer, among thy elect people, and bleſſed Angelles.
            Amen.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               ❧ 
               Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop without Newgate, ouer againſt Saint Sepulchers Church.
         
      
   