
      
         
            
            
            S. AVGVSTINES MANVEL. Conteining ſpecial, and piked meditations, and godlie praiers: Drawne out of the Word of God, and writings of the holie Fathers, for the exerciſe of the ſoule. Corrected, tranſlated, and adorned, by THOMAS ROGERS.
            1. Theſ. 5.17.
            PRAIE CONTINVALIE.
            ¶Imprinted at London by Henrie Denham, dwelling in Pater noster rowe, at the ſigne of the Starre.
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            1581.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ A Preface vnto the Reader.
            
               THis Manuel ſo liked me, and the wel accepting of other bookes whiche I haue publiſhed to the ſame purpoſe, ſo pricked me forward, that I thought it requiſite to ſet foorth the ſame in ſuch order as I haue done.
            The rather I tooke this in hand before anie other in the workes of S. Auguſtine, becauſe this commonlie hath bene annexed in our Engliſh tong vnto thoſe of S. Auguſtine, which alreadie I haue tranſlated; and therefore that, as hetherto they haue ben ioined together, ſo hencefoorth they may be, if it ſo like the owners, I thought good to do this afore anie other. Againe, who ſo wil dulie compare this with the other, eſpecialie with S. Auguſtines praiers, ſhal find this to be euen an abſtract in a maner of the reſt, containing ſpecial and piked meditations in few words,

which in other bookes be more at large. Finalie, had this booke neither ben ioined, nor yet had ſuch affinitie with the other of S. Auguſtine alreadie in Engliſh: yet, ſo ſingularlie diuine are the praiers compriſed in the ſame, that wel I could not publiſh anie other, before this were finiſhed.
            
               1 This Booke why called a Manuel.
               I do cal this booke, as alſo the author doth, a Manuel, becauſe my wiſh is, that Chriſtians would vſe, and haue it in their hands, not onlie when they are at home in their chambers, and ſtudies priuatelie, but alſo when they are abroade in the fields, gardens, and elſe-where idlelie: and that not to dandle, and to handle onlie, but diligentlie, and zealouſlie, as the part of Chriſtians is, to reade the ſame for their ſpiritual exerciſe.
            
               2 Author of this Booke, who.
               Touching the Author, who hee was, I dare not directlie ſet downe. For in ſome copies I finde, that S. Auguſtine made the ſame, in others it is flatlie denied. Therefore, although it be entituled S. Auguſtines Manuel: yet is it in none other ſenſe applied vnto him, than are diuers Pſalmes

in the Pſalter, entituled Dauid his Pſalmes, which happelie Dauid neuer ſawe, much leſſe endited. Notwithſtanding, were S. Auguſtine the Author of the ſame, or were he not, it skilleth not greatlie. For the matter it conteineth, is verie ſpiritual, godlie, and neceſſarie: and wiſe men either do not reſpect the Author, or not the Author ſo much as the matter; nor ſo much who writeth, as what is ſet downe.
            The Argument of this booke is doubtles verie good,3 The Argument of this Booke.
                either holie meditations, or praiers: the one whereof, which is meditation (as Bernard noteth 
                  D. Bern. in die S. Andreae ſerm. 1.,) teacheth vs what is wanting, the other, to wit, praier, obteineth that which wee want; Praier bringeth vnto the ende of our iournie, meditation ſheweth the waie; to conclude, by meditation wee confeſſe the dangers hanging ouer our heads, and by praier wee eſcape them, through the grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, Of theſe this whole booke doth conſiſt.
            The occaſion of making this treatiſe was this.4 The occaſion why this Booke was made.
                The Author conſidering

the frailtie of al men in general, and eſpecialie his owne weakenes in particular; and ſeeking ſome prop to ſtaie himſelfe from falling, found none ſo ſure à ſtaie againſt the engins of Satan and his limmes, as continual meditation, and praier. And therefore out of the meditations and praiers of the fathers (for ſo he ſaith) he gathered this booke, as à pretious iewel alwaie to be carried about him, both to keepe him from ſecuritie, and to enflame the zeale of godlines within him when he waxed colde.
            
               5 Methode of this Booke.
               The methode (for that is another circumſtance to be noted in anie booke) is verie exquiſite: for neuer did Goldſmith more cunninglie diſpoſe either pretious ſtones in à iewel, or linkes in à golden chaine, than are both the meditations in this Manuel, and the ſentences in each meditation, and each phraze wel-nigh in euerie ſentence.
            
               6 Vſe of this Booke.
               Laſt of al, how neceſſarie this, and ſuch like bookes are for this preſent time, he wil confeſſe that calleth into remembrance the

great and general corruption of al mankinde; and waieth by what ſleightes and ſubtelties both the Diuel ſeeketh to deuoure, the fleſh to entangle, and the world to drawe vs headlong vnto perdition: which to auoide, we haue none other remedie, beſide earneſt, godlie, and continual praier. This made both our Sauiour to commaund vs to Watch and praie 
               Mark. 13, verſe. 33.; and S. Paule to bid vs, Praie continualie 
               1. Theſ. 5. verſe. 17.; and Cyril to breake into theſe words 
                  Cyril, praefat. Catech.
               , Bee thou ydle neither in the daie time, nor in the night; and when ſleepe is gone from thine eies, euen then let thy minde bee occupied in praier. Hetherto agreeth that of Hierome 
                  Hierome in Epiſt.
               , When you go abroade, praie; when you returne home, praie; before meate, praie; and before you go to reſt, praie. The reaſon Auguſtine doth yeeld. For praier is, as à ſacrifice vnto God: ſo à ſcourge vnto Satan 
               
                  Auguſt. in ſerm.
               . 
                  Auguſt. in ſerm.
               . Vſe therefore that which God delighteth in, but neuer do that which liketh Satan, that is, neglect not praier.
            One Chapter you ſhal find in this booke, leſſe than is in the Latine

copie: and yet moe by two, than hetherto hath bene in Engliſh. The addition, I doubt not, wil like you, but the omiſſion of a Chapter ſome perhaps wil miſlike, which notwithſtanding was done, neither of negligence vnwittinglie, nor heddilie of preſumption, but with good aduiſement, that thy zeale might not be cooled by the reading thereof. For it containeth ſtrange, that I ſaie not erroneous doctrine: as that Vnicuique 
               
                  Manuel cap. 25. 
               propria voluntas est cauſa ſuae damnationis vel ſaluationis; that, Bona voluntas Deum ad nos deducit, & nos in eum dirigit; that, Per bonam voluntatem Deum diligimus, Deum eligimus, ad Deum currimus, ad Deum peruenimus, & eum poſſidemus, &c. which ſentences being contrarie vnto the truth, and ſauoring of a ſuperſtitious time, were better quite omitted, than tranſlated to the infecting of ſome,
                  Manuel cap. 11. or offence of anie.
            Againe, another Chapter there is, though not cleane left out, yet applied from an il, vnto a good purpoſe, as the eleuenth Chapter, where that which was ſpoken either of the ſacrifice of the altar, is

applied vnto our Sacrament of thankeſgiuing, or of the real and carnal preſence of Chriſt, vnto his ſpiritual being at the Communion. And theſe are the things corrected in this booke.
            To conclude, whatſoeuer is done either in tranſlating, correcting, quoting, or publiſhing this booke, is al done for thy edification, and to prouoke thee vnto this godlie exerciſe of praier. For a better meanes thou haſt not to keepe thy ſelfe in the feare of God than it is. Therefore the more zealous, godlie, and learned bookes to this purpoſe are publiſhed, the more thou haſt to praiſe God, and be thankeful.
            
               
                  
                     The 15. of Iulie, Anno. 1581.
               
               Yours in Christ, THO. ROGERS.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Authors Preface.
            
               FOr ſo much as we are placed among manifold ſnares, our deſire of heauenlie things ſoone vvaxeth cold, & therefore vve do ſtand continualie in neede of help, that ſo often as vve ſlip aſide, vve may, beeing vvakened out of ſecuritie, run backe vnto our God, vvho is the true, and the ſoueraigne happines.
            
               Jn cōſideratiō vvherof, not of raſh preſumption, but through the great loue J beare vnto my God, J haue taken in hand this treatiſe for the aduancement of his glorie, to the ende J might alvvaies haue about me à ſhort abridgement of ſuch things as concerne my God, collected out of the moſt piked ſentēces of the holie fathers, that ſo often as J vvaxe colde, J might be enflamed againe with

an hote burning deſire of him, through the fire vvhich the reading thereof shuld miniſter.
            Novv, O my GOD, whom J do ſeke, whom J do loue, & vvhom both vvith hart, and vvith mouth, and vvith al my ſtrength, J both glorifie and vvorship, aſſiſt me.
            Truelie, my minde conſecrated to thy ſeruice, inflamed vvith thy loue, coueting, ſighing, deſiring onlie to ſet thee, hath none other

delight, but to talke of thee, to heare of thee, to vvright of thee, to confer of thee, to meditate oftentimes of thy fame, and glorious eſtate, that thy ſvveete remēbrance may be ſome refreshing for my ſoule amidſt the raging ſtormes of this vvretched vvorld.
            Vnto thee therefore do J cal moſt earneſtlie, vnto thee do J crie alovvd from the bottome of mine hart.
            And vvhē J cal vnto

thee, J cal vnto thee in my ſelfe: for vnleſse thou wert within me, J ſhuld not be at al; and were J not in thee, thou ſhouldeſt not be vvithin me.
            Thou art in mee, becauſe thou remaineſt in my memorie, through it J haue knovvne thee, and therein J find thee, vvhen J doe remember thee, and take delight both in thee, & of thee, of vvhome, through vvhom, and in vvhome are al things.
         
      
      
         
            A godlie Booke, conteining ſpecial, and piked meditations, and praiers.
         
            Chap. 1. Of the wonderful eſsence, or being which God hath.
            
               O Lord, thou filleſt heauen and earth Iere. 23, verſe. 24.: bearing vp all things Heb. 1, 3., and yet not burthened; filling al things Eccle. 23, verſe. 18.19., and yet not included; alwaies working Ioh. 5, 17., and yet euer quiet; gathering, and yet lacking naught Pſal. 50, 8.9, &c.; ſeking Luk. 15, 4.5, &c., and yet wanting naught;
            Thou loueſt entirelie Wiſ. 11, 23. Iohn. 3, 16. Iohn. 13, 1., yet thou burneſt not; thou art gelous,Exo. 20, 5.
               
and yet ſecure:
            Thou repenteſt Ier. 26, 3., and art not greeued; thou art angrie Pſal. 79, 5., but neuer impatient;
            Thou changeſt thy works Wiſ. 7, 27., but not thy counſel Mal. 3, 6.: Thou receaueſt what thou findeſt, and yet neuer didſt loſe the ſame:
            Thou art neuer needie Pſal. 50, 8.9.10, &c., and yet glad when thou gaineſt; at no time couetous, and yet exacteſt vſurie:
            Thou art bountiful, to whom thou oweſt nought; and manie are bountiful, to binde thee vnto them: Yet who hath aught which is not thine 1. Cor. 7, verſe. 4. Iam. 1, 17.?
            Thou paieſt debts 1. Pet. 2, verſe. 24. Iſai. 53, 5.6, &c., owing naught; thou forgiueſt debts Matth. 18, verſe. 23.27, &c. 35. and yet forgoeſt naught:
            Thou art euerie-where Iob. 23, 8.9. and euerie-where al whole:
            Thou maiſt be vnderſtood,

but not ſeene Ioh. 1, 18. 1. Tim. 6, 16.; and art no where abſent Eccleſ. 23, verſe. 18.19., yet far thou art from the cogitations of the wicked Prou. 15, verſe. 29.:
            Yet art thou not abſent there, where thou art far off; For where thou art not to ſhew fauour, thou art to execute vengeance:
            Thou art euerie-where preſent Eccl. 23, verſe. 18.19.; and yet maiſt hardlie be founde:
            Thou ſtandeſt ſtil when we followe thee; yet can we not lay hold vpon thee:
            Thou poſſeſſeſt al things Pſa. 50, 8.9, &c.; filleſt al things Ier. 23, 24.; enuironeſt al things Ier. 32, 18.19.; ouerpaſſeſt al things Pſa. 139, 7.8; and beareſt vp al things Heb. 1, 3..
            Thou teacheſt the harts of the faithful Iſa. 54, 13. Iohn. 6, 44.45., without noiſe of words:
            Thou art neither ſtroughted out by places Eccl. 16, 18 19.; nor changed

by time Pſa. 102, 24.25, &c.; nor haſt acceſſe and receſſe:
            Thou dwelleſt in the light that none can attaine vnto 1. Tim. 6, verſe. 16., whome neuer man ſaw, neither can ſee:
            Abiding quiet in thy ſelfe, thou goeſt euerie-where about the whole world:
            For thou canſt not be cut, and deuided, becauſe thou trulie art one Deut. 6, 4. 2. Kings. 19, verſe. 15.19.; nor yet be brought into partes: but being whole, thou poſſeſſeſt, filleſt, lighteneſt, and enioieſt the whole.
         
         
            Chap. 2. Of God his vnſpeakeable knowledge.
            
               WEre ye whole world repleniſhed with Bookes: yet could not thine vnſpeakeable knowledge be vttered

foorth. For, becauſe thou art in deede vnutterable, thou canſt by no meanes be either written, or concluded.
            Thou art the fountaine of heauenlie light; & the Sunne of eternal brightnes.
            Thou art great without quantitie, and therefore vnmeaſurable Iob. 23, 8.9. Pſal. 139, 7.8.; and good without qualitie, and therefore in deede & ſoueraignelie good Iam. 1, 17.: yea, to ſaie the truth, there is none good, but thou alone Mar. 10, verſe. 18. Luk. 18, 18.: whoſe wil is à worke, and whoſe wil is habilitie:
            Who, euen becauſe it was thy pleaſure, dideſt make al things, which thou haſt created of nothing Gen. 1, 1.2. Heb. 1, 1.2.:
            Who poſſeſſeſt al the creatures Pſal. 50, 8.9.10, &c. without anie lacke; and gouerneſt them Iohn. 5, 17., without paine; and ruleſt them Matth. 11, verſe. 25. Luk. 10, 21. without wearines; for there is nothing,

either of things on high, or of things belowe, that can diſturbe the order of thy gouernement:
            Who art in al places without anie place; and containeſt al things without incloſure; and art preſent euerie-where Ier. 32, 19. without ſeate or motion:
            Who neither art the author of ſinne Eccleſ. 15, verſe. 20., which thing onlie thou canſt not doo Pſal. 11, 5.6.7., who canſt doo al things Exod. 6, 3. Gen. 35, 11.; neithe
                  •
                haſt thou bin ſorie for aught thou haſt done:
            Of whoſe goodnes we were created Gen. 1, 26.27. Pſal. 100, 3. Pſal. 119, 73.; of whoſe iuſtice we are puniſhed Dan. 9, 4.5.6, &c.; of whoſe mercie we are ſaued Gal. 3, 13. 1. Tim. 2, 6. Pſal. 103, 1.2.3.4, &c.;
            Whoſe almightines doth gouerne, rule, and fil al things Ier. 23, 24., which it hath created:
            Neither in ſaieng, thou filleſt al things, meane we that they conteine thee; but how

they rather be conteined of thee, neither by partes filleſt thou al things, nor yet may it be thought, that euerie thing according to the greatnes of the quantitie it hath, receaueth thee, that is, the greateſt thing more, and the ſmalleſt thing leſſe; thou rather being in al things, or more trulie al things in thee Act. 17, 28.:
            Whoſe omnipotencie encloſeth al things;Pſa. 139, 7.8, &c. whoſe power none may eſcape.
            For whoſoeuer hath not thy fauor, can by no meanes auoide thy diſpleaſure Reu. 6, 15.16.17..
         
         
            Chap. 3. The deſire of that ſoule which hath a feeling of God.
            
               FOR thee then I doe cal into my ſoule, ô moſt gratious God, which

thou prepareſt to receaue thee through the deſire which thou enſpireſt into the ſame.
            Oh, enter thereinto, I beſeech thee, ioine it to thy ſelfe, that both thou maiſt poſſeſſe that which thou haſt not onlie made Gen. 1, 26.27. Coloſ. 3, 10., but alſo renewedRom. 5, 15 16, &c.; & I may enioie the
                  •
                as à ſeale vpon mine hart.
            Merciful God, I beſeec
                  •
                thee, forſake him not whic
                  •
                calleth vpon thee now: fo
                  •
                before euer I could cal vpon thee, thou dideſt not cal m
                  •
                onlie Rom. 8, 30, but alſo ſeeke me Luk. 15, 4.5, &c., t
                  •
                the end that I thy ſeruan
                  •
                might ſeeke thee, & throug
                  •
                ſeeking finde thee, and bein
                  •
                found, loue thee.
            I haue ſought, and I hau
                  •
                found thee, ô Lord, graun
                  •
                that I may loue thee.
            Increaſe my deſire, & gra
                  •••
                my requeſt: for though tho
                  •
               
               
giue me al things which thou haſt made, yet vnles thou giue thy ſelfe withal, I thy ſeruant ſhal neuer be ſatisfied.
            Wherefore beſtowe thy ſelfe vpon me, ô my God, beſtowe thy ſelfe vpon me.
            Lo, I do loue thee; and if too little I loue thee, my deſire is to loue yet more entirelie.
            I loue thee I ſaie, I long for thee, I am much delighted to thinke vpon thee.
            Behold, while fro mine hart I do ſigh, and cal into my remembrance thine vnſpeakeable kindnes, ye burthen of my fleſh ye leſſe greeueth; troubleſome cogitations the leſſe inuade; ye waight of mortalitie, & miſeries do not ſo loade me as they were wont; al things are huſh, euerie thing is quiet. Mine hart burneth; my mind is iocund; my memorie freſh;

mine vnderſtanding cleere; and al my ſpirit, enflamed through the deſire of thy ſight, perceaueth how it is rauiſhed with the loue of things vnſeene.
            Let the ſame my ſpirit take the wings as the Eagles Iſai. 40, 31., let it flee, and not be wearie; let it flee, and neuer faint, vntil it come vnto the place where thine honor dwelleth Pſal. 26, 8., euen vnto the throne of grace▪ there at the table, where ye ſupernal Citizens do repaſt, to be fed frō thine eies in green
                  •
                paſture Pſal. 23, 2., by the ſtil waters.
            Be thou our ioie Reu. 7, 15.16.17., our hope1. Tim. 1, 1. our ſaluation Hoſ. 13, 9., & redēptionIſa. 41, 14. Iſa. 44, 24.
               ▪
            
            Thou which hereafter wil
                  •
                be our reward, be thou ou
                  •
                comfort.
            Let my ſoule euermore ſek
                  •
                thee; and graunt that neue
                  •
                it may ceaſſe to ſeeke, Amen▪
            
         
         
            
            Chap. 4. The miſerable ſtate of that ſoule which neither loueth our Lord and Sauior Chriſt, nor ſeeketh after him.
            
               WO to the wretched ſoule, which neither ſeeketh, nor loueth Chriſt: ſuch à ſoule abideth both drie, & miſerable.
            He looſeth his life time, that loueth not thee, ô God. And he that would liue, but not to ſerue thee, is doubtles nothing, and ſo to be accounted.
            He which refuſeth to liue to thee, is alredie dead: and he that ſauoreth not of heauenlie wiſedome, is à verie foole 1. Cor. 1, 17.18.19, &c..
            O moſt gratious God into thine hand I do commend, render, and yeeld my ſelfe, through whome I both am Gen. 1, 26.27. Pſal. 119, 73., liue Act. 17, 28, and haue vnderſtanding Iam. 1, 17..
            
               In thee I doe repoſe mine whole truſt, confidence, and hope, through whom I ſhal riſe againe Ioh. 11, 25., liue Iohn. 14, 6, and reſt.
            Thee doe I long for, thee doe I loue, thee doe I worſhip, with whome I ſhal euerlaſtinglie abide, raigne, and be bleſſed Reu. 21, 4. Reu. 22, 5..
            The ſoule which neither ſeeketh, nor loueth thee, is à friend of the worldMat. 6, 24. Luk. 16, 13., the ſlaue of ſinne, ſubiect to al maner wickednes; neuer quiet, at no time ſecure.
            Therefore, merciful Sauior, as for my mind let it attend on thee; my pilgrimage let it be toward thee; and mine hart let it euen burne with the loue of thee.
            Let my ſoule reſt on thee, my God; let it, I ſaie, deepelie meditate of thee; let it ſing-out thy praiſes with ioie; & let this be al my comfort in this mine exile.
            Let the ſhadowe of thy wings

be à refuge for my ſoule from the parching heate of worldlie cogitations. Let mine hart, à verie great ſea, ſwelling with waues truſt in thee.
            Thou which aboundeſt with al good dainties, and art a moſt liberal beſtower of ſupernal ſatietie, ô God, giue thou food to the wearied; gather the diſperſed; deliuer the captiued; amend the parted.
            Lo, he ſtandeth at the doore, & knocketh: I therfore euen by the bowels of thy mercie, wherby thou, the daie ſpring from on high hath viſited vsLuk. 1, 78., beſech thee command the doore to be opened to him which knocketh, that boldlie he may enter-in to thee, and reſt in thee, and be refreſhed of thee, the heauenlie bread. For thou art the breadIoh. 6, 35.48.50, &c., and the wel of life Iohn. 4, 13 14.; thou art the light of euerlaſting cleerenesReu. 21, 23; to conclude

thou art al things, whereof the righteous do liue, which loue thee.
         
         
            Chap. 5. A verie Christian deſire of the ſoule after God.
            
               O God, thou who art both the light of the harts Iohn. 1, 9. that ſee thee; and the life of the ſoules Iohn. 4, 13 14. that loue thee; and the ſtrength of the minds that ſeeke thee, giue me grace euermore to cleaue vnto thine holie loue.
            O come, I praie thee, into mine hart, and make me drunke with the riuer of thy pleaſuresPſal. 36, 8..
            It ſhameth, and it irketh me at the very hart euen to ſuffer thoſe things which are done in this wretched world.
            The verie ſight of worldlie vanities

is à griefe vnto me; and to heare of theſe tranſitorie things it doth troble me much.
            Helpe me, ô Lord my God, and cauſe mine hart to reioice in thee; come thou vnto me, that I may behold thee.
            I am penned in this houſe of my ſoule, vntil thou come therinto, and make it wider. It is ruinous, ô repaire the ſame!
            Manie things, I acknowledge and knowe are in it, which may offend thine eies; but alas who can make it cleane; or vnto whom elſe beſide thee ſhould I crie for helpe?
            Clenſe me, ô Lord, fro my ſecret faultes Pſal. 19, 12 13.; keepe thy ſeruant alſo from preſumptuous ſinnes.
            Giue me grace, ô ſweet Chriſt, ô good Ieſu, giue me grace, I beſeech thee, for thy loue & deſire ſake to laie-off the heauie burden

of carnal deſires, and earthlie luſt 
                  
                     •
                  . Ioh. 2, 15.
            Let the ſoule ouer the fleſh; let reaſon ouer the ſoule; let thy grace ouer reaſon beare ſwaie; and make mee both in bodie and ſoule euermore to obey thy wil Matt. 6, 10.
            Grant that both mine hart, and my tongue, and al my ſtrength may extol thy goodnes.
            Enlarge mine vnderſtanding, and lift vp the eies of mine hart, that my ſpirit with ſwift cogitation may attaine vnto thee the euerlaſting wiſedomeHeb. 1, 1.2, &c., abiding aboue al things.
            Loaſe me, I beſeech thee, from the fetters wherewithal I am faſt bound, that leauing al theſe worldlie things, I may haſten vnto thee, cleaue to thee alone, and thinke onelie vpon thee.
         
         
            
            Chap. 6. The happines of that ſoule which is deliuered out of the earthlie priſon of the bodie.
            
               O Happie is the ſoule, which loaſed from ye earthlie priſon Phil. 1, 23., ſoareth without let vnto heauen; which face to face beholdeth thee 1. Cor. 13, verſe. 12. Reue. 22, 4., the moſt gratious Lord; which is touched with no feare of death at al Reu. 7, 15.16., but triumpheth with an incorruptible crowne of perpetual glorie!
            O quiet and ſecure is ſuch à ſoule; and feareth now neither enimie, nor death Reu. 21, 4.!
            She enioieth thee her good Lord, whome long ſhe ſought, and alwaie loued;
            Now ioined to the ſinging quires, ſhe ſoundeth-out without ceſſing vnto the praiſe of thy

glorie, ô Chriſt, her King, ô ſweete Ieſu, moſt melodious Pſalmes ſhe ſingeth of aie laſting ioifulnes.
            For ſhe is ſatisfied with thy fatnes Pſal. 36, 8.; thou doeſt giue her drinke out of the riuer of thy pleaſures.
            Happie is the felowſhip of ſupernal Citizens, and glorious is the ſolemnitie of ſuch as returne vnto thee from the paineful toile of this pilgrimage Heb. 11, 13. Heb. 13, 14., vnto the wonderful beautie, vnto the ſurpaſſing glorie, vnto the excellencie of al comelines, where continualie thy Citizens, ô Lord, behold thy face Reu. 22, 4.. There nothing is heard to troble the minde Reu. 21, 4..
            What mirth Reu. 5, 8.! what melodie! what ſinging! what Pſalmes be there ſoong without ceaſſing!
            There the pleaſant organes do ſounde-out moſt heauenlie

hymnes; the bleſſed Angels moſt ſweetelie do ſing; & ſongs of rare excellencie are vttered out by the ſupernal Citizens, vnto the praiſe and glorie of thy Name.
            There is neither gal, nor anie bitternes in that bleſſed regionReu. 21, 4.. For there is no wicked perſon Reu. 21, verſe. 27., nor anie wickednes at al.
            There is neither enimie to impugne, nor anie enticement to offend.
            There is no lacke1. Cor. 2, verſe. 9., no ſhame, no contention, no vpbraiding, no blaming, no feare, no vnquietnes, no puniſhment; doubtfulnes, violence, diſcord there is none.
            But ſingular peace, and perfect loue, and laſting triumphes, and praiſing of God, and ſecure quietnes, which neuer ſhal haue end, and continual ioie in the holie ſpirit there is.
            
               Oh, how happie ſhould I be, did I heare thoſe moſt comfortable ſongs of thy Citizens, and the ſugred verſes vttering foorth with due reuerence the praiſes of the ſacred Trinitie!
            But moſt ſingularlie bleſſed ſhould I be, might I alſo with them ſing to my Lord Ieſus Chriſt one of the pleaſant ſongs of Zion Pſa. 137, 3.
         
         
            Chap. 7. The bleſſed ioie of the heauenlie Paradiſe.
            
               O Liuelie life! ô euerlaſting life, and euerlaſtinglie bleſſed! whereas ioie is and no ſorowe Reu. 7, 16, 17. Reue. 21, 4.; reſt is and no labour; honor is and no feare; wealth is and no loſſe; health is and no ſicknes; abundance and no want; life and no death; immortalitie and no corruption;

happines, & no miſerie at al is!
            Whereas al good things are in perfect loue; where ſight is face vnto faceReu. 22, 4.; where perfect knowledge is in al men 1. Cor. 13, verſe. 12.13., & al things are knowne; whereas Gods ſoueraigne goodnes is perceaued, and the light enlightening, is glorified of the ſaincts;
            Where the preſent maieſtie of God is beholden, and the minde of the beholders is filled continualie with this meate of life:
            They ſee continualie, and yet they deſire to ſee; they deſire without griefe, and without loathing they be ſatisfied:
            Where the true ſonne of righteouſnes Reue. 21, verſe. 23.24. Reue. 22, 5., with the wonderful ſhow of his beautiful beames, doth refreſh al beholders, and ſo inlighteneth al the Citizens of the celeſtial countrie, that they do giue light, to wit, à light inlightened through God, à light

ſhining more cleerelie, than doth either the Sunne at anie time, or the Starres.
            They do cleaue vnto the immortal God-head, and thereby they become immortal, and vncorruptible, according to the promiſe of our Lord and Sauiour Ioh. 17, 24., Father, I wil that they which thou haſt giuen me, be with me euen where I am, that they may behold my glorie; that they al may be one,21. as thou, ô Father, art in me, and I in thee, euen that they alſo may be one in vs.
         
         
            Chap. 8. The glorious condition of the kingdome of Heauen.
            
               THE kingdome of heauen, is à moſt happie kingdome, à kingdome both immortal Reu. 21, 4., and euerlaſting Dan. 7, 27..
            
               There no times ſucceede by ages; neither night followeth after daie Reu. 21, 4.;
            There the valiant ſoldior after battels fought, is adorned abundantlie with vnſpeakeable rewardes 2. Tim. 4. verſe. 7.8.; and crowned honorablie with an euerlaſting crowne.
            Oh that Chriſt of his diuine goodnes, hauing eaſed me of the heauie loade of my ſinnes, oh that he would bid me, euen the baſeſt of al his ſeruants, to laie off the burthen of this fleſh Phil. 1, 23., that I might to my comfort Reu. 7, 16.17., paſſe ouer vnto the euerlaſting ioies of his citie; be admitted into the felowſhip of the Saincts aboue Reu. 5, 1.2, &c.; attend vpon the maieſtie of the Creator, with the bleſſed Spirits; beholde the countenance of God 1. Cor, 13, verſe. 12.; be neuer touched anie more with feare of death Reu. 21, 4.; but reioice ſecurelie

for the immortalitie attained 1. Cor. 15, verſe. 53.54.; and ioined to him which knoweth al thinges Eccleſ. 23, verſe. 19.20., might forgo al blind ignorance 1. Cor. 13, verſe. 13., and neither make accompt of earthlie things; nor vouchſafe either to behold, or to remember this vale of teares anie more, whereas the laborſome life Iob. 7, 1., the corruptible life Pſa. 102, 11. Pſa. 103, 14.15., the life repleniſhed with al manner bitternes is Iob. 14, 1., ſuch à life as is the Ladie of euils, the handmaid of Diuels.
            The which both humors puffe vp, and ſorowes plucke downe; heate withereth, and il aërs infect; which both much eating maketh purſie, and much faſting maketh leane;
            Which by mirth is looſed, and by ſadnes conſumed; by care is ſhortned, and by ſecuritie dulled; by riches made proud, and by pouertie ouerthrowne; by youth exalted, & by age bowed;
            
               Which is both by ſicknes broken, and by ſadnes depreſſed; which both ye Diuel entrappeth by his ſnares; and the world deceaueth by flatterie; & the fleſh deſtroieth by filthie pleaſure.
            Whereby the ſoule is made blinde, and the whole man diſtempered:
            And after theſe ſo manie, and ſo great euils, ſucceedeth raging death, which bringeth vaine delights vnto ſuch an ende, that when they are once gone, they are as quite forgotten, as if they had neuer bin at al!
         
         
            Chap. 9. How God after much troubles doth comfort the penſiue ſoule.
            
               BVT what praiſes, or what thankes may we render Pſa. 116, 12. vnto thy goodnes, ô GOD,

who ceaſſeſt not for al this by thy gratious viſitation, to comfort vs amids ſo great wretchednes of our mortalitie!
            While I dread much to die; while I conſider the multitude of my ſinnes; while I do feare thy heauie iudgement; while I cal into minde the houre of death; and am a gaſt at the horrible paines of hel; while I wot not how preciſelie, and how ſtrictlie thou wilt waigh my deedes; and am vtterlie ignorant how I ſhal ende my life; and ponder manie other things in mine hart, lo, of thy woonted goodnes, ô Lord my God, thou art preſent to comfort me, wretch, repleniſhed with much ſorowe, and from theſe pitious complaintes and crieng, thou carrieſt my penſiue and troubled vnderſtanding ouer ſteepe hils, vnto the beds of

ſweete ſpices, and makeſt me to reſt in greene paſture Pſa. 23, 2., by the riuers of ſweete waters, where thou prepareſt à table diuerſlie furniſhed againſt my cōming, to refreſh my wearied ſpirites, and to comfort my ſorowful hart, and ſo refreſhed with thoſe dainties, I forget at the length my manifold miſeries, and exalted ouer the earth, I do reſt my ſelfe in thee which art the true peace Phil. 4, 7..
         
         
            Chap. 10. A praier for grace to loue God.
            
               O Lord my God, I do loue thee; and more and more I deſire to loue thee.
            Giue me grace, ô Lord my God Pſal. 7, 1.3., who art fairer than the children of menPſa. 45, 2., giue me grace not onlie to deſire thee, but alſo

to loue thee both as I would, and as I am bound.
            Thou art vnmeaſurable Iob. 23, 8.9. Pſal. 139, 7.8., and therefore to be loued without meaſure, eſpecialie of vs whom thou haſt ſo loued Ioh. 3, 16., ſo ſaued 1. Pet. 2, verſe. 22., for whoſe ſakes thou haſt done ſuch and ſo great things.
            O Loue, which burneſt alwaie, and neuer goeſt out, ô ſweete Chriſt, ô good Ieſu, ô my God who art loue it ſelfe 1. Ioh. 4, 8., ſet mee wholie on fire with thy fire, with the loue of thee, with thy ſweetnes, with hartie affection toward thee, with a deſire of thee, with godlie charitie, with godlie ioie, and reioicing; with godlie kindnes and ſweetenes; with godlie delectation and concupiſcence, the which is holie and good, and chaſt and pure, that being throughlie repleniſhed with the ſweetenes of thy loue, and altogether purged from the

groſſe vapors of earthlie cogitations by the fire of diuine charitie, I may loue thee, moſt ſweet, and moſt louelie Lord, with al mine hart, with al my ſoule, with al my ſtrength, and with al my mindDeut. 6, 5. Matt. 22, 37. Luke. 10, 27., and that with much ſorrowe of hart, and plentiful teares of the eies, with much feare and trembling Phil. 2, 12., hauing thee in ſuch wiſe both in mine hart, and in my mouth, that no ſtrange loues may find roome within me.
         
         
            Chap. 11. A praier for grace both dulie to thanke God for our redemption; and worthilie to approch vnto the holie Table.
            
               O Chriſt my Sauior, who art of al the faireſt Pſa. 45, 2., through the ſhedding of thy pretious blood, wherewithal we be

redeemed 1. Pet. 1, 18.19., I humblie beſeech thee, giue me grace vnfainedlie to repent, & hartilie to bewaile my ſins, eſpecialie at ſuch times when I offer praiers vnto thee, when I ſing-foorth thy praiſes; when I cal into mind the myſterie of our redemption1. Tim. 3, verſe. 16., à manifeſt argument of thy mercie to man ward; when I am at the holie Table, though vnworthie to approch therevnto, deſiring to participate of that wonderful, and heauenlie, and reuerend Sacrament, which thou, ô Lord my God, the vnſpotted Prieſt Heb. 7, 26 27. didſt inſtitute, and command to be receaued Luk. 22, 19 in remembrance of thy loue, to wit of thy death 1. Cor. 11, verſe. 26., and paſſion for our ſaluation, and for the ſtrengthening of our dailie weakenes.
            Let my mind at ſuch myſteries bee confirmed with the ſweetenes of thy ſpiritual preſence;

let it behold thee with the eies of faith, and reioice in thy ſight.
            O ſweete Chriſt, ô good Ieſu, who art both the fire burning alwaies, and the loue inflamed euermore; the euerlaſting and neuer waſting light Reu. 21, 23 24., and the bread of life Ioh. 6, 35.48.51., feeding vs, and yet neuer diminiſhed, and eaten-of dailie, and yet continualie abiding whole;
            Shine thou vpon me, and ſet me on fire, inlighten and ſanctifie me; purge thy veſſel from the dregs of malice, fil me of thy grace, and keepe me ful, that I may eate the meate of thy fleſh vnto the ſaluation of my ſoule, that feeding vpon thee, I may liue of thee, and through thee, I may attaine vnto thee, and reſt in thee, Amen.
         
         
            
            Chap. 12. A zealous praier for grace to meditate deepelie vpon the goodnes of God.
            
               O Sweet loue, & louelie ſweetnes, let my ſtomach digeſt thee; and with the nectar of thy loue be al my bowels filled; & let mine hart vtter-forth good matter Pſal. 45, 
                     •
                  ..
            O my God, who art charitie it ſelfe1. Ioh. 4, 8., the delectable honie, the ſnowie milke, and the foode of ye ſtrong, make me to growe-vp in thee, that thou with à ſound palate maieſt be taſted of mee.
            Thou art my life Ioh. 14, 6. Iohn. 25, 11., whereby I doe liue Act. 17, 28.; the hope wherevnto I truſt 1. Tim. 1, 1.; and the glorie, which I deſire to attaine Col. 3, 4..
            Guide thou mine hart, rule thou my mind, direct mine vnderſtāding, erect my loue, cheere

vp my ſoule, and quench thou the thirſt of my ſpirit, which longeth after thee, with thine heauenlie riuers.
            Let the tumultuous cogitations of the fleſh, hold their peace I beſeech thee; let earthlie, and worldlie phantaſies be ſtil; let al dreames, and vaine reuelations, let euerie tong, euery ſigne, and what elſe ſoeuer doth vaniſh-awaie, be ſilent.
            Yea, let mine owne ſoule alſo be dumme too; and ouer-paſſe it ſelfe, not by thinking on it ſelfe, but vpon thee, my God: becauſe thou art in deed al mine hope and confidence 1. Tim. 1, 1..
            For in thee our moſt gratious, and kind, & merciful Lord, and God, Ieſus Chriſt, ech of vs hath à portiō both of blood & fleſh Eph. 5, 30..
            Therefore where à peece of my ſelfe doth raigne, there I beleeue I doe raigne; where my blood

hath dominion, there I truſt I haue dominion; where my fleſh is glorified, there I knowe I am glorious.
            And although I am yet à ſinner, yet I doubt no whit of this participation of grace; although my ſinnes do hinder me, yet my ſubſtance doth require it; and although mine owne offences doe exclude me, yet the communion of nature doth not repel me.
         
         
            Chap. 13. A thankeſ-giuing vnto God for the incarnation of his deere Sonne to ſaue man.
            
               FOr the Lord is not ſo vnkinde, that he can hate his owne fleſh Eph. 5, 29., his owne members, his owne bowels.
            Surelie I might vtterlie deſpaire, in reſpect of mine outragious

offences, and infinite ſins, which I both haue committed, and dailie doe commit both in hart, word, and deede, and by al meanes whereby the frailtie of man may tranſgreſſe, had not thy word, ô my God, bin made fleſh Iohn. 1, 14., and dwelled among vs.
            But now I dare not deſpaire, becauſe he hauing ſhowen him ſelfe obedient to thee vnto the death, euen the death of the croſſe Phil. 2, 8., hath taken awaie Col. 2, 14. the hand-writing of our ſinnes, and faſtening it vpon the croſſe, hath crucified both ſinne and death.
            In him therefore who ſitteth at thy right hand, and maketh requeſt alſo for vs Rom. 8, 34, I take hart againe.
            Through mine hope 1. Tim. 1, 1., in whom we are quickened Eph. 2, 5.6., and raiſed, and ſit together in the heauenlie places, I deſire to come vnto

thee.
            To thee bee praiſe Reu. 19, 1., to thee glorie, to thee honor, to thee thanks, Amen.
         
         
            Chap. 14. The more God is thought-vpon, the more louelie he ſeemeth.
            
               O Moſt gratious Lord, who haſt ſo louedIohn. 3, 16, and ſaued vs 1. Pet. 1, 18.19.; ſo quickened Eph. 2, 5., and glorified vs Rom. 8, verſe. 30.; ô moſt gratious Lord, how ſweet is thy remembrance! The more I thinke on thee, the ſweeter thou ſeemeſt, and the more amiable in mine eies!
            Therefore thy good things do much delight me; and vnceſſantlie doe I couet, with a pure ſight of the hart Matt. 5, 8., and with the ſweet affection of godlie loue, as far-foorth as I am able in the

place of my pilgrimage, and ſo long as I carie theſe fraile members about me, to deſire, and to thinke-vpon thy woonderful loue, and beautie.
            For I am wounded with the dart of thy loue; I do burne exceedinglie with deſire of thee; I couet long to be with thee Phil. 1, 23.; to behold thee, is al my deſire.
            And therefore I wil ſtand-vpon my gard, and with watchful eies I wil ſing with the ſpirit 1. Cor. 14. verſe. 25., and I wil ſing with the vnderſtanding alſo, and with al my ſtrength too.
            I wil praiſe thee my maker Iob. 10, 8. Pſal. 100, 3., & renewer; I wil perce the heauens with mine hart, and in deſire I wil be with thee, ſo as my bodie onlie ſhal be in this miſerable world, but in thought, and in mind, and in deſire Col. 3, 1.2. I wil be where thou art; and where thou my rich Matth. 13, verſe. 44.45., and incomparable,

and much deſired treaſure art, there ſhal mine hart be alſo Matt. 6, 21. Luke. 12, 34..
            But lo, ô moſt gratious and merciful God, mine hart is not able to conſider the glorie of thine infinite goodnes, and mercie. For thine honor, thy beautie, thy ſtrength, thy glorie, magnificence, maieſtie, and loue, exceede al ſenſe Phil. 4, 7. of mans vnderſtanding; euen as the curteſie of thine eternal loue, wherby thou giueſt to ſuch the adoption of ſonnes Rom. 8, 15 Galat. 4, 5.6., and ioineſt them to thy ſelfe, whom thou haſt createdGen. 1, 26.27., is ineſtimable.
         
         
            Chap. 15. How the trobles in this world are nothing anſwerable to the ioies in heauen.
            
               O My ſoule, were wee euerie daie to endure torments; and to ſuffer the paines

of hel à long ſpace, if we would behold Chriſt in his glorie, and be ioined to his ſaints; were it not meete that we ſuffered al kind of aduerſitie Rom. 8, 18, to attaine vnto the participation of ſuch felicitie, and of ſo great glorie!
            Let the diuels then lie in wait, and prepare their tentations; let faſtings breake the bodie; let hard apparel bring-downe the fleſh; let labors grieue; watchings drie-vp; let this man crie out vpon me; let him or them diſquiet me; let cold benum; the conſcience murmur; heate parch me;
            Let mine head ake, my breaſt burne, my ſtomach ſwel, my countenance become pale, let euerie part of me be weakened.
            Let my life waſte in heauinesPſal. 31, 10., and my yeeres with mourning;
            Let rottennes enter-into my

bones Hab. 3, 16., and let me tremble in my ſelfe, ſo I may reſt in the day of troble, and aſcend-vp vnto the ſaints of God.
            For how ſingular ſhal the glorie of the righteous be 1. Cor. 2, 9! how great the ioie of al the ſancts, when each of their faces ſhal ſhine as the Sunne Matth. 13, verſe. 43.! when the Lord ſhal begin to ſort his people into ſundrie degrees in the kingdome of his Father; and according to each mans deſerts and works Rom. 2, 6. Reu. 22, 12., as he hath promiſed, render his rewards, euen celeſtial for earthlie Matth. 25, verſe. 34.35, &c., eternal for tranſitorie, and great things for verie trifles!
            Doubtles there ſhal be ſtore of happines, when the Lord ſhal bring his ſancts to the contemplation of his fathers glorie 1. Cor. 13, verſe. 12. Reu. 22, 4., and make them to ſit together in heauenlie places Eph. 2, 6., that God may be al in al 1. Cor. 15. verſe. 28..
         
         
            
            Chap. 16. Of the kingdome of heauen, and how it may be attained.
            
               O Happie ioifulnes, & ioiful happines, to ſee the Sancts, to be with the Sancts, to be à Sanct; to beholde God 1. Cor. 13, verſe. 12., and to enioie God from euerlaſting, to euerlaſting!
            Heerevpon let vs earneſtlie muſe; theſe things let vs hartelie deſire, the ſooner to come vnto their happie ſtate.
            Askeſt thou how this may be done; or by what merits or meanes? Liſten ô man. This matter conſiſteth in the power of the worker, for the kingdome of God ſuffereth violence Matth. 11, verſe. 12..
            The kingdome of Heauen ô man, asketh none other price, but thy ſelfe; it is worth ſo much

as thou art thy ſelfe. Giue thy ſelfe, and thou ſhalt haue that.
            What art thou troubled about the price? Chriſt hath giuen himſelfe 1. Pet. 1, verſe. 18.19., that he might purchaſe thee à kingdome to God euen the Father 1. Cor. 15, verſe. 24..
            So giue thou thy ſelfe, that thou maiſt be his kingdome, and let not ſinne raigne in thy mortal bodie Rom. 6, verſe. 12., but the ſpirit to the attainement of life.
         
         
            Chap. 17. VVhat Paradiſe is: and the ioies thereof.
            
               NOw my ſoule, returne we vnto the celeſtiall Citie, wherein wee be written Reue. 20. verſe. 12., and of which we be members.
            For as Citizens with ye SaintsEph. 2, 19., and of the houſhold of God; and as the heires of God Rom. 8, 17, and

heires annexed with Chriſt, let vs cal into minde, as we are able, ye happie ſtate of our Citie. Saie we therefore with the Prophet, Glorious things are ſpoken of thee Pſa. 87, 3., ô Citie of God; they which dwel in thee are like ſuch as ſing. It is faire in ſituation, euen the ioie of the whole earth Pſal. 48, 2..
            There is neither age, nor the miſerie of age in thee; in thee there is no maimed, nor lame, nor crooked, nor deformed perſon; for al do meete together vnto à perfect man Eph. 4, 13., and vnto the meaſure of the age of the fulnes of Chriſt.
            Then what happier thing can there be than this life, where neither pouertie is to be feared, nor ſicknes Reu. 21, 4
                     •
                  
                to weaken! where no hurt is done, and no man wil either be angrie, or enuious!
            Where there is no burning

concupiſcence; no deſire of meate; no ſuing for honor and preferment!
            Where we ſhal be out of al feare of the Diuel; of his traps; and of damnation!
            Where neither bodie, nor ſoule ſhal die Reu. 21, 4.; and à ioiful and immortal life is!
            Where no euils at al, nor diſcord ſhalbe; but al things wel, al things at quiet: becauſe the harts of al the Sancts ſhal wiſh and wil one thing!
            Where peace and mirth do poſſeſſe al; al things are as they ſhould be, and at à good ſtaie.
            Where continual light ſhal be; not ſuch à light as we now enioie, but ſo much cleerer, as it is more bleſſed! For that Citie, as we reade, hath no neede of the Sunne, neither of the Moone to ſhine in it Reu. 21, 23.; for the glorie of God ſhal in
                  •
               ighten it, and the

Lambe is the light of it.
            Where the Sancts ſhal ſhine as the Starres for euer & euer Dan. 12, 3.; and they that turne manie vnto righteouſnes, as the brightnes of the firmament!
            So that no night ſhal be there Reuel. 21. verſe. 25., no darkenes there; no gathering together of cloudes there; no complaining there either of parching heate, or of nipping colde:
            But ſuch à temperature of al things there ſhal be, as eie hath not ſeene 1. Cor. 2. verſe. 9. Eſai. 64.4., neither eare hath heard, nor at anie time hath come into the hart of anie man, they onlie excepted, who are founde worthie to enioie that happines, whoſe names be written in the booke of life Reuel. 21, verſe. 27..
            Notwithſtanding, à greater happines than al this is, to be ioined to the quires of Angels, and of Archangels, and of al the

celeſtial powers; to behold the Patriarches, and the Prophets; to ſee the Apoſtles of Chriſt, and al the Saints, and our parents alſo.
            This is à great glorie: but the greateſt of al is, to beholde God himſelfe face to face1. Cor. 13, verſe. 12. Reue. 22, 4.; to ſee the incomprehenſible light.
            The ſuperexcellent glorie ſhal be, when we ſee God in himſelfe, and when we ſhal both ſee, and enioie him in our ſelues too, of which ſight there ſhal be none ende.
         
         
            Chap. 18. That we can not pleaſe God, but through loue.
            
               THE ſoule, being goodlie through the image of God Gen. 1, 26.27. Coloſ 3, 20., and glorious thorough his likenes, hath in it of God, whereby it may be warned alwaies

either to ſtand with him, or to returne vnto him, if ſhe be moued with hir affections, or defections rather.
            And hath not onlie whence to take hart againe, through hope of pardon, and mercie, but alſo whence boldlie to aſpire vnto the marriage of the word Matth. 22. verſe. 2.3, &c., and to enter into the couenant of felowſhip with God, and to beare the pleaſant yoke of amitie with the king of Angels.
            Al this worketh loue, if the ſoule ſhew hir ſelfe like to God in wil, as ſhe is to him by nature, louing as ſhe is beloued Ioh. 3, 16..
            For of al the motions, ſenſes, and affections of the minde, loue onlie it is, whereby man may, though not fullie ſatisfie the loue of God, yet anſwere in à ſort his good wil.
            When loue once commeth, it draweth vnto it, and captiueth

al other affections. Loue ſufficeth of it ſelfe; pleaſeth of it ſelfe, and for it ſelfe.
            Loue is the merit, the reward, the cauſe, the fruit, the vſe. For by loue we are conioined to God 1. Cor. 13, verſe. 1.2, &c..
            Loue maketh one ſpirit of two. Loue maketh to wil, and to nil one thing. Loue maketh firſt to frame our manners; afterward to conſider things that are, as though they were not; and thirdlie with a pure ſight of the hart Matth. 5, verſe. 8., to behold heauenlie, and ſpiritual things.
            Through loue, firſt honeſt things are wel handled in the world; ſecondlie, honeſt things of the world are deſpiſed Phil. 3, 8., and laſt of al, the ſecrets of God are ſeene and beholden 1. Cor. 13, verſe. 13..
         
         
            
            Chap. 19. How God requireth ſome thing of vs like to himſelfe.
            
               GOD the Father is charitie 1. Ioh. 4, 8., God the Sonne is louingnes, God ye holie Ghoſt is the loue of the Father, and of the Sonne.
            This charitie, and this loue requireth à like thing in vs, euen loue againe, whereby we may be linked, and ioined to God, as it were by ſome alliance of kindred.
            Loue is ignorant what dignitie meaneth, knoweth no reuerence.
            He that loueth, approcheth boldlie vnto God, and ſpeaketh familiarlie to him without feare, and ſtopping.
            He that loueth not, liueth not:

but he that loueth, looketh euermore vpon God whome he loueth, whome he deſireth, vpon whome he thinketh, in whome he delighteth, vpon whome he feedeth, in whome he groweth.
            A man ſo deuoute, doth euermore ſo ſing, and ſo reade, and ſo circumſpectlie, and warelie behaue himſelfe in al his actions, as if God were, as in deede he is Eccle. 23, verſe. 19.20., alwaie preſent before his eies.
            He ſo praieth, as if he were taken-vp and preſented before the face of God in his maieſtical throne, whereas thouſand thouſands miniſter to him Dan. 7, 10., and ten thouſand thouſands ſtand before him.
            The ſoule which he viſiteth with loue, awakeneth him that ſleepeth; it moniſheth, and mollifieth the ſoule, and woundeth his hart.
            
               It inlighteneth darke things; it vnlocketh things ſhut-vp; it inflameth colde things; it mitigateth the froward, angrie, and impatient minde.
            It chaſeth awaie vices; brideleth carnal affections; amendeth maners; reformeth and renueth the minde; and reſtraineth the light motions, and actions of ſlipperie youth.
            Al theſe things loue worketh when it is preſent; but when it is wanting, the ſoule beginneth to droope, euen as à boiling caudron doth when fire is taken from vnder the ſame.
         
         
            Chap. 20. Of the boldnes of the ſoule that loueth God.
            
               LOue doubtles is à great thing, by it the ſoule of hir-ſelfe, doth boldlie aproch

vnto God, and cleaueth conſtantlie vnto him.
            The ſoule that loueth, asketh queſtions of God familiarlie, and conſulteth with him in al matters.
            She can thinke of nothing, and ſpeake of nothing beſide God, al other things ſhe loatheth, and contemneth Matth. 6, verſe. 24..
            Whatſoeuer ſhe mindeth, and whatſoeuer ſhe ſpeaketh, it ſauoreth of loue, and ſmelleth of loue, ſo wholie hath the loue of God won her vnto him.
            He that would haue the knowledge of God, let him loue.
            In vaine doth he giue himſelfe either to reade, or to ſtudie, or to preach, or to praie, that loueth not 8. Cor. 1, 2, &c..
            The loue of God engendreth the loue of the ſoule, and maketh her to harken vnto it ſelfe.
            God loueth, becauſe he would

be loued againe. When he loueth, he would be loued, knowing that through loue they are bleſſed which loue him.
            The louing ſoule renounceth al her owne affections, and wholie giueth her ſelfe to loue, that in rendering loue for loue, ſhe may anſwere the loue ſhe hath found: and when ſhe hath loued what ſhe can, yet what is it vnto the euerlaſting ſtreame of that heauenlie fountaine!
            For loue and the louer, the ſoule and God, the Creator and the creature meete not alike together: yet if man with al his hart wholie doth loue thee, ô GOD, there lacketh nothing where al is.
            Let not the ſoule then feare which loueth; but let the ſoule ſhake and tremble that loueth not.
            The louing ſoule is caried with

deſire, and drawne with longing; ſhe diſſembleth her deſerts; ſhutteth her eies from the maieſtie of God; openeth them to pleaſure; repoſing her truſt in thy ſaluation, and confidentlie reioicing therein.
            Through loue the ſoule withdraweth herſelfe, and departeth from the bodilie ſenſes, to the end that feeling God, ſhe may haue no feeling of her ſelfe.
            Which falleth-out when the mind allured by an vnſpeakeable ſweetenes of God ſtealeth awaie from her ſelfe, yea is rauiſhed and ſlippeth-awaie, the better to enioie God at her ful pleaſure. And this pleaſure ſurpaſſeth al pleaſure, where it is of continuance.
            Of loue ſpringeth familiaritie, of familiaritie boldnes, of boldnes taſte, of taſting hunger.
            The ſoule which the loue of

God hath touched can thinke none other thing, and deſire nothing elſe, but with often ſighes ſaith, As the Hart braieth for the riuers of water Pſal. 42, 1.: ſo panteth my ſoule after thee, ô God.
         
         
            Chap. 21. The ſingular loue of God to man ward.
            
               THrough loue GOD himſelfe came vnto men Iohn. 3, 16, came into men, was made man Iohn. 1, 14..
            Through loue the inuiſible God became like vnto his ſeruants Phil. 2, 7. Mat. 20, 28.. Through loue he was wounded for our tranſgreſſions Eſai. 53, 5. 1. Pet. 2, 24..
            In thoſe wounds of our Sauior, ſure and ſafe reſt is for weaklings and ſinners. There I dwel without care, his bowels of mercie are laid open to my ſight

through his wounds.
            Whatſoeuer I lack of my ſelfe, that I doe boldlie take out of the bowels of my Lord: For his mercies abound, and there want none holes for them to iſſue out by.
            Through the holes of the bodie, I behold the ſecrets of the hart; I ſee the great myſterie of godlines 1. Tim. 3, verſe. 16.; and the bowels of the mercie of our GodLuk. 1, 78., whereby the daie ſpring from an high hath viſited vs, are open to mine eies.
            The wounds of Ieſu Chriſt are ful of mercie, ful of clemencie, ful of ſweetnes, and loue.
            They boared his hands, and his feete Luke. 24, verſe. 39.40. Iohn. 20, 25, and pierced his ſide with à ſpeare Ioh. 19, 34.
            By theſe holes I may taſte, how gratious the Lord is Pſal. 34, 8.; for doubtles the Lord is good and merciful Pſal. 86, 5., and of great kindnes to a

which cal vpon him in truth Pſa. 145, 8, to al yea which cal vpon him Eſai. 55, 6, but eſpecialie to ſuch as loue him Ezo. 20, 6..
            Great redemption is giuen vs through the wounds of our Sauior Chriſt 1. Pet. 1, 18.19. 1. Pet. 2, 24., great goodnes, much grace, and al virtues perfectlie.
         
         
            Chap. 22. The refuge of à Christian in the time of tentation.
            
               WHen I am tempted with anie filthie cogitation, I runne forthwith vnto the wounds of Chriſt; when my fleſh ſubdueth me, I riſe-againe through the recordation of my Lord his wounds; when the diuel laieth ſnares to entrap me, I doe flie vnto the tender mercie of my Lord, and he leaueth me.
            
               If burning luſt doe inflame me, it is quenched through the calling of the wounds of our Lord Col. 1, 2.3., the Sonne of God Mat. 16, 16 Luke. 1, 35. into mind.
            In al extremities I can find none ſo good à remedie, as the wounds of Chriſt.
            In them I ſleepe ſecurelie, and reſt without feare. Chriſt hath died for vs Rom. 5, 6.7.8. Rom. 14, 15. 1. Cor. 15, 3..
            Nothing is ſo bitter vnto the death, but may by the death of my Lord be holpen.
            His death is my merit; my refuge, ſaluation, life and reſurrection Ioh. 11, 25.. The Lords mercie, is my merit.
            I can not lacke merits, ſo long as the Lord of mercies is with me. And if great is the Lords merciesPſal. 86, 5.15. Pſa. 119, 156, doubtles great are my merits.
            The more able he is to ſaue, the leſſe care doe I take.
         
         
            
            Chap. 23. Special medicines against ſinne, and deſpaire.
            
               GReatlie haue I ſinned, ô Lord, and my conſcience accuſeth me of manifold offences; yet doe I not deſpaire. For where ſin abounded Rom. 5, 20 grace abounded much more.
            He that in conſideration of his hainous wickednes doth deſpaire, denieth God to be à merciful God.
            He greatlie defaceth the glorie of God, which doubteth of his mercie; and as much as in him is, denieth God to haue loue Iohn. 3, 16 1. Iohn. 4, 8., truth Pſa. 86, 15. Rom. 3, 4., & power in him Gen. 35, 11 Reuel. 4, 8., wherein al mine hope conſiſteth (to wit in the loue of his adoption Rom. 8, 15 16, &c., in the truth of his promiſe Rom. 4, 16. Gal. 4, 28., & in the power of his redemption 1. Pet. 1, 18.19..)
            Then let my fooliſh cogitation

murmur as much as it wil, ſaieng, who art thou; how great is that glorie; & by what merits hopeſt thou to obteine ye ſame? And I wil boldlie make this anſwere: I knowe whome I giue credit vnto; for of his tender loue he hath adopted me for his Sonne Gal. 4, 28.: who is both of his promiſe true Iohn. 3, 33, and alſo mightie in performance, and he may doe what he wil Ecc. 46, 6. 2. Cor. 6, 18..
            The multitude of my ſinnes can not diſmaie me, if the death of Chriſt come into my mind: for my ſinnes are not able to ouermatch his mercie.
            The nailes, and the ſpeare doe crie vnto me, that I am reconciled to Chriſt, if I loue him hartilie.
            Longinus with his ſpeare hath opened to me ye ſide of Chriſt Ioh. 19, 34., and I am gone-in, and reſt there quietlie.
            
               He that feareth, let him loue. For perfect loue caſteth-out feare 1. Ioh. 4, 18.
            There is no ſuch remedie againſt the heate of luſt, as the death of my redeemer.
            He ſtretched-out his armes vpon the croſſe, and held-out his hands Matt. 27, verſe. 35. Gal. 3, 13., to ſhow how he is readie to embrace the penitent ſinners.
            Betweene thoſe armes of my Sauior, I both wiſh to liue, and deſire to die. There I wil ſing without care: I wil magnifie thee, ô Lord, for thou haſt exalted mePſal. 30, 1., and haſt not made my foes to reioice ouer me.
            Our Sauior bowed his headIoh. 19, 30, and gaue vp the ghoſt, euen to kiſſe his beloued. And ſo often doe we kiſſe God, as we are pricked at the hart with the loue of him.
         
         
            
            Chap. 24. A zealous meditation to mooue vnto the loue of God.
            
               O MY Soule, thou which art endued with the image of GOD Gen. 1, 26.27. Col. 3, 10., redeemed with the blood of Chriſt 1. Pet. 1, 18.19., betrothed through faith 2. Cor. 11, 2, endued with the Spirit Rom. 8, 9.15., adorned with virtues, and counted with the Angels Luke. 20, verſe. 36.:
            Loue thou him, who hath ſo loued thee; care thou for him, who hath a care of thee 1. Pet. 5, 7.; ſeeke thou him, who ſeeketh thee.
            Loue thy louer, of whom thou art loued 1. Ioh. 4, 7.8, &c.; who in louing hath preuented thee 1. Ioh. 4, 19; who is the cauſe of thy loueIam. 1, 17.. He is the merit; he the reward, he the fruite, the vſe, and the end.
            Be thou careful with the careful;

be thou at leiſure, with him that hath leiſure; cleane with the cleane; and holie with the holie.
            As thou offereſt thy ſelfe in the preſence of God, ſo wil he appeare in thy ſight.
            A good, and merciful God, of great kindnes Pſal. 86, 5., requireth ſuch as are good, and merciful, and louing, and humble, and kind.
            Loue thou him who hath brought thee out of the horrible pit Pſal. 40, 2., out of the mirie claie.
            Chooſe him for thy friend before al friends; who when al things ſhal faile, wil keepe his faith Ioh. 13, 1..
            In the daie of thy burial, when al thy friends wil depart from thee, he wil not forſake thee Pſa. 37, 28 Pſal. 27, 10.; but protect thee from the roaring of them that be readie to deuoure Eccl. 51, 3., and conduct thee through an vnknowen contrie,

and bring thee vnto the ſtreetes of ſupernal Zion, & there place thee with the Angels before the face of his maieſtieReu. 22, 4., where thou ſhalt heare that angelical muſicke, Holie, Holie, HolieEſai. 6, 3..
            There is the ſong of mirth Reu. 5, 9. Reu. 14, 3., the voice of ioie and welfare, and thankeſ-giuing, and praiſing, and Halleluiah for euer and euer.
            There is perfect felicitie, excellent glorie, ſurpaſſing ioie, and al good things 1. Cor. 2, 9..
            O my ſoule ſigh hartilie, and earneſtlie deſire to attaine vnto that ſupernal citie, whereof ſuch glorious things are ſpoken Pſal. 87, 3.: in which who ſo dwel are al euen like ſuch as triumph with ioie.
            Through loue thou maieſt aſcend. To the louer nothing is hard, nothing vnpoſſible.
            The ſoule that loueth doth often-times aſcend, and boldlie

runneth about the ſtreetes of celeſtial Hieruſalem, viſiting the Patriarches and Prophets; ſaluting the Apoſtles, wondering at the armies of Martyrs, and Confeſſors; and beholding ye flockes of virgins.
            Heauen & earth, and al things in them contained, do cal vpon me continuallie to loue my Lord God.
         
         
            Chap. 25. Of true knowledge, what it is.
            
               WHat is the knowledge of the truth? It is firſt to knowe thy ſelfe, and that thou both ſtudie to be ſuch as thou oughteſt to be; and alſo amend that which is to be reformed. Secondlie, it is to knowe, and to loue thy maker; for this is al mans happines Ioh. 17, 3..
            
               Conſider therefore how vnſpeakeable the loue of God is to manward. He created vs of nothing Gen. 1, 26.27. Iob. 10, 8. Pſa. 119, 73.; and whatſoeuer wee haue, he gaue the ſame 1. Cor. 4, verſe. 7. Iam. 1, 17..
            But forſomuch as we loued the gift more than the giuer; the creature than the creator Gen. 3, 6.7, &c., we fel into the ſnare of Satan, and became his bond-ſlaues Rom. 6, 16.17..
            Neuertheleſſe, God of his great loue, ſent his owne Sonne Ioh. 3, 16.17., to redeeme ſeruants Rom. 8, 3.; and ſent alſo the holie Ghoſt, whereby he made ſeruants his ſonnes by adoption Gal. 4, 6..
            He gaue his Sonne for a ranſome 1. Pet. 1, 18.19. Gal. 4, 4.5.; the holie Ghoſt for a pledge of his loue 2. Cor. 1, verſe. 22. Ephe. 1, 13.14.; and reſerueth himſelfe wholie for the inheritance of adoption Rom. 8, 17..
            And thus God, as he is verie gratious and merciful Pſa. 86, 5., of his good wil and loue to mankindward, beſtoweth not his goodes

onlie, but himſelfe alſo to redeeme man, and that not ſo much for his owne ſake, as for mans behoofe.
            That men might be borne of God, God firſt was borne of man Ioh. 1, 14..
            Now what hart is ſo flintie, but wil be ſoftened by this loue of God, ſo preuenting man 1. Iohn. 4, verſe. 19.!
            O vehement loue, that God for mans cauſe can vouchſafe to become man Matt. 1, 21.!
            Who can hate man, whoſe nature and likenes he beholdeth in the humanitie of God?
            Doubtles, who ſo loueth not man, hateth God; and ſo abideth in death 1. Iohn. 3, verſe. 14..
            For God became man for mans ſake Luk. 1, 31.69., that he might be a redeemer 1. Pet. 1, 18.19., as he was before a creator Iohn. 1, 1.3. Heb. 1, 3.; and that man not onlie might be ranſomed through his riches, but alſo loue him the

more entirelie.
            God appeared in the ſimilitude of ſinful fleſh Rom. 8, 3., that each ſenſe of man might be made bleſſed in him, and as wel the eie of the hart be renewed in his diuinitie, as the eie of the bodie in his humanitie, that whether it go in, or out, mans nature which he hath created Gen. 1, 26.27., might in it finde comfort and refreſhment.
         
         
            Chap. 26. VVhat the ſending of the holie Spirit worketh in vs.
            
               FOR our Sauiour came into ye worldLuke. 2, 11. and was crucified, and put vnto death for our ſakes Rom. 5, 6.8., that he might through his death Heb. 2, 14., deſtroie him that had the power of death, that is the Diuel.
            
               And ſeeing the grapes of his fleſh were carried vnto ye wine-preſſe of the croſſe, and the pleaſant wine of his diuinitie began to ſpout-foorth; the holie Spirit was ſent to make readie mens harts, that new wine might be put into new veſſelsMatt. 9, 17., and to ſee firſt that they were cleane, leaſt otherwiſe they marred yt which ſhould be powred-in; and then that they were wel hooped that they leaked not: I meane that they were clenſed from the delight of wickednes; and hooped to keepe-out the delight of vanitie.
            For that which is good could not enter, til that which il is were gone.
            The delight in wickednes polluteth; and the delight in vanitie ſheddeth.
            The delight in wickednes makes the veſſel to ſtincke; and

the delight in vanitie maketh it ful of clefts.
            Men delight in wickednes, when they loue ſinne; and they delight in vanitie, when they loue tranſitorie things.
            Then caſt awaie that which is euil, that you may taſte that which good is. Powre-out bitternes, that you may be repleniſhed with ſweetenes.
            The holie Ghoſt is ioie, and loue, then caſt out the ſpirit of the Diuel, and the ſpirit of this world, that you may be capable of the holie Ghoſt.
            The ſpirit of the Diuel worketh the delight of iniquitie; and the ſpirit of the world, the delight of vanitie. And theſe delightes are euil, becauſe the one is a ſinne of it ſelfe, and the other is an occaſion of ſinne.
            But when theſe euil ſpirits are throwne-out, the ſpirit of God

wil come, and enter into the tabernacle of the heart, and worke à good delight there Rom. 14, verſe. 17., euen à good loue, which ſhal expel the loue both of the world, and of wickednes.
            The loue of the world allureth, and deceaueth 1. Iohn. 2, verſe. 15.16.17.; the loue of ſinne defileth, and bringeth vnto deſtruction Rom. 6, verſe. 23.: but the loue of God inlighteneth the mind Rom. 5, 5., clenſeth the conſcience 1. Cor. 13, 1.2, &c., reioiceth the heart Gal. 5, 22., and bringeth into the ſight of God 1. Cor. 13, verſe. 12..
         
         
            Chap. 27. The effects of true loue.
            
               HE that loueth God vnfainedlie, doth euermore thinke it long vntil he come vnto God Phil. 1, 23., vntil he leaue the world, vntil he be free from the corruption of the fleſh Rom. 7, verſe. 24.; his

heart and affection are ſet on things aboue Col. 3, 2., that he may finde the true peace Phil. 4, 7. Reu. 21, 4..
            Whether he ſitteth, or walketh, or reſteth, or whatſoeuer he doth, his heart is with God 1. Cor. 10, verſe. 31..
            He exhorteth al men to loue God; he commendeth the loue of God to al men, and both in hart, in word, and by his conuerſation he ſheweth, both how ſweete the loue of God is, and how euil and ſower the loue of the world.
            He derideth the glorie, and reproueth the care of this world, and ſheweth what a fooliſh thing it is to put anie confidence in tranſitorie things 1. Ioh. 2, 15.16.17..
            He wondereth at the blindnes of men, that they can loue; he wondereth alſo that euerie man wil not forſake theſe tranſitorie and fleeting things of this world 1. Cor. 7, verſe. 31..
            
               He thinketh that what he ſauoreth, ſhould ſeeme ſweete to al men; what he loueth, ſhould like euerie man; and what he knoweth, euerie man ſhould vnderſtand.
            Much and oftentimes doth he mufe vpon God, and is ſweetelie refreſhed through ſuch heauenlie contemplation; and the oftner he doth ſo, the greater is his ioie.
            For verie comfortable is it alwaie euen to thinke vpon that, which to loue and to commend, is ſo delightful to the minde.
         
         
            Chap. 28. VVhat the true quietnes of the minde is.
            
               DOubtles the heart is then at reſt, when through deſire it is wholie fixed vpon the loue of God; and deſireth

nothing elſe, but with a certaine bleſſed ſweetenes is much delighted in that which it hath; and in delighting is made iocund.
            And if anie time either by à vaine cogitation, or through worldlie buſines, it be ſomewhat drawne awaie there-from, it haſteneth to returne thether with al ſpeede, deeming it a baniſhment to be anie-where beſide.
            For, as euerie moment, man may either enioie, or vſe the goodnes of God: ſo euerie moment is man to thinke vpon God.
            And therefore his offence is not ſmall, who in praieng is carried ſuddenlie awaie from his ſight, as though he did neither heare, nor beholde.
            Which is then done, when man followeth his euil, and vnbrideled

affections; and, wherevnto the ſight of the minde is eaſilie carried, preferreth ſome vile creature before God, by muſing, & thinking therevpon, oftner than vpon God, who dailie is to be thought-vpon as à creator Iob. 10, 8. Pſal. 119, 73.; to be worſhipped, as à redeemer Gal. 3, 13. Gal. 4, 4.5.; to be expected, as à ſauiour Phil. 3, 20.21.; and to be feared, as à iudge Acts. 10, verſe. 42. 2. Tim. 4, 1.8..
         
         
            Chap. 29. That whatſoeuer withdraweth the ſight of the minde from God, is altogether to be ſhunned, and abhorred.
            
               WHoſoeuer thou art that loueſt ye world, looke afore-hande, whether thou muſt go. The waie which thou takeſt, is the worſt waie, and verie dangerous Matth. 7, verſe. 13..
            Wherefore, ô man, auoide by

little & little thy worldlie buſines; & withdraw thy ſelf awhile from troubleſome cogitations.
            Caſt awaie heauie cares, laie aſide greeuous diſtractions of the mind; finde ſome leiſure to ſerue God, and reſt thy ſelfe ſomewhat in him.
            Enter into the chamber of thy minde Matth. 6, verſe. 6.; exclude al things ſaue God, and what makes to the ſeeking of him; and the dore being ſhut, ſeeke him.
            And with thine whole heart ſaie vnto God, I ſeeke thy face, ô Lord, I ſeeke euen thy face.
            Oh then, ô Lord my God Pſal. 7, 1.3., giue thou mine heart inſtructions, both where & how to ſeeke thee; both where and how to finde thee.
            O Lord, if heere thou art not, where ſhal I ſeke thee abſent? but if thou art euerie-where Eccle. 23, verſe. 18.19.20. Iere. 23, 24., then why do I not ſee thee preſent?
            
               But vndoubtedlie thou dwelleſt in the light that none can attaine vnto 1. Tim. 6, verſe. 16..
            But how may I come vnto the light that cannot be attained? Or who ſhal guide, and conduct me thereinto, that therein I may behold thee? Furthermore by what tokens, and with what face may I ſeeke thee?
            O Lord my God, I neuer ſawe thee Ioh. 1, 18. 1. Iohn. 4, 12.; I knowe not thy countenance.
            Then what ſhal he doe, ô Lord moſt hie Luk. 2, 14., what ſhal this thy far exiled ſeruāt do Heb. 11, 13.? what ſhal thy ſeruant doe, who is in perplexitie through the loue of thee; and caſt-awaie far fro thy preſence?
            Lo, he longeth greatlie to behold thee; yet thy countenance is far from his ſight. He deſireth to come vnto thee; yet vnto thy dwelling no man can attaine 1. Tim. 6, verſe. 16.. He coueteth to find thee; yet he

wotteth not where. He loueth to ſeeke thee; yet he knoweth not thy face.
         
         
            Chap. 30. How through ſinne man both loſt the ſight of God, and found wretchednes.
            
               O Lord, thou art my GodPſal. 7, 1.3., & my LordMat. 4, 10., yet did I neuer ſee thee Iohn. 1, 18.: thou haſt both made me Pſa. 100, 3. Pſa. 119, 73., yea and made me againe Gal. 4, 4., and beſtowed vpon me what good things ſoeuer I enioie 1. Cor. 4, 7., yet hitherto haue I neither ſeene, nor knowen thee.
            To be ſhort, I am made to ſee, yet hitherto haue not I attained the thing, that I was made for. O miſerable condition of man, ſeeing he hath ſo vndiſcreetlie forgone that, for which he was created! ô heauie, and ô hard chance!
            
               Alas, alas what hath he forgon, and what hath he found? what is loſt, and what hath remained?
            He hath forgon happines, for which he was made; and he hath found miſerieGen. 3, 16.17, &c., for which he was not made. He hath loſt that, without which nothing is happie; and that remaineth which of it ſelfe is meerelie miſerable.
            Man did then eate euen the Angels meate, which now he deſireth; and now he feedeth vpon the bread of ſorowe, which then he knewe not.
            O Lord, how long wilt thou forget, for euerPſal. 13, 1! How long wilt thou hide thy face from vs! when wilt thou reſpect, and heare vs! when wilt thou inlighten our eies, and ſhow vs thy countenance! when wilt thou reſtore thy ſelfe vnto vs!
            
                Behold and heare vs, ô Lord our God; lighten our eies, and

ſhow vs thy ſelfe. Reſtore thy ſelfe to vs, that we may proſper without whome we are in ſuch miſerie. Inuite vs, and helpe vs Lord, we beſeech thee.
            Mine hart is become ſorowfu
                  •
                being made deſolate: ô make it cheereful againe, Lord, with thy conſolation.
            I haue begun to ſeeke thee with an hungrie ſtomach, ô let me not giue-ouer vnrefreſhed of thee; I come with a greedie appetite, let me not depart vnfed; I who am in pouertie, com
                  •
                vnto thee that art rich Rom. 10, 12 Epheſ. 2, 4.; in miſerie, vnto thee moſt merciful 2. Cor. 1, 3 ô let me not go-awaie emptie and contemned.
            O Lord, I am bowed, and crooked verie ſore Pſal. 38, 6., erect me that may looke-vp, and behold thee
            
                Mine iniquities are gon-oue
                  •
                mine head, and as a weighti
                  •
                burden, they are too heauie fo
                  •
               
               
mee.
            O vnwrap, and vnloade me, that the deepe ſwalowe me not vp Pſa. 69, 15.
            Teach me to ſeeke thee; and ſhow thy ſelfe to him that ſeeketh thee: for I can neither ſeeke thee, without thou teach me; neither find thee, except thou reueale thy ſelfe.
            Let me ſeeke thee in deſiring, and deſire thee in ſeeking; let me find thee in louing, and loue thee in finding.
         
         
            Chap. 31. Of God his woonderful mercie.
            
               I Confeſſe LORD, thankes vnto thee therefore, that thou haſt made me after thine owne image Gen. 1, 26.27. Col. 3, 10., to the end I ſhould remember thee, thinke on thee, and loue thee.
            
               Notwithſtanding, through the corruption of wickednes thine image is ſo defaced, and ſo blurred with the ſmoake of ſinne that, without thou renew, and reforme the ſame, it can not do the thing, for which it was created.
            Wherefore, Lord, who giueſt the gift of faith Rom. 12, 3, I beſeech thee, giue mee grace perfectlie to knowe how great thou art.
            For according to our beliefe thou art; and we beleeue thee to be ſuch à thing, than which there can be imagined nothing either for quantitie greater Ier. 32, 18.19., or for virtue better Eſai. 6, 3..
            Then what art thou, ô Lord God, than whom nothing is either greater, or better; but euen that, which being onelie the ſoueraigne good thing of al others of it ſelfe, hath made al other

things of nothing Gen. 1, 1.2.3, &c..
            Then what good thing is there wanting to ye ſoueraigne goodnes Iam. 1, 17. through whome is euerie good thing?
            Wherefore thou art righteousPſal. 11, 7., and trueEſai. 45, 21 Pſal. 86, 15. Iohn. 3.33. Rom. 3, 4., and bleſſedReu. 5, 12.13.; & whatſoeuer is otherwiſe, better is it not to be atal, than to be.
            But if thou art altogether moſt ſingularlie good, how is it that thou ſpareſt the wicked? Is it becauſe thy mercie is ouer al thy worksPſa. 145, 9.? But this lieth hid in the light which none can attaine vnto 1. Tim. 6, 16.
            Verelie the fountaine, whence the riuer of thy mercie doth flowe, lieth-hid in the deepe and moſt ſecrete bottome of thy goodnes.
            For, although thou art wholie and ſouerainglie righteous: yet thou ſpareſt of thy goodnes the wickedMat. 5, 45, becauſe thou art wholie

and moſt ſingularlie merciful too.
            For in verie deede thou ſhouldeſt not be ſo ſingularlie good, vnleſſe thou wert gratious to ſome offenders.
            For he who is good both to the iuſt and to the vniuſt, is better than he who ſheweth fauour onlie to the good.
            And he which is good to the wicked, both by ſparing, and by puniſhing thē, is better than he, who is good onlie by puniſhing.
            So thou art therefore merciful, becauſe thou art altogether, and ſoueraignelie good.
         
         
            Chap. 32. The happie ſtate of ſuch as enioie the ioies of heauen.
            
               O Infinite goodnes, paſſing all vnderſtanding!
            Let that mercie

come vpon me, which proceedeth from ſuch riches;
            Let it haue influence into me, which floweth from thee; Spare of thy mercie, but reuenge not in thy iuſtice.
            Riſe vp now, ô my ſoule, and lift vp al thine vnderſtanding; conſider ſo wel as thou canſt, how great, and what maner of good thing, God is.
            For if each particular good thing be delectable, waie aduiſedlie how delightful that good thing is, which conteineth the ſweetenes of al good things 1. Cor. 2, 9.; and not ſuch as commonlie we perceaue of things created, but ſo much differing there from, as the creator differeth from the creature!
            For if the life created bee good; howe good is the life that created it Ioh. 11, 25.! If the welfare that is wrought, delight; how

ſhal the welfare which worketh al ſaluation Eſa. 12, 1.2.3., delight! If the wiſedome conſiſting in the minde, or in the knowledge of knowne things, be louelie; how louelie is that wiſedome which made, and created al things of nothing Iohn. 1, 1.2.3. Hebr. 1, 2. Prou. 8, 22.23, &c.! To be ſhort, if there be much and great delight in delectable things; what and how great ſhal the pleaſure be in him, who made theſe delectable things!
            Oh what ſhal he haue, or what ſhal he not haue, that enioieth this felicitie! doubtles, whatſoeuer he can wiſh, he ſhal haue it; and what he would not haue, ſhal not come to him.
            For there ſhal be the goodes both of ſoule and bodie, ſuch goodes as eie hath not ſeene 1. Cor. 2, 9., neither eare hath heard, neither came into mans hart.
         
         
            
            Chap. 33. That ſoueraigne happines is to be ſought for.
            
               WHIE then rangeſt thou about, ô ſillie man, ſeeking the goodes of thy ſoule, and of thy bodie? Loue one good, in which are al good things, and it ſufficeth. Deſire the ſimple good, which is al that good is, and it is inough.
            For what loueſt thou, ô my fleſh? what deſireſt thou, ô my ſoule? There it is whatſoeuer thou loueſt; there it is whatſoeuer thou deſireſt.
            If beautie delight thee; the iuſt men ſhal ſhine as ye SunneMatth. 13, verſe. 43.: If either ſuch ſwiftnes, ſtrength, or libertie of the bodie, as nothing may withſtand; they ſhal be as the Angels of God in heauen Matth. 22, verſe. 30.. For it is ſowne à natural

bodie 1. Cor. 15, verſe. 44., but ſhal riſe a ſpiritual bodie, to wit, by the power of God, not through the ſtrength of nature:
            If a long, and an healthful life; there ſhal be founde eternitie, and eternal ſoundnes Reu. 21, 4., becauſe the righteous ſhal liue euer Wiſ. 5, 15.; their rewarde alſo is with the Lord:
            If ſatietie; when the glorie of the Lord appeareth,Pſa. 17, 15. they ſhal be filled:
            If drunkennes; they ſhal be ſatisfied with the fatnes of the Lords houſe Pſa. 36, 8.:
            If pleaſant muſicke; the Angels there ſhal ſing praiſes without ceſſing vnto the Lord:
            If al maner honeſt, not vnhoneſt pleaſure; the Lord ſhal giue them drinke out of the riuer of his pleaſures Pſal. 36, 8.:
            If wiſedome; the verie wiſedome of God ſhal ſhew it ſelfe

to them 1. Cor. 13, verſe. 12. Reu. 22, 4.:
            If faithful amitie; they ſhal both loue GOD more than themſelues, and one another as themſelues; yea, and God ſhal loue them, more than they can themſelues. For they loue both him, themſelues, and one another through him; and he loueth both himſelfe, and them too through himſelfe.
            If concord; al they ſhal be of one minde 1. Cor. 13, verſe. 13.; for they ſhal wil nothing, but what God willeth himſelfe:
            If power; they ſhal haue ful power ouer their owne wil, as God hath of his. For as God of himſelfe can do what he wil: ſo they can do what they wil, through him. Becauſe, as they liſt none otherwiſe, than he liſteth: ſo he liſteth, as they liſt, and what he wil, muſt needes come to paſſe.
            
               If honor, and wealth: God wil make his good and faithful ſeruants Matth. 25, verſe. 23., rulers ouer much; yea, they ſhal be called the ſonnes of God Rom. 8, verſe. 16.17., yea, and gods too; and be the heires, euen the heires of God, and heires annexed with Chriſt.
            To conclude, if certaine ſecuritie; they ſhal be as ſure that that felicitie ſhall not faile them Reu. 7, 15.16.17. Reu. 21, 4., as they are ſure that neither they for their parts would willinglie forgo the ſame; nor God for his part wil bereaue his friends thereof againſt their wils; nor that anie thing is ſo mightie, that it can ſeparate God and them.
            Now what, and how great ioie is there, where ſuch and ſo great felicitie is!
         
         
            
            Chap. 34. How the Sancts loue each other mutualie in Heauen.
            
               O Hart of man; ô poore hart; ô hart ful of miſeries, yea, ouerwhelmed with miſeries, how greatlie wouldeſt thou reioice, if thou aboundedſt with theſe good things!
            Aske euen the moſt ſecret cogitations of thine hart, if they could receaue the ioie of ſo excellent bliſſe.
            But if another, whome thou loueſt as thy ſelfe, did enioie with thee the like felicitie, doubtles thy ioie would be doubled; becauſe thou wouldeſt ſo much reioice at his felicitie, as at thine owne.
            Now if two, or three, or moe, were ſo bleſſed of God, thou

wouldeſt be as glad for each of them, as for thy ſelfe, if thou dideſt loue them euen as thy ſelfe.
            Then, how great ſhal the ioie be in that perfect loue of the innumerable companie of bleſſed Angels and men; where each ſhal loue another euen as himſelfe! for euerie man there ſhal reioice as much for the happie eſtate of each particular perſon, as for his owne felicitie.
            If therefore the hart of man ſhal hardlie receaue the ioie of his owne bliſſe; how ſhal it comprehend ſuch great ioies of ſo manie of his friends! for vndoubtedlie, euen as we loue à man, ſo ſhal we be glad for his felicitie.
            As in that bleſſed happines euerie man ſhal loue God ſoueraignelie aboue himſelfe, and al others with him: ſo moſt ſingularlie ſhal each man be more

glad of Gods felicitie, than of his owne, and of al others with him.
            And if they ſhal ſo loue God with al their harts, with al their minds, and with al their ſoules, that neither al their harts, nor al their minds, nor al their ſoules can be able to comprehend the excellencie of the loue: aſſuredlie the Sancts with al their harts, with al their minds, and with al their ſoules ſhal ſo reioice, as neither their hearts, nor their minds, nor their ſoules, ſhal be able to comprehend the abundant ſtreames of celeſtial ioie.
         
         
            Chap. 35. Of the perfect ioie of eternal life.
            
               O MY GodPſal. 7, 
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 3., and my LordMatt. 4, 10, mine hopePſal. 18, 1.2., & the ioie of mine heart, reſolue my ſoule whether this be the ioie

whereof thou ſpeakeſt by thy Sonne, Aske, and ye ſhal receaue Ioh. 16, 24., that your ioie may be ful. For I haue found à certaine ioie which is ful, yea, and more than ful.
            For notwithſtanding ye whole hart, be ful; the whole mind, ful; the whole ſoule, ful; yea, whole man, ful of this ioie: yet ſhal there remaine ioie for al that, which is incomprehenſible.
            So then, that whole ioie ſhal not enter into the reioicers; but al the reioicers ſhal enter into the ioie of their maiſter Matth. 25, verſe. 21..
            Speake Lord, tel thy ſeruant ſecretlie in mine hart, if this be the ioie whereinto thy ſeruants ſhal enter, who ſhal enter into their maiſters ioie.
            But ſurelie, that ioie, wherewith thine elect ſhal reioice, neither eie hath ſeene 1. Cor. 2, 9., nor eare hath heard, nor entred euer into

the hart of man.
            Then Lord, I haue not yet conceaued in minde, much leſſe vttered by words, how greatlie thine elect ſhal reioice.
            Vndoubtedlie they ſhal ſo greatlie reioice, as they ſhal loue; they ſhal ſo entirelie loue, as they ſhal know thee, ô Lord.
            And how entirelie ſhal they loue thee? ſurelie neither mans eie hath ſeene, nor his eare hard, nor came it euer into his heart in this world Eſa. 64, 4. 1. Cor. 2, 9., how perfectlie they ſhal both knowe thee 1. Cor. 13, verſe. 12.13., & loue thee in the world to come.
            O my God, I beſeech thee, grant that I may knowe thee, loue thee, and reioice in thee.
            And although I cannot ſo thoroughlie do ſo in this life as I ſhould; yet giue me grace to profit from daie to daie, vntil I come vnto perfection.
            Let thy knowledge ſo growe

vp within me heere, yt it may be found ripe there; and thy loue ſo encreaſe within me heere, that it may be perfect there; that my ioie may be great heere in hope, and in deedeful there.
            O iuſt God, my humble ſute is, that I may haue the thing which thou promiſeſt, euen that my ioie may be ful Iohn. 16, verſe. 34..
            In the meane ſpace, let my mind meditate therof, my tong ſpeake therof, mine hart long for it, my ſpeech reaſon thereof, & my ſoule hunger for the ſame.
            Let my fleſh thirſt therefore, and al my ſubſtance deſire it, euen vntil I enter into the ioie of my maiſter Matth. 25, verſe. 21., there to abide for euer and euer, Amen.
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            
            ¶ THE SVMME OF EVERIE CHAPTER CONTAINED IN THIS BOOKE, ACCORding as the titles doe import, with the iuſt number of the page where euerie particular chapter is to be found.
            
               1 OF the woonderful eſſence, or being which God hath, pag. 1.
               2 Of God his vnſpeakeable knowledge, pag. 4.
               3 The deſire of that ſoule which hath à feeling of God, pag. 7.
               4 The miſerable ſtate of that ſoule, which neither loueth our Lord & Sauior Chriſt, nor ſeketh after him, pa. 11.
               5 A verie Chriſtian deſire of the ſoule after God, pag. 14.
               6 The happines of that ſoule which is deliuered out of the earthlie priſon of the bodie, pag. 17.
               
                  7 The bleſſed ioie of the heauenlie Paradiſe, pag. 20.
               8 The glorious condition of the kingdome of Heauen, pag. 22.
               9 How GOD after much trouble doth comfort the penſiue ſoule, pag. 25.
               10 A praier for grace to loue God, pag. 27.
               11 A praier for grace both dulie to thanke God for our redemption; & worthilie to approch vnto the holie Table, pag. 29.
               12 A zealous praier for grace to meditate deepelie vpon the goodnes of God, pag. 32.
               13 A thankeſ-giuing vnto God for the incarnation of his deere Sonne to ſaue man, pag. 34.
               14 The more God is thought vpon, the more louelie he

ſeemeth, pag. 36.
               15 How the trobles in this world are nothing anſwerable to the ioies in heauen, pag. 38.
               16 Of the kingdome of heauen, and how it may be attained, pag. 41.
               17 What Paradiſe is: and the ioies thereof, pag. 42.
               18 That we can not pleaſe God, but through loue, pag. 46.
               19 How GOD requireth ſome thing of vs like to himſelfe, pag. 49.
               20 Of the boldnes of the ſoule that loueth GOD, pag. 41.
               21 The ſingular loue of GOD to manward, pag. 55.
               22 The refuge of à Chriſtian in time of tentation, pag. 57.
               23 Special medicines againſt

ſinne, and deſpaire, pag. 59.
               24 A zealous meditation to mooue vnto the loue of God, pag. 62.
               25 Of true knowledge, what it is, pag. 65.
               26 What the ſending of the holie Spirit worketh in vs, pag. 68.
               27 The effects of true loue, pag. 71.
               28 What the true quietnes of the mind is, pag. 73.
               29 That whatſoeuer withdraweth the ſight of the mind from God, is altogether to be ſhunned, and abhorted, pag. 75.
               30 How through ſinne man loſt the ſight of God, and found wretchednes, 78.
               31 Of God his woonderful mercie, pag. 81.
               32 The happie ſtate of ſuch

as enioie the ioies of heauen, pag. 84.
               33 That ſoueraigne happines is to bee ſought for, pag. 87.
               34 How the Sancts loue ech other mutualie in heauen, pag. 91.
               35 Of the perfect ioie of eternal life, pag. 93.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            1581.
            
               OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT
            
            Printed by Henrie Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the ſigne of the Starre.
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   