
      
         
            
            
            
               ANNO QVINTO REGINAE ELIZABETHE. At the Parliament holden at Weſtmynſter the .xii. of Ianuary, in the fyfth yere of the raigne of our Soueraigne Lady, Elizabeth by the grace of God, of England, Fraunce, and Irelande, Quene, defendour of the fayth. &c. To the hygh pleaſure of Almyghtye God, and the weale publique of this Realme, were enacted as foloweth. ANNO. 1563.
            
         
         
            
            The Table,
            
               
                  AN Act for thaſſuraunce of the Quenes Maieſties royal power ouer all ſtates and ſubiectes within her hyghnes dominions. Cap. i.
               
               An Acte for the mayntenaunce & encreaſe of Tyllage. Cap. ii.
               
               An Acte for the reliefe of the poore. Cap. iii.
               
               An Act touchyng diuers orders for Artificers, Labourers, Seruauntes of huſbandry, and apprentiſes. Cap. iiii.
               
               An acte touchyng certayne politique conſtitutions, made for the mayntenaunce of the Nauye. Cap. v.
               
               An acte agaynſte ſuche as ſhall ſell any ware for Apparell without redye money. Cap. vi.
               
               An acte for the auoydyng of diuers forreyne wares, made by handy craftes men beyonde the ſeas. Cap. vii.
               
               An acte touchyng Tanners, Curryours, Shoemakers, and other Artificers occupying the cuttyng of Leather. Cap. viii.
               
               An acte for the punyſhment of ſuch perſons as ſhal procure or commit any wylfull periury. Cap. ix.
               
               An acte to reuyue a Statute made Anno .xxi.H.viii. touchyng ſeruauntes embeaſelyng theyr maſters goodes. Cap. x.
               
               An act againſt the clipping, waſhing, rounding, or fylyng of the coynes. Ca. xi
               
               An act touchyng badgers of corne, & drouers of cattell to be licenſed. Cap. xii.
               
               An act for the reuyuyng of a Statute, made An. ii. & .iii. Phil. & Marie. for the amendyng of hygh wayes. Cap. xiii.
               
               An act agaynſt the forgyng of Euidences and wrytynges. Cap. xiiii.
               
               An act agaynſt fonde and phantaſticall propheſies. Cap. xv.
               
               An act agaynſt coniurations, enchauntmentes, & witchcraftes. Cap. xvi.
               
               An act for the punyſhment of the vyce of Bogorye. Cap. xvii.
               
               An act declaryng thauctoritie of the Lord keper of the great Seale of England and the Lorde Chauncelour, to be one. Cap. xviii.
               
               An acte for the repeale of a braunche of a Statute, made. An. i. Ed. vi. touching the conueying of Horſes & Geldynges out of the Realme. Cap. xix.
               
               An act for the punyſhment of vagaboundes, callyng them ſelues Egiptians. Cap. xx.
               
               An acte for the punyſhement of vnlawefull takyng of Fyſhe, Deare, or Hawkes. Cap. xxi.
               
               An act agaynſt the carrying of Shepe ſkinnes and Peltes ouer the Sea, not beyng Staple ware. Cap. xxii.
               
               An act for the due execution of the wrytt de excōmunicato capiendo. Cap. xxiii.
               
               An act for the reuyuyng of a Statute, made An. xxiii.H.viii. touchyng the repayryng of Gaoles. Cap. xxiiii.
               
               An act to fyll vp Iuries de circumſtantibus, lackyng in Wales. Cap. xxv.
               
               An act for the enrollment of Indentures of bargayne and ſale, in the Quenes Maieſties courtes of Recorde at Lancaſter, Cheſter, & Durham. Cap. xxvi
               
               An act touchyng fines to be leuied in the coūtie palatine of Durham. Cap. xxvii
               
               An act for the tranſlating of the Byble and the diuine ſeruice into the Welſhe tongue. Cap. xxviii.
               
               An act for the confirmation of a Subſedy graunted by the Clergy. Cap. xxix.
               
               An act of a Subſedye and two Fyſtenes and Tenthes, graunted by the Temporaltie. Cap. xxx.
               
               An act of the Quenes Maieſties moſte gracious generall and free pardon. Cap. xxxi.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ An Acte for thaſſuraunce of the Quenes Maieſties royall power ouer all ſtates and ſubiectes within her highneſſe dominions.
            
               FOr preſeruation of the Queenes moſt excellent hyghnes, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, and the dignitie of the imperial crowne of this Realme of England, and for auoydyng both of ſuch hurtes, perils, diſhonors, and inconueniences as haue before time befallen, aſwell to the Quenes Maieſties noble progenitours, Kynges of this Realme, as for the whole eſtate thereof, by meanes of the iuriſdiction and power of the See of Rome, vniuſtly claymed and vſurped, within this Realme, and the dominions therof, and alſo of the daungers by the fawters of the ſayde vſurped power, at this tyme growen to maruelous outrage and licentious boldnes, and now requyryng more ſharpe reſtraynt and correction of lawes, then hytherto in the tyme of the Quenes Maieſties moſte mylde and mercifull reigne haue ben had, vſed, or eſtablyſhed:
            Be it therefore enacted, ordeyned, and eſtablyſhed, by the Quene our ſoueraigne Lady, and the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by aucthoritie of the ſame, that if any perſon or perſons, dwellyng, inhabityng, or reſiant within this Realme, or within any other the Quenes dominions, ſeignories, or coūtreys, or the Marches of the ſame, or els where, within or vnder her obeyſaunce and power, of what eſtate, dignitie, preeminence, order, degree, or condition ſoeuer he or they be, after the firſt day of Apryll, which ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God. M.D.lxiii. ſhall by wryryng, ciphering, printing, preaching, or teachyng, dede or acte, aduiſedly & wittyngly, holde or ſtande with, to extoll, ſet forth, maintayne, or defende, the aucthoritie, iuriſdiction, or power of the Byſhoppe of Rome, or of his See, heretofore claymed, vſed, or vſurped within this Realme, or in any dominion or countrey, beyng of, within, or vnder the Quenes power or obeyſaunce, or by any ſpeache, open dede, or acte, aduiſedly and wyttyngly attribute any ſuch maner

of iuriſdictiō, aucthoritie, or preeminence to the ſaid See of Rome, or to any Biſhop of the ſame See for the tyme beyng, within this Realme, or in any the Quenes dominions or countreys: that then euery ſuch perſō or perſons ſo doing or offendyng, their abettours, procurers and counſellours, and alſo theyr aydours, aſſiſtentes, and comfortours, vpon purpoſe & to thintent to ſet forth, further, and extoll, the ſayde vſurped power, aucthoritie or iuriſdiction of any of the ſaide Biſhop or Biſhops of Rome, and euery of them, being therof lawfully indited or preſented within one yere next after any ſuche offences by hym or them committed, and beyng lawfully conuicted or attaynted at any tyme after, accordyng to the lawes of this Realme, for euery ſuch default and offence, ſhall incurre into the daungers, penalties, paynes, and forfaitures, ordeyned and prouided by the Statute of prouiſion and premunire, made in the xvi. yere of the reigne of kyng Richard the ſeconde.
            And it is alſo enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that aſwell Iuſtices of Aſſiſe in theyr circuites, as Iuſtices of peace within the limittes of their Cōmiſſion & aucthorities, or two of euery ſuch Iuſtices of peace at the leaſt, wherof one to be of the Quorū, ſhal haue full power & aucthoritie by vertue of this Acte, in theyr quarter or open ſeſſions, to enquire of all offences, contemptes, & tranſgreſſions perpetrated, cōmitted, or done, contrary to the true meanyng of the premiſſes, in like maner and fourme as they may of other offences agaynſt the Quenes peace, and ſhall certifie euery preſentment afore them or any of them, had or made, concernyng the ſame or any part therof, before the Quene, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, in her or theyr court commonly called the kynges Bench, within. xl. dayes next after any ſuch preſentment had or made, yf the Terme be then open, & yf not, at the firſt day of the full Terme next folowyng the ſayde .xl. dayes, vpon payne that euery of the Iuſticiers of Aſſiſe, or Iuſticiers of the peace, before whom ſuche preſentment ſhalbe made, makyng default of ſuche certificat contrary to this Statute, to loſe and forfait for euery ſuche default one hundreth poundes to the Quenes hyghnes, her heyres, and ſucceſſours.
            AND it is enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayd, that the Iuſtices of the kynges Benche, aſwell vpon euery ſuch certificat, as by enquirie before them ſelues, within the limittes of theyr aucthorities, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie to heare, order, and determine euery ſuch offence, done or committed contrary to the true meanynge of this preſent Acte, accordynge to the lawes of this Realme, in ſuch lyke maner and fourme to all intentes and purpoſes, as yf the perſon or perſons agaynſte whom any preſentment ſhalbe had vpon this eſtatute, had ben preſented vpon any matter

or offence expreſſed in the ſayde eſtatute, made in the ſayd .xvi. yere of kyng Richarde the ſeconde.
            And moreouer, be it enacted by the auctoritie aforeſayde, that aſwell all maner of perſons, expreſſed and appoynted, in, and by the Act made in the firſt yere of the Quenes Maieſties reigne that nowe is, intituled (an Acte reſtoryng to the Crowne the auncient iuriſdiction ouer the eſtate Eccleſiaſticall & Spirituall, and abolyſhyng all forreyne powers repugnaunt to the ſame) to take the othe expreſſed and ſet forth in the ſame, as all other perſons which haue taken or ſhall take orders, commonly called ordines Sacros, or Eccleſiaſticall orders, haue ben or ſhalbe promoted, preferred, or admitted to any degree of learnyng, in any vniuerſitie within this Realme, or dominions to the ſame belongyng, and all Scolemaſters, and publike and priuate teachers of chyldren, as alſo all maner of perſon and perſons, that haue taken, or hereafter ſhall take any degree of learnyng, in, or at the cōmon lawes of this Realme, aſwell Vtterbarreſters, as Benchers, Reders, Auncientes in any houſe or houſes of Court, and all principall treaſorers, and ſuche as be of the graunde company in euery Inne of Chauncery, and al Atturneys, Prothonotaries, and Philizers towardes the lawes of this Realme, and all maner of Sheriffes, Eſchetours, and Feodaries, and all other perſon and perſons which haue taken, or ſhall take vpon hym or them, or haue ben, or ſhalbe admitted to any miniſtery or office, in, at, or belongyng to the common lawe, or any other lawe or lawes, or to, or for the execution of them, or anye of them, vſed or allowed, or at any tyme hereafter to be vſed or alowed within this Realme, or any of the dominions or countryes belonging, or which hereafter ſhall happen to belong to the Crowne or dignitie of the ſame, and all other officers or miniſters, of, or towardes any Court, whatſoeuer and euery of them: ſhall take and pronounce a corporal oth vpon the Euangeliſtes, before he or they ſhalbe admitted, alowed, or ſuffred to take vpon hym or them to vſe, exercyſe, ſupplye, or occupye any ſuche vocation, office, degree, miniſtery, roume, or ſeruice, as is aforeſayde, and that in the open court whervnto he doth or ſhall ſerue or belong. And yf he or they do not or ſhall not ſerue or belong to any ordinary or open Courte, then he or they ſhall take and pronounce the othe aforeſayde, in an open place before a conuenient aſſemble to witneſſe the ſame, and before ſuch perſon or perſons as haue or ſhall haue aucthoritie by common vſe or otherwyſe, to admitte or call any ſuche perſon or perſons as is aforeſayde, to any ſuch vocation, office, miniſterye, roume or ſeruice: or els before ſuche perſon or perſons, as by the Quenes hyghnes, her heyres, or ſucceſſours, by Commiſſion vnder

the great Seale of England ſhalbe named or aſſigned, to accepte & take the ſame, accordyng to the tenour, effect, & fourme of the ſame othe, verbatim, which is, & as it is already ſet forth, to be taken in the foreſaid Act made in the firſt yere of the Quenes Maieſties reigne.
            And alſo be it enacted by the aucthoritie of this perſent parliament, that euery Archbiſhop and Biſhop, within this Realme and dominions of the ſame, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie by vertue of this Acte, to tender or miniſter the othe aforeſaide, to euery or any Spirituall or Eccleſiaſticall perſon within theyr proper dioces, aſwell in places and iuriſdictions exempt, as els where.
            And be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the Lorde Chauncellour or keper of the great Seale of England for the time beyng, ſhall and may at all tymes hereafter, by vertue of this Acte without further warraunt, make and direct Commiſſion or Commiſſions, vnder the great Seale of Englande, to any perſon or perſons, geuyng them or ſome of them therby aucthoritie to tender & miniſter the othe aforeſayde, to ſuch perſon or perſons as by the aforeſayde Commiſſion or Commiſſions, the ſayde Commiſſioners ſhalbe aucthoriſed to tender the ſame othe vnto.
            And be it alſo further enacted by thaucthoritie of this preſente Parliament, that yf any perſon or perſons, appoynted or compellable by this Acte, or by the ſayde Acte made in the ſayde fyrſte yere, to take the ſayd othe, or yf any perſon or perſons, to whom the ſaid othe by any ſuch Commiſſion or Cōmiſſions, ſhalbe limitted and appoynted, to be tendred as is aforeſayde, do or ſhall at the tyme of the ſayde othe ſo tendred, refuſe to take or pronounce the ſayd othe, in maner and fourme aforeſayde: that then the partie ſo refuſyng, and beyng thereof lawfullye indited or preſented, within one yere next after any ſuch refuſall, and conuicted or attainted at any time after, accordyng to the lawes of this Realme, ſhall ſuffer and incurre the daungers, penalties, paynes, and forfaitures ordeined & prouided by the ſtatute of prouiſion and premunire aforeſaid, made in the .xvi. yere of the reigne of kyng Richarde the ſeconde.
            And furthermore, be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that all and euery ſuch perſon and perſons, hauyng aucthoritie to tender the othe aforeſaid, ſhal within .xl. dayes next after ſuch refuſal or refuſals of the ſayde othe, if the Terme be then open, and if not, then at the firſt day of the full Terme next folowyng the ſayde .xl. dayes, make true certificat vnder his or their ſeale or ſeales, of the names, places, & degrees of the perſon or perſons ſo refuſyng the ſame othe, before the Quene, her heyres, or ſucceſſours, in her or theyr court commonly called the kinges Benche, vpon payne that euery of the ſaid perſons, hauing ſuch auctoritie to tender the ſaide

othe, making default of ſuch certificat, ſhall for euery ſuch default forfait .C.li. to the Quenes highnes, her heires, or ſucceſſours. And that the Sheriffe of the countie, where the ſaid court cōmonly called the kinges Benche, ſhall for the time be holden, ſhall or may by vertue of this Act, empanel a Iury of the ſame countie, to enquire of, & vpon euery ſuch refuſall & refuſals: which Iury ſhall or may, vpon euery ſuch certificat & other euidence to them in that behalfe to be geuen by vertue of this Acte, proceade to endite the perſon & perſons ſo offendyng, in ſuch ſort & degree, to all intentes & purpoſes, as the ſame Iury may do of any offence or offences agaynſt the Quenes Maieſties peace, perpetrated, cōmitted or done within the ſame Countie, of, & for the which the ſame Iury is ſo impanelled.
            AND for ſtronger defence and maintenaunce of this Act: It is further ordeyned, enacted, & eſtabliſhed by thaucthoritie aforeſayd, that if any ſuch offendour or offendours, as is aforeſayd, of the firſt part or braunche of this eſtatute, that is to ſay, by wrytyng, cypheryng, printing, preaching, or teaching, dede, or acte, aduiſedly and wyttyngly, holde or ſtande with, to extoll, ſet forth, maintayne, or defend, the auctoritie, iuriſdiction or power of the Biſhop of Rome, or of his See, heretofore claymed, vſed, or vſurped, within this Realme, or in any dominion or countrye, being of, within, or vnder the Quenes power or obeyſaunce: or by any ſpeche, open dede, or acte, aduiſedly & wyttyngly attribute any ſuch maner of iuriſdiction, auctoritie, or preeminence to the ſayde See of Rome, or to any Biſhop of the ſame See for the time being, within this Realme, or in any the Quenes dominions or coūtryes, or be to any ſuch offendour or offendours, abettyng, procuryng, or counſellyng, or aydyng aſſiſtyng, or comfortyng, vpon purpoſe & to the intent to ſet forth, further, & extoll the ſaid vſurped power, auctoritie, or iuriſdiction, after ſuch conuiction & attendour, as is aforeſayd, do eftſones commit or do the ſayde offences, or any of them, in maner and fourme aforeſayd, and be therof duly conuicted & attainted, as is aforeſaid, and alſo, that if any the perſons aboue named, and appoynted by this Acte to take the othe aforeſaide, do after the ſpace of three monethes next after the firſt tendour therof, the ſecond tyme refuſe to take & pronounce, or do not take or pronounce the ſame, in fourme aforeſaid, to be tendered: that then euery ſuch offendour and offendours, for the ſame ſecond offence & offences, ſhall forfait, loſe, and ſuffer ſuch lyke, and the ſame paynes, forfaitures, iudgement, and execution, as is vſed in caſes of hygh treaſon.
            Prouided alwayes, that this Act nor any thyng therin conteined, nor any atteindour to be had by force & vertue of this Act, ſhall not extende to make any corruption of bloud, the diſherytyng of anye heyre, forfaiture of dower, nor to the preiudice of the ryght or tytle

of any perſon or perſons, other then the ryght or tytle of the offendour or offendours, duryng his, her, or theyr naturall lyues only. And that it ſhall and may be lawfull to euery perſon and perſons, to whom the ryght or intereſt of any landes, tenementes, or hereditamentes, after the death of any ſuche offendour or offendours ſhould or myght haue apperteyned, yf no ſuch atteyndour had ben, to enter into the ſame without any Ouſter le mayne to be ſued, in ſuch ſort as he or they myght haue done if this Acte had neuer ben had ne made.
            Prouided alſo, that the othe expreſſed in the ſaide Acte made in the ſayde fyrſt yere, ſhalbe taken and expounded in ſuch fourme as is ſette forth in an admonition annexed to the Quenes Maieſties Iniunctions, publyſhed in the fyrſte yere of her Maieſties reigne, that is to ſaye, to confeſſe and acknowledge in her Maieſtie, her heyres and ſucceſſours, none other auctoritie, then that was challenged and lately vſed by the noble king Henry the eyght, and king Edwarde the ſixt, as in the ſayde Admonition more playnely may appeare.
            And be it enacted by the auctoritie aforeſayde, that this Acte ſhalbe openly read, and publyſhed, and declared at euery quarter Seſſions by the Clarke of the peace, and at euery Lete and Laweday by the Stewarde of the Court, and once in euery Terme in the open hall of euery houſe and houſes of Court and Chauncery, at the tymes and by the perſons thervnto to be limitted and appoynted by the Lorde Chauncelour or keper of the great Seale for the tyme beyng.
            And be it further enacted, that euery perſon, whiche hereafter ſhalbe elected or appoynted a Knyght, Citezin, or Burgeſſe, or Baron for any of the fiue portes, for any Parliament or Parliamentes hereafter to be holden: ſhall from henceforth before he ſhal enter into the Parliament houſe, or haue any voyce there, openly receaue and pronounce the ſayde othe before the Lorde Steward for the tyme beyng, or his deputie or deputies for that tyme to be appoynted. And that he which ſhall enter into the Parliament houſe without takyng the ſayde othe, ſhalbe demed no Knyght, Citezin, Burgeſſe, nor Baron for that Parliament, nor ſhall haue anye voyce: But ſhalbe to all intentes, conſtructions, and purpoſes, as yf he had neuer ben retourned nor elected Knyght, Citezin, Burgeſſe, or Baron for that Parliament, and ſhall ſuffer ſuch paynes and penalties, as yf he had preſumed to ſytte in the ſame without election, retourne, or auctoritie.
            Prouided alwaye, that foraſmuch as the Quenes Maieſtie is otherwyſe ſufficiently aſſured of the faith and loyaltie of the Temporall

Lordes of her hygh court of Parliament: therfore this Act nor any thyng therin conteyned, ſhall not extende to compell any Temporall perſon, of, or aboue the degree of a Baron of this Realme, to take or pronounce the othe aboueſayde, nor to incurre any penaltie limitted by this Acte, for not takyng or refuſyng the ſame: Any thyng in this Acte to the contrary, in any wyſe notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that charitable geuyng of reaſonable almes to any of the offendour or offendours aboue ſpecified, without fraude or couin, ſhall not be taken or interpreted to be any ſuch abetment, procuryng, counſellyng, aydyng, aſſiſting, or comfortyng, as therby the geuer of ſuch almes ſhall incurre any payne, penaltie, or forfaiture appoynted in this Acte.
            Prouided alſo, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that yf any peere of this Realme, ſhall hereafter offende contrary to this Acte, or any braunch or article thereof, that in that and all ſuch caſe & caſes, they ſhalbe tryed by theyr peeres, in ſuch maner and fourme as in other caſes of treaſons they haue vſed to be tryed, and by none other meanes.
            Prouided alſo further & be it enacted, that no perſon ſhalbe compelled by vertue of this Acte to take the othe aboue mentioned, at or vpon the ſeconde tyme of offering of the ſame, accordyng to the fourme appointed by this ſtatute, except the ſame perſon hath ben, is, or ſhalbe an eccleſiaſticall perſon, that had, hath, or ſhal haue in the tyme of one of the reignes of the Quenes maieſties moſt noble father, brother, or ſyſter, or in the time of the reigne of the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres or ſucceſſours, charge, cure, or office in the Church, or ſuch perſon or perſons as had, hath, or hereafter ſhall haue any office or miniſtery in any Eccleſiaſticall Court of this Realme, vnder any Archbiſhoppe, or Biſhoppe, in any the tymes or reignes aforeſayde: or ſuch perſon or perſons as ſhall wylfully refuſe to obſerue the orders & rites for diuine ſeruice, that be aucthoriſed to be vſed & obſerued in the Church of England, after that he or they ſhalbe publikely by the Ordinary or ſome of his officers for eccleſiaſticall cauſes, admoniſhed to kepe and obſerue the ſame: or ſuch as ſhall openly & aduiſedly depraue by wordes, writinges, or any other open facte, any of the Rites & Ceremonies at any tyme vſed, & aucthoriſed to be vſed in the Church of Englande: or that ſhal ſay or heare the priuate Maſſe prohibited by the lawes of this Realme, and that all ſuch perſons ſhalbe compellable to take the othe vpon the ſeconde tender or offer of the ſame, and incurre the penalties for not takyng of the ſayde othe, and none other.
            
               AND foraſmuch as it is doubtfull whether by the lawes of this Realme there be any puniſhment for ſuche as kyll or ſlea any perſon or perſons attainted in or vpon a premunire: Be it therefore enacted by aucthoritie aforeſaid, that it ſhall not be lawfull to any perſon or perſons, to ſlea or kyll any perſon or perſons in any maner attaynted, or hereafter to be attaynted, of, in, or vpon any premunire, by pretence, reaſon, or aucthoritie of any iudgement geuen or hereafter to be geuen, in, or vpon the ſame, or by pretence, reaſon or force of any worde or wordes, thing or thinges conteyned or ſpecified in any ſtatute or lawe of prouiſion & premunire, or in any of them: Any law or ſtatute, or opinion, or expoſition of any lawe or Statute to the contrary in any wyſe notwithſtandyng.
            Sauyng alwayes the due execution of all and euery perſon and perſons, attaynted or to be attaynted, for any offence wherevpon iudgement of death nowe is, or ought to be, or hereafter may lawfully be geuen by reaſon of this Statute or otherwyſe: And ſauyng alwayes all and euery ſuch payne of death, or other hurte or puniſhment, as heretofore might without daunger of law be done vppon any perſon or perſons that ſhall ſende or bryng into this Realme, or any other the Quenes dominions, or within the ſame ſhall execute any ſummons, ſentence, excommunication, or other proces, agaynſt any perſon or perſons, from the Byſhop of Rome for the tyme beyng, or by and from the See of Rome, or thaucthoritie or iuriſdiction of the ſame See.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that no perſon or perſons, ſhall hereafter be endyted for aſſiſting, aydyng, mainteynyng, comfortyng or abettyng of any perſon or perſons for any the ſaid offences, in extollyng, ſettyng forth, or defending of the vſurped power and aucthoritie of the Biſhop of Rome, vnleſſe he or they be therof lawfully accuſed by ſuche good and ſufficient teſtimony or profe, as by the Iurye by whom he ſhall ſo be endyted, ſhalbe thought good, lawfull, and ſufficient to proue hym or them gylty of the ſayde offences.
         
         
            ¶ An Act for the maintenaunce and encreaſe of Tyllage. The .ii. Chapter.
            
               FOraſmuch as the Statute made in the fourth yere of the raigne of the late prince of worthy memorye Kyng Henry the ſeuenth, for the kepyng vp of houſes of huſbandry, and one other Statute made in the .vii. yere of the raigne of the late Kyng of moſte famous memory Kyng Henry the eyght, entituled

an Acte to auoyde lettyng downe of Townes, and alſo one other Acte made in the .xxvii. yere of the reigne of the ſame late kyng Henry the eyght, entituled an Acte concerning the decay of houſes and incloſures, are very good and profytable lawes for the common wealth of this Realme.
            It is therefore ordeyned and eſtablyſhed by the Quene our Soueraigne Ladye, with the aſſent of the Lordes Spirituall and Temporall, and the commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that the ſayde Actes, and euery of them, and euery braunche and article in the ſame, and euery of them conteyned, ſhall from henceforth be put in due execution, and remayne and continue in force for euermore.
            And alſo, where by an Acte made in the .xxvii. yere of the reigne of our ſayde late Soueraigne Lorde Kynge Henry the eyght, whereby diuers & ſundrye religious houſes of Monkes, Channons, and Nunnes, whiche myght not diſpende in landes, tenements, and hereditamentes aboue the clere yerely value of two hundreth poundes, were geuen to the ſayde late Kynge Henry the eyght, his heyres, and ſucceſſours for euer: It is among other thynges enacted and ordeyned, that all and ſinguler perſons, and bodyes polytyke and corporate, to whom the ſayde late kyng Henry the eyght, his heyres or ſucceſſours, after the makynge of the ſame Acte, ſhoulde geue, graunt, lette, or demyſe any Scite or precincte, with the houſes thervppon buylded, together with the demeanes of any Monaſteries, Priories, or other religious houſes, that ſhoulde be diſſolued or geuen to the ſayde late kyng Henry the eyght by that Acte, and the heyres, ſucceſſours, or aſſignes of euery ſuche perſon, bodye polytyke and corporate, ſhoulde kepe or cauſe to be kepte an honeſt contynuall houſe and houſeholde in the ſame Scite or precincte, and ſhoulde occupye or cauſe to be occupyed yerelye, as much of the demeanes in ploughyng and tyllyng of huſbandrye (that is to ſaye) as muche of the ſayde demeanes whiche then were commonlye vſed to be kepte in tyllage by the Gouernours, Abbottes, or Pryours of the ſame houſes, Monaſteries, or Priories, or by theyr fermour or fermours occupying the ſame, within the tyme of twentie yeres nexte before that Acte, vppon payne to forfayte to the kynges hyghneſſe, for euery moneth ſo offendynge .vi. li. xiii. s. iiii. d. to be recouered to his vſe in anye of his Courtes of Recorde. And ouer that, by the ſame Statute it is enacted, that all Iuſtices

of peace in euery Shyre where any ſuche offence ſhould be committed and done, contrary to the true meanyng & intent of that Acte or ſtatute, ſhoulde in euery quarter and generall Seſſyons within the limittes of their Cōmiſſion, enquire of the premiſſes, and ſhoulde haue full power and aucthoritie, to heare and determine the ſame, and to taxe and aſſeſſe no leſſe fine for euery the ſayde offences, then is before limitted for the ſayde offence, and eſtreates therof to be made and certified into the Kynges Exchequer, accordynge and at ſuche tyme and fourme, as other eſtreates of fynes, iſſues, and amerciamentes bee made by the ſame Iuſtyces, as by the ſame Acte more at large doth appeare. Whiche parte of the ſayde Acte concernyng kepynge of houſe and houſeholde in the ſayde Scites and precinctes, and occupying of ſuch demeanes of the ſame in tyllage, as is aforeſayde, then was, and yet is thought very beneficiall to the common wealth, and moſte nedefull to be put in due execution.
            BE IT therefore enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the ſayde braunches and articles of the ſayde eſtatute laſt aboue mentioned, made in the ſayde .xxvii. yere of our ſayde late Soueraigne Lorde Kynge Henrye the eyght, and euery penaltie and thyng touchyng the ſame, be alſo from henceforth put in due execution, and ſhall remayne and continue in theyr full force and vertue, accordyng to the good entente and meanyng of the ſame laſte recited Statute: Any thyng in this preſent Acte to be hereafter conteyned to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            AND foraſmuche as there haue ben ſythens the makynge of the ſayde Statute, certayne other lawes and Statutes made in the tyme of our late Soueraigne Lorde king Edwarde the ſyxte, and in the tyme of our late Soueraigne Kynge Phillip and Quene Mary, for the reedifying of decayed houſes of huſbandrye, and for the encreaſe of tyllage, whiche beyng in ſome partes thereof vnperfecte, and in ſome places to mylde and gentle, haue not brought to the decayed ſtate of tyllage, and of houſes of huſbandrye, that longe loked for remedye, whiche was then hoped for: Be it therefore enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the ſayde lawes and Statutes made in the tymes of the ſayde late kyng Edwarde the ſyxt, and Kynge Phillip and Quene Marye, touchynge and concernynge the decaye of houſes of huſbandrye, and for the encreaſe of Tyllage, and euerye article and thynge in them and

euery of them conteyned, ſhalbe form hencefoorth repelled and made voyde to all intentes and purpoſes.
            And be it alſo further enacted and eſtabliſhed by thaucthoritie aforeſayd, that from & after the feaſt of Thannunciation of our Lady, which ſhalbe in the yere of our Lord God, a thouſand fiue hundred threſcore and foure: all ſuch landes and groundes, or ſo muche in quantitie as in any Towne, Village, Hamlette, Lordſhyp, place knowen, or paryſhe within the Realme of Englande or Wales, haue bene eared, ploughed, and put in tyllage in any one yere, & ſo kept in tillage by the ſpace of foure yeres, any time ſithens the feaſt of S. George the Martir in the .xx. yere of the reigne of King Henry theight (other then the ſayd demeanes of the ſayd late Monaſteries, Priories, and religious houſes, geuen as is aboue rehearſed to the ſayde late kynge Henry theight in the ſayde .xxvii. yere of his reigne) ſhalbe eared, ploughed, vſed and kept in tillage, or cauſed to be eared, ploughed, vſed, and kept in tyllage for euer, accordynge to the nature of the ſoyle and cuſtome of the countrey, by the occupyer or occupiers therof, without fraude or colluſion, vpon paine that euery offendour contrary to this Act, ſhal loſe and forfayte yerely for euery acre ten ſhillinges, which forfayture, ſhall go and be in maner and fourme folowynge. That is to ſay, to ſuch perſon or perſons as ben next in reuertion or remaynder therof, for tearme of lyfe, lyues, or in tayle, their executours or adminiſtratours. And that by thaucthoritie of this Act, it ſhalbe lawfull for him or them to leuye the ſame penaltie and forfayture of .x.s. for euery acre by diſtres, and to iuſtifie or make their aduouries or cogniſaunces for the ſame, in ſuch maner and fourme, as any perſon or perſons may do for rentes reſerued vpon eſtate or eſtates made for tearme of yeares, of any landes or tenementes, or otherwyſe, ſhall and may ſue for the ſame penaltie and forfayture by action of debt, byll, playnt, or information in any Court of recorde of the Quene our ſoueraigne Lady, her heires or ſucceſſours, wherin no wager of law, eſſoygne or protection, ſhalbe allowed or admitted for the partie defendant. And if they, or any of them do not diſtrayne, or otherwiſe clayme or demaunde the ſayde penaltie and forfayture by any the wayes or meanes aforeſayde, within the ſpace of one whole yere next after the offence done in fourme aforeſayde, and purſue for the ſame with effect, without fraude or couyn, and do not recouer (and myght haue recouered the ſame) with ſuche ſpede as maye be by the due order of the lawe: That then after ſuch default, it ſhalbe lawefull for him or them to whom the reuertion or remaynder of the fee ſymple of the ſayde landes ſhall

appertayne, their executours or adminiſtratours to diſtrayne, auowe, or make cogniſaunce, and iuſtifie, or otherwiſe to ſue for the ſayd forfayture and paynes in fourme aforeſayd, at any time within one yere next enſuynge any ſuche default. And in his or their default, the ſayde penaltie or forfayture, to go and be to the immediate Lorde or Lordes of the fee or fees, of whom the ſayde landes ben holden, to be recouered in maner and fourme aforeſayde, ſo that he or they do take and ſue for hys or theyr remedie therin, within one yere next enſuinge any ſuche default, in maner and fourme aforeſaide. And in his and theyr default, the ſaid penaltie and forfayture to go and be to the Quenes highnes, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, to be recouered by any of the meanes or remedyes aforeſayd, at any tyme or tymes, at her or theyr wylles and pleaſures, or otherwyſe to any other perſon or perſons that wyll ſue, aſwell for the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, as for him or them ſelues for the ſame paynes and forfaytures, vppon whiche ſuite, the one moytie ſhalbe and go to the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres or ſucceſſours: and the other, to him or them that ſo wyll ſue for the ſame, by action of debte, byll, playnt, or information, in any of the Quenes Courtes of record, wherin no eſſoyne, protection, or wager of lawe, ſhalbe admitted or allowed for the partie defendaunt.
            AND be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf any perſon or perſons, beynge an occupier and owner of any ſuche landes and groundes as is aforeſayde, of any eſtate of inheritaunce, ſhall offende agaynſt the fourme of thys Act: That then the ſayde penaltie and forfayture, ſhall goe and be to the next immediate Lorde, or Lordes of the fee or fees thereof, his or theyr executours or adminiſtratours, to bee recouered by ſuche wayes and meanes, as before is limitted & appoynted, ſo that he or they do purſue and take theyr remedye for the ſame in fourme aforeſayd, within one yeare next after ſuche offence committed. And yf any ſuche occupier and owner, ſhalbe a Coppyholder, or a cuſtomary tenaunt, that then the ſaide penaltie or forfayture, to go and be to the Lorde or Lordes of the manour, of whom the ſame Coppye or cuſtomary tenementes bene holden, theyr executours or adminiſtratours, ſo that he or they do purſue and take theyr remedy for the ſame, in ſuch maner and fourme, and within the time laſt before limitted. And in euery ſuche default of the ſaide Lord or Lordes of the fee or fees, and of the Lord or Lordes of the ſayde manour or manours as is aforeſayde, or of anye of them, the ſayde penalties and forfaytures to go and bee to the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres and ſucceſſours, or to ſuche other

perſon or perſons as wyll ſue for the ſame, aſwell for the Quene, her heyres or ſucceſſours, as for him or them ſelues, in ſuch maner and fourme, as before is declared. In euery whiche ſuite, none eſſoygne, protection, or wager of lawe, ſhalbe admitted or allowed for the partie defendaunt.
            Prouided alwayes, & be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayd, that this Act or any thynge therin conteyned, ſhal not be preiudiciall, ne ſhall extende to charge any perſon or perſons, that hath or ſhall turne any grounde from tillage to paſture, and ſhall kepe ſuch grounde in paſture hole and not conuerted to tyllage, for the onely maintenaunce and kepinge of his or their owne Horſes, Geldinges, Mares, or draught Oxen, or for the mayntenaunce or kepynge of kyne or other cattell, for the onely victuelles to be ſpent in hys or their owne houſes, ſo that the ſame perſon or perſons hath, or ſhall not haue in his or their poſſeſſion, occupation, or diſpoſition, other ſufficient paſture grounde for that purpoſe, within v. myles of his or their manſion houſe.
            Prouyded alſo, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that no perſon or perſons, that ſhal commonly feede and ſell yerely beefes or muttons, to a greater number then he or they ſhall yerely ſpende in victuel, in his or their owne manſion houſe or houſes, or that ſhalbe a cōmon fatter of beefes or muttons, or any of them, as a common graſier or ſhepemaſter, to be commonly ſolde in markettes and fayres, or to cōmon Butchers, ſhalbe taken, expounded, or vnderſtande to be ſuche perſon or perſons, as by this prouiſo laſt aboue mentioned, may kepe any grounde or paſture hole, and not conuerted to tyllage for the maintenaunce and kepinge of kyne or other cattell, for the onely victuell to be ſpent in his or their owne houſes, but ben & ſhalbe excepted out of ye ſame prouiſo: Any thyng in the ſame prouiſo conteyned to the contrary notwithſtandinge.
            Prouided alſo, and be it lykewyſe enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that this Acte or any thyng therin conteyned, ſhall not extende vnto any lawfull Parke or Parkes, or auncient warrens nowe vſed with Deare or Connyes, or to any Parke or Parkes heretofore lawefully vſed as Parkes, and beyng nowe diſparked, or to any other groūdes that heretofore haue ben by any her highnes progenitours, or hereafter ſhall fortune to be made parkes or warrens by licenſe of our ſoueraigne Lady the Quene, her heires or ſucceſſours, with ſufficient clauſe of diſpenſation for conuerting of tyllage into paſture, and ben or ſhalbe layed, beſtowed and imployed to the maintenaunce and kepynge of Deare or Connyes, without fraude or couyn, and not to the feedynge or kepynge of any other cattell or beaſtes, but onelye mylche kyne for hym or

them ſelues, or his or their keper of ſuch Parke or Warren, for the prouiſion of his or theyr houſe or houſes, or for the kepyng of his or theyr horſes, geldynges, mares, coltes, or ſwyne, ne ſhall extende to anye waſte groundes, commons, heathes, downes, fennes, moores, commonly vſed as common, nor to any heathes, fennes, moores, maryſhes, beyng nowe vſed in ſeueraltie, and not commonly vſed to be ſowen and put in tyllage ſence the ſayde feaſt of Saint George, in the ſayd twentie yere of the reigne of kyng Henrye the .viii. nor to any freſhe marſhes being ſurrounded with water within the ſpace of ſixe yeres next before the fyrſte daye of this preſent Parliament, nor to any Orchard, Garden, Poole, or pondyarde, nor to any grounde ſette or ſowen with Saffron, Hoppes, Garlyke, Onyons, Flaxe, Ode, or Madder, or being without fraude or guyle ſowen with Acornes, or ſette with anye kynde of yonge woods, nor to any wood groundes which be not ſtubbed, or wherin the wood hath ben felled, or hereafter ſhalbe felled, & the rotes and ſtubbes therof yet remaynyng vndygged vp, nor any medowes or other groundes without fraude or couyn, accuſtomably vſed to be mowen for Haye once in the yere at the leaſt, duryng ſuch tyme as all and euery the ſame ſhalbe vſed or put to the vſes & intentes before ſpecified: Any thyng in this Acte conteyned to the contrary notwithſtandyng. And where in the ſayde firſt prouiſo it is mencioned that this Act or any thing therin conteyned ſhal not extend or be preiudicial to any perſon or perſons for keping of any ground in paſture or medowe for the only mayntenaunce or kepyng of his or theyr owne horſes, mares, geldynges, or draught oxen, or for the maintenaunce or kepyng of kyne or other cattell for the onely prouiſion or victuellyng of his or theyr manſion, or dwellyng houſe or houſes: Be it declared and enacted by thauctoritie aforeſayd, that yf it ſhall fortune any ſuch perſon or perſons to be abſent, and not reſident, at, or vpon his or theyr vſuall manſion or dwellyng houſe or houſes, with his familie or houſehold, for and by occaſion of ſeruice or attendaūce to be done by any ſuch perſon or perſons, by the expreſſe commaundement of the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres, or ſucceſſours, within the Realme or without, or els hauyng two or three manſion or dwellyng houſes, and ſhalbe reſident and dwellyng with his familie but at one of them, or ſhalbe within age: That then duryng and for the tyme of ſuche ſeruice, attendaunce, minoritie, and abſence (and one yere next after) from any his ſaid dwellyng houſes, or duryng and for the time that he or they ſhalbe reſident & dwellyng with his familie, but at or vpon one of them, ſhall and may kepe ſuch groundes in paſture or medowe, belongyng or vſually occupyed with any of the ſayde two or three houſes,

and with no mo nor others, in his or theyr owne handes or occupation, or let it out to any other perſon or perſons, without incurryng of any danger or forfaiture by vertue of this Acte, ſo that the ſame perſon or perſons, ſhal and do kepe the ſame manſion and dwellyng houſe or houſes vnletten, and in good and ſufficient reparations, and mete and conuenient for hym or them to repayre and reſort vnto at all tymes for his or theyr dwellyng and abode: Any thyng in the ſayde prouiſo, or in any part of this Acte, to the contrary therof in any wyſe notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the repeale of any Acte or Statute nowe repelled by this preſent Acte, nor any other matter or thyng herein conteyned, ſhall in any wyſe extende, or be interpreted, iudged, or expounded, to hynder, hurte, or take away any ſuite, information or informations exhibited, and nowe depending in the Quenes Maieſties court of Exchequer, or in any other court of Recorde, for, or in any wyſe concernyng the decaye of any houſes or tenementes of huſbandry, or for the conuerting of any landes or tenements from tyllage into paſture, contrary to the fourme and effect of any Statute or Statutes heretofore made: But that all and euery ſuche ſuites and informations, ſhall ſtande, remayne, and be of as good force and effecte in the law, to all intentes, conſtructions, and purpoſes, as the ſame and euery of them were before the makyng of this Acte. And that the ſayde Actes and Statutes nowe by this preſent Acte repelled, ſhall for and in reſpect only of the ſayde informations and ſuites, and euery of them ſo nowe dependynge, ſtande, remayne, and be in ſuch lyke force and effecte, as they and euery of them were before the makyng of this Acte: Any thyng herein conteyned to the contrary therof, notwithſtandyng.
            And where as ſome doubt and queſtion, hath heretofore ryſen and ben moued, vpon certayne wordes conteyned in the ſayd Statute, made in the ſayde fourth yere of the reigne of the late Kyng Henry the ſeuenth, that is to ſaye, vppon theſe wordes: houſe or houſes letten to ferme, with .xx. acres of lande at leaſt, or more, lying in tyllage and huſbandrye: whether the ſame .xx. acres of lande or more, ſhoulde be accompted and taken to be all earable lande, and wholly put in tyllage or not, and alſo what quantitie and meaſure euery acre ſhoulde be of, and conteyne.
            For a playne and perfecte declaration and interpretation wherof: Be it enacted and declared by thaucthoritie of this preſent parliament, that the ſayde Statute is, and ſhalbe expounded and taken, to extende to houſe or houſes, that nowe haue, or hath, or at any tyme heretofore ſythens the fyrſt yere of the reigne of the ſayde

late kyng Henry the .vii. haue or hath had, or that hereafter ſhall haue .xx. acres of grounde to the ſame houſe or houſes lying or belongyng, or with the ſame commonly occupyed or vſed, although the ſame grounde hath not ben, is, or ſhalbe all whollye vſed as earable lande and put in tyllage, but onely ſome part therof, and that the content of euery acre, ſhalbe taken and rated after the rate and meaſure limitted and appoynted in the ordinaunce or treatiſe De terris menſurandis: Any ambiguitie, doute, or thyng, whatſoeuer to the contrary therof, notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf any perſon or perſons hath, or at any tyme hereafter ſhall ſuſtayne any penaltie, forfaiture, or loſſe, for or by reaſon of any offence cōmitted or done contrary to the tenour or effecte of this Act, or any other of the Actes before recited & confirmed: that then he or they ſhall not be eftſones ſued, vexed, or impeched for the ſame offence: Any thyng in this Acte, or in any other of the Actes aforeſaide, had or made to the contrary therof, notwithſtandyng.
            And to thintent that the offendour of this Act, or of any the Actes before ſpecified, & by this Act confirmed, & thoffences cōmitted and done againſt any of the ſame, may be the better knowen, & that the more due executiō therof may be had: Be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that the Lord Chaūcellour, or Lord keper of the great Seale of England for the tyme beyng, ſhal haue full power & auctoritie by vertue of this Act; from time to time to awarde & direct a Cōmiſſion or Cōmiſſions vnder the great Seale of Englande, into euery ſhire or countie within this Realme & Wales, to ſuch perſōs, as by his wiſdome & diſcreſſion ſhal be thought moſt mete & conuenient, aucthoriſing them, or foure of thē at the leaſt, by vertue therof, & of this Act, to enquire & ſearch out within euery Towne, Vyllage, Pariſhe, & Hamlet within their Cōmiſſion, by the othes of .vi. lawful & indifferent perſons, or otherwyſe, according to their good diſcreſſions, of the offences cōmitted or done againſt this Statute, or any other the Statutes before mentioned, & by this Acte confirmed, & whether any perſon or perſons to whom any penaltie or forfaiture is geuē, limitted, or appoynted by the ſame, or any of them, haue taken the benefite or aduantage of the ſayde forfaitures and paynes, or not, according to the ſame lawes and ſtatutes. And that within three monethes next after euery ſuch enquitie and ſearch, the ſaid Cōmiſſioners, or foure of them at the leaſt, ſhal make certificat therof, and of their doinges by vertue of the ſaide Cōmiſſion, vnder their handes and ſeales, into the high Court of Chauncery, vpon payne of forfaiture of euery ſuch Cōmiſſioner .xx.li. ſterlyng to the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours. And that the

ſame Cōmiſſioners, or two of them at the leaſt, ſhall haue aucthoritie & power by vertue of this act, to direct their precept to the Sheriffes of the countie, being within the limittes of their Cōmiſſion, to warne as many honeſt men of his Baylywyke, as the ſaid Commiſſioners ſhal appoynt, by whom the trueth in the premiſſes may be beſt knowen, to enquire, and true preſentment make, of all and euery offences cōmitted or done contrary to the ſayde Actes, or any of them, and to ſet ſuch reaſonable fines and amerciamentes vpon ſuch perſons as ſhal make default of their apparaunces, or making theyr apparaunces, ſhall neglect to do their dueties in & about the execution of the premiſſes, as to the ſame Cōmiſſioners or foure of them, ſhalbe by their diſcreſſions thought mete and conuenient, ſo that the ſame fines or amerciamentes for any one default, excede not the ſūme of .xx.s. And that the ſame fines & amerciamentes ſo by them taxed & ſet, ſhalbe yerely well and truely eſtreated into the court of the Exchequer, & there to be leuied to the vſe of our Soueraigne Lady the Quene, her heires, & ſucceſſours, as other fines & amerciaments haue ben there accuſtomed & vſed to be leuied. And that if the Sheriffe to whō ſuch precept ſhalbe awarded, ſhalbe remiſſe or negligēt in ſeruing of the precept, & returnyng of the ſame at the tyme & place appoynted & prefixed in the ſayde precept: that then the ſaid Cōmiſſioners or foure of them, ſhall for euery ſuch default, aſſeſſe & taxe vpon the ſayde Sheriffe .x. li. and ſhall eſtreate the ſame into the ſayde Courte of Exchequer, to be leuied to the Quenes Maieſties vſe, her heyres, & ſucceſſours, as is aforeſayde.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that it ſhal not be lawful to any Sheriffe, vnder Sheriffe, or Sheriffes deputie, to infringe or enter into any libertie or fraūches for thexecution of any ſuch precept: But ſhall make his mandatum to the Baylyffe of the fraunches or libertie for thexecutyng & ſeruing of the ſame, and that the Baylyffe of euery ſuch fraunches or libertie, ſhal ſerue & execute the ſaid precept according to the tenor therof, in ſuch like maner & fourme as the Sheriffe ſhould or ought to haue done, if it had ben within his Baylywyke, vpon payne of forfaiture of .v.li. to be eſtreated and leuyed as is aforeſaid.
            Prouided alſo, & be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that the puttyng of any landes or tenementes hereafter frō paſture to tyllage, accordyng to the tenor and effect of this Acte, ſhall not in any wyſe extende to be any cauſe of breach or forfaiture of any bonde, couenaunt, payment, or conditiō made, or hereafter to be made betwene any perſon or perſons, bodies politike or corporate, whiche in any wyſe is or ſhalbe repugnaunt or contrariaunt to this Acte.
            Prouided alwayes and be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that this Acte or any thyng therin conteyned, ſhall not

extend to geue any benefite, aduantage or libertie to any perſon or perſons, which at any time ſythens the ſayd feaſt of S. George the Martir, hath conuerted or employed, or hereafter ſhall conuert or employ any more grounde to the kepyng of Connyes, not beyng lawfull warren, then fyue acres at the moſte, and the ſame to be within one myle of his dwellyng houſe, and alſo not noyſome or hurtfull to the corne of any perſon or perſons, other then of the owner of the ſame grounde, ſo that he or they put and kepe in tyllage, as much or as many acres of his owne proper grounde, lying within the ſayde Manour, Lordſhip, or Paryſhe, as the ſayde Conygree ſhall conteyne aboue the ſayde numbre of fyue acres, that hath not heretofore ben liable to be continued in tyllage by force of any lawe or Statute: Any thyng in this Act before mentioned to the contrary therof, notwithſtandyng.
            And where alſo by the ſayde eſtatute of Henry the .vii. the meaning of the makers therof appeareth to be, that euery houſe of huſbandrye hauyng .xx. acres of lande or more, belongyng or lying therevnto, or with the ſame commonly occupyed, vſed, or demyſed: the ſame .xx. acres or more, ſhoulde not be ſeuered or deuyded from the ſayde houſe or houſes, but ſhoulde be demyſed, occupyed, or vſed together, for the better maintenaunce of euery ſuche houſe & houſes, and of tyllage and huſbandry.
            Be it therfore enacted and declared by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that no perſon or perſons whatſoeuer, hauyng or that hereafter ſhall haue any ſuch houſes or houſe of huſbandry, with .xx. acres of lande or more, belongyng or lying therevnto, or with the ſame commonlye occupyed, vſed, or demyſed: ſhall from and after the fyrſt day of this preſent Parliament, ſeuer or deuide the ſayde .xx. Acres of lande or more, nor any part therof, from any of the ſayde houſe or houſes, vnleſſe the ſame be kept in tyllage, or otherwyſe for the profyte of huſbandry, accordyng to the nature of the ground, or according to the cuſtome of the Manours where the ſame lande ſhall ſo be, vpon the paynes & forfaitures conteyned in the ſayde eſtatute of Henry the .vii. to be taken in ſuche fourme as by the ſame ſtatute appeareth, excepte he or they ſhall lay & aſſigne to the ſayde houſe or houſes, or to any other houſe or houſes beyng within the ſame Pariſhe or Lordeſhip, or within two myles of the ſaid houſes, being alſo not bounde to be mainteined and vpholden by fourme of the ſaid ſtatute of king Henry the .vii. as much other lande within the ſame Paryſhe, Lordſhip, or within two myles, as is aboueſaid, for & in liew of ſuch or ſo much of the former land, as ought to haue cōtinued by force of the ſaid ſtatute, with the former houſe, & can not cōueniently be returned to the ſame former houſe.
            
               And be it further enacted by auctoritie aforeſayde, that yf any ſuch houſe or houſes of huſbandrye, and lande, be deuided or ſeuered the one frō the other, by reaſon of any leaſe or leaſes, for terme of lyfe, lyues, or for terme of yeres, made or graunted before the fyrſte daye of this preſent Parliament: that then whenſoeuer the ſaid leaſe or leaſes ſhal end or determine by any maner of meanes, ſo as the ſame houſe or houſes, and landes therevnto belongyng, ſhalbe diſcharged of all ſuch leaſes, the ſame houſe and houſes and landes ſo demiſed, ſhall not afterwards be ſeuered or deuided thone from thother, but ſhall go, be kept, and occupyed together at all tymes after, accordyng to the declaration before mencioned, vpon the paynes and forfaitures laſt before ſpecified, and to be taken alſo, as in the ſayde Statute is mencioned: Excepte by the returnyng or reuniting of the ſame lande to the ſayde houſe, there ſhall or may growe any manifeſt decay of any other houſes newly edified, or of any other farmes that hath ben by meanes of diſtribution or ſeueraunce of the ſame lande or landes, or any part therof, made or aſſigned to be ſeuerall tenementes or holdes.
            And where in the ſayde Statute made in the ſayde .vii. yere of the reigne of the ſayde kyng Henry the .viii. amonges other thynges in the ſame, it is enacted, that yf ſythens the fyrſte daye of the ſame Parliament, any landes, whiche at the ſame fyrſt daye, or ſythens the ſame fyrſt day, were commonly vſed in tyllage, were incloſed, or from thenceforth ſhoulde be incloſed and turned onlye to paſture, whereby any houſe of huſbandry then was or therafter ſhuld be decayed: that then all ſuch landes ſhould be by the owner or owners therof, theyr heyres, ſucceſſours, or aſſignes, or other for them, within one yere next enſuing the ſame decay, put in tyllage, and exerciſed, vſed, and occupyed in huſbandry and tyllage, as they were the firſt day of the ſame Parliament, or at any tyme ſythens, and after the maner and vſage of the countrey where ſuche landes dyd lye, as by the ſayd Act more playnely may appeare.
            And foraſmuch as vpon the ſaid part of the ſayd ſtatute, diuers doubtes and queſtions haue ben moued heretofore: Be it therfore enacted & declared by the auctoritie aforeſayde, that yf at any tyme ſythens the makyng of the ſayd Acte, & before the ſayde feaſte of S. George, in the ſayde .xx. yere of the reigne of the ſayde late kyng Henry the .viii. any landes belongyng to any ſuche houſe of huſbandry as is aforeſayd, haue ben turned from tyllage to paſture by any perſon or perſons: that then the ſame landes, or ſo much other landes being within the ſame Paryſhe, Lordſhip, or Manour, that heretofore was not liable or bounde by any lawe or ſtatute to be kept in tyllage, ſhalbe turned agayne into tyllage within one yere

next after the ſeſſion of this preſent parliamēt, & kept in tyllage for euer, according to the cuſtome of the country, & nature of the ſoyle, whether the ſaid houſe whervnto the ſaid landes dyd belong be decayed or no, or whether the ſame landes were encloſed or not encloſed, or whether ſome part therof, & not the whole, were kept in tyllage or not, vpon the paynes conteyned in the ſame ſtatute made in the ſayd .vii. yere of the reigne of the ſaid late king Henry the .viii.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf any perſon or perſons whatſoeuer, hauing any paſture, heath, waſt, or barren ground, which hath not ben heretofore cōmonly vſed to be eared or tylled for corne, and yet neuertheleſſe the ſame perſon or perſons, to thintent to better & amende the ſaid ground, & not to vſe the ſame for tyllage, haue, or hath at any tyme heretofore turned or put the ſame into tyllage, or at any tyme hereafter ſhall turne or put the ſame into tyllage, and hath or ſhall kepe the ſame grounde for that cauſe only in tyllage by the ſpace of foure yeres togethers, that this Act or any thyng therin conteined ſhal not compel any perſon or perſons to continue or put in tyllage the ſaid paſture, heath, barren or waſt grounde ſo eared: Any thing before expreſſed in this act to the contrary therof notwithſtanding.
            Prouided alwayes, that this Act, or any prouiſion, clauſe, or article therin conteyned, ſhall not be vnderſtand or expounded to extende or be in any wyſe preiudiciall to thoſe partes or porcions of groundes, wherin any ower of Leade, Tin, or Iron, or Coles comly called ſea cole, ſtone cole, or moore cole, haue ben, are, or hereafter ſhalbe vſually gotten, by meanes wherof, the ſame groūdes can not conueniently be put & kept in tyllage: This Acte, or any other law, vſage, or cuſtome to the contrary, in any wyſe notwtſtanding.
            Prouided alſo that this Acte, nor any thyng therein conteyned, ſhal extende to compell any perſon or perſons to put in tyllage any landes or groundes within any foreſt or chaſe, excepte the foreſt of Snowden in Northwales, otherwyſe then before the makyng of this Statute, he or they ought, or were bounde to do. This Acte to endure to the ende of the next ſeſſion of Parliament.
            Prouided alway, yt this ſtatute or any thyng therin conteyned, ſhal not extend to cōpell any inhabitant of ye coūties of Northūberland, Weſtmerland, or Cūberland, to reedifie, maintein, or to kepe in manurance any houſe or ground yt ſhalbe ouerthrowē, burned, deſtroyed, waſted, or decayed by enemies, or by any occaſiō of warres or inuaſiōs, during ye warres, or win .iiii. yeres after ye concluſiō of peace next folowing ſuch ouerthrowing, burning, deſtructiō, waſting, or other thyng in this preſent Act to the contrary notwithſtandyng.
            And foraſmuch as this Acte ſhall continue but to the ende of the nexte ſeſſion of Parliament: Be it therefore enacted by auctoriritie

aforeſayde, that no perſon or perſons, ſhall from henceforth conuert from tillage to paſture, any grounde whiche was in tillage the fyrſt day of thys Parliament, other then ſuche as they myght lawfully haue conuerted from tyllage to paſture, before the makinge of this Act: Any thynge contayned in thys Acte to the contrary notwithſtandynge.
         
         
            ¶ An Act for the reliefe of the poore. ¶ The .iii. Chapter.
            
               TO thintent that ydle and loyterynge perſons and valiaunt beggers may be auoyded, and thimpotent, feble, and lame, whiche are the poore in very dede, ſhould be hereafter relieued and well prouyded for:
            Be it enacted by the Quene our ſoueraygne Lady, with thaſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons in thys preſent parliament aſſembled, & by thaucthoritie of the ſame, that the ſtatute made in the .xxii. yeare of the late kinge of famous memory, kinge Henry theight, and alſo the ſtatute made in the thyrde and fourth yeres of the reigne of the famous kyng Edwarde the ſyxt, concerninge beggers, vagaboundes, and ydle perſons, and euery article, clauſe, braunche, ſentence, and other thynges conteyned in them, and eyther of them, other then ſuche thynges as ſhalbe by thys preſent Acte otherwiſe ordayned and prouided for: ſhall ſtande, remayne, and be in their full force and effect, and ſhalbe alſo from henceforth, iuſtly and truely put in execution, accordynge to the true meaninge of the ſayde ſeuerall ſtatutes, and euery of them.
            AND further be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaide, that yerely vpon the Sunday next before the feaſt day of the Natiuitie of S. Iohn Baptiſt, commonly called Midſomer day, in euery Citie, Borough, and Towne corporate, the Maior, Bayliefes, or other head officers for the time being: & in euery other paryſhe of the coūtrey, the Parſon, Vicar, or Curate & churchwardens, ſhal haue written in a Regiſter or boke to be prouided by them, aſwel the names of the inhabitaūtes & houſholders within their citie, Borough, Towne corporate, or paryſhe: as alſo the names of all ſuch impotent, aged, & nedy perſons, as be within their citie, Borough, Towne corporate, or paryſhe, which are not hable to liue of them ſelues, nor with their owne laboure, & ſhal openly in the church & quietly after diuine ſeruice, call ye ſaid houſholders & inhabitantes together, among whō ye Maior or other head officers,

and two of the chiefe inhabitauntes in euery ſuche Citie, Borough, and Towne corporate, ſuche as the Maior or other head officers ſhall thynke meete. And the Parſon, Vycar, or Curate, and Churchwardens in euery other paryſhe, ſhall elect, nominate and appoynt yerely two hable perſons or mo, to be gatherers and Collectours of the charitable almes of all the reſidue of the people inhabytyng in the paryſhe, wherof they be choſen Collectours for the reliefe of the poore, Which Collectours, the Sunday next after their election, or the Sundaye folowing yf nede require, when the people are at the Church at diuine ſeruice: ſhal gentelly aſke and demaunde of euery man and woman, what they of theyr charitie wyl be contented to geue wekely towardes the reliefe of the poore, and the ſame to be wrytten in the ſayde Regeſter or booke. And the ſayde gatherers ſo beyng elected and choſen, ſhall iuſtly gather and truely diſtribute the ſame charitable almes wekely by them ſelues or theyr aſſignes, to the ſayde poore & impotent perſons of the ſayde Cities, Boroughes, Townes corporate, and Paryſhes, without fraude or couin, fauour or affection, and after ſuch ſorte, that the more impotent, may haue the more helpe, and ſuche as can get part of theyr lyuyng, to haue the leſſe, and by the diſcreſſion of the Collectours, to be put in ſuch labour as they be fyt & hable to do, but none to go or ſyt openly a beggyng, vpon payne limitted in the aforeſaid Statutes. And yf the ſayde Maiors, Baylyffes, head officers, Parſon, Vicar, Curate and Churchwarden, or any of them, faile in the doyng and executyng of the premiſſes in fourme aboue declared, he or they ſo makyng default, to forfeyte for euery ſuche default .xl.s. to be employed to the vſe of the poore of that paryſhe, where he or they do inhabite, to be leuyed by the Collectours of the ſame paryſhe by way of diſtreſſe, or otherwyſe, as is appoynted in this Acte for leuying of lyke forfaitures.
            And be it enacted by thauctoritie aforeſayd, that no perſon or perſons ſo elected, nominated, & appoynted to be gatherer or gatherers as is aforeſayd, ſhall refuſe the ſayd office, but ſhall iuſtlye and truelye execute the ſame, by the ſpace of one whole yere next enſuyng ſuch election, vppon payne to forfaite .x.li. thone moitie therof to the Churchwardens of the paryſhe where he or they ſhalbe elected Collectour, and thother moitie therof, to the vſe and reliefe of the poore of the ſaide pariſhe, to be leuied by the Churchwardens where they or he dwelleth, of the goodes of the ſayde gatherer or gatherers ſo refuſyng, by diſtreſſe, or els by action of debte, byll, playnt, or information, to be brought or purſued by the ſayde Churchwardens of the ſayde Paryſhe, where

they ſhall dwell, in any court of Recorde, or in the courte of any Lorde of any Manour within the ſayde paryſhe where the ſayde gatherer ſhalbe ſo choſen. In which ſuite, no protection or wager of lawe ſhalbe alowed or admitted for the partie defendaunt.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf the ſayde Churchwardens, or eyther of them, ſhall refuſe to ſue for the ſayde forfayture, or within two monethes next after the ſame cauſe of forfayture ſhalbe geuen, ſhall not ſue or take the remedie for the recouery thereof, in ſuche maner and fourme as before in this preſent Acte is limitted and appoynted: that then the ſame Churchwardens ſo makyng default of ſuite, ſhall forfayte and loſe xx.li. of lawfull money of Englande, the one moitie therof to him or them that wyll ſue for the ſame by action of debt, byll, playnt, or information, in any court of Recorde, or in the court of any Lorde of any Manour, within the paryſhe where the ſayde Churchwardens ſhall dwell, and the other moitie to the vſe of the poore of the ſayde paryſhe. In which ſuite, no eſſoigne, protection, or wager of lawe ſhalbe admitted or alowed for the partie defendaunt.
            And for the better execution of this Acte, touching the election of the Collectours for the poore: Be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that euery Parſon, Vicar, Curate, or Miniſter, of euery paryſhe within this Realme, ſhall yerely for euermore, vpon the Sunday before Midſomer day, in the Pulpit or ſome other conuenient place in the Church, geue knowledge and warnyng at thend of ſome of the mornyng ſeruice, to the pariſhioners then and there preſent, to prepare them ſelues on the Sunday next after Midſomer day then next folowyng, to come to the Churche, and there to electe and choſe Collectours and gatherers for the poore, according to the tenor of this Acte. And yf the Parſon, Vicar, Curate, or Miniſter, ſhall make default in geuyng of the ſayde knowledge: that then he or they ſo makyng default, to forfaite & loſe .xl.s. towardes the reparations of the ſayde Churche. And the Churchwardens of the ſayde paryſhe, to ſue and diſtrayne for the ſame, in ſuch fourme as before is appoynted for the other forfaitures.
            AND further be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaide, that the ſayde gatherers or Collectours for the poore, ſo to be choſen as is aforeſayd, ſhall make theyr iuſt accompt quarterly, to the Maiors or chiefe officers of the ſayde Cities, Boroughes, and Townes corporate: and in euery pariſhe of the ſayde Countrey, to the Parſon, Vicar, or Curate, and Churchwardens of the paryſhe, at which accompt, ſuch of the paryſhe as wyll, may be preſent. And when they go out of theyr office, they ſhall delyuer or cauſe to be delyuered forthwith vpon thende of their accomptes, all ſuch ſurpluſage of

money, as then ſhall remayne of theyr collection vndiſtributed, to be put in theyr common cheſt of the Churche, or in ſome other ſafe place, to the vſe of the poore, at the ouerſyght and diſcreſſion of the Maior, officers, and others before mentioned. And if the ſaid Collectours, or any of them, do refuſe to make theyr ſayde accompte within .viii. dayes nexte after requeſt made to them for the ſame, then the Biſhop of the dioces, or the Ordinary of the place, Chauncelours, or their Cōmiſſaries, together with a Iuſtice of peace, & the Churchwardens of the ſayd pariſhe, or one of them, ſhall haue aucthoritie by vertue of this Act, vpon complaynt to them made, to cō
               mit the ſayde perſon or perſons ſo refuſyng, to warde, there to remayne without bayle or maynpryſe, vntyll he or they ſo refuſyng, ſhall make theyr ſayd accomptes, before ſuche perſons as the ſayde Byſhop, Ordinary, Chauncellours, or Commiſſaries & Iuſtice of peace ſhall appoynt, & to make immediate payment of the ſummes wherwith by determinatiō of ye ſaid accompt they ſhalbe charged.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that if any perſon or perſons, being able to further this charitable worke, do obſtinatly & frowardely refuſe, reaſonablye to geue towardes the helpe & reliefe of the poore, or do wylfully diſcourage other from ſo charitable a dede, ye Parſon, Vicar, or Curate, & Churchwardens of the pariſhe wherin he dwelleth, ſhall then gentelly exhorte hym or them towardes the reliefe of the poore, and if he or they wyll not ſo be perſwaded, then vpon the certificat of the Parſon, Vicar, or Curate of the pariſhe, to the Biſhop of the dioces, or Ordinary of the place, Chauncelours, or their Cōmiſſaries, or Gardian of the Spiritualties, the ſame Biſhop, Ordinary, Chauncelours or Cōmiſſaries, or Gardian of the Spiritualties, ſhall ſende for him or them, to induce or perſuade him or them by charitable meanes & wayes, to extend their charitie to the poore, as in this Act is well ment & intended. And yf the perſon or perſons ſo ſent for, of his or their frowarde or wylfull mynde, ſhall obſtinately refuſe to geue wekely for the reliefe of the poore, according to his or their habilities: that then the Biſhop or Ordinary of the dioceſſe, Chauncelours or their Commiſſaries, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie by vertue of this Acte, to bynde the ſaid obſtinate and wylfull perſons ſo refuſing, vnto the Quene by recogniſaunce, in the ſūme of ten poūdes, with condition therevpon to be indorſed, that the ſayde obſtinate perſon ſo refuſyng, ſhall perſonally appeare before the Iuſtices of peace, of the Countie where the ſame perſon ſhall then inhabite and dwell, yf it be out of any Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate: and yf it be within any Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate, then before the Maiors, Baylyffes, or other head officers of euery

ſuch Citie, Borough or Towne corporate, at the next generall ſeſſions to be holden before the ſayde Iuſtices within the ſayde Countie, or at the next Court to be holden before the ſayde Maior, Baylyffes, or other head officers within euery ſuche Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate, and that the ſame obſtinate perſon ſhall not from thence depart without licence of the ſayd Iuſtices, if he dwell out of any Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate: or of the ſayde Maior, Baylyffes, or other head officers, yf he dwell within anye ſuche Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate. And yf any ſuch obſtinate perſon ſhall refuſe to be bounde as is aforeſayde: that then the ſayde Byſhop, Ordinary, Chauncellour, or Commiſſary, ſhall haue aucthoritie by this Acte, to commit the ſayde obſtinate perſon to pryſon, there to remayne without bayle or maynpriſe, vntyl the ſayde obſtinate perſon ſhall become bounde, as is aforeſayde,
            AND further be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the ſayde Iuſtices, or ſuch of them as ſhalbe at the ſayde Seſſions, or the Maior, Baylyffes, or other head officers of euery ſuch Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate, yf the ſayde obſtinate perſon do appeare before them: ſhall charitablye and gentelly perſwade and moue the ſayde obſtinate perſons, to extende his or their charitie towardes the reliefe of the poore of the paryſhe where he or ſhe inhabiteth and dwelleth, and if he or ſhe ſhall obſtinately and wylfully ſtande in the ſame, and wyll not be perſwaded therein by the ſayde Iuſtices, Maior, Baylyffes, or other head officers: that then it ſhall and may be lawful to and for the ſayde Iuſtices, if it be out of any Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate, and yf it be within any Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate, for the Maior, Bayliffes or other head officers of the ſame Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate, with the Churchwardens where the ſayde obſtinate perſon ſhall inhabite, or one of them, to ſeſſe, taxe, and limit vpon euery ſuch obſtinate perſon ſo refuſyng, according to theyr good diſcreſſions, what ſumme the ſayde obſtinate perſon ſhall paye wekely towardes the reliefe of the poore within the ſayde paryſhe where he or ſhe ſhall inhabite and dwell. And yf the ſayd perſon ſo ſeſſed and taxed, ſhall refuſe to paye the ſumme that ſhalbe ſo reaſonablye limitted, taxed, and appoynted: then the ſayde Iuſtices of peace, or two of them, whereof the one to be of the Quorum, or the ſayde Maior, Baylyffes, or other head officers of euery ſuche Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie by vertue of this Acte, vpon complaynt and certificate to them by the Collectours and Churchwardens of the ſame paryſhe, where the ſayde obſtinate perſon ſhall dwell, to commit the ſayd obſtinate perſon and perſons ſo refuſyng to paye, to priſon to the next gaole,

there to remayne without bayle or mainpriſe, tyll he or they haue payde the ſayde ſūme ſo appoynted, taxed, & limitted, together with tharrerages therof, yf any ſuch ſhall fortune to be.
            And for the better maintenaunce of this charitable Acte and worke, it is ordeyned and eſtablyſhed by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that where as the late kyng of famous memorye kyng Henry the viii. his heyres or ſucceſſours, or any other perſon or perſons, by his or theyr ſeuerall & lawfull erections and foundations, hath or haue ordeyned & appoynted any ſūme or ſūmes of money to the vſe of the poore, or for the repayryng or amendyng of hygh wayes or bridges, not beyng taken away otherwyſe by Acte of Parliament, whether the ſame be in any Cathedrall Churche, Colledge, or els where, the Biſhop of the dioceſſe, or Chauncelour for the tyme being, ſhall from tyme to tyme, examine howe and after what maner the ſayd money is beſtowed, & to call to accompt the parties which retayne the ſayde money, and therevpon to take ſuch order, as the ſame from thenceforth be diſtributed to the poore, accordyng to the good entent and purpoſe of the ſaide noble kyng that graunted the ſame. And yf they ſhall fayle yerely to call to accompt the perſons aforeſaid, in fourme aforeſaide, and after accompt, to order the diſtribution of the ſaid money in maner before declared, to forfait for euery ſuch default .xx.li. to be employed to the vſe of the poore, by the ouerſight of three Iuſtices of the peace, within the ſaid countie where the perſon that ſo ſhould accompt dwelleth, to be leuied by way of diſtreſſe, or otherwyſe, as other forfaitures in this eſtatute are appoynted to be leuied.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, yf it ſhall chaunce any paryſhe to haue in it mo poore & impotent folkes not able to labour, then the ſaide pariſhe is able to reliefe: that then in euery ſuch paryſhe, not ſtandyng in any Citie or Towne corporate, the Parſon, Vicar, or Curate of the ſaide paryſhe, and two or three of the chiefe inhabitauntes of the ſame pariſhe, and in euery Citie & Towne corporate, the Maior or chiefe officers of the ſame Citie or Towne corporat, & the Parſon, Vicar, or Curate of the ſaid paryſhe, calling to them two or three of the chiefe pariſhioners of the ſame pariſh, ſuch as the ſaid Maior or head officers ſhal thinke mete: ſhall certifie vnto the Iuſtices of peace of the countie where the ſame paryſhe is, the nombre and names of the perſons with which they be ſurcharged, & vpon ſuch certificat, the ſayd Iuſtices of the peace in the ſame countie, or two of them, wherof one to be of the Quorū, ſhall conſider & examine the ſaid certificat, aſwel by the oth of thoſe that ſo certified inſpection of the ſaid poore perſons, to be taken and viewed, at ſuch day, tyme, & place, as to them ſhalbe

thought mete, as by all other wayes and meanes: and fynding the ſame true, after ſuch othe and alowaunce by inſpection, ſhall then graunt vnto ſuch and as many of the ſaide poore folkes as by their diſcreſſion they ſhal thinke good, a ſufficient licence vnder the ſeale appoynted for the limit, to go abrode, to begge, get, and receaue the charitable almes of the inhabitauntes of the countrey, out of the ſayde Paryſhes, Cities, & Townes ſo ſurcharged: in which licenſe, thinfirmitie of the perſon, the places, townes, & paryſhes to which ſuch poore folkes are by that licenſe licenſed to reſorte, ſhall in the ſame licenſe be named, limitted, and appoynted, be it one Hundred or mo, in the ſayde Countie, at the ſaid diſcreſſion of the ſame Iuſtices. And yf any of the ſayde poore folkes ſo licenſed, ſhall tranſgreſſe the limittes to them appoynted, and reſort to begge at other places then is in the ſayde licenſe named, the partie ſo tranſgreſſyng & offendyng, to be taken for a valyaunt begger, and puniſhed according to the ſtatute made in the ſayde .xxii. yere of king Henry the eyght, & his or theyr licenſe to be taken from them. And if the ſayde Iuſtices of the peace ſhal fayle to appoynt a day and tyme for inſpection of the ſayde poore, and examination of the ſayde certificatours, within one moneth next enſuyng the day of receipt of the ſaid certificat, or ſhalt graunt or geue licenſe to any perſon or perſons ſo certified, to go abrode and begge, before ſuch tyme as they ſhall haue viewed and ſene the ſaid poore perſons, & haue receaued othe of the perſons that ſo certified, that the ſaid poore perſons for age, impotencie, or ſickenes, in theyr conſciences, & to theyr knowledge, are not able by any worke or labour to earne them neceſſary meate, drynke, and cloth, and the ſame depoſition put in wrytyng, ſubſcribed or marked by the perſons depoſed, to forfaite for euery ſuch default, ten poundes, to be employed to the vſe of the poore of any paryſhe or paryſhes within the ſayde Countie where the ſayde Iuſtices dwell, at the ouerſyght & appoyntment of the Biſhop or his Chauncelour of the ſame dioceſſe, to be leuied in ſort & fourme as other forfaitures in this Statute are appoynted.
            And be it further enacted, that where any of the ſayde Cities, Boroughes, Townes corporate, or paryſhe, ſo charged, is ſcituate & ſtandyng in one countie or two coūties of this Realme, or ſcituate and ſtandyng in one, and immediatly adioynyng to another countie of the Realme, as the Citie of Bryſtoll, and the Townes of Ludloo and Stamforde ſtande: that in thoſe Cities, the Parſon, Vicar, and Curate of the ſayde paryſhe, and the ſayde Maior, head officers, and inhabitauntes of euery ſuch Citie, Borough, Towne corporate, and paryſhe, ſhall make certificat vnto the Iuſtices of the ſayde counties adioynyng to the ſame Cities, Boroughes,

Townes corporate, & paryſhes, and the ſame Iuſtices of the ſayde adioynyng Countie or Counties, to do, geue licenſe, and folow the order aboue remembred, according as other Iuſtices of the Counties in which the paryſhe ſurcharged ſtandeth, is limitted and aucthoriſed to do.
            And be it alſo enacted, that in all Cities, Boroughes, & Townes corporate, within which be diuers paryſhes, the Maior & head officers of euery the ſame Cities, Boroughes, & Townes corporat, ſhal conſider the ſtate & abilitie of euery ſuch pariſhe. And yf the ſame Maior and officers ſhall vnderſtande by their diſcretion, that the pariſhioners of any one of the ſayde paryſhes is of ſuch wealth and hauor, that they haue no pouertie amongeſt them, or be hable ſufficiently to reliefe the pouertie of the paryſhe where they inhabite & dwell, and alſo to helpe and ſuccour pouertie els where further: that then the ſaide Maior and officers, with thaſſent of two of the moſt honeſt & ſubſtaunciall inhabitauntes of euery ſuch wealthy paryſhe, ſhall conſider the nedyneſſe of thinhabitauntes of thother pariſhe or pariſhes within the ſame Citie or Towne corporate, and moue, induce, and perſwade the paryſhioners of the wealthyer paryſhe, charitably to contribute ſomwhat, accordyng to theyr habilitie, towarde the wekely reliefe, ſuccour & conſolatiō of the poore & nedy within the other paryſhe or pariſhes aforeſaid, where nede is.
            And be it alſo enacted, that all and euery ſuche poore folkes as by any ſuch licenſe, are to be licenſed and aucthoriſed to reſort out of the limittes, liberties, and frauncheſes, of all and euery ſuch Citie, Borough, and Towne corporate, into any the ſayde Counties, to begge, get, & gather the charitable almes of good people, ſhall at all tymes when the ſame goeth abrode to begge, weare openly vppon hym or them, both on the breſt and the backe of his or theyr vppermoſt garment, ſome notable badge or token, to be aſſigned vnto hym by the Maior or head officers of the ſame Citie, Borough, and Towne corporate, or Paryſhe, with thaſſent of the Iuſtices of the peace that ſhall graunt the ſame licenſe, vpon payne to be taken for a valyaunt begger, and to be punyſhed as afore is remembred, and ſhall alſo carry his licenſe with hym, vpon the lyke payne. This Acte to endure to the latter ende of the fyrſt ſeſſion of the next Parliament.
            Prouided alwayes, & be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaide, that all and euery ſumme and ſummes of money, from henceforth to be collected or gathered within the Citie of London & the liberties of the ſame, by vertue of this Acte, ſhalbe payde ouer to the gouernours of the Hoſpytall called the Hoſpytall of Chriſtes Churche, within the ſayde Citie of London, for the tyme beyng, and ſhalbe

by them from time to time diſtributed and beſtowed for the reliefe of the poore of the ſayde Citie, accordyng to theyr wyſdome and diſcreſſions: Any thyng in this Acte mentioned to the contrarye, notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alſo, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaide, that all and euery ſūme and ſūmes of money, from henceforth to be collected or gathered within the Citie of Couentrie, and the liberties of the ſame, by vertue of this Acte, towarde the maintenaunce and reliefe of the Hoſpytall of poore people, erected in the ſayde Citie, ſhalbe payde ouer to ſuche gouernour or gouernours of the ſayde Hoſpitall, as nowe is or hereafter ſhalbe admitted and appoynted by the Maior and Aldermen of the ſayde Citie of Couentrie, or the more part of them, for the tyme beyng. And ſuch gouernour or gouernours ſo admitted and appoynted as aforeſaid, ſhall from time to tyme, diſtribute and beſtowe, for the reliefe of thaforeſayde poore within the ſayde Citie, the ſayde ſumme or ſummes of money, accordyng to theyr wyſdomes and diſcreſſions: Any thyng mentioned in this Acte to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it further enacted, that the Curate, Miniſter, or Reader, together with the Wardens of euery Chappel of eaſe, and where no Wardens are, the Warden or two of the chiefeſt of the inhabitauntes reſortyng & frequentyng the ſayde Chappell of eaſe for hearyng diuine ſeruice, the ſame inhabitauntes to be nominated and choſen by the ſame Curate, Miniſter, or Reader: And alſo the Collectours, and all and euery other perſon and perſons to whom in this behalfe it ſhall appertayne by force of this eſtatute, ſhall do, execute, perfourme, and be liable to all and euery ſuch ordinaunce, clauſe, article, ſentence, and penalties ſpecified and conteyned in this preſent Acte, for and towardes the reliefe of the poore, in like maner & fourme, as the Vicar, Curate, Churchwardens, and Collectours of euery paryſhe Church, ſhall, may, or ought to do by force of this Act, accordyng to the purport and true meanyng of the ſame, & not to be compellable to come or reſort to theyr Paryſhe Church for the ſame onely purpoſe or entent: Any thing in this Act before ſpecified to the contrary notwithſtanding.
            Prouided alſo that this Acte or any thyng therein conteyned, ſhall not in any wyſe extende or be preiudiciall to any gyft, legacie, conueyaunce or aſſignement of any maner of landes or other profite heretofore geuen, aſſigned, or bequeathed to the reliefe of the poore, reparation of hygh wayes, or bridges, vppon any maner of condition: but that the ſame ſhalbe employed, conuerted, beſtowed, and accompted for, in ſuch maner and fourme, and vpon ſuch condition, as the ſame lawfully was or ought to be, before the makyng of this Acte.
         
         
            
            ¶ An Acte touchyng diuers orders for Artificers, Labourers, ſeruauntes of huſbandry, and apprentiſes. ¶ The .iiii. Chapter.
            
               ALthough there remayne and ſtande in force preſently a great number of Actes & ſtatutes concerning the reteynyng, departyng, wages, and orders of apprentices, ſeruauntes, & labourers, aſwell in huſbandry as in diuers other artes, miſteries & occupations: yet partly for the imperfectiō & contrarietie that is found & do appeare in ſundry of the ſaid lawes, and for the varietie & number of them, and chiefely for that the wages & alowaunces limitted & rated in many of the ſaid ſtatutes, are in diuers places to ſmall, and not aunſwerable to this time, reſpecting the aduauncement of prices of all thinges belonging to the ſaid ſeruauntes & labourers, the ſaid lawes can not conueniētly, without the great griefe & burden of the poore labourer & hyred man, be put in good & due execution. And as the ſaid ſeueral actes & ſtatutes were at the time of ye makyng of thē, thought to be very good & beneficiall for the cōmon wealth of this Realme: (as diuers of thē yet are) So if the ſubſtaūce of as many of the ſaid lawes as are mete to be continued, ſhalbe digeſted & reduced into one ſole lawe & ſtatute, & in the ſame an vniforme order preſcribed & limitted, concerning the wages & other orders for apprētiſes, ſeruaūtes, & labourers, there is good hope yt it wyll come to paſſe, that ye ſame law (being duely executed) ſhuld banyſhe ydlenes, aduaunce huſbandry, & yelde vnto the hyred perſon both in the tyme of ſcarſitie, & in the tyme of plentie, a conuenient proportion of wages.
            Be it therfore enacted by thaucthoritie of this preſent parliamēt, that as much of all the eſtatutes heretofore made, & euery braunch of thē, as touch or concerne the hiring, keping, departing, working, wages, or order of ſeruaūtes, workmen, artificers, apprentices & labourers, or any of them, & the penalties & forfaitures concernyng the ſame, ſhalbe frō & after the laſt day of Septēber nexte enſuing, repealed and vtterly voyde & of none effect, and that all the ſaid ſtatutes and euery braunch therof, for any matter conteined in them, and not repealed by this ſtatute, ſhal remayne and be in full force & effect: Any thing in this ſtatute to the contrary notwithſtanding.
            AND be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that no maner of perſon or perſons after the foreſayde laſt day of September nowe nexte enſuyng, ſhall reteyne, hyre, or take into ſeruice, or cauſe to be reteyned, hired, or taken into ſeruice, nor any perſon ſhalbe reteined or hired, or takē into ſeruice by any meanes or colour, to worke for any leſſe, tyme or terme, then for one hole yere, in any of the ſciences, craftes, miſteries, or artes of Clothyers, Wollen cloth weauers, Tuckers, Fullers, Clotheworkers,

Sheremen, Dyers, Hoſiers, Taillers, Shomakers, Tanners, Pewterers, Bakers, Brewers, Glouers, Cutlers, Smythes, Farrors, Curryers, Sadlers, Spurryers, Turners, Cappers, Hatmakers, or Felt makers, Bowyers, Fletchers, Arrowhead makers, Butchers, Cookes, or Myllers.
            And be it further enacted, that euery perſon beyng vnmarryed, and euery other perſon beyng vnder the age of .xxx. yeres, that after the feaſt of Eaſter nexte ſhall marry, and hauyng ben brought vp in any of the ſayde artes, craftes, or ſciences, or that hath vſed or exerciſed any of them by the ſpace of three yeres or more, and not hauyng landes, tenementes, rentes, or hereditamentes, copy holde, or free holde, of one eſtate of inheritaunce, or for terme of any lyfe or lyues, of the clere yerely value of .xl.s. nor beyng worth of his owne goodes the clere value of .x.li. and ſo alowed by two Iuſtices of the peace, of the countie where he hath moſt cōmonly inhabited by the ſpace of one hole yere, and vnder their handes and ſeales, or by the Maior or other head officer of the citie, borough, or towne corporate, where ſuch perſon hath moſt commonly dwelled by the ſpace of one whole yere, and two Aldermen, or two other diſcrete Burgeſſes of the ſame citie, borough, or towne corporate if there be no Aldermen, vnder theyr handes and ſeales, nor beyng reteyned with any perſon in huſbandry, or in any of the aforeſayd artes and ſciences, accordyng to this Statute, nor lawfully reteyned in any other arte or ſcience, nor beyng lawfully reteyned in houſeholde, or in any office with any noble man, gentelman, or others, according to the lawes of this Realme, nor hauing a conuenient ferme, or other holdyng in tyllage, whervpon he may employ his labour: ſhall (during the tyme that he or they ſhal ſo be vnmaried, or vnder the ſayde age of .xxx. yeres, vpon requeſt made by any perſon vſyng the art or miſtery wherin the ſayd perſon ſo required hath ben exerciſed, as is aforeſayde) be reteyned, and ſhall not refuſe to ſerue, accordyng to the tenor of this Statute, vpon the payne and penaltie hereafter mentioned.
            And be it further enacted, that no perſon which ſhall reteyne any ſeruaunt, ſhall put away his or her ſayd ſeruaunt, and that no perſon reteyned accordyng to this Statute, ſhall depart from his maiſter, maiſtres, or dame, before the ende of his or her terme, vppon the payne hereafter mentioned, vnleſſe it be for ſome reaſonable and ſufficient cauſe or matter, to be alowed before two Iuſtices of peace, or one at the leaſt, within the ſayde Countie, or before the Maior or other chiefe officer of the Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate, wherein the ſayde maiſter, maiſtres, or dame inhabiteth, to whom any of the parties greued ſhall complayne,

which ſaid Iuſtices or Iuſtice, Maior, or chiefe office, ſhall haue, & take vpon them or hym, the hearyng and orderyng of the matter, betwixt the ſaid maiſter, maiſtres, or dame, & ſeruaunt, accordyng to the equitie of the cauſe. And that no ſuche maiſter, maiſtres, or dame, ſhall put away any ſuch ſeruaunt at thende of his terme, or that any ſuch ſeruaunt ſhall depart from his ſaid maiſter, maiſtres or dame, at thende of his terme, without one quarter warnyng geuen before thende of his ſayde terme, eyther by the ſayde maiſter, maiſtres, or dame, or ſeruaunt, the one to the other, vpon the payne hereafter enſuyng.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayd, that euery perſon betwene the age of .xii. yeres, & the age of threeſcore yeres, not being lawfully reteyned, nor apprentice with any Fyſherman or Mariner haunting the ſeas, nor being in ſeruice with any kyddyer or carier of any corne, grayne, or meale, for prouiſion of the Citie of London, nor with any huſbandman in huſbandrye, nor in any Citie, Towne corporate, or market Towne, in any of the artes or ſciences limitted or appoynted by this eſtatute to haue or take apprentices, nor being reteyned by the yere, or halfe the yere at the leaſt, for the dyggyng, ſekyng, fyndyng, gettyng, meltyng, fynyng, working, trying, making of any Syluer, Tin, Lead, Iron, Copper, Stone, Sea cole, Stone cole, Moore cole, or Cherk cole, nor being occupied in or about ye makyng of any glaſſe, nor being a gentelmā borne, nor being a ſtudent or ſcoller in any of the vniuerſities, or in any ſcoole, nor hauyng landes, tenements, rentes, or hereditamentes, for terme of lyfe, or of one eſtate of inheritaūce, of the clere yerely value of .xl.s. nor beyng worth in goodes and cattels to the value of .x.li. nor hauyng a father or mother then lyuyng, or other aunceſtour, whoſe heyre apparaunt he is, then hauyng landes, tenementes, or hereditaments, of the yerely value of .x.li. or aboue, or goodes or cattels of the value of .xl. li. nor beyng a neceſſary or conuenient officer, or ſeruaunt lawfully reteyned as is aforeſayde, nor hauyng a conuenient ferme, or holdyng whervpon he maye or ſhall employe his labour, nor being otherwyſe lawefully reteyned, according to the true meanyng of this ſtatute: ſhall after the foreſaide laſt day of September nowe next enſuing, by vertue of this eſtatute, be compelled to be reteyned to ſerue in huſbandrye by the yere, with any perſō that kepeth huſbandry, & wyl require any ſuch perſō ſo to ſerue, within the ſame ſhire where he ſhalbe ſo required.
            AND be it further enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliamēt, that if any perſon after he hath reteined any ſeruaunt, ſhall put away the ſame ſeruaunt before thende of his terme, vnleſſe it be for ſome reaſonable and ſufficient cauſe, to be alowed as

is aforeſayde, or if any ſuch maiſter, maiſtres, or dame, ſhall put away any ſuch ſeruaunt at thende of his terme, without one quarters warnyng geuen before the ſaid ende, as is aboue remembred: that then euery ſuch maiſter, maiſtres, or dame ſo offending, vnleſſe he or they be able to proue by two ſufficiēt witneſſes ſuch reaſonable & ſufficient cauſe of putting away of their ſeruaūt or ſeruaūtes duryng theyr terme, or a quarters warnyng geuen afore the ende of the ſaid terme, as is beforeſaid, before the Iuſtices of Oyer & terminer, Iuſtices of aſſiſe, Iuſtices of the peace in the quarter Seſſions, or before the Maior or other head officer of any citie, borough, or towne corporate, & two Aldermen, or two other diſcrete Burgeſes of the ſame citie, borough or towne corporate, if there be no Aldermen, or before the Lorde preſident & counſell eſtabliſhed in the marches of Wales, or before the Lord preſident and counſell for the time being eſtabliſhed in the North parties, ſhal forfait the ſūme of xl.s. And if any ſeruaunt reteyned according to the fourme of this eſtatute, depart frō his maſter, maſtres, or dames ſeruice before the end of his terme, vnleſſe it be for ſome reaſonable & ſufficient cauſe to be alowed as is aforeſaid, or if any ſeruaūt at thend of his terme depart frō his ſayd maſter, maſtres, or dames ſeruice, without one quarters warning geuē before thend of his ſaid terme, in forme aforſaid, & before .ii. lawful witneſſes, or if any perſō or perſōs cōpelable & bounden to be reteined & to ſerue in huſbandry, or in any other the artes, ſciences or miſteries aboue remēbred, by the yere or otherwiſe, do (vpō requeſt made) refuſe to ſerue for the wages yt ſhal be limitted, rated, & appoynted, according to ye forme of this ſtatute, or promiſe or couenaūt to ſerue, & do not ſerue according to ye tenor of ye ſame: that thē euery ſeruaūt ſo departing away, & euery perſon ſo refuſing to ſerue for ſuch wages, vpon cōplaint therof made by the maſter, maſtres or dame of ye ſaid ſeruaūt, or by the partie, to or with whō ye ſaid refuſal is made, or promis not kept, to .ii. Iuſtices of the peace of the countie, or to ye Maior or other head officer of the citie, borough, towne corporate, & .ii. Aldermen, or .ii. other diſcrete Burgeſſes of ye ſame citie, borough or towne corporat, if there be no Aldermē, where the ſaid maſter, maſtres, or dame, or the ſaid partie to or with whō ye ſaid refuſal is made & promis not kept dwelleth, or to either of the ſaid Lordes preſidentes & counſel of Wales, & the North, the ſaid Iuſtices, lordes preſidentes & coūſels, & alſo the ſaid Maiors or other head officers, & other perſons of cities, boroughes or townes corporate, or any of thē, as is aforeſaid, ſhall haue power by force of this ſtatute, to heare & examine the matter, and fyndyng the ſayde ſeruaunt or the ſaid partie ſo refuſyng, faultie in the premiſſes, vpō ſuch proufes & good matter, as to their diſcreſſiōs ſhalbe

thought ſufficient, to commit hym or them to warde, there to remayne without bayle or maynpryſe, vntyll the ſayde ſeruaunt or partie ſo offendyng, ſhalbe bounde to the partie to whom thoffence ſhalbe made, to ſerue and continue with hym for the wages that then ſhalbe limitted and appoynted, according to the tenor & fourm of this eſtatute, and to be diſcharged vpon his delyuery, without paying any fee to the gayler where he or they ſhalbe ſo impriſoned.
            AND be it lykewyſe enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that none of the ſaid reteyned perſons in huſbandry, or in any the artes or ſciences aboue remembred, after the tyme of his reteynour expired, ſhal depart forth of one Citie, Towne, or Pariſhe, to another, nor out of the Lathe, Rape, Wapentake, or Hundred, nor out of the Countie or Shire where he laſt ſerued, to ſerue in any other Citie, Towne corporate, Lathe, Rape, Wapentake, Hundred, Shire, or Countie, vnleſſe he haue a teſtimoniall vnder the Seale of the ſaid Citie or Towne corporate, or of the Conſtable or Conſtables, or other head officer or officers, and of two other honeſt houſeholders of the Citie, Towne, or Paryſhe where he laſt ſerued, declaring his lawefull departure, and the name of the Shire and place where he dwelled laſt before his departure, accordyng to the fourme hereafter expreſſed in this Acte, which certificat or teſtimoniall ſhalbe wrytten and delyuered vnto the ſayde ſeruaunt, and alſo regiſtred by the Parſon, Vicar, or Curate of the paryſhe where ſuch maiſter, maiſtres, or dame doth or ſhall dwell, takyng for the doyng thereof ii.d. and not aboue, and the fourme thereof ſhalbe as foloweth: Memorand. that A B. late ſeruaunt to C D. of E. huſbandman, or Taillour .&c. in the ſayd Countie, is licenſed to depart from his ſayde maiſter, and is at his libertie to ſerue els where, accordyng to the Statute in that caſe made and prouided. In witneſſe wherof .&c. dated the day, moneth, yere, & place .&c. of the making therof.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that no perſon or perſons that ſhal depart out of ſeruice, ſhalbe reteyned or accepted into any other ſeruice, without ſhewing before his reteinor ſuch teſtimonial as is aboue remembred, to the chiefe officer of the towne corporate: and in euery other towne & place, to the Conſtable, Curate, Churchwarden or other head officer of the ſame where he ſhalbe reteyned to ſerue, vpon the paine that euery ſuch ſeruaūt ſo departing without ſuch certificat or teſtimonial, ſhalbe impriſoned, vntyll he procure a teſtimoniall or certificat, the whiche yf he cannot do within the ſpace of .xxi. dayes next after the firſt day of his impriſonment: then the ſaid perſon to be whipped & vſed as a vacanbond, accordyng to ye lawes in ſuch caſes prouided. And that euery perſon reteyning any ſuch ſeruaunt without ſhewyng ſuch

teſtimonyall of certificat, as is aforeſayde, ſhall forfeyte for euerye ſuche offence fyue poundes. And yf any ſuche perſon ſhalbe taken with any counterfeyte or forged teſtimoniall, then to be whipped as a vagabound.
            And be it further enacted, by the auctoritye aforeſayde, that all artificers and laborers, beinge hyred for wages, by the daye or weeke, ſhall betwixt the middes of the monethes of Marche and September, be and continue at their worke, at or before fyue of the cloke in the mornynge, and continue at worke, and not departe, vntyll betwixt ſeuen and eyght of the clocke at night (except it be in the tyme of breakefaſt, dynner, or drynkynge, the whiche tymes at the moſt, ſhall not excede aboue two houres and a halfe in the daye, that is to ſaye, at euery drynkynge, one halfe houre, for his dynner one houre, and for his ſlepe when he is allowed to ſlepe, the whiche is from the myddeſt of May, to the myddeſt of Auguſt, halfe an houre at the moſt, and at euery breakefaſt one halfe houre, and all the ſayde artifiters and laborers, betwene the myddeſt of September, and the middeſt of Marche, ſhalbe and continue at their worke, from the ſprynge of the daye in the mornynge, vntyl the night of the ſame daye, excepte it be in tyme afore appointed for breakefaſt and dynner, vppon payne to loſe and forfeyte one peny for euery houres abſence; to be deducted and defaulked oute of his wages, that ſhall ſo offende.
            And be it alſo enacted by the auctoritie aforeſayde, that euery artificer and laborer, that ſhalbe lawfully reteyned in, or for the buyldyng or reparyng of any Church, Houſe, Ship, Mylne, or euery other peece of worke taken in greate, in taſke or in groſſe, or that ſhall hereafter take vppon hym to make or fynyſhe any ſuche thynge or worke, ſhall continue, and not departe from the fame, onles it be for not payinge of his wages or hyer agreed on, or otherwiſe lawefully taken or appointed to ſerue the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires or ſucceſſours, or for other lawfull cauſe, or without lycenſe of the maiſter or owner of the worke, or of hym that hath the charge therof, before the finiſhyng of the ſayd worke, vpon payne of impriſonment by one moneth without bayle or mainpriſe, and the forfeyture of the ſumme of fyue pounds to the partie, from whome he ſhall ſo departe, for the whiche the ſayd partie may haue his action of debte againſte him that ſhal ſo departe, in any of the Quenes Maieſties courtes of record, ouer & beſides ſuch ordinary coſtes and damages, as may or ought to be recouered, by the comen lawes, for or concernynge any ſuche offence. In which action, no protection, wager of law; or eſſoygne, ſhalbe admitted. And that no other artificer or laborer reteyned in any ſeruice, to worke wyth the Quenes Maieſtie, or any other perſon, departe not from her ſayde

Maieſtie, or from the ſayde other perſon, vntyll ſuche tyme as the worke be fyniſhed, yf the perſon ſo reteynynge the artificer or laborer ſo longe wyll haue hym and pay hym his wages, or other dueties, vpon paine of impriſonment of euery perſon, ſo departing, by the ſpace of one moneth.
            And for the declaration and lymitation, what wages ſeruauntes, laborers and artificers, eyther by the yeare or daye, or otherwiſe ſhall haue and receaue: Be it enacted, by the auctoritye of this preſent Parliamente, that the Iuſtices of peace of euery ſhyre, rydynge, and libertye, within the lymittes of their ſeuerall commiſſions, or the more parte of them, beinge then reſyant within the ſame, and the Sheriffe of that Countie, if he conueniently may, and euery Maior, Baylyfe, or other head officer within anye Citye or towne corporate, wherin is anye Iuſtice of peace within the lymittes of the ſaide Citye, or towne corporate, and of the ſayde corporation, ſhall before the tenth daye of Iune, next commynge, and afterwarde, ſhall yerely at euery generall Seſſions firſte to beeholden and kepte after Eaſter, or at ſometyme conuenient, within ſix wekes next folowing euery of the ſayde feaſtes of Eaſter, aſſemble them ſelues together, and they (ſo aſſembled) callynge vnto them ſuche diſcrete and graue perſons of the ſayde Countie, or of the ſayd Citie or towne corporate, as they ſhall thynke mete, and confetrynge together, reſpectynge the plentie or ſcarſitie of the tyme, and other circumſtaunces neceſſaryly to be conſidered, ſhall haue auctoritye by vertue hereof, within the lymittes and precinctes of theyr ſeuerall commiſſions, to lymit, rate, and appointe the wages, aſwel of ſuche and ſo many of the ſayde artificers, handy craftes men, huſbandmen, or anye other laborer, ſeruaunte, or woorkemen, whoſe wages in tyme paſt hath ben by any lawe or ſtatute rated and appointed, as alſo the wages of all other laborers, artificers, workemen, or apprentices of huſbandry, whiche haue not ben rated, as they the ſame Iuſtices, Maiors, or head officers within their ſeuerall commiſſions or liberties, ſhall thinke mete, by theyr diſcreſſions to be rated, lymitted or appointed, by the yeare, or by the daye, weke, monethe, or otherwyſe, wyth meate and drynke, or without meate and drynke, and what wages euery workeman or laborer ſhall take by the greate, for mowynge, reapynge or threſſhynge of corne and grayne, and for mowynge or makinge of hey, or for ditchinge, palynge, raylynge, or hedgynge, by the rodde, perche, lugge, yarde, pole, rope, or foote, and for any other kynde of reaſonable labours or ſeruice, and ſhal yerelye before the xii. daye of Iulye, nexte after the ſaide aſſeſſement and rates ſo appointed and made, certifie the ſame, ingroſed in parchement with ye conſiderations & cauſes therof, vnder their handes and ſeales, into the Quenes moſt

honorable Court of Chauncery, wherupon it ſhalbe lawefull to the lorde Chauncelour of England, or L. keper of the great ſeale for the tyme beyng, vpon declaration thereof, to the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires or ſucceſſours, or to the Lordes and others of the pryuye Councel, for the tyme beinge, attendaunt vpon their perſons, to cauſe to be printed and ſent downe before the firſte daye of September nexte after the ſayde certificat, into euery Countye, to the Sheriffe, and Iuſtices of peace there, and to the ſayde Maior, bayliffes and head officers, tenne or twelue proclamations or more, conteynyng in euerye of them; the ſeuerall rates appointed by the ſayde Iuſtices, and other head officers as is aforeſayde, with commaundement by the ſayde proclamations to all perſons, in the name of the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires or ſucceſſors, ſtraightlye to obſerue the ſame, and to all Iuſtices, Sheriffes, and other officers, to ſee the ſame duelie and ſeuerely obſerued, vpon the daunger of the puniſhement and forfeytures lymitted and appointed by this eſtatute. Vppon receypte wherof, the ſayde Sherifes, Iuſtices of peace, and the Maior and head officer in euery Citie or towne corporate, ſhall cauſe the ſame proclamation to be entred of record, by the clerke of the peace, or by the clerke of the Citie or towne corporate: and the ſayde Sheriffes, Iuſtices, and other the ſayde Maior and head officers, ſhall foorthwith in open markettes, vpon the market dayes before Michelmas then enſuynge, cauſe the ſame proclamation to be proclamed in euerye Citie or market towne, within the lymittes of their Commiſſion, and the ſame proclamation to be fixed in ſome conuenient place of the ſayd Citie and towne, or in ſuche of the moſt occupyed market townes, as to the ſayde Sherifes, Iuſtices of peace, and to the ſayde Maior and head officer, ſhalbe thought mete.
            And if the ſayde Sherifes, Iuſtices of peace, or the Maior and head officers, ſhall at their ſaide generall Seſſions, or at any tyme after, within ſyxe weekes then folowynge, vppon their aſſembly and conference togither, thynke it conuenient to reteyne and kepe for the yere then to come, the rates and proportion of wages, that they certifyed the yere before, or to chaunge or reforme them, or ſome parte of them: then they ſhall before the ſayde .xii. daye of Iuly, yerely certifie into the ſayde Court of Chauncerye their reſolutions and determinations therin, to the intente that proclamations may accordynglye be renued and ſent downe. And if it ſhall happen that there be no nede of anye reformation or alteration of the rates of the ſayde wages, but that the former ſhalbe thoughte mete to be contynued: then the proclamations for the yere paſt, ſhall remayne in force vntill newe proclamations, vppon newe rates concernynge

the ſayde wages, ſhalbe ſent downe, accordynge to the fourme of this Eſtatute.
            And be it further enacted by auctoritie of this preſent Parlyament, that if all the ſayd Iuſtices of peace, reſiant within Countyes, where they are or ſhalbe Iuſtices of peace, Maiors and head officers, do not before the tenth daye of Iune nexte commynge, and afterwarde, yearelye appeare and aſſemble at the ſayde generall Seſſions, or within ſyxe weekes nexte after the ſayde generall Seſſions, and lymitte, and rate the wages of the ſayde ſeruauntes and laborers, or ſhall not conſider whether the former rates made, be mete to be continued, or to be altered, and reformed in manner and fourme aforeſayde, or be negligent, or remiſſe in the certificat therof in fourme aboue written: that then euery Iuſtice of peace of the Countie, and euery Maior and head officer of the Citie or towne corporate, in whom any ſuche defaulte or negligence ſhalbe founde, beinge within the ſayde countie, Citie or towne corporate, at the tyme of the ſayde nexte aſſemblye, or at the tyme of the ſaide Seſſions, or at the tymes of the ſayde rates of wages to be ſet, within ſyxe wekes nexte after euerye ſuche Seſſions, and not viſited wyth any ſuche ſickenes, as he coulde not trauell thyther without perill and daunger of his lyfe, or not hauynge anye other lawfull and good excuſe to be allowed by the Iuſtices, then aſſembled for the ratinge and taxynge of wages, as is aforeſayde, or by the more parte of them, vppon a corporall othe and affidauit to be taken and made openlye before the ſayde Iuſtices vppon the holy Euangeliſtes, by ſome credyble perſon, aſſeſſed and taxed in the booke of Subſedye of that Countie, to the cleare value of fyue poundes at the leaſte, or by ſuche other perſon as the moſt parte of ſuche Iuſtices ſhall allowe and accepte to take ſuche othe: ſhall for ſuche defaulte or negligence, forfeyte vnto the Queenes Maieſtie, her heyres and ſucceſſours, tenne poundes of laweful money of Englande.
            And be it further enacted by the auctoritie aforeſayde, that yf any perſon, after the ſayde proclamation ſhalbe ſo ſent downe, and publiſhed, ſhal by any ſecret waies or meanes, directly, or indirectly, reteyne, or kepe any ſeruaunt, workeman or laborer, or ſhall geue any more, or greater wages, or other commoditie contrarye to the true intent and purporte of this ſtatute, or contrary to the rates or wages that ſhalbe aſſeſſed or appointed in the ſayde proclamations: that then euery perſone that ſhall ſo offende, and be thereof lawfully conuicted before any the Iuſtices, or other head officers aboue remembred, or eyther of the ſayde Preſidentes and Councelles, ſhall ſuffer impriſonment by the ſpace of tenne dayes, without

bayle or maynepryce, and ſhall loſe and forfeyte fyue poundes, of lawfull money of England. And that euery perſon, that ſhalbe ſo reteyned and take wages, contrary to this eſtatute, or any braunche therof, or of the ſayde proclamation, and ſhalbe thereof conuicted before the Iuſtices aforeſayde, or any two of them, or before the Maior, or other head officers aforeſayde, ſhall ſuffer impriſonment, by the ſpace of .xxi. dayes, wythout bayle or mayneprice. And that euery reteyner, promyſe, gifte, or payment of wages, or other thinge whatſoeuer, contrary to the true meanynge of this eſtatute, and euery writinge and bond to be made for that purpoſe, ſhalbe vtterly voyde, and of none effect.
            And be it enacted, by the auctoritie aforeſaid, that if any ſeruaunt, workeman, or laborer, ſhall wilfully or maliciouſly make any aſſaulte, or affray, vpon his Maiſter, Maiſtres, or dame, or vppon any other, that ſhall at the tyme of ſuche aſſaulte or affray, haue the charge or overſight of any ſuche ſeruaunte, workeman, or laborer, or of the worke wherein the ſayde ſeruaunt, workeman, or laborer is appointed or hyered to worke, and beinge therof conuicted before any two of the Iuſtices, Maior, or head officer aforeſayde, where the ſayde offence is committed, or before eyther of the ſayde Lordes Preſidents, and Councell before remembred, by confeſſion of the ſayd ſeruaunt, workeman, or laborer, or by the teſtimony, witneſſe, and othe of two honeſt men: that then euery ſuche offendor, ſhall ſuffer impriſonment by the ſpace of one hole yere or leſſe, by the diſcreſſion of two Iuſtices of peace, if it be without a towne corporate: and if it be within any town corporate, then by the diſcreſſion of the Maior, or head officer of the ſame towne corporate, with two others of the diſcreteſt perſons of the ſame corporation at the leaſt. And if the offence ſhal require further puniſhement, then to receaue ſuche other open puniſhment, ſo as it extend not to lyfe, nor lymme, as the Iuſtices of peace in open Seſſions, or the more part of them, or the ſaid Maior, or head officer, and ſixe, or foure at the leaſt, of the diſcreteſt perſones of the ſame corparation, before whom the offence ſhalbe examined, ſhall thinke conuenient for the qualitie of the ſayde offence ſo done and committed.
            Prouyded alwayes, and be it enacted, by the aucthoritye aforeſayde, that in the tyme of hey or corne harueſt, the Iuſtices of peace, and euery of them, & alſo the Conſtable or other head officer of euery towneſhip, vpon requeſt, & for the auoyding of the loſſe of any corne, grayne, or hey, ſhal & may cauſe all ſuche artificers and perſons, as be mete to labour, by the diſcreſſions of the ſayd Iuſtices or Conſtables, or other head officers, or by any of them, to ſerue by the daye, for the mowing, reapyng, ſhearing, gettyng, or Innyng of corne, grayne and

hey, accordynge to the ſkill and qualitye of the perſon, and that none of the ſayde perſons ſhall refuſe ſo to do, vpon paine to ſuffer impriſonment in the ſtockes, by the ſpace of two dayes and one night. And the Conſtable of the towne, or other head officer of the ſame, where the ſaide refuſal ſhalbe made, vpon complainte to hym made, ſhal haue auctoritye by vertue hereof, to ſet the ſayd offendour in the ſtockes, for the tyme aforeſayde, and ſhal puniſhe hym accordingly, vpon payne to loſe and forfeyte for not doynge therof, the ſumme of .xl.s.
            Prouided alſo, that all perſons of the counties where they haue accuſtomed to go into other Shires for harueſt worke, and hauynge at that tyme no harueſt worke ſufficient in the ſame towne nor countie, where he or they dwelt in the winter then laſt paſt, bryngynge with hym or them a teſtimoniall vnder the hand and ſeale of one Iuſtice of the peace of the ſhyre, or other head officer of the town or place that he or they come from, teſtifiynge the ſame, for the which he ſhall pay not aboue one peny (other then ſuch perſons as ſhalbe reteyned in ſeruice, accordyng to the fourme of this eſtatute) may repayre and reſorte in harueſt of hey or corne, from the countryes wherin their dwellynge places are, into any other place or Countie, for the only mowynge, reapynge and getting of hey, corne and grayne, and for the onely workyng of harueſt workes, as they might haue done before the makynge of this eſtatute: Any thynge herein conteyned to the contrary notwithſtandynge.
            And be it further enacted by the auctoritye aforeſayde, that two Iuſtices of peace, ye Maior, or other head officer of any citie, borough or towne corporate, & two Aldermen: or two other diſcrete Burgeſes of the ſame Citie, borough, or towne corporate, yf there be no Aldermen, ſhall and may by vertue hereof, appoint any ſuch woman, as is of the age of .xii. yeres, and vnder the age of .xl. yeres, and vnmaryed, and forth of ſeruice, as they ſhall thynke meete to ſerue, to be reteyned or ſerue by the yere, or by the weke or day, for ſuche wages, and in ſuch reaſonable ſorte and maner, as they ſhall thynke mete. And if any ſuch woman ſhall refuſe ſo to ſerue, then it ſhalbe lawfull for the ſayde Iuſtices of peace, Maior or head officers, to comit ſuch woman to ward, vntill ſhe ſhalbe bounden to ſerue, as is aforeſaide.
            And for the better aduauncement of huſbandry and tillage, and to the intente that ſuch as are fyt to be made apprentices to huſbandry, may be bounden therevnto: Be it enacted by the auctoritie of this preſent Parliament, that euery perſon being an houſholder, and hauing, and vſynge halfe a ploughe land at the leaſt in tillage: may haue and receaue as an apprentice, any perſone aboue the age of tenne yeres, and vnder the age of .xviii. yeres, to ſerue in huſbandry, vntil his age of xxi. yeres at the leaſt, or vntill the age of .xxiiii. yeres, as the parties can

agree, and the ſaide reteynour and takyng of an apprentice, to be made and done by indenture.
            And be it further enacted, that euery perſon being an houſholder, and .xxiiii. yeres olde at the leaſt, dwelling, or inhabityng, or whiche ſhall dwell and inhabite in any cytie or towne corporate, and vſynge, and exerciſyng any arte, myſtery or manuell occupation there, ſhal and may after the feaſte of Saint Iohn Baptiſt next comminge, durynge the tyme that he ſhall ſo dwell or inhabite, in any ſuch Citie or towne corporate, and vſe, and exerciſe any ſuche art, myſtery or manuell occupacion: haue and reteyne the ſonne of any free man, not occupying huſbandry, nor being a labourer, & inhabiting in the ſame, or in any other Citie or towne, that now is, or hereafter ſhalbe, and continue incorporate, to ſerue and be bounde as an apprentice, after the cuſtome and order of the Citie of London, for ſeuen yeres at the leaſt, ſo as the terme and yeres of ſuche apprentice, do not expire or determine, afore ſuche apprentice ſhalbe of the age of .xxiiii. yeres at the leaſte.
            Prouyded alwayes, and be it enacted, that it ſhall not be lawfull to any perſon dwellynge in any Citie or towne corporate, vſynge or exerciſynge any of the myſteries, or craftes of a marchaunt trafficquinge by trafficque, or trade into anye the partes beyonde the Sea, Mercer, Draper, Goldſmyth, Irenmonger, Inbroderer, or Clothear, that doth or ſhal put clothe to makynge and ſale, to take anye apprentice or ſeruaunt, to be enſtructed or taught in any of the arts, occupations, craftes or myſteries, whiche they or any of them do vſe or exerciſe, except ſuche ſeruaunt or apprentice be his ſon, or els that the father or mother of ſuche apprentice or ſeruaunt, ſhall haue at the tyme of takynge of ſuche apprentice or ſeruaunt, landes, tenements, or other hereditamentes, of the clere yerely value of .xl.s. of one eſtate of enheritaunce, or free hold at the leaſte, to be certified vnder the handes and ſeales of three Iuſtices of the peace, of the ſhire or Shires, where the ſaid landes, tenementes, or other hereditamentes, do or ſhal lye, to the Maior, Bailyf, or other head officers of ſuch Citie or towne corporate, and to be enrowled amonge the recordes there.
            And be it further enacted, that from and after the ſaide feaſt of Saint John the Baptiſt nexte, it ſhalbe lawfull to euery perſon beinge an houſholder, and .xxiiii. yeres olde at the leaſt, and not occupying huſbandry, nor beynge a laborer, dwellinge or inhabitynge, or that ſhall hereafter dwell, or inhabit in any towne, not beynge incorporate, that nowe is, or hereafter ſhalbe a market towne, ſo longe as the ſame ſhalbe wekely vſed & kept as a market towne, and vſyng or exerciſynge any arte, myſterye, or manuell occupation, durynge the tyme of his abode there, and ſo vſyng, and exerciſyng ſuche art, myſtery, or manuell occupation as aforeſayde, to haue in like maner to

apprentice, or apprentices, the child or children of any other artificer, or artificers, not occupying huſbandry, nor beyng laborer, whiche nowe doe, or hereafter ſhall inhabyte or dwell in the ſame, or in anye other ſuche market towne, within the ſame Shyre, to ſerue as apprentice, or apprentices, as is aforeſayd, to any ſuche arte, myſtery, or manuell occupation, as hath ben vſually exerciſed in any ſuche market towne, where ſuche apprentice ſhalbe bounde in maner and forme aboue ſayd.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted, that it ſhall not be lawfull to any perſon, dwellynge or inhabitynge in any ſuche market towne, vſinge or exerciſynge the feate, miſtery, or art of a marchant, trafficquinge or trading into the parties beyond the Seas, Mercer, Draper, Goldſmith, Irenmonger, Imbroderer, or Clothear, that doth, or ſhal put cloth to making & ſale, to take any apprentice, or in any wiſe to teach or inſtructe any perſone in the artes, ſciences, or miſteries laſt before recited, after the feaſt of Saint Iohn Baptiſt aforeſaid, except ſuch ſeruaunt or apprentice ſhalbe his ſonne, or els that the father or mother of ſuche apprentice, ſhall haue landes, tenementes, or other hereditamentes, at the tyme of taking of ſuche apprentice, of the clere yerely value of three poundes, of one eſtate of inheritaunce, or freeholde, at the leaſt, to be certifyed vnder the handes and ſeales of three Iuſtices of the peace, of the Shyre or ſhyres where the ſayd landes, tenementes, and other hereditamentes, do or ſhall lye, to the head officers, or head officer of ſuche market towne, where ſuche apprentice or ſeruaunt ſhalbe taken, there to be enrolled by ſuche head officer, alwayes to remayne of recorde.
            And be it further enacted, that from and after the ſaide feaſt, it ſhalbe lawfull to any perſon, vſynge or exerciſinge the art or occupation of a Smith, whelewright, Plowewright, Mylwright, Carpenter, Rough maſon, Plaſterer, Sawyer, Lyme burner, Brycke maker, Bricklayer, Tyler, Slater, Helyer, Tylemaker, Linnen weuer, Turner, Couper, Myllers, Earthen potters, Wollen weuer, weuinge huſwyfes or houſhold cloth only, and none other cloth, Fuller, otherwyſe called Tucker, or walker, burner of ore and woade aſhes, Thatcher, or Shingler, whereſoeuer he or they ſhal dwell, or inhabite, to haue or receaue the ſonne of any perſone, as apprentice, in maner and fourme aforeſaid, to be taught and inſtructed in theſe occupations only, and in none other, albeit the father or mother of any ſuche apprentice haue not any landes, tenementes, nor hereditamentes.
            And be it further enacted, by the auctoritie aforeſayd, that after the firſt day of May, next comminge, it ſhal not be lawfull to any perſone or perſones, other then ſuche as nowe do lawfully vſe or exerciſe any arte, miſtery, or manuell occupation, to ſet vp, occupye, vſe, or

exerciſe any craft, miſtery or occupation, nowe vſed or occupied within the Realme of England, or Wales, except he ſhal haue ben brought vp therin ſeuen yeres at the leaſt as apprentice, in maner and fourme aboue ſaid, nor to ſet any perſon on worke in ſuche miſtery, art, or occupation, beinge not a workeman at this day, except he ſhal haue ben apprentice, as is aforeſaide, or els hauing ſerued as an apprentice, as is aforeſaid, ſhall or wil become a Iorneyman, or be hyred by the yere, vpon paine that euery perſon willingly offendinge, or doinge the contrary, ſhall forfeit and loſe for euery default .xl.s. for euery moneth.
            Prouided alwaies, and be it further enacted, by the auctoritie aforeſayd, that no perſon or perſons, vſynge or exerciſyng the art or miſtery of a wollen cloth weuer, other then ſuch as be inhabityng within the counties of Cumberland, Weſtmerland, Lancaſter, and Wales, weauing Fryzes, Cottons, or houſwyfes cloth only, makyng and weauing wollen cloth, commonlye ſolde, or to be ſolde by anye clothe man or clothear: ſhall take and haue any apprentice, or ſhall teache, or in any wyſe inſtructe any perſon or perſons, in the ſcience, art or occupation of weauinge aforeſaid, in any village, towne or place (Cities, townes corporate, and market townes only except) vnleſſe ſuch perſon be his ſonne, or els that the father or mother of ſuche apprentice or ſeruaunt, ſhall at the tyme of the takynge of ſuche perſon or perſons to be an apprentice or ſeruaunt, or to be ſo inſtructed, haue landes and tenementes, or other hereditamentes, to the cleare yerely value of three poundes, at the leaſt, of an eſtate of inheritaunce or frehold, to be certifyed vnder the handes and ſeales of three Iuſtices of the peace, of the Shire or ſhires where the ſayde landes, tenementes, and other hereditamentes, do or ſhal lye. The effect of the indenture, to be regiſtred wythin three monethes, in the pariſhe where ſuche maiſter ſhall dwell, and to paye for ſuche regiſtringe .iiii.v. vpon paine of forfeyture of .xx.s. for euery moneth that any perſon ſhall otherwyſe take any apprentice, or ſet any ſuche perſon on worke, contrary to the meanynge of this article.
            And be it further enacted, by the auctoritie aforeſayde, that all and euery perſon or perſons, that ſhall haue three apprentices in any of the ſayd craftes, myſteries, or occupations, of a clothmaker, Fuller, Shereman, Weuer, Tailor, or ſhomaker, ſhall reteyne and kepe one Iorneyman, and for euery other apprentice, aboue the nomber of the ſaid three apprentices, one other Iorneyman, vpon paine for euery default therin tenne poundes.
            Prouided alwayes, that this acte nor any thynge therin conteyned, ſhall not extend to preiudice or hinder any liberties heretofore graunted by any acte of Parliament, to or for the companye and occupation of Worſted makers, and Worſted weuers within the Citie

of Norwych, and els where within the Countie of Northfolck, which liberties be in force, vntil the beginninge of this preſent Parlyament: Any thynge herein conteyned to the contrary in any wyſe notwithſtandynge.
            And be it further enacted, that if any perſon ſhalbe required by any houſholder, hauinge and vſynge halfe a ploughe land, at the leaſt in tyllage, to be an apprentice, and to ſerue in huſbandry, or in anye other kynde of art, miſtery, or ſcience before expreſſed, and ſhall refuſe ſo to do: that then vpon the complaint of ſuche houſekeeper, made to one Iuſtice of the peace, of the Countie wherin the ſayd refuſall is or ſhalbe made, or of ſuche houſholder inhabitinge in any Citie, towne corporate, or market towne, to the Maior, Bayliffes, or head officer of the ſaide Citie, towne corporat, or market towne, if any ſuche refuſall ſhall there be, they ſhal haue ful power and auctoritie by vertue hereof, to ſende for the ſame perſon ſo refuſyng: And if the ſaid Iuſtice, or the ſayd Maior or head officer, ſhall thinke the ſaide perſon mete and conuenient to ſerue as an apprentice in that art, labour, ſcience, or miſtery, wherin he ſhalbe ſo then required to ſerue: That then the ſaide Iuſtice, or the ſaide Maior or head officer, ſhall haue power and auctoritye by vertue hereof, if the ſaid perſon refuſe to be bounde as an apprentice, to commit hym vnto ward, there to remayne vntyll he be contented, and wilbe bounden to ſerue as an apprentice ſhulde ſerue, accordinge to the true intent and meanynge of this preſent acte.
            And if any ſuche maiſter ſhall myſuſe or euill intreate his apprentice, or that the ſaid apprentice ſhall haue any iuſte cauſe to complaine, or the apprentice do not his duetie to his maiſter: Then the ſaid maiſter, or prentice, beinge greued and hauinge cauſe to complayne, ſhall repaire vnto one Iuſtice of peace, within the ſayde Countie, or to the Maior or other head officer of the Citie, towne corporate, market towne, or other place where the ſaide maiſter dwelleth, who ſhal by his wyſdome and diſcretion take ſuch order and direction betwene the ſaide maiſter and his apprentice, as the equitie of the cauſe ſhall require. And if for wante of good conformitie in the ſaid maiſter, the ſaide Iuſtice of the peace, or the ſaide Maior or head officer, can not compound, & agree the matter betwene hym and his apprentice: then the ſaide Iuſtice, or the ſaide Maior, or other head officer, ſhall take bande of the ſaid maiſter, to appeare at the next Seſſions, then to be holden in the ſaid Countie, or within the ſaid Citie, towne corporat, or market towne, to be before the Iuſtices of the ſaid Countie, or the Maior or head officer of the ſaid towne corporate, or market towne, if the ſaide maiſter dwell within any ſuch, and vpon his apparaunce, & hearing of the matter before the ſaid Iuſtices, or the ſaid Maior, or other head officer, if it be thought mete vnto them, to diſcharge the

ſaide apprentice of his apprenticehod, that then the ſaid Iuſtices or foure of them at the leaſt, wherof one to be of them Quorū, or the ſaid Maior or other head officer, with the conſent of three other of his brethren, or men of beſt reputation within the ſaid Citie, towne corporate or market towne, ſhal haue power by auctoritie hereof, in writing vnder their handes and ſeales, to pronounce and declare, that they haue diſcharged the ſaide apprentice of his apprenticehode, and they cauſe therof, and the ſaid writing ſo being made and inrolled by the clerke of the peace, or towne clerke, amonges the records that he kepeth, ſhal be a ſufficient diſcharge for the ſaid apprentice againſt his maiſter, his executours and adminiſtratours, the indenture of the ſaid apprenticehode, or any lawe or cuſtome to the contrary notwithſtanding. And if the defaulte ſhalbe founde to be in the apprentice, then the ſaide Iuſtices, or the ſaide Maior, or other head officer, with the aſſiſtentes aforeſaid, ſhal cauſe ſuch due correction, & puniſhment to be miniſtred vnto hym, as by their wyſdome and diſcretions ſhalbe thought mete.
            Prouyded alwayes, and be it enacted, by aucthoritie of this preſent Parlyament, that no perſon ſhall by force or colour of this eſtatute, be bounden to enter into any apprenticeſhip, other then ſuche as be vnder the age of .xxi. yeres. And to thende that this eſtatute, may from tyme to tyme be carefully diligently put in good execution, according to the tenure and true meanyng therof:
            Be it enacted by auctoritie of this preſent Parliament, that the Iuſtices of peace of euery Countie, deuidyng them ſelues into ſeueral lymittes, and lykewiſe euery Maior and head officer of any Citie, or towne corporat, ſhall yerely betwene the feaſt of Saint Michaell the Archangel, & the Natiuitie of our Lord, and betwene the feaſt of the Annunciation of our Lady, and the feaſte of the Natiuitie of Saint Iohn the Baptiſt, by all ſuch wayes & meanes, as to their wyſdomes ſhalbe thought moſte mete, make a ſpecial and diligent inquirie of the braunches and articles of this eſtatute, and of the good execution of the ſame, and where they ſhal fynde any defaultes, to ſee the ſame ſeuerely corrected and puniſhed, without fauour, affection, malice or diſpleaſure.
            And in conſideration of the paines and trauell that the ſaid Iuſtices of peace, and the ſaid Maior, and head officer, ſhal take and ſuſteine, in, and about the execution of this eſtatute, it is further ordeyned and enacted, by auctoritie of this preſent Parlyament, that euery Iuſtice of peace, Maior, or head officer, for euery day that he ſhall ſyt in, & about the execution of this eſtatute, ſhall haue alowed vnto hym fyue ſhyllinges, to be alowed and payd vnto hym, or vnto the ſayde Maior or head officer, of the fynes and forfeitours of the paynes and penalties that ſhalbe forfeited, and due vnto the Queenes Maieſtie,

her heires or ſucceſſors, by force of this eſtatute, in ſuche maner and fourme, as the ſaid Iuſtices haue ben heretofore commonly payed, for their comming & charges at the quarter Seſſions, ſo that the ſytting of the ſaid Iuſtices, or Maior, or head officer, be not at any one tyme aboue .iii. dayes, and for the matters conteyned in this eſtatute.
            And be it enacted by auctoritie aforeſaide, that the one halfe of all forfeytures and penalties, expreſſed and mentioned in this ſtatute, other then ſuche as are expreſly otherwyſe appointed, ſhalbe to oure ſoueraigne Ladye the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires and ſucceſſors; and the other moytie to hym or them that ſhall ſue for the ſame, in any of the Quenes Maieſties Courtes of record, or before any of the Iuſtices of Oyer & terminer, or before any other Iuſtices, or Preſident and Counſell before remembred, by action of debte, Information, bill of complainte, or otherwiſe: in whiche actions or ſuites, no protection, wager of lawe or, eſſoygne ſhalbe alowed, & that the ſaid Iuſtices, or two of them, whereof one to be of the Quorum, and the ſaid Preſidentes and Counſell as is aforeſaid, and the ſaid Maiors, or other head officers of Cities or townes corporate, ſhall haue full power and auctoritie to heare and determine al and euery offence and offences, that ſhalbe committed or done againſte this eſtatute, or againſt any braunche thereof, aſwell vppon indictment to be taken before them, in the Seſſions of the peace, as vpon Information, action of debte, or bill of complaint, to be ſued, or exhibited by any perſon. And ſhall, and may by vertue hereof, make proces againſt the defendaunt, and award execution, as in any other caſe they lawfully may by any the lawes and ſtatutes of this Realme, and ſhall yerely in Michelmas terme, certifie by eſtreate the fynes and forfeitours of euery the offences conteyned in this eſtatute, that ſhalbe founde before them, into the court of the Exchequer, in like ſorte and fourme, as they be bounde to certifie the eſtreates for other offences and forfeitours to be loſte, before them: Any thynge in this ſtatute, conteyned to the contrary notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alwayes, that this acte or any thinge therin conteyned or mentioned, ſhall not be preiudiciall or hurtfull to the Cities of London, and Norwych, or to the lawfull liberties, vſages, cuſtomes, or priuileges of the ſame Cities, for or concerning the hauynge, or takyng of any apprentice or apprentices, but that the Citezins and Freemen of the ſame Cities, ſhall and maye take, haue and reteyne apprentices there, in ſuche maner and fourme, as they might lawfully haue done before the makynge of this ſtatute: This acte or any thing therein conteyned to the contrary in any wyſe notwithſtandynge.
            And be it alſo further enacted, that all Indentures, couenauntes, promyſes, and bargaynes, of, or for the hauing, takyng, or kepynge of

any apprentice, otherwyſe hereafter to be made or taken, then is by this ſtatute lymitted, ordeyned and appointed, ſhalbe clerely voide in the lawe to all intentes and purpoſes, and that euery perſon, that ſhall from henceforth take, or newly reteyne any apprentice, contrary to the tenour and true meanynge of this acte, ſhall forfeit and loſe for euery apprentice ſo by hym taken, the ſumme of .x. li.
            And becauſe there hath ben, and is ſome queſtion and ſcrupule moued, whether any perſon, beynge within the age of .xxi. yeres, and bounden to ſerue as an apprentice, in any other place then in the ſaid Citie of London, ſhuld be bounden, accepted, & taken as an apprentice.
            For the reſolution of the ſaide ſcruple and doubte: Be it enacted, by aucthoritie of this preſent Parlyament, that all and euery ſuche perſon or perſons, that at any tyme or tymes, from henceforth ſhalbe bounden by Indenture, to ſerue as an apprentice, in any arte, ſcience, occupation or labor, accordynge to the tenour of this eſtatute, and in maner and fourme aforeſaide, albeit the ſame apprentice, or any of them, ſhalbe within the age of .xxi. yeres, at the tyme of makynge of their ſeuerall Indentures: ſhalbe bounden to ſerue, for the yeres in their ſeuerall Indentures conteyned, as amply and largely to euery entent, as yf the ſame apprentice were of full age at the tyme of the makynge of ſuche Indentures: Any lawe, vſage or cuſtome to the contrary, notwithſtandynge.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that the inhabitaunts nowe dwellyng or inhabitynge, or that hereafter ſhall dwell, or inhabit within the towne of Godalmynge, within the Countie of Surray, within the lymittes of the Watche of the ſaide towne, may vſe and exerciſe ſuche artes, miſteries and occupations, and take, and vſe apprentices and ſeruauntes, in ſuche maner and fourme, as the inhabitauntes within market townes by this ſtatute may lawfully do.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the auctoritie aforeſayde, that all maner amerciamentes, fynes, iſſues and forfeitures, whiche ſhall ryſe, growe, or come by reaſon of any offences or defaultes mencioned in this acte, or any braunche thereof, within any Citie, or towne corporate, ſhalbe leuyed, gathered and receaued, by ſuche perſon or perſons of the ſame Citie or towne corporate, as ſhalbe appointed by the Maior, or other head officers mentioned in this ſaide acte, to the vſe and maintenance of the ſame Citie or towne corporate, in ſuche caſe and condition, as any maner other amerciamentes, fynes, iſſues or forfeitures haue ben vſed to be leuyed and imployed, within the ſame Citie or towne corporate, by reaſon of any graunt or charter from the Quenes Maieſtie that nowe is, or of any her graces noble progenitours, made and graunted to the ſame Citie, borowe, or towne corporate,

any thyng or clauſe before mentioned and expreſſed in this act to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alwaies, that this acte, or any thing therin conteyned, ſhal not extend to any lawfull reteyninges or couenauntes, had or made before the makynge of this acte, but that all and euery the parties to ſuche reteyninges or couenauntes, ſhall and may haue the ſame and lyke auantages of ſuch reteyninges & couenauntes, and of the ſtatutes heretofore in that behalfe prouided, as if this acte had neuer ben had, nor made: Any clauſe of repeal or other matter whatſoeuer in this acte to the contrary in any wyſe notwithſtanding.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that if any ſeruaunt or apprentice of huſbandry, or of any arte, ſcience, or occupation aforeſaid, vnlawfullye departe or flee into any other Shire, that it ſhalbe lawfull to the ſaide Iuſtices of peace, and to the ſaide Maiors, Bayliffes, and other head officers of Cities and townes corporate, for the tyme beinge Iuſtices of peace there, to make and graunte writtes of Capias, ſo many and ſuche as ſhalbe nedeful to be directed to the Sheriffes of the Counties, or to other head officers of the places, whyther ſuche ſeruauntes or apprentices ſhall ſo departe or flee, to take their bodies returnable before them, at what tyme ſhall pleaſe them, ſo that if they come by ſuche proces, that they be put in priſon tyll they ſhall finde ſufficient ſuertie, well and honeſtly to ſerue their maiſters, maiſtreſſes, or dames, from whome they ſo departed or fledde, accordinge to the order of the lawe.
            Prouided alwayes, that it ſhalbe lawful to the highe Conſtables of hundredes in euery Shire, to holde, kepe, and continue petie Seſſions, otherwiſe called ſtatute Seſſions within the lymittes of their auctorities, in all Shires wherein ſuche Seſſions haue ben vſed to be kepte, in ſuche maner and fourme as heretofore hath ben vſed and accuſtomed, ſo as nothinge be by them done therein contrarie or repugnaunt to this preſent Acte.
         
         
            ¶ An Acte touching certaine politique conſtitutions, made for the maintenaunce of the Nauye. The .v. Chapter.
            
               FOr the better maintenaunce and encreaſe of the Nauye of this Realme of England: Be it enacted by the Quenes moſt excellent Maieſtie, with the aſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the Commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that from the firſt daye of

Aprill, Anno Domini .M.D.lxiiii. and ſo from thenſe fourth, it ſhalbe lawfull to all and euery of the ſubiectes of our ſoueraigne Lady the Quene, her heires and ſucceſſours, at his & their will and pleaſure to carry and tranſporte out of this Realme, in the Shippes or other veſſels of any the ſubiectes aforeſaid, all and euery kyndes of hearring and other Sea fiſhe, to be taken vpon the Seas by any of the ſubiectes aforeſayd (and acte of Parlyament or lawe to the contrary notwithſtanding) and that all and euery perſon and perſons, which ſhal by vertue of this acte tranſporte or carry any hearringes, or other Sea fiſhe, from or oute of any porte or harborough of this Realme, to any place out of the dominions of the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires or ſucceſſours, ſhalbe free from payment of any cuſtome, ſubſedie or pondage monye for the ſame fyſhe ſo carryed or tranſported, duringe the ſpace of .iiii. whole yeres, beginning at the ſaid firſt day of Aprill, M.D.lxiiii. and ſo further, during her Maieſties pleaſure.
            And be it further enacted, by the auctoritye aforeſaid, that from the firſt daye of Maye next commynge, it ſhall not be lawfull to any perſon or perſons in any port, Citie, towne, market, or other place within this Realme, to ſet price, make any reſtraynte, or take, or demaunde tolle or taxe of any Sea fiſhe to be brought into this Realme or any part hereof, being taken by any of the ſubiects aforeſaid, in the Shippes or other veſſels of the ſame ſubiectes, vppon payne to euery perſon offendyng contrary to the meanyng hereof, to forfeite the value of the fyſhe ſo reſtrayned, pryſed, tolled, or taxed: Any libertie, cuſtome, graunte, pryuiledge or other matter whatſoeuer to the contrary in any wyſe, notwithſtandynge.
            Prouided alwayes, that this preſent acte, nor any thinge therein conteyned, ſhalbe preiudiciall or hurtfull to the Maior and Burgeſſes of the Kynges towne vpon Hull, or their ſucceſſors Maiors and Burgeſſes of the ſame towne, or to any other officer, or miniſter of the ſame towne at any tyme hereafter: but that they and euery of them maye receyue, haue, and take all and euery ſuche tolle, cuſtomes, and ſummes of money of all and euery ſuche perſone and perſons, as is lymitted, appointed and ſet fourth by them to be taken, in an acte of Parlyament made in the .xxxiii. yere of the reigne of our late Soueraigne lord Kyng Henry the eyght. And that neither the ſaide Maior and Burgeſſes of Kyngſton vpon Hull, nor any inhabitaunte there, or any of them, ſhal take any aduauntage of that article of this Eſtatute, for the cariage of any hearrynges or ſalted fiſhe to anye the parties beyond the Sea: Any thing in this preſent acte mentioned, conteined, ſpecified, or declared in any wyſe to the contrary, notwithſtanding.
            Be it alſo enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that no purueyour or other perſone whatſoeuer, ſhall from the ſaid firſt day of Maye, by

vertue of any commiſſion, or otherwiſe, take any hearring or Sea fiſhe from any of the ſubiectes afore mentioned, that ſhall take the ſame in the Shippes or other veſſels of the ſaide ſubiects, as it is aboueſaid, otherwiſe then by agrement of the owners or ſellers of the ſame fiſhe, vpon payne for euery purueyour and other perſon whatſoeuer offending contrary to the tenour of this acte, to forfeite the double value of the hearringes or fiſhe ſo to be taken. And it ſhalbe lawful for any perſon, being owner or ſeller of any ſuche Sea fiſhe ſo taken, as is aforeſaid, to withſtand any perſon that will (by any colour of purueying or otherwiſe) demaunde any ſuche fyſhe, or the tolle of any ſuche fiſhe without the good will of the owner or ſeller as aforeſaid.
            Prouided, that the fyſhe called Compoſition fiſhe, heretofore graunted to the Quenes Maieſtie by the ſubiectes of this Realme, trauelyng into Iſeland, ſhalbe taken by her Maieſties officers and purueyours, in ſuche ſorte as the ſame hath ben lawfully vſed to be taken before the making of this acte: and ſauing to the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires and ſucceſſours, and to all other perſons, ſuche fyſhes as be knowen and vſed to be called Regal fiſhes, wherunto her Maieſtie, or the ſaide other perſons, haue, or ſhall haue right or intereſt, for ſuche recompence as heretofore hath ben accuſtomed.
            And be it further enacted, by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that from the ſaid firſt daye of Aprill, which ſhalbe in the yere of our Lord God, M.D.lxiiii. it ſhal not be lawfull to any perſon or perſons, to bye of any ſtraūger borne out of the Quenes Maieſties obeyſaunce, or out of any ſtraungers bottome, any hearringe, beinge not ſufficiently ſalted packed and Caſked, vpon paine to euery perſon and perſons ſo bying, to forfeyte the hearringes ſo by hym or them to be bought, or the value thereof. Prouided alwayes, that this braunche of this acte ſhal not extende to any hearringes to be bought, which by reaſon of ſhipwrack ſhalbe brought into this Realme, but that it ſhalbe lawfull to al and euery perſon and perſons, to bye all ſuch hearringes ſo brought in by Shipwrack as aforeſaide, as he or they lawfully might haue done before the makyng of this acte: Any thing in this acte conteyned to the contrary in any wiſe, notwithſtanding.
            Be it alſo further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that from the feaſte of ſaint Iohn Baptiſte nexte enſuinge, it ſhall not be lawefull to any perſon or perſons, to cauſe to be loden and caried in any bottom or bottoms wherof any ſtraunger or ſtraungers borne, then be owners, ſhip maiſters, or parte owners, any kynde of fiſhe, victual, wares, or thinges, of what kynde or nature ſo euer the ſame ſhalbe, from one Porte or creke of this Realme, to an other porte or creke of the ſame Realme, vpon payne to euery one that ſhal offende, contrary to the true meanynge of this braunche of this preſent Acte, to forfeyt

all the goods ſo laden or carryed, or the value therof. And that from hencefourth al Engliſhe hoyes & plates may croſſe the Seas, as farre as Cane in Normandy, and Eſtward as farre as Norwey: the ſtatute made in the firſte yere of the Quenes Maieſties reigne, to the contrary hereof notwithſtanding.
            And foraſmuch as there is much deceiptful packing, vſed in Codde and Lynges, brought in Barrelles or other caſke into this Realme: Be it therefore enacted, by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that from and after the firſt daye of Aprill, in the yere of our Lorde God. M.D.lxiiii. it ſhall not be lawfull to any perſon or perſons, to bringe into this Realme, any Codde or Lynges in barelles, or other caſkes, but louſe in bulke, and by tale to be ſolde within this Realme, vpon paine for euery one that ſhall offende contrary to the tenour hereof, to forfaite all the Codde & Lynges, ſo to be brought in, or the value therof.
            And be it further enacted, that from the feaſt of S. Michaell tharchaungell next following, no perſon of perſones whatſoeuer, ſhal bring into this Realme of Englande, or anye parte of the ſame, anye wyne commynge out of any of the dominions or countries belonging to the Crowne of Fraunce, or any woade called Tholoſſe woade in anye other veſſel or veſſelles, but onlye in ſuche veſſell and veſſelles, wherof ſome Subiect or Subiectes of the Quenes Maieſtye, her heires or Succeſſours, ſhalbe then onely owner, or part owner, vpon payne to forfayt al wynes and woade, brought contrary to the meanyng hereof, accordinge to the meaninge of an Eſtatute, made in the time of the reigne of King Henry the ſeuenth, concerninge wine of the Duchie of Gaſcoyn and Guyon (Except that there may be brought into Wales, or any porte within the Countye of Monmouth, Rochell wines.)
            Be it alſo enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that from henceforth it ſhalbe lawful to all & euery owner & owners of ſhippes or veſſelles, and to euery houſhoulder vſinge & exerciſynge the trade of the Seas, by fyſhinge, or otherwiſe, and to euery Gonner or Gonners, commonlye called Canoners, and to euery Shipwright, to take and kepe one or more apprentice, or apprentices, to be brought vp in the ſaid trade or trades, euery of the ſame apprentice, or apprentices, to be to them bounde for tenne yeres or vnder. And euery apprentice ſo taken, being aboue vii. yeares of age, ſhall be by the ſame couenauntes bounde, ordered, and vſed to all ententes, accordinge to the cuſtome of the Citye of London, ſo that the ſame couenaunt or bonde of Apprentiſhippe be made by writinge, indented and enrolled in the towne where the ſame apprentice ſhalbe then inhabited, if it be a towne corporate: and yf the towne be not encorporate, then to be enrolled in the next towne encorporate to the habitacion of euery ſuche Apprentice. And that the officers of euerye ſuche towne corporate, ſhall take for

euery ſuche enrolement, not aboue .xii.d. Anye lawe, ſtatute, or other matter, whatſoeuer to the contrarye, notwithſtandinge.
            And be it further enacted, that ſo muche of the Statute, made in the .v. and .vi. yeares of the late Kinge Edwarde the .vi. intytuled An act againſt Regrators, foreſtallers, and Ingrocers: And ſo much of all other Eſtatutes againſte all Regratours, foreſtallers, and Ingrocers, as doth and maye concerne the byinge of Sea fiſhe vnſalted, or mudde fyſhe, or anye wine, oyle or ſalte, to be taken and brought in anye Engliſhe ſubiectes Shippes, Crayers, or other veſſell, vnto anye porte, creeke, or place of this Realme: ſhall from henceforth, to all ententes, conſtructions and purpoſes, be vtterlye repelled and voyde, for ſo muche of the ſaide oyles, wine, Sea fyſhe, mudde fyſhe and ſalte, as any Byer or Byers, vppon the Sea by waye of forſtallynge or regratinge, ſhall or doe bringe and diſcharge in anye porte or hauen within this Realme. And for encreaſe of prouiſion of fiſhe by the more vſuall and common eatinge therof: Be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that from the feaſte of Saint Michael The Archaungel in the yeare of our Lorde God. M.D. three ſcore and foure, euerye Wedneſdaye in euerye weke throughe the whole yeare, which heretofore hath not by the lawes or cuſtomes of this Realme bene-vſed and obſerued as a fyſhe daye, and whiche ſhall not happen to falle in Chriſtmas weke, or Eaſter weke, ſhalbe hereafter obſerued and kept as the Saterdayes in euery weke be, or ought to be, and that no maner of perſon ſhall eate anye fleſhe on the ſame daye, otherwyſe then oughte to be vppon the common Saterday.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, for the benefytte & commodities of this Realme, to grow aſwel in maintenaunce of the Nauie, as in ſparing & encreaſe of fleſhe, victual of this Realme: that from & after the feaſt of Pentecoſte next comminge, it ſhal not be lawful to any perſon or perſons within this Realme to eate any fleſh, vpon any dayes now vſuallye obſerued as fyſhe dayes, or vppon any wedneſday now newly limitted to be obſerued as fyſh day, vpō paine that euery perſon offendyng herein ſhal forfait .iii.li. for euery time he or they ſhall offende, or elles ſuffer three monethes cloſe impriſonment without bayle or maynpriſe. And euerye perſone or perſones wythin whoſe houſe any ſuche offence ſhalbe done, and beinge priuy, or knowinge therof, and not effectuallye puniſhinge or diſcloſinge the ſame, to ſome publyque officer, hauinge aucthoritie to punyſhe the ſame, for euery ſuche offence, to forfeyt fortie ſhillinges. All whiche forfeytures for not abſtaynynge from meates, ſhalbe deuyded into three equall partes: That is, one part to the vſe of the Quenes Maieſtye, her heires or ſucceſſours, the other parte to the informer, the thyrde, to

the common vſe of the pariſhe, where the offence is or ſhalbe committed, and to be leuyed by the Churche wardens, after any conuiction in that behalfe.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted, that this acte, nor any thing herein conteyned, concernyng eating of fleſhe, ſhall in any wiſe extende to any perſon or perſons, that ſhall hereafter haue any ſpecial licenſe, vpon cauſes to be conteyned in the ſaide lycenſe, and to be graunted accordynge to the lawes of this Realme in ſuche caſes prouided. Al and euery which ſaid licenſe and lycenſes ſhalbe voide to all ententes, vnleſſe the ſame conteyne the conditions hereafter mentioned: That is to ſay, euery licenſe made to any perſon or perſons, being of the degree of a Lord of Parlyament, or of their wyues, ſhalbe vpon condition, that euery ſuche perſon ſo to be lycenſed, ſhall paye to the poore mens boxe within the pariſhe where they ſhal dwell or remaine, in the feaſte of the Purification of the bleſſed virgin Mary, or within vi. dayes after the ſame feaſte .xxvi.s. viii.d. The ſame to be payde within one moneth next after the ſame feaſte, vpon payne of forfeiture of euery ſuche licenſe. And euery lycence to any perſon of the degree of a Knight, or a Knightes wife, ſhalbe vpon condition, that euery ſuche perſon ſo lycenſed, ſhall paye yerely .xiii.s. iiii.d. to the vſe aforeſaide, and in fourme afore mentioned. And euery licenſe to any perſon or perſons, being vnder the degrees aboueſaid, ſhalbe vpon condition, that euery ſuche perſon ſo licenſed ſhall paye yerely .vi.s.viii.d. to the ſayd vſe, and in fourme afore mentioned.
            Prouided alwayes, that no lycenſe ſhall extende to the eating of any Byefe, at any tyme of the yere, nor to the eating of any Veale in any yere, from the feaſte of Saint Michaell the Archangell, vntyl the firſt daye of Maye.
            Prouided alſo, that all perſons whiche by reaſon of notorious ſycknes, ſhalbe enforſed for recouerye of health to eate fleſhe, for the tyme of their ſicknes, ſhalbe ſufficiently lycenſed by the Byſhoppe of the dioceſſe, or by the Parſon, Vycar, or Curat, of the pariſhe where ſuche perſon ſhalbe ſicke, or of one the nexte pariſhe adioyninge, if the ſaide Parſon, Vicar, or Curat of his or their owne pariſhe be wilful, or if there be no Curate within the ſame pariſhe. Which lycenſe ſhalbe made in writinge, ſigned with the hande of the Byſhoppe of the dioces, or of the Parſon, Vycar, or Curate, and not endure longer then the time of the ſicknes. And that if the ſicknes ſhal continue aboue the ſpace of .viii. dayes, after ſuche lycenſe graunted: then the licenſe ſhalbe regiſtred in the Churche booke, with the knowledge of one of the Churche wardens, and the partie licenſed ſhall gyue to the Curate .iiii.d. for the entrye therof: And that licenſe to endure no longer,

but onlye for the tyme of his, her, or their ſicknes. And if any licenſe by any Parſon, Vicar or Curate, be graunted to any perſon or perſons, other then ſuche as euydentlye appeare to haue nede thereof by reaſon of their ſicknes: not onlye euery ſuche lycenſe ſhalbe voyde, but alſo euerye ſuche Parſon, Curate, or Vycare ſhall forfait for euerye ſuche lycenſe otherwyſe graunted, fyue markes.
            Prouided alſo, and be it enacted, that all lycenſes heretofore graunted to any ſubiecte of this Realme, by any of the late Kynges, or by the late Quene Mary, or by the Quenes Maieſtie now beinge, or by any Archebyſhoppe of this Realme, hauinge aucthoritie ſo to do, ſhalbe of as good force in lawe for the wedneſday, nowe lymitted, and other accuſtomed fyſhe dayes, as they were before the makynge of this Acte for the ſaide other accuſtomed fyſhe dayes, ſo as the parties lycenſed do hereafter obſerue all ſuche conditions as be lymitted in this eſtatute, to ſuche as hereafter ſhall obteyne any lycenſes. And ſuche perſons alſo as heretofore were or ought to be lycenſed, by reaſon of age or other impediment, or cauſe, by order of the Eccleſiaſtical lawes, ſhal enioye the ſame priuilege and accuſtomed lycenſes, any thinge in this Acte to the contrary hereof in any wiſe notwithſtanding.
            And be it enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that no forfeiture of Shippe, Crayer, or other veſſel, or of any apparel of the ſame, nor any other penaltie or forfeyture, ſhalbe extended or growe againſt any owner or owners of any Shippe, Crayer, or other veſſell for the tranſportinge or carrying of any Wheate or other Corne, or thinges prohibited by the eſtatute made in the Parliament holden the firſte and ſeconde yeres of Kynge Phillippe and Quene Mary, vnleſſe the ſame owner or owners ſhalbe wittinge, knowinge, aydyng, or conſentynge to the prohibited tranſporting or carryinge: the ſaide Eſtatute, or any thinge therein mentioned to the contrarye hereof in any wiſe notwitſtandyng.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that all and euery perſon and perſons, whiche be, or ſhalbe, by the lawes and eſtatutes of this Realme, or otherwiſe, aucthoryſed to ſell wynes by retaile, in the ſeuerall Counties and places where they be, or ſhalbe ſo aucthoriſed: ſhall and maye from hencefourth ſell the ſaide wynes, by pynte, quarte, pottell, gallon, or otherwyſe, at ſuche price or pryces, and in ſuche fourme, as ſhalbe lymitted by the Quenes Maieſties proclamation in that Countie or place, made with the aſſente of ſuche lordes and other perſons, as by the ſtatute made in the .xxviii. yere of the reigne of Kynge Henry the eyght, were aucthoriſed to ſet price vppon wynes in groſſe,

without any payne or forfeyture for the ſame: Any lawe, vſage, or eſtatute heretofore made or had to the contrary hereof in any wiſe notwithſtandinge.
            And be it further enacted, by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parlyament, that from and after the feaſte of ſaint Michael the Archangell next comming, it ſhalbe lawfull to all and euery perſon and perſons, beinge ſubiectes of the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires or ſucceſſours, only out of ſuch portes, or crekes, as by the Quenes Maieſties proclamation hereafter ſhalbe publiſhed and appointed, and not els where, to lode, carrie or tranſporte any Wheate, Rye, Barley, Malte, Peaſe or Beanes, into any partes beyonde the Seas, to ſell as a marchaundiſe, in ſhippes, Crayers, or other veſſels, whereof any Engliſhe borne ſubiect then ſhalbe the only owners, ſo that the price of the ſayde Cornes or graynes ſo caryed or tranſported, exceade not the prices hereafter followinge, at the tymes, hauens, and places where and when the ſame Corne or grayne ſhalbe ſhipped or laden: Vide. the quarter of Wheate at .x.s. the quarter of Rye, Peaſe or Beanes, at .viii.s. the quarter of Barley or malte at .vi.s.viii. d. of curraunte money of England: Any lawe, vſage, or eſtatute heretofore made to the contrary hereof in any wiſe notwithſtandyng.
            And where doubte hath heretofore ben, whether the ſtatute in the xviii. yere of the reigne of Kyng Henry the .vi. heretofore made againſt Souldiours reteyned, which departe from their Captaines without lycenſe, did or ought to extended vnto Mariners & gonners ſeruing on the Seas, takynge wages of the kinge or Quene of this Realme: Be it expreſſed, ordeined, enacted, and declared, by aucthoritie of this preſent Parlyament, that the ſaid eſtatute made in the ſaide .xxiii. yere of the reigne of Kynge Henry the .vi. in all paynes, forfeytures and other thinges, did, doth, and hereafter ſhall extende, aſwell to all and euery Mariner and gonner, hauinge taken or ſhall hereafter take preſt or wages to ſerue the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires, or ſucceſſours, to all intentes and purpoſes, as the ſame did or doth vnto any ſouldyer: Any diuerſities of opinion, doubte, matter, or thing to the contrary hereof in any wyſe notwithſtandyng.
            And where an eſtatute concernynge ſowyng of Flaxe and Hempe, was made and prouided in the Parlyament holden the .xxiiii. yere of the reigne of our late ſoueraigne Lorde Kynge Henry the eyght, to be vniuerſall through euery Countie of this Realme, for the better prouiſion of nettes, for helpe and furtheraunce of fiſhinge, and for eſchewinge of Idelnes:
            Be it ordeined & enacted by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that in euery ſuche Countie of this Realme, or parte of ſuch Countie, where, by the Quenes Maieſties proclamation it ſhall hereafter be

publiſhed, the ſaide eſtatute to be commodious or profitable for the common wealth: The ſaid eſtatute, and euery clauſe, article and prouiſion therein conteyned, be and ſhalbe reuyued, and ſtande in full force and ſtrength to be executed and perfourmed, from the feaſte of ſaint Michaell the Archangell nexte comminge, in all thinges other then in the proportion of a Roade or fourth parte of an acre, & in the paine of .iii.s.iiii.d. by the ſaid eſtatute limitted. In place whereof, be it ordeyned and enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that in euery caſe and degree, where by the ſaide former eſtatute, one Roade or fourth parte of an Acre is lymitted to be ſowne with lynſeade, otherwiſe flaxe ſeade, or hempe ſeade, from the ſaide feaſte of Saint Michaell the Archangel nexte comming: In ſteade and lewe of the ſaide Roade or iiii. parte of an Acre, one whole Acre, or leſſe, as by proclamation in fourme aforeſaide ſhalbe limitted, ſhalbe ſowen with lynſeade, otherwiſe flaxe ſeade, or Hempe ſeade, vpon payne of forfeyture of fyue poundes, for euery ſuche defaulte or offence.
            And further be it ordeyned, and enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that all and euery ſuche of the offences before mentioned, as hereafter ſhalbe done on the mayne Sea or coſtes of the Sea, beinge no parte of the bodye of any Countie of this Realme, & without the precincte, iuriſdiction and liberties of the Sinque portes, and out of any hauen or peere: ſhalbe tryed and determined before the Lorde Admirall of England, or his Lieuetenaunt, deputie, or deputies, & other Iuſtices of Oyer and terminer, according to the fourme of the ſaide eſtatute of Anno .xxviii. Henrici .viii. for cauſes of pyracie. And if the ſame ſhalbe done on the mayne Sea, or coſtes of the Sea, within the iuriſdiction or libertie of the Synque ports, & out of any hauen or porte: then the ſame to be tried and determined before the ſayde Lord warden of then ſayd Syncque portes, or his Lieuetenaunt, or Iudge, or before Iuſtices of Oyer and terminer, according to the true fourme of the ſayde eſtatute of Anno .xxxviii. Henry .viii. for cauſes of pyracie. And for all and ſinguler ſuche other of the offences before mentioned, as ſhalbe done in the lande, or within any hauen or peere: all Iuſtices of the peace in their Seſſions, and Maiors, Sheriffes and Bailifes, and other head officers in Cities and townes corporate, in their Seſſions, or other Courtes within the limittes of their commiſſions or aucthorities ſhal haue full power and aucthoritie to inquire of the offenders of this acte, aſwel by the othes of .xii. men, as otherwiſe by information, and therevpon to heare and determine the ſame. And if any perſon or perſons ſhalbe preſented before the ſaide Iudges, Iuſtices, or officers within the lymittes of their auctorities, or anye information gyuen to them of any offender of this acte: that then they ſhal haue ful power and aucthoritie vpon any ſuche preſentment,

or Information to make proces againſte the offenders of this acte, lyke as is commonly vſed vpon enditementes of Treſpaſſe. And yf any be preſented, and afterwarde be conuicted by confeſſion, or otherwiſe, that then euery ſuche perſon ſhall ſuffer no leſſe forfeiture or puniſhement then herein is before lymitted: All whiche forfeytures to be leuied, in maner and fourme following. That is to ſaye, ſuche forfeytures concernyng eatyng of fleſhe, as are before lymitted to certeine vſes, to be to the ſame vſes in that behalfe before expreſſed, and all ſuch forfeytures, as accordinge to the tenour of this acte ſhalbe determinable before the ſaide Iudges, Iuſtices, or other officers of the Admiralties aforeſaide, or before Commiſſioners of Oyer and terminer in that behalfe, ſhalbe to the vſe of the Lord Admirall of England, or Lord warden of the Syncque ports, where ſuch offence ſhalbe preſented, or where as the Iuriſdiction of the cauſe ſhal apperteyne. And all ſuch forfeitures, as accordyng to the tenour of this acte, ſhalbe determinable before Maiors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, or other head officers of Cities or townes corporate, ſhalbe to the common vſe of the Corporation of the ſaide Citie or towne corporate, where ſuche offences ſhalbe preſented, or wheras the Iuriſdiction of the cauſe ſhall apperteyne. And all ſuche forfeytours, as accordynge to the tenour of this acte, ſhalbe determinable before the Iuſtices of the peace, ſhalbe to the vſe of the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires and ſucceſſours. And if any perſon ſhalbe conuict by confeſſion, or otherwiſe vpō any Information, made by any perſon or perſons againſt any offender or offenders of this acte, in any cauſe (ſaue for the eatinge of fleſhe, firſte before ſpeciallie lymitted) that then euery ſuch perſon ſo conuict vpon any Information, ſhal loſe ſuche forfeiture as is before lymitted, the one halfe thereof to be to ſuche as ſo ſhall make the Information, and the other halfe to thoſe whiche vpon preſentement, without ſpeciall Information, are before lymitted to haue the whole forfeiture. And that for the leuyinge of euery forfeiture growing by this eſtatute, aſwel the ſaide Lorde Admirall of England, Lorde warden of the Syncque portes, theyr Lieuetenaunts; and Iudges, as the ſayde Iuſtices, Maiors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes and other head officers within the lymittes of their Commiſſions or aucthorities, haue and ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie to make ſuch proces, as they ſhal thinke good by their diſcreſſions.
            Prouided alwayes, that none Information at the ſu
                  •
               e of an perſone concernynge this acte, ſhalbe of any effect to put anye perſon to aunſwere or loſſe of forfeiture, excepte the ſayde Information be commenced within halfe a yere nexte after the offence done contrary to this acte, nor that any Information or preſentment for the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires or ſucceſſours, or for the Admirall,

warden of the Sinque portes, Maiors or other officers aforeſaide, be of any effecte, to put any perſon to any aunſwere or loſſe of any forfeiture by vertue of this acte, excepte the ſaide Information or preſentment be within one yere nexte after the offence done and committed contrary to this acte.
            Prouided and be it likewiſe enacted, that it ſhalbe lawfull to any perſon, or perſons, to haue at his or their table vpō euery wedneſdaye, beinge ordered by this eſtatute to be obſerued as a fiſhe daye, one onely vſual competent diſhe of fleſhe, of one kind and no mo, ſo that he, ſhe, or they haue alſo ſerued to the ſame table and meaſe at the ſame meale, their ful competent vſuall diſhes of Sea fiſhe, of ſundry kyndes, eyther freſhe or ſalt, and that without fraude or couyn, and ſo ſhall alſo order, that the ſame fiſhe be mete and ſeaſonable, and that it ſhalbe eaten or ſpent in like maner, as vpon Fridayes or Saterdayes in like caſes are vſed.
            And that alſo ſuch perſons as haue, or hereafter ſhall haue, vpon good and iuſt conſiderations, any lawfull licenſe to eate fleſhe vpon any fiſhe day (except ſuche perſons, as for ſicknes ſhall for the tyme be licenſed by the Biſhop of the dioces, or by their Curates, or ſhalbe licenſed by reaſon of age, or other impediment allowed heretofore by the Eccleſiaſticall lawes of this Realme) ſhalbe bounde by force of this ſtatute, to haue for euery one diſhe of fleſhe ſerued to be eaten at their table, one vſuall diſhe of Sea fiſhe, freſhe or ſalte, to be likewyſe ſerued at the ſame table, and to be eaten or ſpent without fraude or couin, as the lyke kinde is, or ſhalbe vſually eaten or ſpent on Saterdayes.
            And that theſe two articles and clauſes next aboue, ſhalbe taken and interpreted from tyme to tyme, in the fauoure of expence of Sea fiſhe, and that the offendour or offendours herein, ſhalbe puniſhed in lyke maner, as is ordered by this eſtatute, for puniſhment of ſuche as ſhall eate fleſhe vpon Fridayes, Saterdayes, or other fiſhe dayes.
            And becauſe no maner of perſon ſhall miſiudge of the intent of this eſtatute, limittinge orders to eate fiſhe, and to forbeare eatinge of fleſhe, but that the ſame is purpoſely intended and ment politikely for the increaſe of Fiſhermen, & Mariners, and repairing of port townes and nauigation, and not for any ſuperſtition to be mainteyned in the choyſe of meates: Be it enacted, that who ſoeuer ſhall by preachinge; teachinge, writinge, or open ſpeache notifie, that any eating of fiſhe, or forbearinge of fleſhe mentioned in this ſtatute, is of any neceſſitie for the ſauinge of the ſoule of man, or that it is the ſeruice of God, otherwiſe then as other politike lawes are and be: that then ſuche perſon ſhalbe puniſhed, as ſpreaders of falſe newes are or ought to be.
            
               Be it enacted in the fauour of Fyſhermen & Mariners, haunting the ſea as Fyſhermen or Mariners, that none of them ſhall hereafter at any tyme be compelled agaynſt his or theyr wyll, to ſerue as any ſouldiour vppon the lande, or vpon the ſea, otherwyſe then as a Mariner, except it ſhalbe to ſerue vnder any Captayne of ſome ſhyp or veſſell for landyng, to do ſome ſpeciall exploit, whiche Mariners haue vſed to do, or vnder any other perſon hauing aucthoritie to withſtande any inuaſion of enemies, or to ſubdue any rebellion within the Realme, and alſo except all ſuch perſons as by tenure, lawefull cuſtome, or couenaunt, be or ſhalbe otherwyſe bounde to ſerue.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by aucthoritie aforeſayde, that this Acte or any thyng therin conteyned, ſhall not extende to take away or diminiſhe any libertie, priuiledge, fraunches, forfaiture or amerciament, fines, iſſues, wreckes of the Sea, or any other lawfull inheritaunce or free holde, from any perſon or perſons, bodyes politique or corporate, theyr heyres or ſucceſſours, for or touchyng any lawfull libertie, aucthoritie, or iuriſdiction admirall, or for conſeruation of any water, that they or any of them nowe haue lawfullye, or hereafter ſhall haue: Any thyng in the ſame to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alwayes and be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that no Fyſherman vſyng or hauntyng the ſea, ſhalbe taken by the Quenes Maieſties Commiſſion to ſerue her hyghnes as a Mariner on the Sea: but that the ſayde Commiſſion be firſt brought by her hyghnes taker or takers, to two Iuſtices of peace, next adioynyng and inhabytyng to the ſayde Sea coſtes, Townes, or other places, where the ſayd Mariners are ſo to be taken, to the intent the ſayde Iuſtices may choſe out, and cauſe to be returned ſuch ſufficient number of able men, as in the ſaide Cōmiſſion ſhalbe conteyned, to ſerue her Maieſtie as is aforeſayde.
            Sauyng alwayes to the Sinque Portes, and alſo to the towne of great Yarmouth, all ſuch lawfull liberties as they iuſtly haue before the makyng of this Acte, touchyng the free fayer kepte at Yarmouth, other then in bying of ſtraungers, and takyng of toll, as the ſame be before prohibited.
            Prouided alwayes, that any thyng in this Acte conteyned, ſhall not be hurtfull or preiudiciall to any aucthoritie, ſtyle, preheminence, dignitie, or iuriſdiction, belongyng to the office of the Lord warden of the Sinque Portes.
            Prouided alwayes, that it ſhall and may be lawfull to and for any perſon or perſons beyng ſtraungers borne, to bryng yerely in any Shyp, Bottome, or Veſſell, wherof any ſtranger or ſtrangers

borne, is or ſhalbe owner or owners, into the Hauens, Portes, and Townes of the Iſle of man, or into any of them, any of the wynes made in any of the dominions or countreys belongynge to the Crowne of Fraunce, and in the ſame Portes and Townes, or any of them, to diſcharge the ſaid wynes ſo to be brought, ſo that there be not brought and diſcharged by the ſame ſtraungers, in any ſuch ſtraungers ſhyppes, bottomes, or veſſelles, in any one yere, in, or, at the ſayde Hauens, Portes, and Townes, or any of them, aboue one hundred Tonnes at the moſt: This Acte or any thyng therin conteyned to the contrary therof, notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alſo, that it ſhall and may be lawfull to and for any perſon or perſons beyng ſtraungers borne, to bryng yerely in any ſhippe, veſſel, or bottome, wherof any ſtraunger or ſtraūgers borne is or ſhalbe owner or owners, into the Hauen, Porte, and Towne of Chepeſtowe, in the Countie of Monmouth, any wynes made in any of the ſayde dominions or countreys belongyng to the ſayde Crowne of Fraunce, ouer and beſydes all Rochell wynes heretofore in this Acte allowed to be brought, and in the ſame Port and Towne to diſcharge the ſayde wynes, ſo that there be not brought and diſcharged by the ſame ſtraungers, in any ſuche ſtraungers ſhyppes, bottomes, or veſſelles in any one yere, in, or at the ſayde Hauen, Port, and Towne, aboue one hundred Tonnes at the moſt: This Acte or any thing therin conteyned to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alſo, that it ſhall and may be lawefull to and for any perſon or perſons beyng ſtraungers borne, to bryng yerely in any ſhyppe, veſſell, or bottome, whereof any ſtraunger or ſtraungers borne, is or ſhalbe owner or owners, into the Hauens, Portes, and Townes of Cardife, Caneruon, Beawmarrys, and other Hauens, Portes, and Townes in Southwales and Northwales, or any of them, and into the Hauen, Port, and Towne of Newporte, in the ſayde Countie of Monmouth, any of the ſayde wynes made in any of the ſayd dominions or countreys belongyng to the ſaid Crowne of Fraunce, ouer and beſydes all Rochell wines heretofore in this Acte alowed to be brought, and in and at the ſame Portes and Townes, or anye of them, to diſcharge the ſayde wynes ſo to be brought, ſo that there be not brought and diſcharged by the ſame ſtraungers in any ſuch ſtraungers ſhyppes, bottomes, or veſſels in any one yere, in, or at the ſaid Hauens, Portes, & Townes, or any of them, aboue one hundred Tonnes at the moſt: This Acte or any thing therin conteyned to the contrary therof, notwithſtandyng.
            Sauing vnto the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, all ſuch dueties and thynges whiche her hyghnes, her heyres, and

ſucceſſours ought to haue, enioy, be aunſwered and payde, for the ſayde three hundred Tonnes of Wynes, mentioned in the ſaid three laſte prouiſos, to be brought and diſcharged, as in the ſame three prouiſos ben mentioned and declared: Any thing in this Acte to the contrary therof, notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alſo, and be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that this Acte or any thyng or thynges therein conteyned, ſhall not in any maner of wyſe extende to geue vnto the Lorde Admirall of Englande for the tyme beyng, or to any his Viceadmiralles, Iudge or Iudges of the Admiraltie, his or theyr deputie or deputies, or to any other the officers or miniſters of the Admiraltie, or to any others hauyng or claymyng any Admirall power, iuriſdictions, or aucthoritie within this Realme and Wales, or any other the Quenes dominions: any other power, ryght, iuriſdiction, preheminence, or aucthoritie, then he or they, or any of them lawfully haue, hath, or had, or ought to haue and enioye before the makyng of this Acte, other then for ſuche of the offences ſpecified in this Acte, as hereafter ſhalbe done vppon the mayne Sea, within the iuriſdiction of the Admiraltie: This Acte or any article, braunche, clauſe, prouiſion, or thing therin conteyned to the contrary therof, notwithſtandyng.
            This Act ſhall continue and endure vntyll the ende of ten whole yeres, to be accompted from the feaſt of Saint Michaell the Archangell, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God .M.D.lxiiii. and from thence, to the ende of the nexte Parliament then folowyng the ende of the ſayde ten yeres.
         
         
            An Acte agaynſt ſuch as ſhall ſell any Ware for Apparell without redy money. ¶ The .vi. Chapter.
            
               BE IT enacted by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that whatſoeuer perſon after the feaſt of Eaſter next, ſhall ſell or by any meanes delyuer to any perſon, hauyng not in poſſeſſion landes or fees to the clere yerely value of three thouſand poundes auerrable and triable by bookes of Subſedyes, or by any other ſufficient true way or meanes, any maner of foreyne ſtuffe or wares, not growen or fyrſt wrought in any the Quenes Maieſties dominions, of what kynde, nature, name, or condition ſo euer the ſame be, appertaynyng or tendyng to the apparellyng,

clothyng, deckyng, garnyſhyng, or adornyng of the bodye, or the part of the body of any maner of perſon, for all the which ſtuffe or wares, or for the workemanſhip therof, or any part therof, the ſeller, delyuerer, or worker, theyr executours or adminiſtratours, ſhal not haue receaued the whole money or full ſatiſfaction eyther in hande, or within .xxviii. dayes after the ſale, delyuery, or makyng therof: that in euery ſuch caſe, the ſeller, delyuerer, worker, or maker, theyr executours and adminiſtratours ſhalbe without all remedy by order of any lawe, cuſtome, or decree, to recouer or demaunde any money or recompence for the ſayde ſtuffe or wares, or for the workmanſhyp of any parte thereof, what aſſuraunce ſoeuer he or they ſhall haue, by bonde, ſuertie, promiſe, or pawne, of the partie, or of any other on his or theyr behalfe to the contrary. And that all bondes and aſſuraunce whatſoeuer made in that caſe and for that purpoſe, by any meanes or wayes, directly or indirectlye, ſhalbe vtterly voyde to all intentes. And this Acte ſhall endure onely to thende of the next Parliament.
         
         
            An Act for the aduoydyng of diuers forreyne wares, made by handy craftes men beyonde the Seas. ¶ The .vii. Chapter.
            
               WHere as heretofore the artificers of this Realme of England (aſwel within the Citie of Londō, as with in other Cities, Townes, & Boroughes of the ſame Realme) that is to wit, Gyrdlers, Cutlers, Sadlers Glouers, Poyntmakers, & ſuche lyke handycraftes men, haue ben in theyr ſayde faculties greatlye wrought and greatly ſet on worke, aſwell for the ſuſtentation of them ſelues, theyr wyues and families, as for a good education of a great part of youth of this Realme in good arte and laudable exercyſe: beſydes the manifolde benefites that by meanes or by reaſon of theyr knowledges, inuentions, and continuall trauell, dayly and vniuerſally came to the whole eſtate of the common wealth of this ſayde Realme. Yet notwithſtandyng, ſo nowe it is, that by reaſon of the aboundaunce of forreyne wares, brought into this Realme from the partes of beyonde the Seas, the ſayde artificers are not only leſſe occupyed and thereby vtterly impoueriſhed, the youth not trayned in the ſaid ſciences & exerciſes, and thereby the ſayde faculties & thexquiſite knowledges therof lyke in ſhort tyme within this Realme to decay: but alſo diuers Cities and Townes

within this Realme of England much therby impaired, the whole Realme greatly endomaged, and other countreis notably enriched & the people therof wel ſet on worke to their cōmodities & liuinges, in the artes and ſciences aforeſayde, and to the great diſcourage of the ſkylfull workmen of this Realme, being in very dede nothing inferiour to any ſtraunger in the faculties aforeſayde.
            For reformation wherof: Be it enacted by our ſoueraigne Lady the Quenes highnes, and by the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons of this preſent Parliament aſſembled, & by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that no perſon or perſons whatſoeuer, frō or after the feaſt of the Natiuitie of S. Iohn Baptiſt now next enſuyng, ſhall bring or cauſe to be brought into this Realme of Englande frō the partes of beyonde the ſeas, any Gyrdels, harneſſe for gyrdels, Rapiers, Daggers, Kniues, Hiltes, Pummelles, Lockets, Chapes, Dagger blades, Handels, Scabberdes, and Sheathes for kniues, Saddels, Horſe harneſſe, ſtirrops, Bittes, Gloues, Pointes Leather laces, or Pinnes, being redy made or wrought in any partes of beyond the Seas, to be ſolde, bartred or exchaunged within this Realme of England or Wales, vpon payne to forfaite all ſuch wares ſo to be brought contrary to the true meaning of this Acte, in whoſe handes ſoeuer they or any of them ſhalbe founde, or the very value thereof, thone halfe of the forfaiture to be to our ſoueraigne Lady the Quenes hyghnes, her heires & ſucceſſours, & the other moitie therof to him or them that wyll ſeaſe the ſame, or ſue therfore in any court of Record of the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires & ſucceſſours, by action of debt, byll, plaint, information, or otherwiſe, where no wager of lawe, eſſoigne, or protection ſhalbe to him or them alowed. This Act to continue and endure to the ende of the next Parliament.
         
         
            An Acte touchyng Tanners, Curryours, Shoemakers, and other artificers occupying the cuttyng of Leather. ¶ The .viii. Chapter.
            
               WHere before this time, diuers & many good eſtatutes haue ben made for the true tanning, currying, and working of leather, as a thing very neceſſary for the cōmon wealth & cōmoditie for the Quenes Maieſties ſubiectes, for that euery ſort of people of neceſſitie muſt vſe & haue leather for diuers and ſundrye purpoſes, which notwithſtandyng, leather was neuer worſe tanned, curryed or wrought, then now a dayes it is, by reaſon wherof, diuers perſons are not onely put to great loſſe, charge, & other inconueniences,

but alſo do take diuers and ſundrye diſeaſes, to the ſhortenyng of theyr lyues, as by the complayntes of diuers perſons exhibited in this Parliament it manifeſtly appeareth.
            Be it therfore enacted by the Quenes Maieſtie, with thaſſent of the Lordes & cōmons in this preſent parliament aſſembled, and by thaucthoritie of the ſame, that from & after the feaſt of Pentecoſt next cōming, no Butcher or other perſon ſhall gaſhe, ſlaughter, or cut any hyde of any Bull, Oxe, Steare, or Cowe in fleyng therof or otherwiſe, wherby the ſame ſhalbe impaired or hurt. And that no Tanner or other perſon or perſons vſing or occupying the craft or miſtery of tannyng of leather, ſhall after the feaſt of S. Michaell tharchangell next cōmyng, by him ſelfe or any other perſon or perſons, offer or put to ſale any ſuch hyde or ſkyn ſo gaſhed, flaughtered or cut, vpon payne of forfaiture for euery ſuch hyde or ſkynne ſo offred or put to ſale .xx.d.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that no Butcher or other perſon or perſons, after the ſaid feaſt of Pentecoſt, ſhal kyll any Calfe to ſell, being vnder fyue wekes olde, vpon payne to forfait for euery Calfe ſo to be kylled and ſolde .vi.s. viii.d.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that no perſon or perſons occupying the craft or occupation of a Butcher, ſhal after the feaſt of Pentecoſt next cōming, occupy or vſe by himſelfe, or any other perſon or perſōs, the feat, craft or miſtery of a Tanner, duryng the tyme that he ſhall ſo vſe the crafte or occupation of a Butcher, vpon payne of forfaiture of .vi.s.viii.d. for euery day that he ſhall ſo vſe the feate, craft, or miſtery of a Tanner.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that no perſon or perſons, whiche at the feaſt of S. Michaell tharchangell whiche was in the firſt yere of the Quenes Maieſties reigne that nowe is, had not landes, tenementes, rentes, profites, or hereditamentes of eſtate of inheritaunce, or for terme of lyfe or lyues, of the clere yerely value of .xl.li. or aboue, or whoſe Tanhouſe was not at the ſaide feaſt, is, or ſhalbe hereafter in a Citie, Borough, Towne corporate, or market Towne, where ſearchers & ſealers of leather hath ben & ſhalbe vſually appoynted (except ſuch perſon & perſons as then had any Tanhouſe, and dyd then occupy the miſtery of tannyng of leather, and except an apprentice or apprentices to a Tanner or Tanners, & except ſuch as were then, or ſince, or hereafter ſhalbe brought vp, inſtructed, or taught as couenaunt or hyred ſeruaunt for that purpoſe by the ſpace of .vii. yeres in the miſtery or craft of tannyng of leather, and except the wyfe and ſuch ſonne or ſonnes of a Tanner as hath ben brought vp & hath vſed the miſtery of tanning of leather by the ſpace of foure yeres aforeſaid, or the ſonne or daughter of a Tanner, or ſuche perſon who ſhall marry

ſuch wyfe or daughter to whom he hath or ſhall leaue a Tanhouſe and fattes) ſhall tanne any leather, or ſhall vſe, take or haue any profite, gayne, or cōmoditie of or by the ſaid miſtery or craft of tanning of leather, vpon payne of forfaiting of all ſuch leather by him or them ſo tanned, or whereof he or they ſhall receaue any profyte or commoditie by tannyng, or the iuſt value therof.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaide, that after the feaſt of Pentecoſt next commyng, no perſon or perſons whatſoeuer, which ſhall after the ſayde feaſt of Pentecoſt occupy or vſe by hym or them ſelfe, or by any other perſon or perſons, the crafte or miſtery of tannyng of leather, ſhall ſuffer any hyde or ſkynne to lye in the lymes any longer tyme then the heere falleth of, or maye be taken of, nor in any wiſe to be put into the limes after the heere maye be taken of, nor ſhall vſe, employ, occupye, or put by them ſelues, or by any other perſon or perſons, any thing in any lycour, ſtuffe or workmanſhyp in or about the tannyng of leather but only lyme, Culuer donge, or Hen donge, and that in colde water onlye, and wooſes made of colde water and Oken barke onlye, without any mixture of any other thyng or thynges, nor ſhall by hym ſelfe or by any other perſon or perſons put any hyde or ſkynne in any tanne wooſes, or licour made whot, or warmed in any fat or veſſel, to be ſet or couered in any tanne hyll, or otherwyſe, nor ſhall ouerlyme any hydes or ſkynnes in the lyme pyttes, nor ſhall put any hydes or ſkinnes into any tanne fattes or veſſelles before the lime be well and perfectly ſokened and wrought out of them and euery of them, nor ſhall ſuffer his or theyr leather to be layed, or to hange or to lye wet in any froſt vntyll the ſame be froſen, nor ſhall drye or parche the leather with the heate of the fyre or of the ſōmer ſunne, nor ſhall tanne, or cauſe to be tanned any hyde or ſkynne beyng putrified, rotten, or tainted by long lying, eyther before the puttyng of it into the lymes, or after in the water or lycour, or by any other meanes, nor ſhall negligently worke the hydes in the wooſes, nor ſhall not renue & make ſtrong the wooſes as often as ſhalbe requiſite, nor ſhall ſuffer the hydes for vtter ſole and clout leather to lye in the wooſes any leſſe tyme then .xii. monthes at the leaſt, and the hides for vpper leathers in lyke wooſes any leſſe time then .ix. monthes at the leaſt, nor ſhall inſufficiently or imperfectly tanne any hyde or ſkynne, nor ſhall tanne any Oxe hydes, Stere hides, or Cowe hides but whole, without cuttyng of any bellyes cōmonly called wombes, or peeces from the ſame (hydes for cloutyng leather to be cut into three or foure bendes or peeces, ouerthwarte the whole hyde onely excepte) nor ſhall after the feaſte of Saynte Michaell the Archangell nexte commynge, put to ſale anye tanned hyde or ſkynne whiche is or ſhalbe rayſed

in or by the tannyng, workmanſhip, or otherwyſe, or by vſyng any other thing or ſtuffe, or in any other ſort then by his ſtatute is limitted & appoynted, vpon payne of forfaiture of euery Oxe hyde, ſteare hyde, Cowe hyde or ſkyn, tanned, vſed, or put to ſale contrary to the true meanyng of this preſent Acte, or the iuſt value therof.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayd, that frō the feaſt of Pentecoſt next cōming, no perſō or perſōs whatſoeuer, ſhal put or cauſe to be put to ſale, exchange, or otherwyſe depart with any kynde of tanned leather red & vnwrought, but in open fayer or market, in the places therfore cōmonly accuſtomed, and therfore prepared, nor before the ſame be ſearched & ſealed, accordyng to the lawes & order in this eſtatute hereafter mentioned, nor ſhall after the feaſt of S. Michael tharchangel next comming, put to ſale, exchaunge, or otherwyſe depart with any tanned leather red and vnwrought, but ſufficiently & well tanned, & throughly dried, nor ſhal put or cauſe to be put to ſale, exchange, or otherwyſe depart with any oxe hide, ſteare hide, or Cow hyde, but only whole without cutting any bellies called wōbes or other peces frō it (clouting leather cut into bendes as is aforeſaid, only excepted) before ye ſame be ſerched & ſealed, vpon paine of forfaiture for euery hide or peece of leather ſold, exchanged, or otherwiſe departed with, contrary to the true meaning of this Act .vi.s. viii.d. and for euery doſen of calue ſkinnes .iii.s.iiii.d. & the hyde or hydes, ſkin or ſkinnes, & leather in any otherwiſe ſold, exchanged, or bought, or the value therof.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that no perſon or perſons vſing the miſtery of tanning of leather, by himſelfe, or by any other perſō or perſons, from & after the ſaid feaſt of Pentecoſt, ſhall during that tyme that he ſhall vſe the ſaid miſtery, occupy or vſe the craft or miſtery of a ſhoemaker, currier, butcher, or of any artificer vſing or exerciſing cutting or workyng of leather, vpon paine to forfait & loſe all and euery ſuch hyde & hydes, ſkinne & ſkinnes ſo by them or any of them wrought or tanned, duryng the tyme that he ſhall vſe the miſtery or craft of tanning aforeſaid, or the iuſt value therof. It is alſo enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that no perſon vſing the miſtery of tannyng of leather by him ſelfe, or by any other perſon or perſons, ſhall after the feaſt of the Natiuitie of S. Iohn Baptiſt next cōmyng tanne any Bull hyde, horſe hyde, or ſhepe ſkinne, or put to ſale, exchange, or otherwyſe departe with any Horſe hyde, Bull hyde, or ſhepe ſkinne tanned, vpon payne to forfait euery ſuch bull hyde, horſe hyde, or ſhepe ſkin ſo tanned or put to ſale, or the iuſt value therof.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that no perſon or perſons after the feaſt of Pentecoſt next commyng, ſhall bargayne, bye, make any contracte for, or beſpeake any roughe hyde

or Calues ſkynnes in the heere, but only ſuch perſon or perſons as by vertue of this Acte may lawfully vſe the craft or miſtery of tannyng of leather and ſhall tanne the ſame, or ſuch perſon or perſons as ſhall tawe the ſame (excepte ſalte hydes for the neceſſary vſe of ſhyppes) vpon payne to forfaite and loſe all and euery ſuche hydes and ſkynnes ſo bought, or the iuſt value therof.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that no perſon or perſons ſhal or may after the feaſt of Pentecoſt next commyng, bye, bargayne, beſpeake, or take promys to haue any tanned leather, not wrought and conuerted into made wares, but onely ſuch perſon and perſons as wyll and ſhall worke and conuert the ſame leather into made wares, vppon payne of forfaiture of the leather ſo bought, or the value therof.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted, that all and euery artificer, and other perſon and perſons vſyng to conuert tanned leather into made wares, aſwell ſtraunger borne, as other, may lawfully bye all kynde of tanned leather, to make or conuerte the ſame into made wares, at Leaden hall in London, vpon euery Munday, the ſame beyng fyrſt duely ſearched, ſealed, and regiſtred, as is hereafter limitted.
            Prouided alſo, that Sadlers & Gyrdlers may ſell theyr neckes and ſhreddes of tanned leather redde, without incurring any payne or forfaiture for the ſame.
            And foraſmuch as Barke is nowe become ſcant by vnreaſonable fellyng of Oke out of barkyng tyme, and thereby the Tanners be deſtitute of ſuch barke as is neceſſary: Be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that no perſon or perſons ſhall from and after the feaſt of Saint Michaell the Archangell next, fell or cauſe to be felled any Oken trees mete to be barked, where the barke is worth .ii.s. a cartlode, ouer & aboue the charge of barking & pilling (timber to be employed or beſtowed in or about buylding or reparations of houſes, ſhippes, or milles, or any of thē, only except) but betwixt the firſt day of April, & the laſt day of Iune, vpon paine of forfaiture of euery ſuch Oken tree ſo felled, or ye double value therof.
            And for the better preſeruation of Tymber, whiche by the takers of Timber is ſpoyled, through the greedy deſyre of gayne, of the loppes, toppes, or barke of Timber trees: Be it therefore enacted, that no taker or takers, purueyour or purueyours of Timber, or his or their deputie or deputies, ſhall fell or cauſe to be felled for the vſe of the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres, or ſucceſſours, any Oken Timber tree or trees mete to be barked, but in barkyng tyme (trees to be felled for buyldynge or repayrynge of anye her Maieſties Houſes or Shyppes, onelye excepte) or

ſhall in any wyſe take or receaue any maner of profite, gayne, or commoditie by any loppes, toppes, or barke of any tree, to be taken by them or any of them, or ſhall in any wiſe take, carry away, geue, ſell or diſpoſe from the owner, any more of any tree, to be taken as is aforeſayde, then onely the tymber of the ſame tree or trees, to be vſed & beſtowed, or employed only in, vpon, or about the Quenes Maieſties buyldynges, or ſhyppes, vpon payne of forfaiture to the partie grieued, for euery tree and for the loppes, toppes, or barke of euery tree taken contrary to the meaning of this article .xl.s. And that it ſhalbe lawful to the partie of whom ſuch tree or trees ſhalbe taken, or to any other, for, and in his name, to reteyne, withholde, take, and kepe to hym ſelfe all the barke, loppe, and toppe of ſuche tree or trees: Any Cōmiſſion or other matter whatſoeuer, notwithſtandyng.
            And foraſmuch as no Leather can be ſo well tanned, but it may be marred in the currying: Be it therfore enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that from and after the feaſt of Saint Michaell the Archangell nexte, no perſon or perſons ſhall currye any kynde of Leather in the houſe of any Shoemaker or other perſon, but only in his owne houſe, ſcituate in a corporat or market towne, nor ſhal curry any kynde of leather except it be well and perfectly tanned, nor ſhall after the feaſt of Pentecoſt next curry any hyde or ſkinne, beyng not throughly drye after his wet ſeaſon, in whiche wet ſeaſon he ſhall not vſe any ſtale, vryne, or any other deceiptfull or ſubtyll mixture, thyng, waye, or meanes, to corrupt or hurt the ſame, nor ſhall curry any leather mete for vtter ſole leather, with any other ſtuffe then with harde tallowe, nor with any leſſe of that, then the leather wyll receaue, nor ſhall curry any kynde of leather mete for ouer leather & inner ſoles, but with good and ſufficient ſtuffe, beyng freſhe and not ſalte, and throughly lycoured tyll it can not receaue no more, nor ſhall burne or ſcalde any hyde or leather in the currying, nor ſhall ſhaue any leather to thinne, or ſhal gaſhe or hurt any leather in the ſhauyng, or by any other meanes, but ſhall worke the ſame ſufficiently and ſubſtancially in all poyntes and reſpectes, vpon payne of forfaiture for euery ſuche offence or acte done contrary to the true meanyng of this article (other then in gaſhyng or hurtyng in ſhauyng) .vi.s.viii.d. and the value of euery ſuch ſkynne or hyde marred by his euyll workemanſhip, and for euery offence to be done agaynſt this article, in gaſhing or hurtyng by ſhauyng, double ſo muche to the partie grieued, as the leather ſhalbe impaired thereby, by the iudgement of the Wardens of the Curryers, and the Wardens of the companye whereof the partie grieued ſhalbe.
            
               And be it further enacted, that no Cordwayner, Shoemaker, or other perſon or perſons dwelling or inhabiting within the Citie of London or the libertie of the ſame, nor any perſon or perſōs that nowe is, or hereafter ſhalbe free of the Citie of London, dwellyng within three myles of the ſaide Citie, and occupying wet curryed leather in his arte and occupation, ſhall put or cauſe to be put any leather to be curried, but to ſuch perſon & perſons as be or ſhal be free of the company of the Curriers of the Citie of London, vpō payne of forfaiture of all ſuch curryed leather, or the value therof.
            And be it further enacted, that no perſon or perſons ſhall by any meanes occupy or put in any made wares, within the citie of Lonlon, or three myles of the ſame Citie, any curried leather, before the ſame ſhalbe ſearched, and alowed by the Wardens of the Curryers of London for the time being, or ſuch perſons as they ſhal therto aſſigne, and be ſealed with a ſeale therfore to be prepared, vpon payne that euery ſhoemaker, and other artificer cutter of leather, offendyng agaynſt this article, ſhall forfayte for euery hyde or ſkyn otherwyſe curryed or imployed as is aforeſayde .vi.s.viii.d. and the value of euery ſuch hyde or ſkynne.
            And be it further enacted, that no perſon occupying the feate or miſtery of a Curryour, ſhall vſe or exercyſe the feate or miſtery of a Tanner, Cordwayner, Shoemaker, Butcher, or other artificer vſyng cuttyng of leather, during the tyme that he ſhall ſo vſe or occupye the miſtery of a Curryour, vpon payne of forfaiture of .vi.s. viii.d. for euery hyde or ſkynne that he ſhall curry duryng the time that he ſhall occupy or vſe any of the miſteries aforeſayde, contrary to the meanyng of this article.
            And further be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that no Curryour or Curryours, vſyng the arte of currying of leather, ſhal after the feaſt of Pentecoſt next, refuſe to curry any leather, to hym or them for that purpoſe brought by any ſuch artificer as is or ſhal be a cutter of leather, the ſame artificer or his ſeruaunt bryngyng with hym or them good & ſufficient ſtuffe, as is before mentioned, for the perfect lycouryng of the ſame leather, and that the ſayd leather in the preſence of the ſayde artificer cutters of leather, his ſeruaunt or ſeruauntes yf he or they wyll be preſente, ſhalbe licoured and curryed in all thynges and degrees perfectly, and yf he or they wyll not be preſent, it ſhall neuertheleſſe by lykewyſe licoured and curryed in his or their abſence perfectly, and with as conuenient ſpede as may be, not exceading fiue dayes in the Sōmer, and ten dayes in the Wynter, after he ſhall or may take it in hand, vpon payne to forfaite to the partie grieued for euery hyde & peece of leather not in this maner curryed, and well & ſpedely dreſſed .x.s.
            
               And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that the Wardens of the Curryers for the tyme beyng, or ſuche perſons as they ſhall aſſigne or appoynt (beyng therevnto required) ſhall from tyme to tyme, ſearche and trye all ſuch curryed leather, as ſhalbe brought to any of theyr companye to be curryed, and ſhall with a Seale therefore to be prepared, with conuenient ſpede, not exceadyng one day after the currying & requeſt made, ſeale ſuch leather as they ſhall fynde ſufficiently curryed, taking for euery hyde ſo ſealed after the rate of .i.d. for the dycker, and for euery ſyre doſen of Calues ſkinnes .i.d. and not aboue, to be payde by the Curriour, vpon payne of forfaiture for euery hyde which ſhall not be ſearched and ſealed as is aforeſayde .vi.s.viii.d.
            And foraſmuch as Leather well tanned and curryed, may by the negligence, diſceipte, or euyll workmanſhip of the Cordwayner or Shoemaker, be vſed diſceiptfully, to the hurte of the occupyer or wearer of it: Be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that no perſon or perſons, which after the ſaide feaſt of Pentecoſt ſhall occupy the miſtery or occupation of a Cordwayner or Shoemaker, ſhall make or cauſe to be made any bootes, buſkynnes, ſhoes, ſtartvppes, ſlyppers, or pantofles, or any part of them, of Engliſhe leather wet curryed (other then Deare ſkynnes, Calues ſkynnes, or Goates ſkynnes, made or dreſſed, or to be made or dreſſed lyke vnto Spanyſhe leather) but of leather well and truely tanned and curryed in maner and fourme aboue ſpecified, or of leather well and truely tanned onely, and well and ſubſtauncially ſewed with good threde, well twyſted and made, and ſufficiently waxte with waxe well roſened, and the ſtytches harde drawen with handleathers, as hath ben accuſtomed, without mynglyng or mixyng of ouerleathers, that is to ſaye, parte of the ouer leather beyng of Neates leather, and part of Calues leather, nor ſhall put into any part of any ſhoes, bootes, buſkynnes, ſtartvppes, ſlyppers, or pantofles any leather made of a ſheepes ſkynne, bull hyde, or horſe hyde, nor into the vpper leather of any ſhoes, ſtartvppes, ſlyppers, or pantofles, or into the neather parte of any bootes (thinner ſole and heele of the ſhoe only except) any part of any hyde from which the ſole leather is cutte, called the wombe, necke, ſhanke, flanke, poll, or cheke, nor ſhall put into the vtter ſole any other leather then the beſt of the Oxe or Stere hyde, nor into the inner ſole any other leather then the wombes, necke, poll, or cheke, nor in the treſwelles of the double ſoled ſhoes, other then the flankes of any the hydes aforeſayde, nor ſhall make or put to ſale in any yere betwene the laſt of September & the .xx. of Apryll, any ſhoes, bootes, buſkynnes, ſtartvppes, ſlyppers, or pantofles, wherein any drye

                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
mete for any perſon to weare excedyng the age of .iiii. yeres, wherin ſhalbe any drye Englyſhe leather (other then Calues or Goates ſkynnes, made or dreſſed, or to be made & dreſſed lyke vnto Spanyſh leather, or any part therof) nor ſhal ſhew (to thintent to put to ſale) any ſhoes, bootes, buſkinnes, ſtartvppes, ſlippers, or pantofles vpō the Sunday, before the diuine ſeruice (vſed in the forenone) be done and ended, vpon paine of forfaiture for euery payne of ſhoes, bootes, buſkynnes, ſtartvppes, ſlyppers, or pantofles made, ſolde, ſhewed, or put to ſale contrary to the true meanyng of this Acte .iii.s. iiii.d. and the iuſt and full value of the ſame.
            And be it further enacted for the true execution of this eſtatute, that the Maior of the Citie of London, and the Aldermen of the ſame for the tyme beyng, or the more part of them, vpon payne to forfait .xl.li. for euery yere that they make default, the one halfe wherof to be to the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres and ſucceſſours, and the other halfe to hym or them that wyll ſue for the ſame: ſhall yerely appoynt foure or more expert perſons by theyr diſcreſſions, to be ſearchers, who ſhalbe ſworne before the ſayde Maior and Aldermen for the tyme beyng to do theyr office truely. Which ſaid ſerchers ſhal by vertue of this Act, foure times in the yere at the leaſt, that is to ſaye, once euery quarter of a yere or oftener (yf nede require) as they ſhall thynke good, make true ſearch and viewe of & for all bootes, buſkynnes, and other wares and thynges whatſoeuer made of tanned leather, in all and euery houſe & houſes, place and places, aſwell within the ſayde Citie and ſuburbes therof, as in euery other place within three myles of the ſame Citie, where any Shoemaker, Sadler, Gyrdler, or other artificer vſyng cuttyng of leather doth or ſhall dwell, or occupye any of thoccupations of cuttyng of leather: and after euery ſuch ſearch and viewe, to make true preſentment in wrytyng before the ſayde Maior & Aldermen for the tyme beyng, of euery default that they or any of them ſhall fynde in the makyng, ſellyng, or puttyng to ſale of any bootes, buſkyns, ſtartvppes, ſhoes, brydels, ſaddels, or other thynges, ſtuffe, or ware made of leather contrary to the true meaning of this eſtatut.
            And be it further enacted, that the ſayd Maior of the ſayde Citie of London, & Aldermen for the tyme beyng, vpon lyke payne lykewyſe to be leuyed and imployed, ſhall lykewiſe yerely appoynt .iiii. or more, other ſkylfull, expert, and honeſt perſons, wherof one ſhalbe a ſealer, and kepe a ſeale for the ſealyng of leather to be prepared, who ſhall alſo be ſworne before the ſayde Maior and Aldermen for the tyme beyng, to do theyr office truely. Which ſayd ſearchers and ſealer, ſhall viewe and ſearch all and euery tanned hyde, ſkynne or leather, which ſhalbe brought aſwell to the market at

Leaden hall, as to any other lawefull fayer or market therefore vſually appoynted, within three myles of the ſayde Citie, whether the ſame be well and ſufficiently tanned, accordyng to the purport and true meanyng of this eſtatute, or no. And fyndyng it ſufficiently and well tanned, in ſuch maner and fourme as by this eſtatute is appoynted (and as it ought to be) ſhall ſeale the ſame with the ſayde ſeale for that purpoſe to be prouided and prepared.
            AND be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all other Maiors, Baylyffes, and other head officers for the tyme beyng, in all other Cities, Boroughes, and market Townes of this Realme, and all Lordes of liberties, fayres, and markets, out of the circuite or compaſſe of the ſayde three myles: ſhall vpon lyke payne of .xl.li. lykewyſe to be leuyed and imployed euery yere that they make default herein, appoynt and ſwere yerely .ii. iii. or more perſons, of the moſt honeſt and ſkylfull men within theyr ſeuerall offices or liberties, by their diſcreſſion, to ſearche and viewe within the precinct of theyr ſayde offices, liberties, and aucthorities, which ſhall as often as nede ſhalbe or they thynke good, make lyke ſearche within theyr limittes, and ſhall haue a marke or ſeale prepared for that purpoſe, and that the ſayde ſearchers, or one of them, ſhall kepe the ſame ſeale or marke, and with the ſame ſhall ſeale or marke ſuche leather as they ſhall fynde ſufficient, and no other. And if the ſayde ſearchers or any of them, do fynde any leather ſolde, or offred to be ſolde, or brought to be ſearched or marked inſufficiently tanned, or inſufficiently curryed, or any bootes, buſkynnes, ſhoes, ſtartvppes, ſlyppers, brydels, ſaddels, or any other thing made of tanned or curryed leather inſufficiently tanned, curryed, or wrought, contrary to the true meanyng of this eſtatute, it ſhalbe lawfull to the ſaide ſearchers or any of them, to ſeaſe as forfaited, all ſuch leather, ſhoes, and wares made of leather, and to retayne the ſame in theyr cuſtody, vntyll the ſame be tryed by .vi. experte men, appoynted by ſuch Maior, Baylyffe, or other head officer, or Lorde of libertie, or his ſufficient deputie, within whoſe precinctes or liberties ſuch ſeyſour ſhall happen to be: the ſame tryal to be within .xv. dayes after ſuch ſeyſour at the furtheſt, vpon the othes of the ſayde tryers.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that all red tanned leather whiche ſhalbe brought into the Citie of London (whether it be to be ſolde, or be bought before hande or no) ſhalbe brought to Leaden hall before it be houſed in his or theyr owne houſes, and there viewed, whether it hath ben ſearched or ſealed, or no, and ſhall alſo be regiſtred by the ſearchers to be appoynted as is aforeſayde, with halfe ſuch fees therfore to be payde

as is hereafter expreſſed for leather to be ſold in Leaden hall, vpon payne that euery perſon houſyng or not bryngyng his leather to Leaden hall as is aforeſayd, ſhall forfaite for euery hyde or ſkynne vi.s.viii. Prouided that this article ſhall not extende to any leather to be bought in Bartilmewe fayer, or Southwarke market, being ſearched, ſealed and regiſtred accordyng to the true meaning of this Acte.
            And alſo be it further enacted, that if any perſon wyll after the ſaid feaſt wylfully withſtande or denye any ſuch ſearch to be made, accordyng to the tenour of this Act as is aforeſaid, or wyll not ſuffer the ſaid ſearchers ſo appoynted, to enter into his or theyr houſe or houſes, or other place, to viewe and ſearch at theyr wyll & pleaſure all maner of tanned leather, and all maner of ſhoes, bootes, males, ſaddels, and all maner of wares wrought and made, or to be wrought and made of leather, and to ſeaſe and carry awaye all ſuch leather, ſhoes, and wares as they ſhal finde inſufficiently tanned, curryed or wrought, or made of euyll ſtuffe: that then all and euery ſuch perſon and perſons ſo denying and withſtandyng, and not ſuffryng the ſayde ſearchers or any of them (ſo ſworne and appoynted for the tyme beyng, to enter and make ſearch, and ſeaſe as is aforeſayde) ſhall loſe and forfait for euerytyme ſo denying and withſtandyng .v.li.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf the perſons ſo to be appoynted for the ſeuerall ſearches of leather, and wares made of leather, as is aforeſayde, do refuſe with conuenient ſpede to ſeale leather ſufficiently tanned, or do make default in theyr ſearch, or do alowe that, whiche ſhalbe inſufficiently tanned, curryed, or wrought, contrary to the true meanyng of this Acte, or ſhall eyther for affection or corruption conceale the faultes or any of them founde in that behalfe: that then the Maior, Baylyffes, Lordes of liberties, and other perſons, whiche by vertue of this Acte ſhal appoynt ſuch ſearchers and ſealers, ſhall forfait and loſe for euery ſuche default & offence .xl.s. the moitie of which forfaiture, ſhalbe to our Soueraigne Lady the Quene, her heyres, & ſucceſſours, and the other moitie to hym or them that wyll ſue for the ſame in any of the Quenes Maieſties courtes of Recorde, by byll, playnt, information, or otherwyſe.
            AND foraſmuch as heretofore great deceipt hath ben vſed in cuttyng of the wombes from the backes, for that the Tanner dyd not cut of ſo much as was meete, but left more to the backe (wherof vtter ſole leather was made) then was conuenient and meete: And foraſmuch alſo as yf the Curryer ſhould curry the whole hyde together, the Shoemaker myght then put that part of the hyde

called the wombes into vtter ſole leather (which is meete but for inner ſole leather) to the great deceipte & damage of the wearer of ſhoes, bootes, or other ſtuffe made by the ſhoemaker or cordwayner: Be it therfore enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that ſuch perſons as ſhalbe ſo appoynted ſearchers or ſealers as is aforeſayde, ſhall after the true tanning, and before the currying of any leather brought to be ſearched and ſealed as is aforeſayde, by theyr diſcretions cutte of ſo muche of the hyde truely tanned, to be ſolde to a Shoemaker, Cordwayner or Cobler into wombes, as they ſhal by theyr othes thynke vnmeete to make vtter ſole leather of, vppon payne that the Shoemaker, Cordwayner, or Cobler, ſhall forfait for euery ſuch hyde not cut as is aforeſayde .iii.s.iiii.d.
            And be it further enacted, that ſuch perſon and perſons as hereafter ſhalbe aſſigned and appoynted ſearchers and ſealers of tanned leather by vertue of this Acte; ſhall within the limittes and precinctes of euery of theyr ſearches, kepe one booke or regiſter, wherein they ſhall enter all ſuche bargaynes as ſhalbe made for leather, hydes, or ſkynnes, by any perſon or perſons, duryng and by all the tyme of the fayer or market, beyng thereto required by the byer or the ſeller, and alſo the pryces of ſuche leather bought & ſolde, with the names and dwellyng places of the byer and ſeller, takyng for his and theyr payne and trauell therin to be taken, aſwell for the ſealyng of ſuch leather and cuttyng of the wombes as is aforeſayde, as for regiſtryng thereof, of the ſeller of euery dycker of leather ſo entred .ii.d. and ſo after the rate, and for euery ſyre doſen of Calues ſkynnes .ii.d. and of the byer after the ſame rate, and no more or greater ſumme or ſummes of money to be paide for entryng of the ſame, vpon payne of forfaiture for not entryng and regiſtryng, or not cuttyng of, of the wombes as is aforeſayde, for euery dycker of leather .iii.s. iiii.d. and for euery doſen of Calues ſkinnes .iii.s. iiii.d. and ſo after that rate.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that no perſon or perſons, ſhall after the firſt day of May nexte commyng, ſell, exchaunge, or put away, or cauſe to be ſolde, exchaunged, or put away, any maner of tanned leather red and vnwrought, except he or they regiſter or cauſe to be regiſtred the ſayde tanned leather, and euery parte and parcell thereof, and the pryce thereof, vppon payne of forfaiture of the value of the leather ſo ſolde, exchaunged, or put away, and not regiſtred.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that it ſhall not be lawefull to or for any perſon or perſons to bye any tanned leather before the ſame ſhalbe ſearched and ſealed, not to carry or cauſe to be carryed out of the fayer or market, any leather

tyll it be regiſtred as is aforeſayde, vpon payne to forfait the ſayde leather or the value therof, ſo bought and not ſearched and ſealed, or carryed away and not regiſtred.
            And be it further enacted, that no Cordwayner, Shoemaker, or Cobler, ſhal carry or cauſe to be carryed any Oxe or Stere hides tanned, whereof any ſole leather ſhalbe cutte, out of any fayer or markette whole, before the wombes be cut of as is aforeſayde, vppon payne of forfaiture for euery hyde otherwyſe carryed out of the ſame fayer or markette .vi.s. viii.d. and the hyde or the value therof.
            AND be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf any Curryer within the ſaid Citie of London, or three myles compaſſe, after the feaſt of Saint Michaell tharchangell next, do currye any leather inſufficiently tanned, or after the ſayde feaſt nexte do not curry ſuch leather, as he doth or ſhall curry, ſubſtauncially and well, accordyng to the meanyng and purport of this Acte, or if any Shoemaker, Cordwayner, or Cobler, within the Citie of London or three myles compaſſe of the ſame, after the ſayde feaſte of Saint Michaell tharchangell nexte, put any tanned leather into any ſhoes, bootes, buſkynnes, ſtartvppes, ſlyppers, pantofles, or other thinges made of tanned leather, which ſhall not be well and perfectly tanned, accordyng to the purport and true meanyng of this Acte, or after the ſayde feaſte do put any curryed leather into any bootes, buſkynnes, ſtartvppes, ſhoes, ſlyppers, pantofles, or other thynges made of leather, which ſhall not be well and ſufficiently tanned and curryed, and alſo ſealed as is aforeſayde, or do make bootes, buſkynnes, ſhoes, ſtartvppes, ſlyppers, pantofles, or other thynges made of Englyſhe tanned leather, in other maner then is aboue ſpecified and ordeyned, or yf any Shoemaker, Sadler, or other artificer vſyng cutting or working of leather, do make any wares of any tanned leather inſufficiently tanned, and of tanned or curryed leather, beyng not ſufficientlye tanned and curryed as is aforeſaide, or do not make theyr wares belongyng to theyr ſeuerall occupations ſufficiently and ſubſtauncially: That then the Wardens of euery of the ſayde companyes of Sadlers, Curryers, Shoemakers, and other artificers vſyng and exercyſyng cuttyng of tanned leather, for the tyme beyng, ſhall forfaite & loſe for euery ſuch default and offence to be committed or done by any perſon or perſons vnder theyr order, ſuruey, or ſearche .v. li.
            Prouided alwaye, and be it enacted that no maner of perſon or perſons, ſhall (after the ſayde feaſt of Saint Michaell) vtter or ſell or cauſe to be vttered or ſolde (within the ſaide Citie of London, or within three myles compaſſe of the ſame) any maner of wares apperteynyng

to the crafte or miſtery of anye artificer cuttyng of leather, but onely in open ſhoppe, common fayer, or market, whereby the ſayde Wardens may haue the true ſearch of the ſame, in aduoydyng the penalties vpon them by this Act ſet, vpon paine of forfaiture of all ſuche wares ſo ſolde, & .x.s. for euery tyme.
            Prouided alwaye and be it enacted, that all and euery artificer dwellyng or inhabytyng, or which hereafter ſhall dwell or inhabite within the Citie of London, or three myles compaſſe of the ſame, vſyng or exercyſyng any manuell occupation of cuttyng or workyng of leather into made wares, ſhall contribute, paye, and be vnder the ſuruey and ſearch of the Wardens of ſuch companies of the ſayde Citie of London, as the artificers commonly vſing the lyke occupation beyng free men of the ſame Citie of London and of the ſame company be, touchyng and concernyng onelye theyr wares and ſtuffe made of or with leather, in lyke maner & fourme as other free men of the ſame company doth to the Wardens of theyr company within the ſayde Citie. All which paynes, penalties, and forfaitures aforeſayde, of ſummes of money aforeſayde, (excepte ſuch paynes, penalties, and forfaitures as are before or hereafter by this Acte ſhall otherwyſe be diſpoſed) ſhalbe deuyded into three equall partes, one parte whereof ſhalbe to our Soueraigne Lady the Quene, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, and an other part to hym or them that ſhall fyrſte ſue for the ſame in any of the courtes of Recorde of the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, by action of debte, byll, playnt, information, or otherwyſe: In which ſuite, no wager of lawe or eſſoigne ſhalbe admitted or alowed, and the thirde part therof, ſhall go to the Citie, Borough, Towne, or Lorde or Lordes of liberties, where the offence ſhalbe committed or done. And all ſuche leather, ſhoes, bootes, buſkynnes, ſtartvppes, ſlyppers, pantofles, wares, ſtuffe, and other thynges whatſoeuer made of tanned leather, or curryed leather, which ſhalbe ſeaſed by vertue of this Acte, or ſhalbe founde inſufficiently wrought, tanned, or curryed, and declared by this Acte to be forfaited, and ſhalbe ſeaſed by the ſayde ſearchers, or any other perſon fyndyng the fault therof, ſhalbe diſtributed as hereafter enſueth: That is to ſaye, ſuch leather or ſtuffe ſo ſeaſed within the Citie of London or within thre myles compaſſe of the ſame, to be brought to the Guylde hall in London, there to be prayſed by indifferent perſons, and the value thereof to be deuided into three partes, wherof one part to be to the firſt ſeaſer and ſeaſers of the ſayde vnlawful ſtuffe, and an other part to the vſe of the Chamber of London, and the other part to be diſtributed to the poore folkes, aſwell beyng within the newe Hoſpitall of S. Bartilmewes in

London, as to ſuch poore houſholders as ſhalbe inhabiting within the Citie of London, or the circuite aforeſayd, at the diſcreſſions of ſuche perſons as the Maior of the ſame Citie and foure Aldermen of the ſame for the tyme beyng, ſhall appoynt for the ſame. And that al ſuch leather, bootes, ſhoes, ſaddels, wares, ſtuffe & thinges made of or with leather as is aforeſaide, which ſhalbe founde within any other citie, borough, towne, or place win this Realme out of the ſayd Citie of London and three myles compaſſe, vnſufficiently wrought, tanned, or curryed, as is aforeſayd, & ſhalbe ſeaſed & taken as forfaited, ſhalbe brought to the cōmon hall of euery ſuch Citie, Borough, & Towne, or to ſome conuenient and open place to be appoynted by the Lorde of the libertie, or his deputie, where no cōmon hall is, there to be prayſed as is aforeſayde, one part of the ſaid value therof, to be diſpoſed vnto the poore, and in other dedes of charitie in thoſe parties, after the diſcreſſiō of the Maiors, Baylyffes, Headboroughes, & Lordes of liberties, an other parte to be delyuered to the Maiors, Baylyffes, & other head officer of any Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate, to the vſe of the cominaltie of ſuch citie, borough, or towne corporate: & where no ſuche officers be, then to the Lorde or Lordes of the libertie where any ſuch forfaiture ſhalbe cōmitted, or ſeaſour had, & the third part, to the fyrſt ſeaſer or ſeaſers of ſuch leather, ſtuffe, or wares, inſufficiently tanned, curryed, or wrought as is aforeſayde, for his & theyr paynes.
            Prouided alwayes, that no perſon to whom any ſuch vnlawefull leather or ſtuffe ſhalbe geuen by this Act, ſhall geue or ſell any ſuche leather or ſtuffe, to any perſon or perſons that ſhall ſell the ſame, vppon payne that the byer ſhall forfaite for euery parcell of ſuche vnlawefull leather or ſtuffe to be ſolde contrarye to the true meanyng of this laſt clauſe .iii.s.iiii.d.
            Prouided alway, that this Act nor any thing therin conteyned, ſhal not in any wiſe be preiudicial or hurtful to the Chauncelours Vicechauncelours, Proctours, Taxours, and Scholers, their officers, miniſters, aſſignes, or fermers, of the vniuerſities of Oxforde or Cambridge, or any of them, of, for, or concernyng the aucthoritie of ſearch of tanned leather, or any of the forfaitures of the ſame, which they lawfully had or myght haue had before the makyng of this preſent Act, ſo as they do in all thynges obſerue ſuch order in, about, or for ſearching, ſealing, & regiſtring of leather, as by this Acte is preſcribed & appoynted, vpon the paynes herein conteyned: Any thing therin conteined to the contrary herof, notwtſtanding.
            And for the aduoydyng of all ambiguities and doubtes which may and do growe vpon the definition and interpretation of this worde Leather: It is enacted and declared by theſe preſentes,

that the hydes and ſkynnes of Oxe, Stere, Bull, Cowe, Calfe, Deare, red and fallowe, Goates, and Shepe, being tanned or tawed, and euery ſalt hyde, is, ſhalbe, and euer hath ben reputed and taken for leather.
            And for the better execution of this preſent Acte, be it further enacted, that all Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, Iuſtices of gaole delyuery, Iuſtices of peace, and Stewardes of frauncheſes, leetes, and lawedayes, within theyr ſeuerall precintes, iuriſdictions and liberties, and Maior of London for the tyme beyng, within the ſayde Citie and within three myles compaſſe of the ſame Citie, and all other Maiors, Baylyffes, and other head officers of Cities, Boroughes, and Townes, within theyr ſeuerall iuriſdictions, liberties, precinctes, offices, and aucthorities, ſhall enquire of all the premiſſes in theyr ſeſſions, leete, or lawe daye, and heare and determine the ſame, and alſo by theyr diſcreſſions examine all perſons ſuſpected to offende this Acte or any parcell therof.
            And be it further enacted, that where any manour, libertie, or fraunches immediatly appertayneth or ſhall appertayne to the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres, or ſucceſſours: the Stewarde for the tyme beyng of euery ſuch manour, libertie, and fraunches, ſhall haue the lyke aucthorities, powers, iuriſdictions, and aduauntages, and alſo ſhall beare and pay all the lyke paynes, penalties, and forfaitures as are geuen, appoynted, limitted, or layde, by this eſtatute to or vpon the Lordes of liberties and frauncheſes, as in this ſtatute is expreſſed.
            And be it declared and enacted, that all currying and dreſſyng of leather, commonly called drye currying and freeſyng, ſhalbe conſtrued to be dreſſing and currying after the maner of Spaniſhe leather, of what colour ſoeuer it be, and that to all artificers (other then Shoemakers, yerely betwene the laſt of September and the xx. of Apryll) it ſhalbe lawefull to vſe all kyndes of leather dreſſed and curryed in that maner of drye currying and freeſyng, as they lawfully myght before the makyng of this Acte, ſo that the ſame leather ſo to be vſed be well and ſufficiently tanned, accordyng to the fourme preſcribed in this Acte, and alſo well & ſubſtauncially dreſſed, curryed, and freeſed, in the kynde of drye currying and freeſyng aboueſayde.
            And be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that this Acte and euery part therof, ſhalbe conſtrued and adiudged to extende to Wales, as amplye as it doth to this Realme of Englande, to all intentes, conſtructions and purpoſes.
            And foraſmuch as (notwithſtandyng the good lawes and great penalties in that behalfe prouided) great quantities of leather are

dayly tranſported out of this Realme, and ſpecially by the negligence and corruption of comptrollers, cuſtomers, ſerchers, & their deputies: Be it therfore enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that yf any leather, wrought, cut, or vnwrought, to the intent to be ſold or bartred, ſhall hereafter vnlawfully be tranſported or purpoſed to be tranſported into the partes beyonde the Sea, from and out of any Porte, Hauen, or Creeke, of this Realme or Wales, euery Comptroller, Cuſtomer, Surueyour, Collectour of tonnage and pondage, and Searcher, and the deputie of any of them, or any other perſon hearyng or knowyng by any wayes of any leather ment to be tranſported from any place within his office, and do not his beſt indeuour to ſeaſe the ſame, or beyng tranſported, do not diſcloſe or cauſe to be diſcloſed the ſame within .xl. dayes next after ſuche knowledge or hearyng the ſame, in ſome courte of Recorde, ſo as the offendour may be punyſhed accordyng to the lawes in that caſe prouided: ſhall for euery the fyrſt offence committed agaynſt this article forfaite a C.li. and for the ſeconde offence ſhall forfait his office.
            And be it further enacted, that euery Cuſtomer, officer, or officers deputie, that ſhall make any falſe certificat of the arriuall of any leather in any Port, Creeke, or place of this Realme, ſhall alſo forfait for euery ſuch offence a C.li.
            Prouided alwaye, that neither this Acte, nor any article, expoſition, or thyng therein conteyned, ſhall extende to any Scottiſhe hydes to be brought into the towne of Barwicke out of the Realm of Scotlande, beyng regiſtred in a booke therefore to be kepte, by ſuche perſon or perſons as the Maior of the ſayde towne for the tyme beyng ſhall therevnto name and appoynt, with the name and ſurname of the byer and ſeller, to thintent the Englyſhe hides maye be knowen from the Scottyſhe, but that the inhabitauntes of the ſayde towne of Barwicke maye ſende, carry, and tranſport ſuche Scottyſhe hydes as they lawefully myght tranſport before the makyng of this Acte.
            And foraſmuche as the eſtatutes heretofore made touchyng Cordwayners, Curriers, Tanners, and leather, haue ben throughly conſidered, and ſo muche of them and euery of them as ſemeth requiſite and neceſſarye to be reuiued and continued, is inſerted and enacted in this preſent Acte: Be it therefore enacted, that the Statutes hereafter mentioned, that is to ſaye, one Statute made in the .xxv. yeare of Kynge Edwarde the thirde, the fourth Chapter. And one other Statute made in the twelfth yeare

of the raigne of kyng Richarde the ſeconde the .xii. Chapter. And one other Acte or Statute made in the fourth yere of kyng Henry the fourth the .xxxv. Chapter. And one other act made in the ſecond yere of kyng Henry the ſyxt the .vii. Chapter. And one other Acte made in the fourth yere of kyng Edwarde the fourth, intituled Cordwayners and Coblers. And one other Acte made in the fyrſte yere of kyng Henry the ſeuenth, intituled an Act agaynſt Tanners and Cordwayners. And one other Acte made in the .ix. yere of the reigne of the ſayd kyng Henry the ſeuenth, entituled for Curryers and Cordwayners. And one other Acte made in the thirde yere of the reigne of our late ſoueraigne Lorde kyng Henry the eygth, intituled an Act for Curryers to haue ſearche of leather. One other Acte made in the fyfth yere of our ſayde ſoueraigne Lorde kyng Henry the eyght, entituled an Acte for ſtraungers for bying of leather in open market. One other act made in the xiiii. or .xv. yeres of our ſayd late ſoueraigne Lord, intituled an Act concernyng the libertie of Cordwayners and Shoemakers. And one other act made in the .xxii. yere of our ſayde ſoueraigne Lorde kyng Henry the eyght, intituled an Acte concernyng Tanners and Butchers. And one other Acte made in the .xxiiii. yere of our ſayd late ſoueraigne Lorde kyng Henry the eyght, intituled an Acte concernyng true tannyng and currying of leather. And one other Acte made in the ſecond and third yeres of the reigne of our late ſoueraigne Lorde kyng Edwarde the ſyxt the .ix. Chapter, and reuiued in the fyrſte yere of our ſoueraigne Lady the Quenes Maieſtie, intituled an Acte for true currying of leather. One other Act made in the third and fourth yeres of our ſayde ſoueraigne Lorde kyng Edward the ſyxt, intituled an Acte for bying rough hydes and Calues ſkinnes. And as much of an Acte made in the .v. and .vi. yeres of our ſayde late ſoueraigne Lorde kyng Edwarde the .vi. intituled an Acte agaynſt regrating of tanned leather, as doth prouide or geue libertie to any perſon or perſons to carry ouer any ſhoes, bootes, buſkynnes, ſtartvppes, ſlippers, and other made wares to the towne of Callyce. And one other Acte made in the firſt yere of our ſoueraigne Lady the Quenes Maieſtie, intituled an Acte touchyng Shoemakers & Curryers. And one other act made in the ſaide fyrſt yere, intituled an Acte touchyng ſellyng of tanned leather: ſhall from and after the ſayde feaſt of Saint Michaell nexte commyng be vtterly repealed.
         
         
            
            An Act for the puniſhement of ſuch perſons as ſhall procure or commit any wylfull periury. ¶ The .ix. Chapter.
            
               WHere in the Parliament holden at Weſtminſter in the xxxii. yere of the raigne of the late king of famous memorye kyng Henry the .viii. emongeſt other thinges it was ordeyned, enacted & eſtabliſhed, that no perſon or perſons of what eſtate, degree, or conditiō ſoeuer he or they were, ſhould frō thenceforth vnlawfully ſuborne any witnes or witneſſes, by letters, rewardes, promiſes, or by any other ſiniſter labour or meanes for to maynteyne any matter or cauſe, or to the diſturbāce or hinderaunce of Iuſtice, or to the procurement or occaſion of any maner of periury by falſe verdict or otherwiſe, in any of the kinges courtes of the Chauncery, the Starre chamber, the white hall, or els where within any the kynges dominiōs of England or Wales, or the marches of the ſame, where any perſō or perſons haue, or from thenceforth ſhoulde haue aucthoritie by vertue of the kinges Cōmiſſion, patent, or writ, to holde plea of land, or to examine, heare, or determine any tytle of landes, or any matter or witneſſes concerning the title, right, or intereſt of any landes, tenementes, or hereditamētes, vpon payne of forfaiture for euery ſuch offence .x.li. thone moitie therof to be to the kyng, & thother to the partie that would ſue for ye ſame, as by the ſame eſtatute amonges diuers other thynges more plainly it doth appeare. Sithens yt makyng wherof, for that the ſaid penaltie is ſo ſmal towardes the offendours in yt behalfe, the ſaid offence of ſubornation & ſiniſter procuremēt of falſe witneſſe hath neuertheleſſe greatly encreaſed and augmēted, & by reaſon of the wylfull periury cōmitted by the ſame ſuborned witneſſes, diuers & ſundry of the Quenes Maieſties ſubiectes haue ſuſteyned diſheriſon & great impoueryſhment, aſwell of theyr landes & tenementes, as alſo of theyr goodes & cattelles.
            Be it therfore enacted by our ſoueraigne Lady the Quene, by the aſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall & temporall, and the cōmons in this preſent parliament aſſembled, & by thaucthoritie of the ſame, that all & euery ſuch perſon and perſons which at any tyme after the .x. day of April next cōming, ſhal vnlawfully & corruptly procure any witnes or witneſſes by letters, rewardes, promiſes, or by any other ſiniſter & vnlawfull labour or meanes whatſoeuer, to commit any wylful & corrupt periury, in any matter or cauſe whatſoeuer now depending or which hereafter ſhall depend in ſute & varyaunce, by any writ, action, hyll, complaynt, or information, in any wyſe touching or concerning any landes, tenementes, or hereditamentes, or any goodes, cattels, debtes, or damages in any of the courtes before

mentioned, or in any of the Quenes Maieſties courtes of Record, or in any leete, viewe of franke pledge, or lawdaye, auncient demeane court, hundred-courte, courte baron, or in the courte or courtes of the Stannery in the counties of Deuon and Cornwal, or ſhall lykewyſe vnlawfully and corruptly procure or ſuborne any witnes or witneſſes which ſhall from and after the ſaid tenth daye of Apryll be ſworne to teſtifie in perpetuam rei memoriame that then euery ſuch offendour or offendours, ſhal for his, hers, or their ſaid offence, being therof lawfully conuicted or attainted, loſe and forfaite the ſūme of fortie poundes. And if it happen any ſuch offendour or offendours ſo beyng conuicted or attaynted, as aforeſaid, not to haue any goodes or cattelles, landes or tenementes, to the value of .xl.li. that then euery ſuch perſon ſo beyng conuicte or attaynted of any the offences aforeſayde, ſhall for his or theyr ſayde offence, ſuffer impriſonment by the ſpace of one halfe yere, without bayle or mainpriſe, and to ſtand vpon the pyllory by the ſpace of one whole houre, in ſome market Towne next adioynyng to the place where the offence was committed, in open market there, or in the market towne it ſelfe where the offence was cōmitted. And that no perſon or perſons beyng ſo conuicted or attaynted, to be from thenceforth receaued as a witnes to be depoſed or ſworne in any Court of Record within anye of the Quenes hyghnes dominions of England, Wales, or the marches of the ſame, vntyll ſuch tyme as the iudgement geuen agaynſt the ſayde perſon or perſons ſhalbe reuerſed by attaynt or otherwyſe, and that vpon euery ſuch reuerſall, the parties grieued, to recouer his or theyr damages, agaynſte all & euery ſuch perſon and perſons as dyd procure the ſayde iudgement ſo reuerſed to be fyrſt geuen agaynſt them or any of them, by action or actions to be ſued vppon his or theyr caſe or caſes, accordyng to the courſe of the common lawes of this Realme.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf any perſon or perſons after the ſayde tenth day of Apryll next commyng, eyther by the ſubornation, vnlawfull procurement, ſiniſter perſwaſion or meanes of any others, or by theyr owne act, conſent or agrement, wylfully and corruptly commit any maner of wylful periury, by his or their depoſition in anye of the Courtes before mentioned, or beyng examined ad perpetuam rei memoriam: that then euery perſon and perſons ſo offendyng, and beyng thereof duely conuict or attaynted by the lawes of this Realme, ſhal for his or their ſayde offence loſe and forfait twentie poundes, and to haue impriſonment by the ſpace of .vi. monethes without bayle or mainpriſe, and the othe of ſuch perſon or perſons ſo offendyng, from thenceforth not to be receaued in anye Courte of Recorde within this

Realme of Englande or Wales, or the marches of the ſame, vntyll ſuch tyme as the iudgement geuen agaynſt the ſayd perſon or perſons, ſhalbe reuerſed by attaynt or otherwyſe. And that vpon euery ſuch reuerſall, the parties grieued to recouer his or theyr damages agaynſt all and euery ſuch perſon and perſons as dyd procure the ſayde iudgement ſo reuerſed, to be geuen agaynſt them or any of them, by action or actions to be ſued vpon his or theyr caſe or caſes, accordyng to the courſe of the cōmon lawes of this Realme. And yf it happen the ſaid offendour or offendours ſo offendyng, not to haue any goodes or cattelles to the value of twentie poundes: that then he or they to be ſet on the pyllorye in ſome market place within the Shire, Citie, or Borough, where the ſaide offence ſhalbe committed, by the Sheriffe or his miniſters, yf it ſhall fortune to be without any Citie or Towne corporate: And yf it happen to be within any ſuch Citie or Towne corporat, then by the ſaid head officer or officers of ſuch citie or towne corporate, or by his or theyr miniſters, and there to haue both his eares nayled, and frō thenceforth to be diſcredited and diſabled for euer to be ſworne in any of the courtes of Recorde aforeſayde, vntyll ſuche tyme as the iudgement ſhalbe reuerſed, and therevpon to recouer his damages in maner and fourme before mentioned. The one moitie of all which ſūmes of money, goodes, & cattelles to be forfaited in maner and fourme aforeſayde, to be to the Quene our ſoueraigne Lady, her heyres, & ſucceſſours, & thother moitie to ſuch perſon or perſons as ſhalbe grieued, hyndered, or moleſted, by reaſon of any the offence or offences before mentioned, that wyll ſue for the ſame by action of debte, byll, playnt, information or otherwyſe, in any of the Quenes Maieſties courtes of Recorde, in the which no wager of lawe, eſſoigne, protection, or iniunction, to be alowed.
            And be it alſo enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that aſwell the Iudge and Iudges of euery ſuch of the ſaid courtes where any ſuche ſuite is or ſhalbe, and whervpon any ſuch periury is or ſhal happen to be committed: as alſo the Iuſtices of Aſſiſes and gaole delyuery in theyr ſeuerall circuites, and the Iuſtices of the peace in euery Countie within this Realme or in Wales, at their quarter Seſſions, both within the liberties and without: ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie by vertue hereof, to enquire of all & euery the defaultes and offences perpetrated, committed, or done, contrary to this Acte, by inquiſition, preſentment, byll, or information before them exhibited, or otherwyſe, lawfully to heare and determine the ſame, and therevpon to geue iudgement, awarde proces, and execution of the ſame, accordyng to the courſe of the lawes of this Realme.
            
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, of euery circuite within this Realme and els where within the Quenes dominions, ſhal in euery countie within theyr circuites, two tymes in the yere, that is to ſaye in tyme of theyr ſyttynges, make open proclamation of this eſtatute, or of the effect therof, to thintent no perſon or perſons ſhalbe ignoraunt or miſcogniſaunt of the penalties herein conteyned.
            Prouided alſo that this Acte nor any thyng therein conteyned, ſhal not extende to any ſpirituall or eccleſiaſticall court or courtes within this Realme of Englande or Wales, or the marches of the ſame: But that all and euery ſuch offendour or offendours as ſhal offende in fourme aforeſayde, ſhall and may be punyſhed by ſuche vſuall and ordinary lawes as heretofore hath ben and yet is vſed and frequented in the ſayde eccleſiaſticall Courtes: Any thyng in this preſent Acte conteyned to the contrary in any wyſe notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alſo, and be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that if any perſon or perſons, vpon whom any proces out of any of the courtes of Recorde within this Realme or Wales, ſhalbe ſerued, to teſtifie or depoſe, concernyng any cauſe or matter dependyng in any of the ſame courtes, and hauyng tendred vnto hym or them, according to his or their countenaunce or callyng, ſuche reaſonable ſummes of money for his or theyr coſtes & charges, as hauyng regarde to the diſtaunce of the places is neceſſary to be alowed in that behalfe, do not appeare accordyng to the tenour of the ſayde proces, hauing not a lawfull & reaſonable let or impediment to the contrary: that then the partie makyng defaulte, to loſe and forfait for euery ſuch offence .x.li. and to yelde ſuch further recompence to the partie grieued, as by the diſcretion of the Iudge of the court out of the which the ſaide proces ſhalbe awarded, accordyng to the loſſe & hynderaunce that the partie which procured the ſaide proces ſhall ſuſteyne by reaſon of the non appearaunce of the ſaide wytnes or witneſſes, the ſaid ſeuerall ſummes to be recouered by the partie ſo grieued againſt the offendour or offendours, by action of debte, byll, plaint, or information, in any of the Quenes Maieſties courtes of Recorde, in whiche no wager of lawe, eſſoigne, or protection to be alowed.
            Prouided alwayes yt this Act or any thyng therin conteyned, ſhal not extend in any wyſe to reſtraine the power or aucthoritie geuen by Act of parliament, made in the tyme of kyng Henry the .vii. to the Lorde Chauncelour of Englande, & others of the kinges councell for the time being, to examine and punyſh ryotes, routes, heynous periuries, and other offences & miſdemeaninges, which Lord

Chauncelour & other ſithens the making of the ſaid act, haue moſt commonly vſed to heare and determine ſuch matters in the Court at Weſtminſter commonly called the Starre chamber, nor to reſtrayne the power or aucthoritie of the Lorde Preſident and councell of the marches of Wales, or of the Lorde Preſident and councell in the North, nor of any other Iudge hauyng abſolute power to punyſhe periury before the makyng of this eſtatute: But that they and euery of them ſhall and may proceade in the punyſhment of all offences heretofore punyſhable, in ſuch wyſe as they myght haue done, and vſed to do before the makyng of this Act, to all purpoſes, ſo that they ſet not vppon the offender or offenders leſſe punyſhement then is conteyned in this Acte. This Acte to continue vnto the ende of the next Parliament.
         
         
            An Acte to reuiue a Statute, made Anno .xxi. H.viii. touchyng ſeruauntes embeaſelyng theyr maiſters goodes. ¶ The .x. Chapter.
            
               WHERE in the Parliament holden at London the thirde daye of Nouember, in the .xxi. yere of the raigne of the late kyng of moſte famous and worthye memory kyng Henry the eyght, & from thence adiourned to Weſtminſter, and there holden and continued by diuers prorogations vnto the diſſolution therof: It was ordeyned & enacted amonges other thynges, that all and ſinguler ſeruauntes to whom any Caſkettes, Iewels, money, goodes, or cattelles, by his or theyr maiſter or maiſtres, ſhoulde from thenceforth be delyuered to kepe, that yf any ſuche ſeruaunt or ſeruauntes withdrawe him or them from theyr ſayde maiſters or maiſtreſſes, & go away with the ſaid Caſkets, Iewels, money, goodes, or cattelles, or any parte thereof, to the intent to ſteale the ſame, & defraude his or their ſaide maiſters & maiſtreſſes therof, contrary to the truſt and confidence to hym or them put by his or theyr ſayd maiſters & maiſtreſſes: Or els beyng in ſeruice of his ſaid maiſters or maiſtreſſes, without thaſſent or cōmaundemēt of his maiſters or maiſtreſſes, embeſell the ſame Caſkets, Iewels, money, goodes, or cattelles, or any part therof, or otherwyſe conuert the ſame to his owne vſe, with lyke purpoſe to ſteale it, that yf the ſayde Caſkettes, Iewels, money, goodes, or cattelles that any ſuch ſeruaunt ſhall go away with, or which he ſhall embeſell,

with purpoſe to ſteale it, as is aforeſayde, be of the value of .xl.s. or aboue: That then the ſame falſe, fraudulent, and vntrue acte and demeanout, ſhoulde from thenceforth be demed and adiudged fellonye, and that he or they ſo offendyng, ſhoulde be punyſhed as other fellons for fellony cōmitted, by the courſe of the cōmon law, as by the ſayd Act amonges other thynges therin conteyned more at large it doth and may appeare. Which ſayde Acte, in the Parliament begon and holden at Weſtminſter the .v. daye of October in the firſt yere of the raigne of the late Quene Mary, and there continued to the .xxi. daye of the ſame moneth, that is to ſaye, in the fyrſt ſeſſion of the ſame Parliament, by the generall wordes of one Acte then and there made, entituled an Acte repealyng of certaine treaſons, fellonyes, and premunire, was from thenceforth vtterly repealed and made voyde.
            And foraſmuch as ſithens the repeale of the ſame, the ſaide Acte is thought neceſſary for the common wealth of this Realme: Be it therfore enacted by our Soueraigne Layde the Quenes Maieſtie, with thaſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that the ſaide Act made in the ſayde .xxi. yere, and euery clauſe, article, braunche, ſentence, and prouiſion therin conteyned, be from henceforth reuiued and put in due execution, accordyng to thintent and meanyng therof, and from henceforth ſhall ſtande good, endure, and continue for euer.
         
         
            An Act agaynſt the clippyng, waſhyng, roundyng, or fylyng of the Coynes. ¶ The .xi. Chapter.
            
               Where as the offences of clipping, rounding, waſhyng, and fylyng of moneys or coynes of this Realme, was declared by an Act of Parliament in the tyme of king Henry the fyft, to be treaſon to the Kyng and the Realme, and accordyng to the ſaide Act, the ſame offences were and dyd continue treaſon, vntyll the fyrſt yere of the raigne of Quene Mary: At which tyme, the paynes and penalties due for the ſayde offences, were abrogate and taken awaye, by the generall Acte of repeale then made. By reaſon wherof, diuers falſe and euyll diſpoſed perſons, perceauyng them ſelues to be loſe and free from the ſeueritie and daunger of the ſayde lawe and penaltie, haue ben of late the more hardy and bolde, to attempte and practyſe, for wicked lucre and

gaynes ſake, to diminiſhe, impayre, and falſifie the moneys and coynes curraunt within this Realme, and the dominions of the ſame, by ſuch clyppyng, waſhyng, roundyng, and fylyng thereof, (not onlye) to the great diſhonour of the Quenes Maieſtie our ſoueraigne Lady that nowe is, by whoſe greate goodnes the newe moneys or coynes of the ſame, are nowe reduced to as much fineneſſe as euer hath ben in any tyme of her noble progenitours (but alſo) to the greate loſſe and damage of the good ſubiectes of this Realme, and more is lyke to be hereafter, yf the ſame be not ſpedely met withall.
            For remedy wherof, be it enacted, declared, and eſtablyſhed, by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that from and after the fyrſt day of Maye next commyng: Clyppyng, waſſhyng, roundyng, or fylyng, for wicked lucre or gaynes ſake, of any the proper moneys or coynes of this Realme, or of the dominions thereof, or of the moneys or coynes of any other Realme, allowed and ſuffred to be curraunt within this Realme, or the dominions thereof, at this preſent, or that hereafter at any tyme ſhall be the lawfull moneys or coynes of this Realme or of the dominions thereof, or of any other Realme, and by proclamation alowed and ſuffred to be curraunt heare, by the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres, or ſucceſſours: ſhalbe taken, deemed, and adiudged by vertue of this Acte, to be Treaſon, and the offendours therein, theyr counſaylours, conſentours, and aydours, ſhalbe, from and after the ſame fyrſte daye of Maye, taken, deemed, and adiudged as offendours in Treaſon, & beyng thereof lawefully conuicted or attaynted, accordyng to the due order and courſe of the lawes of this Realme, ſhall ſuffer paynes of death, and loſe and forfait all his and their goodes and cattelles, and ſhall alſo loſe and forfait all his & theyr landes and tenementes, duryng his and theyr naturall lyfe or lyues only.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayd, that all and euery perſon and perſons, which haue any lawfull graunt to haue and enioye the forfaiture of landes, tenementes, goodes, or cattelles of offendours, and men attaynted in hygh Treaſon, within any Manour, Lordeſhyp, Towne, Paryſhe Hundrede, or other precinct within this Realme of England or Wales: ſhall and may at all tymes hereafter haue lyke libertie, to take, ſeaſe, and enioye all ſuch forfaitures of landes, tenementes, goodes, and cattelles, as ſhall come or growe within theyr liberties, by force of the attayndour of any perſon or perſons, for, and vpon any offence or offences made treaſon by this Acte, as they or any of them ſhoulde, ought, or myght haue, by vertue of any good and lawefull graunt to them or any of them heretofore had or made.
            
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that this Acte nor any thyng therein conteyned, nor any attayndour or attayndours of any perſon or perſons for any offence or offences made treaſon by this Acte, ſhall in any wyſe extende, or be iudged, interpreted, or expounded, to make any corruption of bloud, to any the heyre or the heyres of any ſuche offendour or offendours, or to make the wyfe of any ſuch offendour to loſe or forfait her dower, of, or in any landes, tenementes, or hereditamentes, or her tytle, action, or intereſt to the ſame: Any thyng in this Acte conteyned, or any attayndour or attayndours hereafter to be had for any offence or offences made treaſon by this Acte, to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that if any of the Lordes of the Parliament, or Peere of this Realme, for the tyme beyng, ſhall fortune at any tyme hereafter to be indicted of any offence made treaſon by this Act: that then they and euery of them ſhall haue his or theyr tryall by theyr peeres, as hath ben vſed heretofore in caſes of hygh treaſon.
         
         
            An Act touchyng Badgers of Corne and Drouers of Cattell, to be lycenſed. ¶ The .xii. Capter.
            
               WHere in the Seſſion of Parliament holden vpon prorogatiō at Weſtminſter the .xxiii. day of Ianuary in the fift yere of the raigne of our late ſoueraigne Lord king Edwarde the ſyxt, amonges other thynges it was enacted, that whatſoeuer perſon or perſons, after the fyrſt day of May then next enſuyng, ſhould ingroſſe or get into his or theyr handes, by bying, contractyng, or promyſe takyng (other then by demyſe, graunt, or leaſe of lande or tythe) any Corne growyng in the fieldes, or any other Corne or Grayne, Butter, Cheeſe, Fyſhe, or other dead victualles whatſoeuer, within the Realme of Englande, to the intent to ſell the ſame agayne, ſhalbe accepted, reputed, and taken an vnlawefull engroſſer or engroſſers, with a prouiſo and ordinaunce conteyned in the ſame Act, that it ſhoulde be lawfull to euery perſon or perſons, beyng a common Badger, Lader, Kydder, or Carryer, which ſhalbe licenced, aſſigned, & alowed thervnto by thre Iuſtices of the peace of the Countie where the ſaid badger, lader, kydder, or carryer ſhall dwell, which ſhall ſell or deliuer in open fayer or market, or to any other victualler, or to any other perſon or perſons, for the prouiſion of his or their houſe or

houſes, all ſuch Corne, Fiſhe, Butter, or Cheeſe, as any ſuch perſon or perſons ſhal bye or cauſe to be bought, and that within one moneth next after he or they ſhall ſo bye any ſuch corne, grayne, butter or cheeſe, ſo that the ſame ſhalbe bought without foreſtallyng: ſhall not be in any wyſe demed, adiudged, or taken, any offence contrary to the ſayde Acte.
            And where alſo it is prouided & enacted by the ſame Act of Parliament, that it ſhalbe lawefull to all and euery perſon and perſons, knowen for a cōmon drouer or drouers, being licenſed, aucthoriſed & alowed in wrytyng by the Iuſtices of the peace, wherof one to be of the Quorū, of the Countie or Counties where the ſame Drouer or Drouers ſhalbe moſt abydyng & dwelling, to bye Cattell in ſuch Shires or Counties where drouers haue ben wont in tymes paſt accuſtomably to bye Cattell, at their free libertie and pleaſure, and to ſell the ſame agayne. And that it ſhalbe lawfull to euery perſon and perſons which ſhalbe aſſigned and alowed by the Iuſtices of the peace of the Countie where he ſhall dwell, to bye, otherwyſe then by foreſtallyng, Corne, Grayne, or Cattell, to be tranſported or carryed by water from any port or place within this Realme or Wales, vnto any other porte or place within the ſayde Realme or dominions, as in the ſaid act amongs other things doth appeare. Since the makyng of which Acte, ſuch a great number of perſons ſekyng onely to lyue eaſely and to leaue theyr honeſt labour, haue and do dayly ſeke to be alowed & licenſed to the ſayde offices or doynges, beyng moſt vnfyt and vnmete for thoſe purpoſes, and alſo verye hurtfull to the common wealth of this Realme aſwell by thinhaunſyng of the prices of corne and grayne, and other the ſaid victualles, as alſo by the diminiſhyng of the number of good and neceſſary huſbandmen, which ſayde number of drouers of Cattel, and badgers, laders, kydders, & carryers of corne and grayne, are many tymes without good orders, and due conſideration, aſſigned & allowed thervnto, to the great preiudice of the common wealth.
            In conſideration wherof, be it enacted by the Quene our Soueraigne Lady, with thaſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the Cōmons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, & by thaucthoritie of the ſame, that no drouer of Cattel, Badger, lader, kydder, carryer, byer, or tranſporter of corne or grayne, butter or cheeſe, be from or after the feaſt of Eaſter next after the fyrſt day of this preſent Parliament, licenſed, admitted, aſſigned, or alowed to thoſe offices or doinges, or to any of them, but only in the general & open quarters Seſſions of the peace to be holden in the ſhire where ſuch perſon or perſons ſo to be admitted, aſſigned, or alowed, doth or ſhall dwell, and hath or ſhall haue dwelled there by the ſpace

of three yeres next before the Teſte of his ſayde licence. And that no perſon or perſons after the firſt day of Maye next comming be admitted to the ſayde offices or doynges, or to any of them, but ſuch only as be or haue ben maryed men, and ſhalbe at the tyme of ſuch licence to be graunted, houſeholders, and not houſeholde ſeruauntes, nor reteyners to any perſon or perſons, and of the age of xxx. yeres at the leaſt. And that all lycences beyng made & graunted as is aboueſayde, ſhall haue continuaunce and be good onlye for one yere next after the date thereof, and for no more nor longer tyme. Which ſayde lycences and euery of them, ſhall beare date of the day and place where the ſayde Seſſions ſhalbe holden, & ſhalbe ſigned and ſealed with the proper handes and ſeales of three of the ſayde Iuſtices of the peace beyng preſent at the ſame Seſſions at the leaſt, wherof one to be of the Quorum, vpon payne that euery perſon or perſons that ſhall take any licence contrary to this ordinaunce, to loſe and forfait to our ſoueraigne Lady the Quene, her heyres, & ſucceſſours, fyue poundes ſterlyng. And that all licences made & graunted, or hereafter to be made and graunted, otherwiſe then is before expreſſed, ſhall from and after the ſayde fyrſt daye of Maye next commyng, be voyde and of none effecte.
            And further be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the Iuſtices of the peace, in the ſayde generall and open ſeſſions, ſhall or maye by their diſcreſſions, take bonde and ſuertie from tyme to time by Recogniſaunce, of ſuch as ſhalbe admitted or alowed hereafter a common drouer of cattell, badger, lader, kydder, carryer, or byer of corne, grayne, butter, or cheeſe, that they, nor any of them, ſhall by colour of his or theyr licence, foreſtall or ingroſſe, or otherwyſe practiſe or do any act or thyng contrary to the tenour & true meanyng, or in defraudyng the ſayde former eſtatute, or of anye matter or thyng therin conteyned. All which licences, and euery of them, and the ſayde Recogniſaunces, ſhalbe made and wrytten by the clarke of the peace of euery Countie where ſuch licence ſhalbe graunted, or by his lawfull deputie, and by none other perſon or perſons. And euery perſon that ſhall haue any ſuch licence, ſhal pay to the Clarke of the peace or his deputie, for makyng therof, xii.d. at the moſt, and for euery recogniſaunce, in fourme aboueſayde to be made and knowledged .viii.d. at the moſte, and for regiſtryng of the ſame licence and Recogniſaunce .iiii.d. at the moſt. For which ſaide fee, the ſaide Clarke or his deputie, ſhall haue and kepe one Regiſter booke, and therein ſhall regiſter and wryte all the names, ſurnames, and dwellyng places of ſuche as ſhalbe licenſed as aforeſayde, with a briefe declaration or entrye of the ſayde licence, and of the day, tyme, and place, where ſuche a licence

or licences ſhalbe graunted. Whiche booke or regiſter, the ſayde Clarke of the peace, or his deputie, ſhall haue and bryng to euery Seſſyons, to the intent that it maye appeare what number of licences be and ſhalbe from tyme to tyme graunted, whereby the better conſideration may be had therof.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that no perſon or perſons, ſhall or may by aucthoritie of any ſuch licence aboue mentioned, bye any corne or grayne out of open fayer or market to ſell agayne, vnleſſe ſuch perſon and perſons ſhalbe thervnto licenced, and ſhall haue ſpeciall and expreſſe wordes conteyned in ſuch licence or licences that he or they may ſo do, vpon payne to forfait for euery ſuch tyme that any ſuch perſon or perſons ſhall do to the contrary .v.li. The moitie of all whiche forfaitures afore rehearſed, ſhalbe to the Quene our ſoueraigne Lady, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, and the other moitie to hym or them that wyll ſue for the ſame in any of the Quenes courtes of Record, by byll, plaint, action of debt, or information: in the which byll, playnt, action, or information, no wager of lawe, eſſoigne or protection ſhalbe admitted.
            Be it alſo enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayd, that the Iuſtices of the peace in euery countie within this Realme or Wales, at the quarter ſeſſions, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie by vertue of this Acte, to enquire, heare, and determine all and euery the defaultes and offences, perpetrated, committed, or done contrary to this Acte, within the Countie where any ſuche ſeſſions ſhalbe kept, by inquiſition, preſentment, byll or information before them exhibited, and by examination of two lawfull witneſſes, or by any of the ſame wayes or meanes by the diſcreſſion of the ſaid Iuſtices, and to make proces thervpon, as though they were indicted before them by inquiſion, or by verdict of .xii. men or mo. And vpon the conuictiō of the offender, by information or ſute of any other then the Quene, to make extractes of the moitie of the forfaitures, to be leuyed to the Quenes vſe, as they vſe to do of other fines and amerciamentes growen in the ſeſſions of peace, & to awarde execution of the other moitie for the complaynant or informer againſte the offender, by Fieri facias, or Capias, as the Quenes Iuſtices at Weſtminſter maye do, and vſe to do. And yf any ſuche conuiction or attaynder, ſhall hereafter happen to be at the Quenes ſuite only, that then the whole forfaitures to be extracted and leuyed to the Quenes vſe onlye.
            Prouided alwayes, that this Acte or any thyng therin conteyned, ſhall not in any wyſe extende to the preiudice of the libertie of anye Citie or Towne corporate, but that they and euery

of them ſhall and may lawefully aſſigne and licence Purueyours for the prouiſion of the ſame Citie or Towne corporate, in ſuche maner and fourme as they myght lawefully haue done before the makyng of this Acte.
            Prouided further, that this Acte nor any thyng therein conteyned, ſhalbe in any wyſe hurtfull or preiudiciall vnto any the inhabitauntes within the Counties of Weſtmerlande, Cumberlande, Lancaſter, Cheſter, and Yorke, or any of them, but that they maye do as heretofore they haue lawfully vſed to do: Any thyng in this preſent Acte to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
         
         
            An Acte for the reuiuing of a Statute, made Anno. ii. & .iii. Phil. & Marie, for the amending of hygh wayes. ¶ The .xiii. Chapter.
            
               WHERE in the Parliament holden at Weſtminſter in the ſecond & third yeres of the raignes of the late Princes Kyng Philip & Quene Mary: Amongeſt other good Actes then had and made, one neceſſary Statute was prouided & eſtablyſhed for the amendment and reparation of the hygh wayes within this Realme, whiche Acte was made to endure and continue for ſeuen yeres, and after the expiration of the ſayde ſeuen yeres, tyll the ende of the Parliament then next enſuyng, as by the ſame ſtatute more playnely appeareth. Whiche ſeuen yeres, foraſmuch as they be nowe expired and ended, and the ſayde Acte is very beneficiall and moſte neceſſary to be continued for the eaſe and common weale of the people of this lande: Be it therefore enacted by the Quenes excellent Maieſtie, the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons in this Parliament aſſembled, & by the aucthoritie therof, that the ſayde Acte made in the ſayde ſecond and third yeres of the raigne of Kyng Philip & Quene Mary, touchyng and concernyng the reparation and amendement of the hygh wayes, and euery article and braunche of the ſame, ſhall from henceforth be, ſtande, and continue in full force, effect, and ſtrength, for and duryng the terme of .xx. yeres next folowyng from and after the begynnyng of this preſent Parliament: and after thexpiration of the ſayde .xx. yeres, to thende of the Parliament then nexte after the ende of the ſayde .xx. yeres to be holden and kept.
            And foraſmuch as the ſayde Statute made in the ſeconde and thirde yeres of kyng Phillip and Quene Mary, in diuers partes of

this Realme, ſerueth not to ſo good purpoſe and effect as it may be made, for that ſuch ſubſtaunce and matter as is moſt fytt and conuenient for the reparations of the ſayde wayes, cannot be lawfullye hadde, fetched, and taken out of the ſeuerall groundes and ſoyle therevnto nygh or adioynyng, beyng no great loſſe or detriment to the owners of the ſame ſeuerall groundes & ſoyle, whereby the amendement of the ſayde wayes is lyttle encreaſed, or els of very ſmall and ſlender continuaunce, to the great and continuall charge and trouble of the poore people inhabytynge thereaboutes.
            For reformation wherof, and that the reparations of the ſayde hygh wayes may hereafter in good due maner well and ſufficientlye be made: Be it further by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament enacted, that from henceforth it ſhall and may be lawfull to all and euery Superuiſour and Superuiſours and orderers of the workes for the tyme beyng, for the amendement of the ſayde hyghe wayes therevnto elected and appoynted, accordyng to the Statute made in the ſeconde and thirde yeres of kyng Phillip and Quene Mary, for the better reparation and amendement of the wayes within theyr ſeuerall paryſhes and limittes where they ſhalbe ſo made Superuiſours (if it ſhalbe ſo to them thought neceſſary) to take and carry away of the rubbyſhe or ſmalleſt broken ſtones of any quarry or quarryes lying and beyng within the paryſhe where they ſhalbe Superuiſours, without licence, controlment, or impechement of the owner or owners, ſo muche as by theyr diſcreſſions ſhalbe demed and adiudged neceſſarye for the amendement of the ſaide wayes. And that for default of any quarrye or quarryes not beyng within theyr ſayde paryſhe or limittes, or in defaulte of rubbyſhe not to be founde in any ſuche quarry or quarryes: it ſhall and may be lawfull to euery ſuch Superuiſour or ſuperuiſours, for the vſe aforeſayde, in the ſeuerall groundes of any perſon or perſons, beyng within the paryſhe and limittes where they ſhalbe Superuiſours, and nyghe adioynyng to the waye or wayes wherin ſuch reparations ſhalbe thought neceſſary to be made, and wherein grauell, ſande, or ſinder is lykely to be founde, to dygge or cauſe to be dygged for Grauell, Sande, or Sinder, and lykewyſe to gather ſtones lying vppon anye landes or groundes within the paryſhe, and meete to be vſed to ſuche ſeruyce and purpoſe, and thereof to take and carrye awaye ſo much as by diſcreſſion of the ſayde Superuiſours ſhalbe thought neceſſarye to be imployed in the amendement of the ſayde hyghe wayes.
            Prouided alwayes, that it ſhall not be lawfull to any ſuch Superuiſour,

or ſuperuiſours by vertue of this Act, to cauſe any rubbyſhe to be dygged out of any quarry or quarryes, but onely ſhall extende to ſuch rubbyſhe as ſhalbe founde there redy dygged by the owner or owners of the ſayde quarry or quarryes, or otherwyſe by his or theyr licence and commaundement, nor ſhall not extende or geue aucthoritie to any ſuperuiſour or ſuperuiſours to dygge or cauſe to be digged any grauell, ſande, or ſinder, in the houſe, garden, orcharde, or medowe of any perſon or perſons, nor that it ſhal be lawefull by this Acte to any ſuch ſuperuiſour or ſuperuiſours to cauſe any more pyttes to be dygged for grauell in any ſeuerall and incloſed grounde, then one only, and that the ſame pyt or hole ſo digged for grauell as is aforeſayde, ſhall not by any waye be in breadth or length aboue ten yardes ouer at the moſt. And that euery ſuch Superuiſour as ſhall cauſe any ſuch pyt to be made & dygged, for grauell, ſande, or ſinder, as is aboueſaid, ſhall within one moneth next after any ſuche dyggyng or pyt made, cauſe the ſame to be filled and ſtopped by with earth, at the coſtes & charges of the paſhioners, vpon payne to forfait to the owner or owners of the ſoyle wherein any ſuch pyt ſhalbe made and dygged, for euery default fyue markes, to be recouered by action of debte, as in other lyke caſes of debte hath ben accuſtomed.
            And foraſmuche as the hygh wayes in ſundrye places of this Realme be full of continuall ſprynges and water courſes, by continuall encreaſe and ſynkyng wherof into the grounde, the ſayde wayes are not only very depe & daungerous, but alſo for the moſte part impoſſible to be amended and repaired in any good and ſufficient maner, without ſome further remedye prouided for the ſame: Be it therfore by thaucthoritie aforeſaide further enacted, that from henceforth euery ſuch Superuiſour & Superuiſours as is aforeſaide, ſhall by force of this Act, within the paryſhe or limittes where he or they ſhalbe Superuiſours, haue full power & aucthoritie to turne any ſuch water courſe or ſpring of water, beyng in any of the ſayde hygh wayes, into any dyche or diches of the ſeuerall grounde or ſoyle of any perſon or perſons whatſoeuer nexte adioynyng to the ſayd wayes, in ſuch maner and fourme, as by the diſcreſſions of the ſaid Superuiſours ſhalbe thought meteſt and moſte conuenient.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that the hayes, fences, dykes, or hedges next adioynyng on eyther ſyde to any hygh or common fayryng way, ſhall from time to tyme be dyked, ſcoured, repayred, and kepte lowe, and all trees and buſſhes growyng in the hygh wayes cut downe by the owner or owners of the grounde or ſoyle which ſhalbe incloſed with the ſaide hayes,

fences, dikes or hedges aforſaide, whereby the ſaide wayes may be open and the people haue more redye and eaſye paſſage in the ſame.
            And whereas in the ſaide ſtatute made in the ſaide ſecond and thirde yeres of the reignes of the ſayde Kynge Phillip and Quene Mary, there are but foure dayes yerely appointed for the reparations and amendement of the ſaide high wayes: Be it further by this preſent Parlyament enacted, that from hencefourth there ſhalbe yerely ſix dayes, duringe the tyme and force of this eſtatute, obſerued, vſed, and employed in reparation and amendement of the ſayde high wayes, in lyke maner and fourme as the ſaide foure dayes were lymitted and appointed to be obſerued and kept, by the ſaide eſtatute made in the ſaide ſecond and thirde yeres of Kynge Phillippe and Quene Mary.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that from hencefourth, all and euerye ſuche Superuiſour, or Superuiſours, for the tyme beinge, within one moneth next after defaulte or offence made, done, or committed by any perſon or perſons, contrary to the prouiſion, purporte and true meanynge of the ſaide eſtatute made in the ſecond and third yeres of Kynge Philippe and Quene Mary, or contrary to the prouiſion, purport and true meanynge of this preſent Acte, ſhall preſent euery ſuch default or offence, to the nexte Iuſtice of peace, for the tyme beinge, vppon payne to forfait for euery ſuche defaulte and offence, in ſuche forte not by them preſented .xl.s. And that euery ſuche Iuſtice of peace, to whom any ſuche defaulte or offence ſhalbe preſented, as is aforeſaid, ſhall certifie the ſame preſentment ſo to him made, at the nexte generall Seſſions within the ſaid Countie then nexte after to be holden, vppon payne to forfayt for not certifyinge of euery ſuche preſentment, of euery ſuche defaulte or offence, as is aforſaide .v.li. And that the Iuſtices of peace of euery Countie, where the ſaide defaultes or offences ſhalbe committed, ſhall immediatly haue aucthoritie to enquire of any ſuche defaulte or offence committed within the limittes of their commiſſion, at euery their quarter Seſſions, and to aſſeſſe ſuche fynes for the ſame, as they, or two of them, whereof the one to be of the Quorum, ſhall thinke mete.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that euery Iuſtice of peace, ſhall haue aucthoritie by this ſtatute, vpon his owne proper knowledge in the open generall Seſſions, to make preſentment of any high waye not well and ſufficiently repayred and amended, or of any other defaulte or offence committed or done within the Countie and limittes of his commiſſion, contrary to the prouiſion and entente of this ſtatute, or the ſaide ſtatute made in the ſeconde and third yeres of Kyng Phillippe and Quene Mary. And that euery ſuch preſentment, made by any ſuch Iuſtice of peace, vppon his owne

knowledge, as is aforeſaide, ſhalbe as good and of the ſame force, ſtrength, & effect in the law, as if the ſame had ben preſented, founde, and adiudged by the othe of .xii. men. And that for euery ſuch defaulte ſo preſented, as is aforeſaide, the Iuſtices of the peace of the ſaide Countie ſhall immediatly at the ſaid generall Seſſions, haue aucthoritie to aſſeſſe ſuche fynes, as to them or two of them, wherof the one to be of the Quorum, ſhalbe thought mete. Sauing euery perſon and perſons, that ſhalbe touched by any ſuche preſentment, to haue his or their lawfull trauers to the ſame preſentment, as they might haue vpon any Indictement of treſpas, or forcible entrye, by the lawes of this Realme, before the making of this eſtatute.
            And that all ſuche fynes, forfaitures, and amerciamentes to be aſſeſſed by the ſaid Iuſtices of the peace, at their generall Seſſions, in any the caſes aforeſaid, ſhalbe eſtreated by the clerke of the peace of the ſaide Countie, and ſhalbe leuyed in ſuche maner and fourme, and employed to ſuche vſes and ententes, as in the ſaide ſtatute made in the ſecond and third yeres of Kynge Phillippe and Quene Mary, is limitted and appointed. This Acte to continue for twentie yeres nexte after the begynnynge of this preſent Parliament, and from thence vntill the ende of the Parlyament, then nexte after to be holden.
         
         
            ¶An Acte againſt the forgyng of Euidences and Wrytynges. The .xiiii. Chapter.
            
               FOraſmuche as the wicked, perniciouſe, and daungerous practiſe of makinge, forging, and publiſhinge of falſe and vntrue Charters, euidences, dedes, and writynges, hath of late tyme ben very muche more practiſed, vſed and put in bre in all partes of this Realme, then in times paſſed, not only to the high diſpleaſure of God, but alſo to the greate iniurye, wronge, hurte, domage, diſheriſon, and vtter vndoing of diuers the Quenes Maieſties ſubiectes of this Realme, and to the greate ſubuerſion of Iuſtice and trueth, which ſemeth to haue growen and happened chieflye by reaſon that the paynes and puniſhments limitted for ſuche greate and notable offences, by the lawes and ſtatutes of this Realme, before this time haue ben, and yet are ſo ſmall, mylde, and eaſye, that ſuche euil people haue not ben, nor yet are afrayed to enterpriſe the practiſynge and doinge of ſuche offences: Be it therfore enacted by the Quenes moſte excellent Maieſtie, with the aſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall

and temporall, and the Commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that if any perſon or perſons whatſoeuer, after the firſte daye of Iune, nowe nexte comming, vpon his or their owne head and imagination, or by falſe conſpiracie and fraude with others, ſhall wittingly, ſubtillye, and falſely forge or make, or ſubtellye cauſe, or wittinglie aſſent to be forged or made, any falſe dede, Charter, or writinge ſealed, court roole, or the will of any perſon or perſons in writtinge, to the intent that the ſtate of freeholde or inheritaunce of any perſon or perſons, of, in, or to any landes, tenementes or hereditamentes, freeholde or Copie holde, or the right, tytle or intereſt of any perſon or perſons, of, in, or to the ſame, or any of them, ſhall or maye be moleſted, troubled, defeated, recouered or charged, or after the ſaide firſte daye of Iune, ſhall pronounce, publiſhe or ſhewe forth in euidence, any ſuche falſe and forged dede, Charter, wrytynge, Court roole or will, as true, knowing the ſame to be falſe and forged, as is aforeſaide, to the intent aboue remembred, and ſhalbe therof conuicted either vpon action or actions of forger of falſe dedes, to be founded vpon this ſtatute, at the ſuite of the partie greued, or otherwiſe, accordinge to the order and due courſe of the lawes of this Realme, or vpon bill or information to be exhibited into the Court of the Starre chamber, according to the order and vſe of that courte: ſhall paye vnto the partie grieued, his double coſtes and damages, to be founde or aſſeſſed in that Court where ſuche conuiction ſhalbe, and alſo ſhalbe ſet vpon the Pyllorye, in ſome open market towne, or other open place, and there to haue both his eares cut of, alſo his noſetrelles to be ſlyt and cut, and ſeared with an hot yron, ſo as they maye remaine for a perpetual note or marke of his falſhead, and ſhall forfait to the Quene our ſoueraigne Lady, her heires and ſucceſſours, the whole iſſues and proffites of his landes tenementes duringe his life, and alſo ſhall ſuffer and haue perpetuall impriſonment during his life. The ſaid damages and coſtes to be recouered at the ſuite of the partie greued, as is aforeſaid, to be firſt payde and leuyed, of the goodes and Cattels of the offendour, and of the yſſues and profites of the ſaid landes, tenemētes, and hereditamentes of ſuch partie conuicted, or of one or both of them, the ſaide title of our ſaide ſoueraigne Ladye the Quene, her heyres, or ſucceſſours to the ſame, notwithſtandyng.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that if any perſon or perſons, after the ſaide firſt daye of Iune, vpon his or their owne head or imagination, or by falſe conſpiration or fraude had with any other, ſhall wittingly, ſubtelly, and falſelye forge or make, or wittinglye, ſubtelly, and falſely cauſe, or aſſent to be made and forged, any falſe Charter, dede, or writinge, to the intent that any perſon or

perſons, ſhall or may haue, or clayme any eſtate or intereſt, for tearme of yeres, of, in, or to any manours, landes, tenementes or hereditamentes, not being copie holde, or any annuitie in fee ſimple, fee taile, for terme of lyfe, lyues, or yeres, or after the ſaid day, ſhal as is aforeſaid, forge, make, or cauſe, or aſſent to be made or forged any obligation or bill obligatorie, or any acquittaunce, releaſe, or other diſcharge of any debte, accompte, action, ſuite, demaunde, or other thing perſonall, or if any perſon or perſons, after the ſaide firſte day of Iune, ſhall pronounce, publiſhe, or geue in euidence any ſuche falſe or forged Charter, dede, writynge, obligation, bill obligatorie, acquittaunce, releaſe or diſcharge, as true, knowynge the ſame to be falſe and forged, and ſhalbe thereof conuicted, by any the wayes or means aforeſaide: that then he ſhall paye vnto the partie greued his double çoſtes and damages, to be founde and aſſeſſed in ſuche courte, where the ſaide conuiction ſhalbe had, and ſhalbe alſo ſet vpon the Pyllorie in ſome open market towne, or other open place, and there to haue one of his cares cut of, and alſo ſhall haue and ſuffer impriſonment by the ſpace of one whole yere, without bayle or mainpriſe.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that the partie and parties greued, by reaſon of any the offences aforeſaide, ſhall and maye at his and their pleaſure, haue and ſue his action of forger of falſe dedes, vpon this ſtatute, againſt any the offendours in the ſame, by originall writte out of the Quenes highnes Courte of Chauncerie, and ſhall and maye haue lyke proceſſe vppon the ſame, as in caſes of treſpaſſe at the common lawe, or maye at his pleaſure take his ſuite againſt any ſuche offendours, in any the premiſſes, by byl, before the Quenes highnes, her heyres and ſucceſſours, in her Court commonlye called the kynges Benche, or in the Court of the Exchequer, in whiche ſuites, no eſſoygne, iniunction or protection ſhalbe allowed for the partie defendaunt.
            And be it further enacted, by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that yf the partie defendaunt ſhalbe conuicted for any the offences aforeſaid, accordyng to the order and fourme aboue lymitted, and ſhall haue receaued thereupon puniſhement corporall; accordynge to this acte: that then he ſhall not eftſones be empeached for the ſame offence.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that although the partie or parties plaintife, in any ſuche action or byll to be ſued, as is aforeſaid, ſhal after verdyt paſſed againſt the defendaunt or defendauntes, happen to releaſſe or diſcharge the iudgemēt or execution vpon the ſame, or otherwiſe ſuffer the ſame to be diſcontinued: that yet neuertheleſſe the ſame releaſſe, diſcharge, or diſcontinuaunce ſhall extende onelye to diſcharge ſuche coſtes and damages, as the ſame plaintifes ſhoulde haue had againſt the defendaunt, and that the

Iudges before whome the ſaide action or ſuite ſhalbe taken, ſhall and may procede to Iudgement, of, and vpon the reſidue of the ſaide penalties and forfaitures, and to commaunde execution vppon the ſame, the ſayde releaſe, diſcontinuaunce or other diſcharge, had, made, done, or ſuffered by the partie plaintife in any wiſe notwithſtanding: This Acte or any thing therein conteined to the contrary in any wyſe notwithſtandyng.
            And be it further enacted, by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that if any perſon or perſons, beinge hereafter conuicted or condempned of any the offences aforeſaide, by any the wayes or meanes aboue limitted, ſhal after any ſuche his or their conuiction or condempnation eftſones commit or perpetrate any of the ſaide offences in fourine aforeſaide: that then euery ſuche ſeconde offence or offences, ſhalbe adiudged felonye, and the parties being therof conuicted or attainted accordinge to the lawes of this Realme, ſhall ſuffer ſuch paynes of death, loſſe and forfaiture of their goodes, cattles, landes and tenementes, as in caſes of felony, by the common lawes of this Realme, ought to be loſt or forfayted, without hauinge any aduauntage or benefit of Clergie or Sanctuarye. Sauynge to euery perſon and perſons, bodyes polytike and corporate, their heyres and ſucceſſours, other then the ſaid offendours, and ſuche as clayme to their vſes, all ſuch rightes, titles, intereſtes, poſſeſſiōs, liberties of diſtreſſes, leaſſes, rentes, reuercions, offices and other profites and aduauntages, which they or any of them ſhall haue at the tyme of ſuche conuiction or attaindour, of, in, or to any the landes, tenemētes, or hereditamētes of any ſuche perſone, ſo, as is aforeſaide, conuicted or attainted, or at any tyme before, in as large and ample maner to all intentes and purpoſes, as if this Acte had neuer ben had nor made.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that any ſuche conuiction or attaindour of fellony, as is aforeſaide, or any forfaiture by reaſon of the ſame, ſhall not in any wiſe extende to take awaye the dower of the wife of any ſuche perſon attainted, nor to the corruption of bloude, or diſheriſon of any the heyre or heyres of any ſuche perſon or perſons ſo attainted: This Acte or any thinge therin conteyned, or any other ſtatute, lawe, vſage, cuſtome or thinge heretofore vſed to the contrary, in any wiſe notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alſo, and be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that this Acte or any thinge therein conteyned, ſhall not extende to charge any ordinary or any there Commiſſaries, officials, regiſters, or any other their officers, or miniſters, with any the offences aforeſaide, for puttinge their Seale of office to any will, to be exhibited vnto them, not knowinge the ſame to be falſe or forged, or for writing of the ſayde will or probate of the ſame: This Acte or any thynge

therin conteined to the contrary notwithſtandyng.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that all and euery Iuſtices of Oyer and determiner, and Iuſtices of Aſſiſe in their circuites, and euery of them, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie in euery of their open and generall Seſſions, to enquire, heare and determine, of all and euery the offences aforeſayde, committed or done within the limittes of their Commiſſion, and to make proceſſe for the execution of the ſame, as they maye do againſt any perſon, beinge indited before them of treſpaſſe, or lawfullye conuicted thereof.
            And be it further enacted, by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that all other ſtatutes heretofore made prouyded for forger of falſe dedes, Charters, munimentes or writinges, and all and euery penaltie appointed by the ſame, ſhal from and after the ſaid firſt daye of Iune, be voyde and of none effecte in the lawe: Any ſuche ſtatute or thynge therin conteyned to the contrary in any wiſe notwithſtanding.
            Prouided alwayes, that this Acte or any thynge therein conteyned, ſhall not extende or be hurtefull in any wyſe to any Proctour Aduocat, or Regiſter of any Eccleſiaſtical courte within this Realme, for the writyng, ſetting forth, or pleading of any proxie made accordynge to the Eccleſiaſticall lawes, or cuſtomes, heretofore vſed and allowed by the Eccleſiaſticalll courtes of this Realme, for the appearaunce of any perſon or perſons, beinge cited to appeare in any of the ſayde Courtes Eccleſiaſticall, nor to any Archdeacon or officiall, for puttynge their Autentique ſeale to the ſayde proxies, or proxie, neyther yet to any Iudge Eccleſiaſticall for admittynge of the ſame: But that they, and euery of them maye hereafter do in all pointes, concernynge the ſame, as they and euery of them myght lawfully haue done, before the makynge of this Acte: Any thinge in this Acte to the contrary in any wyſe nothwithſtandyng.
            Prouyded alwayes, and be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf any perſone or perſons whatſoeuer, that hath of his or theyr owne heade, or by falſe conſpiracie and fraude with any other, wittingly, ſubtelly, and falſelye, forged or made, or ſhall before the ſayde firſte daye of Iune, forge and make any falſe dede, charter, or writinge ſealed, or the wille of any perſon in writinge, or any Courterolle, to the entent that the ſtate of freholde or inheritaunce, or the right, tytle or intereſt of inheritaunce or freholde of any perſon or perſons, of, in, or to any manours, landes, tenementes or hereditamentes, beyng freholde or copyholde, or that by any ſuch forged dede, charter, Courtroll or writynge, before the ſayde firſte daye of Iune, ſhall or may be moleſted, troubled, or defeated of any the ſaide eſtates of any landes, tenementes or hereditamentes,

beinge freholde or copyholde, or if any perſon or perſons haue heretofore publyſhed or ſhewed forth in euidence, or before the ſayde firſt daye, ſhall publyſhe or ſhewe in euidence, for the proffe of any title, any falſe and forged dede, charter, writynge, wille or Courtrolle, as true, knowynge the ſame to be falſe and forged, as is aforeſaide, to the intent aboue remembred, and ſhalbe thereof attainted or conuicted, accordynge to the order of the lawes of this Realme, eyther in an action of forget of falſe faits, or in an action vppon the caſe, at the ſute of the patrie greued, his heires, executours, or aſſignees: that then the partie ſo conuicted, ſhall paye and yelde damages and coſtes of ſute, to the plaintife as ſhalbe aſſeſſed, accordyng to the order of the lawes of this Realme, in any ſuche lyke action or ſute, and ſhall ſuffer impriſonment, and paye fyne and caunſome at the pleaſure of the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres and ſucceſſours. And if any perſon or perſons, ſhall after the ſayd firſt daye of Iune, pleade, publiſhe, or ſhewe forth in euidence, or otherwiſe, for the proffe of any tytle, any falſe and forged dede, charter, writynge, wille, or courtrolle, (heretofore falſelye made and forged, or to be falſely made and forged before the ſayde firſt daye of Iune,) as true, knowynge the ſame to be falſe and forged, to the intent to haue or clayme thereby any eſtate of inheritaunce, freholde, or leaſſe of yeres, in or to any manoues, landes, tenementes or hereditamentes, or any annuitye, rent or profite forth of anye manours, landes, tenementes or hereditamentes, or to the entent to alter, defeate, moleſte, trouble, charge, or recouer the eſtate of inheritaunce, freholde, or for yeres of any perſon, in any manours, landes, tenementes, rentes or hereditamentes: That then euery perſon and perſons that ſhall ſo offende, and ſhalbe thereof conuicted in fourme firſte aboue remembred, ſhall paye vnto the partie greued, double coſtes and damages, and ſhall haue impriſonment, loſſe of eares, ſlittinge and ſearynge of noſe, and forfaiture of landes, in the ſame maner and fourme as aboue is lymitted for any perſon that ſhal offende by forgynge or publiſhynge of any falſe dede or writynge, as is aforeſayde, after the aforeſaide firſt daye of Iune.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that this Acte nor any paine, forfaiture, or thynge therin conteyned, ſhall extende to any Attourney, Lawyer, or Counſelour, that ſhall for his clyent pleade, ſhewe forth, or geue in euidence any falſe and forged dede, Charter, wille, Courtrolle, or other wrytynge, for true or good, beinge not partye and priuey to the forgynge of the ſame, for the pleadynge, ſhewynge forthe, or geuynge in euydence of the ſame: Anye thinge in this Acte to the contrarye notwithſtandynge.
            
               Prouyded alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that this Acte, or any thynge therein conteyned, ſhall not extende to any perſon or perſons, that ſhall pleade or ſhewe forth any dede or writynge exemplifyed vnder the greate Seal of Englande, or vnder the Seal of any other Autentique Court of this Realme, nor ſhall extende to any Iudge or Iuſtice; or other perſon, that ſhall cauſe any Seal of any Court to be ſet to any ſuche dede, Charter, or wrytynge, inrolled, not knowynge the ſame to be falſe or forged: Any thynge in this Acte to the contrary notwithſtandyng.
         
         
            ¶An Acte againſt fonde and Phantaſticall Propheſies. The .xv. Chapter.
            
               FOraſmuche as ſithens the expiration and ending of the Statute made in the time of Kynge Edwarde the ſixte, entytuled an acte againſt fonde and fantaſticall propheſies, diuers euill diſpoſed perſons enclined to the ſtirring and mouinge of factions, ſeditions, and rebellions within this Realme, haue byn the more bolde to attempte the lyke practiſe in fayning, imagining, inuenting, and publyſhing of ſuche fonde and phantaſtical propheſies, aſwel concerning the Quenes Maieſtie, as diuers honorable perſonages, Gentilmen, and others of this Realme, as was vſed and practiſed before the makinge of the ſaide ſtatute, to the greate diſquiete, trouble, and perill of the Quenes Maieſtie, and of this her Realme. For remedie wherof: Be it ordeyned and enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parlyament, that if any perſon or perſons, after the firſt daye of Maye nexte comminge, do aduiſedly, and directly aduaunce, publiſhe, and ſet forth by writing, printing, ſyngyng, or any other open ſpeache or dede, to any perſon or perſons, any fonde, phantaſticall or falſe propheſie, vpon or by the occaſion of any armes, fieldes, beaſtes, badges, or ſuche other lyke thinges accuſtomed in armes, cogniſaunces, or ſignettes, or vpon, or by reaſon of any tyme, yere or day, name, blodſhed, or warre, to the intent thereby to make any rebellion, inſurrection, diſſention, loſſe of life, or other diſturbaunce within this Reame, and other the Quenes dominions: that then euery ſuche perſon beinge

thereof lawfullye conuicted, accordynge to the due courſe of the lawes of this Realme, for euerie ſuche offence ſhall ſuffer impriſonment of his bodye by the ſpace of one yere without bayle or mainpriſe, and ſhall forfait for euerye ſuche offence the ſumme of tenne poundes. And if any ſuche offendour do after ſuche conuiction eftſones offende in any of the premiſſes, and be thereof lawfullye conuicted, as is aforeſaid, that then euery ſuche offendour ſhall for his ſeconde offence and conuiction as is aforeſaide, ſuffer impriſonment of his bodie without bayle or mainpriſe duringe his life, and ſhall forfait al his goods and cattels realles and perſonales. The moities of euery whiche forfaitures, ſhalbe to the Quenes highnes, her heyres and ſucceſſours, and the other moities thereof, to him that ſhall or will ſue for the ſame in any of the Quenes courtes of recorde, by action, bill, plainte or information, in which caſe no eſſoygne, wager of lawe, or protection ſhalbe allowed or admitted.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that all and euerye Iuſtice of aſſiſe, Iuſtice of Oyer and determiner, Iuſtice of peace, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie, by vertue hereof, to enquire, heare and determine, all and euery offence or offences aboueſaid, committed or done within the lymittes of their comiſſion, contrarye to the tenour and meanynge of this Acte.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that no perſon or perſons; ſhall at any tyme hereafter be empeached for any offence hereafter to be committed or done, contrarie to this acte, vnleſſe he be therefore empeached or accuſed within ſixe monethes nexte enſuynge any ſuche offence, by hym or them committed or done.
         
         
            ¶An Acte againſt Coniurations, Enchauntmentes, and Witchcraftes. The .xvi. Chapter.
            
               WHere at this preſent, there is no ordinarye ne condigne puniſhment prouided againſt the practiſers of the wicked offences of coniurations & inuocations of euill Spirites, & of Sorceries, Enchauntementes, charmes and witchcraftes, the whiche offences, by force of a Statute made in the .xxxiii. yere of the reigne of the late Kyng Henry the .viii. were made to be felony, & ſo continued vntill the ſaide Statute was repealed by the acte and ſtatute of

repeale made in the firſt yere of the reigne of the late Kynge Edwarde the ſixte: Sithens the repeale whereof, many fantaſticall and diueliſhe perſons haue deuiſed and practiſed Inuocations and Coniurations of euill and wicked Spirites, and haue vſed & practiſed witchcraftes, enchauntmentes, charmes, and Sorceries, to the deſtruction of the perſons and goods of their niegbours, and other ſubiectes of this Realme, & for other lewde intents and purpoſes contrarie to the lawes of almightie God, to the perill of their owne ſoules, and to the greate infamie and diſquietnes of this Realme.
            For reformation whereof, be it enacted by the Quenes Maieſtie, with the aſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the Commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that if any perſon or perſons, after the firſt day of Iune nexte comming, vſe, practiſe, exerciſe any Inuocations or Coniurations of euill and wicked Spirites, to or for any intent or purpoſe, or els if any perſon or perſons, after the ſaide firſt day of Iune, ſhall vſe, practiſe, or exerciſe any witchcrafte, enchauntement, charme, or Sorcerie, whereby any perſon ſhall happen to be kylled or deſtroyed: that then aſwell euery ſuche offendour or offendours in Inuocations or coniurations, as is aforeſaid, their aydours and counſellours, as alſo euerie ſuch offendour or offendours, in witchcrafte, enchaunmente, charme, or Sorcerie, whereby the death of any perſon dothe enſue, their aidours and counſailours beinge of eyther of the ſaid offenſes lawfully conuicted and attainted, ſhall ſuffer paynes of death, as a felon or felons, and ſhall loſe the priuilege and benefite of Clergie and ſanctuarie. Sauinge to the wyfe of ſuche perſon, her tytle of dower, and alſo to the heyre and ſucceſſour of ſuche perſon, his, or their tytles of inheritaunce, ſucceſſion, and other rightes, as though no ſuche attaindour of the aunceſtour or predeceſſour, had ben had or made.
            And further, be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſiade, that if any perſon or perſons, after the ſaide firſt daye of Iune nexte commyng, ſhall vſe, practiſe, or exerciſe any witchcrafte, enchauntement, charme, or ſorcerie, whereby any perſon ſhal happen to be waſted, conſumed, or lamed in his or her bodie, or membre, or whereby any goodes or Catels of any perſon ſhalbe deſtroyed, waſted, or empayred: then euerye ſuche offendour or offendours, their counſailours and aydours, being thereof lawfullye conuicted, ſhall for his or their firſte offence or offences ſuffer impriſonment by the ſpace of one whole yere, withoute bayle or mainpriſe, and once in euery quarter of the ſaid yere, ſhall in ſome market towne, vppon the market daye, or at ſuche tyme as any Fayre ſhalbe kepte, there ſtande openly vpon the Pyllorie, by the ſpace of .vi. houres, and there ſhall openly confeſſe his or her errour and

offence, and for the ſeconde offence; beinge as is aforeſaide, lawefullye conuicted or attained, ſhall ſuffer death, as a felon, and ſhall loſe the priuilege of Clergie and Sanctuary. Sauinge to the wyfe of ſuche perſon, her tytle of dower, and alſo to the heyre and ſucceſſour of ſuche perſon, his or their tytles of inheritaunce, ſucceſſion, and other rightes, as thoughe no ſuche attaindour of the aunceſtour or predeceſſour had ben had or made.
            Prouided alwayes, that yf the offendour in any of the caſes aforeſaide, for whiche the paynes or death ſhall enſue, ſhall happen to be a peere of the Realme, then his tryall therin to be had by his peeres, as it is vſed in caſes of fellonye or treaſon, and not otherwiſe.
            And further, to the intent that all maner of practiſe, vſe, or exerciſe of Whitchcrafte, Enchauntemente, Charme, or Sorcerie, ſhoulde be from henceforth vtterlye auoyded, aboliſhed, and taken awaye: Be it enacted by the aucthoritie of his preſent Parlyament, that yf any perſon or perſons ſhall from and after the ſayde firſt daye of Iune nexte commynge, take vpon hym or them, by wytchcrafte, Enchauntement, charme or Sorcerye, to tell or declare in what place any treaſure of golde or ſiluer ſhoulde or might be founde, or had in the earth, or other ſecret places, or where goodes or thinges loſte, or ſtollen, ſhoulde be founde or become, or ſhall vſe or practiſe any Sorcerie, Enchauntemente, Charme or Witchcrafte, to the intent to prouoke any perſon to vnlawful loue, or to hurt or deſtroye any perſon in his or her bodye, member, or goodes: That then euery ſuche perſon or perſons ſo offendynge and beinge thereof lawfullye conuicted, ſhall for the ſayde offence ſuffer impriſonment by the ſpace of one whole yere without bayle or mainpriſe, and once in euery quarter of the ſayde yere, ſhall in ſome market towne, vppon the market daye, or at ſuche tyme as any Fayre ſhalbe kepte there, ſtande openlye vpon the Pyllorie, by the ſpace of ſixe houres, and there ſhall openly confeſſe his or her errour and offence. And if any perſon or perſons, beinge once conuicted of the ſame offences, as is aforeſaid, do eftſones parpetrate and committe the lyke offence: That then euery ſuche offendour, being thereof the ſeconde tyme conuicted, as is aforeſaide, ſhall forfaite vnto the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres and ſucceſſours, all his goodes and cattelles, and ſuffer impriſonment durynge lyfe.
         
         
            
            ¶An Acte for the punyſhement of the vyce of Buggorye. The .xvii. Chapter.
            
               WHere in the Parlyament begonne at London the third daye of Nouember, in the .xxi. yere of the late Kyng of moſt famous memorie Kyng Henry the eight, and after by prorogation holden at Weſtminſter, in the .xxv. yere of the reigne of the ſaide late Kynge, there was one Acte and ſtatute made, entytuled, an Acte for the punyſhement of the vice of Buggorye, whereby the ſayde deteſtable vice was made felony, as in the ſayde Eſtatute more at large it doth and maye appeare. Foraſmuche as the ſayde ſtatute, concernynge the puniſhement of the ſayde cryme and offence of Buggorie, ſtandeth at this preſent repealed and voyde, by vertue of the ſtatute of repeale, made in the firſt yere of the reigne of the late Quene Mary, Sithen whiche repeale ſo had and made, diuers euill diſpoſed perſons, haue ben the more bolde to commit the ſayde moſte horrible and deteſtable vyce of Buggorie aforeſaide, to the high diſpleaſure of almightie God: Be it enacted, ordeyned and eſtabliſhed by the Quene our ſoueraigne Lady, and by the aſſent of the Lordes Spirituall and temporall, and the Commons in this preſent Parlyament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that the ſayd ſtatute before mentioned, made in the xxv. yere of the ſayde late Kynge Henry the eyght, for the puniſhement of the ſayde deteſtable vyce of Buggorye, and euery braunche, clauſe, article and ſentence therein conteyned, ſhall from and after the firſt daye of Iune nexte commynge, be reuiued, and from thenceforth ſhall ſtande, remayne, and be in full force, ſtrength and effecte for euer, in ſuche maner, fourme, and condition as the ſame ſtatute was at the daye of the death of the ſayde late Kynge Henry the eyght, the ſayde ſtatute of repeale made in the ſayde firſte yere of the ſayde late Quene Mary, or any wordes generall or ſpeciall therin conteyned, or any other Acte or Actes, thinge or thinges, to the contrary notwithſtandyng.
         
         
            
            An Act declaryng thaucthoritie of the Lorde keper of the great Seale of Englande and the Lorde Chauncelour, to be one. ¶ The .xviii. Chapter.
            
               WHere ſome queſtion hath of late ryſen, whether lyke place, aucthoritie, preheminence, iuriſdiction and power, doth belong, and of ryght ought to belong to the office of the Lorde keper of the greate Seale of Englande for the tyme beyng, as of right doth and ought to belong to the office of the Lorde Chauncelour of Englande for the tyme beyng, or not.
            For declaration wherof, and in aduoydyng ſuch queſtion hereafter: Be it enacted and declared by the Quene our Soueraigne Lady, the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the Commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that the common lawe of this Realme is, and alwayes was and ought to be taken, that the keper of the great Seale of Englande for the tyme beyng, hath alwayes had, vſed, and executed, and of ryght ought to haue, vſe, and execute, and from henceforth may haue, perceaue, take, vſe, and execute, as of ryght belongyng to thoffice of the keper of the great Seale of Englande for the time beyng, the ſame and lyke place, aucthoritie, preheminence, iuriſdiction, execution of lawes, and all other cuſtomes, commodities, and aduauntages, as the Lorde Chauncelour of Englande for the tyme beyng, lawfully vſed, had, and ought to haue, vſe, & execute, as of ryght belongyng to the office of the Lorde Chauncelour of Englande for the tyme beyng, to all intentes, conſtructions and purpoſes, and as yf the ſame keper of the great Seale for the tyme were Lorde Chauncelour of Englande.
         
         
            An Acte for the repeale of a braunche of a Statute, made Anno .i. Ed. vi. touchyng the conueying of Horſes and Geldynges out of the Realme. ¶ The .xix. Chapter.
            
               WHere in the Parliament holden at Weſtminſter in the firſte yere of the raigne of the late kyng Edwarde the ſixt, brother to our Soueraigne Lady the Quenes Maieſtie that nowe is, amongeſt diuers other Statutes, there was one Acte and Statute made agaynſt

the carryng and conueying of any Horſes, Geldynges, or Mares out of this Realme: In which Act, amongeſt other thinges, there is one prouiſo or braunche conteyned in theſe wordes hereafter folowing. That is to ſaye: Prouided alwayes that it ſhalbe lawful to euery of the kynges ſubiectes, that ſhall paſſe ouer beyonde the Sea, to ſhyppe and carry with them Horſes or Geldynges for their only occupation in theyr iourneyes, and not to thintent to ſell the ſame beyonde the Sea, and that intente to be iudged by othe of hym or them that ſo wyll carry ouer any Horſe or Geldyng, which othe ſhalbe taken before the Cuſtomers or theyr deputies, or Searcher of euery ſuch Porte where the ſame Horſe or Geldyng ſhalbe ſhypped, before the ſhyppyng thereof, as by the ſame Acte and prouiſo it doth and may appeare. And although the ſame Acte and Statute in all partes therof (except the ſayde prouiſo) is very beneficiall and profitable for this Realme: Yet neuertheleſſe, by colour of the ſayed prouiſo and braunche conteyned in the ſayd Statute, many euyll diſpoſed perſons, of a couetous and greedy deſyre, do dayly tranſport out of this Realme very great numbers of Horſes and Geldynges, and do exchaunge and ſell the ſame in the parties beyonde the Seas, for theyr owne priuate lucre and gayne. And becauſe the tryall of ſuch offences is by force of the ſayde prouiſo and braunch, mentioned in the ſayde Statute, no otherwyſe to be tryed or iudged but onlye by the othe of the offendour hym ſelfe: therefore the offendours therin do eſcape vnpunyſhed, and therby many perſons are greatly encouraged dayly to commit the lyke offences, contrary to the true meanyng and entent of the ſaid Statute.
            For the redreſſe wherof: Be it enacted by the Quenes Maieſtie, with thaſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by aucthoritie of the ſame, that all the ſayde prouiſo and braunche before rehearſed and mentioned, and conteyned within the ſayde Acte and Statute, and euery article and ſentence conteyned within the ſayde prouiſo, ſhal from henceforth be repealed, made voyde, and of none effecte, and that all the reſidue of the ſayde Acte and Statute, ſhall ſtande, remayne, and be in full force and ſtrength: Any thing herein ſpecified to the contrary not withſtandyng.
         
         
            
            An Act for the punyſhement of Vagaboundes, callyng them ſelues Egiptians. ¶ The .xx. Chapter.
            
               WHere as ſithens the Acte made in the firſt and ſeconde yeres of the late Kyng & Quene, kyng Phillip and Quene Mary, for the punyſhement of that falſe and ſubtyle companye of vagaboundes callyng them ſelues Egiptians, there is a ſcruple and doubt ryſen, whether ſuch perſons as beyng borne within this Realme of England, or other the Quenes highnes dominions, and are or ſhall become of the felowſhyp or company of the ſayde vagaboundes, by tranſforming or diſguyſyng them ſelues in theyr apparell, or in a certayne counterfait ſpeache or behauour, are punyſhable by the ſayde Acte, in lyke maner as others of that ſort are being ſtraungers borne, and tranſported into this Realme of England.
            Therefore for thaduoydyng of all doubtes and ambiguities in that behalfe, and to thintent that all ſuche ſturdye and falſe vagaboundes of that ſort, lyuyng onely vpon the ſpoyle of the ſimple people, may be condignely met withall and punyſhed: Be it enacted by the Quene our ſoueraigne Lady, the Lordes ſpirituall and temporal, and the Cōmons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that the ſaide Statute made in the firſt and ſeconde yeres of the ſayd late kyng and Quene, concernyng thoſe bagaboundes callyng them ſelues Egiptians, ſhal continue, remayne, and be in full force, ſtrength, and effect.
            And yet moreouer, be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and euery perſon and perſons, whiche from and after the fyrſt day of Maye nowe next enſuyng, ſhalbe ſene or founde within this Realme of Englande or Wales, in any company or felowſhip of vagaboundes, cōmonly called or callyng them ſelues Egiptians, or counterfaityng, tranſformyng, or diſguiſing them ſelues by theyr apparell, ſpeache, or other behauour, lyke vnto ſuche vagaboundes cōmonly called or callyng them ſelues Egiptians, and ſo ſhall or do continue and remayne in the ſame, eyther at one time or at ſeuerall tymes, by the ſpace of one moneth: That then the ſame perſon or perſons, ſhall by vertue of this Acte, be demed and iudged a felon and felons, and ſhal therfore ſuffer paynes of death, loſſe of landes and goodes, as in caſes of felony by the order of the common lawes of this Realme, and ſhall vpon the tryall of them or of any of them therin, be tryed in the countie and by the inhabitauntes

of the countie or place where they or he ſhalbe apprehended or taken, and not per medietatem lingue, and ſhall loſe the priuiledge and benefite of Sanctuary and Clergie.
            Prouided alwayes and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that this Acte ſhall not in any wyſe extende to any chylde or chyldren being within the age of .xiiii. yeres, nor to any of the ſayd perſons being in priſon the laſt day of this preſent parliament, ſo that he or they ſo beyng in pryſon, do within .xiiii. dayes next after his or theyr deliuery out of pryſon, eyther depart out of this Realme of Englande and Wales, or put hym or them ſelues to ſome honeſt ſeruice, or exercyſe ſome lawful worke, trade, or occupation, and vtterly forſake the ſayde ydle and falſe trade, conuerſation, and behauour, of the ſayde counterfait or diſguyſed vagaboundes, commonly called or callyng them ſelues Egiptians.
            Prouided alſo, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that the ſaid Act made in the firſt and ſeconde yeres of the ſaid late kyng and Quene, ſhall not extende to compell any perſon or perſons, borne within any the Quenes Maieſties dominions, to depart out of this Realme of Englande or Wales, but onely to conſtrayne and bynde them & euery of them to leaue theyr ſaid naughtie, ydle, and vngodly lyfe and company, and to place them ſelues in ſome honeſt ſeruice, or to exercyſe them ſelues at home with theyr parentes, or els where honeſtly, in ſome lawfull worke, trade, or occupation: Any thyng mentioned in the ſayde former Act to the contrary hereof in any wyſe notwithſtandyng.
         
         
            An Act for the punyſhment of vnlawfull takyng of Fyſhe, Deare, or Haukes. ¶ The .xxi. Chapter.
            
               WHERE aſwell the Quenes Maieſtie, and her moſte noble progenitours, as alſo the noble men, gentlemen and diuers other perſons of great dominions, Lordeſhyppes, manours, & poſſeſſions, within this Realme, haue of auncient & long time had, and many of them nowe of late, to theyr great coſtes and charges, for the neceſſarye & better prouiſion & maintenaūce of theyr houſholdes, haue erected and made in and vpon theyr ſeuerall demeanes, groundes, & poſſeſſions, aſwell pooles, ſtanges, ſtewes, motes, pyttes or pondes, for the only encreaſe of Fiſhe, and haue ſtored the ſame with Pikerell, Breame, Tenche, Carpe, and diuers other good kyndes of fiſhe, for the neceſſary encreaſe of vittayles, and for the better maintenaūce

and prouiſion of their houſes as is aforeſayde, and alſo haue emparked, enuironed & encloſed many parcels of their ſaid demeanes, ſoyles, groundes, and poſſeſſions, for the breedyng, cheriſhyng, and encreaſe, aſwell of redde as fallowe Deare, within theyr ſeuerall parkes and incloſures, for the cauſes afore declared, and alſo haue breeding within their woods & groundes diuers Eyries of hawkes of ſundry kyndes, to theyr great pleaſure and commoditie. Yet neuertheleſſe, the ſaide ſeuerall waters, groundes, parkes, and encloſures ſo beyng had, erected, and made, and alſo beyng ſo ſtored and replenyſhed, haue ben from time to time by euyll diſpoſed perſons, of a very euyll, wylfull, and inſolent diſpoſition, & of mallyce and diſpleaſure, not only by night time broken and entred into, but alſo the heddes or dammes of the ſaid pondes, pooles, ſtanges, motes, ſtewes, or ſeuerall waters, haue ben maliciouſly, wylfully, and vnlawfully cut out, and the pales, fences, and incloſures of the ſaide parkes and groundes, broken, caſt downe, & ſet open, and the Fiſhe, Deare, and Hawkes within the ſame, taken, deſtroyed, caryed away, and ſtollen, not only to the great loſſe and damage of the owners therof, and to the ſmall encouragement of other good ſubiects myndyng the carefull prouiſion of ſuche neceſſary victualles, but alſo to the manifeſt emboldenyng of many lyke wylfull malefactours and malicious offendours, wherby many ryots, manſlaughters, miſchiefes and other inconueniences haue ben dayly perpetrated, and lyke to be committed and done, yf circumſpect remedye be not herevnto prouided.
            Be it therfore enacted by the Quenes Maieſtie, the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the cōmons of this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that yf any perſon or perſons after the feaſt of Pentecoſt next cōmyng, ſhall at any tyme by day or by nyght, vnlawfully without aucthoritie, breake, cutte downe, cut out, or deſtroy any hedde or heddes, damme, or dammes, of any pondes, pooles, motes, ſtanges, ſtewes, or ſeuerall pyttes, wherin fyſhe are, or ſhall happen to be put in or ſtored withall by the owners or poſſeſſioners therof, or do or ſhall wrongfully fyſhe in any the ſayde ſeuerall pondes, pooles, motes, ſtanges, ſtewes, or pyttes, to thintent to deſtroye, kyll, take, or ſteale away any of the ſame fyſhe, agaynſt the wyll, mynde, or pleaſure of the owners or poſſeſſioners of the ſame, not hauyng any lawefull tytle or aucthoritie ſo to do, and therof be lawefully conuicted, at the ſuite of our ſoueraigne Lady the Quene, her heyres, or ſucceſſours, or the partie grieued: ſhall ſuffer impriſonment of his or theyr bodyes by the ſpace of three monethes, and ſhall yelde and paye to the partie grieued his treble damages, and after the ſaide three monethes expired,

ſhall fynde ſufficient ſuerties for his or theyr good abearing agaynſt the Quene our ſoueraigne Lady, her heyres & ſucceſſours, and al her liege people, for the ſpace of ſeuen yeres after, or els ſhal remayne and continue ſtyll in pryſon, without bayle or mainpriſe, vntyll ſuch tyme as he or they ſo offending can and ſhall fynde ſuch ſufficient ſuerties duryng the ſayde tyme and ſpace of ſeuen yeres, as is aforeſayde.
            AND be it alſo enacted by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that yf any perſon or perſons after the ſayde feaſt of Pentecoſt next commyng, at any tyme by nyght or by day, in maner aforeſaid, wrongfully or vnlawfully breake or enter into any parke empaled, or any other ſeuerall grounde cloſed with wall, pale, or hedge, and vſed for the kepyng, breedyng, and cheriſhing of Deare, and ſo wrongfully hunt, dryue, or chaſe out, or take, kyll or ſlea any Deare within any ſuche empaled parke, or cloſed grounde, with wall, pale, or other incloſure, and vſed for Deare as is aforeſaide, or do or ſhal take away any Hawke or Hawkes, or the egges of any of them, by any wayes or meanes vnlawefullye, out of any the woods or grounde of any perſon or perſons (not hauyng lawefull aucthoritie or licence ſo to do) and therof be lawfully conuicted at the ſuite of our ſoueraigne Lady the Quene, or the partie grieued as is aforeſayde: ſhall lykewyſe ſuffer impriſonment of his or theyr bodyes by the ſpace of three monethes, and ſhall yelde and paye to the partie grieued his treble damages. And after the ſayde three monethes expired, ſhall fynde ſufficient ſuerties for his or theyr good abearing, for the ſpace of .vii. yeres after, againſt the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, and all her liege people, as is aforeſayde, or els ſhall remayne & continue ſtyll in pryſon without bayle or mainpryſe, vntyll ſuch tyme as he or they ſo offending can and ſhall fynde ſuch ſufficient ſuerties duryng the ſaid time of vii. yeres, as is afore rehearſed.
            Prouided alwayes, that this Acte or any thyng therein conteyned, extende not to any parke or incloſed grounde hereafter to be made & vſed for Deare, without the graunt or licence of our ſoueraigne Lady the Quene, her heyres, ſucceſſours, or progenitours.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by aucthoritie aforeſaide, that it ſhalbe lawful for the partie grieued to ſue and take his further remedie agaynſt all and euery ſuch offendour and offendours for his loſſe and damages, and to recouer the treble value of the ſame in this behalfe, aſwell before Iuſtices of Oyer and determiner, Iuſtices of Aſſyſe in theyr circuites, and Iuſtices of the peace, as els where, in any other the Quenes courtes of Recorde, and that vpon the true ſatiſfaction of the ſayde treble damages to the

partie grieued, or vpon the confeſſion and knowledge therof by the ſame partie before the ſayde Iuſtices in open ſeſſions to be holden within the Countie where the offence was committed: it ſhalbe at the libertie of the ſame partie grieued, to whom the ſayde offence was committed, to releaſe at his pleaſure the ſayde ſuertiſhyp of good abearyng, at any tyme within the ſayde ſeuen yeres, or before: Any thyng in this preſent Acte before ſpecified or expreſſed to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the Iuſtices of Oyer and determiner, Iuſtices of Aſſyſe in theyr circuites, and Iuſtices of the peace and gaole delyuery, in theyr Seſſions, ſhall by vertue hereof, haue power and aucthoritie to enquire, heare, and determine all and ſinguler the offences aforeſayde, and to make and awarde proces thervpon, aſwell vpon inditementes taken before them, as by byll of complaynt, information, or any other action, in which ſuite or action, no eſſoigne, wager of lawe nor protection ſhalbe alowed.
            AND be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf any perſon or perſons, at any tyme hereafter ſhall fortune to be bounde before any of the Iuſtices before mentioned, to the Quene her heyres or ſucceſſours, for his or theyr good abearyng for ſeuen yeres, accordyng to the tenour of this Acte, and the ſame partie or parties ſo bounde, ſhall afterwardes within the ſayde ſeuen yeres come before the Iuſtices of the peace of the ſayde Countie where the ſayde offence was committed, or ſome of them, in open Seſſions, and there in the ſayde open Seſſions confeſſe and acknowledge his or theyr ſayde offence or offences, and be ſory therefore, and ſatiſfie the partie or parties grieued, accordyng to the tenour of this Acte: That then the ſame Iuſtices before whom the ſayde confeſſion ſhalbe ſo made, ſhall & maye haue power and aucthoritie by vertue of this Act, in the ſame open Seſſion, or in any other open Seſſions afterwarde to be holden before the ſayde Iuſtices in the ſayde Countie, within the ſayde terme of ſeuen yeres, yf it ſhall ſeme good to theyr diſcreſſions, to diſcharge the ſayde Recogniſaunce and bonde ſo taken, and alſo the ſayd partie and parties ſo bounde: This Acte or any thyng therin conteyned to the contrary therof, notwithſtandyng.
         
         
            
            An Act agaynſt the carrying of Shepe ſkinnes and Peltes ouer the Sea, not beyng Staple ware. ¶ The .xxii. Chapter.
            
               FOR reformation of many griefes, lamentably declared this preſent Parliament, by diuers artificers of this Realme, workyng leather: It maye pleaſe your royall Maieſtie, that it maye be enacted & eſtabliſhed with thaſſent of this high court of Parliament, that it ſhall not be lawefull to or for any manner of perſon or perſons whatſoeuer, frō & after the firſt day of Maye next cōming, to make any Peltes, that is to ſay, to pull, ſheare, clip, or take away the woll of any Shepeſkynne or Lambe ſkinne, or to bye any ſkynne of any Stagge, Hynde, Bucke, Doo, Goate, Fawne, or Kyd, or the peltes or ſkynnes of any of them, vnleſſe ſuch perſō or perſons ſo making any peltes, or bying ſuch ſkinnes, as is aforeſaid, do make or cauſe to be made therof tawed or lawfully tanned leather or parchment, or otherwiſe conuert the ſame into ſemittes, panels, or other their owne neceſſary vſes, vpon payne yt euery perſon ſo makyng peltes, or bying any of the ſkinnes or peltes aforeſaid, contrary to the meanyng of this Acte, ſhall forfait & loſe the value of all ſuch peltes or ſkinnes ſo made & bought, and .ii.s.vi.d. for euery ſkynne or pelte ſo bought, or pelt ſo made, as is aforeſayde.
            And be it further enacted, that it ſhall not be lawfull to or for any perſon or perſons whatſoeuer, from & after the feaſt aforeſaid, to ſhip, or conuey, or cauſe or procure to be ſhipped or conueyed, in, or to any ſhippe, boate, or veſſell, in, or vpon the Sea, or in, or vpon any Hauen, riuer, creke, or place, within this Realme of England and Wales, or either of them, any maner of ſhepeſkinnes, wolfels, ſhorelinges, morelinges, or the ſkinnes of any ſtagge, hynde, bucke, doo, goate, fawne, or kyd, or the peltes or ſkynnes of any of them, or the leather made of them or any of thē, to thintent to tranſport or carry the ſame into any the partes beyonde the Seas, there to be vttered, bartred, or ſold, by way of marchaūdiſe or otherwiſe, vpon payne of forfaiture of al ſuch ſkinnes or peltes, bought, laden, ſhipped or tranſported, contrary to the true meaning of this Act, or the value of them, & alſo. ii.s.vi.d. of lawfull money of Englande, for euery fell, ſhorlyng, morling, pelt or ſkinne aforeſaid, bought, laden ſhipped, or tranſported, contrary to the tenor and true meanyng of this preſent Act. The moitie of al which forfaitures, ſhalbe to our ſoueraigne Lady the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires & ſucceſſours, & the other moitie to him or thē that wyll ſue for the ſame, by action byll, plaint, information, or otherwyſe, in any of the Quenes Maieſties courtes: In which action, no eſſoigne, protection, or iniunction,

ſhalbe admitted or alowed.
            Prouided alwayes, that it ſhall and may be lawfull to the marchauntes of the Staple, the marchaūtes of Newcaſtel vpon Tine, Hartilpoole, and Barwicke, their ſruauntes, factours, and atturneyes, and euery of them, to carry and tranſport all ſuch lawefull wares, as heretofore they haue ben accuſtomed, & lawfully might: Any thyng in this Acte to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
         
         
            An Acte for the due execution of the writte de excomunicato capiendo. ¶ The .xxiii. Chapter.
            
               FOraſmuch as diuers perſons offendyng in many great crymes and offences, appertaynyng meerely to the iuriſdiction & determination of the Eccleſiaſtical courtes & Iudges of this Realme, are many tymes vnpuniſhed for lacke and want of the good and due execution of the writte de excomunicato capiendo, directed to the Sheriffe of any Countie, for the taking & apprehending of ſuch offendours. The great abuſe wherof, as it ſhould ſeme, hath growen for that the ſaide writte is not retournable into any Court that might haue the iudgement of the wel executing & ſeruyng of the ſaide writte, accordyng to the contentes therof, but hytherto haue ben left only to the diſcretion of the Sheriffes and theyr deputies, by whoſe negligences and defaultes, for the moſt part, the ſaid writ is not executed vpon the offendour as it ought to be. By reaſon wherof, ſuche offendours be greatly encoraged to continue their ſinfull & criminous lyfe, much to the diſpleaſure of almightie God, & to the great contempt of the Eccleſiaſticall lawes of this Realme. Wherefore for the redreſſe therof: Be it enacted by the Quenes moſt excellent Maieſtie, with thaſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall & temporall, and the Cōmons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, & by thaucthoritie of the ſame, that from & after the firſt day of May next cōmyng, euery writte of Excomunicado capiendo that ſhalbe graunted and awarded out of the hygh Courte of Chauncery, againſt any perſon or perſons within the Realme of England, ſhalbe made in the time of the Terme, & returnable before the Quenes highnes, her heires, & ſucceſſours, in the court cōmonly called the kinges Bench, in the terme next after the Teſte of the ſame writ, & that the ſame writ ſhalbe made to conteyne at the leaſt .xx. dayes betwene the Teſte & the retourne thereof. And after the ſame writte ſhalbe ſo made and ſealed, that then the ſaid writte ſhalbe forthwith brought into the ſayd Court of the kinges Benche, and there in the preſence of the Iuſtices ſhalbe opened, and delyuered of Recorde to the Sheriffe or other officer to whom

the ſeruing and execution therof ſhall appertaine, or to his or their deputie or deputies. And if afterwardes it ſhall or may appeare to the Iuſtices of the ſame Courte for the time beyng, that the ſame writ ſo deliuered of Record, be not duely retourned before them at the day of the retourne therof, or that any other defaulte or negligence hath ben vſed or had in the not wel ſeruing and executing of the ſaid writte: that then the Iuſtices of the ſayde court, ſhall and may by aucthoritie of this Acte, aſſeſſe ſuch amerciament vpon the ſaid Sheriffe or other officer in whom ſuch default ſhal appeare, as to the diſcreſſion of the ſayd Iuſtices ſhalbe thought mete & conuenient, whiche americiament ſo aſſeſſed, ſhalbe extreated into the court of the Exchequer, as other amerciamentes haue ben vſed.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that the Sheriffe or other officer to whom ſuche writte of Excomnicato capiendo or other proces by vertue of this Acte ſhalbe directed, ſhall not in any wyſe be compelled to bryng the body of ſuch perſon or perſons as ſhalbe named in the ſaid writte or proces, into the ſayd court of the kynges Bench at the day of the retourne therof: but ſhall only retourne the ſame writte & proces thyther, with declaration briefly howe and in what maner he hath ſerued and executed the ſame, to thintent that thervpon the ſaid Iuſtices may then further therin proceade, accordyng to the tenor and effect of this preſent Acte. And yf the ſaide Sheriffe or other officer to whom thexecution of the ſaid writte ſhal ſo appertayne, do or ſhal retourne, that the partie or parties named in the ſayd writte, can not be founde within his Baylywyke: that then the ſayde Iuſtices of the kynges Bench for the tyme being, vpon euery ſuch retourne ſhall award one writ of Capias, agaynſt the ſaid perſon or perſons named in the ſaide writ of Excomunicato capiendo, retournable in the ſame Court in the Tearme tyme, two monethes at the leaſt next after the Teſte thereof, with a proclamation to be conteyned within the ſayd writte of Capias, that the Sheriffe or other officer to whom the ſame writ ſhalbe directed, in the full Countie court, or els at the generall Aſſiſes & Gaole delyuery to be holden within the ſame Countie, or at a quarter Seſſions to be holden before the Iuſtices of peace within the ſame Countie, ſhal make open proclamation, ten dayes at the leaſt before the retourne, that the partie or parties named in the ſayde writte, ſhall within .vi. dayes next after ſuch proclamation, yelde his or their body or bodyes to the gaole and pryſon of the ſaid Sheriffe or other ſuch officer, there to remayne as a priſoner accordyng to the tenour and effect of the firſt writte of Excomunicato capiendo, vpon paine of forfaiture of .x.li. And thervpon after ſuch proclamation hadde, and the ſaide .vi. dayes paſt and expired, then the ſayd Sheriffe or other officer to whom ſuch writ of Capias ſhalbe directed, ſhal

make retourne of the ſame writte of Capias into the ſaid court of the kynges Bench, of all that he hath done in thexecution therof, and whether the partie named in the ſayd wrytte haue yelded his body to pryſon or not. And yf vpon the retourne of the ſayde Sheriffe, it ſhall appeare that the partie or parties named in the ſaid writte of Capias, or any of them, haue not yelded theyr bodyes to the gaole and priſon of the ſayde Sheriffe or other officer accordyng to the effecte of the ſame proclamation: that then euery ſuch perſon that ſo ſhall make default, ſhall for euery ſuche default, forfaite to the Quenes hyghnes, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, ten poundes, which ſhall lyke wyſe be extreated by the ſayde Iuſtices, into the ſayde court of Exchequer, in ſuch maner and fourme, as fines and amerciamentes there taxed and aſſeſſed are vſed to be. And therevpon the ſayde Iuſtices of the kynges Bench ſhall alſo awarde forth one other writte of Capias agaynſte the perſon or perſons that ſo ſhalbe retourned to haue made default, with ſuch lyke proclamation as was conteyned in the firſt Capias, and a payne of .xx.li. to be mentioned in the ſaid ſeconde writte and proclamation. And the Sheriffe or other officer to whom the ſaide ſecond writte of Capias ſhalbe ſo directed, ſhalbe ſerue and execute the ſame ſecond writte in ſuch like maner and fourme as before is expreſſed for the ſeruyng and executyng of the ſayde firſt writte of Capias. And if the Sheriffe or other officer ſhall retourne vpon the ſaid ſecond Capias, that he hath made the proclamation accordyng to the tenour and effecte of the ſame writte, and that the partie hath not yelded his bodye to pryſon, accordyng to the tenour of the ſayde proclamation: that than the ſayde partie that ſo ſhall make default, ſhall for ſuch his contempt and default forfait to the Quenes highnes, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, the ſumme of .xx.li. which ſayde ſumme of .xx.li. the ſayde Iuſtices of the kynges Benche for the tyme beyng, ſhall lykewyſe cauſe to be extreated into the ſayde court of Exchequer, in maner and fourme aforeſayde. And then the ſayde Iuſtices ſhall lykewiſe awarde forth one other writte of Capias agaynſt the ſaid partie, with ſuch lyke proclamation and payne of forfaiture as was conteyned in the ſayd ſeconde writte of Capias. And the Sheriffe or other officer to whom the ſayd third writte of Capias ſhall ſo be directed, ſhall ſerue and execute the ſaid third writte of Capias in ſuche lyke maner and fourme as before in this Acte is expreſſed and declared for the ſeruyng & executyng of the ſaid firſt & ſecond writtes of Capias. And if the Sheriffe or other officer to whō thexecution of the ſaid third writte ſhal appertaine, do make retourne of the ſaid third writte of Capias, that ye partie vpon ſuch proclamatiō hath not yelded his body to priſon according to the tenor therof: that then euery ſuch partie

for euery ſuch contempt and defaulte, ſhall lykewyſe forfait to the Quenes Maieſtie, her heires, and ſucceſſours, other .xx.li. which ſumme of .xx.li. ſhall lykewyſe be extreated into the ſaid Court of the Exchequer in maner and fourme aforeſayde, and thervpon the ſayde Iuſtices of the kynges Benche ſhall lykewyſe awarde for the one writ of Capias againſt the ſayde partie, with lyke proclamation and lyke payne of forfaiture of .xx.li. And that alſo the ſaide Iuſtices ſhall haue aucthoritie by this Acte infinitely to awarde ſuche proces of Capias with ſuch lyke proclamation and paine of forfaiture of .xx.li. as is before limitted agaynſt the ſaide partie, that ſo ſhall make default, in yeldyng of his body to the priſon of the Sheriffe, vntyll ſuch tyme as by retourne of ſome of the ſayde writtes before the ſaid Iuſtices, it ſhall and may appeare that the ſaid partie hath yelded him ſelfe to the cuſtody of the ſaid Sheriffe or other officer, accordyng to the tenor of the ſaid proclamation, and that the partie vpon euery default & contempt by him made againſt the proclamation of any of the ſaide writtes ſo infinitelye to be awarded againſt hym, ſhall incurre lyke payne and forfaiture of .xx.li. which ſhall lykewyſe be extreated in maner and fourme aforeſayde.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that when any perſon or perſons ſhall yelde his or theyr body or bodyes to the handes of the ſheriffe or other officer, vpon any of the ſaide writtes of Capias: that then the ſame partie or parties that ſhal ſo yeld them ſelues, ſhall remayne in the priſon and cuſtody of the ſayde ſheriffe or other officer, without Bayle, Baſton, or maynpryſe, in ſuche lyke maner and fourme, to all intentes and purpoſes, as he or they ſhoulde or ought to haue done if he or they hadde ben apprehended and taken vpon the ſayde writte of Excomunicato capiendo.
            
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that if any Sheriffe or other officer, by whom the ſayde writte of Capias or any of them, ſhalbe retourned as is aforeſayde, do make an vntrue retourne vpon any of the ſayde writtes, that the partie named in the ſaide writte hath not yelded his body, vpon the ſaid proclamations or any of them, where in dede the partie did yelde him ſelfe accordyng to the effect of the ſame: That then euery ſuche Sheriffe or other officer, for euery ſuch falſe and vntrue retourne, ſhall forfait to the partie grieued & dampnified by the ſaid retourne, the ſūme of .xl.li. For the which ſumme of .xl.li. the ſaid partie grieued ſhal haue his recouery and due remedie by action of debt, byll, playnt, or information, in any of the Quenes courtes of Record, in which action, byll, playnt, or information, no eſſoigne, protection, or wager of lawe ſhalbe admitted or alowed for the partie defendaunt.
            Sauyng and reſeruing to all Archbyſhops and Byſhops, and all

others hauing aucthoritie to certifie any perſon excommunicated, lyke aucthoritie to accept & receaue the ſubmiſſion and ſatiſfaction of the ſayde perſon ſo excommunicated, in maner and fourme heretofore vſed, and hym to abſolue and releaſe, and the ſame to ſignifie, as heretofore it hath ben accuſtomed, to the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, into the hygh court of Chaūcery, and thervpon to haue ſuch writtes for the deliueraunce of the ſaid perſon, ſo abſolued & releaſed from the Sheriffes cuſtody or priſon, as heretofore they or any of them had, or of ryght ought or myght haue had: Any thyng in this preſent Statute ſpecified or conteyned to the contrary hereof, in any wyſe notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alwayes, that in Wales, the Counties palatines of Lancaſter, Cheſter, Durham, and Eley, & in the Sinque portes, beyng iuriſdictions and places exempt, where the Quenes Maieſties writte doth not runne, and proces of Capias from thence not retournable into the ſayde Courte of the kynges Benche, after any ſignificauit beyng of recorde in the ſayde court of Chauncerye, the tenour of ſuch Significauit by Mittimus ſhalbe ſent to ſuch of the head officers of the ſayde countrye of Wales, Counties palatines and places exempt, within whoſe offices, charge, or iuriſdiction the offendour ſhalbe reſiaunt, that is to ſay, to the Chauncelour or Chamberlayne for the ſayde Countie palatine of Lancaſter and Cheſter, and for the Sinque portes, to the Lorde Warden of the ſame, and for Wales and Eley, and the Countie palatine of Durham, to the chiefe Iuſtice or Iuſtices there. And therevpon euery of the ſaide Iuſtices and officers to whom ſuch tenour of Significauit with Mittimus ſhalbe directed and delyuered, ſhall by vertue of this eſtatute haue power and aucthoritie to make lyke proces to the inferiour officer and officers, to whom the execution of proces there doth appertayne, returnable before the Iuſtices there at their next Seſſions or Courtes, two monethes at the leaſt after the Teſte of euery ſuche proces. So alwayes, as in euery degree they ſhal proceade in their Seſſions and Courtes agaynſt the offendours, as the Iuſtices of the ſayde Courte of Kynges Benche are limitted by the tenour of this Acte, in Terme tymes to do and execute.
            Prouided alſo, and be it enacted, that any perſon at the tyme of any proces of Capias, afore mentioned, awarded, beyng in pryſon or out of this Realme in the Parties beyonde the Sea, or within age, or of non ſane memorie, or woman couert, ſhall not incurre any of the paynes or forfaitures afore mentioned, whiche ſhall growe by any retourne or default happenyng, duryng ſuch tyme of nonage, impriſonment, beyng beyonde the Sea, or non ſane memorie. And that by vertue of this eſtatute, the partie greued may pleade euery ſuch

cauſe or matter in barre of and vpon the diſtreſſe or other proces that ſhalbe made for leuying of any of the ſayde paynes or forfaitures. And that yf thoffendour agaynſt whom any ſuche writte of Excomunicato capiendo ſhalbe awarded, ſhall not in the ſame writte of Excomunicato capiendo haue a ſufficient and lawfull addition, accordyng to the fourme of the eſtatute of prime of Henry the .v. in caſes of certaine ſuites, whervpon proces of exigent are to be awarded. Or if in the Significauit it be not conteyned that thexcommunication doth proceade vpon ſome cauſe or contempt of ſome originall matter of hereſye, or refuſyng to haue his or theyr chylde baptiſed, or to receaue the holy Communion as it is nowe commonly vſed to be receaued in the Churche of Englande, or to come to diuine ſeruice nowe commonly vſed in the ſayde Churche of Englande, or errour in matters of religion, or doctrine nowe receaued and allowed in the ſayde Churche of Englande, incontinencie, vſury, ſimonie, periury in the Eccleſiaſticall court, or Idolatrye: That then all and euery paynes and forfaitures limitted agaynſt ſuche perſones excommunicate by this eſtatute by reaſon of ſuch writte of excomunicato capiendo wantyng ſufficiēt addition, or of ſuch Significauit wanting all the cauſes afore mentioned, ſhalbe vtterly voyde in lawe, and by waye of plea to be alowed to the partie grieued. And yf the addition ſhalbe with a nuper of the place: then in euery ſuch caſe, at the awarding of the firſt Capias, with proclamation according to the fourme afore mentioned, one writte of proclamation (without any payne expreſſed) ſhalbe awarded into the Countie where the offendour ſhalbe moſt commonly reſyant at the tyme of the awardyng of the ſayde firſt Capias, with payne in the ſame writte of proclamation, to be retournable the daye of the retourne of the ſayde fyrſt Capias with payne, and proclamation therevpon at ſome one ſuch tyme and court, as is preſcribed for the proclamation vpon the ſayde fyrſt Capias with payne. And yf ſuch proclamation be not made in the Countie where thoffendour ſhalbe moſte commonly reſiaunt, in ſuch caſes of additions of nuper: that then ſuch offendour ſhal ſuſteine no payne or forfaiture by vertue of this eſtatute, for not yeldyng his or her bodye, accordyng to the tenour afore mentioned: Any thing before ſpecified to the contrary hereof, in any wiſe notwithſtandyng.
         
         
            
            An Act for the reuiuyng of a Statute, made Anno xxiii. H. viii. touchyng the repayryng of Gaoles. ¶ The .xxiiii. Chapter.
            
               WHere in the Parliament begon & holden at London the thirde daye of Nouember in the .xxi. yere of the reigne of the late kyng Henry the eyght, and from thence adiourned to Weſtminſter, and there holden and continued by prorogation vntyll the .xv. day of Ianuary, in the .xxiii. yere of the reigne of the ſaide late kyng Henry the .viii. there was then in that Seſſion of Parliament one Acte and Statute made & eſtablyſhed for the makyng of Gaoles in diuers Shires of this Realme, which Acte was then made to continue and endure for one yere next after thende of the ſame Parliament, as by the ſame Acte more playnely appeareth. And where alſo the ſaid Act and Statute at diuers Parliamentes holden & kept after the makyng therof, in the time of the ſaide late kyng Henry the .viii. was continued & kept in full force & ſtrength vntyll the death of the ſayde late king, as by the ſame Actes of continuaunce more plainly may appeare. And where in the Parliament begon & holden at Weſtminſter the .v. day of October, in the firſt yere of the raigne of our late ſoueraigne Lady Quene Mary, and there vpon prorogation continued & kept vntyll the .vi. day of December then next folowyng, the ſaid Act & ſtatute, and al clauſes & ſentences therin conteyned, was then made to continue and endure vntyll thend of .x. yeres next enſuyng the ende of the ſame Parliament, as by the ſame Acte more plainely doth appeare.
            And foraſmuch as the ſaid Act for the making of Gaoles, made in the ſaid .xxiii. yere of the raigne of the ſaid late kyng Henry the viii. is very good and profitable for the common wealth of this Realme: Be it therfore enacted & eſtablyſhed by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that the ſaid Act for makyng of Gaoles, and all clauſes, articles, & prouiſions in the ſame conteyned, ſhall continue & endure in full force and effect, and be obſerued and kept in all thynges vnto thende and tearme of ten yeres next enſuyng the laſt day of this preſent Parliament.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that the Iuſtices of peace of euery of the Shires named & expreſſed in the ſaid Act, or the moſt parte of the ſaide Iuſtices of peace in euery of the ſaid Shires, within the limittes of their Cōmiſſion, ſhall haue full power & aucthoritie by vertue of this Act, at all tyme & tymes

within the ſaide tearme of ten yeres, to do, make, and execute, and cauſe to be done, made, and executed, all and euery ſuch Acte and Actes, thyng & thynges requiſite for the makyng and buyldyng of the ſayde Gaoles, as they or any of them myght or ought at anye tyme haue done by vertue of the ſayde Acte made in the ſaid .xxiii. yere of the ſayde late kyng Henry the eyght.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that the Iuſtices of peace of the Counties of Pembroke, Glamorgan, Cardigan, Radnor, and Mountgomery in Wales, or the moſt part of them, reſiaunt within euery of the ſayd Counties, and all ſuch Surueyours, Collectours, & other perſons to whom thexecution of the ſaid firſt reſited eſtatute doth or may appertayne, ſhall haue ſuch and like power and aucthoritie to do and execute al and euery ſuch thyng and thynges, for and concernyng the buyldyng and newe makyng of Gaoles, as the Iuſtices of peace & other perſons before mentioned of any of the Counties conteyned in the ſayde firſt reſited eſtatute haue in that behalfe. And that alſo the moſte parte of the Iuſtices of the peace, reſyaunt within any the Counties ſpecified in the ſayd firſt reſited eſtatute, ſhall and maye do and execute all and euery thyng and thynges mentioned in the ſayd fyrſt reſited eſtatute, touchyng or concerning the ſaid Gaoles: Any doubt or ambiguitie heretofore had or moued, or hereafter to be had or moued, notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alſo, that thinhabitauntes of any of the Counties ſpecified in the ſayde fyrſt reſited Acte, or in any of the ſayde Counties of Wales, ſhall not be charged, by force hereof or of the ſayde fyrſt reſited Acte, to beare or ſuſteyne any coſtes or charges for the buyldynge, repayryng, or newe makyng of any Gaole or Gaoles, where any other perſon or perſons, body politique or corporate ought by law, preſcription, or by any other good or lawfull wayes or meanes, to buylde, make, or repayre the ſame.
         
         
            An Act to fyll vp Iuries de circumſtantibus lackyng in Wales. ¶ The .xxv. Chapter.
            
               WHere in the Parliament holden at Weſtminſter in the .xxxv. yere of the raigne of our ſoueraigne Lord kyng Henry the .viii. father to our moſt deare Soueraigne Lady the Quenes Maieſtie that now is, one holſome and profitable Act & eſtatute amonges other was then eſtablyſhed and enacted, intituled

by the name of an Acte, concernynge the apparaunce of Iurers in Niſi prius, where amonges other thinges in the Acte, it was eſtabliſhed, that where a ful Iury returned betwixt partie and partie, did not appeare before the Iuſtices of Aſſiſe or Niſi prius, or els after apparaunce of a full Iury by challenge of any of the parties, the Iury was lyke to remaine vntaken for defaulte of Iurours, that the ſame Iuſtices vpon requeſt made by the partie plaintif or demaundaunt, ſhulde haue aucthoritie by vertue of the ſame Acte, to commaunde the Sheriffe, or other Miniſter or Miniſters, to whom the making of the ſaid returne ſhould appertaine, to name and appointe, as often as nede ſhulde require, ſo many of ſuch other hable perſons of the ſaide Countie, then preſent at the ſaid aſſiſe or Niſi prius, as ſhoulde make vp a full Iury, whiche perſons, ſo to be named and impanelled by ſuche Sheriffe, or other Miniſter or Miniſters, ſhoulde be added to the former panell, and their names annexed to the ſame, and further, as in the ſame Acte more plainely maye appeare. Whiche ſaide beneficiall acte doth not extende vnto the .xii. Shires of Wales, ne to the Countie Palatyne of Cheſter, nor to the Countie Palatine of Lancaſter, nor to the Countie Palatine of Durham, by reaſon wherof many Iuryes remayne vntaken betwixt the parties, what for lacke of apparens of Iurers, and ſome becauſe of chalenges, to the greate hynderaunce of Iuſtice, and great expences and charges to the parties.
            For reformation wherof, be it enacted by the Quene our Soueraigne Lady, with the aſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the Commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame: That in euery of the Shires of Wales, that is to ſaye, Pembrok, Karmarthyn, Cardigan, Brecknocke, Radnor, Glamorgan, Mountgomery, Denbighe, Flynt, Meryonith, Angleſey, Carneruan, and in the Countie Palatine of Cheſter, and in the ſaid Countie Palatine of Durham, and in the ſaid Countie Palatine of Lancaſter, where a full Iurye ſhal not appeare before the Iuſtices of the greate Seſſion in any of the ſaid Shires or Countie Palatines, or their deputies there, or els after apparaunce of a full Iurye, by challenge of any of the parties the Iurie is lyke to remayne vntaken, for defaulte of Iurours: that then the ſame Iuſtices, in euery of the ſaid Shires, and Countie Palatines for the tyme beinge, or their deputie or deputies, vpō requeſt made by the partie plaintife or demaundaunt, ſ
                  ••
               l haue full aucthoritie by vertue of this Acte, to commaunde the Sheriffe or other Miniſter or Miniſters, to whom the makynge of the ſaide Returne ſhall apperteyne, to name and appointe, as often as nede ſhall require, ſo many of ſuche other able perſons of the ſayde Counties then preſent at the ſaide greate Seſſion, as ſhall make vp a full Iurye, whiche perſons ſo to be named and impanelled, by

ſuche Sheriffe or other Miniſter or Miniſters, ſhalbe added to the former panell, & their names annexed to the ſame. And that euery of the parties ſhal & may haue his or their challenge to the Iurours ſo named, added and annexed, to the ſaide former panell, by the ſayde Sheriffe or other miniſter or miniſters, in ſuche wiſe as yf they had ben impanelled vppon the venire facias, awarded to trye the ſayde iſſue. And that the ſayde Iuſtices and euery of them, and their deputie or deputies, ſhall and maye proceade to the tryall of euery ſuche Iſſue with thoſe perſons that were before impanelled & retourned, & with thoſe newly added and annexed to the ſaide former panell, by vertue of this acte, in ſuche wiſe as they might or ought to haue done, yf all the ſayde Iurours had ben retourned vppon the writte of venire facias, awarded to trye the ſaide iſſue. And that all and euery ſuche tryall had, ſhalbe as good and effectuall in the lawe to all intentes, conſtructions & purpoſes, as if ſuch tryal had ben had and tryed by .xii. of the Iurours impanelled & retourned vpon the writ of venire facias, awarded to trye ſuche iſſue. And in caſe ſuche perſons as the ſaide Sheriffe, miniſter or miniſters, ſhall name and appointe as is aforeſayde, or any of them, after they ſhalbe called, be preſente, and do not appeare, or after his or their appearaunce, do wilfullie withdrawe him or them ſelues from the preſence of the Court: that then ſuche Iuſtices or their deputies, ſhall and maye ſet ſuche ſyne vpon euery ſuche Iurour makynge defaulte or wilfully withdrawinge hym ſelfe as aforeſaide, as they ſhall thinke good by their diſcreſſions, the ſaid fyne to be leuied in ſuche maner and fourme as iſſues forfaited and loſte by Iurours for defaulte of their apperaunce, as is prouided by the lawe and cuſtome of the ſaid Countreys of Wales, & Counties Palatines aforeſaide, where ſuche iſſues are forfaited.
            And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that where any Iurye that ſhalbe retourned by the Sheriffe or other Miniſter or Miniſters, ſhalbe made full, by the commaundemente of the ſayde Iuſtices, or their deputies, by vertue of this preſent Acte, that yet neuertheleſſe ſuch perſones as were retourned in the ſayde panel, by the Sheriffe, or other Miniſter or Miniſters, to trye any ſuche iſſue, that ſhall not appeare, but make defaulte, ſhall loſe the iſſues vpon them retourned, in ſuch wiſe as though the ſame Iurye had remayned for defaulte of Iurours.
            Prouided alwayes, & be it further enacted, that vpon a reaſonable excuſe, for the defaulte of appearaunce of any Iurour or Iurours, ſufficiently proued before the Iuſtices of the greate Seſſions, or their deputies in the Countryes and Countyes Palatines aforeſaid, at the daye of their appearaunce, by the othes of two lawfull and honeſt wytneſſes, that the ſame Iuſtices ſhall haue aucthoritie by

their diſcreſſions to diſcharge euery ſuche Iurour of euery ſuche forfaiture of iſſues vpon hym retourned, and that the ſaide Sheriffe or Sheriffes, or other Miniſter or Miniſters, hauyng commaundement by the ſayde Iuſtices to omit the retournynge of ſuche iſſues, as is aforeſaid, vpon ſuche Iurour or Iurours, ſhalbe therein diſcharged of the penalties aforeſaide, for the non retournynge of the ſaide Iſſues, and that yet notwithſtanding the ſaid retourne to be good and effectuall in the lawe: Any lawe, vſage, ordinaunce, or cuſtome to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            Prouyded alſo, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that if the ſaide Iuſtices, or their deputies, afore whome any ſuche Iurye ſhould appeare in the Shieres or Counties Palatines where ſuche iſſue is to be tryed, do not come at the daye and place appointed: that then euery one of the ſame Iurours ſhalbe diſcharged, for forfaitynge of any Iſſues vpon him retourned in the ſame writ. And the Sheriffe or other Miniſter or Miniſters, ſhalbe lykewyſe diſcharged of the penalties of this eſtatute, for the non retournynge of ſuche Iſſues, as are before lymitted in this Acte: Any article or ſentence herein conteyned to the contrary notwithſtandynge.
            And alſo be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that if vpon any ſuch writ of habeas corpora or diſtringas iſſues be retourned vpō any hundredours, Iurour or Iurours, by the Sheriffe or other Miniſter or Miniſters, to whom the execution of the ſame writ or writtes ſhal apperteyne, where as the ſame hundredours and Iurours ſhall not be lawfully ſomoned, warned, or diſtreyned in that behalfe: that then euery ſuche Sheriffe or other Miniſter or Miniſters aforeſaide, ſhall loſe for euery ſuche offence ſo committed, double ſo muche as the ſaid Iſſues retourned vppon ſuche hundredours or Iurours not lawfullie ſomoned, warned or diſtreyned, ſhall amounte vnto, the moytie of all whiche forfaitures conteyned in this preſent Acte, other then the iſſues to be retourned vpon the Iurours as is aforeſaid, ſhalbe to the Quene oure ſoueraigne Lady, her heires and ſucceſſours, and the other halfe, to hym that will ſue for the ſame, by action of dette, bill, plainte, or information, in the Quene her graces great Court, within the ſayde Countie where ſuche forfaiture ſhall happen to be, before the ſayde Iuſtices, his or their deputie or deputies, in whiche, no wager of lawe, eſſoygne, or protection ſhalbe allowed ne admitted. Sauinge to all maner of perſons, and bodyes polytike and corporate, their heyres and ſucceſſours, hauynge lawfull right, tytle and intereſt to haue ſuche iſſues to be before anye ſuche Iuſtices or their deputies, at any tyme or tymes hereafter loſte and forfaited, all ſuche right, tytle and intereſt, as they or any of them ſhoulde or ought to haue had to ſuche Iſſues to be loſte and forfeyted

as though this Acte had neuer ben had or made.
            Prouyded alſo that this Acte nor anye thynge therein conteyned, ſhall not extende to any Citie or towne corporate, or ſo any Sheriffe, miniſter or miniſters in the ſame, for the retourne of any inqueſt, or panell, to be made and retourned of perſons inhabytynge in the ſayde Cities or townes corporate, but that they and euery of them, ſhall and maye retourne ſuch perſons in euery ſuche inqueſt or panell, as before this tyme they might and haue ben accuſtomed to do, and as if this Acte had neuer ben had or made, ſo that the ſame Sheriffe, myniſter or miniſters retourne vppon ſuche perſons as ſhalbe impanelled, ſuche lyke and reaſonable Iſſues, as they ought to retourne, any thinge in the ſame conteyned to the contrarye notwithſtandynge.
         
         
            ¶An Acte for the confirmation of a Subſedy, graunted by the Clergy. The .xxix. Chapter.
            
               WHere the Prelates and Clergye of the Prouince of Cantorburye haue moſte louynglye and liberallye for certayne conſiderations, geuen and graunted to the Quenes Maieſtie, a Subſedye of ſixe ſhillynges of the pounde, to be take and leuyed of all and ſinguler the ſpirituall Promotions within the ſame Prouince, duringe the tearme of three yeres, nowe nexte enſuynge, in ſuche certayne maner and fourme, and with ſuche exceptions and prouiſions, as be ſpecified and conteyned in a certain inſtrument by them thereof made and deliuered to the Quenes highnes, vnder the Seale of the moſte reuerende father in God Mathewe nowe Archbyſhoppe of Cantorburye, and Primat of all England, whiche inſtrument is nowe exhibited in this preſent Parliament to be ratifyed. The tenour wherof enſueth in theſe wordes:
            
               The Prelates and Clergie of the prouince of Cantorbury, beyng lawefully congregated and aſſembled together in a conuocation or ſinode, callyng to theyr remembraunce the greate and manyfolde benefites whiche they haue many and ſundrye wayes receaued of you Maieſties moſte gracious bountifulnes, principally for the ſettyng forth and aduaunceyng of Gods holy worde, his ſincere and true religion, & abolyſhyng all forrayne power contrary to the ſame. Conſideryng alſo the great debtes wherewith thimperiall Crowne of this Realme was charged, when it pleaſed almightie God fyrſte to call your hyghnes to the gouernaunce of the ſame. And further, waying the great and intollerable charges wherewith your Maieſtie of late hath ben burdened, in the repayryng and furnyſhyng of your Maieſties Nauie, and prouiſion of armour and munitions, moſte neceſſarye and requiſite for the defence and ſafegarde of this Realme, whereof the ſame at the begynnyng of your hyghnes raigne was voyde and deſtitute. And finallye, ponderyng the ineſtimable charges ſuſteyned by your hyghnes, aſwell of late dayes, in reducyng the Realme of Scotlande to vnitie and concorde, as alſo in procuryng as muche as in your hyghnes lyeth, by all kynde of godlye and prudent meanes, the abatyng of all hoſtilitie and perſecution within the Realme of Fraunce, practiſed and vſed agaynſt the profeſſours of Gods holye Goſpell and true religion, and in defendyng and preſeruyng this your highnes Realme and natuall Subiectes, in Chriſtian peace and tranquillitie, agaynſte all aſſaultes of forrayne enemies hytherto, duryng all the tyme of your moſte gracious and happye reigne.
            In conſideration of the premiſſes, and for a true declaration of our bounden dueties, good hartes, and myndes towarde your Maieſtie, with one vniforme agrement, accorde, and conſent, together with moſte hartye good wyll, haue geuen and graunted, and by theſe preſentes do geue and graunt to your highnes, your heyres, and ſucceſſours, one Subſedye in maner and fourme folowyng. That is to ſaye: That euery Archebyſhop, Byſhoppe, Deane, Archedeacon, Prebendarye, Prouoſte, Maiſter of Colledges, Maiſter of Hoſpitalles, Parſon, Vicar, and euery other perſon and perſons of whatſoeuer name or degree he or they be, enioying any Spirituall promotion or other Temporall poſſeſſions to the ſame Spirituall promotion annexed, nowe not deuided nor ſeperated by Acte of Parliament, or otherwyſe from the poſſeſſion of the Clergie, ſhall paye to your hyghnes, your heyres, and ſucceſſours, for euery pounde that he may yerely diſpende by

reaſon of the ſayde Spirituall promotion, the ſumme of ſyre ſhyllynges.
            And for the true and certayne value of the ſayde promotions, and euery of them, whereof the payment ſhalbe made, the rate, taxation, valuation, and eſtimation, remaynyng of Recorde in your Maieſties Courte of Exchequer for the true payment of the perpetuall Diſme, concernyng all ſuche promotions as be in poſſeſſion of the Clergie, or any other not deuided by Acte of Parliament, or otherwyſe alienated from the poſſeſſion of the Clergie, ſhalbe folowed and obſerued without making any valuation, rate taxation, or eſtimation, other then in the ſayde Recorde is compriſed.
            Prouided alwayes, that foraſmuche as the tenth parte of the ſayde valuation and rate before mentioned, is yerelye payde to your hyghnes for the perpetuall Diſme, ſo as there remayneth onely nyne partes to the Incumbent clere: this Subſedye of .vi. ſhyllynges the pounde, ſhalbe vnderſtanded and ment only of the ſame nyne partes, and of no more.
            Prouided alwayes, that no perſon that is already promoted to any Spirituall benefice or promotion, ſithens the laſte daye of September laſte paſte, or that hereafter ſhalbe promoted to anye Spirituall benefice or promotion on this ſyde the laſte daye of September, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God a Thouſande fyue Hundreth ſixtie and fiue, by reaſon whereof they be, ſhall, or may be, charged to the payment of the fyrſt fruites, ſhalbe contributory or charged to your hyghnes, your heyres, or ſucceſſours, with any parte of this Subſedye, duryng the fyrſt yere of his ſayde promotion.
            AND your ſayde Prelates and Clergie alſo do graunt, that this Subſedye of ſyxe ſhyllynges the pounde, of the yerely value of euery promotion taxed as is aforeſayde, ſhalbe payde to your Maieſtie, your heyres, or ſucceſſours, within three yeres nexte enſuyng the date hereof. That is to ſaye, two ſhyllynges of euerye pounde in euery of the ſayde three yeres. The fyrſt payment therof, to be due at the laſt daye of September next enſuyng, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God a Thouſande fiue Hundreth ſixtie and three. And the ſeconde payment therof to be due at the laſte daye of September then nexte folowyng, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God a Thouſande fiue Hundreth ſixtie and foure. And the thyrde payment thereof to be due in the ſayde laſt daye of September then nexte folowynge, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God a Thouſande fiue Hundreth ſixtie and fiue,

and to be delyuered and payde yerely by ſuche perſon and perſons as in this preſent graunt ſhalbe appoynted to haue the collection thereof, to the Lorde hygh Treaſourer or vnder Treaſourer of Englande for the tyme beyng, or to ſuche perſon or perſons, and in ſuche place or places as ſhall pleaſe your highnes to appoynt, to be payde at or before the .xiii. day of Ianuary in euery of the ſayde three yeres, without paying any thyng to the Receauour or Receauours, or to any other officers or perſons to be aſſigned for the receipte thereof, for any diſcharge or Quietus eſt vpon any payment and receipte of the ſayde Subſedye to be geuen and deliuered, but only .iii. s. iiii. d. for the generall and finall acquittaunce or Quietus eſt for euery yeres payment.
            Item we your ſayde graces Prelates and Clergie alſo do graunt, that euery Prieſte and all other Spirituall or Eccleſiaſticall perſons, hauyng any pencion by the reaſon of the diſſolution of any the late Monaſteries, Colledges, free Chappelles, Chauntries, Fraternities, Guyldes and Hoſpitalles, or of any other ſpirituall dignitie or corporation nowe diſſolued within the ſayde prouince of Cantorbury, ſhall lykewyſe paye to your hyghneſſe, your heyres, and ſucceſſours .vi. ſhyllynges of euery pounde of the ſayde Pencions within the ſayde three yeres, at ſuch dayes and tymes as is before ſpecified. And that for the ſure payment therof, deduction and retention of the ſayde ſyxe ſhyllynges, ſhalbe made yerely in the handes of the payers of the ſayde Pencions after the rate and proporcion of two ſhyllynges the pounde, euery of the ſayde three yeres, to be delyuered and payde by your hyghnes Receauours and officers deputed for the payment of ſuche Pencions, vnto your Maieſties vſe, at ſuche tyme and to ſuche perſons as the Subſedye of .vi. ſhyllynges of the pounde aforeſaide, ſhalbe payde vnto.
            Item your ſayde Prelates and Clergie do graunt, that euery Prieſte or Miniſter Stipendary, receauyng annuall Stipende of eyght poundes by the yere and vnder, beyng no perpetuitie within the ſayde Prouince, ſhall paye vnto the vſe of your hyghneſſe, your heyres, and ſucceſſours, ſyxe ſhyllynges and eyght pence in euery of the ſayde three yeres, at ſuche tyme and to ſuche perſones as the ſayde Subſedye ſhalbe payde, and vnder the ſame penalties as the reſte of the Clergie do paye for their promotions.
            And that euery Prieſt receauyng Stipende aboue eyght poundes yerely, and not aboue tenne poundes, to paye lykewyſe tenne

ſhyllynges. And that euery Prieſte receauyng ſtypende aboue tenne poundes, and not aboue thirtene poundes ſyxe ſhyllynges and eyght pence, to pay thirtene ſhyllynges and foure pence yerely duryng the ſayde three yeres, at ſuch tyme and to ſuche perſons as the ſayde Subſedy ſhalbe payde. And that euery Prieſt takyng ſtipende aboue thirtene pounde ſyxe ſhyllynges and eyght pence, to paye lykewyſe .xii. d. of the pounde euery yere duryng the ſayde three yeres. And for defaulte or lacke of payment of the ſayde ſtipendaries, that euery Parſon, Vicar, or other Spirituall or Temporall perſon, proprietarie, or Fermour, hyryng any Prieſt or Miniſter to ſerue in any place, ſhalbe aunſwerable for the payment of the ſayde Prieſte or Miniſter in that behalfe, after the ſayde rates, and ſhall and maye make retention of his and theyr wages quarterly, of ſo muche as the ſayd Stipendaries be charged with by this preſent graunt, euery of the ſayde three yeres.
            Item your ſayde Prelates and Clergie further do graunt, that euery Archebyſhoppe and Byſhoppe, and the See beyng voyde, euery Deane and Chapiter of that See voyde, ſhalbe Collectours of this Subſedye within theyr proper dioceſſe, duryng the ſayde three yeres, other then of the pencioners aforeſayde. And the ſaid Archebyſhoppe, Byſhoppe, or other Collectours, and the See beyng voyde, the Deane and Chapiter ſhall certifie into your Maieſties courte of the Exchequer vnder theyr ſeales, the names and ſurnames of all ſuche Stipendary Prieſtes and Miniſters, as be chargeable by this Acte, before the .xxiiii. day of Ianuary yerely, duryng the ſayde three yeres.
            And for the better recouery of the ſayde Subſedye, your ſayde Prelates and Clergie moſte humblye beſeche your hyghnes, that euery Collectour of the ſayde Subſedye, and of euery parte and parcell thereof, and theyr lawefull deputie or deputies, may haue full power and aucthoritie by your Maieſtie, and your hygh court of Parliament, to vſe all ſuche wayes, meanes, and proceſſe, as be preſcribed in your Acte of perpetuall Diſme, for the collection and leuying of the ſame, and ſhall make accompte thereof before the Lorde hyghe Treaſourer or vnder Treaſourer of England for the tyme beyng, or any other officers by your hyghneſſe to be appoynted for the ſame, and in ſuche place as your Maieſtie lykewyſe ſhall aſſigne, in ſuche wyſe and after ſuche fourme onelye as the ſayde Archebyſhoppe and Byſhoppes be nowe charged for the collection of the perpetuall Diſme, whereby is meant howe the lacke and defaulte of payment of and for anye perticuler promotion, ſhall onelye charge the Incumbent, and ſuche as

be bounde to paye the ſame, and that vpon ſuch paynes as be prouided in that Acte to Parliament of perpetuall Diſme, agaynſte them that make defaulte in that behalfe, at or vpon the dayes of payment before expreſſed.
            And that the Archbyſhoppe, Byſhop, or Deane and Chapiter, gatheryng that whiche they can receaue, and makyng payment thereof, ſhall for the reſte not by them receaued, be diſcharged by theyr certificat to be made before the .xxiiii. daye of Ianuarye in euery of the ſayde three yeres, vnto your hyghneſſe courte of Exchequer. And .vi. pence of euery pounde wherewith the Collectour ſhalbe charged in his accompte, clerely to be payde into the ſayde receipte (or into ſuche other place as ſhall pleaſe your hyghnes to appoynt) ſhalbe alowed to the ſayde Collectour for his ſayde accompte for the ſame, for the charges and collection, portage, ſafe conueying and paying of the ſayde Subſedye.
            Alſo your ſayde Prelates and Clergie do further moſte humblye beſeche your hyghnes, that it may be enacted by your Maieſties aucthoritie, and your hyghe Courte of Parliament, that where diuers Curates liable to this Subſedye, beyng often times remoueable, do ſerue aſwell in diuers Impropriations belongyng to your Maieſtie, as in other Impropriations and other Spirituall promotions belongyng to other perſons: that for the ſpedy recouery of the ſayde Subſedye, it may be lawfull to the Collectour or Collectours of the ſayde Subſedye, theyr deputie or deputies, to leuie the ſayde Subſedye vpon the Fermour or Fermours, and occupyers of all ſuche Impropriation or Impropriations and Spirituall promotions, by all cenſures of the Churche and euery of them, or by waye of diſtreſſe, of the tythes of the ſayde Impropriation or Impropriations, or otherwiſe vpon the goodes and cattels of the ſayde Fermour or Fermours & occupyers, in which no inhibition, prohibition, repleuie, or other proces awarded to the contrary ſhalbe obeyed: Any lawes, ſtatutes, priuileges, or cuſtomes to the contrary hereof, heretofore made, graunted, or vſed, or hereafter to be made, graunted, or vſed to the contrary, in any wyſe notwithſtandyng. And that it may be lawfull to the Collectours and the officers and miniſters of ſuch Archbyſhoppe, Byſhoppe, or Deane and Chapiter, for not payment at any tyme of the ſayde three yeres aboueſayde, to prayſe and value the ſayde diſtreſſe or diſtreſſes, by two indifferent neyghbours by hym to be choſen, and the diſtreſſe or diſtreſſes ſo prayſed, to ſell, and therof to detayne ſo much money as ſhall amount to the ſumme paiable to your hyghnes, with the charges of the ſayde Collectour in that behalfe, and and reſt of the money made of the ſayd diſtreſſe, to be delyuered and

payde to the owner or occupyer thereof. And that euery Archbyſhop, & Byſhop, or Deane and Chapiter, of euery See vacaunt, and other perſones chargeable to and with the collection of the Subſedye of ſyxe ſhyllynges the pounde, within the ſaid prouince of Cantorbury, may haue vpon euery payment therof, made to the Lorde hygh Treaſourer or vnder Treaſourer of Englande for the tyme beyng, or to ſuch perſon or perſons, place & places, to whom and where it ſhall pleaſe your hyghnes to appoynt for the receipte therof, in, or at the .xiii. day of Ianuary in euery of the ſayde three yeres, a ſufficient acquittaunce in wrytyng of the ſayd Lord hygh Treaſourer or vnder Treaſourer, or ſuche perſons as your hyghnes ſhall aſſigne for the receipt therof, the ſame acquittaunce witneſſing the receipt of as much of the ſame ſumme of the ſaid Subſedy as ſhalbe ſo receaued. And euery ſuch acquittaunce in wrytyng ſealed and ſubſcribed, with the name or names of the ſayde Lorde hygh Treaſourer or vnder Treaſourer for the tyme beyng, or of ſuch other perſon or perſons as it ſhall pleaſe your hyghnes to appoynt for the ſame receipt as is aforeſayde, maye be good and affectuall in the lawe, and alſo ſufficient diſcharge to all intentes, conſtructions, and purpoſes. And that euery perſon and perſons which ſhall haue and receaue any ſuch acquittaunce, ſhall pay but only .iii.s.iiii.d. to the Clarke for the wrytyng of the ſame.
            Prouided alwayes that euery Incumbent makyng ſuche default of payment, after certificat of euery ſuch default made, and exhibited into your Maieſties court of Exchequer, ſhall forfait and loſe onlye that his benefice or promotion for which he maketh default, and for the ſame ſhall incurre no other forfaiture, loſſe, domage, payne, or penaltie: Any other payne, clauſe, article, or condition in the ſayde Statute of perpetuall Diſme to the contrarye notwithſtandyng.
            Prouided alwayes, that no Spiritual promotion, or any landes, poſſeſſions, or reuenues annexed to the ſame, beyng charged by this graunt or Acte of the prouince of Cantorbury, or any goodes or cattelles growyng, beyng, or renewyng of the ſame, or appertainyng to the owners of the ſayde Spirituall promotion, ſhalbe charged or made contributory to any Fyftene or Tenth, or anye other Subſedye alreadye graunted to your hyghnes by the laitie, or hereafter to be graunted, duryng the tearme of the ſayde three yeres.
            Item your ſayde Prelates and Clergie further graunt, that all Deanes, Archdeacons, Dignities, Preachers, and Prebendaries, of all Cathedrall and Collegiate Churches within the ſayde prouince, ſhalbe charged with this Subſedye for theyr owne promotions

onely, therof to paye .vi. ſhyllynges of the pounde, within the ſayde three yeres, as is aboue rehearſed. And that thoſe porcions of rentes, reuenues, and ſpirituall promotions, whiche haue ben geuen or impropried vnto the ſayde Cathedrall or Collegiate Churches, or any of them, by your highnes or any your highnes noble progenitours, or any other perſon or perſons, whatſoeuer he or they be, or were, for the yerely maintenaunce of poore men, Schoolemaiſters, Vſſhers, Grammarians, Peticannons, Vicars Chorall, and Readers of diuinitie, Choriſters, and all other neceſſary and dayly officers and miniſters of ſuch Cathedrall and Collegiate Churches, ſhall not be charged with any parte of this Subſedye.
            Prouided alſo, that euery Parſon, Vicar, or other ſpirituall perſon, paying any pention, wherof none allowaunce is made in the valuation of his ſayde promotion or benefice, ſhall and may retayne .ii.s. of euery pounde of euery ſuch pention, euery yere duryng the ſayde three yeres, to his owne reliefe, in conſideration that he is charged to paye this Subſedy of .vi. ſhyllynges of the pounde, out of euery pounde of the whole value of his promotion.
            Prouided alſo, that where certayne landes, tenementes, rentes, tythes, pencions, portions, fruites, and other hereditamentes, lately belongyng to diuers Cathedrall Churches, and to other places Eccleſiaſticall within the ſaide prouince of Cantorbury, which were geuen and aſſigned to be beſtowed and ſpent to and on the fyndyng and maintenaunce of certayne Chaunteries, Anniuerſaries, Obites, Lyghtes, Lampes, and other lyke charges, intentes and purpoſes, of late came into the handes and poſſeſſion of the late kynge of famous memory kyng Edwarde the ſyxt, by force of a Statute therof made in the fyrſt yere of his gracious reigne, as by the ſayde Statute more plainely appeareth: That the ſayd Cathedrall Churches, and the Deanes, or Preſidentes and Chapitours of the ſame, and all other places and perſons, to whom the ſayde landes, rentes, and all other the premiſſes, or any of them, dyd latelye appertayne, ſhall not be charged to and with anye contribution or payment of this Subſedye, of, and for that parte or portion wherevnto the ſayde late kyng was entytled or poſſeſſed of, nor of and for any of the ſayde yerely paymentes, goyng out or payde out of the premiſſes, or any part therof: But that this ſaide Subſedye ſhalbe vnderſtanded to be chargeable and due onely of all and ſinguler landes, tenementes, rentes, tythes, pencions, porcions, fruites, and other hereditamentes, whiche do yet ſtyll remayne not diſſeuered from the handes and poſſeſſion of the ſayde Cathedrall Churches, and other the places and perſons aforeſaid.

And that deduction and allowaunce be made to them and euery of them in the payment of the ſayde Subſedye, out of the whole value, taxation, and eſtimation, made for the payment of the ſayde perpetuall Diſme, remaynyng of Recorde in your hyghnes court of Exchequer, for that rate and portion, or yerely payment, which came to the handes and poſſeſſion of the ſayde late kyng Edwarde the ſyxte, or otherwyſe ſeuered from the poſſeſſions of the ſayd Cathedrall Churches, and other places and perſons aforeſayde, by force of the Statute premiſed.
            Prouided alwayes that this Subſedy graunted by the Clergie, ſhall not be demaunded or leuyed out of any benefice, houſe of ſtudentes, or Colledge, ſcituate or ſet within the vniuerſities of Cambridge and Oxforde, or of any benefice or other reuenues vnto the ſayde vniuerſities, or eyther of them, or to any houſe of ſtudentes or Colledge in the ſame vnited, appropried, or appertaynyng, or of the Colledges of Wyndſor, or Eaten nyghe Wyndſor, or of the Colledge called Saint Mary Colledge by Wincheſter, founded by Willyam Wickham, ſometyme Byſhop of Wincheſter, or of any Hoſpitals or Grāmer Scooles, or of any other Church or benefice, or of any other reuenues to the ſaid vniuerſities, houſes, Colleges, Hoſpitals, Almes houſes, Almes halles, or Grammer Scooles, or to any of them, annexed, appropriated, or otherwyſe appertaynyng.
            Prouided alwayes, that all Parſons and Vicars, whoſe benefices be of the valuation of fiue poundes or vnder, after the rate of the perpetual Tenth, ſhall not be charged or chargeable with this Subſedy, or any part therof.
            Prouided alſo, that euery Prieſt, & all other late Eccleſiaſticall perſons, hauyng a pention by reaſon of the diſſolution of the late Monaſteries, Colledges, free Chappels, Chauntries, Fraternities Guyldes, and Hoſpitals, or any other Incorporations within the prouince of Cantorbury, or any of them, and being of the ſūme of xl.s. or vnder, and not aboue, ſhall not be charged or chargeable to this ſaid Subſedy, or any part therof, for any ſuch pention of .xl.s. or vnder: Any thing conteyned in this graunt to the contrarye, notwithſtandyng.
            And for the true & ſure payment of this Subſedy graūted by your ſaid prelates & Clergie of the prouince of Cantorbury, according to the tenour, purport, effect, & true meanyng of this preſent graunt: your ſaid Prelates and Clergie moſt humbly deſire your highnes, that this theyr ſaid gift, graunt, & Subſedy, & euery matter, ſūme of money, clauſe, prouiſions & ſentences in this inſtrumēt conteyned, cōcerning the ſaid Subſedy, may be ratified, eſtabliſhed & confirmed by aucthoritie of this your hyghnes court of Parliament.
            
               Wherefore, for the true and ſure payment of the ſayde Subſedye, graunted by the ſayde Prelates and Clergie of the ſayde prouince of Cantorbury, according to the tenour, effect, and true meanyng of the ſayde inſtrument: Be it enacted by the Quenes Maieſtie, with thaſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the Commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that the ſayde gyfte and graunt, and euery matter, ſumme of money, prouiſion, clauſe, and ſentence in the ſayde inſtrument conteyned, may be ratified, eſtablyſhed, and confirmed by the aucthoritie aforeſayde.
            And furthermore be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that euery perſon that ſhalbe appoynted to the collection & gatheryng of the ſayde Subſedye, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie to leuie, take, and perceiue the ſame Subſedye by thaucthoritie of the cenſures of the Churche, in maner and fourme, as in the ſayde inſtrument of graunt is conteyned, without daunger of the lawes of this Realme, or by diſtreſſe vpon the poſſeſſion of the fermours or occupyers of the landes and tenementes chargeable by the ſaid inſtrument, for or to the payment of any ſumme or ſummes of money, or otherwyſe, by the diſcretion of the Collectour therof. And that no Repleuie, Prohibition or Superſedeas ſhalbe alowed or obeyed, for any perſon or perſons, makyng default of payment of the ſayde Subſedye, contrary to the tenour of the graunt therof, vntyll ſuch time as they haue truely ſatiſfied and contented all ſuch part and portions, as to them in that behalfe appertayneth. And that euery ſuch fermour and fermours, theyr executours, and aſſignes (that ſhall fortune hereafter to be charged to and with the payment of the ſayde Subſedye or any parte thereof) ſhall by thaucthoritie aforeſayd be alowed and retayne in his handes as much of his yerely rent and ferme, as the ſumme whiche he ſhall fortune to paye for his Lorde or Leaſſour ſhall extende vnto: Excepte the ſayde fermour or fermours, theyr executours and aſſignes, by the leaſe and graunt that they haue of any parte of the landes, tythes, profites, and tenementes, chargeable to this ſayde Subſedye, or by force of any couenaunte or article therein conteyned, be bounden and charged to pay the ſame, & thereof to diſcharge theyr Leaſſour and Landelorde, duryng the tearme mentioned in the ſayd Leaſſe.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that euery laye perſon hauyng a ſpirituall promotion, chargeable by this Acte, and alſo hauyng temporall poſſeſſions, goodes, cattelles, and debtes, chargeable to the Subſedye graunted in this Parliament by the Temporaltie: ſhalbe

charged, taxed, and ſette, for his ſayde ſpirituall promocions with the Clergie, and for his temporall poſſeſſions and cattelles, with the Temporaltie, and not otherwyſe: Any thyng before mentioned to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and euery graunt and grauntes, of all and euery ſumme and ſūmes of money, which hereafter ſhalbe graunted to the Quenes Maieſtie by the Clergie of the prouince of Yorke, ſhalbe of the ſame ſtrength, force, and effect in all thynges, as the ſayde graunt made by the ſayde prouince of Cantorbury, & ſhalbe taxed, certified, collected, leuyed, gathered, and payde, accordyng to the tenour, fourme, and effecte of this preſent Acte of Parliament, to all intentes, conſtructions, and purpoſes, in ſuch maner and fourme as though it were ſpecially, playnely, and particulerly expreſſed and rehearſed in this Acte by expreſſe wordes, tearmes, and ſentences, in theyr ſeuerall natures and kyndes.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all prouiſos before rehearſed, conteyned in the ſayde graunt of the Prelates and Clergie of the prouince of Cantorburye, and the lyke of the ſame prouiſions hereafter to be conteyned in the graunt of the Prelates & Clergie of the prouince of Yorke, ſhalbe good and effectuall, and to be obſerued and kepte in euery poynt and article, accordyng to the true purport and meanyng of the ſame.
         
         
            
            ¶ An Acte of the Quenes Maieſties moſt gracious generall and free Pardon. ¶ The .xxxi. Chapter.
            
               THE Quenes moſte excellent Maieſtie perceauyng ye good wylles and faythfull hartes of her louyng and obedient Subiectes at al times towardes her hyghnes, for the good gouernaunce and defence of this her Realme, and doubting that the ſame her obedient ſubiectes haue manye and ſundrye wayes fallen into the daunger of diuers penalties and forfaitures by the lawes and Statutes of this Realme: Hath thaught mete to extende her clemencie and pitie towardes her ſayde louyng and obedient ſubiectes, with her liberall and free pardon, accordyng to her Princely and Kyngly power, and thereby to diſcharge ſome parte of ſuch great paynes, penalties, and forfaitures, wherewith her ſayde ſubiectes ſtande nowe burdened and charged, truſtyng aſſuredly that they wyll continue in theyr due obedience and faithfulneſſe towardes her Maieſtie, and hereafter in ſuch fort obey the good lawes & Statutes of this Realme, and ſpecially ſuch as in this ſeſſion of Parliament are deuiſed, as to them & euery of them of ryght and duetie appertayneth. And therefore her Maieſtie is well pleaſed and contented, that it be enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, in maner and fourme folowyng.
            That is to ſaye, that all and euery of her ſayde Subiectes (aſwell Spirituall as Temporall) of this her hyghnes Realme of Englande, Wales, the Iſles of Ierneſey and Gerneſey, the Townes of Barwicke, & Newehauen in Normandy, theyr heyres, ſucceſſours, executours, and adminiſtratours of them and euery of them. And all and ſinguler bodyes in any maner of wyſe corporated, Cities, Boroughes, Shires, Rydynges, Hundredes, Lathes, Rapes, Mapentakes, Townes, Vyllages, Hamlettes, and Tythynges, and euery of them, and the ſucceſſour and ſucceſſours of euery of them: ſhalbe by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, acquited, pardoned, releaſed, and diſcharged, agaynſt the Quenes Maieſtie, her

heires, ſucceſſours, and executours, and euery of them, of al maner of Treaſons, Felonyes, Robberyes, offences, contemptes, alienations, treſpaces, Intrucions, Entrees, wronges, deceiptes, miſdemeanours, forfaitures, penalties and profites, ſummes of money, paynes of death, paynes corporall and pecuniary, and generally of all other thynges, cauſes, quarrels, ſuites, iudgementes, and executions, in this preſent Acte hereafter not excepted nor forpryſed, whiche maye be or can be by her hyghnes in any wyſe or by any meane pardoned, before and vnto the firſt day of Ianuary, in this preſent fyfth yere of her moſte gracious raigne, to euery or any of her ſayde ſubiectes, bodyes corporate, Cities, Boroughes, Shires, Rydynges, Hundredes, Lathes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Townes, Vyllages, and Tythynges, or any of them. And alſo the Quenes hyghnes is contented, that it be enacted by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that her ſaid free pardon ſhalbe as good & effectuall in the lawe to euery of her ſaid ſubiectes, bodies corporate, and other before rehearſed, in & againſt all thynges, which be not hereafter in this preſent Acte excepted and forpryſed, as the ſame pardon ſhoulde haue ben, yf all offences, contemptes, forfaitures, cauſes, matters, ſuites, quereles, iudgementes, executions, penalties, and all other thynges (not hereafter in this Act excepted and forpryſed) had ben perticulerly, ſingulerly, ſpecially, and plainely named, rehearſed, and ſpecified, and alſo pardoned by proper and expreſſe wordes and names, in their kyndes, natures, and qualities, by wordes and termes thervnto requiſite to haue ben put in, and expreſſed in this preſent Acte of free pardon. And that her ſayde Subiectes, nor any of them, nor the heyres, executours, or adminiſtratours of any of them, nor of the ſayde bodyes corporate and others before named, nor any of them, be nor ſhalbe ſued, vexed, or inquieted, in theyr bodyes, goodes, landes, or cattelles, for any maner of matter, cauſe, contempte, miſdemeanour, forfaiture, treſpas, offence, or anye other thyng ſuffred, done, or committed before the ſayde fyrſte daye of Ianuarye, agaynſte her hyghnes, her Crowne, dignitie, prerogatiue, lawe or ſtatutes: But onely for ſuche matters, cauſes, and offences, as be playnely rehearſed in the exceptions in this preſent Act, hereafter mentioned, and for none other: Any Statute or Statutes, lawes, cuſtomes, vſages, or preſident heretofore hadde, made, or vſed to the contrary, in any wyſe notwithſtandyng. Alſo the Quenes hyghnes of her bounteous liberalitie, by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, graunteth and freely geueth to euery of her ſaid Subiectes, and to euery of the ſayde bodyes corporate, and other before rehearſed, and euery of them, all goodes, cattelles, debtes,

fines, iſſues, profites, amerciamentes, forfaitures, and ſummes of money, by anye of them forfaited, whiche to her hyghnes do or ſhoulde belonge or appertayne, by reaſon of any offence, contempt, treſpas, entree, miſdemeanour, matter, cauſe, or quarrell, ſuffred, done, or committed by them or any of them, before the ſayde fyrſte day of Ianuary, which be not hereafter playnely forpryſed and excepted in this preſent Act. And that all and euery the Quenes ſaid Subiectes, and all and ſinguler bodyes corporate, and other before rehearſed, may by hym or them ſelfe, or by his or theyr deputie or deputies, or by his or theyr attourney or attourneys, according to the lawes of this Realme, pleade and miniſter this preſent Acte of free pardon, for his or theyr diſcharge, of, and for euery thyng that is by vertue of this preſent Acte pardoned, diſcharged, geuen or graunted, without any fee or other thyng in any wyſe paying to any perſon or perſons, for writing or entree of the iudgement, or other cauſe concernyng ſuche plee, wrytyng, or entree, but onely .xvi. pence to be payde to the officer or Clarke that ſhall entre the plee, matter, or iudgement for the parties diſcharge in that behalfe: Any Statute, vſage, or cuſtome to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            AND furthermore, the Quenes hyghneſſe is contented and pleaſed, that it be enacted by thaucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that her ſayde free pardon, by the generall wordes before rehearſed, ſhalbe reputed, demed, adiudged, allowed, and taken in all maner of Courtes of her hyghnes, & els where, aſwell in the wordes and clauſes of the exceptions and forpriſes ſpecified in this preſent Acte, as in all and ſinguler other clauſes, wordes, and ſentences mentioned and rehearſed in the ſayde free pardon, moſt beneficially and auayleably to all and ſinguler her ſayde ſubiectes, bodyes corporate, and others before rehearſed, and to euery of them, and moſte ſtrongly in barre and diſcharge agaynſt her hyghnes, her heyres, ſucceſſours, and executours, in euery thyng, without any ambiguitie, queſtion, or other delaye whatſoeuer it ſhalbe to be made, pleaded, obiected, or alleaged by the Quene our ſoueraigne Ladye, her heyres, ſucceſſours, or executours, or by her or any of theyr generall attourney or attourneys, or by any perſon or perſons for her hyghnes, or any of her heyres, ſucceſſours, or executours.
            And further, it is enacted by the Quene our ſoueraigne Lady, & by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that if any officer or Clarke of any of her hyghnes Courtes, cōmonly called the kynges Bench, Chaūcery, & cōmon place, or of her Exchequer, or any other

officer or Clarke of any other of her Courtes within this Realme, at any tyme after the .xxvi. day of this preſent moneth of Apryll, make out or write out any maner of writtes or other proces, or any extreates, ſommons, or other preceptes, whereby any of the ſayde Subiectes, or any of the ſayde bodyes corporate, or other before rehearſed, or any of them, ſhalbe in any wyſe arreſted, attached, diſtreigned, ſommoned, or otherwyſe vexed, inquieted, or grieued in his or theyr bodyes, landes, tenementes, goodes, or cattelles, or in any of them, for or becauſe of any maner thyng pardoned or diſcharged by vertue of this Acte of free pardon: or yf any Sheriffe or Excheatour, or any of theyr deputie or deputies, or any Bayliffe or other officer, by colour of his or theyr office, or otherwayes, after the ſayde .xxvi. day of Apryll, do leuye, receaue, or take any thyng pardoned or diſcharged by this Acte: That then euery ſuch perſon ſo offendyng, and therof lawfully condempned, ſhall yelde and pay for recompence thereof to the partie ſo grieued or offended, treble damages, beſydes all coſtes of the ſuite, and neuertheleſſe, all and ſinguler ſuche writtes, proces, extreates, and preceptes ſo to be made, for or vpon any maner thing pardoned or diſcharged by this preſent Acte of free pardon, ſhalbe vtterly voyde, & of none effect.
            Except and alwayes forpriſed out of this generall and free Pardon, all and all maner of hygh Treaſons, committed or done by any perſon or perſons, by any ouert dede or acte, agaynſte the Quenes moſte royall perſon, and all conſpiracies, and confederacies trayterouſly had, committed, or done by any perſon or perſons agaynſt the Quenes perſon. And alſo excepted, all and all maner of Treaſons, committed or done by any perſon or perſons in the parties beyonde the Sea, or in any other place out of the Quenes dominions. And all ſuites, punyſhementes, executions, paynes of death, forfaitures, & penalties, for or by reaſon or occaſion of any of the treaſons and offences before excepted. And alſo (except and forpriſed out of this free pardon) all and all maner of forgyng and counterfaityng of whatſoeuer money or coyne curraunt in this Realme, and all and all maner of offences, impeticions, punyſhementes, forfaitures, paynes of death, iudgementes, and executions for the ſame. And alſo excepted and forpryſed out of this generall and free pardon, all and euery pyracy and robbery done vppon the Sea, and all maner of voluntary murders, and wylfull poyſonynges, and all and euery burgularye in any dwellyng houſe, and all and euery robbery done vpon any perſon or perſons in any dwellyng houſe or houſes in the day tyme, and all robberies done vpon or to any mans or womans perſon in the hygh way, or els where, and all and ſinguler acceſſaryes of or to

any of the ſayde offences. And alſo all rapes and carnall rauyſhementes of women. All wylfull eſcapes (aſwell) of Traytours and Felons (as alſo) of Clarkes attaynted. And alſo excepted out of this generall and free pardon, all perſons attaynted or outlawed for any treaſon, murther, robbery, or burgulary. And alſo (excepted) al and euery maner of takyng from the Quene of any goodes, iſſues, rentes, reuenues, or profytes, of any manours, landes, tenementes, or hereditamentes of any Traytour, Murderer, Felon, Clarke or Clarkes, being perſōs attainted, outlawed, or fugitiues, or of any of them. And alſo excepted out of this pardon, all maner of Intrucions, had, made, or done, by any perſon or perſons, in or vpon any manours, landes, tenementes, or other hereditamentes, of our ſoueraigne Lady the Quene, and the takyng of any the iſſues and profites of the ſame landes or tenementes of our ſayde ſoueraigne Lady, and alſo all ſuites and impeticions for the ſame. And (excepted) alſo all waſtes committed or done in any of the Quenes Wardes landes, or in the Wardes landes of anye of the Quenes Committees. And alſo all & euery fine and fines, for the ſingle and double value of the mariage or mariages of all & euery the Quenes wardes, at any tyme growen to the Quenes Maieſtie or any her noble progenitours. And alſo all & euery conſealement of any Cuſtome or Subſedy. And all and ſinguler accomptes of al and euery Collectour and Collectours of any Subſedye, Fyftene, Beneuolence, Myſe, or Contribution. And of euery other perſon whatſoeuer, that ought to be accomptaunt to the Quenes hyghnes, or to her moſt noble father Kyng Henry the eyght, or to King Edwarde the ſyxt, or Quene Mary, or to any of them, & the heires, executours, and adminiſtratours of euery ſuch accomptaunt. And all and ſinguler arrerages of accomptes, and all impeticions, ſuites, demaundes, and executions for the ſame. And alſo (except) all incloſures and decayes of houſes of huſbandrye, and the conuertyng of any lande from tyllage to paſture, made, done, committed, or permitted, contrary to the fourme and effecte of anye Statute or Statutes heretofore made. And excepted and forpriſed out of this free pardon, all iſſues, fines, and amerciamentes, affered, taxed, ſet, extreated, or entred, ſeuerally or perticulerly, touching & concernyng any one perſon, or mo perſons ioyntly, extendyng to the ſumme of .vi. poundes, or aboue. And yet neuertheleſſe, all and ſinguler other fines (aſwell) fines pro licencia concordandi (as other) ſet, taxed, entred, or extreated, and all other iſſues and amerciamentes (aſwell reall as other) which ſeuerally or perticulerly extende not to the ſumme of .vi. poundes, whether they be totted, or not totted, taken to the charge of the Sheryffe, or not

taken to his charge, extreated or not extreated, or whether they be turned into debte or not turned into debte, and not beyng leuied nor receaued by any Sheriffe or Sheriffes, Bayliffes, miniſters or other officers, to the Quenes Maieſties vſe: ſhalbe fully, clearely, and playnly pardoned and diſcharged agaynſt the Quene our ſoueraigne Lady, her heyres, and ſucceſſours for euer, by this preſent Acte of free pardon. And alſo excepted and forpriſed out of this free pardon, all and all maner of deceiptes and offences of all and ſinguler monyers, and other officers, mynters, or workemen, of, or in any of the Quenes myntes, within this Realme or any other her dominions, and all impeticions and punyſhements for the ſame. And alſo excepted and forpryſed out of this general and free pardon, all rauyſhmentes and wrongfull takyng and withholdyng of any the Quenes Wardes, or Wardes landes, at any tyme commen or growen to the Quenes handes, and not yet diſcharged. And alſo (excepted) all tytles and actions of Quare impedit, and all homages, reliefe and reliefes, Rentes ſeruices, Rentes charges, Rentes ſeckes, & the arrerages of the ſame, not done or payde to the Quenes hyghnes. And alſo excepted, all ſummes of money graunted to the Quenes Maieſtie, or to any her noble progenitours, by waye or meane of Subſedye, Fyftene, Beneuolence, or Contribution, or by any of the ſame wayes or meanes. And alſo all debtes which were or be due to our ſoueraigne Ladye the Quene, or to the moſte noble Kyng of famous memory Kyng Henry the ſeuenth, or to Kyng Henry the eyght, Kyng Edwarde the ſixt, or to the late Quene Mary, or to any perſon or perſons to any of theyr vſes, by any condempnation, recogniſaunce, obligation, or otherwyſe, other then ſuch as are due vpon any obligation or recogniſaunce forfaited before the ſayde fyrſt day of Ianuary for non appearaunce in any court or other place, or for not kepyng of the peace, or not beyng of good behauyour. And alſo, excepted & forpriſed out of this pardon, al & ſinguler thoſe forfaitures being due or accrewed to our ſoueraigne Lady the Quene by any penaltie of any Statute or Statutes, whiche forfaitures be conuerted into the nature of debt, by iudgement, or by the agrement of the offendour or offendours, or els wherof there is any verdict paſt for the Quene. And alſo (excepted) all forfaitures and other penalties and profites growen or due to the Quene by reaſon of any offence, contempt, or other Acte, hadde, ſuffred, committed or done contrary to any Statute or Statutes, or contrary to the common law, wherof any information is geuen in the Quenes Exchequer or into the Kynges Bench, or wherof the Quenes hyghnes by her byll ſigned, or otherwyſe, heretofore hath made any gyft or aſſignement

to any perſon or perſons. And alſo excepted and forpriſed out of this generall and free pardon, all ſuch perſons as the tenth day of this preſent moneth of April be in priſon within the Towre of London, or in the pryſon of the Marſhalſea, or in the Fleete, and all perſons put to execution before the ſayde tenth daye of Apryll. And alſo excepted out of this free pardon, all offences of forgyng or counterfaityng of any falſe dedes, eſcriptes, or wrytinges. And alſo excepted all penalties, forfaitures, and tytles of condition accrewed or growen to the Quenes Maieſtie by reaſon of the breache or not perfourmyng of any couenaunt or condition. And alſo excepted out of this generall and free pardon, al and euery ſuch perſon and perſons whiche haue heretofore fledde out of this Realme of Englande, or any other the Quenes dominions for any offēce of hygh Treaſon, petie Treaſon, or miſpriſion of Treaſon. And alſo excepted out of this pardon, all and euery offence and offences, touchyng or concernyng the carrying, ſendyng, or conueying ouer the Seas or out of this Realme, of any golde, ſyluer, iewels, or any coyne of golde or ſyluer, contrarye to the lawes or Statutes of this Realme, vnleſſe it were or be by the Quenes licence. And alſo excepte, all ſuch perſons as be fledde and gone out of this Realme, contrary to the lawes and Statutes of this Realme, without the Quenes Maieſties licence. And alſo all ſuch perſons as haue obteyned and had licence to departe the Realme for a tyme, and nowe do abyde out of the Realme without any lawfull excuſe after the tyme of theyr licence expired.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that all and euery perſon and perſons, which haue tendered and ought to ſue lyuery out of our ſayde ſoueraigne Lady the Quenes handes, of, or for any manours, landes, tenementes, or hereditamentes, whatſoeuer they be, ſhall ſue his or theyr lyuery and lyueryes out of our ſayde ſoueraigne Ladye the Quenes handes, of his or theyr manours, landes, tenementes, and hereditamentes, in lyke maner and fourme as they and euery of them ſhould and ought to haue done yf this Acte hadde neuer ben had ne made: Any article, thyng or thinges in this preſent Acte of generall and free pardon, compriſed and ſpecified to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that in caſe it be obiected to or againſt any Sheriffe, or Sheriffes, or other accomptantes in the Quenes court of Exchequer, or in any other her courtes, that any Sheriffe or Sheriffes or other officers accomptantes haue receaued or taken any ſuch fines, iſſues, or amerciamentes, as by this preſent Acte be pardoned and acquited: that

then euery ſuch Sheriffe & Sheriffes, and other accomptantes, ſhalbe diſcharged and acquited therof, by his or theyr owne corporall othe, to be miniſtred and taken openly before the Barons in the ſayde court of Exchequer, or before the Iuſtices in any other court, without any further tryall in that behalfe.
            Prouided alwaye that this preſent Act of free pardon, nor any thyng therin conteyned, in any wyſe extende to diſcharge, remitte or acquite any perſon or perſons, for any ſuch iſſues, fines, or amerciamentes, as any Sheriffe heretofore haue accompted for before the Barons of the Quenes Exchequer, or els where, and payde the ſame iſſues, fines, and amerciamentes, vpon his or theyr ſayde accompt, determined to the Quenes vſe, and hath his or theyr Quietus est for the ſame.
            Prouided alwayes and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that it ſhalbe lawefull to all and euery Clarke and other officer of any the Quenes Courtes, to awarde and make writtes of Capias vtlegatum at the ſuite of the partie plaintyffe, agaynſt ſuch perſons outlawed as be pardoned by this Acte, to thintent to compell the defendaunt and defendauntes to make aunſwere to the playntyffe or playntyffes, at whoſe ſuite he or they were outlawed. And that euery perſon ſo outlawed, ſhal ſue a writte of Scire facias againſt the partie or parties at whoſe ſuite he or they were ſo outlawed, before this pardon in that behalfe ſhalbe alowed to hym that ſo is outlawed.
            GOD ſaue the Quene.
         
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde by Richard Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Quenes Maieſtie.
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
         
            
            
            
            ¶ An Acte of a Subſedye with two Fyftenes and Tenthes, graunted by the Temporaltie.
            
               THE certeyne knowledge and perfite ſence that we your Maieſties moſte humble ſubiectes haue and fele of the great felicitie, which ſynce your reigne we hitherto haue enioyed, and nowe preſently do enioy, farre beyonde all other nations our neyghbours, yea, muche augmented to our happyneſſe, hauyng regarde to the former troubleſome times amongſt our ſelues: doth vehemently preſſe and enforce vs, firſt and principally, with all our hartes and ſoules to acknowledge our moſt bounden dueties to Almightie God, the king of kinges, for his exceadyng ſinguler and diuine goodnes ſhewed to vs his creatures, in preſeruyng for our ſafetie, after ſo many ſtormes, your royall princely perſon, our moſte gracious Quene, and in guydyng & directing the ſame for our happyneſſe, in ſo vnhappy an age, thus happyly, quietly, and prouidently to gouerne vs his people committed to your charge. And nexte, for the ſame great benefites beſtowed vpon vs by his mercyfull goodneſſe, by and through your Maieſties perſon & Regiment, to offer our ſelues moſt ready, with all obeyſaunce and loyaltie, to ſerue and moſt humblye obey your Maieſtie, as Gods immediate miniſter in earth, and ſupreme gouernour ouer vs, to the vttermoſt of our power and ende of our lyues. And furthermore, conſyderyng with our ſelues, and beholdyng manyfeſtlye with our eyes, the many notable beneficiall and princely actes done by your Maieſtie, with thaſſent of Gods fauour, in theſe fewe yeres, for the weale and ſuretie of this your Realme. ¶ Firſt, in reſtoring  vs to the fauour, knowledge, & true ſeruice of almightie God, by reſtauration into this Churche of Englande, a ſincere vniforme rule and order in Chriſtian religion, by delyuery of vs and our conſciences from a foreyne vnnaturall tiranny and power, notwithſtandyng the many & great threatnynges of worldly power to the contrary. ¶ Next, by reducyng this your Realme and  all other your dominions, from warre wherin you founde it, to

peace with your neighbours, which two godly actes, your Maieſtie did accompliſhe immediatly at your firſt entrie to this your  crowne. ¶ Thirdlye, by the euident deliuery of this Realme frō the great & manifeſt intended inuaſions, conſpired & prepared by ſtrangers (the auncient enemies of this Realme) ioynyng therwith the princely and vpright preſeruation of the libertie of the next Realme and nation of Scotlande, from imminent captiuitie and deſolation, and ſo without any bluddy battayle, moſt prouidētly (though chargeably) diuerting the force of the enemie  intended againſt this Realme, to their reproffe. ¶ Fourthly, by repayryng, ſtoryng, enrychyng, buyldyng, & reenforſyng this your Realme, with the worthyeſt treaſures of Armure, Munition, and all kynd of prouiſions offenſiue and defenſiue for warre, and of a princely nauie of Shippes for the ſeruice and defence of  this your countrey, and vs your people. ¶ And next thereto, as it were in a time almoſt deſperate or doubtfull, for the weight of the matter, by conuertyng of the lothſome an vyle great and long growen bulke of copper and counterfaite moneys, eatyng and dayly conſumyng the honor and wealth of this Realme lyke a Canker, into treaſures only of golde and ſyluer moneys, without hauing any peece of copper moneys currant in this Realme, a ſinguler preheminence aboue all countreys in Chirſtendome.  ¶ And laſtly, by a moſt prouident & ſeaſonable enterpryſe nowe taken in hande this yere, beyng therto neceſſaryly prouoked (beſides the foreſight for ſafetie of your own Realme) for the defence alſo of your Maieſties tender yong Brother and next neighbour the French Kyng, beyng forcyblye gouerned agaynſte his lawes and libertie, by reaſon of the ambition of certeyn his vncontented ſubiectes, being not diſpoſed to liue as ſubiectes in quietnes, as the experience of them towardes this Realme hath alſo proued. And conſequently, in this enterpriſe, your Maieſtie not forgettyng the iuſt and ſeaſonable recouery of an auncient porcion of this your crowne, lately and vnfortunately ſpoyled and broken of, and we alſo generally taſtyng and ſenſibly feelyng, from the hygheſt of vs to the loweſt, through all degrees, places, and tymes, an vniuerſall and moſt bleſſed fruite of Iuſtice, both for our lyues, landes, goodes, and behauours, without acception of perſons, to the ineſtimable, yea, and vnaccuſtomed comfort and ioy of all your good and faithfull Subiectes, & to the ſinguler recōmendation of your Maieſties happyneſſe to al poſteritie, being hytherto neuer compelled to taxe or reprehende, muche leſſe to drawe bloud of any perſon for any offence to your Maieſties royall perſon, a bleſſednes neuer enioyed ſo long by any of your progenitours,

to our knowledge. Which princely and notable actes, with many others, not here for length to be rehearſed, haue ben, and for continuance therof, muſte nedes be ſo burdenous and chargeable to your Maieſtie, that though we can not in dede fynde an example of any one meete preſent or gyfte by name of Subſedye, or any other reliefe or ayde graunted to any of your progenitours, ſufficient to recompence and acquite ſome one of theſe your many princely and notable actes, or the charges therin ſuſteyned: yet we meaning, and freely of our ſelues intending, accordyng to our bounden duties, to make ſome kynde of declaration, ſpecification, and recognition of our great debtes of ſeruyce to your Maieſtie, being not able to make any full ſatiſfaction, as your Maieſties moſt humble obedient and louyng Subiectes, humblye on our knees beſeche your hyghnes, that at this tyme, in ſteade of ſatiſfaction for our great debtes, due for your princely demerites and charges, our ſmall gyfte maye not be meaſured with your actes, or with our owne debtes to your Maieſtie: but of your accuſtomed clemencie, accepted ioyntlye with the treaſure of our humble, infinite, & inmeaſurable thoughtes and intentions of our hartes towardes your Maieſtie, and that for thacception therof, it may be by your hyghneſſe, the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by aucthoritie of the ſame, enacted as foloweth.
            And be it enacted, that your highneſſe towardes the ſaid great coſtes and ineſtimable charges, ſhall haue by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, two whole Fyftenes and Tenthes, to be payed, taken, and leuyed of the moueable goodes, cattalles, and other thynges vſuall to ſuche Fyftenes and Tenthes, to be contributorye and chargeable within the Shires, Cities, Boroughes, Townes, and other places of this your Maieſties Realme, in maner and fourme aforetyme vſed: Except the ſūme of .xii.M. poundes thereof fully to be deducted. That is to ſaye, vi.M. poundes of eyther of the ſayde whole Fyftenes & Tenthes, of the ſūme that one whole Fyftene and Tenth attayneth vnto, in reliefe, comforte, and diſcharge of the poore Townes, Cities, and Boroughes of this your ſayde Realme, waſted, deſolate, or deſtroyed, or ouergreatly impoueryſhed, after ſuche rate as was and hath afore this tyme ben had and made to euery Shyre, and to be deuyded in ſuche maner and fourme as heretofore for one whole Fyftene & Tenthes, hath ben hadde and deuyded. And the ſayde two Fyftenes and Tenth (the exceptions and deductions aforeſayde, therupon had, deducted, and alowed) to be payde in

maner and fourme folowyng. That is to ſaye, the firſte whole fyftene and tenth (except before excepted) to be payd to your highnes in the receipt of your hyghneſſe Exchequer, before the tenth day of Nouember next commyng. And the ſayde ſeconde fyftene and tenth (except before excepted) to be payde to your hyghneſſe in the receipt of your Exchequer, before the tenth daye of Nouember, in the yere of our Lorde God. M.D.lxiiii.
            And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayd, that the knyghtes elected and returned, of, and for the Shyres within this Realme for this preſent Parliament. Citezins of Cities, & Burgeſes of Boroughes and Townes, where collectours haue ben vſed to be named, and appoynted for the collection of anye fyftene and tenth before this tyme graunted, ſhall name and appoynt yerely before the laſte day of Auguſt, in eyther of the ſayde two yeres, ſufficient and hable parſons, for the collection of the ſayde fyftenes & tenthes, in euery of the ſayde Shires, Cities, Boroughes, & Townes, the ſayde parſons then hauyng landes, tenementes, and other hereditamentes in his or theyr owne right of an eſtate of enheritaūce of the yerely value of .x. pounds, or in goodes worth a hundreth pounde at the leaſt. And alſo ſuch parſon or parſons ſo by them to be named and appoynted for the collection of eyther of the ſayde Fyftenes & Tenthes, ſhalbe by them ſeuerally appoynted and allotted into Hundrethes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Cities, Boroughes, and Townes. And alſo the ſaid parſons ſo named and appoynted for the collection of the ſame Fyftenes & Tenthes, ſhalbe charged and chargeable vpon his or theyr accompte or accomptes, in thexchequer to be made, with al ſuch ſumme or ſummes of money, as the Hundredes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Cities, Boroughes, and Townes, where he or they ſhal ſo happen to be appoynted, ſhall amount vnto, and of no more ſumme or ſummes. And vpon the payment of ſuche ſummes of money as he or they ſhalbe charged with, ſhalbe diſcharged, and haue his and theyr Quietus eſt, the non accomptyng or non payment of any other his felowes, or the inſufficiencie of them or any of them, notwithſtandyng. And the names and ſurnames of euery the ſayde collectours for the ſayde fyftenes & tenthes, duryng eyther of the ſayde two yeres, together with the place allotted to theyr collection and charge, the ſayde Knyghtes, Citezins, and Burgeſes, for the Shires, Cities, and Boroughes, wherevnto they be elected, named, and retourned: ſhall certifie before the Quene in her Chauncery, before the .xx. day of October, in euery of the ſame two yeres, accordyng to the tenor of this acte. And if defaute of any ſuche certifying be hadde or made in fourme as is

aforeſayde: then the Lorde Chauncelour of Englande, or keper of the greate Seale for the tyme beyng, ſhall immediatly after, name and appoynt Collectours, for the collection of eyther of the ſayde fyftenes and tenthes, in maner and fourme as the ſayde knyghtes of the Shires, Citezins of Cities, and Burgeſes of Boroughes, ſhoulde haue done, and as afore tyme hath ben vſed. The whiche ſayde Collectours, and euery of them, ſhall haue lyke alowaunce vpon their accomptes, for their fees, wages, and rewardes, for the collection of the ſayde fyftenes and tenthes, in as large maner and fourme, as any Collectour or Collectours of fyftenes and tenthes, haue had at any ſeaſon in tyme paſt. And that the Barons of the Quenes Eſchequer for the tyme beyng, ſhall and may from tyme to tyme, awarde ſuche proceſſe for the ſpeedy payment therof, agaynſt the Collectour and Collectours for the ſame, as by their diſcretions ſhalbe thought conuenient.
            Prouided alway, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that the ſayde Lorde Chauncelour, or keper of the greate Seale for the tyme beyng, knyghtes of the Shires, Citezins of Cities, & Burgeſes of Boroughes, Townes, and other places, hauyng aucthoritie by this preſent Acte, to name and nominate the ſayde Collectours, of, or for the ſayde fyftenes and tenthes: ſhall vpon their nomination and election had and made, take by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, ſufficient Recogniſaunces, or obligation, of euery parſon ſo by them to be named, to be bounde to the Quenes Maieſtie, in the double ſumme of the ſumme of their collection, and to be indorſed vpon ſuch condition, that yf the ſayde Collectour or Collectours do truely content and paye, to the vſe of the Quenes hyghneſſe in her receipt of theſchequer, before the .x. daye of Nouember in euery of the ſayde two yeres, ſo much of the ſumme of money allotted and appoynted to his collection, as the ſame Collectour ſhall haue collected and gathered, and do lykewyſe after the ſayde .x. day of the moneth of Nouember in euery of the ſaid two yeres, content and pay to the Quenes Maieſties vſe, at the ſame receipt, the reſidue of his collection and charge, within one moneth nexte after ſuche tyme as he ſhall haue gathered and collected the ſame reſidue: that then the ſayde Recogniſaunce or obligation to be voyde, or els to ſtande in his full ſtrength and vertue. Whiche Recogniſaunce or obligation ſo taken, the ſayde knightes of the Shire, Citezins, and Burgeſes, and euery of them, takyng any ſuch Recogniſaunces or obligation, ſhall certifie and delyuer to the Lorde Treaſourer, and Barons of the ſame Exchequer, before the ſayd .x. day of Nouember, in euery of

the ſayde yeres, vpon payne of forfaiture of .x.li. to the Quenes hyghneſſe, for euery Reccogniſaunce or obligation ſo to be taken, and not certified. And that euery ſuch collectour, vpon requeſte to hym made, ſhall make and knowledge the ſame Recogniſance or obligation accordyngly, vpon lyke payne and forfaiture of .x. pounde to the Quene, for his refuſall therof. And that the Treaſourer and Barons of the Eſchequer, vppon the payment of the ſame collection, or at the ſayde dayes, ſhal canſell and delyuer the ſayde Recogniſaunce or obligation, to the ſayde Collectour or Collectours, without any other warraunt, or without any fee or rewarde to be payde to any parſon for the ſame.
            And furthermore, for the great and wayghtie conſiderations aforeſayde, we the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons of this preſent Parliament aſſembled, do by our lyke aſſent and aucthoritie of this Parliament, geue and graunte to your hyghneſſe our ſayde Soueraigne Lady the Quenes Maieſtie, your heyres, and ſucceſſours, one entier Subſedye, to be rated, taxed, leuied, and payde at two ſeuerall paymentes, of euery parſon ſpirituall and temporall, of what eſtate or degree he or they be, according to the tenor of this Acte in maner and fourme folowyng. That is to ſay, aſwell of euery parſon borne within the Realme of Englande, Wales, or other the Quenes dominions, as of all and euery fraternitie, Guylde, Corporation, Miſtery, Brotherhed, and Cominaltie, corporated, or not corporated, within this Realme of Englande, Wales, or other the Quenes dominions, beyng worth three poundes, for euery pounde aſwell in coyne, & the value of euery pound that euery ſuch parſon, Fraternitie, Guylde, Corporation, Miſtery, Brotherhead, Cominaltie, corporate, or not corporate, hath of his or theyr owne, or any other to his or their vſe: as alſo plate, ſtocke of marchaūdizes, all maner of corne & blades, houſholde ſtuffe, and of all other goodes moueable, aſwell within this Realme, as without, and of all ſuche ſummes of money as to hym or them is or ſhalbe owyng, whereof he or they truſte in his or theyr conſcience ſurely to be payde: Excepte, and out of the premiſſes deducted, ſuch ſummes of money as he or they owe, & in his or theyr conſciences intendeth truely to paye, and except alſo thapparell of ſuche parſons, theyr wyues and chyldren, belongyng to theyr owne bodies, ſauyng Iewels, golde, ſyluer, ſtone, and pearle: ſhall paye to and for the fyrſt payment of the ſayde ſubſedy .xx.d. of euery pound, and to and for the ſeconde payment of the ſayde Subſedye .xii.d. of euery pounde. And alſo euery Alien and ſtraunger borne out of the Quenes obeyſaunce, aſwell denizen as others, inhabytyng

within this Realme, of euery pounde that he or they haue in coyne, and the value of euery pounde in plate, corne, grayne, marchaundyzes, houſeholde ſtuffe, or other goodes, iewelles, cattelles, moueable, or vnmoueable, as is aforeſayde, aſwell within this Realme as without, and of all ſummes of money to hym or them owyng, wherof he or they truſt in his or theyr conſciences to be payde: Excepte, and of the ſame premiſſes deducted, euery ſuch ſumme or ſummes of money which he or they do owe, and in his or theyr conſcience or conſciences intende truely to paye: ſhall paye of and for euery pounde, to, and for the fyrſte payment of the ſayde Subſedye .iii.s.iiii.d. and to and for the ſeconde payment of the ſayde Subſedye .ii.s. of euery pounde. And alſo, that euerye Alien and ſtraunger borne out of the Quenes dominions, beynge denizen or not denizen, not beynge contributorye to any the Rates aforeſayde, ſhall paye to and for the fyrſte payment of the ſayde Subſedye .iiii.d. and to, and for the ſeconde payment of the ſayde Subſedy .iiii.d. for euery pool. And the maſter, or he or ſhe, with whom the ſame Alien is, or ſhalbe abydyng at the tyme of the taxation or taxations thereof, to be charged with the ſame, for lacke of paymente thereof.
            And further, be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that euery parſon borne vnder the Quenes obeyſaunce, and euerye Corporation, Fraternitie, Guylde, Miſtery, Brotherhed, and Cominaltie, corporate, or not corporate, for euery pounde that euery of the ſame parſon, and euery Corporation, Fraternitie, Guyld, Miſtery, Brotherhead, and Cominaltie, corporate, or not corporate, or any other to his or theyr vſe, hath in fee ſimple, fee tayle, for terme of lyfe, terme of yeres, by execution, wardeſhyp, or by copye of court roll, of, and in any honours, caſtelles, manours, landes, tenementes, rentes, ſeruyſes, hereditamentes, annuities, fees, corrodies, or other yerely profites, of the yerelye value of .xx.s. aſwell within auncient demeane, and other places priuileged, or els where, and ſo vpwardes: ſhall pay to, and for the fyrſt payment of the ſayde Subſedye .ii.s.viii.d. of, and for euery pounde, and to and for the ſeconde payment of the ſayd Subſeyde .xvi.d. of and for euery pound. And euery Alien borne out of the Quenes obeyſaunce, in ſuch caſe, to pay at the firſt of the ſayd paymentes .v.s.iii.d. of euery pound, and at the ſecond payment .ii.s.viii.d. of and for euery pounde. And that al ſūmes preſented and chargeable by this Act, eyther for goodes & debtes, or eyther of them, or for landes and tenements, and other the premiſſes, as is in this Acte conteyned, ſhalbe at eyther of the

ſayde paymentes ſet and taxed after the rate and porcion, accordyng to the true meanyng of this Acte (landes, and tenementes chargeable to the diſmes of the clergie, and yerely wages due to ſeruauntes for their yerely ſeruice, other then the Quenes ſeruantes, takyng yerely wages of .v. poundes or aboue, only excepted, & forepriſed.) And that al plate, coyne, iewels, goodes, debtes, and cattels parſonalles, being in the rule and cuſtody of any parſon & parſons, to the vſe of any corporation, fraternitie, guylde, miſtery, brotherhead, or any cōminaltie, being corporate, or not corporate, be & ſhalbe rated, ſet, a charged by reaſon of this Acte, as the value certified by the preſentours of that certificate, to be ſworne of euery pounde in goodes and debtes, as is aboueſaide, & of euery pounde in landes, tenementes, annuities, fees, corrodies or other yerely profites, as is aboueſayde, and the ſūmes that are before reherſed, ſet and taxed, to be leuyed and taken of them that ſhal haue ſuch goodes in cuſtody, or otherwiſe charged for landes, as is before rehearſed. And the ſame parſon or parſons, and bodye corporate, by aucthoritie of this Acte, ſhalbe diſcharged agaynſt hym or them that ſhall or ought to haue the ſame, at the tyme of the payment or deliuery thereof, or at his otherwyſe departure from the cuſtody or poſſeſſion of the ſame. Except and alwayes forepriſed from the charge and aſſeſſement of this Subſedie, all goodes, catteles, iewels, and ornamentes of Churches and Chappelles, whiche haue ben ordeyned and vſed in Churches or Chappelles for the honor and ſeruyce of almightie God. And the firſt payment of the ſayd Subſedye, ſhalbe, by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, taxed, aſſeſſed, and rated accordyng to this Act, in euery Shyre, Lath, Wepentake, Rape, Citie, Borough, Towne, & euery other place within this Realme of Englande, & Wales, and other the Quenes dominions, before the .xx. daye of Apryll next commyng. And the ſeconde payment of the ſayd Subſedye, ſhalbe by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, taxed, aſſeſſed, and rated, before the .x. day of December next cōmyng. And the particuler ſūmes of euery Shire, Riding, Borough, Towne, and other places aforeſayd, with the particuler names of ſuch as are chargeable for, and to the firſt payment of the ſaid Subſedye, to be taxed and ſet, by the Cōmiſſioners to the ſame limitted, or two of them at the leaſte, with the names of the high Collectours, and in the ſame fourme ſhalbe certified into the Quenes Exchequer, before the .xx. daye of Maye nexte commyng. And the particuler ſummes of euery Shire, Rydyng, Borough, Towne, and other places aforeſayde, with the particuler names of ſuche as are chargeable for and to the ſeconde payment of the ſayd Subſedye, to be taxed

and ſet by Commiſſioners, to the ſame to be limitted, or two of them at the leaſt, with the names of the hygh Collectours, and in the ſame fourme, ſhalbe certified into the Quenes Exchequer before the .xx. day of Ianuary, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God a Thouſande fyue Hundreth Threeſcore and three. And the ſayde ſummes, in maner and fourme aforeſayde, to be taxed for the firſt payment of the ſayde Subſedye, ſhalbe payde into the Quenes receipte of her Exchequer aforeſayde, to the vſe of our ſayde Soueraigne Lady, before the fyrſt day of Iune next cōmyng. And the ſayd ſummes in maner and fourme aforeſayd, to be taxed for the ſeconde payment of the ſayd Subſedye, ſhalbe payde into the receipte aforeſayde, to the vſe aforeſayde, before the .xx. day of February, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God a Thouſande fyue Hundreth Threeſcore and three. And the ſumme aboueſayde, of, and for the ſaide Subſedye, ſhalbe taxed, ſette, aſked, and demaunded, taken, gathered, leuyed, and payde, to the vſe of our ſayde Soueraigne Ladye, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, in fourme aboueſayde, aſwell within the liberties, fraunchiſes, ſanctuaryes, auncient demeane, and other whatſoeuer place exempt or not exempt, as without: except ſuch Shires places, and parſons, as ſhalbe forepriſed, in, and by this preſent Acte, any graunt, charter, preſcription, vſe, or libertie, by reaſon of any letters patentes, or other priuiledge, preſcription, alowaunce of the ſame, or whatſoeuer other matter of diſcharge heretofore to the contrary made, graunted, vſed, or obteyned, notwithſtandyng.
            And it is further enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that euery ſuch parſon, aſwell ſuch as be borne vnder the Quenes obeyſaunce, as euery other parſon ſtraunger borne, denizen, or not denizen, inhabytyng within this Realme, or within Wales, or other the Quenes dominions, which at the tyme of the ſayde aſſeſſynges or taxations, or of eyther of them, to be had or made, ſhalbe out of this Realme, and out of Wales, and haue goodes or cattels, landes or tenementes, fees or annuities, or other profites within this Realme, or in Wales: ſhalbe charged and chargeable for the ſame, by the certificate of the inhabytauntes of the parties, where ſuch goodes, cattelles, landes, tenementes, or other the premiſſes, then ſhalbe, or in ſuche other place where ſuch parſon or his factour, deputie, or atturney, ſhal haue his moſt reſorte vnto, within this Realme, or in Wales, in lyke maner, as yf the ſayde parſone were or hadde ben at the tyme of the ſayde aſſeſſyng within this Realme. And that euery parſon abydyng or dwellyng within this Realme, or without

this Realme, ſhalbe charged or chargeable to the ſame Subſedye graunted by this Act, accordyng and after the rate of ſuch yerely ſubſtaunce, or value of landes and tenementes, goodes, cattelles and other the premiſſes, as euery parſon ſo to be charged, ſhalbe ſet at in the tyme of the ſayde aſſeſſyng, or taxation vpon hym to be made, and in none otherwyſe.
            And further be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that for thaſſeſſyng and orderyng of the ſayde Subſedye to be duely had, the Lorde Chauncelour of Englande, or the keper of the greate ſeale, the Lorde Treaſourer of Englande, the Lorde Steward of the Quenes Maieſties houſholde, the Lorde Preſident of the Quenes honorable Counſell, and the Lorde Priuie ſeale for the tyme beyng, or two of them at the leaſt, wherof the Lord Chauncelour of England, or keper of the great ſeale for the tyme being, to be one: ſhall and may name & appoynt, of, and for euery Shire and Rydyng, and other places, aſwell within this Realme, as in Wales, and other the Quenes dominions, and alſo of, and for euery Citie and Towne, beyng a Countie of it ſelfe, and of, & for the Iſle of Wyght, ſuch certeyne numbre of parſones of euery of the ſame Shires, Ridinges, Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes, Cities, Townes, and Iſle of Wyght, and euery other place, & other the inhabitantes of the ſame, to be Commiſſioners of and within the ſame wherof they be inhabitauntes, and alſo of, and for the honorable houſholde of the Quenes Maieſtie, in what Shire or other places the ſayde houſholde ſhall happen then to be. And the Lorde Chauncelour or keper of the great Seale, & other with hym before named, in lyke maner may name & appoynt of euery other ſuch Borowe, and Towne corporate, aſwell in Englande as in Wales, & other the Quenes dominions, as they ſhall thinke requiſite .vi.v.iiii.iii. or .ii. of the head officers, and other ſadde honeſt inhabitantes of euery of the ſayde Cities, Boroughes, and Townes corporate, accordyng to the numbre and multitude of the people beyng in the ſame. The which parſons, yf any ſuch be thervnto named, of the ſaid inhabitantes of the ſaid Boroughes and Townes corporate, not beyng Counties of them ſelues: ſhal be ioyned and put in as Cōmiſſioners, with the parſons named for ſuche Shires and Rydynges, as the ſayde Boroughes and Townes corporate, not being counties in them ſelues, be ſet and haue theyr beyng. Which parſons ſo named, for, and of the ſayde Boroughes and Townes corporate, not beyng counties, by reaſon of theyr dwelling in the ſame, ſhall not take vpon them, ne none of them, to put any part of theyr Commiſſion in execution for the premiſſes, out of the ſayde Boroughes, and Townes corporate,

wherein they beynge ſo named onely for the ſame, be dwellyng. And alſo not to execute the ſayde Commiſſion within the Borough or Towne corporate where they be ſo dwellyng, but at ſuche dayes and tymes as the ſayde other Commiſſioners for the ſame Shyre and Rydyng, ſhall therevnto limit and appoynt, within the ſame Borough or Towne corporate, not being Countie corporate, wherof they ſo be, and not out of ſuch Borough or Towne: and in that maner to be aydyng and aſſiſtyng with the ſayde other Commiſſioners, in, and for the good executyng of theffecte of the ſayde Commiſſion, vppon payne of euery of the ſayde Commiſſioners, ſo named for euery ſuche Citie, Borough, and Towne corporate, not beyng a Countie, to make ſuche fyne as the ſayde other Commiſſioners in the Commiſſion, of, and for the ſame Shyre or Rydyng ſo named, or three of them at the leaſt, ſhall by theyr diſcreſſions ſette, and certifie into the Quenes Exchequer, there to be leuyed to the vſe of the Quenes Maieſtie, in lyke maner as ſuch or lyke ſummes had ben ſet and rated vpon euery ſuch perſon for the ſayd Subſedye. The which Commiſſioners, ſo named, of, and for the ſayde Cities, Boroughes, and Townes, not beyng Counties, and onlye put in the ſayde Commiſſion by reaſon of theyr dwellyng in the ſame: ſhall not haue any parte of the porcion of the fees and rewardes of the Commiſſioners and theyr Clarkes, in this Acte afterwarde ſpecified and alowed. And the Lorde Chauncelour of England, or the keper of the great Seale of England for the time beyng, ſhall make, and directe out of the court of the Chauncery vnder the great Seale, ſeuerall Commiſſions, that is to ſaye, to euery Shire, Riding, Lathe, Wapentake, Rape, Citie, Towne, Borough, Iſle, and Houſeholde, vnto ſuche perſon and perſons, as by his diſcreſſion, and other with hym afore named and appoynted, in lyke maner and fourme as is afore rehearſed, ſhalbe thought ſufficient for the ſeſſyng and leuying of the ſayde Subſedye, in all Shires and places, accordyng to the true meanyng of this Acte. Whiche Commiſſion for the fyrſte payment of the ſayde Subſedye, ſhalbe directed and delyuered to the ſayde Commiſſioners, or to one of them, before the fyrſte day of Apryll next commyng, and the Commiſſion for the ſeconde payment of the ſayde Subſedye, ſhalbe directed and delyuered to the ſayde Commiſſioners or one of them, before the fyrſte day of Nouember, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God a Thouſande fyue Hundreth Threeſcore and three, and to euery of the ſayde Commiſſions, tenne Sedules, conteynyng in them the tenor of this Acte, ſhalbe affyled. By which Commiſſion, the Commiſſioners

in euery ſuch Commiſſion, named accordyng to this Acte, and as many of them as ſhalbe appoynted by the ſaide Commiſſion, ſhal haue full power and aucthoritie to put the effect of the ſame Commiſſion in execution. And that by aucthoritie of this Acte, after ſuch Commiſſions to them directed, they maye by theyr aſſentes and agrementes, ſeuer them ſelues for thexecution of their Commiſſion, in Hundredes, Lathes, Wardes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Townes, Pariſhes, and other places within the limittes of their ſayde Commiſſion, in ſuch fourme as to them ſhall ſeme expedient to be ordered, and betwene them to be comoned and agreed, according to the tenor and effect of the Commiſſion to them therin directed. Vpon whiche ſeueraunce, euery perſon of this preſent Parliament that ſhalbe Commiſſioner, ſhalbe aſſigned in the Hundred where he dwelleth.
            Prouided alwayes, that no perſon be or ſhalbe compelled to be any Commiſſioner, to, and for thexecution of this preſent Act, but onlye in the Shyre where he dwelleth and inhabiteth, and that any perſon being aſſigned to the contrary thereof, in anye wyſe ſhall not be compelled to put in execution the effecte of this Acte, or any part therof.
            And it is alſo enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that the Cōmiſſioners, and euery of them, which ſhalbe named, limitted, & appoynted according to this Acte, to be Commiſſioners in euery ſuch Shire, Riding, Lath, Wapentake, Rape Citie, Towne, Borough, Iſle, and the ſayde Houſholde, or any other place, and none other: ſhall truelye, effectuallye, and diligently for their part, execute theffect of this preſent Acte, accordyng to the tenor thereof in euery behalfe, and none otherwyſe by any other meanes, without omiſſion, fauour, dread, malice, or any other thyng to be attempted & done by them or any of them, to the contrary therof. And the ſaide Cōmiſſioners, and as many of them as ſhalbe appoynted by the ſayde Commiſſion, and none other, for the execution of the ſayde Cōmiſſion and Acte, ſhall for the taxation of the ſaide firſt payment of the ſaid Subſedye, before the tenth day of Apryll next commyng, and for the taxation of the ſayde ſeconde payment of the ſayde Subſedye, ſhall before the tenth day of Ianuary, which ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God a Thouſand fyue Hundreth Threeſcore and three, by vertue of the Commiſſions deliuered vnto them in fourme aforeſayde: direct their ſeuerall or ioynt precept vnto .viii.vii.vi.v.iiii.iii. or two, as for the number of the inhabitauntes ſhalbe requiſite, of the moſt ſubſtanciall, diſcrete, and honeſt perſons inhabitantes, to be named by the ſaide Cōmiſſioners, or by as many of them as

ſhalbe appoynted by the ſayde Cōmiſſion, of, and in Hundredes, Lathes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Wardes, Paryſhes, Townes, and other places, aſwell within liberties, frauncheſis, auncient demeanes, places exempted, and ſanctuaries, as without, within the limits of the ſhyres, Ridinges, Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes, Cities, Townes, Boroughes, or Iſle aforeſayde, and other places within the limittes of their Commiſſion, and to the Conſtables, Subconſtables, Bayliffes, and other lyke officers or miniſters, of euery of the ſayde Hundredes, Townes, Wardes, Lathes, Wapentakes, Paryſhes, & other places before ſayde, as to the ſaid Commiſſioners & euery number of them, or vnto three or two of them by their diſcretions in diuiſion, ſhall ſeme expedient, as by the maner and vſe of the parties ſhalbe requiſite, ſtrayghtly by the ſame precept, charging and cōmaunding the ſame inhabitantes, Conſtables, and other officers aforeſayde, to whom ſuch precepte ſhalbe ſo directed, to appeare in theyr proper parſones before the ſayde Cōmiſſioners, or ſuch number of them, as they ſhall deuide themſelues, accordyng to the tenor of the ſaide Cōmiſſion, at certeyne dayes and places, by the ſayd Cōmiſſioners, or any number of them, as is aforeſayde, within Cities, Boroughes, or Townes corporate, or without, in any other place as is aforeſayd, by their diſcreſſions ſhalbe limitted therevnto, to do and accomplyſhe all that to them on the parties of the Quenes Maieſtie, ſhalbe enioyned touching this Acte. Commaundyng further by the ſame precept, that he to whoſe handes ſuch precept ſhall come, ſhall ſhewe or delyuer the ſame to the other inhabitauntes or officers named in the ſame precept, & that none of them fayle to accomplyſhe the ſame, vpō payne of .xl.s. to be forfaited to the Quenes Maieſtie.
            And it is further ordeyned, by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that at the ſayde day and place prefixed and limitted in the ſayde precept, euery of the Commiſſioners then beyng in the Shire, & hauyng no ſufficient excuſe for his abſence at the day and place prefixed for that parte wherevnto he was limitted: ſhall appeare in his proper parſon, and there the ſame Commiſſioners beyng preſent, or as many as ſhalbe appoynted by the Quenes Maieſties Cōmiſſion, ſhall call or cauſe to be called before them, the ſayde inhabitauntes and officers, to whom they haue directed their ſayd preceptes, & which had in cōmaundement there to appeare by the ſayde precept, of the ſayde Cōmiſſioners. And yf any parſon ſo warned, make default, vnleſſe he then be letted by ſickeneſſe or lawfull excuſe, and that let then be witneſſed by the othes of two credible perſons, or yf any appearing, refuſe to ſerue in fourme folowing: to forfeit to the Quenes

Maieſtie .xl.s. and ſo at euery tyme appoynted by the ſayd Commiſſioners for the ſame taxation, vnto ſuch tyme the number of euery ſuch parſons haue appeared, and certified in fourme vnder wrytten, and euery of them ſo makyng default, or refuſyng ſo to ſerue, to forfeit to the Quenes Maieſtie .xl.s. And vpon the ſame appearaunce had, they ſhalbe charged before the Comm
                  ••
               ſioners, by all conuenient wayes & meanes (other then by corporall othe) to inquire of the beſt and moſt value of the Subſtaunce of euery parſon, dwellyng and abydyng within the limittes of the places that they ſhalbe charged with, and of other which ſhall haue his or theyr moſt reſort vnto any of the ſayde places, and chargeable with any ſumme of money by this Acte of this ſayde Subſedye, and of all other thynges requiſite touchyng the ſayde Acte, and according to the intent of the ſame, & thervpon as nere as it may be, or ſhall come to theyr knowledge, truely to preſent and certifie before the ſaid Commiſſioners, the names and ſurnames, and the beſt and vttermoſt ſubſtaunce and values of euery of them, aſwell of landes, tenementes, and other hereditamentes, poſſeſſions, & profytes, as of goodes, cattelles, debtes, & other thinges chargeable by the ſayde Acte, without any conceylement, loue, fauour, affection, dread, feare, or malyce, vpon the payne often poundes or vnder, to be taxed, eſtreated, and leuyed in fourme as hereafter in this preſent Acte, ſhalbe limitted or appoynted. And thervpon the ſayd Cōmiſſioners ſhall openly there reade, or cauſe to be read vnto them, the ſayde rates, and openly declare theffect of theyr charge vnto them, in what maner & fourme, they ought and ſhoulde make theyr certificat, accordyng to the rates & ſūmes therof aboueſayde, and of all maner of parſons, aſwell of Aliens and ſtraungers, denizens, or not denizens, inhabytyng within this Realme, as of ſuch parſons as be borne vnder the Quenes obeyſaunce chargeable to this Act, and of the poſſeſſions, goodes and cattelles of Fraternities, Guyldes, Corporations, Brotherheades, Miſteries, and Cominalties, and other as is aboueſayde, and of parſons beyng in the parties of beyonde the ſeas, hauyng goodes or cattels, landes, or tenementes within this Realme, as is aforeſayde, and of all goodes beyng in the cuſtody of any parſon or parſons, to the vſe of any other, as is aboueſayde. By the which information and ſhe wyng, the ſayde parſons ſhould haue ſuche playne knowledge of the true intent of this preſent Acte, and of the maner of theyr certificate, that the ſame parſons ſhall haue no reaſonable cauſe to excuſe them by ignoraunce. And after ſuche charge, and the ſtatute of the ſayde Subſedye, and the maner of the ſayde certificate to be made in wryting, conteyning

the names and ſurnames of euery parſon, and whether he be borne without the Quenes obeyſaunce or within, and the beſt value of euery parſon in euery degree, aſwell of yerely value of landes and tenementes, and of ſuch lyke poſſeſſions and profites, as the value of goodes and cattelles, debtes, and euerye thyng to their certificate requiſite and neceſſarye to them declared: the ſayde Commiſſioners there beyng, ſhall by theyr diſcreſſions appoynt, and limitte vnto the ſayde parſons, an other daye and place, to appeare before the ſayde Commiſſioners, and chargyng the ſayde parſons, that they in the meane tyme ſhall make diligent inquirye, by all wayes and meanes, of the premiſſes, and then and there euery of them, vppon payne of forfeyture of fortye ſhyllynges to the Quenes Maieſtie, to appeare at the ſayde newe prefyxed daye and place, there to certifie vnto the ſayde Commiſſioners in wrytyng, accordyng to theyr ſayde charge, and accordyng to the true intent of the ſayde graunte of Subſedye, and as to them in maner aforeſayde hath ben declared and ſhewed by the Commiſſioners. At whiche daye and place ſo to them prefyxed, yf any of the ſayde parſons make default, or appeare and refuſe to make the ſayde certificat: that then euery of them ſo offendyng, to forfeyte to the Quenes Maieſtie fortye ſhyllynges, excepte there be a reaſonable excuſe of his default, by reaſon of ſickeneſſe or otherwyſe, by the othes of two credible parſons there witneſſed. And of ſuche as appeare, ready to make certificate as is aforeſayde, the ſayde Commyſſyoners there beyng, ſhall take and receaue the ſame certificate, and euery part thereof, and the names, values, and ſubſtaunce of euerye parſon ſo certified, and yf the ſame Commyſſyoners ſee cauſe reaſonable, they ſhall examine the ſayde preſenters thereof, and thervpon the ſayde Commiſſioners at the ſayde dayes and place, by theyr agrementes among them ſelues, ſhall from tyme to tyme openly there prefyxe a daye, at a certayne place or places, within the limittes of theyr Commyſſyon, by theyr diſcreſſion, for theyr further proceadyng to the ſayde aſſeſſyng of the ſame Subſedye, and therevpon at the ſayde daye of the ſayde certificat, as is aforeſayde, taken, the ſame Commyſſyoners ſhall make theyr precepte or preceptes to the Conſtables, Subconſtables, Baylyffes, or theyr officers, of ſuche Hundredes, Wapentakes, Townes, or other places aforeſayde, as the ſame Commyſſyoners ſhalbe of, compryſyng and conteynyng in the ſame precept, the names and ſurnames of all parſons preſented before them in the ſayde certificate, of whom if

the ſayde Commyſſyoners or as manye of them as ſhall be therevnto appoynted by the Quenes Commyſſyon, ſhall then haue vehemente ſuſpecte, to beof more greater value or ſubſtaunce in Landes, goodes, Cattelles, or ſummes of money owynge to them, or other ſubſtaunce before ſayde, then vppon ſuche parſone or parſones ſhalbe certyfyed: the ſame Commyſſyoners ſhall make their precepte or preceptes, directed to the Conſtable, Baylyffes, or other offycers, commaundyng the ſame Conſtable, Baylyffes, or other officers, to whom ſuche precepte ſhalbe directed, to warne ſuche parſones whoſe names ſhalbe compryſed in the ſayde precepte, at theyr manſyons, or to theyr parſones, that the ſame parſones named in ſuche preceptes, and euerye of them, ſhall parſonallye appeare before the ſayde Commyſſyoners at the ſame newe prefyxed daye and place, there to bee examyned by all wayes and meanes (other then by corporall othe) by the ſayde Commyſſyoners, of theyr greateſte ſubſtaunce and beſte value, and of all and euerye Summes of money owynge to them, and other whatſoeuer matter concernynge the premyſſes, or any of them, accordynge to this Acte. At whiche daye and place ſo prefyxed, the ſayde Commyſſyoners then and there beynge, or as manye of theim as ſhall be therevnto appoynted by the Quenes Commyſſyon, ſhall cauſe to be called the ſayde parſons whoſe names ſhalbe compryſed in the ſayde precepte, as is before ſayde, for theyr examination. And yf any of thoſe parſones whiche ſhoulde be warned, as is before ſayde, to be examyned, whiche at anye tyme after the warnyge, and before the prefyxed daye, ſhalbe within ſuche place where he maye haue knowledge of his ſayde appearaunce to be made, make defaulte, and appeare not, vnleſſe a reaſonable cauſe, or els a reaſonable excuſe, by the othes of twoo credyble parſones, before the ſayde Commyſſyoners be truelye alledged for his diſcharge: that then euery of them ſo makyng defaulte, to be taxed and charged to the Quenes Maieſtie, with, and at the double ſummes of the rate that he ſhoulde or ought to haue ben ſette at, for, and after the beſte value of his landes or ſubſtaunce vppon hym certyfyed, yf he hadde appeared, by the diſcreſſyon of the Commyſſyoners there beynge. Whiche Commyſſyoners, ſhall trauayle with euerye of the other parſones ſo then and there appearynge, whoſe names ſhalbe

expreſſed in the ſayde precept or preceptes, and in whom any vehement ſuſpecte was or ſhalbe had, fourme aboueſayde, by all ſuche wayes and meanes they can (other than by corporall othe) for the better knowledge of theyr beſt value, eyther in hereditamentes, or poſſeſſions, eyther els in goodes or debtes. And that euery Spirituall parſon at eyther of the ſayde taxations of the ſayde Subſedye, ſhalbe rated and ſette, accordynge to the rate aboueſayde, of, and for euery pounde that the ſame Spirituall parſon, or any other to his vſe hath, by diſcent, bargayne, or purchaſe, in fee Simple, fee Tayle, terme of lyfe, terme of yeres, by execution, by warde, or by copye of court roll, in anye Manours, Landes, Annuittes, or Hereditamentes, after the true, iuſte, and yerely value therof, after and accordynge as other the Quenes Maieſties ſubiectes borne within this Realme, be charged, in fourme aboue remembred, ſo that it extend to the yerely value of .xx.s. or aboue.
            And it is further enacted, that yf the ſayde taxours and aſſeſſours, ſhall not duely behaue them ſelues in theyr inquirye, taxation, aſſeſſement, or certificat, but ſhall affectionallye, corruptlye, or parciallye demeaſne them ſelues in that behalfe, in ſuche wyſe, that the Commyſſyoners ſhall by theyr conſideration deame them offenders, worthy of punyſhement for not doyng theyr dueties therin: that then foure or more of the Commiſſioners in that Countie, for this Subſedye, ſhall haue power and aucthoritie, by theyr diſcreſſions eyther to charge the ſayde aſſeſſours, vpon theyr corporall othes, for the better ſeruyce aforeſayde in that behalfe, or els by theyr diſcreſſion, to taxe and ſette vpon eyther of the ſayde aſſeſſours, for theyr miſdemeanour in that behalfe, ſuche a fine or payne as they ſhall thynke good, ſo that it exceade not the ſumme of tenne poundes, and the ſame fine or payne, at theyr diſcreſſions to eſtreate. Euery which fine ſo taxed and ſette by foure of the Commiſſioners, or more, and beyng eſtreated with the Sedule or bokes of that lymytte, ſhalbe leuyed and aunſwered to the Quenes vſe, in lyke maner and fourme, to all intentes and purpoſes, as any other ſumme that ſhalbe taxed and become due by vertue of this eſtatute and Acte of Subſedye, and not in any other wyſe or maner. And yf anye parſon certified or rated by vertue of this Acte, be he Commyſſyoner or other, to anye maner of value, doth fynde hym ſelfe grieued with the ſame preſentment, ſeſſyng, or taxyng, and therevppon

complayne to the Commiſſyoners, before whom he ſhalbe rated, ſeſſed, or taxed, or before two of them, before the ſame taxation be certified into the courte of the Exchequer: that then the ſayde Commyſſyoners, or two of them, ſhall by all wayes and meanes, examine particularly and diſtynctlye the parſon ſo complaynyng, vpon his othe, and other his neyghbours, by theyr diſcreſſyon, of euery his landes and tenementes aboue ſpecified, and of euery his goodes, cattelles, and debtes aboue mentioned. And after due examination and parfecte knowledge thereof hadde, and perceaued by the ſayde Commyſſyoners, or two of them, whiche ſhall haue power by aucthoritie aforeſayde: the ſayde Commyſſyoners or two of theim, to whom anye ſuche complaynte ſhalbe made, by theyr diſcreſſyon, vppon the othe of the ſayde parſon ſo complaynynge, maye abate, defaulke, encreaſe, or enlarge the ſame aſſeſſemente, accordynge as it ſhall appeare vnto theim iuſte, vppon the ſame examination. And the ſame ſumme ſo abated, defaulked, encreaſed, or enlagred, ſhalbe by them eſtreated in fourme as hereafter enſueth. And yf it be proued by wytneſſe, or by the parties owne confeſſion, or other lawefull wayes or meanes, within a yeare after anye ſuche othe made, that the ſame parſon ſo taxed, and ſworne, was of anye better or greater value in landes, goodes, or other thynges aboue ſpecified, at the tyme of his ſayde othe, then the ſame parſon ſo ſworne dyd declare vpon his ſayde othe: that then euery ſuche parſon ſo offendynge, ſhall loſe and forfeyt to the Quenes Maieſtie, ſo much in lawfull money of England, as he the ſame parſon ſo ſworne, was ſette or taxed to pay.
            And alſo it is enacted by the ſame aucthoritie, that euerye parſon to bee rated at the ſayde taxation, as is aforeſayde, ſhall be rated, taxed, and ſette, and the ſumme on hym ſette, to bee leuyed at ſuche place where he and his famylye at the tyme of the ſame preſentemente to bee made, ſhall kepe his houſe or dwellynge, or where he then ſhalbe moſte conuerſaunte, abydynge, or reſyaunte, or ſhall haue his moſte reſorte, at the tyme of the ſayde certyfycate to bee made, and no where els. And that no Commyſſyoner for this Subſedye, ſhall bee rated or taxed for his goodes or landes, but in the Shyre and other place where he

ſhalbe Commyſſyoner. And that yf any parſon chargeable to this Acte, at the tyme of the ſame aſſeſſyng, happen to be out of this Realme, and out of Wales, or farre from the place where he ſhalbe knowen: then he to be ſette where he was laſte abydynge in this Realme, or within Wales, and after the ſubſtaunce, value, and other profytes of euery parſone to be knowen, by the examination. certificate, or other maner of wyſe, as is aforeſayde. And that the ſayde Commyſſyoners, or as manye of them as ſhalbe appoynted by the Quenes Maieſties Commyſſyon, or Commyſſyons, ſhall after the rate and rates aforeſayde, cauſe euery parſone to be ſette, rated, and taxed, accordyng to the rate of the ſubſtaunce and value of his Landes, goodes, Cattelles, and other profytes chargeable by this Acte, whereby the greateſte and moſte beſte ſumme or ſummes, accordynge to his moſte ſubſtaunce, by reaſon of this Acte, myght, or maye be ſette or taxed. And that euerye parſone taxed in anye Countie or place, other then where he is moſte reſyaunte, or hath his famylye, or in anye Countie or place, other then where he is a Commyſſyoner for this Subſedye, yf he be a Commyſſyoner, vppon certificate made to the ſayde Courte of Exchequer, vnder the handes and ſeales of three Commyſſyoners for the Subſedye in the ſame Countie or place where ſuche parſon is moſte reſyaunte, or hath his famylye, or where he is a Commyſſyoner for the taxation and paymente of this Subſedye, teſtyfying ſuche his moſte reſyauncie, hauynge of famylye, or beynge a Commyſſyoner: ſhalbe a ſufficient diſcharge for the taxation of that parſon in all other places, and of, and for all other ſummes of money vppon ſuche parſon ſo ſette and taxed, ſaue onely the taxation made in that Countie or place, from whiche ſuche certificate ſhalbe made, as aforeſayde, and for the ſumme of money vppon ſuche parſon there aſſeſſed or taxed. And that ſuch certificate without anye plee or other circumſtaunce, ſhalbe a ſufficient warraunte, aſwell to the Barons and Auditours of the ſayde courte of Exchequer, as to all and euery other offycers, to whom the alowaunce thereof ſhall appertayne, paying for ſuche diſcharge and alowaunce, onely two ſhyllynges, and no more.
            Prouyded alwayes, that euery ſuche parſon, which ſhalbe rated, ſette, or taxed, accordynge to the intente and

true meanyng of this Acte, for payment of and to this Subſedye, for, and after the yerely value of his landes, tenementes, and other Reall poſſeſſions or profites at any of the ſayde taxations, ſhall not after be ſet and taxed for his goodes and cattelles, or other his moueable ſubſtaunce at the ſame taxations, and that he that ſhalbe ſette, charged, or taxed for the ſame Subſedy, for his goodes, cattelles, and other moueables, at any of the ſayde taxations, accordyng to the true meanyng of this Acte, ſhall not after be charged, taxed, or chargeable for his landes, or other reall poſſeſſions and profytes aboueſayde, at the ſame taxations, nor any of them, nor that anye parſon by any taxation be double charged for the ſayde Subſedye, nor ſette or taxed at ſeuerall places by reaſon of this Acte. But yf any parſon happen to be double ſette, taxed, or charged, eyther in one place, or at ſeuerall places: then he to be diſcharged of thone taxation, & charged with the other, accordyng to the meanyng and intent of this Acte. Any thyng conteyned in this preſent Acte to the contrarye, notwithſtandyng.
            And that it be ordeyned by the ſayde aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that no parſon hauyng two manſions, or two places to reſorte vnto, or callyng hym ſelfe houſeholde ſeruaunt, or waytyng ſeruaunt to the Quenes Maieſtie, or other Lorde or Lady, Maſter or Myſteres, be excuſed vpon his ſaying, from the taxes of the ſayde Subſedye, in neyther of the places where he maye be ſette, vnleſſe he bryng a certificat in wrytyng from the Commiſſioners, where that he is ſo ſette in dede at one place. And yf any parſon that ought to be ſette, by reaſon of his remouyng or reſortyng to two places, or by reaſon of his ſaying that he els where was taxed, or by reaſon of any priuiledge by his dwellyng or abydyng in anye place, not beyng forepryſed in this Acte, or otherwyſe by his couyn or crafte, happen to eſcape from the ſayde taxation, and be not ſette and taxed, and that proued, by preſentment, examination, or information before the ſayde Commiſſioners, or as manye of them as ſhalbe by the ſame Commyſſyon appoynted, or before the Barons of the Quenes Maieſties Exchequer, or two Iuſtyces of the peax, of the Countie where ſuche parſon dwelleth: then euery ſuche parſon that by ſuche meanes, or otherwyſe wyllynglye by couyn, ſhall happen to eſcape from the ſayde taxation, or payment aforeſayde, and not be rated, taxed, and ſette, ſhalbe charged vppon the knowledge and profe therof, with and at the double value of ſo muche as he

ſhoulde, myght, or ought to haue ben ſette and taxed at, by vertue of this Acte. And the ſame double value to be leuyed, gathered, and payde, of his goodes and cattelles, landes, and temementes, towardes the ſayde Subſedye, and further to be punyſhed according to the diſcreſſions of the Barons, Iuſtices and Commiſſioners, before whom he ſhalbe conuicted for his offence, and deceite in that behalfe.
            And further be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the ſayde Commyſſyoners in euery Commyſſyon, ſhall accordyng to theyr diuiſions, and after they be deuyded, haue full power and aucthoritie by this Acte, to ſette, taxe, and ſeſſe euery other Commiſſioner, ioyned with them in euery ſuche Commiſſion and diuiſion, and ſhall alſo aſſeſſe euery aſſeſſour within theyr diuiſion, for his and theyr goodes, landes, and other the premiſſes as is aboueſayde: by the which ſayd Commiſſion, the ſayde Commiſſioners ſhall indifferently ſet, taxe, and aſſeſſe them ſelues and the ſaide aſſeſſours. And that aſwel the ſummes vpon euery of the ſayde Commiſſioners and aſſeſſours, ſo ſeſſed, rated, and taxed, as the ſummes made and preſented by the preſenters ſworne as is aboueſayde, ſhalbe written, certified, ſet, and eſtreated, and the eſtreates thereof to be made, with other the inhabitantes of that parties, within the limittes of the ſame Commiſſion and diuiſion ſo to be gathered and leuied, in lyke maner as it ought or ſhoulde haue ben, yf the ſayde Commiſſioners hadde not ben in the ſayde Commiſſion. And that all parſons of the eſtate of a Baron or Barons, and euery eſtate aboue, ſhalbe charged with theyr free holde, and value as is aboueſayde, by the Chauncelour or keper of the greate Seale. Preſident of the Counſell, the hyghe Treaſourer of Englande for the tyme beyng, and other ſuche parſons as by the Quenes Maieſties aucthoritie, ſhalbe named and appoynted, and they to be charged for the ſayde ſeuerall paymentes of the ſayde Subſedye, after the fourme of the ſayde graunt, accordynge to the taxation aforeſayde. And the ſummes vppon them ſette, with the names of the Collectours appoynted for the gatherynge and payinge of the ſame, to be eſtreated, delyuered and certyfyed at dayes and places aboue ſpecyfyed, by the Lorde Chauncellor, or keper of the great Seale, and Treaſourer, and other ſuch parſons as therto ſhalbe named.
            And be it further enacted, by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that after the taxes and aſſeſſes of the ſayd ſummes, vpon

and by the ſayde aſſeſſyng and certificat, as is aforeſaide made, by the ſayde Commyſſyoners, or as manye of them as ſhalbe therevnto appoynted by the Quenes Maieſties Commiſſyon: ſhall with all ſpede, and without delay, by the wrytyng eſtreated of the ſayde taxe thereof, vnder the ſeales and ſignes manuell of the ſayde Commiſſioners, or as many of them as ſhalbe appoynted, at the leaſte to be made, ſhalbe delyuered vnto ſufficient and ſubſtanciall inhabitauntes, Conſtables, Subconſtables, Baylyffes, & other officers ioyntly, of Hundredes, Townes, Paryſhes, and other places aforeſayde, within theyr limittes, or to other ſufficient parſons inhabitauntes of the ſame, onely by the diſcreſſion of the ſayde Commiſſioners, and as the place and parties ſhall require, aſwell the particuler names and ſurnames, as the remembraunce of all ſummes of money taxed and ſet, of, and vpon euery parſon, aſwell men as wemen chargeable to this Acte, houſeholder, and all other the inhabitauntes & dwellers within the ſayd Paryſhes, Townes and places contributory to this Acte of Subſedy. By aucthoritie of which wrytyng or eſtreate ſo delyuered, the ſayde officers and other parſons ſo named and deputed ſeuerallye, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie by vertue of this Acte, immediatly after the delyuery of the ſayd wrytyng or eſtreate, to demaunde, leuie, and gather of euery parſon therein ſpecified, the ſumme and ſummes in the ſame wrytyng or eſtreate compryſed, and for non payment therof, to diſtrayne the ſame parſon or parſons ſo beyng behynde, by theyr goodes and cattels, and the diſtreſſe ſo taken, to kepe by the ſpace of eyght dayes, at the coſtes and charges of the owner therof. And if the ſaid owner do not pay ſuch ſūme of money as ſhalbe taxed by aucthoritie of this Acte, within the ſame .viii. dayes: then the ſame diſtreſſe to be appreaſed by foure, three, or two of the inhabitauntes where ſuch diſtreſſe is taken, and alſo then to be ſolde by the ſayde Conſtable, or other Collectours for the payment of the ſayde money, and the ouerplus commyng of the ſale and kepyng therof (yf any be) to be immediatly reſtored to the owner of the ſame diſtreſſe. Which ſayd officers and other parſons ſo deputed, to aſke, take, gather, and leuie the ſayde ſummes, ſhall aunſwere and be charged for the porcion onely to them aſſigned and limitted, to be gathered, leuyed, and compryſed in the ſayde wrytyng or eſtreate ſo to them, as is aforeſayd delyuered, to the vſe of our Soueraigne Lady the Quenes Maieſtie, and her heyres and ſucceſſours, and the ſayde ſumme in that wrytynge or eſtreate compryſed, to paye vnto the

hygh Collectour or Collectours of that place, for the collection of the ſame, in maner and fourme vnder wrytten, thervnto to be named and deputed. And the ſame inhabitauntes and officers, ſo gathering the ſame particuler ſūmes, for theyr collection therof, ſhall reteyne for euery .xx.s. ſo by them receaued and payde, two pence, & that to be allowed at the payment of theyr collection by them to be made, to the hygh Collectour or Collectours.
            And further, be it enacted by the ſayde aucthoritie, that the ſayde Commiſſioners, or the more part of them, as ſhall take vppon them execution and buſynes of the ſayde Cōmiſſion, ſhall for eyther of the ſame paymentes of the ſayde Subſedye, name ſuche ſufficient and hable parſons, whiche then ſhall haue and poſſede landes and other hereditamentes, in theyr owne ryght, of the yerely value of .xx.li. or goodes to the value of two hundreth markes, at the leaſt. And the parſons ſeuerally by the diſcreſſions of the ſame Cōmiſſioners, in Shires, Ridinges, Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes, Cities, Townes corporate, or other whatſoeuer places, aſwell within places priuileged as without, not beynge forepriſed within this Acte, to be hygh Collectours, & haue theyr collection and receipt of the ſayd ſummes ſet, and leuiable within the precincte, limit, and boundes, where they ſhalbe ſo limitted to gather and receaue. To euery of the which Collectours ſo ſeuerally named, the ſayde Commiſſioners, or two of them at the leaſt, ſhall with all ſpede, & without delaye, after the ſayd whole ſumme of the ſayde Subſedye, be ſette by all the limittes of the ſame their Commiſſion, or in ſuche limittes as the hygh Collectours ſhalbe ſo ſeuerally aſſigned: ſhall vnder the ſeales & ſignes manuell, delyuer one eſtreate indented in parchment, to euery of the ſayde hygh Collectours, compryſyng in it, the names of all ſuch parſons as were aſſigned to leuie the ſayde particuler ſūme and ſūmes of euery Hundred, Wapentake, Towne, or other place aforeſayde, with the names and ſurnames of the parſones ſo chargeable, accordyng to the eſtreate ſo firſt thereof made, as is aforeſayde, and delyuered. And the Collectours ſo to be aſſigned, ſhalbe charged to aunſwere the whole ſumme compriſed in the ſayde eſtreate, limitted to his collection, as is aforeſayde.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the ſayde Commiſſioners hauyng aucthoritie by this Acte, to name and nominate the ſayde hyghe Collectours of the ſaid Subſedy: ſhall immediatly vpon the nomination and election, take by aucthoritie of this preſente Parliament, ſufficient Recogniſaunces or obligations, without any fee or rewarde to be payde therefore, of euerye parſone

ſo by them to be named to be hygh Collectour, to be bounden to the Quenes Maieſtie in the double ſūme of the ſūme of his collection, and to be endorſed and made vpon ſuch condition, that is to ſay, for the collection of the ſaid firſt paiment of the ſaid Subſedye, that yf the ſaide Collectour, his heyres, or executours, do truelye content and paye to the vſe of the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres, or executours, in the receipt of the ſaid Exchequer, before the ſayde firſt day of Iune next commyng, ſo muche of the ſayde ſūme of money allotted & appoynted to his collection, as he ſhall collect and gather, and content and pay the reſidue of his collection and charge, within one moneth nexte after ſuch tyme as he hath gathered & collected the ſame reſidue: that then the ſaid Recogniſaunces or obligation to be voyde, or els to ſtande in full ſtrength & vertue. And for the collection of the ſeconde payment of the ſayd Subſedy, vpon condition that yf the ſaid Collectour, his heyres, or executours, do truely content and pay to the vſe of the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres, or ſucceſſours, in her receipt of the Exchequer, before the .xx. day of February, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God .M.D.lxiii. ſo much of the ſaide ſūme of money allotted and appoynted to his collection, as he ſhal collecte and gather, and content and pay the reſidue of his collection and charge, within one moneth next after ſuch tyme as he hath gathered and collected the ſame reſidue: that then the ſayde Recogniſaunce or obligation to be voyde, or els to ſtande in full ſtrength and vertue. Which ſayd ſeuerall recogniſaunces, or obligations ſo taken, the ſayde Cōmiſſioners ſhal ſeuerally certifie and delyuer the Quenes Maieſties Eſchequer, with the ſeuerall certificates of the ſayde taxations and rates of the paymentes of the ſayde Subſedye, at, & by the tyme to them preſcribed and appoynted by this Acte, for the certificat of the ſayde ſeuerall taxations of the ſayd Subſedye, vpon payne of forfaiture of .x.li. to the Quenes Maieſtie for euery Recogniſaunce or obligation not certified. And that euery ſuch Collectour ſo elected, named, and choſen, vpon requeſt to hym made, ſhall knowledge and make the ſayde Recogniſaunce or obligation, vppon lyke payne and forfeyture of .x.li. to the Quenes Maieſtie for the refuſall therof. And euery Collectour ſo deputed, hauyng the ſayd eſtreate in parchment, as is aforeſayde, ſhall haue aucthoritie by this Acte, to appoynt dayes and places within the circuite of his collection, for the payment of the ſayde Subſedye, to hym to be made, and thereof to geue warnyng by Proclamation or otherwyſe, to all the Conſtables, or other parſons, or inhabitauntes, hauyng the charge of the particuler collection within the Hundredes,

Paryſhes, Townes, or other places, by hym or them limitted to make payment for theyr ſaide particuler collection of euery ſūme, as to them ſhall appertayne. And yf at the ſaid day and place ſo limitted and prefyxed by the ſayd Collectour, the ſayde Conſtable, offycers, and other parſons, or inhabytauntes, as is aforeſayde, for the ſayde particuler collection, aſſigned and appoynted within ſuch Hundred, Citie, Towne, or other place, do not paye vnto the ſayde Collectours, the ſumme within theyr ſeuerall Hundredes, Townes, Pariſhes, and other places, due, and compryſed in the ſayde eſtreate therof, to them delyuered by the ſayde Commiſſioners, or ſome of them, as is aforeſayde, or ſo much therof as they haue by any meane receaued .ii. d. of euery pounde, for the ſayde particuler collection, as is aforeſayde, alwayes to be therof alowed, excepted, and abated: that then it ſhalbe lawefull to the ſaide hygh Collectours, and euery of them, and to theyr aſſignes, to diſtrayne euery of the ſayde Conſtables, officers, and other inhabitauntes, for theyr ſayde ſeuerall and particuler collection of the ſayde ſummes compryſed in the ſayde eſtreate and wrytyng therof to them and euery of them, as is before expreſſed, and delyuered, or for as muche of the ſame ſumme, as ſo then ſhall happen to be gathered and leuyed, and behynde and vnpayde, by the goodes and cattelles of euery of them ſo beyng behynde. And the diſtreſſe ſo taken, to be kept, appreaſed, and ſolde, as is aforeſayde, and therof to take and leuye the ſūmes ſo then beyng behynd & vnpayed. And the ouerplus comming of the ſale of the ſayde diſtreſſe (yf any be) to be reſtored and delyuered vnto the owner, in fourme aboue remembred.
            Prouided alwayes, that no parſon inhabiting in any Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate, ſhalbe cōpelled to be any Aſſeſſour or Collectour, of, or for any part of the ſayde Subſedye, in any place or places out of the ſayde Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate where he dwelleth.
            And it is alſo by the ſayde aucthoritie enacted, that yf any inhabitaunt, or offycer, or whatſoeuer parſon or parſons charged to and for the collection or receipte of any part or parſell of the ſayde Subſedye, by any maner of meanes, according to the tenor of this Acte, or any parſon or parſons for them ſelues, or as keper, gardian, deputie, factour, or atturney, of, or for any other parſon or parſons, of any goodes and cattels, of the owner thereof, at the tyme of the ſayde aſſeſſyng to be made, beyng out of this Realme, or in any other parties not

knowne, or of, and for the goodes and cattelles of any other parſon or parſons of any Corporation, Fraternitie, Myſtery, or other whatſoeuer Cominaltie, being incorporate, or not incorporate, and all parſons hauyng in theyr rule, gouernaunce and cuſtodie, any goodes or cattelles, at the tyme of the ſayde aſſeſſyng, or any of them to be made, or which for any cauſe, for and by collection, or for him ſelfe, or for any other, or by reaſon that he hath the rule, gouernaunce, or cuſtodie of any goodes or cattelles of any other parſon or parſons, Corporation, Cominaltie, Fraternitie, Guylde, or Myſtery, or any ſuch other lyke, or as factor, deputie, or atturney, of, or for any parſon: ſhalbe taxed, rated, valued, and ſet, to any ſumme or ſummes, by reaſon of this Acte, and after the taxation or aſſeſſyng vpon any ſuch parſon or parſons as ſhalbe charged with the receipt of the ſame, happen to dye, or departe from the place where he was ſo taxed and ſet, or his goodes or cattelles be ſo eloyned, or in ſuch priuie and couert maner kepte, as the ſayde parſon or parſons charged with the ſame, by eſtreates or other wrytynges from the ſayde Commiſſioners, or as many of them as ſhalbe thervnto appoynted by the ſayde Cōmiſſion, as is aforeſayde, can ne may leuye the ſame ſumme or ſummes compryſed within the ſame eſtreates, by diſtreſſe, within the limittes of theyr collection, as is aforeſayde, or can not ſell ſuch diſtreſſe or diſtreſſes as be taken for any of the ſayde paymentes, before the tyme limitted to the hygh Collectour, for his payment to be made in the Quenes Maieſties receipt: then vpon relation thereof, with due examination, by the oth or examination of ſuch parſon or parſons as ſhalbe charged with, and for the receipte and collection of the ſame before the ſaid Cōmiſſioners, or as many of them as by the ſayde Commyſſyon ſhalbe therevnto appoynted, where ſuch parſon or parſons, or other as is aforeſayde, theyr goodes and cattelles, were ſet and taxed, and vpon playne certificat thereof made in the Quenes Maieſties Exchequer by the ſame Commiſſioners, aſwel of the dwelling place, names, and ſummes, of the ſayde parſons of whom the ſayde ſummes can not be leuyed and had, as is aforeſaide: then aſwell the Conſtables and other inhabitauntes appointed for the ſayde particuler collection, agaynſt the hygh Collectours, as the high Collectour vpon his accompt and oth in the ſame Exchequer, to be diſcharged therof, & proces to be made for the Quenes Maieſtie out of the ſayd Exchequer, by the diſcreſſion of the Barons of the ſaid Exchequer, againſt ſuch parſon, his

heyres, or executours, ſo being behynd with his payment. And ouer that, the ſame Cōmiſſioners to whom any ſuch declaration of the premiſſes ſhalbe made, in fourme aforeſayde, frō time to tyme, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie, to directe theyr precept or preceptes vnto the ſayde parſon or parſons charged with any ſūme, of, for, and vpon any ſuch parſon or parſons, or other as is aforeſayde, or to any Sheryffe, Stewarde, Baylyffe, or other whatſoeuer offycer, mynyſter, parſon or parſons of ſuche place or places where any ſuche parſon or parſons ſo owyng ſuche ſumme or ſummes, ſhall haue landes and tenementes, or other hereditamentes, or reall poſſeſſions, goodes, & cattelles, wherby any ſuch parſon or parſons ſo indebtted, his heires, executours or aſſignes, or other hauing the cuſtody, gouernaunce, or diſpoſition of any goodes, cattelles, landes or tenementes, or other heredimantes, which ought or may by this Acte lawfully be diſtrayned or taken for the ſame, hath & ſhal haue goodes, cattels, landes, tenementes, or other poſſeſſions, wherof ſuch ſūme or ſūmes which by any ſuch parſon or parſons, may, or ought to be leuyed, be it within the limittes of ſuch Commiſſion where ſuche parſon or parſons was and were taxed, or without, in any place within this Realme of Englande, Wales, or other the Quenes Maieſties Dominions, Marches, or Territories. By which precept, aſwell ſuch parſon or parſons as ſhalbe charged to leuye ſuche ſumme of money, as the officers of the place or places where ſuch diſtreſſe may be taken: ſhall haue full power & aucthoritie to diſtraine euery ſuch parſon indebtted, charged, and chargeable by this Acte, or his executours, or adminiſtratours, of his goodes and cattelles, his gardians, factours, deputies, leſſees, farmours, and aſſignes, and all other parſons by whoſe handes, or out of whoſe landes, any ſuche parſons ſhoulde haue rent, fee, annuitie, or other profyte, or whiche at the tyme of the ſayde aſſeſſynges, ſhall haue goodes or cattelles, or any other thyng moueable, of any ſuch parſon or parſons beyng indebtted, or owing ſuch ſumme. And the diſtreſſe ſo taken, cauſe to be kept, appreaſed, and ſolde, in lyke maner and fourme, as is aforeſayde for the diſtreſſe to be taken, vpon ſuch parſons to be taxed to the ſayde Subſedye, and beyng ſufficient to diſtrayne within the limittes of the Collectours, Inhabitauntes, or other offycers, charged with, or for the ſame ſumme ſo vppon them to be taxed. And yf any ſuch diſtreſſe for non payment, happen to be taken, out of the limit of the ſaide parſons, charged

and aſſigned to leuie the ſame: the parſons ſo charged for the leuie of any ſuch ſumme by diſtreſſe, ſhal parceiue and take of the ſame diſtreſſe, for the laboure of euery parſon goyng for the execution therof, for euery myle that any ſuch parſon ſo laboureth for the ſame .ii.d. And euery fermour, tenaunt, gardian, factour, or other whatſoeuer parſon, beyng diſtrayned, or otherwyſe charged for payment of any ſuch ſumme or ſummes, or any other ſumme by reaſon of this Acte, ſhalbe of ſuch ſūme or ſummes of hym or them ſo leuied and taken, diſcharged and acquited at his next day of payment of the ſame, or at the delyuery of ſuch goodes and cattelles, as he that is ſo diſtrayned, had in his cuſtodye and gouernaunce, agaynſt him or them that ſhalbe ſo taxed and ſet: any graunt, or wrytyng obligatorie, or other whatſoeuer matter to the contrary made heretofore, notwithſtandyng. And yf any ſuche parſon that ſhoulde be ſo diſtrayned, haue no landes or tenements ſufficient, wherby he or his tenauntes and fermours may be diſtrayned, or haue alyened or hyd his goodes and cattelles, whereby he ſhoulde or myght be diſtrayned, in ſuche maner that ſuche goodes and cattelles ſhall not be knowen or found, ſo that the ſumme, of, or by hym to be payde in the ſayde fourme, ſhall ne can be conueniently leuied: then vpon relation thereof to the Commiſſioners, or to as many of them as by the ſayde Commiſſion ſhalbe thervnto appoynted, where ſuch parſon or parſons was taxed and ſet, by the othes of hym or them that ſhalbe charged with the leuie and payment of that ſūme or ſūmes, the ſame Commiſſioners ſhall make a precepte, in ſuch maner as is aforeſaid, for to attache, take, and arreſt the body of ſuch parſon or parſons that ought to pay the ſayd ſummes, and by this Acte ſhalbe charged with and for the ſaide ſūme or ſūmes: and them ſo taken, ſafely to kepe in pryſon, within the ſhyre or other place where any ſuch parſon or parſons ſhalbe taken and attached, there to remayne without bayle or mainpryſe, vntyll he hath payde the ſame ſūme or ſummes that ſuch parſon for hym ſelfe, or for any other, by this Acte ſhalbe chargeable, or ought to be charged withall. And alſo for the fees of euery ſuch arreſt, to him or them that ſhal execute ſuch precept xx.d. And that euery officer vnto whom ſuche precepte ſhalbe directed, do his true diligence, and execute the ſame vpon euerye parſon ſo beyng indebtted, vppon payne to forfeyte to the Quenes Maieſtie for euery defaulte in that behalfe twenty ſhyllynges. And that no keper of any Gaole, from his Gaole

ſuffer any ſuche parſon to go at large by lettyng to bayle, or otherwyſe to departe out of his pryſon, before he haue payde his ſayde debte, and the ſayde .xx.d. for the ſayde arreſt, vpon payne to forfeyte to the Quenes Maieſtie fortye ſhyllynges, and the ſame Gaoler to paye vnto the Quenes Maieſtie the double value, aſwell of the rate which the ſayde parſon ſo impriſoned was taxed, as of the ſayde .xx.d. for the fees. And lyke proces and remedye, in lyke maner and fourme, ſhalbe graunted by the ſayde Commiſſioners, or as many of them as by the ſayde Commiſſion ſhalbe therevnto appoynted, at lyke infirmation of euery parſon or parſons beyng charged with any ſumme of money, for any other parſon or parſons by reaſon of the ſayde Subſedye, and not therof payde, but wylfully withdrawen, ne the ſame leuyable within the limittes where ſuche parſons were therevnto taxed. And yf the ſumme or ſummes beyng behynd vnpayde, by any parſon or parſons, as is aforeſayde, be leuyed and gathered by force of the ſayde proces to be made by the ſayde Commiſſioners, or yf indefaulte, or for lacke of payment therof, the parſon or parſons ſo owyng the ſayde ſumme or ſummes of money, by proces of the ſame Commiſſioners to be made as is aforeſayde, be committed to pryſon in fourme aboueſayde: that then the ſayde Commiſſioners which ſhal awarde ſuch proces, ſhall make certificat therof in the ſayde Exchequer, of that ſhalbe done in the premiſſes, in the Terme next folowyng, after ſuch ſumme or ſummes of money ſo beyng behynde, ſhalbe leuyed and gathered, or ſuch parſon or parſons for non payment of the ſame committed to pryſon. And yf it happen any of the ſayde Collectours to be aſſigned, or any Maiors, Sheryffes, Stewardes, Conſtables, the Nedborow, Borſholder, Bailiffe, or any other officer or miniſter, or other whatſoeuer parſon or parſons, to diſobeye the ſayd Cōmiſſyoners or any of them, in the reaſonable requeſt to them made by the ſayde Commiſſioners, for the execution of the ſayd Commiſſion, or yf any of the officers or other parſons do refuſe that to them ſhall appertayne and belong to do, by reaſon of any precepte to hym or them to be directed, or anye reaſonable commaundement, inſtaunce, or requeſt, touchyng the premyſſes, or other default, in any appearaunce, or collection to make, or yf any parſon beyng ſuſpecte, or not to be indifferentlye taxed, as is aforeſayde, do refuſe to be examined, accordyng to the tenor of this Acte, before the ſayde Commiſſioners, or as many of them as ſhalbe therevnto aſſigned, as is

aforeſayde, or wyll not appeare before the ſame Commyſſyoners vpon warnyng to hym made, or els make reſiſtaunce or reſcous, vpon any diſtreſſe vpon hym to be taken, for any parcell of the ſayde Subſedye, or committe any miſbehauiour in any maner of wyſe contrarye to this Acte, or committe any wylfull omyſſion, or other whatſoeuer wylfull not doyng or miſdoyng, contrary to the tenor of this Acte or graunt: the ſame Cōmiſſioners and euery number of them aboue remembred, or two of them at the leaſt, vpon probable knowledge of any ſuch miſdemeanours, had by information or examination, ſhall and maye ſette vpon euery ſuche offendour for euery ſuch offence, in name of a fyne by the ſame offendour to be forfeyted, fortye ſhyllynges, or vnder, by the diſcreſſyon of the ſame Commiſſioners. And further, the ſame Commiſſioners and euery number of them, or two of them at the leaſte, ſhall haue aucthoritie by this preſent Acte, to punyſhe euery ſuche offendour by inpryſonment, there to remayne, and to be delyuered by theyr diſcreſſion, as ſhall ſeme to them conuenient, the ſayde fynes, yf any ſuche be, to be certified by the ſayde Commyſſyoners that ſo aſſeſſed the ſame, into the Quenes Maieſties ſaid Exchequer, there to be leuyed and payde by the Collectours of that parties for the ſaid Subſedy, returned into the ſayde Exchequer, to be therwith charged with the payment of the ſayde Subſedye, in ſuch maner as the ſayde fines had ben ſette and taxed vpon the ſayde offenders, for the ſayde Subſedye.
            It is alſo enacted by the ſayde aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that euery of the ſayde hygh Collectours, which ſhall accompte for any part of the ſayde Subſedye in the ſayde Exchequer, vpon theyr ſeuerall ſayde accomptes to be yelded, ſhalbe alowed at euery of the ſayde paymentes of the ſayde Subſedye, for euery pounde limitted to his collection, wherof any ſuch Collectour ſhalbe charged, and yelde accopmte .vi.d. as parcell of their charge, that is to ſaye, of euery pound therof, for ſuch parſon as then haue hadde the particuler collection in the Townes and other places as is aforeſayde, ſpecified in his collection .ii.d. and other .ii.d. of euery pounde thereof euery of the ſayde chiefe Collectours or theyr accomptauntes to reteyne to theyr owne vſe, for theyr labour and charge, in and about the premiſſes, and .ii.d. of euery pounde reſidue to be delyuered, alowed, and payde, by the ſayde Collectours ſo beyng thereof alowed, to ſuche of the Commiſſioners as ſhall

take vppon them the buſyneſſe and labour, for, and about the premiſſes, that is to ſaye, euery Collectour to paye that Commiſſioner or Commiſſioners whiche hadde the orderyng of the wrytnges, of, and for the ſayde Subſedye, where the ſayde Collectour or Collectours had theyr collection, for the expences of the ſayde Commiſſioners ſo takyng vpon them the ſaide buſynes and labour of theyr Clarkes writing of the preceptes and extractes for the ſayde collections, the ſame laſte .ii.d. of euery pounde to be deuyded amongſt the ſayd Commiſſioners, hauyng regarde to theyr labour and buſynes, taken by them or theyr ſayde Clarkes, in, and about the premiſſes. For the which part ſo to the ſayde Commiſſioners attaynyng, the ſaid Commiſſioners .vi.v.iiii.iii. or as manye of them as ſhalbe therevnto appoynted by the Quenes Maieſties Commiſſion, and euery of them, ioyntly & ſeuerally, for his and theyr ſaide parte, maye haue his remedy agaynſte the ſayde Collectour or Collectours, which therof ben and myght haue ben allowed by action of debt, in whiche the defendaunt ſhall not wage his lawe, neyther protection, neyther Iniunction, or other Eſſoygne ſhalbe alowed. And that no parſon, nowe beyng of the number of the companye of this preſent Parliament, nor any Commiſſioner, ſhalbe named or aſſigned to be anye Collectour or Subcollectour, or preſentour of the ſayde Subſedye, or of any part therof, nor no Commyſſyoners ſhalbe compelled to make anye preſentemente or certificate, other then in the Quenes Maieſties ſayde Exchequer, of, for, or concernynge the ſayde Subſedye, or any part therof. And lykewyſe that no other parſon that ſhalbe named or aſſigned to be Commiſſioners in any place, to, and for thexecution of this Acte of Subſedye, be, or ſhalbe aſſigned or named head Collectours of any of the paymentes of the ſayde Subſedye, neyther of any parte therof. And that euery ſuch parſon or parſons whiche ſhalbe named and appoynted as is aforeſayde, to be head Collectours in, and for the fyrſte payment of this Subſedye, ſhall not be compelled to be Collectour for the ſecond payment of the ſaide Subſedye, or for any parte therof. And the ſayde Collectours which ſhalbe aſſigned for the collection of the ſaide Subſedye, or for any parte thereof, and euery of them, be, and ſhalbe acquited and diſcharged of all maner fees, rewardes, and of euery other charges in the Quenes Maieſties Exchequer, or els where, of them or of any of them, by reaſon of that collection, payment, or accomptes, or any thyng concernyng the ſame to be aſked. And that if any parſon receaue or take any fees, rewardes,

or pleaſures of any ſuch accomptaunt: that then he ſhall forfeyte to the Quenes Maiſtie, for euery peny or value of euery penye ſo taken .v.s. and ſuffer impriſonment at the Quenes Maieſties pleaſure. And after the taxyng and aſſeſſyng of the ſayde Subſedye (as is aforeſayde) had or made, and the ſayde extractes therof in parchment, vnto the Collectour, in maner and fourme before rehearſed, deliuered: the ſaid Cō
               miſſioners whiche ſhall take vpon them thexecutions of this Acte, within the limittes of theyr Commiſſion by theyr agrementes, ſhall haue metyng together, at which metyng, euery of the ſaide Commiſſioners which then ſhall haue taken vpon them thexecution of any part of the ſayde Cōmiſſion, ſhall by hym ſelfe, or by his ſufficient deputie, truely certifie and bring forth vnto the ſaide Cōmyſſyoners named in the ſayde Cōmiſſion, the certificat and preſentment, made before him and ſuch other Cōmiſſioners as were limitted with hym in one limitte, ſo that the ſame certificat may be accompted and caſt with the other certificates of the other limittes within the ſame Commiſſion, & then the ſaid Cōmiſſioners & euery number of them, vnto two at the leaſt, as is aforeſaide, yf any be in lyfe, or theyr executours, or adminiſtratours of their goodes yf they then be dead, ſhall ioyntly and ſeuerally, as they were deuided within their limittes, vnder theyr ſeales, by theyr diſcreſſiō, make one or ſeuerall wyrtynges indented, conteynyng in it aſwell the names of the ſaid Collectours, by the Commiſſioners for ſuch collection & accomptes in the Exchequer, and payment in the ſayde receipte, deputed and aſſigned, as the groſſe and ſeuerall ſūmes wrytten vnto euery ſuch Collectour to receaue the ſaide Subſedye. And alſo all fines, amerciamentes, & other forfeytures, if any ſuch by reaſō of this Act happen to be within the precinct and limitte of their Cōmiſſion, to be certified into the Quenes Maieſties ſaide Exchequer by the ſaid Cōmiſſioners. In which writing or writinges indented ſo to be certified, ſhal be plainely declared and expreſſed the whole & entier ſūme or ſūmes of the ſayd Subſedy, ſeuerally limitted to the collection of the ſayd Collectours, ſeuerally deputed & aſſigned to the collection of the ſayde ſūmes, ſo that none of the ſaid Collectours ſo certified in the ſaid Exchequer, ſhalbe compelled there to accompt, or to be charged, but onlye to and for the ſumme limitted to his collection, and not to or for any ſūme limitted to the collection of his felowe, but that euery of them ſhalbe ſeuerally charged for theyr part, limitted to theyr collection. And if the ſaide Cōmiſſioners ioyned in one Cōmiſſion, among them

ſelues in that matter can not agree, or yf anye of them be not redy, or refuſe to make certificat with other of the ſame Commiſſioners: that then the ſame Cōmiſſioners may make ſeueral Indentures in fourme aforeſaid, of theyr ſeueral limittes, or ſeperations of Collectours within the limittes of their Cō
               miſſion, vpō & in the Hundredes, Wardes, Wapētakes, Lathes, Rapes, or ſuch other lyke diuiſions within theyr ſayde ſeueral limittes of their Cōmiſſion, as the places there ſhall require to be ſeuered & deuided, and as to the ſame Commiſſioners ſhall ſeme good, to make diuiſions of their limittes or collections, for the ſeueral charges of the ſame Collectours, ſo that alway one Collectour ſhalbe charged & accompt for his part to him to be limitted, only by him ſelfe, and not for any ſūme limitted to the part of any of his felowes, and the charges of euery of the Collectours to be ſet and certified ſeuerallye vpon them, and euery ſuch Collectour, vpon his accompt and payment of the ſūme of money limitted within his collection, to be ſeuerally by hym ſelfe acquited and diſcharged in the ſayde Exchequer, without paying any maner fees or rewardes to any parſon or parſons for the ſame, vpon the payne and penaltie laſt aboueſayde, and not to be charged for any porcion of any other Collectour. And yf any Com̄iſſioner, after he hath taken certificat of them, that as is aforeſayde, ſhall before any ſuche Commyſſyoner be examined, and the ſummes rated and ſet, and the bookes and wrytynges thereof beyng in his handes, or yf any Collectour or other parſon, charged with any receipte of any parte of the ſayde Subſedye, or anye other parſon taxed, or otherwyſe by this Acte charged with and for any parcell of the ſayde Subſedye, or with any other ſummes, or fine, amerciament, penaltie, or other forfeyture, happen to dye, before the Commyſſyoner, Collectour, or other whatſoeuer parſon or parſons haue executed, accomplyſhed, ſatiſfied, or ſufficientlye diſcharged that whiche to euerye ſuche parſon ſhall apperteyne or belong to do, accordynge to this Acte: then the executours and heyres of euery ſuche parſon, and all other ſeaſed of anye landes or tenementes, that any ſuche parſon beyng charged by this Acte, and deceaſſyng before he be diſcharged thereof, or anye other to his vſe onlye hadde, of eſtate of enheritaunce, at the time that any ſuch parſon was named Cō
               miſſioner, Collectour, or otherwyſe charged with and for any maner of thynge to be done, ſatiſfied, or payde, by reaſon of this Acte. And all thoſe that haue in theyr poſſeſſyons or handes, any goodes, cattelles, leaſſes, or other thynges, that

to any ſuch parſon or parſōs at the tyme of his death, or any landes, or tenementes, that were the ſame parſons, at the tyme he was (as is aforeſayde) charged by this Acte, ſhalbe by the ſame, compelled and charged to do, and accomplyſhe to do in euery caſe as the ſame parſon ſo beyng charged ſhould haue done, and myght haue ben compelled to do, yf he hadde ben in playne lyfe, after ſuche rate, of the landes and goodes of the ſayde Commiſſioner or Collectour, as the partie ſhall haue in his hande. And yf the ſayde Commiſſioners, for cauſes reaſonable them mouyng, ſhall thynke it not conuenient to ioyne in one certificat, as is aforeſadye: then the ſayde parſon or parſons that ſhall fyrſte ioyne together, or he that ſhall fyrſte certifie the ſayde wrytyng indented, as is aforeſayde, ſhall certifie all the names of the Commiſſioners of that Commiſſion, wherevpon ſuche wrytynges ſhalbe there then to be certified, with diuiſion of the Hundredes, Wapentakes, Wardes, Tythynges, or other places, to, and among ſuch Commiſſioners of the ſame Commyſſyon, with the names of the ſame Commiſſioners where ſuch ſeperations and diuiſions ſhalbe, with the groſſe ſummes of money, aſwell of and for the ſayde Subſedye, taxed or ſet, of, or within the ſayde Hundredes, Wardes, Wapentakes, or other places to hym or them deuided or aſſigned, that ſhall ſo certifie the ſayde fyrſte wrytyng, as of fines, amerciamentes, penalties, or other forfeyſures, yf any happen to be within the ſame limittes whereof the ſame wrytynges ſhalbe certified, and after ſuch wrytyng indented, which, as is aforeſayde, ſhalbe certified, and not conteyne in it the whole and full ſummes ſet and taxed within the limittes of the ſame Commiſſion, the other Commiſſioners of the ſame, before the day of payment of the ſayde Subſedye, ſhall certifie into the ſayde Exchequer, by theyr wrytyng or wrytynges indented, to be made as is aforeſayde, the groſſe and ſeuerall ſummes, ſet and taxed within the places to them lymytted for the ſayde Subſedye, and other fines, amerciamentes, penalties, and forfeytures, with the names of the Hundredes, Wardes, Wapentakes, and other places to them aſſigned, or els by theyr ſayde wrytynges indented, to certifie at the ſame place, before the ſayde day of payment, ſuch reaſonable cauſes for theyr excuſes, why they may not make ſuch certificat, of, and for the ſayde Subſedye, fynes, amerciamentes, and other forfeitures growyng or ſette by reaſon of the cauſes of theyr lettes, or of their non certifying, as is aforeſayde, or els in default therof, proces to be made out of the Quenes Maieſties ſayde Exchequer,

agaynſt the ſaide Commiſſioners and euery of them, not makyng certificate, as is aforeſayde, by the diſcreſſion of the Treaſourer or Barons of the ſayde Exchequer.
            Prouyded alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the Inhabitauntes of the Paryſhe of Saint Martin, called Stampforde Baron, in the Suburbes of the Borowe and Towne of Stampforde, in the South part of the water there, called Wellande, whiche hereafter ſhalbe contributory to the payment of this preſent Subſedie, graunted to the Quenes Maieſtie, her heyres and ſucceſſours, ſhalbe aſſeſſed, rated, and taxed for this time by ſuche Commiſſioners which ſhalbe appointed for the taxing, rating, & ſeſſing of ſuch Subſedie or Taxe within the Countie of Lincolne, and ſhalbe for this tyme contributory and pay the ſayde Subſedye to the Collectour or Collectours which ſhalbe aſſigned & appoynted for the leuying and gatheryng of the ſame, with the Aldermen & Burgeſſes of the ſayde Borowe and Towne of Stampford.
            Prouided alwayes, and be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and euery parſon and parſons hauyng manours, landes, tenementes, and other hereditamentes, chargeable to the payment of the Subſedye graunted to the Quenes Maieſtie by this Acte, and alſo hauyng ſpiritual poſſeſſions chargeable to her ſayd Maieſtie by the graūt made by the Clergye of this Realme in their Conuocation, and ouer this, hauyng ſubtaunce in goodes and cattelles chargeable by this ſaide Acte: that then yf any of the ſayde parſon or parſons be hereafter charged, aſſeſſed, and taxed, for the ſayde manours, landes, and tenementes, and ſpirituall poſſeſſions, and alſo aſſeſſed, charged, and taxed for his or theyr goodes and cattelles: that then he or they ſhalbe onely charged by vertue of this Acte for his and their ſayde manours, landes, tenementes, hereditamentes, and ſpirituall poſſeſſions, or onlye for his ſayde goodes and cattelles, the beſt therof to be taken for the Quenes Maieſtie, and not to be charged for both, or double charged for any of them: Any thynge in this Acte conteyned to the contrary, in any wiſe notwithſtandyng.
            Prouyded alwayes, that this graunt of Subſedye nor anye thynge therein conteyned, in any wyſe extende to charge the Inhabytauntes or dwellers in Irelande, Ierneſey, and Garneſey, or anye of them, of, or concernyng any manours, landes, tenementes, or other poſſeſſions, goodes,

cattelles, or other moueable ſubſtaunce, which the ſayde inhabytauntes, or dwellers, or any other to theyr vſe haue within Irelande, Ierneſey, and Garneſey, or in any of them, or of, for, or concernyng any fees, or wages, which any of the ſayde inhabitauntes or dwellers, haue of the Quenes Maieſtie, for theyr attendaunce, and doyng ſeruyce to our Soueraigne Ladye in Irelande, Ierneſey, and Garneſey, or in any of them: any thyng in this preſent Acte to the contrarye, in any wyſe notwithſtandyng.
            Prouyded alſo, that this preſent Acte of Subſedy, ne any thyng therein conteyned, extende to any of the Englyſhe inhabitantes or reſiantes in any of the counties of Northumberlande, Cumberlande, Weſtmerlande, the Towne or Barwycke, the Towne of Newcaſtell vpon Tine, & the Biſhopricke of Durham▪ nor to any of them, of, for, or concernyng any manours, landes, tenementes, or other poſſeſſions, goodes, cattelles, or other moueable ſubſtaunce, which the ſame inhabitantes or dwellers, or any other to their vſe, haue within the ſayde counties of Northumberlande, Cumberlande, Weſtmerlande, or the Towne of Barwycke, the Towne of Newcaſtell vpon Tine, or the Byſhoprycke of Durham, or any of them, or of, for, or concernyng any fees or wages, whiche any of the ſayde inhabitauntes or dwellers haue of the Quenes Maieſtie, for theyr attendaunce and doyng ſeruyce to the Quenes for, or within the ſayde Counties of Northumberlande, Cumberlande, Weſtmerlande, the Towne of Barwicke, the Towne of Newecaſtell vpon Tine, and the Byſhoprycke of Durham, or any of them, to, or for the ſayde taxyng, leuying, gatheryng, or payment: but that the Englyſhe inhabytauntes and reſyauntes, and euery of them, of the ſayd Counties, Byſhoprycke, and Townes, and euery of them, ſhalbe of, and from the ſayde Subſedye, and euery parcell therof, and for theyr manours, landes, tenementes, fees, wages, goodes, and cattelles, lying and beyng in the ſayde Counties, Townes, and Byſhoprycke, or any of them, vtterly acquited and diſcharged: any thyng in this preſent Act before rehearſed to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            Prouyded alſo, that all letters patentes graunted by the Quenes Maieſtie, or any of her moſt noble progenitours, to any Cities, Boroughes, or Townes within this Realme, of any maner of liberties, priuileges, or exemptions, frō the burden & charge of any ſuch graūtes of Subſedy, which be at this

preſent time in force & vayleable, ſhall remayne good and effectuall, to the ſayde Cities, Boroughes, and Townes hereafter, accordyng to the purportes therof, though the inhabitauntes of the ſame, ſhall vpon the great and wayghtie conſideration of the graunt aboueſayde, be for this graunt charged and contributory, in lyke maner, fourme, and ſorte, as other Cities Boroughes, and Townes, whiche be not in any wyſe pryuyleged, be from ſuche graunt of Subſedye excepted.
            Prouyded alwayes, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that no Orphan, or Infant within the age of xxi. yeres, borne within any of the Quenes Maieſties dominions, ſhalbe charged to any payment of this Subſedy, for his or her goodes and cattels, to hym or her left or bequeathed: any thing in this Act conteyned to the contrary notwithſtanding.
            Prouyded alſo, that this Acte nor any thyng therein conteyned, ſhall not extende to the goodes or landes of anye Colledge, Hall, or Hoſtell, within the Vniuerſities of Oxforde and Cambridge, or any of them, or to the goodes or landes of the Colledge of Wynton, founded by Byſhop Wykeham, or to the goodes or landes of the Colledges of Wyndſor, and Eaton next Wyndſor, or to the goodes or landes of any common free Grammer Scole within the Realme of Engalnde or Wales, or to the goodes of any Reader, Scolemaiſter, or Scoler, or any graduate reſyant or remayning for ſtudie, without fraude or couin, within any of the ſayde Vniuerſities and Colleges, or Townes of Cambridge and Oxforde, or Suburbes of the ſame, or any of them, or to any theyr ſeruauntes dayly attendaunt vpon any of them, nor to the goodes of any officer, miniſter, almeſman, or ſeruauntes belongyng to any of the ſaid Vniuerſities, Colledges, Halles, or Hoſtelles, and dwellynge and reſyaunt within the ſayd Vniuerſities, or eyther of them, or within eyther of the ſayde Townes of Cambridge and Oxforde, and Suburbes of the ſame, without fraude or couyn. Nor to the goodes and landes of any Hoſpytall, Meaſondue, or Spittell houſe, prepared and vſed for the ſuſtentation and reliefe of poore people: any thynge in this Acte conteyned to the contrary in any wyſe notwithſtandyng.
            Prouyded alſo, that the ſayde graunt of Subſedye, or any thyng therin conteyned, do not in any wyſe extende, or be preiudiciall or hurtefull to the inhabitauntes or reſyauntes at this preſente tyme within the fyue Portes corporate, or to anye of theyr members incorporate or vnited to the ſame fyue

Portes, or to any of the ſame fyue Portes, of, or for any part or parcell of the ſayde ſummes graunted in this Parliament, of the ſayde inhabitauntes nowe reſyaunt, or any of them, to be taxed, ſet, aſked, leuyed or payde. But the ſayde inhabytauntes and reſyauntes in the ſayde fyue Portes, and theyr members, be, and ſhalbe, of, and from the ſayde graunt and paymente of the ſayde Subſedye, durynge theyr reſyauncye there, and no longer, clerely acquyted & diſcharged: any matter, or whatſoeuer thyng in this Acte, had or made to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            Prouyded alſo, and be it enacted, that foraſmuche as diuers and ſundry the Quenes Maieſties tenaūtes, and other inhabitantes and dwellers within the counties of Penbroke, Carmarthen, Cardygan, Brecknocke, Glamorgan, Radnour, Mongomery, Denbygh, Flynt, Merioneth, Angleſey, Carnaruan, & of the Countie palentine of Cheſter, be at this preſent tyme charged and chargeable, aſwell with the ſeuerall paymentes of diuers great ſummes of money, by the name of Myſe due to her Maieſtie, accordyng to the ſeuerall cuſtomes of the ſayde Counties: as alſo with the paymentes of dyuers ſeuerall Subſedyes, lately graunted to our late ſoueraigne Lorde and Lady, kyng Phylyp and Quene Mary, and to the Quenes hyghneſſe that nowe is, and yet vnpayde.
            Be it therefore ordeyned and enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that this Acte of Subſedy, or any thyng therin conteyned, ſhall not extnde to charge any of the Quenes tenauntes, & other inhabitantes and dwellers within any of the ſayde Counties of Penbroke, Carmarthen, Cardygan, Glamorgan, Brecknocke, Radnour, Mongomery, Denbygh, Flynt, Merioneth, Angleſey, Carnaruan, and the Countie palentine of Cheſter, beyng charged or chargeable with the ſayde Myſe, or ſeuerall Subſedyes, for, or in anye of the paymentes of the ſayde Subſedye, graunted to the Quenes Maieſtie by this Acte, vntyll the ſayde ſeuerall dayes and tymes for the paymente of the ſayde Myſes ſhalbe expyred, and vntyll the dayes and tymes aſwell of the ſayde ſeuerall Subſedyes lately graunted to our ſayde late Soueraigne Lorde and Soueraigne Lady, Kyng Phylyp and Quene Mary, as alſo of the ſayde Subſedye heretofore graunted to the Quenes Maieſtie that nowe is, be alſo paſt and expyred. And that then the fyrſt payment of the ſayde Subſedye graunted by this preſent Act, ſhalbe made at the receipte of the Quenes Exchequer

before the firſt day of Iune, next folowyng after the laſt dayes of the laſt payment to be had or appoynted of the ſaide Myſes, and of the payment of the ſayde former Subſedyes. And the ſeconde payment of this Subſedye, to be made by or before the xx. day of February, next after the ſayde payment of the ſayde Subſedye.
            Furthermore, be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the tenauntes and dwellers of euery of the ſayde Counties in this prouiſo remembred, ſhall ſeuerallye before the feaſte of Penthecoſt nexte enſuyng, certifie into the ſayde court of Exchequer, vnder the ſeales of two Iuſtices of peax, of euery of the ſayde Counties, wherof one to be of the Quorum, when and what day the laſte payment of the ſayde ſeuerall Myſes nowe due in any of the ſayde Counties, ſhall ende and expyre.
            Prouyded alſo, that the ſayde graunt of Subſedye, and two Fyftenes and Tenthes, do not in any maner of wyſe extende or be preiudiciall or hurtefull to the inhabitauntes or reſyauntes at this preſent tyme within the liberties of Romney Marſhe, of, or for any part of the ſayde ſummes graunted in this preſent Parliament, of the ſayde inhabitauntes nowe reſyauntes, or any of them, to be taxed, ſette, aſked, leuyed, or payde. But that the ſayde inhabitauntes, & nowe reſiauntes of Romney Marſhe aforeſayde, and euery of them, be, and ſhalbe of, and from the ſaide graunt and payment of the ſayde Subſedye and Fyftenes and Tenthes, duryng theyr reſyauncie there, and not longer, acquyted and diſcharged: Any matter or whatſoeuer thyng in this preſente Acte made, or had to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            God ſaue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprynted at London in Powles Churchyarde by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Quenes Maieſtie.
            
               Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   