
      
         
            
            
            
               ANNO PRIMO REGINAE ELIZABETHE. At the Parliament begunne at Weſtminſter, the .xxiij. of
                Ianuarie, in the fyrſt yere of the raigne of our Soueraigne Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of Englande, Fraunce, and Irelande, Queene, defender of the fayth. &c. And there proroged till the .xxv. of the ſame moneth, and then and there holden, kept, and continued, vntyll the diſſolution of the ſame, being the eight day of May then next enſuyng, were enacted as foloweth. (⸫) 1559.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The Table.
            
               
                  
                     
                        AN acte reſtoryng to the Crowne the auncient iuriſdiction, ouer the ſtate Eccleſiaſticall and Spiritual, and aboliſhing all forraigne power repugnaunt to the ſame.
                     Cap. i.
                  
                  
                     An acte for the vniformitie of common prayer and ſeruice in the Churche, and the adminiſtration of the Sacramentes.
                     Cap. ii.
                  
                  
                     An acte of recognition the Queenes highnes title, to the imperiall crowne of this Realme.
                     Cap. iii.
                  
                  
                     An acte for the reſtitution of the fyrſt fruites and tenthes, and rentes reſerued nomine decime, and of parſonages impropriate to the imperiall crowne of this Realme.
                     Cap. iiii.
                  
                  
                     An acte whereby certayne offences be made treaſon.
                     Cap. v.
                  
                  
                     An acte for the explanation of the ſtatute of ſeditious wordes and rumours.
                     Cap. vi.
                  
                  
                     An acte to reuiue a ſtatute made in the .xxiii. yere of the raigne of king Henry the eyght, touchyng the conueying of Horſes, Geldynges, and Mares into Scotlande.
                     Cap. vii.
                  
                  
                     An acte touchyng Shomakers and Curriors.
                     Cap. viii.
                  
                  
                     An acte touching Tanners, and the ſelling of tanned lether.
                     Cap. ix.
                  
                  
                     An acte that the carying of leather, tallowe, or rawe hydes out of the Realme for marchaundize, ſhalbe felonie.
                     Cap. x.
                  
                  
                     An acte limiting the times for laying on land marchaundize, from beyond the ſeas, and touching cuſtomes for ſweete wines.
                     Cap. xi.
                  
                  
                     An acte agaynſt the deceitfull vſyng of linnen cloth.
                     Cap. xii.
                  
                  
                     An acte for the ſhipping in Engliſhe botomes.
                     Cap. xiii.
                  
                  
                     An acte for the continuaunce of the makyng of Wollen clothe in dyuers Townes in the Countie of Eſſex.
                     Cap. xiiii.
                  
                  
                     An acte that tymber ſhall not be felled to make coales for the burnyng of iron.
                     Cap. xv.
                  
                  
                     An acte to continue the acte made agaynſt rebellious aſſembles.
                     Cap. xvi.
                  
                  
                     An acte for the preſeruation of ſpawne and fry of fiſhe.
                     Cap. xvii.
                  
                  
                     An acte for the continuaunce of certayne ſtatutes.
                     Cap. xviii.
                  
                  
                     An acte of a Subſidie of Tonnage and Pondage.
                     Cap. xix.
                  
                  
                     An acte of a Subſidie, and two Fifteenes and Tenthes, graunted by the Temporaltie.
                     Cap. xx.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  ❧
                  An Acte reſtoring to the Crowne the auncient iuriſdiction ouer the ſtate Eccleſiaſticall and Spirituall, and abolyſhing all forraigne power repugnaunt to the ſame. ¶ The firſt Chapter.
               
               
                  MOſte humbly beſeche your moſt excellent Maieſtie, your faythful and obedyent ſubiectes, the Lordes Spirituall and Temporall, and the Commons in this your preſent parliament aſſembled, that where in tyme of the raigne of your moſte deare father of worthye memorie Kyng Henrye the eyght, diuerſe good lawes and ſtatutes were made and eſtabliſhed, as wel for the vtter extinguiſhment and putting away of all vſurped and forreigne powers and aucthorities out of this your Realme, & other your highneſſe dominions & countreyes, as alſo for the reſtoring and vniting to the imperial Crowne of this Realme, the auncient iuriſdictions, aucthorities, ſuperiorities, and preheminences to the ſame of ryght belongyng and apparteynyng, by reaſon whereof, we your moſt humble & obedient ſubiectes, from the .xxv. yere of the raigne of your ſaid deare father, were continually kept in good order, and were diſburdened of diuers great and intollerable charges & exactions, before that time vnlawfully taken, and exacted by ſuch forraigne power and aucthoritie as before that was vſurped, vntyll ſuche time as all the ſayde good lawes and ſtatutes, by one acte of Parliament made in the firſt and ſecond yeres of the raignes of the late kyng Philippe and Queene Marie, your highneſſe ſyſter, entituled, An acte repealing all ſtatutes, articles, and prouiſions made agaynſt the ſea apoſtolique of Rome, ſynce the .xx. yere of kyng Henry the eyght, & alſo for the eſtabliſhment of al ſpyrituall & eccleſiaſticall poſſeſſions & hereditamentes conueyed to the laytie, were all clearely repealed & made voyde, as by the ſame acte of repeale more at large doth and may appeare. By reaſon of whiche acte of repeale, your ſayde humble ſubiectes were eftſoones brought vnder an vſurped forraine power & aucthoritie, and yet do remaine in that bondage, to the intollerable charges of your louing

ſubiectes, if ſome redreſſe (by aucthoritie of this your high courte of parliament, with thaſſent of your highnes) be not had and prouided.
               May it therefore pleaſe your highneſſe, for the repreſſing of the ſaid vſurped forraigne power, and the reſtoring of the rightes, iuriſdictions, and preheminences apparteyning to the Imperial crowne of this your Realme, that it maye be enacted by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that the ſaide acte made in the ſaide fyrſt and ſeconde yeres of the raignes of the ſaid late king Philip & Queene Marie, and all and euery braunch, clauſes, and articles therein conteyned (other then ſuch braunches, clauſes, and ſentences, as hereafter ſhalbe excepted) may from the laſt day of this Seſſion of Parliament, by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, be repealed, and ſhall from thencefoorth be vtterly voyde, and of none effecte.
               And that alſo for the reuyuing of diuers of the ſaid good lawes & ſtatutes made in ye time of your ſaid deare father, it may alſo pleaſe your highneſſe, that one acte and ſtatute made in the .xxiii. yere of the raigne of the ſaid late kyng Henry the eyght, entituled, An acte that no perſon ſhalbe cyted out of ye dioces where he or ſhe dwelleth, except in certayne caſes. And one other acte made in the .xxiiii. yere of the raigne of the ſaide late kyng, entituled, An acte that appeales in ſuch caſes as hath ben vſed to be purſued to the ſea of Rome, ſhall not be frō henceforth had ne vſed, but within this Realme. And one other acte made in the .xxv. yere of the ſaide late king, concernyng reſtraynte of payment of annates and fyrſt fruites of Archbyſhopprickes and Byſhoprickes to the ſea of Rome. And one other acte in the ſayde, xxv. yere, entituled, An acte concerning the ſubmiſſion of the Cleargie to the kinges Maieſtie: and alſo one acte made in the ſayd .xxv. yere, entituled, An act reſtraining the paiment of annates, or fyrſt fruites to the Byſhop of Rome, and of the electing and conſecrating of Archbyſhoppes, and Byſhoppes within this Realme. And one other acte made in the ſaid .xxv. yere, entituled, An acte concernyng the exoneration of the kinges ſubiectes from exactions & impoſitions heretofore payde to the ſea of Rome, & for hauing licences & diſpenſations within this Realme, without ſuyng further for the ſame. And one other acte made in the .xxvi. yere of the ſayde late king, entituled, An act for nomination and conſecration of Suffragans within this Realme. And alſo one other act made in the .xxviii yere of the raigne of the ſaide late king, entituled, An acte for the releaſe of ſuch as houe obteyned pretended licences and diſpenſations from the ſea of Rome, and all and euery braunches, wordes, and ſentences in the ſaid ſeuerall actes and ſtatutes conteyned, by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, from and at al times after the laſt day of this ſeſſion of Parliament, ſhalbe reuiued, and ſhall ſtande & be in

full force and ſtrength, to all intentes, conſtructions, and purpoſes. And that the braunches, ſentences, and wordes of the ſayde ſeuerall actes, and euery of them, from thencefoorth ſhal and may be iudged, deemed, and taken to extend to your hyghnes, your heyres and ſucceſſours, as fully and largely as euer the ſame actes, or any of them dyd extend to the ſayde late kyng Henry the eight, your hyghneſſe father.
               And that it may alſo pleaſe your highneſſe, that it may be enacted by thaucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that ſo much of one acte or ſtatute made in the .xxxii. yere of the raigne of your ſayde deare father kyng Henry the eyght; entytuled, An act concernyng precontractes of maryages, and touchyng degrees of conſanguinitie, as in the tyme of the late kyng Edwarde the ſixte, your hyghneſſe moſte deare brother, by one other acte or ſtatute was not repealed. And alſo one acte made in the .xxxvii. yere of the raygne of the ſayde late kyng Henry the eyght, entituled, An act that doctours of the Ciuile law, beyng maryed, may exerciſe Eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction, and all and euerye braunches, and articles in the ſayde two actes laſte mentioned, and not repealed in the tyme of the ſayde late kyng Edward the ſixte, may from hencefoorth lykewyſe ſtande, and be reuiued, and remayne in their full force and ſtrength, to all intentes and purpoſes: any thyng conteyned in the ſayd acte of repeale before mentioned, or anye other matter or cauſe to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               And that it may alſo pleaſe your highneſſe, that it may be further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayd, that all other lawes and ſtatutes, and the braunches and clauſes of anye acte or ſtatute repealed and made voyde by the ſayde acte of repeale, made in the tyme of the ſayde late king Philip and Queene Marie, and not in this preſent acte ſpecially mentioned and reuiued, ſhall ſtand, remayne, and be repealed, and voyde, in ſuche lyke maner and fourme, as they were before the makyng of this acte: any thyng herein conteyned to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               And that it may alſo pleaſe your highneſſe, that it may be enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that one act and ſtatute made in the firſt yere of the raigne of the late king Edwarde the ſixte, your Maieſties moſte deare brother, entytuled, An acte agaynſte ſuche perſons as ſhall vnreuerentlye ſpeake agaynſte the Sacramente of the bodye and blood of Chriſte, commonlye called the Sacrament of the aulter, and for the receauing thereof vnder bothe kyndes, and all and euerye braunches, clauſes, and ſentences therein conteyned, ſhall and maye lykewiſe from the laſt day of this Seſſion of Parliamente, be reuyued, and from thencefoorth ſha and may ſtand, remayne, and be in full force, ſtrength, and effecte, to all intentes, conſtructions, and purpoſes, in ſuch lyke maner & fourme, as the ſame was at anye tyme

in the firſt yere of the raigne of ye ſaid late king Edward yt .vi. any law ſtatute, or other matter to the contrary in any wiſe, notwithſtāding.
               And that alſo it may pleaſe your hyghneſſe, that it may be further eſtabliſhed and enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that one act and ſtatute made in the firſt and ſecond yeres of the ſayd late kyng Philip and Queene Marie, entytuled, An acte for the reuiuing of three ſtatutes, made for the puniſhment of hereſies, and alſo the ſaide three ſtatutes mentioned in the ſayde acte, and by the ſame acte reuiued, and al and euery braunches, articles, clauſes, and ſentences, conteyned in the ſayde ſeuerall actes or ſtatutes, and euerye of them, ſhalbe from the laſt day of this Seſſion of Parliament, deemed, and remayne vtterly repealed, voyde, and of none effecte, to all intentes and purpoſes: anye thyng in the ſayde ſeuerall actes, or anye of them conteyned, or anye other matter or cauſe to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               And to the intent that al vſurped and forraigne power and aucthoritie, ſpirituall and temporall, maye for euer be clearely extinguiſhed, and neuer to be vſed or obeyed within this Realme, or any other your Maieſties dominions or countreyes: may it pleaſe your highnes, that it may be further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that no forraigne prince, parſon, prelats, ſtate, or potentate, ſpiritual or temporal, ſhal at anye tyme after the laſt day of this Seſſion of Parliamente, vſe, enioy, or exerciſe, any maner of power, iuriſdiction, ſuperioritie, aucthoritie, preheminēce, or priuiledge, ſpiritual or eccleſiaſtical, within this realme, or within any other your Maieſties dominions or countreys, that now be, or hereafter ſhalbe, but frō thēceforth ye ſame ſhalbe clearly aboliſhed out of this realme, & al other your highnes dominions for euer: any ſtatute, ordinaunce, cuſtome, cōſtitutions, or any other matter or cauſe whatſoeuer to the contrary in any wiſe, notwithſtanding.
               And that alſo it may lykewyſe pleaſe your hyghneſſe, that it may be eſtabliſhed and enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that ſuche iuriſdictions, priuiledges, ſuperiorities, and preheminences ſpirituall and eccleſiaſticall, as by anye ſpirituall or eccleſiaſticall power or aucthoritie, hath heretofore ben, or maye lawfullye be exerciſed or vſed, for the viſitation of the eccleſiaſticall ſtate and perſons, and for reformation, order, and correction of the ſame, and of all maner errours, hereſies, ſciſmes, abuſes, offences, contemptes, and enormities, ſhall for euer, by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliamente, be vnited and annexed to the imperiall Crowne of this Realme. And that your highnes, your heyres and ſucceſſours, kinges or Queenes of this realme, ſhal haue ful power and aucthoritie by vertue of this act, by letters patentes vnder the great Seale of Englande, to aſſigne, name, and aucthorize, when & as often as your highnes, your heyres or ſucceſſours ſhall thynke meete and conuenient, and for ſuche and

ſo long tyme as ſhall pleaſe your hyghnes, your heires or ſucceſſours, ſuche perſon or perſons beyng naturall borne ſubiectes to your hyghneſſe, your heires or ſucceſſours, as your Maieſtie, your heyres or ſucceſſours ſhal think meete, to exerciſe, vſe, occupy, and execute, vnder your highnes, your heyres and ſucceſſours, all maner of iuriſdictions, priuiledges, and preheminences, in anye wyſe touchyng or concernyng anye ſpirituall or eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction within theſe your realmes of Englande and Irelande, or any other your hyghneſſe dominions or countreyes, and to viſite, refourme, redreſſe, order, correct, and amende all ſuche errours, he reſies, ſciſmes, abuſes, offences, contemptes, and inormities whatſoeuer, which by any maner ſpirituall or eccleſiaſticall power, aucthoritie, or iuriſdiction, can or maye lawfully be refourmed, ordered, redreſſed, corrected, reſtrayned, or amended, to the pleaſure of almyghtie God, the encreaſe of vertue, and the conſeruation of the peace and vnitie of this Realme: and that ſuch perſon or perſons ſo to be named, aſſigned, aucthorized, and appoynted by your hyghnes, your heyres or ſucceſſours, after the ſayde letters patentes to hym or them made and delyuered, as is aforeſayde, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie by vertue of this acte, and of the ſayd letters patentes, vnder your hyghneſſe, your heires or ſucceſſours, to exerciſe, vſe, and execute all the premiſſes, accordyng to the tenour and effect of the ſayde letters patentes: any matter or cauſe to the contrary in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng.
               And for the better obſeruation and mayntenaunce of this acte, maye it pleaſe your hyghneſſe that it maye be further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and euerye Archbyſhoppe, Byſhoppe, and all and euerye other eccleſiaſticall perſon, and other eccleſiaſticall officer and miniſter, of what eſtate, dignitie, preheminence, or degree ſoeuer he or they be, or ſhalbe, and all and euery temporall Iudge, Iuſticer, Maior, and other lay or temporall officer and miniſter, and euerye other perſon hauing your hyghneſſe fees or wages within this Realme, or anye your hyghneſſe dominions, ſhall make, take, and receaue a corporal othe vpon the Euangeliſt, before ſuch perſon or perſons as ſhall pleaſe your hyghneſſe, your heyres or ſucceſſours, vnder the greate Seale of Englande, to aſſigne and name, to accepte and take the ſame accordyng to the tenour and effecte hereafter folowyng: that is to ſaye, I.A.B. do vtterlye teſtifie and declare in my conſcience, that the Queenes hyghneſſe is the onlye ſupreame gouernour of this realme, & of al other her highnes dominions & countreys, aſwell in all ſpirituall or eccleſiaſticall thinges or cauſes, as temporal, and that no forraigne prince, parſon, prelate, ſtate, or potentate, hath or ought to haue any iuriſdiction, power, ſuperioritie, preheminence, or aucthoritie, eccleſiaſticall or ſpiritual within this realme, and therefore

I do vtterly renounce and forſake al forrayne iuriſdictions, powers, ſuperiorities, and aucthorities, and do promiſe that from hencefoorth I ſhall beare fayth and true allegiaunce to the Queenes hyghnes, her heyres and lawfull ſucceſſours, and to my power ſhall aſſiſte and defend all iuriſdictions, priuiledges, preheminences, and aucthoties, graunted or belongyng to the Queenes hyghnes, her heyres and ſucceſſours, or vnited and annexed to the imperiall crowne of this Realme, ſo helpe me God, and by the contentes of this booke.
               And that it may be alſo enacted, that if any ſuche Archbyſhoppe, Byſhoppe, or other Eccleſiaſticall officer or miniſter, or anye of the ſayde Temporal Iudges, Iuſticiaries, or other lay officer or miniſter, ſhall peremptorilie or obſtinately refuſe to take or receaue the ſayde othe, that then he ſo refuſyng, ſhal forfeyte & loſe only duryng his life, al and euery Eccleſiaſticall and Spirituall promotion, benefice, & office, and euery temporall and lay promotion and office, which he hath ſolye at the tyme of ſuch refuſall made: and that the whole tytle, interreſt, and incumbencie, in euery ſuch promotion, benefice, and other office, as agaynſt ſuche perſon onlye ſo refuſing, during his lyfe, ſhall clearely ceaſe, and be voyde, as though the partie ſo refuſyng were dead. And that alſo all and euery ſuch perſon and perſons, ſo refuſyng to take the ſayde othe, ſhall immediatlye after ſuche refuſall, be from thencefoorth during his lyfe, diſabled to retayne or exerciſe any office, or other promotion, whiche he at the tyme of ſuch refuſall hath ioyntly, or in common with any other perſon or perſons: and that all and euery perſon and perſons, that at any tyme hereafter ſhalbe preferred, promoted, or collated to anye Archbyſhopricke or Byſhopricke, or to any other Spirituall or Eccleſiaſticall benefice, promotion, dignitie, office, or miniſtery, or that ſhalbe by your highnes, your heyres, or ſucceſſours, preferred or promoted to any tēporal or lay office, miniſterye, or ſeruice within this realme, or in any your highnes dominions, before he or they ſhal take vpon him or them to receaue, vſe, exerciſe, ſupplye, or occupye any ſuche Archbyſhopricke, Byſhopricke, promotion, dignitie, office, miniſtery, or ſeruice, ſhal likewiſe make, take, & receaue the ſayd corporal othe before mentioned, vppon the Euangeliſt, before ſuch perſons as haue or ſhall haue aucthoritie to admit any ſuch perſon to any ſuch office, miniſtery, or ſeruice, or els before ſuche perſon or perſons, as by your highnes, your heires or ſucceſſours, by commiſſion vnder the great Seale of England, ſhalbe named, aſſigned, or appointed, to miniſter the ſaid othe. And that it may likewiſe be further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that if any ſuch perſon or perſons, as at anye tyme hereafter ſhalbe promoted, preferred, or collated to anye ſuche promotion Spirituall, or Eccleſiaſticall benefice, office, or miniſterye, or that by your highnes, your heires or ſucceſſours, ſhalbe

promoted or preferred to any temporall or laye office, miniſterie, or ſeruice, ſhall and do peremptorily and obſtinatelye refuſe to take the ſame othe ſo to him to be offered, that then he or they ſo refuſing, ſhal preſently be iudged diſabled in the lawe, to receaue, take, or haue the ſame promotion ſpyrituall, or eccleſiaſtical, or the ſame temporall office, miniſterie, or ſeruice within this realme, or any other your highneſſe dominions, to all intentes, conſtructions, and purpoſes.
               And that it may be further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayd, that all and euery perſon and perſons temporal, ſuing liuerie, or ouſtre le maine, out of the handes of your highneſſe, your heyres or ſucceſſours, before his or theyr liuerie or ouſtre le maine ſued foorth and alowed, and euery temporal perſon or perſons, doing any homage to your highnes, your heyres or ſucceſſours, or that ſhalbe receaued into ſeruice with your highnes, your heyres or ſucceſſors, ſhall make, take, and receaue the ſaid corporall othe before mentioned, before the Lord Chauncelour of England, or the Lord Keper of the great ſeale for the time being, or before ſuch perſon or perſons, as by your hyghneſſe, your heyres, or ſucceſſours ſhalbe named and appoynted to accept or receaue the ſame. And that alſo all and euery perſon and perſons takyng orders, and all and euery other perſon and perſonnes, which ſhalbe promoted or preferred to any degree of learnyng in anye Vniuerſitie within this your Realme or dominions, before he ſhall receaue, or take any ſuch orders, or be preferred to anye ſuche degree of learnyng, ſhall make, take, and receaue the ſayde othe by this acte ſet foorth and declared, as is aforeſayd, before his or their Ordinarie, Commiſſarie, Chauncelour, or Vicechauncelour, or theyr ſufficient deputies in the ſaide Vniuerſitie.
               Prouided alwayes, & that it may be further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaide, that yf any perſon hauyng any eſtate of inheritance, in any temporall office or offices, ſhall hereafter obſtinately and peremptorilie refuſe to accept and take the ſaid oth as is aforeſaid, and after at any time during his life ſhall wyllingly requyre to take and receaue the ſaide oth, and ſo do take and accept the ſame othe before any perſon or perſons that ſhal haue lawful aucthoritie to miniſter the ſame: that then euery ſuche perſon immediatly after he hath ſo receaued the ſame othe, ſhalbe veſted, iudged, & deemed in like eſtate and poſſeſſion of the ſaide office, as he was before the ſaide refuſall, and ſhall and may vſe and exerciſe the ſaid office, in ſuch maner and fourme as he ſhould or myght haue done before ſuche refuſall: anye thing in this acte conteyned to the contrary in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng.
               And for the more ſure obſeruation of this acte, and the vtter extinguyſhment of al forraigne and vſurped power and aucthoritie,

may it pleaſe your highneſſe, that it maye be further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf any perſon or perſons, dwelling or inhabiting within this your Realme, or in any other your hyghneſſe Realmes, or Dominions, of what eſtate, dignitie, or degree ſoeuer he or they be, after thende of .xxx. dayes next after the determination of this ſeſſion of this preſent Parliament, ſhal by wryting, printing, teachyng, preachyng, expreſſe wordes, deede, or acte, aduiſedly, malitiouſly, and dyrectly affyrme, holde, ſtande with, ſet foorth, mayntayne, or defende the aucthoritie, preheminence, power, or iuriſdiction Spiritual or Eccleſiaſtical, of any forraine Prince, Prelate, Parſon, State, or Potentate whatſoeuer, heretofore claymed, vſed, or vſurped within this Realme, or any Dominion or Countrey, beyng within or vnder the power, dominion, or obeyſaunce of your highnes: or ſhall aduiſedly, malitiouſly, and directly put in vre, or execute any thing for the extolling, aduauncement, ſetting foorth, mayntenance, or defence of any ſuch pretended, or vſurped iuriſdiction, power, preheminence, or aucthoritie, or any part thereof: that then euery ſuch perſon & perſons, ſo doyng and offendyng, theyr abbettours, aydours, procurers, & counſaylours, beyng thereof lawfully conuicted and attaynted, according to the true order and courſe of the common lawes of this Realme, for his or theyr firſt offence, ſhall forfayte and loſe vnto your highneſſe, your heyres & ſucceſſours, all his and theyr goodes and cattels, aſwell reall as perſonal. And yf any ſuch perſon ſo conuicted or attaynted, ſhall not haue, or be worth of his proper goodes and cattels to the value of .xx.li. at the time of ſuche his conuiction or attainder: that then euery ſuch perſon ſo conuicted and attaynted, ouer and beſides the forfayture of all his ſaide goodes and cattels, ſhall haue and ſuffer impriſonment by the ſpace of one whole yere, without baile or mainepriſe. And that alſo all and euerye the benefices, prebendes, and other eccleſiaſticall promotions and dignities whatſoeuer, of euery ſpirituall perſon ſo offendyng, and beyng attaynted, ſhall immediatly after ſuch attayndour be vtterly voyde to all intentes and purpoſes, as though the incumbent therof were dead, and that the patrone and donor of euery ſuche benefice, prebende, ſpirituall promotion, and dignitie, ſhall and maye lawfully preſent vnto the ſame, or geue the ſame, in ſuche maner and fourme, as if the ſaid incumbent were dead. And if any ſuche offendour or offendours, after ſuch conuiction or attaynder, do eftſones commit or do the ſayde offences, or any of them, in maner and fourme aforeſaid, and be thereof duely conuicted and attaynted, as is aforeſayde: that then euery ſuche offendour and offendours, ſhal for the ſame ſeconde offence, incurre into the daungers, penalties, and forfeytures, ordeyned and prouided by the ſtatute of prouiſion and premunire, made in

the .xvi. yereof the raigne of king Richard the ſecond. And yf any ſuch offendour proffendours, at any time after the ſayd ſeconde conuiction and attayndour; do the thirde time commit and do the ſayde offences, or anye of them, in maner and fourme aforeſayde, and be thereof duely conuicted and attaynted as is aforeſayde: that then euerye ſuche offence or offences, ſhalbe deemed and adiudged high treaſon, and that the offendour and offendours therein, beyng thereof lawefullye conuicted and attaynted, accordyng to the lawes of this Realme, ſhall ſuffer paynes of death, and other penalties, forfeytures, and loſſes, as in caſes of high treaſon by the lawes of this Realme.
               And alſo that it maye lykewyſe pleaſe your highneſſe, that it maye be enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that no maner of perſon or perſons, ſhalbe moleſted or impreached for anye the offences aforeſayde, committed or perpetrated onlye by preachyng, teachyng, or wordes, vnleſſe he or they be thereof lawfullye indicted, within the ſpace of one whole yere next after his or theyr offences ſo committed. And in caſe any perſon or perſons, ſhall fortune to be impryſoned for anye of the ſayde offences committed by preachyng, teachyng, or wordes onelye, and be not thereof indicted within the ſpace of one halfe yere, next after his or theyr ſuche offence ſo committed and done: that then the ſayde perſonne ſo impriſoned, ſhalbe ſette at libertie, and be no longer deteyned in pryſon for any ſuche cauſe or offence.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that this acte or anye thing therein conteyned, ſhall not in anye wyſe extende to repeale any clauſe, matter, or ſentence conteyned or ſpecified in the ſaid acte of Repeale, made in the ſayd fyrſte and ſeconde yeres of the raignes of the ſayde late kyng Philippe, and Queene Marie, as doth in any wyſe touche or concerne any matter or cauſe of premunire, or that doth make or ordeyne any matter or cauſe to be within the caſe of premunire, but that the ſame, for ſo much only as toucheth or concerneth any caſe or matter of premunire, ſhal ſtande and remayne in ſuch force and effecte, as the ſame was before the makyng of this acte: any thing in this acte conteyned to the contrarye in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alſo, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that this acte, or anye thing therein conteyned, ſhall not in anye wyſe extende or be preiudiciall to anye perſon or perſonnes for anye offence or offences committed or done, or hereafter to be committed or done, contrarye to the tenour and effecte of anye acte or ſtatute now reuiued by this acte, before the end of .xxx. dayes next after thend of the ſeſſion of this preſent Parliament: any thing in this act conteyned,

or any other matter or cauſe to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               And yf it happen that any yeere of this Realme, ſhall fortune to be indicted of, and for any offence that is reuiued or made premunire, or treaſon by this acte, that then he ſo beyng indicted, ſhal haue his triall by his peeres, in ſuche like maner and fourme, as in other caſes of treaſon hath ben vſed.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted as is aforeſayde, that no maner of order, acte, or determination, for any matter of religion, or cauſe Eccleſiaſticall, had or made by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, ſhalbe accepted, deemed, interpretate, or adiudged at anye tyme hereafter, to be any errour, hereſye, ſchiſme, or ſchiſmaticall opinion: any order, decree, ſentence, conſtitution, or lawe, whatſoeuer the ſame be to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that ſuch perſon or perſons to whom your hyghneſſe, your heyres or ſucceſſours, ſhall hereafter by letters patentes, vnder the great ſeale of Englande, geue aucthoritie to haue or execute any iuriſdiction, power, or aucthoritie Spirituall, or to viſite, reforme, order, or correct anye errours, hereſies, ſchiſmes, abuſes, or enormities, by vertue of this acte, ſhall not in anye wyſe haue aucthoritie or power to order, determine, or adiudge any matter or cauſe to be hereſye, but onlye ſuche as heretofore haue ben determined, ordred, or adiudged to be hereſie, by the aucthoritie of the canonicall Scriptures, or by the fyrſt foure generall counſayles, or any of them, or by anye other generall counſayle, wherein the ſame was declared hereſy, by the expreſſe & plaine wordes of the ſaid Canonicall Scriptures, or ſuch as hereafter ſhalbe ordered, iudged, or determined to be hereſie, by the hygh Court of Parliament of this Realme, with the aſſent of the Cleargie in theyr conuocation: Any thing in this acte conteyned to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               And be it further enucted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that no perſon or perſons, ſhalbe hereafter indicted or arraigned for any the offences made, ordeyned, reuiued, or adiudged by this acte, vnleſſe there be two ſufficient witneſſes or more, to teſtifie and declare the ſayde offences, whereof he ſhalbe indicted or arraigned. And that the ſaid witneſſes, or ſo many of them as ſhalbe liuing, and within this Realme at the time of the arraignement of ſuch perſon ſo indicted, ſhalbe brought foorth in perſon, face to face, before the partie ſo arraigned, and there ſhal teſtifie and declare, what they can ſay agaynſt the partie ſo arraigned, yf he requyre the ſame.
               Prouided alſo, and be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that if any perſon or perſons, ſhal hereafter happen to geue any reliefe, ayde, or comfort, or in any wyſe be aydyng, helpyng, or comfortyng to the perſon or perſons of any that ſhall hereafter happen to be an offendour

in any matter or caſe of Primunire or treaſon, reuiued or made by this acte: that then ſuche releefe, ayde, or comfort geuen, ſhal not be iudged or taken to be anye offence, vnleſſe there be two ſufficient witneſſes at the leaſt, that can and will openlye teſtifie and declare, that the perſon or perſons that ſo gaue ſuche releefe, ayde, or comfort, had notice and knowledge of ſuche offence committed and done by the ſayd offendour, at the tyme of ſuche releefe, ayde, or comfort, ſo to hym geuen or miniſtred: any thyng in this acte contayned, or any other matter or cauſe to the contrary in any wiſe, notwithſtanding.
               And where one pretenſed ſentence hath heretofore ben geuen in the conſyſtorye in Powles, before certayne Iudges, de legate, by the aucthoritie Legantine of the late Cardinall Poole, by reaſon of a forraigne vſurped power and auctoritie, againſt Richard Chetwod Eſquire, and Agnes his wife, by the name of Agnes Doodhul, at the ſute of Charles Tyrrell gentleman, in a cauſe of matrimonie ſolemniſed betweene the ſaid Richard & Agnes, as by the ſame pretenſed ſentence more playnely doth appeare, from which ſentence the ſaid Richarde and Agnes haue appealed to the court of Rome, whiche appeale doth there remayne, and yet is not determined: May it therefore pleaſe your hyghnes, that it may be enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayd, that if ſentence in the ſaid appeale, ſhall happen to be geuen at the ſaid court of Rome, for and in the behalfe of the ſaid Richard and Agnes, for the reuerſing of the ſaid pretenſed ſentence, before the ende of three ſcore dayes next after the end of this Seſſion of this preſent Parliament: that then the ſame ſhalbe iudged & taken to be good and effectual in the lawe, and ſhall, and may be vſed, pleaded, and alowed in anye courte or place within this Realme: anye thyng in this act, or in any other act or ſtatute contayned to the contrary, notwithſtanding. And if no ſentence ſhalbe geuen at the court of Rome in the ſayde appeale, for the reuerſing of the ſayde pretenſed ſentence, before the end of the ſaid three ſcore dayes, that then it ſhall and maye be lawfull for the ſayde Richarde and Agnes, and eyther of them, at any tyme hereafter to commenſe, take, ſue, and proſecute their ſaid appeale from the ſaid pretenſed ſentence, and for the reuerſyng of the ſayd pretenſed ſentence within this Realme, in ſuch like maner & fourme as was vſed to be purſued, or myght haue ben purſued within this realme, at any time ſince the .xxiiii. yere of ye raigne of the ſaid late kyng Henry the eyght, vppon ſentences geuen in the court or courtes of any Archbyſhop within this Realme. And that ſuch appeale as ſo hereafter ſhalbe taken or purſued by the ſayd Richarde Chetwood and Agnes, or eyther of them, and the ſentence that herein or thereupon ſhall hereafter be geuen, ſhalbe iudged to be good and effectuall in the lawe, to all intentes and purpoſes: any

law, cuſtome, vſage, canon, conſtitution, or any other matter or cauſe to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alſo, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that where there is the lyke appeale nowe depending in the ſayde court of Rome, betwene one Robert Harcourt, Marchant of the Staple, and Elizabeth Harcourt, otherwyſe called Elizabeth Robins of the one partie, and Anthonye Fydell, Marchaunt ſtraunger, on the other partye, that the ſayd Robert, Elizabeth, and Anthonye, and euerye of them, ſhal and may for the proſecutyng & trying of theyr ſaid appeale, haue and enioye the lyke remedye, benefite, and aduauntage, in lyke maner and fourme as the ſayde Richarde and Agnes, or any of them, hath, may, or ought to haue and enioy: this acte or anye thing therin contayned to the contrary in any wiſe, notwithſtandyng.
            
            
               An Acte for the vniformitie of Common prayer, and ſeruice in the Churche, and the adminiſtration of the Sacramentes. The .ii. Chapter.
               
                  WHere at the death of our late Soueraigne Lorde kyng Edwarde the ſixt, there remained one vniforme order of common ſeruice & prayer, and of the adminiſtration of Sacramentes, rites, & ceremonies in the Church of England, which was ſet foorth in one boke, entituled, The boke of common praier, & adminiſtration of Sacramentes, and other rites & ceremonies in the Church of England, aucthoriſed by act of parliament, holden in the fifte and ſixt yeres of our ſayde late Soueraigne Lorde kyng Edwarde the ſyxte, entituled, An acte for the vniformitie of common prayer, and adminiſtration of the Sacramentes: the whiche was repealed and taken away by acte of Parliament in the fyrſte yere of the raigne of our late Soueraigne Lady Queene Mary, to the great decaye of the due honour of God, and diſcomforte to the profeſſours of the trueth of Chriſtes religion.
               Be it further enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſente Parliamente, that the ſayde eſtatute of repeale, and euerye thyng therein contayned, onelye concernyng the ſayde booke, and the ſeruice, adminiſtration

of Sacramentes, rites, & ceremonies, contayned, or appoynted in or by the ſaide booke, ſhalbe voyde and of none effect, from & after the feaſt of the Natiuitie of. S. Iohn Baptiſt next comming: And that the ſayde booke, with the order of ſeruice and of thadminiſtration of Sacramentes, rites, and ceremonies, with the alteration and additions therein added and appoynted by this eſtatute, ſhall ſtand, and be from and after the ſaid feaſt of the Natiuitie of. S. Iohn Baptiſt, in full force and effecte, accordyng to the tenour and effecte of this eſtatute: any thyng in the aforeſayde eſtatute of repeale to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               And further be it enacted by the Queenes hyghnes, with thaſſent of the lordes and commons in this preſent parliament aſſembled, and by aucthoritie of the ſame, that all and ſinguler miniſters in any Cathedrall or pariſhe church, or other place within this Realme of Englande, Wales, and the marches of the ſame, or other the Queenes dominions, ſhall from and after the feaſt of the Natiuitie of ſaint Iohn Baptyſte nexte commyng, be bounden to ſay and vſe the Mattens, Euenſong, Celebration of the Lordes Supper, and adminiſtration of eche of the ſacramentes, and all theyr common and open prayer, in ſuch order and fourme as is mentioned in the ſayde booke ſo aucthoriſed by parliament, in the ſayd .v. and .vi. yeres of the raigne of kyng Edwarde the ſixte, with one alteration or addition of certayne leſſons to be vſed on euery Sunday in the yere, and the fourme of the Letanye altered and corrected, and two ſentences only added in the deliuerie of the Sacrament to the communicants, and none other, or otherwyſe. And that yf any maner of Parſon, Vicar, or other whatſoeuer Miniſter, that ought, or ſhoulde ſyng or ſaye common prayer, mentioned in the ſayd booke, or miniſter the Sacramentes, from and after the feaſte of the Natiuitie of. S. Iohn Baptiſt next commyng, refuſe to vſe the ſayde common prayers, or to miniſter the Sacramentes in ſuche Cathedrall or pariſhe Churche, or other places, as he ſhoulde vſe to miniſter the ſame, in ſuche order and fourme as they be mentioned and ſet foorth in the ſayd booke, or ſhall wylfullye or obſtinately, ſtandyng in the ſame, vſe any other ryte, ceremonie, order, fourme, or maner of celebrating of the lordes ſupper, openly or priuely, or mattens, euenſong, adminiſtratiō of the Sacraments, or other open prayers then is mentioned and ſet forth in the ſaid booke (Open prayer in & throughout this acte, is meant that prayer which is for other to come vnto, or heare, either in common Churches or priuate Chappels, or Oratories, commonly called the ſeruice of the Church) or ſhal preach, declare, or ſpeake any thing in the derogation or deprauing of the ſaid booke, or any thyng therein contayned, or of any part therof, and ſhalbe therof lawfully conuicted, according to the lawes of

this Realme, by verdict of twelue men, or by his owne confeſſion, or by the notorious euidence of the facte, ſhall loſe and forfayte to the Queenes highneſſe, her heyres and ſucceſſors, for his firſt offence, the profite of all his ſpirituall benefices or promotions, comming or aryſing in one whole yere next after this conuiction. And alſo that the perſon ſo conuicted, ſhall for the ſame offence, ſuffer impriſonment by the ſpace of .vi. monethes, without bayle or maynepryſe. And yf anye ſuch perſon once conuict of any offence concerning the premiſſes, ſhal after his firſt conuiction eftſones offende, and be thereof in fourme aforeſayde lawfully conuicte, that then the ſame perſon ſhal for his ſeconde offence ſuffer impriſonment by the ſpace of one whole yere, and alſo ſhall therfore be depriued, ipſo facto, of all his ſpirituall promotions, and that it ſhalbe lawful to al patrons or donors of al and ſinguler the ſame ſpirituall promotions, or of any of them, to preſent or collate to the ſame, as though the perſon or perſons ſo offendyng were dead. And that yf any ſuche perſon and perſons, after he ſhalbe twyſe conuicted in fourme aforeſayde, ſhall offende agaynſt anye of the premiſſes the thirde tyme, and ſhalbe thereof in fourme aforeſayd lawfully conuicted, that then the perſon ſo offendyng, and conuicted the thyrde tyme, ſhalbe depriued ipſo facto, of all his ſpirituall promotions, and alſo ſhall ſuffer impriſonment duryng his lyfe. And yf the perſon that ſhall offende, and be conuicted in fourme aforeſayde, concernyng any of the premiſſes, ſhall not be beneficed, nor haue any ſpirituall promotion, that then the ſame perſon ſo offendyng and conuicte, ſhal for the firſt offence ſuffer impriſonment duryng one whole yere next after his ſayde conuiction, without bayle or maynepriſe. And yf any ſuche perſon, not hauyng anye ſpiritual promotion, after his firſte conuiction, ſhall eftſones offende in any thyng concernyng the premiſſes, and ſhall in fourme aforeſayde be thereof lawfully conuicted, that then the ſame perſon ſhall for his ſeconde offence ſuffer impryſonment duryng his lyfe.
               And it is ordayned and enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf any perſon or perſons whatſoeuer, after the ſayde feaſte of the Natiuitie of ſaint Iohn Baptiſt next comming, ſhall in any enterludes, playes, ſongues, rymes, or by other open wordes, declare or ſpeake any thyng in the derogation, deprauyng, or deſpiſyng of the ſame booke, or of any thyng therin contayned, or any part therof, or ſhall by open facte, deede, or by open threatnynges, compell or cauſe, or otherwyſe procure or maynteyne any Parſon, Vicar, or other Miniſter in any Cathedral or Paryſhe Church, or in Chappell, or in any other place, to ſing or ſay any common or open prayer, or to miniſter any Sacrament, otherwyſe, or in any other maner & fourme then is mentioned in the ſayde booke, or that by any of the ſaid meanes ſhall

vnlawfully interrupt, or let any Parſon, Vicar, or other Miniſter in any Cathedrall or Pariſh Churche, Chappell, or anye other place, to ſyng or ſay common and open prayer, or to miniſter the Sacramentes, or any of them, in ſuch maner and fourme, as is mentioned in the ſayd booke: that then euery ſuch perſon beyng thereof lawfully conuicted, in fourme aboueſayde, ſhall forfeyte to the Queene our Soueraigne Ladie, her heyres and ſucceſſours, for the firſte offence, a hundreth markes. And if any perſon or perſons, beyng once conuicte of any ſuch offence, eftſoones offend agaynſt any of the laſt recited offences, and ſhall in fourme aforeſayde be thereof lawfully conuicte: that then the ſame perſon ſo offendyng and conuict, ſhall for the ſecond offence forfayte to the Queene our Soueraigne Lady, her heyres and ſucceſſours, foure hundreth markes. And if anye perſon, after he in fourme aforeſayd, ſhall haue ben twyſe conuict of any offence concerning any of the laſt recited offences, ſhall offend the third tyme, and be thereof in fourme aboueſayde lawfully conuict: that then euery perſon ſo offendyng and conuicte, ſhall for his thirde offence, forfayte to our Soueraigne Ladye the Queene, all his goodes and cattels, and ſhal ſuffer impriſonment during his life. And if any perſon or perſōs, that for his firſt offence concernyng the premiſſes ſhalbe conuicte in fourme aforeſayde, do not pay the ſumme to be payde by vertue of his conuiction, in ſuch maner and fourme as the ſame ought to be paide, within .vi. weekes next after his conuiction: that then euery perſon ſo conuict, and ſo not paying the ſame, ſhall for the ſame firſt offence, inſteede of the ſayde ſumme, ſuffer impryſonment by the ſpace of .vi. monethes, without baile or mainpriſe. And if any perſon or perſons, that for his ſeconde offence concernyng the premiſſes, ſhalbe conuicte in fourme aforeſayd, do not pay the ſaide ſumme to be paide by vertue of his conuiction, and this eſtatute, in ſuch maner & fourme as the ſame ought to be paid, within .vi. weekes next after his ſaid ſecond conuiction: that then euery perſon ſo conuicted, and not ſo paying the ſame, ſhal for the ſame ſecond offence, in the ſteede of the ſayde ſumme, ſuffer impriſonmente duryng .xii. monethes, without bayle or maynepriſe. And that from and after the ſayde feaſte of the Natiuitie of .S. Iohn Baptiſt next comming, all and euery perſon and perſons, inhabiting within this realme, or any other the Queenes Maieſties dominions, ſhall diligently and faithfully, hauing no lawful or reaſonable excuſe to be abſent, endeuour them ſelues to reſort to their pariſh Churche or Chappell accuſtomed, or vppon reaſonable let thereof, to ſome vſuall place where common prayer and ſuche ſeruice of God ſhalbe vſed, in ſuche tyme of let vppon euery Sundaye, and other dayes ordeyned and vſed to be kept as holye dayes, and then and there to abide orderlye and ſoberlye, duryng the tyme of the common prayer, preachinges,

or other ſeruice of God, there to be vſed and miniſtred, vppon payne of puniſhment by the cenſures of the Churche, and alſo vpon payne that euery perſon ſo offendyng, ſhall forfeyte for euery ſuch offence .xii.d. to be leuied by the Churchwardens of the pariſhe where ſuch offence ſhalbe done, to thuſe of the poore of the ſame pariſh, of the goodes, landes, and tenementes of ſuche offendour, by way of diſtreſſe. And for due execution hereof, the Queenes moſte excellent Maieſtie, the lordes temporall, and all the commons in this preſent parliament aſſembled, doth in Gods name earneſtly require & charge al the Archbyſhopes, Byſhopes, & other Ordinaries, that they ſhal endeuour them ſelues to the vttermoſt of their knowledges, that the due and true execution hereof, my be had throughout their dioceſſe and charges, as they will aunſwere before God, for ſuch euilles & plagues wherwith almighty God may iuſtly puniſh his people for neglecting this good and holeſome law. And for their aucthoritie in this behalfe, be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and ſinguler the ſame Archbiſhops, Byſhops, and all other their officers exerciſing Eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction, aſwell in place exempt, as not exempt, within their dioceſſe, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie by this acte, to refourme, correct, and puniſh by cenſures of the Churche, all and ſinguler perſons whiche ſhall offend within any their iuriſdictions or dioceſſe, after the ſayde feaſte of the Natiuitie of. S. Iohn Baptiſt next comming, agaynſt this acte and ſtatute: any other law, ſtatute, priuiledge, libertie, or prouiſion, heretofore made, had, or ſuffered to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               And it is ordeyned and enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and euerye Iuſtices of Oyer and determiner, or Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie in euery of their open and generall Seſſions, to enquire, heare, and determyne, all and all maner of offences, that ſhalbe committed or done contrary to any article conteyned in this preſente acte, within the limites of the Commiſſion to them directed, and to make proceſſe for the execution of the ſame, as they may do agaynſt any perſon beyng indited before them of treſpas, or lawfully conuicted thereof.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and euery Archbyſhop and Byſhop, ſhall or may at all tyme and tymes, at his libertie and pleaſure, ioyne and aſſociate hym ſelfe by vertue of this acte, to the ſayd Iuſtices of Oyer and determiner, or to the ſayde Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, at euery of the ſayde open and generall Seſſions to be holden in any place within his dioceſſe, for and to the enquirie, hearing, and determining of the offences aforeſayde.
               Prouided alſo, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the bookes concernyng the ſayde Seruices, ſhall at the coſtes and

charges of the pariſhioners of euery pariſhe, and Cathedrall Church, be attayned and gotten before the ſaide feaſt of the Natiuitie of Saint Iohn Baptiſt next folowyng, and that all ſuche pariſhes and Cathedral Churches, or other places, where the ſaid bookes ſhalbe attained and gotten before the ſaid feaſt of the Natiuitie of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, ſhall within three weekes next after the ſayde bookes ſo attayned and gotten, vſe the ſayde ſeruice, and put the ſame in vre, accordyng to this acte.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that no perſon or perſons ſhalbe at anye tyme hereafter impeached, or otherwyſe moleſted, of, or for any the offences aboue mentioned, hereafter to be committed or done contrarye to this acte, vnleſſe he or they ſo offendyng be thereof indited at the next generall Seſſions to be holden before any ſuche Iuſtices of Oyer and determiner, or Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, next after any offence committed or done contrary to the tenour of this acte.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it ordayned and enacted by thauctoritie aforeſayde, that all and ſinguler Lordes of the Parliamenet, for the third offence aboue mentioned, ſhalbe tryed by their peeres.
               Prouided alſo, and be it ordayned and enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that the Maior of London, and all other Maiors, Bailiffes, and other head officers, of all and ſinguler Cities, Boroughes, and Townes corporate, within this Realme, Wales, and the marches of the ſame, to the whiche Iuſtices of Aſſiſe do not commonlye repayre, ſhal haue full power and aucthoritie by vertue of this acte, to enquire, heare, and determine the offences aboueſayde, and euery of them, yerelye within .xv. dayes after the feaſte of Eaſter, and. S. Michaell tharchangell, in lyke maner and fourme as Iuſtices of Aſſiſe and Oyer and determiner may do.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it ordeyned and enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and ſinguler Archbyſhoppes and Byſhoppes, and euery of their Chauncellours, Commiſſaries, Archdeacons, & other Ordinaries, hauing any peculier Eccleſiaſtical iuriſdiction, ſhal haue full power and aucthoritie by vertue of this act, aſwel to enquire in their viſitation, Synodes, and elſwhere within their iuriſdiction at any other tyme and place, to take accuſations & informations of al and euery the thynges aboue mentioned, done, committed, or perpetrated, within the limites of their iuriſdictions and aucthoritie, & to puniſh the ſame by admonition, excommunication, ſequeſtration, or depriuation, and other cenſures and proceſſe, in lyke fourme as heretofore hath ben vſed in like caſes by ye Queenes Eccleſiaſticall lawes.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted, that whatſoeuer perſon offendyng in the premiſſes, ſhal for their offences fyrſt receaue puniſhment

or the Ordinarie, hauing a teſtimoniall thereof vnder the ſayde Ordinaryes Seale, ſhall not for the ſame offence eftſoones be conuicted before the Iuſtices. And lykewyſe receauing for the ſayde firſte offence puniſhment by the Iuſtices, he ſhall not for the ſame offence eftſoones receaue puniſhment of the Ordinarie: any thing conteyned in this acte to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alwayes and be it enacted, that ſuche ornamentes of the Churche, and of the miniſters therof, ſhalbe reteyned and be in vſe, as was in this Churche of Englande, by aucthoritie of Parliament, in the ſecond yere of the raigne of kyng Edwarde the .vi. vntill other order ſhalbe therein taken by the aucthoritie of the Queenes Maieſtie, with the aduiſe of her Commiſſioners appoynted and aucthorized vnder the great Seale of Englande for cauſes Eccleſiaſticall, or of the Metropolitane of this Realme. And alſo that if there ſhall happen any contempt or irreuerence to be vſed in the ceremonies or rites of the Churche, by the miſuſyng of the orders appoynted in this booke: the Queenes Maieſtie may by the lyke aduiſe of the ſayde Commiſſioners or Metropolitane, ordayne and publiſhe ſuch farther ceremonies or rites, as may be moſte for the aduauncemente of Gods glorye, the edifying of his Churche, and the due reuerence of Chriſtes holye Myſteries and Sacramentes.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all lawes, ſtatutes, and ordinaunces, wherein or whereby anye other Seruice, adminiſtration of Sacramentes, or common Prayer, is limited, eſtabliſhed, or ſet foorth to be vſed within this Realme, or anye other the Queenes dominions or countreyes, ſhall from hencefoorth be vtterly voyde, and of none effect.
            
            
               An acte of Recognition the Queenes hyghneſſe tytle to the imperiall Crowne of this Realme. The .iij. Chapter.
               
                  AS there is nothing vnder God (moſt dreade Soueraigne Ladie) where we your moſte humble, faythfull, and obedient ſubiectes, the lordes ſpiritual and temporal, and commons in this preſent Parliamente aſſembled, haue, may, or ought to haue more cauſe to reioyce, then in this only, that it hath pleaſed God of his mercyfull prouidence and goodnes, towardes vs and this our realme, not onely to prouide, but alſo to preſerue and keepe for vs, and our wealthes your royall maieſtie, our moſt ryghtfull and lawfull Soueraigne

liege Lady and Queene, moſte happylye to raigne ouer vs, for the which we do geue and yeelde vnto hym from the bottomes of our heartes, our humble thankes, laudes, and prayſes: Euen ſo there is nothyng that we your ſayde ſubiectes for our parties can, may, or ought towardes your hyghneſſe, more firmely, entirely, and aſſuredredly in the puritie of our hearts thinke, or with our mouthes declare and confeſſe to be true, then that your Maieſtie our ſayde Soueraigne Lady is, and in very deede, and of moſte meere ryght ought to be by the lawes of God, and the lawes and ſtatutes of this Realme, our moſt rightfull and lawful ſoueraigne liege Lady & Queene: and that your highnes is rightly, lineally, and lawfully deſcended, and come of the blood royall of this realme of Englande, in and to whoſe princely perſon, and the heyres of your body lawfullye to be begotten after you, without all doubt, ambiguitie, ſcruple, or queſtion, the imperial & royall eſtate, place, crowne, and dignitie of this realme, with all honors, ſtiles, titles, dignities, regalities, iuriſdictions, & preheminences to the ſame now belongyng and apparteining, are and ſhalbe moſt fully, rightfully, really, and entirely inueſted, and incorporated, vnited, & annexed, as rightfully, and lawfully, to al intents, conſtructions, and purpoſes, as the ſame were in the ſayd late king Henry the eight, or in the late kyng Edwarde the .vi. your highnes brother, or in ye late Queene Marie your highnes ſiſter, at any time ſince the act of parliament made in the .xxxv. yere of the raigne of your ſaid moſt noble father kyng Henry the eight, entituled, An act concerning the ſtabliſhment of the kings maieſties ſucceſſion in the imperial crowne of this realme. For which cauſes, we your ſaid moſt louing, faythfull, & obedient ſubiectes, repreſenting the three eſtates of your realme of England, as therunto conſtrained by the law of god and man, except we ſhould ouermuch forget our dueties to your highnes, and to the heires of your body lawfully begotten, can no leſſe do, but moſt humbly beſech your highnes, that by thaucthoritie of this preſent parliament, it may be enacted, eſtabliſhed, and declared, that we do recogniſe, acknowledge, and confeſſe the ſame your eſtate, ryght, title, and ſucceſſion, as is aforeſaid, to be in and to your highnes, and the heyres of your body to be begotten, thorowoutly, and in the whole, and in euery part therof, in ſuch maner & fourme as before is mentioned, declared, or confeſſed, and therunto moſt humbly & faithfully we do ſubmit our ſelues, our heires & poſterities for euer. And further do make our moſt heartie & humble petition vnto your highneſſe, that it may pleaſe the ſame, not only to accept this our ſaid recognition, but alſo our faythfull promiſes, that we, accordyng to our dueties, ſhall and will ſtand to aſſiſte and defende your royall Maieſtie, and the heires of your bodye to be begotten, beyng Kynges and Queenes of this Realme, and your ſayd ryghtes, and titles in & to the ſayde imperiall

eſtate, place, crowne, and dignitie in all thynges thereto belongyng, at all tymes to the vttermoſt of our poſſible powers, and therein to ſpende our bodies, landes, and goodes, agaynſt all perſons whatſoeuer, that any thyng ſhall attempt to the contrary.
               And that it may be enacted by thauctoritie aforeſaide, that aſwell this our declaration, confeſſion, & recognition, as alſo the limitation & declaration of the ſucceſſion of the imperial crowne of this realme, mentioned and conteyned in the ſayde acte made in the ſayde .xxxv. yere of the raigne of your ſayde moſte noble father, ſhall ſtande, remayne, and be the lawe of this realme for euer. And that all ſentences, iudgementes, & decrees, had, made, declared, ſet foorth, publiſhed, and promulged, and alſo as muche of euery clauſe, article, braunche, matter, or thyng, contayned and expreſſed in any acte or actes of parliament, as be in any thyng repugnaunt, contrary, or derogatorie to this our ſaide confeſſion, declaration, and recognition, or to any parte or parcell thereof, or contrary to the ſaid limitation of the ſucceſſion of the imperiall crowne, eſtablyſhed and made by the ſaid act in the ſaid xxxv. yere of the raigne of the ſaid late king Henry theight (by whatſoeuer power or aucthoritie the ſame ben, or haue ben had or made) ſhalbe vtterly fruſtrate, voyde, and of none effecte: and alſo ſhall and may be cancelled, defaced, and put in perpetuall obliuion at your highnes wyll and pleaſure, as yf the ſame had neuer ben had, made, declared, ſet foorth, publiſhed, or promulged.
            
            
               An acte for the reſtitution of the firſt fruites and tenthes, and rentes reſerued nomine dicime, and of parſonages impropriate to the imperiall crowne of this Realme. The .iiii. Chapter.
               
                  IN their moſt humble wyſe beſechen your moſte excellent Maieſtie, your faithful and humble ſubiectes, the lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the Commons of this your Realme in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, that where in the Parliament of your moſte noble father of famous memorie kyng Henry the eyght, holden at Weſtminſter vpon prorogation the thirde day of Nouember, in the .xxvi. yere of his proſperous raigne, it was enacted, ordayned, and eſtabliſhed by thaucthoritie of the ſame parliament amongſt other thynges, that his hyghneſſe, his heyres & ſucceſſours, kings of this Realme, ſhould haue & enioy from time to time to endure for euer, of euery perſon and perſons, which at anye tyme after the firſt day of Ianuary then next enſuing, ſhoulde be nominated, elected, prefected, preſented, collated, or by any other meanes appoynted

to haue any Archbiſhoprike, Byſhopryke, Abbacye, Monaſterye, Pryorye, Colledge, Hoſpitall, Archdeconry, Deanerye, Prouoſtſhyp, Prebend, Parſonage, Vicarage, Chauntrie, Free Chappell, or other dignitie, benefice, office, or promotion ſpiritual, within this Realme or els where, within any of the kings dominions, of what name, nature, or qualitie ſoeuer they were, or to whoſe foundation, patronage, or gyft ſoeuer they dyd belong, the firſte fruites, reuenues, and profytes, for one yere of euerye ſuche Archbyſhopryke, Byſhoprike, Abbacie, Monaſterie, Pryorye, Colledge, Hoſpital, Archdeaconry, Deanery, Prouoſtſhyppe, Prebende, Parſonage, Vicarage, Chauntrie, Free Chappel, or other dignitie, benefice, office, or promotion ſpiritual aforenamed, whereunto any ſuch perſon or perſons ſhoulde after the ſayde fyrſt day of Ianuary be nominated, elected, prefected, preſented, collated, or by any other meanes appoynted. And that euery ſuch perſon and perſons, before any actual or reall poſſeſſion, or medling with the profites of any ſuche Archbiſhoprike, Byſhopryke, Abbacy, Monaſtery, Colledge, Hoſpitall, Deanery, Prouoſtſhyp, Prebend, Parſonage, Vicarage, Chauntrie, Free Chappel, Pryorye, or other dignitie, benefice, office, or promotion ſpirituall, ſhoulde ſatiſfie, contente, and pay, or compoūd, or agree to pay to the kings vſe, at reaſonable dayes, vpon good ſuerties, the ſaid firſt fruited and profites for one yere. And it was further enacted by aucthoritie aforeſayd, that the firſt fruits of benefices, before that tyme accuſtomed to be paide to the Byſhoppe of Norwiche within his Dioceſſe, and to the Archdeacon of Rychemonde within his Archdeaconrye, or anye other perſon or perſons within this Realme, or any other the kings dominions, ſhould from the ſayd firſt day of Ianuary, ceaſſe and be extincte, and no longer be payde but only to the kinges highnes, his heyres and ſucceſſours, in ſuche fourme as is before mentioned. And further it was enacted by aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the kynges Maieſtie, his heyres, and ſucceſſours, for more augmentation and mayntenaunce of the royall eſtate of his imperiall crowne, ſhoulde yerelye haue, take, enioy, and receaue, vnited and knytte to his imperiall crowne for euer, one yerely rent or pention, amounting to the value of the tenthe part of al the reuenues, rentes, farmes, tythes, offeringes, emolumentes, and of al other profites, aſwel called ſpiritual as temporal, apparteining or belonging, or that from thenceforth ſhould belong to any Achebyſhoprike, Byſhoprike, Abbacye, Monaſterye, Pryory, Archdeaconry, Deanerye, Hoſpitall, Colledge, Houſe Collegiate, Prebende, Cathedrall Church, Collegiate Church, Conuentual Church, Parſonage, Vicarage, Chauntry, Freechappel, or other benefice, or promotion ſpiritual, of what name, nature, or qualitie ſoeuer they were, within any dioceſſe of this realme, or in Wales, the ſaid pention or annal rent, to be

yerely paid for euer, to the ſaid late king, his heires & ſucceſſors, at the feaſt of the Natiuitie of our Lord God, and the firſt payment thereof to begyn at the feaſt of the Natiuitie of our Lode God, which ſhould be in the yere of our Lord god, a thouſand, fiue hundred, thirtie & fiue, & to be paid yerely by ſuch as ſhould be appoynted to haue the collection therof, before the firſt day of April next folowing, after the ſaid feaſt of the Natiuitie of our Lord God, as in the ſayd acte more playnely it doth appeare. And where alſo one other act was made & eſtabliſhed in the ſayd Parliament, the ſayd .xxvi. yere, that no farmour of ſpirituall perſons, ſhoulde be compelled or charged to pay for theyr leaſſours firſt fruites or yerely pention for the tenth graunted vnto the kynges hyghnes, notwithſtandyng any couenaunt, contracte, bond, or other thyng made to the contrary, as by the ſame act more playnely appeareth. And where alſo at one other ſeſſion of the ſame parliament, holden by prorogation at Weſtminſter, in the .xxvii. yere of the raigne of your ſayde father, one other acte was made and eſtablyſhed, that the kynges ſpirituall ſubiectes, ſhoulde be deducted and allowed of the tenth of theyr ſpirituall promotions, for that fyrſte yere for whiche they ſhould pay the firſt fruites, as in the ſaide acte alſo more at large appeareth. And where alſo in one other Parliament of the ſayde late king, holden at Weſtminſter, in the .xxviii. yere of his raigne, amongſt other thynges it was enacted and ordayned, that the yere in whiche the fyrſte fruites of euery benefice and ſpirituall promotion ſhoulde be payde, ſhoulde begyn and be accompted immediatlye after the aduoydaunce thereof. And that the tythes, commodities, reuenues, caſualties, and profites thereof (Chauntries only except) in the time of vacation, ſhoulde belong and afferre to the next incumbente, towardes the payment of the firſt fruites, as by the ſame acte more at large appeareth. And where alſo in one other Parliament holden vppon prorogation at Weſtminſter, in the .xxxii. yere of the raigne of the ſayde late kyng, one acte was made and eſtablyſhed, that Byſſhoppes vpon theyr accomptes, of, and for the ſayde yerelye tenthe, ſhould be diſcharged by their othes of paiment of ſuch ſumme or ſummes of money, of the ſayd annal rent, or tenth, as they could not lawfully leuy, and alſo an order appointed howe the king ſhould be aunſwered of the tenth of any benefice & ſpirituall promotion, omitted in the originall or former certificate of benefices and ſpirituall promotions, made in the Exchequer, as by the ſame act laſt mentioned more at large appeareth. And where alſo in the ſame ſeſſion and Parliament holden in the ſayde .xxxii. yere of the raigne of your hyghneſſe ſayde noble father, and by aucthoritie of the ſame Parliament, one courte was erected, eſtablyſhed, and made, for the better anſwering of the ſayde firſt fruites and tenthes vnto the king, called the courte of

firſt fruites and tenthes, as in the ſame acte of erection thereof more fully appeareth. And where alſo in the ſame ſeſſion and Parliament one other act was made, wherby the Biſhop of Norwich for the time beyng (beyng before that diſcharged from the collection of the tenth within his dioceſſe) ſhoulde be charged and chargeable for euer, for, and with the collection of the ſame tenth within his dioces, & make paiment therof, as other Biſhops ſhould or ought to do within their dioces, as by the ſame acte more playnely appeareth. And where alſo in one other Parliament of the ſayde late kyng, holden at Weſtminſter vpon prorogation, in the .xxiiii. yere of his raigne, one acte was eſtabliſed and made concernyng Collectours and Receauers, to make payment of their receiptes within three monethes next after the ſame ſhoulde be due, and payde to the kinges vſe, vnder certayne penalties therin expreſſed, as by ye ſame acte more at large appeareth. And where alſo in the ſame Seſſion and Parliament it was enacted and eſtabliſhed, taht the newe erected Biſhops, of Cheſter, Glouceſter, Peterborough, Briſtoll, Oxford, and their ſucceſſours for euer, ſhould pay their tenthes reſerued vpon their letters patents, or their ſeuerall erections, onely in the ſayd court of the firſt fruites & tenthes for euer, as by the ſame acte more at large appeareth. And where alſo in the Parliament of the ſayd late kyng, holden at Weſtminſter in the .xxxvii. yere of his raigne, one act entituled, An acte for the vnion of Churches, not exceedyng the value of .vi.li. was eſtabliſhed and made, wherein is conteyned a ſauyng to the kyng of the firſt fruites and tenthes of all Churches and Chappels, not exceeding the value of .vi.li. that then were, or from thenceforth ſhould be vnited and conſolidate in one, as in the ſame acte and ſauyng more largely appeareth. And where alſo in the Parliament of your hyghneſſe deareſt brother of worthy memorie kyng Edwarde the ſixth, holden at Weſtminſter vpon prorogation, in the ſeconde yere of his raigne, one acte was made, that by the certificat of the Biſhop of any dioceſſe within this Realme, or any of the dominions of the ſame, of recuſaunce or none payment of any tenth of any benefice or ſpirituall promotion, the incumbente ſhoulde leeſe but the benefice or promotion onely, as by the ſame acte more playnely appeareth.
               And where alſo in one other Parliament of the ſayde late kyng Edwarde, holde at weſtminſter in the ſeuenth yere of his raigne, one acte was made and eſtabliſhed, declaring howe and in what ſort the vnder Collectours of the tenth in euery dioces, appoynted by the Biſhop, ſhould be bounde to diſcharge the Biſhops of that collection, and a lenger day geuen for the payment of the tenth: and howe the kyng ſhoulde be aunſwered of the tenth for the tyme of vacation of euery benefice and ſpirituall promotion, and that the patentes of the

collection of tenth, ſhoulde be good only duryng the incumbentes of the grauntours, as in the ſame acte more at large is conteyned. And where alſo in the ſecond ſeſſion of Parliament of our late ſoueraigne Lady Queene Marie your Maieſties deareſt ſiſter, holden at Weſtminſter in the firſt yere of her raigne, one acte was made and eſtabliſhed, whereby full power and aucthoritie was geuen and appoynted vnto her highneſſe at her wyll and pleaſure, to alter, chaunge, vnite, tranſport, diſſolue, or determine, aſwell the ſayde court of firſt fruites and tenthes, as the court of augmentations of the reuenues of the kynges crowne, and other courtes therein expreſſed, and to reduce the ſame courtes, or any of them, into one, two, or more court or courtes, or to vnite and annexe the ſayd courtes, or any two or more of them, together, or to any other of her Maieſties courtes of recordes, as to her it ſhoulde be thought moſt conuenient & beſt, for the better, ſure, and more ſpeedie aunſwering of her yerely reuenues, caſualties, and profites, then aunſwerable in the ſayde courtes, or any of them, as in the ſame acte more at large is expreſſed: by vigor and aucthoritie of which act, the ſayde late Queene by her graces foure ſeuerall letters patentes, wherof two beare date the .xxiii. day of Ianuary, in the firſt yere of her raigne, and the other two the .xxiiii. day of Ianuary in the ſame yere, dyd not only diſſolue, determine, and extinguiſhe the ſayde courts commonly called and entituled, The court of augmentations and reuenues of the kings crowne, and, The court of the firſt fruites and tenth, and the iuriſdiction and aucthoritie thereof: but alſo dyd vnite, tranſpoſe, and annex the ſayde courtes of augmentations and reuenues of the kinges crowne, and of the firſt fruites and tenthes ſo diſſolued, to the ſayde court of the Exchequer, there to be and continue as a member and parcell of the ſame court of the Exchequer: and did appoynt all and ſinguler the reuenues, caſualties, profites, and hereditamentes then aunſwerable in the ſayde courtes, to the order, rule, ſuruey, and gouernaunce of the ſayde court of the Exchequer, there to be aunſwered and accompted for euer, in ſuche order, maner, and fourme, as in the ſayde later letters patentes, and in two Scedules vnto the ſayde letters patentes annexed, is mentioned and declared, as by the tenour and purport of the ſayde letters patentes and Scedules, ſigned with her highnes hand, more plainely may appeare. By reaſon of all whiche ſayde premiſſes, not onelye the ſayde perpetuall reuenues of the firſte fruites and tenthes, graunted by the ſayde acte in the .xxvi. yere of the reigne of your highnes moſt noble father, in augmentation & maintenaunce of the crowne of this Realme, but alſo the tenthes or yerely rentes reſerued nomine decime, by any letters patentes, of your ſayde noble father, ſithence the ſaid .xxvi. yere of his raigne, and of your ſayd deareſt brother

and ſiſter, or of any of them, made to any Biſhop, and his ſucceſſours, or to any Cathedral Church, Deane and Chapter, Colledge, or any other Eccleſiaſtical and Spiritual perſon or perſons, or corporations, and their Succeſſours for euer. And alſo all and euery the rentes, reuenues, iſſues, and profites, of all and ſingular Rectories, perſonages, and benefices impropriate, glebe landes, tithes, oblations, pentions, portions, and other profites, and emolumentes eccleſiaſticall and ſpirituall to the ſame belonging, beyng in the handes and poſſeſſion of your ſayde deareſt ſiſter, at the ſayde .xxiiii. day of Ianuarie, were ordered, aunſwerable, and accompted for in the ſaide court of the Exchequer, and were therein well and iuſtly aunſwered and payde vnto her hyghneſſe vſe and behoofe, lyke as the ſame had ben vnto the ſayd two noble kinges, her ſayd father & brother, by the ſpace of .xx. yeres, without greefe or contradiction of the Prelates and Cleargie of the Realme, to the great aide, releefe, and ſupportation of the ineſtimable charges of the Crowne of this Realme, which dayly ſince the tyme of the making of the ſayde firſt acte, haue encreaſed and growen more and more. Which thing although the ſayde late Queene mought and dyd manyfeſtly feele & perceaue to be moſt true: yet ſhe vpon certayne zealouſe and inconuenient reſpectes, not ſufficiently, nor politikely inough waying that matter, nor hauyng due conſyderation and regard to the maintenaunce, and vpholdyng and good continuance of the ſtate of the Imperiall Crowne of this Realme in ſucceſſion, whiche rather needed an augmentation, then any diminution, procured and wylled an acte of Parliament, to be made and prouided in the ſeconde and thirde yeres of the raigne of kyng Philip her late huſbande and her, that all paymentes of the ſayde firſt fruites, ſhoulde from thencefoorth ceaſe and be clearely extinct and determined for euer. And that aſwell all the ſayde benefices and ſpirituall promotions, as the poſſeſſours, owners, and incumbentes thereof, and their ſucceſſours, ſhoulde from and after the .viii. day of Auguſt, in the ſayd ſecond and third yeres, and ſo from thencefoorth at all tymes for euer, be clearely exonerate, acquited, & diſcharged, agaynſt the ſayd late king Philip & Queene Marie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, of and from the payment and paymentes of all and euery the ſayde firſt fruites, in as ample and large maner and forme, as they were before the makyng of the ſayde acte, of the firſt and originall graunt thereof, in the ſayde .xxvi. yere of the raigne of the ſayd late kyng your noble father, and as though the ſame had neuer ben had ne made. And further, that neyther the ſayde perpetual pention, annall rent, or tenth, graunted by the ſayde firſte acte of the .xxvi. yere of the ſayde noble kyng Henry: nor alſo the ſayde ſeuerall annall rentes, or tenthes, reſerued nomine decime, by and vpon the ſayde

ſeuerall letters patentes, of the ſayd late Kyng and Queene, made to ſpirituall perſons and corporations as is aforeſayde, or any of them, from and after the feaſt of S. Michael Tharchangell then laſt paſt, ſhoulde any more be payde or payable vnto the ſayde late kyng Philip and Queene Marie, her heyres, or ſucceſſours, but that aſwell all the ſayd Archbyſhoprickes, Biſhoprickes, and other benefices, dignities, Deanes, and Chapters, Colledges, Corporations, and Spirituall promotions aforeſaide, as alſo the poſſeſſours, owners, proprietaries, and incumbentes of the ſame, and their ſucceſſours, from and after the ſayde feaſt of S. Michael Tharchangel, ſhoulde be clearely exonerate, acquited and diſcharged of, and from the payment therof, agaynſt them, and the heires, & ſucceſſours of the ſame late Queene for euer. And furthermore, that the ſayd late kyng Philip & Queene Marie, her heires, or ſucceſſours, from and after the ſayde feaſt of S. Michael Tharchangell, ſhoulde not receaue, perceaue, take, and enioy any the iſſues, reuenues, profites, or commodities of the ſayde rectories, perſonages, benefices, glebe landes, tythes, oblations, pentions, portions, and other profites and emolumentes eccleſiaſticall and ſpirituall aforeſayde, or of any of them, or of the reuertion or reuertions of them, or any of them: but in and by the ſayde acte, the ſame late kyng and Queene, clearely gaue ouer, renounced, and relynquiſhed aſwell the ſayde rectories, perſonages, benefices, glebe landes, tythes, oblations, pentions, portions, and other profites and emolumentes eccleſiaſticall and ſpirituall aforeſayde, and euery of them, and the reuertion and reuertions of them, and euery of them, and all their ryght, tytle, vſe, intereſt, and demaunde of, in, or to the ſame, from them, and the heyres, and ſucceſſours of the ſayde late Queene for euer, as alſo the ſayde perpetuall pention, annall rent, and tenth, and alſo the ſayde yerely rentes, reſerued nomine decime, vpon the ſayde ſeuerall letters patentes, and all theyr ryght, tytle, and intereſt, which they or eyther of them, or the heires or ſucceſſours of the ſayde late Queene, had or mought haue had, in or to the ſame. The ſame yerely pention, tenthes, yerely rentes, parſonages, emolumentes, and profites, to be perceaued, taken, receaued, counted, employed, vſed, and diſpoſed by the late reuerend father in God Reginald Poole, late Cardinal and Legate, and ſuche other perſons as he ſhould name and appoynt, and ſuch other as ben ſpecially limited in the ſayd acte, to and for certayne vſes, purpoſes, and intentes mentioned in the ſame acte, with diuers prouiſions, and a ſauyng in the ſame expreſſed and conteyned, as by the ſame more at large appeareth. We your ſayde humble and obedient ſubiectes, the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and commons in this your preſent Parliament aſſembled, callyng to our remembraunce the huge, innumerable,

and ineſtimable charges of the royal eſtate, and imperiall Crowne of this Realme, and how the ſame is lefte vnto your Maieſtie, at this your firſte entrye thereunto, greatly diminiſhed, aſwell by reaſon of the ſayde acte made in the ſayde ſeconde and thirde yere of the raigne of the ſayde kyng Philip and Queene Marie, as otherwyſe, do conceaue at the bottome of our heartes greate ſorowe and heauyneſſe, as ſubiectes carefull for their naturall and liege Soueraigne Ladye, vppon whom dependeth the ſuretie, worldly ioy, and wealth of vs all: and beyng no leſſe affected towardes your Maieſties moſte royall perſon, and the preſeruation and mayntenaunce of the ſame, and of the eſtate and ſucceſſion of your Maieſties ſayde Crowne, then were the firſte grauntours of the ſayde firſte fruites and tenthes towardes your hyghnes moſt noble father, and his ſayde royall eſtate, at the tyme of their ſayde graunt to hym thereof made, do accompt of very ryght and good congruence no leſſe then our moſte bounden duetie, to moue your hyghneſſe, and therewith moſt humblye to beſeeche the ſame: that the greate diſheriſon and decay committed and done to the crowne and eſtate royall of this your Realme, and the ſucceſſion thereof by reaſon of the ſayde acte made in the ſayde ſeconde and thirde yeres of the raigne of the ſayde kyng Philip and Queene Marie, may at this Parliament be refourmed and auoyded, and that with your hyghneſſe fauour and royall aſſente it may be enacted, ordeyned, eſtabliſhed, and prouided by aucthoritie of this Parliament, in maner and fourme hereafter enſuyng: That is to ſay, that the ſayd acte made in the ſeconde and thirde yeres of the raigne of the ſayde late kyng Philip and Queene Marie, and all articles, clauſes, and ſentences therein conteyned, ſhalbe form and after the firſt day of this preſent Parliament, vtterly and clearely repealed, made voyde, and of no force ne effect: and all aucthorities and liberties graunted, limited, and appoynted in & by the ſayd acte to the ſaide late Cardinall Poole, or made or deriued, by force, ſtrength, or colour of the ſame acte, by or from the ſayde late Cardinall, to any other perſon or perſons, bodyes politike or corporate, to ceaſſe and be vtterly voyde and determyned: and that the ſaid firſt fruites, and all paymentes thereof, from and after the ſayde firſt day of this Parliament, ſhalbe reuiued, and haue their being and continuaunce againe, and be deemed and adiudged to al intentes, conſtructions, and purpoſes, in the Queenes hyghnes moſt royal perſon, her heires, and ſucceſſours, and vnited and annexed to the imperiall crowne of this Realme, of and in ſuche lyke, and the ſame eſtate, intereſt, tytle, quantitie, ſorte, degree, and condition, and in as ample and beneficiall maner and fourme, as the ſame was or were in the perſon or poſſeſſion of the ſayde late Queene Marie, at and before the ſayde eight day of Auguſt, in the ſayd acte of extinguiſhment mentioned and

expreſſed: the ſame acte of extinguiſhment, or any letters patentes, or anye other matter or thyng had, done, or ſuffered by the ſayde late Queene, to the contrary thereof in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng. And alſo that aſwell ſo much of the ſayde perpetuall and annall tenth, and pention, graunted by the ſayde acte made in the ſayde .xxvi. yere of the raigne of the ſayde late kyng Henrye the eight, as alſo ſo muche of the ſayde yerely rentes reſerued vppon the ſayde ſeuerall letters patentes nomine decime, and alſo ſo many of the ſayde rectories, perſonages, and benefices, impropriate, glebe landes, tithes, oblations, pentions, portions, and other profites and emolumentes eccleſiaſticall and ſpirituall aforeſayde, and the reuertion and reuertions thereof: and all rentes, emolumentes, and profites incident to the ſame, as were in the handes and poſſeſſion of the ſayde late Queene Marie, at and before the ſayde .viii. day of Auguſt, ſhall from the ſayde feaſte of. S. Michaell Tharchangell laſt paſt, be beſted, adiudged, and deemed, actually and really in the ſeaſme and poſſeſſion of our ſaid ſoueraigne lady Queene Elizabeth, her heires, and ſucceſſours, to all intentes, conſtructions, & purpoſes, of and in ſuch lyke and the ſame eſtate, intereſt, order, degree, qualitie, ſorte, and condition, and as fully, holy, largely, and beneficially, as the ſame were in the ſeaſme and poſſeſſion of the ſaid late queene Marie, at and before the ſame eight day of Auguſt. And that aſwell the ſayde firſt fruites and tenthes, and the order thereof, as alſo the ſayde annall rentes reſerued nomine decime, and the ſayde rectories, perſonages, benefices, glebe landes, tythes, oblations, pentions, portions, and other profites and emolumentes eccleſiaſticall and ſpirituall aforeſayde, and euery of them, and the reuertion and reuertions of them, and of all rentes and profites vnto the ſame, or any of them incident or belongyng, ſhalbe within the ſayde order, ſuruey, rule, and gouernaunce of the ſayde courte of Thexchequer, in euerye degree, ſorte, and condition, as they were (at and) before the ſayde eight day of Auguſt: the ſayde acte made in the ſayde ſeconde and thirde yeres, or anye other matter or thyng to the contrary thereof, notwithſtandyng. And that ſo much of all and euerye the ſayde actes and ſtatutes firſt recited, or of anye other acte or ſtatute, touchyng or concerning the order, leuying, true aunſweryng and payment or qualification of the ſayde firſte fruites and tenthes, and of the ſayde rectories, perſonages, and benefices improprietate, and of the rentes, reuenues, emolumentes and profites thereof, and of all other the premiſſes, and alſo the charge, diſcharge, or alteration of them, or any of them, or any matter or thing in any wyſe ſoundyng or tendyng thereunto, which were ſtandyng, and beyng in force, effect, and vnrepealed at and before the ſayde eight day of Auguſt (except onlye the ſayd actes of the erections of the courtes of

augmentations and fyrſte fruites and tenthes) ſhalbe, remayne, and contynue in their full and perfect ſtrengthes and forces, and be obſerued and put in due execution, accordyng to the tenours and purportes of the ſame, and euerye of them. And that the Queenes Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament ſhall from the ſayde firſte day of this preſent Parliament, haue, holde, poſſeede, and enioye for euer the aduouſons, gyftes and patronages of all vicarages belongyng or incident to any of the ſayde rectories, and perſonages impropriate, in the ſame ſorte, qualitie, condition, and degree, to all intentes and purpoſes, as the ſame were in the perſon and poſſeſſion of the ſayde late Queene Marye, at and before the ſayde eight day of Auguſt: any thyng or acte done by the ſame late Cardinall, or anye graunte or grauntes by letters patentes made by the ſayd late Queene Marye, of the ſayd aduouſons and patronages, or anye of them, to anye eccleſiaſticall or ſpirituall perſon or perſons, or anye ſpirituall corporation, to the contrary in anye wyſe, notwithſtandyng.
               Sauing to all and euerye perſon and perſons, bodyes politike and corporate, and their heyres, executours, ſucceſſours, and aſſignes, and euerye of them, other then ſuche perſons as be mentioned and named in any letters patentes, made by the ſayd Queene Marie, the ſaid viii. day of Auguſt▪ or at any tyme ſithen, or clayming only by or vnder thaucthoritie, and ſtrength of the ſame acte or letters patentes or anye of them, all ſuch ryght, tytle, intereſt, eſtate, offices, leaſſes, grauntes, annuities, pentions, fees, corrodyes, rentes, and other yerely profites and commodities, as they or anye of them ought or ſhoulde haue had perceaued, or enioyed, of, in, or by reaſon of anye the perſonages, rectories, or of anye other the premiſſes, in caſe the ſayde former acte nowe repealed, and this preſent acte of repeale had neuer ben had ne made: anye thyng in the ſame actes, or eyther of them conteyned, or ſoundyng to the contrary therof in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng.
               And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that from and after the ſayd feaſte of ſaint Michaell Tharchangell laſte paſt, and ſo from thencefoorth from tyme to tyme, the ſayde pentions, annuities, rentes, corrodies, fees, and other yerelye paymentes, ſhalbe payde and payable onlye by our ſayde ſoueraigne Ladye, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, at the receipte of the Exchequer, or in ſuche other places as the Queenes Maieſtie her heyres, and ſucceſſours ſhal appoint, to all and euerye perſon and perſons, that ought to haue and enioye the ſame, in ſuch ſort, order, and fourme as the ſame ſhould or ought to haue ben payde and payable in caſe the ſayde acte nowe repealed had

neuer ben had ne made: anye thyng therein, or els in this acte conteyned to the contrary thereof in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng.
               And be it further enacted by aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and ſinguler incumbentes, proprietaries, tenauntes, farmours, leaſſes, and occupyers of the premiſſes, or any part thereof, their heyres, executours, and aſſignes, whiche the ſayde firſte day of this preſent Parliament, were behynd, or in any arrerages of and with the rents, farmes, tenthes, or other reuenues, profites, or dueties, by them or any of them due, and payable, for or by reaſon of the premiſſes, or any of them, ſhal & may be by the aucthoritie of this acte, ſeuerallye chargeable, accomptable, and aunſwerable to the Queenes Maiſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, in and at the ſayde court of the Exchequer, of and for the ſame arrerages and dueties, as other accomptauntes be and ſhalbe in the ſame courte: any thyng in the ſayde acte, nowe repealed in this acte, or any other matter or cauſe to the contrary thereof in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng.
               And yet neuertheleſſe the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie, at the humble requeſt of her ſayde ſubiectes, of her aboundaunt grace and bountefulnes, is pleaſed and contented that it be enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and ſingular vicarages, not exceeding the yerelye value of tenne poundes, after the rate and value vppon the recordes and bookes of the rates and values for the firſte fruites and tenthes, nowe remayning in the Exchequer, or that ſhall hereafter come and remayne in the ſame courte, and alſo all and ſinguler parſonages, not exceedyng the yerely value of tenne markes, after the like rate and valuation, and the incumbentes thereof, and euerye of them, their executours, adminiſtratours, ſucceſſours, and ſureties, & euery of them, from the ſaid feaſt of S. Michael Tharchangel laſt paſt, ſhalbe free and clearely diſcharged, and acquited for euer, agaynſt the Queenes Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, of and from the ſayde firſte fruites: any thyng in the ſayde acte of firſt fruites and tenthes made in the ſayde .xxvi. yere of the raigne of the ſayde late kyng Henrye the eight, or in this acte of repeale, or anye other acte or actes before recited to the contrary thereof in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that if any Incumbent of any ſuche promotion ſpirituall, as is aforeſayde, charged or chargeable to the payment of the ſayde firſte fruites, happen to liue to thend of one halfe yere next after the laſt auoydance of the ſame promotion ſpirituall, ſo as he hath receaued, or without fraud or couin, might lawfully haue receaued or enioyed the rentes or profites of that halfe yere, and before the ende of the other halfe yere, then nexte folowyng, ſhall happen to dye, or to be lawfullye euicted, remoued, or put from the ſayde promotion ſpirituall, by iudgement

in any action at the common lawe, without fraude or couine: that then euery ſuche incumbent, his heyres, executours, adminiſtratours, and ſuerties, ſhalbe charged and chargeable but only with the fourth part of the firſt fruites due to be payde for ſuche his promotion, and with no more of the ſaide firſt fruites: any thing in this acte conteyned, or any bonde or writing to be made for the payment of the ſayde firſt fruites, or any other matter or cauſe to the contrary, notwithſtanding. And yf it ſhall ſhall happen any ſuche incumbent to lyue by the ſpace of one whole yere next after the laſt aduoidaunce of the ſame promotion ſpirituall, and after before the ende of one halfe yere then next folowyng ſhall fortune to dye, or to be lawfully euicted, remoued, or put from the ſayd promotion ſpiritual, by iudgement in any action at the common lawe, without fraude or couine: that then euery ſuche incumbent, his heyres, executours, adminiſtratours and ſureties, ſhalbe charged and chargeable but only with the moytie and one halfe of the firſt fruites due to be payde; for ſuche his promotion ſpirituall and with no more of the ſame firſt fruites: any thyng in this acte conteyned, or any bonde or wrytyng obligatorie to be made for the paiment of the ſame fyrſt fruites, or any other matter or cauſe to the contrary, notwithſtanding. And yf it ſhal happen any ſuche incumbent to lyue to the ende of one whole yere and a halfe, next after the laſt auoydaunce of ſuche promotion ſpirituall, and after and before the ende of ſixe monethes then next folowyng ſhall fortune to dye, or to be lawfully euicted, remoued, or put from the ſayde promotion ſpirituall, by iudgement in any action at the common lawe, without fraude or couine: that then euery ſuche incumbent, his heyres, executours, adminiſtratours, and ſureties, ſhalbe charged and chargeable but onely with three partes of the firſt fruites of the ſame promotion ſpirituall, in foure partes to be diuided, and with no more: any thyng in this acte conteyned, or any bond or writing obligatorie had or made for the payment of the ſaide fyrſt fruites, or any other matter or cauſe to the contrarye, notwithſtandyng. And yf it ſhall happen any ſuche incumbent to lyue to the ende of two whole yeres, next after the laſt auoydaunce of the ſame his promotion ſpirituall, and not to be lawfully euicted; remoued, or put from the ſame promotion ſpirituall as is aforeſayd, that then euery ſuche incumbent, his heyres, executours, adminiſtratours, and ſureties, ſhall content and pay to our ſayde Soueraigne Ladye the Queene, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, the whole fyrſt fruites due to be payde for the ſame promotion ſpirituall, accordyng to the eſtatutes aforeſayde.
               Prouyded alſo, and be it enacted, that all grauntes, immunities, and liberties, geuen to the Vniuerſities of Cambridge, and

Oxforde, or to any Colledge or Hall in either of the ſaid vniuerſities, and to the Colledges of Eton and Wincheſter, and vnto euery or any of them, by our late Soueraigne Lord king Henry the eyght, or any other of the Queenes hyghneſſe progenitors or predeceſſors, or by act of Parliament, for or touchyng the releaſe or diſchardge of the ſayde firſt fruites and tenthes, or any part thereof, ſhalbe alwayes and remayne in their full ſtrength and vertue: and that all ſuche lawfull conueyaunces and aſſuraunces in the lawe, as were had or made before the makyng of this acte, to eyther of the ſayde vniuerſities of Oxforde and Cambridge, or to any Colledge or Hall within any of them, by what name or names ſoeuer they or any of them be incorporated or named, of any of the ſayd perſonages, or benefices impropriate, or of any part of the ſame, or of any patronages, for the maintenaunce of ſtudentes, or learnyng, ſhalbe as good and effectuall in the lawe, to all intentes, conſtructions, and purpoſes, as though this acte had neuer ben made.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforſayde, that the Deane and Canons of the free Chappell of S. George the Martyr, within the Caſtle of Windſor, and all the poſſeſſions and hereditamentes of the ſame free Chappell, Deanrie, and Canons, by whatſoeuer name or names they be incorporated or knowen, ſhall be exonerated, and ſhall ſtande for euer diſcharged of the tenthes and firſte fruites before mentioned: any thing in this acte, or any other acte or ſtatute before mentioned to the contrarie thereof in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alſo and be it enacted, that all leaſſes made before the twentie day of December laſt paſt, for .xxi. yeres, or three lyues at the moſte, by any perſon or perſons, bodyes polytike or corporate, beyng lawfully ſeaſed of, or in any of the ſayde perſonages impropriate, or of, or in any other the premiſſes wont commonly to be let, or ſet to ferme, then being out of leaſſe, or wherof there was not at the time of the making of the ſayde leaſſe or leaſſes, any former leaſſe to endure aboue one yere then to come at the moſte: and vppon whiche newe leaſſe or leaſſes, the olde yerely rent, accuſtomably wont to be payde for the ſame, by the ſpace of .xx. yeres laſt before the makyng of ſuche leaſſe or leaſſes, or more yerely rent is reſerued and payable duryng the ſayde terme, and all other lawfull grauntes, by them or any of them heretofore made of any office or offices, in olde tyme wont commonly to be graunted: and all giftes and grauntes of any perſonage or perſonages impropriate, heretofore belongyng to the Archdeaconrie of Welles, in the Countie of Somerſet, or to the incumbent of the ſame office or dignitie, or to the incumbent of the ſame lately geuen and reſtored, ſhalbe as good and effectuall in the law, as

though this acte or any thing therein conteyned had not ben had or made.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the ſayde Archdeaconrie, and all Rectories and ſpirituall promotions, geuen, aſſigned, lymited, or appoynted to the ſame, and all and euery incumbentes and incumbent, whiche hereafter ſhall be preſented, collated, preferred, and admitted vnto the ſayde Archdeaconrie, and the Rectories and ſpirituall promotions thereunto lymited and appoynted, or apparteynyng and belongyng, ſhal ſtande, remayne, and be charged and chargeable with the payment of the fyrſt fruites and tenthes for the ſame to the Queenes hyghneſſe, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, in ſuche lyke maner and fourme as other ſpirituall promotions, and the incumbentes of the ſame, be and ſhalbe charged and chargeable by this acte, or by any other acte or ſtatute before ſpecified.
               Prouided alwaies and be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that ſo many of the ſayde Rectories, perſonages, and benefices impropriate, glebe landes, tythes, oblations, pentions, portions, and other profites, and emoluments eccleſiaſticall and ſpiritual, and euery of them, and the reuertion and reuertions of them, and all rentes and profites vnto the ſame or any of them incident or belongyng, as were at and before the ſayde eyght day of Auguſt in the handes or poſſeſſions of the ſayde late Queene Marie, and within the ſurueye, rule, & order of the court of the Duchie of Lancaſter, ſhall be agayne within the order, ſurueye, rule, and gouernement of the ſayde court, in ſuche and the ſame maner and fourme, to all intentes and purpoſes, as they were at and before the ſayde eyght day of Auguſt, in the ſayde ſeconde and thirde yeres of the raigne of the ſayde late king and Queene: any thyng in this acte, or in the ſayde acte of the ſame late king and Queene to the contrarie therof in any wiſe, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it further enacted by the thaucthoritie of this Parliament, that no perſon or perſons preſented, inſtituted, or inducted, at any time ſithens the firſt day of this preſent Parliament, or that ſhall be preſented, inſtituted, or inducted on this ſide the feaſt of the Natiuitie of S. Iohn Baptiſt next comming, to any the ſayde ſpiritual or eccleſiaſtical promotions, chargeable to or with the payment of the firſt fruites or one yeres profites of ſuch promotion, ſhall incurre anye penaltie or forfayture, by entryng into anye of the ſayde ſpirituall or Eccleſiaſticall promotions, or by takyng the profites thereof, for the non payment or not compoundyng of or for the firſt fruites thereof, ſo that he or any other for hym, ſhall or do compounde for the ſame fyrſte fruites, accordyng to the true

meanyng of the ſtatute, before the ſayde feaſt of the Natiuitie of S. Iohn Babtiſt: any thing in this acte conteyned to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alſo, that this acte, or any thing therein conteyned, ſhal not in any wyſe extend to charge any hoſpital founded and vſed, and the poſſeſſions therof employed to and for the releefe of poore people, or any Scoole or Scooles, or the poſſeſſions or reuenues of them, or any of them, with the paimēt of any tenthes or firſt fruits: any thing in this acte before mentioned to the contrarie in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng.
            
            
               An acte wherby certayne offences be made Treaſon. Chapter .vj.
               
                  WHERE in the Parliament holden at Weſtminſter the .xii. day of Nouember, in the ſecond yere of the raigne of the late Queene Marie, ſiſter vnto our moſt gratious Soueraigne Ladye the Queenes Maieſtie that nowe is, there was one act or ſtatute made for the better ſuretie and preſeruation of the ſayd late Queene, entituled, An act whereby certayne offences be made treaſons, as by the ſame acte more at large doth appeare. And for as muche as the very wordes and ſentences of the ſaid eſtatute, do extende no further but vnto the ſayde late Queene Marie, and the heires of her body, therfore yf any ſuch lyke offences as be mentioned and conteyned within the ſayde ſtatute, ſhould hereafter happen to be committed agaynſt our ſayde Soueraigne Lady that nowe is, there were no due remedie, or condigne puniſhment prouided for the ſame.
               In conſyderation wherof, and to thintent that the malice of wicked and euyll doers may the better be reſtrayned by thextendyng of the effecte and benefit of the matters conteyned in the ſayde eſtatute, to our moſt deare Soueraigne Lady that nowe is, and for the more ſuretie and preſeruation of her highneſſe royal eſtate, be it enacted by the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie, with the aſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, & by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that if any perſon or perſons after the firſt day of May next to come, do malitiouſly, aduiſedly, and directly, compaſſe or imagine to depriue the Queenes Maieſtie that nowe is, or the heyres of her body to be begotten, beyng Kinges or Queenes of this Realme, from the ſtyle, honour, & kingly name of the imperiall Crowne of this Realme, or from any other the

Realmes and dominions vnto our ſaide Soueraigne Lady apparteyning and belongyng, or to deſtroye the Queenes Maieſtie that nowe is, or any the heyres of her body, being Kinges or Queenes of this Realme, or to leuie warre within this Realme, or within anye the marches or dominiōs to ye ſame belonging, againſt the Queenes Maieſtie that now is, or any the heyres of her body, being Kinges or Queenes of this Realme, or to depoſe the Queenes Maieſtie that nowe is, or any the heyres of her body, being Kinges or Queenes of this Realme, from the imperiall crowne of the Realmes and Dominions aforeſaid, and the ſame compaſſes, or imaginations, or anye of them, malitiouſly, aduiſedly, & directly ſhall or do vtter by open preachyng, expreſſe wordes or ſayinges: or yf any perſon or perſons, after the ſaide fyrſt day of May next comming, ſhall malitiouſly, aduiſedly, and dyrectly ſay, publiſhe, declare, mainteine, or hold opinion, that the Queenes Maieſtie that nowe is, during her lyfe, is not, or ought not to be Queene of this Realme, or after her death, that the heyres of her highnes body, being kinges or queenes of this realme, of ryght ought not to be kinges or Queenes of this Realme, or that anye other perſon or perſons, other then the Queenes highnes that nowe is, during her life, ought to be king or queene of this realme, or any other ye Realmes or dominiōs aforeſaid, or after her death, other then the heyres of her body, being kinges or queenes of this Realme, as long as any of her ſaid heyres of her body begotten ſhalbe in lyfe, of ryght ought to haue & enioy the imperiall crowne of this Realme, or any the realmes & dominions aforeſaide: that then euery ſuche offendour, beyng thereof duely conuicted or attaynted by the lawes of this Realme, theyr abbettours, procurers, and counſaylours, and all and euery their comforters, knowyng the ſaid offences, or anye of them, to be done, and being therof duely conuicted or attaynted, as is aboueſayde, for his or theyr ſuch offence, ſhall forfaite and loſe to the Queenes highneſſe, her heyres and ſucceſſours, al his & theyr goodes and cattels, and the whole iſſues and profites of his and their lands, tenementes, and hereditamentes, for tearme of the lyfe of euery ſuch offendour or offendours, and alſo ſhall haue and ſuffer duryng his and theyr lyues perpetuall impriſonment.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and euery eccleſiaſticall perſon, beyng conuicted or attaynted in fourme aforeſayd, for euery ſuch his offence, ſhal immediatly and preſently vpon ſuch attaynder had, be iudged & remayne in the lawe to all intentes, depriued from all his benefices and promotions ſpirituall or eccleſiaſticall, in ſuch maner and fourme, that it ſhalbe lawfull for euery patrone, founder, or geuer thereof, to preſent immediatly after ſuche attaynder had, ſome one other to the

ſame, as though the ſayde offendour or offendours were deceaſſed.
               And if any perſon or perſons, beyng hereafter conuicted or attainted of any the ſaid offences, in fourme aforeſayd committed, ſhal after his or theyr conuiction or attayndour eftſones commit or perpetrate any of the ſayd offences in fourme aforeſayd, that then euery ſuche ſeconde offence or offences, ſhalbe deemed and adiudged high treaſon, and the offendour or offendours therin, their abbettours, procurers, and counſaylours, and all and euery theyr aydours, and comforters, knowyng the ſayd offences, or any of them to be done, beyng thereof conuicted or attaynted, accordyng to the lawes and ſtatutes of this Realme, ſhalbe iudged and deemed hygh traytours, and ſhall ſuffer paynes of death, and loſe and forfeite al theyr goodes, cattels, landes, and tenementes, to the Queenes Maieſtie, her heyres, & ſucceſſours, as in caſes of high treaſon by the lawes of this Realme, at this day of ryght ought to be loſt and forfeyted.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that yf any perſon or perſon, at any time after the ſaide firſt day of May next to come, by any writing, printing, ouert deede, or acte malitiouſly, aduiſedly, and directly, do affyrme that the Queenes Maieſtie that nowe is, ought not to haue & enioye, the ſtyle, honour, and kingly name of this Realme, or that any perſon or perſons, other then the Queenes Maieſtie that now is, ought to haue or enioy ye ſtile, honour & kingly name of this Realme, or that ye Queenes Maieſtie that nowe is during her life, is not, or ought not to be Queene of this Realme, or after her death, that the heyres of her highneſſe bodye being Kinges or Queenes of this Realme, of right ought not to haue & enioy the imperial crowne of this realme, or that any perſon or perſōs other then the Queenes maieſtie that now is, during her life, or after her death other then the heyres of her body begotten, being kinges or queenes of this Realme, as long as any of her ſaide heyres of her body ſhalbe in lyfe, of right ought to haue and enioy the imperial crowne of this Realme, that then euery ſuche offence and offences ſhalbe adiudged high treaſon, and the offendour and offendours therein, their abbettours, procurers, and counſaylours, and all and euery theyr aydours and comforters, knowyng the ſaid offēces or any of them to be done, being thereof lawfully conuicted or attaynted by the lawes of this Realme, ſhalbe deemed and adiudged high traytours, and ſhal ſuffer paynes of death, and loſe and forfaite all theyr goodes and cattels, landes and tenementes to the Queenes Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, as in caſes of high treaſon by the lawes of this Realme, at this day of ryght ought to be loſt and forfayted.
               Sauing to euery perſon and perſons bodyes politike and corporate theyr heyres and ſucceſſours (other then the offendours and theyr heyres, and ſuch perſon and perſons as clayme to any of theyr vſes)

all ſuch rightes, titles, intereſtes, poſſeſſions, leaſſes, rentes, reuertions, offices, and other profites, which they or any of them ſhall haue at the day of the committing ſuch treaſons, or at any time afore, in as large & ample maner, as yf this acte had neuer ben had nor made.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it declared and enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that concealement, or keping ſecrete of anye high treaſons, be deemed and taken only miſpriſion of treaſon, and the offendours therein to forfeyte & ſuffer, as in caſes of miſpriſion of treaſon hath heretofore ben vſed: any thing aboue mentioned to the contrarye, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alſo that yf it ſhall fortune hereafter any of the peeres of this Realme, to be indited of anye the offences made treaſon, or miſpriſion of treaſon by this acte, that then the ſame peeres or peere ſo beyng indited, ſhall be put to aunſwere to euery ſuch indytement before the hygh Stewarde of Englande for the time beyng, and to haue his and their triall of all his and their peeres, and to receaue and haue ſuch lyke iudgement vpon the ſame triall of his or theyr peeres, or make open confeſſion of the ſame offence or offences, as is vſed in other caſes of high treaſon.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayd, that no perſon or perſons, ſhall in any wyſe be impeached for any of the offences aboueſayd committed, only by open preaching or wordes, vnles the offendour or offendours be thereof indited within ſixe monethes next after the ſame open preaching or wordes: any thing mentioned in this acte to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alwayes, that the counſaylours, procurers, comforters, and abbettours mentioned in this acte, for his or their firſt offence, ſhal ſuffer lyke puniſhment, penaltie, and forfeyture, as is conteyned in this acte againſt the principall offendours for their firſt offence, and none other: and that the counſaylours, procurers, comforters, & abbettours, for his or their ſecond offence, ſhall ſuſtayne like puniſhment, penaltie, & forfeyture, as is conteyned in this acte, agaynſt the principal offendor or offendors, for theyr ſecond offence, & none other.
               Prouided alwayes, & be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaide, that no perſon or perſons, ſhalbe hereafter indited or arraigned for any offence or offences made treaſon, or miſpriſion of treaſon, by this acte, vnleſſe the ſame offence & offences of treaſon & miſpriſion of treaſon aforeſaid, be proued by the teſtimonie, depoſition, & oth of two lawful and ſufficient witneſſes, at the time of his & their inditement, which ſaid witneſſes alſo at the time of ye arraignement of the partie ſo indited (if they be then liuing) ſhalbe brought forth in perſon before the partie ſo arraigned face to face, and there ſhall auowe and openly declare al they can ſay againſt the ſaid partie ſo indited, vnleſſe the ſayd partie ſo indited, ſhall wyllingly without violence confeſſe the ſame.
            
            
               
               An acte for the explanation of the ſtatute of ſeditious wordes and rumours. ¶ The .v. Chapter.
               
                  WHERE in the Parliament holden at Weſtminſter, the .xxi. day of Nouember, in the fyrſt & ſeconde yeres of the raignes of the late kyng Philip and Queene Marie (ſiſter vnto our Soueraigne Ladye the Queenes highneſſe that nowe is) & there continued and kept, vntil the .xvi. day of Ianuarie then next enſuing, there was one act or ſtatute then and there made, entituled, An act againſt ſeditious wordes & rumours, which acte was then made to endure to the ende of the next Parliament: and after in the next parliament holden at Weſtminſter the .xxi. day of October, in the ſeconde and third yeres of the raignes of the ſayde late king and queene, and there continued vntill the .ix. day of October then next folowyng, the ſaide ſtatute was then further continued vntill the laſt day of the next Parliament: and after in one other Parliament holden at Weſtminſter the .xx. day of Ianuarie, in the fourth and fifth yeres of the raignes of the ſaid late king and queene, and there continued vntil the .vii. day of March, then next folowing, the ſaid acte and ſtatute was then and there further continued, reuiued, and enacted, to ſtande and be in full force and ſtrength, vnto the laſt day of the nexte Parliament: in whiche acte (amongeſt other thinges) certayne puniſhment is prouided for ſuch perſons as ſhould malitiouſly vtter or ſpeake anye falſe, ſeditious, and ſlaunderous newes, rumours, or tales of the ſaide late kyng and queene, as by the ſame acte and ſtatute more at large it doth and may appeare.
               And for as much as the ſayde acte and ſtatute ſithen the makyng therof hath ben proued to be a very good and neceſſarie lawe, for due correction and puniſhment of ſuch lyght and euill diſpoſed perſons, as moſt ſeditiouſly dyd ſpreade abroade verye falſe and ſlaunderous rumours and tales, to the great diſturbaunce of the common tranquilitie of this Realme: and for that it is doubtfull whether the ſaid ſtatute, and the wordes and ſentences of the ſame, extende anye further, then onlye to the ſayde late king and queene, and whyther the ſame ſtatute geue any remedie againſt ſuche perſons as ſhall malitiouſly vtter or ſpeake any falſe, ſeditious, and ſlaunderous rumours, newes or tales, againſt our Soueraigne Lady the queenes highnes that nowe is, or not. For remedie whereof, and for a plaine declaration and explanation of the ſaid former acte: be it therefore declared, ordeyned, & enacted by thaucthoritie of this preſent parliament, that the ſaid acte and ſtatute made in the ſayd fyrſt and ſecond yeres of the

raignes of the ſayde late kyng and Queene, and continued as is aforeſayde, and all and euery braunche, article, wordes, ſentences, clauſes, prouiſions, and thinges therein conteyned, ſhall from hencefoorth by thaucthoritie of this preſent parliament, be expounded, iudged, taken and deemed in all thynges to extende to the Queenes hyghneſſe that now is, as fully and largely, to all intentes, conſtructions, and purpoſes, as though the ſame acte had by expreſſe wordes extended to the heires & ſucceſſours of the ſaid late Queene: any queſtion, ambiguitie, or doubte, growen, ryſen, or made, or hereafter happenyng to growe, ryſe, or to be moued to the contrary in anye thyng, notwithſtandyng. And that al & euery perſon & perſons, which hereafter ſhal malitouſly vtter or ſpeake anye falſe, ſeditious, or ſlaunderous newes, rumours, ſayinges, or tales, of the Queenes hyghneſſe that nowe is, or of the heyres of her bodye, beyng kynges or queenes of this Realme, or ſhall commit or do anye the offences expreſſed in the ſaide acte, agaynſt our ſayde Soueraigne Ladye the Queene that nowe is, or the heyres of her body, beyng kinges or queenes of this realme, & being therof conuicted or attaynted accordyng to the fourme and order in the ſayde former acte expreſſed, ſhall from hencefoorth incurre ſuch paynes and penalties, and haue ſuche and the ſame tryall, iudgemente, and puniſhment for the ſame offences, as in the ſayde acte is limited and appoynted, and accordyng to the fourme, tenour, and effecte of the ſame acte, and none otherwyſe.
            
            
               An acte to reuiue a ſtatute made in the xxiii. yere of the raigne of kyng Henry the viij. touchyng the conueying of Horſes, Geldinges, and Mares into Scotlande. The. vij. Chapter.
               
                  WHere in the Parliament holden at London the thirde day of Nouember▪ in the .xxi. yere of the raigne of the late Kyng of moſt worthye memorie Kyng Henrye the eight, and from thence adiourned and proroged to Weſtminſter, and there continued by diuers prorogations, vntyll the .xv. day of Ianuarye in the .xxiii. yere of the raigne of the ſayde late kyng, amongſt other thynges there was one acte or ſtatute made, whereby the ſellyng, exchaungyng, or deliuerie of any horſes, geldynges, or mares into Scotlande, by anye Engliſhe man, ſhoulde be felonie, which acte or ſtatute is intituled, An acte that no Engliſh man ſhould ſell, exchaunge, or deliuer, to be conueyed into Scotlande, anye horſe, geldyng, or mare, without the kinges lycence, as by the ſame acte and ſtatute more at large it doth and maye appeare. And although the ſame eſtatute was a very good and neceſſarye lawe for the mayntenaunce of the ſtrength of this Realme, and for

the due preſeruation of the ſtate of the ſame, yet the ſaid ſtatute by certaine actes repeale made, aſwel in the time of the late kyng Edward the ſixt, as alſo in the time of the late queene Marie, was by certayne generall wordes repealed and made voyde, by reaſon whereof, diuers wycked and euill diſpoſed perſons, haue of late tyme for their owne priuate gayne, conueyed diuers horſes, geldinges, and mares out of this realme into Scotland, to the great ſtrength and boldening of the Scottiſhe, and much to the detriment & hinderaunce of this realme.
               Wherefore be it enacted by the Queenes moſte excellent Maieſtie, with the aſſent of the lordes ſpiritual and temporal, and the commons of this preſent parliament aſſembled, and by thaucthoritie of the ſame, that the ſayde act & ſtatute made in the ſayd .xxiii. yere of the raigne of the ſayd late kyng Henry the eyght, and al and euery braunch, ſentences, articles, wordes, matters, and clauſes therin conteyned, ſhall from the firſt day of May next comming, ſtande, remayne, and contynue in full force and ſtrength, to all intentes and purpoſes, as fullye and as holye as euer the ſame was at any tyme heretofore: any acte or ſtatute of repeale, or anye other matter or cauſe whatſoeuer to the contrarye notwithſtandyng.
            
            
               An acte touching Shooemakers and Curriours. The .viij. Chapter.
               
                  WHere at a parliament holden at Weſtminſter vpon prorogation the .xv. day of Aprill, in the ſixte yere of the raigne of our late ſoueraigne lorde king Edwarde the ſixt, brother to the Quenes maieſtie, it was enacted amongeſt other thynges, agaynſt regratours of tanned Leather, that no perſon or perſons, of what eſtate, degree, or condition ſo euer he or they be, ſhal buye, ingroſſe, or cauſe to be bought or ingroſſed, any kynd of tanned Leather, to the intent to ſell the ſame agayne, ſauyng, only Sadlers, Gyrdlers, Corde wayners, and al other artificers, which ſhall make thereof any kynde of wares to be ſold, as by the ſame act more playnely at large may appeare: which act was in the Parliament holden at the Weſtminſter the ſecond day of April, in the firſt yere of the raigne of our late ſoueraigne ladye Queene Marie, repealed, made voyd, and of none effect: and one other acte was then made, entytuled, touchyng the buying and currying of Leather, the repealyng of whiche acte, as experience hath ſithen taught vs, hath brought ſhooes, bootes, males, ſaddles, and all other kynde of wares made of tanned Leather, to great & vnreaſonable prices to the vndoing of a great number of the Queenes Maieſties poore ſubiects.
               For reformation wherof, be it ordeyned, enacted; & eſtabliſhed, by the Queenes Maieſtie, the lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons

of this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that the foreſayde ſtatute made in the .vi. yere of the raigne of the ſayde late kyng Edwarde the ſixte, and entytuled, agaynſt all regratours of tanned Leather, and euerye article, braunche, ſentence, and clauſe therein conteyned, ſhalbe reuyued and ſtand in effect from the fyrſt day of Aprill next commyng, in as full force, ſtrength, and effect, as though the foreſayde acte made in the ſeconde day of Aprill, in the firſte yere of Queene Maries raigne, touchyng the buying and currying of Leather, whereby the ſayde former acte is repealed, had neuer ben had or made.
               And be it alſo enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that the ſayde ſtatute and acte made in the fyrſt yere of Queene Maries raigne, ſiſter to the Queenes Maieſtie, entytuled, An acte touchyng the buying and currying of Leather, and euery braunche, ſentence, and article therein conteyned, ſhall from the ſayde firſte day of Aprill not ſtande, but be vtterly repealed, and be of no force nor ſtrength: any clauſe, ſentence, or article therein conteyned to the contrary in anye wyſe, nothwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alwayes and be it enacted, by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that when and as often as any Shoomaker or his deputie doth bring anye Leather ſufficientlye tanned, to anye curryour to be curryed (deliueryng ſufficient liquor for well dreſſing of the ſame) the ſame ſhalbe by euerye ſuche Curryour well and ſufficientlye curryed and made redye for the Shoomaker, within the ſpace of fyue dayes in ſommer, that is to ſay: from the firſte day of Marche to the laſt day of September. And alſo in lyke maner within the ſpace of tenne dayes in winter, that is to ſay from the fyrſt day of October, vnto the laſt day of February, vppon payne to forfeyte to the partie greeued, for euerye hyde not curryed and dreſſed in maner & fourme aforeſaid, the ſumme of .x. s.
               Prouided further, that this prouiſo ſhal not extend to bind any Curriour to dreſſe any leather, which by doyng his beſt is not able to dreſſe within euery of the times aforeſaid, but ſhal extend to al ſuch Leather as he conueniently may dreſſe, after the common rate of the dreſſyng.
               And be it alſo enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſente Parliament that no perſon or perſons, vſyng or occupying the feate and myſtery of Shoomakers, ſhal from henceforth worke or make any bootes or ſhooes of Neates Leather, that ſhalbe myngled, made or wrought with any other Leather, but only Neates Leather of it ſelfe, vnleſſe it be in the hemmes or lining of bootes, ſhooes, or ſlippers, and that they ſhall put in all and euerye bootes, ſhooes, or ſlippers, made of Neates Leather, innerſoles made of wombes, which ſhalbe well & truely tanned and curryed, and alſo all ſuche other bootes, ſhooes, and ſlippers, as ſhalbe made of drye Neates Leather, or Calues Leather, not to be

myngled with any other kynde of leather (ſauyng in the ſoles) but only of it ſelfe, vnleſſe it be in hemmes or lyninges of the ſame: that is to ſay, Neates leather of it ſelfe, & Calues leather of it ſelfe, vpon paine of forfeyture of all ſuch bootes, ſhooes, & ſlippers made ſo to the contrary.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the one moytie of all ſuche forfeytures afore named, ſhalbe to our Soueraigne Ladye the Queenes Maieſtie, and her highneſſe heyres: and the other moytie to hym or them that ſeaſe or firſt ſue for the ſame penalties in any the Queenes Maieſties courtes of record, by action of debte, byll, complaynte, information, or otherwyſe, wherein no wager of lawe, eſſoygne, protection, or iniunction, ſhalbe admitted or alowed for the defendaunt in that behalfe.
            
            
               An acte touching Tanners and the ſelling of tanned Leather. The .ix. Chapter.
               
                  FOR ſundrye good cauſes and conſyderations, be it enacted by the aucthorite of this preſent Parliament, that no perſon or perſons, hauyng landes, tenementes, or rentes of eſtate of inheritaunce, or for tearme of lyfe, to the cleare yerelye value of .x.li. or aboue, except ſuche perſon and perſons as haue anye tanhouſe, and doth occupye the myſterie of tannyng at this preſent, and except an apprentice and other brought by and taught, or to be brought vp and taught as a couenaunt ſeruaunt, or hyred for that purpoſe by the ſpace of foure yeres in the myſterie or crafte or tannyng of Leather, ſhall vſe or haue profite, gayne, or commoditie, of or by the ſayde myſterie or craft of tannyng of Leather, after the feaſte of S. Michaell tharchangell next commyng, vppon payne of forfeyting of all ſuche Leather ſo to be tanned, or the iuſt value thereof.
               Alſo be it further enacted, that from and after the feaſte Saint Michaell tharchangell, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God M.D.lx. no perſon or perſons ſhall vſe or exerciſe the feate, crafte, or myſterie of tannyng of Leather, or ſhall by anye meanes receaue anye profite, gayne, or lucre by tannyng of Leather, but only in a Citie, Borough, Towne corporal, or market towne, where ſellers ſhalbe vſually appointed, except he or they haue ben apprentice exerciſed & brought vp, as is aforeſaide, in the ſaide craft and myſterie, by the ſpace of foure yeres at the leaſt, and alſo excepted the ſonne or heyre & wyfe of euerye ſuch Tanner, to their owne vſe and vſes, vppon payne of forfeyture of all the Leather ſo tanned contrary to this acte, or the value thereof.
               And be it alſo further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that no maner of perſon or perſons whatſoeuer, ſhall after the firſte day of

May next comming, buye bargaine, beſpeke, or take promiſe of bargaine of or for any rawe Hide, or Calues ſkinne, but of, or for ſuche and the ſame, as ſhal be preſent in faire or market then to be ſolde, ne they ſhall put or cauſe to be put to ſale any kinde of tanned Leather, reade, & vnwrought in any place within this Realme, other then in open market or fayre, in the place therefore commonly accuſtomed, and therefore prepared, vpon paine of forfeiture for euery hide .iii.s.iiii.d. for euerye doſen of Calues ſkinnes .iii.s.iii.d. and the Hide or Hides and Leather in any otherwyſe ſolde or bought, or the value thereof.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayd, that no perſon whatſoeuer, ſhall or may after the feaſt of S. Michael tharchangel next comming, buye, bargaine, beſpeke, or take promiſe of bargayne, of or for any tanned Leather vnwrought as is aforeſayd, but only ſuche perſon or perſons as haue ben, be, or ſhalbe brought vp in cutting of Leather into made wares, and do wyll and ſhall worke and conuert the ſame into Leather, cut into made wares wrought, vpon payne of forfeyture of the Leather ſo bought, bargayned, or beſpoke, or the value therof. And where as at a Parliament holden at Weſtminſter vpon prorogation, the ſecond and thirde yeres of the raigne of kyng Edward the ſixt, brother to the queenes highneſſe, amongſt other thinges in an acte, entituled, An acte for true currying of Leather, vppon diuers good conſyderations, it was enacted that euery Tanner ſhal cut of euery wombe of euery Oxe hide, ſixe inches broade, and of euery Steere hyde fiue ynches broade, and of euerye Cowe hyde eyght inches broade of aſſiſe in the narowe place, as by the ſayde acte more at large appeareth: Sythens whiche time the greedie and vnſatiable couetouſneſſe of many of the Tanners haue ben ſuche, to defraude the ſayde good and godly acte, that they wyll not cut of the wombes of the Hydes, nor bryng them to the market to be ſolde, ſo that the Cord wayners can not haue wombes to put into the inner ſoles of bootes, ſhoes, ſtertovopes, and ſlippers, accordyng to the tenour of the ſaide ſtatute in that caſe prouided: be it therefore enacted by the Queenes royal Maieſtie the Lordes Spirituall and Temporal, and the Commons in this preſent parliament aſſembled, and by thaucthoritie of the ſame, that al and euery perſon and perſons, that doth occupie, or ſhal hereafter occupie the tanning or barkyng of any Oxe, Steere, or Cowe hide or hydes, to be conuerted for ſole Leather, for or in ye name of ſole Leather, now commonly called backes, ſhal cut or cauſe to be cut of euery ſuch Oxe, Steere, or Cow hide or hides, that ſhalbe tanned or wrought for ſole Leather, commonly called backes, two peeces, which is now called wombes, of euery ſuch hyde or backe that ſhalbe wrought, barckte, or tanned for backes, vpon paine of forfeyting of euery ſuch hide or hides, backe

or backes ſo tanned or wrought, the wombes beyng not cut of .vi.s.viii.d. for euery hyde.
               And be it alſo further enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent parliament, that euery Tanner or Tanners, or any other perſon or perſons that occupieth, or hereafter ſhal occupie the myſterie of tanning of Leather, and that ſhall cut of, or cauſe to be cut of thoſe two peeces aboue named, called wombes, ſhal begin vpon ye two hinder ſhankes of euery ſuch hyde, and there cut two peeces, and ſo cut throughout alongeſt the belly to the foreſhanks, and there to cut of both the foreſhankes, and thoſe two peeces ſo called wombes, to be well and truely tanned, after the maner of inner ſole leather, and to conteyne of good and drye tanned leather, ſixe inches broade of aſſiſe in the narroweſt place, accordyng to the ſyſe of the ſtanderd in the Exchequer when they be tanned or put to ſale, or offered to be ſolde, promiſed, or bargayne made, vppon paine of forfeyture of .iii.s.iii.d. for euerye wombe being cut leſſe then ſo many inches broade of aſſiſe in the naroweſt place, as aboue ſayde.
               And be it further enacted, that euery Tanner or other perſon that occupieth, or hereafter ſhall occupie the myſterie of tanning of Leather, which after the feaſt of the byrth of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt next comming, ſhall put to ſale, or offer to be ſold in any fayre or markets, any backe or backes, ſhal bryng at the ſelfe ſame time to the fayre or markets, where he or they ſhall put ſuch backe or backes to ſale, for euery backe, the two forenamed peeces called wombes, there to be ſolde with the backes, or otherwyſe as the fayre or market ſhall hym beſt ſerue, ſo that they be ſolde in the open market; vpon payne of forfeyture of euery ſuch backe or backes ſo brought to be ſolde, or offered to be ſolde, or the value thereof, not hauyng the wombes there in the open market or fayre as is aboueſayde.
               Be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that no perſon or perſons ſhall after the fyrſt day of May next comming, ſel, or cauſe to be ſolde any maner of Leather (clout leather ſolde in ſmall peeces onlye excepted) except he or they regeſter, or cauſe to be regeſtred the ſaid Leather, and euery part and parcell therof, vpon payne of forfeyture of the value of the leather ſo bought and not regeſtred, and alſo the buyer to forfayte the ſaide Leather ſo bought and not regeſtred, as is aforeſaide.
               And be it further enacted that ſuche perſon or perſons as are, or hereafter ſhalbe aſſigned or appoynted ſearchers, ſealer or ſealers of tanned Leather, by vertue of any acte or ſtatute heretofore, or hereafter to be made, ſhall kepe one booke or regeſter, to enter all ſuche bargaynes as ſhalbe made for leather, hydes, or ſkinnes (clout leather ſolde in ſmall peeces only excepted) by any perſon or perſons, duryng

and by all the tyme of the fayre or market, and ſhal enter all ſuch bargaynes, beyng thereunto required by the buier or the ſeller, takyng for his or their payne and trauaile therein to be taken: and for the regiſtring therof, of the ſeller of euery dicker of Leather ſo entred one penie, for euery ſixe doſen of Calues ſkinnes one penie, and ſo after the rate, and no more or greater ſumme or ſummes of money to be payde for entring of the ſame, vppon payne of forfeyture, for not entering and regiſtring as is aforeſaid, for euery dicker of Leather .iii.s iii.d. for euery doſen of Calues ſkinnes .iii.s.iiii.d. & ſo after the rate. And where alſo one other acte, entituled, An Acte for true tannyng of Leather was made at a Parliament of the ſaide king Edwarde holden vpon prorogation at Weſtminſter, ye fourth day of Nouember, in the ſeconde yere of his moſt gratious raigne, whiche acte was made to endure vnto the ende of the next Parliament then folowyng, and after the ſame acte was reuiued at one other Parliament holden at Weſtminſter the fyrſt day of Marche, in the .vii. yere of the raigne of the ſame kyng Edwarde the ſixt, to continue till the laſt day of the next Parliament then folowyng: and after the ſame acte was continued in the ſeconde & laſt ſeſſion of our Soueraigne Lady Queene Marie, holden vppon prorogation at Weſtminſter the thirteene day of October, in the fyrſt yere of her graces raigne, to continue tyll the laſt day of the next Parliament then folowyng, whiche beyng expyred and the ſame acte neuer ſince continued, his force and efficacie is ended. And for as much as the ſayde acte is good and beneficiall for the common wealth of this Realme: be it therefore enacted, ordeyned, and eſtabliſhed by the Queene our Soueraigne Lady, with the aſſent of the lordes ſpiritual and temporal, and the commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that the ſayde acte made in the ſeconde yere of ye ſayd kyng Edwarde the ſixt, and all wordes, clauſes, articles, and prouiſions in the ſame, (except theſe wordes, Aſhe barke, Tap worte, Meal or Culuer dong) ſhalbe reuiued, continued, ſtande, and endure in his full force and ſtrength, to all intentes, conſtructions, and purpoſes, and that no Tanner in or about the tannyng of any Leather, ſhall vſe or exerciſe any other kynde of ſtuffe, but only Aſhe barke, Oke barke, Tap wort, Meal lime, or Culuer dong.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayd, that thone moytie of all ſuche forfeytures aforenamed, ſhalbe to our Soueraigne Lady the Queenes Maieſtie, and her highnes heyres, or ſucceſſours, and thother moitie to him or them that ſeaſe or fyrſt we for the ſame penalties in any of the Queenes Maieſties courtes of recorde, by action of debt, bil, complaint, information, or otherwiſe wherein no wager of lawe, eſſoigne, protection, or iniunction, ſhalbe admitted or alowed for the defendaunt in that behalfe.
            
            
               
               An acte that the carying of Leather, Tallowe, or rawe Hides out of the Realme for marchaundize, ſhalbe felonie. ¶ The .x. Chapter.
               
                  WHERE at this preſent tyme tanned Leather, Hydes, and Tallowe, and all thinges thereof made, is growen and come vnto ſuche high and exceſſiue price, as the like within the time of mans memorie hath not ben ſeene within this Realme, by reaſon that diuers and ſundry couetous and greedy perſons nowe of late, hauing more regarde vnto their owne ſinguler lucres and gaynes, then vnto the mayntenaunce and preſeruation of the common and publique weale of this the Realme of Englande, haue contrary to the lawes and ſtatutes of this Realme, conueyed, or cauſed to be conueyed out of the ſame, vnto the parties beyonde the ſeas, there to be vttered by way of marchaundize, ſuche great ſtore and plentie thereof, that the ſame Leather, Hydes, and Tallowe, is more plentifull, and to be had better cheape there, then here within this Realme, to the great hurt, hinderaunce, and dammage of all the Queenes moſt louyng ſubiectes.
               For reformation whereof, be it enacted by the Queene our Soueraigne Lady, the Lordes Spirituall and Temporall, and the Commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that no perſon or perſons, whatſoeuer he or they be, ſtraunger or Denizen, from and after the fyrſt day of Iune next comming, ſhall ſhippe, conuey, or abbet, procure, or cauſe to be ſhipped or conueyed, in, or to any Shippe, Boate, or other veſſell, in, or vpon the ſea, or in, or vpon other Hauen, Riuer, Creke, or place within this Realme of Englande, or Wales, or other the Queenes dominions, anye maner of Leather tanned or vntanned, or any ſalt, or vntanned Hides, or any Leather called Backes, or ſole Leather, or anye Tallowe, to thintent to tranſport or cary the ſame into any ye parties beyonde the ſea, there to be vttered, bartered, or ſolde by waye of marchaundize, vppon payne that euery ſuch offender, ſhalbe deemed, adiudged, and taken to be a fellone for euery ſuch offence. And that euerye perſon and perſons, beyng after the ſayde fyrſt day of Iune lawfully attaynted, by the due order of the common law of this realme, before ſuch as ſhall haue power and aucthoritie to heare and determine felonies by the common lawe, ſhall for euery ſuche offence ſuffer ſuch paynes of death, & forfeytures of goodes and cattels, as he or they ſhoulde haue done, yf he or they had ben lawfully attainted for anye offence beyng felonye by the common lawe of this Realme:

And alſo ſhall forfayte to the Queenes highnes, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, all his or theyr landes, tenements, & hereditaments, duryng the lyfe of euery ſuche offendour only. And for the better execution of this lawe, and for the meetyng with the offendours therein: Be it alſo enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and euerye offence or offences, committed or done by any perſon or perſons, contrary to this acte, from and after the ſayde firſt day of Iune next commyng, ſhalbe enquired of, tryed, determined, and iudged in ſuche Countie of this Realme, or other the Queenes dominions, as ſhalbe next adioynyng to the place where anye ſuche offence ſhalbe firſt committed: any iuriſdiction, aucthoritie, or vſage to the contrary in any wiſe, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that this act, nor any thyng therein contayned, ſhall in any wyſe extende or be interpretated to make anye corruption of blood of anye ſuch offendour, or of any heyre of any ſuch offendour, but that euery heire and heires, of euery ſuch offendour and offendours, in any of the caſes aforeſayd, & alſo the wife of euery ſuche offendour, ſhal haue after the death of euery ſuche offendour or offendours, like title, intereſt, benefite, profite, commoditie, action, and aduauntage, as they or any of them ſhoulde haue had, yf any ſuche offence, conuiction, or attaynder had not ben had ne made: ſauyng to al & euery perſon and perſons, bodyes politike and corporate, their heires and ſucceſſours, and the heires and ſucceſſours of euerye of them, other then all and euery ſuche offendour and offendours, whiche ſhalbe conuicted or attaynted by any ſuche offence, all ſuche ryght, tytle, intereſt, rentes, leaſſes, commons, profites, commodities, aduauntages, and hereditamentes, whatſoeuer they be, as they or any of them might or ought to haue had, in, or to any manours, landes, tenementes, rentes, pentions, ſeruices, hereditamentes, or other thyngs whatſoeuer, or in, or to any parte or parcell thereof, to all intentes, conſtructions, and purpoſes, as he or they ſhoulde haue had, yf ſuche attaynder had neuer ben had ne made: anythyng in this acte contayned to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alſo, that this act, or any thing therin contained, ſhal not be hurtfull nor preiudiciall to any Captayne of anye Shippe in the time of warre, being in the retinue and ſeruice of the Queenes Maieſtie, or her heires, or ſucceſſours, nor to anye owner or maiſter of any Shippe, nor to any other beyng the Queenes ſubiect, and trauaylyng to any forraigne partes beyonde the ſea, for the hauyng carying, and takyng with hym or them in tyme aſwell of warre as of peaces of any Hydes, Leather, or Tallowe, for theyr neceſſarye vſes about theyr ſhip or ſhippes, ſo that it be not to be vttered beyonde the

ſeas, by any fraude or couin, by way of marchaundiſe: this acte or any thing therin conteined to the cōtrary in any wiſe, notwithſtanding.
               And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforeſayd, that this act, or the effect and ſubſtaunce thereof, ſhalbe openly read, publiſhed, or declared, at euery quarter Seſſions, and at euery Lete or Lawday, by the Iuſtices that ſhall geue the charge at the Seſſions, and by the Steward of the Lete or Lawday, in his charge when he kepeth the Lete or Lawday. This act to endure from the ſayd fyrſt day of Iune, and to continue the ſpace of fyue yeres: and from thence vnto the end of the next Parliament, after the ſayd fyue yeres.
            
            
               An Acte limiting the times for laying on lande Marchaundize from beyonde the ſeas, and touchyng Cuſtomes for ſweete wines. The .xi. Chapter.
               
                  MOſte humblye the wyng, beſechen your hyghneſſe, your Lordes, and commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, that where the ſummes of money, payde in the name of Cuſtomes, Subſidies, of wares and marchaundizes tranſported out, and brought into this your highnes Realme of Englande, by any marchaunt ſtraunger, or denizen, is an auncient reuenue annexed & vnited to your imperiall crowne, and hath in the tyme of kyng Edwarde the third, and other your moſte noble progenitors, amounted to great and notable ſummes of money, tyll of late yeres many greedye and couetous perſons, reſpectyng more theyr priuate gayne and commoditie, then theyr duetie and allegiaunce, or the common profite of the Realme, haue and do dayly aſwell by conueying the ſame theyr wares and marchaundizes out of creekes and places where no cuſtomers reſident, as alſo by or through the negligence or corruption of the cuſtomer, ſearcher, or other officer, where they be reſident, as by diuers other fraudulent, vndue, and ſubtill practiſes and deuiſes, conuey theyr goodes and marchaundizes, aſwel brought from the parties beyonde the ſea, as tranſported out of this your Realme of England, without payment, or agreeyng for the payment of the cuſtomes and ſubſidies therefore due: whereby the yerelye reuenue aforeſayde, is very muche empayred and diminiſhed, to the great loſſe and damage of your hyghnes, and to the great burden and charge of your louyng ſubiectes, who by occaſion thereof haue of late yeres ben more charged with ſubſidies, and payment for the ſupplement of the ſayde loſſe and damage, then els we ſhoulde haue ben.
               
                  That it may therefore be enacted by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that it ſhall not be lawfull to or for any perſon or perſons whatſoeuer, from and after the fyrſte day of September next commyng, to lade, or put, or cauſe to be laden, or put, of, or from anye Wharfe, Key, or other place on the land, into any ſhip, veſſell, Crayer, Lyghter, or Bottome, any goodes, wares, or marchaundizes whatſoeuer, (fyſhe taken by your hyghneſſe ſubiectes, onlye excepted) to be tranſported into any place of the parties beyonde the ſea, or into the Realme of Scotlande, or to take vp, diſcharge, and lay on lande, or cauſe, or procure to be taken vp, or diſcharged out of any Lighter, ſhyppe, Crayer, veſſell, or Bottome, beyng not in a lecke, or wracke, and layde on lande, any goodes, wares, or marchaundizes whatſoeuer (fyſhe taken by any of your highnes ſubiectes, and ſalt onlye excepted) to be brought from any the parties beyonde the ſea, or the Realme of Scotlande, by way of marchaundizes, but only in the day light, that is to ſay, from the firſt of March, vntil the laſt of September, betwixt the ſunne ryſyng, and the ſunne ſetting, and from the laſt of September, vntill the firſt of Marche, betweene the houres of ſeuen in the mornyng, and foure at the after noone, and in, and vpon ſome ſuche open place, Keye, or Wharfe, places, Keyes, or Wharfes, as your hyghnes, your heyres, or ſucceſſours, ſhal on this ſide the ſaid firſt day of September therefore aſſigne and appoynt by vertue of your highnes commiſſion or commiſſions, within your graces porte of London, Southampton, Briſtowe, Weſtcheſter, Newcaſtell, and the ſuburbes of the ſame, and euery of them, and in ſome open place, Key, Wharfe, places, Keyes, or Wharfes, in al other Portes, Creekes, Hauens, or Rodes, (Hul only excepted) where a Cuſtomer, Comptroller, and ſearcher, of ſuche Portes, Hauens, Creekes, or Rodes, & euery of them, or the ſeruauntes of any of them, haue by the ſpace often yeres laſt paſt ben accuſtomably reſident, or hereafter ſhalbe reſident, vpon payne of forfayture of all ſuche goodes, wares, or marchaundizes ſo laden and diſcharged contrary to the true meaning of this acte, or the value thereof.
               And be it further enacted by the authoritie aforeſayde, that no maner of perſon or perſons, after the ſayd day, ſhal receaue or take into any ſhyp, Crayer, or other veſſel, any goodes, wares, or marchaundizes (except before excepted) to be tranſported into any place beyonde the ſea, or into the Realme of Scotlande, by waye of marchaundize, nor ſhall diſcharge and laye on lande, out of any ſhypye, Crayer, or other veſſell, anye goodes, wares, or marchaundize (except before excepted) beyng brought from anye place beyonde the ſea, or out of the Realme of Scotlande, by way of marchaundize, in any other place or places, or at any other howres or tymes,

then is before limited and appointed, vpon paine that the owner and owners, maiſter and maiſters, or other perſon or perſons, which ſhal take charge or guydyng of any ſuch ſhyppe, Crayer, or veſſell, or of the marchauntes goodes, duryng and for that voyage, ſhall forfaite & loſe for euery ſuch offence. C. pounde, of lawfull money of Englande.
               And be it further enacted by aucthoritie aforeſayde, that no maiſter Shypper, or Purſer, or other perſon or perſons takyng charge of the voyage, or of the marchauntes goodes, ſhall after the ſayde day receaue or take into any Shippe, Crayer, or other veſſell, any goodes, wares, or marchaundize (except before excepted) to be caried or tranſported into any of the partes beyonde the ſea, or into the Realme of Scotland, before he ſhall haue ſignified to the Cuſtomer of the porte where he ladeth, & other officers there, in ye open cuſtome houſe, if any ſuch be there, or els where, the ſaid officers, their deputies or ſeruauntes, or any of them, be or ſhalbe vſually reſident, that he entendeth to lade, and to what place he entendeth to paſſe, nor ſhall after his or theyr full lading depart out of the Porte, Creekes, or ſtreame where he ſhall ſo lade, before he do in like maner ſignifie vnto the Cuſtomer, and other officers as is aforeſayde, of his lading, and what marchaunts and other perſons ſhal haue ladyng with him, or in his ſhip, crayer, veſſell, or botome: and further truely do aunſwere to ſuche queſtions as ſhalbe miniſtred to him or them by the cuſtomer or other officer, concerning ſuch wares and marchaundizes as he ſhall haue laden, being examined vpon his or theyr oth, or otherwiſe in the open cuſtome houſe, or otherwiſe, as is aforeſayde, vpon paine to forfaite for euery ſuch default, not truely aduertiſyng nor aunſweryng, as is aforeſayde, a hundred pounde.
               And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that no owner, maiſter, purſer, or other perſon, takyng charge of any ſhippe, crayer, veſſell, or botome, wherein any goodes, wares, or marchaundizes (except before excepted) ſhalbe laden and brought, from any the parties beyonde the ſea, or the Realme of Scotlande, ſhall, after the ſayd day, diſcharge into any lighter, or botome, and laye on lande, or procure, cauſe, or willingly ſuffer to be diſcharged into any lyghter or botome, and to be laide on land, out of ſuch ſhip, crayer, veſſell, or botome, any goodes, wares, or marchaundize whatſoeuer, before ſuche owner, maiſter, purſer, or other perſon or perſons, takyng charge of the ſhippe, crayer, botome, or veſſel, or the marchauntes goodes, for that voyage, ſhal haue ſignified and declared to the cuſtomer, or other officer of the port, hauen, or creeke, where he arriueth, the names of euery of the marchauntes, or laders, and ſhall haue truely aunſwered to ſuche queſtions and interogatories, touching or concernyng ſuche goodes, wares, or marchaundize, as ſhalbe then laden in anye ſuche

ſhippe, veſſell, or botome, as ſhalbe to him miniſtred by ſuch cuſtomer or other officer, openly in the cuſtome houſe, or in ſuche other places as is aforeſayd, vpon his or their othe, if neede ſo require, vpon payne that euery maiſter, purſer, or other perſon or perſons, taking charge of ſuche ſhyppe, crayer, or other veſſell for that voyage, ſhall forfayte and loſe for euery ſuche default, not truely aduertiſyng nor aunſwering as is aforeſayd, an hundreth pounde.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that from and after the ſayd day, no perſon, denizen, ne ſtraunger, do take vpon him to enter, or do, or cauſe to be entred into the bookes of any cuſtomer, or other officer or officers of anye porte or hauen within this Realme, or his or their deputie or deputies, ſeruaunt or ſeruauntes, any maner goodes, wares, or marchaundize whatſoeuer, comming or brought into your highnes Realme, from any the partes beyonde the ſea, or from the Realme of Scotland, or going, or to be tranſported out of the ſame your highnes Realme, into any the partes beyonde the ſea, or into the Realme of Scotlande, in the name or names of any other perſon or perſons, then the very true owner or owners of the ſame goodes, wares, or marchaundizes, beyng not ſolde, bargayned, or contracted for, to or with any perſon or perſons, before ſuche entre, or before the arriuall of ſuche goodes, wares, or marchaundize, in the partes beyonde the ſea, vpon payne of forfayture of the value of the goodes ſo entred.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf any wharfinger, crane keper, ſearcher, lighter man, weighter, or other officer, parteynyng to the ſubſidie, cuſtome, or cuſtome houſe, do at any time after the ſaid day, conſent or knowe any offence or thyng to be committed or done contrary to the true meanyng of this acte, or any article therein conteyned, and do not within one moneth nexte after knowledge thereof had, diſcloſe the ſame to the cheefe cuſtomer or other officer of the porte, where or within whoſe office or charge any ſuch offence ſhalbe committed or done, or els to the Lord Treaſurer, Chauncellour, vnder Treaſurer, or one of the Barons of the Exchequer, or the attourney generall for the time being, ſhall for euery ſuch concealement, or not diſcloſing ſuche offence, as is aforeſayd, forfaite & loſe a hundreth pound of good and lawful money of England.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that the cuſtomer of Hull ſhall haue a ſeruaunt or deputie continually reſident at the citie of Yorke, and euery other cuſtomer, comptroller, and ſearcher of euery porte, ſhall from and after the day aforeſayde aſſigned and appoynted to and in euerye of the places aboue mentioned, and in all and euery porte, creeke, or Roade, where the ſeruaunt, or anye of them haue ben continually reſident by the ſpace of tenne yeres,

or hereafter ſhalbe, as is aforeſayde, one able and ſufficient deputie, or ſeruaunt, at the leaſte, and that aſwell all and euerye of the cuſtomers, comptrollers, and ſearchers, as all and euery his or theyr deputie and deputies, ſeruaunt and ſeruauntes, ſhall from tyme to tyme, do his and theyr diligent attendaunce, at the houres, tymes, and places afore appoynted, aſwel in the cuſtome houſe, as els where, as it ſhalbe moſte expedient and conuenient, for the ſpeedy diſpatche of the marchaunt, and his goodes, wares, and marchaundize, and for the due execution of this Acte, in ſuche thinges as to him or them ſhall apparteyne, without concealement or conſentyng to any thing or thinges whiche may be to the hurte or damage of your hyghnes, your heyres, or ſucceſſours, in the iuſt aunſweryng of your hyghnes due cuſtomes and ſubſidies, vpon payne that euery ſuche cuſtomer, comptroller, and ſearcher, ſhall forfayte and loſe for euery offence by hym or them committed or done, his or their ſeuerall office or offices, and an hundreth pounde of lawfull money of Englande: the moitie of all whiche forfayture ſhalbe to your hyghnes, your heyres, and ſucceſſours, and the other moitie to hym or them that wyl ſue for the ſame, in any your highnes courtes, wherein no eſſoigne, protection, wager of lawe, or iniunction ſhalbe admitted and alowed.
               And where of late yeres there hath ben muche greater quantitie of ſweete wines brought into this Realme, then in tyme paſte hath ben accuſtomed, whiche ben alſo brought from the ſame place where the wine commonly called Malueſey is brought, and is of the ſame nature of grape, and neuertheleſſe, eyther by negligence, ignoraunce, or corruption of the officers, there hath not ben ſuche cuſtome and ſubſidie receaued for the ſame, to the vſe of your highnes, and your progenitours, as is due, and ought of very ryght to be payde for ſuch ſweete wines, commyng through the ſtrayghtes, commonly called the ſtrayghtes of Marrocke, otherwiſe, Mallegaye, to the great loſſe and hynderaunce of your highneſſe, and the burthen of vs your louyng ſubiectes.
               For the auoydyng of all ambiguities and doubtes, and to thintent the officers may more certaynely knowe what they ought to receaue for ſuche kynde and nature of marchaundize: be it enacted and declared by this preſente acte, and by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that lyke cuſtome and ſubſidie is of very right to be payd, and ſhall from hencefoorth be payde, for ſuche ſweete wines as is aforeſayde, as is and hath ben accuſtomed to be payde for Malueſeyes: anye negligence, none payment, vſage, or cuſtome to the contrary in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng. Sauing to all and euery Lorde Marcher, and other perſon and perſons whatſoeuer, body politike and corporate, all and euery ſuche ryght, title, and intereſt, as they or any of them haue, and

of ryght ought to haue in the payment or hauing of any fraunchiſe, libertie, cuſtome, and ſubſidie, or any of them: any thyng in this acte to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted, that it ſhalbe lawfull to ſhip, lade, and tranſport into the portes beyonde the ſea, al maner of corne, and grayne, out of the Counties of Northfolke and Suffolke, and eyther of them, at ſuche places as heretofore hath ben accuſtomed, and betweene the houres in this act appointed, when the ſame corne and grayne ſhall not exceede the ſeuerall priſes mentioned in the ſtatute made in the fifth and ſyxth yere of our late Soueraigne Lord king Edwarde the ſixt, entituled, An act agaynſt regrators, foreſtallers, and engroſſers, the cuſtomes and ſubſidies therefore due, beyng well and truely payde: any thyng in this act, or any other act or ſtatute to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alwayes, that this acte, nor any thyng therein conteyned, be not preiudiciall or hurtful to the Iſle of Angleſey, the ſhyres of Carnaruon, and Flint, in Northwales: but that the inhabitauntes thereof, and euery of them, may receaue, lade, and diſcharge, according to their olde auncient vſes, cuſtomes, or liberties, graunted to them, or any of theyr predeceſſors, by the late king of famous memory king Henry the eyght, or any other his progenitors: ſo that they, and euery of them, pay the cuſtomes and ſubſidies that ſhalbe due, and diſcharge and lode within the tymes and houres before mentioned: any thyng in this preſent acte to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            
            
               An Acte agaynſt the deceiptfull vſyng of lynnen Cloth. The .xii. Chapter.
               
                  WHere certayne euyll diſpoſed and deceiptfull perſons, vſyng to bye and ingroſſe into theyr handes great ſtore of linnen cloth, do vſe to caſt the peeces of cloth ouer a beame or peece of tymber, made for theyr purpoſe, and do by ſundrye deuiſes racke, ſtretche, and drawe the ſame both of length and breadth, and that done, do then with batteldores, peeces of timber and wood, and other things, ſore beate the ſame, euer caſting therupon certaine deceiptful liquors, mingled with chalke, and other like things, wherby the ſaid cloth is not duly made to ſeeme muche finer & thicker to the eye then it is in deede, but alſo the thredes thereof be ſo loſed and made weake, that after .iii. or .iiii. waſhinges, it will ſcarcely holde together, to the great diſceipt, hinderaunce, and loſſe of the ſubiectes of this Realme: be it therefore enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament,

that yf any perſon or perſons, ſhall hereafter wyllingly vſe, or cauſe to be vſed the aforeſayde deceytes, or any other acte or actes, meane or meanes, to, in, or with any kynde of linnen cloth, whereby the ſame ſhalbe deceitfull or worſe, to, & for the good vſe thereof: that then the ſaid cloth ſhalbe forfaited, & thoffendour therin to be puniſhed by one monethes impriſonment at the leaſt, and ſhal pay ſuch fine as ſhalbe aſſeſſed, for his or their offence or offences, by ye Iuſtices, before whom he or they ſhalbe condemned accordyng to the tenor of this acte.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that al and euery the Iuſtices of oyer and determiner, and Iuſtices of aſſyſes in all theyr ſeſſions, and all Iuſtices of peace in euery Countie and place of this Realme, or .iii. of them at the leaſte, whereof one to be of the Quorum, ſhal haue ful power and aucthoritie to enquire, heare, & determine the offences aforeſayde, in theyr ſeſſions, by information, inditement, or vppon the trauerſe of anye preſentment, or inditement, founde before the ſayde Iuſtices, or any of them.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf any perſon or perſons, ſhall at the next ſeſſions of the peace (after the ſayd ſeaſer, to be kept within the ſhire or place where the ſeaſer was made, or before two Iuſtices of peace, wherof one to be of the Quorū
                  ) make due information of the offence, and of the ſeaſer of the ſayde cloth, or els ſhall procure the offendours to be therof indited, at the ſayd next ſeſſions after the ſayde ſeaſer, and ſhall alſo be bounde before the ſayd Iuſtices by recogniſaunce or obligation, to the vſe of the Queenes Maieſtie, her heires, and ſucceſſours, in ſuch fourme as the ſaid Iuſtices, or any of them, ſhall thinke meete for the greatnes of the matter, and to purſue the ſame matter with effecte, and to geue euidence, as of right apparteyneth, and alſo to pay and gyue the moytye of all that he or they ſhall ſo recouer and receaue, to the Sheriffe, or other accomptaunt; to the vſe of the Queenes Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours: and the one halfe of all the forfaytures and fynes of and for the premiſſes to be vnto the Queenes Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, and the other moitie to him or them that ſhall make information, or procure inditementes of and for the premiſſes, and ſhall folowe the ſame with effect.
               And further be it ordained and enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that the Iuſtices before whom any ſuche offence ſhalbe tryed, ſhal certifie the ſame by their eſtreate into the Exchequer, at the leaſt yerely at Michaelmas, as they be boūd to do other their eſtreates, & vpon that certificate, the Barons of the Exchequer to haue ful power & aucthoritie to make proces for ſo much therof as by this eſtatute ſhal apparteyne to the Queenes Maieſtie, in lyke maner & fourme as they only do for any other fines and amerciamentes ſo certified before them.
            
            
               
               An Acte for the ſhipping in Engliſhe Botomes. The .xiii. Chapter.
               
                  WHere by diuers ſtatutes made in the tyme of the Queenes Maieſties moſt noble progenitours, it hath ben enacted & prouided, that no perſon borne within the Realme of Englande, or beyng of the legiaunce of the prince of the ſayde Realme, or any the dominions of the ſame, ſhould ſhip any maner of marchaundize either out of the realme, or into the ſame, but only in a ſhyp or botome wherof the ſaid prince, or ſome other of their ſubiectes, were owners, poſſeſſioners, proprietaries, and maiſters, & the mariners of the ſame veſſel, for the more part, to be alſo theyr ſubiectes, vpon diuers paynes and penalties, as in the ſayd ſtatutes more playnly appeareth. Since the making of which ſayde ſtatutes, other forraigne princes fyndyng them ſelues agreeued with the ſaid ſeuerall actes, as thynkyng that the ſame were made to the hurt & preiudice of their countrey & nauie, haue made like penall lawes agaynſt ſuch as ſhould ſhyp out of theyr countreys in any other veſſels then of their ſeueral countreys and dominions: by reaſon whereof there hath not only growen great diſpleaſure betwixt the forraigne princes and the kinges of this realme, but alſo the marchauntes haue ben ſore greeued and endomaged.
               For reformation whereof, and for increaſe of continuaunce of amitie, be it enacted, that the ſeuerall actes made in the fyfth yere of kyng Richarde the ſeconde, the third Chapter, and in the fourth yere of the late king of famous memory king Henry the ſeuenth, intituled, Of wine and tholouze ode, ſhalbe from henceforth clearely voyde & of none effect, And neuertheleſſe for auoyding of great diſceyt practiſed, & nowe a dayes vſed by ſundry ſubiectes borne within this Realme of England, and dominions of the ſame, whiche enter in the cuſtomers bookes, wares and marchaundize of aliens borne, in theyr owne name, whereby the Queenes maieſtie is defrauded in her cuſtomes and ſubſidies, to the great decaye of the auncient reuenues of the crowne: be it enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent parliament, that all and euery perſon and perſons, beyng owner or owners of any goodes, wares, or marchaundizes, whiche after the firſt day of Ianuary nexte enſuyng the ſeſſions of this preſent Parliament, ſhall in tyme of peace, and when there is no reſtraynt made of Englyſhe ſhyppes, embarke, ſhyppe, lade, or diſcharge by waye of marchaundize, any wares, or marchaundize (maſtes, Raffe, Pitch, Tarre, and Corne only excepted) out of, or into any ſhyppe, barke, hoye, veſſell, or botome, whereof our ſayde ſoueraigne Ladye the Queene, her heires, or ſucceſſours, or ſome of her or theyr ſubiectes of this

Realme, or the dominions of the ſame, be not poſſeſſioners and proprietaries, and the maiſters vnder God, and the mariners of the ſame ſhip or ſhippes, for the moſt part, be not ſubiectes of our ſayde Soueraigne Lady, her heires, and ſucceſſours, ſhall aunſwere, yeelde, and pay to the vſe of our ſaid Soueraigne Lady the Queene, her heires, & ſucceſſours, ſuch cuſtome and ſubſidie, for ſuch wares and marchaundizes ſo ſhipped, laden, or diſcharged, as is aforeſaid, rate and rate like, as ſtraungers and aliens borne out of the obeyſaunce of our ſayde Soueraigne Lady the Queenes Maieſtie, do, and ought to paye for wares and marchaundizes of lyke nature and kynde.
               And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, that no Hoy, or Plate, wherof any Engliſh ſubiect or ſubiects, is, be, or ſhalbe owner or owners, at any time after the firſt day of Ianuary aforeſaid, from any port, creeke, or place of this ſaid Realme of England, or any of the dominions of the ſame, ſhall trauers or croſſe the ſeas, in, to, or for any of the portes beyonde the ſeas, with any wares, goodes, or marchaundize, vpon payne that the ſayde owner or owners ſhal forfaite and loſe the ſame Hoy or Plate, with all and euery the munition, tacklyng, and other neceſſaries parteynyng thereunto: whereof the one moitie to be to the vſe and behoofe of the Queenes ſayde Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, and thother moitie to the perſon or perſons whiche will ſue for the ſame, by byll, playnt, action, or information, in any her highnes courtes at Weſtminſter: in whiche caſe no wager of lawe, protection, or eſſoigne ſhalbe admitted.
               Prouided alwayes, & be it enacted, that it ſhalbe lawfull to the marchaunts, commonly called marchaunts aduenturers, & marchaunts of the Staple, & euery of them, at their ſeueral Fleetes, or ſhippings of cloth, and woll, & euery of them, from & out of the Riuer of Thames, only beyng made, twyſe in one yere at the moſt, to embarke, ſhyp and lade any goodes, wares or marchaundize in, or to any ſhyppe, veſſell, or Bottome, belongyng or apparteining to any ſtraunger or alien borne, ſo long and at ſuche time as there be not ſhips, veſſels, or Bottomes belonging to the Queenes highnes, her heires, or ſucceſſours, or any of her ſubiectes, in the ſayde Riuer of Thames, ſufficient in number, and apte and meete for the ſure and ſafe conueyaunce of the wares and marchaundize into the partes of Flaunders, Holland, Zelande, or Brabant, or any of them, without paying any greater or more cuſtome and ſubſidie, that Engliſhe men do, and ought to pay: any thyng in this acte to the contrary, notwithſtandyng. This acte to continue and ſtande in force for the ſpace of fyue yeres only next immediatly folowyng this preſent ſeſſion of Parliament, and from thence to the ende of the Parliament then next folowyng.
               Prouided, that foraſmuche as the marchauntes of the Citie of

Briſtow, haue ſuſteyned of late great loſſes at the ſea by the enemies, by reaſon of takyng of all theyr beſt ſhyppes, with much ſubſtaunce, ſo that they be not of abilitie to prouide ſufficient ſhyps and veſſelles of theyr owne within the time limited in this preſent acte: that they for lacke of their owne ſhippes, or any other veſſelles of the Queenes dominions, within .xl. myles of the Citie of Briſtowe, may lode and embarke theyr owne wares and marchaundizes in ſtraungers Bottomes, without paying any other cuſtome, then for wares and marchaundizes laden in Engliſhe Bottomes: this acte or any thyng therin contayned to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
            
            
               An Acte for the continuaunce of the makyng of VVollen Cloth, in diuers Townes in the Countie of Eſſex. The .xiiii. Chapter.
               
                  WHereas by a certayne Acte of Parliament begun of Weſtminſter, the twentie day of Ianuarye, in the fourth and fyfth yeres of the raignes of the late kyng Philip and Queene Marie, and there continued tyll the ſeuenth day of March, in the ſayd fourth & fifth yeres of the raignes of the ſaide late king & Queene, amongſt other thynges it was enacted, that from and after the firſt day of May then next folowyng, no perſon or perſons whatſoeuer, ſhall vſe or exerciſe the feate or myſterie of making, weauyng or rowyng of wollen clothes, long or ſhort, or Karſeyes, pinned whites, or plaine ſtreightes, to the intent to put the ſame to ſale, but only in a market towne where cloth hath continually ben vſed to be made by the ſpace of .x. yeres then laſt paſt, or in a Citie, Borough, or towne corporate, vppon payne of forfayture for euery ſuche wollen cloth or Karſey made, wouen, or rowed, out of ſuche citie, borough, towne corporate, or market towne fyue poundes.
               And where alſo it is prouided in the ſayde acte, that it ſhalbe lawfull to anye perſon, then vſyng or exerciſyng the feate or myſterie of making, weauing, or rowyng of cloth or Karſey, to inhabite or dwell where he then dyd dwell and there to vſe the makyng, weauyng, or rowyng of cloth or Karſey, as he hath heretofore: any thyng in the ſayde acte, notwithſtandyng.
               And where it is further prouided by the ſayde acte, that it ſhalbe lawfull to all and euery perſon or perſons, whiche then dyd, or after that tyme ſhoulde inhabite or dwell in any of the ſhyres of Northwales, or Southwales, Gheſhyre, or Kancaſhyre, Weſtmerlande, Gumberlande, Northumberlande, Byſhoprike of Durham, Corne,

Suffolke, Kent, the Towne of Goddelmine in the Countie of Surrey, or Yorkeſhyre, being not within .xii. myles of the Citie of Yorke, or in any of the Townes or Villages neare adioynyng to the water of Strowde, in the Countie of Gloceſter, where clothes hath ben vſually made by the ſpace of twentie yeres then laſt paſt, and hauyng ben apprentice to the occupation of cloth makyng, or vſed the ſame by the ſpace of ſeuen yeres, to ſet vp, vſe, and exerciſe the feate or myſtery of making, weauing, or rowing of wollen cloth, out of a citie, borough, or market towne, as before that tyme they myght haue done: any thyng in the ſayde acte to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               And foraſmuche as the townes or villages of Bockyng, Weſtbarfolde, Dedham, and Cockſhall in the Countie of Eſſex, be fayre large Townes, and aſwell planted for cloth makyng, as the ſayd towne of Goddelmine, or better, and fewe townes in this Realme better planted for that purpoſe, & haue berrinhabited of a long tyme with clothmakers, which haue made, and dayly do make good and true cloth, to the great common weale of the Countrey there, and nothyng preiudiciall to, or for the common wealth of this Realme: be it therfore ordayned and enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that it ſhalbe lawful to al and euery ſuche perſon and perſons, which nowe do inhabite or dwel, or hereafter ſhall dwell in the ſayd townes or villages of Bockyng, Weſtbarfolde, Cockſhall, and Dedham, or in any of them, nowe vſyng or exerciſyng, or that hereafter ſhall vſe or exercyſe the feate or myſterie of makyng, weauing, or rowing of cloth or Karſey, by the ſpace of ſeuen yeres at the leaſt, or haue ben prentice thereto by the ſayde ſpace of ſeuen yeres, to inhabite and dwell in the ſayde townes or villages of Bockyng, Weſtbarfolde, Cockſhall, and Dedham, and in euery or any of them, and to vſe the makyng, weauing, or rowyng of cloth or Karſey, as before this tyme they myght haue done, yf the ſayd act had neuer ben made: any thyng in the ſayde acte to the contrarye thereof made, or any other acte, ſtatute, or lawe heretofore made, or hereafter to be made to the contrary hereof in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng.
            
            
               An Acte that tymber ſhall not be felled to make coales for the burnyng of yron. The .xv. Chapter.
               
                  FOR the auoydyng of deſtruction and waſtyng of timber, be it enacted by our ſoueraigne Lady the Queenes Maieſtie, the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that no perſon or perſons hereafter ſhal conuert or imploy, or cauſe to be conuerted or imployed

to coale or other fuel, for the making of iron, any timber tree or tymber trees, of oke, beeche, or aſhe, or of any part therof, of the breadth of one foote ſquare at the ſtub, and growing within .xiiii. myles of the ſea, or of any part of ye riuers of Thames, Seuerene, Wye, Humbre, Dee, Tine, Teeſe, Trent, or any other riuer, creeke, or ſtreame, by the which cariage is commōly vſed by boate, or other veſſell, to any part of the ſea, vppon payne of forfayture for euery ſuche tree, or any part therof, ſo imployed or conuerted to coale, or other fuel, for the making of iron as is aforeſayd .xl.s. of lawful money of England; ye one halfe of all whiche forfaytures to be to our ſoueraigne Lady the Queenes Maieſtie, and to her heyres, and ſucceſſours, and the other moytie to hym or them that wyll ſue for the ſame, by original writ, byl, plaint, or information, wherin no eſſoigne, protection, iniunction, or wager of lawe ſhalbe admitted or alowed.
               Prouided alwayes, that this acte ſhall not extende to the countie of Suſſex, nor to ye Weyld of Kent, nor to any the pariſhes of Charlewoode Newdigate, and Lighe, in the Weylde of the countie of Surrey: this acre to begyn and take effect from and after the feaſt of the Natiuitie of S. Iohn Baptiſt next commyng, after this ſeſſion of Parliament.
            
            
               An acte to continue the acte made agaynſt rebellious aſſembles. Chapter .xvj.
               
                  WHERE in the Parliament holden at Weſtminſter the xxiiii. day of October, in the firſt yere of the reigne of the late Queene Marie, ſiſter vnto the Queenes highneſſe that now is, there was one acte & ſtatute made agaynſt vnlawful and rebellious aſſembles, to indure and ſtand in force vnto thend of the next Parliament then folowing, as by the ſame acte more playnely doth appeare. Which ſayde acte and ſtatute in the Parliament holden at Weſtminſter the .xii. day of Nouember, in the firſt and ſecond yeres of the raigne of the late king Philip and Queene Marie, amongeſt other thinges was then and there continued vnto the laſt day of the next Parliament: and after, at the next Parliament begun and holden at Weſtminſter the .xxi. day of October in the ii. and .iii. yeres of the ſayde late king Philip and Queene Marie, the ſayde acte and ſtatute amongeſt other thinges was alſo further continued to ſtande in force, vntyll the laſt day of the next Parliament then folowing: and alſo at the next Parliament holden at Weſtminſter the .xx. day of Ianuarie in the .iiii. and .v. yeres of the raignes of the ſayde late king and Queene, the ſaide acte and ſtatute amongeſt other thinges was lykewyſe further continued to ſtande & remayne in force vntyl the laſt day of the next Parliament then folowyng,

whiche is this preſent Parliament, and ſo the ſayde acte and ſtatute by the actes of continuaunce aforeſayde, doth ſtande in force but onely vnto the laſt day of this preſent Parliament.
               And foraſmuch as the ſayd acte and ſtatute, duryng al the time aforeſayd, hath ben proued by experience to be a very good and beneficial lawe, and meete to be continued & kept in force, aſwel for the preſeruation of the peace, as alſo for the common wealth, and quietneſſe of this Realme: be it therefore enacted by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that the ſaid act and ſtatute, and euery braunch, clauſe, and article therin conteined, ſhal ſtand, remayne, continue, and be in full force and ſtrength, to all intentes and purpoſes, for & during the naturall lyfe of the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie that nowe is (which almightie God long preſerue and continue) & to thend of the Parliament then next folowing: and that the ſayd act and ſtatute, & the wordes and ſentences mentioned & conteined in the ſaid act, ſhal extende and be to the Queenes hyghneſſe that nowe is, as fully and amplie as euer the ſame did extende to the ſayd late Queene Marie.
            
            
               An acte for the preſeruation of ſpawne and frye of Fiſhe. Chapter .xvij.
               
                  FOr the preſeruation hereafter of ſpawne, frye, and yong breede of Eles, Samons, Pikes, and of all other fyſhe, which heretofore hath ben muche deſtroyed in riuers & ſtreames, ſalt and freſh within this Realme, in ſo much that diuers places they feede ſwine & dogges with the frye and ſpawne of fiſhe, and otherwyſe (lamentable and horrible to be reported) deſtroy the ſame, to the great hynderaunce and decay of the common wealth: Be it therfore enacted by the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie, the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that no perſon or perſons, or what eſtate, degree, or condition ſo euer he or they be, from and after the firſt day of Iune next cōming, with any maner of net, weele, butte, tayning, kepper, lyme, crele, rawe, fagnet, trolnet, trymenet, trimbote, ſtalbote, webliſter, ſeur, lammet, or with any deuiſe or engine made of heare, woll, lyne, or canuas, or ſhall vſe any heling net, or trimle boate, or by any other deuiſe, enginne, cawtell, wayes or meanes whatſoeuer, heretofore made or deuiſed, or hereafter to be made or diuiſed, ſhall take and kyll any yong brode, ſpawne, or frye of Eles, Samon, Pike, or Pickerell, or of any other fiſhe, in any fludgate, pipe at the tayle of any myll, weare, or in any ſtreites, ſtreames, brokes, riuers, ſalt or freſhe within this Realme of Englande, Wales, Barwike, or the marches therof, nor ſhal from and after the firſt day of Iune next comming by any

of the wayes and meanes aforeſayde, or otherwyſe, in any ryuer or place aboue ſpecified, take and kyll any Samons, or Trowtes, not beyng in ſeaſon, being kepper Samons, or kepper Trowtes, ſhedder Samons, or ſhedder Trowtes.
               And be it further enacted by aucthoritie aforeſaide, that no perſon or perſons, of what eſtate, degree, or condition he or they ſhalbe of, from and after the ſayd firſt day of Iune, by any of the meanes aforeſayde, in any of the riuers or places aboue named, ſhall take and kyll any pike or pickerell, not beyng in length .x. inches fiſhe or more, nor any Samon not being in length .xvi. inches fiſhe and more, nor any Trowte, not beyng in length .viii. inches or more, nor any Barbell, nor beyng in length .xii. inches or more.
               And to thintent the ſayd young frye, brode, or ſpawne, may be preſerued according to the true meaning hereof, be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that no maner of perſon or perſons, from & after the firſt day of Iune next commyng, ſhal fiſhe or take fiſhe with any maner of net, tramell, kepe, wore, hiuie, crele, or by any other ingin, deuiſe, wayes or meanes whatſoeuer, in any riuer, or other places aboue mentioned, but onely with net, or tramell, whereof euery meſhe or maſke ſhalbe two inches & a halfe brode, anglyng excepted.
               Prouided neuertheleſſe, and be it enacted by aucthoritie aforeſayd, that in all ſuche places where ſmeltes, loches, minneys, bulheades, gudgions, or eles hath ben vſed to be taken and killed, that in al ſuch places, it ſhalbe lawful only for thetaking of ſmeltes, loches, mineis, gudgions and eles, to vſe ſuche nets, lepes, & other ingines, deuiſes, wayes and meanes, as heretofore hath ben vſed for the taking of the ſame: ſo that ſuche perſon or perſons vſing or occupiyng ſuch nets, or other ingines, as is laſt afore mentioned, do not take, kyll, or deſtroy any other fiſhe, with the ſayde nettes, or ingines contrarie to the tenor and fourme aboue in this eſtatute conteyned.
               And be it further enacted, that if any perſon or perſons, after the aforeſayd day limited in this preſent act, offend in any of the poyntes before rehearſed, contrarye to the tenor, fourme, and purpoſe of any part of the ſame: that then euery ſuche perſon and perſons ſo offendyng, ſhall loſe and forfayte for euery tyme of his or their offence, the ſumme of .xx. s. 
                     •
                   the fiſhe ſo taken contrarie to the tenor hereof, and alſo the vnlawfull nets, ingines, deuiſes, and inſtrumentes whatſoeuer they be, wherewith or whereby ſuche offence ſhall fortune to be made, commited, or done.
               And to thintent that a perfect execution may be had of this preſent act, be it further ordeyned by aucthoritie aforeſayd, that the lord Admirall of Englande, and the Maior of the Citie of London, for the tyme beyng, and all and euery other perſon and perſons bodyes politike and corporate, whiche by graunt or other lawfull wayes or

meanes, lawfully haue, or ought to haue any conſeruation or preſeruation, of any riuers, ſtreames, or water, or puniſhmentes and corrections of offences committed in any of them, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie by vertue of this acte, to enquire of all the offences to be committed and done contrarye to the effecte and true meanyng of this act, within his or their ſuche lawfull rule, gouernement, iuriſdiction, and conſeruacie, by the othes of .xii. men or more, & to heare and determine all and euerye the ſame offences, committed within his or their ſuche iuriſdiction, conſeruacie, rule, and gouernment. And that all ſuche paynes and forfaytures, as ſhall ryſe or growe by the reaſon of any ſuche conuiction for any the offences aforeſayde, ſhalbe to the vſe of euery of the ſayde perſon and perſons, beyng no body politique or corporate, nor head of any body politique or corporate, before whom ſuche conuiction, as is aforeſayde, ſhall be had, and to the vſe of euery ſuche body politique and corporate, as heretofore haue lawfully had any fynes, forfaytures, and amerciamentes, for any offence vnlawfully committed or done, in any ſuche their iuriſdiction, or conſeruacies, vppon conuiction had before the head of any ſuche body politique or corporate. And that alſo the Lorde of euery leete within this Realme of Englande, and Wales, or the dominions of the ſame, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie to enquire of all thoffences contrarie to the purport, tenor, and fourme of this eſtatute, within the precinct of their ſayde leete: ſuch inquirie to be had, in maner and fourme, and after ſuche ſort as common amerciamentes, or other thynges, inquirable in their court leete, haue ben lawefully vſed and accuſtomed to be had and made. And that vpon euery ſuch preſentmēt had in any court or leete, by the oth of twelue men or more, as is aforeſayd, of any offence or offences, made contrarie to the tenor of this eſtatute: that then all ſuche forfayture aboue in this eſtatute limited and appoynted for ſuche offence, ſhalbe vnto the lord of the ſayde leete for the tyme beyng, to his owne vſe for euer, and ſhalbe leuyed in ſuche maner and fourme, as amerciament for affrayes committed within the precincte of ſuche leete haue ben vſed and accuſtomed to be leuied. And if any leete, after the ſayde firſt day of Iune, be kept within this Realme of Englande, or Wales, or the dominions thereof, and the Stewarde of the ſayde leete, for the tyme beyng, or other for him, do not charge the Iurie ſworne in ſuch leete to inquire of all the offences done within the precinct of the ſaid leete, contrary to the tenor and fourme of this eſtatute: that then the Stewarde of the ſayde leete, to leeſe and forfayte .xl.s. the one moitie of whiche forfaytures ſhalbe to the Queenes Maieſtie, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, and thother moitie to him that wil ſue for the ſame. And if any Iurie ſworne in any leete, and beyng charged to enquire of the offences committed within the precinct of that leete, do wylfully

and willyngly conceale and make default in preſentment, or do not preſent the offence and offendours: that then it ſhalbe lawfull to the ſtewarde, or bayly of the leete, or his or their deputie for the tyme beyng, to empanell one other Iurie within the ſaide leete, and to enquire of ſuch concealement, default, and none preſentment, and that vpon ſuche concealement, default, or none preſentment founde and preſented, euery of the ſayde Iurours which ſo did conceale make default, or not preſent, ſhall looſe & forfayte for euery ſuch offence .xx.s. to the lorde of the ſayd leete, the ſame to be leuied in maner & fourme as is aboueſayde, for the other offences limited and expreſſed.
               And it is further enacted by aucthoritie aforeſayde, that if the offences aboue mentioned, touching the takyng, kylling, or deſtroying of fiſhe, or frye and Spawne, be not preſented at the leete where they ſhalbe committed, within one yere next after the offence committed, that the Iuſtices of peace in their ſeſſions, Iuſtices of Oyer and determiner, and Iuſtices of aſſiſe in their ſeuerall circuites, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie to inquire therof, and to heare and determine al the offences committed contrary to the tenor of this eſtatute.
               Sauing alwayes to al and euery perſon and perſons, bodyes politique and corporate, and euery of them, all ſuch right, title, intereſt, clayme, priuiledge, and conſeruation, and enquirie, and puniſhment of and for any the offences aforeſayd, as they or any of them lawfully haue and enioy, or of right ought to haue and enioy, by any maner of meanes: any thing in this acte to the contrary, notwithſtanding. This acte to endure to the ende of the next Parliament.
               Prouided alwayes, that this acte, or any thing therin conteyned, ſhall not extende vnto the fyſhyng of the ryuer or water of Tweede, nor to any riuer or water wherof the Queenes Maieſtie is aunſwered of any yerely rent or profite, nor to the owners, fermours and occupyers of the riuers of Vſke, or Wye, in the Countie of Monmouth, for any fiſhe hereafter to be taken in any the riuers or waters before mentioned and expreſſed, but that it may be lawfull at al ſeaſonable time and tymes hereafter, for ſuche as haue or ſhall haue any maner of intereſt therein, to take and fiſhe the ſayde riuers and waters, in ſuch maner and fourme as heretofore hath ben vſed and accuſtomed, not vſing any net or enginne, to the intent wylllingly to take, kyll, and deſtroy the ſpawne, breede, or frye, breedyng any kynde of fiſhe, within the ſayde ſeuerall riuers or waters: this acte or any thyng therein mentioned or conteyned to the contrarie, notwithſtandyng.
            
            
               
               An acte for the continuaunce of certayne Statutes. Chapter .xviij.
               
                  WHere in the Parliament begun and holden at London the .iii. day of Nouember, in the .xxi. yere of the raigne of our moſt dread Soueraigne Lorde of moſt famous memorie king Henry theight, & from thence adiourned to Weſtminſter, and there holden and continued by diuers prorogations vnto the diſſolution therof, one acte was made for the true wyndyng of Wolles, and one other acte was there made to reſtrayne kyllyng of waynelinges, bullockes, ſtires, and heyfers, beyng vnder the age of two yeres: which ſayd ſeuerall actes were then made to endure and continue vnto the next Parliament, as by the ſayde ſeuerall actes more playnely appeareth. And where alſo in the ſame Parliament one other acte was made & eſtabliſhed for attayntes to be ſued for the puniſhment of periurie vpon vntrue verdites: which acte laſt before rehearſed was then made & ordeyned to continue and endure to the laſt day of the next Parliament, as by the ſame act more plainely appeareth. And where alſo in the Parliament begun & holden at Weſtminſter the .viii. day of Iune, in the .xxviii. yere of the raigne of our ſayd moſt dread ſoueraigne Lord king Henry the eight, & there continued and kept vntyll the diſſolution therof, it was ordeyned, and enacted, that all & ſinguler the ſayde actes aboue remembred, and euery of them, ſhould continue and endure in their force and ſtrength, and alſo be obſerued and kept vntyll the laſt day of the next Parliament, as by the ſame acte, amongſt other thinges therein conteyned, more playnly appeareth. And where alſo in the Parliament begun & holdē at Weſtminſter the .xxviii. day of April, in the .xxxi. yere of ye raigne of our ſayd late moſt dread ſoueraigne lorde king Henry theight, and there continued vntyll the .xxviii. day of Iune then next folowing, it was ordeined and enacted by thaucthoritie of the ſame Parliament, that all and ſinguler the ſayde ſeuerall actes aboue remembred, and euery of them, and all articles, clauſes, and prouiſions in them and euery of them conteyned, ſhould continue and endure in their force & ſtrength, and alſo be obſerued and kept vntill the laſt day of the next Parliament, as by the ſame act amongſt other thinges therein conteined, more plainly appeareth. And where in the Parliament holdē at Weſtminſter, in the .xxxv. yere of the raigne of our ſayde late ſoueraigne Lorde king Henry the eight, one act was made for the preſeruation of woodes, to endure for .vii. yeres then next folowyng, and from thence to thend of the next Parliamēt, as by the ſame act more playnly it doth and may appeare. And where alſo at the parliament

holden at Weſtminſter in the .xxxvii. yere of the raigne of the ſaid late king Henry theight, and there continued and kept vntyl the diſſolution thereof, it was ordeyned and enacted, that all and ſinguler the ſayd actes aboue remembred, and euery of them (except the ſayde acte made for the preſeruation of woodes as is aforeſaid) ſhould continue and endure in their force and ſtrength, and alſo be obſerued and kept vntyll the laſt day of the next Parliament then next folowyng, as by the ſame act amongſt other thinges therin conteyned more plainely appeareth. And where alſo at the ſeſſion of the Parliament ended at Weſtminſter the .xiiii. day of Marche, in the thirde yere of the raigne of our late ſoueraigne lord king Edwarde the ſixt, one act was made for the true currying of leather, whiche acte was made to endure to the ende of the next Parliament, as by the ſame acte more playnely appeareth. And where alſo at the ſeſſion of a Parliament ended at Weſtminſter the firſt day of Februarie, in the .iiii. yere of the raigne of our ſayd late ſoueraigne lord kyng Edwarde the ſixth, one acte was then and there made concerning the buying of rother beaſtes, & alſo one other acte was then and there made touchyng the buying and ſelling of butter and cheeſe: which ſayd ſeueral actes where then and there made to endure and continue vnto the ende of the next Parlialiament, as by the ſame ſeuerall actes more at large it doth and may appeare. And where alſo at the ſeſſion of a Parliament by prorogation holden at Weſtminſter the .xxiii. day of Ianuarie, in the fift yere of the raigne of our ſaid late ſoueraigne lorde king Edwarde the ſixt, one other act was then and there made againſt regratours and foreſtallers, to endure to the ende of the next Parliament: al and ſinguler which ſayde actes aboue mentioned, together with the ſayde acte for the preſeruation of woodes, at a Parliament holden at Weſtminſter the firſt day of Marche, in the .vii. yere the raigne of our ſayde late ſoueraigne lord king Edwarde the ſixt, and there continued and diſſolued the laſt day of the ſame moneth of March, and al clauſes, articles, and prouiſions in them & euery of them conteyned, were there reuiued & continued to ſtand in their force and ſtrength vntyl the laſt day of the next Parliamēt. And where alſo at the ſeſſion of a Parliament holden by prorogation at Weſtminſter ye .xxiiii. day of October, in the firſt yere of the raigne of the late Queene Marie, ſiſter to the Queenes highneſſe that now is, and there continued and kept vntil the diſſolution thereof, all and ſinguler the actes aboue mentioned, and before that tyme continued at ſundry Parliamentes, as is aforeſayde, and all clauſes, articles, and prouiſions in them and euerye of them conteyned, were there reuyued and continued to ſtande in their force and ſtrength vnto the laſt day of the next Parliament. And where alſo at a Parliament begun and holden at Weſtminſter the .xii. day of Nouember, in the firſte and ſeconde yeres of the

raignes of the late kyng Philip and Queene Marie, and there continued and kept vntyll the diſſolution of the ſame, being the .xvi. day of Ianuarie then next enſuyng, all and ſinguler the actes aboue remembred, that were before that tyme continued at ſundrye Parliamentes, as is aforeſayde, and all clauſes, articles, and prouiſions in them and euery of them conteyned, were by the aucthoritie of the ſayd Parliament there reuiued and continued to ſtand in their force and ſtrength vnto the laſt day of the next Parliament. And where alſo at a Parliament begun and holden at Weſtminſter the .xxi. day of October, in the ſeconde and thirde yeres of the raignes of the ſayd late kyng Philip and Queene Marie, and there continued vntil the diſſolution of the ſame, beyng the .ix. day of December then next enſuing, one acte was then and there made for the kepyng of Milche kyne and for the breading and rearyng of calues, and one other acte for the reedifying of decayed houſes of huſbandrye, & for the encreaſe of tyllage, the ſayde two ſeuerall actes to endure tyl the laſt day of the next Parliament, as by the ſame more at large doth appeare.
               And foraſmuch as all and ſinguler the ſayde ſeuerall actes aboue mentioned, be good and beneficiall for the common wealth of this Realme: be it therfore enacted, ordeined, and eſtabliſhed by the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie, with the aſſent of the Lordes ſpirituall and temporall, and the commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, that all and ſinguler the ſaid ſeuerall actes and eſtatutes aboue mentioned and rehearſed, & euery of them, and all clauſes, articles, and prouiſions in them and euery of them conteyned, ſhalbe reuiued, continued, ſtande, and endure in their ful force and ſtrength, to all intentes, conſtructions & purpoſes, and ſhalbe obſerued and kept in all thinges vntyll the laſt day of the next Parliament. And where in the Parliament begun and holden at Weſtminſter the .xxi. day of October, in the ſecond and third yeres of the raignes of the ſayde late king Philip and Queene Marie, and there continues and kept vntyll the .ix. day of September then next enſuing, one acte was then and there made, entituled, An act for the reliefe of the poore, and to endure to the latter ende of the firſt ſeſſion of the next Parliament. Foraſmuch as the ſayde acte is good and beneficiall to the common wealth of this Realme: be it therefore enacted, ordeyned, and eſtabliſhed by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that the ſayde acte laſt aboue mentioned and rehearſed, and all clauſes, articles, and prouiſions in the ſame conteyned, ſhalbe reuiued, continued, ſtande, and indure in full force and ſtrength, to all intentes and purpoſes, and ſhalbe obſerued and kept in all thinges vntyll the laſt day of the next Parliament.
            
            
               
               An acte of a ſubſidie of Tonnage and Pondage. Chapter .xix.
               
                  IN their moſt humble wyſe ſhewen vnto your moſte excellent Maieſtie, your poore and obedient ſubiects and commons in his your preſent Parliament aſſembled, that where aſwell your noble graundfather, of worthy memorie, kyng Henry the ſeuenth; the moſt victorous & myghtie prince king Henry the eyght your moſt deare father, the late prince of worthy memorie kyng Edwarde the ſixte, your moſte entirely beloued brother, and our late ſoueraigne Ladye Queene Marie, your moſt deare ſiſter, as other your ryght noble and famous progenitours, kynges of this your Realme of Englande, tyme out of mynde, haue had and enioyed vnto them by aucthoritie of parliament, for the defence of the ſame now your Realme, and the kepyng and ſauegarde of the ſeas, for the entercourſe or marchaundize, ſafely to come into, and to paſſe out of the ſame, certayne ſummes of money, named Subſidies, of all maner of goodes and marchaundize, commyng in or goyng out of the ſame your Realme. And foraſmuche as we your ſayde poore commons, vndoubtedly and moſt aſſuredly do truſt and haue ſure confidence in your Maieſties good fauour and wyll towardes vs your ſayd poore commons, in and for the kepyng and ſure defendyng of the ſeas, agaynſt all perſons, intendyng or that ſhall intende the diſturbaunce of vs your ſayde commons in the intercourſe and the inuadyng of this your Realme, to our modeſtation, inquietyng, and loſſe whiche at any tyme cannot be borne without the great exceſſe, and intollerable coſtes, charges, and expences of your Maieſtie, whiche is not (when neede ſhall require in ſuche caſes) to be lacked at any tyme. But rather we your ſayde commons, wiſhyng that ſuche furniture of all thynges may be had in redyneſſe from tyme to tyme, when neceſſitie ſhall require, for the ſpedie indilayed prouiſion and helpe for the ſuppreſſing of ſuch inconueniences, diſturbances, and inuaſions, humbly deſire your moſt excellent Maieſtie, benignely and fauourably to take, accept, and receaue theſe our poore grauntes hereafter enſuyng, as graunted of true heartes, and good wylles, whiche we beare vnto your highneſſe, towardes your ſayd great coſtes, charges and expences, whiche may be expended and layde out by your Maieſtie for the cauſes aforeſayde, when neede ſhall require, as the firſte fruites of our good wylles and heartes towarde your hyghneſſe, although the ſame do, or hereafter ſhall nothing in effect counteruayle the ſame your great charges, nor yet we your ſayde poore commons able fully to gratifie your highneſſe by any meanes: yet neuertheles

we your ſayd poore commons, by thaduiſe and conſent of the Lordes ſpiritual and temporall, in this your preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame, to the intent aforeſayde, geue and graunt to you our ſupreme liege Lady and ſoueraigne, one ſubſidie called Tonnage, that is to ſay, of euery tunne of wyne commyng, or that ſhal or is come into this your realme, by way of marchaundize, the ſumme of .iii.s. and ſo after the rate. And of euery tun of ſweete wyne, alwell malueſey as other, that ſhall or is come into the ſame your Realme, by euery or any marchaunt alien, aſwell by the marchauntes of Haunſe, & Almanie, as by any other marchaunt ſtraunger, of what nation ſo euer he be .iii.s. and ſo after the rate ouer and aboue the .iii.s. afore graunted. And of euery aume of renniſh wyne, commyng or that ſhall or is come into this your Realme, by way of marchaundize, by euery or any marchaunt denizen, or alien, of what natiō ſoeuer he be .xii.d. And alſo one other ſubſidie called Pondage, that is to ſay, of all maner of goodes and marchaundizes, of euery marchaunt denizen and alien, whatſoeuer he be, caried and to be caried out of this your ſayde Realme, or brought or to be brought into the ſame, by way of marchaundize of the value of euery .xx.s. of the ſame goodes and marchaundize .xii.d. and ſo after the rate. And of euery .xx.s. value of tynne and pewter veſſell, caried out of this your Realme, by any and euerye marchaunt alien .xii.d. ouer and aboue the .xii.d. aforeſaid. Except and alwaies forepriſed out of this graunt of ſubſidie of Pondage, al maner of wollen Cloth, made or wrought, or that ſhalbe made and wrought within this your Realme of Englande, & by euery or any marchaunt denizen, and not borne alien, caried or to be caried out of this your ſayde Realme: and all maner of wolles, molfelles, and hydes, and backes of leather, alſo caried or to be caried out of this your Realme: and all wynes, and all maner of freſhe fiſhe, and beſhall, commyng, or that is or ſhall come into the ſame your realme. And further we your ſayd poore commons, by the aduiſe, aſſent, & aucthoritfe aforeſayd, geue and graunt vnto you our ſayd ſoueraigne liege Lady and ſoueraigne, for the cauſes aforeſayd, one other ſubſidie of al maner of wolle, wolfelles, and leather, caried or to be caried out of this your Realme, in maner and fourme folowyng: That is to ſay of euery marchaunt denizen, of and for euery ſacke of woll .xxxiii.s.iiii.d. and for euery .xxxl. wolfels .xxxiii.s.iiii.d. and of and for euery laſt of hydes & backes of euery ſuche marchaunt denizen .iii.l.vi.s.viii.d. And of euery marchaūt ſtranger, not horne your liegeman, aſwel thoſe that be made denizens, as hereafter ſhal be made by letters patentes, or otherwyſe, as all other marchaunt ſtraungers, of and for euery ſacke of wol .iii li. vi.s. viii.d. and of and for euery .ccxl. wolfels .iii. li. vi.s. viii.d. and alſo for euery laſt of hides and backes .iii. li. xiii.s. iiii.d. And ſo of all the ſayde wols, wolfelles,

hydes, and backes, & euery of them, after the rate that ſo is or ſhalbe caryed, to haue, take, enioy, and perceaue the ſubſidies aforeſaid, and euery of them, and euery part and parcell of them, to your highneſſe, from the .xvi. day of Nouember laſt paſt, duryng your lyfe naturall.
               And further we your ſayde poore commons, moſt humbly deſire your Maieſtie, that it may be enacted by your highnes, by the aduiſe and aſſent of the Lordes aforeſayd, & vs your ſayde commons, and by the aforeſayd aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament aſſembled, that the giftes & graunts aforeſaid, ſhalbe good and effectual accordyng to the true meaning of the ſame. And that it may be further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaide, that if any wines, goodes, marchaundize, woll, wolfels, hides, and backes of leather aforeſaid, or other thinges afore ſpecified, whereof the ſubſidies aforeſayde, or any of them, is or ſhalbe hereafter due, ſhal at any tyme hereafter duryng ye tyme aforeſayd, be ſhipped, or put into any boate, crayer, ſhip, or veſſell, to the intent to be caried into the parties of beyond the ſeas, or els be brought from the parties of beyond the ſeas into any port, hauen, creeke, or other place of this your Realme by way of marchaundize, & there laid on lande (the ſubſidies aforeſayd of the premiſſes due, or to be due, by the reaſon of this graunt not paide) or the collector of the ſame ſubſidie, or his deputie, with & by the conſent, knowledge, and agreement of the cōptroller & ſurueyor, or one of them at ye leaſt, not agreed with for the ſame in the cuſtome houſe, according to the true meaning and intent of theſe aforeſaid graunts & euery of them: that then from the ſaid .xvi. day of Nouember laſt paſt, and not before, al the ſaid wines; goodes, marchaundize, wols, wolfels, hydes, & backes, and other the premiſſes aforeſayd, & euery part and parcell therof, ſo ſhipped, or els put into any boates, crayer, or other veſſel aforeſayde, to the intent aforeſaid, or brought into this Realme, & there layd on land, as is alſo aforeſayd, ſhalbe & remayne forfait to your highnes, during the tyme aforeſayd, thone moytie or the value therof to your hyghnes, & the other moitie to him or them that ſhall ſeaſe the ſante, or ſue for ye ſame. And that it may pleaſe your highneſſe, that all marchauntes, aſwell denizens as ſtraungers, cōming into this your Realme, be wel & honeſtly entreated & demeaned, for ſuch things as ſubſidy by this act is graūted for, as they were in ye time of your ſayd noble progenitours, without oppreſſion to thē to be done, paying the ſubſidies aforeſaid.
               And further that it be enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that yf any goodes, marchaundizes, wolles, wolfelles, or leather aforeſayde or any part thereof, of any marchaunt denizen, naturally borne your liege man, whiche hath or ſhall paſſe out of this your ſayde Realme, after the ſayde .xvi. day of Nouember laſt paſt, duryng the tearme of this gyft and graunt, hath or ſhall happen to be taken with enemies or pyrates vppon the ſea, or peryſhed by

infortune in any ſhip or ſhyps that ſhall happen to be taken, or periſhed within the time of the fayde graunt, wherof the ſubſidies aforeſayd, or any of them, to your hyghnes due, or to be due, is or ſhalbe in fourme aforeſayd duely payd or agreed for, without fraude or colluſion, & ſuch loſſe or loſſes as ben before rehearſed, be found and proued before the Treaſurer of England, or the cheefe baron of your Exchequer for the tyme beyng, by the examination of the ſame marchauntes yf they be aliue, or of their executours or adminiſtratours yf they be dead, or two true credible perſons ſworne, or other reaſonable witneſſe and proues ſworne, witneſſing the ſame marchaundizes ſo to be loſt or periſhed: that then the ſame marchauntes denizens that were or ſhalbe owners of the aforeſayd goodes, marchaundizes, wol, wolfels, hides, or other marchaundizes aforeſayde, a ſhalbe ſo periſhed or loſt, if they be on liue, or their executours & adminiſtratours, if they be dead, and euery of them, by force & vertue of this acte when them lyketh, during the ſayd terme, ſhall or may newly ſhip as much wol, wolfels, hides, or other goodes and marchaundizes in the ſame port or portes in the which the ſame woll, wolfelles, hydes, or other goodes and marchaundizes aforeſayde ſo loſt and periſhed, were or ſhalbe ſhipped, without any, of the ſubſidies aforeſayde nowe graunted to be had or payde therefore to your hyghneſſe in any wyſe: and that al ſuche profites of the premiſſes ſo to be loſt or periſhed, be certified into your chauncerie by your ſayde treaſurer or cheefe Baron, there to remayne of record. And after ſuch certificat made, the chaunceler of England, or the Lorde Keper of your great ſeale for the tyme being, ſhall make and deliuer vnto the ſayde marchauntes, their executours, or adminiſtratours, or any of them, or to theyr atturney or atturneys in that behalfe, or any of them, as many and ſuch writtes and warrauntes to be directed aſwell to the collectours of the ſubſidies aforeſayde, or any or euery of them, for the tyme beyng, as to the treaſurer and Barons of your Exchequer for the tyme beyng ſhalbe thought requiſite and needefull, for the ſayd marchauntes, their executours, or adminiſtratours, or their atturney or atturneys, or any of them, or the ſayde Collectours, or any of them, to haue for the obtaynyng aſwell of the ſhipping, as of the alowaunce thereof.
               And further that euery marchaunt denizen that ſhall ſhyp hereafter any woll, wolfelles, hides, or any other goodes and marchaundize in any Carricke, or Galley, ſhal pay to your Maieſtie during the tyme aforeſayde, all maner of cuſtomes, and all the ſubſidies aforeſayde, as any alien borne out of this your Realme.
               God ſaue Queene.
            
            
               
               An acte of a ſubſidie and two Fifteenes and Tenth by the Temporaltie. The .xx. Chapter.
               
                  THE care which we do perceaue your Maieſtie hath, moſte noble and redoubted Soueraigne, to reduce this Realme, and the imperiall Crowne thereof, nowe lately ſo ſore ſhaken, ſo impoueriſhed, ſo infeabled and weakened into the former eſtate, ſtrength and glory, doth make vs not onlye to reioyce much in the great bounteouſneſſe of almyghtie God, who hath ſo marueylouſly, and beyond all worldlye expectation, preſerued your Maieſtie, in theſe late difficult and daungerous tymes: but alſo to ſtudie and bende all our wittes and force of vnderſtandyng, how we may lyke louing and obedient ſubiectes, folowe our head, in this ſo noble and ſo neceſſarie an enterpriſe. And conſydering with ourſelues, that the decay hath ben, beſides many other thinges, eſpecially in theſe three. Fyrſt, waſting of Treaſure, abandonyng of ſtrength, and in diminiſhing of the auncient aucthoritie of your imperiall Crowne.
               We do moſt earneſtly and faythfully promiſe to your highneſſe, that there ſhall lacke no good wyll, trauell nor force on our behalfe, to the redreſſe of all this: but we ſhalbe readye with hearte, wyll, ſtrength, bodye, lyues and goodes, not onlye to recouer agayne that whiche is thus diminiſhed: but yf neede be, to recouer farther (as far as ryght, and the wyll and pleaſure of God ſhall ſuffer) the olde dignitie and renownie of this Realme. The tyme and place whereof doth not reſt in vs, but as moſt reaſon is, in your moſte noble Maieſtie, with the aduiſe of your honorable Counſell. Neuertheleſſe ſince it doth ſo manifeſtly appeare to vs all, what ineſtimable waſtyng, and conſumption of the Treaſure and auncient Reuenues of this Realme hath ben of late dayes, and what great newe charges, and intollerable expences, your highneſſe is forced nowe to ſuſtayne, by reaſon of the decaye and loſſe of percell of your auncient Crowne. So beyng not ignoraunt that no worthye enterpriſe, no noble attempte, no not ſo much as the preſeruation of a ſtrong and puiſaunt eſtate, may be without ſome maſſe of Treaſure preſentlye to be had, and redye agaynſt all occurrentes.
               
                  Therefore we your moſt obedient and louing ſubiectes, the lordes Spirituall and Temporall, and the Commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembed, to ſhewe our wylling heartes and good mindes, vpon mature conſultation had, haue condiſcended and agreed with one voyce, and moſt entire affections, to make your highneſſe at this time a preſent, not ſuch in dede as in our affections we do wiſhe it, & as we know moſt certaynely ought to be. But yet of your accuſtomed clemencie which you do ſhewe to all men, we humbly on our knees pray your highneſſe not to reiect it, but to accept our good wylles and heartie deſyres therein, and that this our ſmall gyft maye be by your highnes, the lordes ſpiritual and temporall, and the cōmons in this preſent parliament aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame enacted.
               And be it enacted that your highneſſe towardes the ſayde great coſtes, and ineſtimable charges, ſhall haue by aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, two whole Fifteenes, and Tenthes, to be payd, taken, and leuied of the moueable goodes, cattelles, and other thinges vſuall to ſuch Fifteenes and Tenthes, to be contributorie and chargeable within the Shires, Cities, Boroughes, Townes, and other places of this your Maieſties Realme, in maner and fourme aforetime vſed. Except the ſumme of twelue thouſande poundes, thereof fully to be deduced, that is to ſay .vi.M. poundes of eyther of the ſayd whole Fifteenes & Tenthes, of the ſumme that one whole Fifteene and Tenth attaineth vnto, in reliefe, comfort, & diſcharge of ye poore Townes, Cities, and Boroughes of this your ſaide Realme, waſted, deſolate, or deſtroyed, or ouer greatly impoueriſhed, after ſuch rate as was and hath afore this time ben had and made vnto euery Shyre, & to be diuided in ſuche maner & fourme as heretofore for one whole Fifteene and Tenth hath ben had and diuided. And the ſayde two whole Fifteenes and Tenthes (thexceptions, and deductions aforeſaid, thereupon had deducted, and alowed) to be paide in maner and fourme folowyng: that is to ſay, the fyrſt whole Fifteene & Tenth, except before excepted, to be payde to your highneſſe in the receipt of of your highnes Exchequer, before the tenth day of Nouember next comming. And the ſaid .ii.xv. and .x. except before excepted, to be paid to your highneſſe in the receipt of your Exchequer before the .x. day of Nouember, in the yere of our Lorde God. M.D.lx.
               And be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the knightes elected and returned, of, & for the ſhyres within this realme for this preſent parliament, citizens of cities, & Burgeſes of boroghes & townes, where Collectours haue ben vſed to be named & appoynted for ye collection of any Fifteene & Tenth before this time graūted, ſhall name and appoynt yerely before the laſt day of Auguſt, in eyther of the ſayde two yeres, ſufficient & able perſons for the collection

of the ſaid Fifteenes & Tenthes, in euery of the ſaide ſhires, cities, borowes and townes, the ſaide perſons the hauing landes, tenementes, and other hereditamentes, in his or their owne right of an eſtate of enheritaunce, of the yerely value of tenne poundes, or in goodes worth a hundreth pound at the leaſt. And alſo ſuch perſon or perſons ſo by them to be named and appoynted, for the collection of eyther of the ſaid Fifteenes and Tenthes, ſhalbe by them ſeuerally appointed, and allotted into Hundredes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Cities, Boroughes, and Townes. And alſo the ſayde perſons ſo named and appoynted for the collection of the ſame Fifteenes and Tenthes, ſhalbe charged and chargeable vppon his or their accompt or accomptes, in the Exchequer to be made, with al ſuch ſumme or ſummes of monie, as the Hundredes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Cities, Boroughes, and Townes, where he or they ſhall ſo happen to be appoynted, amount vnto, and of no more ſumme or ſummes. And vppon the payment of ſuch ſummes of money, as he or they ſhalbe charged with, ſhalbe diſcharged, and haue his and theyr Quietus eſt, the non accompting or non payment of any other his felowes, or the inſufficiencie of them, or any of them notwithſtandyng. And the names and ſurnames of euery of the ſayde Collectours, for the ſayde Fifteenes and Tenthes, during eyther of the ſaide two yeres together, with the place allotted to their collection and charge, the ſaid Knightes, Citezins, and Burgeſſes for the Shires, Cities, and Boroughes, whereunto they be elected, named, and retourned, ſhall certifie before the Queene in her Chauncerie, before the .xiii. day of October, in euery of the ſame two yeres, accordyng to the tenor of this acte. And yf default of any ſuch certifying be had or made in fourme as is aforeſayde, then the Lorde Chauncelour of England, or keper of the great ſeale for the time beyng, ſhall immediatly after, name and appoynt Collectours, for the Collection of eyther of the ſaid Fifteenes & Tenthes, in maner and fourme as the ſayde Knightes of the Shyre, Citizens of Cities, and Burgeſes of Boroughes, ſhoulde haue done, and as aforetime haue ben vſed. The which ſaid Collectours and euery of them, ſhall haue lyke alowaunce vpon their accomptes, for their fees, wages, and rewardes for the collection of the ſayd Fifteenes and Tenthes, in as large maner and fourme as anye Collectour or Collectours, of Fifteenes and Tenthes, haue had at any ſeaſon in tyme paſt. And that the Barons of the Queenes Exchequer for the time being, ſhall and may from time to time, awarde ſuche proces for the ſpedye payment thereof, agaynſt the Collectour and Collectours for the ſame, as by their diſcretions ſhalbe thought conuenient.
               Prouided alway, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that the ſayde Lorde Chauncelour, or keper of the great ſeale for the tyme beyng Knightes of the Shyres, Citizens

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
of Cities, and Burgeſſes of Boroughes, Townes & other places, hauyng aucthoritie by this preſent acte, to name & nominate the ſayd Collectours, of, or for the ſaid Fifteenes and Tenthes, ſhal vpon their nomination and election, had, and made, take by aucthoritie of this preſent parliament, ſufficient recogniſaunces, or by obligation of euery perſon ſo by them to be named, to be bound to the Queenes Maiſtie, in the double ſumme of the ſumme of their Collection, & to be endorſed vpon ſuch condition, that if the ſaide Collector or Collectors do truely content and pay to the vſe of ye Queenes highneſſe, in her receipt of thexchequer, before the tenth day of Nouember, in euery of the ſaid two yeres, ſo much of the ſumme of money alloted and appoynted to his collection, as the ſame Collectour ſhall haue collected and gathered, & do likewyſe after the ſaide thenth day of ye moneth of Nouember, in euery of the ſaid two yeres, content and pay to the Queenes Maieſties vſe, at the ſame receipt, ye reſidue of his collection & charge within one moneth next after ſuch time, as he ſhal haue gathered & collected the ſame reſidue that then ye ſaid recogniſance or obligation to be voide, or els to ſtand in his ful ſtrength and vertue, which recogniſance or obligation, ſo taken, the ſaid knightes of the Shyre, Citizens and Burgeſſes, and euery of them, taking any ſuch recogniſaunces or obligation, ſhal certifie & deliuer to the lord Treaſourer, & Barons of the ſame Exchequer, before the ſaid tenth day of Nouember, in euery of the ſaid yeres, vpon paine of forfeyture often pound to the queens highnes, for euery recogniſaunce or obligation, ſo to be taken, and not certified. And that euery ſuche Collectour vpon requeſt to him made, ſhall make and knowledge the ſame recogniſaunce or obligation accordingly▪ vpon like paine & forfeyture of ten pound to the Queene, for his refuſal thereof. And that ye Treaſurer or Barons of thexchequer, vppon the paiment of the ſame collection, or at the ſayd days, ſhall cancell and deliuer the ſayde recogniſaunce or obligation to the ſaide Collectour or Collectours, without any fee or rewarde, to be paide to any perſon for the ſame.
               And furthermore, for the great and waightie conſyderations aforeſayde, We the Lordes Spirituall and Temporall, and the Commons in this preſent Parliament aſſembled, do by our lyke aſſent and aucthoritie of this Parliament, geue and graunt to your hyghnes, our ſaid Soueraigne Lady, the Queenes Maieſtie, your heires and ſucceſſours, one entire ſubſidie, to be rated, taxed leuied, and payd at two ſeuerall paymentes, of euery perſon, ſpirituall and temporall, of what eſtate, or degree he or they be, according to the tenor of this acte, in maner & fourme folowyng, that is to ſay, aſwell of euery perſon borne within this Realme of Englande, Wales, or other the Queenes dominions, as of al & euery Fraternitie, Guild, Corporation, Miſterie, Brotherhead, & Cominaltie, corporated, or not corporated

within this realme of England, Wales, or other the Queenes domonions, beyng worth .v.li. for euerye pounde, aſwell in coyne and the value of euery pound that euery ſuch perſon, fraternite, guylde, corporation, myſterie, brotherhead, comminaltie, corporate, or not corporate, hath of his or their owne, or anye other to his or their vſe, as alſo ſtocke of marchaundizes, all manner of corne and blades, houſeholde ſtuffe, and of all other goodes moueable, aſwell within the Realme as without, and of all ſuch ſummes of money as to hym or them is, or ſhalbe owyng, wherof he or they truſt in his or their conſcience ſurelye to be payde (except and out of the premiſſes deducted) ſuche ſummes of money as he or they owe, and in his or their conſciences intendeth truely to pay, and except alſo thapparrell of ſuche perſons, their wyues and chyldren belongyng to their owne bodyes (ſauyng Iewels, golde, ſyluer, ſtone, and pearle) ſhall paye to and for the firſte payment of the ſayde ſubſidie .xx.d. of euery pound, and to and for the ſecond payment of the ſayde ſubſidie .xii.d. of euery pounde. And alſo euery alien and ſtraunger borne out of the Queenes obeyſaunce, aſwell denizen as others, inhabiting within this Realme, of euery pounde that he or they haue in coyne, and the value of euery pound in plate, corne, grayne, marchandizes, houſhold ſtuffe, or other goodes, iewels, cattels, moueable or vnmoueable, as is aforſayde, aſwell within this Realme as without, and of all ſummes of money to hym or them owyng, wherof he or they truſt in his or their conſciences to be payde (except and of the ſame premiſſes deducted, euery ſuche ſumme or ſummes of money, which he or they do owe, and in his or their conſcience or conſciences intende truely to pay) ſhall pay of and fore euerye pounde, to and for the fyrſt payment of the ſayde ſubſidie .iii.s.iiii.d. and to and for the ſecond payment of the ſaid ſubſidie .ii.s. of euery pound. And alſo that euerye alien and ſtraunger, borne out of the Queenes dominions, beyng denizen or not denizen, not beyng contributorie to anye the rates aboueſayde, ſhall pay to and for the firſte payment of the ſayde ſubſidie .iiii.d. and to and for the ſecond payment of the ſayde ſubſidie other .iiii.d. for euery pole. And the maiſter, or he or ſhe with whom the ſame alien is, or ſhalbe abyding at the tyme of the taxation or taxations therof to be charged with the ſame for lacke of payment thereof.
               AND be it further enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that euery perſon borne vnder the Queenes obeiſaunce, and euery corporation fraternitie, guylde, myſterie, brotherhead, and comminaltie corporate, or not corporate, for euerye pounde that euerye of the ſame perſon, and euerye corporation, fraternitie, guylde, myſterie, brotherheade, and comminaltie, corporate or not corporate, or anye other to his or their vſe, hath in fee ſimple, fee tayle, for tearme of lyfe, tearme of yeres, by execution, wardeſhippe, or by copie of court rolle, of, and in anye Honours, Caſtels, Manours, Landes, Tenementes, Rentes,

ſeruices, hereditamentes, annuities, fees, corrodies, or other yerelye profites of the yerelye value of .xx.s. aſwell within auncient demeane and other places priuiledged, or els where, and ſo vpwardes ſhall pay to and for the firſte payment of the ſayde ſubdie .ii.s.viii.d. of and for euery pounde, and to and for the ſeconde payment of the ſayde ſubſidie xvi.d. of & for euery pound. And euery alien borne out of the Queenes obeyſaunce, in ſuche caſe, to paye at the firſte of the ſayde paymentes v.s.iiii.d. of euery pound, and at the ſecond payment .ii.s.viii.d. of and for euerye pound. And that all ſummes preſented and chargeable by this acte eyther for goodes, and debtes, or eyther of them, or for landes and tenementes, and other the premiſſes as is in this acte conteyned, ſhalbe at eyther of the ſayde paymentes, ſet and taxed after the rate and portion, accordyng to the true meanyng of this acte (landes and tenementes chargeable to the diſmes of the Cleargie, and yerelye wages due to ſeruauntes for their yerely ſeruice, other then the Queenes ſeruauntes, takyng yerelye wages of fyue poundes or aboue, onlye excepted and forepriſed.) And that al plate, coyne, iewels, goodes, debtes, and cattelles perſonelles, beyng in the rule and cuſtodie of anye perſon and perſons to the vſe of any corporation, fraternitie, guylde, myſterie, brotherhead, or anye comminaltie, being corporate or not corporate, be and ſhalbe rated, ſet, and charged by reaſon of this acte, as the value certified by the preſenters of that certificate, to be ſworne of euery pound in goodes and debtes, as is aboueſayde. And of euery pounde in landes, tenementes, annuities, fees, corrodyes, or other yerely profites as is aboueſayde: and the ſummes that are before rehearſed, ſet, and taxed, to be leuyed and taken of them that ſhall haue ſuch goodes in cuſtody, or otherwiſe charged for landes as is before rehearſed. And the ſame perſon or perſons, and body corporate, by aucthoritie of this acte ſhalbe diſcharged agaynſt him or them that ſhall or ought to haue the ſame, at the time of the payment or deliuerie therof, or at his otherwyſe departure from the cuſtodie or poſſeſſion of the ſame. Except and alwayes forepriſed from the charge and aſſeſſement of this ſubſidie, all goodes, cattelles, iewels, and ornamentes of Churches and Chappels, whiche haue ben ordeyned and vſed in Churches or Chappels, for the honour and ſeruice of almyghtie God.
               AND the firſt payment of the ſaide ſubſidie, ſhalbe by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, taxed, aſſeſſed, and rated according to this acte, in euery Shire, Riding, Lathe, Wapentake, Rape, Citie, Borough, Towne, and euery other place within this realme of England and Wales, and other the Queenes dominions, before the laſt day of Aprill nexte comming. And the ſecon̄d paiment of the ſaid ſubſidie, ſhalbe by thaucthoritie aforeſaid, taxed, aſſeſſed, & rated, before the .xx. day of Ianuary next cōming. And ye perticuler ſummes of euery Shire, Riding, Borough, Towne, and other places aforeſaid, with the perticuler names of ſuch

as are chargeable for and to the firſte payment of the ſayde ſubſidie, to be taxed and ſet by the Commiſſioners to the ſame limited, or two of them at the leaſt, with the names of the hygh Collectours, and in the ſame fourme ſhalbe certifed into the Queenes Exchequer, before the laſt day of May next commyng. And the perticuler ſummes of euerye Shyre, Rydyng, Borough, Towne, and other places aforeſayde, with the perticuler names of ſuche as are chargeable for and to the ſeconde payment of the ſaid ſubſidie, to be taxed and ſet by the Commiſſioners to the ſame to be limited, or two of them at the leaſt, with the names of the hygh Collectours, & in the ſame fourme ſhalbe certified into the Queenes Exchequer, before the .xx. day of February, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lord God .M.D.lix. and the ſaide ſummes in maner & fourme aforeſaid, to be taxed for the firſt payment of the ſayde ſubſidie, ſhalbe payde into the Queenes receipt of her Exchequer aforeſayde, to the vſe of our ſayd ſoueraigne Lady, before the .xxiiii. day of Iune next comming, and the ſayd ſummes in maner and fourme aforeſayd, to be taxed for the ſecond paiment of the ſaid ſubſidie, ſhalbe payde into the receipte aforeſayd, to the vſe aforeſayd, before the firſte daye of March, which ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God. M.D.lir. And the ſumme aboueſayde, of and for the ſayde ſubſidie, ſhalbe taxed, ſet, aſked, and demaunded, taken, gathered, leuied, and paide to thuſe of our ſayde ſoueraigne Lady, her heyres, and ſucceſſours, in fourme aboueſaid, aſwell within the liberties, fraunchiſes, ſanctuaries, auncient demeane, and other whatſoeuer place exēpt or not exempt, as without. Except ſuche Shyres, places, and perſons as ſhalbe forepriſed in & by this preſent acte, any graunt, charter, preſcription, vſe, or libertie, by reaſon of any letters patentes or other priuiledge, preſcription, alowaunce, of the ſame or whatſoeuer other mater of diſcharge heretofore to the contrary made, graunted, vſed, or obteyned, notwithſtandyng.
               AND it is further enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent parliament, that euery ſuch perſon, aſwel ſuch as be borne vnder the Queenes obeyſaunce, as euery other perſon, ſtrange borne, denizen, or not denizen, inhabiting within this realme, or within Wales, or other the Queenes dominions, which at the tyme of the ſayd aſſeſſinges, or taxations, or of either of them, to be had or made, ſhalbe out of this realme and out of Wales, and haue goodes or cattels, landes or tenementes, fees or annuities, or other profites within this Realme, or in Wales, ſhalbe charged and chargeable for the ſame, by the certificate of the inhabitauntes, or the parties where ſuch goodes, cattelles, landes, tenements, or other the premiſſes then ſhalbe, or in ſuch other place where ſuch perſō or his factour, deputie, or atturney, ſhal haue his moſt reſort vnto, within this realme, or in Wales, in lyke maner as if the ſaid perſō were, or had ben at the time of the ſaid aſſeſſing within this realme. And yt euery perſō abiding or dwelling within this realme or without

this Realme ſhalbe charged or chargeable to the ſame ſubſidie graunted by this acte, accordyng and after the rate of ſuche yerely ſubſtaunce or value of landes and tenementes, goodes, cattels, and other the premiſſes, as euery perſon ſo to be charged ſhalbe ſet at, in the tyme of the ſayde aſſeſſyng or taxation vpon hym to be made, & in none otherwyſe.
               AND further be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that for thaſſeſſyng and orderyng of the ſayde ſubſidie to be duely had, the Lorde Chauncellour of Englande, or the keper of the great Seale, the the Lord Treaſourer of England, the Lord Steward of the Queenes Maieſties houſholde, the Lorde preſident of the Queenes honourable counſell, and the Lord priuie Seale for the tyme beyng, or two them at the leaſte, whereof the Lorde Chauncellour of Englande, or keper of the great Seale for the tyme beyng to be one, ſhall and maye name and appoynt, of, and for euerye Shyre, and Riding, and other places, aſwell within this Realme, as in Wales, and other the Queenes dominions, and alſo of and for euery Citie & Towne, being a Countie in it ſelfe, and of, and for the Iſle of Wyght, ſuche certayne number of perſons of euerye of the ſame Shyres, Rydynges, Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes, Cities, Townes, and Iſle of Wyght, and euerye other place, and other thinhabitaunts of the ſame, to be Commiſſioners of, and within the ſame whereof they be inhabitauntes. And alſo, of and for the honourable houſholde of the Queenes Maieſtie, in what Shyre or other places the ſaid houſhold ſhall happen then to be. And the Lorde Chauncellour or keper of the greate Seale, and other with hym before named, in lyke maner maye name and appoynte of euery other ſuch Borough and Towne corporate, aſwel in Englande as in Wales, and other the Queenes dominions, as they ſhall thinke requiſit .vi.v.iiii.iii. or .ii. of the head officers, & other ſad honeſt inhabitauntes of euery of the ſaide Cities, Boroughes, and Townes corporate, accordyng to the number and multitude of the people beyng in the ſame, the whiche perſons if anye ſuche be thereunto named, of the ſayde inhabitauntes of the ſayde Boroughes and Townes corporate, not beyng Counties in them ſelues, ſhalbe ioyned and put in as Commiſſioners, with the perſons named for ſuche Shyres and Rydynges, as the ſayde Boroughes and Townes corporate, not beyng Counties in them ſelues, be ſet and haue their beyng, whiche perſons ſo named for and of the ſayde Boroughes and Townes corporate, not beyng Counties, by reaſon of their dwelling in the ſame, ſhall no take vpon them, ne none of them, to put any parte of their commiſſion in execution, for the premiſſes out of the ſayde Boroughes and Townes corpoporate, wherein they beyng ſo named, onlye for the ſame be dwelling. And alſo no to execute the ſayde commiſſion within the Borough or Towne corporat where they be ſo dwelling, but at ſuch daies & times as the ſaid other Commiſſioners, for the ſame Shire and Ryding ſhal

thereunto limit and appoint within the ſame Borough, or Towne corporate, not being Countie corporate, whereof they ſo be, and not out of ſuch Borough or Towne, and in that maner to be ayding and aſſiſting with the ſaid other Commiſſioners, in and for the good executing of theffect of the ſaide Commiſſion, vpon paine of euery of the ſaide Commiſſioners ſo named for euery ſuche Citie, Borough, and Towne corporate, not being a Countie, to make ſuch fine, as ye ſaide other Commiſſionrs, in the commiſſion of, and for the ſaide Shyre or Riding ſo named, or three of them at the leaſt, ſhall by their diſcretions, ſet and certifie into the queenes Exchequer, there to be leuied to the vſe of ye queenes maieſtie, in like maner, as ſuch or like ſummes had ben ſet and rated vppon euery ſuch perſon for the ſaid ſubſidie. The which Commiſſioners ſo named of, and for the ſaid Cities Boroughes, and Townes, not being Counties, & onlye put in the ſayde commiſſion, by reaſon of their dwelling in the ſame, ſhall not haue any part of the portion, of the fees and rewardes of the Commiſſioners, and their Clarkes, in this acte afterward ſpecified. And the Lorde Chauncelour of Englande, or keper of the great ſeale for the time beyng, ſhall make and dyrect out of the Court of Chauncerie, vnder the great ſeale, ſeuerall commiſſions, that is to ſay, To euerye Shyre, Ridyng; Lath, Wapentake, Rape, Citie, Towne, Borough, Iſle, and houſholde, vnto ſuch perſon and perſons, as by his diſcretion and other with him aforenamed and aypoynted, in lyke maner and fourme as is afore rehearſed, ſhalbe thought ſufficient for the ſeſſing and leuying of the ſaide ſubſidie, in all Shires and places, accordyng to the true meaning of this acte, which Commiſſion for the firſt payment of the ſayde ſubſidie, ſhalbe dyrected and deliuered to the ſayde Commiſſioners, or to one of them, before the fyrſt day of Aprill next comming. And the Commiſſion for the ſeconde payment of the ſayde ſubſidie, ſhalbe dyrected and deliuered to the ſayd Commiſſioners, or one of them, before the fyrſt day of Ianuarie, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God, a thouſande, fiue hundred, fiftie and nine. And to euery of the ſaide Commiſſions, ten ſcedules conteyning in them, the tenor of this acte, ſhalbe affiled. By which commiſſion the Commiſſioners in euery ſuch Commiſſion, named accordyng to this acte, & as many of them, as ſhalbe appoynted by the ſaid Commiſſion, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie, to put theffect of the ſame commiſſion in execution. And that by aucthoritie of this act, after ſuch Cōmiſſion to them directed, they may by their aſſentes & agreementes ſeuer them ſelues for the recution of their cōmiſſion, in Hundredes, Lathes, Wardes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Townes, Pariſhes, and other places, within the limites of their ſaid commiſſion, in ſuch fourme as to them ſhal ſeme expediēt to be ordered, & betwene them to be cōmoned and agreed, accordyng to the tenor and effect

of the commiſſion to them therein dyrected, vpon which ſeueraunce euery perſon of this preſent Parliament, that ſhalbe Commiſſioner ſhalbe aſſigned in the hundred where he dwelleth.
               Prouided alwayes, that no perſon, be or ſhalbe compelled to be any Commiſſioner, to and for the execution of this preſent acte, but only in the Shyre, where he dwelleth and inhabiteth. And that anye perſon beyng aſſigned to the contrary thereof, in any wyſe ſhall not be compelled to put in execution the effecte of this acte, or anye part thereof. And it is alſo enacted by the aucthoritie of this preſent Parliament, that the Commiſſioners and euery of them, which ſhal be named, limited, and appoynted accordyng to this acte, to be Commiſſioners in euery ſuch Shyre, Rydyng, Lath, Wapentake, Rape, Citie, Towne, Borough, Iſle, and the ſayde houſeholde, or anye other place, and none other, ſhall truely, effectually, and diligently for theyr part, execute theffect of this preſent acte, accordyng to the tenor thereof in euerye behalfe, and none otherwyſe, by anye other meanes, without omiſſion, fauour, dread, malice, or any other thing to be attempted, and done by them, or anye of them to the contrarye thereof. And the ſayde Commiſſioners, and as manye of them as ſhalbe appoynted by the ſayde Commiſſion, and none other, for thexecution of the ſayde commiſſion and acte, ſhall for the taxation of the ſayde firſt payment of the ſaide ſubſidie, before the ſixt day of Aprill, next comming: and for the taxation of the ſayde ſeconde payment of the ſayde Subſidie, ſhall before the ſixt day of Ianuarie, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lorde God, a thouſande, fiue hundred, fiftie & nine, by vertue of the commiſſions, deliuered vnto them in fourme aboueſayde: directe their ſeuerall or ioynt precept vnto .viii.vii.vi.v. iiii. or .iii. or mo, as for the number of thinhabitants, ſhalbe requiſit of the moſt ſubſtantiall, diſcrete, & honeſt perſons, inhabitances, to be named by the ſaide Commiſſioners, or by as many of them as ſhalbe appoynted by the ſaide Commiſſion, of, and in Hundredes, Lathes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Wardes, Pariſhes, Townes, & other places, aſwell within Liberties, Franchiſes, auncient demeanes, places exempted, and Sanctuaries, as without, within the limites of the Shyres, Ridinges, Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes, Cities, Townes, Boroughes, or Iſle aforeſayd, and other places, within the limits of their commiſſion, and to ye Conſtables, Subconſtables, Bayliffes, & other like officers, or miniſters of euery of ye ſaide Hūdreds, Townes, Wardes, Lathes, Wapētakes, Pariſhes, and other places beforeſaid, as to ye ſaid cōmiſſioners, and euery number of them, or vnto three, or two of them by their diſcretion in diuiſion ſhal ſeme expedient, as by the maner & vſe of ye parties ſhalbe requiſit, ſtraightly by ye ſame precept, charging & commaundyng the ſame inhabitantes, conſtables, and other officers aforeſaide, to whom ſuch precept ſhalbe ſo directed

to appeare in their proper perſons, before ye ſaide Commiſſioners, or ſuch number of them as they ſhal diuide them ſelues, accordyng to ye tenor of the ſaid cōmiſſion, at certaine dayes & places by the ſaid commiſſioners or any number of them as is aforeſaid, within cities, boroughes, or townes corporate, or without, in any other place as is aforeſayd, by their diſcretions ſhalbe limited thereunto to do & accompliſh al that to them on the parties of the queenes Maieſtie, ſhalbe enioyned touchyng this acte. Commaundyng further by ye ſame precept, that he to whoſe handes ſuch precept ſhall come, ſhall ſhewe or deliuer the ſame to thother inhabitauntes or officers named in the ſaid precept, & that none of them fayle to accompliſhe the ſame, vpon payne of fourtie ſhillinges, to be forfeyted to the Queenes Maieſtie.
               And it is further ordeyned by the aucthoritie of this preſent parliament, that the ſaid day and place prefixed & limited in the ſayde precept, euery of the Cōmiſſioners then beyng in the ſhyre, & hauyng no ſufficient excuſe for his abſence, at ye day & place prefixed for that part whereunto he was limited, ſhal appeare in his proper perſon, & there the ſame cōmiſſioners being preſent, or as many as ſhalbe appointed by ye queenes Maieſties cōmiſſion, ſhal cal or cauſe to be called before them the ſaide inhabitauntes & officers to whom they haue directed their ſaid precepts; & which had in cōmaundements there to appeare by ye ſaid precept of the ſaide Cōmiſſioners, & if any perſon ſo warned make default, vnles he then be letted by ſickneſſe or lawfull excuſe, & that let them be witneſſed by ye othes of two credible perſons, or if any appearing refuſe to be ſworne in forme folowing, to forfeit to the Queenes Maieſtie .xl.s. And ſo at euery time appoynted by the ſayd Commiſſioners for the ſame taxation, vnto ſuch time the number of euery ſuch perſons haue appeared & certified in fourme vnder wryten, and euery of them ſo makyng default, or refuſing to be ſworne, to forfeyte to the Queenes Maieſtie .xl.s. and vpon the ſame appearaunce had, one of the moſt ſubſtanciall inhabitauntes or officer ſo being warned, and appearing before the ſaid Commiſſioners, ſhalbe ſworne vpon a booke openly before ye Commiſſioners in fourme folowyng. I ſhall truely enquire with my felowes that ſhalbe charged with me, of the Hundred, Wapentake, Ward, Towne, or other place of the beſt and moſt ſo alue of the ſubſtaunce of euery perſon dwelling and abydyng within the limits of the place that I and my felowes ſhalbe charged with, and of other which ſhall haue his or their moſt reſort vnto any of the ſaide places, & chargeable with any ſumme of money by this acte of this ſaide ſubſidie, & of all other articles that I ſhalbe charged with touching the ſaide acte, and accordyng to the intent of the ſame, and thereupon as nere as it may be, or ſhall come to my knowledge, truely to preſent and certifie before you the names,

ſurnames, and the beſte and vttermoſte ſubſtaunce, and values of euery of them, aſwell of landes, tenementes, & other hereditaments, poſſeſſions, and profites, as of goodes, cattels, debtes, & other things, chargeable by the ſaid acte, without any conceilement, loue, fauour, affection, dread, feare, or malice, as nere as God wyll geue me grace, ſo helpe me God, & the holy contentes of this booke. And euery other perſon that ſhal appeare there by ye ſame precepts, from time to time, ſhal make like oth, and vpon the oth ſo taken as is aforeſayde, by the inhabitantes and officers of euery Hundredes, Warde, Wapentake, Towne, or other place, the ſaid Cōmiſſioners ſhal openly there reade or cauſe to be read vnto them the ſaide rates, & openly declare theffect of their charge vnto them, in what maner & fourme they ought and ſhould make their certificate, accordyng to the rates & ſummes therof aboueſayd. And of al maner of perſons, aſwell of aliens & ſtraungers, denizens or not denizens, inhabiting within this Realme, as of ſuch perſons as be borne vnder ye Queenes obeyſance, chargeable to this acte. And of the poſſeſſions, goodes, and cattelles of Fraternities, Guyldes, Corporations, Brotherheades, Myſteries, & Comminalties, and other as is aboueſayde. And of perſons being in the parties of beyond the ſeas, hauyng goodes or cattelles, landes, or Tenementes within this Realme, as is aforeſaid. And of al goodes, being in the cuſtody of any perſon or perſons, to the vſe of any other, as is aboueſayde, by the which information and ſhewyng, the ſaid perſons ſhould haue ſuch plaine knowledge of the true intent of this preſent acte, and of the maner of their certificate, that the ſame perſons ſhal haue no reaſonable cauſe to excuſe them by ignoraunce, & after ſuch othe, and the ſtatute of the ſayde ſubſidie, and the maner of the ſayde certificate to be made in writing, conteyning the names & ſurnames of euery perſon, and whether he be borne without the queenes obeyſaunce, or within, & the beſt value of euery perſon, in euery degree, as well of yerely value of landes, & tenementes, & of ſuch lyke poſſeſſion and profites, as ye value of goodes, & cattels, debtes, and euery thing to their certificat requiſite & neceſſarie to them declared, the ſaid commiſſioners there being, ſhal by their diſcretions appoint & limit vnto the ſaide perſons, another day & place to appeare before the ſaid commiſſioners, & charging the ſaid perſons, that they in the meane tyme ſhal make diligent inquirie by al wayes and meanes of the premiſſes and then & there, euery of them, vppon paine of forfeyture of .xl.s. to the queenes Maieſtie, to appeare at the ſaide newe prefixed day and place, there to certifie vnto the ſaid Cōmiſſioners in wryting, accordyng to their ſaid charge, and accordyng to the true intent of the ſaid graunt of ſubſidie, & as to them in maner aforeſaide, hath ben declared and ſhewed by the Commiſſioners, at which day and place ſo to

them prefixed, if any of the ſayd perſons make dafault or appeare and refuſe to make the ſayde certificate, that then euery of them ſo offending, to forfayt to ye Queenes Maieſtie .xl.s. except only a reaſonable excuſe of his default, by reaſō of ſicknes, or otherwyſe by the othes of two credible perſons, there witneſſed be had. And of ſuch as appeare redy to make certificate as is aforeſayde, the ſayde Commiſſioners ther beyng, ſhall take and receaue the ſame certificate, & euery part therof, and the names, values, and ſubſtaunce of euery perſon ſo certified, and yf the ſame Commiſſioners ſee cauſe reaſonable, they ſhall examine the ſayde preſenters thereof. And thervpon the ſayde Commiſſioners, at the ſayde dayes and place by their agreement amongſt them ſelues, ſhall from tyme to tyme, openly there prefixe a day, at a certayne place or places, within the limites of their commiſſion, by their diſcretion, for their further proceeding to the ſayde aſſeſſing of the ſame ſubſidie, and thervpon at the ſayd day of the ſaid certificate, as is aforeſayde taken, the ſame Commiſſioners ſhall make their precept or precepted to the Conſtables, Subconſtable, Baylyffes, or other officers of ſuch Hundredes, Wapentakes, Townes, or other places aforeſayde, as the ſame Commiſſioners ſhalbe of, compriſing and conteyning in the ſame precept, the names, and ſurnames of all perſons preſented before them in the ſayd certificate, of whom if the ſaid Commiſſioners, or as many of them, as ſhalbe therevnto appoynted by the Queenes commiſſion, ſhall then haue vehement ſuſpect to be of more greater value or ſubſtaunce in landes, goodes, cattelles, or ſummes of money owing to them, or other ſubſtaunce beforeſayde, then vpon ſuch perſon or perſons ſhalbe certified, the ſame Commiſſioners ſhall make their precept or preceptes, directed to the Conſtable, Baylyffes, or other officers, commaundyng the ſame Conſtable, Bailiffes, or other officers, to whom ſuche precept ſhalbe directed to warne ſuche perſons whoſe names ſhalbe compriſed in the ſayd precept, at their manſions, or to their perſons, that the ſame perſons named in ſuche preceptes, and euery of them, ſhal perſonally appeare before the ſaid Commiſſioners, at the ſame newe prefixed day & place there to be examined by all wayes and meanes, (other then by corporall othe) by the ſayde Commiſſioners, of their greateſt ſubſtaunce, and beſt value, and of all & euery ſummes of money owyng to them, and other whatſoeuer matter concernyng the premiſſes, or any of them accordyng to this acte, at which day and place ſo prefixed, the ſayde Commiſſioners, then and there beyng, or as many of them as ſhalbe thervnto appoynted, by the Queenes commiſſion, ſhall cauſe to be called the ſayde perſons, whoſe names ſhalbe compriſed in the ſayde precept, as is beforeſayde, for their examination. And yf any

of thoſe perſons whiche ſhoulde be warned, as is beforeſayde, to be examined, which at any tyme after the warnyng, and before the prefixed day, ſhalbe within ſuche place, where he may haue knowledge of his ſayde appearaunce to be made, make default, and appeare not, vnleſſe a reaſonable cauſe, or els a reaſonable excuſe by the othes of two credible perſons, before the ſayde Commiſſioners, be truely alleged for his diſcharge, that then euery of them, ſo makyng default, to be taxed and charged to the Queenes Maieſtie, with and at the double ſummes of the rate that he ſhould or ought to haue ben ſet at, for and after the beſt value of his land or ſubſtaunce, vpon hym certified, yf he had appeared by the diſcretion of the Commiſſioners there beyng, whiche Commiſſioners ſhall trauell with euery of the other perſons, ſo then and there appearing, whoſe names ſhalbe expreſſed in the ſaide precept or preceptes, and in whom any vehement ſuſpect was or ſhalbe had in fourme aboueſayde, by all ſuch wayes and meanes they can, other then by corporall othe, for their better knowledge of theyr beſt value, eyther in hereditamentes or poſſeſſions, eyther els in goodes or debts. And that euery ſpirituall perſon, at eyther of the ſayde taxations, of the ſayde ſubſidie, ſhalbe rated and ſet accordyng to the rate aboueſayde, of, and for euery pounde that the ſame ſpirituall perſon, or any other to his vſe, hath by diſcent, bargayne, or purchaſe, in fee ſimple, fee tayle, terme of lyfe, terme of yeres, by execution, by warde or by copie of court roll, in any manours, landes, tenementes, rentes, ſeruices, offices, fees, corrodies, annuities, or hereditamentes, after the true iuſt and yerely value thereof, after and accordyng as other the Queenes Maieſties ſubiectes borne within this Realme, be charged in fourme aboue remembred, ſo that it extende to the yerely value of .xx.s. or aboue. And if any perſon certified or rated by vertue of this acte, be he Commiſſioner, or other, to any maner of value, doth fynde hym ſelfe greeued with the ſame preſentment, ſeſſing, of taxyng, and therevppon complayne to the Commiſſioners, before whom he ſhalbe rated, ſeſſed, or taxed, or before two of them: That then the ſayde Commiſſioners, ſhall by all wayes and meanes, examine perticulerly and diſtinctly the perſon ſo complayning, and other his neighbours by their diſcretion, of euerye his landes, and tenementes aboue ſpecified, and of euery his goodes, cattelles, and debtes aboue mentioned, and after due examination and perfit knowledge thereof, had and perceaued by the ſayde Commiſſioners, whiche ſhall haue power by the aucthoritie aforſayde: the ſayd Commiſſioners, or two of them, to whom any ſuche complaynt ſhalbe made, by their diſcretions, vppon the othe of the ſayde perſon ſo complaynyng,

may abate, defaulke, encreaſe, or enlarge the ſame aſſeſſement, accordyng as it ſhall appeare vnto them iuſt, vpon the ſame examination. And the ſame ſumme, ſo abated, defaulked, encreaſed, or enlarged, to be eſtreated in fourme as hereafter enſueth. So that he come before the eſtreates of the ſame aſſeſſing, be deliuered by the ſame Commiſſioners into the Queenes Maieſties Exchequere. And if it be proued by witnes, his owne confeſſion, or other lawfull wayes or meanes, within a yere after any ſuche othe made, that the ſame perſon ſo taxed & ſworne was of any better or greater value in landes, goodes, or other thinges aboue ſpecified, at the tyme of his ſayde othe, then the ſame perſon ſo ſworne dyd declare vpon his ſayd othe. That then euery ſuch perſon ſo offendyng ſhall loſe and forfayte to the Queenes maieſtie ſo muche in in lawfull money of Englande, as the ſame perſon ſo ſworne was ſet at or taxed to pay, and all perſons, ſet, rated, and taxed as is aboueſayd, ſhalbe bound and charged by the ſame, & the ſumme or ſummes vpon hym ſet, to be due towardes the payment of the ſayde ſubſidie, and to be leuied as hereafter ſhalbe ſecified.
               AND alſo it is enacted by the ſame aucthoritie, that euery perſon to be rated at the ſayde taxation, as is aforeſayde, ſhalbe rated, taxed, and ſet, and the ſumme on hym ſet, to be leuied at ſuche place where he and his family, at the tyme of the ſame preſentment to be made, ſhal kepe his houſe or dwelling, or where he then ſhalbe moſt conuerſaunt, abyding, or reſtaunt, or ſhal haue his moſt reſort, & ſhalbe beſt knowen at the tyme of the ſayde certificate to be made, and no where els, and that no Commiſſioner for this ſubſidie, ſhalbe rated or taxed for his goodes, or landes, but in the Shyre and other place where he ſhalbe Commiſſioner, and that if anye perſon chargeable to this acte, at the tyme of the ſame aſſeſſing, happen to be out of this Realme, and out of Wales, or farre form the place where he ſhalbe knowen, then he to be ſet where he was laſte abydyng in this Realme, or within Wales, and beſt knowen, and after the ſubſtaunce and value, and other profites of euerye perſon, knowen by the examination, certificate, and other maner of wyſe as is aforeſayde. The ſayde Commiſſioners or as manye of them as ſhalbe appoynted by the Queenes Maieſties Commiſſion, ſhall after the rate aforeſayde, ſet, and taxe euery perſon accordyng to the rate of the ſubſtaunce and value of his landes, goodes, and other profites, whereby the greateſt and moſte beſt ſumme accordyng to his moſte ſubſtaunce, by reaſon of this acte, myght or maye be ſet or taxed.
               Prouided alwayes that euerye ſuche perſon, whiche ſhalbe ſet or taxed for payment of and to this ſubſidie, for and after the yerely value of his landes, tenementes, and other reall poſſeſſions or profites, at any of the ſayde taxation, ſhall not be ſet and taxed, for his goodes and

cattels, or other moueable ſubſtaunce at the ſame taxations. And that he that ſhall be charged or taxed for the ſame Subſidye, for hys goodes, cattels, and other moueables, at anye if the ſayd taxations, ſhall not be charged, taxed or chargeable for hys landes, or other reall poſſeſſions, and profites aboueſayd, at the ſame taxations, nor that anye perſon be double charged for the ſayde Subſidye, neither ſet or taxed at ſeuerall places by reaſon of this acte: any thing conteyned in this preſent acte, notwithſtanding.
               AND that it be ordeyned by the ſayde aucthoritie of this preſent Parliamente, that no perſon hauyng two manſions, or two places to reſorte vnto, or calling hym ſelfe houſholde ſeruaunte, or wayghtyng ſeruaunte to the Queenes Maieſtie, or other Lorde or Layde, Maiſter or Maiſtres, be excuſed vpon his ſaying, from the taxes of the ſayde ſubſidie, in neyther of the places where he may be ſet: vnleſſe he bryng a certificate in wrytyng from the Commiſſioners, where that he is ſo ſet in dede at one place. And if any perſon that ought to be ſet by reaſon of his remouyng or reſorting to two places, or by reaſon of his ſaying that he els where was taxed, or by reaſon of anye priuiledge by his dwellyng or abydyng in anye place, not beyng forpriſed in this acte, or otherwyſe by his couin or crafte, happen to eſcape from the ſayde taxations, and be not ſet, and that proued by preſentment, examination, or information, before the ſayde Commiſſioners, or as manye of them, as ſhalbe by the ſame commiſſion appoynted, or by the Barons of the Queenes Maieſties Exchequer, or two Iuſtices of the peace, of the Countie where ſuch perſon dwelleth, then euerye ſuch perſon, that by ſuch meanes or otherwyſe willingly by couin ſhal happen to eſcape from the ſayde taxation or payment aforeſayde, and not to be rated, taxed, and ſet, ſhalbe charged vpon the knowledge and proofe thereof, with and at the double value, that he ſhoulde or ought to haue ben ſet at afore, accordyng to his bahauiour. The ſame double value to be leuyed, gathered, and payd of his goodes and cattels, landes, and tenementes, towardes the ſayde ſubſidie. And further to be puniſhed accordyng to the diſcretions of the Barons, Iuſtices, and Commiſſioners, before whom he ſhalbe conuicted for his offence and deceipte in that behalfe.
               AND further be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the ſayde Commiſſioners or euerye commiſſion ſhall accordyng to their diuiſions, and after they be deuided, haue full power and aucthoritie by this acte, to ſet, taxe, and ſeſſe euerye other Commiſſioner, ioyned with them in euerye ſuche commiſſion and diuiſion. And ſhall alſo aſſeſſe euery aſſeſſour, within their diuiſion, for his and their goodes, landes, and other the premiſſes, as is

abouſeayde. By the which ſayde Commiſſion, the ſaid Commiſſioners ſhall indifferentlye ſet, taxe, and aſſeſſe them ſelues, and the ſayde aſſeſſours. And that aſwell the ſummes vpon euery of the ſayde Commiſſioners and aſſeſſours ſo ſeſſed, rated and taxed, as the ſummes made and preſented by the preſenters, ſworne as is aboueſayde, ſhalbe wrytten, certified, ſet, and eſtreated, and the eſtreates thereof to be made, with other the inhabitauntes of that parties, within the limits of the ſame commiſſion, and diuiſion, ſo to be gathered and leuyed, in lyke maner as it ought or ſhoulde haue ben, if the ſayde Commiſſioner had not ben in the ſayde commiſſion. And that all perſons of the eſtate of a Baron or Barons, and euerye eſtate aboue, ſhalbe charged with their free holde and value as is aboueſayde, by the Chauncellour, or keper of the greate Seale, Treaſurer of Englande, Lorde Preſident of the Queenes Maieſties priuie counſell, & Lord priuie Seale for the tyme being, or other perſons by the Queenes Maieſties aucthoritie to be limited, & they to be charged for the ſaide ſeuerall paymentes of the ſayd ſubſidie, after the fourme of the ſayd graunt, accordyng to the taxation aforeſaid, and the ſummes vppon them ſet, with the names of the Colloctours appoynted for the gathering & paying of the ſame, to be eſtreated, delyuered, and certified at dayes and places aboue ſpecified, by the Lorde Chauncellour or keper of the great Seale, Treaſurer, Lord preſident of the counſell, & Lord priuie Seale for the tyme beyng, or ſuche other perſons as ſhalbe limited by the Queenes Maieſtie. And after the taxes and aſſeſſes of the ſaid ſummes vpon and the ſaid aſſeſſing and certificate as is aforeſayde made, the ſayde Commiſſioners, or as many of them as ſhalbe thereunto appoynted by the Queenes Maieſties commiſſion, ſhal with all ſpede and without delay, by the writing eſtreated of the ſayde taxe thereof, vnder the ſeales and ſignes manuel of the ſaid Commiſſioners, or as may of them as ſhalbe appoynted at the leaſte to be made, ſhalbe delyuered vnto ſufficient and ſubſtantiall inhabitauntes, Conſtables, Subconſtables, Bayliffes and other officers, ioyntly of Hundredes, Townes, Pariſhes, and other places aforeſayd, within their limites, or to other ſufficient perſons inhabitauntes of the ſame only, by the diſcretion of the ſayde Commiſſioners, and as the place and parties ſhall require, aſwell the perticuler names & ſurnames, as the remembraunce of all ſummes of money, taxed and ſet, of, and vpon euery perſon, aſwell man as woman, chargeable to this act, houſholder, and all other inhabitauntes and dwellers within the ſayde Pariſhes, Townes, and places contributorie to this acte of ſubſidie. By aucthorite of which wrytyng or eſtreat ſo delyuered, the ſaid officers and other perſons ſo named and deputed ſeuerallye, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie by vertue of this acte, immediatly after the deliuery of the ſayde writing or eſtreat, to demaund, leuy, and gather of

euery perſon therein ſpecified, the ſumme or ſummes in the ſame wryting or eſtreate compriſed. And for none payment thereof, to diſtrayne the ſame perſon or perſons ſo beyng behynde by their goodes and cattels, and the diſtreſſe ſo taken, to kepe by the ſpace of .viii. dayes, at the coſtes and charges of the owner thereof. And if the ſaide owner do not pay ſuch ſumme of money as ſhalbe taxed by this act, within the ſame viii. dayes, then the ſame diſtreſſe to be apprayſed by .iiii.iii. or .ii. of the inhabitauntes where ſuch diſtreſſe is taken, and alſo to be ſolde by the ſaide Conſtable or other Collectour for the payment of the ſaid money, and the ouerplus commyng of the ſale and kepyng therof (if any be) to be immediatly reſtored to the owner of the ſame diſtreſſe, whiche ſayde officers and other perſons, ſo deputed to aſke, take, gather, and leuye the ſayd ſummes, ſhall aunſwere and be charged for the portion only to them aſſigned or limited to be gathered, leuied, and compryſed in the ſayde wrytyng or eſtreate ſo to them (as is aforeſayde) delyuered, to the vſe of our ſoueraigne Lady the Queenes maieſtie, her heires, & ſucceſſours. And the ſayd ſumme in that wryting or eſtreat compriſed to pay vnto the high Collectour or Collectours of that place for the collection of the ſame, in maner & fourme vnder written, therunto to be named & deputed, & the ſame inhabitauntes & officers ſo gathering ye ſame perticuler ſummes for their collectiō therof, ſhall reteine for euery .xx.s. ſo by them receaued and payd .ii.d. & that to be alowed at the payment of their collection by thē to be made to the high collectour or collectours.
               AND further be it enacted by the ſayde aucthoritie, that the ſayde Commiſſioners, or the more part of them as ſhall take vpon them the execution and buſyneſſe of the ſayde commiſſion, ſhall for eyther of the ſame paymentes of the ſaid ſubſidie, name ſuch ſufficient and albe perſons which then ſhall haue and poſſede landes & other hereditaments, in their owne ryght, of the yerely value of .xx.li. or goodes to the value of .CC. markes at the leaſte. And the perſons ſeuerallye be the diſcretions of the ſame Commiſſioners in Shires, Ridings, Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes, Cities, Townes corporat, & other whatſoeuer places, aſwel within places priuiledged as without, not beyng forepriſed within this act to be hygh Collectours, and haue the collection & receipt of the ſayd ſummes, ſet and leuiable within the precinct, limit, & bondes, where they ſhalbe ſo limited to gather, & receaue, to euery of the which Collectours ſo ſeuerally named, the ſaid Commiſſioners, or .ii. of them at leaſt, ſhal with all ſpede, & without delay, after the ſaid whole ſūme of the ſayd ſubſidie, be ſet by all the limites of the ſame their cōmiſſion or in ſuch limites as the hygh Collectours ſhalbe ſo ſeuerally aſſigned, ſhal vnder their ſeales and ſignes manuel, deliuer one eſtreat indented in parchment to euery of the ſayde high Collectours, compryſing in it the names of al ſuch perſons as were aſſigned to leuie the ſaid perticuler

ſummes, & the ſummes of euery Hundred, Wapentake, Towne, or other place aforeſayd, with the names and ſurnames of the perſons ſo chargeable, according to the eſtreat ſo firſt therof, made as is aforeſaid, and deliuered, and the Collectour ſo to be aſſigned, ſhalbe charged to aunſwere the whole ſumme compriſed in the ſayde eſtreate limited to his collection, as is aforeſayde.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the ſayd Commiſſioners hauing aucthoritie by this acte to name and nominate the ſaid hygh Collectours, of the ſayde ſubſidie, ſhal immediately vppon the nomination & election, take by aucthoritie of this preſent parliament, ſufficient recogniſaunces, or obligations, without any fee, or reward to be paid therfore of euerye perſon ſo by them to be named to be hygh Collectour, to be bounden to the Queenes maieſtie in the double ſumme of the ſumme of his collection, & to be endorſed and made vppon ſuche condition: that is to ſay, for the collection of the ſaid firſt paiment of ye ſaid ſubſidy, that if the ſaid Collectour his heires or executors, do truely content & pay, to thuſe of the Queenes maieſtie, her heyres or executors, in the receipt of the ſaid Exchequer, before the ſaid .xxiiii. day of Iune next comming, ſo muche of the ſayd ſumme of mony allotted & appointed to his collection, as he ſhal collect & gather, and content and pay the reſidue of his collection & charge, within one moneth nexte after ſuche tyme as he hath gathered and collected the ſame reſidue, that then the ſaid recogniſaunce or obligation to be voyde, or els to ſtand in full ſtrength and vertue. And for the collection of the ſecond payment of the ſayde ſubſidie, vppon condition that if the ſayde Collectour, his heyres or executours, do truely content and pay, to the vſe of the Queenes maieſtie, her heyres or executours, in her receipt of the Exchequer, before the firſt day of March, whiche ſhalbe in the yere of our Lord God .M.D.lix. ſo much of the ſaid ſumme of money allotted and appoynted to his collection, as he ſhall collect and gather, and content and pay the reſidue of his collection and charge, within one moneth next after ſuche time as he hath gathered & collected the ſame reſidue, that then the ſayde recogniſaunce or obligation to be voyde, or els to ſtande in full ſtrength and vertue, whiche ſaid ſeuerall recogniſaunces or obligations ſo taken, the ſaid Commiſſioners ſhall ſeuerally certifie, and deliuer into the Queenes maieſties Exchequer, with the ſeuerall certificates of the ſayde taxations and rates of the paymentes of the ſayde ſubſidie, at and by the time to them preſcribed and appoynted by this acte for the certificate of the ſaid ſeuerall taxations of the ſaid ſubſidy, vpon paine of forfeiture of .x.li. to the Queenes maieſtie, for euerye recogniſaunce or obligation not certified. And that euery ſuche Collectour ſo elected, named, and choſen, vppon requeſt to hym made, ſhall knowledge and make the ſayde recogniſaunce or

obligation, vppon lyke payne and forfayture of .x.li. to the Queenes Maieſtie, for the refuſall thereof, and euery Collectour ſo deputed, hauyng the ſayde eſtreate in parchement, as is aforeſayde, ſhall haue aucthorite by this acte, to appoynt dayes and places within the circuite of his collection, for the payment of the ſayde ſubſidie to him to be made, and therof to geue warnyng, by proclamation or otherwyſe, to all the Conſtables, or other perſons or inhabitauntes, hauyng the charge of the perticuler collection, within the Hundredes, Pariſhes, Townes, or other places, by him or them limited, to make payment for their ſaid perticuler collectiō of euery ſumme as to them ſhal apparteyne. And if at the ſaid day and place ſo limited and prefixed by the ſaid Collectour, the ſayde Conſtable, Officers, or other perſons or inhabitauntes, as is aforeſayde, for the ſayd perticuler collection aſſigned and appoynted within ſuch Hundred, Citie, Towne, or other places, do not paye vnto the ſayde Collectours, the ſumme within their ſeuerall Hundredes, Townes, Pariſhes, and other places, due and compriſed in the ſayde eſtreate thereof to them delyuered by the ſayd Commiſſioners, or ſome of them as is aforeſayd, or ſo much thereof as they haue by any meane receaued .ii.d. of euery pound for the ſayde perticuler collection as is aforeſayde, alwayes to be thereof alowed, excepted, & abated: that then it ſhalbe lawfull to the ſayde hygh Collectours and euerye of them, and to their aſſignes, to diſtrayne euery of the ſaide Conſtables, Officers, and other inhabitauntes for their ſaide ſeuerall and perticuler collection of the ſayde ſummes compriſed in the ſayde eſtreate, and wryting thereof, to them and euerye of them, as is before expreſſed, delyuered, or foraſmuch of the ſame ſumme as ſo then ſhall happen to be gathered & leuyed, and behynd and vnpayde by the goodes and cattels of euery of them ſo beyng behynde. And the diſtreſſe ſo taken, to be kept, apprayſed and ſolde as is aforeſaid, and thereof to take and leuye the ſummes ſo then beyng behind and vnpayd. And the ouerplus comming of the ſale of the ſayde diſtreſſe (if anye be) to be reſtored and deliuered vnto the owner, in fourme aboue remembred.
               Prouided alwayes, that no perſon inhabiting in anye Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate, ſhalbe compelled to be an aſſeſſour or Collectour, of, or for anye parte of the ſayde ſubſidie, in anye place or places out of the ſayde Citie, Borough, or Towne corporate where he dwelleth.
               AND it is alſo by the ſayde aucthoritie enacted, that if any inhabitaunt or officer, or whatſoeuer perſon or perſons, charged to and for the collection or receipt of any part of portion of the ſayde ſubſidie, by any maner of meanes, accordyng to this acte, or any perſon or perſons for them ſelues, or as keper, gardian, deputie, factour, or atturney, of or for any other perſon or perſons, of any goods and cattels of the owner

thereof at the tyme of the ſayde aſſeſſing to be made, beyng out of this Realme, or in anye other parties not knowen, or of, and for the goodes and cattels, of any other perſon or perſons, of any corporation, fraternitie, myſterie, or other whatſoeuer comminaltie, beyng incorporate or not incorporate, and all perſons hauyng in their rule, gouernaunce and cuſtodie, anye goodes, or cattels, at the tyme of the ſayde aſſeſſyng, or any of them to be made, or which for any cauſe, for and by collection, or for him ſelfe, or for any other, or by reaſon that he hath the rule, gouernaunce, or cuſtodie of anye goodes or cattels, of anye other perſon or perſons, corporation, comminaltie, fraternite, guilde, or myſterie, or anye ſuche other lyke, or as factour, deputie, or atturney, of or for any perſon, ſhalbe taxed, rated, valued, and ſet to any ſumme or ſummes by reaſon of this acte, and after the taxation or aſſeſſing vpon anye ſuche perſon or perſons as ſhalbe charged with the receipt of the ſame, happen to dye, or departe from the place where he was ſo taxed and ſet, or his goodes or cattels be ſo eloyned, or in ſuche priuie and couert maner kepte, as the ſayde perſon or perſons, charged with the ſame, by eſtreates, or other wrytinges, from the ſayd Commiſſioners, or as many of them as ſhalbe thereunto appoynted by the ſayde commiſſion, as is aforeſayde, can ne may leuie the ſame ſumme or ſummes compryſed within the ſame eſtreates, by diſtreſſe, within the limites of their collection, as is aforeſayde, or can not ſell ſuch diſtreſſe or diſtreſſes, as be taken for any of the ſayde paymentes, before the tyme limited to the hygh Collectour for his paymente to be made in the Queenes Maieſties receipt, then vpon relation thereof, with due examination, by the oth or examination of ſuch perſon or perſons, as ſhalbe charged with and for the receipte and collection of the ſame, before the ſayde Commiſſioners, or as many of them as by the ſayde commiſſion ſhalbe thereunto appoynted, where ſuch perſon or perſons, or other as is aforeſayde, their goodes and cattels, were ſet and taxed, and vppon playne certificate thereof made in the Queenes Maieſties Exchequer by the ſame Commiſſioners, aſwell of the dwellyng place, names, and ſummes of the ſayde perſons, of whome the ſayde ſummes can not be leuied and had as is aforeſayde, then aſwell the Conſtables and other inhabitauntes appoynted for the ſayd perticuler collection, agaynſt the hygh Collectours, as the hygh Collectour vppon his accompte and othe in the ſayde Exchequer to be diſcharged thereof, and proces to be made for the Queenes maieſtie, out of the ſaid Exchequer, by the diſcretion of the Barons of the ſayde Exchequer, agaynſt ſuche perſon, his heires or executors, ſo being behind with his paiment. And ouer that the ſame commiſſioners to whom any ſuch declaratiō of the premiſſes ſhalbe made in fourme aforeſaid, from time to time ſhal haue

full power and aucthoritie to direct their precept or preceptes vnto the ſayde perſon or perſons, charged with any ſumme, of for or vppon any ſuche perſon or perſons, or other as is aforeſayde, or to any Sheriffe, Stewarde, Bayliffe or other whatſoeuer officer, miniſter, perſon or perſons, of ſuche place or places where any ſuche perſon or perſons, ſo owing ſuch ſumme or ſummes, ſhal haue lands, & tenements, or other hereditamentes, or reall poſſeſſions, goodes & cattels, wherby any ſuch perſon or perſons ſo indebted, his heires, executours, or aſſignes, or other hauing the cuſtodie, gouernaunce, or diſpoſition, of any goodes, cattels, landes, or tenementes, or other hereditamentes, which ought or may by this acte lawfully be diſtrayned, or taken for the ſame, hath as ſhal haue goodes, cattels, landes, tenementes, or other poſſeſſions, whereof ſuch ſumme or ſummes, which by any ſuch perſon or perſons, may or ought to be leuyed, be it within the limites of ſuche Commiſſion, where ſuche perſon or perſons was and were taxed, or without in any place within this Realme of England, Wales, or other the Queenes Maieſties dominions, marches, or territories, by whiche precepte aſwell ſuche perſon or perſons as ſhalbe charged to leuye ſuch money, as the officers of the place or places, where ſuch diſtreſſe may be taken, ſhall haue full power and aucthoritie, to diſtrayne euery ſuche perſon, indebted, charged and chargeable by this acte, or his executours or adminiſtratours of his goodes and cattels, his gardians, factours, deputies, leaſſes, farmours, and aſſignes, and all other perſons by whoſe handes, or out of whoſe landes, any ſuch perſon ſhould haue rent, ſee, annuitie, or other profite, or which at the tyme of the ſayde aſſeſſinges, ſhal haue goodes, or cattels, or any other thyng moueable, of any ſuch perſon or perſons, beyng indebted, or owyng ſuche ſumme: and the diſtreſſe ſo taken, cauſed to be kept, apprayſed and ſolde, in lyke maner and fourme as is aforeſayde, for the diſtreſſe to be taken vppon ſuche perſons, to be taxed to the ſayde ſubſidie, and beyng ſufficient to diſtrayne within the limites of the Collectours inhabitauntes, or other officers, charged, with or for the ſame ſummes, ſo vpon them to be taxed. And if any ſuch diſtreſſe for non payment, happen to be taken out of the limit of the ſaide perſons, charged and aſſigned to leuye the ſame, the perſōs ſo charged for the leuy of any ſuch ſumme by diſtreſſe, ſhal perceaue & take of the ſame diſtreſſe, for the labour of euery perſon, going for the execution thereof, for euery mile that any ſuche perſon ſo laboureth for the ſame .ii.d. And euery farmour, tenaunt, gardian, factour, or other whatſoeuer perſon, being diſtrayned or otherwiſe charged for payment of any ſuche ſumme or ſummes, or anye other ſumme, by reaſon of this acte, ſhalbe of ſuch ſumme or ſummes, of him or them ſo leuied, and taken, diſcharged, & acquited at his next day of payment of the ſame, or at the deliuerie of ſuch goods and cattels, as he that is ſo

diſtrayned had in his cuſtodie & gouernaunce, agaynſt hym or them, that ſhalbe ſo taxed and ſet, any graunt or writing, obligatorie or other whatſoeuer matter to the contrarie made heretofore, notwithſtanding. And if any ſuch perſon, that ſhould be ſo diſtrained haue no landes or tenementes, ſufficient, whereby he or his tenauntes, and farmours, maye be diſtrayned, or hath eloyned, aliened, or hyd his goodes, and cattels, wherby he ſhould or might be diſtrayned in ſuch maner, that ſuch goodes and cattels ſhall not be knowen or founde, ſo that the ſumme, of, or by hym to be payde in the ſayde fourme ſhall ne can be conueniently leuyed. Then vppon relation thereof to the Commiſſioners, or to as many of them, as by the ſayde commiſſion ſhalbe therunto appoynted, where ſuch perſon or perſons was taxed and ſet, by the othes of hym or them, that ſhalbe charged with the leuie & payment of that ſumme or ſummes, the ſame Commiſſioners, ſhal make a precept in ſuch maner as is aforeſaid, for to attache, take and arreſt the body of ſuche perſon or perſons, that ought to pay the ſayd ſummes, and by this act ſhalbe charged with, and for the ſayde ſumme and ſummes, and them ſo taken, ſafely to kepe in priſon, with in the ſhire, or other place, where any ſuche perſon or perſons ſhalbe taken, and attached, there to remayne without bayle or maynpriſe, vntyl he hath payd the ſame ſumme or ſummes, that ſuch perſon for him ſelfe or for any other by this act, ſhalbe chargeable or ought to be charged withall. And alſo for the fees of euery ſuch arreſt, to hym or them that ſhall execute ſuch precept .xx.d. and that euery officer vnto whom ſuch precept ſhalbe directed, do his true diligence, and execute the ſame, vpon euery perſon, ſo being indebted, vpon payne to forfait to the Queenes Maieſties, for euery default in that behalfe .xx.s. And that no keper of any gaole, frō his gaole ſuffer any ſuch perſon to go at large, by letting to baile, or otherwiſe to depart out of his priſon, before he haue payd his ſaid debt, & the ſaid .xx.d. for the ſaide arreſt, vpon payne to forfayte to the Queenes Maieſtie .xl.s. And the ſame Gaoler to pay vnto the Queenes Maieſtie, the double value, aſwell of the rate which the ſayd perſon ſo impriſoned was taxed at, as of the ſayde .xx.d. for the fees, and lyke proceſſe, and remedie, in like fourme ſhalbe graunted by the ſayde Commiſſioners, or as many of them, as by the ſayde commiſſion ſhalbe thereunto appoynted, at like information of euery perſon or perſons, being charged with any ſumme of money, for any other perſon or perſons, by reaſon of the ſayde Subſidie, and not thereof payde, but wylfullye withdrawen, ne the ſame leuyable within the limites where ſuche perſons were thereunto taxed. And yf the ſumme or ſummes, beyng behynde vnpayd, by anye perſon or perſons, as is aforeſayde, be

leuied and gathered by force of the ſayde proces, to be made the ſayde Commiſſioners, or if in default or for lacke of payment thereof, the perſon or perſons ſo owing the ſayd ſumme or ſummes of money, by proces of the ſame Commiſſioners, to be made as is aforeſayde, be committed to priſon in fourme aboueſayde, that then the ſayd Commiſſioners whiche ſhall awarde ſuche proces, ſhall make certificate therof in the ſaid Exchequer, of that ſhalbe done in ye premiſſes, in the terme next folowing after ſuch ſumme or ſummes of mony, ſo beyng behynde ſhalbe leuied & gathered, or ſuch perſon or perſons for none paiment of the ſame committed to priſon. And if it happen any of the ſaid Collectours to be aſſigned, or any Maiors, Shiriffes, Steward, Conſtable, the headborrowe, houſholder, Bayliffe, or any other officer, or miniſter, or other whatſoeuer perſon or perſons, to diſobey the ſayde Commiſſioners, or any of them, in the reaſonable requeſt, to them made by the ſayde Commiſſioners, for execution of the ſayde commiſſion, or if any of the officers or other perſons, do refuſe that to them ſhall apparteyne and belong to do, by reaſon of any precept to hym or them to be directed, or any reaſonable commaundement, inſtaunce or requeſt, touching the premiſſes, or other default in any appearaunce or collection to make, or if any perſon beyng ſuſpect, or not to be indifferently taxed, as is aforeſayde, do refuſe to be examined accordyng to the tenor of this acte, before the ſayde Commiſſioners, or as many of them, as ſhalbe there vnto aſſigned, as is aforeſayd, or wyll not appeare before the ſame Commiſſioners, vpon warnyng to him made, or els make reſiſtaunce or reſcous, vppon any diſtreſſe vpon hym to be taken, for any parcell of the ſayde ſubſidie, or commit any miſbehauiour in any maner of wyſe, contrarye to this acte, or commit any wylfull omiſſion, or other whatſoeuer wylfull, not doyng or miſdoyng, contrary to the tenor of this acte or graunt, the ſame commiſſioners, and euery number of them, aboue remembred, or two of them at the leaſt, vpō probable knowledge of any ſuch miſdemeanors, had by information or examination, ſhall & may ſet vpō euery ſuch offendour for euery ſuch offence, in name of a fine, by the ſame offendour to be forfayted .xl.s. or vnder, by the diſcretion of the ſame Commiſſioners. And further the ſame Commiſſioners, and euery number of them, or two of them at the leaſt, ſhall haue aucthoritie by this preſent act, to puniſh euery ſuch offendour, by impriſonment, there to remayne & to be deliuered by their diſcretion, as ſhall ſeme to them conuenient, the ſaide fines, if any ſuch be, to be certified by the ſaid commiſſioners that ſo aſſeſſed the ſame, into the Queenes Maieſties ſaid Exchequer, there to be leuied and payd by the Collectours of that parties for the ſayde Subſidie, returned into the ſayde

Exchequer, to be therewith charged with the payment of the ſayde ſubſidie, in ſuch maner as yf the ſayd fynes had ben ſet and taxed vppon the ſayde offendours of the ſayde ſubſidie.
               It is alſo enacted by the ſayde aucthoritie of this Parliament, that euery of the ſayde hygh collectours, which ſhall accompt for any part of the ſayde ſubſidie, in the ſayde Exchequer, vpon theyr ſeuerall ſayd accomptes to be yeelded, ſhalbe alowed at euery of the ſayd paymentes of the ſaid ſubſidie, for euery pounde limited to his collection whereof any ſuch collectour ſhalbe charged and yeelde accompt, ſixe pence; as parcel of their charge: that is to ſay, of euery pound therof, for ſuche perſon as then haue had the particuler collection in the townes & other places, as is aforeſaid, ſpecified in his collection two pence, and other two pence of euery pounde thereof, euery of the ſayd cheefe, collectours, or theyr accomptauntes, to retayne to theyr owne vſe for theyr labour and charge in and about the premiſſes, and two pence of euery pounde reſidue, to be deliuered, allowed, and payde by the ſayd collectours ſo beyng thereof alowed, to ſuche of the commiſſioners as ſhal take vpon them the buſines and labour, for, and about the premiſſes, that is to ſay, euery collectour to pay that commiſſioner or commiſſioners, which had the ordering of the wrytynges, of, and for the ſaid ſubſidie where the ſayd collectour or collectours had their collection, for expences of the ſayde commiſſioners, ſo takyng vppon them the ſayde buſines, and labour of their clarkes writing the ſayd preceptes and eſtreates of the ſayde collections, the ſame laſte two pence of euery pounde to be diuided amongſt the ſayde commiſſioners, hauyng regarde to theyr labour and buſines taken by them or their ſaid clarkes in and about the premiſſes, for the which part ſo to the ſayd commiſſioners attaynyng, the ſayd commiſſioners .vi.v.iiii. iii. or as many of them as ſhalbe therunto appointed by the Queenes maieſties commiſſion, and euery of them ioyntly and ſeuerally for his and theyr ſaid part, may haue his remidie agaynſt the ſayd collectour or collectours, which there of ben, and might haue ben alowed, by action of debt, in which the defendaunt ſhal not wage his law, neyther protection, neither iniunction, or other eſſoigne ſhalbe alowed. And that no perſon now being of the number of the company of this preſent parliament, nor any commiſſioner, ſhalbe named or aſſigned to be any collector, or ſubcollector, or preſentor of the ſayd ſubſidie, or of any part therof, nor no commiſſioners ſhalbe compelled to make any preſentment or certificate, other then in the Queenes maieſties ſayd Exchequer, of, for or concernyng the ſayd ſubſidie, or any part thereof. And likewiſe that none other perſon that ſhalbe named or aſſigned to be commiſſioners in any place, to and for the execution of this acte of ſubſidie, be, or ſhalbe aſſigned, or named head collectours of

any of the paimentes of the ſaide ſubſidie, neither of any part therof. And that euery ſuch perſon and perſons which ſhalbe named and appoynted as is aforeſayd, to be head collectours, in and for the firſt payment of this ſubſidie, ſhal not be compelled to be collectour for the ſeconde payment of the ſaide ſubſidie, or for anye part thereof. And the ſayd collectours which ſhalbe aſſigned for the collection of the ſayde ſubſidie, or for anye part thereof, and euery of them, be and ſhalbe acquited and diſcharged of all maner fees, rewardes, and of euery other charges in the Queenes Maieſties Exchequer, or els where, of them or any of them, by reaſon of that collection, payment, or accomptes, or any thing concerning the ſame to be aſked. And that if any perſons receaue and take any fees, rewardes, or pleaſures of any ſuche accomptant: That then he ſhal forfait to the Queenes Maieſtie, for euery peny value of peny ſo taken, fiue ſhillinges, & ſuffer impriſonment at the Queenes maieſties pleaſure. And after the taxing and aſſeſſing of the ſaid ſubſidies, as is aforeſaid, had or made, and the ſaide eſtreates therof in parchment vnto the collectour, in maner and fourme before rehearſed, deliuered, the ſayde commiſſioners whiche ſhall take vpon them thexecution of this acte, within the limites of their commiſſion by theyr agreementes, ſhal haue meeting together, at which meeting euery of the ſaide commiſſioners which then ſhall haue taken vppon them thexecution of any part of the ſaid commiſſion, ſhal by him ſelfe or by his ſufficient deputie, truely certifie & bryng forth vnto the ſaid commiſſioners named in the ſaid commiſſion, the certificate and preſentment made before hym, and ſuch other commiſſioners as were limited with him in one limite, ſo that the ſame certificate may be accompted and caſt with the other certificates of the other limites within the ſame commiſſion. And then the ſayde commiſſioners and euery number of them, vnto two at the leaſt, as is aforeſayde, if anye be in life, or their executors or adminiſtrators of their goodes, if they then he dead, ſhall iontly and ſeuerally as they were diuided within their limites, vnder their ſeales by theyr diſcretion, make one or ſeuerall writinges indented, conteyning in it aſwel the names of the ſaid collectours by the commiſſioners, for ſuch collection and accompt in the Exchequer, and payment in the ſaid receipt, deputed & aſſigned, as the groſſe and ſeuerall ſummes written vnto euery ſuch collectour, to receaue the ſaide ſubſidie. And alſo all fines, amerciaments, & other forfaitures, if any ſuch by reaſon of this act, happen to be within the precinct and limite of theyr commiſſion, to be certified into the Queenes maieſties ſaid Exchequer by the ſaid commiſſioners, in whiche wryting or writings indented ſo to be certified, ſhalbe playnely declared & expreſſed, the whole & entire ſumme or ſummes of the ſaid ſubſidie ſeuerally limited to the collection of the ſaid collectours, ſeuerally deputed

and aſſigned to the collection of the ſayde ſummes. So that none of the ſaid collectours ſo certified in the ſaide Exchequer, ſhalbe compelled there to accompt or to be charged, but only to & for the ſumme limited to his collection, and not to or for anye ſumme limited to the collection of his felowe, but that euerye of them ſhalbe ſeuerally charged for theyr parte, limited to theyr collection. And yf the ſayde commiſſioners ioyned in one commiſſion amongſt them ſelues, in that matter can not agree, or yf any of them be not redy, or refuſe to make certificate with other of the ſame commiſſioners, that then the ſame commiſſioners, may make ſeuerall indentures in fourme aforeſaid, of theyr ſeueral limites or ſeparations of collectours, within the limites of theyr commiſſion, vppon, and in the Hundredes, Wardes, Wapentakes, Lathes, Rapes, or ſuche other like diuiſions within theyr ſayde ſeuerall limites of theyr commiſſion, as the places there ſhall require to be ſeuered and diuided, and as to the ſame commiſſioners ſhall ſeeme good, to make diuiſions of theyr limites or collections, for the ſeuerall charges of the ſame collectours. So that alway one collectour, ſhalbe charged and accompt for his part to hym to be limited onlye by him ſelfe, and not for any ſumme limited to the parte of any of his felowes, and the charges of euerye of the collectours, to be ſet and certified ſeuerally vpon them, and euery ſuche collectour vpon his accompt and payment of the ſumme of moneye limited within his collection, to be ſeuerallye by him ſelfe acquited and diſcharged in the ſayde Exchequer, without payyng anye maner fees or rewardes to anye perſon or perſons for the ſame, vpon the payne & penaltie laſt aboueſayde, and not to be charged for anye portion of anye other collectour. And yf anye commiſſioner after he hath taken certificate of them, that, as is aforeſayde, ſhall before any ſuch commiſſioner be examined, and the ſummes rated and ſet, and the bookes and wrytynges thereof beyng in his handes, or yf anye collectour or other perſon charged with anye receipt of any part of the ſayde ſubſidie, or any other perſon, taxed or otherwyſe by this acte charged, with and for any parcell of the ſayde ſubſidie, or with anye other ſumme or fine, amerciament, penaltie, or other forfayture, happen to dye before the commiſſioner, collectour, or other whatſoeuer perſon or perſons, haue executed, accomplyſhed, ſatiſfied, or ſufficiently diſcharged, that which to euery ſuch perſon ſhall apparteyne or belong to do, according to this acte; then the executours, and heyres of euery ſuche perſon, and all other ſeaſed of any landes, or tenementes, that any ſuche perſon beyng charged by this acte, and diſceaſlyng before he be diſcharged thereof, or any other to his vſe onely had of eſtate of inheritaunce, at the tyme that anye ſuche perſon was named commiſſioner, collectour, or otherwyſe charged with and for any maner of thyng to be done, ſatiſfied,

or payde by reaſon of this acte, and all thoſe that haue in theyr poſſeſſions or handes, any goodes, or cattels, leaſſes, or other thinges that were to any ſuch perſon or perſons, at the tyme of his death, or any landes or tenementes, that were the ſame perſons, at the tyme he was (as is aforeſayd) charged by this act, ſhalbe by the ſame compelled and charged to do and accomplyſhe, to do in euery caſe as the ſame perſon ſo beyng charged, ſhoulde haue done and myght haue ben compelled to do, yf he had ben in playne lyfe, after ſuch rate of the landes and goodes of the ſaid commiſſioner, or collectour as the partie ſhall haue in his hand. And yf the ſayde commiſſioners for cauſes reaſonable then mouing, ſhall thynke it not conuenient to ioyne in one certificate, as is aforeſaid, thē the ſaid perſon or perſons that ſhall firſt ioyne together, or he that ſhall firſt certifie the ſaide writing, indented as is aforeſayde, ſhall certifie all the names of the commiſſioners of that commiſſion, wherupon ſuche wrytynges ſhalbe there, then to be certified, with diuiſion of the Hundredes, Wapentakes, Wardes, tythynges, or other places, to and among ſuche commiſſioners, of the ſame commiſſion, with the names of the ſame commiſſiners, where ſuche ſeparations and diuiſion ſhalbe, with the groſſe ſummes of money, aſwell of and for the ſayd ſubſidie, taxed, or ſet, of, or within the ſayd Hundredes, Wardes, Wapentakes, or other places to him or them diuided or aſſigned, that ſhall ſo certifie the ſayde firſte writing, as of fines, amerciaments, penalties, or other forfaitures, if any happen to be within the ſame limites, whereof the ſame wrytynges ſhalbe certified, and after ſuch wrytyng indented, whiche as is aforeſayde, ſhalbe certified, and not conteyne in it the whole and full ſummes, ſet and taxed within the limites of the ſame commiſſion, the other commiſſioners of the ſame, before the day of payment of the ſayd ſubſidie, ſhall certifie into the ſayde Exchequer, by theyr wrytyng or wrytynges, indented to be made as is aforeſaid, the groſſe and ſeuerall ſummes, ſet and taxed within the places to them limited for the ſayde ſubſidie, and other fines, amerciamentes, penalties, and forfaytures, with the names of the Hundredes, Wardes, Wapentakes, and other places to them aſſigned, or els by theyr ſaid wrytinges indented, to certifie at the ſayde place, before the ſayde day of payment, ſuche reaſonable cauſes for theyr excuſes, why they may not make ſuch certificate, of, and for the ſayde ſubſidie, fines, amerciamentes, and other forfaytures, growying or ſet by reaſon of the cauſes of theyr lettes, or of theyr none certifiyng as is aboueſayde, or els in default thereof, proces to be made out of the Queenes Maieſties ſayd Exchequer, agaynſt the ſayde commiſſioners, and euery of them, not makying certificate as is aforeſayde, by the diſcretion of the Treaſurer, or Barons of the ſayde Exchequer.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde,

that the inhabitauntes of the pariſhe of ſaint Martin, called Stampforde Baron, in the Suburbes of the Borough, and Towne of Stampforde, in the South part of the water, there called Welland, which hereafter ſhalbe contributory to the payment of this preſent ſubſidie, graunted to the Queenes Maieſtie, her heires, and ſucceſſours, ſhalbe aſſeſſed, rated, and taxed for this tyme, by ſuche commiſſioners, whiche ſhalbe appoynted for the taxyng, ratyng, and ſeſſing of ſuche ſubſidie, or taxe within the Countie of Lyncolne, and ſhalbe for this tyme contributory, and pay the ſayde ſubſidie, to the collectour or collectours, whiche ſhalbe aſſigned and appoynted for the leuying and gatheryng of the ſame, with the Aldermen and Burgeſſes of the ſayde Borough and Towne of Stampforde.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that all and euerye perſon and perſons, hauyng manours, landes, tenementes, and other hereditamentes, chargeable to the payment of the ſubſidie, graunted to the Queenes Maieſtie, by this acte, and alſo hauing ſpirituall poſſeſſions, chargeable to her ſayde Maieſtie, by the graunt made by the Cleargie of this realme, in their conuocation: And ouer this hauyng ſubſtaunce in goodes and cattels chargeable by this ſayd act, that then if any of the ſaide perſon or perſons, be hereafter charged, aſſeſſed, and taxed for the ſaid manours, landes, and tenementes, and ſpirituall poſſeſſions, and alſo aſſeſſed, charged, and taxed, for his or their goodes and cattelles, that then he or they ſhalbe onely charged by vertue of this acte, for his and theyr ſayde manours, landes, tenementes, hereditamentes, and ſpirituall poſſeſſions, or onely for his ſayde goodes and cattels, the beſt therof to be taken for the Queenes Maieſtie, & not to be charged for both, or double charged for any of them: any thyng in this act conteyned to the contrary in any wyſe, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alwayes, that this graunt of ſubſidie, nor anye thyng therein conteyned, in anye wyſe extende to charge the inhabitauntes or dwellers in Irelande, Ierneſey, and Garneſey, or any of them, of, or concerning any manours, landes, tenements, or other poſſeſſions, goodes, cattels, or other moueable ſubſtaunce, which the ſaid inhabitauntes or dwellers, or any other to their vſe, haue within Ireland, Iernſey, & Garnſey, or in any of them, or of, for or concerning any fees or wages, which any of the ſaid inhabitaunts or dwellers, haue of ye Queenes Maieſtie for their attendaunce & doing ſeruice to our ſoueraigne Lady, in Ireland, Ierneſey, & Garneſey, or in any of them: any thing in this preſent act, to ye contrary in any wiſe, notwithſtanding.
               Prouided alſo, that this preſente acte of ſubſidie ne anye thing therein conteyned, extende to any of the Englyſhe inhabitauntes or reſiauntes in anye of the Counties of Northumberlande, Cumberland, Weſtmerland, the Towne of Barwicke, the Towne of

Newcaſtell vpon Tine, and the Byſhoprike of Durham, nor to any of them, of, for, or concernyng any manours, landes, tenementes, or other poſſeſſions, goodes, cattelles, or other moueable ſubſtaunce which the ſame inhabitauntes or dwellers, or any other to theyr vſe, haue within the ſayde Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Weſtmerlande, or the Towne of Barwicke, the Towne of Newcaſtel vpon Tine, or the Byſhoprike of Durham, or any of them, or of, for or concernyng any fees or wages whiche anye of the ſayde inhabitauntes or dwellers, haue of the Queenes Maieſtie, for theyr attendaunce and doyng ſeruice to the Queenes Maieſtie, for, or within the ſayd Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Weſtmerland, the Towne of Barwicke, the Towne of Newcaſtell vpon Tine, & the Byſhoprike of Durham, or any of them, to, or for the ſayde taxyng, leuiyng, gatheryng, or payment, but that the Engliſhe inhabitantes or reſiauntes, and euerye of them, of the ſayde Counties, Byſhoprikes, and Townes, and euery of them, ſhalbe of and from the ſayde ſubſidie, and euery parcell thereof, and for theyr manours, landes, tenementes, fees, wages, goodes, and cattelles, lying and beyng in the ſayde Counties, Townes, and Byſhoprike, or anye of them, vtterly acquited and diſcharged: any thyng in this preſent acte before rehearſed to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alſo, that al letters patentes graunted by the Queenes Maieſtie, or any of her moſte noble progenitours, to any Cities, Boroughes, or Townes within this Realme, of any maner of liberties, priuileges, or exemptions, from the burden and charge of any ſuch grauntes of ſubſidies, whiche be at this preſent tyme in force and vayleable, ſhall remayne good and effectuall to the ſayde Cities, Boroughes, and Townes hereafter, accordyng to the purportes therof, though the inhabitauntes of the ſame, ſhall vpon the great and waightie conſyderation of the graunt aboueſayd, be for this graunt charged and contributory, in lyke maner, fourme, and ſorte as other Cities, Boroughes, and Townes, which be not in any wiſe priuileged, be from ſuch graunt of ſubſidie excepted.
               Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforeſayde, that no Orphant or Infant, within the age of twentie & one yeres, borne within anye of the Queenes Maieſties dominions, ſhalbe charged to anye payment of this ſubſidie, for his or her goodes and cattelles, to hym or her left or bequeathed: any thing in this acte conteyned to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alſo, that this acte, nor anye thyng therein conteyned, ſhall extende to the goodes or landes of any Colledge, Hall, or Oſtell, within the vniuerſities of Oxenford and Cambridge, or any of them, or to the goodes or landes of the Colledge of Winton, founded by Byſhoppe of Wyckeham, or to the goodes or landes of the

colledge of Eton next Wyndſor, or to the goodes or landes or anye commō free grammer ſcoole within the realme of England or Wales or to the goodes of anye Reader, Scoolemaiſter, or Scoller, or any graduate within the ſayd vniuerſities and colledges, or any of them there remaynying for ſtudy, without fraude or couin, or to the goodes and landes of any hoſpital meaſondue, or ſpittelhouſe, prepared and vſed for the ſuſtentation and releefe of poore people: any thyng in this acte conteyned to the contrary in any wiſe, notwithſtandyng.
               Prouided alſo, and be it enacted, that foraſmuche as diuers and ſundry the Queenes Maieſties tenauntes, and other inhabitauntes and dwellers within the Counties of Penbroke, Carmarthen, Cardigan, Glamorgan, Brecknocke, Radnouce, Mongomerye, Denbigh, Flint, Merioneth, Angleſey, Carnaruon, & of the Countie Palentine of Cheſter, be at this preſent tyme charged and chargeable with the ſeuerall paymentes of diuers great ſummes of money, by the name of Miſe due to her Maieſtie, accordyng to the ſeuerall cuſtomes of the ſayde Counties.
               Be it therefore ordeyned and enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayd, that this acte of ſubſidie, or anye thyng therein conteyned, ſhall not extende to charge any of the Queenes tenauntes, & other inhabitantes and dwellers, within any of the ſayd Counties of Penbroke, Carmarthen, Cardigan, Glamorgan, Brecknocke, Radnoure, Mongomerye, Denbigh, Flinte, Merioneth; Angleſey, Carnaruon, and the Countie Palentine of Cheſter, being charged or chargeable with the ſayd Miſe, for, or in any of the paymentes of the ſayde ſubſidie graunted to the Queenes Maieſtie by this acte, vntil the ſaid ſeueral dayes and times for the payment of the ſaid Miſes ſhalbe expired, and vntil the dayes & times of the ſeuerall ſubſidies, lately graunted to our late ſoueraigne lord & ſoueraigne lady, King Philip & Queene Mary be alſo paſt and expired, & that then the firſt payment of the ſaid ſubſidie graunted by this preſent acte, ſhalbe made at the receypt of the Queenes Exchequer, before the firſt day of March next folowing after the laſt dayes of the laſt paiment to be had or appoynted of the ſaid Miſes, and of the payment of the ſaide former ſubſidies. And the ſecond payment of this ſubſidie, to be made by, or before the firſt day of Marche next after the ſayd firſt payment of the ſayde ſubſidie.
               Furthermore be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſayde, that the tenauntes and dwellers of euery of the ſayde Counties in this prouiſo remembred, ſhall ſeuerally before the feaſt of Pentecoſt nexte enſuing, certifie into the ſaid court of the Exchequer, vnder the ſeales of two Iuſtices of peace of euery of the ſayd Counties, wherof one to be of the Quorum, when & what day the laſt payment of the ſayde ſeueral Miſes now due in any of the ſayde Counties, ſhal end and expire.
               
                  Prouided alſo, that the ſayde graunt of ſubſidie, or anye other thing therin conteyned, do not in any wyſe extende to be preiudiciall or hurtfull to the inhabitauntes or reſiauntes at this preſent time, within the fiue portes corporate, or to any of theyr members incorporate, or vnited to the ſame fyue portes, or to anye of the ſame fiue portes, of, or for any part or parcell of the ſaide ſummes graunted in this parliament, of the ſayd inhabitauntes now reſiaunt, or anye of them, to be taxed, ſet, aſked leuied, or payde. But the ſayd inhabitauntes and reſiauntes in the ſayd fyue portes, and their members, be and ſhalbe of, and from the ſayde graunt and payment of the ſayde ſubſidie, duryng theyr reſiauncie there, and no longer, clearely acquited and diſcharged: any matter, or whatſoeuer thing in this preſent act had or made to the contrary, notwithſtandyng.
               God ſaue the Queene.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maieſtie. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   