
      
         
            
            THE SINNERS GLASSE. Containing AVGVSTINES Ladder to Paradiſe. With diuers Meditations and Prayers, both for Morning and Euening. Collected out of Saint Auguſtine and other ancient Fathers.
            LONDON Printed by Iohn VVindet for John Budge. 1609.
         
         
            
            
            To the vertuous and honorable Ladie, Anne Windſor, wife to the right honorable Lord Henry VVindſor.
            
               AFter I had collected certaine doctrines and Meditations, out of ſundrie works of Auguſtine, to mine owne priuate contentment: In time following, ſome of my learned friends, by chance peruſing and liking the order and method of them, it put me in comfort, to make them more knowne through the Engliſhing of them. And honourable Ladie, firſt out of that Booke (vnder the name of Auguſtine) intituled of the

Spirit and Soule, I had according to mine owne purpoſe, diſpoſed & framed 15. portions, or particulars out of many Chapters in that booke. They are eſpeciall & eaſie teachings to many, that yet know not what themſelues are, that thereby (conſidering and beholding well of what they are made, and their ſubſtance, which is of the Soule and Body vnited, and yet falling too often at variance, will not be perſwaded the one by the other) they may, feeling their owne miſerie by it, ſeek and deſire higher after many diuine knowledges, which may keepe their ſoules and bodies in vnitie, and to bee at peace with God. Then

for the Meditations, that follow, I gathered them out of that bleſſed man his woorkes, euery where when I thought which might mooue a godly minde: not ſetting downe whole Chapters neither, except foure or fiue, but parcels thereof: and contented partly with breuitie, as alſo ſome time in a chapter, meeting with the ignoraunce and corruption of that time, in praying to Saints: I left that part out, which inuocation is a ſacriledge, not poſſible to haue any office allowed it in prayer through the whole ſcripture: but by the large authoritie thereof it is moſt forcibly extruded. And no doubt, but Auguſtine in his

time found it ſo, lib. contra Parmenid. 2. cap 8. For he ſayeth Chriſtian men doe togither commend themſelues in their prayers, but hee for whom none maketh interceſſion, but he himſelfe for all: Hee is the verie, onely and true Mediator. And ſaith Ambroſe, lib. de Iſaac & anima, He is our mouth by which we ſpeake to the father: our eye by which we ſee the father: our right hand by which wee offer vs to the father: otherwayes then by whoſe interceſſion, neither wee nor all the Saintes hath any thing with God. And I intend not, that theſe abſtracts out of thoſe prayers and meditations, vnto part

of which I haue after my iudgment, applied ſome verſes out of the Pſalmes, ſhuld be vſed of any, for, or as in ſtead of their prayers, for that cannot bee, they haue beene long ſithence offered vp by that holy man, they were his owne. But now they are to be taken as moouers & ſtirrers vp of others, to heauenly contemplation, contrition, and holy ſorrow. Our perfect prayer with the duties thereto belonging, riſeth of faith and knowledge which commeth by hearing and reading the Scriptures, whereby thorough the holy ghoſt, we are made able to ſeeke Chriſt, and ſo the inuiſible father, who is not found elſewhere,

but in Chriſt, that thus wee are come to haue a certaine communication with God, in which (entred into the Sanctuarie of heauen) wee haue to doe with three perſons, As Gregorie Nazianzene vpon the Trinitie writeth. I cannot (ſayeth he) thinke of one, but preſently I am compaſſed round, with the brightneſſe and glorie of three: Neither can I diſtinguiſh of three, but ſuddenly I am brought again to one. And ſo in our prayers it is with vs. Paul ſayth thus Gal. 4. God hath ſent the Spirit of his Sonne into our hearts, which crieth Abba father, which ſpirit ſo ſent, proceedeth from the Father and the Son, and ſendeth vs

forth-with to call on the Father, through his Sonne. And alſo Rom. 8. That ſpirit in our hearts certifieth our Spirit, that wee are the children of God. And the ſame moſt holy 3. perſons & one God, keepeth ſuch an immediate courſe in our prayer, that no Saint in heauen can come betweene the holy ghoſt and our redeemer, to intreat him to heare vs, or to bee ioyned with him, or to bee in his ſtead for an in terceſſor: his leue and worthineſſe maketh vs worthy through his ſpirit to come to him our ſelues. As alſo that holy Spirit which is the cauſe that wee haue knowledge in the Scriptures, prompteth vs how to pray

how to edifie, and how to anſwere our aduerſaries, viſible & inuiſible. Moreouer moſt excellent and heauenly knowledge is learned out of the Scripture, in praiſe of which, and comparing it aboue all other learnings. Auguſtin ſaith, de doct. Chriſtiana lib. 2. Whatſoeuer a man can learne without it if it be faultie, or offenſiue, there it is condemned. If it bee profitable, there it is found. And when whoſoeuer hath found, all things which elſewhere hee hath profitably learned, hee ſhall finde thoſe things the more abundantly by much, which are learned no where elſe at all, but in the admirable highneſſe and marueilous

humility of the ſacred Scriptures. Thus (Madame) ſignifying vnto you the contents of this briefe Collection, I pray to the Almightie to enlighten and direct you alwaies with his Spirit, to the increaſe of true honour through you in this life, and to crowne you with glorie in the life euerlaſting.
            
               
                  Your ſeruant to your honour dutifully affected. Timo. Pimm.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A confeſſion of our Sinnes.
            
               O Lord my God euerlaſting & almighty Father: I acknowledge and confeſſe before thy holy and high Maieſtie, that I was bred and born in ſinne and corruption: and that ſince my birth I haue not ceaſed, nor doe ceaſe dayly to tranſgreſſe thy commandements. In reſpect wherof. I cannot eſcape ruine and deſtruction according to thy rightfull iuſtice

Notwithſtanding, foraſmuch as I am ſory that I haue offended thée, and doe condemne both my 
                  •
               elfe and my ſinne: and foraſmuch as it hath pleaſed thée to loue vs, euen when wee were thine enemies and for aſſurance thereof, to giue vs thy onely and wel be loued Sonne, our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, to be a Mediator, and aduocate betwéene thée and vs, promiſing that wee ſhall obtaine whatſoeuer we aſke of thée in his name.
            Vouchſafe O moſt louing God and mercifull Father, to pardon and forgiue

me in his name, and for his ſake: and not only to clenſe my heart from all vanity and vncleannes, but alſo to gouerne and guide me by thy holy ſpirit in all my waies, that I may liue according to thy holy and heauenly commandements all the daies of my life, to the glory of thy holy name, through the ſame thy welbeloued Sonne, So be it.
         
         
            Morning Prayer.
            
               O God and Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, whom no man

knoweth but by thy ſpeciall gift: grant that vnto the reſt of thine excéeding great benefites towardes mée, this which is the greateſt, that can bee beſtowed vpon mankinde, may be added alſo, namely that as thou haſt raiſed vp my body from faſt and ſound ſléepe, ſo alſo thou wilt deliuer my mind from the ſléepe of ſinne, and from the darknes of this world: and after death reſtore the ſame body to life, as well as thou haſt called it again from ſléepe. For that which is death to vs, is but ſléepe vnto thée. I

pray and beſéech thée, that through thy goodneſſe, this body of mine may bee fellow and furtherer of all godlineſſe to my ſoule in this life, ſo as it may alſo be partner with it of the endleſſe felicity in the life to come, through Ieſus Chriſt thy Sonne our Lord. For whoſe ſake and by whom, thou giueſt vs all good and wholeſome thinges to our welfare, Amen.
            
         
         
            Euening Prayer.
            LOrd Ieſus Chriſt, to whoſe vnconſumeable

goodneſſe we bee beholden for all things: which haſt graunted the chearefull light of the day, vnto all men both good and bad to doe their buſineſſe in, and mercifully giuen them the ſwéet ſtilneſſe of the night, to refreſh the powers of their ſilly bodies, and to put away the cares of their mindes, & to aſwage their ſorrowes: For ſo much as thou thy ſelfe performeſt all theſe things much more beneficially to them that loue thée, to whom thou giueſt a farre greater light by the grace of faith, to doe all déedes of

godlineſſe by, then doth the ſhining of the Sunne vnto the world: Inſomuch as thy promiſes neuer ſuffer them to faint, but the comfort of thy ſpirit putteth away all cumberances of minde, farre more effectually then any ſleepe of the body. And the whole man reſteth not more ſweetly, or ſafely in any thing, then in thy mercy (O deare Redéemer:) I 
                  •
               eſeech thee, that if I haue done any thing this day through humaine frailty, & negligence, which hath offended thine eies, pardon it for thine wonted goodneſſe

ſake, and grant therwithall that this night may be happy to mee, by thy proſpering thereof, pure by thy preſeruing of me, & ſafe from the nightly illuſions of wicked féends, through thy protection, ſo as this ſléepe may make both my body and mind more chearefull, and luſty to ſerue thee to morrow.
            Moreouer, becauſe this life hath not one houre certaine, whenſoeuer the euentide therof commeth and the long ſleepe of the body groweth vpon mee, from which we ſhall not

wake, till the dead riſe againe at the ſound of thine Angelles Trumpet. I beſeech thee lighten thou then the eyes of my mind, ſo as I may not ſleepe in euerlaſting death, by the quenching of my faith, but reſt in thee, to whom euen the dead are aliue; Which liueſt and raigneſt with the Father, and the holy Ghoſt, one God world without ende, Amen.
         
         
            
            Auguſtine his Ladder to Paradice.
            
               BEing buſied on a certaine day with the bodily labour of hands, when I had begunne to conſider of a ſpirituall mans exerciſe: Foure degrees or ſteppes ſuddenly offered themſelues vnto my conſideration, which were, Reading,

Meditation, Prayer, and Contemplation. This is the Ladder of ſecluded men, of ſolitary men, wherewith they are lifted vp into heauen, it is a Ladder diſtinguiſhed and noted but with a few degrees or ſtepps, and yet of an vnmeaſurable, and incredible greatneſſe. The firſt part of the which is ſtayed vpon the earth, but the vppermoſt part pierceth the clouds, and ſearcheth the ſecrets of the Heauens. Theſe degrees or ſteps, as in names and number they are diuers, ſo in order and number

they are diſtinguiſhed· Whoſe properties and benefites, ſurely euery of them, what they may bring to paſſe in vs, How betweene themſelues they differ and excell, if any one would throughly conſider, whatſoeuer labour or ſtudy he ſhal beſtow in them, be ſhall briefely and eaſily thinke and thinke againe vpon them, in regard of the greatneſſe of their profite, ſweetneſſe, and delight. For Reading is a diligent and earneſt looking on the ſcriptures, with a bending and ſtrayning of the mind. Meditation is a ſtudious

action of the minde ſearching out the knowledge of the ſecret truth, by the leading of ones owne and ſpeciall reaſon. Prayer, is a deuout intention of the minde to God, for the putting away of euill things, and the obtaining of things that are good, Contemplation, is a certaine lifting vp of a ſtayed minde to God, taſting the ioyes of eternall ſweetneſſe.
            
               
               A diſcription of the parts and duties of thoſe foure degrees.
               
                  THerefore the diſcriptions of the foure degrees aſſigned it remaineth that wee ſhould ſée their parts and duties. Reading ſearcheth. Meditation findeth. Prayer ſueth or maketh interceſſion. Contemplation, féeleth or taſteth. Wherevpon the Lord himſelfe, ſaith. Seeke and ye ſhall find, knocke, and it ſhall

bee opened vnto you. Seeke by reading and yee ſhall finde in meditating. Knocke ye by Prayer, and it ſhall bee opened to you in contemplation. Reading ſetteth the mouth as it were to ſound meate. Meditation cheweth and breaketh Prayer obtayneth taſt. Contemplation is the ſame ſweetneſſe which gladdeth and comforteth. Reading is in the barke or ſhell, Meditation in the fat. Prayer in the ſupplication of deſire. Contemplation in the delectation of gotten ſweetneſſe, which that it may appeare

more plaine, I will apply one example out of many. I heare in reading, Bleſſed are the cleane 'n hart for they ſhall ſee God. Beholde a ſhort ſentence, but ſwéet and manifolde in knowledge. I come ouer and beſide to the feede of the ſoule, as it were of a Grape, the which thing after the ſoule hath diligently ſéene into it ſayth within it ſelfe, may there be any good? I will come to my heart and will try if happely I may vnderſtand and finde this cleanneſſe, for this thing is precious and worthy to bee
1
wiſhed for, the poſſeſſors of which are called Gods, to whom is promiſed the ſight of God, which is eternall uſe, which is commended with ſo many teſtimonies of holy ſcriptures. Therefore deſtring this thing more plainely, to be expounded to it ſelfe, it beginneth to chew and breake this grape, and putts it into the preſſe, vntill it mooueth reaſon to ſearch out, whether this cleanneſſe ſo precious and worthy to be wiſhed for, can be, and how it may be bad.
            
            
               
               The office of Meditation.
               
                  THEN commeth Diligent and earneſt Meditation, it farieth not behinde, it hath not any thing in the ſuperficie or outſide of another, it pitcheth foote, it pierceth the inward parts, it ſeeketh euery corner, it conſidereth beedely, that he hath not ſayde, Bleſſed be the cleane in body but in minde: becauſe it ſufficeth not to haue harmeles hands from euill worke,

but that alſo we ſhould bée 
                     •
                  lenſed in mind from wicked thoughts. Which is confirmed by the authority of the Prophet ſaying. Who ſhall aſcend into the hill of the Lord, or who ſhall riſe vp. in his holy place: euen he that hath cleane hands and a pure heart. Alſo this Meditation, it conſidereth this cleanneſſe of heart which the ſame Prophet would Thinke alſo how carefull bleſſed Iob was in keeping this, who ſaid, I haue made a couenant with mine eyes that I would 
                        •
                     ot thinke any thing of

the Virgin. See how much the holy man ſtrayned himſelfe, who ſhut his eyes leaſt hee ſhould behold vanitie, leſt by chance vnawares hee ſhould reſpect that, which afterwards inwardly he might deſire. Afterward and after ſuch ſort that the prophet hath entreated of the cleanneſſe of the heart, he beginneth to ſpeake of the reward thereof. How glorious and delectable a thing it would bee to ſee the face of the Lord ſo long wiſhed for, beautifull in faireneſſe aboue the Sonnes of men. Now not abiect and baſe

not hauing a hope with which his mother cloathed him, but arayed with a robe of immortality, and Crowned with a diademe, with which his father hath crowned him in the day of reſurrection and glory, the day which the Lord hath made. Meditation thinketh, that in that viſion, there ſhall bee that fulnes of which the prophet ſpeaketh. We ſhall be ſatiſfied when thy glory ſhall appeare. Doe you not percerue how much lie our hath flowed out of a little grape, how great a fler is

riſen out of this ſparke, and how much this little text is extended in the ſame Meditation. Bleſſed bee the cleane in heart, for they ſhall ſee God. But how much yet might bee extended or enlarged, if any one ſhould come that hath proued ſuch things? For I feele that the well is déepe and I in theſe things vnſkilfull, I haue ſcantly ſound a veſſel, in which I might draw vp few things The ſoule inflamed with theſe lights, ſacrificed with theſe deſires, the Alablaſter box of ſweete oyntment broken, beginneth to ſauor,

not of taſt, but as it were of an odoriferous ſent. Of this the ſoule doth gather, how ſwéet a thing it is, to féele the experience, whereof it hath knowne Meditatiō to be ſo pleaſant. But what ſhall the ſoule doe, it burneth with deſire to haue it, but it doth not find in it ſelfe, how it may haue it, and in how much more it ſearcheth, the more greatly it deſireth, whilſt it ſetteth before it meditation, it ſetteth before it alſo ſorrow, becauſe it vnderſtandeth not the ſweetnes which Meditation ſheweth to be in the cleaneſſe of

heart. For it commeth not of reading and meditating to vnderſtand this, ſweetneſſe, except it bee giuen from aboue, for to reade and meditate, is as common to the euill as to the good. And thoſe Philoſophers of the Gentiles by the leading of reaſon found out in what the ch
                     •
                  efe of true goodneſſe conſiſted. But becauſe when they had known God, they glorified him not as God (but preſuming on their 
                     •
                  wne power, they ſayde bee will magnifie our owne tongues, our lipps 
                     〈◊〉
                   our owne) they deſerued

not to vnderſtād what they might ſee. They vaniſhed in their owne thoughts, and their wiſedome is devoured, which humane ſtudy of diſcipline had beſtowed vpon them, not the ſpirit of wiſedome, which onely giueth true wiſedome, which is to ſay, ſauory knowledge, which when it is, in whomſoeuer that ineſtimable ſauor gladdeth and comforteth. And of that it is ſaid, wiſedome doth not enter into a malicious ſoule. For this is of God alone, and as God had giuen the office of baptizing to many, yet

in baptiſme he hath retayned to himſelfe onely, the power and authority of forgiuneſſe of ſins Wher vpon John hath ſayde of him diſtinctly▪ this is hee which baptiſeth in the holy Ghoſt. And of him we may ſay, this is he which giueth the taſt or ſauor of wiſedome, hee maketh knowledge ſauory to the Soule.
               For truely ſpeech is giuen to many: Wiſedome to a fewe, the which the LORD diſtributeth to whom hée will and how he will.
            
            
               
               The office of Prayer.
               
                  BVt the Soule perceiuing of it ſelfe, that it cānot atta
                     •
                  ne to the deſired ſwéetneſſe of knowledge & experience, & by how much the more it commeth to the ſecret heart, by ſo much the more God is exalted, it humbleth it ſelfe vnto prayer ſaying. Lord which art not ſeene but of cleane hearts, I haue ſearched in reading, I haue ſought in me
                     •
                  itating, how true cleanneſſe of heart may be

had that by that meanes I might know thee. I did ſeeke thy face O Lord, thy face O Lord did I ſéeke. I haue long meditated in my heart, and in my meditation the fier waxed not. and my deſire more to know thee, whilſt thou breakeſt to me the bread of holy ſcripture, and in the brea
                     •
                  ing of bread, in which then art more knowne. And how much more I know thee, I long the more to knowe thée, not in the barke of the letter, but in the ſée
                  
                     •
                  ng of practice and experience. Neither do I humbly

aſke this O Lord, for my merits, but for thy mercy. Becauſe I confeſſe I am vnworthy and a ſinner, but yet the dogs doe eate of the crums that fall from their maſters table. Giue me O Lord an earneſt of the inheritance to come, at leaſt one droppe of heauenly raine, wherwith I may coole my thirſt, for I burne with great deſire.
            
            
               The office of Contemplation.
               
                  WIth theſe and ſuch burning ſpeeches, the ſoule doth inflame

her deſire, like as ſhee doth ſhew her affection. With theſe incantations ſhee calleth vpon her bridegroome. But the Lord whoſe eyes are vpon the righteous, & his eares open only vnto their prayers: euen thoſe their prayers he tarteth not for, vntill they ſhall end their ſpeech, but interrupteth the middle courſe of their prayer and making ſpeede offereth h
                     •
                  mſelfe, and compaſſed about with the dew of heauenly ſweetneſſe, meeteth the longing ſoule, and annointed with excellent oyntments refreſheth the

wearied ſoule, comforteth the hungrie, fatneth the poore, maketh it forget earthly things, quickneth it vnmindfull of it ſelfe, in ſtrengthening it meruailouſly. And as in certaine carnall and fleſhely pleaſures, carnal concu
                     •
                  iſcence doth ſo much ouercome, that it loſeth all the vſe of reaſon: So of good right, worthyly in this ſupernal Contemplation, carnall & fleſhly motions are quite conſumed and ſwallowed vp from the ſoule, ſo that the fleſh may contrary or gain ſay the ſoul in nothing & man become altogether ſpirituall.
            
            
               
               Signes of the holy Ghoſt comming to man.
               
                  O LORD how doſt thou appeare when thou wilt doe theſe things, and what ſigne of thy comming? Whether are déepe ſighes and teares witneſſes and meſſengers of this comfort and gladneſſe. If it bee ſo, this is a new meaning, and an vnuſuall ſigne For what agreement is there of comfort to ſighes, of gladneſſe to teares: but

yet if theſe are to bee called teares, and not rather the ouerflowing aboundance, of the inward dew powred vpon, and a ſigne of an inward waſhing, and an outward clenſing. Like as in baptiſme of Children, by the outward waſhing is ſignified and figured the inward waſhing of the ſoule, ſo here the inward clenſing goeth before the outward waſhing. O happy teares by which, the inward ſpotts are purged, and by which the burning flames of ſinnes are quenched. Bleſſed are you that ſo mourne, for you ſhal reioyce.

O ſoule acknowledge thy Bridegroome with teares, imbrace thy long wiſhed for. Now bee drunken with the flowing ſtreame of pleaſure, ſucke milke and hony from the breaſt of his comfort. Theſe be the cleane giftes and comforts which thy Bridegroome hath giuen thee, which are ſobs and teares. He bringeth to thee drinke wt teares in meaſure theſe teares are bread to thee day & night: bread truely ſtrengthning mans heart, ſwéeter then honny and the honnies Combe. O Lord if theſe teares bee

ſo ſweete which are ſtirred vp through ye remēbrance & deſire of thee, how ſweet ſhall the ioy bee conceiued, by the open and m
                     •
                  nifeſt ſight of thée. If it bee ſo ſweete to weepe for thee, how ſweet will it be to bee glad and reioyce with thée. But why doe we ſet forth in common, theſe ſecret conferences of that? Why doe we endeuor to expreſſe eternal affections in common words The vnexpert vnderſtand not ſuch things in the booke of experience: whom the ſame annoynting teacheth. And other wayes the outward

leter profiteth not the reader any whit. Litle ſauory is the reading of the outward letter, except it can take the expoſition and inward ſence from the heart.
            
            
               How the Soule remaineth, the feruency of the holy Ghoſt ceaſing for a time.
               
                  
                     O
                   My ſoule wee haue a great while prolonged ſpeech. It were good for vs to be here with Peter and Iohn, to

beholde the glory of the Bridegroome and to tarry long with him. But I would to bee made here, not two or thrée tabernacles, but one, in which wee might bee together, and take delectation together. But as the Bridegroome ſaith let me depart, for now riſeth the morning, thou haſt receiued the light of grace, and the viſiting which thou didſt deſire. Therefore the bleſſing being giuen, the ſinnow of the thigh mortified, and the name changed from Iacob to Iſrael, the bridegroome long wiſhed for,

withdraweth himſelfe for a little time. He withdraweth himſelfe aſwell from the foreſaid viſion, as from the ſwéetneſſe of the Contemplation, notwithſtanding hee remaineth as much as to gouernment, as much as to glory, and aſmuch as to peace and vnity.
            
            
               Here is rendred a cauſe why the feruency of the holy Ghoſt leaueth the Soule a little time.
               BVt thou maieſt not be afraide Spouſe, nor

diſpaire, neither thinke thy ſelfe diſpiſed although the Bridegroome withdraw his face from thee a little while: All is wrought for thy good, and of his comming and going away thou getteſt profite. Hée commeth to thy comfert, he goeth away as a warning to take héed, leaſt the greatneſſe of conſolation ſhould heaue and puffe thée vp, leaſt if alwayes the Bridegroome ſhould be with thée, thou ſhouldeſt begin to contemne thy fellowes, and attribute ſuch continual viſiting not to grace, but to nature.

But the Bridegroome giueth this grace to whom hee will, and when hee will, it may not bee poſſeſſed by right of Inheritance. It is a common prouerbe yt too much familiarity breedeth contempt. Therefore he goeth away leaſt by too much continuance he ſhould be contemned, and being abſent hee might be the more wiſhed for: and the more wiſhed and deſired, he might the more ardently bee ſought for. Moreouer what is preſent life, which (in reſpect of future glory, that ſhal be reueled to vs) is like a

riddle, by which now wee know in part. For wee haue not here an abiding Citie, but we ſéeke one to come. Therefore wee ſhould not eſteeme baniſhment for a country, a token for a great ſum of money. The bridegroome commeth, likewiſe he goeth away, now bringing comfort, then changing our generall ſtate with infirmity, a little while hee ſuffereth vs to taſt how ſwéete he is, and before we can fully féele it, hee withdraweth himſelfe, and ſo as it were with ſpread wings houering ouer vs,

prouoketh vs to flie, as though he would ſay. Behold you taſt a little, I am ſwéet, if you will fully bee ſatiſfied with this ſwéetnes, run yee after me in to the ſwéete ſauour of my oyntments hauing your harts lifted vp, where I am, on the right hand of God the Father, where you ſhall ſee me, not by a glaſſe or in a ridle, but face to face, and where your hearts ſhall reioyce fully, and your ioy no man can take from you.
            
            
               
               A care and diligence of the Soule that it be not altogether forſaken of God.
               
                  BVt take héede thou Spouſe how the bridegroome may turne away himſelfe from thee. Hee goeth not far, and though thou ſéeſt not him, yet he full of eies ſéeth thee before & behind▪ thou canſt neuer hide thy ſelfe frō him. He hath alſo about thee ſpirits, his meſſengers moſt witty, and prudent

ſpies, that they ſhould marke how (the Bridegroome abſent) thou behaueſt thy ſelfe, and might accuſe thée before him; If they perceiue and finde in thée any ſignes of wantonneſſe or ſcurrility, this Bridegroome is ielous, i
                     •
                   thou entertaine an other louer, if thou fancy to pleaſe others, he will preſently ſeperate himſelfe from thee, and cleaue to other yong ones. This bridegroome is delicate noble and rich, goodly to beholde in beauty aboue the Sons of men. And therefore hée doth not vouchſafe or

thinke worthy to haue any other then a beautifull Spouſe. If he ſee in thee a ſpot or a wrinkle, preſently hee turneth away his face. He cannot indure any vncleanneſſe. Therfore be thou chaſt, be thou modeſt and humble, that ſo of thy Bridegroome thou maiſt deſire often to be viſited.
            
            
               The office and effects of euery one of the degrees by repetition.
               THerefore that thoſe things that are difficultly

ſpoken, ioyned and vnited together, may ſéeme the better, let vs gather (by repetition) the ſumm
                     •
                   of ſuch thinges ſpoken of before, like as that before noted, may be ſéene in the foreſaide examples, how thoſe ſteppes and degrées may agrée together, and as ioyntly and ſeuerally they may ſurpaſſe or excell eyther other. For reading as it were a ground worke and chiefe meane; firſt offereth it ſelfe, and in matter being miniſtred ſendeth vs to meditation And then Meditation diligently inquireth, what is

worthy to bee ſought for and as it were digging, findeth treaſure and ſheweth it. But when it cannot obtaine of it ſelfe, it ſendeth vs to Prayer Prayer lifteth vp it ſelfe with all vehemency, when it findeth by the ſweetnes of contēplation, the treaſure worthy to bee deſired. Comming to this, when it moiſtneth the thirſtie ſoule with the dew of heauenly ſwéetnes, it rewardeth the labour of theſe thrée before. So then reading is an outward exerciſe Meditation an inward perceiuing. Prayer a deſire, and

Meditation aboue al ſenſe. The firſt degrée is of beginning, the ſecond of profiting, the third of deuoutnes, the fourth of bleſſedneſſe. But theſe degrées, are ſo linked together, and are ſo ſeruiceable, in ſupplying helpe one to another, that thoſe going before without thoſe that follow, profite little or nothing, and thoſe that follow without thoſe that goe before, ſeldome or neuer profite. For what profiteth it to vſe the time with continuall reading, to run ouer the great acts & writings of holy men, except in

breaking and chewing on them, wee may ſucke the iuyce and paſſe it through in ſwallowing it, euen to the moſt inward part of the heart, that out of them wee may diligently conſider our ſtate or order of life, and ſtudy and indeuor to doe their workes▪ whoſe déeds and writings we couet to reade often. Bubow ſhall wee conceiue theſe things in minde, or how may wee take héede, leaſt in meditating on ſome of them falſly, and vainely, wee ſhould paſſe the bounds ſet downe of the holy Fathers, except

firſt we ſhall be inſtructed by reading or by hearing, for bearing after a certain manner belongeth to reading. Whereupon wee were wont to ſay, not only to haue read thoſe books which we read to our ſelus and others, but alſo thoſe which we haue heard of our Maſters. Alſo what profiteth it a man when he may perceiu what may bee done by meditations, except he getteth helpe by prayer, and Gods grace to obtaine to them. Euery good gift and euery perfect gift, is from aboue, comming from the Father of

Lights, without whom we can doe nothing. It required prayer of the Samaritane woman, when he ſaid, if thou kneweſt the gift of God, and who it is that ſayeth to thée giue me drinke, thou wouldeſt haue aſked of him, and hée would haue giuen thee water of life. The woman hearing this, (as if ſhe had beene inſtructed by reading) meditating in her heart to bee good and profitable for her to haue this water: Therefore inflamed with deſire of hauing it, turned her ſelfe to prayer, ſaying, Sir giue me of

that water, that I may not thirſt, neither come hither to draw. Note the hearing of the word of God, and the meditation vpon it, incited or ſtirred her vp to prayer. For how might ſhe bee carefull and earneſt to aſke, except firſt meditatiō had moued her? Or what had meditation going before profited her, except prayer following did ſhew what ſhe had requeſted to attaine to. Therefore to the end that meditation bee profitable, it behoueth that deuout prayer ſhould follow, the effect of which is as it

were the ſwéetneſſe of Contemplation.
            
            
               Here are declared all theſe degrees ſo to bee conioyned, that they are inſeperable.
               
                  OVt of theſe we may gather ye reading without meditation is barren. Meditation without reading is erroneous. Prayer without Meditation is nothing earneſt. Meditation without prayer vnprofitable. Prayer with deuoutneſſe and obtainer

of Contemplation. The obtaining of Contemplation without Prayer is very rare or miraculous. For God of whoſe power there is no number or ende, and whoſe mercy is aboue all his workes, readeth vp Sonnes to Abraham out of fiue ſtones, whileſt or as yet hard and vnwilling, hee bringeth them together to aſſent, that they may be willing. And ſo as prodigall (as it is a cōmon ſaying) he draweth the Oxe by the horne, whē not called he putteth in himſelfe. Which thing, and if when wee reade to

happen to ſome men, as to Paule and ſome others, yet notwithſtanding wee ought not as in a manner of tempting God, to take vpon vs diuine things, but to doe that which belongeth vnto vs, that is to read and to meditate in the law of God To pray to him yt he wold helpe our infirmities, and conſider our imperfections. Which hee teacheth vs to doe, ſaying, aſke and yee ſhall receiue, ſéeke and yee ſhall finde▪ knocke and it ſhall be opened vnto you▪ For now the Kingdome of heauen ſuffereth violence, and the

violent taketh it by violence. Sée if the properties of the foure degrees aforeſaid, in their agreeable diſtinctions, can bring to paſſe how they may agrée together, and what euery one of them may effect, or accompliſh in vs. Bleſſed is the man whoſe mind is at leaſure, from other buſineſſes, hee alwayes deſireth to be exerciſed in theſe foure degrées, who, althings that he hath being ſolde, buyeth that fielde in which lyeth hid the treaſure long wiſhed for Marke yee and conſider how ſwéete the Lord is.

Who that is exerciſed in the firſt degrée, héedful & circumſpect in the 2. deuout in the 3. & in the 4. lifted vp aboue himſelfe, he doth aſcēd by theſe (which he hath diſpoſed & ſet in order in his heart) frō vertue to vertue vntill hee may ſée the Lord of Lords in Sion. Bleſſed is he to whom it is grāted to remaine in this higheſt degrée, euen a ſmall time, for he may truely ſay, behold I féel the grace and fauor of God, behold I contemplate with Peter and Iohn, behold wt 
                  Iacob I am often times delighted with the imbracings of Rachel.
                  
But let this man beware, leaſt after this Contemplation in which hee was lifted vp to heauen, hee fall downe by any diſordinate occaſion, into the bottomleſſe pitt, nor after that viſiting ended, he bee turned into laſciuious déeds of the world, and inticements of the fleſh. When in truth the weake ſight of mans minde, cannot long indure the brightneſſe of the true light, let it deſcend eaſily & orderly, to ſome one of the thrée degrées, by which it had aſcended, and by courſe & turne, now in one, now in another, it may ſtay, as

in conſideration of the place and time, then is it by ſo much the nearer to God, by how much it is the further from the firſt ſteppe or degrée. But alas 
                     •
                  he fraile and miſerable condition of man! beholde wee apparantly ſée by the leading of reaſon, and the teſtimonies of ſcriptures, the perfection of good life, to bee contained in theſe foure degrées; And in theſe ſpiritual good things mans exerciſe ought to bee imployed. But whois he? and we wil praiſe him. To wil is preſent with many, but with a few to performe,

and would to God wee were of that few.
            
            
               Foure Cauſes which draw vs from theſe foure degrees.
               
                  BUT there are Foure cauſes which draw vs often times frō theſe foure degrées, that is to wit, vnauoidable neceſſity. Commodity of honeſt buſineſſe. Humane infirmity, and worldly vanity. The firſt excuſable, the ſecond tolerable, the third miſerable, the fourth culpable. For thoſe whom

ſuch cauſe withdraweth from a holy purpoſe, had béene yet better not to know the glory of God, (then known) afterwards to goe backe. What excuſe ſhall we haue for ſin? for iuſtly can the Lord ſay what ſhould I haue done for thee and haue not done it. Thou waſt not and I haue created thée, thou haſt ſinned, and madeſt thy ſelfe the ſeruant of the Diuell, and I haue redéemed thée, thou diddſt runne a race of the world with the wicked, and I haue choſen thée. When I gaue thee grace in my ſight & would

make an abiding with thée thou deſpiſedſt me, and not onely haſt caſt behinde thée my wordes but my ſelfe, and haſt walked after thine owne concupiſcenſes But O good God, gentle and méeke, a ſwéete friend, a wiſe councellor, a ſtrong h
                     •
                  lper, how vain how raſh is he that renounceth thée, that putteth back ſo milde and quiet a gueſt from his owne heart. O vnhappy and dangerous change, to put away his Creator and to receiue hurtfull cogitations. Yea that ſecret ſeate of the holy Ghoſt, the ſecret of the heart, which a

litle time before, bent and applyed it ſelfe to heauenly ioyes, ſo ſuddenly to bee ſuppreſſed with vncleane thoughts and ſinnes. The ſtepps of the Bridegroome are but yet freſh in it, and now adulterous deſires are let in. It euill beſéemeth and tis a filthy thing, the eares which euen now heard the wordes, which are not lawfull for man to ſpeake, and ſo ſoone to bee inclined to heare fables, and ſlanders, the eyes which euen now were baptiſed with holy▪ and deuoute teares, ſo ſuddenly to be turned to beholde vanities,

the tongue which euen now ſwéetly ſong the wedding ſong, which had reconciled the Bride & her bridegroom, with eloquent perſwaſions, and now lead her into the tauerne again, to bee turned into vaine ſpéeches, to ſcoffing and ſcurrillity, to forge deceits, and to report euill. Lord be it far from vs. But if it happen we ſlide into ſuch falts through humaine infirmity, we ſhould not then diſpaire, but let vs runne backe agine to that milde and mercifull Phiſition who taketh the ſimple out of the duſt, and lifteth the

poore out of the myre, and which will not the death of a ſinner, he will againe cure vs. Let vs pray God therefore, that thoſe impediments which wtdraw vs from his Contemplation, that for the preſent he will mitigate them in vs, and hereafter vtterly take them from vs. Who bring vs by thoſe foreſayd degrées from vertue to vertue, vntill wee ſée the God of Gods in Sion. Where the Elect ſhall not receiue the ſwéetneſſe of Divine Contemplation droppe after droppe, but (inceſſantly repleniſhed

with the riuer of pleaſure) ſhall haue that ioy which no man ſhall take from them, and peace, not ſubiect to any alteration, peace into it ſelfe.
               Amen.
            
         
         
            
            THE SINNERS GLASSE.
            
               CHAP. I. How God gaue the ſoule to Man.
               
                  IN the beginning, God on the ſixt day, gaue to man and woman reaſonable ſoules, ſuch as continually hee breatheth into euery one in their creation. My Father ſayth Chriſt, worketh euen till now, and I alſo worke. The fleſh is begotten of the fleſh. But one ſoule

begets not an other. Touching all other liuing creatures, it is ſaide in the firſt of Geneſis. Let the waters bring forth, &c. And let the earth bring forth liuing creatures, &c. But neither the water nor earth bringeth forth the Soule, for God inſpireth that into man. And man hath not originall ſinne, by reaſon of the ſoule, but by the fleſh, from whence ye ſoule is made guilty of the firſt fault, or original ſinne, which the fleſh draweth or powreth into the ſoule, with which

fleſh the ſoule is vnited in perſon, although differing in nature, for the acts & déedes of the body are of one ſort, and the actions of the ſoule of another. And yet notwithſtanding the vices of ye body may charge the ſoule. Becauſe the Soule was giuen to that ende that it ſhould correct the vnlawfull motions of the fleſh, whether they happen by negligence or ignorance. which cannot be excuſed. Like as when the ſcholler or ſeruant by the negligence of the teacher or maſter doth offend, the

teacher or maſter cannot bée without blame: So no leſſe can the ſoule bée blameles, when it ought to gouerne and cauſe the fleſh to obey.
            
            
               CHAP. II. A diſtinction between the ſpirit and the ſoule.
               THe Soule and the ſpirit although they bee two wordes, and names, it is not to be vnderſtoode, that they are of ſeuerall eſſence or being in a man but are clearely one eſſence, and

ſubſtance, as ſelfe one of pure nature, for in theſe two words, as there is not vnderſtood a double ſubſtance, yet in them, there is a difference to be noted, by a double force▪ of the ſame eſſence or being in a man. As thus the ſpirit is taken as the higher, and the ſoule is taken as the lower, or inferior part. The ſoule, in that it is a liuely, and an euerlaſting thing, and maintaining life, in the body, is reckoned as it were the lower part. But the ſpirit in that it is ſpirituall, flyeth vp to

the higheſt, and is ſerued from the Soule, that it might be vnited to God: becauſe as it is written, that cleauing to God is one ſpirit with him. Happy is that diuiſion, of the ſpirit from the ſoule, and maruailous, which beeing lifted vp vnto the Lord, is transformed into his Image. And thus, at that preſent & inſtant lifting vp of the Spirit, the ſoule which is the inferior part, is moſt quietly in peace▪ and great tranquilitie. And the ſpirit which is the higher and purer part, is exalted

into excellent glory, and reioycing. My ſoule, ſaith the virgine, doth magnifie the Lord, and my ſpirit reioyceth in God my Sauiour. Men may perceiue, being touched by the word of God, either in their ſorrow and contrition (being caſt downe by the power of the ſame word) or comforted therby, how the ſoule and ſpirit are deuided. For as the very truth ſaith, the word of God is quicke and of great force, more piercing then the two edged ſword, euen reaching out to the diuiſion

of the ſoule, and the Spirit. So that no diuiſion amongſt men is ſo much to bée marueiled at, as when that which is eſſentially one, and indiuideable, ſhould be parted in it ſelfe. Now before yt this ſoule and ſpirit doe leaue our bodies, we muſt conſider and vnderſtand an other ſpirit, a leaged by the Apoſtle, which is the grace of the holy ſpirit, the which the Apoſtle doth pray that it may remaine in vs ſound, and whole, becauſe that ſpirit doth flie from that which is fained, and remoueth

it ſelfe from the thoughts which be wtout vnderſtanding. Therefore with continuall Meditation, wee ſhould exerciſe our ſelues and conſider our miſeries and wants, our labours and ſorrowes. For we entred into this life with mourning, and liue in it with trauell, and muſt againe put it of with paine and feare. Therefore wée ought to thinke, how ſhort our life is, how fraile a life it is, how certaine it is that wee ſhall die, and how vncertaine the howre of death is.

Let vs cōſider with how many bitter griefes life is mixed, if any thing bée ſwéet and ioyfull, in the way of this life fanning on vs, how deceitfull it is, and to bée ſuſpected: how vnconſtant and tranſitory it is, whatſoeuer the loue of this world bringeth forth, whatſoeuer ſhew or temporall brauery it promiſeth. On the other ſide, let vs conſider, the pleaſant beauty, and ſwéetenes of our heauenly coū
                  try. Let vs take heede and well weigh from whence wee are fallen,

and where we lie, what we haue loſt, and what we find: that on both parts wee may vnderſtand, how much wee ought to mourne and lament in this exile, and baniſhment. And then hereupon it is that Salomon ſaith, he that ſetteth before him knowledge, ſetteth before him ſorrow. Becauſe, by how much the more a man knoweth his euils, by ſo much the more hee hath cauſe and ought to ſigh and grone.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III. How man is made to the Image of his creator.
               THe reaſonable ſoule & belonging to vnderſtanding, is made according to the Image & likenes of God yt it may know ye creator by his Image, & loue him becauſe of his likenes: for according to ye image of God, it hath reaſon, and according to his likenes it hath loue or charity, for as the creator which created mā according to his own Image, is charity good and iuſt, pacient & méek, pure

and pitiful with other notable and holy vertues read of him. So a man is created, that hée ſhould haue charity, that hée ſhould bee good and iuſt, patient and méeke, pure and pitifull. Which vertues, any man, by how much the more hee hath them in himſelfe, by ſo much the nearer he is to God, and beareth the greater likenes of him his Creator. But if any man, by the wrong wayes of vices, and the crooked turnings of euils, doth out of kinde, wander from this moſt

noble likenes of his creator, then it ſhall become of him, as it is written, A man when hee was in honor did not vnderſtand▪ &c. for what greater honour may there bee to a man, then to bee made according to the likeneſſe of his creator, and to bee adorned with the ſame robes of vertues, that he is of whom it is reade. The Lord is King, and hath put on glerious apparell, &c. Which is, that he is glorified with al the ſhining of vertues, and garniſhed with the honour of all goodneſſe.

What greater diſgrace may there be to man, or vnhappier miſery, that this glory of his Creator being loſt, hee ſhould ſlide and fall into the deformity, and vnreaſonable ſimilitude of a bruite Beaſt. Wherefore let euery man, more diligently haue his minde fixed, into the excellencie of his firſt ſtate and condition, and acknowledge in himſelfe, the moſt worſhippfull Image of the holy Trinity: and ſtriue with himſelfe, to obtaine the true honour of the diuine likeneſſe, by

the nobleneſſe of good conditions, and maners, and the exerciſe of vertues, that when hee ſhall appeare, what he is, then hee may ſhew himſelfe, like vnto him that maruailouſly made him to his likeneſſe in the firſt man, and more marueilouſly renued him in the ſecond.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII. That the ſoule is no part of God.
               THe ſoule is no part of God, the mutability into which it runneth proueth that,

for God is immutable, or vnchangeable. The ſoule is often changed, by reaſon of ſinne, and ſometime changed by reaſon of paine, and being damned, becomes moſt miſerable. Yet nothing may hurt it, but when it departeth from God. It departeth, when it ſinneth, wherupon the miſerable runnagate frō God, is tormented. Seuered from one, it is ſcattered into many things, and by reaſon of the intemperance of it, is made as it were ſicke, and corrupt, and is become

diſcomfited, and grieued. Therefore the bodily ſenſes (the memory béeing diſtempered or diſturbed) are diſquiet and heauy, they are made féeble, and diſmaide. Then the fleſh doth ſuffer, then faintings begin, and violent death houereth about. Surely a man turned from God by ſinning, is froward, and vnfortunate, becauſe he diſagréeing with God, is alſo at diſcord, and diſcontent with himſelfe, and bringeth paine of himſelfe into himſelfe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V. That the ſoule is immortall.
               
                  A Man conſiſteth of body and ſoule, and whatſoeuer is ſéene, with theſe bodily eyes, is made for the body, the body for the ſoule, but the ſoule for God: that when the body returneth to the earth, out of which it is taken, the ſpirit may returne to God, who gaue it. The ſoule giueth life to the fleſh, when it commeth, (no other wayes then the Sunne giueth light to the day) and it cauſeth death when it departeth:

yet death dooth not conſume the body and ſoule, once ioyned togither, but parteth them vntill both of them come againe, to their firſt originall or beginning. And leaſt any man ſhould thinke, the ſoule to be conſumed by the death of the body, let him heare what the Lord ſaith in the Goſpell: Feare ye not them (ſayth he) which kill the body, but the ſoule they cannot kill.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI. Of the loue and friendſhip betweene the body and the ſoule.
               WOnderfull is the fellowſhip of the fleſh and the ſoule, the breath of life, and the clay of the earth: for thus it is written, God made man of the clay of the earth, and breathed into his noſtrels, the breath of life, giuing to him ſenſe, and vnderſtanding, that by ſenſe, hée ſhould quicken the clay aſſotiated to him: and by vnderſtanding, he ſhould rule

and gouerne it, and by that vnderſtanding, hée ſhould enter inwardly into himſelfe, and behold the wiſdome of God; and that by ſenſe, hée ſhould goe forth, and behold the workes of his wiſedome. By vnderſtanding hée hath enlightened man inwardly, and to ſenſe he hath abroad, beautified, and made things ſo faire that man might find delight, and recreation in both of them: felicity inwardly, and outwardly: and abroad pleaſure and gladneſſe. But becauſe the outward good things

canot indure long: man is commanded to returne from them, to things inward, and from thoſe inward things, to aſcend to higher matters. For, of ſo great a dignity, is the ſtate and condition of man, that no good thing, beſides the chiefe good, may ſuffice him. It is very miraculous, that ſuch diuerſe & contrary things, one frō the other, might conioine together in one. Neyther leſſe maruaylous is it, that the euerlaſting and liuing God, hath ioyned himſelfe to

our molde and clay, that God and clay ſhould bee vnited together, ſo great a highneſſe, and ſo much baſeneſſe: for nothing is higher then God, and nothing more baſe then ſlime and clay. Maruaylous was the firſt coniunction, and maruailous the ſecond, nor leſſe maruailous ſhall the third bée, when men, Angells, and God, ſhall bee one ſpirit. For with the ſame goodneſſe is man good, with the which the Angels are good, and with that ſelfe goodneſſe, both, and either of them are

bleſſed. If ſo it bee, that both doe deſire the ſame thing, with the ſame will and the ſame ſpirite. For if God could ioyne ſuch a differing and vnlike in nature, as is of the fleſh and ſoule, to bée of one league, confederacy and friendſhippe, no doubt, it is as poſſible for him, to exalt and extoll a reaſonable ſpirite, to the partaking of his glory, which is brought lowe, euen to the company of an earthly body, that the ſame body being gloryfied, it may bee to it a glory, which was a burthen,

yea euen to the fellowſhip of thoſe bleſſed ſpirits, which haue continued ſtill in their brightneſſe and purity. Very certainely the moſt higheſt hath created man to that purpoſe, of his onely and méere loue, without any neceſſity, that hee might become partner of his happineſſe, If therfore ſo much ioy, and ſo great gladneſſe, is in this temporall life, which conſiſteth by the preſence and company of the ſpirit, in a corruptible body, then how much more gladneſſe, and ioy

ſhall there be in the eternall and euerlaſting life, which conſiſteth by the preſence of the Godhead, in a reaſonable ſpirite. Therefore let the body bee ſubiect to the ſoule, and the ſoule to GOD, and it ſhall be one ſpirite with him, ſo that it remaine in humility, and acknowledge the grace and fauour of him the Creator of it, by whom it is to be exalted and glorified.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII. For what cauſe the ſoule is vnited to God.
               IT is his commaundement, that wee ſhould abide in his loue, Abide you, ſaith hee, in my loue: For my loue he hath coupled man vnto him that hee ſhould haue him alwaies, and ſhould euer remaine in him, delighting, reioicing, and magnifying of him, and in him. Man is coupled by loue vnto his Creator: for it is the onely bond of loue, that bindeth them together. By

the loue of God, all of vs cleaue vnto him: by the loue of our neighbor, we are all one together, that the goodes of all ſhould become the goodes of euery one, and whatſoeuer any one hath not of himſelfe, hee ſhould poſſeſſe it by another. Charity and loue is the way of God to men, and the way of men to God: for through loue God came to men, hée came into men, and hee was made man. By charity and loue men loue God, they chuſe him aboue all thinges, they flie vnto

him, and liue to him. So familiar is charity with God, that hée will haue no abiding place, where Charity is not. Then if thou haſt loue and Charity, then haſt God, becauſe God is charity.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. A perſwaſion to loue God.
               WRetch that I am, how much ought I to loue my Lord my God, who made mée when I was not, redéemed me when elſe I had béene loſt, and periſhed. I was not, yet hee made

me of nothing, neither ſtone nor trée, nor birde, nor any of the brute creatures. But his pleaſure was to make me a man, he gaue mee life, ſenſes and diſcretion. I had periſhed, hee deſcended to mortality, he tooke vpon him mortality, hée ſuffered his paſſion, hee ouercame death, and ſo reſtored mee. I had periſhed, and had béen caſt away, becauſe I was ſolde in my ſinnes. Hée came after mée to redéeme mée, hée weighed the price of his precious blood for mee, and by that meane

brought mee backe from exile, and redéemed mée from bondage. Alſo hee called mée by his name that the memoriall of him ſhould alwaies bée with mée. He annoynted me with the oyle of gladneſſe, with the which hée was annointed, and that of Chriſt I ſhould bée called a Chriſtian. So his grace, and mercy, hath alwaies preuented me. Hée my God hath often deliuered mée from many perils, and dangers. When I erred, hée led me forth of it. When I was ignorant, hee

taught me. When I ſinned, bee corrected mée. When I was ſadde, hée comforted me. When I diſpaired, be ſtrengthned me againe. When I fell, he reared me. When I ſtood, hée helde mée. When I went hée ledde mee. When I came, hée receiued mee. This and many other things, my Lord my God, did for mée, of which his goodneſſe, ſwéete it is to mée, euer to ſpeak of, alwayes to thinke of, and alwaies to giue him thanks for. And I deſire him, that for all his benefites, I

may for euer prayſs him, and loue him: for as he is an aider to euery one, filling and ſatiſfying euery one, hauing care ouer all, and aſwell prouident to euery one, as to all: ſo I ſée him wholy buſied for my ſafety. So that if I will regard mine owne ſafety: hée is as though forgetfull of all men, and would attende onely on me. He ſheweth himſelfe euer preſent, offereth him ſelfe euer ready, if hée might finde mée ready. Whither ſoeuer I turne my ſelfe he forſaketh mée not, except I firſt forſake

him. Wherſoeuer I will be, hée departeth not becauſe he is euery where. So that whereſoeuer I goe I may find him, with whom I may be. Likewiſe, whatſoeuer I ſhall doe hee ſtandeth by, as if he were a cōtinuall ouerſéer of all my thoughts, purpoſes, and déedes, When I doe diligently conſider theſe thinges, I am confounded, both with fear & great ſhame, becauſe I beholde him euery where preſent with me, ſéeing into all my ſecrets, for there bee many things in mee before

his eyes, of which I am aſhamed: and for which I greatly feare to diſpleaſe him. Neither haue I for al theſe things anything to render him, but onely I will loue him, for there is nothing better, or more becomming then to render that by loue, which was giuen for loue.
            
            
               CHAP. IX. Of the inward ſenſe, and the outward.
               THere are two ſenſes in man, one inward, and an other outward, and eyther of them

hath his good, in which it is recreated and comforted. The inward ſenſe is refreſhed & comforted in the contemplation of diuinitie: the outward ſenſe, in beholding of matters belonging to men. Wherefore God was made man, that hée might make bleſſed the whole man in himſelfe, and that the whole conuerſion of man, might be to him, and that all the loue of man ſhould bée in him. But this is al the good of man, that whether hee ſhould goe in, or goe out, hee ſhould finde

comfort in his maker, comfort abroad in the fleſh of his Sauiour, comfort inwardly in the Godhead, and diuinity of his creator. But there is an euill following this great good, becauſe (the good loſt that was within) the ſoule is gone forth to ſtraying goodes that are abroade, and made a couenant with the delights of the world, repoſing vpon them: not regarding the abſence of his inward good, in that that hee poſſeſſeth his conſolations in ſtrang goodes. For whileſt the

outward carnall ſenſe vſeth his good, the inward ſenſe of the minde, lyeth as it were aſléepe, for he doth not know the goodes of the inward ſenſe, which is taken and inſnared, with the iolity of outward things. For he that delighteth in the fleſh, liueth and abideth therin, fléeing the griefes and ſorrowes thereof, by all poſſible meanes▪ but of the woundes of the ſoule hée is vtterly ignorant, neyther ſéeketh hee any remedy for them. But here in this world, if he be not clenſed of that

fleſhly ſenſe, the ſame fleſh being put off, the ſoule ſhal féele the paines of thoſe wounds, it hath receiued by the pleaſures of the outward ſenſe, in what worldly thinges ſoeuer.
            
            
               CHAP. X. That a man may know how hee is diſpoſed to good or euill.
               THere be two things neceſſary to vs, by which wee ſhould know our ſelues, that is to ſay, how wee are diſpoſed to euill, and how to good.

Prone wee are to euill, and if the mercy of God kéepe vs not, likely we are of our ſelues to fall into euery vice: nor to riſe from them, except the mercy of God follow vs at hand, to holde vs vp. The Prophet well knew this when he ſaid, Thy mercy O Lord, is before mine eyes, which kéepeth mée, and let thy mercy follow me, that it may ſuſtaine me. Weak and vnable wee are to goodneſſe, neither without the grace of God to doe any good, or able to perſeuere in any good

thing. This alſo the Apoſtle did know, when he ſaide: By the grace of God I am that I am, and becauſe his grace in me is not in vame, his grace remaineth in mee. This double knowledge had Abraham of himſelfe, when he ſaide, Beholde I haue taken vpon me to ſpeake vnto ye Lord which am but duſt and aſhes. In truth man is but duſt: for as duſt is forced about with euery winde and is caſt downe and there remaineth. So man may fall into euery vice, neither can

moue to riſe except the mercy of God ayde him. Alſo man is aſhes, becauſe as aſhes bringeth forth neyther budde, nor ſproute of it ſelfe, neither the receiued ſéede ſpringeth out of it: So a man neither can doe good, nor remaine in any good thing, without the grace of God. Therefore wée ought to render great thankes vnto God, becauſe hee hath granted many good things vnto vs, and many euils that wee haue done hee hath pardoned vs, and hath preſerued vs from many

euils, which wee might haue done, as likely as many others which wee haue committed & done. for what euill ſoeuer wée haue not done, it is through his mercy that we haue not done it: for if he had ſuffered it, ſurely we had done it aſwell in déed as will. And in ſooth I do not know, whether wee ought to loue him more for thoſe thinges, which hee hath forgiuen vs, or for thoſe ſins which hée hath kept vs frée from. For although wée haue not done them, wée ought to thinke as if wée

had done them, and as though hee had forgiuen them: for ſomuch as we had at the leaſt done thē willingly, if he had ſuffered it. In very truth whoſoeuer in ſuch maner doth acknowledge himſelfe, he is both humble before God and men. He loueth God, and all men for God his ſake. And if hée haue perfect charity, hée iudgeth no man, he accuſeth no man he condemneth no man, he beareth no malice, hée mooueth no brawles, 
                     •
                  ée ſoweth no diſcorde, hée doth not perſecute innocents

he h
                     •
                  re
                     ••
                   not thoſe which reproue him, hée committeth no theft, no falſe witneſſe, no periury, he ſlandereth no man, be hurteth no man, hée hateth none, but loueth all men. It is written, yée ſhall loue one another: for ſo familiar is charity with God, that hee will not dwell in him in whō charity is not. Who ſo euer therefore hath charity, hath God, becauſe God is charity. And who ſo hateth one man, looſeth God, and the good that he doth Wherefore let euery one be carefu
                     •
                  l

leaſt for the hating of one man he looſeth God, and euery good thing.
            
            
               CHAP. XI. That euery man ſhould know himſelfe.
               KNow thy ſelf, know from whence thou commeſt, and whither thou ſhalt, how thou liueſt, how much good thou doſt or faileſt therein, how farre thou art from God, or how neare, not as in ſpace betwéene places, but in the likenes and vnlikenes of good life and behauior. Know

how thou art a man, whoſe conception was in ſinne, to bée borne in miſery, to liue in griefe and paine, and that to die there is no remedie. Certaine is it that thou ſhalt die▪ but vncertaine how, or when, or where. becauſe death expecteth thée euery where. And thou, if thou be wiſe expect it euer. Therefore carefully take héed what thou doeſt, or what thou oughtſt to do: if thou haſt anything to doe, do it. If it be to doe good, mixe it not with any euill: if it be good, that thou ſhouldeſt

doe accompliſh it with much vprightneſſe as thou oughteſt, If it be for another, doe it as if thou ſhouldeſt doe it for thy ſelfe. If thou thy ſelfe doeſt good, doe it ſo well that it be a good example to others. And thus, as the Prophet Dauid ſayeth and willeth▪ Thou ſhalt decline from euill, and doe good.
            
            
               CHAP. XII. What Meditation is.
               BY Meditation wée may the better know God & our ſelues.

Meditation bringeth knowledge, knowledge bringeth compunction, compunction cauſeth deuotion, deuotion cauſeth prayer. Meditation is an often moouing of the minde, very diligent and foreſéeing, to ſearch or finde out the meaning of thinges, which are hard to bee vnderſtood, and to bring ſecrete thinges to knowledge. Knowledge or learning, is when a man is inlightned by often. Meditation, to the knowledge of himſelfe. Compunction, is when through the conſideration

of his owne euills, the heart is touched with an inward griefe. Deuotion is a godly and an būble affection towardes God. Hamble by the knowledge of his owne infirmities, godly by the conſideration of the diuine mercy. Prayer is a deuotion of the minde, conuerting to God, thorough holy and humble affection. Affection is a certaine ſelfe will, and ſwéete inclination of the mind, wholy towardes God: for there is nothing mouing God ſo much to loue and mercy, as the

pure affection of the minde. Mens natures is to loue and prayſe the knowledge of heauenly and earthly thinges. But they are much better that preferre before this knowledge, the knowledge whereby to know themſelues. For truely more prayſe worthy is the ſoule, that knoweth his owne infirmity, and miſery, then it which ſearcheth the courſe of the ſtarres, and natures of things. For the ſoule which waiteth vpon the Lord, moued by the feruency of the holy Ghoſt,

and imbaſeth it ſelfe before him in his loue: and though not able, yet willing to enter into him, and hee ſhining o
                     •
                   that ſoule, it wayteth on him, and findeth him, and acknowledging the grief of minde not to bée compared to his mercy, hath good cauſe méekely to wéepe, and to beſéech him, that hee will haue mercy and compaſſion on it, and to put from it all miſery. This poore ſoule, néedy and ſorrowfull, knowledge puffeth not vp, becauſe loue and charity edifieth and eſtabliſheth

it. For man ſetteth before him knowledge, that is to know himſelfe, and his owne infirmities, rather then to know the force and vertue of hearbes, and the nature of all liuing creatures, and ſetting before him this knowledge, hée ſetteth before him griefe and ſorrow: that is, in what hee hath rebelled, and lailed in, in this his life and pilgrimage in the earth, conſidering of his owne country which hee is to go to, and to ſée his liuing and eternal God. He ſorroweth

that he is kept in baniſhment and exile, becauſe hee is delayed and put off from his kingdome. Hee ſorroweth whileſt hee calleth to minde, what and how great euils he hath done, and what intollerable paines for them hee is like to ſuffer.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII. That the ſoule cannot containe it ſelfe in good thoughts.
               WHen I doe conſider what the nature of the Soule is, which can giue life to

the fleſh, but cannot as it deſireth containe it ſelfe in good thoughts, I doe finde a certaine ſpirit belonging to vnderſtanding, liuing by the power of the Creator, and quickening the body, which it nouriſheth and maintaineth. But notwithſtanding ſubiect to vanity and changeableneſſe, which often times myrth and gladneſſe lifteth vp, feare troubleth, iniquity mortifieth righteouſneſſe reuiueth, for in trueth the life of the Soule is God, the death of the Soule is ſinne, for

it is ſaide by the holy Spirite, that the ſoule which ſinneth ſhall die, but that Soule which hath done Iudgement and righteouſneſſe ſhall liue and not die. In ſuch ſort is the ſoule immortall that it cannot die, and in ſuch ſort mortall that ſteānot but die. By mortality it is mortall. & by immortality it is immortall. Wherefore to the wretched and accurſed, death is without death, end without ende, wearines without wearineſſe, becauſe death euer liueth, and the ende

ſhall euer beginne, and wearines ſhal not know to be weary: death ſhall kill, and yet not end life: paine ſhall torment, and ſhall not put away feare and horror: the flame ſhall burne, but not driue away darkenes: for there ſhall bee in fire darkeneſſe: in darkeneſſe horrible feare: and in burning vnſpeakeable torment▪ Thus the reprobate caſt into hell fire, ſhall féele in their puniſhment ſorrow & paine and in the extremity of ſorrow, ſhall be ſtrooken with feare, and ſhal euer

ſuffer and euer be afraid, becauſe euer tormented without ende, they ſhall euer liue without hope of pardon, and mercy, which is a miſery aboue all miſeries: for after ſo many thouſand of yéeres in number as they haue had haires on their head, how many ſoeuer they were, if they ſhould hope to end their paines then, yet they ſhould much the better endure them. But becauſe they haue no hope, nor ſhall haue, they ſhall faint in diſpaire, and ſhall not ſuffice their torments. Of them it is

written by Eſay the Prophet, Their worme ſhall not die, and their fire ſhall neuer bee put out, becauſe, neither they ſhall euer bee conſumed. The worme ſhall gnaw their conſcience, the fire ſhall burne their fleſh: and becauſe they haue forſaken their Creator in heart and body, they ſhall be puniſhed both in heart and body, & when the ſoule ſhall be ſeperated from the bleſſed life euerlaſting, the body ſhall be ſubiect to euerlaſting puniſhment. There ſhall be feare and heauineſſe

of heart, mourning and ſorrow. There ſhall bée the tormentors ſitting, the worme gnawing, the fire conſuming, ſinnes diſcouered, the guilty puniſhed, and all this euerlaſtingly. Who ſoeuer ſhall come to theſe torments, ſhall neuer go out againe, where they ſhall ſée deteſtable monſters of diuels, and the vgly ſhapes of them. And they ſhall alſo ſée, in the torments of fire their mates, and followers, which againſt the commaundements of God, they haue loued in vnlawful

loue, and luſt, and beholding their diſtruction, it ſhall afflict them in the increaſing of their damnation. Such ſhall not ſée God, which is the moſt miſery of all miſeries: for who can expreſſe what a paine it is not to ſée the Creator, and framer of al things, the redéemer and ſauiour of the faithfull, the King of heauen and earth, the Lord of all, by whom we are, wée liue, and haue knowledge. Therefore it behoueth vs on euery ſide, that we circumſpectly looke about vs, & euery

where watch, that wée commit no euill, or doe not thoſe things rightly that wee are commaunded to doe. And in thoſe things rightly done, that we bee not proud in our thoughts therefore: for many through their vertues that way haue fallen headlong into hell.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII. Of the euill Angell.
               IT is ſaide that Satan doth fill the minde of ſome, not entring into them and their ſenſes, but (intycing and inducing them by guile and

iniquity) doth by euery malicious meane, bring lewde motions, and alluring vices into their thoughts. But the diuell doth not fill the ſoule by participation of nature, or ſubſtance, as ſome thinke, as an inhabiter therein, but by fraudulent deceite and malice, filleth them whome it is ſaide he dwelleth in: for it onely belongeth to the Trinitie, to fill the nature and ſubſtance which it hath created.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV. That wee deſire and ſeeke after good things.
               WHoſoeuer truely and vnfaynedly be waileth his ſins and will feare to commit ſinne, and will rebuke himſelfe in his ſmalleſt faults, remembring how much hee hath offended in the greateſt. And although with how great vertue ſoeuer his minde may bee mighty, and with how great conſtancie it may be in force, yet childiſhly notwithſtanding, ſome fleſhly

toyes will outwardly bewray themſelues. And except with a certaine manly vehemency, they be reſtrayned, they draw the weake minde to all frailties and lightneſſe, wherin if by long cuſtom it bee inured, when it would riſe it cannot, being preſſed downe by the weight of euill vſe and cuſtome. Therefore as the Apoſtle ſayth, who ſoeuer ſtandeth, let him take héed he fall not: and if he fall, let him with an humble & contrite heart very quickly riſe againe, let there be no deferring.

Let him bee the 
                     •
                  um
                     •
                  ler in his owne conſcience, the earneſter and readier to repentance, and the waryer not to offend againe: for whoſoeuer through the onely deſire of heauenly bleſſedneſſe hateth theſe temporall things, and loueth nothing of this world, and ſéeketh onely his after euerlaſting Country, ſhall bee comforted and ſuſtained with great peace and tranquility of minde. How much the clearer doth man ſée God, when hee findeth himſelfe with h
                     •
                  m alone.

For nothing is more preſent then God, and nothing more ſecret. Wée ought to deſire therefore a ſeperation of the minde, from the ſwarme of earthly delights and deſires, and then driuing out from the inward of the heart, the commotions of vnlawfull imaginations & thoughts: wée ſhould labour with diligence to our heauenly Country, for the loue of eternall reſt. Let vs déepely conſider what thoſe companions of Angelles bée, what that fellowſhipp is

of bleſſed ſoules. What is the Maieſtie of the viſion of God, and how God doth comfort his Saints with the ſweete euerlaſtingneſſe thereof, For no man in this life, can worthyly weygh in his mind how great that felicity is, to ſee God face to face, how much ſweetneſſe to heare that Angelicall melody, how much gladneſſe to enioy the company of al ſaints. For euery one ſhall reioyce ſo much at the bleſſedneſſe of the other, as at his own vnſpeakeable ioy. In that glory, I bebeholde

nothing more willingly, I find nothing more delectable to contemplate, then the affection of the inward loue, wherewith euery one ſhall loue the other ſo much as himſelfe, & God more then himſelfe, and God ſhall loue thē more then they ſhal loue them ſelues and that in perpetuall ioy. There we ſhall ſee nothing ſtrange, wee ſhall loue nothing out of order, wee ſhall heare nothing to offende out eares: for all things there are agreeing, al thinges delightfull, all thinges

quiet. There is all felicity, all pleaſantneſſe, all gladnes, al things goodly to beholde, all beauty, all ſwéetneſſe. Whatſoeuer is néedfull, and whatſoeuer to delight is there, as all riches, and al da
                     •
                  nties, all reſt, and all ſolace. There is continuall tranquility, pleaſant ſayreneſſe, eternall ioyfulneſſe, ioyfull and honourable praiſe, and the full knowledge of al good things. For what may be wanting there where God is, which wanteth nothing. How many ſo euer bee there, are as

Gods: neither it néedeth that the one ſay to the other, know God, for all knoweth him, and beholdeth him, all praiſe h
                     •
                  m and loue him. They know him without errour, they ſée him without ende, they prayſe him and loue him without wearineſſe. They euer ſee him, and deſire to ſée him, ſo much worthy hee is to be ſéene. They euer loue him and euer deſire to loue him, ſo ſweete is hée to be loued. And by how much they loue him, by ſo much the more they will loue him, hee is

ſo delightfull to bee enioyed. In this delight they repoſe themſelues, being full of God, full of all bleſſing and ſanctification, and cleauing euer to bleſſedneſſe, they are bleſſed, and happie, beholding euer eternity, they are eternall. And ioyned to the light, are made light, beholding euer vnchangeableneſſe, are chaunged into vnchaungeableneſſe. So much the more willinglier they beholde him, in how much hee is the ſweeter, which countenance is holy and mercifull,

his face honorable, his ſpeeche pleaſant. O bleſſed ſight to ſee the King of Angels in his honour, to ſee the holy of all holy, by whom all are holy. To ſee him is the chiefeſt felicity, the chiefeſt ioy, a bleſſed life, and life euerlaſting.
            
         
         
            Godly Prayers.
            
               
               A Prayer to God the Father to vouchſafe to helpe mankinde.
               
                  ALmighty God the ouerſéer and ſearcher of my heart, I doe moſt humbly confeſſe the omnipotency of thy Maieſtie, and the maieſtie of thy omnipotency. But how thou haſt vouchſafed to helpe mankinde, to the ende of all ages, as I beléeue in my heart to righteouſneſſe and iuſtification: ſo with my mouth before

thée, I confeſſe to my comfort and ſaluation. Thou onely indéede God the father art neuer read as ſent; but the Apoſtle writeth ſo of thy Sonne, which is, when the fulneſſe of time came, God ſent his ſonne. When hée ſaith hee ſent, hee apparantly ſheweth that hee came ſent into this world (as borne of the bleſſed virgin) he appeared in the fleſh▪ very true and perfect man. But what is it that the chéefeſt of the Euangeliſtes ſaith of him: hee was in the world, and the world

is made by him. In truth thither hée is ſent in humanity, where hee was euer, and is, touching his Gothead. Which ſending I aſſuredly beleeue with all my heart, and confeſſe with my mouth to be the worke of all the holy Trinity: But how haſt thou loued vs, holy and good▪ Father, how much haſt thou loued vs mercifull maker, which alſo haſt not ſpared thine onely Sonne, but haſt deliuered him for vs wretched ſinners. Hee was ſubiect and obedient to thee, euen vnto the

death yea to the death of the croſſe, taking vp the ha
                     ••
                   writing againſt vs, of our ſinnes and nailing it to the Croſſe, crucified ſinne, and ſlew death: hee onely free amongſt the dead, hauing power to lay downe his life for vs, and to take it againe for vs. Therefore is he a conquerer, and a ſacrifice for conqueſt, and therefore a conquerour, becauſe a ſacrifice to thee for vs: a Prieſt and an oblation, & therefore a Prieſt becauſe an oblation or offering. Worthily haue I a

ſtrong hope in him, becauſe thou ſhalt heale through him all my griefes and weakeneſſe, who ſitteth at the right hand and maketh interceſſion for vs. For Lord my languors, and griefes are great and many, many they be and great, for the Prince of this world hath many things in me, I know and confeſſe it. But I beſéech thee deliuer mée through our redéemer, ſitting at thy right hand, in whom no euill may be found. Thorough him iuſtifie mee, which hath done no offence,

neither was there found any guile in his mouth: through him our head, in whom is no ſpot, deliuer me,, a member of him although very ſlerder and weake, I beſéech thée deliuer mée, from all my ſinnes, imperfections, faults, and negligences. Repleniſh mee with thy holy vertues and make mée to preuaile in good vſage and behauiour: make me for thy holy names ſake, to perſeuers in goodneſſe euen to the end according to thy will, Amen.
            
            
               
               A Prayer to God the Sonne.
               
                  Obountiful Ieſu, O ſweete Ieſu, O Ieſu, the Sonne of the bleſſed virgin Mary, full of mercie & truth. O ſweet Ieſu, haue mercie on mee, according to thy great mercy. O gracious Ieſu, I beſeech thée by that precious bloud, which thou haſt vouchſafed to ſhed for vs wretched ſinners, vpon the aultar of the Croſſe, that thou wilt caſt away all

mine iniquities, and that thou wilt not deſpiſe me, humbly praying thee, and calling vpon this thy moſt holy name Ieſus, this name Ieſus is a cō
                  fortable name, for what is Ieſus but a ſauiour. O bountifull Ieſu, which haſt 
                     •
                  reated mee, and redéemed me with thy precious blood, ſuffer me not to bee damned, whome thou haſt made of nothing. O good Ieſu Chriſt▪ let not mine iniquitie deſtroy, whom thy omnipotent goodneſſe hath made and created. O ſwéete Ieſu reknowledge

that which is thine in me, & wipe away that which is contrary, from me. O good Ieſu haue mercy on me, whileſt time is of taking mercy, leaſt thou ſhouldeſt deſtroy mée in time of thy terrible iudgement. O good Ieſu, if I wretched ſinner, from thy true iuſtice haue deſerued euerlaſting puniſhment for my moſt grieuous ſins, yet hauing a ſure confidence, I appeale from thy true iuſtice vnto thine vnſpeakeable mercy, vntill thou haſt compaſſion on mee, like a

louing Father, and a mercifull God. O mercifull Ieſu, what profite is there in my bloud, if I deſcend into euerlaſting corruption. For O Lord the dead ſhall not praiſe thée, neither ſuch as goe downe into hell. O moſt mercifull Ieſu haue mercy on mee, O moſt ſwéete Ieſu bee vnto me wretched ſinner a fauorable Iudge. O Ieſu the health of thoſe that put their truſt in thée. O Ieſu the health of al that beléeee in thée, haue mercy on me. O ſwéet Ieſu, the remiſſion of all my

ſinnes. O Ieſu ſonne of the virgin Mary, poure into me grace, wiſdome, charitie, chaſtitie, and alſo a holy patience in all mine aduerſities, that I may perfectly loue thee for euer worlde without end, Amen.
            
            
               A Prayer to God the holy Ghoſt.
               
                  GIue ſentence with mee O GOD, and diſcerne my cauſe againſt the vngodly people.
               Teach me to do thy will becauſe thou art my god,

I beleeue, in whome ſoeuer thou dwelleſt, thou buildeſt there the long abyding place of the Father and the ſonne togither. Bleſſed is hee that ſhall deſerue to receiue and lodge thee, becauſe by thee the Father & the ſon make their manſion with him. Come nowe, come moſt bleſſed comforter of the ſorrowfull ſoule, deſcending in due time. In tribulation an helper. Come the clenſer of euills, the curer of woūds· Come ye ſtrength of the weake, the releeuer of thoſe ready to fall.

Come the teacher of the humble, the deſtroyer of the proude. Come the gentle Father of the fatherleſſe and motherleſſe. the fauourable Iudge of the widowes. Come the hope of the poore, the refreſher of ye faint. Come thou ſtarre of the Mariner, thou hauen of them that eſcape ſhipwracke, Come the excellent glorie of all the liuing, the onely health of the dying. Come moſt holy ſpirite, come and haue mercy on mée, prepare mée for thée, and diſcend louingly to me, that my vnability

and weakeneſſe may pleaſe thy greatneſſe and ſtrength, according to the multitude of thy compaſſions, through Ieſus Chriſt my ſauiour: who with the father in vnitie of thée, liueth and raigneth world without end, Amen.
            
            
               A Prayer to the holy Trinity.
               
                  
                     O
                   Thrée coequal and coeternall perſons. one god and true, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy

ghoſt, who onely poſſeſſeth eternity and light, that no man can come to: who haſt made the whole worlde with thy power, and ruleſt the round compaſſe of the earth with thy wiſdome. Holy-holy, holy, Lorde God of Sabaoth, terrible and ſtrong, iuſt and mercifull, to be wondred at, to bee praiſed, and to be beloued, one god three perſons: one power, wiſdome, and goodneſſe one and vnſeparable Trinitie. Open to mee calling on thee, the gates of righteouſneſſe, and then

entring into them, I wil confeſſe to thee O Lord. Beholde the earneſt deſire of the inward affections of my heart crying out, and the complaint of the teares of mine eyes, at thy gate O moſt gracious father, before thee is all my deſire, and my mourning is not hidde from thee, and thou, O Lord turne not thy face any more from me, neyther paſſe by in thy wrath from thy ſeruant. Father of mercie, heare the wailing of thine Orphan, and reach out thy right hande an helper,

that it draw mee backe from the depth of waters, and lake of miſeries and the puddle of dregs, leaſt I ſhould periſh, the mercy of thine eyes looking on, the clemency of thy heart beholding, but that I may paſſe without danger to thée my Lord God, that I may ſée the riches of thy Kingdome, and beholde thy face for euer, and ſing prayſes to thy holy name O Lord, which doeſt maruailous thinges, which makeſt my heart glad with the remembrance of thee, which

lighteneſt my youth. Deſpiſe not mine olde age but make my bones to reioy
                     •
                  e and my gray haires to renue as an Eagle. Amen.
            
            
               Another of the ſame.
               
                  O God the true and very excellent life, from whome, by whome, and in whome, all things whatſoeuer doe liue, are good and glorious to ſee to. God whoſe faith doth erect vs, whoſe hope doth comforte vs, whoſe loue doth linke vs together. God which commandeſt thy ſelfe to bee ſought, and makeſt thy ſelfe to bee found,

and openeſt to him that knocketh, God from whome to bee turned, it is to fall, to whome to bee turned, it is to riſe, in whome to remaine, it is moſt auaileable. God whome no man loſeth, but is deceyued, whome no man ſeeketh, but is warned, whome no man findeth, but is clenſed and healed God whom to knowe, it is to liue, whome to ſerue, it is to raigne, whome to praiſe, 
                     •
                  t is health and ioy to the ſoule. Thee I praiſe, bleſſe, and honour with my lippes, and heart, and with all the ſtrength and

power I am able, and I thanke thy mercy, and goodneſſe for all thy benefites, and I ſing an Hymne to thy glorie, Holy, holie, holy: I call on thee O bleſſed Trinity, that thou wouldeſt come into mee, and make mee a worthie temple of thy glorie. I beſeech the Father,, by the Sonne, I beſéech the ſonne by the Father, I beſeech the holy Ghoſt, by the Father and the ſonne, that all my ſines and weckedneſſe bee remooued farre from mee. Moſt mightie God, from whome all things, by whom all things and in whome all thinges

are made, viſible and inuiſible, which compaſſeſt thy workes round aboute. which repleniſheſt them within, couereſt them aboue. and ſuſtaineſt them vnderneath, keepe mee the worke of thy handes, hoping in thee, and truſting in thine onely mercy: keep mee I beſeech thee heere and euery where, now and euer, within, and without, before and behind, aboue, beneath and round about, ſo that no place lie open in me, to the deceits of mine enemies. Thou art God omnipotent, the keeper and protector of all them that put

their truſt in thee, without whome no man is ſafe, no man is deliuered from daungers: thou art God, and there is no other God beſides thee neither in heauen aboue, nor in earth below, which doeſt great things to be wondred at, of which there is no number. Praiſe, honour, and ſongs, to thy laud belongeth. To thee al the Angels, to thee the heuens and all the powers, make Hymnes and ſing prayſes inceſſantly: as it behooueth the creatures to their Creator, the ſeruants to their Maiſter, the Souldiours to their

King. Euery creature magnifyeth thee, euery ſoule prayſeth thee, moſt holie, and vnſeperable Trinity through Iſus Chriſt our Lord, Amen.
            
            
               A Prayer how the word becomming fleſh, is cauſe of our hope.
               
                  GOD is not ſo much an enemy that hee may not loue his owne fleſh, his owne members' and bowels, verily I might deſpaire, by reaſon of my too many ſins and vices, faults, and infinite

negligences, which I haue committed, and dayly and continually do in Hearte, and Worde and deede, and by all the meanes by which humaine frailety may ſinne, but that thy worde my GOD, was become fleſh, and dwelled in vs. But now I dare not deſpaire, becauſe hee beeing obedient to thee, euen to the Death, yea the death of the Croſſe, tooke vp the hand writing of our ſinnes, and nailed it to the Croſſe, Crucified ſinne and Death. Therefore in him ſafely I reſt, which ſitteth at thy righte

hand, and maketh interceſſion for vs. Hauing a ſure confidence in him, I look for to come to thee, in whom we are riſen againe now we are aſcended into heauen, and ſet together in the celeſtiall places: to thee be praiſe to thee hee glorie, to thee be honour, to thee be praiſe and thanſgiuing, Amen:
            
            
               A Praier that the kingdome of Heauen may be obtained.
               
                  O Happie reioyſing, and reioyſing happineſſe to ſee

the holie ones, to bee with them, and to bee to ſee the holy God, to poſſeſſe God for euer, and infinitly, theſe things wee ſhould conſider of with an earneſt minde, theſe thinges wee ſhoulde deſire with all longing that wee might bee able quickly to come to them. If thou wouldeſt conſider and inquire how this may bee brought to paſſe, either by what meanes, heare mee: this matter is put in the power of him that can doe it, becauſe the kingdome of Heauen ſuffereth violence, the Kingdome of Heauen. O man ſeeſeeketh

no other price then thy ſelfe, it is worth ſo much as thou art, giue thy ſelfe and thou ſhalt poſſeſſe it. Why art thou troubled touching the price, Chriſt hath yeelded and deliuered vp himſelfe to God his father▪ that thou ſhouldeſt purchaſe thee a Kingdom: thou ſo giue thy ſelfe, that thou be his Kingdom and that ſinne may not raigne in thy mortall bodie, but the ſpirit in obtaining of eternall life.
            
            
               
               A Praier for the ſweetnes of heauenly loue.
               
                  
                     I
                   Loue thee my God, I loue thée and more and more will loue thee O my Lorde my God faire and honourable before all the ſonnes of men, graunt mee that I maye deſire thee, that I maye loue thee ſo much as I will, and as much as I ought. Thou art exceeding great, and exceedingly thou oughteſt to bee beloued, chiefly of vs whome thou haſt ſo loued, ſo ſaued, for whome

thou haſt done ſo many things. O loue which euer burneſt, and art neuer quenched. Sweete Chriſt, méeke loue Ieſu my God, inflame mee wholy with thy loue, with thy light, with thy delight, with thy deſire, with thy gladneſſe and reioycing, with thy affection and ſwéete kindeneſſe, with thy pleaſure and deſire, which is holy and excellent, which is chaſte and cleare, that being altogether full with the ſwéetneſſe of thy loue, altogether pleaſured with the feruencie of thy loue, I may loue thée my

Lord moſt ſweete and beautifull, with all my heart, with all my ſoule, with all my power, and all my diligence, with great contrition of hart, and a fountaine of tears, with great reuerence and feare, and hauing thee in heart, in mouth, and before mine eyes, alwaies and euery where, ſo that no place in mee, appeare open to falſe and counterfeite loues, Amen.
            
            
               
               Prayers of the Soule thirſting to ſee Ieſus
               
                  MY ſoule thirſteth for thée my L. God my fleſh alſo longeth alter thee. My ſoule thirſteth for God ye liuing fountaine, when ſhal I come and appeare before the face of the Lord? When wilt thou come my comforter whō I waite for? O when ſhal I ſee my ioy I looke for, O then I ſhall bee ſatiſfied, when my glory will appeare, whom I

hunger for. O then ſhal
                     •
                   I bee drunken of the aboundance of his houſe, which I ſigh for. O that thou will ſoake me with the flowing ſtreame of the pleaſures. In the meane time, O Lord, let my teares be to me bread day and night, vntil it be ſaide to mee, beholde thy God, vntill my ſoule may there looke vpon the Bridegroome. Féede mée in the meane time with my ſobbes, refreſh me with my ſorrowes, it may bee that my redéemer will come, becauſe he is louing, and will not

tarry becauſe he is merfull. To him be all honor for euer and euer Amen.
            
            
               Another of the ſame.
               STrike Lord, ſtrike I beſéech thée, this my moſt hard heart, with the godly and ſtrong point of thy deare loue, and pierce déeper to the very bottome, with thy mighty power. And ſo bring forth paſſing much water from my head, and a true fountaine of teares from my eyes, aboundantly flowing, through the excéeding affection and deſire of the ſight of

thy beautie, that I may mourne day and nighte, receiuing no comfort in this preſent life, vntill I may bee worthie to ſee thee my beloued Lorde and God, in the celeſtiall bride chamber, that there beholding thy glorious admirable & moſt beautifull face, full with all pleaſure and ſweetneſſe, I may humblie adore and worſhipp thy maieſtie, with thoſe whome thou haſt choſen, and there at the laſt, repleniſhed with the vnſpeakeable ioy of eternal reioyſing. I may cry out with

them that loue thée, ſaying. Beholde now I ſée that I haue deſired, now I hold that I haue hoped for: now I haue that I haue longed for: I am ioyned to him in heauen, whom ſēt vpon the earth I haue with al my power loued, with all loue imbraced, to whom with all loue I haue cleaued: him I extoll, praiſe and honour, who liueth and raigneth God without end, Amen.
            
            
               
               A Prayer for the feare of the great Iudge.
               
                  LLord God of gods, forceable and mighty vpon all wickednes, I know certainely yt thou wilt come I know thou wilt not euer be ſi
                     •
                  ent, when in thy ſight the lightening waxeth violent, and in thy courſe the great tempeſt ſhall ſuddenly come, whē thou ſhalt call heauen from aboue, and the earth to iudge thy people. Then loe, before ſo

many thouſands of people, all mine iniquities ſhall be reuealed, before ſo many armies of Angels, all my abhominations ſhall he open, not of my déedes onely, but of my thoughts and words. Thou righteous Iudge marking ſinnes, haſt kept all my wayes, as in a Sachell, and haſt numbred my ſteppes togither: thou haſt held thy peace, thou haſt béene ſilent, thou haſt béen long ſuffering. But wo is me at laſt thou ſpeakeſt as though ſore trauailing with child, &c.
            
            
               
               A Prayer where the Father is called vpon through the Sonne.
               
                  
                     O
                   Father I beſeech thee, for the loue of thy almighty Son bring my ſoule out of priſon, to praiſe thy holy name, I inſtantly deſire thee, through thine onely ſon coeternall with thee, deliuer me frō the bonds of ſinne, and thou moſt higheſt, beeing appeaſed through the interceſſion of thy Sonne, ſitting at thy right hand,

reſtore me to life, whoſe owne merits threaten to mée deadly and eternall doome. For what other interceſſor I ſhould bring to thee I know not, but the ſame which is the onely ſacrifice for our ſinnes, which ſitteth at thy right hande intreating for vs. Behold my aduocate with thee God the Father, beholde the chiefe Biſhop, who néedeth not to make an attonement with others bloud, becauſe he appeareth glorious, imbrued with the blood of his own woundes. Beholde the

holy ſacrifice, well pleaſing and perfect, offered vp and accepted into the ſauour of ſwéetneſſe. Behold the lambe without ſpot, who before the ſhéerers of him became as dumbe, who beaten with buffetes, beraied with ſpittle, and rayled vpon, opened not his mouth. Beholde him that hath done no ſins, hath borne our ſinnes, land healed our infirmities with his owne bloud, Amen.
            
            
               
               A prayer of the penitent.
               
                  CReator of heauen and earth▪ king of kings▪ and Lord of al that rule, which haſt made me of nothing to thy Image and likenes and haſt redeemed mee with thy precious blood, whome I wretched ſinner am not worthy to name, neither to call vpon, or meditate of in heart, I beſe
                     •
                  ch thee, kneeling on my knees, and humbly intreating

thee, that thou wilt pitifully regarde mee, thy euill ſeruant, and to haue mercy on me, who hadſt compaſſion on the woman of Canaan, and of Marie Magdelen, who forgaueſt the Publicane, and théefe hanging on the Croſſe. In thee moſt mercifull Father I confeſſe my ſinnes, which to conceale from thée, O Lord, I cannot, if I would, Pardon mee O Chriſt, whome I haue greatly offended, both in thought, word and deed, and by all the meanes in which I wicked fraile

man might offend. Therfore O Lord, I beſeech thy clemency, who deſcendedſt from heauen, for my ſafety, who rearedſt Dauid from the fall of ſinne, pardon mee, O Lord pardon mee, O Chriſt, who forgaueſt Peter denying thee. Thou art my Creator and redeemer, my Lord and my ſauiour, my king and my God, thou art my hope and my truſt, I beſeech and intreate thee helpe me, and I ſhal be ſafe: gouerne and defend mee, ſtrengthen me, and comfort me, confirm

me, and make mee glad' inlighten and viſite mee' reare me that am dead, becauſe I am of thy making, and thy worke: Lord diſpiſe mee not, becauſe I am thy ſeruant although a bad one, vnworthy, and a ſinner. But whatſoeuer I am either good or bad I am alwaies thine, to whom ſhould I flie but to thee? If thou caſt me off, who ſhall receiue mee? If thou diſpiſe me, who ſhal regarde mee? O God I do acknowledge my ſelfe vnworthy, flying againe to thee, Lord thy mercy

is greater then my iniquitie thy compaſſion is more then my vngraciouſneſſe towardes thée. Thou canſt forgiue more thē I can commit, and canſt pardon more then I can offend. Deſpiſe mee not O Lord, neither note the multitude of my ſinnes, but acording to the multitude of thy mercies pitty me, and bee fauourable vnto me a haynous ſinner. Say vnto my ſoule▪ I am thy ſauiour, which ſaydeſt, I will not the death of a ſinner, but rather that he conuert and

liue. Conuert mee O Lord to thee, and be not wrathfull againſt mee. I beſéech thee moſt gentle father, for thy mercies ſake, that I may end my life well, and with true and harty repentance of all my ſinnes. Amen.
            
            
               Short Meditations.
               
                  THy hands O Lord, haue made me, and faſhioned me, I may ſay, thoſe hands which were nayled with nayles for mee, Lord deſpiſe not the

worke of thy hands. Beholde in thy handes, O Lord my God, thou haſt writen mee, reade that writing and ſaue mee. Beholde I thy creature ſigh to thee; thou art my creator, renew me, make me againe, beholde thy workemanſhippe, I cry vnto thee, thou art life, quicken mee, beholde, I thy clay looke backe to thee, thou art the Potter faſhion me againe. Lord haue mercy on mee, for my daies are nothing, &c·
            
            
               
               Another.
               
                  THou full of pittie, ſay vnto mee thy wretched ſeruant, ſay vnto mee, through thy compaſſions what thou art to me. Say vnto my ſoule. I am thy health, doe not hide thy face from mee leaſt I die.
            
            
               
               Another.
               
                  SAue mee O Lord which art the true ſafety, and that willeſt not the death of a ſinner. Lord haue mercy on my ſinfull Soule, looſe the bonds thereof. Sweete Ieſu regarde my humility, and blot out all my tranſgreſſions, bee my ayde, leaue me not, neither deſpiſe mee O God mine onely comfort, but tèach me to doe thy will. O bountifull Ieſu, although

though I haue offended, whereupon thou maieſt iuſtly damne mee, yet thou haſt not loſt that whereby thou art accuſtomed to ſaue. Good lord my Ieſu, why cameſt thou down from heauen, to what ende yéeldeſt thou thy ſelfe to death, but that thou wouldeſt ſaue ſinners, of which ſort I am exceeding. O vile ſinner that I am, take breath againe be of good cheare, thou maiſt not deſpaire: hope in him whom thou feareſt, fl
                     •
                  e to him from whom thou haſt fled, call vpon him

importunately, whome proudly thou haſt prouoked. Say vnto him, Ieſu for thy ſweete names ſake. do by me according to thy name. Ieſus is a name of fauour, a name moſt delightfull, a name comforting a ſinner, and a name of happy hope: for what is Ieſus but a Sauiour? Therefore for thine owne ſake O Ieſu, be Ieſus to me, be to me a mercifull Sauiour which art magnified and bleſſed world without ende, Amen.
            
            
               
               Godly Meditations of our Lord his ſufferings
               
                  
                     O
                   God, who for the worldes Redemption wouldeſt bee reproued of the Iewes, deliuered by the traitor Iudas, and bee bound with bonds like an innocent Lambe led to the ſacrifice. Alſo vnſeemely to bee brought before the beholding of Annas, Caiaphas, Pilate, and Herod, to bee acc
                     •
                  uſed, by falſe witneſſes

to bee tormented with whippes and reproches, to be defiled with ſpittle, crowned with thornes, beaten with buffets, ſtroken with a Reede, blindfolded, thy garmēts put off, wouldeſt be nayled on the croſſe, lifted vp thereon, reputed among theeues, drinke vinegar and gal, and be wounded with a Speare. O moſt mighty Lord, how wonderful is thy kindnes and pitie, that wouldeſt indure all theſe extreeme torments, ſhames and cruell death, and all for to appeaſe the almighty

father, and be an attonement betweene him and ſinfull mankinde. I beſéech thée moſt mercifull Ieſu, ſithence all this was of excéeding loue, that through thoſe thy ſharpe and bitter paines, which I vnworthie wretch now meditate of and call to minde, thou wilt defende and deliuer mee from the paines of hell, and vouchſafe to bring mee whether thou broughteſt the thiefe crucified with thee. O meek and vnſpotted lambe▪ my onely righteouſneſſe and iuſtification, haue mercie

on me, who with the father and the holy ghoſt liueſt and raigneſt world without end.
            
            
               Another.
               
                  HOrde Ieſu Chriſt, Son of the liuing God, which hanging on the Croſſe, ſaying, father forgiue thē for they know not what they do grant yt I for the loue of thée may pardon euery one that doth euill vnto me. And which ſaideſt vnto the theefe, this day thou ſhalt bee with

me in paradiſe, grant me ſo wel to liue that in the houre of my death, thou ſay to me: this day thou ſhalt be with me in Paradice. And which ſaydſt to thy mother, Woman behold thy ſonne: Moreouer to thy Diſciple, behold thy mother, graunt that thy loue, and perfite charitie may accompanie me vnto thy mother. And which ſaiedſt, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me, grant me to ſay in all my afflictions, & griefes of mind, m
                     •
                   Father, my Lorde, haue mercie on me a ſinner,

and helpe mee, my king, and my God, which with thy precious bloud haſt redeemed mee. And which ſaydeſt, I thirſt, graunt that I may euer thirſt after thee, the fountaine of liuing water. And which ſaideſt, Father, into thy handes I commend my ſpirit. Receiue me yeelding my ſelf vp vnto thee. And which ſaydeſt, It is finiſhed: graunt that I may bee worthie to heare that ſweete voyce of thine, ſaying, Come my Loue, my dearly beloued ſpouſe, come that thou mayeſt

go vp with me with my Angels, and Saints, to banquet, reioyce, and remaine together in my kingdome, through infinite worlds of worldes. Amen.
            
            
               Another.
               
                  
                     O
                   Lorde Ieſu Chriſt, for ye bitterneſſe which thou ſuſtainedſt for me wretch on the Croſſe, chiefly about that houre, when thy moſt excellent ſoule departed out of thy bleſſed bodie. Grant (I moſt

humblie beſeech thee) mercie to my ſoule in the departure thereof, and bring it into life euerlaſting. Amen.
            
            
               Another.
               
                  
                     I
                   Beſéech thée Lorde Ieſu Chriſt, throgh thoſe thy woundes ſuffered on the Croſſe and bringing Saluation vnto vs, wounde this my ſinfull ſoule, for which alſo thou haſt vouchſafed to die, wound it with thy burning and moſt mightie dart of thy exceeding

loue, Thruſt my heart through with the arrow of thy loue, that my ſoule may ſay vnto thee, I am wounded with thy loue, ſo that out of that wounde, teares may bountifully flowe day and night. O Lord ſtrike I beſeech thee, ſtrike my moſt hard heart, with the godly & ſtrong point of thy loue, yea deepely to the bottome pierce it, with thy mighty power, who liueſt and raigneſt worlde without ende, Amen.
            
            
               
               Another of the ſame.
               KIng of the elect, I beſéech thee, throgh him, holie of all the holie ones, through him my redeemer, make mee to runne the way of thy commandements that I may bee able to come to him, in ſpirit, which hath not feared to bee couered with my fleſh. Merciful father, doſt thou not beholde the head, bowing downe of toy moſt beloued Sonne, reſolued to moſt pretious death. Regarde O moſt fauourable

Creator, the humanity of thy dearely beloued ſonne, and haue mercie on the weakeneſſe of brittle clay. Look on (O glorious Father) the torn lims of thy moſt acceptable ſonne, and graciouſly remember of what I am made. See the paines of God and man, and releaſe the miſerie of mortall man. Beholde the puniſhment of the Redeemer, and forgiue the offence of the redeemed. My Lord it is hee whome for the ſinnes of thy people thou haſt ſtroken although he

bee the dearely beloued, in whome thou art well pleaſed the ſame is hee, the innocent in whome no guile is found, and yet 
                     •
                  s reputed amongſt the wicked.
            
            
               Another.
               
                  WHAT haſt thou committed moſt ſwéet Sonne of God, that thou ſhouldeſt ſo be adiudged, what haſt thou offended (moſt louing Lord) that in ſuch ſort thou ſhouldeſt bee handled? What is thy

wickedneſſe? what is thy fault? what is the cauſe of thy death? what is the occaſion of thy cō
                  demnation? Doubtleſſe I am the wounde of thy griefe, the blame of the ſlaughter done on thee: I am the deſeruing of thy death: the heynous offence of thy puniſhmēt I am the print, and ſigne of thy paſſion, the worker of thy torment. O marueylous manner of iudgement, and vnſpeakeable miſerie.
               The wicked ſinneth, and the iuſt is puniſhed, the gui
                     •
                  tie offendeth, and the

innocent is beaten, the vngodly doth amiſſe, and the godly is condemned. What the euil deſerueth the good ſuffereth: what the ſeruant treſpaſſeth, the maſter diſchargeth: what man committeth▪ God beareth, &c. Behold my vnrighteouſnes, and thy righteouſnes is manifeſt. My King and my God. what ſhall I render againe to thee for all that thou haſt done for me?
            
            
               
               That the remembrance of the woundes of Chriſt is a Preuayling remedie againſt all aduerſities.
               
                  
                     I
                   haue committed a grieuous ſinne, and am guilty of maay offences, neither therfore doe I deſpaire, becauſe where ſinne hath abounded: alſo grace hath much more abounded. He that deſpaireth of pardon of his ſinnes, denyeth God to be mercifull. Hee doth great wrong to God

that is miſtruſtfull of his mercy: for ſo much as in him is, he denieth God to haue loue, truth and power, in which thinges all my hope conſiſteth, which is in the loue of his adoption, in the truth of his promiſe, and in the power of his redemption. Now let my fooliſh imagination murmure how much it will, ſaying? What art thou, and how great is that glory? or with what mer
                     •
                  is hopeſt thou to obtaine the ſame? I aſwell wil faithfully anſwere, I knowe, whome I h
                     •
                  ue truſted

becauſe in excéeding loue he hath adopted me for a ſonne, becauſe he is true in his promiſe, able in the performance thereof, and hath power to doe what hee will. I cannot bee terrified with the great multitude of ſins, if the death of the Lorde come into my minde, becauſe my ſinnes cannot ouercome him. The nayles and Speare call vnto me that I am truly reconciled vnto Chriſt, if I will loue him. Longius opened to mee the ſide of Chriſt with his Speare, and I haue entred

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
and there ſafely doe I reſt. Hee ſtretcheth out his armes on the croſſe, and ſpreadeth out his hands ready for the imbracement of ſinners. Betweene the armes of my Sauiour, both will I liue and deſire to die. There ſafe and ſure will I ſing vnto him high praiſes, I will praiſe thee O Lord, becauſe thou haſt receyued mee, neyther wouldeſt thou ſuffer mine enemies to triumph ouer me. Our ſauiour in his death, bowed downe his head, that he might kiſſe his dearely

beloued. So often doe we kiſſe God, as often as wee are pricked in heart with the loue of him.
            
            
               Prayers before the receyuing the Communion.
               
                  MErciful lord Ieſu Chriſt I ſinful ſoul nothing preſuming of mine own merits, but only truſting in thy mercy and goodnes; am afraid & tremble, to draw neare to the table, of thy moſt ſweete and

comfortable feaſt: for I haue a heart and bodie polluted with many grieuous crimes; and a minde, and a tongue very euilly gouerned. Therefore O gracious Deitie, O dreadfull Maieſty, I miſerable wretch apprehended and taken betweene the troubles and griefes of mind, and ſpirit, returne to thee the fountaine of mercie. I make haſte to thee to be healed. I flie vnder thy protection. And thee whō I cannot endure to bee my Iudge, I hope to haue my ſauiour▪ to thee

Lord I ſhew my woūds to thee I vncouer my ſhame. I know my ſins to bee many and great, for the which I am afrayed, yet I truſt in thy mercies, of which there is no number. Lord Ieſu Chriſt eternall King, God and man, crucified for man, look on me with the eyes of thy mercie, heare mee putting my truſt in thee, haue mercy on mee full of miſeries and ſins, thou which euer makeſt the fountaine of thy compaſſions to ſpring. Remember Lord thy creature, whō with

thy pretious blood thou haſt redeemed, I am ſorie that I haue ſinned, I deſire amendment, of thy gracious fauour help me take frō me moſt mercifull Father al my ſinnes and iniquities, that being cleanſed in mind and bodie. I may through thee, deſerue worthily to taſte the holy thing of all holieſt, and graunt that the holy and ſpirituall receiuing of thy body & bloud which I vnworthie intende, bee a ful remiſſion of all my ſinnes, and a perfect purging of all my tranſgreſſions, a baniſhing

of all euill thoughts, and a getting againe of good ſenſes, alſo a moſt ſtrong defence againſt all the deceits of the worlde, the fleſh and the diuell, Amen.
            
            
               Another.
               
                  ALmighty & euerlaſting god behold I come to the Sacrament of thine onely Sonne our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. I come as one ſicke to the Phiſition of life, foule to the fountain of mercie: blinde, to the light of eternall brightneſſe:

poore and needy to the Lord of heauen and earth. Therefore I beg of the aboundance of thy exceeding bounty to that end, thou wouldſt vouchſafe to heale my infirmitie, to waſh away mine vncleanneſſe, to lighten my blindneſſe, to enrich my pouertie, to cloath my nakednes yt I may receiue the bread of Angels, the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, with ſo much reuerence and meekenes, with ſo much contrition and deuotion, with ſo much purity and faith, with ſuch purpoſe

and intention as is expedient to the health of my ſoule. Graunt mee O Lord I beſeech thee not only to take the Sacrament of the body and bloud of the Lord; but alſo the effect and vertue of the Sacrament. O moſt fauourable God; grant mee, ſo ſpiritually to receiue the bodie of thy onelie Sonne our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that I may be worthy to be incorporated in his myſticall bodie, and to bee numbred amongeſt the members of him. O louing father, grant to me

thy dearly beloued Son, whom now as a ſhadow in the way I purpoſe to receiue, & at laſt his face reuealed to beholde him for euer: who liueth and raigneth with thee and the holy Ghoſt worlde without end, Amen.
            
            
               Another.
               
                  
                     O
                   Lorde, my ſoule, my cō
                  panion, and friend, wearie and comming out of the way, fainteth, & lyeth broken & torne, of thoſe vanities which it had

paſſed through, it is hungry and greatly thirſteth, and I haue not wherwithall to ſet before it, becauſe I am poore and a, begger. Thou my Lord God art rich of al good things, moſt rich and a liberall giuer of dainties ſatiſfying from aboue, giue meate to the weary, bind vp the ſcattered, refreſh the broken and torne. Sée, it ſtandeth at thy doore and knocketh, I beſéech thée through the vowels of thy mercy, with which thou haſt viſited vs riſing out of the déepe: open (to the wretched knocking) the hand of thy deuotion, and bid with thy mercifull

fauour, that it may enter into thee, it may liue with thée and bee refreſhed of thee, with heauenly Bread and Wine, whereby béeing ſatiſfied, and ſtrength taken againe, it may aſcend to higher places & being taken vp with the wings of holy deſire, from this vaile of teares, it may fly to the celeſtiall kingdomes. Lord I beſeech thee, that my ſpirit might receiue wings like an Eagle, and might flie and not faint, that it might flie euen to the beauty of thy houſe, and to the place of the habitation of thy glorie, that there vpon the table

of the refection of heauenly Citizens, it may bee fedde of thy ſecrets in the place of thy Paſture, next toe moſt flowing waters. &c.
            
            
               Prayers after the Communion.
               
                  MOſt ſweet lord Ieſus, ſtrike through the inward part of my heart, and bowels of my Soule, with the moſt ſweete and Healing wound of thy loue, with the true, cleare, and

moſt holy Apoſtolicall loue, that my ſoule may languiſh and melt with the onely and continuall loue and deſire of thee, that it may couet thée, and faint in thy porch: that it may deſire to be diſſolued and be with thée. Grant that my ſoule may hunger after thée, the bread of Angels the refreſhing of holy ſouls, our dayly bread, hauing all pleaſantneſſe of taſt, and all delectation of ſwéetneſſe, yea for euer that my heart hunger and be fed on thee, on whom the Angels delight to looke, and that the inwards of my ſoule may bée filled with the pleſantneſſe

of the taſt of thée, that it may euer thirſt after thée, the well of life, the fountaine of wiſedome and knowledge, the ſpring of eternall light, the riuer of pleaſure, the bounty of the houſe of God, that it may euer deſire thée, ſéeke thée, finde thée, come to thee, Meditate on thée, ſpeake to thée, and may worke all thinges to the prayſe and glory thy holy name, with all humility and diſcretion, with delight and delectation, with obedience and affection, with perſeuerance to the ende. And be thou alwaies my onely hope, my truſt, my riches, my delight,

my reioicing, my ioy, my reſt, my peace, my ſweetneſſe, my wiſedome, my portion, my poſſeſſion, my treaſure. In whom bee my mind and heart faſtned ſure and immoueable rooted for euer, Amen.
            
            
               Another.
               
                  
                     I
                   Giue thee thankes O Lord, holy Father, almighty and eternal God, which vouchſafeſt to ſatiſfie me ſinner, thy vnworthy ſeruant, with the precious body and blood of thy ſon our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, not by any of

my merits, but with the only fauour of thy mercy, I beſeech thee that this holy Communion be not my guiltineſſe to puniſhment, but a healthfull interceſſion to pardon. Be it vnto me an armour of faith, and a target of good will, be it an auoiding of my faults, an increaſing of Charity, patience, humility & obedience, a ſure defence againſt the wiles and deceits of all mine enemies, as well viſible as inuiſible, a perfect appeaſing of my motions, as well carnall as ſpirituall, a ſure faſtning in the true and one God, and a happy conſummation of

my ending. And I pray thée, that thou wilt vouchſafe to bring me ſinner, to that vnſpeakeable feaſt, where thou with thy Son and the holy Ghoſt, with thy elect art the true light, the ful ſatiety, the ioy euerlaſting, the confirmed reioyſing, and p
                     •
                  rfite felicity, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, Amen.
            
            
               A warning to the ſoule.
               
                  
                     O
                   Sinnes, what eaſie entries you haue whileſt you are in counſel, but how hard and difficult goings out haue

you? Whileſt you perſwade and obtaine, you doe delight: but after you ſting and vexe euen to the death of the ſoule. My ſoule before all things I warne thee, as the Mother of vertues, leaſt in the thoughts of thy euils, thou ſhouldeſt runne into the ſnares of ſome Diuill, into the which many vnheedily run, and through the remembrances of the ſinfull delights, fooliſhly fall againe into the ſame their ſinnes and euils.
            
            
               
               The Concupiſcence of the fleſh, the concupiſcence of the eye, and the pride of life.
               
                  BEhold Lord my God, all the world is full of ſnares and concupiſcences, which they haue prepared for my feet. And who may flie theſe ſnares? Truely hee from whom thou takeſt away the euill lifting vp of his eies, that the concupiſcence of his eyes take him not: and from whome thou takeſt a way the concupiſcence of the fleſh, leaſt the

concupiſcence of the fleſh take him: And from whom thou takeſt away an vnreuerent and a vaine glorious mind: leaſt the pride of life ſubtillie deceiue him. O how happy is hee, for whome thou doeſt theſe things, ſurely he ſhall paſſe through free and blameles Now my redéemer, I beſéech thee for thine owne ſake, helpe me that I fall not grieuouſly in the beholding of mine aduerſaries, takē wt their ſnares which they haue made ready for my féet, that they bow not downe my ſoule. Thou Lord God father of the fatherles, heare ye pitiful cries

of the children and ſpred out thy wings, that wee may flie vnder them, from the face of the enemie. Thou tower of ye ſtrength of Iſrael, which ſlumbreſt neither ſléepeſt, kéeping Iſrael becauſe the enemy neither ſlumbreth nor ſléepeth that fighteth againſt Iſrael.
            
            
               Of the miſery of man without God.
               
                  LOrd forſake me not, leaſt the ſhadowes of mine ignorance increaſe, and mine offences multiply, for without

thee all thinges are darkneſſe, vnto mee all things are euill, becauſe nothing is good without thée, the true, onely and chiefeſt good. This I confeſſe, this I know, my Lord my God, for wherſoeuer I am without thée, it is euill with mee, not onely of matters external, concerning my ſelfe, but in my ſelfe, for all plenty, and aboundance without my God, is to mee want and miſery. Then ſhall I be rich and ſatiſfied, when thy glory ſhall appeare. And thou lord my

happie life, graunt that I may euer confeſſe my miſery to thee.
            
            
               With how much bitternes this life is ſprinckled.
               
                  
                     I
                   Am greatly weary Lord of this life of tedious pilgrimage. This life is a frail life; an vncertaine life, a painefull life, a defiled life, a life Ladie of euils, a Quéene of pride, full of miſeries and errours, which is not to bee tearmed a life but death, in wich wee die euery moment

with diuerſe kinde of deathes, through ſundry the defects of mutability. Whether therefore we which liue in this world, may call it a life which humors puffe vp, ſorrowes abate, ayres infect, meates breed diſeaſes, hunger makes leane, diſports makes diſſolute ſadnes cōſumes, thought ſhortneth, riches maketh proude, pouerty debaſeth, youth aduanceth, olde age maketh crooked, and ſickneſſe ouer commeth. And after all theſe euils furious death followeth, and moreouer

appointeth ſuch an end to all the ioyes of this miſerable life, that when it ceaſeth to be, it may be ſupoſed neuer to haue béene. This death vitall and life mortal, although it bee ſprinkled with theſe and other bitterneſſes, yet alas, how many doth it deceiue with falſe promiſes? And ſo this life as of it ſelfe, it is falſe and bitter, ſo alſo, it cannot be hidden and vnknowne to the blinde louers of it, yet notwithſtanding, it ſoketh and vtterly drunkeneth an infinite number of fooles,

with the golden cup it hath in hande. Happie they are, and they be but few, that forſake the familiarity of it, that deſpiſe the flitting ioyes of it, and reiect the fellowſhip therof, leaſt that alſo they be compelled to periſh with that periſhing deceiuer.
            
            
               Prayers in aduerſity and trouble.
               
                  HAue mercy Lord, haue mercy on me miſerable ſinner, doing wickednes, &

worthily ſuffering therefore, continually ſinning and dayly earning thy ſcourges. If I weigh the euill dayly that I haue done, it is not much that I ſuffer, grieuous it is that I haue committed, eaſie it is that I endure. Thou art iuſt, O Lord, and thy iudgements are right, all thy iudgements are iuſt and true. Iuſt and vpright art thou our Lord and God, and there is no iniquity in thee: for not vniuſtly, neither cruelly, doeſt thou aflict vs ſinners, almighty and moſt mercifull Lord,

who when wee were not, mightily madeſt vs, and when wee had béene loſt through our owne offence, in thy mercy and goodneſſe, marueylouſſy thou reſtoredſt vs. I know, and am ſure, that our life is not guided with raſh motions, but is ordered and gouerned by thee our Lord God, whereby thou haſt care of all, chiefly of thy ſeruants, who haue put their whole hope in thy onely mercy. Therefore I beſeech and humbly pray, that thou doeſt not to mee according to my

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
ſinnes, in which I haue deſerued thy wrath, but according to thy great mercy, which paſſeth the ſinnes of the whole world. Thou O Lord which outwardly impoſeſt plagues and ſcourges, graunt alwaies an vnfainting patience, ſo that thy prayſe neuer depart out of my mouth, haue mercy on me Lord, haue mercy and helpe me, as thou knoweſt how; becauſe I haue néed therof both in ſoule and bodie, thou knoweſt all things, thou canſt doe all things, which liueſt

and raigneſt world with out end, Amen.
            
            
               Of the felicity of the life which God hath prepared for them that loue him.
               
                  O Thou life which God hath prepared for them that loue him: a life long hoped for: a bleſſed life, a peaceable life: a glorious life: a vndefiled life: a chaſt life: a holy life: a life without knowledge of death, ignorant of ſadneſſe, a life without ſpot, without

paine, without griefe without corruptiō, without vexation, without variety and change, a life of all beauty, and moſt full of honor, where there is no aduerſarie reſiſting, where bee no allurements of ſin, where there is perfect loue and no feare, where day is euerlaſting, and of all one ſpirit, where God is ſeene face to face, and the mind ſatiſfied with this nouriſhment without want. O thou life moſt happie, where that ſouldiour the conquerer (accompanied with all the

companies of Angelles ſinging praiſes) ſingeth to God without ceaſing the pleaſant ſong of the ſongs of Sion, the perpetuall crowne compaſſing his honorable head. I would to God, the pardon of my ſins granted me, and this vnprofitable burden of the fleſh put off, I might enter to poſſeſſe the true reſt to thy ioy. And that I might go into the bright and beautifull walles of thy City, to receiue a crown of life of the hand of ye Lord, that I might be in preſence with thoſe

moſt holy companies. that I might ſtand before the glory of the Creator, with the moſt bleſſed ſpirits, that I might ſee the preſent countenance of Chriſt, that alwaies I might beholde that high, and vnſpeakeable and vnmeaſurable light, and ſo to bée moued with no feare of death, but that I might reioyce of the reward of euerlaſting incorruption without ende.
            
            
               
               A Meditation of the celeſtiall Soule.
               
                  
                     O
                   My ſoul ſigh feruently, deſire earneſtly that thou mayeſt come into ye Citie aboue, of which ſo glorious things are ſpoken in which there is a dwelling of all reioyſinges, Thou mayeſt aſcende through loue, nothing is difficult to him that loueth, nothing vnpoſſible. The Soule that loueth aſcendeth often, and paſſeth familiarly through

familiarly through the ſtréets of heauenly Ieruſalem, in viſiting the Patriarks and Prophets, in ſaluting the Apoſtles, in marueling at the armies of Martyrs, and Confeſſors, and in beholding the companies of Virgins. Let not heauen and earth ceaſe to call on mee, that I loue the Lord my God.
            
            
               That all our hope and deſire ought to bee to God.
               
                  ONe thing I haue aſked of the Lord, and this I requeſt,

that I might dwel in the houſe of God all the dayes of my life. For as the Hart deſireth the water ſprings. ſo my ſoule longeth after thee, my liuing God. O when may I come and appeare before thy face, when ſhal I ſee my God, whome my ſoule thirſteth for: when ſhall I ſee him in the land of the liuing▪ For in earth of dying men hee cannot bee ſeene with mortall eies. What ſhall I doe, wretch that I am, bound with the ſetters of my mortality, what ſhall

I do? Whileſt wee are in this bodie, wee goe on pilgrimage to God, wee haue not heere any Citie to inhabit, but wee ſeeke an other that is to come, for our incorporation is in heauen. Ah wo is me, that I am conſtrained to dwel with Meſech, and to haue my habitation amongeſt the Tentes of Cedar. My ſoule hath long dwelt amongſt them that haue beene enemies to peace. Who ſhall giue mee wings like a doue, and I wil flie and take m
                     •
                   reſt. Nothing is ſo ſweete to

mee as to bee with my Lord, for it is my good to cleaue vnto the Lorde. Graunt mee O Lord whileſt I am preſent in theſe frail lims to cleaue vnto thee, according as it is written. Hee that cleaueth to the Lord is one ſpirit with him.
            
            
               Another.
               
                  THou O lord, the hope of Iſraell, the deſire after which our hearts ſigheth, dayly make haſt, tarrie not. Ariſe,

make ſpeede and come that thou maiſt deliuer vs out of this priſon, to praiſe thy holy name, that I may glory in thy light. Open thine eares to the cries and teares of thine Orphanes, which crie out vnto the. Our Father giue vs this day our dayly bread that with the ſtrength thereof, wee may walk day and night, vntill wee come vnto thy holy mount Horeb, And I a little one among the little ones of thy houſehold O God ye father and my ſtrength, when ſhall I

come & appear before thy face? that who now acknowledgeth thee for a time, I may heere after acknowledge thee for euer. Bleſſed ſhal I bee, if I be admitted to ſee thy brightnes. Who may grant me this that thou licence mee to come to this, I know O lord, I know and confeſſe my ſelfe vnworthy to enter vnder the roofe of thy houſe, but graunt it for thine honour, and confound not thy ſeruant, putting his truſt in thee.
            
            
               
               The viſion of God is loſt by reaſon of ſin and miſerie found.
               
                  
                     O
                   Lorde thou art my God & my Lord and I haue neuer ſeene thee, thou haſt made mee, and made mee new againe, and haſt beſtowed all thy good things on mee, and yet I haue not ſeene thee, neither know thee. Finally, I am made to ſee thee, and yet I haue not done that for which I am made. O

miſerable condition of man, when hee loſt that for which he was made: O that curſed and hard fall. Alas what loſt he, & what hath he foūd? what departed, and what remained? He loſt felicitie, to which hee was made, and found miſerie, to which he was not made, That departed without which nothing is happy, & that remained, which of it ſelfe is not but miſerable. Man did then eate the bread of Angels which now he hungreth for: and now hee eateth the breade of ſorrowe

which then hee knew not. O thou lord, how long wilt thou forget for euer, how long turneſt thou thy face from vs when wilt thou looke backe and heare vs. When wilt thou lighten our eies, and ſhew thy face vnto vs? When wilt thou reſtore thyſelfe vnto vs? Regarde O lord, heare and enlighten vs, and ſhew thy ſelfe vnto vs, that it may bee well with vs, without whom it is ſo euill with vs. Recreate vs, help vs I beſeech thee O Lord, My hart is become bitter

in his deſolation, make it ſweete with thy conſolation Being hungrie, I haue begun to ſeeke thee, let me not liue vnfed of thee, I come poore to the rich, a wretch to the pitifull, let me not go away emptie, and deſpiſed, O Lord I am bowed downe and crooked, that I cannot ſee but downward, reare me, that I may look and indeuour my ſelfe vpward. Mine iniquities are gone ouer my heade, they haue couered mee, and wrapped mee round about, and lode mee like

an heauy burden. Vnwrap me, and vnburden me, leaſt the pit ſhut her mouth vpon me. Teach me to ſeeke thee, and ſhew thy ſelfe to me, ſéeking thee, becauſe I can not ſeeke thee except thou teach mee, neither finde thee except thou ſhew thy ſelfe to me. I may ſeeke thee, in deſiring after thee. I may deſire thee in ſeeking thée, I may find thee in louing thee: and I may loue thee in finding thee.
            
            
               
               A reaſon intreating God to helpe.
               
                  HElpe mee O Lord my life, leaſt I ſhould periſh in my wickedneſſe, If thou hadſt not created mee, O Lord. I had not béen, but becauſe thou haſt created me, now I am. If thou gouerneſt mée not, yet I am not: for my merits, my grace compelled thee not that thou ſhouldeſt create mee, but thy moſt fauourable goodneſſe and thy mercy. That loue of thine, O lord my

loue of thine, O Lord my God, which compelled thee to creation: I beſeech thee now, that the ſame may compell thee to gouerne it. For what profiteth that thy loue hath compelled thée to create me, if I ſhould periſh in my miſerie, and thy right hand ſhould not gouerne me. Let the ſame mercie O Lorde my God compell thee to ſaue that, that is created, which compelled thee to create, what was not created. Let the loue winne thee to ſaue, which wonne thee to create, becauſe that loue is not leſſe now then it was, for thou thy ſelfe

art the ſame loue, who euer art all one.
            
            
               Prayers and Meditations much mouing the hart to deuotion & diuine loue.
               
                  BLeſſed bee the pure in heart, for they ſhal ſee GOD. Bleſſed bee they which dwell in thy houſe O Lord, they ſhal praiſe thee world without end.
               I beſeech thee therefore O Lord, through all thy mercies, by which wee are deliuered from euerlaſting

death, make ſoft my hard and ſtonie heart, my rockie and yron hart, with thy pretious and rich annointing, and make mee through the inward touch and griefe of heart for my ſinnes, to become a liuely Sacrifice before thee, at all times. Grant mee in thy ſighte, euer to haue a contrite and an humble heart, with aboundance of Teares, graunt mee for the loue of thée, vtterly to bee dead to this world, and through the greatneſſe of thy feare and loue, quite forgetfull of tranſitory things, ſo farre forth, that concerning

worldly things, I neither mourne nor reioyce for them, neither that I may feare any thing temporall, nor loue it, neither that I bee corrupted with allurements, nor broken with aduerſities. And becauſe thy loue is as forceable as death, I beſeech thee, that the very whote and ſweet force of thy loue, may draw vp my minde from all things, which are vnder heauen, that I may abide faſt to the onely memorie of thy ſweetneſſe. Lorde let thy moſt ſweete ſauour deſcend I beſeech thee, let it deſcende into my Heart, that thy

loue moſt ſweete may enter in, let the wonderfull and vnſpeakeable fragrant ſweetineſſe of thy ſauour come to mee, which may reare vp euerlaſting deſires in me, and may bring the veines of the ſpringing water of my heart into eternall life, and that at length I may ſee thee the God of Gods in Sion, and that I may dwell in thy houſe O Lord, world without end Amen.
            
            
               
               Another.
               
                  SWeete Chriſt, bountifull Ieſu, I beſeech thée repleniſh alwaies my heart with thy vnquenchable loue, with thy continuall remembrance inſomuch that as a burning flame, I may wholie burne in the ſweetneſſe of thy loue, the loue, the which many waters may neuer quench in me, Make mee, ſweete Lorde to loue thee, and for the deſire of thée, to put off the heauy burden of earthlie

concupiſcence, which fighteth againſt, and grieueth my miſerable ſoule, that running without let after thee in the ſauour of thy ſweete perfumes, I may effectually bee ſatiſfied, and thou beeing my guide I may deſerue to come to the ſight of thy beauty.
            
            
               Another.
               
                  SWeete Chriſt, bountifull Ieſu, as I deſire, and as I humblie pray with all my mind and heart, graunt me thy loue, holy and chaſte, which

may fill mee, may dwell in me, and altogither poſſeſſe mee. And graunt to me an euident ſigne of thy loue, a watering fountaine of teares, continually flowing, that alſo thoſe my teares may witnes thy loue in mee, that they may bewray and declare how much my ſoule loueth thee, Whileſt for the exceeding ſweeteneſſe of thy loue, it cannot reframe from teares. I doe remember, holy lorde, that good woman Hanna, which came to the tabernacle, to pray and intreted thee to haue a ſonn: of whome the Scripture

mentioneth that her countenance after teares and prayers, was no more diuerſly chaunged. But I mindfull of ſo much vertue, and ſo greate conſtancie, am tormented with ſorrow, and confounded with ſhame, becauſe I beholde my ſelfe, wretch, ſo much abaſed. For if a woman wept ſo, and perſeuered in weeping, which deſired to haue a ſonne, how much ought my ſoule to lament and continue in lamentation which ſeeketh and loueth GOD, and loueth to come to him? Howe ought ſuch a ſoul to mourn and lament, which ſeeketh

God day and night, which beſides Chriſt, will loue nothing. Surely maruell it is, if then the teares of that ſoule be not made bread for it day and night. Looke backe therfore and haue mercy on me becauſe the ſorrowes of my heart bee multiplyed. Graunt mee thy heauenly comfort and deſpiſe not my ſinfull ſoule for which thou dyedſt, Grant me I beſeech thée inwarde teares with al effect, which may breake the bonds of my ſins, and for euer ſtore my ſoule with heauenly reioyſing.
            
            
               
               Another.
               
                  SWeete Chriſt bountifull Ieſu, the maruellous deuotion of an other woman, alſo commeth into my minde, the which with holy loue ſought the liuing in the Sepulcher, the which (the Diſciples going away from the Sepulcher) departed not the which ſate downe there ſad and ſorrowfull, and wept both long and much: and riſing with many teares againe and againe, ſhee diligently ſearched

the hollow places of the forſaken ſepulchre, if happily ſhe might ſée thee in any place, whom with a feruent deſire ſhe looked for. Then ſurely going into the Sepulchre, ſhée had ſéene it once and againe. but too much was not ſufficient to her that loued. For the vertue of a good worke is perſeuerance, or conſtant abyding therein. And becauſe before others ſhe loued▪ and in louing wept, and in wéeping ſought, and in ſeeking perſeuered: therefore the rather ſhee firſt of all others deſerued

to finde thee, to ſee thee, and to ſpeak to thée And not onely for theſe things, but ſhee was the firſt tydings bearer to the Diſciples of thy glorious reſurrection, thou inſtructing, and meekely aduertiſing her, ſaydeſt, Go tel my brethren that they goe into Galilee, there they ſhall ſee mee If therefore a woman ſo wept, and perſeuered in wéeping, which ſought the liuing amongſt the dead, which touched thée with the hands of faith, how ought the ſoule to lament and abide in lamentation,

wh
                     •
                  ch beleeueth in heart, & confeſſeth with mouth thee hi
                     •
                   redeemer now ruling in heauen, and raigning euery where▪ How therefore ought ſuch a ſoule to mourne & weepe, which loueth thee with al heartineſſe, and coueteth to ſee thee with all deſire. Thou alone ſuccour and onely hope of al, that are in miſerie, who neuer is humblie intreated without hope of mercie. Giue me this grace for thine owne ſake, and for thine holy name, that how often I thinke of thee, I

ſpeake of thee, I write of thee, I reade of thee. I conferre of thee, how often I remember thee, I ſtand before thee, I offer thanks, prayers and ſacrifice to thee, that ſo often with riſing teares in thy ſight, I may aboundantly & méekely wéepe, ſo that my teares bee inſtead of bread to me day & night. Verily thou king of glory, and maſter of all vertues, haſt taught in thy word and example to mourne and wéepe, ſaying, Bleſſed bee they that mourne, for they ſhall be comforted.
            
            
               
               Another.
               
                  AH, alas my Lord, woe is my ſoule, yu comforter of my ſoule, thou departedſt and ſaideſt not ſo much as farewell. Going thy wayes, thou bleſſedſt thine, neither was I preſent, Thy handes lifted vp, thou waft receyued into heauen with a cloud neither did I ſee it. The Angels promiſed thou wouldeſt come againe, neither did I heare it What ſhall I ſay, what

ſhall I doe whether ſhall I goe, where ſhall I ſéek him, or when ſhal I find him? Whom ſhal I aſke who ſhall tell my deerly beloued that I languiſh in loue, the delight of my heart ceaſeth, my laughing is turned into heauineſſe, my fleſh and my heart fainteth, O God of my heart, and my portion, thou God for euer. My ſoule refuſeth to bee comforted, but of thée my delight, for what haue I in heauen, & beſides thée what would I vpon the earth. I wiſh for thée I hope for thée, I ſeeke

thee, my heart hath ſaide to thée, I haue ſought thy face, I will ſeeke after thy face: O lord, turn not thy face away from me. O moſt gracious louer of men, the poore is left alone to thee, thou art an ayder to the Orphan? My onely defending aduocate, haue mercie on mee deſolate Orphan. I am become fatherleſſe, my Soule is as it were, a widow. Regarde the teares of my lacke, and widowhoode, which I offer vnto thée vntill thou cōmeſt again Ah now my Lord, alas,

Appeare vnto me, and I ſhall be comforted. Let me beholde thy preſence and I ſhall inioy my deſire: reueale thy glory, and my ioy ſhall be full.
            
            
               Remember this note.
               SO often as wee doe well the Angells reioyce, and the Diuells are ſad. So often as wee go out of the way from that which is good, wee make the diuels glad, and defraude the Angels of the
                     •
                  r ioy. For there is ioy with them ouer one ſinner which hartely repenteth.
            
            
               
               Grace before Dinner.
               ALmighty GOD, whoſe prouidence reacheth to the vttermoſt ends of the world, and to the depth of the Sea: which nouriſheſt all creatures with ſuſtenance agreeable to their natures, the fiſh, the foule, the foure-footed beaſt, and the creeping worme: we beſeech thee, that the meate & drinke which is ſet before vs on this table, at this preſent may be ſo moderately receiued, that our bodies

therby may be refreſhed, & our ſenfes comforted, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, Amen.
            
            
               Grace after dinner.
               BLeſſed God, eternal thankes and praiſe bee aſcribed vnto thee, which haſt opened thine hand at this time, and made vs partakers of thy benefites: and haſt ſupplyed the neceſſity of our nature with theſe nouriſhing elements: without the which our life cānot be maintained. We beſeech thée to kindle

in vs a continuall remembrance of thy bountifull goodnes towards vs, that as thou neuer withdraweſt thy fatherly care from vs, ſo wee may neuer ceaſe to offer vnto thee the ſacrifice of praiſe and thankſgiuing, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord and Sauiour, Amen.
               FINIS.
               
               
            
         
      
   