
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ A Dyall for dainty Darlings, rocktin the cradle of Securitie.
            
            
               ❧ A Glaſſe for all diſobedient Sonnes to looke in.
            
            ¶ A Myrrour for vertuous Maydes.
            
               A Booke right excellent, garniſhed with many woorthy examples, and learned aucthorities, most needefull for this tyme preſent.
            Compiled by VV. Auerell, Student in Diuinitie, and Schoolemaiſter in London.
            
            
               Imprinted at London for Thomas Hackette, and are to be ſolde at his ſhoppe in Lumbert ſtreete, vnder the Popes head. 1584.
         
         
            
            
            To the right vvorſhipfull, and his ſinguler good freend, Maiſter William Wrathe, Warden of the Worſhipfull Company of the Mercers, W. Auerel wisheth health of body, happineſse of ſoule, and continuall proſperitie, both in this life, and in the life to come.
            
            
               
                  HAuing long tyme ſtudied (well beloued Syr) which way I might shew the fr
                  ••
               ies of my good will, by gratifying your worship, with ſome ſigne of my affectionate heart, and hauing by opportunitie this booke ready finished, I could not tell on whome I might better beſtowe it then on your worshippe, whoſe affabilitie, gentleneſſe, courteſie, vertue, and other commendable giftes, I haue not onely heard with mine eares, but iudged by mine eyes, as hauing had experience thereof from the beginning of my remembraunce, whome therefore I haue made the ſole ſupporter of my labour, in bestowing this handfull of paper vppon you, knowing that you will courteouſly take it, thankfully accept it, and freendly defend it, being a matter vertuous, againſt all the ſcoffes, and girdes of the vicious, whoſe enuie and ignoraunce, ſo dimmeth the ſeate of theyr affections,

that being blinded with follie, they lothe wiſedom, and euerie vertuous exerciſe, for which cauſe I ſtudie not to pleaſe them, nor care not to content them, conſidering that to pleaſe the wicked, is to diſpleaſe the godlie.
            I haue rather ſelected you out as a patrone of my paynes, then any other, for that I hope you wyll more gratiouſlie take them, then accuſtomablie the greater ſort doo in theſe dayes, whoſe ingratitude is growne ſo great, that the ſtuddies and toyles of menne, which in tymes paste were in great fauour regarded, and with lyberallytie rewarded, are nowe ſo coldly esteemed, and ſo vnthankefullie receyued, that the learned are nowe a dayes, rather bent to ſtuddy for theyr owne gaine, then by writing, to procure the publique profyte of others.
            By meanes whereof, learning groweth in contempt, and men wexe colde in the studdie thereof, ſeeing vertue lacketh her reward, and learning looſeth a freendly countenaunce.
            Yet I knowe there are that fauour good letters with cheerefulneſſe, take the giftes of the good Studentes, that both receyue theyr labours., and reward theyr vertues, and ſuch are truelie vertuous, and duelie noble, how inferiour a calling ſoeuer they poſſeſse, for vertue is true Gentillitie, and the onelie badge of renowmed Nobillitie, which dooth more nobillitate the name of a Gentleman, then treaſure, and more aduaunce his fame, then ritches.
            Among whome I account your vvorshippe, hoping

that you wyll with a good countenaunce accept my trauailes, and with freendlineſſe eſteeme my labours, which if you doo, then am I as fullie ſatisfied, as if I had reaped a greater benefite, accounting your good wyll my ſuffycient recompence, and your fauourable acceptation, a freendlie requitall: And thus committing you and yours to the gouernement of the Almighty, I ende, deſiring God to bleſſe you in this lyfe with all happineſſe, and in the lyfe to come, ſende you perfect felicitie.
            
               Your poore freend and well willer. VV. A. Schoolemaiſter.
            
            Amen.
         
         
            
            To the freendlie and courteous Reader.
            
               
                  GEntle and freendlie Reader, if thou thinke him to be thy freend that beſtoweth vpon thee frankly, and with a lyberall heart, ſome coſtly iewell to delight thine eye, or ſome golden gyft to pleaſure thy minde: then thinke me no leſſe, that giue thee not a materyall thing alone to feede thy fancy, but a coſtly comfort for thy hearts delyght, which albeit it ſeeme ſmall in ſhew, and beare a ſlender bulke, yet mayſt thou, of what condition ſoeuet thou be of (if with iudgement thou reade it) picke out ſuch wholſome leſſons, as may pleaſure thy minde, and profite thy life. Heere ſhalt thou learne in proſperitie, to beware of pride, and to auoyde ſecurity: if thou be a Father, how to bring vp thy chyldren with diſcretion: if a Sonne, how to reuerence thy Father with wiſdome: if thou be ſingle, how to chooſe thy wife, ſo that thy lyfe may be happy, and thy tyme ſpent in quietneſſe: if married, how to gouerne thy ſelfe and thy mate in all ſeemelynes and vertue: heere may wiues learne wiſedome, and maydens gather modeſty. To conclude, the commodities are many, the examples pleaſaunt,

and the practiſe thereof profitable, and therefore, to the ende that thou mighteſt be pertaker of that which may be thy future profite, I haue compyled this ſmall Booke, not wearying thee with long diſcourſes, leaſt thy minde ſhould (being queaſie) wexe lothſome, and ſo diſdaine it before thou reade it: but in ſhort and breefe Treatiſe, I haue packed together that which if thou can rightly vſe it, ſhall be as gaine ſome as pleaſaunt, wherfore, if thou bring with thee a thankfull heart, and a vertuous minde, thou wylt thankefully take that which I haue freendly written: but if thou haue an enuious eye, thou wylt ſoone carpe at that by enuie, which the Printer by ouerſyght, and I by infirmity haue committed.
            Learned Homer ſometime ſleepeth, and the faſteſt foote ſomety me ſlyppeth, the wiſeſt tongue maye catch a tryp, and the warieſt penne committe a fault, errour is as naturall, as the correction thereof commendable.
            VVherefore that which remayneth is, I commit my ſelfe and my labour to thy good lyking, if thou lyke it, commend it and vſe it, if thou diſlyke it, amend it, or refuſe it, do not Nodum in ſcirpo querere, ſeeke a knotte in a ryſhe: For many will finde fault, that cannot amend a worke, and ſome diſday ne others labours, that are themſelues loytering ydle lyuers, that eyther cannot doo any thing woorthy commendation, or if they be able, conſume theyr tyme in ſcoffing, or elſe in ydle liuing. But knowing

I ſhall not be ſo fortunate as to eſcape ſome ſuch altogether, ſeeing that vnder euerie Stone lyeth a Scorpion, I commend me to the vertuous, deſpiſing the enuious, and ſo gentle Reader, wiſhing thy well fare, I ende, committing thee to him, whome I beſeech graunt thee to reade with profit.
            Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ A Dyall for daintie Darlinges, that are rockt in the Cradle of Securitie.
            
            
               
                  HErodotus ſayth, that
               
               Hugo in libello ad ſocium voleatem nubere. when a Woman putteth off ſhamefaſtneſſe with her garment, and that ſhee walketh without her veſture, ſhee walketh naked, forgetting her ſelfe to haue doone any ſuch thing: ſo that ſhamefaſtneſſe once loſt, ſhée drowneth her ſelfe in the Charibdis of all vices, & falleth into the Scilla of all outragious miſchéefes. And therfore ſayth Cicero in his booke De oratore, Cuſtos omnium virtutum verecundia eſt, Shamefaſtneſſe is the preſeruer and keeper of all vertues. And Valerius Maximus ſayth: 
                  Ʋerecundia parens est omnis honesti conſilij, Shamefaſtneſſe is the mother of all honeſt counſelles.
                But where ſhamefaſtneſſe remaineth not, there entreth pride, whoredome, vntemperaunce, and the ſinke or puddle of all peſtiferous vices: ſo that beholding an vnſhamefaſt woman, we may iuſtlie imagine, we ſee a naked ſtrumpette, openly ſhewing her cloſe and hidden ſecretes. This vice of vnſhamefaſtneſſe, is continuallie matched with pride, yea, they are ſo vnited and ioyned together, that euermore they walke arme in arme, lyke ſiſter and germaine, and are neuer found to be ſeperated a ſunder: after pride, followeth forgetfulneſſe of God, contempt of man, and vtter diſdaine of all vertue. But eſpeciallie pride ſo tranſformeth the inward ornaments of the

minde, that it leadeth the body to all abuſe, and bringeth the ſoule to vtter ruine, inchaunting the wittes with ſuch vnnaturall paſſions, that it altereth the ſhape, as it were with Circes illuſions, the ſpectacle of this outragious furie: you may euidently beholde, in the example of a Captaines wife of Conſtantinople, whoſe deteſtable pride, was ſo lothſome in the eyes of the Lord, that it procured his iuſtice to worke reuenge vpon her ſtincking carcaſe. The report whereof as I haue bréefely read, ſo the diſcourſe thereof, I will ſhortly write, truſting that all theſe in whome the ſparkes of vertue are kindled, will by her example growe into a greater increaſe of vertue, and they whome the water of follie hath quenched theyr good deſyres, will warme themſelues at the flames of wiſedome, to drie vp the moiſture of theyr vicious mindes.
            
               ¶ A notable and excellent example of Gods iudgements, in his most ſeuere punishment, of the rare and ſtraunge pride, of a Captaines wife of Conſtantinople.
               
               THere was within the famous Cittie of Conſtantinople, a Captaine ouer a certayne bande of Venetians, whe, if he could as well, by wiſdome haue gouerned his wiues infirmitie, as he could by pollicie conduct and rule his armie, his memorie had béene obſcured, with blotte of obliuion, and his wiues example drowned in the ſuddes of ſilence.
               But there is no arte can chaunge the ſpottes of the Leoparde, no labour waſhe off the colour of the Morian, nor force of the hammer breake the Adamant, nor no Art nor ſtrength reſiſt a wicked woman, but that if ſhée once let looſe the raines to pride and pleaſure, ſhaking of the grace

of God from of her careleſſe ſhoulders: If the feare of her creator▪ can not reduce her from ſinne, nor the worlds report conuert her to ſhame: it is neither wiſedome nor pollicie, perſwaſion nor counſell, force nor fortitude, can alter the courſe of her corrupted nature.
               But returning to the diſcourſe of this Venetians wife, ſo tenderlie, ſo delycatelie, or rather ſo dyſſolutelie, ſhée ſpent the courſe of her vngratious lyfe, delighting her ſelfe ſo ſuperſticiouſlie with artificiall pleaſures, that ſhée diſdayned to waſhe her ſoft and dainty ſkinne, with the neceſſary vſe of common Conduite water.
               Lyke to a number of our curious Dames, that are more wanton then wiſe, more prettie then profitable, and more finiſhe, then eyther wiſedome wylleth, or the ſtate of theyr huſbandes alloweth, not contented with thinges neceſſarie, but alwayes ſéeking that is ſuperfluous.
               Thus lothing the licquor ordayned by Nature, ſhee ſought to procure her ſome other by Arte, and therefore cauſed her ſeruauntes, by theyr continuall toyle, to gather for her, the dropping deaw of Heauen: by the which theyr no ſmall labour, they procured for her, a bathe to waſhe her tender lymmes.
               O monſtrous Pride, O vnſatiable nature, O execrable furye, that not contented with Natures ſymple vſe, would ſeeke for thinges of dainty artes deuice.
               But as the Myrre, though it be ſwéete in ſmell, yet is it bytter in taſte, or as the Water in Leontinis, though it quenche thyrſte, it preſentlie kylleth, ſo her preſent vſe of pleaſures, though a whyle they were ſwéete, yet at laſt they were ſowre, when the anger of God was kindled againſt her pride.
               If the Lion bite of ye woorme Leōtophon, incōtinently he

dyeth: if a man drinke of a certaine redde water in Ethiope, he wereth madde: and certainly, who ſo taſteth of this deteſtable vice of pride, it leadeth them eyther preſentlie (without grace) to euerlaſting death, or bringeth them in ſhort tyme to ſuch madneſſe of minde, that they vtterlie forgette whereof they are made, from whence they came, and wherevnto they ſhall.
               This impe of Venus, or rather companion of Lucifer, was ſo rooted in pride, being Lerna malorum, The dunghill of miſcheefes:
                   that ſhée continuallie deuiſed to ſatiſfie her luſte, and diſdained that which was common to natures kinde, acquainting her ſelfe with ſuch contemptible quallities, that ſhée lothed to touch her meates with her white and delycate fingers, and therefore found out a rare and ſtraunge inuention, to ſatiſfie the appetite of her queaſie ſtomacke, cauſing her Eunuches (being certayne gelded perſonnes) to miniſter vnto her in little morſelles, her neceſſarie vſe of her néedefull nouriſhmentes, which ſhée receyued not at theyr handes, which ſcorned to touch them with her owne, but from off a golden fleſhe hooke, with her two foretéeth, ſhe daintelie conueied the ſame into her mouth.
               But as eche diſeaſe, if it be not taken in time, créepeth by continuaunce into euerie part of the body, or as the water that breaketh out of his boundes, if it be not quicklie ſtopped, gathereth at length into a mightie flood: So this malladie of her minde, being let at lybertie, ouerflowed the bankes of reaſon, and drowned her quite in the ſwallowing gulfe of ſurquedrie.
               Her bed chamber was garniſhed with ſuch diuerſitie of ſwéete hearbes, ſuch varietie of fragrant flowers, ſuch chaunge of odoriferous ſmelles, ſo perfumed with ſwéete odours, ſo ſtored with ſwéete waters, ſo beautified with tapiſtrie, and decked ſo artificially, that I want memorie to rehearſe it, and cunning to expreſſe it, ſo that it

ſéemed, her Chamber was rather ſome terreſtriall Paradiſe, then a manſion for ſuch a mateleſſe myſtereſſe, rather a tabernacle for ſome Goddeſſe, then a lodging for ſuch a lothſome carcaſe.
               But the ſtroke the higher it is fetcht, is of greateſt force in falling, the wound, the longer it corrupts, brings greateſt ſmart in curing, and the iudgements of God, the longer deferred, are the more ſeuere in puniſhing, for though his patience procure ſufferaunce, yet his iuſtice yéeldeth vengeaunce, though he haue leaden féete, yet hath he yron handes, though it be long or he come, yet at laſt he payeth home, as may euidentlie appeare in the myrror of this womans miſerie, vpon whome the Lord ſhewed the ſeuerity of his Juſtice, as an vpright reward of her vnſhamefaſt offences.
               Draw néere you wanton woorms, that leane your lofty heades, vpon the dainty pyllowes of pride, you that haue periwigs to curle your heaire, colours to paint your face, art to ſquare your ſhoulders, bolſters to faſhiō your waſt, inuentions to chaunge nature, and deuiſes to alter kinde, conſider what Cyprian ſayth: De habitu virginis, quod natum est, ex Deo est, quod mutatū est ex demone: That which is borne, is of God, that which is chaunged, is of the deuill.
                   Your waſhing in ſwéet waters, your anoynting with ſwéete odours, your muſke, your ciuitte, your baulme, and a number of deuiſes, to make the body ſwéete, when your pride and whordome, with the reſt of prides companions, do make your ſoules to ſtincke, as the Poet Martial ſayth: Non bene olent, qui ſemper bene olent, They ſmell not well, that alwayes ſmell well.
                   Beholde how the Lord puniſhed the pride of this woman, which had ſolde her ſelfe to vnſhamefaſtneſſe in his ſight, for with the ſhyning ſword of his diuine iudgement, he rotted euery parte of this her pampered body, ſo that no member, no ioint, nor part therof was frée, from the mouldred plague of putrifaction.
               
                  Her Chamber was filled with ſuch an intollerable ſtincke, that no man could abide the ſmell thereof in his noſtrelles: thus was ſhe hatefull to God, diſdainefull to man, and lothſome to her ſelfe, but that moſt might increaſe her gréefe, vtterlie forſaken of all company, her Eunuches which had fedde her daintelie, diſdainde to cheriſh her ſimplie, her Maides which had ſerued her curiouſlie, refuſed to nouriſhe her poorelie, ſcarcelie one Maiden ſeruaunt, who by her flatterie and fayre perſwaſions, by promiſes and fayre allurementes, intiſed with hope of gaine, and aſſiſted with ſwéete perfumes, miniſtred to her want and ſupplied to her neceſſitie, tyll the twiſted lyne of her myſerable life, waſted with the corruption of weakeneſſe knapped in ſunder, and the full tyme of her fatall Glaſſe expyred, ſhe yéelded her ſelfe to the wonted courſe of nature, and finiſhed the race of this her ruthfull pilgrimage.
               Quicklie was this languor digeſted of her fréendes, the end of whoſe gréefe increaſed theyr gladneſſe, her complet mone, procured theyr myrth, and her finiſhed ſorrowe brought vnto them ſwéeteneſſe of contentation, rather reioycing at her deliuerie, then ſorrowing at her departure, who in her lyfe time was a myrror of miſerie, and at her death a glaſſe of ignominie, in her proſperitie the praye of pride, and the vewe of vanitie: and therfore iuſtlie in aduerſitie, the play of Fortune, and the blotte of Infamie.
               Beholde héere deare Dames, the ende of prides preſumption, and in this myrror conceyue her laſt concluſion: learne by this example to auoide curioſitie, and craue of God with teares, for true humilitie, the which ſhall make you moſt acceptable to God, moſt lyke vnto Angelles, and beſt beloued of earthlie creatures. Where contrariwiſe pride, as it is the greateſt miſerie, ſo dooth it tranſforme men to monſters, Angelles to deuilles, and reaſonableAuguſt. ad quendam comitem. creatures, to internall furies. To which purpoſe Auguſtin ſayth: Humilitae homines ſanctis Angelis ſimiles facit, et ſuperbia
                  
                  ex Angelis demones facit, &c. Humility maketh men like to holy Angelles, but pride of Angelles maketh men deuilles.
                   And as I may plainly ſay, ſhe is of all ſinnes the beginning, the end and the cauſe, for that not onely pride it ſelfe is ſinne: but alſo no ſinne hath béene, or can be, orGregory▪ in moralibus. ſhalbe without pride. Gregorie ſayth, Radix cuncti mali▪ et regina omnium vitiorum ſuperbia est, &c. Pride
                   (ſayth he) is the roote of euerie miſcheefe, and the princeſſe of all vices: Of which the Scripture witneſſeth, ſaying: Pride isEccle. 10. the beginning of all ſinne. Seuen principall vices ſpring from the venemous roote of pride, namely, vaine glory, enuie, wrath, ſadneſſe, couetouſneſſe, glutteny, and lecherie, with the which ſeuen vices of pride, the deuill often holdeth vs captiue. I remember, Hugo Victorinus maketh a notable deſcription of pride, ſaying: Quatuor
                  Hugo, victori. in lib. de clauſtro, animae. 
                  ſunt quae trahunt elationis currum▪ &c. There be foure horſes
                   (ſayth he) that drawe the wagon of pride (Videlicet) deſire of rule, loue of proper prayſe, contempt, and diſobedience: the wheeles therof are boaſting of minde, and arrogancie, gloriouſneſſe in ſpeeche and leuitie: the driuer of this wagon is the ſpirite of pride: they which are borne heerin, are the louers of this world: the horſſes are vnbridled, the wheeles eaſily turned, the carter froward, and they weake which are caried. Verie well therefore was it ſaid in Eccleſiaſticus, that the original of all ſin is pride, ſo hateful in the ſight of the Lord, hath it alwaies béen, that in all ages and all perſons, it neuer went vnpuniſhed: how proude was Nabuchodonozer, which in theDani. 4. middeſt of his glory cried out: Is not this great Babylon, which I haue built for the houſe of the kingdome, by the might of my power, and for the honour of my maieſtie. But ye ſame hower was he puniſhed, for he was caſt out of mens company, & did eate graſſe like Oxen, and his body was wet with the deaw of Heauen, tyll his heaires were growne as Eagles feathers, & his nailes as birds clawes.
               
                  O howe many hath pride béene the deſtruction of, which haue ſuffered themſelues to be carried away thereby? yea and what miſchéefe is there, which hath not béene through pride prouoked? héereby was Abſalon intiſed to expell2▪ Sam. 15. his Father foorth of his kingdome, by this Romulus ſlew his brother, that hee alone might rule as King, through this Iulius Caeſar purſued Pompei vnto death, with whome he had many battailes, and all through pride and couetouſneſſe of rule. Of this, Marius the Romaine not contented that he had ſixe tymes béene Conſull of Rome, would violently kéepe the ſame the ſeuenth, wherby came a great ſlaughter betwéene Marius and Silla, who withſtood him therein: through this, Alexander the great moued battayle, & vexed all the Orient with warres, through his vniuſt pride and ambicious deſyre.
               But to turne againe to examples in Scripture, becauſe vpon the trueth thereof we builde our beleefe: Lucifer, through pride was thrown out of Heauen, Adam through pride, was thruſt out of Paradiſe, the tower of Babel was thereby ouerthrowne, Goliah the Phyliſtian was thereby ſlaine, Aman was hanged, Nichanor kylled: And to reſemble the Hiſtorie whereof I intreate, Antiochus for his pride was ſo plagued, that his bowelles by Gods iuſt iudgements rotted, yea, and from thence iſſued woormes in ſuch aboundaunce, that the ſmell of his carcaſe was to euerie man annoyaunce. Herode aduauncing himſelfe in his royall eſtate, would for his glorie be eſtéemed a God, but the power of the Lord ſuppreſſed his pride, that the ſtincking woormes conſumed his carcaſe. Thus maye we ſée, how pride hath cauſed the wrath of the Lord to be kindled, ſo that in men, nay, in Angelles, it hath not ſcapte vnpuniſhed: and to queſtion againſt the vaine pride of ſome women, what became of Eues preſumption, what of Iezabelles pride, the one deſyring to be as God, was thereby to the deuill ſubiected, the other for her wickedneſſe, was

of filthy Dogs deuoured. O vanitie of vanitie, O fond and fickle beautie, nay, O ſtinking fleſhly glory. Inquire of an olde & wrinckled creature, what is become of her wonted giftes of Nature by age defaced, by ſickneſſe chaunged, by ſorowes and cares altered, and by times continuaunce waſted: why then art thou proude, earth & aſhes, where is Helen of Greece? Polixena
                   of Troy? Dido
                   of Carthage? Arotonica
                   of Syria? Venus
                   of Cypres? Cleopatra
                   of Egipt? Lucrece
                   of Rome? with Fauſtin & the reſt: Where is theyr beauty? Where is theyr pompe? Where is theyr Princely apparell? Theyr coſtly chaines? Theyr precious iuels? Theyr ringes? Theyr bracelettes? And the reſt of all theyr glorie? Is it not in the earth? Is it not forgotten? What remayneth thereof to them? But as a certayne man had written on his graue, Hoc ſolum mihi ſuper eſt Sepulchrum, Onely this Sepulchre remaineth vnto me.
                   Euen ſo, of all your pride, of all your beautie, and of all the reſt of your worldlie pleaſures, wherein you fixe your chéefe felicitie: nothing but earth remaineth to your delycate body, and for your naked ſoule, the ritcheſſe of Gods mercie: caſt away therefore theſe fading ſhaddowes, and cleaue to the ſubſtaunce of aſſured thinges: conſider with your ſelues, that whatſoeuer you poſſeſſe, or whatſoeuer you vſe in this lyfe, it is but a vapor that ſwiftlie ſlydeth, and a falſe flame that quicklie fadeth, onely your good conſcience ſhalbe a braſen wall, and a tower of defence for you, at the daye of iudgement, before the preſence of the omnipotent God, vnto whome if you will liue wel, account all worldly thinges but ſmoke, ſo ſhall you not be preſſed downe with the vanities of this lyfe, but that you may without feare of conſcience, lyft vp your eyes, to beholde the preſence of your redéemer, and raine with him in that euerlaſting place of pleaſure.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The puniſhment of diſobedience, ſhewed vppon an obſtinate and ſtubborne Sonne, who moſt miſerablie and vnnaturallie, withheld from his Parentes, the needfull noutiſhmentes, of theyr neceſſarie ſuſtenaunce. A notable ſpectacle for euerie diſobedient childe, to ſee therein the plagues of God, vpon vnnaturall chyldren, that withdrawe from theyr aged Parentes, the duetie and loue that they ought to ſhowe.
            
               A 
               Mongſt the workes that nature hath framed, we count it great deformitie, for any thing to be repugnaunt to the kinde, whereof it tooke increaſe, in as much as in thoſe ſenſible Creatures, ſeperated from rationall vnderſtanding, and being but led by ſenſuall gouernement, we ſée an inward duetie and ſecrete loue, that cauſeth the roote of thankfulneſſe, to yéelde foorth liuelie fruites of plentifull good will, to repaye the paſſed paines of theyr ſéellie Parentes. Both byrde, beaſt, fiſhe, or whatſoeuer receyueth life, is in ſome part endued with a certaine knowledge, and loue of thoſe, from whom they had theyr being, or eſſenciall ſubſtaunce: and therefore thoſe children, vnto whome ſo little regard of naturall loue remaineth, that they not onely derogate that dutie from theyr Parents, which God and nature hath commaunded, but alſo purſue the lyfe of theyr progenetours, euen to their graues, being led on with a couetous deſire, rather of theyr ſubſtaunce, then any willing wiſh of theyr

liues aſſuraunce. I knowe not wherevnto I may reſemble them by ſimilitude, but to the Vipers broode, moſt full of ingratitude, who not tarying theyr timelie maturitie, eate out theyr Mothers ſides moſt cruellie, preparing theyr timelie paſſadge, to the vntimelie death of theyr miſerable mother: and as both the Male and Female receiue theyr death, by the increaſe of theyr vnnaturall ſéede, (the one by bearing, the other by ingendring) ſo fareth it with a great many impious children, (that like theſe Vipers, vnthankefull to theyr Parentes for theyr being) deſire not onely the death of theyr Fathers, but, (if any richeſſe or ſubſtaunce, is growing to them by theyr Mothers departing) like deteſtable ſéede, doo alſo procure the death of both, to the ende (that lyke the Vipers) they may procure theyr preſent being, though it be to both theyr Parentes vndooing: Example of this you ſhall perceyue in the ſequell of this diſcourſe, as alſo the vengeaunce of God, vppon the vice of diſobedience, being left as a clappe to diſmay the mindes of ſuch rebellious perſons, before the bolt of Gods vengeaunce, be ſhot to their further puniſhment.
            In the partes of Normandie, there dwelt a man, more renowmed for his ritcheſſe, then fortunate in his iſſue, who, though by byrth he was to ſome inferiour, yet for ſubſtaunce, to many men ſuperiour: ſo that, I knowe not whether he were more happie in his wealth, or vnhappie in his Sonne, ſuch contrarietie was there, in both theſe giftes of fortune: that for the one, he was to her beholding: for the other, to accuſe her of diſdaine. But ſuch is the vnconſtauncie of fortunes giftes, that amidde many pleaſures, the aucthour of fortune, ſendeth ſome diſpleaſures, leaſt the forgetfull nature of man ſhould decline from the remembraunce of his omnipotencie.
            
               This man had but one onely ſonne, whome therefore he tenderly and delicately brought vp to mans ſtate, not bending the wyeth while it was gréene, nor propping the plant while it was young, by reaſon whereof the wyeth grew ſtiffe, and the trée croked: ſo that it paſſed Artes integritie, to alter the courſe of natures deformitie, Quo ſemel est imbuto recens ſeruauit odorem: The veſſell being new, was at firſt ſeaſoned with ſtinking lothſome licquor, ſo that it was to harde afterward to remoue thereof the ſauour: they that will haue fine Spanielles, teach them being ſmall: they that will haue good horſſes, bridle them being young: and they that will haue vertuous Children, doo correct them being Infants: otherwiſe the dogge will not hunt, the Horſe will not beare, nor the Chylde liue in honeſt behauiour: but the one will ſnarle, the other will kicke, and the thyrd will ſtubbornelie ſpurne at his duetie.
            There was adioyning to this man, a certaine Knight, who noting the wealth of this vnfortunate Father, to returne to the poſſeſſion of this his onely Sonne: thought that ſuch a maſſe of money, as he poſſeſſed, would counterpayſe the ſimplicitie of his ſtocke, and beare out the baſe ignobillitie of his byrth: and therefore hauing a Daughter of comelie countenaunce, adorned with the giftes of natures lyberalitie, purpoſed to contriue a match, betwixt this ritch mans ſonne, and his fayre daughter: and wayting oportunitie, brought certaine of his fréendes, to perſwade this ſeelie man to an vnprofitable match, and thus he framed vnto him his ſpéeche.
            Syr, muſe not at my wordes, but fréendly waye my meaning, which I intende to vtter, the ende whereof tendeth to the aduauncement of your ſtocke and kindred: So it is, that fortune hath giuen vnto me a Daughter, of byrth well borne, of beautie ſufficient, and of goodes and vertuous gouernement, her will I beſtowe in marriage

vpon your ſonne, which if you like, ſhall (as I hope) not onely redound to your great comfort, and further helpe while you are héere, but alſo héereafter exalt your poſteritie, and bring your ſtocke vnto high renowne and gentry: This will I doo conditionallie, that you will make a preſent deliuerie of all your poſſeſſions, into the handes of your onelie ſonne, who though by nature he ſhall be mooued, to your ſufficient maintenaunce, yet will I ſée, that to your neceſſitie ſhall be miniſtred aboundauntlie, the commodities are diuers that may induce you héere vnto: fyrſt conſider, that your age requireth reſt, which you may take, hauing once accompliſhed this thing, then what ioy maye it be vnto your aged minde, to beholde with your eies, your ſonne aſſured lie placed in your poſſeſſions, who though he be your onely heire, to ſuccéede you in the ſame, yet may be thereof preuented by death, or by accident of aduerſe fortune.
            This ſimple man, heard attentiuelie this ſugred tale, not conſidering, that in ſmotheſt ſtreames, is moſt daungerous wading, in ſhalloweſt waters, moſt perillous ſayling, and in greateſt places, moſt hurtfull ſléeping: the Bée carrieth honny in her mouth, and a ſting in her tayle, the Sirens ſing ſwéetly, but theyr ſong is the Saylers ſorrow. So this flattering Knight, though in his ſpéeche appeared an outward ſhowe of trueth, yet was it but the hooke to catch this ſéelie fiſhe with all, to the ende that his Daughter might come to the poſſeſſion of his wealth. And therefore I may liken the ſimplicitie of ſuch men (that caſt not the diſprofite of eche cauſe, as well as the commoditie) to the follie of the fiſhe Sargus, whereof Aelianus ſpeaketh,Aelia. in li. 11. cap. 19. de nat. animal. which ſo vehementlie loueth the Goate, that the fiſherman when he purpoſeth to take her, putteth on a Goates ſkin ouer his head with hornes, prepareth his nettes, the Sunne ſhining at his backe, and diſpearſeth in the Sea: Wheate ſodden in porrage, made with Goates fleſhe, the

ſauour thereof when the Fiſhe perceyueth, ſhe draweth nie, delighting in the ſight of the fained Goate, and ſo is taken in the nette to her owne annoyaunce: euen ſo, theſe men delighted in the ſhaddowe of outward trueth, are deceiued with ſubſtaunce of inward deceits.
            Thus this olde man, truſting to the glorious wordes of this wilie Fisher, was caught in the nette of vaine beléefe, that ſuch eaſe and contentation ſhould redounds to his deſyre, as ſhould cauſe the ſmall courſe of his future lyfe, to be ſpent, in fulneſſe of all delyght, and therefore (though lothe to depart from that hee firmelie loued) yet perſwaded thereto, by the profeſſed fréendes of this glorious Gentleman, was induced to condiſcend to theyr deſires.
            The marriage daye therefore appointed, the ſolemnities thereof were ſhortlie accompliſhed. The Sonne and the Daughter the firſt yéere, miniſtred to the neceſſitie of theyr aged Parentes, plentie of all thinges: the ſecond more ſparinglie: but the thirde moſt vnſhamefaſtlie: the fowrth yéere, through the ſuggeſtions of his Wife, he prepared for his wofull Parents, a lyttle lodging, oppoſite againſt his ſtatelie building, where he might yéeld vnto them, a bare ſcantling of neceſſary ſuſtenaunce.
            Thus theſe odious children, as time increaſed, beganne to immitate the nature of the Pellicanes younglings, who after theyr mother hath brought them vppe to ſome bygneſſe, beginne to ſtrike and pecke her in the face, for which ſhe being vexed, in her furie kylleth them, and afterward being ſorie therefore, ſhe pearceth her ſides with her boyſterous beake, tyll the warme blood iſſuing from her breaſt, renueth her younglinges to newneſſe of life: In which ſimilitude, is comprehended the entyre affection of a mother to her children, and the ſmall requitall of children to theyr Parentes.
            
               This aged and vnfortunate Father, with his croaked olde Wife, ſuffered in this ſtate no lyttle néede and neceſſitie, yea, ſcarſelie durſt they ſet foote within the doores of theyr vngodlie Sonne: but commaunded thoſe things, yea, and requeſted the ſame, which they could not want, from the handes of a houſehold ſeruant. O myſerable ſeruitude, nay, O vntollerable ſlauerie, that he which had aucthoritie to commaund the ſonne, was now at the pleaſure of a ſeruaunt.
            In this caſe, theſe two croked Creatures, paſſed a great part of theyr toyleſome time, vntyll, it fortuned the aged Mother, out of her cottage windowe, eſpied one daye, in the houſe of her Sonne, meate ſpitted, and layde to the fyre, ready to be roaſted: the ſight whereof, procured vnto her ſome hope of better fare, then accuſtomable vſe did yéelde vnto her. But ſéeing that delaye of eyther ſending for her, or to her, did driue her in doubt of the leaſt parte thereof, ſhée came vnto her aged huſbande, the onelie copartner of all her gréefe, ſaying vnto him.
            O my well beloued huſbande, the auncient companion of all my paines, thou ſéeſt in what hungerie ſtate, we ſpend our withering time, which requireth greateſt ſappe of nouriſhment, as for me, I am but a myſerable mother, and an vnhappy woman, whome fortune hath taught, to be with feweſt things content. But goe thou to the houſe of our Sonne, where it may hap thou ſhalt fyll thy hungerie bodie, with part of that meate, which mine eyes by chaunce eſpied.
            The olde man hearing theſe wordes of his fréendlie Wife, leauing his aged lymmes vppon his ſtaffe, haſted to the houſe of his vnnaturall childe, hoping to finde that fare, that his hungerie heart did wiſhe.
            But this wretched and accurſſed childe, hauing intelligence of his Fathers approche, cauſed the meate to be

taken from the fyre, and priuilie conuaide the ſame into a ſecrete place, leaſt the eyes of his aged Syre ſhould, but be fedde with the ſight thereof, and haſtelie running to méete his croaked Father, in ſteede of reuerent ſpéech, gaue him froward language, and for honour to his ſiluer heaires, obſtinatelic ſhewed him a frowning countenaunce.
            Which when the ſéelie ſimple man perceyued, how fruſtrate he was of his longed hope, diſſembling the matter, he preſentlie returned to his former abode, whoſe ſorrowfull heart, I referre to the milde conſideration, of euerie lenious and gentle Parent, that haue felt the diſcourteſie of ſuch baſtards and vnnaturall ſlips: which degenerate from the vertue of theyr auncient roote, from whence they tooke theyr off-ſppring.
            Sée héere the nature of a dunghill byrd, once matched in alyaunce with the noble Eagle: beholde the nature of this crabtrée ſlippe, being once grafted into the daintie Pearetrée ſtocke. Marke well the nature of this carren Kite, being entred in ſocietie with the fléeing Faulcone, & conſider the quallitie of this vpſtart Gentleman, matcht in affinitie with this new alyaunce: Set a begger on horſebacke and he will gallope, ſet a foole on a bench, and he will knocke his héeles, make a cobler a Courtier, and who more ſcornefull, make a iauell a Gentleman, and who more diſdainefull. This yong youth, aduaunced to this ſtate, forgot the place from whence he had his originall, diſdaining his Father, contemning his Mother, and withholding from them ſuſtenaunce and reuerence, which had giuen vnto him ſubſtaunce & eſſence. But behold, the puniſhment of God vpon diſobedience, how ſeuerelie he reuenged, this lacke of earthlie duety, which by his word he hath commaunded, and let it be a myrror to all vertuous chyldren, that they withholde not from theyr aged parents, that loue and affection, which nature hath required: This haggard ſonne, his father being gone, commaunded

the meate to be laide againe to the fyre, the which was no ſooner doone, but ſuddenlie a monſtrous 
                  •
               uglie Tode, violently leaping vp and downe the Chamber, approched the fire ſide, and haſtelie ſhipping vpon this accurſſed meate, cleaued to cloſe to the ſame, that force nor ſtrength could beat the ſame away. The maide crying to her young maiſter, with a ſhriking voice, cauſed him quicklie to diſcerne the matter, who aſſaying by ſtripes to repulſe the ſame away, wrought (by Gods iuſt iudgement) his owne puniſhment: for this filthie Tode, contrarie to natures temeritie, which hath taught the ſame to flie the ſight of man, with forcible ſtrength, reuerted from the meate, and reſpringing from the ſame, leapt ſuddenlie into the face of this Lordlie ſonne, cleauing ſo faſt therevnto, that no art nor councell, no force nor fortitude, could driue the ſame from his accurſſed fleſhe, but that ſticking thus vnto his face (many yéeres) puniſhed the wickedneſſe of this vngratious impe, that contrarie to lawe & nature diſdayned the duetie due to his withered Parents. But that which is moſt myraculous, when any man touched any part of this hateful monſter, or endeuored to driue the ſame from of his face, the terror of torment ſo aſſaulted his heart, that it pinched the ſame with moſt vntollerable paines.
            The fame of this woonder, was ſpread throughout all the vttermoſt endes of Normandie, and Fraunce, the ſtraungeneſſe whereof, did amaze as many as heard the ſame, cauſing in many children ſome feare and duetie to theyr Parentes, and in many Fathers more carefull regard of theyr children.
            Yet as there is no offence ſo bainous, but by contrition auoideth Gods vengeaunce, ſo is there no ſinne ſo gréeuous, but is pardoned by repentaunce, for though the fire of Gods wrath, be often kindled againſt our tranſgreſſion, yet the waterie teares of ſubmiſſion, quencheth the conſuming coles of his anger, and obteineth preſent remiſſion,

and ſo though this obſtinate ſonne had both offended his earthly Father, and alſo incenſed his heauenlie Creator, yet his minde melting in humility, prouoked the Lord to accuſtomable pittie, ſo that after long, patient, and ſufficient ſufferaunce, the Lord ſent vnto him ſpéedy delyueraunce.
            Drawe néere you dallying Daddes, that marre the mindes of your children, by exceſſiue and ouermuch cockering: beholde the iudgementes of God, that puniſheth you in thoſe thinges that you chéefely loue, becauſe you make them your Gods, who ought to be theyr guides, you adore them lyke Saintes, which ſhould ſerue you lyke Sonnes, you let them run at lybertie, which you ought to kéepe in ſtraightly, you miniſter to theyr néedleſſe youth, which ſhould labour for your néedfull age, you giue them all things, and deny them nothing, and yet you complaine that your children are graceleſſe, when you your ſelues are not therein blameleſſe.
            O Fathers, remember you haue béen children, remember that in your childhood, the fleſh did aſſayle yée, letchery dyd burne yée, luſt dyd inflame yée, the world dyd prouoke yée, and the deuill dyd tyſe yée, and ſith thou art a Father, and haſt béene a ſonne, ſith thou art olde, and haſt béene young, let not thy chylde liue ſo in youth, as maye make thée wéepe in age, neyther let him ſo follow his affection, as maye cauſe thee wayle thy want of diſcretion. Harke what the Wiſe man ſayth: If thou bring vp thy ſonne delycatelie, he shall make thee afraide: and if thou playeEccle. 20. with him, he shall bring thee to heauineſſe: laugh not with him, leaſt thou weepe with him alſo, and leaſt thou gnash with thy teeth at the laſt: giue him no lybertie in his youth, and excuſe not his follie, bowe downe his necke whyle he is young, hye him on the ſydes, whyle lie is but a childe, leaſt he waxe ſtubborne, and giue no more force of thee, and ſo shalt thou haue heauineſſe of ſoule.
            
            
               Saint Auguſtine reciteth a notable example of Cyrillus
               Aug ſermo. de d
                     •
                  teſtatione 
                     •••••
                  
                  tatis. 
                     •••
                  . 
                     •
                  3. a Cittizen of Hiponenſes, who hauing a Sonne, which he ſuperfluouſly loued, for that he was his onely ſonne he poſſeſſed, he brought him vp ſo delicately, that he wanted nothing, but had it of him willinglie, denying nothing that he demaunded, but graunting him all things that he requyred, being as ſlowe to correct him, as he was loth to diſpleaſe him: this youth conſumed a great part of his fathers goodes, in luxurious lyuing, (as a number doo with vs in theſe dayes, which frequent the Tauerne before the Temple, viſite theyr harlottes with letters, before theyr redéemer with teares, delyte rather to ſippe the cuppe of theyr concubine, then to taſte of the comfortable cuppe of Communion:) but beholde the glorie of fooliſh Fathers, and marke the fruite of vnbridled children: for being one day dronken with as much wine, as his Syre was with ſuperfluous loue, he kylled his Father weake with age, oppreſſed his Mother great with childe, would haue defyled his ſiſters, and wounded two of them vnto death.
            O myſerable and deteſtable impe of the deuill: but ſée héere, O fathers: what cōmeth of your too too fooliſh affection, & ſuperfluous loue, which blindeth your iudgement, that you cannot, & will not correct the faultes of your children, as the Philoſopher ſayth: Amor et odium ſepe faciunt
               1. Rh
                     •
                  . 
               iudicium non cognoſcere, Loue and hatred oftentimes peruert iudgement.
                The cauſe of which maketh you to nuſſel them in ſuch nicenes, that they are vnfit for labor or ſtudy, through corruption of idlenes: the Emperor Octauian, ſetPolicra. in lib. 6. cap. 4. his ſonnes & daughters to labor, to the end yt they might if fortune failed, obtaine a meane to liue in honeſt behauior: he taught his ſonnes the exerciſe of chiualrie, & his daughters to worke in wooll painefully. Licurgus, taught hisCicero in lib. Tuſenlan. queſt. yong children to ſuffer harme patientlie, & to doo good willingly. Many examples may be héerin inſerted, in which I ſhould ſéeme too tedious, if I ſhould proſecute them with

prolixitie, but becauſe I will not be too long, I will therefore conclude with breuitie, ſhewing how this want of correction, and this too fond affection, hath cauſed Parents to be puniſhed in theyr children.
            
               Dauid, for as much as he was too ſlacke in correcting his childrens abuſes, was therefore plagued in theyr oppreſſions, how was he expulſed by Abſalon? How was he ſhamed in Amon? And to be ſhort, Hely for his negligence in not correcting the offences of his children, was puniſhed1. Reg. 4. of God, ſo that in one day his ſonnes were ſlaine, he brake his necke, and his daughter in lawe for ſorrowe thereof, trauailed with childe and died.
            
               Boetius reciteth a Hiſtory of Lucretius, that was nouriſhedBoe. in lib. de doctri. ſcolarim. vp of his father without diſcipline and correction, vntyll mans ſtate, who conſumed his money at dice and harlottes, and being many times redéemed by his Father out of priſon, fell notwithſtanding to ill company and conuerſation, tyll on a time being taken for ſome great offence, and led vnto the gallowes, his father folowing him, he requeſted at the place of execution, that he might ſpeake with his father, and that he might but kiſſe him before his departure, and fayning the ſame, moſt ſharplie bitte of his fathers noſe, ſaying: Father, iuſtlie by thy meanes doo I ſuffer this, for hadſt thou but corrected me, I neuer had come to this miſerie.
            Beholde héere O fathers, the fruite of ſlacke correction, what fooliſhe pittie procureth in graceleſſe children, what lyttle lacke of vice, and what great want of vertue, corruption hath ſowne in the hearts of your younglinges, bring not your ſelues therefore vnder the yoake of your children, for your ſhall finde it a painefull burthen. The Wiſe man ſayth, Truſt not to their lyfe, nor regard notEccle. 16. their labours: For common experience teacheth vs in theſe dayes, that the loue of Fathers to theyr children is verie great: but the affection of children to theyr Parents

verie ſmall: we ſée what care Fathers haue ouer the ſtate of theyr children, and what negligence children haue euer theyr Fathers: and therefore it may be ſaide verie well, that loue by nature dooth deſcend, but not aſcend, it deſcendeth from the Father to the Sonne, but it aſcendeth not from the ſonne to the Father, wherein the loue of the Father appeareth more, and the loue of the childe leſſe: but what is the cauſe, that the loue of the Father is more effectuall to the childe, then the childes good will to the Father? the reaſon is, Quia radix citius putreſceret quamque, ramus remitteret ſibi influentiam, Becauſe the roote shall ſooner rotte, then the braunch shall ſend backe his influence vnto it.
               
            
            But ſomewhat to amplifie, as well the duetie of children, as to quallifie the vaine affection of Parents. I wiſh all children, to print this paſſed patterne in theyr hearts, and to write the ſame in the table of theyr thoughts, that they may learne thereby, to honour theyr Parents, and to cheriſh them in theyr latter yéeres: The Wiſe man ſaith, My ſonne, make much of thy Father in his age, & greeueEccle. 3. him not as long as he liueth. And againe: Honour thy Father from thy whole heart, and forget not the ſorrowfullEccle. 7. trauaile thy Mother had with thee. It is written in the booke of Tobias: Honour thy Mother all the dayes ofTob. 4. her lyfe, for thou oughteſt to remember, what and howe great perilles she ſuffered for thee in her wombe. This did that Heathen man Coriolanus remember, of whome Valerius maketh mention, who being Conſull of Rome,
               Valer. in lib. 5. cap. 4▪
                and depreſſed thereof, being driuen into exile by the Romaines, went vnto the Volſcans, of whome being fréendly entertained▪ he was made theyr Captaine againſt the Romaines: and after many Citties taken, he approched vnto Rome, and comming within a thouſand paces thereof, they ſent vnto him Orators from the Senate, to intreate of peace, but he would not heare them: againe, they

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
ſent their Prieſts with their Inſignes adorned, but he refuſed them: at the length, his Mother named Veturia, cō
               ming to the campe, & being ſuddenly eſpied of her ſonne, he cried out. O mater, viciſti iram meā, ſcio quid vis, O mother, thou haſt
                (ſayth he) ouercome my anger, I knowe what thou wouldeſt haue: wherof hapned peace, onely through the loue of his mother, inſomuch as he ſaid, more hath the loue of my mother doon, then the ſtrength of the Romains. The Philoſopher Ariſtotle ſayth: Dijs, parentibus et magistris,
               Ariſt in lib. Eth. 9. 
               non potest reddi equiualens: To God, to Parentes and maſters, no man can yeeld recōpence. Valerius
                rehearſeth a notable hiſtory, of a mother in Rome, which had a daughterVale. in lib. de ſubuentione filiorum ad Parentes. married, the mother had committed a fault, for which ſhe ſhould be burned, her daughter came to the Emperor with her little child, & bowed her knée, deſiring life for her mother: the Emperor ſayd, the caſe committed required death, & that ſhe was worthy the ſame: the daughter replied, O mightie Emperor, Princes ſhould be mercifull, not ſuffering their ſuppliants to depart without comfort, yet, I beſéech thée, O Emperor, let not my mother be publiquelis put to death, for how filthy will that be, & how ful of confuſion, ſo to die before the people: but if that no pardon may redéeme my mothers life, yet graunt I beſeech thée, that ſhe may be condemned to perpetual priſonment, there to finiſh her laſt farewel. The Emperor conſidering ye meeknes of the daughter, gaue ſentence that the mother ſhould be condemned to die in priſon, without any nouriſhment to her giuen: the daughter yet craued, that ſhe might naked deſcend vnto her mother in the dungeon, which being graunted, ſhe viſited her mother in this wiſe, O mother, I came naked out of thy wombe, & naked vnto thee I doo deſcend, to bring thee bread or foode, was not to me permitted, but as I being young did ſucke thy breaſt to maintaine me, ſo thou being old, ſucke mine to ſuſtaine thee, thus liued the mother eight dayes with the milke of her mild daughter: this being ſhowne to ye Emperor, how

that ſhe was yet liuing, moued him to wrath, in ſomuch yt he would haue slaine the Jayler, for that he ſuffred not her to famiſh with hunger, who ſware that nothing was by him adminiſtred to her, the Emperor therfore marked ſecretlie the egreſſe of this kinde and louing daughter, and heard her ſweet and mild cōmunication, and ſéeing her giuing vnto her mother her breaſts to ſucke, cōmaūded this daughter to be drawne foorth of priſon naked & wéeping, & ſéeing the compaſſion of the daughter to her mother, ſaid; daughter I giue vnto thee thy mother, whoſe tender & intyre good will hath deſerued her deliuerance. A moſt worthy & rare example, for children in theſe daies to immitate and folow For as ſaith Rauen, Auelle à ſole ſolis radium, et
               
               Peter Ra
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  
                  ▪ quodam ſermo. 
               nō lucet, rinum à fonte et areſcit, ramū ab arbore et exiccatur, membrū à corpore, et putreſcit, ſepara filium à deuotione paterna, et iam non eſt filius, ſed frater et collega illorum de quibus dicitur, vos ex patre diabolo eſtis. Take away from the Sun his beames, and it shineth not, from the fountaine his riuer, & it waxeth dry, from the tree his bough, & it wil wither, from the body his member▪ & it will rot▪ ſo ſeperate a ſonne from fatherly loue, and then is he no ſonne, but a brother, and a fellowe of them of whome it is ſayd, Ye are of your father the deuill.
               
            
            To conclude, let all children, or they (of what age, ſtate or calling ſo euer) which haue Parents thinke them worthy of all honor, reuerence, loue, & feare, endonoring to requite as much as in them lyeth (though fully they cannot) the labor & trauaile, the coſt and care, the loue & loſſe, that theyr Parents haue paſſed for theyr preſeruatiō, that they may ſay, they haue nouriſhed vp, no Woolues to worrie them, but well-willers to cheriſhe them: that beaſtes in theyr nature, exceed not theyr loue, whom reaſon hath framed,Ambroſe in exame. hom. 5. to excell all creatures: As the Storke
                  •
                that ſuccour theyr parents in theyr aged time, recouering them with theyr winges, ſupporting them in flying, and alſo adminiſtring to theyr noriture and neceſſitie.
            
               Moreouer, let them conſider but the tender nature and kinde affection, that they ought to beare vnto them, being ſtronglie vrged thereto by reaſon of theyr being, for by theyr Parents they haue the ſame, without whome they had not béene. And héerein let them conſider the carefull loue, and the notable thankfulneſſe: but of Aeneas (whichVirgill. 
                     •
                  . Aenid. may onely endure them to carefull kindneſſe) who being a noble Prince of the Troyans, diſdained notwithſtanding (at the ſubuerſion of the Cittie, wherein he might haue prayed vpon great ſubſtance) to carrie his aged Father, whome (as he was) he counted his greateſt treaſure, vpon his ſhoulders, and bearing him through the middeſt of his enimies, from flaming fire and bloody weapons, he cried: Parcite nunc ô Graeci nulla enim erit vobis adoria, ſi decrepitum ſenem interfeceritis, mihi vero maxima, ſi parentem cariſsimum liberauero: Spare now, O you Graecians, for no glorie shall you gette, if you kill a croked olde creature, but vnto me great glorie remayneth, if I shall deliuer my deereſt Parent.
                Whoſe Chriſtian example procéeding but from an Heatheniſh heart: if children followe; they ſhall obtaine that reward which God hath promiſed the obſeruers of this commaundement, namelie, long lyfe vppon earth, the which though it be abreuiated in this life (as ſometime it happeneth by Gods appointment) ſhall be prolonged and performed in the true life euerlaſting: in reſpect whereof, this is but a death, and a continuall threatning the chaunge of our mortallitie.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The rare vertue of a Maiden, and the ſingular diſcrecion of a young man, the one in her good and godlie gouernment, the other in his wiſe and prudent choiſe of his Wife. An excellent example to all Maidens, how they ſhould exerciſe their golden tyme: and a perfect platforme to young men, not to runne raſhlie to the bayte of theyr pleaſures, leaſt they be caught in the hooke of follie, to their owne harme and hinderaunce.
            
               
                  IN no one action that pertaineth to the life of man, ought there to be ſo great care, ſtudie, or foreſight, as in the choiſe or election of a Wife, becauſe that therein conſyſteth, eyther the pleaſure or paine, the gaine or gréefe, of him that endeuoureth to enter that ſtate of lyfe, neither may the ſame once taken in hand and accompliſhed, be reuoked, except by the diſſolution of that bonde, the deſtruction (or at leaſt the continuall gréefe) of eyther part be procured: And therefore, as he that betaketh himſelfe to the Seas, muſt abyde the ſtormes or tempeſt: or he that entereth warres ſuſtaine of lyfe the daunger, without reuerſion, tyll fortune finiſhe theyr trouble in bringing a happie ende to theyr taken enterpriſe: So, who ſo attempteth marriage without aduiſement, running raſhlie vpon the reckes of theyr owne ruine, and entring the comberſome conflict of cares, where the gunſhotte of calamitie ſhall batter theyr braines, and the aſſaultes of ſorrowes ouer maiſter theyr mindes, ſuch

muſt patientlie beare the brunt of theyr owne breeding, abiding the bitter blaſtes of vnquiet brawling, tyll death make a deuiſion of theyr fortunes, by diſioynting of theyr bodies, conglutinate together by the free conſent of theyr headdy mindes: To auoiding therefore of ſuch daungers, as maye be the vnſauorie ſance of the whole life, it behoueth eche wiſe man to enter the garden of diſcretion, there to picke out the pureſt hearbes of wiſedome, which maye ſerue him as preſeruatiues of knowledge, before choyſe to make right election, or as plaiſters of remedie in choyſe to heale the heart with contentation.
            And that example of right chooſing, might appeare vnto thoſe vnſkilfull in chooſing, whoſe tender yeeres, or haſtie heades driueth foreward theyr poſting mindes, to experience of marriage, before wiſdome haue taught them what it meaneth: I haue bréefely, though bluntlie layde a platforme thereof, in the conſequent that followeth vnto their open conſtruction.
            There was ſometime a ritch man, of great poſſeſſions, of large reuenewes and ample ſubſtance, hauing a ſonne, whoſe wiſedome ſurpaſſed his fathers wealth, whoſe reaſon, his ritcheſſe, and whoſe good gouernement, his fathers hereditament: ſo that if the Father were fortunate in his wealth, yet his good happe ſucceeded in his heyre, which more adorned the lyfe of his Father by his vertue, then the ſame was garniſhed by his treaſure, ſo that if the ſame were luckie by the inheritaunce of the Father, yet was the Father more renowmed by the vertue of his ſonne: a great contrarietie in the giftes of fortune, for as much as where ſhe cōmonly giueth wealth, there ſhe withdraweth wiſdome, where ſhe yeeldeth vſually beauty, there ſhe wi
                  •
               
               dome placeth continencie, and where for the moſt part, ſhe lendeth ſtrength, there many times ſhe withholdeth humilitie, yet héere it pleaſed her to beſtowe both the one and the other, as a large myſtriſſe of her heauenly gifts.
            
               But as the vnchaſt minde is neuer ſatiſfied, nor the drie ground neuer ſuffiſed, ſo is the minde of the ritch and couetous neuer contented, but that he daily contriueth how to encreaſe his ſtocke plentifullie, how to marry his chyldren wealthily, and how to aduaunce his kindred ritchly, as this Father, that albeit his owne landes and ſubſtance were ſufficient, to the maintenaunce of his ſucceſſiue heire, yet his muſing minde continually compaſſed, howe to accuimulate and heape vp riches for his ſonne, by inſinuating this braunch of his body, into the ſtocke of ſome noble kindred of affinitie, rather regarding the vallour of the preſence, then the vertues of the perſonage, more eſtéeming the wealth, then the wiſdome, the dowrie, then the déeds, the ritches, then the renowne: and hauing eſpied a match meete to his minde, for mucke, though not meaſured at the meatwand of wiſdome, for womanhead, namely, the daughter of a ritch Knight, whoſe pulchritude ſo pleaſaunt, whoſe beautie vnblemiſht, whoſe feature well framed, but chéefelie, whoſe dowrie delightfull, he thought might content as well the fantaſie of his ſonne, as it lyked his couetous appetite: brake therefore vppon a tyme with his ſonne, as concerning the ſame, laying fyrſt the beautie of her bodie, as a baite to allure him, and afterward her treaſure, as a trap to traine him.
            But hee, whoſe wiſedome ouerwaide his Fathers gréedie will, conſidered that the ſweeteſt Cedar in ſmell, is bitter in ſent, that the fayreſt fruite in touch, is not the beſt in taſte, that the goodlieſt Oke in ſight, is not moſt ſound and ſafe, nor the ritcheſt ſtate, on vertue chéefeſt ſtayed.
            But that the Spider may lurke in the Roſe, the rotten woorme in the fayre fruite, the ſtinging Adder in the gréene graſſe, and heapes of vice in high Eſtate. And therefore diſcretelie aunſwered his Father, that as duetie dyd driue him to eſteeme his good will, ſo reaſon

reuokt
                  •
                him from his vnſéemelie choiſe, which his fancie grounded on vertue miſliked, for that he ſawe not in her actions, the things that might drawe his déere affections. And albeit ſhe were endowed with temporall treaſure, concordaunt to her corporall beautie, yet vertue being a habite of the hidden minde, appeared not in her externall déedes, the valure whereof, he eſtéemed aboue the maſſe of mouldred muck, for as much as it ſo farre excéeded wealth, as the minde ſurpaſſeth the body, and as the ſuperior element, the inferior creature.
            But as the Mole, vnto whome the whole meddowe is ſcarcelie ſufficient, rooting vp euerie furrowe of the féeld, to ſatiſfie her gréedie nature, therein deſtroying the earth, hindering the owner of the grounde, and lyttle profiting her ſelfe, except in contenting her waſtfull minde. So this couetous father, not content with aboundaunce, hauing his minde as much vppon gathering money, as the Mole in rooting the meddowe, increaſing his ritches peraduenture by the decay of others, hauing no profite thereby, except in beholding the ſame, to ſuffiſe his couetous hart: was incenſed againſt his ſonne, in that he condiſcended not, to the concluſion of his choiſe which he had made, as much and more to the pleaſure of himſelfe, then the affection of his ſonne, conſidering he had determined the ſame with the father of the Maiden, the conſent of the virgin, but moſt eſpeciallie, the agréement of her dowrie, the quantitie whereof ſo tickled his hoording heart, that vppon the refuſall thereof, he caſt his ſonne out of his fauour, willing him to auoide his ſight, with moſt bytter threates of his diſpleaſure, loſſe of his heredetaments, but chéefelie, the lacke of his bleſſing.
            Yet this ſober youth, giuing place to the paſſions of his Father, and ouercomming his anger with quiet ſufferaunce, knewe that though the impatience of his Father, was for a time ſomewhat troubleſome, yet time might

both appeaſe the ſame, and yéeld better fortune vnto him, that his Fathers couetous minde did wiſhe.
            He well remembred that the herbe Scamone, although it be venemous, yet it purgeth coller, though Southernwoodde be vnſauorie, yet it expelleth venime, and though Rew be bitter, yet it cleanſeth the braine, cleareth the ſight, purgeth fleame, and bringeth many commodities to the body: So thought he, that albeit the auoyding of this match, and the abiding of this brunt be bitter, yet future profite, may repaye the ſame with double pleaſure, and therfore to auoide the coller of his Father, to diſſipate and make voide the deuiſe of his braine, and to accommodate vnto himſelfe ſome better fortune, he fled the ſight of his aged Syre.
            And tracing his iourney through many a wilde wilderneſſe, walking through vnknowne woods, vncouth pathes and wearie wayes: the Sunne withdrawing his lyghtſome beames, and the night approching with his duſkiſhe clowdes, he declined into the houſe of an aged man, to reſt himſelfe after his taken trauaile.
            And entring into the doores thereof, he found the daughter of the olde man (being his onely childe) with lyfted handes, bended knées, and open mouth, yéelding prayſe vnto the Lord, for his great benefites beſtowed vpon her, and making her prayers vnto him from the bottome of her heart, to graunt her his grace to liue in his feare, to the reuerence of her Father, the diſcharge of her duetie, and the quiet contentation of her owne conſcience. A woorthy preſident to fire before the face of all modeſt Maidens: ſhée was not héere occupied, neither in trimming her head, in glaring in the glaſſe, in fingering her Lute, in ſinging of Sonnets, in deniſing of Letters, in daunſing with her Louers, nor in any ſuch lewde and vnſéemelie paſtimes, but like a chaſte Virgin, a milde Maiden, and a good Chriſtian, was occupied in heauenly contemplation.
            
               This routh muſing at the rare exerciſe, and no leſſe admyring at the godly praiers, ſtepped vnto her with fréendlie ſalutations, requeſting to know whether theſe diuine orations, were her continuall ſtudy and frequentations, and conſidering her pouertie (which appeared in outward ſhowe) how and for what cauſe ſhe yéelded ſuch thankes vnto God, for great receyued benefites.
            The Maiden méekely beholding him a while, although at firſt abaſhed with his ſuddaine ſight, yet at laſt, ſhe wiſelie and diſcretelie framed vnto him this aunſwere. Syr, I ſee you meruaile, that my pouertie ſhould not be an obſtacle to my prayers, for as much as to your iudgement, it conteineth few worldly benefites: conſider with your ſelfe, that as a ſimple medicine, dooth more often cure great diſeaſes, then large compoundes curiouſly framed: ſo pouertie, though in apparaunce ſimple, yet to a contented minde, the very ſchoolemaiſter of vertue, and the perfect path vnto perpetual pleaſure, more excellent to ye godlie, then the gliſtring ſtate of golden ritches, which though in outward appearance it ſéem glorious, yet is it the hooke of hurtfull ſecuritie, couered with the baite of worldly felicitie, a log to vertuous life, a ſtop to quiet ſtate, and the verie blocke, whereby worldlinges ſtumble into the pricking perils of choking cares. And although I am not indewed with aboundaunce of worldly treaſures, yet doo I thinke that the Lord hath left vnto me great ritches, in as much as he hath graunted me the onely company of my aged Syre, vnto whome (as in youth) he ſhewed me loue, ſo in age I may yéeld good will, being vnto him in age a ſtaffe, that was to me in youth a ſtaye. And thinke you good Syr (quoth ſhe) that I haue receiued but ſmall benefites at the hands of God, who hath made me a reaſonable creature, that might haue made me a ſenceleſſe thing by nature, who hath giuen to me a ſoule, that might haue cō
               ſtituted me onely of a body: who hath made me a chriſtiā, that might haue made me an infidel, redéeming me by his

blood, that might haue periſhed in mine owne, & ſanctifying me by his ſpirite, that might haue béen poſſeſſed by the enimie: Theſe cauſed conſidered, I doo twiſe euerie day make my praiers vnto ye Lord for my ſoule, as I doo twiſe euerie day féed my body, leſt if I ſhould cheriſh my body, & not nouriſh my ſoule, the one might grow diſdainful, and the other ſinfull, and if I ſhould not thus repay him with thankes, that hath fed me with benefits, I might appeare more vngratefull to him for his mercies, then he beneficiall for mine vndeſeruinges.
            O myrror of maidenhood, O glaſſe of true virginitie, O mind endued with modeſty, O hart fraught with true humility: Sée héere you gadding girles, that gape after euery gaude, and preaſe after ech peeuiſhe paſtime, you that can daunce with the daintieſt, ſmile with the ſmotheſt, & laugh with the leudeſt, you that wāder to weddings, thruſt in at Theaters, & trip into Tauerns, you that take more care to trick your bodies to the pleaſure of men, then to deck your ſoules to the will of God, you that had rather ſpend two houres at ye glaſſe, then a minute at the bible, taking more delight to vew your faces, then to behold your conſciences, rather hardning your héels with daūcing, then your knées with praying. Behold the exerciſe of this virgin, note her life, and follow her example, begin in vertue, & end in the ſame, be not like a number of fooliſh damſelles that begin hotlie, after a while are luke warme, but in the end ſtark cold: like to the monſter Chimera, whoſe vpper part was a Lion, whoſe midle a Gote, but her neather part a Serpent. Be not like to the Jewes that bowed theyr knees vnto Chriſt, and yet buffeted him in the face, neither him that prayſeth a man now, and yet ſlandereth him by & by after: folow not the example of the vſurer, who on the one ſide prayeth, and on the other ſide notwithſtanding taketh vſurie: but if you will be true prayers, and perſeuerers in déede, follow this virgins example, plucke out the ruſtie yro
                  •
                out of your wound, before you proceede to take a

plaiſter, and purge your ſoules of corruption, that you may be healed, and perſeuere.
            But to returne to the ſequell of this Hiſtorie. The yong man hauing impreſſed in his memorie, the wiſe and vertuous aunſwere of this rare and godly Virgin, thought that time thriſe happy, that he directed his ſteppes into the doores of this olde man, and paſſing the tyme with her in common conference: found her wiſdome ſuch, and her gouernement ſo godly, that his affections which before were his owne, were now alyenated and eſtraunged from him ſo farre, as his whole delight was fixed how to drawe vnto him her good lyking, purpoſing not to paſſe any further, tyl he had made a tryal of her good will: and although the conſideration of her pouertie, might ſome what diſcourage him from his pretended choyſe, yet thought he, that greater ritches could not remaine in any, then the true poſſeſſion of a vertuous minde, the which he found to be ſo aboundauntlie placed in the breaſt of this young Maiden, as he thought it as harde to finde her match, as to gette a blacke Swan.
            By this her father (who vſually after ſupper, walked abroade into the féeldes) returned home, and finding a gueſt in his houſe more then either he knew or expected, was not a little abaſhed, for as much as through the ſuſpition of his pouertie, his poore cottage was but ſmally frequented, yet being wiſe and well acquainted with courteſie, bade him welcome: vnto whome this young man, after humble thankes for his good entertainement, requeſted of him that he might but finde ſo much fréendſhip at his handes, as for his money to tarry and refreſh himſelfe in his houſe, tyll he were more apt and able to paſſe foorth the reſt of his vnknowne iorney.
            Vnknowne iorney (quoth the old man) why, are you out of your way good Sir (ſayth he) or know you not the name of the place wherevnto you are bent, eyther haue you forgotten

the ſame, or dyd you neuer héeretofore trauaile this wayes.
            Good father (ſayth the yong man) for ſo both your age and ſtate requireth, I am not out of my way, but rather in the ſame, & thriſe happy doo I thinke my ſelfe, that fortune guiged me into this pathe: the name of this place I neuer knew, and therefore haue I not forgotten the ſame, neither did I euer before trauaile this way, but I ſo bide mine vnknowne iorney, in as much as I am ignoraunt, whether it will pleaſe you to graunt me abyding within the compaſſe of your cottage, which if you doo, then is not my iorney vnknowne, but at an end, for as much as ſince my arriuall at your houſe, I haue found the place, which I hope fortune decréede I ſhould atchieue.
            Gentleman (quoth the old man) what good happe is that, that you harpe on ſo much, that hath guided you hither, I know not, but if you ſhall receyue any good by the meanes of your comming hyther, I ſhalbe right glad of the ſame, as for the vſe of my poore cottage, although it be but ſimple, & not woorthy your entertainement: yet leaſt I ſhould ſéeme to deny you the ſame, vſe both it and me I beſéech you at your pleaſure, taking ſuch fare as you finde and ſee, agréeable to my poore ſtate and calling.
            Good father (quoth the other) the good I haue got, and the lucky hap I haue had ſince my comming, I ſhall in time to come (I hope) make knowne vnto you, in the meane while, I am to yéeld you moſt harty thanks, that being a ſtranger altogether in theſe parts, you haue notwithſtāding deined to proffer me ſuch courteſie, as greater can I not find amōg my beſt acquaintaunce, and as for your fare, were it neuer ſo ſimple, if I ſhould miſlike the ſame, procéeding from a franke and willing heart, I might be counted an yl gueſt, that would eſtéeme more of the meat then the man or more of your fare then of your faithfull hart, I account the dwelling good, that is not daungerous, and the chéere great that is willingly beſtowed.
            Gentleman (ſayth the olde man) the good behauiour and

courtesse that I ſée apparaunt in your outward habite, maketh me to iudge therby, the maners of your inward mind, and therefore your none acquaintaunce, is quitted by your modeſt demeanor, for vertue maketh a ſtraunger vnto euerie wiſe man a familliar, neyther haue I euer ſéene that young man héeretofore, vnto whome mine eye, vppon ſo ſmall acquaintaunce, hath drawne my heart more néerer, and therefore I & my poore cottage are to vſe at your pleaſure, tarry your time, and depart at your leyſure.
            Thus taried this youth in the houſe of this olde man, noting the outward pouertie of the Father, and the inward vertue of the Daughter, no leſſe muſing at the one, then meruailing at the other: but eſpeciallie, the Virgins godly gouernement, her modeſt manners, her words placed with wiſedome, her lookes without luſte, and her déedes ruled by diſcreſion, ſo that it ſéemed vnto him, that her life was a lampe to the lende, a lantorne to the looſe, and a light to the laciuious, gouerned by grace, ruled by reaſon, and bridled with the bytte of Gods holy word, wherein he ſawe her ſo continually occupied, that her whole delight ſéemde to be placed in the meditation thereof.
            On the other ſide, the old father marking the godly life of this young man, noting his courteous ieſture, his wiſdome, his humility, his ſobriety, his ſpéeches familiarly ſpoken, yet wiſely placed, his minde ſtored with myrth, yet vſed with modeſty, his contentiue minde, his patient ſufferaunce, his earneſt praiers for his Father, though he might haue grudged at his vnkindneſſe. And knowing his Father, his kindred and fréendes, yet more regarding his vertue, then his fortune, or any part of his hoped wealth, was wunne vnto ſuch an inward affection towardes him, as he ſtudied howe to bring that to paſſe, which the young man did moſt ſecretlie deſyre.
            Noting alſo, the honeſt and mutuall fréendſhip, the vertuous and faithfull loue, that daylie increaſed in the minds of theſe two younglings, he thought that match could not be made a miſſe, where loue was the beginning, and vertue

was the ende, and therefore breaking one day the matter vnto his daughter, was deſyrous to know the affections of her minde, at which he aimed by ye diſpoſitions of her body, and ſhe whome ſimplicity had nouriſhed with the milke of truth, hauing her face ſtained with the vermillion of vertue, with bluſhing countenaunce reuealed that loue, which her outward ieſtures could not conceale, deſiring therin the conſent of her fathers mind, from whoſe body ſhe had receiued the ſubſtaunce of her being, ſhewing him that ſhe was more drawn to loue him by the view of vertue, then any affection dimmed with the vaile of vanitie, requeſting him, that as he had béene a Father of her body, in giuing to her thoſe thinges neceſſarie for her vſe, ſo he would be alſo a gouernor of her life, in not denying her him wheron her ioies did reſt: which the good olde man did as willingly graunt, as ſhe did heartely deſire, perſwading her that as ſhe had béen a comfortable ſtaffe to ſtaye vp the weight of his aged lymmes, ſo he would be a carefull father in prouiding her a mate agréeable to her minde, as ſoone as tyme would permit the accompliſhment of the ſame.
            Shortly after the old father eſpying an apt occaſion to performe his promiſe, brake with the young man in the demaund of this match, requeſting of him to know, how he liked the rude demeanor of his daughter, and for as much as he had moued the queſtion of mariage vnto her, of which ſhe had certified him at large, was deſyrous to know what he ſawe in her, that ſhould drawe him to lyking of ſo vnſéemelie a choiſe, perſwading him, that if he ſhot at wealth▪ in ſtéede thereof he ſhould finde want, for as much as his ſtate could yéeld no ſupplie to his neceſſitie, but if he aimed at vertue, he thought her able to bring him a ſufficent dowrie, in that his ſtudy had béene, to make her therewith ſufficientlie endued.
            The young man replied vnto him, that he gaped neither after gold nor goods, for as much as he ſaw by ſufficient appearaunce, that there was no ſuch gaine to be gaſed after, within the compaſſe of his cottage, but that he had found

already an ineſtimable treaſure, in an obſcure corner, the poſſeſſion wherof, if it pleaſed him he might quietlie enioy, he acknowledged himſelfe ritcher then Creſſus, and his ſubſtaunce more then all the golden ſandes of Pactolus, or the ſiluer ſtreames of Ganges, more happier in his conqueſt then Alexander, and farre more more fortunate then Policrates.
            
            This good old man (eſpying the vertuous end of this yong mans deſyre, and ſeeing that vertue was the onely marke whereat he did Jeuell the ſhotte of his affections) could not any longer diſſemble his hidden ſtate, neither the good will that he bare to his vertuous minde, & therefore taking him apart into a priuie corner of his cottage, he ſhewed him a huge ſumme of gold & ſiluer, not gathered by his care (who was rather addicted to contemplation, then to heaping of treaſure,) but bequeathed by the death of her Vncle, a man of great ſubſtaunce, who noting the hope of her vertuous heart, that ſhined foorth in the image of her face, deliuered to her Father to kéepe for her vſe, a homelie coffer in outward ſhowe, farced within full of gold and ſiluer, all which (for ſo much as he ſaw, he deſired not wealth, but wiſdome, nor the body of his daughter, but her minde) he gaue him, calling vnto him his onely child, and ioyning theyr handes with the frée conſent of theyr ioyful hearts, he bleſſed them, praying God, that as vertue was the beginning of theyr loue, ſo it might be the ende of the ſame, that they might liue together héere in all godlineſſe and felicitie, and ende theyr dayes in peace and tranquilitie, that ſuch iſſue might ſpring of their ſéede, as might be the common wealths commoditie, to theyr comfort and Gods glorie.
            Thus liued they together in all honeſtie, godlineſſe, and quietneſſe, breaking all brawles with humilitie, & quieting euerie diſcorde by loue, the one not being proude through rule, the other not checking her huſband for wealth, looke what he lyked, ſhe loued, looke what he loathed, ſhe luſted not after, in pleaſure ſhe would be his partner, in ſorrowe his companion, her honeſt myrth was his mellody, and her

fréendly hart his harmony, in health his delight, and in ſickneſſe, his Phiſitian, and in bréefe, the piller of his life, and the onely patterne of a vertuous wife.
            O how many wiues haue we in our Citie, that follow not the example of this Damſell, but rather runne with maine ſtrength the contrary way, whoſe liues if they were noted, would rather deſerue a ſharpe inuectiue, then a plauſible prayſe, againſt whome I will not inueigh, leaſt I might be rather vniuſtlie accuſed of ſome of enuie, then thought to write of iudgement and experience. I will therfore ſtrike ſayle in ſuch a tempeſt, rather then ſtriuing with contrarie windes, runne againſt the rockes of womens venemous tongues, and ſo put in perill the ſhip of my ſafetie, accounting this only example ſufficient to encourage the good, and to gaule the wicked, the one burning with the praiſe of vertue, the other bluſhing at the want thereof.
            Wherefore, let all Maidens learne by this Virgins example, how to weare out theyr golden time of virginitie, not by ſpending the ſame in wantonneſſe, wildneſſe, l
                  •
               ſeneſſe and libertie, but in ſhamefaſtneſſe, diſcréetneſſe, chaſtneſſe, and ſobrietie, which as Valerius ſayth, is, Custos caſtitatis, The preſeruer of chaſtitie.
                Moreouer, let them be ſilent, not coueting by wordes rather to be ſéene, & ſo to ſhew their eloquence, then by ſhamefaſtneſſe to declare theyr honeſt ſilence, as a number doo in theſe daies, who make their tongues ſwéete inſtruments, to delight the eares of trifling talkers, & count it a great gaine to floriſh in glorious ſpeech, ſo that if nature had made them for that vſe, I thinke ſome of them would prooue gallaunt Orators to pleade, and as ſutle Sophiſters to deceyue.
            Let them learne alſo to kéepe theyr féete from gadding, and to exerciſe themſelues at home in vertuous dooing, of which, the one will blotte theyr good name with infamie, but the other adorne theyr life with glorie.
            This Maidens modeſty may be theyr myrror, and her gouernment a glaſſe for theyr behauior, how to conſume their time in godlineſſe and praier, and to bridle theyr looſe affections

from vicious demeanor, whoſe example if they immitate, they ſhall finde more faithfull louers of theyr vertue, then fooliſhe doters on theyr beautie, more ſuters for theyr honeſtie, then lykers of theyr braucrie: and aboue all, they ſhall be ſure that God will prouide them ſuch huſbands, as ſhall be truſty louers, and honeſt lyuers.
            But for ſo much as I promiſed in the Exordium of this hiſtorie, to ſet downe ſomewhat, whereby the vnſkilful youth may be warned, how to make a right choiſe in the choſing of a Wife, or hauing choſen, how theyr life may be ſpent in quietnes, I wil bréefly performe it, and ſo drawe to an end.
            
               Chryſoſtome, perſwadeth him that will marrie, to cenſiderSuper. Math. whether the Parentes be both good, or both euill, or whether the one be good, and the other euill: if they be both good, then may he ſafely make choiſe of her, if both euill, then to refuſe her: if the one be good, & the other euill, then may he be doubtfull what to doo: yet if the Father be good, and the mother diſhoneſt, vnquiet, or without gouernment, he ought rather to feare, then contrariwiſe: and the reaſon is, becauſe Maidens haue béene more accuſtomed to be conuerſaunt with theyr Mothers, then with theyr Fathers: and therfore more inclined to follow their manners, whervpon roſe the prouerbe, Qualis mater talis filia, Such a moher, ſuch a daughter.
               
            
            But eſpecially let him beware that intendeth to marrie, that theſe things concurre and méete together, namely, that in theyr ſtates there be an equallitie, for where there is no equallitie of condition, there can be no quietneſſe of life, for as much as two contraries are neuer found in one ſubiect, nor one hart in two contrarie fortunes, for wealth in a woman without wiſdome, & pouertie in a man without great gouernement, doo neuer make vp a quiet marriage.
            Moreouer, let there be a lykeneſſe in theyr manners, and a vnitie in theyr mindes, leaſt if there affections be variable, they become ſeperable: for where there is no likeneſſe in manners, there can be no ſoundneſſe in fréendſhippe: where is no ſoundnes in fréendſhip, there is no faithfulnes

in loue: where is no faithfulnes in loue, there may be no quietnes of lyfe, and where the lyfe is vnquiet, there is the lyfe but a death, and the mariage a myſerie.
            But aboue all, ſéeing that Natura nihil ſolitarium amat, And that thoſe that haue not the gift of continencie muſt marrie, (albeit that in marriage are many diſcommodities, yet of euils the leaſt is to be choſen, For better it is to marrie, then to burne in fleſhlie deſires:) let euery wiſe man haue a ſpeciall regard therefore, that her Parentes be honeſt, ſhe vertuous, and therewithall Religious, ſéeing that the lacke of Religion is the want of good lyfe, and the open gappe to all vngodlineſſe, and ſurely, this lacke of foreſight in choyſe, leadeth many a man to yll chaunce, making the whole lyfe vnſauerie, that elſe might be ſpent in ſwéete and pleaſaunt quietneſſe, and ended in myrth, ioye and happineſſe.
            In breefe therefore, good education is better in a Maiden then ritches, albeit I will not diſſwade any man from profite, ſo it be not wholie reſpected: for I deny not, but that wealth & wiſdome may be coupled, and vertue and ritches conioyned, that there may be as much vice in néedy pouertie, as pride in gliſtering ritches, for Marcus Cato had a wife, who although ſhe were poore, yet was ſhe proude, pō
               tifical & péeuiſh: yet is a poore Maiden vertuous, better then a ritch that is vicious, and pouertie with glorie, is better then ritches with infamy.
            But now to vſe Apostrophe, to thoſe that are married, as in the choyſe of a wife, there is to be vſed diſcretion, ſo muſt thou gouerne her by mildneſſe and wiſedome, auſteritie of wordes, muſt be mingled with gentleneſſe of ſpéech: feare muſt in her be turned into loue, and bitterneſſe in thée, into ſwéetneſſe of behauiour, ſeeing that ſhe was not made of the head nor the foote, but of the ryb and ſide of man, which ſheweth, that as ſhe may not be a myſtreſſe, ſo muſt ſhe be no maide, as no ſoueraigne, ſo no ſeruaunt, but an equall companion, and a freendly fellow, to participate with thee of euery fortune.
            
               With this mildneſſe of gouernement, muſt be matched, ſecrecie of chaſtiſement, that euery fault be not openly corrected, nor euery offence publique detected, euery light fault muſt not be found, nor euerie infirmity ſharply noted, for as a diſcord in muſicke, being a harſhe and vnpleaſaunt ſtroke of mixed ſoundes, ſharpe and flat, is unpleaſaunt to the tuneable eare: So the publique diſagréemēt of cooples, being an vnſauerie noyſe of iarring wordes, is gréeuous to the honeſt godly minde, therefore if any occaſion of offence fal out, (as it cannot chuſe but euen among the beſt, it may ſometimes happen, for, 
                  Ʋnicuique dedit vitium natura creato, To euerie one that liues, hath nature giuen a fault,
               ) there ought to be great cyrcumſpection, that it be not onely reprooued, leaſt a ſmall offence vnwiſely handled, bréede a gaule in the minde, and a gréefe in the heart.
            Laſt of all, accuſtome thy ſelfe to fréendlineſſe in ſpéeche, and louingnes in cōmunication, to honeſty of life, and vertuouſneſſe of manners, that going before in gouernement of life, ſhe may follow in obedience of behauior, let thy life be a lantorne to light her, and a guide to leade her, an example of vertue, and a patterne of honeſt demeanor, that ſhe beholding thy vertue, may immitate thée in euery godly action. Theſe notes duely obſerued, will profite thée in ſingleneſſe, and eaſe thée in wedlocke, make thy whole life delightfull, and thy death ioyfull, that departing from the ſhaddowe of this ſhort life, a good conſcience may accompany thée to the life eternall, and a good name remayne for thy eternall memorie. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   