
      
         
            
            
            A Commemoration or Dirige of Bastarde Edmonde Boner, alias Sauage, vsurped Bisshoppe of London.
            Compiled by Lemeke Auale.
            
            
               Episcopatum eius accipiet alter.
            
            
               Anno Domini.
            
            
               1569.
            
            ¶ Imprinted by P. O.
            
         
         
            
            
            ¶ The Preface.
            MAtters beyng yet in doubt, maie with questions and reasons, bee brought out of doubt: but thinges beyng without doubt, ought not with the subteltie of wordes, bee broughte into doubte. As without all doubte Edmonde Boner, late vsurped bishop of London, was a bastarde, and also the soonne of a Bastarde: that is a Bastarde in grosse, and a Bastarde can not, neither maie not bee a bisshop. Boner was a Bastarde, ergo no bishop, and this is a true conclusion. This is not true said an old Dunsticall felowe, sittyng at the table with a graue learned Lawier of the common Lawe, and an eloquente Ciuilian, that were all three together: the one frouned, the seconde did bite his lippe, the third in a greate rage saied: men maie saie what thei will now a daies, & belye the truthe as you haue doen, he was a blessed confessor, although a bastard, and a true bishop, bothe by Gods Lawes, the Canonicall lawes, & the lawes of this realme of Englande. To this thei saied all Amen, Proue you the cōtrary saied thei, and we wil yelde vnto you: will you q he, then will I proue hym no bishop, when he liued, whiche you graunt to bée bastarde by these thrée Lawes.

Make proffe saied these three, I will by Gods grace quod he, proue that neither 
                  〈◊〉
               , nor Boner, were any bishoppes of London, but vsurped, bicause thei twoo were bastardes: and all bastardes bee vnder the same predicament. For the booke of Wisedome in the. iiii. Chapit. makyng a difference betwene twoo generations of the lawfull, and vnlawfull. Of the lawfull it is saied: O quam pulcra, & casta generatio. &c. O how faire is a chaste generation with vertue: the memoriall therof is immortall, for it is knowen with God, and with men: when it is presente, men take example thereat, and if it goe awaie, yet thei desire it: it is alwaies crouned, and holden in honor, and winneth the rewarde of the vndefiled battaill. But the other generation, that is vnknowen emong men, that are called the children of the people: thus muche is spoken of in the same booke. Multigena autem impiorū multitudo non erit vtilis, & spuria vitulamina non dabunt radices altas, nec stabile fundamentum constituit. That is. The multitude of the vngodly children, are vnprofitable children, and the thynges that are planted with whoredome, shall take no depe roote, nor laie any fast foundation, though grene for a tyme in the braunches, yet thei shalbe shaken with the winde,

for thei stande not fast, and through the vehemencie of the windes, that is Gods vengance thei shalbe rooted out, for the vnperfite braū
               ches shalbe broken, the fruicte shalbe vnprofitable and sower, mete for nothyng. For why 
                  〈◊〉
                demaunded of their parentes, that is, who were their fathers, or mothers, doe witnesse against them, and declare their abhomination, and dooe disclose their synnes, as did that wicked Cham, the sonne of Noe, whiche vncouered his fathers secretes, for whiche cause, Noe asked vengeaunce vpon the offenders sonne, that therby the offender might 
                  〈◊〉
                more greued, then with his owne mishappe. Therfore the lawe that punisheth thoffēders issue, 
                  〈◊〉
                more prohibite synne, then that whiche plageth the offender alone: by this it maie be cōsidered, with what zeale the law of Englande abhorreth vnlawfull coniunctions, depriuyng them not onely of lawfull parentes, but also of Ecclesiasticall dignitie, and tē
               porall inheritaunce. The Ciuill Lawe, speakyng of the birth of children, saieth: Quod non potest arbor mala fructus bonos facere. &c. An euil tree, saie thei, can not bring forth good fruite: nor a good tree beare euill fruites, and by the consente of the lawes it is agreed, that euery plante yeldeth to the nature of the grounde,

wherein it is planted. The childe also hathLeges Ciuiles dicūt filium naturalē tuū esse fil. um populi. muche more certaine, and sure knowledge of the mother, then of the father. Therfore saith the Ciuill Lawe, your naturall or bastarde soonne, is the soonne of the people: and when suche a bastarde is, hauing no certain, or knowen assured father at the birthe, as it is daily seen, and so iudged by lawe. How can he come by a father after: as example. If one woman should beare twoo children, of twoo fornicatours, and one of these fornicatours, after doe marie with this woman, whiche of these children should this mariage make legitimate? This would partly help Tunstall by the CiuilTunstallwas a Bastarde. lawe, bicause his father reconsiled his mother into mariage, but lōg after his birth: this is not Boners case (whose father was neuer maried to his mother) fātasy would som what perswade: but reason can not finde, seyng the tyme was ones, when bothe these children were bastardes, and the sonnes of the people, and did not knowe their fathers: it wer therfore against all reason, that a child afterward borne in the same Matrimonie, being lawfullyGenes. 16. borne, should lose the inheritaūce, and placeGalla. 4. the bastardie in the same, as lawfull heire. The lawes of Englande agreeth with the scriptures. Ismael did not inherit with Isaac:

So no bastardes doe inherite lawfully, by the lawes of Englande, neither is equall to the lawfull begotten in the inheritaunce, whiche by the Ciuill lawes can be deuided, but onely emong the male children. Saincte Augustine in lib. xvi. de Ciuitate dei, saieth, Abraham gaue all his substaunce vnto Isaac his soonne, but vnto the soonnes of the Concubines, he gaue giftes, and sente them awaie from Isaac his soonne. Wherevpon he ment that to bastardes, there is no inheritaunce due, but onely necessary liuyng, and vnder the name of a bastarde. Sainct Augustine vnderstande all vnlawfull issues, and so doeth holie scripture also, and thinketh no small difference betwene the succession of the lawfull begotten, and the bastarde in tēporall thynges, or worldly inheritance, muche lesse in the churche of Christ, in that, that it admitteth them not into holie Orders: and that is proued in the Popes Lawes, againste the bastardly Papistes: and if the Pope dispēce with suche a one, yet he permitted not hym to haue a dignitie, or preheminence in the Churche, as to bee a bishoppe.Et ecclesia que eos a sacris repellit ordinibus. &c. Et si tale dispensauerit non enī tum permittit dignitate habere in ecclesiae dei. Therefore it is conuenient, that mannes lawes should cutte them shorte, in the benefite of worldly succession. When the Churche doe iudge thē vnworthy of orders, of ministerie,

of pontificall dignitie: yea, whom the holie scripture do thrust doune, and greatly embace for though some, that is, one, emong a thousande is good, yet most are not onely giuen to wickednesse, and persecution. &c. Example of Ismael, some to murder. Example of Abimelech,Iudicū. ix. the bastarde soonne of Gedion, whiche Gedion had lawfull begotten sonnes. lxx. and but one bastarde, whiche bastarde Abimelech with one stone, traiterously killed al his brethren, one excepted. So there is more abominatiō in one bastard, then in. lxix. lawfull sonnes. Many examples I can bryng forthe of histories, repugnant to bastards, of their filthinesse of life, whoredome, idolatrie, extortion, treasō, murder, glottonie. &c. For it is thought that thei doe drawe a certain staine from the volupteous lust, mutuall of bothe their filthie parētes, whiche in lawfull chaste mariage taketh no place:Note this. and then knowing them selues to be bastardes, hateth all them that are lawfully borne, inuentyng mischief against them as traitors would haue all men traitors: this base borne Bocher Boner, like Abimeleche, hath slain a great nōber of the legitimate children of God: whose blood asketh the same crewell vengeaunce, that holie Abels doe still in the presēce of God, against his brother Cain.

So you shall not doubte, but by Gods lawes, the lawes of Englande, and also the Canonicall lawes, that bastardes are all 
                  〈◊〉
                of lawfull parentes, therefore of inheritaunce Temporall: also not lawfull to take Orders, therefore no ministers of Spiritnall dignitie,Ergo. therfore no bishops. Iudge of this your selues,Ergo. and then make answere, when it shall please you. Sir, we will depart, quod thei, referryng this matter till an other tyme. Here is one, quod he, with plaine Musicke Dirge like, in the next chamber, singeth to a dull base Lute I praie you let vs heare him, it will not hurt vs, my thinke he singeth of D. Boner, some merie vanitie, of that vain man, whiche spēt his daies in vain Papistrie: we are cōtent said thei, to heare this matter, and then to depart hence, when he hath doen: we praie God it be mery, for we haue talked of sad matters, peace a little, silence my maisters, quod he, agreed saied thei. Then the fellowe on the other side of the walle, reade in the Bible to hymself alone, and that beyng dooen, he songe in rude rime, against rude Boner, the Papist bastard.
            
               The fellowe doe read.
            
            
               I will sende a curse vpon you, and I willMalach. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . curse your blessynges, yea curse them will I, if ye doe not take hede: beholde I shall corruptDeute. 26.
                  
your seede, and cast dunge in your faces, euenMarkerehell, marke Papiste. the donge of your solemne feastes, and it shall cleaue fast vpon you. You are cleane gone out of the waie, and haue caused the multitude to be offended at the lawe of the lorde. You haue broken the couenaunt of Leui, saith the lorde of the hoste, therefore also I will make you toEzech. 13. be despised, and to be of no reputation emong
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 8. the people bicause that you haue not kept my waies. My handes shall come vpon the false Prophetes, that looke out vaine thinges, and preache lyes: thei shall not be in the counsaill of my people, nor written in the boke, bicauseEzech, 34. thei haue deceiued my people. The beste (that is the martyres) haue ye slain, the flocke haue you not nourished: but churlishely and cruelly haue you ruled them. Therefore woe and vengeaunce be vnto you, saith the lorde God. All these places of holie writynges, crieth out against Boner asmuch as to any false pastor, that euer hath made spoile like a Wolfe in Christes flocke: & the soules of the slain, whō
                  Apoea. 6. he burned for the woorde of God, and for the testimonie whiche thei had: 
                     〈◊〉
                   still crie with a loude voice, saiyng: Howe long 
                     〈◊〉
                   thou lorde, 
                     〈◊〉
                   and true, to iudge and auenge our blood on thē, that dwell on the yearth? Well ones it will fall out thus: That the righteous

shall stande in greate stedfastnes, again suche
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 5. as haue dealt extremely with them, and takē awaie their labours, when Boner with his wicked companions shall se it (as thei shall in 
                     〈◊〉
                  ) thei shalbée vered with horrible feare, and shall wonder at the hastines of the sodain health, gronyng for verie distresse of mynde, and shall saie within them selues, hauyng inwarde sorowe, and mournyng for verie anguishe of mynde. These are thei, whom wee somtyme had in derision, and iested vpon, we fooles thought their liues verie madnes, and their ende to be without honor. But loe, how thei are compted emong the children of God, and their portion emong the sainctes? Therefore we haue erred from the waie of truthe, and the light of righteousnes haue not shined vnto vs. 
                     〈◊〉
                   waies haue wee gone, the waie of the lorde we haue not knowen: what profit haue our pompe brought vs: suche wordes shall suche as haue persecuted their brethren speake in helle. Lette the persocutours marke this well. Well, well.
            
            
               
                  •
                Boner speaketh.
            
               
                  My soule haue cleaued fast to the grounde,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         pauimento 
                           〈◊〉
                         mea.
                  
                  I haue fed like a swine, and liued like a hoūde
                  My thought it did me muche good,
                  In broilyng the christians, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      blood
               
               
                  
                  I haue she wed my waies, I haue she wed my waies
                  How well I loued the Romishe kaiesVias meas annūciaui.
                  
                  The reliques of Rome were my delight,
                  I was a maiden priest, and our ladies knight.
               
               
                  Iustification I could not abide,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         iusti 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                  
                  Specially if it came on Christes side:
                  I will clime heauen walles with Scala coeli,
                  
                  And followe Alkoc, quondam bishop of Elie.
               
               
                  My soule now slepe in dreames and 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     Dormitat 
                           〈◊〉
                         mea.
                  
                  My corps is buried emong false theues:
                  For my bodie and soule, th'apointed place,
                  Abusyng mercie, and refusyng grace.
               
               
                  The waie of wickednes, I loued well,Viam iniquitatis.
                  
                  In missyng of Purgatorie, perhaps to hell:
                  I beshrowe Dorbell, and Dunses harte,
                  Would I had béen no bishop, but gon to carte.
               
               
                  The waie of truthe, I did once take,Viam veritatis.
                  
                  Whiche of malice, I did for sake:
                  And neuer since I did repente,
                  In despisyng the eternall testamente.
               
               
                  I did sticke ones vnto Goddes lawes,Adhesit te 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  But to forsake it, I had no cause:
                  And hardned my harte, & stopped mine eares
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     And could not wepe repentant teares.
               
               
                  The waie of thy cōmaundmēt I might not bideViam 
                           〈◊〉
                         tuorum.
                  
                  After that I was drunke with ye cup of pride,
                  But waxed lothly, foule, and fatte,
                  Like to cardinall Wolsey, with his red hatte.
               
            
            Boner ende.
            
               Deus 
                     〈◊〉
                   in Synagoga deorum.
               His lordship would plaie the Iustice of Corum
               
               In the place of iudgement, it did hym good,
               To accuse the martyres, and shed their blood.
            
            
               O Clemens.
               There is no man within the citie,
               Professyng Christes Gospell, that he would pitie
               Muche mischief this verlet, did begin
               Therefore his praier is tourned to synne.
            
            
               O Pia.
               He had a cancred proude looke,
               With bell and candell, and Popishe booke:
               In cursyng Gods people with hellishe grace,
               A waie graundpanche, with thy greasie face.
            
            
               O Crux.
               Now a peece of your Dirige I will begin,
               I care not whether, I lose or winne:
               You were no greate state of honor,
               A bastarde, no bishop, but bloudie Boner.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               MOurnyng in blacke, wailyng with care and woo,
               Wryngyng of their handes, thei began with Placebo.
               
               
                  Dilexi q
                   master Papist, I loued well Boner,
               That was boshoppe of London, and liued in greate honor.
               
                  Quia inclinauit aurem suam, to our good father the Pope,
               
                  I am iacit ille cinis, alas gone is our hope.
               
                  Circumdederunt eum dolores mortis, now rotten in graue,
               Well, well, said the 
                     〈◊〉
                   well rid of a. k.
               Perhaps cū pericula inferni with Chymerus fell,
               Or Cerborus the triple hedded dogge of hell.
               
                  Tribulationem & dolorem inuenit, that bastarde theefe.
               That haue spoiled Christes flocke, with spite and greefe.
               
                  O domine libera animam meam, from this Basan Bull,
               That the innocent lambes did teare and pull.
               
                  Custodiens paruulos dominus, the Lorde hath helped Sion:
               And taken awaie this mad dogge, this wolfe, and this Lion.
               
                  Quierupit animam de morte, and my hart from sorowe,
               
                  Now gentle maister Boner, God giue you good morowe.
               Lorde surely, thou hast giuē thē eternall rest,Et lux 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     .
               
               Whom Boner in prison, moste sore opprest.
               
                  Plàcebo. Bo. Bo. Bo. Bo. Bo.
               
               
                  Heu me, beware the bugge, out quod Boner alas,
               
                  De profundis clamaui, how is this matter come to passe.
               
                  Laeuaui oculos meos, from a darke depe place.
               Now Lazarus helpe Diues, with one droppe of grace.
               
                  Ne quando rapiat vt Leo animam meam, druggārde, 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               To defende this matter, came Ihon Auaile, and Miles Huggarde.
               From the gates of hell, quod the rebelles, dedefende B. Boner,
               That with S. Fissher and Becket, he maie haue honor.
               
                  Amen quod R. C. B. H. and L.
               Deliuer hym from this paines of hell.
            
            
               R. Doe beginne the first lesson.
               
                  Parce michi domine.
               
               
                  SPare vs oh swete lord, our 
                        〈◊〉
                      are all gone,
                  Our holie father deare Boner, hath left vs alone.
                  Now enclosed in tombe, wrapte

in yearth and claie,
                  
                     Ecce nunc in puluere dormit, doo rot & fade awaie
                  We hoped that he should haue doen, as he did before,
                  Come forthe of prison ones againe, and burned more and more.
                  Who shall trust temporall powers, in whom is no healthe,Nolite cōfideri in principi.
                  
                  Fare well our spirituall father deare, our cō
                     forte and wealthe.
                  Now helpe, Dominicke, Becket, Dunston, and sainct Line,
                  Gregorie with thy Trentals, Antonye with thy swine.
                  This father was heauenly mynded, and neuer carnall,
                  Therefore defende hym from the flames infernall.
               
               
                  Responde.
                  Praie for Boner B. and D. soules,
                  You that walke in the Popishe ilde of Poles
                  Ye praie for them, and thinke no skorne,
                  The like of Boner was neuer borne.
               
               
                  Boner.
                  
                     Et in carne mea videbo, the bones that I haue burned.
                  And also Iesus Christe, against whom I haue sporned.
                  
                     I haue not one dogge tricke of legarde maine,
                  
                  
                     Posuisti me tibi contrarium, heu me, greate paine.
               
               
                  I crie to man, childe, and wife,
                  I abhorred muche the booke of life:
                  And loued moste the Popes lawes,
                  And regarded not Christ twoo strawes.
                  
                     Ue miserum michi therefore,
                  Sainct Peter haue locked the dore,
                  And bidde me go the wrong waie,
                  Bicause I had not the right waie.
                  I will make an other shifte,
                  Seyng I am driuen to this drifte,
                  Now helpe holy father the Pope,
                  With skalyng ladder and rope:
                  Chaunce what chaunce maie fall,
                  Now will I scale heauen wall.
               
            
            
               ¶ L. Doe rede the seconde lesson.
               
                  Tedet animam meam.
               
               
                  OH his soule was wearie here, in the life that he had,
                  His foode was breade and water, his lodgyng was to badde.
                  Clothed in heere, slepyng againste the harde stones,
                  That through fastyng, his skinne claue to the bones.
                  Watchyng in praier, lamentyng bothe daie

and night:
                  Subduyng fleshlie affection, and walked in the spirite,
                  Meeke in mynde as a Wolfe, and simple as a Fore:
                  As chaste as the he Goate, as slender as the Oxe.
                  As liberall as the she Beare, as swete as the Brocke,
                  Of all kinde of linnen clothe, he loued well a smocke.
                  As wholesome as a madde Dogge, as cleanly as a Bore,
                  He loued well a fatte Pigge, so he did a h.
                  Paale as the Turkie Cocke, as gentle as a Snake.
                  The like is not in all helle, if you seeke hym with a rake.
               
               
                  Responde.
                  Speake you of Boner?
                  God saue his honor,
                  Some saied thei heard hym saie,
                  In bedde as he laie,
                  
                     Noli me condemnare,
                  
                  
                     Dum veneris iudicare,
                  
                  
                     Ante te erubesco,
                  
                  
                     Comissa mea pauesco.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Qui Lazarum resuscitasti, frō stinking graue
                  Farewell, farewell, you Popishe k.
                  
                     Te decet deus hymnus in Syon,
                  
                  Boner was as cruell as a Lion:
                  For if he had liued, and the worlde tourned,
                  Many a good man, he would haue burned.
               
               
                  
                     Per ignem with fire,
                  That was his desire.
               
            
            
               ¶ T. The thirde lesson.
               
                  Manus tue dn̄e fecerunt me.
               
               
                  THe hande of God framed hym ones in goodlie shape,
                  Then transformed like a Boore, and conditioned like an Ape:
                  From a Bishoppe to a Butcher, moste bloudie of kinde.
                  Whiche often in Bastardes, 
                        〈◊〉
                      like you maie finde:
                  There is a greate decree made by C. the pope
                  That no Bastarde should weare staffe, miter or Cope:
                  Neither hath any dignitie, vnder a Cathedrall steple,
                  Bicause he is fatherlesse, and the sonne of the people:
                  Abraham left inheritance, to Isaac his sonne by right:
                  
                     To his bastardes he gaue giftes, and put thē from his 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  So if bastardes bee vnworthie of Temporall inheritaunce,
                  Muche lesse in Christes Churche, to haue any preheminence:
                  This Boner was a bastarde, of bloudde and condition,
                  And departed frō this life, without 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                  Responde.
                  Lorde how he would pullam,
                  When he was at Fullam,
                  With fire, rodds, and chaines
                  He put them to paines,
                  And that was well seen,
                  By M. and Bartlet green.
               
               
                  O Lorde I praie thee in what placeVbiabscō
                        datfaciam suam.
                  
                  Shall bloudie E. Boner, past al grace
                  Hide his greasie blocke hedde,
                  Whē he shall iudge the quick & dedde.
                  
                     Quid hoc reiest?
                  
                  Mary he shall rise like a beast,
                  Emong the Romishe pied coates,
                  On the lefte hande emong the goates
               
               
                  He would not 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  Nor saie Mattens that 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  But swell and pante,
                  
                     If victuals were scante.
                  But redde wine and a Pigge,
                  Would make him lepe & frig
                  And saie diligo vxores vestras,
                  
                  
                     Ab ortu solis ad vesperas.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The fowerth lesson.
               
                  Quantis habuit iniquitas.
               
               
                  HOwe sore was this bloudie beaste, fraught with synne,
                  So fatte was his fleshe, scante holde would the skinne.
                  
                     Incrassatus, impiguatus, dilatatus, Symoniacus,
                  
                  Grosse, fat, and puffed vp with a great patus,
                  
                     Sacrificium deo nostro, cor contritum
                  
                  
                     Tu autem argenteos lebetes, was thy delitum,
                  
                     Cur faciā tuā abscōdisti like an oule in the night
                  Refusing the blessed Gospel the word of light
                  Thy cursed actes, in parchmēt shalbe inrolde,
                  Against God & thy prince, thou wert to bolde
                  Thy bloudie crimes shall bee in mynde, now thou art gone and paste,
                  Thou shalte make a dreadfull compt to God, for them at the laste.
               
               
                  Responde.
                  
                     Iam fetet, quia putrifactus est,
                  
                  
                     Which made the Papistes many a feast
                  But in his cole house, he gaue no meate
                  But in Smithfield moste cruell heate,
                  Now death his power doe inuade,
                  Like rotten donge, his fleshe doe fade,
                  I doe not quarell,
                  His guttes filled a barrell.
               
               
                  Alas quod the Papistes and well awaie,
                  He was buried in the night, not in the daie,
                  Where were the Papistes that hower?
                  Some in the Flete, some in the Tower,
                  And many paste all grace,
                  Be in euery Popishe place,
                  God sende them suche honor,
                  As hath their dadde Boner,
                  
                     Qui vomuit nigrum, post fata cruorem.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The fifte lesson.
               
                  Homo natus.
               
               
                  
                     HOmo natus,
                  
                  Came to heauen gatus:
                  Sir you doe come to latus,
                  With your shorne patus.
                  
                     Frequentia falsa Euangelij,
                  
                  For the loue of your bealie,
                  
                     Cumauro & argento,
                  
                  You loued the rules of Lento,
                  Whiche the Pope did inuento
                  
                     You are spurius de muliere,
                  
                  Not legittimate nor lawful here
                  
                     O quam venenosa pestis,
                  
                  
                     Fur, periurus, latro mechus,
                  
                  
                     Homicidus tantum decus,
                  
                  
                     De salute animarum,
                  
                  Of Christes flocke thou hadest small carum.
                  
                  Thou art filius populi,
                  
                  Go, go, to Constantinopoli,
                  
                  To your maister the Turke,
                  There shall you lurke:
                  Emong the Heathen soules,
                  Somtyme your shorne brethren of Poules,
                  Were as blacke as Moules,
                  With their cappes fower forked,
                  Their shoes warme corked,
                  Nosed like redde Grapes,
                  Constant as she Apes,
                  In nature like blacke Monkes,
                  And shoote in Sparowes trunkes
                  And boule when thei haue dinde,
                  And kepe them from the winde,
                  And thei whiche are not able,
                  Doc sitte still at the table,
                  With colour Scarlet pale
                  So small is their good ale,
                  Thus from God thei did tourne,
                  Lōg before their church did burne
                  
                     Then when riche men wer sicke,
                  Either dedde or quicke,
                  
                     Valde diligenter notant,
                  
                  
                     Vbi diuites egrotant,
                  
                  
                     Ibi currunt, nec cessabunt,
                  
                  
                     Dcnec ipsos tumilabunt,
                  
                  
                     Oues alien as tondunt,
                  
                  
                     Et perochias confundunt.
                  
                  These felowes pilde as Ganders,
                  Muche like the friers of Flāders,
                  Whiche serue Sathan about the cloisters,
                  Thei loue red wme and Disters,
                  
                     Qui vult Satanae seruire
                  
                  
                     Claustrum debet introire,
                  
                  And euer haue suche an hedde,
                  As bastarde Boner that is dedde:
                  He would for the Pope take pain,
                  Therfore help you friers of spain:
                  You enquisiters take paine,
                  It is a greate maine.
                  Unto the Pope your hedde,
                  That Boner is thus dedde,
                  And buried in a misers graue,
                  Like a common k.
                  Lo, lo, now is he dedde,
                  That was so well fedde,
                  And had a softe hedde.
                  
                     Estote fortis in bella.
                  
                  
                     Good Hardyng and thy fellowe:
                  If you be Papistes right,
                  Come steale hym awaie by night
                  And put hym in a shrine,
                  He was the Popes deuine,
                  Why, shall he be forgotten,
                  And lye still and rotten:
                  Come on and doe not fainte,
                  Translate with spede your sainct.
                  And put hym in a tombe,
                  His harte is now at Rome.
                  Come forth you loughtes of Louē
                  
                  And steale awaie this 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  You are so fuil of Ire,
                  And Popishe desire:
                  And Romishe derision,
                  And hellishe deuision.
                  Therefore I am sure,
                  Your kyngdome will not dure.
                  
                     Crescit rancor, crescit ira,
                  
                  
                     Crescit & inuidia,
                  
                  
                     Totus Louen in errorem,
                  
                  
                     Voluiter in caligine,
                  
                  
                     Nullus curat obidire,
                  
                  
                     Verbis Iesu Christi,
                  
                  
                     Fides ī Roma nō apparet,
                  
                  
                     Totus Louen fide carit.
                  
                  Thus he must tourne to duste,
                  
                     In Louen there is none to truste.
                  As slipperie as Eles,
                  The worlde doe run on wheles,
                  Now helpe old frendes of Poules
                  And praie for our soules:
                  This is our desire,
                  From these flames of fire.
                  
                     I am in Purgatorij,
                  
                  Oh. L. R. G. and F. be sorte,
                  
                     Breuis eius dies sunt,
                  
                  He breathed ouer Poules Funte
                  
                     Ridiant me inimici,
                  
                  But all you that bee wiste,
                  Beware of Papistrie all,
                  The Chequer, & westminster hall
                  And all the Innes of Courte,
                  I doe not scoffe nor sporte.
                  And all this greate citie,
                  It is greate pitie:
                  That I Edmonde Boner,
                  Against Goddes greate honor,
                  Haue drawen you from truthe,
                  Oh this is greate ruthe.
                  
                     Comissa mea pauesco,
                  
                  
                     Et ante te tremesco,
                  
                  
                     Dum veneris iudicare,
                  
                  
                     Quare, quare, quare, quare.
                  
                  
                     Fremuerunt Genies.
                  
                  
                     I beshrowe the Popes dentes
                  
                  
                     In cathedra Moysi impij sedent,
                  
                  Therefore repent, repent, repent
                  
                     Tempus est vos reuertendi,
                  
                  
                     Tempus est nobis non penitendi,
                  
                  
                     Tempus est vos redeundi,
                  
                  
                     Ab errore falsi mundi
                  
                  False Papistes, and false theeues
                  Shall iuer haue paines & greues,
                  Thus did Boner sore lamente,
                  Mouyng Christes to repente.
               
               
                  Responde.
                  
                     Ne recorderis peccata,
                  
                  He was full of hata
                  
                  Regardyng non estata,
                  
                  
                     Et quasi flos,
                  
                  with his greate nose,
                  
                     Fugit velut vmbra,
                  
                  Thei morne for hym in northūbria
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The sixte lesson.
               
                  Quis michi hoe tribuat.
               
               
                  ONe alas in dreadfull dreame, poore Boner did beholde:
                  In wofull weede attired soule, sometyme was braue in golde.
                  
                     With fierie stroke sore beaten was, that sometyme had smitten other:
                  He was as sore turmented there, as Cain that slewe his brother.
                  His salte teares ran doune apace, with bloudie hande he strake his breast:
                  A worme about his harte bewrapte, that reaued hym of his reste.
                  About this gooste flocked a rablement, of Friers fatte and foule:
                  Then cried out a little spirite, like a shrikyng Oule.
                  
                     Ve, ve, and out alas, thy vengeaunce doe now begin:
                  These flames and floudes, & dungeons daepe, are wages all for synne.
                  Come drinke thy fill in Lethae flod and then to Styx retourne:
                  Forget thy self, denaye thy God, lo, this is a place to burne.Syllius lib. 13. Cal this the floudes of hell, that spue forthe bloud, 
                           〈◊〉
                        . &c
                  
                  The wicked ones, whiche ordeined were, as chaffe caste from the corne:
                  So in this bloudie Cocytus, thou shalt be rent and torne.
                  
                     Quis mihi tribuat quod Boner tho shall I in this place dwell:
                  Let me be clensed in Purgatorie, awaie you fiendes of hell.
                  
                     
                     Donec, donec, my trentals are doen in the Churche of Rome:
                  Tary here said the Mōkes blacke vntill the daie of do me.
                  With that he swelde with lothly looke, criyng, now haue I nede:
                  Where are become my Romishe frendes, where is good Henry Crede?
                  
                     Miseremini mei, miseremini mei, if merites maie me saue:
                  Suche measure as you haue measured othermen,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . suche measure shall you haue.
                  
                     Quis potest facere mundum, a bastarde wert thou borne:
                  
                     De immundo conseptum semine, now art thou rente and torne.
                  Burnt and dround and neuer 
                        〈◊〉
                      we haue none other place:
                  
                     Spes impiorum peribit, we are exclude all from 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     Non remittitur ei in hoc seculo, neque in alio.
                  
                  You are 
                        〈◊〉
                      by the Iudge, to dwell still in our 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     Et sicut dies marcennarij, thy daies are made an ende:
                  An enemie to the Lorde thy God, but to the Pope a frende.
                  
                     Then cast thei hym in Melas flood moste darcke and blacke in sight
                  In dreadfull slepe a man did se, this vision in the night.
               
               
                  Responde.
                  
                     Ne recorderis peccata,
                  
                  But open heauen gata
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Peter with your kaies,
                  Shewe my 
                        〈◊〉
                      the right waies
                  He dwelt ones at Poules,
                  And had cure of our soules:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      wisse he was not a baste,
                  But holie, meke, and chaste:
                  It is a greate pitie,
                  That he is gone from our citie:
                  A man of greate honor,
                  Oh holy sainct Boner,
                  You blessed Friers,
                  That neuer wer liers:
                  And you holy Nunnes
                  That neuer had sōnes
                  Set this child of grace,
                  In some Angelles place.
               
               
                  
                     Dum veneris iudicare,
                  
                  Helpe, helpe S. Marie
                  
                     N oli cum condemnare,
                  
                  
                     He burned many in
                  the daies of 
                        〈◊〉
                      Marie.
                  
                     Sicut Leo querens praedam,
                  
                  
                     animas deuorauit.
                  
                  If this was not a blessed deede,
                  Aske L. R. S. P. and H. Crede.
               
            
            
               ¶ The seuenth lesson.
               
                  Spiritus meus.
               
               
                  MY spirit God wotte, is feble, weake and sore:
                  and so shall wee Papistes, daiely more and more.
                  Our tyme of Papistrie shalbe shorte, foolishe and vaine.
                  
                     Ab aquilone penditur omne malum, the Papistes tooke paine.
                  Nowe Mars our bloudie Boner is laied in yearth full colde:
                  Whose life and libertie, would haue made vs bolde.
                  With bloudie handes, and cruell hartes was our desire:
                  To haue burned the Protestantes, with hote flamyng fire.
                  Set vp 
                        〈◊〉
                      crounes (the stewes) and 
                        〈◊〉
                      kes in bootes:
                  And destroied Christes doctrine cleane by the

rootes.
                  Brought in Idols, Latin seruice, and ryngyng of belles.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Chauntries, Masses, Abbaies, and Celles.
                  Thus we would haue dooen, in Tindall, and Comberlande.
                  And brought Romishe seruice, againe into Northumberlande.
                  There are a remnaunt left, I maie them call
                  The children of Antichrist, and of God Ball.
                  
                     Rumor super rumorem, while the storme do last,
                  Antichrist and his, are now at the laste caste.
                  And Boner is, rotten, and stinketh in graue:
                  Well rid is Christes flocke, of so Woluishe a 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     Si veritatem dico, quare non creditis michi?
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The Responde.
                  
                     Dies eius breuiabuntur,
                  
                  Boner was a greate hunter:
                  
                     Per ignem with, fire hotte,
                  
                     Nunc in putredine God wotte
                  
                     Ubi est ergo nunc
                  
                  Either Frier, Nonne, or Monke,
                  That can for a little space,
                  Put hym a purgyng place:
                  Now good man sir Pope,
                  
                     What doe your worship hope:
                  
                     In inferno nulla est redemptio.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The eight lesson. Fo. rede it.
               
                  Pelle mei consumptus.
               
               
                  MY fleshe is consumed, there is but skinne and bone:
                  In 
                        〈◊〉
                      Georges Churche yarde, my graue and I alone.
                  My tongue that vsed lewde woordes, and lippes awaie are rotten:
                  Take pitie vpon me. R. L. and H. let me not be forgotten.
                  Regester me in with a Leaden penne, emong the Romishe roules,
                  And make some Obsequi for my sake, I would it were in Poules.
                  Saie Dirige for me 
                        〈◊〉
                      T. H. U. R. L. and B.
                  Saie you the Masse, mōurne you in blacke, W. F. and C.
                  Ryng you the belles, holde you the lighles A. P. S. and N.
                  A. B. the Crosrowe of Papistes, shewe your selues like men.
                  For if your merites doe not helpe, then come I verie late:
                  Like the foolishe virgines fiue, whiche knocked

at the gate.
                  To whom he saied, I knowe you not, depart from my sight:
                  You wanted faithe, and watched not, when I came in the night.
                  Let liuyng wightes, watche therfore, though it be paine and griefe:
                  For sodainly the Lorde dooe come, vn wares like to a thefe.
                  O Boner, Boner, ones againe, in thy skynne thou shalt be clad:
                  And haue suche members in degree, as in this life thou had.
                  Then shalt thou see the Martyrs all, in iudgement stande vpright:
                  Whom in this worlde thou didest abuse with murder, and with spight.
                  And called them 
                        〈◊〉
                      all, and nowe in greate honor:
                  Suche was the blindnes of Papistes hartes, and specially of thee Boner.
               
               
                  ¶ The Responde.
                  Uaine, vaine, vaine, vaine,
                  All bloudie Papistes doe liue in vaine.
                  There is no meane, but heauen and hell
                  In doyng euill, and workyng well.
                  Eche soule shall go vnto his place:
                  
                     The brande of hell, and childe of grace.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊◊〉
                         transit hora,
                  
                  
                     Redeamus sine mora,
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊◊〉
                        ,
                  
                  The hower of death, drawyng on a pace
                  Praie for mercie, ioye, and 
                        〈◊〉
                     :
                  
                     V ade & non amplius 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The nineth lesson.
               
                  Quare de vulua. 
                        
                           〈◊◊〉
                        .
                  
               
               
                  ALas from my mothers wombe. why hast thou brought me out?
                  I haue liued like a Butchers dogge and died like a 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  I stopped myne eares against the truthe, Gods worde I would not heare:
                  And hardened my harte against the Prince, in persone many a yere.
                  There 
                        〈◊〉
                      my life in 
                        〈◊〉
                      delite, my soule did feele no care:
                  In softe bedde, and choise, of wine, wantyng no daintie fare.
                  False hope I had to come for the as ones I did before:
                  But still dispaire, said I should 
                        〈◊〉
                      and persecute no more.
                  One morne betime I loked forth,

as ofte as I did before:
                  And did se a pulpit, in churches 
                        〈◊〉
                     , made by my prison dore.
                  A Preacher there was, that Crowly hight, whiche preached in that place,
                  A meane if God had 
                        〈◊〉
                      me, to call me then to grace.
                  
                     Hodie sivocem, was his theme, and harden not thyne 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  As did the fathèrs the rebelles old that perished in desarte,
                  Thus protestantes, haue me slain with the power of the worde:
                  But if the worlde had served me, with fire, and with sworde.
                  I would haue 
                        〈◊〉
                      and burnebal more then I did before:
                  But now farewel you papistes al from hensfor the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  Would no 
                        〈◊〉
                      had me knowen nor eyes me neuer seen:
                  Then should I haue been in suche sorte, as I had neuer been.
               
               
                  The Responde.
                  
                     In die illa tremenda,
                  
                  Who shall my lorde defenda:
                  Neither Pe. Wes. Nor. Mar.
                  Traitors Tempest that blowe vp warre,
                  
                     Slinge. Hil. nor Swineburne,
                  Or any traitor, that gape for a tourne.
                  Thei shall haue horror inhabitans,
                  
                  God sende them mischaunce.
                  
                     Onine regnum diuisum. &c.
                  
                  Against the Quene thei risum,
                  
                  
                     Per aliam viam reuersi sunt.
                  
                  Papistes are traitours, as thei are wont.
                  
                     Rumor super rumorem erit.
                  
                  Betwene Doncaster and Perith,
                  Be many Popishe hartes,
                  Would their heddes wer in carts.
                  And their bodies in graues:
                  Rebelles are theues and knaues.
                  
                     Ardiet pugnas vicio parentum,
                  
                  The rebelles beyonde Trentham
                  Shall quickly repentham.
                  
                     Sepulchrum paten: est venter eorum.
                  
                  Thei abhorre doctrina Apostolorum
                  
                  
                     Sepe expugnauerūt you knowit wel
                  Northren stormes are sharp & fell
                  Snowe, Haile, Ise, and Froste,
                  All their hope is but loste.
                  
                     Dies magnae & amara.
                  
                  Thei are now in sorow and cara
                  Thei will neuer haue suche honor
                  As had this bastarde E. Boner.
                  Although 
                        〈◊〉
                      were a Po. k.
                  
                     Yet buried he was in a graue,
                  
                     Pluet super proditores laquios.
                  
               
               ¶ The'nde of Boners Dirige. Per ironiam Erat vir ille simplex & rectus, ac timens deum, & recaedens a malo.
            
            
               ¶ Here after dooe followe a liniall Pedegree of Boners kinred, by the minde and iudgemente of many Doc. a man of a greate house, long before the captiuitic of Babilon.
               
                  ¶ Bastarde Edmonde Sauage, beyng a greate lubberly scholer, was supposed to be the soonne of one Boner.
               
               
                  Which was the sōne of a Iugler or wild roge
                  Whiche was the sonne of a villaine ingrosse.
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Cutpurse.
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Tom of Bedlam
                  Whiche was the sonne of a proctor of a spitle
                  Whiche was the sonne of a theffe or a rebell
                  Whiche was the sonne of a wilde Irishe.
                  whiche was the sōne of a Stoick Philosopher
                  whiche was the sonne of Agarion.
                  whiche was tho sonne of a Patriside.
                  whiche was the sonne of a Sectuarie.
                  whiche was the sonne of Appelles.
                  whiche was the sonne of Anabaptiste.
                  
                     whiche was the sonne of 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  whiche was the sonne of Almerichus.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Aetius.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Adamiani.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Alepheli.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Appolinaris.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Ammonus.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Aquary.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Arrius.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Barbara Sigismundi.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Angelici.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Anthropomorphius.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Belzebub.
                  whiche was the sonne of Bisylides.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Berillus.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Carpocratis.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Cataphrigius.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Caluthus.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Cazinzarius.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Catharides.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Caparnaitis.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Cherinthus.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Donatus.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Ebion.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Elindius.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Ennopus.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Ennomius.
                  
                  whiche was the sonne of Euthices.
                  
                  
                     Whiche was the sonne of Ecrastines.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Gnotiques.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Iesebel.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Faustuti.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Helchesate.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Iouinianus.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Manacheus.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Mahomet.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Martion.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Messalianis.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Montanus.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Monothelete.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Nouatis.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Nestorius.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Nicolaus.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Nectages,
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of 
                        
                           〈◊◊〉
                        
                     
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Praitas.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Petrus Lumbardus.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Photius.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Pollo.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Sabinus.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Roganus.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Sabellicus.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Sarahatis.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Simachcus.
                  
                  
                     Whiche was the sonne of the Sodomites.
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Templarij.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Theodorus Coriarus
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Tatian.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Sargius.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Benedicte monke.
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Carthusian.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Cistertian.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Canon Reguler.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Barnardine.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Cluniacke
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Dominicke.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Celestin.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of Iesuit.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of an Heremite.
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Minoret.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Charmilet.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Bomson.
                  
                  Whiche was the sonne of an Anker.
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Buggerer.
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Limiter.
                  Whiche was the sonne of a Balamite.
                  whiche was the sonne of a Coniurer.
                  whiche was the sonne of a Dispensator.
                  whiche was the sonne of a Pardoner.
                  whiche was the sonne of a Romish comissary
                  whiche was the sonne of a Doctor Canon.
                  which was the sōne of a master of plukalites.
                  
                     whiche was the sonne of a Suffragham.
                  whiche was the sonne of a Romishe bishop.
                  whiche was the sonne of a Courtisan.
                  whiche was the daughter of a 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  whiche was the mother of the Pope.
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   also in the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Babilon, did beare three 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                   Magus, Iudas 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and Mahomette, by Antichriste the sonne of the Deuil, of iniquitie, and perdicion the cause of al ignoraunce, infidelitie, Simonie, Treason, Idolatrie, persecution, Rebellion, Tumulte, wicked assemble, and finally euerlasting 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               
               ¶ A praier to the holy Trinitie, against ignoraunce of Goddes worde, and Wolues.
               ALmightie and eternall god the father, the soonne, and the holie spirite, one God in trinitie, and the trinitie in vnitie, whiche art alwaies more readier to heare, then wee are apte to praie: and doest giue vnto vs, more then we can desire, or deserue. We moste humbly praie thee, to haue mercie vpon vs, accordyng to thy great mercie, and perdon vs good Lorde for our sinnes: that we haue rebelled against thy diuine Maiestie, in thought, woorde, and deede, mouyng thee to cast vpon vs sondrie plagues for our offences: As pestilence, dearthe, rebellion with other greuous calamities, vnto our miserable bodies. But oh my good Lorde God, thou haste taken greater vengeaunce vpon vs, the whiche with mortall eyen cā not well be seen, but felt: that is, the ignoraunce of thy blessed will and commaundemente. Ignoraunce oh Lorde GOD, the guide and pathe waie to all deadly synnes, death, and finallie dampnation, banishement from thy glorious Maiestie, worlde without ende. Haue mercie

haue mercie and pitie, oh Iesus Gods onely sonne vpon thy flocke, thou greate Shepherd of the Shepe. Regarde thy folde, defende thy flocke, whom thou hast redemed in thy moste precious blond. Deliuer thy Uineyard of Englande, from the Bore of Roome, and thy Lambes, from the mouthe of Wolues, as bloudie Boner was. Oh lette God a rise, and let his enemies be scattered, lette them also that hate hym flie before him: so that we that are the Shepe of his pasture, maie in the vnitie of his worde, be fedde in the pleasaunt fieldes of his holy scriptures, to life euerlastyng: Through Iesus Christ our lorde.
            
            Amen.
            
         
      
   