
      
         
            
            
            A meruailous combat
of contrarieties.
            Malignantlie ſtriuing in the mē
               bers
of mans bodie, allegoricallie
repreſenting vnto vs the enuied
ſtate of our floriſhing Common
wealth: wherin dialogue-wiſe by
the way, are touched the extreame
vices of this preſent
time.
            VVith an earneſt and vehement
exhortation to all true Engliſh harts,
couragiouſly to be readie prepared
againſt the enemie.
by W. A.
            
            Concordia paruae res creſcunt, diſcordia
maximae dilabuntur.
            Printed by I. C. for Thomas
Hacket, and are to be ſolde at hys
ſhop in Lomberd ſtreete▪ vnder the
ſigne of the Popes
heade.
            Ann. D. 1588.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honorable
M
                  •
               iſter George Bonde, Lord
Maior of London, much health,
and happy ſucceſſe through out hys
whole gouernment.
            
               I Haue reade right Honourable,

                  Ʋirtutem eſſe bonum commune patriac,
that virtue is the common
profit of our Countrie, and that
he is not to bee honoured with
the noble name of virtue, which
doth not wholy apply his mind
freely to profit manie, and to
ſeeke the cōmoditie of others:
which made Cicero to ſay, that if
there were a queſtion, or compariſon, to whom wee ought
to ſhew moſt duetie, our Countrey & Parents ought chieflie
to be regarded, vnto whom we are bound by many benefits:
And Cicero did not alone ſay it, but by his owne example
confirmed it, when beeing Conſul of Rome, through his
ſingular diligence, and painfull watchfulnes, he both preſerued
the Cittie from the ſecret conſpiracies of Catiline, and
alſo repreſſed his violent attempts, that fully purpoſed the
ouerthrow of his Countrey: ſo that hee might iuſtly ſay of
himſelfe as hee did, O fortunatam natam me Conſule Roma
                     •
                  ;
O happie Rome in the time that I was Conſul. Your ſelfe
(right Honorable) may in theſe dangerous daies, and doubtful
times, worthily deſerue Ciceros praiſe, that are ſo carefullie
occupied, painfully buſied, and watchfully prepared, not
onlie to preuent by warie foreſight all priuie attempts that
noiſome vipers, and hurtful Traytors, either by night or day

ſhall practiſe againſt this honorable and famous Cittie, but
are ready bent valiantly to defende
                  •
               t, though with loſſe of
your owne life, rather then it ſhould in the leaſt part bee
harmed, or the inhabitants thereof 
                  〈◊〉
                wayes iniuried.
            The valour of your antique predeceſſors, are yet to bee
ſeene in the armes of your honorable Cittie, and ſhall for euer
remaine in the minds of all poſteritie, whoſe glorie wee
ſee you emulate, and to which, your watchfulnes and painfull
diligence will make you equiualent, if in theſe ſtormie
tempeſteous times, you ſhall (like a warie and heedfull Pilot)
skilfully (as you haue begunne) continue to holde the
helme in this Ship of your gouernment, and happily guide
it from bluſtering vvindes, and wallovving vvaues of ſecret
malicious enemies: which the more they are, dooth make
you more carefull, and the more ſecret, farre more watchful.
            The time wherein you gouerne, may wel be compared to
the time of Catiline, but that in this point it is far more dangerous,
for that we haue not one Catiline that purpoſeth the
ruine of our Cittie, but manie: & as Cicero ſayd at that time,
Creſcit in dics ſingulos hoſtium numerus, ſo may we ſay, the nū
               ber
of our enemies doo ſtill encreaſe, yet vvill not we ſtande
vppon that vvhich he did, neither doe I thinke you of his
mind, that either our nightly watches (vvhich God knowes
are but ſlender) the garriſon of our Cittie, the ſtrength of
our people, the vnitie of our mindes, the counſels of your
Senate, or ſuch like can preſerue vs, but that our God, euen
for the glory of his name, and for his mercy ſake will defend
vs, that neither their counſels or conſpiracies ſhall euer bee
able to hurt vs. And albeit they doe inteſtinam aliquam quotidie
perniciem reipublicae moliri, deuiſe dailie ſome ſecret and
deadlie deſtruction of our common vvealth, yet I doubt not
but firſt by Gods mercie, and then through the prouident
care of you and our Magiſtrates, not alone this Cittie, but
the whole land ſhalbe preſerued from their malice, and they
thēſelues fall into the pit that they haue digged for others,

as Catiline did, with his conſpiratours.
            I haue printed your Honors name in the forehead of this
my Booke, not becauſe I wanted patrons to defend it, (for
vvho in this time will not eſteeme the faithfull good vvill of
a louing Subiect, that zealouſly ſeeketh the profit of hys
Countrey) but for that I heare and ſee your honors care, &
vvatchfulnes deſerues it, & to depriue the vertuous of their
praiſe, vvere nothing els but meere enuie and ſecret malice.
Wherefore as I vvillinglie dedicate this vnto your Honor:
ſo I beſeech you gratefully accept it, and defend it againſt all
the malitious tongues of enuious and ſlaunderous Papiſts,
vvhoſe mouthes either I deſire the Lorde God to ſtop, and
conuert their harts, or els confound them, that they may neuer
ſee their deſires.
            And ſo wiſhing your Honour to proſper in all your
counſelles and that you take in hand. I
ceaſe to trouble you anie
further.
            
               Your Honours in all duety to
commaunde,
William Auerell.
            
         
         
            
            To the friendlie and Chriſtian Reader.
            
               THREE ſorts of people (courteous Reader) I
knowe there are, that will diſlike, and diſcommend
that which I ſhall write, the firſt are our proude
Dares, that are as farre in loue with themſelues as
Narciſſus, and our wanton wiues and mincing
minions, that all day pranke themſelues at the Glaſſe, like daintie
Miſteris Acco. The ſecond are our gluttonous Sanctrae that
for their feeding and vnmeaſurable drinking, may better be called
Beotians then Engliſhmen: and the third are our couchant Papiſts
that priuilie lurke in corners, to bring euery thing in diſgrace,
that is not for their purpoſe, nor ſerues (as we ſay) for their tooth.
Theſe peraduenture beeing gauled, cannot abide to haue their ſore
rubbed, like to Phillip of Macedon that becauſe he had but one
eye himſelfe, was angry when any man talked of a Cyclop, or named
a gogle eye, or ſpake of any that had but one of his eyes: Or
like Hyrmeas, that beeing himſelfe an Eunuch, coulde not abide
to heare of a Raſer, or a knife, or anie man that was cutte, becauſe
he was himſelfe a gelding. Wherfore if we touch theſe men, it muſt
be figurate but not aperte, cloſelie and cunninglie, not openly nor
plainely, for if we doe, we vtterly loſe their good wil, but as for theſe
I count not, onely I wiſh them better mindes, with a ſound amendment
of their liues.
            The reſt that are well diſpoſed, I earneſtlie deſire to beare
with whatſoeuer faultes haue eyther haſtilie ſcaped my handes in
wryting, or the Printers preſſe in printing.
            I am not Roſcius in Scena, I knowe manie coulde better
haue handled this Theame, yet I friendly requeſt thy patience,

and gentle acceptance of that I haue written, knowing that if thou
haue iudgment, thou wilt not be a Lynx, in prying too narrowlie
into my ouer-ſights, but rather a Mole, in not ſeeing mine infirmities.
That I haue written hath beene for thy profit and pleaſure,
my ſelfe in labouring haue felt the payne, all the reward I demaunde
is thy good worde, which if I may haue I am ſatisfied,
and ſo repoſing my ſelfe thereon I ende, wyſhing thee health
and long life, with the fruition of heauenlie
ioyes. Farewell.
(⸫)
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶A Dialogue, wherin the extreame
vices of this preſent age are dyſplayd againſt
Traytors and Treaſons.
            
               The Tongue.
               
                  DEare Brethren and fellowe members,
by what authoritie or right, rather
with what boldnes, dare our Brethren the
Belly and Back oppreſſe vs, and ſo Lordlike
commaund vs? it is a ſhameful thing,
extreame folly, and a thing very vnſéemly,
when the ſeruaunt ruleth, and the Lorde
obeyeth, the ſlaue commaundeth, and the Maiſter ſerueth:
truelie we are worthy of the greateſt torments, that lyke
drudges will become a ſcoffe and ſcumme to others. Like
fooles we haue made the Belly and Backe our Lords, with
great labour we get and prouide al things may pleaſe them:
poore ſoules we haue no reſt, ſometime the Belly commaū
                  deth
one, ſometime the Backe another, one ſaith to y• Foote,
ariſe ſluggard, awake, the other to the hand, beſtirre thée apace,
get me ſome meate, prepare mee ſome dainties, fetch
me ſome wine, lay the Table, the day paſſeth, the time goeth,
and I haue eaten nothing: Hunger and Thirſt my two
enemies come & threaten my death, the one on the one ſide,
the other on the other, and therfore except yée ſpéedely help
me I die, and theſe are their daielie and vſuall complaints.
            
            
               The Hande.
               Syſter, you ſaie trueth, and amongſt the reſt no one hath
more cauſe to cōplaine of them both then I, for I labor ſundry
waies to maintaine thē. In the Winter I ſuffer cold, in
the Summer I endure heat, my ioynts are benummed with
the one, and dryed with the other, I labor day & night to procure
for thē both what I can & yet they are neuer ſatiſ-fied.
            
            
               
               The Tongue.
               I knowe it, but yet your toyle is not equall with myne,
for I am often a common Paratour and ſolicitour for them
both. Manie times I am faine to braule for them, when I
haue ſmall thanks for my labour, ſomtimes I am a Patrone
or rather a Latrone to robbe the Miniſtry by ſelling of lyuings,
ſometimes a Iudge, and eftſoones a witnes, ſomtimes
a Counſeller, otherwhiles a Merchant, and then after a retailour
of wares, I counterfait Lawes, I tell lyes, I ſewe
ſeditions, I ſtirre vp Traytors, I ſlaunder Princes, vnder
cullour of trueth I beguile and deceiue, I 
                     •
                  weare and forſweare,
I breake promiſe, I allure to whoredome, to theft,
to murder, and to all miſchiefe: I make no account ſo I may
get them ought, whether per fas or nefas, by right or wrong.
If I come among Princes, I flatter, if among the noble or
ritch, I ſooth them vp with ſwéete wordes, Si ai
                        •
                     rt aio, ſi negant
nego, looke what they ſay I affirme it, and all this I doe,
that by flatteries I may féede the Belly dai
                     •••
                  lie, & clothe
the Back brauelie.
            
            
               The Hande.
               And I praie you is my toyle any leſſe? are my deceites
inferiour vnto yours? am I not forced through their procurements
(if I may without ſhame open my follies) to
picke and ſteale, ſometimes by priuie filching to make all
fiſh that comes to net? ſometimes by open robbing violently,
to lay hands vpon others? What treaſons, what poyſonings,
what murder is it or what wickednes, that I doo not
for their ſakes accompliſh? whoſe goods haue I ſpared?
whoſe bloode haue I not ſpilled, to ſerue the turne of theſe
my Lordlie Maiſters?
               Haue I ſpared the Prince, the Father, the Childe, the
Siſter, the Brother, the Huſbande, the Wife? Nay what
age, or ſe
                     •
                  e haue I pittied, to pleaſe theſe ouerruling & commaunding
Lords? I want no examples to confirme my ſayings,

yet leaſt you ſhould imagin me to ſay more then I can
proue, I will ſette downe a fewe for the maintainaunce of
my cauſe. And firſt to begin with Traytors, did not Curio
(at firſt Caeſars enemy, yet afterward to maintain the Bellie
and Back) ſell vnto Caeſar for 26000. crownes the Cittie
of Rome? How vnfaithfully did Polymneſtor of Thrace
murder Polydorus King Priamus ſome, and all for his gold
to maintaine his brauerie, and to ſette him one degrée higher
in his Kingdome. Aul. Poſthumius Albinus, béeing ſent
to ouerthrow Iugurtha, was corrupted with money, and in
ſtead of warre moſt ſhamefully concluded a peace. How did
Standley and Yorke, two Engliſh Traytors in Flaunders,
deale with the moſt vertuous and famous Quéene of England,
whom God preſerue long to raigne ouer vs to the confuſion
of all forraine and domeſticall Traitors.
               When the Romaines warred againſt the Latines, Caſſius
a ſtanderdbearer f
                     •
                  ue Craſſus Brutus his ſonne, becauſe for
money he would haue betrayd his Father, and opened the
Gates to the enemies.
               
                  Heraclius the Emperour, ſlewe Phocas his Father to
maintaine himſelfe in the brauerie of an Empire.
               
                  Richard the third, reaching with ambition of a crowne,
moſt vnnaturally ſlew his two little Nephewes, his hart
contriued it, but I performed it.
               
                  Frotho the King of Denmark had thrée ſonnes, Haldanus,
Roe, and Scato, who when their Father was deade,
ſtroue all togeather for the Kingdome, by meanes of which,
Haldanus the elder, ſlew y• two yonger, that hee alone might
ſway the Kingdome.
               
                  Semiramis hauing obtained of her Huſband Ninus, to ſit
but one day in the princelie ſeate, and for that day to ſway
the Kingdome, impriſoned her Huſband, & afterward ſlewe
him, that ſhe alone might liue in all daintines and brauerie.
               Theſe and infinit other, haue the Belly and Backe 
                     〈◊〉
                  
me to deſtroy, making me as a ſlaue to ſerue their appetites.
            
            
               
               The Foote.
               Séeing each of you haue iuſtly made your complaints,
as Nature hath placed me loweſt, ſo giue me leaue at laſt
to declare my griefe: I acknowledge the Tongue is greatly
enforced, the Handes meruailouſly troubled, and the other
members wonderfully oppreſſed, to ſerue the turne of two,
not Maiſters by Nature, but Monſters by abuſe, yet conſider
my trauaile, and you ſhall find it nothing leſſe then the
reſt. How doo I trott vp and downe, and as a Porter togeather
with my fellow, am forced to beare vppe the reſt of the
members. Whatſoeuer muſt be had, I am the Meſſenger
to fetch it, is there any diſh to féede the Belly? then muſt I
runne to buy it, is there any fine apparrell faſhionable for
the Backe? be it neuer ſo farre, I muſt trudge for it. And albeit
y• the waight of the members which nature hath gyuen
be ſufficient to charge & ouerburden my féeble force, yet muſt
I haue a loade deuiſed by arte, to oppreſſe the weakenes of
my ſlender ioynts, ſo that I thinke my burden heauier then
Aetna, or the waight of the Heauens vpon the ſhoulders of
Atlas, with griefe héerof my boanes conſume, my ſynnowes
ſhake, my humors dry vp, and my ioynts quake, like as
when two weake Pillars beare vppe the burden of a heauie
houſe. Beſides, neither can the Tongue come to vtter her
ſpéech, nor the hands to execute their purpoſe, without it be
by my help and furtheraunce, ſo that if the Belly bidde the
Tongue deceiue, I poaſt out to performe it, if y• Back commaund
the Hands to ſteale, or ſhed blood, then I haſte to
make them finiſh it, ſo that in all actions I am a ſeruaunt in
moſt vile ſlauery to theſe vniuſt oppreſſors, and therefore
haue as much cauſe to complaine of their tyranny in euerie
thing, as either of you in any thing.
            
            
               The Tongue.
               Certaine it is we all doo ſerue them dilligently, we labour
for them painefully, and yet are rewarded ſlenderlie.

The Tyrants of Sicilia neuer oppreſſed their ſubiects with
more violence, then they do
                     •
                   vs with their exactions, and yet
we haue thereby no benefit, for had wee any recompence, it
woulde aſſwage the burthen of our trauaile, and make our
labour ſwéete, but ſuch is the condition of theſe two, that albeit
we dailie giue them, hourelie labor and continually prouide
for them, yet they neuer ceaſe complayning, that wee
giue them nothing.
            
            
               The Hande.
               Yea, for though I labour to day to féede the one, and trauaile
to morrow to clothe the other, yet if I doo not the next
day, and the next day alſo giue them ſtil, they complayne of
myne idlenes, of mine vniuſtice & negligence: ſaying I am
vnnaturall, vnkinde, ſlothfull, and giuen to eaſe, and that I
forget the ende wherefore I was made, which is, (they ſay)
to ſerue them in all neceſſities, what ſaid I? nay rather in
all ſuperfluities.
            
            
               The Foote.
               In the ſame ſtate am I, and ſo they deale alſo with mée,
for though I nowe fetch them in things not wholy needfull,
but for the moſt part curious, it may bee that a while they
will be contented, but ſhortly after they crie it is too little,
and except I procure the one varietie of dainties, and the other
diuerſitie of ſutes, they are neither contented, ſo variable
are they, and ful of alteration, ſo that I cannot tell what
to compare them to, except to the lake in the furtheſt part of
Affrick, among the people Trogloditae, which is thriſe in a
day bitter and ſalt, and yet anone pleaſant and ſweete.
            
            
               The Tongue.
               Nay rather they are like the gaping Gulfe in Sicil, named
Charybdis, which euer deuoureth, & is neuer ſatiſ-fied,

or like the fire, that the more it hath, the more it ſtill conſumeth:
for Polypus had neuer more ſhifts, then y• Back hath
ſuites, nor the Camelion more cullers then y• Belly Cookes.
            
            
               The Hande.
               I thinke the Crocodil is not more gréedy then the Bellie,
nor the Leopard more variable then the Backe. Theyr
nature is like y• ſtone Siphnius, which heated in Oyle wareth
hard, but let alone becommeth ſoft. The more we pleaſure
them, the more they diſpleaſe vs, and the more wee beſtowe
vpon them, the more they are vnthankfull.
            
            
               The Tongue.
               Will you ſée the patterne of a gluttonous Pantrey, then
looke vpon the Bellie, for he is a ſmoking Kitchin of variable
viands, Gurmand
                        •
                     ſe is his Porter, and Gluttony hys
Cooke, the luſtfull Lyuer like a flaming fire, boyleth vnder
the great Kettle & Cauldron of the ſtomack, the breathing
Lunges, like blowing bellowes, 
                     〈◊〉
                   by the Liuer as by a
Forge, the Wealand pype as it were a Ceſtern, bringeth in
liquor to dreſſe the cates, and the entrayles like a ſinck conuay
the filth downe the Fundament. Nowe all this while
who fareth the better for theyr co
                     •
                  kery, nay which of vs are
not the worſe for the Bellyes vntemperancie, and which of
vs ſmarteth not for the Backs prodigalitie? Wherefore
Bretheren, and fellow members, let vs not be ſubiect to two
ſuch Cormorants, which regarde not our benefit, but theyr
owne profit, conſider the ſeruillity, they haue long kept vs
in, what labour and paine, what carke and care, they haue
continually put vs to, if we caſt off their yeake, we ſhall bee
freed from ſlauerie, if not, wee liue in continuall drudgery,
they rule not by reaſon but by rigour, their luſt is a law, and
their will a warrant, and therfore to ſtake off their oppreſſion,
were wiſdome, and to liue at liberty, wilbe our onelye
happines.
            
            
               
               The Hand.
               Siſter, I promiſe for my part, to yéeld to your perſwaſion,
and whereas in times paſt I haue wrought full harde
for the maintenaunce of theſe my iolly Maiſters, I purpoſe
now to take mine eaſe, thinking it better to liue at reſt, thē
to toyle and haue no thank for my labour, and therefore let
them worke for themſelues if they wil, for I neither meane
to féede the one, nor clothe the other.
            
            
               The Foote.
               Neither will I ſtep ouer the threſhold, to fetch in anie
thing for the ſuſtenaunce of the one, or maintainance of the
other, but meane to take my reſt in mine Inne, expecting
howe theſe that haue ſo long ruled as Lordes, can become
nowe ſeruaunts to themſelues.
            
            
               The Tongue.
               In this dooing wee ſhall abate their pride, and plucke
downe their Peacocks plumes, ſo that though nowe they
holde theyr heades full high, yet within theſe two or thrée
dayes, I am ſure my gluttonous Maiſter the Belly, wyll
ſing a newe ſong, for I promiſe for my part to be no inſtrument
to feede, nor no ſeruaunt to ſerue him, and as for our
gallant youth the Back, I doo not doubt but y• want of your
ſeruice, will make him in ſhort time after beſhrew himſelfe.
But huſhe, Lupus eſt in fabula, behold where they both come
of whom we haue long talked, let vs ſhrinke a ſide to heare
their communication, till opportunity ſerue for vs to ſpeake.
            
            
               The Belly.
               What greater miſery can happen in this life, then when
as in a naturall body, where the members ſhould ſerue each
others neceſſitie, and mutually helpe & ſuccour one another,

they ſhall not onely denie their ayde vnto the body, but conſpire
alſo the death of the ſame: by meanes of which, not
the body alone dooth conſume and pine away, but the members
themſelues doo conſequently periſh: and yet are they
ſo blinded with enuie, and ledde on with ſelfe loue, that they
cannot perceiue their deſtruction at hand, till preſent perrill
doo teach them, and their owne ſmart doo warne them, what
folly it is to be led by enuie, whereby to make a mutinie in
a naturall bodie, in which there ought to be a cordiall conſent
of amitie, and a tuneable harmonie of loue.
               I knowe not what hath mooued my fellow members to
this conſpiracie, for my part I haue naturally fedde them,
and louingly nouriſhed them all, yet they complaine, and not
of me alone, but of the proude Back alſo, whoſe pride & prodigalitie,
hath oftentimes (indéede) depriued both them and
me of our due ſuſtenaunce and naturall nouriſhment, euen
this ſtatelie and lordly Backe, the pyllar of pryde, the waſter
of wealth, and the window opening to all wickednes, a
leader vnto luxurie and vncleane leacherie, a bulwarke to
beate backe chaſtitie, & the roote from whence all preſumptuous
pride dooth growe, for whoſe faults, it is no reaſon I
ſhould ſuffer the malice of the members, that not onelie in
mine office foſter y• reſt, but am neereſt to him in all things.
            
            
               The Backe.
               Brother, I haue hearde your vnbrotherly ſpéeches, in
which, though you would to cleare your ſelfe, make me the
cauſe of y• members variance, yet if you iuſtly examine your
owne condition, you ſhall finde that your gluttony, and vntemperancie,
doth not onely diſtemper the members, but alſo
conſume that ſhould ſerue for my maintenaunce: & therfore
good cauſe haue the reſt of our Brethren to condemne
your exceſſe, and diſlike your extortion: for they ſerue an euill
Maiſter, who is alwaies crauing and neuer contented,
euer feeding, and neuer filled, for what is more vnſatiable

then the Bellie? that is this day crammed, and to morowe
crauing? Who when he is full, can diſpute of temperance
and continencie, yet preſently after doth ſhake handes with
all vertue. You ſaie that I am the pillar of pride, but it happeneth
then through your vntemperaunce, you affirme that
I am the waſter of wealth, but you forget your owne delicacie,
that conſume more at one banquet in a day, then I doe
vppon apparrell in a yéere. You make mee a leader vnto all
leacherie, but you remember not that Sine Cerere et Baccho
friget Ʋenus, and that I am but the effect, you the cauſe, I
the flame, you the Oyle, I the meane, but your ſelf the matter,
you ſay I am the bulwarke to beate back chaſtitie, but
you conſider not that y• full Bellie is not able to kéepe continencie,
you make me the roote of pride, but it is your ſelfe
that is both roote and trunck, to foſter the braueſt branches
of pride, and to cheriſh all wickednes, and vice: and therfore
you ſuffer not for mee, but for your owne faultes, and your
diſorder in féeding, hath made the members breake, and my
garments bare.
            
            
               The Tongue.
               Now the matter beginnes to worke, when Théeues attache
one another, true men come by their goods, but of both,
there is neither barrell better Herring.
            
            
               The Bellie
               Why, had euer Prometheus more ſhapes, then the backe
ſutes? or y• 
                  Hydra more n
                     •
                  w heads then the back new Garments?
not ſo variable for their matter, as changable for
their faſhion: this daie French, to morrowe Engliſh, the
next day Spaniſh, to daie Italianate, to morrow for faſhion
a deuill intarnat, O tempora, o mores! To daie you ſhine in
ſutes of ſilke, to morrow you iet it out in cloth of Golde, one
daie in blacke for ſhow of grauitie, an other daie in white

in token of brauerie, this day that cullour, the next day another,
nowe ſhort waſted, anon long bellied, by and by after
great Buttoned, and ſtraight after plaine laced, or els your
Buttons as ſtrange for ſmalnes, as they were monſtrous
before for greatnes, this yéere bumbd like a Barrell, the
next ſhottend like a Herring, nowe your hoſe hang looſe like
a bowe caſe, the next daie as ſtraite as a pudding ſkinne, one
while buſkind for lacke of ſtocks, another while booted for
want of ſhooes, and thus from you that are the graund Maiſter,
doo the inferious members fetch their faſhions, & theſe
be the mutabilities of men.
               As for women, you make them through your pride in
lookes like Lais, in faſhions like Flora, in maners like Thais,
more wauering then the wind, and more mutable then the
Moone: in Gate & ieſture moſt daintie, in the Church moſt
angelicall, in the ſtréetes modeſt & amiable, abroade among
men in finenes ſuperficiall, but at home by themſelues moſt
ſluttiſh and beſtiall. Yet I meane not all but the worſt, and
ſuch as entertaine your pride, who from the top to the toe,
are ſo diſguiſed, that though they be in ſexe Women, yet in
attire they appeare to be men, and are like Androgini, who
counterfayting the ſhape of either kind, are in déede neither,
ſo while they are in condition women, and woulde ſéeme in
apparrell men, they are neither men nor women, but plaine
Monſters.
               Their heads ſet out with ſtrange hayre, (to ſupply nature
that waie defected, or rather by their periwigges infected)
do appeare like the head of Gorgon, ſauing that they
want the crawling Snakes of Meduſa, to hang ſprawling
in their haire along their faces, & yet they retaine the propertie
of this Daughter of Phorcus, for they turne a number
of their beholders into ſtones, who while they affectionatlie
gaze on their painted pride, doe loſe the reaſon of men
and become like ſtones, without anie féeling of a vertuous
mind, the onelie Image of a man.
               But as they are Venerian Dames, euen ſo in their flatteries

to beguile fooles, they imitate the nature of the Cyprian
women, who comming into Syria and ſeruing in ye Court,
would coure downe and become footeſtooles for the Ladies,
thereby to aſcend into their Coaches, for which cauſe they
were called Climacidae, of Climaca, which ye 
                  Aſſirians name
a Ladder: but héerin onelie they differ, in that our Phrynae,
and Cytherean Damſels, become not Ladders for Women,
but footeſtooles, yea and pillowes for Men. And therefore it
is not without cauſe that Tyreſias ſaide, (béeing choſen an
Arbiter betwéene Iupiter and Iuno,) that there were In viro,
tres amoris vnciae, in femina, nouem, in a man three ounces of
luſt, in a woman nine: for what meaneth els their outward
tricking and daintie trimming of their heads, the laying out
of their hayres, the painting and waſhing of their faces, the
opening of their breaſts, & diſcouering them to their waſtes,
their bents of Whale bone to beare out their būmes, theyr
great ſléeues and bumbaſted ſhoulders, ſquared in breadth
to make their waſtes ſmall, their culloured hoſe, their variable
ſhooes, and all theſe are but outward ſhowes. As for the
reſt, leaſt their rehearſall might rather hurt, then profit the
honeſt eares, I will couer them with ſilence, but all theſe
are your prouocations, theſe are the fruites of your pride,
the ſignes of your waſte, and the abridgment of my fare, for
while you ſpend ſo fréelie vpon your Backe, the leaſt ſhare
falles to the Bellie, nay▪ I am faine oftentimes to 
                     •
                  aſt, to
beare out the prodigalitie of your pride, and then 
                     •
                  anting
nouriſhment to féede the members, I am complained on for
your fault.
            
            
               The Backe.
               I perceiue you can Arcem facere ex cloaca, and Lapidem
e ſepulchro venerari pro Deo, make much of your painted
ſheath, and make a Mountaine of a Molehill. You can loue
your ſelfe beſt, & ſpie a mote in anothers eye, forgetting the
beame in your own, I am not ſo variable in my ſutes, as you

are in dainties of diuers ſorts, nor ſo ſumptuous and gorgious
in garments, as you are coſtly in cates, but you count al
too much that goes beſides your owne bellie, and thereunto
you bend the ſumme of your talke, like Pithonicus, y• when
he gaue anſwer of the Oracle, ſo ſpake, as the voice ſeemed
not to come from his tongue, but from his belly.
               What ſhould I ſpeake of your two greateſt Gods 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , gluttonous féeding and exceſſiue drinking, by
which you make a number not men but beaſtes, that haue
their ſoules but in ſtedde of ſalt, to kéepe their bodies from
noyſome ſtincke, who though they appeare men, are indeede
but Ventres, that place their pleaſure in long feeding, and
their delight in ſtrong drinking.
               I am not ſo changable in faſhions, as you are choyſe in
diſhes, what boyling, what baking, what roaſting, what
ſtewing, what curious and daintie conſeruing, what Syrropes,
what ſauces, with a thouſand deuices to moue an appetite
without neceſſitie, and charge nature without néede.
Did you not make Demetrius Phalerus conſume euery yere
two hundred talents, in néedleſſe ſtuffing of your bottomles
bagge?
               And howe mooued you Heliogabalus at euery ſitting
downe, to ſpend no leſſe then an hundred Seſtertij? Made
you not Philoxenus to wiſh that he had ye neck of a Crane,
that in féeding on delicate meate, and drinking ſwéet wine,
he might feele the greater pleaſure?
               With this you made the Sodomites to abound,Ezech 16 which
was the cauſe they were conſumed with fire.
               You made the Iſralites héerin to offend,Exod 32 that after they
had glutted their bellies fell to Idolatry.
               You infected Eſau with this greedines,Gene, 25 that he ſold his
birth-right for a meſſe of pottage, yea, infinite others haue
periſhed by the Belly, and more by the Belly then ye ſword.
               The King of the Cookes (that is the Bellie) ouerthrew
the walles of Ieruſalem, (ſaith Gregorie,) for while the Bellie
is farced with Gluttonie, the vertues of the ſoule are deſtroyed

by Leacherie, for 
                     Ʋicina ſunt venter et genitalia.
There can be no order in liuing, where there is no meaſure
in féeding, and as a wild Horſe if he haue the bridle wil caſt
his ryder, or carrie him whether he liſteth, ſo an vntemperate
Belly, leadeth the ſoule to all ſinne, and the members
to ſicknes and ſorrowe. Or as the Earth by too much rayne
becommeth barraine of all good fruites, and bringeth foorth
nothing but thiſtles and thornes, ſo the Belly ouercharged
with two much foode, is vtterly voide of all vertue, & wholly
barraine in well dooing, producing nothing but pricking thiſtles
of ill example to hurt others, or choking thornes of
beaſtly life to deſtroy it ſelfe. How manie doth the Bellie
make Epicures, that ſay, Ede, bibe, poſt mortem nulla voluptas,
eate and drink,Philip. 3 there is no pleaſure after death, who make
their Belly their Gods. Such are like Acephalus, whome
the Mathematicians place before one of the wandering
ſtarres, with his head and mouth kiſſing his bellie. Or the
Fiſh named Aſinus, who alone of all liuing things (as Ariſtotle
ſaith) hath his hart in his bellie, a number of which
Aſſes the Belly maketh, that eate not to liue, but liue to
eate.
               As for vnmeaſurable drinking, Authors haue written,
and experience dooth tell vs dailie, that through abuſe thereof▪
manie not onely liue not out halfe their daies, but therein
conſume that which ſhould ſerue to clothe both me and the
members. Archeſilaus Pytaneus dyed by exceſſiue drinking
of wine. Andebuntus a King of England at a Supper drank
ſo much wyne, that béeing ouercome with the aboundaunce
thereof, in caſting and ſtrayning himſelfe he ſuddainly died.
               
                  Anacreon the Poet, a louer of wine, was ſuddenly ſtrangled
with a Grape. And many wee ſée through your ſurfetting
and ſwilling, are rouled into the graue before their naturall
time, that els might liue in happines and health. But
nowe I remember Cato the elder, when he accuſed y• gluttonie
and laciuiouſnes of the people of Rome, ſayde it was
very harde verba ventra facere 
                        〈…〉
                      non habet, to talke to

the bellie that hath no eares, or els I might tell of a greate
manie more, that indulgentes abdomini farcing their bellies
out with fat, through fulnes of féeding by daie, and gorging
their guts ful of wine with late drinking by night, are right
Antipodes that neuer behold the ſunne in his riſing, nor ſee
him in his going downe: ſuch doe viuere ad faces et cereos,
ſpend their time by torche light, while they conſume ye night
among their cups, and ſnorte all day vpon their beddes. And
theſe are your Lucifugi, or Lychnob
                        ••
                     , that liue contrary to
Nature, who are as well knowne by their cullours, as the
gluttonous Eſtriche by his feathers, ſome of them beeing
more pale through diſtemperature, then thoſe that are ſicke
of a feuer, others more ruddie then the Rubie, and more déeper
in die then the reddeſt Grape, but with the moſt pinguis
aqualiculus prepenſe ſeſquipede extet: their fat paunches like a
water trough ſtandes out a foote and a halfe.
               I talke not of other effects that accompany your gluttonous
bellie whē it is farſt wt wine. What laſciuiouſnes in
wordes, what wantonnes in geſtures, what filthines in
deedes, what ſwearing and blaſpheming, what quarrelling
and brawling, what murder and bloodſhed, nay what wickednes
is not an vntemperat belly ſubiect to, and moſt readie
to accompliſh?
               Beſides, howe doth your gluttonie chaunge Natures cō
                  lines,
into foule deformednes? how doo the eyes flame with
flerines, the face fluſh with rednes, the hands ſhake wyth
vnſtedfaſtnes, and the féete réele through drunkennes? the
head ſwimmes, the eyes dazell, the tongue flammers, the
ſtomack is ouercharged, the body diſtempered, and the féeble
legges ouerburdened, which, béeing not able to beare an vnrulie
Lord, 
                     〈◊〉
                   lay him in ye durt like an an ouer ruled ſlaue,
and ſo through your diſtemperature, your ſelfe not alone
weakened, but the other members ſo diſeaſed, as to reckon
vppe the ſickneſſes and ſores, of which the Bellie is cauſe,
were to purge the ſtables of Augea King of Elis, or to ſette
them downe which were neuer knowne to Auicen, Galien,

Hippocrates, nor all the Phiſitions that euer liued, ſo that
by theſe meanes it may be ſaide, that a gluttonous Bellye
makes rich Phiſitions and fat Churchyardes.
            
            
               The Bellie
               I had not thought the Backe had béene ſo good an Oratour:
you haue taken great paines to decipher my gluttony,
forgetting your owne pride and prodigalitie, but you knowe
the morrall of Eſops Ante & his Flye, he that ſpeakes what
he will, muſt heare what he will not, I will not ſay ye Backe
is a Monſter, that can carrie vppon his ſhoulders, Landes,
Caſtles, and Townes.
            
            
               The Backe
               Nor I ſhowe, howe the Belly deuoureth, not onelie
Lordſhips, Reuenewes, and great poſſeſſions, but whatſoeuer
flyeth in the ayre, is bredde on the earth, or engendred
in the Sea, all is too little to fill the vnſatiable Belly.
            
            
               The Belly
               Your ſhining out in Silkes, hath brought many a man
into the Mercers Bookes, and wrapt more in the Vſerers
bandes. Howe many hath the Backe made Banqueroutes,
that to maintaine their outward iollitie, haue béene fayne
to gage not Landes alone, but plate, goods, or whatſoeuer
was ought worth, and in the end, either to take Ludgate for
their lodge, or ſome worſe priſon for their harbour, and then
their Wiues, Children and houſhold liue after in pennury,
through your former pride and prodigalitie, yea I and the
other members hunger for that, which the Backe hath before
moſt vainly ſpent. Beſides, you make the Landlorde to
maintain your brauery, ſo ſtretch his poore Tenant in rent,
that to ſerue your turne the Belly muſt faſt, the Handes

labour, the féete to trudge, and the other members toyle to
their greate gréefe and ſorrowe.
            
            
               The Backe
               But thinke you that the Backe alone is cauſe of al this
miſerie? no no, the Belly hath héerein his portion, and that
the greater part, how ſoeuer you would ſhift the matter vppon
me, for although (as Plinius ſayth) Simplex cibus corpori
vtiliſſimus, the ſimpleſt meate is moſt profitable for the body,
yet the Belly béeing not herewith contented, muſt haue dyuers
and daintie ſortes of fruites, beaſts of the earth, foules
of the ayre, fiſhes of the Sea, and thoſe not cōmon but rare,
beſides, banquetting dyſhes of ſundry ſortes, made of ſwéete
conceits to pleaſe your appetite. Moreouer, golde & cullours
to adorne them, and ſwéete ſpices to ſauour them, then the
fatteſt and faireſt, the yongeſt & ſweeteſt, a cunning Cooke
muſt be ſought to dreſſe thē, and daintilie to prepare them,
who turneth the ſubſtaunce into an accident, and nature into
arte, that the full belly may become hungry, and the ſtuffed
ſtomack renew his appetite, and while all theſe thinges
muſt be prouided, the ſtocke waſtes, the Landes are gaged
and morgaged, and rather then the Belly ſhall want his ſuperfluities,
the Backe and members ſhall want their neceſſaries,
ſo ſhortly after followeth a topſituruey downefall of
the whole ſtate, which muſt be layd vpon the Backe, though
wrought by the Belly, and ſhifted to mée though chéefely effected
by your ſelfe. But beholde where they are, who can
giue equall iudgment whether of vs twaine doo moſt excéede
or procure greateſt wrong to the members. Doe you not ſée
them?
            
            
               The Belly
               Yes full well, and better ſhoulde I thinke of their company
were it not for the malicious tongue, who hath contrary
to nature made them enemies to me, that am by nature
a friend vnto them.
            
            
               
               The Tongue.
               We are eſpied, wherefore to decide this controuerſie we
will goe to them, as though we came but now within theyr
hearing, but it ſhall not neede, for they approche to vs.
            
            
               The Bellie.
               Deare Brethren and fellow members well met, I cannot
chooſe but meruaile, what helliſh furie worſe than Megaera
hath ſturred you vp to be at enmitie with me, that haue alwayes
tenderly loued you, and what ſhoulde moue you to
withdrawe from me my nouriſhment, that am a ſeruant to
feede you all, in miniſtring to euerie one ſo much as nature
requireth.
            
            
               The Tongue.
               Becauſe rather thou art a lawleſſe Lord (howſoeuer thou
couer thy extortion with the colourable gloſe of a ſeruant)
alwayes crauing and euer commaunding, ſtill feeding, and
neuer leauing, thou art a bottomleſſe whirlepoole of all gluttonie,
an vnſatiable ſea of ceaſeleſſe gourmandie, a rauenous
cormorant that greedely deuoureth, an idle creature that neuer
laboureth, thou ſetteſt the whole world vpon vntemperaunce,
making the rich a Nabuzardan, that rather beſtowe
more vpon Cookes to fill the belly, than on the learned to inſtruct
the mind. Thou teacheſt the poore 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   not 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
to liue after their luſt, not according to vertue, cōſuming
without care, not onely what ſhoulde maintaine their family,
but that alſo that might otherwiſe paie their debtes, O
bellie moſt beaſtial, thou cauſeſt all vncleanneſſe: O monſter
moſt vnreaſonable, that workeſt all filthineſſe: through thee
come murthers, robbing and théeuerie: through thée come
contentions, treaſons and villany: through thée Kings reach
at others crownes to increaſe their treaſure, and Popes at

Princes rule to inlarge their honour, through thée comes
pride, warre, and deceit, enuie, hatred, and ſlaunder, to conclude,
thou art the chaſer awaie of all vertues, and the haler
in of all vices, and in thée as in a Troiane horſe, is included
not the ouerthrowe of one Citie, but the ruine of infinite
Countries and innumerable people, thou art the bellows to
kindle all luſt, and the ſacke that containeth all filth, the
plague of vs the members, and the vtter ouerthrowe of the
ſoule it ſelfe.
            
            
               The backe.
               She hath nipt you verie neere, and méetelie well painted
out your gluttonie.
            
            
               The Tongue.
               And as much may I ſaie to thée thou proude pecocke, the
porter of pride, the baite of bauderie, the lure of lecherie,
thou roote of all riot, and beginning of all iniquitie, thou art
the ſturrer of ſtrife to maintaine thy pride, and the nource of
warre and all ſedition, through thée Countries fall at iarre,
and kingdomes are turned topſituruie, for thy brauerie falſe
ſubiects forſake their Prince, and vilanous traitours betray
their Countrie, thy leaproſie infecteth all the world, corrupteth
euery age, and defileth euery ſexe, thy pride maketh the
rich loath the poore, the child diſdaine the Father, the neighbour
contemne his neighbors, the wife deſpiſe her huſband,
and the ſeruant to make no account of his maiſter, all which
being trickt vp in thy ornaments, thinke that 
                     Ʋeſtis virum
facit, Apparell makes a man, but they forget Simia eſt ſimia,
etiamſi aurea geſtet inſignia, that an Ape is an Ape, though hée
be clothed in golde, to conclude, what vice is it whereof thou
art not cauſe, nay what ſinne whereof thou art not the beginning,
the midſt, and the end.
            
            
               
               The bellie.
               As well hath ſhe decyphered your pride, but what ſhould
I ſaie vnto the tongue, as I haue patientlie hearde her, ſo
déere brethren and fellowe members, giue me leaue to aunſwere
her agayne. You knowe deare brethren, that the tong
is but a little member, but it is nimble, and quickly ſlideth,
yea, hardly may it be reſtrained, & therefore hath it no meaſure
in talking, for of a ſpark it will make a flame, and of one
coale kindle a great fire, her wordes are but light, becauſe
they lightlie flie, and although they flie ſwiftlie, yet they
wound deeplie, ſting grieuouſly, & pearce inwardly, ſhe may
well be called Lingua, for ſhe can Lingere adulando, ſmoothlie
flatter, as ſhe hath done you, but ſhe hath bitterly bitten and
ſlaunderouſlie belied me, ſhe perſwadeth you that I am your
Lord, and ſhe telleth you that I am your enimy, but I know
I am your ſeruant, and entirely loue you as a friende, the
great creator of all things when he framed the world of one
lumpe, made both you and me one ſubſtance, and ioyned vs
together in one bodie, knitting vs in mutuall league, to the
end we ſhould be linked in friendly loue, he woulde haue all
things common amongſt vs, that none ſhould challenge any
thing proper to himſelfe, ſo far as concerneth the vſe of theſe
naturall things, hee hath giuen vs euerie one our proper office,
to be helpers and ayders one to another, hee hath made
me your ſeruaunt, and ordayned me your cooke to dreſſe for
you that ſhould ſerue for your nouriſhment, for as the Cooke
by his arte doth make the meate méete for the mouth, ſo doe
I by my naturall heate, boyle the ſame méete for the members.
I conſerue (at his pleaſure) both your life and mine,
and little is it that I kéepe for my ſelfe, hauing miniſtred to
you that which is néedful, if you giue me ought, I take it, and
whatſoeuer it is I am therewith contented, I digeſt it, and
diuide to euerie one of you his portion, what is néedfull, that
I retayne, what is hurtfull, that I caſt out▪ I am your poore
ſeruant, and therefore can giue you nothing, for except you

giue me, my purſe is alwayes emptie, it is not much that I
demaund, neither doe I by nature deſire that is daintie, for
as I am placed in the middeſt, ſo doe I naturally loue meaſure,
if you giue me too much, your ſelues are cauſe of my diſtemperance,
and of your owne ſorow, if you ouercharge me
you driue me to belching, to dronkenneſſe, to lecherie, to ſickneſſe,
and many diſeaſes, if you giue me too little, you make
me an image of death, my lookes heauie, my face pale, my
ſkinne looſe, and my bodie weake. If ſufficient, a chéerefull
countenance, a merrie and ſober minde, a happy life, a quiet
reſt, and a ſound bodie.
               Therfore ye rich muſt beware of too much, & ye poore prouide
for a little, and that little will ſerue me, for Natura paucis
contenta, nature is content with a little, wherefore yée muſt
take héede of meaſure being temperate, and ſparing in giuing
vnto me, for I diſtribute according to the quantity and
qualitie you giue.
               I knowe the tongue will perſwade you that I am neuer
content, but that you alwayes giue mee, but it is for your
owne cauſe, you giue me often, for that you wil be often fed,
for héereby you liue & haue your health, if you keepe me long
faſting, then I deſire no meate, but as the Phiſitions ſay, I
drawe from the entrailes and bowelles certaine filthie vapours,
of which matter are ingendered wormes, yea the gall
is thereby troubled, and ſpreadeth his bitterneſſe through
the inward parts, by this meanes in thinking to profite, you
hurt your ſelues. But whatſoeuer ye hateful Tongue ſaith,
good brethren regarde her not, for ſhe is the ſower of diſſentions,
and the cauſer of all diſcorde, ſhe is more ſlippery
than an eele, more pearcing than an arrowe, ſhe delighteth
to make ſtrife betwéene friendes, and to make all men enimies,
ſhe raiſeth braules, procureth bloudſhed, cauſeth
warres, ſtirreth vp treaſons, and prouoketh traitours, it is
ſhe that ſetteth the ſubiects agaynſt their lawfull Prince,
and maketh mutinies in a peaceable gouernment, it is ſhée
that would ouerthrowe a happy ſtate, in making the members

at deadly variaunce, but deare brethren, though ye bée
ſimple as doues, yet be as wiſe as the ſerpent Aſpis, that to
auoide the charmer clappeth one eare vpon the ground, and
her taile vpon the other, ſo hearken not you to her perſwaſions,
but ſtoppe your eares againſt her flatteries: for if you
continue in this hatred towarde mee, you will ſpéedely procure
your owne deſtruction. And me thinkes euen this ſmal
time wherein you haue denied my nouriſhment, hath made
you heauy, faint, and ſlothfull.
            
            
               The Hand.
               Brother, I ſée thy reaſons are good, and I perceiue nowe
the malitious tongue hath lead vs awry, I well vnderſtand
that thou art no Lord, but in truth a ſeruant to the meaneſt
of vs all, and that which hath moſt force to perſwade me, is,
the féebleneſſe and faintneſſe that I now féele, I know now
that without thée we cannot continue, but that thou art the
nouriſher and féeder of vs all, wherefore I hate the bitterneſſe
of the tongue that hath ſo vniuſtly accuſed thée, and I
well finde by experience, that thou art no troubleſome creditour,
but art content with a litle, if we giue thée that which
we ought, not ſo as much as we can: but what can the Back
ſay in his behalfe?
            
            
               The Backe.
               As the Belly hath proued, and by reaſon declared that he
hath bene malitiouſly accuſed of the Tongue, ſhewing that
in déede he is a ſeruant, no Lord, a natural friend, no enimy,
a preſeruer of you all, no deſtroyer of any, if you moderatlie
miniſter to his neceſſitie, and doe not ouercharge him with
ſuperfluitie, ſo I ſay, that the tongue hath enuiouſly touched
and falſely burthened me with vntruths, for albeit in déede
I cannot alleadge ſo much for my ſelfe as the Belly, by reaſon
he hath a greater charge, and therfore deſerues the more

praiſe, yet cannot mine office bee wanting, nor my ſeruice
miſſing in many reſpects, wherby it ſhal appeare that I am
no Lord, but a helping ſeruaunt to you all, for as we ſée that
in a politique ſtate diuerſe men haue diuerſe duties, whereof
ſome are of greater importaunce than the other, for ſome
are wrought by ſubtiltie of wit, others by agilitie of the mē
                  bers,
others by ſtrength of the bodie: ſo in a naturall bodie,
each member hath his ſeuerall dutie, and one may ſerue to
diuerſe and ſundrie ends, the head as it is the higheſt, is occupied
in matters of wit, and is therefore a guide to the reſt
of the members, hauing the moſt of the ſenſes placed about
it, to the end it ſhould warilie prouide for the profite & commoditie
of the others. The handes are buſied in labouring,
and ordayned to worke for ſuch things as may ſerue to the
maintaynance of the whole man. The féet made to trauaile
& with their agilitie quickly to fetch what ſo is néedfull, yet
hath not nature giuen them ſuch ſtrength as ſhe hath placed
and ſetled in me, that where the other members cannot
for feebleneſſe, there I with my force doe beare out theyr
weaknes.
               Beſide, whereas the tongue woulde perſwade you that I
am the author of pride, & cauſer of all wantonneſſe, I would
deare brethren, you ſhould knowe that it is not in me, but in
your ſelues, for looke what you put vppon mee I weare, and
am therewith contented, I ſéeke not for that is curious, but
that which is neceſſarie, Crimen non eſt in rebus ſed in vſu agentis,
I take no pride in ſilkes, no more than in cloth, if any
pride be, it is not in me nor in the garments, but in the vanitie
of the eie and the luſt of the heart, that are better pleaſed
with the one than the other. If you giue me that wil defend
me in the winter from colde, and in the Summer from
heate, I am pleaſed, but if you withdrawe from me to couer
my nakedneſſe, the one of thoſe my two enemies will not
onely bring mee to ſickneſſe, but you all in like caſe to death
it ſelfe, and therefore deare friends and fellow members beléeue
not the vnfaithfull tongue, that ſwelleth with enuy at

your peace, and therefore would faine diſturbe your tranquilitie,
not caring to harme her ſelfe, ſo ſhe may hurt you, therby
to bring deſtruction to you all, her allurementes haue alreadie
wrought you ſome ſmart, enfeebling your ſelues by
withdrawing from the belly and me our neceſſaries, ſo that
without you returne vnto your former amitie, there is nothing
to be expected but preſent death.
            
            
               The Foote.
               Brethren, the deceitfull tongue hath beguiled vs all, and
hath intended thereby nothing but our ouerthrow, and that
doe I too well féele in my feeble fainting ioynts, that through
want of ſtrength are ſcant able to beare vp the bodie, wherfore
let vs renue our former friendſhip with the Bellie, by
whome we haue hetherto maintained our health, and without
whome we cannot continue, let vs not hereafter be lead
by the tongue, but as Nature hath incloſed her in with a
double wall, and ſhut her vp as in a priſon, ſo let vs charge
the téeth and lippes to lock her vp, and according to their office
ſet a bolt before her for walking at large, and if theſe
cannot containe her in dutie, then will we make the handes
helpers by violent force to holde her in, & not without cauſe
doth it behoue vs ſo to do, for by her meanes we ſée (through
this contention) the hands are weakned, the head bedulled,
and the face apalled, the heart panteth, yea the Tongue her
ſelfe is ſilent, what will followe now but a finall ende of vs
all, if we doe not ſpeedely miniſter to the Belly wherewith
to féede vs, and to the Backe to kéepe vs warme, and therefore
I promiſe for my part, as faſt as my fainting lims will
ſerue, to trudge for ſomewhat for their maintainance.
            
            
               The Hande.
               And as readie am I to reléeue them, as I was before forward
to pull from them, being ſorie that I lent anie eare to

the diſſentious Tongue, wherby to diſpleaſe natural friends,
promiſing hereafter not to forſake them, for the perſwaſions
of any craftie enimie.
            
            
               The Bellie
               Then deare brethren beſtirre ye, prouide ſome thing with
ſpéede, and you ſhall finde how I will refreſhe your fainting
members, for as Nature hath made me your ſeruant, ſo wil
I not faile in doing my dutie, and let this your ſmart warne
you hereafter to liue together in mutuall loue, that as wee
are all fellowes and members of one bodie, ſo we may violently
and voluntarily withſtand all ſubtill entiſementes of
vnnaturall enimies, that ſhal go about to diſquiet our peace,
ſo ſhall our amitie in a natural harmonie be maintained, our
bodily health the longer preſerued, our quietneſſe and peace
ſtill eſtabliſhed, and our hatefull enimies inwardly grieued,
to our continuall ioy, and their vnſpeakable griefe.
            
         
         
            The application, briefelie declaring
the ſumme of this
Dialogue.
            
               THis excellent frame and moſt
beautifull order of viſible things
in the worlde, this poſition and
placing of bodies, the heauens,
the aire, and the earth, enuironed
and ſpread about with the great
Ocean, this order of heauenlie
mouings, which maketh ye courſes
and change of times and ſeaſons,
dayes and nights, Summer
and Winter, to conclude, the whole forme pertaining to the

heauenly and elementarie nature, is called among the Grecians

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a greater world, or more excellent beautie,
and from thence haue the Latines named it Mundus, of
the neatneſſe & comelineſſe of theſe viſible creatures, which
frame beareth in his naturall harmonie, an apt ſimilitude
of a politique magiſtracie, and therefore they were ſayde among
the Lacedemonians 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that bore a kind of office or
authoritie in the common wealth. In this order we knowe
there is a continuall Sympathie, no ſhew of contrarietie, for
if there were, it could be no order but a diſorder, no Sympathie
but an Antipathie, ſo yt ye whole courſe of natural things
ſhould either be diſſolued, or vnnaturally be meruailouſly
confounded, and therefore as this order hath bene created of
God, ſo is it ſtill conſerued of him, to teach man (being 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
a leſſer world, in reſpect of the greater, participating
both of the heauenly and terreſtriall matter, and bearing alſo
a ſimililtude of the heauens and elements likewiſe) what
a natural agréement there ſhould be among the fellowſhips
of men, to the making vp of a politique bodie, knit together
in the vnitie of mindes.
            A meruailous concord is there among the heauenlie bodies,
for as the writers of nature teach, if our groſe eares
could heare their ſurpaſſing harmonie, wrought by theyr equal
and orderly motions, we ſhould finde their tunable melodie
farre aboue the ſweetneſſe of anie mired muſicke. No
leſſe ought the vnitie of mens minds to be tuneable in amitie,
without anie iarre of diſſonāt diſcord, becauſe they beare
a liuely ſimilitude of the heauens, in their terreſtrial bodies,
for as the heauen which they call Coelum Empireum, contayneth
and includeth within it the Angels & Saintes of God:
ſo the bodie of man concludeth and ſhutteth in it the ſoule,
and heauenly vertues, memorie, vnderſtanding, and will.
Wherefore as in the heauenly creatures there is with men
a plaine reſēblance, ſo ought there among earthly creatures
to be a heauenly repreſentation in agréement of minds, and
hearts.
            
               
As in the Firmament bee ſeuen Planettes and foure
Elements, ſo in the head of man be ſeuen holes or iſſues, and
and in the bodie foure principall members.
            As the Sun & Moone are two lights placed in the heauens:
ſo are there two eyes made for lights in the head.
            The bodie carrieth a ſumilitude of the elementarie matter,
for the heart hath a ſtrie ſpericke likeneſſe, beeing moſt
excellent of the members, and the ſeate of the liuing
ſoule.
            The breaſt of man is as the aire, wherein the vapours of
the ſtomack and bellie being congealed, do cauſe coughs and
yexings, with ſuch like.
            The ſtomacke is like a great ſea, in which ariſe all grieuous
diſeaſes, as it were flowing tempeſts, and to which the
humours of the whole bodie, as all the riuers of the earth, do
eb and flow.
            The féete as the centerie of the heauens and elementes,
beare vp the waight of the bodie, and thus wee ſée what a fit
ſimilitude there is betwéene the greater world and the leſſer,
betweene the ſuperiour creatures, and mans earthlie
members.
            This conſent hath God left in nature betwéene the heauens
with their elements, and our humane members, that
wee might learne what agréement ought to bee among our
ſelues, that are tied together in a politique ſtate. For looke
what ſimilitude is betweene theſe twaine, the like may bée
and is in moſt pointes betwéene the naturall bodie and a eiuill
pollicie, maintained in a well ordered Citie, or wiſe gouernment
of a common wealth.
            For as the head is by nature placed in the top of the body,
ſo ought the Prince to haue the higheſt roome ouer all cauſes
in her common wealth and Country, being ſuperior and
ſupreame head of all others, not excepting Popes or theyr
authoritie: and as nature hath garded the heade wiſh moſt
of the ſenſes, ſ
                  •
                doth ſhe teach vs what defence we ought to
yéelde to our Queene, and howe to ſuccour her in all extreamities.
            
               
The heart being the place of vnderſtanding, and onelie
ſeate of wiſedome is incloſed and fenced about with the bodie,
to inſtruct vs▪ y• in our politique gouernment, wee ought
ſtoutly alſo to countergard our nobles, counſaylours, and magiſtrates,
from whome we receiue through their wiſedome,
the peaceable ſtate of our happy pollicy, as the members receiue
their life from the heart.
            The whole trunke of the bodie, may be compared to the
ſtate of the bodie of the common wealth, vnto which nature
hath conioyned and combined two ſtrong members, the
armes and handes, to helpe and defend both the head and it
from all harts and dangers, which declareth that this ought
to haue a ſtrong defence & ſuccour, for that the ruine of this
is the ouerthrow of all the reſt.
            The legges and féete as the lower and poorer ſort, though
not indued with pollicie as the head, nor ſtored with vnderſtanding
as the heart, nor able to execute the function of the
hands, are yet furniſhed with greateſt ſtrength, becauſe they
beare vp the whole maſſe and frame of the bodie, as alſo the
other members therevnto pertaining: and teach vs thus
much, that as they are onely indued with moſt might and
naturall ſtrength, ſo they ought to be gouerned by the other
members, (who by their pollicie can rule, by their wiſedome
direct, and their agilitie further thē, in that they know not.)
And to aid them alſo with their ſtrength agaynſt them that
ſhall attempt the ruine of the whole ſtate. Where this conſent
remayneth, and naturall harmonie hath place, there as
in the bodie, ſo in a common wealth or Countrie, if one bee
ioyfull, they all generallie reioyce, if one be ſorrowfull, they
altogether lament, for as if the finger be hurt or grieued, the
heart preſently feeleth paine, or when the head is troubled,
the other members are diſquieted: ſo in a common wealth
there ought to be that vnitie, that the Princes ioy ſhould be
the delight of his commons, and the commons grones ſhould
bee the Princes griefe, which GOD bee thanked, as a mutuall

amitie we inioy among vs.
            But as there is no body wherin are not ſome infirmities,
ſo is there no common wealth wherein there are not ſome
enimies: yet among all the enimies of a common wealth,
there is none more pernitious than the enuious tongue of
falſe and lying Papiſts, who when they cannot by their opē
practiſes preuaile to harme or impugne our happie gouernment,
go thē about by falſe lying ſpéeches, not alone to ſlander
our ſtate, & to perſwade others to diſlike of our gouernment,
but alſo labour by ſurmiſing reportes and couloured
lies, to ſtrike a terrour in the hearts of the common people,
or elſe to make them diſlike of thoſe that are in authoritie,
whereby to ſteale awaie theyr heartes from faithfull loue
and reuerence of thoſe, whome for theyr truſtie hearts and
noble vertuous mindes, wee ought to eſteeme and honour.
            Thus played the Tongue as you haue heard, with the
members of the bodie, in ſeducing them one to enuie & maligne
another, thus would our Papiſts deale with vs, to ſet
vs among our ſelues at variance, eſpecially to bring vs in
diſliking of our magiſtrates, but it ſhall be profitable for vs.
If we take this oath with our ſelues, which the youth of Athens
were wont to take, which for the pithineſſe thereof
and the ſtate of our time is 
                  〈◊〉
                agreeing to our purpoſe, and
that euerie one may know it thereby, to be inſtructed, I wil
record it as I haue found it written.
            I will ſpeake no euil of theſe wars, but count them ſacred:
I will not forſake my Captaine to whome I ſhall bee appointed:
I wil fight for religion, and alſo for theſe things we
haue in common among vs, whether I be alone or in companie
with others: I wil not forſake my Countrie, nor leaue
it in a worſe ſtate, but in a better than I founde it, if I
can.
            I will euer obey my Prince and Magiſtrates, which are
iuſtly ordayned ouer me: I will obey and yeeld to the lawes,
and whatſoeuer decrees ſet down by conſent and 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
of the commons. If anie goe about to breake theſe lawes of
my Countrie, or will not obey them, I will not yéeld to him,
but will reuenge him euen by my ſelfe, though I haue no
companie or helpe of others, theſe things to performe, I call
the Gods to witnes.
            If wée haue as much care in kéeping our vowe made
in Baptiſme, wherein wee promiſe to fight agaynſt all enemies
of our Religion, as the Athenians had in perfourming
theyr Paganiſh oathe. If wee bee as duetifull in obeying
our Magiſtrates, whoſe authoritie is confirmed
vnto vs out of the holie Scriptures, as they were carefull
in honouring theirs, although the force thereof proceeded
but from cuſtome and inſtinct of nature. If wee bee
as readie to defende the Lawes of our Countrie, as
they were willing to maintayne theyrs, there is no traytorous
tongue of anie ſubtill ſlie Papiſte, which ſhall bee able
to diſturbe our ſtate, or empayre our quiet gouernment,
but that wee ſhall bee as ſafe from all theyr conſpiracies, as
the young Storkes vnder the winges of theyr dammes.
And rather than our aduerſaries ſhall hurt vs, if wee liue
together in vnitie, and agrée in one heart and minde, fearing
GOD, bewayling our ſinnes, and amending our
wicked liues, wee ſhall bée more ſure and ſafe than if wee
were encloſed about with the ſtrongeſt bulwarkes, or enuironed
rounde with inuincible rampiers, nay rather than
the ſubtiltie or ſpite, fraude or force of our enemies ſhall
wrong vs, our deare redeemer Chriſte Ieſus, who loueth
vs as the henne doth her chickens, will ſaue vs in all extremities
from theyr rage and violence, and if he ſee our
enemies ſtill purſue vs, will doe with vs as the Whale
doeth with her young ones, who perceiuing them, fiercelie
followed, and not by anie meanes to eſcape, doeth ſwallowe
them vppe into the wide chambers of her ſpacious
bellie, and ſo will Chriſte to preuent the tyrannie of our
enemies, rather than they ſhall too farre execute their malicious

purpoſes on vs, take vs into his owne tuition, and
hide vs in his owne boſome, which hee graunt for his name
ſake, Amen.
         
         
            
               ❧ TO ALL TRVE ENGliſh
heartes, that loue God,
their Queene, and
Countrie.
            
               I Know you are not ignorant deare Countrymen,
of the fable of Icarus, who preſuming
vpon his waxen wings beyond his
reach, had them melted with the Sunne,
& ſo was drowned in the ſea. But more
preſumptuous may I appeare, that without
wings, (I meane without knowledge)
dare flie ſo farre into your conceites, as that I dare
preſume vpon your fauors in acceptance of this my rude exhortation
to be friendly fauoured, & generally taken in good
part: yet relying vpon the goodneſſe of your natures I haue
pend this Pamphlet (moſt louing & naturall Countrimen)
not with ſuſpition, much leſſe knowledge of anie diſcorde among
you, for with vnſpeakable ioy I knowe it, you are faſt
linked in loue, and tied together with infringeable faithfulneſſe,
the cords of which your concord ſhall be ſo hard for the
enemie to breake, as I hope they ſhall breake their heartes
(before they vnioynt your handes) that woulde goe about to

diſturbe your peace: but for becauſe I ſée, and you all do generally
heare, what ſeedes of ſedition are heere daily ſowen
amongſt vs, and to be more and more dayly expected, as ſent
ouer by pelting Prieſts from that pedler ye Pope, that continually
vnleadeth his pack to make ſome ſale with vs of his
Popiſh traſh, whereby to increaſe his mart, as he hath lately
done with his Bulles, brought hether by ſome of Balaams
calues, with other Libels moſt ſlaunderous to our ſtate, dangerous
to our peace, and infamous for their vntruth: I haue
therefore (moſt kinde Countrimen) as it were by the waie
put in a caueat by this my Exhortation, to warne you to be
circumſpect hereafter, as you haue ben warie before, that no
ſubtiltie of the enimie ſhake your amity, nor ſecret new perſwaſion,
alter you ancient loue and ſincere religion, but that
as you haue bene in time paſt, ſtable in religion, and ſtedfaſt
in loue, whereby your foes haue beene afraide, ſo your continual
vnitie may daunt the enimy, and be your ſtrongeſt bulwarke
of defence, agaynſt both their ſecrete pollicies and open
violence.
            The things that I would perſwade you to (louing Countrie
men) are, conſtancie in your vnitie, and courage agaynſt
your enemie, fewe thinges in number, but greate in nature,
ſmall in ſight, but of much force in effect. For as touching
concord, it is a certaine infringeable band and faſt tying together
of mens mindes in agreement of truth, the cauſe of
which is that diuine loue, being a fire to burne vp the ſtubble
of diſſention, a light to illuminate the mind with peace,
the honie and ſwéetneſſe of mans life, a comfortable wine to
cheriſh the heart, and the chéerefull Sunne, that not onelie
gladdeth euery eie to behold it, but that noriſheth euerie one
yt retaynes it. From this as from a fountaine of happineſſe
flowe infinite benefites to mans life, for hereby are kingdomes
maintayned, common weales gouerned, houſes and
priuate families well ordered, riches and treaſures increaſed,
health and long life prolonged, and both the the foraine
and domeſticall enemie grieued. If I had as much arte

as Zeuxes in paniting Penaelope, Tymantes in coulouring Iphigenia,
Appelles in drawing Venus, or Amulius in counterfaiting
Minerua, I could then portray forth to your ſight
the amiable face, & paſſing excellencie of concord, the ſwéeteneſſe
of whoſe countenance, though ſhe were naked without
ornaments, were able to allure you to perſiſt in encreaſe of
your friendly loue, and the maieſtie of her vertuous lookes
enough to moue you to inward hatred againſt al diſſentious
enemies. But what ſhould I neede ſo to doe, for the preſent
happineſſe you doe now and haue long felte, vnder the moſt
vertuous Ladie of concord and conſeruer of peace, your gracious
Quéene, hath for theſe thirtie yeeres made you famous
for your gouernment, happie for your peace, a wonder to the
world, and gauled your enemies with enuie at your ſtate, in
which ſo long as you continue, it ſhall bée a braſen wal to defend
you, and a ſtrong fortreſſe to ſhroude you from all their
Popiſh rage and tyrannie. Ageſilaus king of the Lacedemonians,
being demanded why the Citie Sparta wher
                  •
                he was
reſident, was not encloſed with walles, ſhewed his Citizens
Armatos and Vnanimes ready armed to fight, and all of one
heart and minde, theſe (ſayth he) are the walles of Sparta▪
               
meaning that a Country or common wealth cannot haue anie
ſurer defence than the courage and concorde of the Citizens.
            
               Lycurgus thus anſwered his Citizens that ſent to know
how they might repel the force of their enemies, if (ſaith he)
you ſhall couer your riches by faining pouertie, and lay aſide
contentions, entertaining concorde. Knitting vp in a worde
that greate riches, and eſpecially diſcorde, are meanes to
worke the ruine and ouerthrowe of Countries.
            But what ſhould I multiplie examples, the experience of
the contrarie in other Countries, is yet manifeſt vnto your
eyes.
            What miſerie hath diſcord & diſſention brought the flouriſhing
Countries of France & Flanders vnto? It is a common
ſaying, Happie are they whom other mens harmes can

make to beware. But from what root hath growen the fruit
of their miſhap? Hath it not ſprong from the ſame peſtilent
root (the Pope) that would faine plant it ſelfe euen amongſt
vs? O deare Countriemen, beware of Papiſtes, hate their
conſpiracies, auoide their counſelles, they will make you beléeue
they are friendes, but they are deadly enemies, Non
poſſunt eſſe veri amici qui religione diſſentiunt. They cannot bée
true friendes that doe differ in religion: there is no beaſt
more like a Mule than an Aſſe, nor none more like a friend
than a Papiſt, but

                  Nunquam te fallunt agni ſed vulpe Litentes,
                  Dulci ſub melle, ſaepe Ʋenena latent.
                  Beware the Foxe that ſhape of lambe retaines,
                  In honie ſweete there poiſon oft remaines.
               
            
            They would be ſhéepe, but they are wolues couered in
ſhéepes ſkinnes, who although they ſame ſimplicity, like the
ſhéep, yet are they knowen firſt by their voice, for they houle
and rore againſt the heauens, in ſeeking to deſtroy ye Saints
of God, when the ſhéepe bleateth downe to the ground: next
they delight themſelues in bloud, wherewith they loue to beſmeare
their téeth, the ſhéepe reioyceth in no ſuch food, but is
content to féede vpon the gréene graſſe. Theſe counterfaite
ſhéepe, theſe papiſticall Ieſuites, or rather apiſticall Iebuſites,
are diſpenſt with by ye Pope to weare ſundrie habites,
you cannot knowe them by their Prieſtly garmentes, for
ſometimes they iet in Lions ſkins, but you may diſcry them
by their aſſes eares, péeping out from vnder their hoodes.
They will faine vnto you outward holineſſe, when inwardly
they are verie hypocrites, they will perſwade you they
ſéeke the ſaluation of your ſoules, when they meane to bewitch
you with that inchantment, that hath alredy wrought
the deſtruction of their owne. They will giue you Popiſhe
bookes, and poiſoned Pamplets, but at firſt make ſqueamiſh
and daintie to lend them, praiſing them for their goodneſſe,
godlynes, and learning, when within them there is nothing
but miſchiefe, poperie, and errour, they will incenſe you that

you haue no Quéene, no common wealth, no Church, no gouernment,
but (deare friends) beléeue not their perſwaſions.
You are all knit together in one common wealth, as it were
members in a naturall bodie, beware therefore of the enuious
tongue that laboureth ſtill to confounde your peace, and
learne to knowe theſe ſubtill Seminaries and priuie Papiſts,
and knowing them lay hands vpon them, let them bée
diſcouered, examined, impriſoned, and if they bee obſtinate,
preſently diſpatched, ſo ſhall you haue no vipers to gnawe
your ſides, nor no gréedy wolues to lap your bloud, whom as
your Countrie by nature will not bréede, nor féede, ſo doe not
contrarie to nature nouriſh anie of a forraine broode, eſpecially
Romiſh, for they are in nature moſt rauenous.
            Then deare Countrimen, being thus minded, friendly and
brotherly to ioyne together in concord and vnity one with an
other, that your enemies may haue no gap wherby to enter,
adde to you concord, courage, & fortitude to your friendſhip.
Conſider the auncient fame you haue often won in the field,
when your Kings haue bene crowned in foraine lands, and
you renowmed for your martiall proweſſe, where are nowe
the noble heartes that haue ſo much honoured your Engliſh
land? Shall the enemie thinke they are gone, and chaunged
from their wonted nature? No, no, they ſhall I hope finde
them redoubled in increaſe of their former déeds, to their ignomie,
and your continuall glory.
            You are called Angli quaſi Angeli,
               Pſal 7. 8 and in déede you are as
it were Angels,Iohn. 6. for the Lord hath fed you with Angels food,
he hath giuen you Chriſt & the pure knowledge of his word,1. Cor. 10.
euen the true bread that came downe from heauen, long
haue you had it and inioyed it among you, which is a ſingular
token of Gods mercie, wherefore take vnto you the faith
of Angels, as you retayne the hearts of men, ſtedfaſtly truſt
in the Lord, and ſtoutly fight for the defence of his worde.
The Almond trée the older it is, the more fruitfull, ſo the
longer you haue had the word, bee you the more faithfull. If
you die in the defence of this, you ſhall liue for euer, if you

liue without this, you die euer.
            Strangers haue written in the deſcription of your countrie,
that you are in bello intrepidi, vnfearefull in warre, that
you will dimicare ad internitionem alterius partis, fight it out to
the laſt man, and that you only ſéeke after victorie, then adde
your valour to their cenſure, and let your courage ſhew your
Countrie. Plinius writeth, that the nobleneſſe of the Lion is
beſt ſéene in daungers, for being perſued of the hunters, and
hard folowed by the hounds, he hides not his head in holes,
nor ſhroudes himſelfe among buſhes, but gets him into the
open fields, & there moſt noblie expecteth his enemies. Louing
Countrimen, you know the princely lion, is the armes
of your famous Countrie, retaine then his nature, and kéepe
his courage, faint not nor flie from your enemies, but moſt
valiantly beard them to their faces, that they may knowe
the Lion will not ſhrinke in daungers, nor Engliſh hartes
faint in troubles.
            Againe, there is this Antipathia, betwéene the Lion and
the Wolfe, that the Lion is an enemie vnto him by nature,
& will ſooneſt of al others teare him in péeces, according to ye
verſe, Torua leaena lupum ſequitur, &c. You haue now rightly
to deale with wolues couered humana ſpecie, they ſeeke your
bloud, and not yours alone, but of your wiues and children,
wherefore like Lions encounter them, and as like wolues
they thirſt for bloud, ſo let them iuſtly wallow in their own.
Doubt not of victorie, it is Gods quarrell, the Lion of Iuda
will be your helper, you ſhall but holde the weapon, hée will
giue the ſtroke, you ſhall but giue the onſet, he will proſper
the end, onely be faithfull and doubt not.
            You haue had a long peace, God will try you nowe with
warre, you haue had much pleaſure, he will proue you nowe
with paine, you haue had the ſwéete, now taſte ſome ſower,
Dulcia non meruit qui non guſtauit amara. He not deſerues the
ſwéete, that will not taſte the ſower. The great & long proſperitie
you haue inioyed, hath ben vnworthily beſtowed vppon
you, if now you cannot be content with a little aduerſitie.

The Eagle tryeth her birdes by oppoſing them agaynſt
the Sunne open eyed, ſo God trieth his children by the eyes
of their faith firmely ſet vppon Chriſt, wherefore like noble
Eagles, faſten the eyes of your ſoule vpon this true Sonne
of righteouſneſſe, and firſt with repentant heartes for your
ſinnes, and then with aſſured hope of the promiſes of God in
Chriſt, perſwade your ſelues of moſt happie victory.
            Defend your moſt gracious and ſoueraigne Quéene, by
whoſe meanes you haue happily inioyed a long and flouriſhing
peace, vnto whome in reſpect of naturall clemencie, and
paſſing motherly loue, you owe your ſelues, your liues, and
all you haue: Let no traitour nor enemie, either forraine or
domeſticall doe her wrong, or but goe about to thinke her il,
whoſe bloud you would not be willing to ſhed, though with
loſſe of your own liues: ſhe is your moſt lawfull Quéene, and
therefore lawfully to be defēded, not vnlawfully to be wronged
by anie traitors, or their complices whether forraine or
domeſticall.
            She is your true and naturall Quéene, bred, borne and
brought vp amongſt you, and as ſhee hath naturally loued
you euen from the beginning of her raigne, ſo doe you moſt
naturally like Engliſh men, lyke true harted Engliſh men,
like couragious Engliſh men, defende her, fight for her, and
not onely gard her with daunger of your liues, but alſo aide
her with your landes and liuinges, and as God hath bleſſed
you by her meanes with gold and ſiluer, which are but a red
and white earth, and nothing in compariſon of a gracious &
vertuous Quéene, ſo willingly, not conſtraynedly, fréely, not
whiningly, liberally, not niggardly, open your purſes and
beſtowe largely vpon her nowe in time of warre, by whome
you haue filled your cofers richly in time of peace. Conſider
to what end God hath inriched you, and wherefore you haue
more lent you than other mē. If you hoord it vp now in time
néede, you ſhal haue not onely your conſciences to accuſe you
of vnthankfulneſſe, and vnworthineſſe of ſo good a Quéene,
but Gods iudgements one day to light vpon your ſelues and

your riches, ſo that it ſhall not foyſon with your heires, that
was ſo vniuſtly detayned from your natural and moſt louing
Soueraigne, through whom you haue receiued ſo many and
infinite benefites.
            Remember howe many daungers her ſacred perſon hath
ſuſtayned and often endured, for defending both you & yours
from Popery, and kéeping you ſtil in peace and tranquilitie.
What forcible inuaſions haue bene proued? What ſecrete
treaſons attempted, not onely to diueſt her Maieſtie from
crowne & dignitie, but to bereaue her Highneſſe alſo of life:
wherefore as ſhe hath ventured her life, crowne, and honor
in defence of you and that you haue, ſo bountifully, kindly,
and thankfully, doe you agayne naturally requite her, and
manfully defend her, with liues, landes, and goods, that ſhee
may thinke her ſelfe happie of ſo good ſubiectes, and you not
vnworthie of ſo gracious a Quéene, that hath béene a louing
mother vnto you in her carefulneſſe, and a diligent nurſe in
continuall painfulneſſe.
            You are not ignorant, Neruos et robur belli omnes pecu
                     ••••
                  
eſſe. That money is the ſinowes and ſtrength of warre, and
as Demoſthenes that famous Oratour and wiſe Captaine
ſayd to the Athenians, Pecunia certe opus eſt, nec quicquam ſi
                        •
                     e
ea in bello perfici poteſt,
                Certainly money is néedfull, neyther
may anie thing be done in warre without it. Wherefore as
you ſée the neceſſitie thereof in this action, and the opportunitie
of the time, ſo be not ſlacke to beſtow that, which may
be not alone the defence of her roiall perſon, but the ordinarie
meane alſo for ſafegard of your owne liues.
            
               Pugnate pro patria, fight for your country, your deareſt countrie,
wherein you haue ben bred, borne, nouriſhed, & brought
vp, toward which you ought to bee as inwardly affected, as
you are naturally moued to your mothers. It is your natiue
ſoile, and therefore moſt ſwéete, for what may bee dearer or
ſwéeter than your Countrie? No gold nor ſiluer comparable
to your Countrie, no pleaſures nor delightes like to your
Country, for what ſo is néereſt to nature, that thing is ſwéeteſt

to life, and as Plato ſayth in Critone, Et patri et matri et
progenito
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     bus omnibus patriam eſſe anteponendum,
                Our Countrie
ought to be preferred before Father, Mother, or els our
aunceſtours: for though our fathers, mothers, and kindred
die, yet our Countrie doeth nouriſh vs, cheriſh and preſerue
vs.
            When the people of Tegea in Arcadia made warre with
them of Pheneum, the battaile being ſet and ordered on each
ſide redie to ioyne together, they tooke counſaile each to ſend
thrée brethren valiant and ſtout men, who ſhoulde contend
for the victory They of Tegea ſent the ſonnes of Rheximachus,
they of Pheneum of Demonſtratus, theſe ſixe met, and
in fight two of Rheximachus ſonnes were ſlaine, & the third
named Critolaus ouercame his enemies with this ſtratagem,
he fained to flie, and as each of the other purſued him,
he ſeuerally ſlew them all, and returning with victorie was
ioyfully receiued of all ſaue of his ſiſter Demodice, & though
he had ſaued the Citie by his valour, yet becauſe hee had by
chance ſlaine her louer, ſhee enuied at his victorie, and reioyced
not at his triumph, which the young man diſdayning, as
an enimie of her Countrie, he ſlew her, and beeing after accuſed
of his mother, was notwithſtanding by the Citizens
fréed.
            If there be anie among vs that be ſuch enuious traitors,
that regard rather theyr owne pleaſures or commodities,
more than the ſafegard of their country, be they fathers, mothers,
ſiſters, or brothers, I would they had the rewarde of
Demodice: and famous haddeſt thou bene Critolaus, in the
memorie of all ages, that preferredſt thy Countrie before
thy kinne, and the honor thereof before thine owne life, haddeſt
thou not filed thy hands in womaniſh bloud. Into this
your Countrie your enemies boaſt to ſet foot, they count vpō
your riches and treaſures, your landes and poſſeſſions, your
wiues and fayreſt daughters, and to diſpoſſeſſe you not onely
of your pleaſures, but of your deareſt liues, but I remember
the fable of Hermogenes, that the Apes ſéeing the commodities

that men had by Cities, how the couerings of their
houſes and penteiſes kept out the raine and winde in Winter,
and ſhut out the hot Sunne in Summer, their walles
and doores ſhut out théeues, and their defenced townes and
great gates defended them from wilde beaſts and enemies:
certaine of them (eſpecially thoſe that liked this ciuill life,)
concluded to call a counſell, and in open aſſemblie (as the nature
of Apes is apt to imitate euery action) they perſwade to
take from men a péece of ground, whereon they would build
Cities as men doe, they reckon vp the commodities, that the
walled townes would kéepe out wolues, & their houſes wind
and wether, but they adde this, that they would build theirs
more commodiouſly, for they would haue their orchards and
gardens all within their Cities, the fruites whereof ſhould
maintain them: Alſo they would haue their Theaters and
playes for pleaſure, but they ſhould be al within their wals,
this they perſwaded, the counſel was liked, and with the remembrance
hereof they were delighted, it was ſoone contriued
in thought and eaſie to be ſpoken, but not ſo ſoone done,
for when the wood was to bée hewed, the ſtones to bee ſquared,
the boords to be ſawed, and euerie other thing to be prepared,
they ſawe then their Apiſh counſel was fruſtrate and
too hard for them to accompliſh: euen ſo the proude Spaniards
like Hermogenes Apes haue conſulted, and determined
to enter your Iland, and therein to inioy both their pleaſure
and commoditie, but I doubt not (deare Countrimen) when
it ſhal come to the puſh of the pike and dint of the ſword, but
that our God wil ſo fruſtrate their purpoſe, as through your
valiant mindes and hardie déedes, they ſhal finde their counſell
but vaine, and returne home again like Apes without
tailes.
            They play with vs as Iulianus the Apoſtate did with the
Chriſtians in his time, who (as Theodoritus in his 6. booke
and 44. Chapter telleth) after the Parthian warres, made
great preparation againſt the Chriſtians, whō he ſcornfully
tearmed Galilaeans, threatning he would race them out, and

ſet vp deuilliſh images in their Churches. At that time Libanius
a ſingular Sophiſt, but an enemie to the truth, and a
follower of Iulian, looking and longing after his maiſters victory
in regard of his threates, came to a godly Schoolemaiſter
and teacher of youth in Antiochia, & ſcoffing at his religion,
ſcornfully aſked him, Fabri filius quid nunc putas agit?
What thinkeſt thou nowe doeth the Carpenters ſonne?
But hee inſpired with the ſpirite of GOD, foretolde that
which preſently followed, ſaying, O thou Sophiſt, the creacreator
of all things, whom thou calleſt the carpenters ſon,
Loculum Juli
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  o concinnat, is making a coffin for Iulian, and
in deede (according to his propheſie) within few dayes after,
this Apoſtate died, was put in a coffin, and being laide in the
graue, for all his ſwelling pride, came ſhort of that which he
proudly threatned.
            I might tell of Sancherib, of the Philiſtines againſt Saul,
and diuerſe others that haue threatned the Saints of God,2 Chr. 32.
which becauſe they boaſted agaynſt the Lorde,1. Sam. 17. were ouerthrowen.
But becauſe I haue fallen in hand with Iulian, I
will not let paſſe the apt Antitheſis, that is betwéene the
Spaniards and Iulian with his followers. They bragged to
ouerthrowe the Galilaeans (as they tearmed them) ſo doe the
Spaniards the Proteſtants, or the Lutherans as they name
them, they threatned to ſet vp Idols, ſo doe the Spaniardes
images, they proteſted to root & race out Chriſtians, ſo do the
Spaniards the true profeſſors, they threatned to ſhed their
bloud moſt ſpitefully, ſo do the Spaniards beaſt to ſpil ours
moſt cruelly, but doubt not louing Countriemen, but that
Chriſt Ieſus whom you ſerue, is making their coffins, and
that eyther the ſea or a ſtraunge lande ſhal be their graues,
that cannot be contented with their owne, but proudly ſéeke
to oppreſſe the Saints of God.
            Therefore I exhort you, as Hezechia did thoſe of Iuda,
Be ſtrong and couragious: feare not, neither bee afraide for
the force of Spaniards, nor for al the multitude that is with
them, for there be more with vs than with them, with them

is an arme of fleſh, but with vs is the Lord our God to helpe
vs, and to fight our battailes.
            They doe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , fight agaynſt God, wee do fight in
defence of his word, they ſeek after ſpoyle, we after the building
of Gods Church, they ſéeke wretchedly to rent from vs
that is not their owne, wee ſeeke valiantly to defende our
owne. Thinke therefore (ſwéete Countrimen) vpon true religion,
your Countrie, your wiues and children, your landes
and riches, your friends and kinſfolkes, and vpon your owne
liues, let the cowards buy it dearely, and with price of theyr
bloud that they get. Fall downe vpon your knees before the
Lord, humble your hearts in his ſight, come vnto him with
faſting and prayer, in ſackcloth & aſhes, let euerie one turne
from his wicked wayes. Let our Prieſts leaue pride, couetouſneſſe,
and ſ
                  •••
               nie: let Lordes and Magiſtrates rule by
iuſtice, not vſurpe authoritie: let ſtinking pride ceaſe to bee
called pretineſſe, and whooriſh luſt forſake the name of louingneſſe:
let gréedie auarice be no more tearmed warines,
let the gluttonous bellie eate but that which ſufficeth, the
dronken throte deuour no more than néedeth, pluck from the
backe to cloath the naked, & from the belly to féede the hungry,
weepe for your ſinnes, and lament for your miſdéedes,
amend your liues and doe no more amiſſe, flie vnto God in
Chriſt Ieſus, and ſtedfaſtly comfort your ſelues in his mercie,
then riſe with boldneſſe, méete your enemies with courage,
let there come thouſands and ten thouſands, they ſhall
fal vpon your right hand and vpon your left, and neuer be able
to doe you harme: and that this may ſo come to paſſe, let
vs all begge it at the hands of God for Chriſts ſake, that hée
will forgiue vs our ſinnes, and giue vs grace to amende our
liues: that he will defend his little flocke, that he will fight
our battayles both by ſea and lande: that neither the fraude
nor force of our enemies hurt vs: that he will aduaunce his
Goſpel and giue it the vpper hand, that the wild Bore waſt
not his vineyard, nor the bloudie wolfe deuour his flock, but
that we may ſtil heare the Trumpet ſound in Sion, and the

goldē bels ring in his Sanctuarie, that our gracious Quéene
may long liue among vs, perfectly to reſtaure his decayed
Temple, that her aged counſaylours may counſayle wiſely,
to the glorie of God and benefite of our Countrie, that the
Miniſters and Preachers may vtter the worde zealouſly,
and performe it in their liuing alſo effectually, that our common
people may embrace penitencie, and faithfully liue to
Gods glorie, ſo that wee may praiſe him for euer in his
congregation, to the propagation of his
truth, and confuſion of
Antechriſt, Amen.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ A MOST NEEDFVLL
Praier for this troubleſome
time.
            
               HOW are wee able (moſt deare Father) to
render due thankes vnto thée for thy wonderfull
bleſſings beſtowed vppon our ſinfull
land? Our tongues are not able to vtter, nay
our harts cannot thinke, the excéeding mercies
whiche thou haſte from time to time
poured out in full meaſure vpon vs, who by the multitude
of our tranſgreſſions haue not deſerued thy fauor, but iuſtly
merited thy wrath and indignation, to conſume vs vtterly
from the face of the earth.
            For albeit in pride we excéede all nations, & in dronkenneſſe,
whooredome, and couetouſneſſe, with other vices, ſurpaſſe
all others in our time, ſo that our ſinnes may be matched
with Sodome and our iniquities with Gomorah,
               Gen, 19. (for
who is it among vs that doth not abuſe himſelfe in pride &
abundance) yet haſt thou not as a rigorous iudge executed
thy iuſtice in our condemnation,Eſay. 3. but as a mercifull Father
ſpared vs, when we deſerued not an eaſie rod gently to correct
vs, but a ſmarting whip ſeuerely to ſcourge vs, nay, eternal
death and hell fire to torment vs, with a moſt iuſt depriuation
of all fatherly benefites: Notwithſtanding thou
haſt hetherto bleſſed vs with the fruition of thy holy word,
ſincerely and cléerly ſounded forth as from a ſiluer trumpet,
thou haſt purged our ſtinking channels of Popery, thou haſt
taken awaie our ſtinking waters of Nilus,
               Iere, 1. and giuen vs the

chriſtal ſtremes of the cleane water of life:Iohn. 7 The golden bels
of thy Goſpell ring euerie day in our eares:Apo. 21. ſuperſtition &
errour are banniſhed our Churches,Exod. 28. ſo that wee may all
ſerue thée in puritie of ſpirit. Thou haſt giuen vs a moſt religious,
vertuous, and gracious Quéene, who as ſhe hath till
this time bene a mother in England, and like a Deborah in
Iſrael,
               Iudg 4. ſo we beſéech thée make her a Iael to foyle Siſera, a Iudith
to vanquiſh Holophernes,
               Iudg. 5 and an happie Eſter, to confound
proud traitorous Haman with his poſteritie.Iudith 13.
            
            Thou haſt beſtowed on vs a godly,
                  
                     ••
                  t. 7. graue, wiſe, & prudent
counſel, whō we humbly intreate thee to make to her Maieſtie,2 Sam 7.
as Nathan to Dauid in counſell,1. Sam. 18. or Ionathas in comfort
and loue.1. Sam. 20.
            
            Thou haſt endued vs with faithfull & zealous Miniſters,2. Tim. 2
that rightly diuide vnto vs the worde of truth, who as they
are to vs the meſſēgers of light,Mat. 5 ſo we beſeech thée their light
of good life may ſhine in ſuch ſorte vnto others, that they ſéeing
their good workes may glorifie thée our Father which
art in heauen.
            We haue had a long and proſperous peace, wherein euerie
man hath eaten of his owne vine, & drunke the water of his
owne well,Eſay. 36. wee haue had no warre in our gates, nor danger
in our houſes, but that we might each man ſit vnder his vine
and vnder his figge tree, and eate the labours of his hands in
peace.Mich. 4. And when thou ſcourgedſt other nations about vs,
thou fatherly ſparedſt,Pſal. 128. and mercifullie with-heldeſt from vs
thy rod. Theſe thy bleſſings (deare Father) we haue not regarded,
nor thought vpon the afflictions of our brethen: and
now for our vnthankfulneſſe thou ſhakeſt thy rodde againſt
vs, and ſheweſt vs the ſignes of thy diſpleaſure, thou haſt
brought againſt vs the Moabites, Ammorites, & Agarims,
they haue conſulted together and made a league againſt thée
and vs,2 Chr 20. they haue gaped on vs with theyr mouthes,Pſal. 83 they
haue ſharpned their tongues like a ſerpent, they haue laied
a ſnare for vs,Pſal. 140. and ſpread a net with cordes in our waie,
they haue bent their bowes, whet their ſwords, and go barking

at vs like dogges,Pſal. 59 they haue laide waite euen for our
ſoules,Pſal. 79. but Lord how long wilt thou be angrie, O let not thy
iealouſie burne like fire, let our ſighings come before thee,
and according to thy mercy and mightie power, preſerue vs
that are but children of death.Pſal. 108 O giue vs helpe in theſe our
troubles, for vaine is the helpe of man, remember not our
ſinnes and our iniquities,Pſal. 79. but let thy mercie preuent vs: O
let not our enemies ſaie where is their God: ſaue vs from
the hands of bloudie Papiſts, and from Spaniſh enemies
that riſe vp againſt vs, for we put not our truſt in the bow,
neither can our ſwordes ſaue vs,Pſal. 44. but ſaue thou vs from our
aduerſaries, and put them to confuſion that hate vs: ſuffer
not the wicked to haue their deſire, but keepe vs from theyr
ſnares, and from the grinnes of theſe workers of iniquitie,
make them to fall into their owne nettes,Pſal. 141. while wee eſcape
their bloudie deceits, ſo will wee praiſe thy name for euer,
and laude thy mercies in thy congregations, ſo ſhall they
ſee it and be aſhamed that go about to ouerthrow thy truth,
ſo ſhall they confeſſe thy power, and ſtand in feare to riſe againſt
vs, & we thy ſeruants will neuer forget thy mercies,
but ſound forth dayly new ſongs of thankſgiuing: graunt O
deare Father, theſe our petitions, not for our merits, but
for thy mercies in Chriſt Ieſus. To whome
with thee and the holie Ghoſt, be al
honor & glory, world without
ende, Amen.
            FINIS.
         
      
   