
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ THE COMENTAries of Don Lewes de Auela, and Suniga, great Maſter of Aranter, which treateth of the great vvars in Germany made by Charles the fifth Maximo Emperoure of Rome, King of Spain, againſt John Frederike Duke of Saxon, and Philip the Lantgraue of Heſſon with other gret princes and Cities of the Lutherans, wherin you may ſee how god hath preſerued this vvorthie and victorious Emperor, in al his affayres againſt his enemyes trā
               ſlated out of Spaniſh into Engliſh.
            An. Do. 1555.
            Londini in Aedibus Richardi Totteli.
         
         
            
            ¶ To his right honorable Lorde and mayſter, Edwarde Earle of Darby, Lord Stanley and Strainge, Lord of Man and the Iles, knyght of the moſte noble order of the Garter. Your humble and obediente ſeruaunte John wilkinſon, wiſheth proſperitie, honour and health.
            
               GIftes bee commonlye geuē to Princes and other benefactors (right honorable Lorde and maſter) of the moſt precious thinges that can bee founde by the geuers. So I haue conſydred what thyng I myght geue vnto your Lordſhip to bee acceptable, as this whiche treateth of the actes and dedes of th
                  •
                
               
                  ••
               ctorious and moſt famous (now in our ty
                  ••
                Charles the fifth, moſt exeellente Emperour of Rome, king of Spayn, who hath ſpled his bāners from the Eaſt vnto the weſt parte of the worlde: and not onely agaynſte the Turkes and Mores, but moreouer to ſubdue the diuerſities ofſectes as it appereth in thys Commentary of the late wartes in Germany, newly tranſlated out of Spaniſh into Engliſh to certifie the myndes of ſuche that are deſyrous to know what hath folowed the doctrine of Martin Luther by the bearing of Ihō Frederike Duke of Saxon, & other great princes & cities of Germany.
         
         
            
            The preface to the Reader.
            
            
               VPon the ſight of this Comentary in ſōdry languages I haue cōſidred what a lack it hath beē emō
               geſt ſo many Engliſh Bokes, as not to haue ſo notable a hyſtory as this is. Wherfore I haue thought it good to be tranſlated, and although it be not ſo curyous as it might be, ne
                  ••
               rtheleſſe it is of a trueth and wort
                  •
               y of a more excellēt ſtile thē this of mine, which yet may ſatiſfie the mindes of ſuche as be deſirous to knowe the ſucceſſe and what hath folowed the doctrine of Luther through the ſupportaciō and mightye power of Duke Ihon

Fredderike of Saxon and Philip the Launtgraue of Heſſon with other great Princes, of the furious and infinite people of Germany, as it appeareth in this and other ſtories which be written of the warres there made by Charles ye fifth, Maximo Emperour of Rome, king of Spaine. An. M. D .xlvi.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               A COMENTARY OF the right Honorable Lorde Lewes, de Auela and high ſtewarde of Ocanter, of the warres in Germanye.
            
               GErmanye of late being in ye power of ye Proteſtātes & new religiō: ſo that it is clearely ſeē, how neceſſary it hath beē for almightye God to put his remedye therin: for as to the help of man ther hath been ſo many difficulties, that there could no meane be founde, by any diſcourſe of reaſon, howe to remedy ſo much euill. For if it ſhould haue paſſed by counſailes: ther hath beē ſuch a multitude of people. And

ſo many Princes to be treated withal, that in long time and wyth great difficultie it ſhould haue been brought to any concorde. And yf by ſtrength, ye difficulty had been much more, for the confederacion of the league was ſo great: that there was no part in Germanye, where ye Lutherans wer not the moſt ſtrōg. Except Cleaues and Bauer, the which although thei profeſſed to be catholiques yet they tempered ſo with the Lutherans in ſhewing of frendſhip to the one, and the other part in ſuch ſort, that they might be called rather newters, then catholiques. All the reſt not comprehendyng the londes of the king of Romayns, and a few cytyes of the Empyre, ſtoode all in the leagues Malcaldo: ſo named by the Proteſtauntes) after the place

where it was made. And thei which were not of thys league, wer neuertheleſſe called Lutherans. The prī
               cipals of the catholiques wer theſe, Colan, Metz in Loran, and Aquiſgrame with fewe other. The pryncipals of the league were theſe. Auguſt, Ulme, Argentine and Frankfort, ryche and mighty cities, & ioyned with them other infynyte. As Muremberg, Rotemberg, Norlīg, & other, whoſe number be ſo great yt I omit to writ them, which wer not of the league, but yet Lutherans: ſo that the power of the one and the other was the whole Empyre. All the Princes and lordes wer entred into this league, except the King of Romains, ye Duke of Cleues, and the Duke of Bauer, with certain gētle men of which there wer that daylye

turned to the Lutherās. And moreouer thei had abrode mightye & ſuſpect frendes. Nowe being in thys power which dayly encreaſed, and proudly preſumed, to ſet out things not onely to the ruine of the Empire but alſo to the totall deſtruccion of the chriſtian common welth, ſetting furth one new Empire with al newnes that could be deuiſed to be new.
            ¶ At this time the Emperor beig in Flaunders and certified thereof, parted toward Almain paſſyng by Vtrike, where he kepte the Chapter of his order of the golden fleeſe. And there he gaue it to certayne knyghtes, as Flemminges, Hiſpamardes, Almains, and Italyans, After he paſſed into Gilderlande, which he had of late gotten. And frō thence he came to maiſtrique vpon

Moſe, to the which place ther came ambaſſadours from the Lordes of Almain, amongeſt whom it ſemed to be a ſlaunder of a fame devulged that his mageſty would make an army into Almayne, but they vnderſtonding that thei wer deceyued in their own cōceites, did take no more 
                  •
               cedence thereunto, for he brought with hym but .v. C. horſes, with the which nūber he doth ordinarily ride out of Flaunders into Almaine, accompanied with theſe, he parted frō Maiſtrique where he did take hys leaue at his ſyſter Quene Marye, which done: he remoued with hys court toward the 
                  〈◊〉
                of Lucē
               burge, lykewiſe newly 
                  •
               eco
                  •••
               ed of the Frenchmen. He entred into Almain, wher although it appeared yt his comming was nothing ſuſpect.

yet neuertheleſſe he aſſured hymſelfe to be out of their daunger. But he was fully determyned, and remoued to Sperſe: where the countye Palatine and the Launtgraue became ſuyters to hys mageſtye, touchynge theyr affayres. The Erle treated of the common welth, and the Launtgraue to proue concluſions for his purpoſe pretended. The Earle could bring nothyng to paſſe, nor the Launtgraue obtained any thyng to his entent, ſo the one & the other parted frō the courte. The Erle in ſhort tyme after ioyned him ſelf with thē of the league. His mageſty rem
                  •••
               d from Sperſe, where he paſſed 
                  〈…〉
               , traueſing Sueuerlād. He came to Tonauert, Ingleſtot, and to Ratiſbone, where the counſaile had been conuocate ye yere

paſſed. Procurers were ſent frō the Princes, and cityes of Germany to his mageſty beyng there where thei beganne to treate of many thynges touchyng the common welth.
            At this tyme there was maryed the eldeſt doughter of the Kyng of Romayns, named Anne to the ſōne of the Duke of Bauer. The ſecond named Mary to ye Duke of Cleues Now I wil be brief for to begin the wars yt the Emperor had againſt ye Lutherās whoſe power was gret & mighty, but yet I wil not write of euerye ꝑticuler ꝓcedīg before, nor yet other ꝑticulers touchīg ye ſtate of religiō for theſe ſhal remain to thē who haue ī charge to write more at large for I write but only thoſe thynges whiche I haue ſeen & can be witnes to ſay the truth.
            Now ye cities of ye league & lordes

therof begin openly to ſhew how litle they wer concluded in the counſaile concernyng that his mageſtye pretended, and began to murmure becauſe they vnderſtode that he entēded to ſet forth to the honor of god and the chriſtian commō welth, according to his office: for the whyche he ſent for certain vpper captaines, without making any gret apparāce in reſpect of ſo great wars as might folowe. But it was not ſo ſecretely done, but that it came to the knowlage of the procurers, of the Lordes and the cities beyng there. For verely they lacked no power, craft, nor ſubtelty. So on a day they came together before the Emperour, and ye ſumme of theyr ſaying was: that as they dyd vnderſtand he had ſent for certayne Coronels and captaines,

for to reiſe men of warre. Beſeching his mageſtye for to geue thē knowledge where and againſt whome he would begyn: and they would be redy to ſerue him as they had been in tymes paſt. His mageſty anſwered that he had ſent for men to chaſtyce certain rebels in the Empyre. And they which would help to ſerue him therin, he would repute thē as good and true ſeruauntes, and that he would be good Emperour & gracious lorde vnto them, and they that would not: he would reckō them in coūt with the rebels agaynſt whom the war ſhould be made.
            With thys aunſwere they of the league parted out of ye court to theyr lodginges, and ſhortly after to their houſes, and ſo to theyr Lordes, and from that time forth the warres beganne.

Where of I wil write as perticulerly as ſhall come to my remembraunce. But fyrſte it is nedefull to vnderſtond, where ye Emperor was whē it was declared & ye preparaciō made at that time: you ſhall vnderſtond yt he was at Ratiſbone, which ſtondeth vpon the riuer Danubia, & is ye vttermoſt of the cities imperial ſtonding vpō this riuer toward Auſtrich. It is coūted to be of Bauer it is a great citie & of ye Lutherans, frō thence to Auguſt it is .xviii. Dutche leagues & Ingulſtot ye laſt town of Bauer .ix. leagues vpō Danubia vpward frō Ingulſtot to Culō, al Almain except ſome Biſhops & a few tounes be Lutherans, & thoſe which be not for theyr ſafegard, vitail ye enemies as ye other do. The Duke of Cleues although he be catholique,

hath detracted his buſines ſo ſlowly (I do not ſay fearfully) yt his taryig ī determinaciō hath not a litle ēcreaſed ye difficulti of our wars. For if he had ſhortly det̄mined, his mageſty might haue made neceſſary prouiſiō one moneth earſt thē he did, and not only this incōueniēce, but alſo ye kig of Romains, becauſe of his buſines taryed one moneth longer then hys mageſtyes expectacion was. Hys comyng being ſo neceſſarye for dyuers cauſes. And moreouer thē this there came much damage by ye reaſon of ſcant ſecretnes, & litle regarde of ſome miniſters which by the reaſon of paſſion or affeccion, could not kepe ſilence. In ſo much that our enemies had knowledge fyrſte & before our frēdes. His mageſti had no thing in order for yet the Almayns

and Spanyardes laye ſtyll in three 
                  〈◊〉
               , of whō we ſhal ſpeake hereafter: nor yet the Pope had not ſent hys men whych he had appointed to ſende, ſo that our ſtrength was al in the determinacion of the Emperour and power of ye catholiques in Germany.
            They of Auguſt were the fyrſt yt rayſed men and not named to be agaynſt the Emperour: for at thys tyme they ſuffred his ſeruauntes to come & go into theyr citye, to dreſſe theyr harneys, bye and ſel. Now his mageſty had ſent Alipzando brother to the Cardinal of Trent, & George of Ranſpurge one olde Souldyer whych hath ſerued hym long in hys warres and to Examburge he gaue alſo the charge of a number, and to the Marques of Marenā, generall

of the artilery that euery one of theſe ſhould bryng .iiii. M. Almayns.
            Theſe. foure Coronels according to theyr cuſtome, made two regymentes, & after there were deuided emongſt them egally .x. baners, ſent by the baſtard of Bauer and other captaynes ſo that thei came to be. L baners of duche men .xxv. in euerye regyment. His mageſtye prouyded for Don Aliuaro de Sāde, of Hū
               gary with his Terce whiche wer .ii. M. & .viii. C. Hiſpanyardes. And ye Arce ſhould come out of Lūbardye with three. M. The marques Albert of Brandemburg ſent in haſte for ye horſes, wherwith he was boūd to ſerue, whych be two. M. & eyght C. The marques John brother to ye elector of Brandemburg, rode and brought eyght. C. horſes. The maſter

of Pruſe was apoynted to brig one. M. horſes. The yonge Duke Henry of Brandēburg .iiii. C. horſes. The Prince of Hungary. M. & v. C. horſes, but theſe horſmen were to be made in ſo many partes of Almanye: that for to come together it was verye harde, bycauſe the enemyes were betwixte them and hys Maieſty.
            At this time the Pope ſent his me out of Italy, ſo when he had prouided theſe thiges, he wrote into Flaū
               ders to the Erle of Bure, to ſende. x M. footmen and .iii. M. horſemen of the Netherlanders. This campe together might ſuffice to fight with anye power. But beinge forced to come from ſo manye partes: there was none of it ſelfe able to fyght wyth the enemies.
            
               Now there went out of Auguſt xxii. Baners of the ſame Citie, and vi. from the Duke of Vertemburg, & .iiij. of them of Vlme, one. M horſes and .xxviii. peeces of Artilerye, vnder the name againſt the Souldiers, which came out of Italy whiche they ſayde were ſent by ye Pope for to deſtroye Almayne, & nothing agaynſt themperour. And ſo they went ſtreyght to Cluſe, & becauſe it maye be the better vnderſtād: that for to come out of Itali into Bauer they way lieth by Trent, & frō thence to Inſpurg is a wai: & frō Inſpurg to enter into Bauer be .ii. one down by ye Riuer to come to Raueſten, a ſtrōg walled towne of Tyrol for to enter into Bauer. The other lieth aboue toward Suyſa going thorow a valley wherī ſtādeth a ſtrōg caſtel

which ſhutteth vp the way not farre from Feſſen, belongyng to the Cardinal of Trent, and ſo to Quintain emperial & Lutheran, & Memēgā likewiſe emperial & Lutherās, both theſe Lutherans and of the league with Auguſt. This firſt enterpryſe was becauſe they thought it conuenient to haue this paſſage beig next vnto thē & ſo they ſent thyther .v. M fotemen and one. M. horſemē, with Sebaſtian Exertel, which had been in times paſt haulberder to the Emperour. Syth a tauerner in Rome, & after in the warres of Sanderſay he was made a prouoſte marſhall, where he became riche and in great eſtymacion in the citye of Auguſt. Wherfore they choſe hym to be theyr general, in this enterprice, & ſo cōtynued al the warres after. So with

theſe campe they came to Fieſſen: whych was taken by Exartel, with out any contradicciō, & thē to Eluſe where he entred without ſhutte or ſtroke: there wer a litle from thence, foure or .v. M. Almains, for the reſt wer at Rattiſbone about his mageſtye. They ſhewed themſelf wylling to fyght, but theyr captaines would not ſuffer it, ſeyng the other to haue ſo great aduauntage. Then theſe our Almayns came by hys mageſtyes commaundement to Rattyſbone, and like ſo dyd George of Rā
               ſpurg wyth his bend lying nere vnto the city of Vlme.
            At thys tyme the enemyes whych had taken the Eluſe went ſtreyghte to Inſburg intending for to take it, which was a enterpriſe of great importunitye yf they ſhoulde haue ſo

done: then they myght ſhortly haue gotten the reſte, for being their they might haue byn lordes of .ii. wayes of the whiche I haue ſpoken lienge 
                  〈◊〉
                Tyrol into Bauer, and more 
                  〈◊〉
                the waye whiche lieth to come out of Italy and Trēt to Inſburg, ſo that they might haue ſhut vp and mayſtered the way, ſo that no men, Money, nor Victuales might haue come to the emperour. But they of Inſburg ꝓuided ſo wel, yt thei wold not ſuffre them to come nere theyr towne, for in .vi. or .vii. dayes they were .x. or .xii. M. men, Caſtelal the inge their Captayne. Now the enemies began to diſpayre in this enterprice, and turned backe agayne leauinge Cluſe and Fieſſen prouided. Thys Caſtelalt is one of the eldeſt Captaynes in Almanye, belongynge

to the Kinge of Romayns, whoe after in thys warre recouered the Cluſe.
            At this time the men which were ſent by the Pope out of Italy be cō
               ming, and likewyſe the Hyſpanyardes of Lumberdy, and they of Naples had ſhipped in Pule and were landed in the lande of the Kyng of Romayns nere vnto the Veniſſēs, in a towne called Fume in Damacia and from thence to Corinthia & to Eſtria for to come to Salebrug & ſo to Bauer. The enemies returned to Auguſt, after they had prouided the paſſage of Ratiſbone with .ii. C. Hackebutters. This enterprice was to them very Importunate, but more īportunat it might haue been: if yt when they parted frō Auguſt thei had gone to Rattiſbōe

for then they ſhould haue found the Emperour ſo diſpurueyde, that hys remedy had beē to haue gone down by the ryuer of Danubia, out of Almany, for as yet were not come the bendes vnder the conducte of Madrucho & of George. But the Hiſpanyardes of Hungarye came to the Emperour alone, and his number whych is worth much in Germany. Thys was our army, ordynaunce we had none, but we taryed for that whych ſhould come from Viene, ſo that al thynges wer vnprouyded, ſo that yf the enemyes had come, they ſhould haue obtayned theyr purpoſe without any withſtondyng. Thys was theyr fyrſt errour.
            At thys tyme the Duke of Saxō and Launtgraue wrote a letter to his mageſtye. The ſumme whereof

was, that they dyd vnderſtand that he would chaſtice certayn rebels accordyng to theyr deſertes, and that they wer much deſyrous to knowe becauſe thei would be ready to ſerue his Mageſtye. And yf he founde himſelf greued in any thing againſt any of them, they would be ready at his commaundement to make ſatiſfaccion according to reaſon.
            To thys letter his mageſty made no aunſwere, for not aunſweringe therto was his aunſwere. For whē they wrote this letter, a great parte of their Campe was on foote, and had ſente to the Cities and Lordes of the League to ſende their numbre according to their pomiſes. And Sebaſtiane Exartel, was now gōe from Auguſte to Inſburg, & from thence to Tonauert, as the names

do ſygnifie for to defende Danubia for the defence of ye Duke of Saxō and Launtgraue beinge in Tonauert with great prouiſiō for Auguſt for there was the Lordſhip of the water of Lico, whiche is a paſſage through Auguſt and deuideth Bauer and Sueuerland. Danubia is a paſſage for all maner of vituales from Vlme and Viertēburge, ſo yt the ſcituacion is ſufficient to lodge an army: for all thynges neceſſarye. Shortlye after Exartell with hys Campe ioyned wyth the Duke of Saxone and the Launtgraue ſo yt they al together made a mighty army gathered of the Cities & lordes of ye league betwene .iii. &. iiiī. ſcore. M. footmē & ix. or .x. M. horſemē, a hundred peces of Artilerie moūted.
            At this tyme hys maieſty was in

Rattiſbone but wyth ſuch a number as I haue ſpoken of before, nether Artilery but .x. peeces which he had borowed of the Cities there about, for his ordinaūce was not yet come frō Viene. The newes that he had from hys men was that Exāburg had hys Coronell in a redynes at Mount Naegra, which with great difficulty muſt paſſe the Countrey belongynge to Vlme, an enemye a ſtronge and a myghty Citie, and throughe Vierteuiburg the ſtrongeſt Prince of the League, & therefore muſt be fetched a great cōpaſſe by the Lake of Conſtance and by Cyroll a playne way and more out of perill then the other. Alſo we had newes that the Hyſpanyardes of Naples were ſhipped, and the Hiſpanyardes of Lūberdi were cōmīg

and the Prince of Salmona Captayne of the light horſmen with .vi. 
                  •
                horſes, and the artileri was coming in Barkes, by the Riuer from Viē, but the enemies being ſo nere it required a longe time, in the whyche the Duke of Saxone & Laūtgraue might haue come to Ratiſbone, and haue founde themperour ther wyth x. or .xii. M. mē with litel ordenaūce & leſſe victualles, nor yet the towne ſo ſtronge for to defende, & thoughe it had byn yet it was not meite for themperour to be ſet about, hauyng no other reſcue thē he had their. So that to my iudgement: if the Duke of Saxone & the Launtgraue, had come at that time: they had driuen ye emperour out of Rattiſbone, and yf they had ſo done: he had ben driuen out of Germanye, and their coming

had byn lyght, for they had lefte nothynge at their backes to deſturbe them, but one bande of footmen lyinge in Rayne. A towne of the duke of Bauer a league from Tonauert and .ii. baners of footmen in Ingulſtat, which done Peter Guſhmane a Knight of themperours houſe, as for the people of Vauer there was no truſt in them, ſo that they left an enterprice to doe, as I and other thought well left. Thys was theyr ſeconde errours, that they came not together to Ratiſbone, but went to Ratyn, whyche was to them gyuen without any battarie, they ſuffred the garniſon to departe wyth Baner & armour, and left one other of theirs: and came to Newburge, where thei pitched their Cāpe. The towne was for them, for whye it is

belonginge to the Duke Otto, the firſt Duke of Bauer, & to the coūty Pallatine a lorde of ye Lutherans, the towne is ſtrong & a paſſage vpō Danubia .iii. leagues from Tonauert, and .iii. from Ingulſtat.
            Now the king of Romayns was come vnto Prague with the Duke Morres: accordinge to thēperours appoyntment, for to enter into the Duke of Saxones lande Elector. This Duke Morres is one of the Dukes of Saxone: for after ye cuſtome of Almayne, they part the inheritaūce emongeſt their linage, he is a great lorde and euer hath been at debate with the Duke of Saxon his coſyn, although a Lutheran: but at the beginning of this warre they were in peace: vntil his maieſty had ſet forthe the baniſhment agaynſte

the Duke of Saxone and Launtgraue as rebelles. This baniſhmēt imperiall, is for to gyue the landes and goods of the rebelles to al that wyll go agaynſt them, & ſo the king & Duke Morres came togither to take Saxonie, it came well to theyr purpoſe for al his landes lye borderynge vpon theirs.
            At thys tyme the Emperour had knowledge: that the enemies were determyned to take Lanſente, a towne of the Duke of Vauer ſtandynge in the waye to Rattiſbone, for to goe to Inſburg by whyche wayes he looked for hys men whyche ſhould come out of Italye, and from Silua negra, for they had no other waye (Cluſe gotten) for that taken it ſhould be much to their aduauntage, for they beyng there hys

Maieſtie myght haue byn encloſed in Ratteſbone, for they had then bin in place where none of hys coulde haue come to Ratteſbone, for ye Hiſpaniardes & I talians muſt nedes perforce haue come that waye. And likewiſe the Almayns from Silua Negra, & they might haue left the place fortefied and turned agayne to Rattiſbone. This done, his maieſtie had bē in a ruynous caſe, therfore he was very erneſt to prouide agaynſte this perell, and in perſon went to defende the towne, toward the which was ſet forth all the force and ſtrengthe of the enemyes. He lefte in Ratteſbone .iiii. M. Duche men and a Baner of Hiſpanyardes with the artilerye and munycyon yt came from Viene. And geuing the charge thereof to Peter Colona.

His maieſtie remoued with the reſt of the campe: and in two lodginges thei came to Landſen, he woulde not lodge within the towne, but he determined there to tarry for the enemies, and for the footemē which wer come out of Italy (if thei might come in time.) The newes of ye enemies coming encreaſed dayly, with knowlage that thei wer paſſed Ingulſtat. The Emperour hearyng theſe newes, ſent abrode for his mē. In the meane time he choſe a place for to fight: for this was his determinacion to do, ſith there was no other remedy, or els to leaue thē Almain peaceably, the whiche his maieſty determined that he would neuer do. For I haue heard hi diuers tymes ſaye, (in ſpeakyng of this terrible warre,) that dead or aliue he

would tarryin Almayne. And with this determinacion he abode for the enemies, in whoſe parſon and valew was al our truſt. And knowing that Ratteſbone was ſette in place where thei coulde not paſſe, they remembred thēſelues and tarried. vileagues frō vs, camping and interteining Minique and Ingulſtat in the meane time.
            ¶ The Duke of Saxon and the Lātgraue ſent a page with a trūpet to his maieſty, ye page brought a letter in a rodde, as it is the cuſtom of Almain, when one maketh warre againſt an other. Thei wer called to ye tēt of ye duke of Aluoy captain general, ye which ſaid vnto thē. The anſwer of him to whō ye be ſente, is, yt ye deſerue to be hāged: but his maieſty hath pitie vpō your liues, & wil

puniſh none but thē yt make defaut, geuing thē the proclamaciō of their baniſhemēt in print yt was proclaymed agaīſt their maſters. This me think was a direct anſwer. His maieſtye woulde not ſee the letter to the ſhame and rebuke of the Lantgraue, to whome he had been good mayſter in tyme paſte. About thys tyme the footebende of Italie came vnto Landſen. It was one of the fayreſt bendes that euer I ſawe come out of Italy. They wer. x or xi▪ M. footemen, and .vi. C. lyghte horſes, theyr general was Octauiā Farneſſe, neuew to ye Pope. Alſo ye duke of Florence ſēt▪ ii. C. light horſes, & one hundred frō the duke of Farrer, to ſerue his maieſty. At this tyme came in the Hyſpanyardes of Lumbardy, excellent ſouldyers,

and a litle after, the good olde ſouldiers of Naples. So theſe .iii. Terces were the flower of the old ſouldiers of Spayne.
            ¶ Now the Almayns of Examburge aſſēbled in Silua negra, be cōming at hande, but thei had gone a great compaſſe, and many tymes they haue ſkirmiſhed with their enmies by the way. Nowe there was in our camp the fourme of an army: for his mageſty had then with them in Ratteſbone .xvi. M. Almains, which wer receiued at ye paye xx. M as thei be wont for to haue emongſt their footebandes. Thei wer about viii. M. Spaniardes, & .x. M. Italians, and now came in .vi. C. horſemen for the marques John from Boeme. The marques Alberte had viii. C. the maiſter of Pruſe had .ii.

C. for al the other of the marques Albert, and of the Archduke might be .iiii. M. not yet come to the ryne, which was kept with the enemyes. Now his maieſtie, with the menne that he had broughte out of Flaunders, with his court, and with .ii. C. horſes of the Archdukes, he had .ii. M. armed horſes. But as to ye fote men, to my iudgement, I neuer ſaw the lyke. I did ſee the Almayns that his maieſty brought to Viene, whē he went againſt the Turke. I. dyd ſee the Spanyardes whiche were there thē. And likewiſe I did ſe the Italians, but none like vnto theſe. I did ſee the Almaynes, Hiſpanyardes, & Italyās that his maieſtie led to Tunezey, & thoſe that he lead after īto ꝓuince, & thoſe that he had whē he toke Gilderland, & made the

Frenche kyng to retyre with his campe from Camberſey. But as I thynke there was none of theſe like vnto this. Lykewyſe ſaye they, whiche were with his maieſtye in the warre of Sandaſier, and haue ſeen that campe, they ſaye that they were not lyke vnto theſe, although they were well choſen, the which I haue not ſene, I beyng abſent. After that al theſe were come together, he parted from Landſen, and went to Ratteſbone for to take his artillery and menne that he there lefte, and from thence to goe to ſeke hys enemyes: and beyng at Ratteſbone, he commaunded to ſette forth ſixe and thyrtie peces of artillerye, leauing three banners to kepe the reſte. Then with his campe he tooke the waye to Ingulſtat, where the enemyes

entended to campe. It is from Ratteſbone to Ingulſtat .ix. leagues, whiche .ix. were deuyded in foure iourneys, ſo he came with his campe to a place vpon Danubia called Newſtat, there was a bridge, but he cauſed two other to bee made of the barges whiche he brought in his campe, for he determined to paſſe the riuer in any wiſe.
            ¶ His maieſty being thus purpoſed, he was enfourmed that the duke of Saxon and the Lantgrane with al their campe, vpon the other ſide of Danubia, had taken the way to Ratteſbone, an enterpriſe well vndertaken. His maieſty ſent foure hundred Spanyardes, hackbutters horſed, & .ii. baners of Dutchmen, the whiche by their diligence the ſame nighte yt they were ſente,

entred into Ratteſbone, the whiche was now ſure. For yf the enemyes came not, it was ſafe. And if thei came, they might defend vntil thei might haue reſcu frō the cāp, which might wel be had, (Danubia beyng betwixt vs and our enemies.) But they ſeing that Ratteſbone was prouided, or becauſe thei perceiued that his maieſtye would paſſe the riuer, and lyīg at their backes might take away theyr vitayles, beyng within iii. leagues of Ratteſbone, thei gaue a turne toward Ingulſtat, makyng great haſt to be out of the woodes & ſtreyte paſſages, where it was thought they might haue bene well ouertakē. But we hauing no know ledge of the countrey, ſo that they with extreme diligēce did geat the playne field, ſo that when our lyght

horſemen had paſſed the wode: they wer nere into Ingulſtat. His maieſty in two daies paſſed the riuer, and lodged his campe in a valley, vpon a litle moūtayn nere vnto the riuer, and this lodgyng was two myle frō Ingulſtat. This paſſage was of great importaunce, for it did not onely cauſe the enemyes to bee aduiſed: but alſo to be drieuen together, and not to goe lyke Lordes in the fields as thei had done. For this ſhewed them that his determinaciō was to fight when tyme and place might ſerue. There our campe was fortified with a litle trenche, for the duke of Aluoy had ſo takē the groūd that it neded not to make any other. There was alarū, although it was not true, our ſouldiers were ſo well ordred that it might bee euidentlye

ſene, how willyng they wer to fight.
            ¶ At the ende of two dayes the Emperour parted from thēce, whē he hadde newes that the enemyes were lodged on the other parte of Ingulſtat ſixe myles. Wherfore he made ſpede to take theyr lodgyng that they had lefte the daye before that he departed from his. Nowe it was conueniente, that the Emperour ſhould make haſte towarde Jugulſtat, and not to leaue it in peryl to be taken with the enemies: For why, from thence they myght lightlye haue diſtourbed monſuer de Bure from ioynyng with oure campe, or elles they myght haue taken theyr lodgyng betwixte it, and the place where we hadde lodged. But the Emperour conſyderyng howe muche it did importe, beeyng

now ſo nere vnto the enemies to be euer their ſuperiour in lodgyng: he ſente to viewe two lodgynges, the one was a league from Ingulſtat, (whiche I haue ſpoken of,) and in oure waye. And the other neare vnto Ingulſtat vpon the other ſyde, for it behoued to take that nexte vnto the towne before the commyng of oure campe, the other in oure waye was good to be taken. Before that his maieſtye ſhoulde ſette foorth his campe, his intencion was to haue theſe two, ſo that if he mighte not occupye that nexte vnto Ingulſtat, yet that he myght lodge in the other, and therfore the daye before, he hadde ſent John Baptiſta Gaſtaldo, mayſter of the Campe generall, for to bee particularlye viewed▪ And

he with al ſpede that might bee, the next daye in the mornyng remoued his campe, the whiche went in partz vawarde & battayle. The baggage and artillery vpon our left hand vpō the riuer ſide. Our horſmen vpō the ryght hande, and the footemen ī the midſt. The duke of Aluoy did leade the vaward, and the Emperor the battayl. With the Duke wēt the marques Albert and his horſemen, and the maſter of Pruſe. And with the Emperour, the Duke of Auſtriche, and the prince of Pyemont, & the marques John of Brandē
               burge. The Hiſpanyardes, Dutchmen, and Italyans, moued confyrmably to the order that was geuen them: ſo they went in the vawarde & in the battayle. The Emperor marchyng, approched the firſte lodgyng

that I haue ſpoken of, and there he reſted a litle, whyleſt the batail was cōmyng. For now the vaward was euen at hande, and there he toke the duke of Aluoy and .xx. horſmē with hym, and rode vnto Ingulſtat for to be holde the other lodgyng nere thereunto.
            ¶ It is nedeful particularly to know, that the ſame day the Emperor ſēt the duke of Aluoy, the prince of Salmona, and Don Antony de Tolledo, with part of the light horſmen, and two hundred hackbutters Hiſpanyardes horſed, for to haue knoweledge of the enemies, (with whom they had a fayre and 
                  〈◊〉
                ſkyrmiſh,) the enemies being come forth therto with great ſtrēgth. But the ſkirmiſhe beyng the one parte & the other retired: they turned again

and came foorth, increaſing ſo theyr▪ number in Eſquadrons, that the Emperour was certified that they wer comming with al their campe, to battayle, ſo it was neceſſary to ſet al thinges in order. The Emperor cōmaunded the duke of Aluoy yt he ſhould take hede in al pointes to the proceding of the enemies. He turned into ye place where he had ſtaide the vaward and the batail in ye lodging aforeſayde being in the waye choſing a place mete for to fight. He ſette the footemen in place conuenient, and the artillerye and horſemē where thei ſhould ſtād. And ſo they ſtode loking for the comming of the enemies, which made countenance yt thei would fight. I thinke vnder correccion of better iudgement, yt if thei had come yt daye to fyght with

vs by the way, they might haue put all thinges in greate auenture, although we had taken a place fauorable ynough for oure auauntage. But it ſemed to the Emperour that thei would not fight that daye, ſeyng that thei had differred the tyme ſo long, for it was ſomwhat late: but the duke ſent him worde for to ſtay, for he thought the enemyes made a greate muſter to paſſe forwarde, but incōtinent he ſent hym word to kepe on the waye with his campe, for the enemyes beganne to retyre vnto theyrs. This varyaunce was a cauſe of the late departure. For the Emperoure ſeeyng howe muche more he ſhoulde aduenture in tarrying, then to come late that nyght, and howe muche he ſhoulde geue vnto his enemyes to geue

them one nyght, & parte of the other day, and ſpace to ame
                  •••
                th
                  •
               ir lodgynges, & that they had erred when that thei had not diſturbed our cāpe by the wai, he came (although it was late) vnto his lodgyng, whiche was on the other ſyde of Ingulſtat, towarde the enemies, hauīg the town vpon ōur backes: and Danubia vpon our left hande, and a marris vpon the right hande: and at the frōt, the plaine fieldes. The duke of Aluoy cauſed to be cloſed vp with gret diligence, the moſt part thereof. It was thought, if the enemyes hadde come the next daye, it myght haue turned vs to gret trouble. But they had ſuch a confidence in their great nūber, & ſo ſtoute, that thei thought al times & places might haue ſerued for to achieue their enterpriſe. For

the Launtgraue had promiſed thē of the league, that he woulde dryue the Emperour out of Germanye in iii. monethes. To theſe woordes the lordes and the cities gaue ſuch credit, yt as to a thing done, ſome of thē dyd geue hym more then he did demaund. And ſo he caried .iii. or .iiii. ſcore thouſande footemen and moe. Then .x. thouſand horſemen, & one hūdred and thirty peces of artilery, but that night thei ſtyrred not with any horſes abrode in the fyelde.
            ¶ The next day the Emperour prouided for al thinges neceſſarye, agaynſt ſuche thinges as the enemyes myght take in hand: but that day they made no mouyng nor ſtirryng at all.
            ¶ The other daye folowyng, he went to view theyr ſtrong lodgyng

aforeſayde .vi. little Italian miles from oure lodging, in a ſtronge place: for vpon the righthande and on the fronte, they hadde adepe ryuer and a marriſh kept with a Caſtel ſtādyng vpō the ſaid riuer, vpō theyr backes a great woode, vpon ye other ſyde a mountayne, whereupō they had layde theyr ordeinaunce. There was at this view a ſkirmiſh but it was of litle effect.
            ¶ The next day after, the enemies ſet forth their horſemen & fotemen in arraye, it was thought that they would come to our campe, but it was not but to take the muſter of their folkes. When thei had taken it, they returned to their lodging, ſithe the next day after they rayſed theyr campe from thence, and came with in three myles of ours, in a ſtrong

place emongeſt lytle hylles, hauing the water ſomewhat farre of. The Emperour was purpoſed to cut thē from that.
            ¶ The duke of Aluoy conſulted with his maieſty, and ſent Don Aluaro de ſand, & Arze, with one. M hackbutters, geuing them inſtruccions what thei ſhould do, & guides which knew thei countrey. And thei paſſed through a wood, and brake into the lodging of the enemyes, about one or two of the clocke in the nyght, and killed the watche & many other, before the campe could bee ſet in ordre. Thei gaue thē a great alarū & loſt but .2. or .3. ſouldiers, one of our ſouldiers had gotten a horſemans ſtanderd. I thinke thei were kylled with theyr owne men, for the nyght was very darke. After thys,

Octauiā with John Baptiſta Sabello, captayne of the horſemen, and Alexander Uitello, captayne of the fotebēd of ye Italiās, apointed with theyr men to geue them a ſkirmiſh, and ſo they ſet foorth the next daye, but the enemies apointing the ſame they had taken a place in the woode that was choſen by duke Octauian and his other captaines for the ſame purpoſe. But the enemies began to ſet vpon our menne in a barne, nere vnto the woode, and there was that daye a ſkyrmiſhe, but it came not to paſſe as it was purpoſed. The enemyes receyued loſſe by the reaſon of the hackbutters that came with Alexāder. There was on both partes ſlayne and taken.
            ¶ Theſe two Campes beyng but three myle a ſunder, and beyng

betwixt thē but a litle riuer, whiche in many partes myght bee paſſed, & the paſſages more nere vnto theyr Campe then to ours: ſo that the ſkyrmiſhes could not bee made but the one parte muſte paſſe by leaſure, al thynges came vnto this terme. It was deuyſed howe they might be greued, for tarryīg or not tarryīg ther: it muſt nedes be done, hauyng a reſpecte by what pollicye it might be done. But earely ye next day, they rayſed theyr campe in order with al their artiliery, the which they might eaſily carrye, the fieldes being ſo open and playne. And ſo in the morning thei wer paſſed the ryuer afore ſaid goīg ouer againſt our camp. The Emperor cōmaūded althinges to be in order, ye day begā to wexe clere, ye miſt did breake, ſo yt we

might the more clearely ſee them, & as I thought, thei wer in forme of a new mone. Upō ye right hand, there was a marriſh which lay vpon oure left hand to Danubia, and vpō that ſide rode a gret eſquadrō of horſmē & x. peces of ordinance, & vpon their left hād, did ryde one other with .xx. peces of ordināce, & ſo al their horſmen were deuided & ſcattred in the fieldes, not in rāckes but in partes, becauſe thei would ſhote of, & therefore thei ſet forth their artillery and horſmē. Their fo
                  •
               emē marched after in rāckes. On this ſort went the Lantgraue to fulfil ye promes yt he had made to the cities of the league. Oure campe was ſet in an order to fight according to their quarters as thei wer lodged. The Hiſpaniardes ſtode in ye front of the enemies, they

had ye mariſh vpō ye left hād. The Almains of ye regimēt of George dyd ſtād on ye right hād with a winge of hackbutters Hiſpaniardes, & by & by ſtode turning toward the ryght hād ye moſt part of ye fotemē of Italy, for part of thē wer in ye fort yt was made in ye marriſhe. Nere after thē euer folowing vpō the right hande, ſtode ye Almains of ye regimente of Madrucho, frō thē to ye town it lay opē, & ſo part of that ſpace was ſhut with ye timber of our bridges. And ye reſt was ſet with our horſmē in .iiii. eſquadrōs: for becauſe if ye enemies horſmen ſhoulde come vpon yt ſyde, our horſemen beyng ſet in yt holde, we might fyght with them. And likewyſe it was a conuenient place for the charge. So by the parte that the trenches ſtode moſt low: ſtode ye
               
horſes, & for this purpoſe there wer left ſome ſpaces betwixt our Eſquadrones of fotemen, the whiche becauſe for to be better vnderſtand, it is thus ſet forth in portrature.
            ¶ At this time the enemies began for to approche, ſhoting of their artillery, & with the order that they had taken to girde in our camp, frō ye marriſh yt was vpon the left hād, as it wer the half of the plain fielde lying vpon oure right hande, euermore ſhoting ſo nere, that many peces of theirs, & eſpeciallye thoſe that lay vpon the right hand, did ſhoote within .vi. C. paces of our Eſquadrōs. Our artillery was ſhotte of, but theirs had helpe by the diſpoſiciō of the grounde more then we had. His maieſtie had bene round about the campe, and dyd ſee what order

the duke of Aluoy had ſette. And horſed and armed as he was: he turned agayne and dyd ſtande before our Eſquadrons, and ſometimes he went amongeſt the Almaynes. On ye one ſide & the other there was great ſhoote of artillery, which was litle regarded, ſeeyng his maieſtye emongeſt them. There it myght clearely be ſeene in ſuche thynges, howe muche is worthe the preſence of a prince that hath a good oppinion emongeſt his ſouldiers. The enemyes hadde approched ſo nere, where they thought they myghte beate vs at theyr pleaſure. They made a ſtonde with theyr horſemen and footemen, and began to tempeſt on al partes with al theyr artillerye, and to beate vs ſo nye, and with ſo great furye, that verelye it

appered to be a ſtorme of pellettes, for in the trenches and eſquadrons there was nothing ſene but Gunſtōs and pellettes. The duke of Aluoy ſtode with the Hiſpaniardes at the poynt of the campe, where the battery of the enemyes was nereſt at hande. A pece wherof toke away a ſouldier ſtandyng next vnto him, as he was prouydyng for euerye thing neceſſarye. They made coū
               tenaunce openlye two tymes to ſet vpon vs. The duke tooke an order with the hackbutters to bee aduiſed not to ſtyrre, vntyll the enemyes ſhoulde bee two pickes of length from our trenches, for in this forte none of the ſhote of our hackbutters which wer many and good, ſhoulde be loſte. And yf they ſhould ſhote afarre of, ye moſt part ſhould be ī vain

Alſo he cōmaūded, yt the firſt ſalutaciō which is euer ye beſt, ſhould be at hād. The enemies did euer beat ſo yt it ſemed yt thei begā again: they ſette forth & auaūced their eſquadrōs, our artillery was ſhotte: but as I haue ſaid, ye diſpoſiciō of ye groūd did helpe ſo much, yt there was no great hurte done emongeſt thē. So hath it pleſed god to preſerue vs, ſo manye as hath bene ſent frō them, inſomuche that nere to the Emperor there hath fallen many Gunſtons & pellettes. Inſomuche that many left lookyng to their own peryll for ye Emperor. Eſpecially one pellet was ſo ſtreight & ſo nere, yt the peril was manifeſt, but it pleaſed god yt it tooke ye earth before his fete. An other pece kylled one of his garde, all other brake a ſtanderd, other .2. killed .2. horſes.

This was the hurte that was done about his maieſtie .vi. peces of ours dyd breake that day, one of thē kylled .vi. ſouldiers Hiſpaniardes, and hurt two.
            ¶ The enemyes preaſed vpon vs ſo muche, that they thought to diſlodge vs with their terrible ſhot of artillery, in geuyng ſhotes with their fury infernal. And for all thys fury yt neuer ceaſſed, there was not one ray brokē, nor any ſouldier that ſtirred his head to loke if there wer any more ſafe then he. This battery continued .viii. houres, when it ſemed that the enemies wexed wery, and to take an other way and not to come to battayle with vs, ſeing that we were more ſtoute then they had thought we had bene. His maieſtie parceiuing this, & ſeing now yt they

began to fagge: he commaūded the horſmē to retier into their campe, & to be al ready if neceſſitie ſhould require to returne to the trenches on fote. Here it may bee aſked, to what purpoſe horſmē ſhould be entrēched To aunſwer this: ye trenches were made ye night before, & ſo low that ye horſmen wer ſet in place where they lacked. And wher ye mē of armes of oure enemies mighte enter, there ſtode ours, for ſo it was ordeyned, yt if they came to fyght, there we were redy to defēd. Al the tyme of this batery, the duke of Aluoy had ſet forth certain hackbutters Hiſpaniardes: which ſkirmiſhed with ye enemies yt kepte their artillery, whiche did lye nere vnto a gret houſe prepared for to defēd thē .vi. C. paces frō our trē
               ches, ſo that at one ſelf time they did

beate with their ordinance, and our ſouldiers ſkirmiſhed with thē that kept their artillery. Nowe had they continued .ix. houres and began to retier nere vnto the houſe, and the litle riuer aforeſayde, where aboue nere vnto a mylle, they had ſet their tentes and pauillions. Now beyng late, thei withdrew thēſelfes where thei had pitched their campe, ſo that the point towarde the marriſh was viii. C. paces from our campe, & the other point vpō the left hand .ii. M. and .v. C. paces.
            ¶ This night the Launtgraue being at ſupper toke the cup (after the maner of Almayn:) and dranke to Exertel, ſaying theſe woordes: Exertel, I drink to al thoſe that we haue killed this day with our artillery. Exertel anſwered, my lorde, I

do not know how many be ded this day, but I knowe yt thoſe yt be alyue haue not loſt one fote of groūde. It was ſayd yt Ex
                  •
               rtel was of opinion yt day for to geue vs battaile at our trēches, but the Laūtgraue would not & as I think he had cōſidred ye better, for in ſuch thinges be manye aduentures, chaunces. And for to iudge according to reaſon, the mē yt ye Emperour had there, would not haue bene lightly diſlodged, & that ye Laūtgraue did know verely by experience: ſeing yt we had bene ſo furiouſly beatē, & that he could perceiue no kind of weakenes in our campe. For our ſouldiers ſtode not only at defēce, but thei alſo ſtepped foorth & ſkirmiſhed at ye mouth of their artilery. So it is ſayde that the duke of Saxō coūcelled to geue vs battaile

the other day at our cōmyng. But in the ende they tooke an other order, and that night it was prepared yt al the cartes in the field ſhould bryng faggotes to raiſe the repares of our trenches, and euery ſouldyer did labour in their quarters, yt in ye mornyng the campe was fortifyed, ſo yt we might be behynd them ſurely defended. And moreouer with this, the duke of Aluoy ēlarged our trenches with takyng in parte of the field, and ſet therin ſure watche and warde.
            ¶ The next day ye enemyes let reſt their artillery, & ſent foorth certayne hackbutters ſcattered to prouoke vs to ſkirmiſh, ſo we ſent forth ix. C. hackbutters, Spanyardes, they ſkirmiſhed with their enemies in ye plaīfield. The ſkirmiſh was ſo,

that our enemies were conſtrained to ſet forth a M. horſmen in fauour of their hackbutters, & theſe came in .iii. eſquadrons. The firſt myght be. C. horſes whych wente loſe dyſperſed, the other two came in order one after another. Our hakbutters were .iij. or .iiij. C. ſcattered abrode, And in the rereward came. 5 .c. The hundred horſes of our enemyes coming loſe, ſet vpon our firſt hackebutters: puttyng their truſte in the plaine fielde, in the whyche, for the moſt part, horſmen haue aduantage againſt hackbutters. But ours receiued them in ſuche ſorte, that they made them to turne fliyng, ſo that of neceſſity, the ſecōd eſquadrō came to ſuccour with a ſtādred of Guels, gyuing the charge vpon our hackebutters. But they gaue them ſuch a

ruſh, that they did breake in the middeſt and turned with the firſt. And ſo our hackbutters euer chargyng, came the thyrd eſquadron bearyng a ſtandred aſure, but they were ſo receyued with our hackbutters, that they brake & turned theyr backes whōward into theyr trenches. Many taried behinde, horſe and horſmē fallē in the field. A thyng to be lauded, It was praiſed of his maieſty, for verely it was not egal, horſmen againſt hackbutters, ſo the ſkirmiſh made an ende of al that day.
            ¶ That nyght the Duke of Aluoy cauſed the laborers of Boeme to the nōber of two thouſād, which be called the beſt laborers that can be founde in the worlde, to make a newe trenche, the whyche deuyded, drawyng towarde the houſe aforeſayde

wythin foure hundred paces, ſo that the cabbyns of the one parte and the other myght reache. Thys trenche had helpe by a certayne diſpoſition of the grounde, ſo that the laborers myghte be couered out of daūger. They had alſo fortifyed & trenched the houſe aforeſayd. Wyth our trenche was charged Don Aluaro de Sand, wyth hys hackbutters Hyſpaniardes, a woorke vnto the enemyes verye noyfull ſeeyng we came ſo nere, they were lyke to be dyſpatched wyth the contynuall ſhoote that we ſent from thence.
            ¶ At thys tyme the Duke of Aluoy conſulted wyth hys Maieſtye takyng an order for to ſende the Marques of Marnano and Maderucho wyth hys regyment, and Alonſo Biuas wyth his terce,

for to kyl and degule .iij. M. Suycheners whyche were lodged in the Suburbes of Newburge, for to kepe the towne & certaine artilerye left there by the Duke of Saxon & Lantgraue, but they were ſent for that day, & ſo ſeaſed the enterpryce. Another daye the enemyes in the ſame ſelfe order as before, came into the fielde and ſet forth theyr artylery, and furiouſly beganne to beate our campe, how be it not ſo nere as the firſt day: for the newe trench beſyde the houſe cauſed them to haue a more reſpect then they had before. Theyr battery was in moe partes, but they did not ſo much hurt. The Emperour heard Maſſe that daye in the trenches, and brake hys faſte amōgeſt the ſoldiors of Lumberdy and Naples, in whoſe quarter he

was. The enemies did ſhoote continually, but not muche to oure damage, being wythin our rampyers where hys maieſty was. There died one becauſe hys haulberde was ſtricken out of hys hand with a pellet, whych haulberd kylled one that ſtoode by. Thys day, his hal, & bedchamber was ſhot thorow of his tēt where he lay. Thus the enemies cō
               tinued theyr batery vntyl it was. 4. of the clocke. Thē the duke ſēt forth Alon ſo Biuas wyth .v. C. hackbutters of his terce, to ſcyrmyſhe wyth thē whych the enemies had ſet forth. He ſcirmiſhed ſo wel, that he gat the firſt of theyr .ij. trenches, and after he turned vpon them that were in the houſe, he ſcyrmyſhed with them vntil it was late, and then he returned to oure Campe in good order.
            
               ¶ This nyght there was geuen to the enemyes ſodaynelye a larum as they hadde manye ſythe theyr commyng, ſo that they were kepte wake, and dyſquyeted that daye wyth ſcyrmyſhes: and in the nyght lying in theyr harnes (as we hadde knoweledge by the pryſoners,) ſo that theyr impituous furour beganne for to ſwage. For nowe we hadde gathered them ſo nere together, that theyr horſmenue that were wont to ride within two hundred paces of our cāpe to ſpye, came not nere by a thouſand and fiue hū
               dred paces, for our hakbutters purſued them ſo nere, and our trenches and repayres beyng ſo ſtrong, that they were nowe forced to haue reſpect, and to kepe them wythin their

Campe. And moreouer our newe trenche went forewarde, for hys Maieſtye woulde dyſlodge them in anye wyſe. Here it myghte bee ſeene that he that came to dyſlodge, was hym ſelfe diſlodged. Now the trenche was driuen to the houſe the whyche we haue nowe gottē, wherby we myght eaſylye beate al theyr Campe: that there was no remedy but awaye from thence. The Coūte Palatine ſent at thys tyme thre hū
               dred horſes, whyche ſerued amongeſt the enemyes vntyll wythin a ſhorte tyme before that they were broken. He excuſed hym ſelfe, and ſayd, that he ſente them to the duke of Vertemburge as he was bound by a promes and a league made in tyme paſt, and not agaynſte the

Emperour: and that he cauſed thē to go parforce. Let it be as it was, for the greater nomber that were agaynſt hym, ſo muche more was the victory that God gaue him. Many ſcirmiſhes wer made in theſe daies, and many thynges done by partyculer ſouldiers.
            One day early in the mornyng, they began agayne wyth theyr artilerye to tempeſt and beate our cāpe, but more at large thē they had done before. Thys cōtinued vntyl it was late: then in their retier they gaue a notable peale. It is to be knowen, that in theſe daies they had ſent vs pelletes innumerable, of the which there were many loſt and fallen in our campe, but thoſe that wer foūd about the tent of the Maiſter of the ordenaunce, were one M. & .vi. C.

Thys night they had ſuch a larum, that they were all nyghte in araye. This was ſo ordinary that larums were loked for, the going out of our trēche was the entering into theirs. Now had they loſt manye horſes & ſoldiors dead and ſlain. And moreouer then thys, our horſmen tooke theyr victuales in al partes, ſo that they lyued in great trauaile & miſerye, and we neuer ſuffered them to reſt, but ſome tymes in the nyght, & euer in the day, they kept theyr battayle ray. Thē they determined for to diſlodge ſeing ther was no other remedye. The next night they paſſed priuelye ouer a lytle ryuer wyth theyr great artilery and caryage, & wyth ſo great diligence, that in the mornyng there could no tentes nor pauilions be ſeene, but onlye theyr

horſmen whyche beganne to paſſe, for they had ſent theyr footemen be fore, and deuided theyr horſmen in xiij. or .xiiij. partes, wyth certayne fielde peeces which went in the rerereward. In this order thei made towarde Newburge. The Emperour ſent out lighthorſmē to ſe what they woulde do: & thē with the duke of Aluoy & other knightes, he rode to marke theyr faſhions, whych to my ſyght was this. They ſent their great artilery and fotemen before, and theyr horſmen incōtinent after. It was a maruelous beutiful ſight to ſee all the fyeldes couered wyth eſquadrons of horſemen and footemē in ray, and ſo in two lodginges they came to Newburge.
            ¶ Nowe the Emperour hadde newes that the Earle of Bure had

paſſed the Ryne in deſpight of their enemyes, whoſe Captayne was the Earle of Aldamberge ſent by the Duke and the Lātgraue for the defence therof. After thys paſſage the Earle of Bure made toward Frāk fort, his cāpe was of power to with ſtād the defēders of ye Rine, but not to reſiſt, they being ioyned wyth thē of the leage. Therefore his maieſty ſent to enforme him how that he had diſlodged the duke of Saxō & Lātgraue, and that they had taken the way toward Newburge & Tonauert, which wai the Erle entēded to come. It was thought beſt to gyue him warnīg therof, he being ſo nere vnto Frākfort, doutīg that the enemies wold haue takē the ſame way.
            ¶ The Earle of Bure brought thre. M. horſmenne at hys charge

and .iiij. M. which wer come to him belongyng to the Marques Albert of Brandenburge, & to the Maſter of Pruſe, and to the duke of Auſtriche. The which not beīg of power to paſſe the Ryne, they tarryed for the cōming of the erle of Bure, which brought .xxiiij. baners, good Soldiers of the Netherlande, and iiij. baners of Hiſpaniardes which had ſerued the kyng of England againſt the Frenchemen, & ij. of Italians from the ſame warres, wyth ii. C. hackbutters, horſmē, and .xij. peces of artilery. The enemyes at the defence of the Rine, were. xxxvi baners, one. M. & ii. C. horſmenne. The erle of Bure ſet ouer v. M. ſoldiers one night .iii. leages aboue the enemyes, & dyd take a towne ſtandyng vpon the ſame paſſage, where

al the reſt of the armye myght paſſe wythout any diſturbance. And after at Frankforte was foughten a great ſcirmyſhe, where many of the enemyes were ſlayne and dryuen into the towne. Theſe newes came to the Emperour, but not wythoute great difficulty, ſo many townes of the enemyes being betwene.
            The Duke and the Lantgraue beyng .ij. dayes in Newburge, in which tyme diuers newes came to the Emperour, ſome ſayd they paſſed Danubia to enter into Bauer. And other ſayd that they wold take the way to Tonauert. His maieſtie determined to tarry for to ſee theyr fetche. And at the end of two daies they moued they
                  •
                campe, and in .ij. lodginges they came to Tonauert, leauīg in Newburg
                  •
               . 3. baners for

to kepe ye town. Here was one other great errour, for there they had one great, & a ſtrong lodgīg, with wood water, & al maner of virtuals, with the bridge at Newburge vpon the riuer of Danubia, a great countrei of villages & forages for horſes, & al at libertie throughe Bauer vp to Minique, thei were ſure of Lico the riuer of Anguſt wyth the towne of Rain, ſo that if we ſhuld haue gone thither, we ſhould haue had Neweburge vpō our backes: nether could he haue gone to Anguſte, but they woulde haue bene there before him: nor to Vlme, for they ſtande in the paſſage, but they looked not vppon all theſe qualityes, or paraduenture they had a reſpect to other thynges. They went to Tonauert, and as it

is thoughte by many to theyr great loſſe.
            ¶ The Duke of Saxon and Launtgraue, beyng at Tonauerte two or three dayes the Lantgraue went to a towne of the Duke of Bauers, two leagues frō Tonauert, called Limbygane, whyche was to hym yelded. He ſet there Commiſſioners for the prouiſion of vyctuals, he tourned to Tonauert where they hadde ſtrongly pytched theyr campe.
            ¶ In al this time wrot the Lantgraue vnto the cities of the league, geuing thē accoūpte of all thinges that was done, putting them in cō
               forte of moe thinges thē was done, in boſting of their ſkirmiſhes, with killinge and takinge manye of the pryncypalles (and thys he fayned:)

but in thē end of hys letters it was euer more for mony, which I think vnto them was not much agreable, for now the tyme drewe nere, that he had promyſed to dryue the Emperour out of Germanye, or for to take hym. But they parceiued hys buſynes, order and facultye, not to be as he had promyſed them, nor as they had thought.
            At this time the Emperour had knowledge that the Lātgraue had taken the waye to Bendengan, agaynſte the Erle of Bure, for ſo it was ſayd in the Campe of the enemyes that he wold do. He ſēt gides of the ſame Country for to conduct the Erle to hys maieſty by an other way, and it was determined, that if thys might not be, for to folowe the enemies, and for to encloſe them for

the one or the other was the reaſon of the warre, and not to ſuffer the Cāpe of the enemies to go agaynſt the erle of Bure.
            Nowe his maieſtie turned towarde the principall Cities whiche were lefte prouided by the Duke of Saxone and the Lantgraue, for it ſhould haue bene a thing in vain to beſiege them, and a greate parell to hazarde the principal part of our armie againſt the nomber in the cāpe of the duke of Saxon & Lātgraue, being now ioyned wyth the .xxxvj. baners whych had beene in the defence of Ryne, & as it was thought the enemyes erred yet in this, that th
                  ••
                being at Tonauert al this time and had paſſed Daunbia with .x. or xij. M. fotemen and certayne peces of artilery. Thei made a forte vpon

the riuer of Lico nere vnto Rayne, they lodged there as mē that would make an ende of the warre, in the place that they had taken. For with the paſſage of Lyco, they were ſure of Auguſt, and with Tonauert vpō Danubia thei wer ſure of Vlme: but they content therewyth, contynued a greate ſpace in ſpendyng of tyme in theyr lodging. At this time the Erle of Bure had paſſed Frākforte, he came by Rotemberge and nere Noremberge, out of the waye and daunger of hys enemies. Hys maieſtie abode in Ingulſtat for the tōming of the Earle of Bure, & after hys commyng, he rode into the fieldes to his cāpe, which was faire and well furnyſhed wyth horſemen and footemen.
            ¶ After that he had bene there

two daies, he determined to folowe the enemies, & firſt to Newburge, for he woulde not leaue ſo ſtrong a towne, ſo wel prouided at his backe eſpecially ſtanding vpon Danubia: a principall ryuer and ſo neceſſarye to ſerue a Campe. Wherefore he woulde go hym ſelfe to vewe it, takyng with him the light horſmen, & a nomber of hackbutters Hiſpanyardes. So early in the morning he ſet forthe and went to Newburge, where he lyghte on foote to take the vewe thereof. They ſent pellettes but to a lytle effecte.
            ¶ The nexte daye in the mornyng, he raiſed his campe, and cauſed brydges to be layd ouer Danubia, ſo that in ſhort tyme he paſſed ouer & lodged. j mile frō Ingulſtat, in the wai to Newburge, & frō thys

daye forewarde, our Campe went in an other order thē we had gone: for we had gone but in two partes, vaward and battaile: becauſe if we ſhould haue made a rereward, euery part of the .iij. had bene to weake for our enemyes, they beyng ſuperiour in number. Therfore our vawarde & battaile, went in euery one of them .ij. eſquadrons of fotemen, and .ij. of horſmē, for to be the more ſtrong whatſoeuer myght chaunce. But after the coming of the Erle of Bure, we made arerewarde. In this ſort his maieſty tooke the waye towarde Newbrocke, where at the firſt comīg, the Burgemaſters did yeld vp the toun. And the captaines therein, ſet by the Duke of Saxone and Lātgraue, it was yelded to his maieſty to do wyth the one and the

other according to his pleaſure. It was muche to be thoughte that ſo ſtrong a hold and ſo wel prouyded, hauing the paſſage & reſcue ſo nere, did ſo lightely ſurrender.
            At thys time the enemyes haue forſaken Rayne, onelye ſuſtainyng the forte vpon the riuer of Lico. Before thys tyme there hath beene dyuers opynyons that hys maieſtye ſhould not ſet foorth toward Newbrocke being ſo ſtrongly defended, but he was determined therein. He left two baners of Dutchmen, and ſer the men of warre in an Ile nere vnto the Caſtel for that nyght.
            The nexte daye hys Maieſtye wyth the order that he had taken, lodged in the orchardes & ſuburbes of Newbrocke, and there was takē the armoure and weapon from the

ſoldiers, where he myghte as well haue taken theyr lyues beyng Rebelles to theyr Prynce, he toke their othes and let them go. He dyd the ſame to the Captaynes ſaying: he dyd knowe that they were begyled. They aunſwered, not onelye begyled, but alſo enforced.
            ¶ Hys maieſty being thre daies in Newbrocke, he made a generall muſter, in the whych he foūd. ir. M horſmen, & .xxix. M. footemē. How be it, they had bene a greater nōber, but they were nowe mynyſhed by hurt, ſlaughter & infirmiti. After he had taken the fidelitie of the towne, he ſet a garyſon there, and after he would ſeke the enemies, for his intē
               cion was to finde thē in place where he might geue thē battaile. He determined to pas Danubia by ye bridge

of ye ſame town, for to make toward Tonauert, for it was ſaid that they had cāped, & that there they woulde make an end of ye warre, in .ij. daies, his maieſti aproched within a leage of their cāpe, where he came to a village called Marqueſē, the diſtance was not much, but ye difficulti was more, becauſe of a thicke wood ſtanding betwene the .ij. cāpes, hauyng no other paſſage but .ij. or .iij. cartwaies. This wood begā at our cāpe & extended vnto theirs, his maieſty cōmaūded to vewe the ward, to ſee by what poſſibility an army myght paſſe, & whether by the diſpoſitiō of the place the cāpe might lye ſo nere the enemies to make vs lords of the wood. He ſēt the duke of Aluoi with a nōber of hakbutters which wer deuided in ye wood, as it was thought

Then he wyth .xxiiij. horſes paſſed thorow the woode, ſo nere vnto their trenches, that he was wythin the ſhoote of a ſaker. The Duke tooke wyth him thre or foure and went on foote, where he dyd ſee the ſcituaciō of our enemyes, they were ſo buſye in labour, that they had no other regarde. There the Duke perceyued that the wood ſtretched ſo nere their campe, that there was but a lytle playne of .iiij. or .v. paces, and at the vtter part thereof, one ſteppe going downe, and a lyke goyng vp. And vpon the toppe of the banke they made theyr trenches ſo, that vpō the left hand it ioyned wyth the woode. This vallei ſerued as a ditche. Vpon the ryght haud they were fortified with Danubia, ſo that there was no place to lodge our campe.
            
               Wyth this relation he turned to the Emperoure, who ſeeyng that it was not poſſyble to aproche our enemies for the cauſes aboue ſayd: hys maieſty imagined by what meanes he might remoue them out of theyr ſtrong lodging, for being there and the woode betwene, it coulde neuer be brought to paſſe, but this warre ſhould be euer at large. Then he cō
               cluded that we ſhoulde go with our campe on the right hand towarde a towne called Bendengen, leauing our enemyes vpon the right hand.
            
               IT is to be vnderſtande that the Emperou hath trauailed muche in Germany, wherby he doth not alonlye knowe a greate part therof, but moreouer he hath a diſcreſcion and a vniuerſal knoweledge

of al the whole coūtrey, ſo that when nede ſhal require, verelye he doth deſerne & cōprehend the ſcituacion of the cities & townes, and how they ſtand with theyr dyſtances the one frō another, fo that it apeareth that he hath bene there parſonaly, rather thē by ſyght of painting: ſo that it was his opinion, that hys campe being at Bendēgē, we might be lodged at Norling, & there being, wee ſhould haue a good coūtry for victuals, & at the backes of our enemies, and a place wherby might be taken from them, al that came frō thence. Al the time the Emperour was in this determinaciō, there wer cōtinually ſcirmiſhes in the wood, by forragers, but no great ſlaughter on the one part nor on the other. And whē
               the dai apointed was cōe, the Emperour

cōmāded for to diſlodge in the order acuſtomed & beīg a great miſt we cāe to Monehū, a town in the liberties of Newbrok. The day folowing his maieſty diſlodged & cāe in a litter becauſe of his Goute. At his cōming to Bendengē the Duke of Aluoy ſēt him the Burghmaſters, which did yeld thē & theyr towne into his hādes. Now his maieſty was certified that the horſmē of our enemies appered after our rereward, wherfore he cōmaūded it to be reforced with hakbutters, for accordīg to the diſpoſition of the way, they were moſt neceſſary, & therefore to be ſet in place wher thei might be ꝓfitable if the enemyes ſhould take the way to make any other prouiſion. Thys day we lodged betwene Bendēgen and Norling euer kepīg this order.

The vawarde ſtoode euer in araye to the commyng of the battayle, the whych in commyng made theyr eſquadrons. The vawarde and the battayle lodged, they abode the comyng of the rerewarde, thys was the order in al hys warres.
            The campe of the Emperoure being lodged, did come knowledge that Norlyng had receyued .ij. baners from the duke of Saxon and Lantgraue, for the whyche doyng they did muche repent as they confeſſed after. In al this tyme the mouīg of the enemies was not knowē, but that they had ſet two baners in Norling that night. After the cāpe was lodged were ſēt forth light horſes for to ſearch the waies towarde the enemyes, by whom we wer certified that one parte of the footemen

were diſcouered, and .ij. eſquadrons of horſmen with theyr carriage, but no knowledge what way they wold take. This referred to the Emperor he cōmaūded the campe to be in order before the day.
            At this time came an other warnyng that they marched ſtreight towarde our campe, thys was a lytle before the day: ſo the campe ſtode al in a readines, and when it was day, the miſt was ſo darke, that it differd but a lytle from the nyght, hys maieſty was then muche payned wyth the Goute, neuertheleſſe he cōmaū
               ded horſmen and footemē to be readye in eſquadrons and not to looke for the breakyng vp of the myſte, ſo that if the enemyes came to fyght, they ſhuld not finde vs out of order, or if they ſhould paraduenture take

an other waye, and the place might geue vs occaſiō to preſēt thē battail.
            ¶ At this time the miſt continued ſo darke, that verelye we coulde not ſee the enemies, nor our campe wyth our eſquadrons, ſtandyng ſo nere together coulde not deſerne one another. The enemyes by the helpe of the miſt (which for a truth maye be called helpe) they folowed the way to Norling. They paſſed. ij paſſages before they could be diſcouered wyth our horſmenne, ſo that by. 
                  •
               ij. of the clocke in the daye, they had paſſed theſe two ſtreygtes, and daungerous ryuer, and gotten the mountayne going toward Norlīg. They had a great time for they wēt al the night, and after in the day in the myſt ſo cloſe, that it ſerued them as well as the nyghte. They marched

ſo dyligently and wyth ſuche ſpeede, that it woulde neuer haue bene thoughte that the Almaynes, whych ſeme to beſlouthful & heauy, would haue made ſuche ſpeede, but we haue ſene the experience in thys warre, that they can warlyke rayſe theyr cāpe in good order, & their cariage together with their artileri in place cōueniēt at al times whē nede ſhal require. And ſeing that I haue ſaid ſo much, I wil ſay more of that we haue experience of thys nacion. This it is, they can rayſe their cāpe (as I haue ſayde) and chonſe ſure & ſtrong lodging, haing a reſpect to al cōmodities that may be for a cāpe. yet ther is an other thīg that I note muche in them, that in their ſkirmyſhing, they come out ſtronglye & retier warrely, beginning with theyr

lyght horſes which they cal blacke, taking the name of theyr blacke harnes which they beare with ſieues of mayle, ſhorte dagges of. ij palmes of length, and iauelyns, with which they are very handſome. And as for theyr footemen, they keepe good order & cā take great aduātage wyth artilerie. They can breake victuals from theyr enemyes, ſet emboyſes, and other lyke feates of warre to good purpoſe. Thys was the dylygence of our enemies by the help of the night, & after of the miſt. Nowe his maieſty had ſeene our campe in order, and when it was cleare day, the duke of Aluoy came and certyfied hym, that he thought they wold geue battaile, for he had ſene them in order, & ready for that purpoſe. To the which his maieſty aunſwered.

In the name of god. For yf the enemyes would fight, ſo would he. Theſe wer his woordes in ſūme ſitting on horſebacke, for becauſe of ye goute, he might not ſtand on foote. He did take his curates & braſelets and moued the campe in this ordre.
            ¶ The duke dyd leade the vaward, & with hym ye Erle of Bure, with al his horſemen and foremen. In this vaward went al the fotemē of Spayne, and ſhortly after wente his maieſtie, the horſemen of hys houſe and court, and the bendes of Flaunders, which went with theyr ſtanderdes. There went the prince of Pyemont, to whom his maieſtye had geuen charge in thoſe warres, with ye eſquadron of his houſe, and the court. There went alſo Maximilian the prince of Hūgarye, with

al his horſemē. The marques Ihō of Brandemburge with his. The fotemē of the battaile wer the regiment of Madrucho and the Italyans: the rerewarde was conducted by the great maiſter of Prence, and the marques Albert, the regimente of George of Ranſpruge. The vaward did leade ſixtene or ſeuentene thouſād fotemē in thre eſquadrōs, & thre thouſād horſes. The rereward might be .viii. thouſand fotemen, & ii. M. horſemen in one eſquadron. The horſemen of theſe three partes wer deuided cōfirmably for ye neceſſitie, ſetting ye black harnes in place conueniente, & the menne of armes with their launces in their places. The rereward & the battayle went, (as it wer) egal: for why, his maieſty would honor the captaynes whiche

wer willing in ſuch a day to mete ye enmies in frōt, & not to be left behīd
            ¶ It is to be vnderſtande, yt before the breaking vp of the myſte, the Prince of Salmona hadde begonne a ſkirmiſh with the enemies at the commyng of the Emperour. It was ſo hote, that his maieſty ſēt the Earle of Bure with his horſemenne, to bee nere vnto the riuer, whatſoeuer might chaūce. Al thīges being in theſe termes, now ye battail of his mateſty, had made egal with ye vawarde cōming to ye ſhore. And ther he toke ye duke of Aluoy, & other captains, & wēt vpō a moūtaī where he might ſe what ye enemies did. In ſome thīges ther it did appere yt thei would accept ye battel, & come down into the plain, lying betwene yt hils & the riuer. To ye whiche they were

muche procured on our part, with a new ſkirmiſh of back butters, yt wer ſent ouer the water. But they kepte the moūtaines going toward Norling, and now their vaward had takē their lodging. His maieſty made the campe to ſtay, but now the Erle of Bure had proued the paſſages, with certaine horſemen, but it was ſtreyte, & trauelous to be done late and farre of the day. But this day it had beē foughtē without any dout, if the miſte had not couered the enemies ſo long time vntyll they had paſſed the ſtreightes & paſſages aforeſayd, feding vs with ſkirmiſhes to their aduauntage, for our horſes could not paſſe the ryuer in any order, & our fotemen wadīg through the water, ſhould haue foughtē with great trauaile, but they tooke an other

counſel: for they dyd take a lodging eaſy to be kept, with leſſe power then they hadde, but nowe as I haue ſayd: it was late, and tyme to turne vnto our campe, and the enemyes in the mountaynes, dyd the ſame. This night they loſte manye ſouldiers & cartes which our horſemen did take.
            ¶ The other day his maieſtye thought beſt to rayſe his campe, and to goe nere vnto the enemies, and ſo in the ſelf and ſame order as the day before, he went ouer againſt them & toke a place for his lodgīg one mile and an half frō theyr campe, where the ſame day was foughten a ſkyrmiſh of horſmen. In the which the marques John of Brandenburge with .xxx. of his horſmē did fyght agaīſt one of ye dukes of Brūzwique

which came with ye campe of ye enemies, he was hurt & after died of his woūdes at Norling, & other notable mē of theirs which wer hurt & ſlain yt day, & ſome of ours likewiſe.
            ¶ His maieſty beīg there lodged certain daies, ſekīg by al meanes to haue thē in chaſe, but thei wer ſo ſetled to their purpoſe for vitailes, that he did know it was neceſſary for to moue the reaſon of the warre, and not to lye cāping and leſing of time without anye profite agaynſte the enemies whiche were ſo ſtronglye lodged, that for to remoue them, it behoued rather to vſe pollicye then force: & ther about he was determined to worke. And thought whiche way he might take awaye from thē Danubia, the which was ſo neceſſary for both ye campes, yt to my iudgement,

a great parte of the victory did conſiſte in the geatting thereof, for the townes ſtanding therupon, be of great importance to be lordes of the bridges, for to goe into Beauer and Sueuer. And at this time, the enemies hadde al thoſe betwixt Vlme and Tonauert, and ſo they were lordes of great plentye of vytayles For thei had the paſſage of Anguſt at theyr pleaſure, then he ſeeyng, that the geattyng of them ſhoulde bee to their greate detryment and diſaduauntage, and that moreouer he myghte haue places neceſſarye bothe agaynſte Anguſt and Vlme, two principal heades of the league. He conſidred what was beſte to be done, and ſo he deuyſed in this ſorte. He commaunded a muſter dayly to be made agaynſte

our enemies. Thē he ſent one night duke Octauian, with the horſemen and fotemen of Italy. And Examburge with his Almayns and .xii. peces of ordinance: with al diligēce to Tonauert, from our campe .iii. leagues, geuing them inſtruccions what was to be done Wherby with great diligence they came vnto the towne earely in the morning, where they began to beate, without rāpire or trenche. And ſo with open ſtaling they entred. There went out fleyng ouer the bridge two baners of fotemē, which wer ſet there by the duke and Launtgraue.
            ¶ Now I haue thought good for to declare one thyng, whiche the readers may deſyre to knowe. How many ſouldiers be a banner .ii. or. iii becauſe I haue ſpoken ofttymes of

banners, and not of the number. A banner of Dutchemen is commōly of .iii. C. men or aboue. This towne gotten, they left theyr two banners, the reſt returned to the campe. The enemyes had no knowledge of this vntyl the next daye in the mornyng, for although they lay nere vnto our campe, it was done with ſuch dilygence, that they had no vnderſtanding therof. This was of great importunitie, by reaſon of the ſcituaciō of the place. In one day his maieſtye rayſed his campe, and remoued to Tonauert, and there lodged and the towne at his backe, vpō the left hande Danubia. That daye the enemyes moued not, for to geue anye diſturbance in our way, whereof I haue maruayle, beyng ſo gret a noumber of horſemen, and knowyng

the countrey, and the paſſages ſo muche oute of order, for in paſſyng we haue bene oftentymes in ſtaye and looſyng of tyme: and forced to bee ſubiecte to manye inconueniences. Howe bee it, his maieſtye hadde prouided agaynſte all ſiniſter chaunces. He ſette the hackebutters Hyſpanyardes and Italyans, in a place apte for theyr purpoſe. The rerewarde was fortified, accordyng to the diſpoſicion of the waye, whiche gaue no place, but to goe in range. At lengthe he came to Tonauert, and from thence to Tillingam, aboue vpon Danubia, which is a towne of ye Cardinals of Anguſt. There is a good bribge and a plaine waye, hauyng Danubia vpon oure lefte hand, and vpon oure righte hande, a greate

thicke wood, ſtanding betwixt vs and oure enemies, euer folowyng, vntyll we came to the ryuer of Prence, whiche is three myles aboue T
                  •
               llingā, & entreth into Danubia: and ſo we went, leauing the wood vpon our ryght hand. In the whiche there bee two wayes from Norling to Tillingam. His maieſtye takyng that wayes, there came to hym to bee ſurrendred, the towne of Ho
                  •
               hſcot, with a ſtronge Caſtell ſtanding vpon Danubia. Lykewyſe was ſurrendred the towne of Tillingam, whiche was taken from the Cardinall of Auguſte, wherin was a banner of garde, but thei fled when thei heard of his coming. He lodged that day betwene Tillingam & Londginguē. There

is a brydge vpon Danubia, and a ſtronge holde reaſonablye fortyfyed. There wer three banners, and that whiche went out of Tillingā. They were ſyted by the duke of Aluoy, for to yelde. They aunſwered ſtoutelye that they woulde not, for they truſted to bee reſcued the nexte daye, by the duke and the Launtgraue. But ſeyng the batterye prouided, they tooke an other counſayle, and in the nyghte they wente from thence, and tooke the waye to Anguſte. The Burgemaiſters ſubmitted themſelues wyth one excuſe that they had been conſtrayned by menne of warre, and not willingly, to do any thing agaīſt his maieſtye.
            ¶ At this tyme the Emperour had knowledge that the duke and

the Launtgraue were commyng ſtreight toward Lodgingen: to this he gaue credit, in ſo muche that the menne of warre whiche had bene there, looked for reſcue. He cauſed the campe to bee in order, and a certayn paſſage to bee taken, where the enemyes muſt of neceſſitie fight or turne backe agayne. If they woulde fyghte, his maieſtye hadde the place for aduauntage. And yf they woulde turne backe, they ſhoulde looſe theyr labour. Then for doubte of the one or the other, they ſette theyr enterpryſe aſyde. But al thinges beyng at this point, the towne of Langinguen came to ſurrender to his maieſtye, it was knowen of them, that not onelye they looked for ſuccoure from the duke of Saxon and the Launtgraue,

but moreouer that Exertell hadde beene there that nyghte, and that he hadde fetched awaye the fowre banners to Auguſte. Shortelye after Longinguen, came into a towne called Gunel
               
                  •
               inguen, ſtandyng vpon the ryuer Prence. The Emperor commanded John Babtiſta Sabello, with the Popes horſemenne, and Aldadano Aguilera, to purſue Exertell, and theſe foure banners with their two companions, and Nicholas Seco with his Italians, which by great diligence dyd ouertake Exertell, where they hadde a greate ſkirmiſhe: wherein was taken manye ſouldiers with three peces of ordinaunce, whiche they carryed frō Longinguen to Anguſte. With this, John Babtiſta Sabello turned

to the Emperour, ye which Ihō the ſame daye lefte in Longinguen two bāners, the Emperour lodged with al his campe. Whē he had paſſed the riuer of Prence, in a village ſtanding therupon called Sulten, three leagues from Vlme: for hys maieſtie woulde goe to Vlme, intending to take the townes, ſtāding vpon Danubia, for he beeing there afore the enemies, yf they woulde come to reſcue, the battayle myght bee to his aduauntage. The whiche he was ſure they woulde procure to doe, except they would loſe it: So he cōcluded the next day to part frō thence. But when the Campe was riſyng, certayne lyght horſemenne whiche his maieſtye hadde ſente the daye before, certyfyed that the enemyes were in gate. And then it

was neceſſarye to knowe: whereupon they woulde determyne, before that his maieſtye ſhoulde dyſlodge hys campe. He ſente foorth other to ſee what waye they woulde take. They hadde gone that daye a long iourney. Our horſemen had not diſcouered them, for being ſtraū
               gers in the countrey, it was longe before that they coulde fynde the right wai. Some Almains brought newes, but they agreed not all in one, vntyll the enemyes wer ſo nere that our ſcoutes hard their drūmes, and one part of their menne appeared.
            ¶ At this time the enemies were come ſo nere, that the duke of Aluoy being abrode, he hard their drūmes and dyd ſee ſome of theyr folkes. He certified his maieſtye, whiche

wente vpon a mountayne, where he might ſee the vawarde of the enemyes, with greate ſtrength of horſemen, and the footemen nere vnto a wood ſide, with certain held peces, wherewith the Launtgraue profeſſeth himſelf to be a great doer I doe not knowe to whom a manne ſhould geue the thankes, to ye Laūt graue or to his captaynes. But this I can ſay, yt it hath bene diligentlye beſtowed, as I haue ſeē. After that the Emperour had ſeen the trade of the enemies, he perceiued that they would take the way toward Guingane, ſtanding a league from oure campe. He returned to his campe, & ye enmies to their lodging. There was at this tyme, a ſkirmiſh, but of litle effecte. It hath bene thought by ſome that day, that it had bene good

to haue geuen them battayle, but al thynges counted and debated, the trueth is, that we had no ſpace nor tyme to haue ſette foorth our menne in eſquadrōs, becauſe of the wodes, and the ſpedye takyng of the yr lodginges. And eſpectallye the riuer of Prence being betwene both cāpes: and if there wer a faulte, the faulte was this. That our enemies were found after yt the dede ſhould haue be done. And this was through dyuers relacions of the ſkoutes: for when the trueth was knowen, the time was paſt.
            ¶ I haue conſidred one thing in this warres, whiche I haue diuers times ſene, that for the moſt part, we haue lacked good guides, although thei haue bene naturallye borne in the coūtrey, yet of a trueth we haue

gone groping as menne dooe in the darke, by coniecture, and all for lacke of good guides and ſkoutes, I cannot ſaye what is the cauſe except it he as Ceſar ſaid by Conſidio, a valiāt ſouldier and of great experience. Ceaſar ſente hym for to haue knowledge of his enemyes. Conſidio roode foorth and dyd ſe menne, thinkyng that he had ſene the enemies He returned to Ceaſar, and ſayd that he had ſene his enemyes. And that the mountayne that he hadde appoynted Labiano to take, was taken, and occupyed wyth the Frenche menne, and that he hadde ſeene theyr banners and armes. This erroure of Conſidio, was the cauſe that Ceaſar was all that daye in a ſtaye, and dyd nothyng vntyll the enemyes hadde tyme

to mende theyr lodgynges. So Ceaſar ſayeth, that Conſidio being afrayde, he thought he had ſeen that thing that he hadde not ſene. Now this is to our purpoſe, for oure diſcouerers, eyther they haue not ſene their enemies, or when thei haue ſeē them, thei haue had litle regarde, to ſay the trueth.
            ¶ The Emperour being in his lodgyng, the enemyes muſtarde certayne eſquadrons of horſemen ouer agaynſte hym, hauyng a lytle ſkirmiſhe as I haue ſayde, they retourned vnto theyrs, the whiche although it was deuided by ſlackes and runnyng brookes, yet they had a ſtrong lodging for their purpoſe.
            ¶ This nyght, his maieſtye ſpake of goyng to Vlme, but after

many oppinions. Finally, the nexte daye he did take reſolucion for the mouing of his campe: for why, he was certified that the enemyes had ſente vnto Vlme, thre thouſand ſuichiners, and xv. C. ſouldiers of the ſame countrey menne, ſufficient to defende that citie. The whiche ſo being, it was no reaſon to goe theragaynſte. Leauyng one armye at oure backes of foure ſcore and .x. thouſande menne, for it is cleare, yi we hadde left our lodgyng, they woulde haue been ſhortelye therein, where they myghte eaſily haue taken awaye oure vyctualles, for they coulde not come anye other waye. They ſhoulde haue been Lordes of all the townes vpon Danubia. Therefore the goyng to Ulme was reuoked, by the reaſon

of theſe particulers afore ſayde. For the manour of the warre ſhoulde haue turned from lodging to lodgyng, and euerye daye ſkyrmiſhīg, where unto ye enmies came continuallye. The duke of Aluoy appoynted to make them a ſkyrmiſhe, more then ordinarye. So the nexte daye in the mornyng, he made an Imboyſhe of three thouſande hackebutters, in a wood towarde the enemyes ſtandyng vpon Prence. He ſente the prince of Salmona with certayne of his horſemenne, to geue them a bayghte nere vnto theyr campe, and there he ſette vpon the Straglers, there came oute in groſſe after theyr cuſtome, ſome looſe, ſome in Eſquadrons, and the prince withdrewe

hymſelfe towarde the place appointed. There was a greate ſkyrmyſh with horſemenne and hackebutters, there were many ouerthrowē, and laye alonge in the fieldes, with the bendes of theyr coloure. In this ſkyrmiſhe they dyd much helpe themſelues with theyr artyllery, but oure hackebutters hadde the vpper hande, by the helpe of oure lyghte horſemenne. Howe bee it, thei charged ſtoutelye in groſſe, but there were of the principal horſes of all the nacions that ſerued his maieſty. But the order yt the duke had taken the night before, dyd not fully take effecte, becauſe of ſome neglygence. His maieſtye commaunded the ſkirmiſhe to retyre, to the which the enemyes were ſo wyllynge,

that the retrayte was all at once.
            ¶ Hys maieſtye parceyued his enemies to be ſo lyghtly prouoked: he entended to geue them a notable onſette. So he appoynted on a daye the lyghte horſemenne to aſſayle theyr trenches, ſo that by ſkyrmiſhes, they myght be brought abrode. He deuyded the Dutchemenne couertelye in tenne partes of the woode, and lykewyſe the Hyſpanyardes, and Italyans hackebutters, and all the reſte to bee in a readineſſe, if nede ſhoulde requyre, and moreouer certayne peces of artyllerye to bee layde ſecretelye. He alſo commaunded that the Prynce of Salmona with hys lighte horſemenne, to dooe accordyng to the order that was taken. Whyche was to allure

the enemyes out of their camp. as he hadde done the daye before. There came foorth of theyr campe two greate Eſquadrons of horſemenne, whiche woulde not for anye thyng that coulde be done, departe from theyr artyller. Aynd thys I thinke was for one of theſe two cauſes, eyther they had knowledge what order we hadde taken: or becauſe they hadde been ſo ſkirmiſhed with ye other ſkirmiſh paſt, that they durſte no more come in the place where theihadde ſo much loſte.
            ¶ The Emperour ſeing there coulde no other thyng bee done, becauſe their campe was ſo ſtrong, he procured to prouide for the night, a Cameſado, in the whiche he appointed the footemen Hiſpaniardes

and Madrucho with his charge. The great maſter of Prence, and ye marques Albert with his horſmen. With this Camiſado the next nyght the duke of Aluoy made towarde theyr campe. The Emperour was abrode ſecretelye in a place, for to haue knowlage from the duke what was to bee done. But when the duke was within halfe a mile of the campe, he perceyued theyr watche to bee reforced. He commaunded them to ſtaye vntyll he hadde farther knowledge, for then ſhortelye he dyd parceiue that they hadde warnyng, for theyr linkes might be ſeen from one warde to an other. Then the place conſydered, and howe it was fortifyed and prouyded, it was not thoughte good for

to hazarde vpon ſuche a chaunce. For after, we had knowledge that thei hadde warnyng fowre houres before oure commyng, by an eſpye out of oure campe. So the duke retourned to his lodgyng before it was daye, and the Emperoure at the ſame tyme. Nowe it ſemed that this warre was newe to beginne agayne, for the enemyes were ſo ſetteled, they coulde not bee remoued.
            ¶ Then the Emperoure began to ſearche an other entrye, but in the meane tyme we hadde continuall ſkyrmiſhes with takyng their vytaylles, and killing their forragers with larums in the night, which is a thyng noyful vnto all nations.
            ¶ At this tyme his maieſtye

tooke an order, that the Prynce of Salmona with his light horſes, and the Lorde of Brabanſone, knyghte of the order of the golden Flece, Flemmyng, with the Erle of Bures horſemenne, ſhoulde goe in a ſkoute, as the enemyes dyd. They mette with two great bendes of horſemenne, not farre from their campe, where was ouerthrowen, ſlayne and taken, a greate parte of them, a ſtanderd, and the ſtanderd bearer was taken. There was a chaunce, whiche I haue thoughte good to bee wrytten. It is ſo, that the ſame horſemanne that dyd take the ſtanderde, was belongyng to mounſure de Bure, whiche the ſame daye in twelue monthes, had kylled a ſtanderd bearer, and taken a ſtanderde from one whyche

was brother to this ſame ſtanderd bearer. This done, the Prynce retourned to the Emperour, after that he hadde ſlayne and taken manye of the enemyes, bryngyng a greate noumber of horſes & cartes, whiche turned them to great hynderaunce, loſſe, and detriment.
            ¶ At thys time the Emperoure determined to chaunge his lodging for diuers cauſes: one was becauſe of the greate infyrmitye and ſickeneſſe amongeſt oure ſouldyers, and alſo it was ſo full of mudde and mire, that oure artillerye was welnere immouable, ſo that we coulde not helpe our ſelues therwith: wherfore it was thought moſte conueniente to retourne to Longinguen, as to a place moſte mete for al thinges neceſſarie. In

this lodgig died ye Coronel George o
                  •
                Rauſburge, which in al the Emperors warres had done good ſeruice. At this ſame time ye Cardinal Ferneſe, nenew to ye Pope, returned to Rome.
            ¶ The Emperour departed frō this lodging of Sultan, with the order accuſtoined, and came to Lau gingam. This daye the enemyes made no ſhew, but with one eſquadron of .iiii. C. horſes. There haue bene diuers oppinions, that yf the duke and ye Laūtgraue had woulde thei might haue geuen battayle to their aduauauntage, for thei had inforced their campe with .xv. M. men of Uiertemburge whiche they call choorles, but ſuche choorles as thei bee, they haue of late geuen an ouerthrow to .xxv. M. Suichiners

Nowe thei bee in ſtrength and we lacking, for the Almayns of the ouerland and of the netherlande bee fallen in ſickenes, and of the Hiſpaniardes a great nūber. There could not be founde .iiii. M. Italyans, for the reſte were dead and gone vnto their countrey, but as I haue ſaide, the enemies made no demonſtraciō for to take any aduauntage of any cōmoditie that thei mighte haue for to fight. After ye Emperor departed from Sultan, and was lodged at Laugingam, he had newes from ye kinges brother, that he had the victory in Saxony, & that he & ye duke Morris hadde taken the moſt part of the eſtate thereof, the whiche for to be more ſpedelye ſignyfyed vnto our enmyes, or for becauſe thet did knowe that we hadde knowledge,

there was ſent a great ſalutacion of artillery.
            ¶ All the tyme that the Emperoure was lodged in Longynguen, he rode daylye aboute the campe, (as it is his ordinarye cuſtome in all hys warres,) and into the fieldes, for to beholde where the enemies mighte occupye anye place agaynſte hym, or he againſte them. Thei hadde been two or three times ſpying aboute a caſtell in the keping of the Hiſpanyardes, a myle from oure Campe, (but euer at ſuche tymes when they coulde not bee ouertaken.) When the Emperoure hadde diligentely conſidered all thynges, he ſoughte for to haue an other lodgyng, ſo that hys dooynges hence foorth

might take better effecte. He found one for his purpoſe, and after he turned to his campe, which was ſo full of mudde and mire, that our men of war were ſore trauailed & weryed. Wherefore there wer diuers opinions, but al agreed that hys maieſty ſhould diſlodge and to auoyde hys mē by garyſons, and ſo for to make the warre, but he was of a contrarie opinion, and that was to folow the warres, and thys was the beſt as it hath proued ſince by experience.
            ¶ Nowe being in our lodging ſo foule and myrye, that our cartes nor yet wagones could cōe in wyth victuals, he determined to remoue to ye other, which he had afore ſene, leading the campe in twoo partes, the footemē and artilery in the one parte, and in the other part the horſmen

toward the enemyes. This day I thinke that the enemyes myghte haue geuin vs battaile, for they had the plaine fieldes to come aga ynſte our horſmen, our footemen & artylery farre of. I dooe not knowe the cauſe, except they did not know our paſſage, in the which the Emperour was forced to deuide by partes, as I haue ſayde. The waye was of ſuche ſorte that this muſte nedes be done.
            ¶ The Emperour being lodged (as it is ſaid) it was a great pleaſure to al the army, in ſo muche that it was called in prayſe, the Emperours lodging, for it was diffarent and dyd excede that whiche we had le
                  •
               t: for there was muche wood and water, a ſtrong place and for the reſorte of victueles, commodious: A

mountayne vppon the fronte agaynſte our enemyes, muche lyke vnto the woorke of handes, wherevpon we layd oure artilerye, from whence we myghte ſhoote into the fyeldes. Vpon the ryghte hand we hadde a Marrys, and vppon the lefte hande a greate woodde, the whyche dydde extende vppon oure backes: Wee were ſo nere vnto the ennemyes, that oure warde and theyrs ſkirmyſhed ordinaryly. The Emperour commaunded to cutte theyr vyctualles, the whyche was done by ſuche dylygence by the lygh
                  •
                horſes and hackbutters, that all the waye goyng to Norlyng, Tynckeſpoole and Vlme, dydde lye full of deadde menne, broken cartes, and vyctualles ſcattered. And of oure part there were geuen

ſo many ſkirmiſhes in the daye, and larums in the night, that they could neither eate nor ſlepe in reſt.
            ¶ Nowe our campe being lodged in thys place, called the Emperours lodgig, our aduātage began for to appeare, & our enemyes to be more ſlowe in ſkirmiſhes, for they came not out with ſuch vigour, nor ſo luſtely as they had done, but our men aſſayled theyr trenches, out of the whyche they came but ſeldome times. Thei ſhewed only with their artilery what wyls they had to ſkirmyſh, for now with their gōnes thei begynne to make a forte, and many times priſoners wer taken nere vnto theyr campe, & they were not only oppreſſed in thys, but they began to be in great penury for lack of bread inſomuche that dyuers pryſoners

cōfeſſed that they had bene .v. daies wythout it. And moreouer that thei were in great feare, ſeeing that they had thought that the Emperor had bene gone afarre of, and yet he was returned more nere at hand then he was before, and with his campe he determined to put them to flyghte, the which they might wel perceiue, ſeing the place yt he had taken. And becauſe he would the more oppreſſe them, he cauſed a mount ouer them for to be takē, ſo that they might eaſely be beaten in al partes. At thys tyme the citye of Norling intreated to yelde, the which hadde: there did nede no other aduantage for to diſlodge the enemies, for one Gariſon beyng therein, theyr victuals might be taken, whereby they might be in famyne more harde and ſharper

then any artilerye.
            ¶ At thys tyme the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue wer at a conſent for to write a letter to the Marques John of Brādenburge brother to the Electour, the whiche ſhoulde be written in the name of a knyghte, ſeruaunt to the Electour. The ſubſtaunce whereof was, that the knyghte ſhoulde pray the Marques John, that he woulde ſpeake wyth the Emperour, and ſaye vnto hym: ſeeyng that he was a Prynce enclined vnto all reaſon, he thought it ſhould be good yt by ſome meanes peace mighte be 
                  •
               ounde, laying before hym the wealthe of Germany. And to thys they offered certayne capitulacions touchyng relygyon, whyche were to the great aduauntage of the Catholiques, but not ſo

great as hys maieſtye by the help of God dyd entende. Thys letter was wrytten by thys knyghte, called Adam Trope, chaunceler to the Electour of Brādenburge, it was brought by a trumpette to the Marques John, whereof he made relation to the Emperour, and by hys conſent it was anſwered▪ that if the Duke and the Launt graue would put theyr parſones and eſtates into hys handes, he would be content to ſpeake of peace, or els not. They hearing th
                  •
               s aunſwere, wrote agayne, ſaying: that the affayres touchyng parſons of eſtate, required delyberacion, wherefore they thought it good that he and the Erle of Bure, with ye duke, & the Lantgraue, might comō together in ſōe place apointed. The Marcas wrote vnto them agayne

by the Emperours conſent, the very ſame wordes as he hadde before wrytten.
            ¶ Nowe they of Norling ether by diſſimulation, or for becauſe they wer not of power to put out of their Citye the banners there lefte by the Duke and the Lātgraue, they treated ſo long, yt the Emperor thought beſt to take the vpper hand, and for to diſlodge the enemies parforce for being there it could not be done, but he was determined in anye wyſe it ſhould be done. So the next day we rayſed our campe. He cōmaunded theyr campe to be beaten, for ſythe that Norling did ſo tracte the time, he would take an other order. This was in the latter ende of Nouēber, in which time was taken the Lantgraues brother in law, by his other

wyfe which he had taken, for ſo they kepe the lawes which they fynde in theyr goſpels.
            ¶ At this tyme the Emperour had newes that the enemyes were vp and going, but this was aboute the middeſt of the day, for the Spie (although he was natural of ye coū
               trey) had loſt his waie, therefore we had no knowledge, vntyll they had hurnt their lodginges, and ſēt theyr cariage and great ordināce before. And at midnight theyr footemē began to marche, leauing in the rereward theyr horſinen and ſmal artylery, which were wont to go before. The Emperour hearyng of this, he ſent certaine light horſmen for to be clearelye certified of theyr parting. The certificacion was, that theyr campe was altogether forſakē. The

Emperour rode foorthe wyth the horſmen of Monſure de Bure, and commaunded the Dutche menne to come after, and the footemen to be in order and ready at the ſending for them. He commaunded ſixe hundred Hiſpaniardes hackbutters to be ſet forth as ſpedely as myght be and then with the horſemen that he had taken, he rode to the campe of the enemies, there they had left many ſicke mē, for of a truth that made great haſte. Then he commaunded the horſmen to followe, and to keepe them in ſkirmyſh. The Duke of Aluoy deſyred the horſmenne of the Earle of Bure for to folowe after. But nowe the horſmenne whyche were ſent to kepe them in ſkyrmyſh, turned agayne, wyth the ſtraglers whych they had taken of theyr rerewarde,

but theyr campe dyd keepe on the way, geattyng of ground towarde a hyll, where they hadde one thouſande hackbutters, theyr horſmenne paſſed ouer on the other part all excepte twoo ſtanderdes, which taryed thereuppon wyth the hackbutters. But when they dyd ſee his Maieſtye commyng wyth his horſmenne, bothe theyr Hackebutters and the horſemenne dydde forſake the hyll, goyng downe towarde theyr Armye. The Duke of Aluoye dydde make all the haſte poſſyble for to take the hyll that they hadde forſaken, from whence it myghte well be ſeene where they hadde taken an other hyll a myle frō thence. The 
                  ••
               nce betwene theſe two hyls, was all playne and dyſcouered.

They did lay vpon that hyl .vj. peeces of artilery, with the whiche they did beate al the plain fieldes. Now they being gone downe into ye valley, and the Duke of Alnoy vpō the hyl aforeſaid, theyr footemen might be ſene marching along, leauyng a great wood vpon theyr right hand. Their horſmen wer deuyded in the plaine, in .viij. or .ix. partes. Oure light horſmen did begin for to ſkyrmiſh in the valley, then one banner of blacke harnes was ſent down by the Duke for to engroſe hys ſkyrmyſhe. This was at the commyng of the Emperour with other horſes, but the enemies with a hye trot, had gotten ground on the other ſyde of the hyl, vnder theyr artilerye. Then they began to ſhoote of at our men in the valley, theyr hackbutters at

the corner of the wood, made away for to be with the footemen, whyche kept the ordenaunce vpon the moū
               tayne aforeſayde.
            ¶ Nowe the Emperour wyth a fewe horſmenne came to the hyll, whiche we had taken, for the other came after as men of armes might come. He abode there for to take aduiſe what might be done to kepe thē there, but nowe the daye was farre paſt, and the enemies being vpō the hyl aforeſaid, began to kindle theyr fyers in many places. And hys maieſty ſeing that it was not poſſyble, for to ouer take thē that day for lack of warning, as it is aforſayde: he determined to take the other hyll, and to leaue the Duke of Aluoy wyth his horſmē there. And when it was late, he returned to the other lodgīg

for to ſet forth the footemenne that night, becauſe the enemyes ſhoulde haue no time for to diſlodge. For ye Emperours determinaciō was for to haue thē in chaſe, ſo that he might finde one place to geue thē a brake, and vtterlye to breake their campe, or els to driue them from lodgyng to lodging, as he euer had done.
            ¶ Foure times in theſe warres the Emperour hath dyſlodged thē, & as it ſemeth to be, ij. tymes by arte and twoo by force. Firſt at Ingulſtat (as they confeſſed them ſelues) they were conſtrayned by force for to retier. The ſecond tyme at Tonauert, by arte in the geattīg of the coū
               trey at theyr backes, in takyng of their victuals and ſetting vpō Norling, a citye of great reputacion, and in keping of the ſame, & from Norling

he put thē an other time bi arte: for his maieſty did take from them Tonauert, and gat al the cities and townes vpō Danubia vnto Vlme. He did take away from thē the forward & waies to ſuch cities where they might haue any ſuccour or aid, being the principals of al the power by the loſſe whereof all their enterpriſe did ſtand at an aduēture. The fourth time was this: At Gangone where nowe they haue bene diſlodged parforce, & reaſon of the warre, as it may be euidentlye knowen by thys that I haue written. I wil not leaue one thyng vnwrytten, although it be but a Soldiers terme, it maye come to the purpoſe to thys that I haue ſayde. The Almaynes haue a ſaying, that when the Lantgraue doothe manaſe anye manne,

he threatneth hym ſaying: I wyll make thee to go a loofe This is the name of a town where he gaue one ouerthrow to one army, whereof the makes his great boaſt. The ſoldiers reken vpō this, ſaying: the Lāt graue hath threatned vntyll nowe, that he woulde make vs go aloofe, but for to paye hym withal, we haue ſent hym nowe frō Gangone. This in theyr tounge hath a propertye of grace in wordes amongeſt ſoldiers as Poyſes myllitar whyche hathe ſtrength and vertue.
            ¶ Nowe to tourne to the purpoſe, the Emperour returned to his lodging, and becauſe he woulde get tyme for the next day, he cauſed the footemen and artilery to be ſpedely in order, and then after a litle collacion he parted frō thence in a darke

ſnow. At two of ye clocke after midnight he came to the lodging where he had left the Duke with the horſemen and hackbutters Hiſpantards (as I haue ſaid) The footemē came diligently after, we dyd ſee their fyers that they hadde made, and they might ſee ours: but leauing their fyers burnīg, they wēt on their waies ſo that when it was mornyng they had paſſed the ryuer of Preuſe, taking there a lodging nere vnto a caſtel belonging to the Duke of Viertemburge.
            ¶ Thys nyght, Lewes Onixi
               
                  ••
               , captaine of Lumbardy, wēt for to ſee the doinges of the enemyes, who made relacion that he had ſene them, and that they were on foote & ready to depart: thys was referred to the Emperour whē it was lyght

daye, but the ſnowe which was fallen in the night, and then ſnowyng was two foote depe, wherefore our Soldiers were ſo weary and ſo diſperſed, ſekyng where for to warme them, that it would haue grudged a man for to haue ſeene them, and the horſes troubled wyth the euil night being wythoute meate, ſadeled and brydeled all daye before, it was a double trauayle, but neyther the tyme, nor the inconuenience, nor yet the ſtrong lodging of the enemyes, myghte ſuffiſe, but that the Emperour would folow, except he ſhould haue other diſturbāce, as not haue vyctualles, or not to haue lodgyng nere vnto hys enemyes, or for lacke of forradge for oure horſes, the whych wythout great trauayle then coulde not be had. All thoſe partes

beyng gotten and deſtroyed wyth the hoſte of oure ennemyes, ſo that thorowe theyr longe beyng there, and by the rodes that we had made, it was impoſſible for horſes to endure. For wee were broughte into the ſame neceſſitye, whereunto wee hadde broughte our enemyes, for they hadde the fruitefull Countrey of Viertemburge vppon theyr backes, whyche waye they made theyr muſter. Wherefore the Emperour beyng inforced of neceſſitye by famine moſt terrible of all other in warres, and moreouer wyth the harde and ſharpe weather, the enemyes hauing the forewarde, ſo that it was thoughte inconuenyent to continue the campe, but hys Maieſtye was determynes for to followe them, and ſeeynge vpon

the other part, that the wether was ſo terrible as it begon to be, he wold not they ſhould lacke meate, drinke or lodging. So that night we came late to the lodging with al the cāpe, which was neceſſary to all men, for we were ſore trauailed, but wee refreſhed our ſelues with victuals, & ſome reſt, ſo that we myght the better labour and folowe our buſynes afterwarde.
            ¶ This diſlodging of ye Duke and Launtgraue at Gangon, was the ſubſtancial pointe of the warre: for from that time foorth they were vtterly broken & diſperſed, as hereafter foloweth. But before that I wryte, I thynke beſt to touche one thing that in al this warre thei haue not offered vs occaſions, I do not ſay that we myght fyght wyth anye

aduantage, nor yet egallye that we myghte ſo doo, ſithe this being of a truth as it is, offering hath not bene euen in dede, but ſet aparte: for battailes be venterous, & as wee maye geat, ſo may we leeſe, as it is daylye ſene: If we had loſt, it is clearly ſene what we had loſt, if we had won, it was impoſſible to be without great loſſe of bloud in our army, & a great part therof to be broken, & the cities in Germanye being whole. So although we had had the victorye, we ſhould haue bene conſtrained wyth a brokē army to haue reſiſted a new power, and th
                  ••
                appeareth clearely, ſithe nowe the enemies be broken, & the campe of his mateſtye ſtandyng whole, now the cities of Germanye may haue a reſpect to that thei haue taken in hande, ſo that to my iudgement

it had bene a greater honour to the Emperour to deface his enemies, hys armye being whole then wyth any loſſe thereof. It is a common prouerbe, bloudy victory attribuite to the ſoldiours, vyctory without bloud, honour to the Captayne.
            ¶ Nowe to tourne to the order of my wrytyng, I ſay that the Emperoure lodged two dayes in thys lodgyng called the Emperours lodgyng, there he hadde knowledge that the enemyes were gone from Laugingam, and deuided in twoo partes, the one was of the folkes of the cities which did take the way to Auguſt & to Vlme, the other were ye horſmen of the duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue: & as it apeared thei did take the way toward Frānckonia, and without dout, if thei might

haue bene lordes of that prouince, warres ſhould haue bene new to begyn, for they might haue raūſomed many riche townes, & biſhoprickes, they might haue leaued a great ſom of mony, with great aboundance of victuals & good lodging, which be. 
                  •
                thynges ſufficient to ſuccour a cāpe going broken & traueled. The Emperor being aduertiſed what ye enemies intēded to do, as he had before ſuſpect, he raiſed his campe, & marched toward Norlīg in a troublous weather of froſt & ſnow, & in .ij. lodginges he came within a mile of the towne▪ to a village called Bo
                  •
               ingā, for this was the right way to Rotē
               burge, wher he entēded to be before the cōming of the enemies, & there for to fight with them by the way: it was eaſye to be taken the forehand,

for they roued farre about, and out of the waye, but his Maieſtye came ſtrayghte vnto Boſingane. The Burgemaſters came forth agaynſt him, to yelde vp their towne, and a Caſtel ſtāding aboue it, belongyng to the Erles of Ottingame, and the men of warre therein yelded to hys maieſty, howe be it they had made a litle brabling before.
            ¶ The next dai thei of Norling came to geue vp their towne, for the campe was ſo nere, that there was no other thing to treat vpon. He put therin .iiij. baners, for the. ij baners which were left there by the Duke and the Lantgraue, were gone that night to a caſtell, a myle from Norling, where they found other .ij. baners belōging likewiſe to the Erles of Ottingam. Theſe .iiij. baners 
                  •
               et

out ſoldiers to ſkirmiſhe wyth▪ oure mē that lay a litle frō the caſtel they made a coūtenāce for to come down but the Emperour ſent the Earle of Bure with his men & ordenance, & thē they yelded. The Earle brought the .iiij. ſtanders to the Emperour, let the ſoldiers go free, they woulde haue ſerued the Emperour, but he cōmaunded them to folow the duke of Saron & the Lantgraue. Nowe Norling being ſurrendred, and mē of warre therein, he made gouernor of the countrey of Ottingame, a brother of the ſaid Earles, which is catholique, he left the Cardinal of Anguſt in Norling for certayne prouiſion that ſhoulde be made there. He went from Boſingame to Tinkeſpoole, a towne imperyall and of the league, they muſter to hold faſt, but

the Duke of Aluoy was ſent by the Emperours cōmaundemēt with artilerie, & certain Hiſpaniardes and Almaynes. He gaue moniciō to thē of the towne, and if the artilery wer laid agaynſt them, they ſhoulde be geuen in ſpoile to the men of warre, then they gaue vp the towne. The Duke brought the Burge maſters before his maieſtye then being nere vnto the towne, and there being one day, he left two banners of Garde. He remoued thence, and in .ij. daies he came to Rotenburge wyth great labour and trauaile, the weather being ſo foule & roughe. They of Rotenburge came out againſt his maieſty the daye before hys commyng thither, offering theyr towne to him ſaying: that they neither ſent menne nor mony againſt hym, and that is

truthe.
            ¶ The Emperour had knoweledge that hys ennemyes were not farre from thence, and they intended to haue the Lordſhip of Franckonia, and therfore he made greate ſpeede to Rotenburge, where the waies might be beſt foreſet, where the ennemyes intended to paſſe: for now it is neceſſarye to vnderſtande that when his maieſtye was at Boſingane, the weather was ſo rygorous wyth froſte and ſnowe, that it ſemed to be intollerable. Wherfore the moſt parte of his campe, and of hys Captaynes (as al of a vowe) adnyſed hys Maieſtye to lodge hys campe in Norlyng, & other townes whych he hadde gotten vppon Danubia, and about Vlme & Auguſt: & to this they layd ſufficient reaſōs.

His maieſtye was of an other opynion, differing from his Captaines and to chooſe a way more importāt, which was to defend Franckonia, and to lye before the enemyes, that they ſhuld not lodge at Auguſt nor Vhne, for why thys was an enterprice, that if it myghte be obtayned, althinges might be done wyth more facility afterward. But if thei ſhuld be ſuffered to come together, and to recouer ſtrengthe in Franckonia, it ſhuld haue bene hard to haue come to any ende, becauſe the cities were yet in hope, ſeeing that their campe was not yet altogether broken, therfore notwithſtanding al theſe difficulties offered, at this preſent he determined to cut thē their waye, or to cōſtrain thē to take an other, where by they might be dryuen in ſunder,

and diſperſed. And this was a good forecaſt, as it hath ſence apeared by experience. For the enemies hauing knowledge that the Emperor was in Rotemburge, they left the way to Franckonia for to take an other on the left hand, and with a great rode, they made thorow the moūtaines, where of neceſſitie they left parte of theyr great ordinance, deuyding it by cariage into the Caſtelles of the Dukes of Viertemburge, beyng there by, ſo that when his Maieſtie came to Rotemburge, they wer. 24. mile from thence, being but. i
                  •
               . the day before. They go now ſo broken that theſe two heades, their guydes parted them ſelues, the Lantgraue went with .iij. C. horſes toward his houſe: and paſſing by Frankeforte, the gouernours of the towne came

to ſpeake wyth hym, as to a neyghbour and captayne generall of the league, & aſked him counſayle what he thoughte was beſt to be done, in time of ſo great neceſſity. He anſwered them ſaying: this that I thincke beſt is, that euerye Foxe keepe hys owne tayle.
            ¶ Lykewiſe the Duke of Saron did take an other way, gathering vp the reliques of the fyelde that he coulde catche. Wyth a great code he went towarde hys countrey, compounding wyth Albies by the way, taking of them money to paye hys Soldiours, for therefore they folowed hym.
            ¶ The Emperoure beyng at Rotenburge, and ſeeyng the ennemyes ſo altered, and that the tyme and place ſerued not to ouertake

them, he determined for to geue lyrence to the Earle of Bure, for to retourne into Flaunders wyth the campe that he hadde broughte, and that he ſhoulde go to Frankeforte, and procure by force or otherwayes for to get the towne, whych is great and ryche. Then the Emperoure parted wyth the reſte of hys armye, where the buſynes hadde beene in tymes paſte, but the great reputacion of the vyctorye, nowe made the warre in Germanye for the Emperoure. At thys tyme dyuers cytyes ſent to Rotenburge their Embaſſadours for to yelde, & other began for to intreate to doe the ſame. Hys maieſty remoued frō thence, whē al the cityes and townes imperial vnto the Ryne, and ſome of Suauer came for to yelde them.
            
               ¶ The Emperor parted from Rotemburge: and in .ij. lodginges he came to Hale in Sueuer, one of the cities geuen vp, and of the moſt richeſſe of the prouince, and one of the league: and there, for the indiſpoſition of the goute, he taried longer then he had thought to haue done.
            ¶ At this time the Coūtey Palatine began to treate as a mā repē
               ted, becauſe he had ſhewed himſelfe againſt hys maieſtie. Theſe treatiſe and rogacions, were ſo ſet forth, that his maieſty amitted hym to his clemencie: for at the ende this is the vertue of Ceaſar: ſo they ſaide at the beginning, that it might pleaſe him for to remēber al thynges but theyr offences. The Coūte Palatyne cāe to Hale to his courte, a day was appointed to come to ye palace, he was

brought into a chamber where his maieſty was ſet in a chayre, for the indiſpoſicion of his fete. The Earle came in with great reuerence, and began for to knowledge his faulte, and that he hadde offended, wherefore he did muche repent. His maieſtye aunſwered, ſaying. And verelye I haue lamented in extreme, that in youre laſte dayes, and beyng of my bloude, and broughte vp in my houſe, that you haue ſhewed youre ſelfe ſo agaynſte me in fauor of my enemies, in the aide of theyr campe. But I hauing a reſpect that we haue been brought vp together ſo longe time, and to youre repentaunce, truſting that hence forward that you wyll ſerue me as you ought for to dooe, and other wayes then you haue done, then I am

pleaſed to pardon you, and to forgeat all that you haue done agaynſte me, and ſo truſtyng that with newe deſeruynges ye wyl deſerue the loue and amitie wherewith I receyue you. The Earle ſayde he tooke great repentaunce in knoweledgyng hys offences ſufficientely. As I thought and other that ſtoode by, the teares fell from his eyes, in the mekeneſſe that he ſhewed. It moued menne to p
                  •
               e
                  •
               ye for to ſee a Lorde of a houſe of ſo muche antiquitie, and of the Emperours bloude, ſo honourable and principall, that whyte head diſcouered the teares in his eyes: verelye it gaue a gret force to his diſcharge: From thence forewarde, his maieſtye treated hym with the familiaritie paſt, althoughe he hadde then

receiued him with ſeueritie neceſſarye.
            ¶ Nowe the Lordes of Vlme make ſuche ſpede for to reduce thē
               ſelues into the ſeruice of his maieſty at the ſame tyme that the Countye Palentine was in halle, they came vnto the Palace, deſyryng to bee before his maieſtye. They were broughte into his chamber where thei founde hym ſytting in a chaire, and the Earle ſtanding before him, thei kneeled downe, ſhewyng a countenaunce of their mindes. Thē their principall ſayd in ſumme theſe woordes.
            ¶ We of Vlme make knowlage and confeſſe, the offences that we haue done, whiche hath been all in oure defaulte, and of other that hath deceyued vs: but nowe ſeyng

there is none ſo great a ſinne, but God doth pardon them which do repent: wherfore we truſte that youre maieſtie will emit, hauing a reſpect to our repentaunce, and to receyue vs into youre mercye, and ſo we beſeche you for the paſſion of Chriſt to haue pitie vpon vs, and to receyue vs into your fauoure, ſeyng that we do ſubmit our ſelues vnto your ſeruice, to ſerue you as true and good ſubiectes, with body and goodes as we owe of duety to ſo good an Emperour.
            ¶ His maieſtie aunſwered, that ye comming to knowledge of their errour was a great part to haue their pardon, and moreouer that it was a great ſigne (being repentant for yt which was paſt,) yt thei would ſerue hym truelye in tyme to come, as

good and true veſſayles to the Empire: it ſhoulde bee a cauſe that he woulde bee the more wyllyng to graunt their pardon, and ſo he admitted them to his grace, reſeruyng vnto hymſelfe that whiche was conueniente to bee done in their Citie, to the wealthe and quietnes of the Empire. This is in ſūme al yt there was done.
            ¶ Shortelye after, his maieſtye, becauſe although the duke of Viertomburge beganne for to fele the banners imperiall approche, and to flatter a litle, it was not ſo muche, but yet it was more neceſſarye that the Emperour with weapon in hande ſhoulde bryng him to obedience: for the Emperoure hauing at Vlme ſo nere a neyghbour

of the Duke of Viertemburge, that it was not conueniente to leaue him free in ſtrength, and to depart from hym to goe aboute anye other enterpryſe: for why, his maieſtye beyng abſente, it myghte haue bene an occaſion to haue hadde newes. For Auguſte beyng one foote ioyned with that eſtate, there myghte lyghtlye haue been ſome reuolucion in Vlme: for this hath been euer in a readineſſe, through the neighbourhoode that they haue hadde together with other neyghbours, whiche naturally be troublous, and euer haue deſyred to tourne his affayres when they haue bene moſte quiet. I ſaye this by the Frenche men the whiche Viertemburge beyng out of obedience of his maieſty thei haue had euer an open porte to

range about in Germanye. The Emperour for this reſpect, or for other, whiche he oughte for to knowe better then thei that knowe no other thing but that which toucheth their handes: he toke vpon hym the ēterpriſe of this eſtate, and ſent ye Duke of Aluoy before with the Hiſpanyardes, and the regimente of Madrucho, and the Coronell Examburge, and the Italians that were left, the whiche were ſo fewe, that I make no number, and to my iudgemente, the cauſe was this: that the continuall trauayle in oure campe, made that there lacked many ſouldiers of al theſe nacions: and moreouer then this, the ſlowe paymente of wages, which ſith the commyng from the riuer of Prence, had euer ēcreaſed in our cāpe, & yt Laūtgraue

hauing enforced his, as it is ſayde, yet gaue vs no battayle, as he had ſo ofto promyſed to them of the league.
            ¶ Nowe the duke of Aluoy is gone with the parte of the armye, whiche I haue ſpoken of, with the Dutchehorſemen, and the thre hundred mē late come out of the realme of Naples. His maieſtye came after with the reſte of theyr horſmenne, & the regimente of the Almaynes, whiche of late hadde bene in the conduite of George of Ranſburge, and nowe at the leadyng of the Earle of Maſſoulte. Thei went ſtreight to Alprime, a towne imperiall and of the league, ſtandyng vpon the entrye of the three wayes that goe to Viertemburge, the waye to that towne is moſte open and playne

for to carrye Campe and ordenaunce. The Emperoure beyng at Alprime, the duke of Viertemburge beganne for to make readye his buſineſſe, for by the waye dyuerſe townes were come vnto the duke of Aluoy, for to yelde. And goyng forewarde, they came in to obedience all, excepte ſome ſtronge holdes, whiche by the diſpoſicion of their Scituacion, were inprenable. But the Duke of Viertemburge, takyng a more holeſome counſayle, was refourmable to all thynges that the Emperoure dyd demaunde, and gaue hym three of his ſtronge holdes, whiche ſhoulde pleaſe his maieſtye to take, and theſe were Ahſbridge, a greate Caſtell full of ordinaunce and vittayles, Ruramberge, which

hadde prouiſion for manye yeares. The thirde is called Porendorſe, whiche was prouided for two thouſande menne for manye yeares, of ordinaunce and vittaylles, conformable to the ſame. In theſe Fortreſſes were founde muche artillerye of the Duke of Saxons and Launtgraue, the whiche they had left there, becauſe they might make the more haſte: and in eſpecially in this towne, beyng Ladye and the keye of the entrie into that eſtate, thē he gaue vnto his maieſty, two hundred thouſande Duckettes, promiſyng to be at his commaundement, nothing except.
            ¶ The Emperoure hauyng in ſhorte tune thus ſubdued the Duke of Viertēburge, hauing theſe fortes

in his power, and the countrey aſſured, he hadde knoweledge from the Earle of Bure, that Frankeforde was geuen his maieſtye, and that he was therein with twelue bāners. Two dayes after, came the Burgemaiſters of the ſame citie, whiche he receiued accordyng, and with like condicions as the other, reſeruyng it to the conuenient wealth of Germanye. The nexte daye after, came ſeuen cities together, al of the league, emongeſt the whiche were Menengam, and Quintain, ſo that before his partyng from Alprone, al the Cities of Sueuer, excepte Auguſte, were come to his obedyence: for as I haue ſayde, the victorie of the Emperour did fyght for him in Germany.
            ¶ His maieſtye parted from

Alprone, & did take ye way to Vlme paſſyng through the Duchie of Viertemburge, and in▪ vi. dayes he came thither, but thei of the citie had ſent vnto their Borders and confines with a greate companye of embaſſadours to receiue hym: and there knelyng in the fielde, they made hym an oracion in ſpaniſhe, becauſe they thought it (as they ſay) moſte reuerente to be ſpoken in the tongue whiche moſt naturally was his, and more tractable then theirs, they offred him their citie with their bodyes and goodes, as men determined for to ſerue their prince. He aunſwered them in Spaniſhe graciouſly, as they ſaye, ſhewyng them ſelues well contente, and ioyous to beare good wyll, to the which now they be come generally in all Germany.

In ſo much yt ye mē of warre call hym commonlye▪ Vnſer fater, that is to ſaye, Our father. Theſe woordes were ſpoken one day by a priſoner of the enemyes, brought in by the Dutchemen before his maieſty. He aſked him it he knew him: he ſayd yea, I knowe you, ye be our father. Vnto whō his maieſty ſaide: ye be villayns, ye be not my ſonnes, theſe good menne that ſtande about me be my ſonnes, and I am their father. This was a great rebuke to ye priſoner, and a ioy to the Dutchmē yt ſtode about him. Moreouer then this, with all other he is loued and deſired, for they that haue beene againſte hym in the warre, moſte parte offer to proue, that thei haue bene begyled, and not to bee of knowledge to goe agaynſte hym,

inſomuche that there is amongeſt them a principall Earle, which hath ſtricken hymſelfe ſeyng his own defaulte, and no meruayle of this, for the force of vertue is ſo muche, that it moueth them that be euyl to quarell well: and ſo nowe all menne eſteme muche more to bee in his fauour, then for to ſaue theyr goodes, whiche without hym may be loſt. I write as I haue ſene and know.
            ¶ His maieſtie being in a town belongyng to Vlme, came to hym embaſſadours from Auguſte, for there had bene geuen the earneſt of our Campe: yet although they ſent for to yelde them to hys maieſtye, it was in cōdicions ſuch as he would not excepte. For theyr ſupplicacion was for to haue pardon for Sebaſtian

Exertell: and yf that it pleaſed hym not, yet at the leaſte, hys Caſtels and townes myghte remayne vnto his chyldren. But hys maieſtye woulde not graunte vnto this. They declared vnto him that Exertell was in Auguſte, and that he hadde two thouſande menne and a great parte of the citie, with ſuche ſtrength, that they wer not able for to deliuer it. His maieſtye aunſwered, that they ſhoulde not nede to trouble themſelfe with that, for he woulde bee there ſhortelye and dyſpatche that matter. When they were retourned to theyr citye, with this reſolucyon from hys maieſtye, the people were ſo afrayde, that they gathered together concludyng for to yelde: and they of

the Senate being in the halle of the citie. Exertell came in and ſayde vnto them. Lordes, I can tel whervpon you treate, it is to be at a compoſicion with the Emperoure, but becauſe you ſhall not lette for me, I am determyned to goe myſelfe, for parauenture in ſo doyng, and other thinges that I thynke for to doe, maye bee a meane for to obtain my pardon. Theſe wordes ſpoken, he went to his houſe as ſecretelye as he coulde. It is ſayde that he tooke the waye to Suiſa. They of Auguſte came to Vlme at the days and howre appoynted, they were brought before his maieſtie ſitting in a chayre with all the ceremonies imperial accuſtomed. Thei kneling vpon their knees, one of them ſpake in this maner, fyrſte ſeyng the ordinarye

tytles, vſed vnto Emperours.
            ¶ We of Auguſt hauing a reſpect to our offences, and lyke ſo to the correccion that we haue deſerued, but knowyng by experyence your clemency to be ſo much, that al thei who h
                  ••
               e offended you, & after being repented of their errours, aſking you mercye, haue founde it in you. Now ſyth we haue repented with al our heartes, we be ſo bold to call for the ſuccour of your clemencye, beſeching you, that this whiche hath not fayled you in other, that it be not lackyng vnto vs. And ſeyng that we ſubmitte our ſelf vnto your wyll: we be ſeche you, that the diſfauour which we haue deſerued, may turne vnto fauour, as from ſo pitiefull a prince it is looked for. His

maieſty aunſwered confirmably as to thē of Vlme, fewe wordes more or leſſe, and commaunded them to riſe: thei came & touched his handes as the other cities did.
            ¶ After ye yelding vp of Auguſt, Vlme and Frankfort, there lacked but Argentine, of all the fowre principal heades of the Empire: but ſhe ſeing that Auguſt, Vlme & Frankfort, had obtained to be admitted of his maieſty, thei ſent to Vlme for to haue ſafeconduit for their Burgemayſters, ye which came for to geue vp their citie, & to be obediente vnto his maieſty. For now thei haue knowen that the pitifull victorie of the Emperor, may do more then the inducinges & promiſes of ſome other for their own ꝑticuler reſpectes, hauīg treated with thē of other thīges
            
               
               ❧ The cōdicions with ye which generally that he hath receiued the countie Palatine, the duke of Viertemburge, and other knightes, and al the cities beſyde thoſe which particularly I dooe not knowe, beyng league perpetual with them of Auſtriche.
            
               1. ¶ Thei ſhal ſet at nothyng al other leagues yt thei haue made heretofore with any other.
               2. ❧ Thei ſhal declare themſelf to bee enemies to John Duke of Saxonye, and to Philip of Heſſon Launtgraue.
               3. ¶ They ſhall chaſtiſe all thoſe ſouldiers yt haue gone or ſhall goe oute of theyr countrey to ſerue any other agaynſte the Emperour.
               4. ❧ Thei ſhall receiue men of warre in thoſe places, where it ſhall

pleaſe his maieſty, as Examburge with his coronel in Auguſt, ye Earle Thō of Naſſoult, with his in Vlme and the .xii. Bāners de monſure de Bure in Franckforte, with other cō
                  dicions whiche bee reſerued vnto a time conuenient.
            
            ¶ This warre hath tracted with this moſt furious nacion .vi. monthes: in all this time his maieſtye hath lacked no care, perill, trauayle nor watching, that for to atchieue ſuch an enterprice, hath been nedefull: in the whiche I dare ſaye (although it hath bene done with felicitie,) the Emperors fortune was neuer greater thē his induſtrie. For who that wyl conſider frō that daye that he ſette his campe, and hath ſene the enemies, ſhall ſee that he hath gone euer geatting of ground,

and in putting them backe, and alſo diſlodged them at Ingulſtat forcibly: ſynce from Tonauert & from Norlyng, with great induſtry. And after the laſte of all from Guinguē, by force and reaſon of the warre, where they wer ſo broken, that they loſte all theyr force, but onelye thoſe whiche duke John might gather together, for to goe agaynſte duke Morris. And the Launtgraue retired into his countrey, his maieſtye reſerued for a tyme conueniēt what was to bee done with theſe two in the meane time. For theſe thinges, & other like, he woulde take his reſte for a certayne tyme in Vlme, for to purge himſelfe there with the Pale of the Indes, that for his Goute is wont to be profitable.
            ¶ The duke of Viertemburge

came to kyſſe the handes of his maieſtye, offeryng hym eſſenſuallye, hymſelfe with all his power: he tarryed fowre myles from Vlme, for there he was taken with the Goute, with the whiche he is muche vexed.
            ¶ Who that conſidereth well the progreſſe of this ſame iourney, ſhall ſee howe manye importunate effectes were theſe fowre tymes that the enemyes haue bene diſ
                  •
               odged, and howe muche more it hath beene for his maieſtye to folowe them agaynſte the tyme, and agaynſte all other lettes, that haue been layd before hym. For as this appeareth vnto me, in this onelye dooeth conſiſte the accompliſhment of the victorye: for there hath been no lacke in tyme of enuious parſons,

to procure and to diſturbe the progreſſe hereof. But God that hath parmitted and wyll parmitte his greateneſſe to goe forewarde, for hys maieſtye with the ſame induſtry and felicitie that he hath gotten this Empyre, with ye ſelf ſame likewiſe, he ſhal conſerue it. For why, with theſe artes that ye Empire is gotten, with thoſe it is a thing eaſy to bee ſuſtayned.
            
               〈1 page missing〉
            
            
            had ſente, that he hadde no tyme for to take anye reſt in Vlme, but muſt begynnne for to take an order for a newe enterpriſe, whiche was as neceſſarye to haue hys parſon, as that whiche was paſt. For duke John with the menne that he hadde gathered, had recouered his eſtate, al excepte onely Subiſa, nor he hadde left duke Morris but Triſſen and Lipſia, whiche he kept with ſtrong hand, ſo yt it might be ſayde yt he dyd hold Saxonie & Boeme in ſuch ſort, yt thei cōfeſſed him to be their frend without any remembrance of their kyng. But for the duke all yt myght bee done, they were ſo ſhameleſſe that with one honeſte diſſimulacion they did take and kepe by force the Caſtel of Prage.
            ¶ When the Emperour had ſet

all thinges in a readineſſe at Vlme, he did take vpon him this new trauaile of his parſon, and ſent .viii. baners of fotemē, and .viii. C. horſes, with the marques Albert of Brandemburge, which had alſo with him one. M horſes. And other .viii. banners alſo. He ſent Pence whiche be the ſinowes of the warre, if theſe ſhould ioyne with ye king and duke Morris, thei might be ſuperiour to the duke John, al thinges framing as it was prepared, for the more as herafter foloweth: for it was otherwaies ꝓuided for ye king then he had thought. The Emperor ſent downe Aluaro de Sāde, maſter of ye campe with his terce Hiſpaniardes, ye marques of Marnā with 8. banners of dutchmē, but thei wer cōmaūded to tary, for ye affaires of Saxonye bee

come vnto this, that of neceſſitye he muſte goe parſonally in this warre: and he determined not to pardon anye of his labour or trauayle therein, ſeing howe it did ſtande, not onlye to the kyng and duke Morris, but alſo to all Germanye: for that fyer lefte burnyng, it might kindle ſo, that the victory paſte might haue been conſumed and broughte into the termes that it was before. This conſidered, the Emperour departed from Vlme, when he had prouided for the footemenne of Spaine, to parte from their lodgyng with the ordinaunce that he had in Vlme.
            ¶ The duke of Viertemburge becauſe of his infyrmitie, myghte not come when he was appoynted: but nowe beyng amended, he came the ſame daye that the Emperour

parted from Vlme, to dooe his obedience as a Prynce vanquiſhed oughte for to dooe vnto his vanquiſher and Lorde. Heabode in the halle vntill his maieſtye hadde dyned, ſittyng in a Chayre, wherein he was broughte with fowre menne (for it coulde bee no other wayes.) The Emperour paſſed by, but he ſaw him not, but the duke dyd beholde him ſtyll. The Emperoure dyd ſette hym downe with the Ceremonies accuſtomed. The Marſhall of the Empyre ſtoode by with a naked ſweorde, the Chauncelour of the duke and all his counſayle knelyng vpon theyr knees. Then after the ordinarye tytles declared to the Emperoure, in the name of his mayſter he ſayde theſe woordes,
            
               ¶ I with all humilitie according vnto my duetie, preſent myſelf before your maieſtie, and openly cō
               feſſe that I haue greuouſly offēded in theſe warres paſt, & that I haue deſerued all the indignacion that ye haue hadde agaynſte me: wherefore I am ſorowfull, and repent as it is reaſon, and come humbly to beſeche your maieſty for the mercy of god, and for the natural inclinacion of your maieſty, to pardon and to receiue me into your grace: for onelye you and no other I acknowlage for to be my natural and ſupreme lorde vnto whom I promes in al partes to ſerue with al mine, as an obedient prince, veſſel and ſubiect, with obedient ſubieccion and thankes according vnto my duetie for to deſerue the moſt greateſt grace which

I nowe receiue. And moreouer I offre to accompliſh and faithfully to fulfill all the Chapters whiche hys maieſtie hath geuen me.
            ¶ The Chauncellour of ye Emperour at his commaundement anſwered the maieſty of Ceſar. Moſt pietiful Lord, vnderſtanding this, that the duke Vldrike of Vtertemburge hath humbly proponed, and ſeyng his repentaunce, and that he openlye confeſſeth his greuous offences agaīſt his maieſty, and how woorthilye he hath deſerued his indignacion hauing a reſpecte that he hath bewayled, and that for, & in the name of the mercye of God he aſketh hys pardon, his maieſty Ceaſaria for the honor of God, & by hys naturall clemēcy, & becauſe ye poore

people which haue not offēded ſhall not ſuffer, he is contente to forgeat all the indignacion that he hath had agaynſte the duke of Viertemburge, vpon condicion that he obſerue and kepe al thynges which he hath offred, and is bound to parfourme. The duke of Viertēburge gaue great thankes to his maieſtye, promiſing for to bee euermore hys moſt faithfull, the duke ſittīg barehead in a chayre, for his Embaſſadours wer ſent before to beſech hys maieſty that he might come as hys infirmitie permitted, for on foote nor vpō his knees (although it was to aſke pardō) it might not be. This was to them of Vlme a great admiracion, ſeeyng theyr myghtye neyghboure ſo call for pardon. This paſſed, his maieſtye did take

his iourney toward Gāgon, where the enemyes had lodged: he dyd ſee theyr nomber and parceyued howe thei had forti
                  •
               ied the place where he had thought for to haue geuen the Camiſado, where they myght haue had a great aduātage. He went trō thence to Norling, where he was taken wyth the goute, ſo that it was thought that he ſhoulde not be able for to ryde of long tyme, but there was ſuch diligence with al thynges that might be found for his health, that he began to amende and was able to walke.
            ¶ At this time John Frederike duke of Saxon had encreaſed his campe, and began to be a lord ouer all, for he had taken the Marques Albert in this ſorte. The Marques was in a place called Rockeles, for

they which kept the warres againſt the duke John, were ſet in fronte againſt him. Duke Morres was in Frayberge, the king of Romaynes in Treſſon, ye Marques Albet with x. baners & .viij. C. horſemen in the place aforeſaid. Moreouer they had furniſhed Suybiſa and Lipſia, the which had bene a litle before aſſayled: but it was ſo well defended by the ſoldiers, that his aſſaultes were al in vayne. This towne of Rokelez was belonging to a Lady, widdow and ſiſter to the Lātgraue, ye whiche did entertaine the Marques Albert with daunces & bankettes after the cuſtome of Almayne, ſhewyng ſo great amitie, that he became more neglygent then a good Capytayne oughte for to be in the warres. And on the other parte ſhe aduyſed the

duke of Saron being in garde .iij. leagues from thence, wyth .j. bende of horſmen, and ſyxe baners of foote men, whych on the other daye dylygentlye and earlye in the mornyng came vpon the Marques Alberte, which would in any wyſe fyghte in the playne fieldes, and there he was taken fyghtyng more lyke a valyaunt knyghte then a politique Captayne.
            ¶ There haue beene dyuers opinions, for ſome dooe ſaye that the place might not be defended. Other ſaye, that if he hadde taryed there, the duke Morres being nere thereby wyth hys horſmen myghte haue reſcued hym. Other ſay, i
                  •
                he hadde kepte the foure banuers whyche he lodged in the Bourawghe, he hadde not hadde the ouerthrowe:

but for al theſe opinions it came to this, that he loſt .v. C. horſes kylled and taken, and many of the reſt wēt to the Duke of Saxon, which had gotten al the baners of the footemē: other wer taken and ſworne, not for to ſerue agaynſte hym as is the cuſtome of Almayne. The Marques was broughte to Gotte, a ſtronge holde of the Dukes.
            ¶ Nowe after thys victorye, it was thoughte that he woulde haue gone againſt the Duke Morres, he being ſo nere at hande: but leauyng them in Frabrige, he began to haue a reſpect concerning the affayres in Boemia: he ſent Thumſern with vj. C. horſmen and .xij. baners, they being at thys tyme lordes & Gouernours of the vale Laquimiſtal, thorowe the good wyll and diſſimulacion

of the Be
                  •
               moſe, for this diſſimulacion was the foundacion of al his caſt and compaſſe. Thys referred vnto the Emperoure, he ſeeing that the king and duke Morres ſuſtained theſe warres in the keeping of the principal holdes, and that thei ſet not forth of them for to attempte theyr fortune: He ſet forth in haſte from Norling, where a litle before had bene the Burgemaiſters of Argentine, a riche and mighty city, as it is ſaide, and there they ſubmytted them ſelues to be vnder the obedyence of his maieſty, with ſuch cōdicions as it hath pleaſed hys maieſtye to accepte them, whiche was neuer grāted to any emperor in time paſt.
            
               1. Firſt that they ſhould forſake al the leagues which they had made taking a othe not for to enter into anye,

where the houſe of Auſtriche was not the firſt.
               2. And to chaſtiſe al thoſe ſoldyers of theyr citye that hath beene againſt his maieſty.
               3. Laying a greuous payne vp on al them that ſhal go againſt him hereafter.
               4. And to caſt out of their citye al rebels & offendours againſt hys maieſty. Amongeſt the which there was one captayne generall, whoſe name was William, the Erle of Fuſtēberge, who excuſed him ſelfe with al dylygence and iuſtificacions that myghte be.
               5. Thei deliuered vnto his maieſty al theyr artilery and municion at hys pleaſure, as other cities had done, with other particulers whych I dooe omytte to wryte, becauſe I

wyll followe the breuitye that I haue begon, ſythe it may be ſet forth more at large: in ſomuche that the Emperour hath opened to them ſo large a fielde that they may wel extende theyr ſubtil ſtile how great ſo euer they be. I enſure you they ſhal remaine inferiours in the matter.
            
            ¶ Nowe the Emperour parted from Norling, he dyd take the way to Newrēberge with .ii. regimentes of Almaines, of the olde Soldiers of the Marques of Marenan, and of Illeprande, the whyche a lyttle before the departyng of the Emperoure from Vlme, he died of a burnyng Agewe. The Emperour loſte in hym a good ſeruaunt, and a ſoldyer of greate experyence, and of greate reputacion in Almayne, beſyde theeſe twoo Regymentes.

He commaunded an other whyche was made and ſet forth by a knight of Sucuer, called Hanſe Walter, he had alſo the leading of the footemē of Spaine, and the men of Armes of Naples, with .vj. C. light horſes, and a. M. Dutche horſemen belonging to ye Taichemaſter, and to the Marques John, and to the Duke of Auſtriche.
            ¶ The Emperor had ſent before, the Duke of Aluoy, which had lodged his campe about Newrēberge, except certaine baners which taryed to wayte vpon his maieſty. The Duke being at Newrēberge prepared al thinges neceſſary for the Emperours cōming, leauing there .viij. baners as it required for the Emperours authoritye. And it was neceſſarye: for although the nobles of the

countrey he muche imperial, yet the multitude of the people, which be a great nomber, and many tymes furious, and worthy to be brideled as thē they were: The Emperour was receiued into theyr citye with great demonſtracion of pleaſure, he was lodged in the caſtell for the ſpace of v. or .vj. daies for the aſſembling of hys campe, and for to recouer hys healthe, for yet hys indiſpoſicions were not all quieted.
            ¶ Who well conſydereth thys warre, it ſeemeth to be all one, thys preſent being a braūche of the other whyche is paſt, in ſome caſe there is reaſon, but to my iudgement it is not one warre: for the firſt the Emperour hath finiſhed in the defactiō of the mighty power in the campe of the league. The cities thereof rendered,

& ſome of theyr greateſt princes: ſo yt as cōcerning this warre of ye league, it ſemeth to be ended. The other of Saxoni (although the duke was therein) it is not to be accompted for a member, but the head and principal of the other, ſo parilous, yt it was neceſſary for to haue the coū
               ſaile accōpanied with the determinacion & the hardines of the Emperor.
            ¶ I wyll not make any boaſt of hys doynges, for they be ſo great of them ſelues, that it ſhoulde be euyll done of me if I ſhoulde make payment (becauſe he hath broughte me vp in his houſe) wyth any leſynges, although I acquite it with theſe trauayles, beyng ſo worthye, that they bring with thē admirations: ſo that al men may meruel, neither wyll I diſpraiſe the the enemies, althoughe

the Emperour who hath ouercome them, ſemeth to be greater: but to ſay the truthe, ſythe I am a wytnes, for there was nothing done but I haue bene nere vnto hym frō Newremberge, which was the way the Emperour did take for to mete with the king and duke Moreys at ye towne of Egner, where by oportunitie of the place, it was apoynted for to make the A maſſe of the warres, & that the kyng ſhoulde be there wyth hys horſmen and certayne banners of footemen, and bryng wyth hym duke Morres with his nomber, for ſo it was determined, & the time appointed to be done. The king parted frō Treſſen, a towne belongyng to Duke Morres, and to the Duke of Fra
                  •
               brige, & leauing the ſtrength of the enemies vpon the ryght hande:

They entered into Boeme, for to come ouer the mountaines, wherewith it is al enuironed, and to ioyne with the Emperour in Egner, but the Boemoſe made a muſter then of their intēcions, declaring that the great truſte was not in vayne that the Duke of Saxon had in thē, the why▪ he extended ſo that it was the cauſe of manye opinions, whiche I dooe not wryte, becauſe I dooe not know ſo much of a truth as it requireth to be wrytten.
            ¶ Nowe the Emperour beyng iij. iourneys from Newremberge, there came a Gentleman from the kynge of Romaynes wyth knoweledge, that ſithe that the king & duke Morres were entred into Boeme with theyr horſemen and footemen: A knight of the countrey had gathered

a great nomber to cut down the woodes in dyuers partes to ſtoppe the paſſages and the waies, by the whyche the kyng was purpoſed to come to Egner: wherefore he muſt go about thorow the mountaines & the caſtels belōging to the knightes there being with him. Wherefore he required a nomber of hackbutters Hyſpanyardes for to paſſe more ſtrongly, and for to haue the Lordſhyp of the wood. The Emperoure prouided for al thinges conuenient, albeit that after it was no neede to haue the Hyſpaniardes in thys paſſage, for the knightes of the country whyche were come to ſerue, didde ſo muche, that they wer al broken and diſparſed. Thys knyght of Boeme came not wyth the men whyche he had aſſembled, hys name is Gaſper

Flucke, a principal man in that coū
               trey, from whō in tyme paſt the king had taken landes and goodes (and notwithout deſeruing) and ſence liberally he gaue them to him again: but it ſeemeth that he hath remembred more the takyng then the geuing thankes for the gyfte, for it is euer the fyrſt poynt of ingratitude, to forgeat benefytes receyued.
            ¶ It is ſayd that theſe knightes whyche mette together for to defende thys paſſage, hadde made a bancket, and after caſte lottes who ſhoulde be theyr Captayne Generall. They dydde take ſuche an order, that it fell to Gaſper Flucke, and not for that he was more apte then the other for thys charge, but becauſe he was moſte in power for to furnyſhe wyth men and money;

or elles it myghte be that they dydde it, becauſe that if theyr enterpryſe ſhoulde not haue good ſucceſſe, euerye manne woulde rather ſee the paryll vppon the head of an other, then vppon hys owne. But let it be as it was, for the moſt parte of that kyngdome made a ruynous demonſtracion againſt their prince.
            ¶ Now is the king of Romaines paſſed by the Caſtels aforſayde, the Emperoure was commyng three leagues from Egner, the which is a citye of the kyngdome of Boeme, ſtanding vpon the borders of Saxoni, but it is out of the mountaines: for Boemeis cōpaſſed about wyth great & thicke woods, but towarde the parte of Morabia, it is more plaine: for on all other partes, it ſeemeth that nature hath fortyfyed it:

for the thickenes of the woods & the marriſes which be in them, maketh the paſſages in the enteryng maruelous di
                  ••
               i
                  •
               il: how be it the lande which lyeth compaſſed aboute wyth theſe woods, is playne and fertyll, ful of caſtels and cities. The people thereof be naturally valiant and of good diſpoſicion. Their horſmen in armes be like to the Almaines, the footemen dyffer, for they keepe not lyke order to the Almaines, nor thei vſe not like weapon, for one beareth a halberd, an other a Jauelin, other ſtaues of one faddame and a halfe of length, with great pykes of iron, other beare ſhorte handgōnes wyth brode hatchettes, with ye whych they caſt .xx. paces very hādſomli. Theſe Boemoſe haue beene in tyme paſte ſoldiers of great eſtimaciō: but now

not ſo much in reputaciō. The moſt part of Saxoni bordereth vpō Boeme from Egner, keping the mountaynes of Boeme vpon the ryghte hand, vntil it paſſe the Albes, which is a ryuer of Boeme, and entereth into Saxony, nere vnto ye citye Laitemers. This I haue thought good to be wrytten, for the better vnderſtanding of other thinges paſt.
            ¶ The Emperour nowe being at Egner, thither came the king his brother, duke Morres, & the Marques John of Brandenburge ſōne to the Electour, for now hys father had taken an order wyth the kyng for to ſerue the Emperour, & ſo ſent his ſonne for to ſerue in this warre. The nomber of the horſmen wyth ye king myght be .viij. c▪ Duke Morres brought one. M. the Marques

John .iiij. c. as well apointed. More ouer the king brought .ix. C. hungarians, whyche to my iudgement be the beſt light horſmen in the world: and ſo they ſhewed thē ſelues to be in the warres of Saxoni, the .xlvi. & nowe this the .xlvij. Their weapōs be long ſpeares, ſtiffe & great, where wyth they geue greate incounters. They beare Targettes or Tabbelines, which beneathe be large vnto the middeſt, and frō the middeſt vpward they be made ſharpenīg, with a point aboue theyr heades. Some weare ſhirtes of Maile, but in their Targets they put & paint poyſes & deuiſes after their faſhions, whiche do beſome thē very wel. Thei beare long ſtiffe arming ſwordes, & hand hāmers called Martlets with long 
                  ••
               eles, with ye which they helpe them

ſelues hādſomely. They ſhew themſelues great frendes to ye Hiſpaniardes, for as thei ſay the one and the other came of the Scithians. Theſe were the horſmē which came with ye king, footemē he brought none, for he had left .iiij. baners in Treſſen, and the reſt in the entryng into Boeme went home to theyr houſes. He had but one baner whyche tarryed wyth him, & thys he ſent to Egner. Duke Morres put al his footemen in Lipſ
                  •
               a and Subiſa. The Duke of Saxon beyng thereby with .viij. M. Outchemē good ſoldiers, and a great nōber of foremē which he had made in the coūtry, &. 3 M. horſemē armed & wel choſen for ye other .xij. baners, & the reſt of his horſmē wer with Thumſerne as it is ſayde, and deuided in diuers partes.
            
               ¶ The Emperour came to Egner, a citie chriſtened, which is no litle maruel, ſtanding ſo nere Boeme and Saxō, for why in the one there be but fewe chriſtened men, and in the other there be none. The nexte day after the cōming of the Emperoure, the kyng came to thys cytye, where they abode the paſſion weeke and Eaſter holy daies, and after he remoued when he had ſent ye Duke of Aluoy before with the footemē & part of the horſmen, the whiche ſent iiij. baners of footemen, iij. bandes of light horſmen with Don Antony de Tollido, to a towne where there was .ij. baners of the duke of Saxons: but after they had ſkirmyſhed a lytle, they yelded vp theyr baners and armour.
            ¶ All the countrey of Saxony

borderyng vppon Egner, is full of moūtaines, woods & mariſhes: but after wee came to a towne called Plao .vij. leagues frō Egner, there the countrey begynneth to be more open & playne, there be faire fieldes and meddowes, with many caſtels and townes. This prouince was ſo ſet in armes, & furnyſhed wyth the dukes ſoldiers, that there was no place free without his baners, euer cōquering and geatting of groūde. At thys time the Emperour with al diligence made ready towarde the enemies, for his deſyre was to finde them in the fielde with al their power, becauſe thei ſhould not take theſe iiij. ſtrong holdes, which be Viertē
               berge, Got, Sonobalde, & Eldram, the which he had taken a litle before from the Earle of Manfelte, for eueriche

one of theſe was of ſtrēgth, & ſufficiēt for to prolong the warres many yeres: wherefore the Emperour with al diligence, did take the wai to Meſſene, a town of the duke Morres, taken by the duke of Saron, and therein dydde lye wyth his campe, for that was a place apte for whatſoeuer he woulde apoint to be done, for there were bridges vppon the ryuer of Albys, and nere vnto Boeme, from whence he looked for to haue great ayde of horſemen and footemenne, and lykewiſe for to goe to Viertemberge, if neede ſhoulde requyre. So beyng in thys place, and the Emperor folowing ye way, diuers townes there about came in for to yelde, and alſo the companyes whiche the duke of Saron had lodged abrode in theſe partes were in

chaſe, for in one day ye prince of Salmona put to flight three baners, an other day lykewyſe was done by a captaine of the hackebutters Hyſpaniardes called Aldana, and certaine Hungarianes wyth hym. At an other tyme, one captaine called George E
                  •
               peche, with .vij. banners of Dutchemenne, and certain horſmē did geue an ouerthrowe to .viij. baners which the duke hadde lefte in a place called Exemburge, they were al broughte to the Emperour, ſo that our campe was euer doyng thinges worthy to be wrytien more at large.
            ¶ In this time the Emperor aproched Meſſene wyth hys campe, and beyng at hys lodgyng, there came newes that Thumſerne was but one league and a halfe from

thence, wherewith Duke Morres & the king of Romaines wer much altered, ſo that they beleued it as if thei had ſene the enemies with their eyes. Moreouer they thoughte it good to prouyde more then it was nedefull: for our folkes being come wearye and in great heate, and the newes being vncertaine, it was but to geue a greater trauayle to oure campe. But the Emperour, whych could prouide for al thinges neceſſarie, ſent .ij. C. Hungarians for to diſcouer the fieldes, and ſo dyd let reſt the campe, which to my iudgement was better then to haue trauayled men with an enterprice ſo much vncertaine. The Scoutes came to the place where ye enemies ſhould haue bene, they could not finde them, nor yet haue any newes that horſe or ſoldier

had bene ſeene there that daye, but one which had bene taken wyth a Spaniard in the morning, of whō it was knowē that the duke of Saxon was in Meſſene vpon the other ſyde of the ryuer of Albeis where he fortified his lodgyng. The Emperour abode there two daies for to refreſhe hys footemen, for they hadde gone .x. daies with great laboure & trauayle. Then he determyned to marche towarde Meſſene, & there to make brydges of barckes, for the duke had burnt thoſe of the towne, but he woulde procure to fight on ye other ſyde of the ryuer, but he hadde newes that ye duke was vp & gone from thence, & that he had taken the way toward Viertemberge.
            ¶ I haue many tymes ſene the Emperours ſetting forth take good

efferte: but I did neuer ſe any come ſo to paſſe as this, for from the tyme that he remoued from hys lodgyng vntil he had made an end of ye iourney, there was nothing left vndone yt he had apointed, nor yet ſucceded otherwaies thē he had determined. He nowe cōſidering that ye goyng to Meſſene with his campe which did ſtande vp aboue vpon the riuer, he ſhould loſe ſo much tune yt the duke of Saxon whiche was on the other ſide of the riuer might be at Ʋier
                  •
               ē
               burge, which ſtode below & benethe vpō the ryuer, & therfore he ſoughte for to haue a forde, to be in his way and before his enemye. He was enfourmed by one of the country, th
                  ••
                iii. leages frō thēce beneth vpon the riuer, there were .ii. fordes, but they wer like to be kept & defended with

the enemies vpon the other parte.
            ¶ At this tyme there came certaine hackbutters horſinē Hiſpaniardes with captaine Aldana, which had bene ſent abrod to diſcouer the enemies, & of thys captaine it was knowē that the night paſt they had lodged in Milburge, on the other ſide of the riuer .iii. leagues frō oure campe: & there as they ſayde was a ford, but their horſes had paſſed ſwiming. The emperour ꝑceiuing that it was not time for to delay the iourney, he ſēt for the duke of Aluoy and cōmaūded to prouide for euery thīg 
                  •
               ōuemēt, for he was determined for to paſſe the ryuer by ford or bridge, & to fight with ye enemies, & vpō this determinaciō. ꝓuided for al thinges con
                  •
               i
                  •
               mable thereunto, the which to maniſemed to be a thig impoſſible.

The enemies being on ye other part of the riuer, the waye long and many thinges lacking, it ſemed to be a greatlet. But the Emperour wolde in any wyſe that his determinacion ſhould take effecte, & commaunded the artilerye, and the barkes of the bridge to be ſpeedelye ſet foorth that day, and the footemē Hiſpaniardes at midnight, and ſhortelye after the regimētes of Almaines, and all the horſemen in the order accuſtomed: but in the morning there fell a very thicke miſt, ſo that there was neuer a part of the army did ſee how other did go, and of this the Emperour cō
               plained & ſaid: theſe myſtes do euer folow vs when we be nere vnto our enemies: but whē we came nere vn to the riuer, the miſt begā to breake vp, ſo that we might ſee the Albeys,

and our enemyes lodged vpon the other ſide. This is the Albies ſo many tymes named by the Romaines and ſo ſeldome ſene of them.
            ¶ The duke of Saxon lodged on the other parte of ye ryuer in this towne of Milbroke, wyth .vi. M. footemē, olde ſoldiers, & about .iii. M. horſmen: for the reſt were wyth Thumſerne, and the other were diſperſed and taken by the waye. He had with him .xxi. peeces of artilery and he was well aſſured and dyd know, that if we wold go and paſſe by Meſſene, he might tarry or go where he wold: & where as he was, it was hard for to paſſe, for ye bredth and the depenes of the ryuer beyng in his keping vppon the other ſyde, with a town and a caſtel (although they were not ſtrong,) yet they wer

ſufficient to kepe the paſſage. Nowe the lodging of our campe being ſetled & deuided by quarters at the emperours comming about .viij. of the clocke in the mornyng, he comaunded the horſmen to be in order, and not to lodge. The place of our cāpe was nere vnto ye riuer, but betwixte vs and our enemies was a medow ground & a wood ſtandyng vpō the riuer. Now at this time aforeſayde, the Emperour and the king of Romaines, rode before to meete wyth the duke of Aluoy, whych had bene to haue knowledge of the enemies, & cōſidering the riuer to be deſēded, it could not be thought by any meanes how for to paſſe. The Emperor the kyng, & the duke cōſulting together to make ſearche by the aduyſe of ſome in the coūtry there about, to

fynde a forde, for ſuche a thyng was not to be taken in hande temeraryouſlye, without knowyng where or how. Now the Emperour, the king and Duke Morres, after a litle recreation taken in a houſe thereby, at theyr commyng foorthe, goyng toward the enemies, came the duke of Aluoy, and ſayd that he had knoweleddge by a manne of the countreye, that coulde bryng hym to a forde, the name of the place where the Emperour came forth, is called Exſemeſer, whiche is as muche to ſay, wade, it was not farre frō the forde. They on the other parte hadde ſette foorthe and deuided theyr artilerye & hackbutters vpon the ſhore, ſtanding at the defence of the paſſage, & at the bridge yt was brought & made of barkes the which they had made

of three peeces to bring down with them more at eaſe. The diſpoſiciō of the paſſage was in this ſorte.
            ¶ Their riuage in the keeping of the enemies was muche ſuperior & aboue oures, with a diche wherewith theyr hackebutters myght be couered, our part was ſo plaine and diſcouered, ye euery floud dyd flowe ouer. They had the towne and caſtel aforeſaide, but we had no couer but the plaine fieldes, except a fewe litle trees ſtanding by the water, & where the forthe was thought for to be, it was .iij. C. paces brode. And al though the ſtreame ſeemed for to be ſlowe, it had a vehement courſe: ſo that thorow al theſe thinges that I haue ſpoken of, there was ſo greate difficultie, that the helpe and determinacion of the Emperoure was

nedefull with art and force. An order was taken that certayn peces of artillery ſhoulde be layd emōgſt the trees, ſtanding nexe vnto ye water, & .viii. C. hackebutters Hiſpaniardes, ſo that theſe together with the artilery, might beate the enmies from the riuer, ſo that our hackbutters might be lordes vpon our ſyde and come to ye water. For although it was diſcouered, harde and perylous for to be done, yet of neceſſitye it muſt be done.
            ¶ At this tyme the enemyes had layde hackbutters in their barkes, whiche were commyng downe by the ſtreame, ſo that it was nedefull for our hackbutters to goe to the open banke, the which ther dyd ſo vehemently that many of them entred into the riuer vp to the breſte, and

charged ſo harde vpon them in the riuer and in the barkes, and killed ſo many, that thei did forſake thē, except a 
                  •
               ew that ſtode at defence. At this time the Emperor was preſēt, and this was the ſkirmiſhe on the one parte and the other: all their artilery, and hackebutters were dyſcharged vpon vs, but our hackbutters although the place was notegall: they preaſed ſo nere, that the aduauntage myght bee perceyued on our parte, for the enemies began to ſlake and to ſhoote ſlowly. Then the Emperour commaunded to bee ſente one thouſande hackebutters Hyſpamardes, with the Archemaiſter de Campo of Lumberdye, for to a Taulte the enemies yet more liuely, and ſo the ſkirmiſhe wente ſo hotely on the one parte and the other,

ſo that it might bee called a ſalutacion of hackbutters. The duke of Aluoy certifyed his maieſtye, that the forde was founde, and yt we myght paſſe. The Emperour was fully determined for to paſſe yt daye, and not to geue anye tyme to the Duke of Saxon, for to occupye theſe ſtrong holdes before named. Thei being ſufficiente for to delate the warres manye yeares. The Emperoure came to the forde when thei were hearyng a ſermon, after the cuſtome of ye Lutherians: but when they harde howe it was, I think thei tarryed not lōg to here their preacher, but to prouide, which profited litle againſt him that came agaynſt them.
            ¶ The Emperor withal ſpede cō
               maunded the horſemenne to paſſe,

the riuer and the bridge to be layde and the footemenne Hiſpaniardes with thre regimentes of Almayns. A
                  •
               ter that the riuer had been dilygently ſought with guydes and other of practiſe in the countrey, emongſt whom there was a younge manne from whom the enemyes had taken two horſes the day before and he for to be reuēged of his loſſe, offred hymſelfe to ſhewe the forde, ſaying: I wil be reuenged vpō theſe traytors yt haue robbed me, I pray god they may be hāged, he was like to be worthy to haue good fortune: for he paſſed not vpon his loſſe, but for to be reuēged, as he ſhortly after was. The enemyes ſet fyre on ſome of their Barges, other wer forſakē, in ſome other, the ſouldiers did lye along to be out of peril. At this time

the bridge was come to the ſhore: but the riuer being ſo brode, our barges might not ſuffiſe, therfore their bridge was nedefull to be gotten, & like as agaynſt ſtrength and vertue there is nothyng diffic
                  •
               le, ſo all theſe difficulties of the Albeis haue not been impoſſible.
            ¶ Nowe the enemyes goe frō the riuer, for thei may no longer ſuffer to be there, but a few which ſtode at the defence. The Emperor ſeyng that their bridges muſte nedes bee had, he commaunded the hackebutters to be diligent. Then ſodaynlye x. Hiſpaniardes ſtripped thē, & with their ſweordes ouerwharte in theyr mouthes, thei did ſwimme to the barkes of the enmies, and after thei had kylled the kepers, thei brought them to our ſhore. There were alſo

thre Hiſpaniardes horſemen which dyd take the riuer, but one of them was drowned. But whē the bridge was gotten, and our hackebutters ſtanding vpon the banke, theyr heartes began to fayle them. All the horſemenne came to the water ſyde, but the Emperoure commaū
               ded .ix. banners of Almaynes to kepe the fyelde, of euery regimente thre, and, xv. hundred horſemē, two hundred and fiftie of the marques Albertes horſemē, which wer come from the ouerthrowe of their lorde, to the kyng. He commaunded the horſemen Hungarians, the whiche with the Emperours horſemē now began to paſſe before the enemyes wente out of the towne aforeſayde. They hadde made a litle ſkirmiſh,

but oure hackebutters entred into the water, and defended ſo lyuelye with ſhootyng of 
                  •
               o thicke, that our horſemenne were as ſafe vpon the other ſyde as vpon oure part. But when the enemyes beganne to breake, there was no more hope to kepe them foorth: then they made towarde a town called Troga, and if they myghte not take this aduauntage, 
                  •
               hen for to goe to Viertemberge, or elles to fighte by the waye, i
                  •
                they might not haue tyme to dooe one of theſe two thinges.
            ¶ The Emperour did take an order, and commaunded the Duke of Aluoy, that the Hungarians and the Prynce of Salmona with hys lyghte horſes, ſhoulde take euerye eche one a hackebutter

behinde him, and to paſſe ouer with the menne of armes of Naples, taking with hym duke Morris, for theſe were the horſemen of the vawarde. Then the Emperoure and the kyng of Romayns with theyr Eſquadrons came to the riuer. The Emperour rode vpon a darke dun Spaniſhe horſe, preſented by monſure de Ry, knyght of the order, and his firſt chamberlayne, he rode in white armour gilt, hauing no other apparell, but a brode bende of Taffata Crimſen, and a dutche murrione, a Demilance like a iauelyng in his hand. He rode as thei wryte of Julius Ceaſar when he paſſed the Ribicon, ſpeakyng theſe notable wordes, and without any doubte it was a proper compariſon to vs beyng there, to haue the repreſentaciō
               
of the ſight of Ceaſar, paſſyng a ryuer armed, and with an oſte armed, and on the other part not for to treat but of victorie, for the paſſage of the riuer was onely with this hope and determinacion, ſo that with the one and the other, the Emperor did take the water, folowing the milner who was our guide. He did take ye waye more vpon the ryght hande aboue in the ſtreame, then the horſemen whiche were paſt before: the groūde was harde, but the depe was aboue the knees of the moſte of the horſemenne, and in ſome places they did ſwyme a lytle ſtretche. In this ſort we paſſed the riuer, the forde extendyng thre hundred paces.
            ¶ The Emperour commaunded for to be geuē to the guyde, two horſes and one hundred crownes,

nowe the bridge was made with our barkes, & thoſe whiche we had gotten of our enemies, and the Hiſpaniardes began to paſſe, and a
                  •
               ter the Almains according to the order that the Emperour had taken, and nowe the Hungarians ſette downe the hackebutters whiche they hadde ſette ouer the riuer, and rode before to ſkirmiſh, & to intertain ye enemies which made great haſt without leauing of any ſouldier in Milbrucke, as it was thought at ye firſt he would haue done: & this was one of the reſpectes, for the paſſage of ye hackbutters with the lighte horſemen. But with their cāpe, thei dyd geat euer ye aduauntage of the ground, parting their fotemen in two eſquadrons, ye one greater then the other, &. ir. ſtā
               derds of horſemen deuided in ſuche

ſort, that when our lighte horſemen ſhould ouertake them, they mighte turne and geue them the charge, ſo that their fotemē in the meane time might marche forewarde.
            ¶ The Emperour with a hygh trot as men of armes might ſuffer, folowed the way after his enemies, in the which way he founde a crucifix ſtanding, as 
                  ••
                is commōly vſed, it was ſhot with a hackbut ī ye midſt of the breſte, This was of the Emperoure ſo abhorde, that he coulde not diſſemble his Ire, ſeyng ſo vyle a de de, he looked vp toward the heauen, and ſayde: O Lorde if it bee thy wyll thou arte of power to be reuenged. Theſe wordes ſpoken he rode out through the plain & opē 
               
                  •
               ield. But the duſt that came frō the

vawarde was verye great, and the eyre did driue it in our eyes. The Emperour rode vpon the right hād and this was for two cauſes. One was for to haue ſyght at libertie, the other to prouide for ſuch perylles as we haue ſeen in our tyme folowe when Eſquadrons goe not in order, as it is ſene by experience, ye vawarde broken the battaile loſt, whē it is not ſet in order as it ought to be
            ¶ Therefore the Emperor prouided agaynſt ſuche inconuenyences, ſettyng the kyng apart with his Eſquadrons, ſo that if our vaward ſhoulde haue been in peryll, he was at hande for to ſuccour, ſettyng vpō our enemyes, who went ſo ſtrongly yt it was neceſſary ſo for to prouide.
            ¶ Now the duke of Aluoy with his menne in the vawarde, ſkirmiſhed

ſo nere, that they made a ſtond and began to ſhote of al their artilerye, wherewith the Almayns be very great doers. The Emperour haſted to bee egall with the vawarde, oure footemen had but .vi. peces of artillery, being farre behynd out of our ſight: it was no meruayle, for ye bridges could not be ſoſhortly made This was then thre dutche leagues from the Albes, and the Emperour made great ſpede with the horſmen becauſe he woulde vndertake to defeate his enemies: for if we ſhoulde haue taryed for the reſt of our fotemenne, they ſhould haue had time & place, to atchieued their enterpryſe. Therefore here it maye be clearelye ſeen, what maye bee done in greate thynges, when counſayles be determined.
            
               ¶ The horſmen in our vaward wer theſe iiii. C. light horſes with ye prince of Salmona, & with dō Antony de Toledo .iiii. C and. L. Hū
               garians. He had ſēt .iii. C. out of our campe this morning to viewe Troga, a. C. horſmē hackbutters Hiſpamardes, & .vi. C. ſperes with Duke Morts, & two. C. hackbutters horſmen, two. C. and .xx. men of armes, out of Naples, with the duke of Caſtor, here you may ſee our battayle, whiche went in two Eſquadrons. The Emperoure might bee .iiii. C. ſperes, & .iii. C. hackbutters dutchmenne horſed, the kyng was .vi. C. ſperes, and iii. C. hackbutters horſmenne. Theſe were al our horſmē, and I enſure you I make the number no leſſe then it was, our Eſquadrons ordered indifferently, from

the Dutchemenne, for they made the front of the Eſquadrons of their horſemenne ſharpe. The Emperor made his of ſeuentene in a ranke, and ſo the fronte was brode, and they ſhewed a greate noumber, and repreſented a fayre ſight. And to my iudgemente: this is the beſt order and the moſte ſure, when the dyſpoſicion of the grounde maye ſuffer it, for why the front of one Eſquadron of horſemenne beyng large, there is not ſo muche rowme to bee coumpaſſed by the Flancke, whiche maye bee done when the Eſquadron is poynted and ſtreyghte, and ſeuentene in rancke, and ſeuentene in fylar ſuffice for ye ſhocke. This hath bene ſeen by experience at the battayle that the menne

of armes of Flaunders did geat of the menne of armes of Cleues, at ye towne of Sitrade in the yere a. M. D .xliii.
            ¶ The enemyes went in order as I haue ſayde beyng .vi. M. fotemenne in two Eſquadrons, and .ix. ſtanderdes of horſmen, of two. M. and .vi. C. horſes, and a Gueten accoumpanied with .viii. or .ix. C. horſes. This was the duke of Saxon, whiche wente prouidyng emongeſt his Eſquadrons, which at the firſte had diſcouered but our vawarde, for the duſt dyd kepe the ſyght from the battayle, wherefore he thought that he myght well reſyſt thoſe horſe men: But a marſhal of his campe called Wolf Kraytes, who ꝑceiued vs better, called hym a parte and ſhewed him the battayle diſcouered

where the Emperour and the kyng came together. In this Eſquadron with his maieſtye wente the prince of Piemont, & the kinges two ſōnes who led his Eſquadron.
            
               ❧ When the duke of Sarō had ſene al our horſmen, and that he had clearly ꝑceiued in our order & going al our determinacion, he tourned again emōgſt the Eſquadrons, determinīg with all ſpede poſſible to take a wood which did ſtand in his way, thinking to bee there, with his fotemē ſo ſtrōgly, yt in ye night he myght go to Viertemberge, for ye was hys purpoſe, for at Troga he thought he coulde not bee ſurely, for as he hath ſaid ſence, he had heard ſhotyng of gūnes ī ye mornīg, which euē ī dede did ſhote at ye ſkoutes which wer ſēt by ye Emperor, but he had thoughte

we had been but the one halfe ſent to folowe hym with the Duke of Aluoy, & that the other had been gone with the Emperor to Troga. Therfore he woulde not take the waye to Troga, for there was none of hys counſayle that woulde aduiſe hym thereto, ſo that at the ende he cōcluded to take the wood, in the way towarde Viertemberge: and yf that he muſt nedes fight, yet yt it myght be to his aduauntage: and for to folowe one of theſe two effectes, he thought for to geat the wood, which is full of marriſhes, and ſtreyghte waies he ſente his hackbutters and light horſmē to geue the charge vpō our light horſemen, ſo that his footemenne might take the place in the wood that he had appoynted.
            
               ❧ Now at this tyme as it is ſaid:

the Emperor had made mete with the vawarde: he ſpake chearefullye to duke Morris, and to the men of armes of Naples, the woordes beſeming a captayne in ſuche a day as this, and to the ſouldiers geuing thē the name that was Sainct George imperial, Sainct James Spayn, ſo going towarde ye enemyes a pace that was conuenient. Theſe eſquadrons going thus egally, the battell fell into a marriſh vpon the ryghte hande, wherein dyd fall many horſes, wherfore it was nedefull for to drawe in the battayle, ſo that the vawarde might paſſe without intermedling one eſquadron with an other, & to bee both out of order: & for this cauſe it came to paſſe, yt goīg by it paſſed ye vaward before the time yt the enemies woulde geue ye charge

as I haue ſayd, the which they gaue vpon our light horſemenne in good order.
            
               ❧ At this tyme the duke of Aluoy perceyuing good occaſion, ſente vnto the Emperor yt he would geue ye charge, and ſo he dyd at a wynge with his men of armes of Naples: the duke Morris with his hackebutters vpon the other parte, incontinent their menne of armes & oure battayle which now went turnyng to geat the right hand did mete: thei moued againſte the enemies with ſuch vehemency, that ſodainly they began to turne: our horſemen brake in with ſuch violence, that they had no place but for to flie, and began to forſake their fotemē, ye whiche at the firſt made a litle reſiſtāce, thinking for to take the wood: but now al our

horſemen wer ſo farre forwarde amongſt theyr horſemē and fotemen that in one momente they were all brokē and ſcattered in ſunder. The Hungarians with the lighte horſes dyd take a ſyde, and with a merueilous quicke ſpede they began to execute the victorie, vnto the whiche theſe Hungarians haue a meruaylous great induſtrye. They ſette vpon crying Spayne, Spayne. For of a truth the name of the Empire, of an olde hate, is not to them agreable.
            ¶ In this ſorte thei did take the wood, in ye which there was ſo many weapōs, & ſo much harnes ſcattred, yt it was a greate trouble to thē that executed the victorie. The dead and hurt wer many, ſome at the encounter, other with great cuttes, ſome

with hackbuttes, & of diuers ſortes, there were ſo manye priſoners that manye of our menne had .x. or .xii. runnyng aboute them, manye dyd lye dead, other dyd lye wallowyng in their bloud. There ye might haue ſeen howe thei offred their fortune to theyr takers. Some wer ſlayne, ſome were taken, euerye manne as he woulde: the dead menne dyd lye in manye places on heapes, and other in partes as they were taken flying or fightyng. The Emperour folowed the chaſe one myle: al the light horſemenne and parte of the Dutchemenne, and men of armes of the kinges folowed thre leagues.
            ¶ Nowe we beyng in the midſt of the wood, the Emperoure beyng there, ſtayde: and commaunded the menne of armes to requoyle, for all

wente ſo diſperſed and out of order, that the winners and looſers were ruffled together: wherfore he would make ſure the victorie, if anye inconuenience ſhould ſuccede to them that wente before: for it is a thing to bee noted, that a captayn do thinke ſo, that he dooe not ſaye afterwarde if I hadde thought, (as many haue ſayd,) but this is a foule woorde of a captayne.
            ¶ The Emperour and the king came together, which verely ſhewed the courage of a kyng. The Duke of Aluoy came from the chaſe, in whyte armoure gylte, and a bende of redde vpon a baye horſe, withoute anye other garniſhyng, but of the bloude of the wounde that he brought. The Emperour receyued him ioyfully, & not without cauſe: &

there being, it was ſayde vnto the Emperour, that the duke of Saxon was taken, and his priſoner, pretendyng to be the principals two men of armes Hiſpaniardes of them of Naples, and thre or foure light horſmen Hiſpaniardes and Italyans, one Hungarian, & a captain Hiſpaniarde. The Emperour commaunded to bring hī, & ſo he was brought before him. He came vpō a griſeld horſe, in a great ſhirt of mayle, and therupon a payre of blacke curates beyng bloudye of a wounde that he had in his left ſyde. The duke of Aluoy came vpon his ryght hād, and preſented hym vnto his maieſtye. The duke of Saxon would alyghte one foote, takyng of hys gloue for to haue touched the Emperour by the hande, after the maner

of Almayne, but the Emperor would neither the one nor the other. And for to ſay the truth, he was ſore trauayled through the heate and with the wounde, that he came ſo weary and heauye, that he thoughte that the Emperour had had a more reſpecte to this then he hadde deſerued. Then he beyng bareheaded, ſayde vnto the Emperour accordyng to the cuſtome of Almayn. Moſte mightye and moſt gracious Emperoure, I am youre priſoner. To this the Emperoure anſwered: Now ye call me Emperoure: thys is an o her name then ye haue geuē me in tymes paſt. And this he ſayd: for when the duke of Saxon and Launtgraue did leade the campe of the league, they dyd wryte hym in theyr letters, but Charles of

Gaunt: therfore our Almayns whē they heare of this, they ſaye: lette Charles of Gaunte alone, for he wyll ſhewe hymſelfe to bee an Emperour. Therefore the Emperoure aunſwered hym ſo. And after he ſaid that his deſeruing had brought hym to this. To theſe woordes the Duke of Saxon made no aunſwer but hurcled vp his ſhoulders, and hanged down his head, with a coū
               tenaunce like woorthye to bee blamed. As a barbarous, braggyng, proude manne as he hath been. Yet the Duke ſpake agayne, beſeching hym that he myghte bee entreated as his priſoner. To whome the Emperoure aunſwered, that he ſhoulde bee entreated as he had deſerued. And commaunded the

Duke of Aluoy, to leade hym ſtrongelye to the lodgyng vpon the ryuer, whyche was gotten the ſame daye at the takyng of the forde. The ioye of this victorye was generall: for the wealth that is come thereby, is euerye daye knowne more and more. The Duke Morres that daye goyng in chace, one of the enemyes hadde charged a hackebutte behynde hym, readye to fyre, but he was cu
                  •
               te in peces, and his horſe with them whiche were there about the Duke.
            ¶ There was ſlayne of the footemenne of the enemyes, two thouſande, and manye hurte, and beeyng lefte there, dyuerſe wente awaye, and ſaued themſelues

in the nyght folowyng. The next daye were taken .viii. C. footemenne, and of horſemen were ſlayn v. C. and a great noumber takē: but emongeſt our Almayns the nacion being al one, there were many cō
               uaid: but thoſe which came to knowledge were ſo many, that the Hungarians light horſmenne, and other menne of armes had taken, there came not to Viertemburge of fotemen and horſemen fowre hundred. There wer takē .xv. peces of artilerye, two long Coluerins, and .iiii. demye Coluerins .iiii. demye Cannons .v. Fawcenettes, & great plē
               tie of municion. The next day was taken other .vi. peces, there was taken all their carriage, where oure horſemen did find great aboundāce of good ſtuffe & money. Alſo there

were taken .xvii. banners of fotemē and .ix. ſtanderdes of horſemen, and the Geaton of the Duke of Saxon was taken, the Duke Herneſt of Branzwique was taken▪ He in the warre paſte whiche had the ſettyng foorth and leadyng of al the ſkirmiſhes, the eldeſt ſonne of the duke of Saxon was hurte in the hand, and he kylled hym that hurte hym, and after he fledde to Viertemberge, manye of the principalles were taken that daie: of ours there dyed. 
                  •
               l. horſemenne, and other whiche died afterward of theyr woundes. This battayle was the fowre and twenty daye of Aprill. M. O xlvii. vpon Saincte Markes euen, twelue dayes, after that the Emperoure parted from Egner, it beganne vpon the riuer of Albeis, aboute .xi.

of the clocke, and was ended at ſeuen of the clocke at after noone, from the geattyng of the forde, he was folowed as it is ſayde, euer fyghtyng vntyll he was taken. His footemenne and horſemenne broken with ſuche courage, and good induſtrye, that it may bee ſayde by hym: ille ſapit ſolus voli
               
                  •
               ant alu velut vmbrae.
            
               ❧ This greate victorye the Emperoure dyd attrybute vnto God, as a thyng geuen by his hand, and therefore he ſayde theſe three woordes of Ceaſar, chaunging the thyrde, as a moſte Chriſten prince oughte for to doe, knoweledging the goodneſſe of God. Veni vidi & vici.
            ¶ The moderacion of the Emperoure appeared vnto all menne

in the vſyng of the duke of Saxon, one other Conquerour might haue been that yf he hadde ſo offended, coulde not haue tempered his Ire, as the Emperoure dyd, whiche is a greatter difficultie ſometyme, then to vanquiſhe the enemie. Now being late, the Emperour returned vnto his lodgyng, at a leuen of the clocke in the nyght. The nexte daye artillery, municions, harnes, & weapons with ye ſixe peces, wer brought together, and the light horſemenne Hungarians, brought in yet a great noumber of priſoners: for three leagues beefore the chaſe, they hadde folowed the victorie. The Duke of Saxon was deliuered by the Duke of Aluoy to Alonſo Biuas, maiſter of the campe of the Hiſpaniardes, of the kingdome of

Naples, and alſo with hym duke Harneſt of Brāzwique, which was taken by a Duchemanne borne vnder the king of Romaynes, and ſeruaunt to duke Morres.
            
               ❧ In this place the Emperor abode ii. dayes. At this tyme Troga did ſurrender, and the Emperor with al his armye intended to goe againſt Uiertēberge, the head of the eſtate of the Duke of Saxon, & principall towne of thoſe of the eleccion: and ſo he kepte it moſte importunate, and fortifyed it continually for the ſpace of. xxv yeres paſt, with a great number of artilerye. The waye lyeth by Troga, where ſtandeth a Caſtell, one of the moſte fayreſt that is in Almayn. In the which place duke Ihō did take moſt ordinarilye his ſolace and paſtyme,

and there it was knowen by the priſoners, that thei looked for Thumſerne with his mē, yt he had brought oute of Boeme wyth .xx. banners which they of that kingdome had ſēt him, and a nomber of horſmen with them: but the quicke ſpede of ye Emperor hath cut away al their leages, ſuccour and aides from him.
            ¶ The Emperor paſſed ye riuer of A
                  •
               bes benethe, halfe one league from Uiertemburge, by a brydge made of hys barkes, and of thoſe whyche he had taken from the enemies. I thinke it is a thing worthye to be had in remembrance, this that hath bene ſene and knowen of thys riuer. At that time that ye Emperor pa
                  •
               ed by forthe, althoughe it was depe, yet the day after, it coulde not be paſſed in ani p
                  •
               a
                  •
               e without ſwimming.

Here it ſemeth that God maketh thinges light to them which go in his ſeruice. Other two thinges I wyl write, becauſe I haue ſeene thē. One is, yt in the paſſage of the footemen of Spaine, an Eagle came ſoryng ouer them a greate ſpace. In the meane time a Wolfe came running out of the wood, and was kylled with the ſoldiers in the myddeſt of the playne fyeldes, thys was a thing ꝑmitted of God or by chaūce, ſo that it was a great maruell to thē that did beholde it.
            ¶ Thys daye it was a greate heate, the Sunne apeared in colour of bloud, & vnto vs that did beholde it, verelye it was not ſo lowe, and as it was thought, it ſhoulde haue bene at yt houre. It was a notable ſyghte and in the opinion of all men to be

true, ſo that I dare not ſaye the contrary, it was noted that ſame daye in Newremberge and in Fraunce, as the kyng dothe ſaye, and in Pymount, it was ſeene in the ſame colour. Theſe thinges were ſo mu he noted & ſpoken, that I haue thought good to write. The Emperour paſſed the ryuer of Albes, and lodged betwene the woods in the ſyght of Viertemburge, whyche ſtandeth in thys maner.
            ¶ This towne of Viertēberge is great & ſtrong, it ſtādeth quadrāt 4 .c. paces frō the Albes. It is ſet in a raire plaine yt it may be ſene in all partes, enuironed & watered with a depe & brode diche, it hath a rāpire of 60. foote thicke, full of graſſe & herbes. It hath a vādemute yt it is impoſſible to be beaten wyth artilerye.

There be .v. bulwarkes, & a ſtrong caſtel ſtanding aboue, which dyſcouereth al the countrey. Vppon that parte the Emperour was determined to make the batterye: he ſent for the .xv. M. laborers whyche Duke Morres had promiſed, & the artilerye to be broughte from Treſſene, where was a great nomber and ynough to beate Viertemberge, & to defend their towne wyth ye reſt. But al ſtoode vpon this, that althoughe we had the artilery, theſe labourers were ſo intreated by the way, that of xv. M. there came but. 4. C. & wyth great difficulty, as Duke Morres dyd ſay. At this time the Emperour began for to heare the praiers & ſupplicacions of the Marques of Brā
               de
                  •
               burge Electoure, whyche was come for to intercede and intreate

for the Duke John of Saron. Hys maieſtye hadde conſidered diuers thinges, amōgeſt the which he hath conſidered the duke of Cleues to be Sonne in lawe to the kyng of Romaines, and Neuew to the duke of Saxon, who wyth great inſtaunce procured to ſaue the lyfe of Duke John, with part of his eſtate, whatſoeuer it might be, hauing pite vpon ſo great a prince come vnto ſo miſerable fortune, and not to conclude vpon the firſt determinacion, which was to take his life, and ſo it was be gōne to treate, that the duke myght be chaſtiſed: and yet the Emperour to vſe clemencye, as it beſeemed ſo greate a prince, ſo muche lauded in vertue as the firſt Ceaſar, who ſaith that he did geat more by clemencye then by armes. There hath bene diuers

uers opinions touchyng the lyfe of duke John, one ſort conſidered him only to be chaſtiſed, other conſidered the manor of the correction, with other qualicies ſo importunate, that they reputed the victory of the Emperoure to lyue for euer, and that it ſhould not nede to bring them vnto vtter deſperacion, whiche put theyr truſt in the Emperours mercye. At the which men looked for to take example in that he woulde dooe to the duke of Saron, and ſo treating vpō the one and the other, the Emperor concluded to be confirmable to hys natural condicions that was giuig the lyfe to duke John wyth the condicions whyche were ſufficient, ſo yt they might be a recompence for the deathe of hym, whyche of manye he was iudged to be worthye.
            
               ¶ There were in Viertēberge the wife of the duke and his brother, & his yongeſt ſonnes. In Gote was his eldeſt ſonne, whych was eſcaped wounded from the battaile. Al theſe looked for the ſucceſſe: touching the duke, to whō nowe the Emperour had pardoned lyfe, by the interceſtiō of thē whiche dyd intreate.
            
               1. Firſt was taken from hym, the election, and all the Townes whyche haue gone wyth the ſame, of the whyche Vtertemberge and Troga be pryncipalles, and manye other.
               2. To enter vppon al the artylerye and municions vohyche is a great nomber: for onelye from Viertemburge were fetched out an hundred and twentye peeces, the ſmall ordynaunce excepte.
               
                  3. Hys maieſtye did apointe in Curing certayne caſtels & townes to hys vſe.
               4. Gote which is a forte inexpugnable, he commaunded it to be caſt downe & raſed by the ground.
               5. There was founde one hundreth peces of artilery, an .c. the uſād pellettes, and other municiōs accordyng to the ſame.
               6. He to remayne pryſoner in the Emperors court or in any other place where he wyll cōmaunde at al times durig his maieſties pleaſure.
               7. And to be brought in, the baners, ſtanders and arulerie that he hadde taken from the Marques Albert, boſent for to the courte. In thynges touchyng relygyon at the firſt he ſtoode faſt, but after he anſwered ſo faire, that it ſeemed to hys

maieſty, that he ſhould not neede to ſpeake ani more of that. His brother loſte a towne which hys maieſty did geue to the Marques Albert.
               8. The Duke ſurrendred al the Caſtels and townes that he had vſurped of the Earles of Manſfell, & from the charches & Monaſteryes of Saxonye, & to be at the diſpoſiciō of the Emperor, the which ſeing that the principal part was touching religion, he began to take a good way & to be content with theſe condictōs, and becauſe he would not that ſo aū
                  ciēt a h
                     •
                  uſe which had done ſo great ſeruice to his in times paſt ſhoulde be vtterlye extincte and vndone: he would rather folow equitie & mekenes, then theire and iuſt indignaciō to the which he hath bene deſeruīglie encited by the warres in the yere

paſt when he dyd breake the campe of the league.
            
            ¶ Al thinges cōpounded in this ſorte, duke John aliue and chaſtiſed with ſo great correction, that from one of the mightieſt princes in Germani, he is become a priuate knight and his ſonnes ſhal deuide amongſt them that which he onely poſſeſſeth, ſo that thys houſe whych hath beene of ſo greate power, ſhall be come ſo lyttle as hys pryde hathe deſerued, but for all thys it is not parceyued that thys duke hath ſpoken one lowlye woorde, or ſhewed anye countenance confirmable to hys fortune, but euer a conſtancie worthye to be kepte in our true religion. Uiertemberge yelded wyth three thouſande menne of warre. The Emperoure ſent to be there in garriſon four baners.

Twoo dayes after thys, the Ducheſſe came foorth to dooe reuerence and ſee hys maieſty: ſhe came to h
                  •
               stent accompanied wyth the brother of Duke John, & hys wyfe ſiſter to the Duke Henrike of Brūzwique, and a ſonne of duke Johns, an other was ſycke in Uiertēberge, and the thyrd at Gote. There came alſo in theyr companye the Sonnes of the kyng of Romaynes, the Marques of Brandemburge, and other Lordes of Alnmyne. She came before the Emperoure wyth all humilitye that myghte be. It was not nede to 
                  〈◊〉
                her her huſbād beyng in ſo greate trybulacion ſeeyng her ſelfe depo
                  •
               e
                  •
               , and in a myſerable eſtate. Her fortune ſhewed her what ſhee ſhoulde nowe dooe,

ſhe kneled downe before the Emperour, but he did take hir vp, & receyued her as curteouſlye as i
                  •
                ſhe had loſt nothīg of this that ſhe had in her firſt fortune: it was a thing that moued euerye man to pitie. There ſhe beſought the Emperour touchyng the duke her huſbande, whereunto ſhe was graciouſlye aunſwered, ſhe went after where he was amongeſt the Hiſpaniardes in theyr warde, & there ſhe did viſet hym hauing liſēce of the Emperor, and then returned to the caſtel of Uiertemberge. The next day the Emperour entred into Uiertemberge, for to ſee the caſtell where the Duches lai, which ſemed to be a viſitacion like vnto Alerander when he viſited the mother and wife of Darius: for ſo muche more is the victorie when a prynce dothe

vſe it moderatlye.
            ¶ At thys tyme came from the confines and coſtes of Tarterye, & Muſcouia nere vnto ye riuer of Neper .iij. captaines, offering to ye Emperoure their ſeruice, wyth .iiij. M. horſes: he aunſwered thē with great thankes, and that the warres were now in terme that it ſhould not nede and ſo thei departed. Likewiſe there came Embaſſadours from the king of Tunezey, for to treate wyth the Emperour concerning certaine affaires for theyr Lord, & they offered hym as many Aloraues whiche are the chief horſmen, ſo that it maye be ſayd that out of Cythia, & from Libia, men be atracted bithe greatnes of the Emperour to write of him.
            ¶ Nowe the Emperour hadde ſent a knyghte of hys houſe called

Lazaro Eſbende, for to take Gotte with two baners, and that he ſhould ſet at libertie the Marques Albert, and that he ſhould tarrye there, and ſee it deuided and caſt downe to the groūd, other places came in to ſurrender at their termes: for ſuche an order was taken, that in Saxonye there was nothing lefte to be done. But Boeme, whych is theyr neyghbour, was at an euyll poynte wyth theyr kyng, but they of the kyngdōe ſent Embaſſadours to the Emperour, wyth the faireſt woordes and greateſt offer yt mighte be, but his maieſty dyd kepe thē there for to be diſpatched when he ſaw his tyme.
            In theſe dayes duke Henrique of Brunzwique the yonge mā was agaynſte Breame with twoo thouſande horſemenne, and foure thouſande

footemenne, in the whych enterpryſe he hadde ayde of the Emperoure, becauſe he was an enemye to the Dukes of Lūburque Lutherans, & of the league, as it is writtē more particularlye by them whych haue in charge to wryte more at large. He was putte to flight by an Earle of Manſ
                  •
               elte, a Rebell and Lutheran, and Thumſerne Captayne for the Duke in Saxony, the whych wyth the menne that he had in Boeme, wyth a greate rode that he made aboute, he ioyned wyth thys Earle of Manſfyelde. They twoo beyng together, hadde toure thouſande horſemenne, and .xiiij. or .xv. M. footemen. Duke Henryque of Brunzwique cōplained vnto the Emperor vpō an other captaine

that hauing a commiſſion from hys maieſtye had made warre againſte thoſe cities, whiche came not to hym in tyme: it folowed that the Emperour cauſed the captaines to be takē.
            ¶ This ſtory is to be wryttē by them which write more particularlye of the Emperoure: but to ſpeake of the power of Duke John, as he hath ſaid ſithe, if the Emperour had tarryed twoo daies longer, he had receyued hym. wyth .xxx. M. footemen, and .vij. M. horſmē, a ſtrēgth ſufficient to fight with .iiii. M. horſmen and .xvi. M. footemenne, if he which was their leder had not bene worthe ſo much as to fulfil the nomber of thē that lacked for to be egale with our enemies. And it is cleare, that he had this ſtrēgth, beſide thoſe which were with him when he was

taken, and the baners which we put to flight before ye battaile. There remained whole .iiij. M. horſmen and xiiij. or .xv. M. footemen, beſide the accompt of thoſe which he loked for out of Boeme, and ſo he was determined, that if he might not fyghte to his aduauntage, to deuyde his men by gariſons, ſome in Madeburge, & one of his ſonnes in Got, an other in Viertēb
                  •
               rge, a captain in Eldrā, an other in Sonab
                  ••
               t, and of thys ſorte to compaſſe the Emperoure about: with taking away of his victuals, but al theſe policies came to nothing. For whē the duke of Saxon was ouerthrowen, they beganne to ſcatter, and not onelye theſe, but all ſo the Lantgraue: how and bi which waye he myghte make hys peace, ſo that they let fal al the truſt that they

had in their neyghbours and other ſtraungers, of whom they had receiued money & giftes, for the which they haue had as muche thanke and gaines that haue tarryed at home, as they which haue bene abrod and haue not folowed the Emperoure. Here it may be ſene of what weyght the parſon of duke John of Saxonie wyth hys power, hathe beene in Germanye. For after hys defaccion and taking, he hath had lyttle power which hath thought hym ſelfe to be a Gouernour ouerall. For after thys victorye, the Lantgraue is come to make interceſſion vnto Duke Morres for to haue hys pardone, and at the fyrſte, he offered to fulfyll manye condicions, but at the laſte he handeled the matter otherwayes.
            ¶ The Soliciters in thys, be

duke Morres and the Electour of Brandemburge, vnto whome the Emperour had a great reſpect, and at theyr contemplacion, he was content to heare what they woulde propone for ye Lantgraue, but neuerthe leſſe he woulde haue the thing done whych he thought conuenient. And ſo he anſwered them what was hys pleaſure ſhoulde be done. The Lātgraue replyed, addyng yet more thereunto, but he lefte oure euer one thyng whyche muſte nedes be done. The Emperoure aunſwered reſolutelye that he woulde not treate wyth the Launtgraue, but it ſhould be at hys pleaſure. Thys aunſwere was gyuen to the Launtgraue being .viij. leagues from oure campe, from whence he then departed in

great deſperacion, ſo that there was no hope for remedy, but onelye that which he feared moſt. And he ſayd, for nothing in the worlde he would ſubmit him ſelfe to the Emperours mercy, & to be at his wyl. And wyth this determinacion, he wrot to duke Morres certain chapiters with his owne hande, how he would agree & enter, which wer the very ſame that the Emperoure demaunded. Thys concluſion the Emperoure woulde haue concluded in Hale, in Saxon, ſtanding in the way toward the coū
               trey of the Lantgraue, the whyche way the Emperour entēded to lead his campe. The ſame daye that hys maieſty came to Hale, the ther came the Marques Albert of Brandemburge, to whom as it is ſaid: he had geuen lybertye wyth hys banners▪
               
ſtanderdes, and artilerye which he had loſt, becauſe he ſhould lacke nothing that belonged to libertye. He reſted a great tyme there: for one of the things that pleaſed him moſt in his warre, was that he had recouered this prince whiche came vnto ye Emperour and ſayd: Lord I thank God and you. He ſaid no more, & I thinke this to be be ſufficient.
            ¶ Two daies before the Emperoure parted frō Viertēberge. The king of Romaines had taken ye way toward Prage, with, iij. M. horſmē & vj. M. footemen, with thoſe which were ſent frō the Marques of Ma
               
                  •
               enan. The Emperor remoued frō Viertēburge to go againſt ye Lantgraue, as againſt ye roote of al myſchief in Germany, which was neceſſari to be plucked vp: for letting this

great deſperacion, ſo that there was no hope for remedy, but onelye that which he feared moſt. And he ſayd, for nothing in the worlde he would ſubmit him ſelfe to the Emperours mercy, & to be at his wyl. And wyth this determinacion, he wrot to duke Morres certain chapiters with his owne hande, how he would agree & enter, which wer the very ſame that the Emperoure demaunded. Thys concluſion the Emperoure woulde haue concluded in Hale, in Saxon, ſtanding in the way toward the coū
               trey of the Lantgraue, the whyche way the Emperour entēded to lead his campe. The ſame daye that hys maieſty came to Hale, thether came the Marques Albert of Brandemburge, to whom as it is ſaid: he had geuen iyberrye wyth hys banners.

ſtanderdes, and artilerye which he had loſt, becauſe he ſhould lacke nothing that belonged to libertye. No reſted a great tyme there: for one of the things that pleaſed him moſt in his warre, was that he had recouered this prince whiche came vnto ye Emperour and ſayd: Lord I thank God and you. He ſaid no more, & I thinke this to be be ſufficient.
            ¶ Two daies before the Emperoure parted frō Viertēberge. The king of Romaines had taken ye way toward Prage, with, iii. M. horſmē & vj. M. footemen, with thoſe which were ſent frō the Marques of Ma
               
                  •
               enan. The Emperor remoued frō Viertēburge to go againſt ye Lantgraue, as againſt ye roote of al myſchief in Germany, which was neceſſari to be plucked vp: for letting this

growe, and to goe parſonallye into Boeme, althoughe that kyngdome might be ſubdued: yet neuertheleſſe the Launtgraue might ſtand in caſe to begyn the warres agayne, but ye Lātgraue ſubdued: Boeme ſhould be more lyght to be taken in hande: For why that kingdom and al theirs of the rebels in Germanye, looked for the ſuſtentacion of ye Lantgraue as in a heade in whom they dyd depende nexte vnto Duke John, and therefore the Emperour would that the king ſhould part in haſt, becauſe the heate of his great victory myght encreaſe his ſtrēgth, ſo yt this kyngdōe which feared ſo much ye Emperor might be brought more 
                  •
               ightli to obedience, by force or other wayes.
            ¶ The daye before the partyng of the king, the Hūgarians came to

kyſſe the handes of the Emperoure with ſupplicaciō, that it might pleaſe him to haue in remēbraunce the ſuccour of Hungary, they made an Oracion according to the time of their fortune. The Emperour put them in comfort, and wryt vnto ye eſtates of theyr kyngdome, that they were worthye to haue hys parſon, & commaunded to be geuen to euery captayne a chaine of golde, to the value of. 3 .c. crounes, & a paye to be made to theyr mē, the vohych they did take wyth thankes, & cōſidered it to be a gift of fauour. His maieſtie gaue to duke Morres ye robes of ye eleccion, with ye tounes belongīg to ye ſame, & becauſe amōgeſt greate thinges he would not forgeat the litle, he commaunded to be geuē to the ſoldiers ye which did ſwim to get the barges,

garmentes of crymyſon after their faſhyon, and to eueryche one .xxx. crounes, wyth the aduauntage of their banners.
            ¶ The Emperor being come vnto Hale in Saxonye, which is a great towne ſtandyng in the dyoces of Madeburge, although duke John had taken it for his owne. His maieſtie lodged in the houſe of the byſhop, and there determined to put in effect, that the which by the interceſſion of the electors, it had pleaſed the Emperour to conſent. The condicions general whiche to my remembraunce be theſe.
            ¶ Firſt that the Lantgraue ſubmit hym ſelfe into the handes of the Emperour with al his poſſeſſions, & to ſwere fidelitie to his maieſtye, to giue the .iiij. principall townes that

he hath, and for to be caſt downe at his commaundement.
            ¶ He dothe geue to the Emperoure .v. C. and. 
                  •
               . M. Florauns of gold with al his artilery, which be. ij C. peeces catted, & to deliuer Duke Henrique of Brunzwique, whiche he had kept priſoner ſence the yeare M. D .xlv. and to reſtore to ye ſayde duke, al thinges that he hathe vſurped, and to be in the determinacion of the chamber imperiall.
            Thys is the pointe whiche is to hym ſo muche voorthe, that not for to come there
                  •••
               , he hathe ſuſtayned hys opinious ſo long, vntyll that he hathe ſworne fide liue to the Emperour: & the nobles alſo be ſworn, that when the Lantgraue goeth oute of the way, they ſhal take him & bryng hym to the Emperoure, who nowe

pardoneth hym his lyfe, and taketh away the Vande imperial, whyche was proclaimed againſt him, & like wyſe remitteth him from perpetual priſon. Before the commyng of the Launtgraue to Hale, there was a great queſtion and bebate betwene the Hiſpaniardes & the Dutchmen: it was ſo farre forth, that the Emperour put him ſelf amongſt them. It was a neceſſarye remedye, for none but only he might ſuffice, howe be it that it was not without peril which might haue chaūced, being betwene ij. parties ſo furious, which now be ganne to be blynde.
            ¶ At thys time the Emperor dyd geue licence to ye Embaſſadours of Boeme, ſaying vnto thē in ſumme, yt he wold make interceſſiō to ye king, and yt if the realme was greued in

any thing, it ſhould be diſgrauated. But thys was to be vnderſtanded cōming firſte into the obedience of their king in doing their duty, and if not, his maieſti could do no leſſe, but to take the affaires of his brother as his owne proper. This was in ſ
                  •
               me hys anſwer, how be it in hys letters they were anſwered more at large.
            ¶ Now the day is come that the Lātgraue cōmeth to Hale with one hundreth horſes: he dyd lyght at the lodging of Duke Morres hys ſōne in lawe, nowe Electour. The nexte day at the houre apoynted, he came to the pallace accompanyed wyth theſe two Electours. The Emperour was in the haule wyth the ceremonies accuſtomed in theſe thinges. There were manye lordes and knightes of Almme which came to ſe that which they thought neuer to

haue ſene in the Lātgraue: but whē he came before the Emperoure, he did take of hys bonnet, and kneled downe vpon his knees, & his chauncelour lykewyſe: the whyche by the name of his lord ſaid theſe wordes. ¶ Right high, moſt mighty & victorious prince, Emperour and gracious Lord, Phillip the Launtgraue of Heſſene hathe greuouſlye offended your Maieſtie beyng in theſe warres, and geuing a cauſe of iuſte indignacion for the enducing of other parſons to fal in the ſame fault, wherfore your maieſty may vſe al rigour in ye correcciō of his deſeruing. He confeſſeth meekely that he is ſorowful with al his hart, & folowing the offers that he hath offered for to come before your maieſtye, he yeldeth himſelfe vnto your maieſtye in

al pointes freely at your wyll. Hū
               bly beſeching for the loue. & merci of God, yt your maieſty wyl be content to vſe of your goodnes & clemenci to pardon and forgeat theſe ſaid offences, and to take away the baniſhmēt imperial, which your maieſty hathe ſo iuſtly declared againſt hym parmitting ye he may poſſeſſe his lādes, & gouern his vaſſailes, whych make ſupplicacion that it may pleaſe you to pardon and to receiue them in to your grace, knowledging euermore to make recogniſance vnto your maieſty, and to take you only rightfullye ordeined of God to be our ſoueraigne Lord and Emperor, to obey & to do ſeruice to your maieſty, & to the whole Empyre, al yt a prynce & vaſſalle is bound to do, and ſo euer to continue, and neuer to do, or treat

any thing to the contrary, for to be al his life a meke and obedient ſeruāt in knowing of the great benefite of thys pardon obtayned at your maieſty, for the whiche he deſyreth and ſhall deſier al hys lyfe to ſerue wyth thankes, as he is bound in ſuch ſort, that your maieſty may know in effecte, that the Lantgraue & his ſhal kepe and obſerue as they be bounde by the articles, by the whyche your Maieſties pleaſure hath bene for to graunt. Theſe were the woordes of the Lantgraue in effect.
            ¶ The Emperoure commaunded one of his Coūcel Almane who ſayde theſe woordes. Hys Maieſty (pyteful Lord) doth vnderſtande what the Lantgraue hath ſayd: that although he hath confeſſed and hath greuouſlye offended, ſo that he hath

deſerued al puniſhment, thoughe it were the greateſt that might be geuen, whiche is to all the worlde well knowē. Notwithſtanding, his maieſty hauing a reſpecte that he hathe ſubmitted him ſelfe at his feete, and by his clemency accuſtomed, & likewiſe at the interceſſion of the prynces which haue intreated, he is content to take awaye the baniſhment iuſtlye declared agaynſte hym, and not to punyſhe hym wyth payne capitall as he hathe deſerued for the rebellyon committed agaynſte hys Maieſtye, nor with perpetual prieſonne, neyther yet wyth the confyſcacion of hys goodes: but hencefoorthe to be contente wyth the Artycles in the Chapters, whyche hys Maieſtye hathe graunted.

He receiueth him into his grace and mercye wyth the ſubiectes and ſeruantes of his houſe, ſo that he accō
               pliſhe al that is cōteined in his chapters, ſo that he doth not go directlye nor indirectly in any thyng againſt them. And that his maieſty doth beleue and truſt that the Lantgraue and his ſubiectes wyll deſerue the great mercy and pitye that he hath vſed towarde them. Theſe be the wordes of ye anſwer to ye Lātgraue.
            ¶ Al thys tyme the Lantgraue kneeled vpon his knees: but when he did ſtand vp, his maieſty touched not his hand, nor yet made vnto him any ſight of curteſy. It was a thyng notable to ſee hym kneling a pryſoner, & the duke Henrique of Brunzwique which had bene his priſoner, at lybertye, ſtandyng by one foote.

Here might bee ſene the chaungeable ſucceſſe of man. This finiſhed, the duke of Aluoy came vnto hym, and ſaid: you muſt depart, deſiring the two electors to ſupper with him. So the Lantgraue was led out of ye palace vnto ye caſtel where ye duke did lie, & after ſupper he appoīted hī a lodging in ye caſtel, & commaūded Don Ihō de Gneue
                  •
               a, captain of ye terce of Lumbardy to be his keper.
            ¶ At the fyrſte the Launtgraue did take his impriſonmente vnpacientlye: for of a trueth, he thought 
                  •
               his priſōmēt not being perpetual but temporall, that it ſhoulde haue been ſo light, and diſſembled that he might haue gone a huntyng in the foreſt of Heſſon: but it ſemeth that God hath permitted that where he thoughte for to excede all other in

Almayne in buſines and quarrels, that in the ſelfe ſame, he is come for to write agaynſt himſelfe, with hys owne hande, intreating of no other thing, but to be a priſoner perpetual or temporall, at the diſcrecion of him, into whoſe handes he hath ſubmitted himſelf, and ſith is come to knowledge that his mouth hath ſpoken againſt hym. He beganne to quiet himſelfe, and to take his fortune with more pacience: ſo he that prayſed hymſelf ſo muche in buſyneſſe it is come to paſſe, that he is loſte in trouble and buſineſſe. The Duke of Saxon whiche hath praiſed hymſelfe to be a man of warre, and of ſtrength, it is come to paſſe that he hath loſte hymſelfe in the warre.
            
               ¶ Theſe twho heades of the Lutherans which haue ſo muche dyſquieted al chriſtendome, nowe god hath geuen them into the handes of the Emperour, with ſo honourable meanes, to hym and his fame ſo lōg as the worlde ſhall endure. And ſithe for to ſpeake of theſe two princes, I thinke it ſhall not bee farre from the purpoſe, to ſay what euery manne may iudge in them. The Duke of Saxon is a manne of a greate courage, eloquente, and diſcrete. And in his manours he hath a grace in all thing that he ſayth or dooeth. He is liberall, and for theſe good qualities, he is muche beloued in Germanye and well frended. He is more quyete then the Launtgraue, by whoſe

counſaile, as they ſaye, they beganne the warre this yere paſt. The Lantgraue differeth muche in condicions frō this: for why he is vnquiete in extreme, a great frend and main tayner of quarelles and ſtryfe. He is not of ſuche effabilitie, nor ſo light of ſpeche in his practice and conuerſacion, but rather a light witte, and as to his ciuilitie he is not of that opinion emongeſt folkes, nor lyke to the Duke of Saxon: but becauſe he hath gone more diligentlye aboute this buſineſſe paſte, and being captayne generall of the league, he hath geuē more occaſion to ſpeake of him then of the other, although the duke hath been more of aucthoritie.
            ¶ In the citie of hale came vnto his maieſtye a great greting and congratulacion of this victorie, frō
               
the Pope. And in his briefe that he wrote vnto hym, he ſette hym foorth with the renowme of Marimo, with mighty names as wel deſerued as geuen. Theſe thinges done, his maieſtye parted from hale when he hadde prouided for the raſyng of Gotte, the artillerye was broughte to Francfort, and moreouer from all the fortes of the Laūtgraue, excepte one that his maieſty left him. The artilerie and municions were broughte from all partes to Franckeforte, for thyther was broughte al the artillerye and municions, which was gotten in theſe warres, excepte the hundreth peces of Uiertemberge of the whiche wer ſente fiftie to millayne, and fiftie to Naples. The two hūdred that wer taken from the Launtgraue, and

one C. from Gotte. And the hundreth that were taken of the cities at the breaking vp of the campe of the league, thei wer brought thither for to carry into Flaūders. Of theſe iiii. C. the Emperor ſent into ſpayn one. C. with one other hūdreth, and xl. which he did kepe for to be ſent thither. In Flaunders remayne an C. and lx. for why it is mete yt in all partes of his eſtates where ye fame of this victorye is knownen, that the the ſignes and tokens thereof bee ſeen.
            ¶ Al theſe thinges done, ye Emperrour remoued to Newremberge folowing the coſte of Boeme. becauſe yet he woulde geue more hea
                  •
                to the affayres of that kingdom, frō whence his maieſtye hadde newes▪
               
that it was ſubdued: ſo muche is worthe the reputacion of a Prynce in any enterpriſe, howe di
                  ••
               icile and harde ſo euer they bee. Nowe the Emperoure dyd take the waye throughe Turing a countrey fruitfull and full of ſtrayte paſſages, the whiche they of the countrey hadde ſo muche fortyfyed, that it ſemed that they putte a truſte muche differyng from that ye folowed: for they hadde ſuche a confidence in the ſtrength of their Lorde, that they loked not for the Emperour 
                  ••
                bee there victorious, for 
                  〈…〉
                wer 
                  〈◊〉
                that i
                  •
                had 
                  〈…〉
               , 
                  〈◊〉
                been īpoſſible 
                  〈…〉
               
               
warre of ye Laūtgraue agaynſt the Duke of Brunzwique, and of them of Breame, with the yonge manne Duke Henrique of Brunzwique. and with Groūgue, & Vierſpergue and other particularities, for I wyl not enlarge my Comētarie, nor take awaye from them whiche haue in charge to wryte theſe and other: this that I putte here, maye be a help to theyr remembraunce, and alſo becauſe I wyll not leſe for my parte theſe worthye dedes, aboue al other as theſe be of the Emperour.
            
               ❧ In this waye of Turyng came to ſubmitte hymſelfe vnto the Emperoure, the eldeſt ſonne of the Duke of Saxon, whiche had been in Gotte, and ratified all that hys father hadde graunted, and when he came to Bamberge, he receyued

there a legate from the Pope. And from thence to Nuremberge where he abode certayne dayes, lokyng for to take reſolucion of the citie, where he was diſpoſed to kepe the diet, for in Vlme it was thought not to be commodious, as it behoued for all the princes and cities of Germanye to come together, eſpeciallye for health.
            ¶ At this tyme the Citizens of ye mightie cities of Lubique, came before the Emperoure, declaryng that they hadde neuer offended: and trueth it is, for they neuer dyd thing agaynſte his maieſtye. Breame takyng the kyng of Denmarke for theyr interceſſour, labored for their pardon. The duke of Pomerana and Lunemburge, laboured with excuſes, prayers, and iuſtificacions

Theyr affayres, Brunzwique, Hilſon, and Breme, came to Auguſte to bee at the Emperours mercye, for why, they dydde ſee theyr correccion at hande, for it ſhould not haue been nede, to haue his perſon, nor yet any of his armye to chaſtice them, but to haue ſent to the lordes theyr neyghbours to make them warre, the whiche they deſyred as a thyng muche for theyr profyte. Hamburge came to ſurrender to the Emperoure beyng in Nuremberge. And ſo the head Cities Maritane, ſtandyng vpon the Sea, came to ſurrender, m
                  ••
               yng great paymentes, ſubmyttyng themſelfe to the obedyence Imperiall, which they haue not knowen vntyll nowe and other thynges to bee done as

it ſhoulde pleaſe the Emperoure to commaunde.
            ¶ Nowe the Emperoure hath broughte to paſſe all theſe thynges in Germanye, whiche haue been ſo hyghe in the toppe of pryde, and with ſo greate power, that it ſemed to the heades of them, that theyr pryde was no preſumpcion, but all reaſon, and withoute anye doubte theyr power was ſo greate, that it ſemed to all menne, that there was not ſtrength in the reſte of chriſtendome for to reſyſt. But he that may dooe all thynges, hath ſuffered the Emperour to haue the victorye, for the whiche his name ſhall remayne more cleare then anye of the other Emperours of Rome, conſyderyng the greate dedes and the

cauſes wherefore, ſo that al princes be bounde, whiche ſtande in the determinacion of the churche, as the countye Palatyne, the Duke Morres, the Duke of Viertemberge, the marques of Brandemburge Elector, and all they of their names. And they of Almayne, whiche ſemed to bee moſt impoſſible, as the ſelfe Launtgraue, with other princes, and ioyntlye all the cities of the Empyre, from Auguſte, where his maieſtye kept the diet. He ſente with the Cardinall of Trente large relacion to his holines.
            ¶ The greatnes of theſe warres, deſerue a relacion more at large, then this of myne, but I with thys briefe remembraunce, maye helpe them whiche write more particularlye:

but ſurely this I ſay, yt when Ceaſar had conquered Fraunce in x. yeres, he filled the world with his Comentaries. And Rome made ſupplicacions to the gods, whē thei had paſſed the Ryne, and had been x. dayes in Almayne, he thoughte yt it ſuffiſed to haue ye authoritie & the dignitie of the people which gouerned the worlde. The Emperoure in one yere, hath ſubdued this braue prouince, witneſſe the Romayns of our tyme. Charles the great in. xxx yeres ſubdued Saxony. The Emperour in leſſe then fowre monthes was lorde of all the whole prouince. The greatneſſe of this warre is woorthye a greatter ſtile then mine is: for I cannot write but ye naked trueth, without anye affeccion, but yet the remembraunce may be perpetual

according to the deſeruing of the greatnes of the enterpriſe, the whiche, and of the yere paſſed, hath been gouerned by the Emperour ſo ſtreight, that if it had been guyded otherwayes, it hadde not come vnto the ende that we haue ſene it: for at al tymes when it hath bene nedeful to be gouerned by arte, the order hath been obſerued to that effecte neceſſarie. And alſo when it hath bene conuenient to woorke by force, the determinacion hath bene ſo executed with ſuche courage & ſtrēgth, as hath bene nedeful. Wherfore his fame is worthy to bee ſo muche ſuperiour to the other Capitayns in time paſt, ſo much as in the vertue & goodneſſe, he is to them all.
         
         
            
            ¶ A letter ſente from the kyng of Romayns vnto the Emperour his Maieſty, vpō
                ye ſucceſſe of Boeme.
            
               THis that we haue here new, ſith the third day of July is that the teweſday laſt, thei of ye citie of Prage, beyng as it may be thought, in pride and malicious intenion, and we hauyng deferred ye terme of the Sitacion, at theyr ſupplicacion vntil the Friday, thei begā aboute the middeſt of the daye to ſhoote of their hackebuttes at oure menne, beyng on this parte of the ryuer, ſo that they were forced to do the ſame. We tooke an order for to defende their breakyng out vpō vs:

for as yet the marques of Marenano was not come with his menne. But we hadde knoweledge at that tyme that he was within fowre leagues. We ſente a Gentlemanne in poſte to haſte his commyng, thei of the citie perſeuering in their purpoſe, and not contente with ye ſhotte of their hackbutters, they ſhotte of their artillery, with the which they kylled fiue or ſixe parſons, and beganne to fortify themſelfes to make theyr rampiers, and ſette forth their ordinaunce vpon the porte of the bridge. And in the mornyng folowyng they did the ſame, and we hadde knowledge when it was late, that the borderers on the other parte of the riuer wer commyng for to enter into the citie that nyghte. We ſente one number of horſmen armed and

Hūgarians, and Charles 
                  •
               aradin with them to paſſe the riuer by ford, and firſt to admoniſh them to kepe theyr houſes in peace, and yf they would not ſo doe, for to kyll & make ſlaughter. When it was day, they of the citie ſeing oure horſemen on the other parte, ſet foorth to the noumber of one thouſande, with handegunnes and other weapons agaīſt our menne, but they wer brokē, put to flight, and ſlayn in ye chaſe to the
                  •
               r gates ii. C. and. L. and taken one C. and .xx. of the citie, whence they ſhotte many muſcattes and artilery but none of ours were killed. With this hande that we had of them, and with the comming of the marques of Marenano with his footemen, about the middeſt of the daye, theyr heartes fayled & beganne to flatter,

promiſyng that they woulde turne and take away their artillery from the places where they had laide it, & to ſende foorth vittailes of theyr citie for our folkes, whiche before thei had ꝓhibited, kepīg their gates ſo that there might be no paſſage.
            ¶ The ſupplicacion for the prolongacion of the terme the whiche we hadde graunted them, was with crafte, ſubtiltye, and malice, ſo that thei might prouyde themſelues and preuayle by ſtrength, as it hath appeared, for incontinent thei wrote twelue letters into diuers partes for ayde, and of thoſe they hadde ſente onelye three, wherof one copy was brought vnto vs: but of a truth thei haue repēted them, and forſakē the letters that they haue ſente, and kepe the reſt.
            
               
               ❧ The Fridaye paſte whiche was the daye of the accompliſhmēt of the terme, that they hadde geuen them to make aunſwer to our Sitacion, they came to the caſtel of the olde and newe citie, about fiue hundred parſons: and beyng ſette in the greate Halle, their Biſhoppes, Barons, & Gentlemē, which we cauſed to come thyther, we commaunded thē for to ſpeake & geue anſwer to ye Sitaciō in ye which was declared ye articles of ye dedes, which wer done againſt vs. Thē thei for themſelfes, & in the name of their Citizens aunſwered that thei did knowe to haue erred, and greuouſly offended, and kneling thei made ſupplicaciō to be receiued & to haue their pardō. Vnto the which we commaunded them to be aunſwered, yt they dyd knowe

right wel what thei had done to our diſpleaſure before, and now of late ſith our commyng as it is manifeſt. Then we cōmaūded it for to be read there, more at large then it had beē ſēt in ye Citaciō. And when ye reding was accompliſhed al kneling, and for the moſt part weping, beſoughte that it mighte pleaſe vs to graūt thē their pardon, taking for oratours & aduocates, my ſonne Hernando, the duke of Auguſt and of Texē being there preſente, to the whiche as it is here the cuſtom, we did graunt, cō
               maunding them to aunſwer, if they had any thing to ſay, or to alledge in their diſcharge, for we would bewel content to determine by the waye of Juſtice, ſo that it mighte bee ſeen wherby they dyd hold: & thei anſwered, thei haue nothīg to alledge, but

by ſupplicacion: hearing this, we cō
               maunded to be ſayd, that althoughe their errours and exceſſes were ſo great, that thei haue deſerued great correccion and puniſhment, hauing a reſpect to the peticion of my ſonne, the dukes, and other parſons which haue made interceſſion for them, we would receiue them and geue them certain articles, whiche we woulde haue to be accompliſhed: and in the meane time to remain & to be kepte in a great ſtewe, ſtāding in the ſaid haule, where we commaunded thē to be vntyll we had bene at counſell and dined. Then we ſente them the articles whiche we would haue accompliſhed, whiche be theſe.
            Firſte that thei ſhall canſell and breake al the ſeales of the league yt they had made at the firſte dyct and

parlament that we did holde of the kingdom, with the whiche we were content: for why then we thought it ſhould haue bene for the beſt.
            ¶ The ſeconde, that they geue in to our handes all the priuiledges that they haue, and to denull & take awaye at our pleaſure, & to reforme as we ſhal thinke conuenient, for of a truth there be ſome neceſſary to be had.
            ¶ The third, that they ſhal geue al the priuiledges of the offices and conferaries, of the whiche thei haue many, and cauſe of muche diſorder.
            ¶ The fowrth, that they geue vs all the rentes, caſtels, vaſſalles, and cuſtomes, ſo that hence forewarde, they may be ours.
            ¶ The fifth, that thei ſhall deliuer vs all the letters and wrytinges

of leagues, confederations, and intelligēces, that thei had made with John duke Frederike of Saxony, and thoſe of this kingdome, & al other of what degree, eſtate or cō
               diciō ſo euer thei be, ſubiectes or not our ſubiects, emōg ye which, we truſt to find ſome thing for our purpoſe.
            ¶ The ſixt, yt the cuſtom of their ſeruice yt thei haue graunted for .iii. yeres, ſhalbe perpetual and for euer ours.
            ¶ The ſeuenth to deliuer vs all the artilerye and municions yt they haue, without any reteining in their cuſtodie, & yt al their harnes & weapō yt thei haue and hold, (the ſweord except,) to bee brought into ye haule of the citie, & to bee done therewith accordyng to oure wyll and pleaſure▪
            
            
               ¶ This accompliſhed, we were cōtent to pardon al ye people, except certain parſones whiche haue grieuouſly offended, ye which we wil ſhal be reſerued for to be puniſhed. For why this cānot be left vndone, with out offēce of Juſtice, and preiudice of the common wealth.
            ¶ Theſe ſaid articles by thē ſene, although thei ſemed hard, neuertheleſſe thei did conſente, howbeit they thought it mete and nedefull to bee propouned vnto the people, and for this we commaunded to be ſette at libertie, fortie or fiftie parſons, for ye excecucion Therof. The whiche propouned, accepted, and conſented of all ye people, yeſterday ſaterday thei broughtin, and deliuered al theyr priuiledges, excepte certayn partyculers,

which be many, and can not be ſo ſpedily brought together. Thei broughte alſo yeſterdaye, a greate parte of theyr artilery, and this day they ſhall bryng in the reſt, and the harnes and weapon into the haule of theyr citye accordyng vnto oure commaundement, and ſo to accompliſhe theſe articles, as ſhortelye as can bee poſſible, in the whiche there is no doubte, ſi
                  •
               he theſe two moſte harde and difficile of the priuiledge and artillerye bee nowe welnere accompliſhed and fulfilled. Thoſe whiche bee priſoners, made vnto vs yeſterdaye ſupplicacion to bee deſyuered, but they bee aunſwered to haue pacience two or three dayes vntyll all thyng bee finyſhed. For all thys we haue deliuered from

thence, certayne whiche we knowe not to be culpable, and the other remayne ſtyll in priſone. This is it that is done vntyll nowe, of the whiche you ſhall make account vnto his maieſtie, ſo that he may know in what eſtate we be here, and cōmō alſo with my ſonne.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Fleteſtrete within Temple barre, at the ſigne of the hand & ſtarre, by Richard Tottel.
            
               ❧ Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
   