
      
         
            
            ¶The cruel aſſault of Gods Fort.
            By Edward the ſixt, of England kyng,
            A Fort was made gods truth to ſhield
            In whoſe lyfe time / by good rulyng,
            Both friend and ſoe to it dyd yelde.
            But when for ſynne of hys owne flocke,
            The Lord in wrath tooke him away:
            Leauing the Fort to his next ſtocke / 
            The enmies then ſought out theyr pray.
            Then blew vp trūpets of Papiſts ſoūde
            Souldiers to call / and wages gaue:
            Come who ſo would / was armed rounde,
            None they refuſde, but dreſt them braue.
            The field was pytcht of Papiſts part,
            With corned caps, tippets, and gownes.
            Theyr ordnaunce lay redy in cart,
            To beat the fort of gods truth downe.
            The generall Gardner / braue and ſtone
            And Captaine Boner, marcht foorth amain,
            Bourne with ſtanderd, cryed out,
            Al arme / al arme, our ſhauelinges traine.
            The Auncient which that Bourne bare / 
            Were fierce wolues teeth, wt blood beſprent
            Fire and Fagot, whych did declare,
            Their rauenous hartes to Chriſtians ment.
            Then doctour Martin, as clarke of army
            With Doctour Story, the maſter Gonner:
            Theſe two in office, were as truſty,
            As Gardner, Bourne / or byſhop Bonner.
            A cry was made, throughout the hoſt:
            With fire and hempe, all to deſtroy:
            Where euer they were, in al the coſt,
            That dyd the Popes power ſeke to noye.
            The Fort thus ſieged on euery ſyde,
            With crye ſo fierce, to kyll them all:
            
               
                  •••
               te for feare durſt not abyde,
            But from Gods Fort to them dyd fall.
            Then might ye heare the Canons rore / 
            Which Bourne and Watſon falſely ſhot:
            Yelde, yeld theſe cryde, from heretickes lore
            Or batter we ſhal / both wall and fort.
            No / no (quoth they within the Fort)
            We yelde vs not Gods truth to ſtayne:
            Though you deſtroy vs in this ſort / 
            God ſhal our Fort / wyth force maintayne.
            Wyth that they all the Fort wythin / 
            Wyth ſighes and ſobs to God out cryde:
            Thou Lord of hoſtes, way not our ſynne,
            But ayde thy flocke ſo wo betyde.
            For though with ſume, we cauſde this day
            That our good king yu ſhouldſt thus take:
            Yet Lord with bitternes of ſoule we pray,
            Strength vs againſt this firye lake.
            This done they blowde a chereful blaſt,
            Vnto the ſouldiers in the Fort:
            Arme ye / arme ye, in all the haſt,
            Our enmies now to Fort reſort.
            The Auncient which was ſpred on wall,
            Had a white Lambe, with red ſpots thicke:
            And in gold letters were theſe wordes all,
            Why do ye Sauls, againſt me kicke?
            Forth came Rogers, Hooper & Sanders
            Vpon the walles the Fort to fende:
            We yelde not (ſaid they) to ſuch deſtroyers,
            But fight we will vnto the ende.
            To theſe Steuen Gardner, gaue onſet,
            And layde on lode, as wolfe on pray:
            He tooke them priſoners, with his falſe net / 
            And ſent them to the fire ſtraightway.
            Then Story the maiſter of the ſhot / 
            On Papiſts rampire braue and proude:
            For ſpilling bloud he cared not,
            Aſſault / aſſault he cryde aloude.
            Theſe were no ſooner of the wall,
            But vp lept Rydley and Latimer:
            To reſcue Gods fort, ſo nere to fall.
            And did with force, the foes encounter.
            And biſhop Cranmer / though with gyle,
            The enmies ſtole him from the Fort:
            Yet boldly fought with them a whyle,
            And folowed his mates, in lyke ſort.
            Then doctour Weſton, at theſe out ſhot,
            The pellets of Rome, and them did mayme:
            So that away they paſſed not,
            But were deſtroyed with fire and flame.
            But Bradford then on wall vp lept,
            And Philpot eke by hym did ſtand:
            Cardmaker and Taylour alſo vp crept,
            And theſe by truth dyd neytheyr band.
            Biſhop Boner, on theſe laide hand,
            And to Smithfield ſent them in haſt:
            But to the death / theſe did withſtand,
            And would not yeld to enmies blaſt.
            Then blewe the Papiſts to aſſault,
            And ſet a watch about the Fort:
            Of knightes and yemen to finde ſome fault / 
            To make them yelde after this ſort.
            And ſworen men in euery coſt,
            They did compell to watche and ſpye:
            If any did reſiſt their hoſt / 
            They muſt preſent them for to dye.
            The Fort with enmies laid round about,
            And al the captaines ſo cruelly ſlaine:
            The ſoldiours therof with courage ſtout,
            Kept yet the walles with might and maine.
            Now ſcale the walles (quoth Boner then)
            Behold the captaines we haue ſlaine:
            Ranſacke the Fort / deſtroy all men / 
            Both wemen & children let none remaine,
            Then ſcaling lathers were vp rearde,
            And Iohn Auales on them with targe:
            His knees had croſſes becauſe he fearde,
            The ſteps wold breake and hang him large
            Vp came Beard, by Vales his man / 
            Armed al round as dronkardes vſe:
            His head was cloſde, with goodale can / 
            And in his hand a Tauerners cruſe.
            But they in Fort / did with them play / 
            And caſt them bribes, which made thē yelde,
            They ſtriuing who ſhould haue the pray,
            Fought one with other in their owne fielde.
            Yet battred was this Fort full ſore / 
            With vehement ſhot on Papiſts part:
            The walles they bet ſtyl more and more / 
            But yet the fortmen would not ſtart.
            Then puſſhed the Papiſts wt their pikes,
            The Hargabuſſes ſhot out amayne:
            And dyms the ayre and many ſtrikes / 
            Of them that did the Fort ſuſtayne.
            The Holberts and the Bowmen eke,
            Came preaſing toward the Fort with ſpede:
            Theſe were the rakehels that did ſeke,
            To haue mens goodes playde Cains dede.
            There might ye ſee the Fort about.
            Great ſtreames of bloode & bodies ſlayne.
            The handes of al the hoſt throughout,
            With blood of Saints they did them ſtaine.
            In this aſſault the infants out cryde,
            And eke their mothers as wydowes left,
            To ſee theyr friendes before them dyde / 
            And al their goodes from them bereft.
            Though thus the Fort, was almoſt gone,
            By cruel aſſault of enmyes bolde:
            Yet ſome within the Fort alone,
            To God did crye / Lord keepe thy holde.
            Thē God did ſend his ſlaue Death down
            Into the Papiſts hoſt among:
            Which ſlew the chiefeſt in all the towne / 
            And greateſt captaines in the throng.
            By thys great ſtroke of mightie Ioue,
            The vehement force of Papiſts fell:
            And ſent this Fort (which is hys Loue)
            A godly captaine to keepe it well.
            Which when in Fort ſhe did appere / 
            And flag of truce ſpred in her hand:
            Aloud ſhe cried, ceaſe nowe your yre / 
            And yelde to me right heyre of England:
            Then ſcattred were the Papiſts hoſt / 
            Their flags of fire to ground did fall.
            Their flaming brandes which oft they toſt,
            Were clene out quentch at our Quenes call.
            Crye was then made to God on hye / 
            Of al the ſouldiours in the Fort:
            Oh praiſe the Lorde for victorye,
            In helping vs after this ſort.
            Now yelde (they cried) our brethren dere,
            Which haue againſt Gods truth ſo ſtoode:
            Behold our Quene doth profer here,
            To graunt ye peace to chaūge your moode.
            Which if her clemencie you refuſe / 
            And pleade not for your liues graunt:
            The law of armes ſhe muſt nedes vſe / 
            On ſuch as are to her repugnaunt.
            Yelde, yelde therefore ye chiefe captaines
            Example geue to all your hoſt:
            Or els wyll God reuenge with paines / 
            The bloud of thoſe whom ye haue roſt.
            And all ye Chriſtians of this England / 
            Your trumpets ſound to Gods hie praiſe,
            On Gods head ſet a Bay garland / 
            For your triumphe of all theſe fraies.
            Yeld now your liues after ſuch ſort,
            As God may not this Fort ſo plage.
            Strength now your ſelues in this gods fort
            That ye yelde no more to enmies rage.
            So God wil ſpare vs our Quene long,
            So God will make our land encreaſe:
            So God wyl builde our fort ſo ſtrong,
            That no enmies dare to it preaſe.
            To this ſay al right Chriſten men,
            God ſaue our Quene. Amen. Amen.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
                     •
                   I. A.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by Iohn Awdeley, dwelling by great S. Bartelmewes beyonde Alderſgate.
         
      
   