
      
         
            
            ECCLESI. XX.
            ¶Remember Death, and
thou ſhalt neuer ſinne.
            
               
                  YE Adams broode and earthly
wightes, which breath now
on the earth.
            Come daunce thys trace, and
marke the ſong of me moſt
mighty Death.
            Ful wel my might is knowen
& ſene, in al the world about,
            When I do ſtrike, of force they
yeld, both noble, wiſe & ſtout.
            Of liuing things which breath and bray, I raigne as puiſant Prince,
            No ſooner take they lyfe, but I, purſue it to conuince.
            In Mothers wombe the Babe I ſlay, in birth ſometime I ſtrike,
            No place nor ſtate may me exempt, to me all is a like.
            The Prince with Begger to graue I take, the yong eke wyth the old,
            
               
                  ••
               e wiſe graue men with fooles and dolts, I lodge them in one fold.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                courtly Dames, & town wyues fine, though neuer ſo trim they be,
            
               
                  ••
               th Malkins, Sluts, & ſloyes they trudge, in graue I make thē gree
            The ſeming braue fine Courtiers, which ſquare it out in gate,
            With Hob and Lob I cloſe in clay, and bring them to one ſtate.
            The tchuffe with tchinckes and ruddocks red, wherin is all hys truſt,
            In moment I wyth myſers poore, do hyde hym vp in duſt.
            The Iudge ſeuere, and Counceller ſage, with me they all muſt trudge,
            I force not for their hye eſtate, nor feare their hate or grudge.
            I wayting am on euery one, as ſhadow wyth body am I.
            And when the myghty God doth byd, I ſlay them by and by.
            Sometyme in game, ſometyme in myrth, ſomtyme in ſleepe I kyll,
            In eating, drinking, and in ſport, I many tymes them ſpyll.
            No place ſo ſure, no food ſo good, no exerciſe at all,
            Me Death can barre, but at Gods becke to earth I make them fall.
            And yet behold how ech one thynckes, to ſcape me and my dart,
            Though neuer ſo nere I come them to, and grype them to the hart.
            My Minſtrell Sicknes pipes ech houre, by aches, ſtitches and cramps,
            It ſoūdes my daunce ſtyll in their eares that they muſt to my damps.
            The luſty Brute with ſnuffing lookes, by manhood doth hope 
                  •
               o lyue
            The Coward out, yt feares to fight, though wounds him daily greue▪
            
            
               
The Coward agayne thinkes long to lyue by ſleeping in a whole ſkin,
            With ſhunning wars and forayn broyles, which countries oft be in.
            The rytch by gold, the wyſe by wyt, do thinke to ſhift me of
            To Beggers that ſtarue, & careles fooles, but yet them ſelues thei ſcot
               ▪
            
            For one wyth other I take them all, feare they, or feare they not,
            The deſperat toole and fearefull one go all into my pot.
            The youthfull Lads by ſtout courage, thinke to driue me away
            To crooked age, yet many times by ryot I oft them ſlay.
            And old old age hopes ſtyll to lyue, by keepyng a merry hart,
            With youthful ſports and wanton toyes, though it be to their ſmart.
            Yea my nere Syb and Beldam Trot, that croompled is for age,
            By youthly tyre & wanton trickes, thinkes deathes power to aſwage.
            It makes me laffe oft times to ſee, their gate, their lookes, their walke,
            How halting tryps, and fine wryde ieſtes they counterfet in talke.
            They would ine blere and make folkes think, they wer to yong for me,
            And yet forſooth if ſtript they were, faire Notamies might ye ſee.
            What ſhall I ſay to theſe old folkes, when nature cannot them teach?
            By fūbling ſpech & paines ech wher, which death at hand doth preach.
            Nay vſuall is it wyth all ſtates, though ſences all be gone,
            And I at hand to ſtrike the ſtroke, yet thincke they not thereon.
            Thus all would ſhift and driue me of, though I them follow & trace,
            And dayly ſend vnto the graue all ſtates before their face.
            But fooles they are that dread me ſo, which cannot be auoyded,
            Syth God the maker of all thinges to lyfe hath ſo me ioyned.
            Yet nede they not to ſhun me ſo, if all were wayde aryght,
            For I the worldly griefes do end, which vexe them day and nyght.
            Yea and beſides the guyde am I, to heauen and ioyfull blys,
            Of thoſe that vertuouſly do lyue, and feare to do amys.
            And to theſe folke welcomde am I, though neuer ſo ſharpe I pere,
            Becauſe with Chriſt they ſhal then raigne, and ſee his glory clere.
            But as for thoſe that wicked be, and ſo ſtill leade their life,
            Good cauſe they haue to dread me ſore, for I begin their griefe.
            With death I bring an endles wo, which neuer ſhall haue end,
            Wherefore if me you would not dread, your yll lyues then amend.
            For precious is the death of thoſe, which dye in Chriſt their Lord,
            Who hath ſaued them from ſynne and hel, and ended their diſcord.
            FINIS.
            
               Quoth Ioh. Awd.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ IMPRINTED AT LONdon
by Iohn Awdeley, dwelling in litle Britaine ſtreete
wythout Alderſgate. 1569.
The .xxx. of Aprill.
         
      
   