
      
         
            
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
            HEre begynnys a ſchort & breue tabull on thes Cronicles And ye muſt vnderſtond yt eueri leef is markid vnder with A. on .ij.iij. &̄ iiij. & ſo forth to viij. all the letters. an what ſum eu
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                ye fynd ſhortli writ
                  •
               n in this table. ye ſhall find oppenli in the ſame letter.
            
               ¶The ꝓheme. a. ij.iij.
               
                  
                     The warke of the firſt vi. dais
                     Adam the firſt man.
                     Eua the firſt woman.
                     Seth ſon to adam.
                     Delbora ſuſtre to Abell. 
                  a. iiij.
               
                  
                     ¶Abell ſon to adam.
                     Cayn and Calmana ſuſtre & wyfe to cayn Chaynan.
                     Malabeell Iaret Enoch of the line of criſt.
                     Matuſele Lameth of Criſtis line.
                     Tuball the firſt grauer: Iabe fond Pauilions firſt. Neoma fond weuyng. 
                  a. v.
               
                  
                     Noe. The ſhip The raynbowe
                     Chaam· Sem. Iapheth: noe his ſonnys. 
                  a. ſex.
               
                  
                     Arphaxat and his childer.
                     Chus and his childer.
                     Sale and his ſone.
                     Hebar and his childer.
                     Iacten Nemroth and Suphen the bylders of the toure of babylon. 
                  a. vij.
               
                  
                     ¶How gentelmen began.
                     Saruch of Criſtes line
                     Belus kyng of babilon:
                     Ninus kyng of babilon.
                     Thare of the lyne of criſt. 
                  a. viij.
            
            
               HEre begīnes ye ſecūd ꝑt and continues to brute
               
                  
                     Abraam and his brether and ther progeny.
                     Abraam wyues.
                     Melcheſadeke kyng of ſalem.
                     Symyranus of babulon.
                     Ninus kyng of babulon.
                     Arrius kyng of babulon. 
                  b. one.
               
                  
                     Yſaac of the line of criſt. and of his wyues and his ſonnys of Gomorra and Loth wife
                     Iacob of the line of criſt and hys wyues and therprogeny.
                     Xerſes kyng of Babulon.
                     Armauictre after him▪
                     
                     Belocus kyng of babulon.
                     Innacꝰ the firſt kīg in grece
                     
                        Phoraniꝰ kyng after him
                     Iudas of the lyne of criſt
                     Beleus kyng of aſſerio
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        
                     
                     Athalas an aſtronomyer
                     Sarapys kyng of grekis
                     Omogires put firſt oxen to the ploughe
                     Beleus kīg of babulon.
                     Pharao kyng of egipt
                     Amythus kyng of babulon. 
                  b. ij.
               
                  
                     Pharao kyng of egipt
                     Aram of criſtes lyne iob the holy man
                     Moyſes the iuge of iſraell
                     Aron the byſſhop
                     Daſrus the kyng of babulon
                     Cicropos king of athenas
                     Amynadab of criſtes lyne
                     Moyſes the firſt iuge
                     Aron the firſt biſſhop
                     Pharao kyng of egipt
                     Naſon ſon to aminadab when the law of god wos yeuen in the ſynay
                     Salmen of criſtis lyne ioſue the iugge
                     Eleaſar biſſhop
                     Othonyell iugge. 
                  b. iij.
               
                  
                     Aoth iugge.
                     Ianas the firſt kyng of ytaly
                     Amictus kyng of babulon.
                     Boos of the line of criſt
                     Sangar iugge.
                     Delbora iugge
                     Phenyes biſſhop.
                     Saturnus kyng of italy.
                     Pycus kyng of italy.
                     Gedyon iugge
                     Boccy biſſhop
                     Abymalech iugge·
                     Tola iugge
                     Boccy biſſhopp
                     Iae
                           •
                         iugge.
                     Rannus kyng of Ytali. 
                  b. iiij
               
                  
                     Latinus kyng of italy.
                     Tauranus kyng of babulon
                     Laamydon kyng of Troy
                     The new ſyn of iſraell.
                     Oſy biſſhop
                     Ebeſſam iugge.
                     Abiolon iugge
                     Abdon iugge
                     Anthanys kyng of babulon.
                     Agamenon kyng in grece.
                     Eneas kyng of italy.
                     vlixes an eloquent man 
                  b. v.
               
                  
                     Obeth of criſtis line
                     Samſon iugge
                     Ieſſe of criſtes line.
                     Saull kyng of iſraell
                     
                        Aſcanius kyng of itali.
                     Syluius kyng of itali.
                     Off venys and homere 
                  b. vi
            
            
               HEre begynneth the ſecū
                  de parte and the kīgdō of bretan:
               Albyon firſt womā that was in englond. b. vij & viij.
               Brute kyng of bretan c i.ij.iij. & iiij
               Lotrin kyng of bretan c v
               
                  
                     Madan kyng of bretan
                     Memprice kyng of bretan
                     Dauit kyng of iſrael
                     Ab
                           •
                        athar biſſhop 
                  c. vi.
               
                  
                     Sala
                           •
                        on kyng of iues ſadoch biſſhop
                     Roboas kyng of iues
                     Achimias biſhopp
                     Ieroboas kyng of iſraell
                     Aſa kyng of iues
                     baſa kyng of iſraell
                     Helathe kyne of iſrael 
                  c. vij.
               
                  
                     Ebrac kyng of bretan
                     Brute greneſheld
                     Lyell kyngꝭ of bretan
                     Ioſephat kyng of iues
                     Ochoſias kyng of iſraell
                     Lud ludybras
                     
                        Bl
                              •
                           dud kyngee of breten.
                     Ior
                           •
                        m kyng of iues when helias wos rauychd in to paradiſe
                     Aſarias kyng of iues 
                  c. viij.
               
                  
                     Ioram kyng of iſraell
                     Iehen kyng of iſraell
                     Athalia kyng of iues
                     ioam kyng of iues
                     ioathae kyng in iſraell
                     ioam kyng in iſraell
                     Leir kyng of breteyn 
                  d. i. & ij.
               
                  
                     Amaſias kyng of iues
                     iereboam kyng of iſraell
                     Ozias kyng of iues
                     Abdias a prophet
                     Zacharias
                     Phoſaia kynges of iſraell.
                     Morgan & Conadag kynges of breteyn 
                  d. iij
               
                  
                     Rygnold & Gorbodian kyngꝭ of breteyn
                     Ferres and Porres kynges of bretayn
                     Scater & Dawalier & Rudac kynges of bretayn
                  d. iiij.
               
                  
                  
                     Gloten.
                     Doneband and Belin and Brenne kynges of bretan. 
                  d. vi
               
                  
                     Corumbatrus kyng of bretan
                     Ioatham kyng of iues.
                     Amarias biſſhopp.
                     Olympyas war ſet in grece.
                     Acham kyng of iues
                     Ozee kyng of iſraell.
                  d ·vij.
            
            
               HEre begynneth the thrid parte and continues to the paſſion of criſt.
               
                  
                     Rome wos byldid by romulꝰ.
                     Ezechias kyng of iues
                     Sadoch biſſhop.
                     Manaſſes kyng of iues
                     Numa kyng of rome.
                     Amon and Ioſias the kyngꝭ of iues.
                     Azaſtas biſſhopp
                     Tobias the holy man
                     Tulyus kyng of rome 
                  d. viij.
               
                  
                     Nabegodonoſar of babulon:
                     Ancus kyng of rome
                     Daniell the ꝓphet.
                     Ioathas and Ioachym and
                     Sedechias the kyngꝭ of iues.
                     ioſedech piſſh̄opp
                     Abacuke ꝓphet
                     The tranſmigracion.
                     Priſcus tarquinus the kyng of rome 
                  e. i.
               
                  
                     
                        Nabogod kyng of babulon.
                     Seruyus kyng of rome
                     Reguſar kyng of babulon:
                     Balthaſar kyng of babulon.
                     Darius kyng of babulon
                     Cirus emprour of ꝑſes
                     Tarquinus ſuꝑbꝰ kīg of rome
                     Lucres the wyfe
                   e. ij.
               
                  
                     How the romans gouernyng wos changed aft
                           
                              
                           
                           er
                         the kyngꝭ.
                     Zorobobell the duke
                     Eſdras preſt
                     Cambiſes kyng of ꝑces 
                  e. iij.
               
                  
                     Ereneides kyng of ꝑces
                     Darius kyng of ꝑces
                     Abiuth of criſtis line
                     The ſenatours at rome were ordeyned.
                     Artharxerſes and Xerſes the kyngꝭ of parſa
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        
                     
                     Segdianus of parſa
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        
                     
                     Eliachym of criſtis line.
                     Edras an holy man
                     Neomias the butteler
                     Permenides Socrates
                     
                        Donnotritus and Ipocras philoſophiers.
                     Azor of the line of criſt 
                  e. iiij
               
                  
                     Camyllus dictor of rome
                     Darius kyng of ꝑſi..
                     Plato a philoſophir:
                     Titus dictator of rome
                     Gayus a ſenatour
                     Marcus a ſenatour
                     Arthraxarſes kyng of ꝑſes.
                     Amaſus and Darius kyngꝭ of parſes
                     Iudas biſſhopp
                     iohannes a biſſhopp
                     Ariſtotilis & Senocrate philophiers.
                     Guentholen. Seiſell Kymor
                     Howā Morwt kīgꝭ of breton 
                  e. v.
               
                  
                     Grondobodian. Artogaill &
                     
                        Heſid xxxiij kīgꝭ of bretan
                     Lud kyng of bretan 
                  e. vi
               
                  
                     Sadoch of criſtes line
                     Iudas byſſhopp
                     Eneas biſſhop
                     Manilius
                     Alexander kyng
                     Achim of the line of criſt.
                     Symon biſſhopp
                     Eleazarus biſhop
                     Dolobela emylius marcus
                     Genucius cōſules of rome
                     Thelomeꝰ kyng of egipt
                     Elyud of criſtis line.
                     Omias biſhopp
                     Symon biſhopp
                     Semꝓmꝰ. Appiꝰ Gu
                           •
                        us. artilius. ſenateurs of rome
                     Ptholoꝰ kyng of egipt.
                     Ptholoꝰ kyng of egipt
                     Haneball kyng of peno
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        .
                     Lucateꝰ. Semꝓ
                           •
                        ꝰ Fulmus
                     Capio conſules at rome 
                  e. viij.
               
                  
                     Epiphanes kyng of egipt
                     Antiocus kyng of 
                           •
                        urri
                     Onyae biſhopp
                     ſymon biſhip
                     eleaſar of the lyne of criſt
                     Onias biſhop
                     Paulus▪ ſcipio ſenatours at rome.
                     philometer kyng of egipt
                     Mathothias an holy man.
                     Iudas machabeus
                     ionathas his brother
                     Anthiochus kyng of 
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        ri. 
                  f. i.
               
                  
                     Quitus
                     Marchus & Tyberius wer ſenatours at rome.
                     Mathan of criſtes lyne
                     
                        Iohannes biſſhop
                     Publius. Lucius lucius and
                     
                     Luciꝰ ſenatours at rome
                     Ptholomeꝰ kyng of egipt:
                     Ariſtobolus kyng and priſt
                     Alexander biſſhop 
                  f. ij·
               
                  
                     Seruiꝰ. lucius Fabius ſenatours at rome
                     Ptholomeꝰ kyng of egipt.
                     Iacob of the line of criſt
                     Alexander wyfe and biſhopp.
                     Hircanus kyng of iues
                     virgill the gret poete 
                  f. iij.
               
                  
                     Oracius ſoluſtiꝰ Quintus &
                     Gayus conſules at rome.
                     Pompayus. marcus. & iulius wer dictatours at rome
                     Caton. philoſopher
                     Caſſibelon kyng of englond
                     
                     Androgen kyng of englond
                     Ioſeph of the line of criſt
                     Antigonꝰ biſſh̄opp 
                  f. iiij & v.
               
                  
                     Octouian emprour
                     The houſbondis of ſeint anna
                     Herod aſcolonyta
                     Kymbalin kyng of englōd.
                  f. vi
            
            
               HEre begynneth the iiij. parte continuyng to the comyng of the ſaxons.
               
                  
                     Criſtis natiuite.
                     Pilate the iuge.
                     pilatis natiuite
                     Ouidius. Naſo
                     Tyberius the emprour 
                  f. vij & viij.
               
                  
                     Mathia the apoſtill
                     Iudas ſcarioth.
                     The makyng of the crede
                     The iiij. euangeleſtis
                     Petre the firſt pope
                     Gayus emprour 
                  g. i & ij.
               
                  
                     Gynder king of englond
                     
                     Armager kyng of englond.
                     weſtmer kyng of englond
                     
                        Coill kyng of englond
                     Claudius the emprour 
                  g. iij &̄ iiij
               
                  
                     Iamys the apoſtill
                     Nero the emprour
                     Iuuenalis the poete
                     Lucanus the poete
                     Iamys the loſſe
                     Lynus a marter & pope
                     Galba the emprour
                     Otho emprour
                     vitelyus emprour
                     vaſpaſianus emprour
                     
                        Cletus a marter pope
                     Titus emprour
                     Domician emprour
                     Clemens a marter pope
                     Nerua emprour
                     Traianꝰ emprour 
                  g. vi.
               
                  
                     Anaclitꝰ a marter pope
                     Plenius orator
                     Euariſtus a mart
                           
                              
                           
                           er
                         pope
                     Alexander a marter pope
                     Sextus a martpr pope
                     Adrianus emprour
                     Euſtachius emprour 
                  g. vij.
               
                  
                     Theleſphorus a marter pope.
                     ignius a marter pope
                     Antonius emꝑor
                     Pompaiꝰ hiſtoriofragꝰ
                     Pius a martir pope
                     Auicetus a marter pope
                     Galienus a lech
                     Marcus emꝑor 
                  g. viij.
               
                  
                     Lucie kyng of englond
                     Aſclepades kyng of englond.
                     
                        Coill kyng of englond
                     Conſtans kyng of englond
                     Conſtantin kyng of englond 
                     
                  h. i. &̄ ij.
               
                  
                     Octauyan kyng of englond
                     Maximian kyng of englond
                     Gracian kyng of englond
                     Conſtantyne kīg of englōd
                     Conſtance kyng of englond 
                     
                  h. iij.iiij.v. and vi.
               
                  
                     Sother a marter pope
                     Elentherius a mart
                           
                              
                           
                           er
                         pope
                     Marcius emꝑor
                     Lucius· comodꝰ war emꝑors
                     Helius emꝑor
                     victor a marter pope
                     Zepherius a marter pope
                     Origines the clarke
                     coliſtus a marter pope
                     Antonius emꝑor
                     Antoniꝰ marcus emꝑs
                     Alexander emꝑor
                     vrbanus a marter pope
                     poncianꝰ a marter pope
                     Anteros a marter pope 
                  h. vij.
               
                  
                     Maximianus emꝑor
                     gordian emꝑor
                     philip emꝑor
                     Decius emꝑor
                     Fabianus a marter pope
                     cornelius a marter pope
                     Lucius pope
                     gallus emꝑor
                     valerian emꝑor
                     Stephanus a marter pope
                     Sextus a marter
                     Dioniſius a marter pope
                     
                        Felix a martir pope.
                     Claudius emꝑour
                     euticianus a martir pope
                     Aurelius emprour. 
                  h. viij.
               
                  
                     Tacitus emꝓur
                     Probus emprour.
                     Carus emprour
                     Diaclycion emprour.
                     Maximian emprour.
                     gayus pope and martir.
                     Arcellinus pope and martir.
                     Marceylus pope and martir.
                     euſibius pope and martir.
                     Melchiades pope and marter.
                     galerius emprour. 
                  i.i.
               
                  
                     Sylueſter pope.
                     Conſtantyn the emprour
                     Seint Nicholas.
                     Athanaſiꝰ made quicū
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vult
                     Marcus pope
                     Iulius pope
                     Conſtantinus emprouro
                     Liberius pope.
                     Felix pope
                     Iulianus emprour
                     Ioninianus emꝓur 
                  i.ij
               
                  
                     valentinan emprour
                     Domaſus pope
                     valens emprour.
                     Auguſtinꝰ rethoricus.
                     ſyritius pope
                     Theodoſius emꝑour
                     Claudianus poeta
                     Archadius empror
                     Honorius emprour. 
                  i.iij.
               
                  
                     Ierom the doctour
                     ſanctus herachides
                     iohannes criſoſtamꝰ.
                     Anaſtaſius pope.
                     innocenciꝰ pope.
                     Zozimꝰ pope.
                     Bonefacius pope
                     Celeſtinꝰ pope
                     Theodoſius emprour
                     Sextus pope
                     Leo pope
                     Marcianꝰ emprour 
                  i.iiij
            
            
               HEre begynneth the v. ꝑte & cōtinues to the comyng of the daynes
               
                  
                     vortiger kyng of englond
                     vortimer kyng of englond 
                     
                  i.v vi vij viij. & k.i.
               
                  
                     Aurelambros kīg of englond.
                     vter kyng of englond 
                  k. ij iij iiij v & vi.
               Arthur kyng of englond k. vij & viij. &̄ all. l
               
                  
                     Conſtantine.
                     
                        Adelbright
                     Edell
                     Curan
                     Conan
                     Cortif.
                     Guimond kīges of englond
                     
                     Sycwith.
                     Elfride
                     Br
                           •
                        cinall
                     Cadewan
                     Edwyne
                     Cadwalyn
                     Oſwald
                     Oſwy kynges of englond 
                  all. m.
               
                  
                     Offa
                     Oſbright
                     E
                           •
                        le
                     ſeint edmond
                     Edelfe
                     Eldred kynges of englond
                   n. i.ij and .iij.
            
            
               Here begynneth the popis ye Emprours & othir noble thīgꝭ in the tyme of the ſaxons being in englond
               
                  
                     Leo he firſt pope.
                     Hillarius pope
                     ſimplicius pope
                     Zeno emprour
                     Felix the thrid pope
                     Gelaſius pope
                     Anaſtaſius emprour
                     Anaſtaſius pope.
                     ſimachus pope
                     Claudianus kyng of fraunce.
                     Honorius a pope
                     Iuſtinus emprour
                     Pricianus gramaticus
                     Iohannee pope
                     Feliy pope
                     Iuſtinianus emꝓur
                     Bonefacius the ſecund pope.
                     iohannes the ſecund pope 
                  n. iiij.
               
                  
                     Agapitus a confeſſour
                     ſiluerius pope a mart
                           •
                        r
                     virgilius pope
                     ſinodus quarta.
                     Pelagius pope
                     Iohannes the thrid
                     Iuſtinus the ſecund emꝓur.
                     Tyberius the ſecūd emprour.
                     Benedictus pope
                     Palagius emprour
                     Mauriciꝰ emprour 
                  n. v.
               
                  
                     What tyme ſeint auſtyn come in to englond
                     Focas emprour
                     Gregorie the firſt pope
                     Saninianus pope
                     Bonefacius the thrid pope▪
                     
                     Eraclyus emprour
                     
                        Deus dedit pope 
                  n. vij.
               
                  
                     Bonefacius the firſt pope
                     Machomite ye duke of ſariſēs
                     Conſtantine the thrid emꝑour
                     Martinꝰ the firſt emprour
                     Eugenius a pope.
                     vitilianus a pope:
                     Adeodatus pope
                     Conſtantine the iiij emꝑour
                     Demus a roman pope.
                     Bonefacius pope
                     Agatho pope 
                  n viij.
               
                  
                     Leo the ſecund pope
                     Benedictus the ſecund pope.
                     Iuſtinianus the ſecund pope
                     iohannes the v▪ pope.
                     Zeno pope
                     Sergyus pope
                     Seint beede. 
                  o. i.
               
                  
                     Leo the ſecund pope
                     Liberius emprour
                     Leo the thrid pope.
                     iohannes the ſext pope
                     iohannes the vij▪ pope·
                     Iuſtinianus the ſecūd emꝑour
                     Syſynnyus pope.
                     Conſtantine pope.
                     Philip the ſecund emprour
                     A
                           •
                        aſtaſius the ſecūd emꝑour
                     Gregorius th
                           •
                         ſecūd emꝑour 
                  o. ij.
               
                  
                     Theodoſius emprour
                     Leo with Cōſtantinne emꝑour
                     Gregorie the thrid a pope
                     Conſtantinus emprour
                     Zacharias a pope
                     Stephanus the ſecund pope 
                  o iij.
               
                  
                     Paulus a roman pope.
                     Conſtantine the ſecund pope.
                     Karolus magnus
                     Stephanus the thrid pope
                     Adrianus pope.
                     Leo the fourth▪ emprour
                     Conſtantine the emprour
                     Nichohaus the emprour.
                   o iiij.
               
                  
                     Karolus magnꝰ ye firſt ſent
                     Leo the fourth pope.
                     Lodewyke emprour.
                     Stephanus the fourth pope.
                     Paſcall pope.
                     Eugenius the iiij pope.
                  o. v.
               
                  
                     valyntinus pope.
                     Gregorie the iiij. pope.
                     Letherius the emprour
                     Sergius the ſecund pope
                     leo the v. pope.
                     Benedictus a roman pope
                     lodewycus emprour
                     
                        Iohannes a woman pape
                     Nicholaus pope
                     Adrianus pope
                  o vi.
            
            
               HEre begynnys the ſext ꝑt continuyng to the comīg of the Normans
               
                  
                     Alured kynd of englond
                     
                     iohannes the viij pope
                     Karolus the ſecund emprour
                     Martinus pope
                     Adrianus the thrid pope
                     ſtephanus the .v. pope
                     Karolus the thrid emprour
                     Ernulphus emprour 
                  o: vij. &̄ viij
               
                  
                     Formoſus pope
                     Bonefacius the ſext pope
                     ſtephanus the ſext pope
                     iohannes the ix pope
                     Theodoſius the ſecund pope.
                     iohannes the x. pope
                     Benedictus the fourth pope
                     Leo the iiij: pope.
                     Criſtoforus the firſt pope
                     Lodewycus the thrid emꝑour
                     beringarius & Conradus were emprours
                     Kyng Edward mart
                           
                              
                           
                           er
                         of ēglōd
                     ſergyus the thrid pope
                     Anaſtaſius pope
                     Laudo & iohannes the x. popes 
                  p. i.
               
                  
                     Henri emprour
                     Adelſtone kyng of englond
                     
                     Edmōd kīg of englōd
                     Eldrede kyng of englond
                     Edwyne kyng of englond
                     Leo the ſext pope·
                     ſtephanus the xi: pope
                     Martyne the thrid pope
                     Agapitus pope
                     iohannes the xij. pope 
                  p ij.
               
                  
                     Edgar kyng of englond
                     
                     Beringariꝰ the thrid emꝑour
                     Lotherius emprour
                     beringarius the .iiij. emprour
                     Leo the viij. pope:
                     iohannes the xiij. pope
                     benedictus the ſext pope
                     Otto emprour
                     Otto the ſecund emprour
                     ſeint Edward of englond 
                  p iij iiij & v.
               
                  
                     Eldred kyng of englond
                     
                     ſwyne kyng of englond
                     
                     bonus pope
                     bonefacius pope
                     benedictus pope
                     iohannes the xiij. pope
                     Gregorius the v. pope▪
                     
                     
                        Otto the thrid Emprour.
                     Silueſter the ſecund pope.
                     iohannes the xviij: pope.
                     Iohannes the xix. pope.
                     Henricus the firſt emprour:
                     Benedictus pope.
                     Iohannes the xx: pope.
                     Knoght kyng of Englond. 
                  p: vij.
               
                  
                     Edmōd yrenſide kīg of englōd
                     Knought kyng of englond.
                     Benedictus the ix: pope
                     Conradus the emprour
                     
                        Harold harefote of englond
                     Hardeknoght kīgꝭ of englōd 
                  p viij. q on ij. & iij.
               
                  
                     Silueſter the thrid pope.
                     Damaſus the ſecund pope.
                     Kyng Edward confeſſour.
                     victor the ſecund pope.
                     Henri the ſecund emprour
                     Stephanus the .ix. emꝑour
                     Benedictus pope:
                     Henricus the thrid emprour.
                     Nicholaus the ſecund pope.
                     Alexandre the ſecund pope.
                     Harrold kyng of englond 
                  q iiij v vi vij &̄ viij.
            
            
               HEre begynnis the vij ꝑt continuyng to our dais yt is to ſay to the regne of king Edward the iiij
               
                  
                     
                        Wyllm conquerour
                     Gregorius the vij: pope.
                     victor the thrid pope
                     vrbanus pope.
                     
                        willm Rous kīg of englond
                     
                     Henri Beauclerke kyng
                     henri the fourth emprour
                     Gelaſius pope.
                     Calixtus pope
                     honorius pope.
                     Locharius emprour.
                     hugo de ſancto victori
                     The ord
                           
                              
                           
                           er
                         of ſent iohn̄ baptiſt
                     Innocencius pope
                     Stephanus kyng of Englōd
                     
                     Celeſtinus the ſecund pope
                     Lucius pope
                     Eugenius the ſecund pope
                     Petrus lumbardus
                     Petrus commeſtor
                     Fredericꝰ the firſt emprour.
                     Anaſtaſius pope: all r.
                  
               
               
                  
                     henri the ſecund
                     Adryanus the iiij pope
                     Alexander the thrid pope
                     Lucius the thrid pope
                     vrbanus the thrid pope:
                     Gregori the viij:
                     Clemens the thrid pope
                     Richard the firſt kīg of englōd
                     
                     henricus the v. emprour
                     
                        Celeſtinus the thrid emprour.
                     Innocencius the thrid emꝑour.
                     
                        willm of paris
                     Franciſcus in itali 
                  s. i.ij.iij. & .iiij.
               
                  
                     Kyng iohn̄ of englond
                     Fredericus the ſecūd emprour
                     Honorius the thrid pope
                     Kyng henri the thrid of englōd 
                  s. v.vi.vij viij. &̄ all. t
               
                  
                     Gregorius the ix pope.
                     Celeſtinus the iiij pope
                     Innocencius the iiij pope
                     Thomas de aquino
                     Albertus magnus.
                     Euſtacius
                     Boneauenture
                     Alexander pope.
                     vrbanus pope
                     Ricardus emprour
                     Clemens the iiij. pope
                     Gregorius the x pope
                     Innocent the v. pope
                     Adrian after him
                     Iohannes the xxi pope
                     Nicholaus the thrid pope
                     Rodulphus emprour
                     Martin the iiij emprour
                     Nicholaus del
                           ••
                        a
                     Honorius the iiij. pope
                     Nicholaus the iiij. pope 
                  all u. & x i.ij.iij.iiij. & v.
               
                  
                     Celeſtinus pope
                     Bonefacius pope
                     Benedictus the xi pope
                     Adulphus emꝑor
                     Albertus emprour
                     Clemens pope
                     Iohannes the xxij. pope▪
                     
                     Henri the vij. emꝑor
                     Kyng edward the ſecund 
                     
                  x. vi vij viij. & all. y and all z. and & .i.ij.
               
                  
                     Lodowycus the iiij. emprour.
                     Iohanes maundeuell
                     Benedictus pope
                     Kyng Edward the thrid
                     Clemens the ſext pope
                     Karolus the fourth emꝑor
                     Innocencius the ſext pope
                     vrbanus the v.
                     Gregorius the xi. pope
                     wenſelaus emꝑor
                     vrbanus pope
                     Bonefaciꝰ the ix. pope
                  
                  
& .iij▪iiij.v.vi.vij. & viij and all 9. and all A capitall B C. & D. i.ij.iij. &̄ iiij
               
                  
                     Kyng Richard the ſecund
                     Innocencius the .vii.
                     Robert emꝑor
                     Iohannes the xxiij. pope
                     Sigmūd emꝑor
                  D. v.vi.vij.viii. and all E capitall
               
                  
                     Kyng Henri the fourth
                     Martin the v.
                     Eugenius pope
                     Kyng henri the fifth
                     Felix the v: pope
                     Albertus emprour
                     Fredericus the 
                           •
                        hrid emꝑor
                     Nicholaus the v. pope
                  all F. G. and H. i.ii. iii and iiij.
               
                  
                     Kyng henri the ſext
                     Calixtus the thrid pope
                     Pryntyng of bokes
                     Pius the ſecund pope
                     Paulus a venicion pope
                     Sixtus the fourth pope.
                  H. v.vi.vii.viii. & all I. and K. & ſo endith this boke.
            
            Here endith the tabull
         
         
            
            The Prolog
            
               
                  •
               N ſo myche that it is neceſſari to all creaturis of criſten religyon. or of fals religyon 
                  •
               s gētyles and ma
               
                  •
                
               
                  •
               homytes to knaw theer prince or prynces that regne a pon them. and the
                  •
               m to obey. So it is commodyus to knaw theer n
                  ••
               ill actis or d
                  •
               ys. and the circumſtās of theer lyu
                  ••
               . Ther fo
                  ••
                ī the yeer of our lorde .M.iiijC.lxxxiij. And in the xxiij. yeer of the regne of Kyng Edward the fourth at Saynt Albons ſo that a
                  •
               en may knaw the actys naemly of our nobull kyngys of Englond is cōpylit to gether thys book. &̄ moor ouer is tranſlayt 
                  〈…〉
                latin ī to englich froom the beg
                  ••
               ng of the world the 
                  •
               ynage of criſt: from Adā till it be cōm
                  •
                to Dauid. &̄ from Dauid the kyngys of iſrael &̄ of Iuys: the h
                  •
               gh byſchoppys in theer days wyth the Iuges and ꝓphettis. The iiij pryncipall Reames of the worlde. that is to ſay of Babulon: of Perces. of Grekys. and of Romans. &̄ all the Emꝑoures of Rome or 
                  〈◊〉
                by o
                  •
               dyr and theer namys. and mony a notabull fadyr: wyth cer
                  •
                of ther actys breuyatly as moor planly is dec
                  •
               t in the chapytur n
                  ••
               t aftyr. And heer be reherſit the namys of the autors of whom thees Cronyclys ben tranſlatte mooſt naamly. Galfridus Munmoth monke in hys boke of Brute. Saynt Beed ī the actys of Englond I 
                  •
               m̄ Beed in hys boke of tymys. Gyldas in the actys of Bretan Wylliam Malmiſbery monke in the actis of kyngys of Englond &̄ biſſhoppys. Caſſiderus of the actys of Emꝑours and biſſhoppys. Saynt Auſtyn de Ciuitate dei Tytus Lyuyus de geſtis Romanorum Martyn Penytēcia
                  •
               y to the pope in his Cronyclys of Emꝑours &̄ byſſhoppys. And namly Theobaldus Cartuſiencis contenyng in hys boke the progreſſe off all notabull fadyres from the begynyng off the worlde vn to oure tyme wyth the notabull actys of the ſaem. ¶In thys neew tranſlacion ar contened many notabull and meruelles thyngys▪ &̄ the
                  •
                been legged by auctoryte of mony famous clerkys
            
               And that eu
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               y man may knaw how thes croniclis be ordyrt ye ſhall vndyr ſtond that this boke is deuidit ī to vij partys. Off the wych the fyrſt ꝑte cōtenys from Adam till Brute cam in to bretan ¶The ſecūd parte contenes from brute cam fyrſt in to Englond vn to the cyte of Rome was byld be romolꝰ. ¶The therd part cōtenes ſethyn rome wos byld vn to Criſt wos born of our lady mari ¶The fourth from thens vn to the cōyng of the ſaxons ī to englond ¶The fyft part from thēs vn to the cōmīg of the danys ¶The ſext part from thens vn to the cōmyng off the normās ¶The ſeuīt part from the Normās vn to owr tym the wich is vndir the regne of kyng Edward the fourth xxiij yer whos nobull croniclis be cuſtū may not be ſeen ¶And ſo in e
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               
               uy part of thes .vij. partes is ſhewed the moſt and neceſſary actys of all the kyngis of Englond &̄ ther namys wrettyn abooe in the margent that euery man may fynd them ſoon. And afor the kyngꝭ of englōd actis be writī. ther is writī ye linage of criſt from Adā till that criſt was borne of our lady with the egh byſſhopp &̄ the iuge that war ī that tyme. &̄ certan of ther actis neceſſari. till it be cūmyn to criſt wos borne. And aftir that cryſt wos borne &̄ peter wos pope of rome is ſhewed be ord
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                the namys of all the popys and Emprours of rome afoor and aftir wyth certan off ther actis breuyatly. And mony other dyu
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               es thyngis &̄ in̄uellus ī thes mens days fallyng. And it is ſhewid eueri thīg in his place how mony yere it fell aftyr the begynyng of the worlde and how long afoor that Criſt was borne. And when that I cum to criſt wos borne then it is wrettyn how long any thyng fell aftyr the Natiuite of criſt. And this is the ordyr off thys boke and the thyngis that be ſpokyn of.
            And to men deſyryng to haue aueray knawlech of thes Cronyclis or of any other hit is neceſſary to knaw ſex thīgꝭ

¶The firſt is the ſtatye of thīgꝭ. &̄ thos ben ij. con is fro the begynnyng of the world vn to cryſt: the wych is cald the ſtate of demacion. The ſecund is from cryſt to the end of the world the wych is cald the ſtate of reconſiliacion ¶The ſecund thyng is the diuiſion of tymys. &̄ thoo be iij. c
                  •
               n is a foor the law of Moiſes. anodir is vndyr the law of moyſes. anodir is vndyr the law of grace aftyr cryſt dyed ¶The iij. is the gou
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               nyng of kyngdomes &̄ as for that ye moſt knaw that all thogh thar war iii
                  •
               . principall kyngdōys that is to ſay of Babulon of Perſes of Grecis & Romans neu
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                the lees os to the courſe of the world &̄ the ordyr of holy ſcriptur the fyrſt gouernyng wos vndirfadyrs from Adam vn to Moyſes. The ſecund vndir Iuges fro moiſes vn to ſaul The thyrd vndyr kyngꝭ fro Saul vn to Zorobobel. The forthe vnd
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                Biſſhoppis fro zorobobel vn to criſt ¶The iiij. is the diu
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               ſite of lawis and thos war .v. The fyrſt wos the law of Natur &̄ that wos cōmyn to all men. The ſecūd is the law or the cuſtum of Gētils when that vndir kyng Nyno be gan the pepull to worſhype fals goddys. The thyrd vndir the law writtyn roos the law of Iues when circūciſion diuidyt the iues from odir pepull. The iiij. vndir Criſt roos thhe law of criſtyn men wheen fayth and grace of the ſacramentis informyd ye lyffe of mē. The v. vndir Machomyte roos the law of Saryſons &̄ torkys. The ſext is the nobulnes or vnnobulnes in dedys. and as to thes it is to knaw that vij. ꝑſons be red of whom the dedys mony tymes har had in mynd in hyſtoryes. That is to wete of a Prince ī his reame. of a Knyght in batell. of a Iuge in his place. of a Byſſhope in the clergy▪ of a Polityke man in the pepull. of an Huſband man in an howſe. and of an Abbot ī his chyrche. And of thes ar wretyn mony tymes the laudes of good men. and the punychmentis of the curſſit men. The ſext is the trew cowntyng of the yeris. and as to that it is to be knaw that ther war viij. maner of nombring or cōtyng of the yeris iii. aftyr the hebreus ii
                  •
               .

aftyr thee Greky. con. aftyr the Romans. and. con. now aftyr the Criſtyn men. The hebreus iij. maner of wyſe begynyth thar yere. aftyr the Hebreꝰ ther is the yere vſuall begynyng at Ianuary the wych they vſe in connandys and bargans makyng. And the yere lefull begynnyng at Marche the wych they vſe in ther ceimonyes. And the yere emergens from May begynyng when they went from Egypte. the vſe in ther Cronyclys &̄ Calculacionis ¶The Grekys nomburth ther yeres iij. maner of wyſe. fyrſt to the glory and ioy of ther victory. Contyth thar yeres from the deſtruccion of Troy the fyrſt the ſecund the therd the fourth etc ¶Then aftyr the cheualry be gon at the hyll of Olympus the notefied ther yeres aftyr the ſame Olimpiadū &̄ wat Olimpiodes is ye ſhall knaw after in tha boke. The iij. when they be gan to haue lordſhyp of all the world they notefyed theer yeres thes māer of wyſe. In the yere of the regne of grekys the iiii. the x. the xv. etc. as is it opyn in the boke of machabeorum ¶Then after the Romans gou
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               nyng the world. cōtyt or nō
               buryt ther yeres Ab vrbe cōdita ¶The laſt of all criſtyn mē
               cowntitt ther yeres from the Incarnacion of Criſt. and be cauſe we be criſeyn men. we vſe moſt to nomb
                  ••
                fro the begynyng off the world vn to criſt wos borne. And fro criſt wos borne. vn to our tyme. and this ordyr is kepyt in all the boke of euery thyng in his place as it is ſayd a foor.
         
      
      
         
            
            Pars Prima
            Hic incipit fructus temporum
            
               
                  •
               E cauſe thys boke is mad to tel what tyme ony thyng notabull wos. Theer foor the begynyng of all tymes chortly ſhall be tochit. For thee wych aftyr docturs it is to be knawyn that .iiij. thyngꝭ war made fyrſt. and in on tyme and of oon age. that is to wete the Heuyn imperyall. Angyls nature. the mater of the .iiij. Elementis. and tyme. And that docturs call the werke of the creacion. the wich wos made afor ony day or nyght: of the myghty powr of god: and wos made of nothyng ¶Then after foloyth the werke of the diuyſion thee wich wos made ī iij. of the fyrſt dayes: ī the wich is ſhewed the he wiſdōe of the maker ¶Then after foloith the a rayng of this wark ī the wich is ſhewed the goodnes of ye creature the wich wos maed iij. of the next days foloyng. vt 
                  pꝪ
                  patet
                clare ī textu. gen primo ¶The fyrſt day god mad: &̄ deuidyt the lyght from the dyrkenes ¶The ſecund day god mad: and ordanyt the firmamente and deuidyt the water from the water ¶The thryd day god mad in the wich he gedyrit the watrys in to oon place: and the erth to apperit ¶The fourth day god mad: ī the wich he ordant thee ſon the mone: and the ſterrys· and put them in the fyrmament. ¶The fythe day god mad: in the wich he ordant fyſſhys and follis: and gret whallis in the awter ¶The ſext day god ordant in the wich he mad beſt and man ¶The ſeuent day god maad and in that day hee reſtyt off all werkes that he had ordant. noot os in werkyng beyng wery. bot he ſeſſit to make mo new creaturys. vide plura 
                  geneſ 
                  Genesis
               primo.
            Be it know that Adam the firſt man of whom it is written in this firſt aage next folowing: leuyd ixC yere and .xxx. and he gate xxxij ſonnis and as mony doghtires
            
               
               Anno mūdi .i. Et ante xpī natiuitatē .vM.C.lxxxxix.
               
                  
                     Adam Eua
                     Here begīnith the firſt aage durīg to the flood of Noe
                   In the fyrſt yere of the world the ſext day god maad Adam. ī the feld of Damaſcen. &̄ Eua of his rybbes putiyng them ī ꝑadyſe. and bad them to kepe heys cōmandment that they ſhuld not ete off the frute of lyffe: vndyr the payn of dethe. and the ſame day when they had ſynnyt a noon he keſt them owte of paradyſe in to the lond of curſitnes that the ſhuld lyff ther wyth ſwetyng &̄ ſorow tyll thei dyed. vide plura gen. primo. ¶This Adam wos an holy man: all the dayes of his lyfe. gret penance and deyly he dide. and he commandyt his chyldyr to lyff ryghtwyſly. and naamly that they ſhuld auoyd in all wyſe from the cumpany off Cayn: and his chyldyrn. ner that they ſhuld not mary wyth non̄ of them. This man Adam wos owr fyrſt fadyr. and for co ſyn he put vs from paradyſe. bot throw his holy conuerſacion: and penance: he gaff vs an exampull to cum to the kyngdom of heuyn And he that wyll nott folow hys holy conuerſacion &̄ exampull. for co ſyn ryghtwyſly he can not complayn on hym in ſo mych as we doo many. 
                     ••
                  eth ſon to Adam wos borne aftyr the begynnyng of the world .C. and xxx. yere and leuyd .ixC xij. bot moyſes ower ſkeppis a .C. yere of thos in the wich Abell weppit ī the vaale of plorocion: ny ebron▪ this Seth for the oyle of mercy to be gettyn went to paradiſe. 
                     •
                  elbora wos ſyſter to abell
               
                  Abell wos ſlayn of Cayn his brother. this Abell the fyrſt marter be gan the chyrche of god. This man aftyr: auſtyn mad the cite of god. &̄ he wos the fyrſt cityſyn of that cite. & be cauſe that hee wos ryghtwis owr lord reſauyt his offyring 
                     •
                  almana wos ſyſtir and wiffe to Cayn. this cayn wos a curſat mane and he mad the fyrſt erthli cite that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos in this world: in thee wich: he put his pepull for drede in ſo mych os he vſit rauyn and violens for he truſtit ſych thingꝭ to be doon to him os dyd to odir ther for he put hym and his in to ſekir place. this man ſlew hys brother abell for enuy. and he wos punyſchyt of god: and wandyrt a bowte ī a diſpare. &̄ efter wos ſlayn of Lameth ablynd mā
               
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijC.xxxv. Et an̄ xpī natī iiijM.ixC.lxxiiij.
               ENos of the lyne of criſt: leuyd .ixC. yere and v. this Enos be gan to call the name of owr lord. hit myght hape he fond ſum wordis of prayer. or mad ſum ymages for god to bee worſchippit as is now in the chyrche. Chaynā leuyd aftir ixC yere and .x
            
            
               Anno mūdi vijC.lxxxxv. Et an̄ xpī natī .iiijM.iiiiC. &̄ iiii
               MAlaleel of the lyne of criſt leuid .viiiC.lxxxxv Iareth of the ſame lyne leuid .ixC lxii. Enoch of the ſaame lyne. leuid ccc. yere and lxv. This Enoch wos a rightwis mā and pleeſet god. and for his grett holines our lord tranſlait hym in to paradiſe. wher he leuis with Heli. in gret reſt of bodi and ſaule. tyll the cummyng off Ante criſt. Then they ſhall go forth for the comfortacion off good men. And they ſhall be crownyt with the crowin off Martirdoome.
               
                  Matuſele of criſtis lyne leuyd ixC: lxix. This Matuſale wos the olddyſt man that euer ony ſcriptur has mynd of. for when hee had leuyd neer vC. yere. owr lord ſaid to him: byld the an howſe now and thu will. for yet thu ſhall lyffe vC. yere. And he onſward & ſayd for ſo lytill a tyme as vC. yere. I will byld no howſe bott reſt vndyr trees and heggis &̄ ther ſlepit os he wos wontt to doo a for tyme.
            
            
               Anno mūdi .M.iiijC.liiii. Et an̄ xp̄i natī .iijM.vijC·xlv▪
               
               LAmeth wos of age vijC.lxxvij. This lameth the fyrſt agaynes natur and good maners ordant that a mane myght haue .ij. wyffes in doyng of his a woytery. and he wos ſo or punyſhit of them. for they gaff hym mony a ſtrype. for it his ſo. that by what thing a man ſynnys: by the ſame he is punyſhit ¶This lameth ſlow Cayn not wyllīgli. bot when he wos old and blynd. he wos lad of an child. the wich trouyt that he had ſeen a wyld beſt. &̄ ſayd to his maſter that he ſhuld ſchote. and ſo he ſlew Cayn. wher for he beete his chyld ſo ſoorthat the chyld alſo wos deed ¶And it is to be knaw that all craftys orſcyens liberall. or hond craftis or of phyſike: ſeruyng to the curioſite off man: ar red that they wor foundyn of the chyldor of lameth. and for they dred the ꝑell to cum of the flood and the fyer. ther for Tuball grauyt the ſame craftys in .ij· pelours. the theon woos of marbull and tho odyr of tyell or breke. Tuball fond fyrſte the craft to wyrke gold and ſiluer: and yrne. and wos the fyrſte grauer that euer wos. Iabe fond fyrſt tentoria for ſcheper dys and pauylyons for odyr men. Iuball fond fyrſt the crafte to play a pon an harpe and organs. & odyr muſik inſtremētis he vſyt. Noema fond the craft fyrſt to weue lyne and wollyne clothe and to draw thredys of wooll &̄ flax. and a for that tyme the pepull vſytt the ſkynnys of beſtys for ther clothys
            
            
               
               Anno mūdi ·M.viC.xlii. Et an̄ xpī natī .iiiM.vC.lvn.
               The ſhype of Noe had ī lenght iiiC. cubettis. ī bred .l. in altytude xxx. vide plura Gen. 6 knaw ye after doctoris that a conueniēt payn this tyme wos ordant to the world. For thē lechory habundyt the wych defollyt māys body. And ther by water the erth wos waſſhyt and clēſud 
               In the ſigne of the promys that god mad to man that ther ſhuld neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   be ſych a flod agayn. And the rayn bow has ii. principall colurs. the wich repreſēt the ii. Iugemē
                  tis: The watyr colur repreſentis the flode that is paſſit the fyeer colur be tokyns the Iugement to cū: &̄ fy
                     •
                  re the wych we certanli abyde
               In the end of the world be cauſe couetues ſhall habunde: by fyer it ſhall be brenet: gold and ſyluer by the fier is wonte to be clenſ yt.
               
                  
                     Noe
                     Here begīnith the ſecunde aage of the world durīg to habr
                           •
                        ham
                   This Noe wos a ryghtwys man and fond grace a nēdys god. When Noe wos vC. yere of age he had gettyn Chaam Sem and Iaphet that tyme by the cumandment off god he be gone to make a ſchyp. and he made it parfite in a hundyrth yere. And the .C. yer completyt our lord god apperyt agayn to hym. and commā
                  dyt hym. that he wyth his wyffe &̄ his chyldyrn and the wyfes of them ſhuld entyr the ſchyp wyth all maner of beſtys. and all maner of folis all ſo. etc.
               
               And a noon the flod cam. and ſtode a bown all hillis xv. cubittis. vide plura gen .7. Aftyr the flode. a gret drunkīnes  betyd
                  
vn to Noe. and thurgh the occaſion of that drunkynnes he bleſſit his ij ſōis. Sem and Iaphet. for the fadyrs honor that thei haad to hym. &̄ for the honeſt ſhame that they couyrt meekly ther fadyr membyrs whan that he wos droyng. and his ſon Cham for his ſkornnyng and his vnreuerens he curſed. And heer aft
                     •
                  r ſent Auſtyn: is mad the fyrſt mencion of bondage. And of nobulnes contrary to hit. for Noe ſayd that Cham ſhuld be 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uand in bondage to Sem &̄ Iaphet. for his vnreu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ens. Nerye ſhall not trow that all that deſcēdit of Cham war vnnobull men. and of no power. for they be gan fyrſt to be myghty men oon the erthe as it is opyn of Nemroth &̄ the kyngꝭ of Chanaon and aſco
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . Nerall of Sem and Iaphet war vertuꝰ and nobull and myghty men when almoſt euerych oon fel in to the crime of ydolatry. and war oft tymes oppreſſit of odyr men. Bot this bleſſing and this curſyng has a reſpec to vertu and vyce. for the whe
                     •
                  cch a mā is cald truli a nobull man or a vnnobull man. for he that is vertuus is a nobull man. and he that is vnu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tuus is not nobull. The ſame maner of wyeſe. tho that foloyt the fayth of Abrahe rather war cald his chyldyr then the Iues the wich carnally deſcendit from hym. Neuer the leeſſe they had a ſpirituall preualeg of god for the fadyrs m̄yttis and his bliſſyng And of the
                     •
                   iij. ſonnys of Noe: he beyng alyue. aftyr the hyſtory of Philoīs war borne .xxiiij.M. &̄ C· men with owte wemen and chyldyr. and the had oon them iij. Princes Nenroth. Iectan and Suphen.
            
            
               Anno mūdi .ijM.iiC.xlii. Et an̄ xp̄i natī .iiM.viC.lvii.
               SEm ſon to Noe the ſecund yere aftyr the flode gat arphaxat. &̄ odyr whyle he is cald Melcheſedech. the wych fyrſt after the flod mad the cite of Salē. &̄ now is cald Ieruſalē Cham his brother obtenyt affr
                     •
                  can▪ &̄ gat ſonnys ij Chus & Meſcaym. and thes ij gat ſonnys & dowttrys. and many a region

wos of them and mony of them to vs be wnknaw. for the enhabytte in the occidētall ynd. Iaphz wos brother vn to cham and wos bleſſit of his fadyr. and he had vij ſonnys. s. Gomer Magog Maday Ianā Tuball Moſog and Iras. And thes gat ſonnys and doghtrys. and of them cam mony a region. vide plura gen. ih. Arphaxat ſon to ſem leuyde iiiC xxx yere. &̄ gat Elam Aſſur Lud &̄ Arā. &̄ they gat mony a ſone & doghter vt 
                     patꝪ
                     patet
                   
                  gen. This aſſur be cauſe he wold not rebell agaynes god in the bylding of the towor of babulon as nemroth dide. Ther for he wos dreuyn vn to the lond of Sennaar a lond that wos ſtrawnge to hym &̄ wos not afor enhabit. the wich wos callid aftyr his name Aſſuria. &̄ ther he bildit a cite aftyrward namitt Niniue. the wich wos the metopolō of al the kyngdom of aſſuri
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   
                  
                     •
                  hus ſon to cham wos fadir to nemroth. this nēroth woe agyāt of .x. cubettis long &̄ he be gon to be myghty ī the world and he is callid a buſ
                     •
                  wys hunter afoor god. this man be gon that wrichyt vyce of couetues by hys tyrānyde. wyth the wych euer moor aftir this world is fulfyllyd. and the principall kyngdom that he had wos babulon. and he had archad. ediſſa. ſelencia. &̄ the lond of ſennaar. Sale ſone to arphaxat leuyd iiijC xxxiij yere and of hym in ſcriptur is no thyng wrettyn bot that Moyſes nōburs hym in the lyne that cumys of cryſt. ¶This Sale gat a ſon that wos namyt Heber the wych aftyr the hebreus had the ſprete off ꝓphecy. And of thys heber the hebreus be namyt For the hebreus tong boode allon ī hys hows ī the ꝯfuſion of the langage. And that langage was callid manys langage. the wyche eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man vſyett a for the toure of Babulon was bildyt ¶This Heberhade .ij. ſonnys &̄ oon wos callyd Iectan a nother Phaleg this Iectan thurgh enſaumple of Nemroth deſcending froom Cam toke the pryncehood a pon the chyldrin of Sem. &̄ he had .xiij. ſonnys. bot this pepul aftyr Iherom ar not knaw of vs for farnes of the cuntre or mutacion of the pepull or of ſum other cauſe
            
            
               
               Anno mūdi .ijM.viC.xliij. Et an̄ xp̄i natit .ijM.vC.lvi
               Phaleg leuyd .ijC.xxxix. yeer this  Phaleg wos the yōger ſone of hebar. &̄ ī his dayes wos made the ꝯfuſion of langage. For in his howſe a bood the olde tong allon: &̄ that wos ebreu wherfor aftyr Sant Auſtyn in hym apperith a greett ſtedfaſtnes of rygthtuyſnes. for this houſe wos free of that payen. as not conſentyng to the byldyng of the tour. Et 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  m Auguſ. ther weer lxxij. generacions &̄ ſo ther war. lxxij langage. Iectan brother to phaleg of Sem Nemrothe Prince of Cam Suphen of Iaphet. Thes in Pryncis wyth thaer pepull gedyrid them to gedyr ī the felyde of Sennaar dreding the flood to cum a gayen. and ſayde: let vs bylde a Touer. of the wych the altytude ſhal̄ extend to heuyn &c Gene. .ii. our lord ſaw the fulyſh̄nes of the Towr of Babulō pepull: merueluſly for the payne of theer ſyn: he confundyt the tong of theym. ſo that no man vnderſtood watt an other ſayd. &̄ ſo they waer diſparpuld by all the world. Of the malis of this Nemroth bookys be wrytyn full. &̄ after the ꝯfuſion of the langage· he went to the lond of ꝑſis. and thor he toght them to worſhyp the fyer as god. And he laft his ſone belus ī babulon. the wych ſuccedyt hym. and ſo fro thens his ꝓgeny obtenyt that kyndō. vn to the tyme of mony ayere aftyr: ¶This tyme be gan mōy kyngdōys. &̄ the moſt of them all wos the kyngdom of Scitarū bot ther war ſo rued pepull in it: that hit was neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had in worſhip.

And it wos amyghtty region of diſtās ¶A bowte this tyme be gan the kyngdom of Egypt. the wich wyth dyu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe alteraciōs māy tymes wos chongit. And it is ſpokyn of ofttymes ī ſcriptur Nobulnes or Gentilmen abowte this time be gan. And this nobulnes wos ordant for mony cauſis ¶The fyrſt c
                     •
                  uſe wos neceſſite. for when mankynd grouyd ſoor. & men war redy to do il it wos neceſſari to wythſtond the malys of curſit pepull. agōys good men. therof a man is callid a gentylman or a nobull man as be foor odyr in vertuys notabull. wher of Gerom ſayth. I ſe nothyng ellis ī nobulnes or in gētilmen. bot that thay er bonden in a certan neceſſite: that thay ſhall not recede fro the vertu and the gentylnes of theer nobull awnſſetory ¶The ſecuede wos the dyuſe worſh̄yppyng of the pepull. For no man worſhyppyt then. bot as his naturall reſon gaff. &̄ they knew not rightwyſly what they ſhuld worſhyp. all though they leuyd peſſabuly emong them ſelf▪ for they war ſo dull of wytte that they culd ponder no gre
                     •
                  t thyng. bot that wos pubplychit be the commyn pepull. wherfor it wos expedient for ther peeſſe to be kepit. that they ſhuld haue pryncis of nobull byrthe ¶The thyrd cauſe ꝓcedit off ſum ſenguler ſtrength· Mony tymes the comyntees war greuyde thurgh ēnys comyng apon them And then they ſayd. that who ſū eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wold defend them fro thes pellys. he ſhuld haue the ryght of nobulnes for hym &̄ his ayres for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more: And in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of wyſe mony ar red to be nobull men ¶The fourth cauſe off nobulnes wos grett habūdans of good. ſū tyme the pepull wos holdyn wyth grett penury of meete &̄ drinke. &̄ then they toke thē 
                  and thayres to ſum rich man. that thurgh that conant they ſhuld tēꝑ the grete ſtratnes of ther hongyr. &̄ aftir that they ſhuld knaw hym as ther lord &̄ a nobull man ¶Alſo. ther be fond certayn nobull men be the ꝓuiſion of god. tho thay war bot fewe of the wych ſome a bood ī vertu as Dauit &̄ ſū faylit a non as Saul &̄ Ieroboan. Alſo it is red that mōy war nobull men by

tyrannyde &̄ violens of the wich ſum war diſtryet a non. and ſū a bood in ſtabulnes as Paynyms myght
            
            
               Ao mūdi ijM.ixC v. Et an̄ xp̄i natī .ijM.ijC.lxxxxiiij.
               SAruch lyneally deſcendyt from Adam to Abraham. and Nachor wos hys ſone &̄ lyuid an hundyrth &̄ xlviij yere. And a bowte this tyme Ydolatri be gan myghttely. And yf ye reuolue &̄ loke the hyſtoryes ye ſhall fynd that iij. thyngꝭ principall broght men to ydolatri. that is to wete the affeccion that they had to deed men. Dreed &̄ flatyring a nendys thaer prīces &̄ the dyligens of craftimen a boute ſculptures or grauyngis. dulys then entyrt the ydolis. and gaf ownſwars to the pepull. and thes ſpretis cōformyt the errur of the pepull myghtily. In ſo mych that who ſū eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wold note cōforme hym to ther reſon he ſhuld ſuffir the payn of deth. alſo wos addit to thes thyngꝭ: the diſſauyng laud of poettys. the wych wrecchys and dampnyt men in to heuyn wyth ther gay writyngis exaltit. And that ſame tyme when dulys be gan to ſpeke ſo farly and ſo mekely to man. the good lorde of his grett marcy ſend his angils: that thay ſh̄uld ſpeke to hys eleckyt men in viſibely. leſt that all man kyne ſhuld ꝑych wyth that muſcheuus errower. Belus ſonne to Nemroth this tyme wos Kyng of Babulon. &̄ he was the fyrſt kyng of this world. and this man wos he whom the errur of pepull fyrſt trawit ſhuld be a god. wher for diuſe pepull namyt hym diuerſly. &̄ ſū 
                  cald hym Bell. ſum Baall. ſū Baalim. ſum Beelphagor. &̄ ſum Beelſabub. and this vnhapy errur ſtood in man kynd moor thē ijM. yere. Ninus ſon to belus the ſecund kyng of Babulon or of aſſurio
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   regnyt liiij. yere. and this Ninus deſyryt to haue lordſhyp &̄ worſhyp. &̄ to that entent that he myght be lord of all the cūtre a boute hym: and he gaaffe batell̄ to all̄ that dwellit ne a bowte hym. And be cauſe that tyme the pepull wos rude: &̄ had

not the connyng of feghtyng: nor armur. a noon he ſubduyt vn to hym all Aſiam. &̄ ther wos maad the fyrſt monarch ī the eſt ꝑti. &̄ when his hart wos ſory for the deth of his father Belꝰ: hee maad to be maad to hym for his comforth an ymage of his fadyr to whom he gaafe ſo myghti reuerens: that what ſum euer gylty man had fleed to that ymage ther ſhuld no man do vn to hym no hurte. And he pardonythim of all his treſpaſe. And thurgh his enſampull: mōy a mā be gan to worſhype the deed ymag of ther deer frendys. Then thees malicius ſpretis ſeyng the curioſite off the pepull: hyde them with in them: and gaafe onſwars to the pepull. and ſaid they war goddys: and commandit them to do reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ēs vn to them: as god. thus that vnhappy ſyn of ydolatri wos broght in. the wich repugnyt myghteli to goddis mageſty. &̄ ī ſo myche this madnes grew: that he ſhuld ſuffir the payne of deth: thatt ſayd they warmen: bot goddys:
            
            
               Anno mūdi iijM.C.xiiij Et an̄ xp̄i natī ijM lxxxv.
               THare ſon to Nachor leuyd ijC &̄ v yere. this Thare aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the deth of Aram went from vr of calde and paſſit in too Charram with his childyrn &̄ his neuens. and it is ſayd be cauſe he woldnot worſhipe the fier as Nemreth had taght he wos flemyt the cuntre. And the comyn oppynion of the Hebreus is that Nē
                  roth regnyt ther the wich wos cald. a nodir name. Amraphel the kyng of Sennaar: wom long tyme after this Abraham awrcā vt dicitur. 
                     Geneſ 
                     Genesis
                  .xiiij.
            
         
         
            
               Anno mūdi iijM.C.lxxxiiii. Et an̄ xpī natiuitatē ijM xv:
               Heer begynnith the deuoit &̄ holy ſtory of owr Patriarkis the wich worſhippit the u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ay god. &̄ ī ther worſhipping thai taght it vide plura gen 12. vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad finē. this Abrahā a faithfull louer of god: wos born the xliij yere of Ninus kyng of babulō. & knaw

ye that the lxxv yere of Abrahā  thurght the myghty glori of the hee god:
                     Abraham
                     Here begīnith the threde aage of the worlde durīg to dauid
                   the word of merci decēdit apon mankynd for then be gane to appeer the oraculꝰ of the ꝓmiſſe of god. vide aug. 16 de ci. de Itm gen ih. for this tyme holy ā
                  gels apperit to vs ī form of mankynd ¶This abrahā had .ij. brether. Arā &̄ Nachor. &̄ aram gatt Loth a rightwes mā &̄ an holi. &̄ he de
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uyt to be viſit with angels as his hunkil abrahā wos. &̄ for this loth abrahā ſmoot iiii. kyngꝭ for they toke loth vt gen 14. of whom on was ſaid to be Nemroth bot he is cald heer amraphell ¶And abrahā had mony wiffes as Sarar &̄ agar. &̄ his childer &̄ his brether had mōy childer. bot for vs that writte cronyclis: it is not neceſſary to ſpeke of all mē: bot of the noble faders. 
                     
                        
                     
                     sed
                   vide plrāfīe gen. Melchyſedech this tym wos kyng of Salē. this mā wos cald a right wis kyng. for hys excedyng holines. &̄ he offirt bred &̄ wyne to abrahā ī ſigne of a gret myſteri. he wos alſo the preſt of the he god Semyramis the thrid king of Babulō this ordāt an army &̄ went ī to ynde: &̄ obtenet that cūtre. &̄ ſo by all Aſiam the kīgdom of Aſſurio
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   wos dilatit. &̄ he multiplied the cite of Babulō myghteli. &̄ maad wallis a bowt it. this Semyramis had a wyff &̄ he for ſoke hiir. &̄ it is wreten that ſche wos ſlain of hiir ſone Ninus. be cauſe ſche ꝓuokit him to the vnleful cōcupicēs. ſic dicit aug. 18 de ci dei. &̄ ye maiſter ī his ſtorys ſayes that ſche weddit hiir awn ſon. &̄ he gat a child on hiir. the wich ordant bobulon to be the heed of his reme. Ninus the iiij. kyng of babulō wos ſon to gret Ninus. of this man litill is wreten bot that he ſlow his own modir as it is ſayed a foor. Arrius wos the. v kyng of babulon. and vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym wos borne yſaac.
               
                  Yſaac ſone to Abraham of the lyne of criſt leued .C.lxxx. yere. This Yſaac had a wife cald Rebecca. &̄ on hir hee gat ij: ſonnys. Eſau &̄ Iacob. this eſau ſould his enheritons to his brother Iacob. &̄ he wos the fadyr of Ydumeo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . &̄ he had in poſſeſſion the hille of Seir. &̄ put fyrſt maris to aſſys. wher of wos gēdyrte mulis ¶A bowte this tyme: xxx: lordſchippis &̄ Gomorra forther horrobli ſyn war owerthrow. the wife of Loth lokyng bacward: turnet ī to a ſalt ſtone. ſhewis that no mā ī the way of deliberacion ſhuld deſyre thyngꝭ paſt. hee augꝰ. de ci. dei▪
               
            
            
               Anno mūdi iijM.iijC.xliij. Et an̄ xp̄i natī .M.viijC lvi
               Iacob leued .C.xlvij yere this Iacob had iiij wyfes or ſū ꝯcubynes that is to wete. Lyā. Balā. Zelphā &̄ Rachell lyam wos the fyrſt wiff. &̄ ſhe wos blereit. and ſhe baar hym ſex ſonnys. s. Iudas. Rubē. Symeō. Leny. Yſachar. Zabulon &̄ a doghttyr that heyt Dina. Bala 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uand to lya and ꝯcubyne to Iacob baar him .ij· ſōnys. s. Dan and Neptalim. Rachel the ſecūd wieff to Iacob wos barran long tyme. and at the laſt ſhe bare hym .ij. ſōnys. Ioſeph and Beniamyn Zolpha 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uand to Rachel baar Iacob ij ſōnys. Gad and Aſer. and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ychoon of thes maad a trybe: of whom ī this place it is not neceſſary too ſpeke. vide plura gen. Ioſeph ſon to Iacob wos borne lxxxx yere of his fadre age & he leued .C. yere & on Xerſes this tyme wos kyng of babulō vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   whom wos born Iacob & he wos the: vij kīg of babulō. Armauictre wos kyng aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſent aug. in that mānys dayes our lord apperit to Yſaac: ꝓmyſing him tho thyngꝭ the wich h
                     •
                   ꝓmyſed to his fadre. Belocꝰ the ix. kyng of babulō wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this mā & vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this belocꝰ or ī his tyme our lord ſpeke with iacob promiſing hym that he had ꝓmyſit to his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wich war ij.s. the poſſeſſiō of the lond of ꝓmiſſion & chanaan &̄ the bn̄diccion of al pepull ī his ſeed the wich is our lord thū criſt

Abraham a boute this tyme deceſſit &̄ wos bereed ī hebrō. Inachꝰ the friſt kyng that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was ī Grees wos this tyme. foor then the kyngdō be gone. Phoronius wos kyng after hym and he ordant lawis to the grekys. etc.
               
            
            
               Anno mūdi iijM.iijC.iiij. Et an̄ xpī natī .M.vnC.lxxxxix.
               Ivdas ſō of Iacob deſcēdit of hym: &̄ of this tribe of Iudas cā the kīgꝭ ꝓgeni &̄ at the laſt criſt our lord ¶Iudas gat Phares &̄ phares Eſrō. &̄ of thes mē litil his had īſcript bott Math reherſis them. Beleus ī this phares days wos kyng of Aſſurio
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   or of babulō &̄ he wos the .x. kyng. vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wh
                     •
                  m yſaac deceſſid Athlas the gret Aſtronomyer wos alſo the wich is ſaid to beer vp heuyn on his ſhuldre: for the veray knaulech of ye ſterris: Sarapis wos the thy
                     •
                  d kyng of arguio
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   or of Greco
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . 
                     •
                   this ſarapis wos called other wiſſe apis. and he cā ī to Egyppit with a myghty nauy. &̄ ther deceſſit: &̄ wos made of ye blind gētyles the egipcions: the gretteſt god emongꝭ them. &̄ that tyme began ameruelꝰ ſuꝑſticion ī ydolatri of a calfe of .ij. colours. the wich they called Apem. & that calf deyd: the dulis ꝓcurrit a lyke calf to that· for to be maid. that they myght deſſoue the rude pepul &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that it come that the chyld of iſrael did on the ſame wiſe. vt patet. &̄ what thīg cold be more wrechit or foliſſhir ī mā hauīg reſō Argus wos the .iiij. kyng of grekis aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   whō the nobul cite of argꝰ toke his nāme Cicropis edefied Athenas ī grecia &̄ this cite wos ye noricher of liberal ſciens. &̄ of mōy pheloſoforꝰ. yet they wordeſ ſaiued by dulys. &̄ gret ſuꝑſticioſite ī the cite wos maid: vide augꝰ. et mirabilē fabulā reꝑies Omogires the fyrſt mā put ox ſin to the plough. Beleꝰ this tyme wos kīg of babulō. &̄ he woſ the .x. kīg of that region. &̄ vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym died yſaac Pharao wos kyng of Egipt the wich reſayuyt Ioſeph &̄ 
                  exaltet hym: for the īterpretaciō of his dremes. vide ſcīſiāz pulcherimā
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   hiſtoriā 
                  gen 41. etc. Amythus wos the xij. kyng of babulō. vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   whome

dyed Ioſeph a bleſſit mā ī chaſtite Pharao emonophis aboute Eſrom dayes wos kyng of Egypt. & this pharao knew not Ioſeph ner nōe of his linage. & he cōmandet the child of iſrael to be drenchynt. as it is had exodi po. & ye that be clerkes loke that boke for we that be none: pas to the Croniclys. bot a boute this tym the hyſtory of exodi be gone.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iijM vC xliiij. Et an̄ xp̄i natī .M.vC lx.
               Aram ſon to Eſrom of the lyne of criſt wos aboute this tim & he got Aminadab. Naaſon: of thes mē litill is wrete ī ſcriptur & therfor: I ꝓcede to other maters Iob that holi man & of al paciens the enſampyll. a boute this tyme wos born: of ye lyne of nachor the brother of habrahā. & he leued mōy yeres. &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that god had viſit hym. &̄ had aſſayed hys paciēs. he leued .C.xl. yere ꝑ augꝰ greg & lir. Moyſes abowt this tyme wos born. & the child of iſrael war ī gret tribulacion & bondage. &̄ Moyſes wos put ī the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to be drounet Aron a boute this tyme wos borne Dafrus wos king of babulō. & he wos the xiiij. kyng &̄ Moyſes ws borne vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym ī egipt Cicrops wos the fyrſt kīg of Athenas. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Sent auſtī that tyme mōy leſyng war wretyn ī the hiſtories of the grekys. the wich cōmīli war leſſe then the cōmyn faame ſayes. of a litell thyng they wret a grett mater be cauſe to ſhew tther connyng. for ther wos the vniu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſite of grekys
            
            
               Ano mūdi iijM viC lxxxviij. Et an̄ xpī natī .M.vC xi.
               AMynadab ſon to Arā of criſt lyne wos this tyme. thys amynadab fyrſt aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   moyſes with a fool fayth entyrd ī to the reede ſee. &̄ dred not whē mōy a hūdrith war ferd leſt they ſhuld be drenchit. &̄ therfor he de
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uyt to bring forth the kyngꝭ linage of whom decēdit our lord Ihū criſt. Moyſes wos the fyrſte iuge of iſrael that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos. &̄ he wos iuge xl. yere. this moyſes was the moſt excelent ꝓphit that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   god made &̄ the moſt notabil

writer of ſtories. &̄ of his louyng heuyn &̄ erth ſpeeke. for he ſaw almyghty god clerli fais to fays. the wich in this freel lyef wos neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   fondē īſcriptur bot of hym &̄ paule the apoſtell. Aron thee fyrſt biſſhope leued a .C.xxiij yere. this Arō wos called of god ī to the dignyte of the hee preſt or of a biſſhope. &̄ wos ordāt the eternall teſtamēt to hym ſelf & to al that come aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym for ye gret pouer of preſthod. when he wos an .C.xxiij yere of age. he deceſſit &̄ wos bereid ī the hill of hor. &̄ his ſon Heleazarꝰ ſuccedit hym ī the biſſhoprike· Pharao boccharis this tyme wos kyng ī egipt & this Pharao wold not her the cōmādment of god. ner delyu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the child of iſrael. wherfor he wos ponichit with x. plagis vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   exo. And afterward he with all his hooſt: wos drounet ī the reid ſee Naaſon ſon to Aminadab wos prince of the tribe of Iudas ī the diſſert ¶And a bowt this tyme ye law of god wos geuē ī the hill of ſinay. &̄ the boke of leueticū wos wretyn: and a nod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   boke wos called nume
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . &̄ the tabernacul wos ordand. The boke of deuteronamiū wos made: Balaam wos ꝓphet &̄ wos ſlayn.
            
            
               Anno mūdi .iijM vijC xxv. Et an̄ xpī natī .M.iiijC lxxiiii
               SAlmen of the line of criſt wos abowte this tyme &̄ he had a wife that heyt reab. Moyſes abowt this tyme deceſſet. the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of fleme iordane wos dry. Iericho wos take: the ſon ſtoid ī the firmamēt īmeuabull. hiſtoria libri ioſue īcipit & iudicum. Ioſue the ſecūd iuge ī iſrael wos a myghty mā ī batell &̄ the fryſt ī deſert he awer com amelech. &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Moyſes of god he wos ordant iuge of iſrael of whom the batels: the werkes: &̄ the religius lyfe ye may ſe ī the boke of Ioſue wretē. Eleazar wos the ſecund byſſhop: &̄ he &̄ ioſue deuyded the lond of ꝓmiſion to the child of iſraell. &̄ of hym decēdit the byſſhoppis vn to criſt a few exceppyt Othonyell of the tribe of Iuda wos the thryd iuge. and this man delyuered the children of iſrael fro the oppreſſion of thee Reame off Meſopotomie. the wich he ower come in batell. thys

man toke axam to his wyefe. the wiche aſked the vale londis a bown &̄ be nethe of hir fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   caleph. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   
                  iudic prio. Aoth wos the iiij iuge ī iſrael. this mā ſubduid eglō the kyng of moab: and deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  it the child of iſrael. this wos a myghty man in batell and he vſyd the ton hond as well as the tother for his right hond ¶A bowte this tyme the kīgꝭ of Italy be gone. and mony tymes ther names be changet. of the wich the ꝓgenite of the romans mo
                     •
                   clerly is ſhewed Ianas wos the fyrſt kyng of ytaly. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ward of the rude gentilys he wos worſhyppit as a god. and they fenyd hym to haue ij faces. for they worſhippit his feſt in the begynnyng of the yere as he war the ende of the laſt yere. and the begynnyng of the fyrſt yere. and of hym the mone of Ianuary has his name. Amictus wos the viij kyng of babulon vndyr whom Ioſue deceſſit.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iijM vijC lxxv. Et an̄ xpī natī .M: iiijC xxiiij
               Boos ſon to ſalmon of the lyne of criſt wos this tyme. bott of hym is lytill wretten bot that Math nombres hym iij the genology and as docturs ſayth ther wos made ſkyppīg of namys be twyx Boos &̄ Obeth for at the leſte be twyx them war CClxxij yere the wich tyme to on man may not be referred. &̄ ther for heyr mony thynges is ſpoken or I cum to the lyne of criſt a yane. Nicholaꝰ de lyra dt ꝙ ſūt tres boos vnus poſt alium Sangar wos the v iuge of iſrael bothe leued no yeres. Delbora wos the vi. iuge this Delbora wos a womā. and for thee grace of hir ꝓphecy wos gyffen to hir honour that ſhe iuget iſrael ſhe by the cōmādment of god called Baruch that he ſhold go feght with the enmys of iſrael and the child of iſrael gat the victory a yans Iabin the kyng of Chanaan and Cizaram the prīce of his cheualry and he deſtrued hem vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   iudicū 4o. Phenies wos biſſhop. and this Phenies yet a yong man for goddis ſake

ſlew mony lecherus men And therfor our lord wos pleſit wit him Saturnus this tyme wos kyng in Italy. and he wos the ſecū
                  de kyng ther. this Saturmis is ſayed to cum from the lond of cretens in to Ytaly. whom by ydolatri thurght a meruelꝰ blendnes they ſayed wos no man bot a god. And yet they ſayed that hee regnet vpon them as ther kyng and he taught mē fyrſt to donge ther feeldys and of Saturnus the romās war cal̄led ſaturniam. P
                     •
                  icus wos ſon to Saturnus and or he wos kyng in Italy he wos kyng in Laurentyn: and after his deceſſe of the gētilis wos worſſhippit for a god.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iijM viijC lxxv. Et an̄ xp̄i natī .M.iijC xliiij
               GEdeon the vij Iuge off iſrael wos this tyme. this Gedeon ſubduyt iiij. kynges. s. Oreb: Zebee. Zeb: and Salmana. And hee ſubduyt Madean to iſrael. vide plura iudi cū .6.7. et .8.
               Bocci wos Biſſhope in iſthel: then: Abymelech the: viij iuge in iſrael wos naturall ſone to Gedyan and he wos not called of god bot malycioſly toke on hym the Prinſhod of iſrael and he ſlew lxx of his brether wherfor he endit his lyfe myſcheuuſly vt patet iudicum. 9 Tola wos the ix Iuge in iſrael and this man gydit hym after the olde gouernans of iuges by thee maner of dyreccion and counſell. moor then by domynacion. Bocci wos biſſhop a bowte this tyme: bot of hym lytell is wretyn Iayr the x iuge of iſrael had xxx ſonnys: whom he made princes of xxx citees. And be cauſe thes war good men and rulit to the pleſour off god. Therfor in the dayes of thees .ij. men iſreel drew to our lord And therfor all thyng come and wos in proſperite and welche.
               Fannus wos the iiij kynge of Italy and he wos kyng of Laurentyn

b
                     •
                  the Latinus wos kyng in Italy after Fānus and of thys Latinus wos called the kyngdō of latinorum ¶And Carmentis doughter to Euandri foond fyrſt latyn lettyrs. Thauranus a bowt this tyme wos kyng of babulon or of aſſeriorum and vnder thys man Troy wos deſtruyed fyrſt. The occaſion off the batell off Troy be gone for a lytell thyng. in ſo myche as Lamydon kyng of Troy: reſeyued not Hercules and Iaſon wyth dew honour as they ſhold haue be reſaiued. and off ſo lytell a treſpaſſe how mony harmys and hurtys grew. Sibilla delphica a for the batell of Troy proficyed how a chyld ſhuld be borne of a virgin wyth owt mannys ſeed. Laamydon kyng of Troy wos ſlayn: And hys doughtyr xiona wos taken in to grees lond. for the wych foulyth myghty batell and moſt ferfull myſcheuys vide hiſtoriam troianam. Hercules wyth Iaſon deſtruyd Ilyum or Troy. the wych a none after wos bylded of Pryamus ſon to Laamydon This hercules did mony meruelus thynges. and mony myghty batelles. and infenyte leſinges be fennyt on hym· at the laſte when he had ower come mych pepull hee wos ſoor hurt in werre. And when he myght not ſuffyr the payn of his ſoor with the wych he wos greued. hym ſelfe he ron in to the fyer and when he wos deyd he wos worſhyppyt emonges the goddis of the gentyles myghttely.
            
            
               Circa annū mūdi iijM ixC lxxv Et an̄ xpī natī .M.ijC xxiiij
               After the deth of Iayr iuge of iſrael: the pepull of iſraell addyt new ſynnys to ther olde: And our lord toke them ī to the pouer of the Phyl̄yſtiens: and to ye chylder of amon xviij yere and they war grettly oppreſſit. and then they cryed to owr lord Then iepte wos enſpyred wyth all myghtty god: And faught a ganes. Amon and. Sedicios pepull off the hyll off Effraym: And for an vnprudent voy hee ſlew hys owne

doughter fulliſhly & did ſacrifice to god with hir. iudicū. 11: & 12 Ozy this tyme wos byſſhop in iſrael and he wos of the ſeed of Aron by the line of Eleazari the wiche deed through the ꝓuiſiō of god the byſſhoprike turned to the lyne of Ythamaran. C xx yere in the wich line Hely wos the firſt hee biſſhope. & Abiather wos the laſt Ebeſſam wos iuge in iſrael vn. yere: and he wos the xij. iuge. and he wos named other wiſe Boos the wych wed ruth Abialon the xiij iuge of iſrael wos iuge x yere. and vndyr thes tymes the chyldir of iſrael warqwiet. and therfor no notabull thynges was done in theys dayes Abdon the xiiij iuge gouerned in iſrael viij yere. and a bowte this tyme the hiſtori of Ruth wos wreten Authāis this time wos kyng of aſſeri
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  : & Priamus kyng of Troy ſon to Laomidō byldet his cite a yane meruelusly ſtrong and be gone batell with the grekys in to hys owne hurt. and he had a ſon wos called Hector a lefull gettyn ſon bi his wyf Eccuba. this man wos faythfull and wyſſe: and in cōꝑabull of ſtrengh & nobulnes: this Priamis had a nother ſon wos called Paris the wich toke a way fro the lond of grekis Helena wyfe to Menelayus the kyng Agamenon the kyng brother to menelay the leder of all the grekis ooſt faught a yans Troy and at the laſt he won the cite falſly & to the grekys the moſt ſhame &̄ ſklandir that myght be. for certanly that myght be cald a vnhappy batell wher no man gewes louyng to the grekys. bott eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man reportis ſham. Eneas wos kyng in Itali iij yere. &̄ this Eneas after troy wos deſtuyt of the grekys come in to Ytaly wyth xx ſchyppys. and did myghty batelles ther: and this mā had wedit Priamus doughter Elinſuram. and he wos made A god thrugh the errour of the cōmyn pepull and of this man come Iulius ceſar & Octauianus auguſtus. Vlixes an eloquent man emong all the grekys after mony parrellys on the ſee. wēt home to hys Penolopem the moſt faythfull: And the moſt chaſtyt woman that is red off: and the grekys parychit wrecchytly

aftir they had deſtruyd Troy bothe on the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & on the land os they went homward a yane ¶And that wos thee principall date of ther writyng aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that victori. for the wrot ther hiſtores &̄ odyr writyngꝭ ſic. Anno primo uel ſecūdo &c. poſt troiam captam And that wos the .iij. yere of Abdon iuge of iſrael.
            
            
               Circa annū mūdi iiijM.xxv. Et an̄ xpī natī .M.C.lxxiiij.
               OBeth of criſtis lyne ſon to Boos is reherſſet in Math. Samſon the xv. iuge regnet xx yere. this Samſon wos the moſt ſtrong man that euer wos. And he delyuered iſrael from the Phyliſtians and for hys meruelus ſtrength mē trowed he had beyn hercules Eteiꝰ mirabilia oꝑa vide iudicū .13.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM lxxv. Et an̄ xpī natiuitatē .M.C xiiij
               IEſſe ſon to Obeth of the lyne of criſt: odyrwyſe called Yſay fadre to Dauid thys tyme leued a noaull man in honeſty no kyng ne gret gouerner bot of hym mony tymes is made mencion in holy ſcriptur: for of hym deſcendit criſt our ſaueour. Thys tyme Hely wos iuge and biſſhop in iſrael: the wich had ij. ſonnys Ophni and Phinees. and for he coreket them not ſufficiently He and they were ponyſſhit bothe of our lord. for they were ſlayn of the Philiſtions: and Hely feell of his ſeit and brake his nec. This hely wos iuge next after Samſon: and not of the linage of Aron that wos fyrſt Biſſhop of god electe bot off Ythamar the linage duryt .C.xx yere. in the wych lynage Hely wos fyrſt biſſhope and Abyathar the laſt. vide plara primo regum.
               This tyme Saull wos kīg in iſrael̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the maſter in hys hiſtories &̄ Ioſephus ī his viij. boke this Saule wos firſt kyng ī iſrael̄ and regnet xx yere. the wich or he wos kyng wos a good man and electe off god bot afterward wrecchytly he fayled. And he wos ſlayn and his iij. ſonnys in the hyllys

of gylboy. In the tyme of ſaul. Samuell wos Iuge: & prophet in iſrael an holi man &̄ borne of a baran moder mony a day. &̄ he mynyſtred a foor our lord from a child to his age. &̄ wos not hee Biſſhope. bot he iuget iſrael all the dayes of his liffe. &̄ wos the veray prophet of god .ij. kynges he anoyntet. Saul fyrſt &̄ after Dauid. this Samuell alone and Moyſes ar red that thei prayed for ther enmys in all the old teſtament. Of thys Samuell. and Saull be dyuerſe opynions Iſodyr ſayth that Samuell and Saul ruled iſrael xl yere and Ioſephus in his viij boke and the maſter ī his hyſtories ſayn Samuel to be Iuge xij yere aloon. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym: ſaul to regne xx yere. plura vide prio regum Aſcanius the vij. kyng of ytaly wos ſon to Eneas & beldit the cite of Albion &̄ he wos cald the kyng of Albano
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . ¶Thys aſconyus got Siluiꝰ the viij. kyng of Italy. the wycch ſiluius was fadir vn to Brute kyng of bretan now called Englond. And I leef of the kyngꝭ of Italy for they did bot litill nobull thynges tyll it be cōmen to Romulꝰ &̄ remꝰ that rome wos bilded. And then ſhall thos kyngꝭ cū a yane & we ꝓcede to the cronicls 
                     Albion.
                     Here ye may ſe how Englond fyrſt began at albion
                   of englōd for the wich this boke namly is maade. And venis and Padua wor bylded a bowte this tyme of the reſudw of the troyans Homere the gret poete a bowte this tyme wos: the wyche wrotte and fened gloriuſli mony a leſyng.
            
         
         
            ¶Incipit regnum britanie nunc dict anglia.
            ¶Afor yt I will ſpeke of Brute it ſhall be ſhewed how ye lōde of englōd wos fyrſt namd albiō &̄ by what c̄cheſō it vos ſo namit

IN the nobull land of Sirrie ther wos a nobull kyng & myghty &̄ a mā of gret renōe that wos called Diecliſian yt wel &̄ wortheli him gou
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               ned &̄ ruled thurgh his noble chiualri So that he ꝯquered all the landes about hym ſo that almoſt all the kynges of the world to hym were entēdāt. Hit be fell thꝰ that this Diocliſian ſpouſed a gētill damiſell that wos wōd
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                fair that was his emes dought
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                labana: & ſhe loued hym as reſon wold ſo that he gat vpō her xxxiij. doughtres: of the wich the eldeſt wos called Albine &̄ thees damiſelles whan they comē vn to age bicomen ſo fair that it wos vōder. wher of Diocliſian anōe let make aſompnyng &̄ cōmaunded by his lettres that all the kynges that helden of hym ſhold cum at a certain day as in his lett
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               s were cōteyned to make a riall feſt ¶At wich day thider they cōen &̄ brought with hem amirallis princes &̄ dukes: and nobull chiualrie. The feſt wos rialy arayed and ther they leued in Ioye &̄ myrthe ynough: that it wos wond
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                to wit. And it befeell thus that this Diocliſian thought to marie his doughtres among altho kynges that tho were at that ſolempnite. &̄ ſo they ſpakene &̄ ded that albine his eldeſt doughter &̄ all hir ſuſtres richely were maried vn to xxxiij. kynges that were lordes of gret honour &̄ of pouer at this ſolempnyte And when the ſolempnite wos done eu
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               y kyng toke his wyf & lad them in ther own cōtre &̄ ther maad hem quenes. and it befell thus afterward that this dame albine bicome ſo ſtoute & ſo ſterne that ſhe told lytell pris of her lord & of hym had ſcorne and deſſpyt and wolde nat done his will butt ſhe wold haue hir owne will in dyuerſe matres and all hir other ſuſtres euerychone bere them ſo euel ayenſt ther lordes: that it was wondyr to wytt & for as moch as them thought that ther huſbondes were nought of ſo hy ꝑage comen as ther fadre. But tho kynges that were ther lordes wold haue chaſtized them with fair maner vpon all loue and frendſhipp that they ſhold amend ther

lith er ꝯdycions: but all wos for nought for they diden ther own wyll ī all thyng that them liked: & had of poer wher for tho. xxxiij kyngꝭ vpon a tyme & often times beten ther wyfes for they wened that they wold amended ther tatches & ther wilkednes bot of ſoche cōdicions they were that for fair ſpeche & warnyng they didden all the wors and for betynges eft ſones mochel wers wher for the kyng that had wedded Albine wrot the taches & ꝯdicions off his wyf
                  •
                albin and the letter ſent to Diocliſion hir fadre. & whē the other kyngꝭ herd that Albines lord had ſent a lett
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                to Diocliſian. anone they ſent lettres enſeled with ther ſeales the ꝯdicions & taches of ther wyfes. ¶When the kyng diocliſian ſaw and herd ſo many playntes of his doughtres he wos ſore aſhamed & become wond
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                angre & wroth toward his doughtres & thought bothe nyght and day yf he tho myght a mend it: that they ſo miſded and anone ſent his lettres vn to the xxxiij. kynges that they ſhold cū to hym & bring with hem their wyfes eu
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               ychone at a certane day: for he wold ther chaſtiſe hem of ther wikkedneſſe yf he myght in any maner of wiſe So that the kyngꝭ comen all at that tyme and day that tho wos ſette bitwene hym and the kyngꝭ. Diocliſian them vnd
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                ſong with moche honour &̄ maad a ſolēpne feſte to al that were vnd
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                his lordſhipp. &̄ the thrid day aft
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                that ſolēpnite the kyng Diocliſian ſent aft
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                his xxxiij. doughtres that they ſhold cum &̄ ſpeke with hym ī hys chambre &̄ when they war come he ſpake vn to them of ther wikkednes &̄ of ther cruelte &̄ ſpitueſly hem reꝓued & vndernam &̄ to hem he ſaid that yf they wold nat be chaſtiſed they ſhold his loue leſe for eu
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                more. And when the ladies herden all this they be comē abaſſhed and gretli aſchamed & to ther fadre they ſaid that they wold make all amendes & ſo they deꝑted out from ther fadres chambre. & dame Albine that wos the eldeſt ſuſter lad hem all to hir chambre and tho made void all that wer theryn ſo that no lefe wos among hem but ſhe and hir ſuſtres yfere: Tho ſayd this Albine my faire ſuſtres wel we know that

the kyng our fadre vs hath reproued ſhamed and deſpyſeed for encheſone to make vs obedient vn to owr houſbandes. but certes that ſhall I neu
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                whiles that I leue ſith that I am come of a more hier kyngꝭ blod then myn houſbond is. &̄ whan ſhe had thꝰ ſaid. all hir ſuſtres ſaid the ſame. &̄ tho ſaied Albine full well I wot fair ſuſtres that owr houſbandes has plened vn to our fader vpō vs wherfor he hath vs thꝰ ſoule reproued &̄ deſpiſed. wherfor ſuſtres my counſell is that this nyght when our houſbandes bene a bedde all we with one aſſent: cutten hir throtes &̄ than we may bene in pees of hem &̄ better we moo doo this thing vnder our fadres power than ower where ells. And anone all the ladis conſented &̄ grāted to thys cōſell. &̄ when nyght wos cōyn the lordd &̄ ladies went to bedde &̄ anone as ther lordes were in ſlepe: they cutte all heir houſbondes throtes. &̄ ſo they flow them all. when at Diocliſian the kyng her fadre herd of this thing. he bicome hugeli wroth ayenſt his doughtres &̄ anōe wold hem all haue brenet ¶But al the barons &̄ lordes of ſirrie: coūceilled not ſo for to doo ſuche ſtretnes to his owne doughtres: bot onli ſhold voyde the lond of them: for eu
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                more: ſo that they neu
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                ſhuld com ayene. and ſo he dyde ¶And Diocliſian that wos ther fadre anōe cō
               maunded them to gone in to ſhypp: &̄ deliu
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               ed to hem vitailles for half a yere. And whan this wos done: all the ſuſtren went in to the ſhip &̄ ſailed forth ī the ſee: & bitoke all ther frendes to Appolyn that wos ther god· And ſo long thee ſailed in the ſee till at the laſt they come &̄ arreued ī an yle that wos all wylderneſſe. &̄ when dame Albion wos come to that lond &̄ all hir ſuſtres thys Albine went freſt forth out of the ſhypp: and ſaied to hir other ſuſtres: for as moche ꝙ ſhe as I am the oldeſt ſuſter of all this cōpany &̄ fyrſt this land haue takē: &̄ for as moche os my nam is Albine I will that this lond be called albiō aft
                  
                     
                  
                  er
                myn own name &̄ anōe al hir ſuſtres grāted to hir with a good wyll Tho vēt out al ye ſuſtres of ye ſhip: & tokē the lond albion as hir ſuſter cald it

And ther they went vp &̄ downe and fonde nether mā ne womā ne child but wyld beſtes of diuerſe kyndes. and when ther vitalles war diſpended and thei failled: they fedde them wyth herbes: &̄ frutes in ſeſon of the yere. and ſo they leued as they beſt myght and aftee that they token fleſſh of dyuerſe beſtes and bycame wonder fat and ſo they deſired mannys compane: and mānys kynde that hem failled. and for hete they woxen wonder coragious of kynd ſo that they deſired more mānys companie then eny othyr ſolace or myrthe whan the deuel that ꝑceuyd and went by dyuerſe contreys and nōme bodi of the eir: and likyng natures ſhad off men: and come in to the lande of Albion. and lay by thoo wymē and ſhad tho natures vpon them: and they conſaued after &̄ they broght forth Geantys of the wich one wos called Gogmagog. and an other Langherigan. and ſo they wer named by diuerſe names. nad in this maner they come forth: and wer borne horrible geantes in Albion. and they duelled in caues: and ī hylles at ther wyll: and had the londe of Albion as them lyked: vn to the tyme that Brut arriued: and come to Totnes that wos in the yle of Albion. and ther this brute conquered: and 
               ſkomfited thes geantes aboue ſayd.
            
               ¶Here be geneth now how Brut was goten: and how he ſlewe fyrſt his moder. and after his fader: and how he conquered Albion that after he named Bretan after his owne name that now is called Englond: after the name of Engiſt of ſaxonie. Thys Brute cam in to Bretan a bowte the .xviij. yeer of Hely
               BE it knaw that in the nobull cite of greet Troy: theer wos a nobull Knyght and a man of grete pouer: that wos called Eneas and when the cite of Troy was loſt and deſtroed thurgh them of Grece: this Eneas with al his meyne fled thens: and comeī to Lumbardy: that tho wos lord and gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nour

of that lond a kyng that wos called Latyne. and a nother kyng ther wos that wos called Turocelyne that ſtrongli wered vpō this kyng latyne that often tymes did hym moche harme And whē this kyng latyne herd that Eneas was comen he vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  feng hym wyth mochel honour & hym with helde for as moche as he had herd of hym & wiſt well that he wos a nobull knyght and a worthy of hys body &̄ of hiy dedes: this Eneas helpet kyng Latyne ī his were &̄ ſhortly for to tell ſo well & ſo worthely he did: that he ſlew Turocelyne &̄ diſcomfited hym &̄ all his pepull. And when al this wos done: kyng latyne yaf all that lond that wos turocelinis to thys noble man Eneas in mariage with Lauyne his doughter the moſt faire creature that any man wiſt: and ſo they lyued to geder in ioye and myrthe all the dayes of theyr lyfes tyme. and after Aſconyus ſon to Eneas wedded a wyfe and vpō hyr he begat a ſon that wos called Silueyn &̄ this ſilueyn whan he colde ſum reſun of man vn wittyng his fadre and a yenſt his wyll acquentyd hym with a damyſell that wos coſyn to Lauyne that wos kyng latynes dougter the quene that wos eneas wyfe and brought the damyſell wyth chylde. and whon Aſcanius his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   it wiſt anone let enquere of the wiſeſt maſters and of the gretteſt klerkes what chyld the damiſey ſhold bring forth and they anſuered &̄ ſayed that ſhe ſhold bring ofrth a ſon that ſhold kyll bothe his fadre and alſo his modre: and ſo he did: For his moder dyed in beryng of hym. And whan this chyld wos borne: his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   let calle hym Brute: and the maſters ſiyd that he ſhold doo moche harme &̄ ſorow in mony dyuerſe places: and after he ſhold come to gret honour and worſhyp: This kyng aſcanius dyed when god wold and Silueyn his ſon reſaued the lond and made hym wonderly well beloued amonges his pepull. and whan Brute thatt wos Siluenus ſon wos xv. yere olde he went vpon a day wythe his fadre for to play &̄ ſolace &̄ as Brute ſhold a ſhote vn to an hert hys harew myſhapped & glaced & ſo ther Brutkel led his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  .
            
            
               
               ¶How Brute wos dreuen out of the lond and how he helde hym in Grece.
               And when this myſchance befell: all the pepull of the lond made ſorow ynowgh and war ſore an angreyd and for encheſon therof they driuen Brute oute of the lond & wold not ſuffer hym amonges them: and he ſaugh that he myght not ther a bide & he went from thens in to grece: &̄ ther he fond vij.M. men that were of the lynage &̄ kynred of Troy that wor comē of gret blode as the ſtori telleth as of men & womē &̄ 
                  child the wich wer all holden in thraldom &̄ bondage of the kyng Pandras of grece for the deth of Achilles that wos bitrayed &̄ ſlayn at troy. thys Brute wos a wonder fayr man & a ſtrong and huge of his age and of glad cheyr and ſembland &̄ alſo worthy of body and wos wellbeloued emonges his pepule. This kyng Pandras herde ſpeke of his goodnes and his condicions and anone made hym duell with hym ſo that Brute bicome wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   priue &̄ moch beloued with the kyng: ſo that long tyme brute duelled with the kyng: ſo at the laſt they of troy and brute ſpakyn to gedre of kynred and of lynage &̄ of acquantance and ther plened them vn to brute of ther ſorow and of ther bondage and of mony other ſh
                     •
                  mes that ye kyng Pandros had them done: &̄ to brute they ſayn vpon a tyme ye ben a lord of our linage &̄ a ſtrong man & a myghty be ye ou
                     •
                   captayn & lord &̄ gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nour &̄ we wyll be cume your mē and your commandmentes done in all maner of thinges and bryng ye vs oute of this wrecchitnes and bandage &̄ we wil fyght wyth the kyng for trouth wt ye grace of the gret god we ſhall hym ouercome and we ſhall make you kyng of the lond and to you done homage &̄ of you we ſhall holde euermore. Brute had tho gret pite of ther bondage that they were brought yn: and preuely went hem from the kynges court: and tho that were of Troy wē &̄ put them in to wodis and in to montaygens and them the helde and ſent vn to kyng Pandros that he ſhuld yeue them leu

ſauely for to wend out of the lond for they wold no longer duelle in his bondage: The kyng Pandras wax tho ſore annoyd and tho ſwore that he wold ſlae them eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ychone and ordeneyd a grett pouer and went towardes them all for to feght but Brute and his men manli them defended and ferſly foughten and kylled al the kynges men that none of them aſcaped and token the kyng &̄ hym helde in priſon and ordeyned counſell bi tweyn them what they mygth done: &̄ ſū ſaid that he ſhuld be put to deth and ſū ſaid that he ſhuld be exiled out of the lond and ſū ſaid that he ſhuld be brent ¶And tho ſpake a wyſe knyght that was called Mempris and ſaid to Brute and to all tho of Troy yf kyng Pādras wold yelde hym and haue his lyfe I councell that he yeue vn to brute that is our duke and our ſoferayne his doughter Gennogen to a wyfe and in mariage with hyr an hondreth ſhippes wel araied and all hys treſour of gold and ſiluer of corne and of wyne and as moch as os nedeth to haue of o thyng and other and than go we oute of his lond &̄ ordayn we vs a land elles where for we ne none of our kynred that comen after vs ſhall neuer haue pees in this lond amonges them of grece: for we haue ſlayn ſo mony of ther kynghtes and of other frendes that euermore were and contake ſhold be amonges vs: brut tho and all his folke conſented well to that counſell and this thyngꝭ they tolden to kyng Pādras and hee for to haue his lyfe graunted as moch as they axid: and a none yaf vn to brute gennogen his douter to wyfe & an hūdreth ſhippes with os myche os them neded of all vitalles os befor wos ordenyd: brute tho toke his wife and all is men that for ſoke the lond of grece and went them vn to the ſee. and had wynd and wedre at ther wyll: and com the thrid day in to an Ile that wos called Lorgres: this brute anone ſent of his mē a lond for to aſpye the man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of the contre & they found a nold Cite al waſted &̄ forlet that nas therynne nether mā ne woman ne no thyng duelling & ī the mydell of this cite they founden an

old tempull of an feier lady yt wos called Diane the goddeſſe &̄ they comē ayene vn to Brut & told hym what they had ſeyn and found & they cōſelled hym gone & doo ſacrifice vn to dame Dian for ſhe was woned to yef anſuer of what thyng yt eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   men prayed hir &̄ namli vn to them yt hir honoured wt ſacrifice Brut wēt to yt ymage &̄ ſayd Diane noble goddeſt lady yt all thyng haſt in myght &̄ ī thy pouer wyndes waters wodes feldes &̄ al thyng of the world &̄ all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of beſtes yt ther ī ben to you I make my prayer yt ye me cōcell &̄ tell wher & ī what place I ſhall haue a counabull duellyng for me &̄ for my pepull & ther I ſhall make ī honor of you a welfaier tempyll & a nobull wher ī ye ſhall eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  more be honoured. when he had done his praer Diane anſuerd ī this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  : Brute ꝙ ſhe go euē forth thy wey ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee ī to fraunce toward the weſt &̄ ther ye ſhall find an Ile yt is called Albion & yt Ile is bicompaſſed all with ye ſee & no mā may cū therī: bot it bene by ſhippes: & ī yt lond wer wōed to be geantes bot now it is not ſo bot all wyldernes and that lond is deſtenyed &̄ ordant for yow and for your pepull.
            
            
               ¶How Coryn becōe brutes mā &̄ how kīg goffar wos diſcōfid
               WHen Brute hade this anſuere of diane the goddeſſe anōe he let the ancres wynd vp & ſayled ī to the high ſee &̄ whē he &̄ his men had ſailed xx. dayes and mo they fond faſt beſide a coſt of the ſee a thouſand mē of the lynage and kynred of Troy and ther ſouerayne &̄ ther maſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of all was called Corin. and whan Brute wiſt whennes they weer he tho toke them with moch Ioye ī to his ſhippis &̄ led them forth with hym. this Corin ther becōe brutes mā & to hym dyd homage &̄ ſo long they ſailled forth ī yt ſe till they comē ī to Gaſcoyne and anōe they arriued ī the hauen of liegers and ther they duellid viij. dayes them for to reſt &̄ ther ſayles to amende ther that it wos nede: tydyngꝭ ſone come to kīg Goffar that was lord of the lond how yt moch pepill of ſtrange

lond were arreuid in to his lond in the hauen of liegers wherfor hee was ſore angreyd and anoyde that they come and arriued in his lond with out his lyſens and his leue. And anone he ordeyned hym a gret pouer for to dryue out Brute and to ſhend him and all his pepull: bout it was ſo that kyng Goffar wos diſcomfited and all his pepull: and hym ſelf flede in to Fraunce: ther to ſeke helpe and ſocour. ¶And in that tyme regned in fraunce xij. kynges: and a xi. of them aſſemaled a gret pouer for to help Goffar and for to fight ayenes Brute: this Goffar duelle with them of fraunce halfe a yere and more. And in the mene tyme when goffar was in fraunce. Brute and hys companye deſtruyed all the lond of Gaſcoyne and let take all treſour that kyng goffar had and ther let bryng it all in to his ſhippes And this Brute founden in that lond a fair place and couenabull & theyr brute made a faire Caſtell and a ſtrong. ¶When that this wos done kyng Goffar come fro fraunce and xi. kynges with hym and brought with them .xx: M. men for to fyght wt Brute & his compani and brute had but vijM. and iijC. men: & neuerthelees when the ij. hoſtes mett to gedre: brutes folke thorgh help of hym ſelfe and of Turyn his coſyn &̄ of Corin that well and manly hym defended and fought ſo tell that lytell tym they had kylled of the fraunſhemen ijM. and mo. anon all tho that were alyue fled a way ¶And in this batell Turin brutes coſyn was ſlayn and brute let enteer hym worthely whan he had ſpace &̄ leyſer in the Caſtell that he had made: and tho let call that ſame caſtell Tours for be cauſe of the name of Turin that ther wos entyred and yet in to this day ther is a nobull Cite that is c
                     •
                  lled Tours. And when kyng goffar wiſt that Turin wos deyd he cō ayene with his men and after yaf a ſtrong batell vn to brute. bot brute and hys men were ſo wery for fighttyng that they myght no longer endure bot to meegre hym and all his. and than

Brute went ī to his caſtell with all his men &̄ made the yates faſt for to ſaue them and for to take conſell amonges them what were for to do Brute and Corin yaf counſell and ordeyned that corin priualy ſhold goo oute and buſſh hym in a wod til the morne So that in the mornyng whan brute ſhold fight with his enymys Corin ſhold cum with his folke in one ſide and ſla and do all the harme that he myght And in amornyng in the dauyng of the day Brute went out of the caſtell &̄ faught with his enmys and they ferſly defendid bot with ī a litell tyme brute and his folke ſlew viijC. of gofears men. and then come Corin with the buſſhement and ſmot to ground he & his compani all that wold ſtond or a byed ſo that that kyng goffar and his comp
                     •
                  nye war deſcomfited and faſt they gun to fle. And Brute and Corin with ther companye ferſly them perſoed and kylled moo of them in the fleyng than they did in batell ¶And in this maner Brut had the victorie and nertheles brute made moch ſorow for his coſyn Turin that ther wos ſlayn and other alſo that he had loſt of his men that is to ſay vijC. and xv. the wich nobulli he let entier in the ſome caſtell of Tours ther wher that he had entyred Turin his coſyn.
            
            
               ¶How Brute arriued at Totneſſe in the Ile of Albion. and of the batell that wos by tuix Corin and Gogmagog.
               WHen all this wos done Brute wold no longer ther duell for to fight nor for to leſe no mo of his pepull For kyng Goffarus pepull mygth euery day encreſſe mo and mo And bruttes laſſenned and therfor he toke all his men and went vn to the ſee & had wynd and weder at ther will. And the fyfte day afterwaard they arriued in an hauen at Totneſſe and comen in to the Ile of Albion and ther nether man nor woman as the ſtori tels

the fond: but Geautes and thei woned in hillis & in caues. &̄ Brut ſaw the lond wos fayr and at his likyng and wos good alſo for him and for all his pepull as Diane the goddeſſe had hym behight. And ther wos brute wonder glad and late aſſemble vpon a day all his folke to make a ſolempnie ſacrifice and a gret feſt in honour & reuerens of Diane the goddeſſe of the wich he had counſell firſt for to cū in to this lond And whan that they had thar ſolempnite done: as they vpon a day ſat at ther mete ther come in vppon them ſodanly xxx. geantes and kylled of brutes men xxx. Brute and his men anone ſturten vp and fought wt the geantes and kylled them euerychone: bot one that was called Gogmagog: and he was maſter of all the geantes and he wos ſtronger and heyr than ony of the other. And brute keped hym for encheſon that he ſhold wreſtyll with Corin that was brutes mā: for he wos gretter and hyer than ony of Brutes men from thee gredyl ſted vpward ¶Gogmagog and Corin vndir toke ther for to wreſtyll: and ſo to gedre they went and wreſtilled a long tyme but at the laſt gogmagog held Corin ſo faſt that he brake ij. ribbbes of his ſide wherfor Corin wos ſore angri and ther he toke gogmagog betwix his armes and keſt hym doune vpon a roche ſo that gogmagog brak all to peces &̄ ſo he died an euell deth and therfor the place is called yit vn to this day the faut of gogmagog And then after brute yaf all that cuntre vn to Corin & ther corin called it after his name Cornwalle: and his men be called Cornwailles and ſo ſhuld men of that contre be called for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  more And in that contre duelled corin and his mē and thee made tounes &̄ houſes &̄ inhabited the lond by ther own wyll.
            
            
               ¶How Brute made London & called this lond britane and ſcotland Albyne and Walis Cambir.
               
                  BRute and  his mē wēt forth &̄ ſaw aboute in dyuerſe places wher yt they myght fynd a good place and couenabull yt they myght make a Cite for hym & for his folke Soo at the laſt they come by a fayr Riuer that is called temys & ther Brute biganne a fair Cite and let calle it new Trey in mynd and remembrance of the gret Troy from the wich place all theer linage was comin ¶And this brute let fell doune wodes and let erye and ſawe landes and let maw doune medoys for ſuſtenā
                  ce of him and alſo of his pepull: and he departed the lond to them ſo that euerychon haad a parte and a certayn place for to duell in And then Brute let call all this lond Bretene after his owne name and his folke he let call bretons And this Brut had gotē on his wife Gennogen iij. ſonnys that war worthy of dedes the fyrſt wos called Lotrin ye ſecund Albanac and the thred kambar And brute bore croune in the cite of new Troy .xx. yere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye tyme that the cite was made: and ther he made the lawes that ye bretons holden And this brut wos wonderly well belouyd emōg all men: And brute ſonnys alſo loued wonderly well to gedeer ¶And whan brute had ſought all the lond in length &̄ alſo ī breyd he found a land that Iuned to bretane yt wos in the north and that land brute yaf to albanac his ſon and let call it Albanie aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his name yt now is called Scotland ¶And brute fond an other contre toward the weſt and yaf yt to Cambar his other ſon and let call it Camber after his name and now it is cald walys. and whan brute had regned .xx. yere as be for is ſayd

then he died in the cite of new Troy.
            
            
               ¶How Lotrin that wos brute ſon entroed wyth moch honour and gouerned the lond well and worthely
               AFter Brute regned Lotrin his ſon that wos the ſecund kyng in bretane the wich be gane to regne the ſecund yere of Samuell. and this lotrin wos croned kyng with moch ſolemnite of all the land of bretane and after whan he wos croned kīg Albanac and Cambar his .ij. brether went a gayn ī to ther own contre and ther they liued with mekyll honour and worſhyp. and Lotrin ther brother regned and was kyng and gouerned it well and wyſeli: for he wos a good man and wonderly well beloued of all his land And it be fell ſo that Albanac duelled in his owne lond with mekell hoonour and worſhipe: and then come kynge Humbar of Hunlond with a grett pouer and ariued in albine and wold haue conquered the land and by gone to were vpon kīg Albanac & hym kylled in batell. ¶when albanac wos ſlayne the pepull of yt land fled vn to Lotrin and tould hym for he wos kyng of bretan how that his brother wos ſlayn and prayed hym of his help and of his ſocour for to a venge hys brother deth.
               ¶Lotrin ther anone let aſſemble all the bretans of kent of douer in to derewent of Norfolk and Southfolke of keftefen and lyndeſſey and when they war all enſembled they ſped them faſt to ward ther enmys for to yef them batell. and lotrin had ſent to Camber his brother that he ſhuld come vn to hym with all thee pouer that he myght make hym for to help. and ſo he did with a good wyll and ſo they come to gedres and toke ther way preualy for to go and ſeche Humbar wher they myght hym fynde.
               ¶And ſo it befell yt this Humbar wos by ſide a wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt wos a gret reuer with his folke hym for to diſport & ther come Lotrin

and Cambir his brother with all ther folke ſodanly or that ony of that other wiſt ¶And whan Humber ſaw them cū he wos ſore adrad For as moch as his men wiſt it not afore: and alſo they were vn arayed And anone Humber for drede he lepyd ī to the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and drenched hym ſelf and ſo he died and his men wer all ſlayn that none of them aſcaped: And thefor is that water called Humbar and euermore ſhall be for be cauſe that this kyng Humbar ther in was drenched.
               And after that Lotrin went to his ſhippis and toke ther gold & ſiluer and os moch as he fand vn to hym ſelf and all that other pylfre he gaf vn to other folke of the hoſt and they fond in one of the ſhippis a fair damyſell that wos kyng humbars dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and ſhe wos called Eſtrild ¶And whan Lotrin ſaw hir he toke hir with hym for hir fayrnes▪ and for hir wos ouer taken with loue &̄ wold haue wedded hir. This tidīges come to Corin and anone he thought to aueuge hym vpon lotrin Far os mych as Lotrin had made counand for to ſpouſe Corins douhhter that was called Guentolen And corin in haſt went to hym vn to new Troy & thꝰ he ſayed to Lotrin. now certes quod he ye reward me full euell for all the paynes that I haue ſuffred and had mony tymes for Brute your fadre: and therfor ſen that it is ſo I wyll a uenge me now vpon you and he drew his fauchon an hight and wold haue ſlayn thys Lotrin the kyng but the damiſell went by tweyn them and made them acorded ī this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  : that Lotrin ſhold ſpouſe guendolen that wos Corins doughter And ſo Lotryn did And nertheles whan that he had ſpouſed Guentolen Corins doughter preualy he come to Eſtrilde and brought hir wich chyld &̄ gate vpon hir a doughter the wych was called Abren ¶And hit befell ſo that anone after that Corin dyed: and after when he was deid Lotrine for ſoke Guendolen that wos his wyfe. and made Eſtrilde quene. And ther guentolen that was his wyffe

went from thens all in gret ire and wroth vn to Cornwaill and ther ſeiſed all the lond in to hir owne hond: for as moche as ſhe was hir fadres eyr: ſhe vnder toke feautes and homages of al the men of the lond and afterward aſſembled a gret hoſt and a gret pouer of men for to be a venged vpon Lotrin that was hir lord: and to hym come and yaf hym a ſtrong batell: and ther wos Lotrin hir hoſband ſlayn and his men diſcomfited in the v. yere of his regne. Guentolen let take Eſtrile and Abram hir doughter and bynd them b
                     •
                  the h
                        •
                     nd &̄ fete &̄ keſt them bothe in to a water and ſo they drenched wherfor that water was euer more called after Abram after thee name of the damyſell that was Eſtrildis doughter: and englyſſh men calleth that water ſeuern and walſh men callis it Abram vn to this day ¶And when this was done Guentolen let croune hir quene of all the lond: &̄ gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned the lond full well and wyſely vn to the tyme that Madan hir ſon that Lotrin had goten vpon hir were of xx. yere of age that he myght be kyng: and ſo the quene regned xv. yere: and tho lett ſhe croune hir ſon kyng & hee regned & gouerned the lond well and worthely And ſhe went in to Cornwall and ther ſhe duelled all hir lifes tyme.
            
            
               ¶How Madan regned in pees all his life.
               THys Madan ſon to Lotrin regned on the bretans xl. yere The wich be gone regne the xv. yere of Saull. And this Madan liffed in pees all his dayes. & got ij. ſonnys Mēpris &̄ Maulyn. Then he dyed and lyeth at new Troy.
            
            
               
               Anno mūdi iiijM.C.xxij. Et an̄ xpī natītatē: M.lxxiiij.
               Dauid the ſecund kyng in iſreell regned thys tyme a man 
                     Daui
                           •
                        
                     
                     Here begīnith the fourte aage durīg to the tranſmigracion
                   choſyn after the deſyre of god. And he wos a noynted in hys yong age by Samuell. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the deth of Saull he regned ·xl. yere. this Dauid wos as a meruell in all man kynd: In whome euer was y found ſo moche power and ſo mochel humylyte So mochel nobulnes an ſo moche mekenes: So gret a charge of ſeculari thynges. And ſo pure and dewoute a contemplaciō of ſpyrituall thynges So mony men to kyll. And ſo mony teres to wepe for his treſpas. plura vide primo regum.
               Abiathar this tyme wos byſſhope: and he fled fro Saull vn to Dauid and he wos glorius wyth hym all his dayes. Gad Nathan and Aſaph: war prophettes than: and Nathan wos brother ſon to Dauid.
            
            
               ¶How Mempris ſlew his brother Maulyn.
               THis Mempris and his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   maulyn ſtr
                     •
                  ue faſt for thee lond &̄ mēpris begone to regne the xxxv. yere of Dauid and for encheſō yt he wos the eldeſt ſon he wold haue had all the lōd and Maulyn woldnat ſuffre hym ſo yt they toke a day of loue &̄ acorde ¶And at this day Mēpris let kyll his brother thurgh treſon and hym ſelf afterward held the lond and anōe let croune

hym kyng and regned. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   became ſo lither a mā that he deſtroid ī a while all ye mē of his lond: and at the laſt he bicame ſoo wikked and ſo lecherous that he for ſoke his owne wyfe and vſed the ſynne of ſodomye wherfo: almyghti god wos gretly diſpleſyd and wrothe with hym and vpan hym toke vengeance for be cauſe of his wikkednes. For on a day as he went forth on huntyng in a foreſt ther he loſt all his men that wos with hym and wiſt not what he ſhold done: and ſo he went vp and doune hym ſelf alone and cried after his men bot they war gone and ther come wolfes anone and all to dreu hym in peces when he had rened xxiiij. yere. and when his pepull herid that he wos ſo deyd they made Ioy and myrth y nowgh and anone mada Ebrac his ſon kyng and he regned with moch honour.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM.C.lxv. Et an̄ xp̄i natītotē. M xxxiiij.
               SAlamon the kyng of Pees of the gyft of our lord had a ſynguler excedyng a bown all men that euer wos in thys world bot alonly god in wiſdom &̄ in riches. indayntethis &̄ in glory. and famyliarite with god. And all thogh Moyſes and Dauid Peter & Paule Ierom and Auſtyn and othee moo excedit hym in holines. bot yet they excedit hym not in Glori and reches. And this mā ſo excedīg all mē wrechitly fell. Of thys Salamon is red in a pyſtill of ſent Ierom that he got a chyld on the doughter of Pharao at xi. yere of his age. vide plrā regū Sadoch this tyme wos biſſhop And for he declynet not to thee he part of Adonie Dauid ſon: bot wos with Nathan for Salomon. &̄ Abiather on the other parte wos depoſit.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM.ijC v. Et an̄ xpī natītatē ixC.lxxxxiiij.
               ROboas ſuccedit Salamon his feder in his kyngdome. bott not in wyſdome: he wos deſſaued thurgh thee counſell

of yong mē. & loſt x. tribꝰ ī ſo mych yt he awnſuaid not ye pepul wiſly as it is opyn t
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  cio regū. A chymyas wos byſſhope: and wos the ſon of Sadoch. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   primo paroliopo.
               Reges iſrael incipiunt. Iherobaas regned kīg ī iſrael xxij: yere. And he wos fyrſt of ye houſold of Salamō &̄ a good man. bot whē he wos made kyng he wos a myſcheuꝰ mā ī ydolatri. &̄ made iſrael to ſyn ī ydolatri: &̄ mōy gret vncōuemētis war done almoſt to the deſtrucnon of all iſraell. for he wos the fugour of machomyte. plrā vide 3o regū. Abdias ye ſon of Roboas regned ī ye Iuri iij. yere &̄ other whil a good mā: and holpen by god and oethr whyle wrechedli diſpoſed ī ydolatri: &̄ therfor our lord ſuffred him to regne lityll tyme. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   3o regū et 2o paralipo.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM ijC xxv. Et an̄ xp̄i natītatē ixC lxxiiij.
               Aſa the ſon of Abdias regned xvi yere. ī the begīyng of his regne he wos a rightuis mā &̄ walked as Dauid did &̄ he ower com ye Ethyopes: &̄ deſtruyd Ydoles Bot after that he wos ſuorne to ye kyng of Syrie benedab. for Baaſa kyng of iſrael: thē be gon feyght aganes hym. the wich diſpleſed god. wherfor he ſend to hī the ꝓphet Anani: whom he put in preſō and therfor he had ye goute ſtrongli & died therof. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   3o regū 2o pa. Azarias ſon to Achonias wos biſſhop. Nadab kyng of iſraell regnet ij. yere the wich begon to regne the ſecūd yer of Aſe kīg of Iues &̄ did nought os his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  : and Baſa ower thrugh hym & rened for hym. vt 3o regū. Baſa kyng of iſrael regnet xxiiij yer the wich begone to regne the iij. yere of Aſe kyng of Iues & hee walked ī the ſynnes of Ieroboā &̄ kylled Iehen the ꝓphet. Hela the ſon of Baſa rened ī iſrael ij. yere &̄ Zamri ſlew hym & regned vij. dayes Amri renet xij yer. &̄ did noght as his prediceſſores did Acha ſon to amri: regned on iſral̄ xxij yere: &̄ aboon all that wos a foor hym he wos curſit for wickid Ieſabell ruled moor then he: &̄ meued hym to folow hyr. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   icio regū.
            
            
               
               ¶Off kyng Ebrac the wich be gone to regne the xv. yere of 
                     •
                  ala
                     ••
                   and how he conquered frrance.
               This Ebrac regned lx. yere &̄ a ſtrong man he wos and a myghty. and this Ebrac thurgh hys myght and helpe of hys bretons conquered all fraunce and wan ther ſo moche gold and ſiluer that whan he cō a yane in to this lond he made a cite after his own name let call it Ebrac that is called euerywyk & this kyng made the caſtell of maydenes that now is called Edenburgh This kyng had xx. ſonnys &̄ xxiij. doughtres by diuerſe wymen goten & thyes ſonnys wer called as ye ſhall here Brute. Greneſcheld. Margand: Seiſell Morghwyth: Flēgham Bladud Iakyn Kynbar Rocelm Spadogh Godeher
                     •
                   Thorinnan Gldaugh Iorkanghut Haibor Ketin Rother Kaier and aſſaruth And the dougtres highten os ye ſhall heyr after Elegine Ymogen Oghdas Guenbran Gnardich Augarell Guenthold Tanguſtel Gorghon Michel Medhan Mailour Ondur Cambredan Ragan Renthely Neeſt Cheghan Skaldud Gladꝰ Heber hyn Abalaghe and Blandan &̄ thees were tho xxiij. doughtres &̄ the bretheren bicame good knyghttys &̄ worthy ī mōy contres.
            
            
               ¶Off kyng brute greneſheld the fyrſt ſone of Ebrac kyng
               AFter the deth of kyng Ebrac: regned Brute grenſheld his ſon xxx. yere that wos Ebrakes fyrſt ſon that well & nobully regned and whan tyme come he died & lieth at yorke.
            
            
               ¶Off kyng Leyl that wos Brute grenſheld ſon.
               And whan Brute grenſheld wos deyd rened his ſon Leyll. xxij. yere & he made a fayr towne &̄ let calle it Karlille aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his name & he wos a worthy mā &̄ welbeloued of his pepul & whā he had regned xxij. yere he dyed &̄ lieth at Carlille. and ī his tym regned kyng Salomō ī Ieruſalem &̄ made the nobull tempull &̄ to hym comi Sibelle quene of Saba for to here & ſee yf it wer ſoth that men ſpeken of the gret & nobull wit &̄ wiſdum of kyng Salomon & ſhe fond it ſoth that men had hir told:
            
            
               
               Anno mūdi iii
                     •
                  
                  M ijC lxvi. Et an̄ xpī natī .ixC.xlij
               IOſaphat kyng of Iues wos a good man &̄ a rich & a devoyt ī the way of our lord: &̄ regnet xxv yere & did no ill bot to the curſet kyngꝭ of iſrael gaf helpe. And other litel thingꝭ &̄ therfor our lord was with hym. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   2o para. Helyas thee gret prophet wos this tyme an holi man that wos lifted vp in to ꝑadiſe with gret ſolas in a chayr Macheas &̄ Abdias ꝓpheſied with hym Ochoſias ſon of Achab renet in iſrael .ij. yere &̄ ſend to Belſabub god of Acharan to be heeled for the wich he dyed after the ſayeng of helie. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   4o regū.
            
            
               ¶Off kyng lud ludibras that wos kyng leyles ſon.
               And this kyng Lud ludibras made the cite of Cantorbery & Wyncheſtre &̄ he regned xxxix yere & then he dyed & lieth at wyncheſtre.
            
            
               ¶Off kyng Bladud that wos ludibras ſon how he regned and wos a good man and a nygromancer.
               And after this lud ludibras regnet Bladud his ſon a gret nigromancer and thurgh his craft of nigromanci he made the meruellus hote bath as the geſt telleth and he regned xxi. yere and lyeth at the new Troy.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM ijC lxxxxi. Et xpī natī. ixC viij.
               IOram kyng of Iues ſon to Ioſophet regned viij yere this Ioram wos a curſed man &̄ had a good fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . he kylled is brether &̄ wrecchedli leuyd os did the kyngꝭ of iſrael. Therfor he wos ſor corecked &̄ dyed vnhappeli. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   2o paralo. This tym Helias wos rauichitī to paradiſe Ochoſias or Aſarias kyng of iues regnet .i. yere. &̄ 
                  leued noght as his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   did & anōe wos ſlayn. with all the hows of Achab. Athalya moder to aſarias toke the the kyngdom and kylled all the kynges blude: & rened x. yere. and the vij yere of Ioiada byſſhope ſhe wos ſlayn 4o 
                  reg
                  
This aſarias and his ſon Ioas & his neuu Amazia Matheꝰ the goſpeller puttis not in the line of criſt for ther giltis. Ioram kyng of iſrael regnit xij. yere the wiche began to regne the xviij. yere of Ioſaphat. for his brother Ocheſie. and curſitli he leuyd &̄ was ſlayn of Ien wt all his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   is houſold vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   Iehen anountit of the child of heliſe opon iſ il̄ kyllit Achariā the kīg of Iuys. and Ioram the kyng of iſrael. & Ieſabell mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to ioram and .lxx. child of Achab. and .xlij. bredir of Azari. &̄ all the preſtis of baal. &̄ he regned xviij. yere. Athalia mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to Azari kyng of iues: doght
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to Achab regnit on the iuys .vi. yere. and killet the kyngis blud of Ioram. except Ioas the ſon of azari the wich was keppet emong ſhepꝑd. &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſhe was ſlayn.
            
            
               Ano mūdi iiijM.iijC.ix. Et an̄ xpī 
                  nat .viijC.lxxxxiij·
               IOam ſon to achazie regnit in the iury .xl. yere whom ioiada the Biſh̄op crownit kyng at .vij. yere of aage. and he leued wele as long as he was rulet by ioiada bot aftir he forſooke god and marterit Azarias that tyme byſhop ſon to ioiada for he blamit hym that he forſoke his god. plura vide 2o paralo. Ioathas ſon of iehen regnit in iſrael .xvij. yere: in whos days heliſe the ꝓphet d
                     ••
                  d: and he began to regne the .xx. yere of ioas. vide plura 4o regū. Ioam ſon of Ioathas regnit ī iſrael xvij. yere & he trobuld 
                     •
                  zia plura vide 4. regū 13.
            
            
               ¶Off kyng Leir ſon to bladud &̄ of the anſuer of his yongeſt doughter that graciouſli was maried to the Kyng of fraunce.
               AFter Kyng Bladud regned Leir his ſoon and this Leir made the toune of leyceſtre: & let call the toune after his name. & he gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nit the 
                     〈◊〉
                   wele &̄ nobulli This king Leir had iij. doughteris the firſt 
                     •
                  d Gonorill. the ſecunde Rigan &̄ the therde C
                     ••
                  d
                     ••
                  ll. and 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   yongeſt doughter was faireſt and beſt of ꝯdicions. The kyng hir fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   became an old man &̄ wold yt
                  
his doughteres were maried er that he died. but firſt he thoght to aſſay wich of hem loued hym moſt &̄ beſt: for ſhe that loued him beſt ſhold beſt be maried & he axed of the fyrſt doughter how well ſhe hym loued. and ſhe aunſuerd &̄ ſaied better then hir own lyffe Now certes quod hir fadre that is a gret loue Then axed he of ye ſecūd doughter how moch ſhe hym loued and ſhe ſaied more and paſſing all the creaturs in the world ꝑ ma foy quod hir fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   I ma no more axe: and tho axed he of the thrid doughter how mych ſhe hym loued: certes fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   quod ſhe my ſuſtres haue told you gloſyng wordes: but for ſo the I ſhall tell you trouth For I loue you os I aught to loue my fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and for to bring you more in c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn how I loue you I ſhall you tell: as moche as ye bene worth ſo moch ſhall ye be loued ¶The kyng hir fader went that ſhe had ſkorned hym and become wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth and ſuore by heuen &̄ erth ſhe ſhold neuer haue good of hym: bot his doughtres yt loued hym ſo moch ſhold be well auaunced and maried And the fyrſt dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he maried to Maugles kyng of ſcotland: and the ſecond he marid to hanemos Erle of Cornewaell: and ſo they ordined and ſpak bitwene them that they ſhold depart the Reame bitwene them two after the deth of kyng Leir ther fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſo that Cordeill his yongeſte doughter ſhold nothyng haue of his lond: but this Cordeill wos wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   fair and of good condicions and maners yt thee kyng off fraunce Agampe herd of hir ſpeke and ſent to the kyng Leir hir father for to haue hir vn to his wyfe. and prayed hym therof. and kyng Leir hir fader ſent hym word that he had departed his land and yeffen it all vn to his two doughtres be for ſaied. and he ſaied he had no more land wher wyth hir to mary ¶And whā Agampe the kyng of fraunce herd this aunſuar he ſent anone a yene to Leir and ſayed that he axed no thyng withhir bot only hir clothyng and hir body And anone kyng leir ſent hir ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee to ye kīg of fraūce And he reſſaued hir with moche worſhip and with ſolempnite he hir ſpouſed & made hir quene of fraunce.
            
            
               
               ¶How kyng Leir wos driuen out of his land thurgh his folke &̄ how Cordeill his yongeſt doughter helped him ī his nede.
               THus it befell afterward that tho .ij. eldeſt daughtres wold not a bide tyll leir ther fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos deid but wered vpon hym whilles that he wos on liue and did hym moch ſorow &̄ ſham wherfor they benōme hym holi the ream and bi twene them had or deyned that one of them ſhold haue kyng Leir to ſeiourne al his liue tyme with xl. knyghtes and ſquyers that he myght wurſhip fulli go and ride whedd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that he wold & ī to what contre that hym liked to play and to ſolace. ¶So that Manacles kyng of ſcotland had kyng Leir with hym in the maner os is a boune ſaied and or other half yere wer paſſed Corneil that wos his eldeſt doughter and quene of Scotland was ſo a noyed of hym and of his pepull that anone ſhe and hir lord ſpeke to gedre wherfor his knyghtis half and his ſquers from hym wer gone and nomo left wt him bot only xxx. ¶And when this wos done Leir bi gon for to make moch ſorow for encheſon that his eſtate wos empeired. &̄ men had of hym more ſcorne and deſpiet then eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they had before wherfor he not wiſt for to done. and at the laſt thoght that he wold weind in to Cornwaill to Rigan his other dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   And when he was come the Erle and his wife that wos Leirs dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym welcomed and with hym made moch Ioye and the er he dwelled wt xxx. knyghtis & ſquyers And he had not duelled ther ſcarſly xij. month that his dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of hym was weri and his companye and hir lord and ſhe: of hym had gret ſcorne and deſpitte: ſo thatt from xxx. knyghtes they brought vn to .x. and afterward had he but .v. and ſo they left hym nomo ¶Than made he ſorow ynouh: and ſaied ſore wepyng Allas that euer he come in to yt land and ſaied yit had me better to haue duelled with my fyrſt doughter And anone he went thens to his fyrſt dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   a g
                     •
                  ne: bot anōe as ſhe ſaw him come ſhe ſuore by god and bi his holi name and by as moch as ſhe myght that he ſhold haue nomo with hym

but one knyght yf he wold ther a bied Then begon Leir ayene to wepe and made moch ſorow &̄ ſaid tho alas now to long haue I leued that this ſorow and myſchefe is to me now fallen. for now am I pooer that ſū tyme wos rich: bot now haue I no frend ne kyn that me wyll do ony good ¶But whē I was riche all mē me honoured and worſhipped & now eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y mā hath of me ſcorne &̄ d
                     •
                  ſpite. and now I wot well that Cordeill my yongeſt doughter ſaied me trought when ſhe ſaid as moch as i had ſo mych ſhuld i beloueid and all the while that i had good ſo long wos i loued and honoured for my riches: but my two doughtres gloſed me tho. & now of me thei ſet litell pris and ſoth told me Cordeill bot i wold nat beleue it ne vndiyrſtond and therfor i let hir go fro me as a thyng that i ſet litell pris of: and now wote i neuer what for to done ſith my ij. doughtre haue me thus diſſaiued that i ſo moch loued: and now moſt i nedes ſeche hir that is in an other land that lyghly i let hir gone fro me with out any reward or yeftes and ſhe ſaid that ſhe loued me as mich os ſhe aght to loue hir fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   by all maner of reſon and tho i ſhold haue axed hir nomore: and tho that me other wiſe behightyn thurgh tber fals ſpeche now haue me deſauid: in this maner Leir long tyme began to make his mone and at the laſt he ſhop him to the ſee and paſſed ouer in to fraunce and aſked and aſpied wher the Quene myght be fonde and men told hym wher ſhe was And whan he come to the Cite that ſhe was in preualy he ſent his ſquyer vn to the quene to tell hyr that hir fadre wos comen to hir for gret neides ¶And when the ſquyer come to the quene he told hir euery dele of hir ſuſtres from the begynnyng vn to ye end· Cordeill the quene anone toke gold and ſiluer plente and toke it to the ſquyer in counſell that he ſhold go and bere it vn to hir fadre and that he ſhold go in to a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tan Cite and hym aray and waſſhen and than cum ayene to hir &̄ bring with hym an honeſt companye of knyghtes xl. at the leyſt with ther menye: and than he ſhold ſend to hir lord the kyng and

ſayne that he were comen for to ſpeke with his dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & hym for to ſeen: and ſo he did ¶And whan the kyng and the quene he
                     •
                  d that thei com. with mych honour they hym roſſayued And ye kīg of fraunce tho let ſend thurgh all his reame and cōmanded that all mē ſhold bene als entendent to kyng Leir the Quens fadre in all maner of thynges as it war vn to hym ſelf when kīg leir had duelled ther a moneth and more he tolde to the kyng and to the quene his doughter how his two eldeſt doughtres had hym ſerued. Agampe anone let ordeyne a gret hoſt of fraunce men and ſent in to bretan with Leir the quenes fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for to comquer his land ayene and his kyngdom. And cordeill alſo come with hir fader in to bretane for to haue the reame after hir fadres deth And anone they went to ſhip and paſſed the ſee and come in to bretan and foughten with the felous and them ſcomfited and kylled. &̄ tho had he his lond ayene and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   leued iij. yere and held his ream in pees and afterward died &̄ Cordeill his doughter hym let ētyr with mekell honour at Leceſtre.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM iijC xlix. Et an̄ xpī natītatē viijC liij.
               AMaſias ſon to Ioam regned on the Iues xxix. yere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wich the kyngdō of Iues wos wt out kyng xiij. yere This man worſhip the goddis of Seyr. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   2o para. 2
                     •
                  .
               Ieroboam ſon to Ioam rened on iſreell xli. yere y• with was manly and victorius for he ouer come the kyng ſirie &̄ 
                  reſtorid iſraell & damaſke aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye word of Iono ye ꝓphet: bot he wos not good ther foor ſayeth Auſtyn yf good men regne thay ꝓphet mony mē &̄ yf ill men regne they hurt mony men.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM iijC lxxxviij. Et an̄ xpī natītatē viijC xi
               OZias or Azarias ſon to Amaſie regned on the Iure lij yere. the wich leued well a for our lord. Off hym is no ill thyng wretyn. bot that he vſurpit the dyngnyte of preſt hoid vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  
Azari. the wich he for bed hym. for the wich cauſe our lord ſtrok hym with a leper. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                  . 
                     •
                  
                  o. para. Ozee biſſhop and ꝓphet was this tyme the fyrſt of the xij. is ſend a yanes the x. tribis. Iohell the ſecund of the xij. ꝓpheſied of iuda. Anias the iij. ꝓphiſed agās mani peple ¶Abdias the iiij. of the xij. ꝓpheſied agayns edom Iacharias ſon to Ieroboā regned ī iſraell vi. monethis the wich be gan to regne the xxxviij. yere of Oſias: and wos nought in his leuyng as his prediceſſurs war. And zelluz kylled hym. and regned a moneth. And Manahen kyllid hym & toke his kyngdom. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   4o regū This manahen regned x. yere yt wich be gon to regne the xxxix. yere of Oſias. and he ruled him myſcheuyſly and our lord toke hym in the poer of the kyng of aſſurio
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . &̄ he payed to hym .M. talentis of ſiluer. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   4 regū. Phaſeia ſon to manahen regned in iſraell ij. yere And he bee gan to regne the .l. yere of Oſias & he wos noght ī his leuyng. Phaſee ſlew Phaſaia & regned xx. yere. And he be gan to regne the lij. yer of Oſias and did as other curſed men did. plura vide 4o regū. And after this. iſraell wos with owttyn ony kyng viij. yere.
            
            
               ¶How Morgan and Conedag that wos nevus to Cordeil werred wpon hir and put hir hir in to preſon.
               WHen that kyng Leir wos deid Cordeill his yongeſt doughter regned: the x. yere of Oſias kyng of Iuri And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hir ragned Conedage. the xv. yere of Oſias. And Cordeill yt wos Leir yongeſt doughter aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the deth of hir fader had all ye lōd v. yere and in the meyn tyme died hir lord Agampe that was kyng of fraunce and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his deth ſhe left wedo. And ther come Morgan and Conedag that wer Cordeill ſuſtre ſonnys and to hir had enmite for as moch as ther aunt ſhold haue the land. So that bitweyn them they ordeyned a gret pouer and vpon hir wered gretly. and neuer they reſt till they had hir taken &̄ put hir vn to deth: and tho Morgan & Conedag ſeyſed ale the land &̄ deꝑtid it

bitwene them. And they held it xij. yere▪ and when tho xij. yere were gone ther bi gane bitwene them a gret debate ſo yt they wered ſtrongly to gedre yfere & eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y of them did other moch diſeſe. for Morgan wold haue all the land fro beyond humbet that Conedage held. but he come ayenſt hym with a ſtrong pouer ſo that Morgan durſt not abide but fled awey in to wales and Conedage purſued hym &̄ toke hym and kylled hym. And tho come conedage ayen and ſeyſed all the lond in to his hand and held it &̄ regned after xxxiij yere. & tho he died &̄ lieth at new Troy.
               ¶And be cauſe the mater contennys moſt comediuſly to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of the kynges of bretan now called Enegland for the tyme of them is not certenly knawyn what tyme of the world thes kynges foloyng regned. Therfor they ſhall be to geder: tyll it be comen vn to Guentolen kyng of bretan now called Englond.
            
            
               ¶How Reignold yt wos Cōadag ſon regned aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ ī his tyme it reyned blode iij. dayes ī tokennyng of gret deth.
               
                  ANd after this Conedage regned Reignold his ſon that was a wiſe knyght and an hardy and curtes that well &̄ nobully gouerned the lond and wonder well made hym beleued of all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of folke and in his tyme it rayned blode that leſted iij. days as god wold and ſone after ther come gret deth of pepull for hoſtes with out nombre of pepull foughten tyll that all myghty god therof toke mercy and pytty and tho gan it ceſe and this Reignold regned xxij. yere &̄ died & lieth at Yorke.
            
            
               ¶How Gorbodian regned in pees that wos reignold ſon. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he died and lieth at yoik.
               
                  ANd after this Reignold that wos Gonedag ſon rened Gorbodian that wos this Reignold ſon xv. yere &̄ then he died & lieth at yorke.
            
            
               ¶How gorbodian had ij. ſonnys & how that one ſlew the other for to haue the heritage: And how ydoyne ther modre killed thatt other wherfor the land was deſtruied.
               
                  WHen this Gorbodian was deid his .ij. ſōnys yt he had become ſtout & proude & eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wered to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for ye land: &̄ the one was called Ferres &̄ other Porres. And this ferres wold haue all ye land: but ye other woldnat ſuffre him this ferres had a felons hert & thought thurgh treſō to ſlee his brother but preualy he wēt ī to fraunce & ther abode wt the kīg Syward till vpō a tyme whan he come ayene &̄ fought wt his brother ferres: but ful euell it happed tho for he was ſlayn fyrſt. whē ydoyne ther mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wiſt yt Porres was deid ſhe made gret ſorow for encheſō yt ſhee loued hym more thē that other &̄ thought him for to kyll preualy ¶And preuely ſhe come to hir ſon vpō a nyght wt ij. knyues & therwith cut his throt & ye bodi alſo ī to ſmall peces who herd eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſuche a curſed mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt kyllid with hir owne handes hir own ſon and long tyme aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   laſt the reproue &̄ ſhame to the mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt for encheſun of that one ſon ſhe murdred the other &̄ ſo loſt them bothe.
            
            
               ¶How .iiij. kynges courtaſly held all Breten and what be ther names ye ſhall heyr after
               WHen the ij. brethern war deid they nad left behynd them nother ſon ne dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ne nōe other of the kynred yt myght haue ye heritage &̄ for as moch as ye ſtrangeſt mē driuē & ſcomfited ye febleſt &̄ toke all ther londes ſo that in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y cōtre they had gret were &̄ ſtrife vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   them but emong all other thynges ther were amōges them ī ye contre that ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come all tho other &̄ thurgh ther myght &̄ ſtrenght they tuke all ye londes &̄ eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y of them tok a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn cōtre & ī his contre let call hī kyng &̄ con of thē was cald Scater &̄ he wos kīg of ſcotland & yt other wos called Dawaliere &̄ he was kīg of loegers &̄ of all the land that wos Lotrins thatt wos Brutes ſon The thrid was called Rudac and he was kyng of walis And the iiij. was called Cloten &̄ was kīg of Cornewaill. but this Cloten ſhold haue had all the land by reſon for be cauſe thar wos no mā that wiſt nōe ſo right heir os he was: butt they that were ſtrongeſt ſet litell bi hem that wer of leſſe eſtate

and therfor this clotē had nomore lād amōg hem but cornwaill.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Donebant that was Clotens ſon wone the lond
               THis Cloten had a ſon yt was called Doneband that after the deth of his fadre by come an hardy man and a fair and a curteys ſo that he paſſed all the other kingꝭ of fairnes &̄ of wortheneſſe. And a none as he was knyght he wiſt well that when his fader lyued he was moſt rightfull heir of all the lōd and ſhold haue had by reſon but other kynges that were of moch more ſtrength than he toke from hym his lond ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward this Doneband ordeyned him gret pouer and conquered fyrſt all the land of Logeris a and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wold haue conquered all the land of ſcotland and wailles: and Scat came with his mē and yaf him batell and Rudac come ayene with his walys men for to help hym. but ſo it be fell that Rudac wos kylled & alſo Scater ī playn bataill and ſo Doneband had the victorie and conquerid all the land and well maintined it in pees and in quiete that neuir befor it was ſo well mayntined.
            
            
               ¶How doneband was the friſt kyng that euer bore croune of gold in bretan.
               THys Doneband let make hym a croune of gold and wered the croune vpon his hede as neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   kīg did bifore and he ordyened a ſtatut that and a man had done neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſo moch harme and myght comē in to the tempull ther ſhold no man hym myſdo but gone ther in ſafete and in pees and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   goin to what lond or cūtre that hym pleſed with owt ony harme▪ and if ony man ſett any hond vpon hym he than ſhold leſe his life. And this Doneband made the toun of Malmeſberi and the toune alſo off the viſe And when he had regned well & worthely xl. yere. then he died and lyeth at new Troy.
            
            
               ¶How Bronne and Belin deꝑted bitweyn them the lond after the deth of Doneband ther fadre and of the were be twix them.
               
                  
                  ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt this Doneband wos deid: his ſōnys yt he had deꝑted the land bitweyn them as ther fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had ordeyned ſo yt belyn his eldeſt ſon had all ye land of bretan: from humbar ſouthward. And his brotherbrenne had all the land from humber to Scotlād: but for as moch that Belī had the better part Brenne therfor waxed wroth & wold haue had more of the lond &̄ belyn his brother wold greunte hym nomore wherfor cōtake & were a roſo betweyn them two. But brenne the yonger brother had no myght ne ſtrenght a yens belyn: &̄ therfor brenne thurgh cōſell of hys folke wēt fro thens ī to norwey to the kyng Olſinges & prayd him of help & ſocour for to cōquer all ye lond vpō belin his brother vpon that connaund that he wold haue his doughter to wiſe &̄ the kyng Olſinges him grāted. & belyn anōe as his brother wos a go to norway he ſeyſed ī to his hond all the land of northhūberlōd &̄ toke all the caſtelles &̄ let them be arayed: and keped the coſtes of the ſee that brenne ſhold not arriue ī no ſied but yt he war take ¶The kyng ol ſinges let aſſemble a gret hoſt and deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  yd his doughter to brenne & all the pepull yt he had ordeyned. &̄ this damiſell Samye had long tyme loued a kyng that wos called Gutlaghen and to hym ſhe told all hir counſel̄ how yt Brenne ſhold hir haue & hir lede with hym for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more & ſo he ſhold leſe hir but that ſhe myght for ſake brenne. And whan gutlagh had herd this tydīg he lay for to aſpy brenne with as mony ſhippis as he myght haue ſo the two fletes metten to gedre and long tyme they faught ſo that Brenne turned ayene and wer diſcomfited And kyng gutlagh toke Samye and put hir in to his ſhyppe and brenne ſham fulli fled thens as a man diſcomfitied ¶And this kyng gutlagh wold haue went in to his owne contre but ther come vpon hī ſych a gret tempeſt that ·v. dayes laſted ſo that thurgh that tempaſt he wos driuen ī to breten with: iij. ſhippis and no mo. &̄ tho that keped the coſtes on the ſee toke Gutlagh and Samye & all his folke & them preſented to belyn: &̄ belyn put them ī to preſon.
            
            
               
               ¶How Belyn drofe out of this land kyng Gutlagh of Dē
                  marke and Samye.
               HIt was not long after that brenne come ayene with a gret nauye & ſent to his brother belyn yt he ſhold yeld ayene his land to his wife & his folke & his caſtels alſo: or els he wold deſtru his land. belyn drad no thyng h
                     •
                  s malas &̄ wold no thyng do aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that he had ſaid: wherfor brenne come with his folke & fought wt belyn & brenne was diſcōfited &̄ his folke ſlayn &̄ him ſelfe fled with xij. mē ī to fraunce And this belyn yt wos brennes brother wēt then to yorke and toke counſell what he myght do with kynd gutlagh for kyng gutlagh profered to be come his man and to hold his land of hym yeldyng bi yere a .M. pound of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more &̄ for ſikerneſſe of this cōuenyant to be holden Gutlagh ſhold bring hym good hoſtages &̄ to him ſhold do homage & all his folke And yit he ſhold ſwere vpon a boke that it ſhold neuer be broken ne ſaled. ¶Belyn tho bi counſell of his folke grāted hym his axyng And ſo gutlagh become his man and belyn vnder toke of him his homage by an oth &̄ bi writyng the ſame conuenantes. and vpon thes couenants kyng Gutlagh toke ſamie and his folke &̄ went thens & turned ayene to Denmarke: eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  mor aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   were the couenants holden and the truage payed till the tyme that Honelus was kyng of Denmark and alſo of this land thurgh his wife Gildeburgh that he had ſpouſed for ſho wos ye righ heir of this lond ¶This belin duelled tho in pees and worſhipfully hym held among his barons and he made iiij· riall weyes one from the Eſt in to the weſt and that was called watling ſtret and an other from the northe vn to the ſouth and that wos called Ikelme ſtrete and ij. other weyes he made ī boſſyng thurgh out the land that on is called foſſe and that other foſſedike and he maintened well the good lawes that Doneband his fadre had made and ordened in his tyme as befor is ſaied.
            
            
               
               ¶How a cordment wos made be twene Brenne and Belī thurgh Cornewen ther mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  .
               BRenne that was Belenꝰ brother: had long tyme duellid in fraunce and ther had conquered a gret lordſhyp thurgh mariage For he wos duke of Burgoyne thurgh the dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of the duke Fewyn that he had ſpouſed that wos right heir of thee lond and this Brenne ordeyned a gret pouer of his folke and alſo of fraunce and come in to this land for to fight with Belī his brother and belin come ayens hym with a gret poer of bretōs &̄ wold tho haue yeuen hym batell but ther mother Cornewyn that tho liued had herd that: that on brother wold haue deſtruyed that othir and went bitwene hir ſonnys and them made accorded wt moch peyne ¶So that at the laſt tho .ij. bretheren with mych blis went to gedre in to new Troy that now is called London &̄ ther they duelled a yere and after they toke ther counſell for to go &̄ conquer all fraunce &̄ ſo they did: and brent tounes and deſtrued the land bothe in length & in breyd & the kyng of fraunce yaf them batell with his poer but he wos ouer comen & yaf truage vn to Belin and to his brother. ¶And after that they wēt forth vn to Rome and conquered rome and all Lumbardy & Germani and toke homage & feaute of Erles Barons & of al other: and after they come in to this land of bretan and duelled with ther bretons in Ioye and reſt and tho made Brenne the toune of briſtowe and ſith he went ouer to his own lordſhipp and ther dueld he all his life and belin duelled atnew Troy &̄ ther he made a fair gate that is called belynges gate after his own name and whē this belyn had regned nobuly xi. yere he deid & lieth at new Troy
            
            
               ¶How kyng Cormbatrus kylled the kyng of denmarke for encheſon that be wold not pay hym his truage.
               
                  ANd after this Belyn regned his ſon Cormbatrus a good mā & a worthy & the kyng of Danmark wold not pay

vn to him his truage that is to ſaye a .M. pound as he had ſworne bi oth for to pay it & alſo by writing recorde to Belin his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wherfor he wos euell a payed &̄ wroth &̄ aſſemled a gret hoſt of bretons &̄ wēt in to denmarke & ſlew ye kyng Gutlagh &̄ brought ye land ī ſubiecciō all new & toke of folke feautes &̄ homage and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wēt ayene ī to his lond &̄ os he come forth bi Orkeney he fōd xxx. ſhippes full of mē &̄ womē be ſide the coſt of ye ſee &̄ ye kyng axed what they war And an Erle that wos maſter of them all curteſly aunſuerd vn to the kyng & ſaid yt they war exiled out of ſpayne &̄ ſo yt they had trauelled half a yere &̄ more ī the ſee to wit yf they myght fynd any kyng ī ony land yt of them wold haue pite or merci to yeue them any land ī ony contre wher ī they might duell &̄ haue reſt &̄ becum his liege mē & to hym wold do homage & feaute whilles yt he leued &̄ to his heiers aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hī. &̄ of him &̄ of his heirs holden yt land And whē the kīg this hard he had pite off them &̄ yafe them an Ile all wildernes ther yt no man was duellyng ſaue only wyld beeſtes and the Erle thanked moch thee kīg. &̄ becom his man & did hym homage &̄ feaute &̄ toke all his folke & went ī to the ſame yle. and the Erle wos called irlamall &̄ therfor he let call the land Irland aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his owne name. This kīg Cormbatrus com ayene in to his land and regned xxv. yere and after he deid and lyeth at new Troye.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM iiijC xl. Et an̄ xp̄i natītatē vijC lvi.
               IOathan ſon to Oſias regned in the iure xvi. yere. Off this ioathan nothyng is wreten of bot that he toke not a way excelſa os other did. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   2o para. Amarias wos byſſhoppe. And Yſoyas the nobull prophet wos in his dayes. Olympias with the grekes be gan the fyrſt yere of ioathā aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ioſaph̄ꝰ. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Beda Troy wos deſtrued .cccc.vi. yere afor the fyrſt Olymphias be gan vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   E
                     •
                  alo a iuge of Athens. in the wich Core
                     
                        
                     
                     bus
                   gat the cheualri a monges all men. Olimpꝰ is

the name of an hill in Grecia. the wich for his precioſnes is called the hyll of god. And after Ierom on Olimpias cōtenes fulli iiij yeres. in the wich iiij yeres iiij yerly pinces ar made. & thes Olimpiades ar places ordant to the worſhip of Iupater vndyr the hyll of Olympo. And the law of them is this that who ſū eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   is beſt in any cheualri· what gyfte ſom euer he deſyeres hee ſhall haue.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM iiijC lvi. Et an̄ xpī natītatē vijC xliij.
               ACham the ſon of Ioathan regned on the Iues xvi yere of this Acham no thyng that is good is wretten. for he forſoke our lord. And our lord ſtroke hym with his own pepil ſtrongly. and with the kynges of Syrri. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   2o para. 28. Achitob this tyme was byſſhope. Ozee kyng of iſraell regned ix. yere the wich be gone to regne the xij. yere of Acham kynge off Iues. This Ozee dred not god for he leued noght. And he wos the laſt kyng of iſreell. and in the ix. yere of his regne he was takyn of Salmanaſar. & iſraell was tranſlait in to Aſſirias. vt habetur 4o regū .17.
            
         
         
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM iiijC lxiij. Et an̄ xpī natītatē vijC xl.
               
                  
                     Rome
                  AFt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Euſeby  Rome was made ī ye hill of palatyn ye iiij. yere of acham kīg of iues of ij brether Romolus & Remus xi.liln̄ Maij. the vij Olimpiades begynnyng. Ioſopꝰ &̄ Beed ſaith the vi. Olympiades & ſo they dyffer a yere. Neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  theleſſe it is red other mē to haue regned a bout ye place myghtely ī Italy. yt is to wite ianꝰ: picꝰ Famꝰ Latinꝰ ye wich vn to Eneas regned about. CC. yere

Then afterward from Enee to this Romolꝰ it wos regned vndir. xv gouernours iiijC xxxij. After that fro the cite wos made vn to the laſt yere of Tarquyn ye prode it wos regned vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   vij kynges About ijC. and xliii. yere. Then afterward vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Senetours and counſelers vn to Iulius Ceſor Emprour by iiijC: lxiiij. yere Romolus the fyrſt of romans of whom the be called in latyn Romans made the Cite to be named Rome after his name: the wich gedyrd to gedir the pepull on eueri ſide an .C. off the ſaage men & wytte he choiſe. thrugh the counſell of whom all thyng he diſpoſed the wich he named ſennetours for the tyme off ther age. And he made ther names to be wreten in goldyn letters: wherfor we writte nobull faders and thynges ſo yet· Alſo he cald A.M. men of armys the wich he named milites a nuo millenario bot thes war no nobull blude. ¶Therfor as ſent Auſtyn ſayth de ciuitate dei And alſo ther wos long were be twix ye Sabyns and them for Romolꝰ toke mony women of the nobyll blud of ſabyns: and maried them to that vn noble blud of this romulus Oroſius writtis mych ill. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   ī libro ſuo ¶About this tyme Merodoch the kyng of babulon ſend grete geyftys to Ezechie the kyng of Iues. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   4 regū 2
                     •
                  . And than the kyngdom of babulon begone.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM lxxij. Et an̄ xp̄i natītatem vijC.xxvii.
               EZecheas xiiij. kyng of Iues a good child of a curſed fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   regned with a ꝑfite hart to our lord: And he reſtored thee hows of god and ther wos nonē lyke hym a for ner after emong the kynges of Iues. Therfor our lord god glorified hym for when Sennacherib the kyng of Aſſurio
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   cam ayens Ezechye with a myghty hoſt. our lord ſtroke his pepull &̄ ſlew. C: lxxxv of fightynh men. and Sennacherib fled ſhamfully. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   4o regum 19. et 2 para. 33. Sadoch this tyme was hee biſſhopp ther.
            
            
               
               Anno mūdi iiijM vC.i. Et an̄ xp̄i natītatē viC lxxxxviij.
               MAnaſſes kyng of Iues regned lv. yere and he wos an ill chyld of a good fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . for he did more curſitly thē any yt wos a for hym. for be ſlew the ꝓphetes of god: that the ſtretys in Ieruſalem war all bludy: And he made Yſae the ꝓphet to be ſawyd in peeſes with a ſaw of tre: wherfor the kyng of Aſſurio
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   waſtyd the Iuri & toke Manaſſes &̄ put hym ī preſon &̄ after Manaſſes repented his treſpas: & cried for mercy to our lord. and wos herd. then he was reſtored to his kyngdō and he a mēdit his lyffe. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                  . 4. regū 21: et .2. para .33. Sel̄lum wos biſſhop: &̄ Echias after hym This tyme the vij. wyſemen had worſchip in greke. s. Tales Solon Chylon Poriandꝰ Eldobolꝰ Bias Pitacꝰ This Talꝰ fond fyrſt the defaute of the ſon & the mone vide plura augꝰ .8. de ciuitate dei. Numa the ſecūd kyng thys tyme regned in Rome xlij. yere the wich wos a gret worſhypper of fals goddis he fillid Rome ſo full that he myght haue no place for hym ſelf to duell in. ¶This man put Ianuary &̄ February to the begynnyng of the of the yere. vide plrā ī augꝰ de ci. Aboune all reſon it is meruell that ſich men ſo excedyng ī witte in all thynges that wos ill reſedit fro the knaulegh of vera g
                     •
                  d Amon kyng of Iues regned .ij. yere the wich was nought in his leuyng: and he wos ſtrekyn of his ſeruandis and he dyed with owte eny repentans.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM vC lviii: Et an̄ xpī natītatē viC xli.
               IOſias the ſon to Amon at viij yer of age be gan to regne &̄ regned xxxi. yere a good child of a ꝑuerſe fadir. ī his yong age he ſought the grace of god. And in that grace laudabully a bood tyll his end: his relegius lyffe and his holy werkis ye may ſe. 
                     •
                  . regū .22. et 2 para. 34 Azaſtas the ſon of Elchie wos biſhope Tobias a bowt this tyme died &̄ he wos an verey holy man: and he proficied the deſtruccion of Ieruſalem. Tulius hoſtilius wos the thred kyng in Rome. And Sent

Aſtyn ſaeth ī his boke de ciuitate dei. that from Rome wos made vn to Auguſt the Emprour: ther was ſo cōtinuall batel yt it wos taken for a meruell and they were on yere with out batell except xlij. yere in Nume dayes ī the wich wos cōtinuall pees &̄ this Tuliꝰ be cauſe he had reſt he did curſedly to his nebrus. and then he wos ſlayn and all his houſhold with a ſtroke of ligh
                     •
                  īyng Nabegodonoſor this tyme wos kyng of babulon a manly mā and a victorius: for he was the ſcoourge of our lord to ponych the ſynnys of mōy pepull. This man wos king of babulō 
                  and afterward he conquered the kyndgom of aſſurio
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . and made it one monarche. But mony way ſcriptur ſpekis of this man now good and now ill And for becauſe ſcriptur cōcludis that he endyt his lyfe ī the louyng of god bi the prayer of Daniel &̄ ī the knaulege of one veray god ſū docturs ſayeth he is ſaued &̄ ſū ſayeth it is doute. Ancus Marciꝰ the iiij. kyng of rome regned xxiij yere. This man for grace and triſt that he had to Tarquinus Priſcus made hym the gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nour of his chyld. & ayres & he ill rewardit hym Daniel yet a child deluyed Sent ſuſan· and ſ
                     •
                  oed in the cōſait of the kyng with his felouys and aftirward he deſcuſſit the drenmys of the kyng: and wos made a mā of gret honeſti vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   
                  dan primo Ioathas the ſecund ſone of Ioſie regned on ye Iues iij. monethes & wos made kyng bi the pepull: & he wos not good. And Pharao toke him & lede hym in to Egipt &̄ made hys heldir brother kyng· vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   4o regū 23.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM vC lxxxviij Et an̄ xpī natītatē viC xi.
               IOachym or Ieconyas the ſon of Ioſie wos made kynge of Iues by Pharao & regned xi yere. &̄ be cauſe he liued noght. ne herd not the ꝓphettis Nabegodono
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   toke hī &̄ made hī his 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uand iij. yere And he rebellid a yens hym afterward and he toke hī and was aboute to haue led him vn to babulon bot his conſell wos changed & ſo Nabegodonſer kylled hym ī Ieruſalem &̄ keſt his bodi ower the walles after the propheſy of Ieromy. and

toke with hym the veſell of our lord and put them ī his tempull. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   2o para. vlt. Samias wos biſſhop vrias ꝓphet was ſlain of Iecony the kyng &̄ ieromy wos p̄ſēt Ioachim ſon to Ieconias regned ī the Iure iij. monethes and leued nought & therfor a none he wos meuyt that he ſhuld regne no longer: And wos bonden and tranſlat ī to Babulō & mōy wt hym wer tranſlayt. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   4 regū 24. Daniell Ananyas Azarias Miſaell Ezechiell &̄ Mardochius. all thes with Ioachym ye kīg wer led ī to babulō yong child for be cauſe they wer of the nobull blode
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM viC. Et ante yp̄i natītatē viC:
               SEdechias the thrid ſon of Ioſie regned on the iues xi. yere This ſedechy wos a myſcheuꝰ man ī his leuyng and he wold not here Ieromy the ꝓphet. Therfor he ꝑyſchet wrecchidli And all the iury wt hym. And his 
                     •
                  en wer put out: and his chylder wer ſlayn. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   4o regū Ioſedech the ſon of Azarie wos biſſhop. &̄ wos trāſlayt fro ieruſalē bi Nabogodonoſor ī to babulō Abacuk ꝓpheſyed ayenes Nabuch at babulon. &̄ ther be oppynyons what tyme this abacuk wos. This abacuk broght mete to Daniell whē he was put to the Lyons aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ierom: & here endis ye fourth age &̄ the hiſtory of regū This tyme the tempull of Salamon wos brent of ye Caldees 
                     Tranſmigracio
                     Here begīnis the fifte aage of the world during to the Natīte of criſt
                  
&̄ ieruſalem wos deſtruyed. this tempull ſtood iiijC xlij. yere yt is to wete fro the fyrſt makyng the wich was made the fourth yere of Salamō. And fro that deſtruccion the wich wos made by Tytus that is to wete xlij. yere after the paſſion of Criſte Priſcus torquinꝰ the v. kynge of Rome regned &̄ he made Capit
                     •
                  lliū
                  
quaſi caput ſolū For in the gronde werke wos found a hed with out ony body as for ꝓpheſy of thynges to cū. For ther aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ward the ſenatours ſat as on heed of all the world ¶This tyme iij. chyldir wer keſt in to a fornes brynnyng: &̄ with a myracull thei war deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed as it it is ſchewed in dan prio Nabogodono
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the ſon of Nabogodonoſor the myghty. regned ī babulō This mā made an hyngyng gardyn wt myghty coſtys for hys wiffe. and mony meruelꝰ thinges he did: ſo that he wold be named to excede Hercules in his gretnes &̄ ſtrength Enylmerod
                     •
                  ch brother to the later Nabagodono
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   regned in babulō. This mā toke Ioachym out of preſon & worſhippit him. and his fad
                     ••
                   deed body after the counſell of this man: he deuidet to an hūdyrth gripes leſt that he ſhold riſe from deth to lyue. Nota The play of the Ches wos found of Xerſe a philoſophur for the correccion of Enylmerodach this tyme the kyng of babulon a gret tyrant the wich was wont to kyll his own maiſters and wyſe men. And for he durſt not rebuke him oppynly. with ſych a witty game he procurt hym to be me
                     •
                  ke
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM viC xxxiiij. Et an̄ īxp̄i natītatē vC lxv.
               SAlathiell of the line of criſt wos ſon to Ieco
                     •
                  y the king of Iues the wich he gat aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the tranſmigracion of babulō as Marke the Euangeleſt ſaeth Seruius Tuliꝰ the ſext kīg of Rome was of a bond codecion on the mother ſyed: for ſhe was a captiue madyn: bot ſhe was of the nobull blude. This mā had gret louyng: and nobully he bare hym in euery place iij. hellis to the cite he put & diked the walles round a bowt Reguſa
                     •
                   Sabuſardach and Balthaſar wer bretheren the wich regned on after a nother and wos kynges in Babuloo: and Balthaſar wos the laſt kyng in babulō the wich wos ſlayn of Darius & Cyrus· Plura vide daniel̄ quinto.
               
                  DArius vnkyll to Cyro felo ī the kyngdō with Ciro. occupied the kyngdom of babulō Darius tranſlatit the kyngdom of babulons Caldees in to the kyngdō of ꝑſa
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   &̄ medo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . Cyrus was emprour xxx. yere This cyrus held the monarch hoill at perſes: of this man ꝓpheſied Yſaias. & he deſtruyed babulon: and kylled Balthaſar the kyng of babulon. and he worſchipped gretly Daniell. the Iues he ſend home ayene that they ſhold bilde the tempull of god. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   eſdre primo.
               Babulon that ſtrong caſtell was deſtrued &̄ his pouer was taken fro him. as it wos ꝓpheſied. This wos the fyrſt cite and thee gretteſt of all the world. of the wich incredebyll thyngꝭ ar wretē and this that wos ſo ſtrong ī on nyght wos deſtrued. that it myght be ſhewed to the power of god. to the wich power all other be bot a ſparke &̄ duſt. For it is ſaied for ſothe that it wos incredabull to be made with mans handis or to be dethruyed with mans ſtrenght. wherof all the world myght take an enſample. and it wold or myght be informyt. Tarquinus ſuꝑbus wos the vij. kyng of Rome & he regned xxxv. yere This man ꝯſaued fyrſt all thes tormētis wich ar ordeyned for malefacturs. as exile: p̄ſō weilis & galowis. fettres &̄ manyclys. chynes & colers. & ſych other. Ther for his gret pride & cruelnes: god ſuffrid him to myſchefe. and in what man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wyſe it ſhall bi ſhewed ¶He had a ſon of the ſame name. the wich ſon dofouled a worthy manys wiffe: thei called hym Collatyn. & his wyffe wos called Lucres. This Tarquynꝰ yt wos this ſeuynth kīg ſon a foor ſaied. come vn to this ladyes howſe. abſent hir howſbond to ſoꝑ. &̄ to logīg: and when all wer a ſlepe he roſe with a ſuerde in his hond: &̄ wt ſtrengthe & feir he rauychid the womā. And whē he wos go ye nexte day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſhe ſend vn to hir fadre & to hir houſbond for ſhe was off gret kynne. and thus ſhe ſaied vn to them ¶This kyngꝭ ſon come heder. os a freynd of whom I had no myſtriſt. and thus he has defilyt my chaſtyte. and loſt my name for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  more. then hir

frendys ſe hyr wepe and petuyſly cōplayn. &̄ they cōforthid hir os the cold. And ſaied it wos no velany vn to hir for it wos ayenes hir will. ſhe anſwered & ſayd· yet ſhall ther neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   woman excuſe hir bi Lucres for thou ſhe cōſentyd not to thys deed: yet ſhall ſhe not dye wt out payn: for that deed. And wt that word ſhe had a knyffe redi vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hir mātill with wich ſhe ſmote hir ſelff to the hert And for this cruelnes and this petuꝰ deth: the pepull of Rome a roſe and exiled this kīg for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  more: &̄ all his ꝓgeny and thꝰ ſeeſ ſit thes kynges of rome &̄ neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos none after:
            
            
               ¶Of the gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nans of Rome till the Emꝑours be gan.
               AFtyr this tyrant wos deid. the romans ordeyned yt ther ſhuld neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   be kyng more ī rome. Bot they wold bi gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned fro yt forth bi conſules. So whē thos kīges had regned CC. yere & xl. they made this ſtatute yt .ij. conſules ſhuld be choſen. and they ſhuld goueren the cite & the peepull. and for this cauſe thes tow wor choſen: that yf on of them wold make any exceſſe: thee other ſhuld gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ne him. For ther wos no thyng obeyed bot yf they cōſented both: alſo they ſhuld not ſtond ī ther dīgnite paſſyng on yere for this cauſe. that for dominacio
                     •
                   of long tyme they ſhuld not vſurpe vpō them more then wos righfull. In all this tyme the Empyre of rome was not dilatid paſſyng xij. myell: ne had no lordſhipp paſſing xij. myell The fyrſt conſules yt wer made the called Luciū & the other Brutū. and thes two mē did gret thīgꝭ in ther tyme: but yet the pepull bare heuy of ther dominacion. wher foor the choſe an other man the wich ſhuld haue more auctorite then they. & thei clepeed hym dictator ¶In this ſame tym ther wos a gret diſcencion be twix the pepull and the ſenate. wherfoor they choſin Tribunas wich war Iuges ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the pepull &̄ defendit hem from wrong as ſayeth Yſid. For the dictator when he was choſe. he laſted ·v. yere and the tribunas war remeued euery yere ¶Bot ye muſt vndir ſtond that ye ſhall not haue heir after

all the conſules namys yt gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned Rome be twix the ſeſyng of ye kynges and the beginyng of the Emꝑours: for it war to long to write ſpecially whē they wer eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y yere new: ſen yt oon man myght be choſen ſo oft tyme as we red. And alſo for the endurynge of ther gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nance: for they wer gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nours of Rome. vC. yere &̄ lxvij. So the moſt famus men of thes ſhall be reherſed aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the forme of cronyclis. & os they ſtond ī the boke wos ychon aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   other Incipit hiſtoria libri Eſdre
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM viC lix. Et ante criſti natītatē vC xl.
               ZOrobobell after the cōmandment of god founded the tempil &̄ made it ꝑfite bot it wos long after. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   eſdre. 6o. Aftir the pepull of Ieruſalē come fro babulon thes ij. ruyled Iheſus the hee preſt os gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nour: & Zorobobell as duke. And thys maner of gydyng was kepid vn to Herodes tyme that the hee preſtis ſhuld be principall: and the dukis vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   them. bot the dukes wos eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of the tribe of iuda: after the propheſi of Iacob. and vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that good gydyng of preſtis it is not rede the pepull to haue recedit fro the varay truthe of faythe as they did afoor in the tyme off Iues and of kyngis. for then mony tymes they ran to ydolatry. Eſdras the preſt of the kynrad of Aron this tyme excedid mē ī holynes throgh whos gret wiſdō all the Iues ſtait was holpin Cambiſes the ſon of Ciri regned on the kyngdom of Perſa
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   the wich commaunded myghtili the tempull of Ieruſalem ſhold not be bildid ayene. his fadre cōmandid it ſhold be byldid: This Cambiſes made a curſed Iuge to be fleid or hilt: a lyue &̄ mad his ſon to ſit on his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſkyn: that thurgh that drede he ſhold drid falſhed and iuge rightwiſli ¶This Cambiſes had mony namys in holx ſcriptur. in the boke of Eſdri Artharxerſes or aſſuorus in hiſtoria Iudith: yt wasdoon vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hī he is called Nabogodonoſor for Olifernes the prince of his cheualry ſubdued mony landes to his lord. and at the laſt he come vn to Bethelem & ther wos ſlayn of Iudit a woman vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   iuddith 2 et 13.
               
                  Ereneides regned in Perſis half a yere. Darius regned at the perſes the wich bi the mocion of Zorobobell cōmaundid thee werke of ye tēpull to be take ayene. &̄ ꝯmaunded his princes that on no wiſe they ſhuld let it. bot ſhuld help it in all yt they could vide plrā ī eſdre ho: de ho tēpore ābiguū pp̄ diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſitatē docto
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  .
            
            
               Circa annū mūdi iiijM vijC xxxiiij. Et an̄ xp̄i natī. iiijC lxv
               ABiuth ſon 
                     •
                  o Zorobobell of ye lyne of criſt wos a bowt this tyme· for of him and of other foloyng vn to Ioſeph nothyng is had inſcriptur: but that Matheu the euangeleſt nombris them in the genologi: And therfor the certayn tyme of them dewly cannot bi knaw. Ioachī wos biſſhop this tī aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ioſophꝰ wos called Ioſedech vndir whom ieruſalem wos belded ayene vt dicit et ho idem 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   Neemie 12.
               In the .CC.xliiij yere after that Rome wos made: Thee Romans ordyned .ij. Cōſules in the ſteid of ther kyng ye wich ſhuld gouerne on yere aloin· leſt that bi tariyng they ſhuld be proude. And yt the on ſhuld corec the other yf he excedit or errit. Brutus wos the fyrſt Conſuler and Lucius the ſecund. &̄ then was ther a man that was called Dictator the nome of an office the wych ſhuld go with the pepull ayens ther enmys. Titus puphius Marcus conſules. Then after the Romans complayned gretli on the condecions of the conſules. and then the power was put to .x. men to an excedyng coſt to the comyn pepull. for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ych on of them went like a kyng and need cauſed them to leue that dygnite. And they triſted neuer to reſt. the were wos ſo ſtrong ayens them Artharxerſes wos kyng of Perſa
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   vnder whome Eſdras come to Ieruſalem. & Neemias wos butteler to the ſame kyng whom aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward he ſent to bylde the walles of Ieruſalem. Xerſes rened aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hī ij. monethes Segdianꝰ vij monethes after hī & lityll they did.
            
            
               
               Circa annū mūdi iiijM vijC lix. Et an̄ xp̄i natītatē iiijC xl
               ELiac hym is reherſed in the lyne of criſt ī Math. po. and more of him is not had in ſcriptur. Eſdras an holy man and a conyug and worſhipfully wos had emong the pepull. thys man come fro babulō with odyrr. And he meued with veray cherite went ayene to bobulon that he myght wyn mo of Iſraell and ſaaue the ſawles and bring them home with hym. In this tyme he repared the law and the holy bokys. the wich the caldes had brent. And an happy wittynes to all the world he left in ſcriptur. He fond new litters and lighter in faccion. the wich thurgh the holy goſt fulfilled he come ayene to ieruſalē with a gret multitude. & with the kynges preualeges that he ſhuld teche the pepull yt law that he had repayred. And ther he died in a good age. Neemias an hebru butler of kyng Artraxerſes at his lord commandment went from babulon in to ieruſalem. wher he yaf xij. yere the ledīg of pepull. And the v. yere he be gon to repare the yates and the wallis of Ieruſalem: the wich werke he endit in .ij: yere and iiij monethes. and that with gret inpedimentes. for the halfe of the pepul ſtoed armeid with out the Cite to withſtond the pepull of odyr naciōns intendyng to deſtruy them. And the other part labured in armes holdyng in the ton hond ſtonys for wallis. and ī the notobull odyr hond a ſwoord or ne by it. vide plrā libo ſuo Permenides pheloſophurs and namly in morall thynges war a bowte this. Socrates a pheloſophur the wich vndirſtoed mych of the power of god. &̄ he wos Plato maiſter. Democritus Ipotras and odi
                     •
                   of whom the nobull werkis a boode.
            
            
               Circa annū mūdi iiijM viijC ix. Et an̄ criſti natī. iijC lxxxx
               AZor is reherſed in the lyne of criſt in mathe primo. Bot nothyng off his dedes is wreten in the ſcriptur. Elyaſib or Elyſaphat ſuccedid Ioachym in the byſſhoppryke. vt dicit Euſebius et magiſter hiſtor

Camillus wos Dictator at Rome in whoes days myſcheuys playes wer ordand that the peſtelans ſhuld ſees at Rome. Off thes playes Sent auſtyn tretis delygently in repreuyng the falſhed of the goddis. The wich deſired to be pleſed with ſych writch it playes. So ſhamfully thes playes wer vſed with naked men &̄ womē: that honeſt mē ne womē wold not be at thos playes ne yet behold them. vide plura in Augꝰ de ciuitate dei.
               Darius nothus regned at the perſes .xix. yere. Plato thee diuyn pheloſopher: And Ariſtotill his diſcipull wos this tyme nobull and famus clerkis.
               Tytus quintius wos Dictator at rome: and he wos a couetus man whom Auſtyn de ciuitate dei bringes in a yens couetus and prewd criſten men. Gayus wos a ſonetour vnder whome was a gret batell a yens the kyng of Tuſco
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . and viijM. men of them wor taken. Marcus valerius was an other ſenetour thee wich with .lxM. Romans fought with the fraunſhmen and had the victorie and mony of them kyllid. Artharxerſes kyng of ꝑſes called a yene to his empyre Egipt. and he put Nactanabo ye kyng in to Echeopiam &̄ mony Iues ī to tranſmigracion: alſo he ſend vagoſū a prince ower flumiordan to aſke a yene the tribute that was for yefen to Eſdra that was the vij: yere rent pp̄ ſabbā 
                  tre. Arſamꝰ ſuccedit hym and regned an yere. Darius the ſon of arſamy regned with the ꝑſes xxiiij. yere This darius wos a myghty man and a bold the wich aſked of the Grekis a tribute. And that wos the cauſe of the deſcruccion of the Monarch of ꝑſa
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   for it was tranſlatit to the grekes after the propheſy off Daniell. for it is ſayid that Darius brought xvC.M. fightīg men. whom all alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſlew. Iodas the ſon of Elyzaphat was he biſſhop ī ieruſalē in tyme of Mardachn: Iohēs his ſon ſuccedid him Ariſtotiles the moſt ſotell and famuſt Ppiloſophur leuyd this tyme. Senocrate the moſt chaſt pheloſophur was this tyme with dyuers other mo.
            
            
               
               ¶Bi cauſe the kīgꝭ of bretan next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   leued ī peeſe moſt pte & lytyl of them is wretē. therfor they ſhall be ſet to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   tyll it be cōmī to Caſſibulon kīg of Breton the wich wos brother to Lud
               
                  ANd whan Crombatrus was deid regned Guentholen yt wos his ſō a man of good ꝯdicions &̄ welbeloued & he gouerned the lond well and wiſeli and he regned xxvi. xere and after he died and lyeth at new Troy.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Seiſell regned and well gouerned the land after guentholen.
               
                  ANd after this Guentholen regned his ſon Seiſſel well &̄ wortheli & well gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned ye lōd as his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had done befor him & he regned xv. yere and died and lieth at new Troy.
            
            
               ¶How Kymor regned after Seiſſell his fader and he begat Howan that regned after his fader in peeſe.
               
                  ANd after Seiſſell regned his ſon Kymor well &̄ nobli xix. yere in peeſe and then afterhym regned howan hys ſon x. yere and then he died and lieth at Ikaldoune.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Morwt died thurgh myſchaunce thurgh a beſt.
               AFter this howon regned Marwith &̄ become ſo weked &̄ ſo ſterne tyll at the laſt gret vengeance come to him. for as he went vpon a tyme by the ſee ſide he mete a gret beſt yt wos blake & horibull & hideus & he wened that it had bene a whale of the ſee & bent an arblaſt &̄ wold haue ſlayn that beſt with his quarell but he myght not ſmyte hym And when he had ſhot all his quarelles the beſt anone come to hym in a gret haſt and hym deuored a lyfe and ſo he died for his wickednes thurgh vengeaunce of god after that he had regned ix. yere.
            
            
               ¶Of Grādobodiā yt wos morwith ſon yt made Cāmbregge.
               AFter that this Morwith wos deid the Bretens crosned Grādobodian his ſō: &̄ this grandobodian long tyme regned ī goodnes & made tēpuls & tounys & this grādobodiā made the toune of Cambregge &̄ the toune of Grauntham &̄ wos wel

beloued of rich & poer for he honourd the rich & helped the poer. this Grandobodian had iiij. ſonnis Arthogaile Heſidur Higamꝰ & Petitur & when he had regned xi. yere he died & lieth at new troy
            
            
               ¶Of Artogaill that wos grādobodians ſon how he wos made kyng &̄ ſieth put doune for his wikkednes.
               AFter Grandobodian regned his ſon Artogaill v. yere & he become ſo wikked &̄ ſo ſterne yt the britons wold not ſuffre hym to be kyng but put him doun &̄ made Heſidur his brother kyng & he bi come ſo good &̄ merciabull that men hym called kyng of pytte ¶And whē he had regned v. yere he had ſo grete pitte of his brother Artogaill yt wos kyng before. &̄ anōe he forſoke his dignite &̄ toke his brother the croune ayene: &̄ made hī kyng ayens all the britans will ¶And afterward Artogaill become ſo good of cōdicion yt he was welbeloued of all ye land for he become ſo bonair & fre and did right & reſon to all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of men and he regned vi. yere and died and lidth at grantham.
            
            
               ¶How Heſidur wos made kīg aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye deth of his brether
               AFter the deth of Artogaill the britons crouned an other tyme Heſidur but his ij. bred Higamꝰ & Petitur had of him gret ſpite & ſcorne and ordined them help for to were vpon the kyng ther brother and ſo they toke hym an put in to priſon ye ſecūd yere of his regne &̄ they deꝑted all the land be twix them both but higamus leued but vij. yere &̄ tho had petitur all the lond & he made the toune of Pickering.
            
            
               How the Britons come and toke Heſidur out of priſon & made hym kyng the thrid tyme.
               
                  ANd when this petitur was deid bretās toke heſidur anoon &̄ made hym kyng the thrid tyme and tho regned he īpees xiiij. yere and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he died and lieth at Karleill.
            
            
               How xxxiij. kīgꝭ rened ī pees eche aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   
                  raft ye deth of heſidur
               AFter the deth of heſidur regned xxxiij kīges ich aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   other ī pees &̄ wt out ony long tariyng I ſhall tell thē all and

how long eche of them regned as the ſtori telleth ¶The fyrſt kyng of tho xxxiij. was called Gerbodia & he regned xii yere and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him regned Morgan ij. yere and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him rened Cighnus vi yere: &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him regned Idwalan viij yere &̄ after hym regned Rohugo xi. yere &̄ after regned voghen xiij yere and after hym regned Catill xv yere and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym regned Porex ij yere and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym regned Cherin xvij yere: and after hym regned Coyll xij. yere and after hym regned Sulgenis xiiij yere and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hī regned Eſdad xx: yere and after hym regned Andragie xvij: & after hym regned vrian v. And aftei hym regned Elind ij. yere And after hym regned Eldagan xv yere and after hym rened Claten xii yere and after hym regnid Ouirgunde viij yere and ofter hym regned Mortan vi yere and aftir hym regned Bledagh iij yere and after hym rened Caph i. yere And after hym regnee Gen ij yere and after hym regned Seyſell &̄ kīg Bled xxii yere And kyng Tabreth xi yere and Archinall xiiij yere: and Croll xxx yere: and Rodingu xxxij yere and Hertir v yer & Hanipir vi. yere &̄ Carpour vij yere and Digneill iii. yere &̄ Samuell xxiiij yere &̄ Rede ij. yere & Ely vii. monethes thys Ely had iii. ſonnys Lud Caſſibalā & Enemyon.
            
            
               ¶How Lud wos made kyng aftir the doth of Ely his fader.
               AFter the deth of Ely regned Lud his ſon & gouerned wel the lond and moch honoured gud folke & tēpred & amēded wikked folke This lud loued more to duell at Troy then ī any other place of the lond wherfor the name of new troy was left and tho wos the cite called Ludſtone But the name is changed thurgh variance of letters and now is called London And this kīg made in the cite afayr gate &̄ called it lud gate aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his name & the folke of the cite ar londeneres and when he had rened xi: yere he died and lieth at London &̄ he had .ij. yong ſonnys that oon wos called Andraghen and the other Tormace. but they coude nether ſpeke ne go for yongth and therfur the Bretans crouned
                  
a ſtrong knyght thas was called Lud that was Caſſibalamus brother &̄ made hym kyng of bretane now called Englond.
            
            
               Circa annū mūdi iiijM viijC lxxxiiij Et an̄ xp̄i natī. ijC xv.
               SAdoch of ye lyne of criſt is nōbred ī math po. bot inſcript ther is nomore mēcion of hī Iadꝰ ye ſon of Iohn̄ was he biſſhop ī ieruſalē. This tyme kīg alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   rened ye wich wos wroth wt ye pepull of ieruſalē: & come to ye cite: Thē Iadꝰ arraed ī his pōtificall ornamēts ran to meyt hī: & he ſodāly wos pleſed & worſhipped ye biſſhope. and wt pees & Ioye entrid the cite: &̄ he made to be brought to him ye boke of Daniell: &̄ the ꝓpheſi to be exponyd to hym: ye wich was ſpokē of hī &̄ yt doon. he ioyed ſtrōgly for all thyng ye wich he had herd bi the drem ī dew ordir wos fulfilled. & it wos likly to hym: yt he ſhold be ye ſame ꝑſō. of whō daniell ꝓpheſied. &̄ of yt he toke more hardynes to fight wt Darius kyng of ꝑſa
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . and he did the ſacrafis. &̄ cōmanded the Iues to aſke what they wold haue: & he granted that they ſhold kepe ther own lawis &̄ at the ſeuent yere ſhold be wt out tribute. vide mrm̄ ī hiſto. The hoſt of Alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   as Oroſius ſayth wos xxxijM of foote men. and iiijM hors men. and ſchippes .C.lxxx. And it is vn c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn whedre it is more meruell that he ſhold conquer al ye world wt ſo lytell a pouer. or how yt eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he durſt go vpō them wt ſo lityll a pouer And ther wos of alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ his hoſt ſlayn thee kyng of ꝑſa
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . Et vt oroſiꝰ dicit quīquies decies cētena milia. Enias the ſon of Iadi wos biſſhop aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Manilius Papiriꝰ &̄ Fabiꝰ wer cōſules at Rome This papiriꝰ whhen he wos a chyld he wos veray wiſſe. &̄ he fenyd mony a fayr leſing that he myght keip his maſter cōſell & the ſenetours. & when he cā to a man. he wos ſo nobull a werur: that when the Romās dred Alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he was choſen to go a yenes hī. &̄ of the goddis he chargit not. bot he ſcorned &̄ rapreued the goddis: ſayng a fore yt vn happy thingꝭ ſhold fall: &̄ yt to his gret louīg holy docturs ſaeth.

Incipit Monarchia greco
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   et ceſſat monarchia perſarum. KYng Alixandre thys tyme be gone to be lord of all thee world: and he wos called gret alexander for his gret victory the wich he had in ſo litell tyme. it wos an euident iugemēt of the wroth of god: ayens ſynners of that tyme. certanly ſum myraculs our lord did for hym in helpyng of his pouer: for the ſe of Pāphilicon wos deuided to hym: as in olde tyme the reid ſe to the iues when he purſecutit dariū. Alſo at is prayer the hilles of Caſpij war ſchit: that certayn of the curſed iues myght neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cum 
                     •
                  wt. bot at the laſt in babulon with venum he was poyſumt and dyed: the xxxiij. yere of his age. And the v. yere of his monarch. the xij. yere of the kyngdom of macidon. Nōnd that when Alexander was deid thos xij. to whom he deuydet his kyngdom myght not a corde. And then by gone infenite batellis. and at the laſt iiij· obtened all the kyngdō. vide plrā in oroſio.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM ixC ix. Et ante xp̄i natītatē .CC.ix.
               AChym of the lyne of criſt ſon to Sadoch is nombreid in Mathe prio. &̄ of hym his nomore had inſcripture Symon wos biſſhop this tyme an holy man and alſo rightwys he wos named of the pepull. Eleazarus wos biſſhop after ſymō This man ſend to Ptholameo kyng of Egipt lxxij. lerned men of euery tribe ſex to interpret the law of the iues. the wich tranſlatit from hebru in to greke thurgh a gret myracull that ſo moni men ſhold ī lxxij. dayes tranſlate all holy ſcriptur with on acorde vide augꝰ de ciuitate dei. Dolobela Emilius Marcus Curius Genutius this txme wer counſelers at Rome. This dolobela conquered Sammtes and after mony batelles had. And Marcus ſubduit Epirotas and kylled xxiijM. of his men and then fled kyng Pirro the wich kyng ſend vn to hym for pees & offyrryng vn to hym gret yeftes
               
                  And then thys Conſull anſuered & ſaied ther ſhall no batell

cauſe me to fle. nor no mōy corrupt me. for I had leu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   
                  cōmaund richmen to do this & this. then be rich my ſelf ¶Tonutiꝰ ſobduit the cite of Argiuo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  : and a legion of rome knyghtis he ſend to rome: & cauſed them to be betyn oppynly ī ye meddis of thee marketh for they had them not lefully to the court of rome. for thee law was then kepid ſo ſtratly at rome: that and they fayled to do ther dew ob
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uans ī u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tu: they ſhold be penychid. Thes romans & mōy a foor and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   war the moſt nobull men aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the worldis honeſty that myght be. and ī all maner of u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tu circūſpectt as holy dacturs ſaieth. that they put thor ſampuls to criſten men: bot not the intencion for they lacked the key of fayth: Incipiunt reges Egipti quia al̄
                  
                     •
                   nō 
                  pt fī cōtinuaciō: & ītexūtur reg ſirie Ptholomꝰ Philodolphꝰ this tyme was kīg ī Egipt. This philodolphus wos the veray worſhipper of on god. and full gracius to the Iues. of whom xxM and C he delyu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed out of captiuite and that he did that he myght pleeſe the god of iſraell. of whom he had herd the meruels. and his law he deſiered to haue. ner it myght not be tranſlayt in to no other langage: bot of deuote mē. and that with a dew reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ens and a ſolempnite. certan men attempt to haue wreten it emonges the gentile ſtories: whom the plage off god ſtroke tyll they repented. This kyng ſend vn to Eleazer the biſſhop ſend to hym lerned men the wich he did gladly. vide plura in magiſtro hiſtorio.
            
            
               Anno mūdi iiijM ixC lix. Et ante criſte nātiuitatē ijC xl.
               ELiud of the line of criſt gat Eleaſar as it is opyn ī math primo. And more in ſcripturis not had of hym. Onias biſſhop was ſon to Simon Symon was biſſhop after hym the wich was a veray relegius man. he reformed the tempull of god in to better: and encreſſid the cite of ieruſalem with mony other good thīges Sēꝓmus Appyus Claudius Gueus Gaiꝰ Artiliꝰ regulꝰ Eīliꝰ Fabiꝰ this tyme war ceneturs at rome

This Semꝓmus fought ayens ye cūtre of Picc̄tes: &̄ almoſt the cheualry on bothe ye ꝑtes war ſlayn except a few Romās that left a liue & ſubdued the cūtre Appius Claudiꝰ ſubdued Syracuſanas &̄ the cūtre of Penos &̄ put gret tributis to them Artiliꝰ Regulꝰ a nobull cenytour ower come iij. kyngꝭ. & lxxiij. citeys ſubduit And a dragon of a .C.xv. fote he kyllyd. aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward whan he wos ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cruell ayenes his emnys &̄ denyeng to yef them peſe. bot if they wold pay a myghty tribute. they almoſt beyng ī a diſpare fought ayeneſt him: and ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come hym &̄ his hoſt & toke hym. and neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  theles yet they wold fayn haue had pees bot this moſt fayethful mā had leu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   dye ī paynes gret thē to yef reſt &̄ pees to curſet pepull. his louyng ſent Augꝰ hogely exaltis Emulius fabiꝰ &̄ gaius wold haue deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed Regulꝰ bot the obtened not. Ptholomeas eugites this time wos kīg of Egipt a victoriꝰ prince & a myghty: this man ſubdued Syriam &̄ Ciciliam &̄ the moſt ꝑte of Aſie and toke ther goddis & brought them in to hys cuntre. Ptholomeus Philopat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſon to Eugetes regned ī Egippt xvij. yere. This man fought ayenes ij. brether. s. Seleneū & gret Anthiocū & he ꝓſtatit mōy a M. bot neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  theles he p̄ualit not. vide plrā in iohē ſuꝑ daniel̄
               
               Haniball the moſt curſed kyng of Peno
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   or of Affricano
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   myghtely hated the Romās: for he deſtrued them almoſt to the vtt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  maſt end & neer the cite of rome he deſtruyed. and ſo mony noble men of Romans he kylled at on tyme: that iij. buſſhell of goldī ringes he drow of ther fyngeres. Alſo ī acertayn water of the ſlayn bodies of thes romans: he made as it wer a brige that his hoſt myght pas: and at the laſt Cipio the noble ſenytour direckid his hoſt to hym: and ſcumfited him and almoſt Cipio hoſt off Romans war ſlayn. Lucatiꝰ conſul Symꝓnyꝰ valeriꝰ Fulniꝰ lutinꝰ gaius & Scipio reuled at Rome. this tyme the romans had pees on yere alon and it wos taken for a myracul that they had ſo long reſt. for afoor this tyme ī iiijC &̄ xl. yere the

Romans had neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   reſt. Thes conſules when the yere wos done congregatit all the ſtrenght of Ytaly and they had in ther hoſt viijM. armed men. for dreed of the frenchmen whom they dred ſtrongly: and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward the romans ſubdued them. Epiphanes the ſon to Philopator regned in egipt xxiiij. yere Cleopatra doughter to gret Anthiocus wos his wife Antiochus magnus this tyme rened at Syrry the wich did moch myſchefe to the Iues. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   math. Onias this tyme wos biſſhop in Ieruſalem this Onias for the tyrannyde of Antiochus fled with mony Iues in to Egipt fenyng hym to fulfyll the propheſi of Yſaie 19. that is to wete to bild the tempull. Bot in that he ſynned for he ſayed other wyſſe then he thought. The kyng of Egipt gracioſly reſaued him and gaff hym the lond of Helipolees and ther he bild his tempull Symon his ſon was biſſhop at Ieruſalem aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that his fader was flede.
            
            
               Circa annū mūdi v·M.xxxiiij. Et an̄ xp̄i ntītem .C.lx.v
               ELeaſar of the lyne of criſt was a bowt this tyme of hī no thyng is wreten in ſcriptur bot that math. nombres hym. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   primo. Onias Pius wos to the Iues biſſhop this tyme an holy man. & welbeloued with god and man. and not alonli with good men: bot ill mē alſo. at the laſt vn righwiſli wos ſlayn of Andronito· vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   2o Machabeo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . 4o Paulus Therencius: Scipio Affricanus: this wer ſenetous at Rome. thes ij. ereckyt an hoſt a yeneſt Haniball & ther almoſt the romans hoope died for ther wos ſlayn xliiij.M. romans. And this nobull man Cipio offricanus brought a yene the ſtate of the Romans pepull the wich ſtoode in a deſſpare eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to haue rekou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed. for he fought with Haniball manleli and ſcumfited him. all Spayn he ouer come. all Affricam he ſubduet. gret Antiochus he brought to be his 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uand. al Aſiam he made tributary to the remans This man ſo nobull & ſo victorius bi his own vn kynd cūtre

was owtlayed &̄ ther he died Philometor the ſon of Epiphanes of Cleopatra regned ī egipt xxxv. yere. this kyng yet a child nobull Antiochꝰ hogely oppreſſit wt mōy diſſaytes. bot ye romans ſent legats the wich cōmāded antiaco yt he ſhold ſeſe of his tyrannyde a yenſt hym. And Marcꝰ publiꝰ made a cerkill a boute Antiochi thꝰ ſayng The ſenetours of Rome & ye pepul cōmā
                  dith the that thow go not out of this cerkell till thow haue anwſar to this mat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   This antiochꝰ ſeyng yt he myght not cōtinu his tyranyde ſayed yf it be thꝰ cōmādid me of ye ſenetour & romans pepull. I muſt nedis turne ayene. & ſo woed angre he wos yt he loſt the ſeege of Alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ turned to the poer releuys of ye Iues vengyng hym vpō them: be cauſe he myght not vēge hym an no myghtier pepull. vtꝪ ī lio machabeo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   primo et 2o.
               MAthathias an holy mā & of all louīg moſt worthy hated ī his hert & ꝯu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſaciō al ſynners: alonly triſtyng ī our lord god of iſrael. vtꝪ prio macha. 2o And this man had v. ſōnes of the ſame loue vn to god. This mā woſ not biſhop ī iſrael. bot his iij. ſōnes wer. Iudas machabeꝰ wos biſhop iij. yere and he wos ſon to Mathathias. This macabeꝰ was the moſt named mā yt eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos ī iſraell. the wich had neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   none like hym a foor ne aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . he wos ī batell a myghty man. and offred hī to dye a mart
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for the lawys of god: Ionathas his brother ſuccedit hym xix.
yere the wich grew ī u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tu & gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned & ſtedfaſt ſtode ī the lawis of god: and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   falſly was ſlayn of Criphone & ij. of his ſōnys. plrā vide iuda et frē eiꝰ libro macha. Antiochꝰ Epiphanes ſon to Antiochꝰ the myghty this tyme was kyng of Syrry. this mā from the heed vn to the fort wt ī &̄ with out all was curſed. And therfor he was figured to antecriſt. mōy mart
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s cruelly he made. and falſly he diſpoſid hym to entyr ī to Egipt as his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   did bot he obtened not. For the romans lettyd hym. his moſt vnhapy werkes. &̄ how he wos ī hoſtage at Rome: & how ye ꝓpheſi of daniell is completed in hym ye may ſe in the boke of machabeo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  .
               
                  Qvintus Flaminius. Marchus Catho. Thiberiꝰ Graccꝰ weer ſenetours of Rome. this tyme was ſo contiunall and ſo mych batell. that lerned men of Gentyles and off the trew fayth bothe wer wery to writte the actys or haue them in mynde ī the wich batellis men merueled gretly on the ſtedfaſtnes of the Romās. that no tribulacion no drede no herdnes myght feere them bot euer contynuid in batell. And certanly thes Romans aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the worldis honeſty they wer the moſt wiſe men that wer. And therfore the Machobees deſired ther companye.
            
            
               Circa annū mūdi vM lix. Et ante xp̄i natītatē .C·xl.
               MAthan ſon to Sadoch of the lyne of criſt gat Iacob. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   Math .1o. Symon ſon to Mathathias wos biſſhope viij. yere This ſymon was a veray wiſe man: and from hys youth vn tyll his age wos eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of good conuerſacion euer more u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  tuus. &̄ at the laſt he was ſlayn of his brother Elay. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   prio machabeo. Iohannes Hyrcanus ſon to Symon wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his fadir xxix yere. a nobull man as all the kynred wos be fore hym This man aftir his deceſſe left his wife a veray wyſſe woman And his .v. ſonnys to gouerne the Iuri. of whom the holdeſt wos called Ariſtobolꝰ an vnpacient man and an vnhappy. His own mother with .iij. of his yonger brether he preſenit. and ſlew them thurgh honger: and ſo a loyn he leued kyng and biſſhop on yere. vide plura libro machabeo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  : Publius Lucinius Luciꝰ Emilius▪ Lucius Lucinius Lucius Cenſorinus. wer cōſules at Rome: in whos tyme the Cartagines and the Romans wered ſtrongly: bot the romans ſabduit them intendyng to haue deſtrued the Cartagines vtterly. Bot emong the Romans ther wos a notabull wiſſe man calldd Cipio nauta. and emong mony notabull conſellys .ij. he gaffe ſpecealli to be had ī mīde: The fyrſt that Cartago ſhuld not be deſtrued. that thurght the occaſion of forand batellis. a inward concord ſhuld a bide emong the Romans. and a ꝑpetuall ſtrength for continuall exorciſe of batell

The ſecund that in no wiſe the teathur ſhuld be belde in Rome for he ſayed that was the moſt enmy that myght be to the pepull yt vſid were. for that place nuryched ſlouthe. and prouoked lechory And how wiſely this notabull man yaf counſell. the tymes foloyng declare. vide plura ī augꝰ de ciuitete dei et oro. libro quarto Yet for all this counſell that nobull cite of Cartagie wos deſtruyed of Cipio and the ſenetours: and it brent xvij. dayes continually. mony men ther wer ſold: and mony men ran in to the fyer willely ¶Corinthus this ſame yere wos deſtruyed of thee romans: the wich wos the richeſt cuntre of the world. Ptholomeus this tyme regned in Egipt. and wos famulier with thee romans. And ſo long he and his prediceſſurs regned as they kepyd fidelite to the romans. and knaw euery man that ther was no other cauſe that the pouer of the romans encreſed ſo ſtrongly a bown odir pepull. bot vertu the wich abundantly regned in them and nomli rightwiſnes: the wich a bown all thyng they vſed. And as long as they keped meſurnes and loued rightwiſnes. ſo long they wer neuer ouer comen. And os ſoon as they wer corrupped. it is red thei wer eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ower comen: Hit is had ī a certayn reuelacion of god ſhewed to Sent Briget that our lord god beris witnes to thes oold Romans: that noon in this world of puer naturall reſon leued more rightwiſly. And what lyghttis of faythe they ſhewed in the tyme of criſtyn relegion ſhall by ſhewed afterwerd. Regnū iudeo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   reſtituitur.
               ARiſtobolꝰ wos the fyrſt kyng and preſt ī the Iuri: This man regned on yere a loyn. and toke to hym the dyame of the kyngdom: And he held hym not content with that that his fadre yaf hym ī hys teſtament. bot he put his modir ī preſon: and his bred: & therfor he periched wrechidli with his brother antigonꝰ the wich wos of his counſell and helpet hym. vide mrm̄ ī hiſtoriis ¶Antigonꝰ brother to the kyng wos ſlayn thurgh the enuy of the quene Alexander wos biſſhop after ariſtobolus and he

ſtood xxvij. yere And he wos all a tyrend. all though he appered ſobur ī the begīyng. bot he made it knawyn what he wos ī his ſtomoke· for he ſlew his own bred: and ī xij. yere he ſlew .l.M of the old ſaage fadres of gret u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tu. be cauſe they told hī his myſgydyng: Then whē he ſhuldie hed left ij. ſonys bi hynd hī Hircanū & Ariſtobolū: bot c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tanly he ſaied his wyfe ſhuld regne for ſhe ſtood ī the grace of the pepull. Seruiꝰ Flaocꝰ Lucius Celius Fabius Publiꝰ. this tyme wer ſenetours at rome this tyme batels emong them ſelf be gan. of the wich the fyrſt cauſe &̄ the begīyng wos Graccꝰ a myghty mā well knawyn wt nobull romans: bi gan to ſeke a cauſe a yenes them. And be cauſe that he myght do nothīg a loyn to them. he meued the comyn pepull to thē ſayng: that all ye lōdes & poſſeſſions ſhuld be deuyded equaly: &̄ alſo the money etcc. And for that cauſe ther wos an īſurreccion ī the wich Graccꝰ wos ſlayn. & mony myſcheuys fell aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   vide oroſiū ¶In the tyme of thes mē ther wos a child born at Rome hauyng iiij. feete iiij armes ij faceſſe & iiij een. The hill of Ethna ſpytted out flamyng fyer horobli. & deſtrued the places ne abowt it. ¶&̄ thes mē bering ruel Cartago was cōmādid to be reſtored: &̄ it wos fulfilled of the romans pepull &̄ ther wos myhhty batell ī the cite of rome ¶Fabiꝰ wt a lytell hoſt ower come the kyng of Armenie. & ther wer drynched a C lxxxM. in the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of reme. Ptholomeꝰ Alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos kyng ī Egipt In his tyme wos borne Lureciꝰ a poeyd the wich aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward wos mad for luffe of women & ſlew hym ſelf Ptholomeꝰ ſon to Cleopatre regned aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   whom Saluſtiꝰ the nobull writer of hiſtories wos borne Ptholomeꝰ dioniſiꝰ wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this man And ī his tyme virgyll and Oracius wer borne.
            
            
               Anno mūdi vM C xxx iiij. Et an̄ xp̄i natītatē 
                  Cv.
               IAcob natural fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to Ioſeph of the lyne of criſt is reherſit in Luke and Mathe: And litell of hym is had īſcriptur Alexandra wyfe to Alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos biſſhop ī the Iuri ix yer

And ſhe did mych tyrannyde. all yef ſhe wos made biſſhop bi hir ſenyt holy relegiō. & Hircanū hir ſon ſhe ꝓmotit to the biſſhoprik & ſhe ordant yt he ſhuld regne aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hir ¶This womā ī ye line of the byſſhoppis is put for the cowntyng of the yeres. not at ſhe vſed the office of a biſſhop: for it wos not lefull to hir. Hircanꝰ ſon to Alexandra regned xxxiij yere. This Hircanꝰ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther deceſſe of his mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſuccedit ī the kyngdom. In the wich he had lytill ꝓſperite for ꝑcialite of the pepull. for anōe he wos owercumē 
                  and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward he wos reſtored thurgh the help of the Arabees. & then he was made trubutari to the romans. &̄ ſo he was ī perſe a lityll tyme. bot not ī the name of kyng. at the laſt he died wricchydly for he wos begyled thurgh the fraude of Partho
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . the wich antigonus hyered ayenes hym. vide plene mrm̄ hiſtori ¶The hereci of the Pharaſeys a bowt this tyme began: And emong them war iij. ſektis in the Iuri Pharaſey Saducey &̄ Eſſey all thes wer deuided fro the cōmyn vſe of the Iues. &̄ wer īſeckt wt mōy errours. for they ſayed that they wer holier thē other men for they leued ſtratlyer thē other men did. vide plus alias.
               Virgill the moſt excelēt of poetis wos magnified thys tyme &̄ meruelus thinges he did And emong other when that Neopol̄ wos vexit with dethly payn of myghty wormys. virgill keſt an worme made of gold in to a ponde or a water and it lay a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn ſeſon ther. And when it was take vp ī to the toun all the cite was full of wormys. & till the worme of gold was put ī to the water ayene. they had īfinite wormys: and whē it was ī the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   all the wormys went ther way ¶Alſo it is wreten ī the croniclis of Rome that virgill by conyng cōdēſit or thicked the ayre ſo that he walled his gardyn with the ayr. &̄ he made a brige of the ayr bi the wich he mygh paſe eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   tyme yt he lyſt: alſo he aſkyd marcellū Neopolicanū neueu vn to the Emꝑour yf he wold haue a bride taght to kill all birdes: or a fle taght to driue all fleys out of the

cite And this Marcell ſhewed this to the Emprour. and he deſyrid to teche a fle to kyll all fleys. for the comyn pepull wer ſoor auexed with fleys. and mony other meruellis he did. vide mrm̄ radulfū 
                  ceſtern. Oracius Flaccꝰ & Saluſtius Criſpꝰ hiſtoricꝰ wer this tyme Quītus Cipio Gaius Luciꝰ this tyme war cōſules at rome Pompeꝰ Marcꝰ Craſſus and Iuliꝰ Ceſar this tī wor dictats at rome. for os it is ſayd afor ther wos mōi dygnites ī rome of the wych ſū dureth on yere. ſū ij. yere And emong all the dignites the Dictators excedit. for itduret vyer Bot whē the comyn pepull & ye lordſhipis of rome encreſing wer made iij. dictators And this tyme wos Pompeꝰ Iuliꝰ & Marcus Craſſꝰ dictators And becauſe Pompeꝰ wos of gret honour and aged he boed at rome to kepe the comyn pepull of Rome. Marcꝰ craſſꝰ wos ſend to ſubdu &̄ fight wt the regiō of Perthꝰ & thurgh treſō he wos taken & ſlayn Iuliꝰ ceſar wos ſend to ye weſt part of the world to ſubdu them. and he had wt hym vij. legions of pepull and whē that he had ſubduit Lūberdi & Fraunce his v. yere wer ſpendid the wich wer aſſyngned te him &̄ no lōger. Ther bi his own autorite he toke other v. yere on hym: ī the wych he ſubduid Caſſibolon the kyng of Bretan and the fraunche men that rebeled ayenes hym This ſame Iulius aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he had cōquered thes cūtreys. vn to rome he roed ayene for to be reſſaued with certayn worſhip as cōquerours wor be foor hym. bot it wos denied hym: and alſo the entre of the cite. by īſtigacion of a lord called Pompay. Wherfor this Iulius ceſar wos a noyed and with fors of myght entyred the cite. &̄ robbed the comyn treſour. And led it with hym. and deꝑted it emong the v. legiones that wer his 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uandes. Then went he in to Spayn to fight ayen this Pompoy: for pompay had the gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nans of cartago. bot aftar that iornay ī Itali pompay & he counterd to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in the wich batell pompay fled vn to the kyng of Egipt: and that ſame kīg for ſpeciall luffe that he had vn to this Iuliꝰ ceſar. ſmot of pompays hed

and ſend it vn to Iulius ceſar. yet for all the enmyte that was be twix thes two. Iulius weppid when that he ſaw this pōpayes heed. This Iulius was excedyng in witte a foor other men and he fought in batell lij. tymes. this man aloyn excedit Marcus craſſus the wich is ſayed to haue foughten xxxix. tymes Thys man toke fyrſt the empire of Rome a pon him when Pompay & other nobull men of the romans wor ſlayn. And at the laſt the v. yere of his Empire this iuliꝰ ceſar the ruler of all this world was ſlayn in the counſell houſe thurgh treſon of his lordis.
               Cathon the moſt named Pheloſopher ſeyng Iulis ceſar haue the victori whom he fauort not. at a toune called vticam ſlew hī ſelfe. iuxta illud ¶Mauult cato mari: quam deroget vrbis honori. Bot for that after auguſtyn he wos not excuſed of ſyn ¶This time the Iuri wos trebutori to the romās for ꝑcialyte of ij. bretheren. s. Ariſtobolus and Ercanus bothe of them for enuy of odirkeſt them to the Romans that they myght regne. ¶This tyme iij ſonnes appered in heuyn toward the eſt parte of the world the wich be lytill and lytyll wer brought in to on body A gret ſigne it wos. that Affrica. Aſia &̄ Europa ſhuld be brought in to on Monarch. and that the lordſhip of Anthom the ſenetour and Lucus Antonij ſhuld turne in to on lordſhip Marcus Cicerio Tulyus the moſt excelent retricion wos conſull of Rome this tyme.
            
            
               ¶How that the Bretons graunted vn to Caſſibolan that wos Ludd brother the land. In whos tyme iulyus ceſar come twyes for to conquere the lond of bretan:
               AFter the deth of kyng Lud regned his brother Caſſibolon and become a good man and mych belowed of his bretōs ſo that for his goodnes and curteſie they graunted hym the reame for euermore to hym and to his ayres. And the kyng of his goodnes let noriſch worthely bothe the ſonnys that wos Ludis his brother: and after made the eldeſt ſon erle of Cornwaill &̄
                  
the yongeſt ſon he made erle of London And while this kyng caſſibulon regned come Iulius ceſar that wos Emprour of Rome ī to this land wt a pouer of romans and wold haue had thys land thurgh ſtrength: but Caſſibalon ouer come hym ī batell thurgh helpe of the bretons and drofe hym out of this land and he went ayen to rome and aſſemled a gret pouer an other tyme and come ayene in to this land for to gif batell to Caſſibalan bot he wos diſcomfitied thurgh ſtrenght of the britons and thurgh helpe of the erle of cornwaill and the erle of London his brother and thurgh help of Gudian kyng of ſcotland and corbond kyng the kyng of north walles and of Bretaill kyng of ſouthwales: &̄ in thys batell wos ſlayn Nennon that wos caſſibolams brother wherfor he made moch ſorow And ſo went Iulius ceſar out of this land with a few of Romans that were left on lyue And tho Caſſibalan went ayene to Londō & made a feſt vn to all his folke that tho hym had holpen and when that this feſt was done. ther euery man went in to his own cuntre.
            
            
               ¶Of the debate that wos bitwix caſſibolom an the Erle of Londō & of the truage that was paied to Rome.
               
                  ANd after it befell thus vpon a day yt the gentilmen of ye kynges houſhold and gentilmē of ye Erles houſhold of l̄ondon after mete went in fere for to play and thurgh debate that aroſe emong them: Enelyn that wos the erles coſen of London kyiled Irenglas that wos ye kynges coſin wherfor the kyng ſwore that Enelyn ſhold be honged bot the Erle of London yt was Enelyns lord wold not ſuffre hym wherfor the kyng was gretly vexid and wroth towarde the Erle and thought him to deſtru & preualy the Erle ſēt lettres to Iulius ceſar yt he ſhold cum ī to this land for to helpe hī & hī a venge vpon the kīg &̄ he wold help hym with all his myght And when that the Emprour herd this tidyngꝭ: he was full glad &̄ ordeyned a ſtrōg pouer and come a yene the thrid tyme in to this land: and the Erle of London helpe

hym with vijM. men and at the thrid tyme was Caſſibalon ouer comen and diſcomfited and made pees to the Emprour for iijM. ponde of ſyluer yeldyng by yere for truage for this land for euer more. And then half a yere after paſſed the Emprour weent vn to rome and the erle of London with hym for he durſt not abid in this land. and after Caſſibolan regned xvij. yere in pees & tho he died the xvij. yere of his regne and lieth at yorke.
            
            
               ¶How that the lordis off the land after the deth of Caſſibolan and for encheſon that he had no heir made Andragen kyng
               AFter the deth of Caſſibolon for as myche as he had none heir of his lefull body begottyn: the lordes of the lond bi ye comyns aſent crouned Andragen Erle of Cornwaill and made hym kyng and he regned well and worthely and he wos a good man and well gouerned the lond and when he had regned viij. yere then he died and lieth at London.
            
            
               Circa annū mūdi vM.C.lix. Et xp̄i natiuitatē xl.
               IOſeph of the lyne of criſt abowt this tyme wos borne and after wos huſband vn to our lady Antigonus was Byſſhope this tyme in the Iuri. This Antigonus was ſon vn to Ariſtoboly. and on euery ſide he was fals. for he obeyed not to the Romans and a gret plage he brouaht vn to the land for to deſtruy Hircanus his vnkyll that he mygh regne kyng And ſo Hircanuu was expulſed. and Falelus wos kylled· and Herod wos flemyd. bot whē Herod come vn te Rome and told to the Senetours all thes thynges. The Emprour creatit hī kyng ſēdīg with hī an hoſt the wich toke ieruſalem. And Antigonum the Byſſhope taken led to Anthony the ſenetour the wich made hym ſekyr. And ſo wos Herod confirmed in to his kīgdō. &̄ he a ſtrang regned on the iues. And ſo the kīgdō of the iues ſeeſyd as Iacob had ſaid. Titꝰ liuiꝰ hiſtoricꝰ and
                  
Ouidius wer this tyme. Incipiūt imꝑatores auguſti 
                     •
                  et dictus eſt Auguſtus quia augebat populū.
               OCtauian wos Emꝑour of rome lvij. yere vi. monethes and x. dayes. This Octauian Neuew to Iuly wen he wos a yonge man toke the Empire vpon hym. His florichyng youth he ſpend in were .vM. batels he did. And chortly aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   mony batels he brought all the world in to on monarche: This mā had no felow: And in his dayes pees was ī all the world thurgh the prouiſion of the veray god: that the temporall pees myght glorify the Natiuite of our ſauyour criſt iheſu. This Octauian wos the fayreſt man that myght be. and hegh in witt: the moſt fortunate in all thynges: and he lakked not the vice of his fleſhly luſt This man made all the world to be meſured. and the .lij. yere of his regne wos our lord Iheſu criſt borne the ſauer of this world: the wich granteth eternall pees to his louery ¶Hic nota ſecund ieroīmū. that Anna and Emeria wer ſiſtirs. and of Emeria wos borne Elezabeth mother to Iohn̄ baptiſte: & ſhe wos fy
                     •
                  ſt wedded to Iochym of whom ſhe toke Mari mother of criſt ¶The ſecūd houſbond wos Cleaphe: & he gat on hir Maria Cleaphe the wich wos wedded to Alphe. of whom procedid Iamys the leſſe Symon Cananeus. Iudas Taddeus &̄ ioſeph the wich is called Barſabas ¶The thrid tyme anna wos wedded to Salome. of whom ſhe toke Mari ſalome. the wich was weddid to Zebedi. &̄ of them cō iamis the more and iohn̄ the Euāgeliſt. the firſt mari wedded ioſeph brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to Cleaphe a fore ſayd. ¶Thys tyme Sibilla tiburtina ꝓpheſied of criſt And ſayed to the Emꝑour auguſt that he ſhold not trow that he was god aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the fulychnes of the panyms. And ther ſhe ſhewed hym a fayr virgyn in heuyn holdyng a chyld in hir armys & ſayed to hī: This chyld is gret thē tho. & therfor do hī worſhipe: ¶The

                  Monch of Rome a bowt this time mightili encreſed And whē it wos ſo that bi all the world in diuerſe ꝓuynſis batiles wer raſed ſodanli all men meruellyng. they werſeſid: & put them holly to the prince of rome. that opynly it myght be ſhewed: that ſych a vniuerſall peeſe come neuer by labur of batell. bot of the power of the veray god. That in his Natiuite peeſe ſhuld regne in all the world Herod Aſcolonita wos kyng ī the Iuri xxxvij yere This Herod ydumeus wos the fyrſt ſtrang kyng that regned on the Iues: The maiſter ī hiſtoriis ſayes he wos a nobull mā and faythfull in the begynnyng. and in all thyng he had hym nobully. He wos veray gentyll vn to the romans and to the pepil that louyd peeſe. And in his old age: when he wold awr mekyll pleeſe the Romans. And herd of the byrth of criſt. dredyng to be expulſit of his kyndoom as a ſtranger wrycchitly he fell and kylled the Innoſentis and diuerſe of his own chylder. And at the laſt wos hatfull to all pepull. and fell ſeeke and died wretchydly ¶Mari the mother of criſt was borne a foor ethe Natiuite of criſt. xvi yere. or ther a bowte.
            
            
               ¶Of Kymbalyn that wos Androgeus ſon a good man and well gouerned the lond of Bretan.
               AFter the deth of Androgen regned Kymbalin his ſon yt wos a good man and well gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned the lond in moch ꝓſperite and pees all his lyfes tyme and in his tyme wos borne Iheſu criſt our ſauyour of that ſwete virgin Marie This kyng Kymbalin had ij. ſonnys Guidar & Armoger good kynghtes and worthy and when this kyng Kymbalyn had rogned xxij. yere then he died and lieth at London.
            
         
         
            
            
               Xp̄s natꝰ ē ex virgine maria. ano mūdi vM C lxxx xviij.
               IN the begynnyng of the xlij. yere of Octauian the Emperour the wich be gan to regne in marrhe. And the xxxi. yere of Herod. vijC li yere after that rome was belded The ſext moneth from the conſauyng of Iohn̄ Baptiſt the viij. kalend of Aprill. The ſext fery. at Nazareth of galalee of the virgin Mari wos ꝯſaued criſt our ſaueour. & the ſame yere was borne.
               
                  
                     Xp̄s natus eſt
                     Here beginnith the ſexte aage during to the ende of the world
                  And heir begyneth at Criſtes natiuite the ſext age duryng vn 
to the finall iugement of our lord god. hauyng yeres as mony as our lord knaweth ¶When yt our lord Iheſu criſt wos borne a well of oylle ſprang be yonde Tybur by Rome: and ran all the day ¶The goldyn ymage fell the wich Romalus had made: and put it in his palas: ſayng this ymage ſhall not fall vntil a mayd beyr a chyld: ¶When Herod diſſpoſed hym to kyll the chylder of iſraell. He was commanded by the letter of the Emperour to cum vn to rome. to onſwer to the accuſaſion of his childir Alexiū and Ariſtoboli ¶And ther wer iij. herodes gretli ſpaken of: for ther yll dedis. The fyrſt wos callid aſcolonita. And vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this man was borne criſt: and the chylder of iſraell wer ſlayn. The ſecund wos called Antipas. ſon to the fyrſt Herod. vnder whom Iohn̄ baptyſt wos hedit. and Criſt ſuffyrd deth.
               
                  And thee thred wos called Agrippa: ſone to ariſtoboly ſone

to the fyrſt Herod: the wich kylled Iamys and preſenyd Peter ¶The fyrſt Herod when he ſaw his ſonnys Alexium: and ariſtobolem thurgh the pretens of his letter by the Emperour ſend. ſtriue for the ſucceſſion off his kyngdom. He diſpoſed and made Antipatron that wos hys fyrſt be goten ſō to be bi for them. and when they wer talkīg of the deth of ther fadir. he keſt thē away. & they went to the Emprour to complayn of the wrong of ther fadre ¶And in thee meyn tyme the iij. kynges of Colan come by Herod vn to Ieruſalem. And when that they come not a yene by hym. he thought that they war aſſhamed for to cum ayene by hym for be cauſe that they wer deſſaued and that they fond not the chyld as he trowed. Therfor in the meynſeſon he ſeſſed to kyll the chyldyr off iſraell. And than he went vn to Rome for thee citacion of the Emperour: and he toke his way by the cite of Tarſum. wher he brent the ſhyppes in the wich the iij. kynges of Colan ſhuld haue ſailed in to ther own cuntre. ¶Then aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   a yere and certayn dayes: this Herod come fro rome a yen
                     •
                  e. acorded with his ſonnis. and for the confirmacion of his kindō he wos made much boldyr. And then he kylled all the chyldir of Bethelem that wer of ij. yere of age and vndir· yt had ſpace of on nyght of aage. and emong thes was ther oon of his own chylder. And Ariſtobolus and Alexiū wer had ſuſpeckyt. In ſo mych as they promyſed a barbour a gret reward that he ſhuld take an
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ut ther faders throte when that he did hym ſhaue. And when this Herod herd this he was greued: & ther he kylled bothee his ſonnys. and herod agrippa his ſon. he ordand to be kīg. wher foor Antipat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his holdeſt ſon wos a bout for to puſyn hys fadre the wich Herod agrippa vndyr ſtoed: and preſenit ther hys brother the wich the Emprour herd and ſayed that he had leueyr be an hog off Herodes then for tyll be on of his ſonnys. For hys hoggys he ſporeth. and his ſonnys he kyllis. And when thatt

Herod wos lxx. yere off age He wos ſtrikyn with a gret ſekenes in his hondes and in his feit and ī his mēbres that no leche myght cū to hym for ſtynke and ſo died So Antipater his ſune in priſon herd tell this: and ioyed gretly. And therfor that cauſe he wos ſlayn ¶Then ſtroffe Archelaꝰ an Herodes for the ſucceſcion of the fyrſt Herod: a fore the Emꝑour The Emperour ther thurgh conſell of the ſenetours: the half of the iuri & idumya gaffe to Archelaꝰ. vndir name of a tetrarche. The other partte he deuided ī to too: Galali he yaf to herod antippe. And Ituriā and Traconitidē he yaf to Philippe herods brether ¶And that ſame yere criſt come frō Egippt: &̄ Archelaꝰ was accuſed mony tymes of the iues: and was exiled ī to viēnam ī to fraunce. & in that place wer ſet iiij: tetrarches to the repreuyng of the īſtabulnes of the Iues ¶And yt ſame yer Octouiā the emꝑour died
            
            
               Anno Criſty xij.
               IHeſus criſt at xij. yere of age herd the doctors ī the tēpull Our lord ihū criſt at xxx yere of age was baptiſed. Iheſu criſt the lord of all thynges 
                     INRI. Crux xp̄i.
                   at xxxiij yere of age: and iij. monethes dyed for his ſeruandes: Anninus Rufus wos Byſſhop ī ye Iury a bowt this tyme Valerius graccꝰ wos after hym .xi: yere: this man opynly ſold the biſſhopryke: and he that moſt yaf had it: And ſo ther wos mony ī a litell while. Poncius Pilatus wos Iuge &̄ proctur ī the iuri vnder the Emꝑour &̄ vndyr this man: Iohn̄ thee baptiſt be gan for to preche ¶And our lord ſuffered deth: the wich he dampned to deth vn rightwiſly for dreed of the Emꝑour

Tyrus a certayn kyng gat a child on Pila a poer mās doughter the wich mā heght Atus & this child of his mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   name & his belſer put to gedir wos called Pilatus This pilatꝰ ye iiij. yere of his age wos ſend to his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wich kyng of his lefull wyffe had gotten a child euyn of age with pilate. And becauſe this lefull goten child as they ꝓceded in age excedit this baſterd pilatꝰ 
                     •
                  he was full of enuy & kyllid his brother: the lefull getyn child Wherfor his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſend hym to Rome for plege for his tribute yt he payed vn to rome. intendyng he wold neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   redeme hym ¶In the wich tyme the kynges ſon of fraunce wos pleage for his tribute. the wich excedid hym in ſtrengthe & cheualri alſo he kylled hym. Therfor the romans ſend Pilate as a ꝓphetabull man for the commyn well. to the Ile of ponto. to taam the curſſed pepull the wich kylled eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y Iuge that come to them. And he that curſed man gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned that vnhappy pepull. what with thretyng and with ꝓmys and wt law. and with yeftes that none of them durſt contrary to his pleſour wherfor he was called pilat of ponto ¶Herod antipa yong in his conu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſacions. with yeftes and meſſīgers drew hym to hym: And made hym prince of the Iure vndir hym And this tyme pilat gedered mych money: And Herod not knawyng he went to rome. that he mygit reſ
                     •
                  ue of the Emꝑour yt herod had yefen hym. Wherfor Herod and Pilat wer enmys to gedre. vn to the paſſion of our lord. when that pilat ſend Iheſus criſt vn to herod clothed in a white cloth then they wer made frendys. Ouidius Naſo in ponto a bout this tyme died the .iiij. yere of his exile. Tibirius this tyme wos emꝑour at rome &̄ he regned xxiij yere. And he leued ī the yere that our lord iheſu criſt died and ſūwhat after. This man was in all his werkes gretly a viſed. that ther ſhuld be no thyng ſodenli done. wyſſe in wer ſtudious in bokis. fayr of ſpech. frech in witt Saue he wold oft tyme feyn hym ſelfe to do thyngis that he wold not wer done of od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ¶This emꝑour vndir ſtode and traſted in criſt &̄ worſhio
                     ••
                  d

hym for god. Sum men ſaieth at the laſt he wos cruell a yenes pepull. bot it wos a gret reſon of pety that he was eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   gracius to his ſubiectis & poer men. And he had pees all his dayes. &̄ all pepull that ſaied ayeneſt criſtyn folke with out ony mercy he deſtrued And he exiled Pilat for euer. then he deceſſed and a wors ſuccedid hym. After Euſibe it is wretin our lord at xxx. yere of his age choſe his xij. apoſtilis. the wich made our cred yt is our beleue. And they made hit aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the reſureccion of criſt: and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the holy goſt was ſend vn to them. when thei had choſin Mathia the a poſtill and ich on of them made aꝑte as it is ſhewed heir aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ¶And this mathia wos choſyn be twix ye day of the aſcenſion and witſonday in the place of Iudas ſcarioch ye tratur of the wich iudes ī an hiſtori is thꝰ red ¶Ther was a certayn man ī ieruſalem yt heyght Rubē and after ſent Ierom he was of the tribe of Yſachar. and his wyfe het Ciborea: the wich on a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tā night whē he wold luſtili knaw his wife. ſhe dremed yt ſhe ſhuld bere a child of myſchef & yt child ſhuld be a t̄t
                     
                        
                     
                     ur
                   to his kīg & to all the peple of yt regiō. &̄ when ye chyld wos borne & called iudas. his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & his mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   abhorrit as well to kill ther child as to nuryſh a trator to the kyng and all his pepull. Therfor they put hym in to a panyer or a leep in to the ſee. And he floyd to the ile of Scaryoth wher the lady of that place had no child by hir houſband. & ſhe fened hir to be with child bot ſhe faled. And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in a lityll ſeſon the ſame lady & quene cōſaued a child of hir huſbond. &̄ when that he wos of age. iudas mony tymes angred him &̄ cauſed hī to wepe ye wich ye quene ſawe. And bet iudas mōy tymes. & after ſhe knawlech that iudas wos not the kynges ſon ne hers. wherfor iudas kyllid the kyngꝭ ſon. & he dred the payn of the law. &̄ fled wt c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tan exiles to Ieruſalem. &̄ when he come ther he gat hym in to Pilates couurt that wos iuge. And becauſe that oo curſed mā drew to an other therfor he drew to pilate. &̄ ſtoid gretly in hys fauoure. And vpon a certan day when pilat lokyt owt of hys

pales ī to an orcherd of a mans that wos called Rubē the wych wos verey fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to Iudas Pilat deſired to haue appuls: & iudas went to gedre apuls & ruben ran to iudas for to lette hym becauſe he toke his appuls wt out ony leefe: and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt they had chyed. this iudas ſmot his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   on the heed wt a ſton &̄ kylled him. and iudas fled a way ſecretly aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt deed. bot is wos ſaied yt ruben died ſodenly: Then Pilat yaf to Iudas all ye goodis yt Rubē had & Ciboria Rubēs wife yt was mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to Iudas. And he delt not curtaſly with hyr as a man ſhuld do wt his wiffe: and for yt ſhe wepid & weiled for ſhe had put hir ſon to the ſee: & yt ſhe was maried a yeneſt hir will. it was ꝑſaued that iudas had kylled his own fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & weddie his own moder: Then Ciboria his mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ wife meuyd hī to leef his ſyn. And then he fol
                     •
                  ed criſt. & he for gafe him his ſinnys. &̄ made him his proctor &̄ a poſtel. and how fals he wos to criſt it nedith not to reherſſe. And that ſame yere Mathew wos choſin &̄ the holy goſt wos ſend ī to them as is ſaid afor The apoſtils or they wer ſparpild ī to all the world they gedyrd them to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ī to Ieruſalem. &̄ made the credo heir foloyng that is our belefe.
               
                  
                     Petrꝰ
                     Credo ī deū patrē omnipotētē creatorem celi et terre
                     Andreas
                     Et in iheſum xp̄m filium eius vnicū dominū nrm̄
                     
                     Iohānes
                     Qui cōceptus eſt de ſpiritu ſc̄o natꝰ ex maria virgine
                     Iacobus
                     Paſſus ſub pōcio pilato crufixꝰ mortuus et ſepultus
                     Thōas
                     Deſcendit ad īferna tercia die reſurexit a mortuis
                     Iacobꝰ
                     Aſcendit ad celos ſedet ad dexterā dei ptīs omnipotentis
                     Philippꝰ
                     Inde vēturus eſt. iudicare viuos et motuos
                     Bartholoꝰ
                     Credo in ſpiritum ſanctum.
                     Matheꝰ
                     Sanctam eccleſiam catholicam.
                     Symon
                     Sanctorum commumonem remiſſionem peccatorum.
                     Iudas
                     Carnis reſureccionem
                     Mathias
                     Et vitam eteernam 
                     Amen.
                  
               
               
                  IHeſu criſt our ſaiueour roos from deth to lyue and ſaied to his diſcipules all the power in heuen and erth is geuyn vn to me. And go ye thus ī to al the world and preche and teche wn to eueri creatur. And I ſhall be with yow to the end of thee world ¶Her he choſe him lxxij diſcipules. And he had xij apoſtolis the wich he ſend ī to al the world to p̄che. ne it is not red that ther war mo ord
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  is emong the diſcipuls of criſt. Of whom thee preſtys and byſſhoppis in the chirche of god yit kepe the forme. for to the appoſtill: the biſſhoppis ſuccede. and to the diſcipuls preſtis. to the wich ij. ordirs all the chyrche is geuen as a godly gerarche. vt patet in decreto Damaſie pape.
               
                  
                     
                        Iohēs 
wrot in Aſia ī greke lāgage In principio erat verbum etcc.
                     
                     
                        Lucas
wrot ī grecia in greke lāgage Fuit in diebus herodis regis iude ſac
                           
                              
                           
                           er
                        dos etc
                     
                     
                        Marcus
wrot ī ytalia bot ī greke langage. Initiū euāgelii ihū criſti etcc
                     
                     
                        Matheꝰ
wrot in the Iuri ī hebru langage. Liber gen
                           
                              
                           
                           er
                        acōis iheſu criſti &c
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶Her begyneth the ordir of popys of Rome: and continuys as the lyne of criſt did afoor. for ī th
                     •
                   god l
                     •
                  ſt hi
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . Anno domini xxxiiij.
               PEtur a Iue the fyrſt pope wos a bliſſed man and a glorius poſtyll of criſt: he wos heed of the chyrche after Ierom xxxvij yere. And he held hiſ biſſhoprik in the eſt v. yere and ſaid maſſe he made our lord and alone ſaid the pater noſter ¶Thē after he come to Anthiociam. and ther he a boed vij yere techyng the way of trowth. and Symon magus he flemed a way. that ſeſon he prechid to the pepull that wer circumſiſit the wych wer in pōto of galati. Capadecia. Aſia Bithinia ¶Thē he herd yt Symon magus deludit the romans. thurgh the lufe of the faith he come to Rome in the iiij yere. of Claudius the emprour. and ther he preched the word of god. and ſhewd the falſed of Symon magus. and turned mony aman to the fayth. Then he ſend his prechours bi diuerſe prouynſe: by whom criſtyn relegion was myghtyly encreſed ¶He ordand the feſt of lentyn a fore eſtyr. and the aduent. and the emyring dayes to be faſtid of all criſtē pepull in to the merour of the friſt and the ſecund comynge of our lord. Then when he had be pope at Rome xxv yere & vij moneths & viij dayds: he was ſlayn of Nero. eiꝰ plurima oꝑa vide actibꝰ apoſtolo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . Gayus this tyme wos Emprour at rome and regned iij. yere and x monethes This Gayus wos full vicius in leuyng for ij of his own ſyſtres he myſuſed and on of them hee gat a doughter. wich child he ſet be twix the keis of Iupit
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in the tempull. and fened afterward that iupat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had be gettyn hyr wherfoor he did cry thurgh the cuntre that all men ſhuld worſhyp hyr as a goddeſſe ¶This mon alſo made an ymage like hym ſelf and ſend it to oon Patronie preſedent at ieruſalem vndir the romans cōmaundyng hym that he ſhuld compell the Iues to doo worſhip therto. And for thes enormytes and mony other owr lord ſuffyrd hym to be ſlayn at Rome in his own pales.
            
            
               
               ¶Of kyng Gynder that was kymbalin ſon that wold nott pay the treuage to Rome for the land that Caſſibalon had granted and how he wos ſlayn of a romayn
               ANd after the deth of this Kymbalin regned Gynder hys ſun a good man and a worthe and wos of ſo hygh hert yt he wold not pay to Rome that tribute that kyng Caſſibalon had graunted vn to Iulius Ceſar: wherfor the Emprour that wos tho that wos called Claudius ceſar: wos ſore annoyed and ordāt a gret power of remans and com in to this land for to conquere the tribute thurgh ſtrength and for to haue it on the kyng: but this kyng Gynder and Armager his brether aſſembled and gedired a gret hoſt yfere of Britons and yaf bataell to the Emprour Claudius and kylled of the romans gret plente: The emprour had afterward one that wos called Hamon that ſaw ther pepull theer whaerfaſt ſlayn and preuali keſt a way his own armes and toke the armes of a d
                     •
                  ed breton and armed him with his armuro and come in to the batell to the kyng: and ſayed in this maner Syr be ye good of hert for goddis loue for the romans that be your enmys anone ſhall be ſlayn and diſcumfited euerychon: &̄ the kyng yaf no kepe vn to his wordes ne his ſpeche for becauſe of the armes yt he had vpon hym and wened it had be a Briton but the tratour eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   held hym next the kyng: and preualy vnder the ſhulders of his armes he ſmot the kyng wherfor he was deid and fell doune to the erthe: Whan Armag
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſaw his brother deid he caſte away his armes and toke to hym his brothers armes and come in to the botaill among the Britons & bad them hertely for to fight and faſt lay a doune the Romans: and for the armes they wened it had be kyng Gynd that afore wos ſlayn that they wyſt not: then begone the Britans ferſly for to fight and kyld the romans ſo at the laſt the Emprour for ſoke the felde &̄ flede as faſt os he myght with his folke in to wyncheſtre and the fals traitour Hamon that had ſlayn the kyng faſt anone gan for to

fle with all the haſt that he myght and Armager the kynges brother purſued him full ferſly with a fers hert and drofe hym vn to a water and ther he toke hym: and anone ſmot of bothe hand &̄ hede and feet and hewed the body all to peces and tho let caſt him in to the water wherfor that water was called Hamanus hauen and afterward ther was made a fayr toune that yet ſtandeth yt is called ſouthamton And afterward Armager went to Wyncheſtre for to ſeke Claudius ceſar the Emprour of Rome and ther Armager hym toke: and Claudius the emprour thurgh concel of his romans that with him left a lyue made pees with armager in this maner as ye ſhall here that is to ſay how that Claudius the Emprour ſhuld yeue vn to armager Gennen his fair doughter for to haue to wife ſo that this land fro that tyme forward ſhuld be in the empreurs poer of rome uppon ſuche conueant that neuer afterward no Emprour of Rome ſhuld take none other tribute of this land bot only feaulte and they wer acorded And vpon this conand Claudius ceſar ſent to reme for his doughter Gennen and when ſhe wos comen claudiꝰ ceſar yaf hir to Armager to wife and armag
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſpouſed hir at london with mych ſolempnite &̄ myrth & tho was Armager crouned & made kīg of Britan
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Armager in whoſe tyme ſent Petre preched in Antiochie with other apoſtoles in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe cuntreis.
               THis Armager regned well and worthely and the lond gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned: and Claudius ceſar in remembrans of this acord and for reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ence and honour of his dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   made in this lond a fair toune and a caſtell and let call the toune after his name Clauceſtren that now is called Glouceſtre and when this wos all done the Emprour toke his leue and tho went to Rome and Armager tho was kyng and gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned the lond well and nobely all his lifes tyme and this Armag
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   gat a ſon of his wife thatt wos called Weſtmer &̄ whiles that this Armager regned ſent Petre preched in Antioche and ther he made a nobull chyrche in

the wich he ſat fyrſt in his chair and ther he dwelled vij. yere &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he went to Rome and was made pope till that Nero the Emprour let martir him: and tho preched opanly all the appoſteles in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe landes the right fayeth And when Armager had regned xxiiij. yere he died and lieth at london.
            
            
               ¶How kyng weſtmer yaf to Berynger an yland forlet and ther this berynger made the toun of Berewike.
               
                  ANd after this Armager regned his ſon Weſtmer that wos a good man &̄ a worthy of body & well gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned the land. Hit befell ſo that tydyng come to him on a day that the king Rodrik of Gaſcoine was come in to this land with a houge hoſt of pepull and wos duellyng in ſtaynſmore And when kyng weſtmer herd tho tydynges he let aſſemble an houge hoſt of britans and come to the kyng Rodrik & yaf hym batall &̄ kyng weſtmer kylled rodrik with his own hondes in playn batall And whē kyng rodrikes men ſaw that ther lord wos deid they yolden them all to the kyng weſtmer &̄ bicome his men for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more &̄ he yaf them a cōtre that wos forleten wher ī they myght duell &̄ thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they wēt &̄ duelled ther all ther lifes tyme &̄ ixC men ther were of them &̄ no mo left at that batell. Ther gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ner and prince wos called beringer and a nō he began a toun yt they myght ther ī duell & haue reſoorte and let call the toune Birewyke vpō twede and ther they duelled & become riche but they had no women amonges them &̄ the bretons wold not yef ther doughtres to theſtrangers wherfor they went ower ſee in to Irland and brought with them women and ther they them ſpouſed but the men koud nat vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſtond ther langage ne the ſpeche of thes women &̄ therfor they ſpoken to geder as ſcottes and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward thurgh changyng tber lanhages. in all fraunce they war called tho ſcottet and ſo ſhulde that folke of that cuntre be called for euer more
            
            
               ¶How kyng Weſtmer let arere a ſtone in the entring of weſtmerland ther that he ſlew rodrik and ther he begon fyrſt houſing
               
                  
                  ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this bataill that is aboue ſaied whē Rodrik wos deid kyng weſtmer in remēbrance of his victorie let arere ther be ſydes the way a gret ſtone on hygh and yet hit ſtandeth &̄ eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  more ſhall ſtand & he let graue ī the ſtone lettres yt thꝰ ſaied The kyng weſtmer of britonne killed in this place Rodrik hys emmny ¶And this weſtmer was the fyrſt that bylded houſe & toune ī weſtmerland & at yt ſtone begīeth weſtmerlond yt weſtmer let call aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his own name ¶And whē weſtmer had ſo done he duelled all his lyfes tyme ī that contre of weſtmerlōd for he loued that cūtre more then ony other cōtre And when he had regned xxv. yere he died and lieth at Carleill.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Coill that wos weſtmer ſon that held his lond in pees all his lifes tyme.
               AFter this kyng weſtmer regned his ſon Coill a good mā. &̄ a worthi &̄ of good cōdiciōs & well gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned his lōd & off all me he had loue &̄ pees & ī his tyme wos neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cōtake debate nor were ī Britan & he regned and wos kīg in pees all his lifes tym & whē he had bene kyng xi. & ere he died an lieth at yorke.
               CLaudiꝰ wos emꝑour at rome next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Gayꝰ: &̄ he regned xiiij. yere &̄ viij. dayes This mā come ī to gret bretan now called englōd for to chalāge the tribut wich thei did deni vn to the romans &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   gret batels ther wos be twix ye emꝑour Claudiꝰ: and Armag
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   kīg of britan. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   a cordmēt made yt this Armag
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſhuld wed Claudiꝰ doughter &̄ after thes ij. ſhuld eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   life ī pees. ī tokē wher of this claudiꝰ named the cite wer they wer weddid after hī & called it Claudiceſtre: we call it Glouceſtre ¶This Claudiꝰ had iij. wifes: & on Petiua the fyrſt wyf he gat a doughter yt heyght Antōia The firſt wife deceſſed &̄ he weddit meſſalinā and gat a ſon yt height britanicꝰ &̄ octauia a dought The thrid he wedit agrippma: hauīg a ſon yt height nero Claudiꝰ wedit his doughter octauia to nero his wifes ſon: this

claudiꝰ for luf yt he had to agrippma his laſt wife he killed meſſalina his fyrſt wife. leſt ſhe ſhuld haue holp britanicꝰ hir ſon & his to the empyre. yet agrippma the laſt wife of Claudius dred leſt hir houſband wold haue proferred Britanicus and haue depoſed Nero his ſon. Therfor ſhe poyſunied hir houſband Claudius and Nero was ꝓmotit to the Empire and this ſ
                     •
                  me Nero yaf his mother ſich a reward a yene. for he poyſunied britanicū and kyld his own motber and his wife octauia. Iamys the more the apoſtil this time was ſlaī of Herod agrippa & Petre wos preſīd. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   actuū 12. ¶The body of ſent Iamys by myracull wos brought in to Galeciam of ſpayn. Nero after claudiꝰ wos emꝑour & he regned xiij. yere & vij monethis This nero wos a curſid mā &̄ made gret waſt ī the empire: he wold not fiſh bot with nettis of gold and ropis of ſylke. a gret part of the lordis off Rome he kylled. he wos enmy to no men bot to good men. he kylled his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ his wife. his mother and his maſter. he killed alſo Petre and Paule. he wold neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wer on cloth ij. timys. all his horſſe and his mulis wer ſhod wt ſylu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . And at the laſt he did ſet an gret ꝑte of Rome on fyere. ſū ſays to ſe how Troy brened. and ſum ſayeth the romans cōplayned the ſtretes wer to narow. and whē he had brent a gret part of rome. Nero ſayd ther wos ſpace to bild ther ſtretis wyd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . then the Senatours wt the cōmyn pepull com vpō him to kyll hym. and he fled by nyght ī to ſubbarbis of the Cite and hid him a mong the vines. And he hered karlys and begers cū bi hym &̄ ſayed & they wiſt wher the Emꝑour war he ſhuld neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſkape them. Nero thought it ſhuld be gret derogacion to his name & he wer ſlayn of chorlys. And on a gret ſtake he ran hī ſelf to the hert and died &̄ ther wos bereid. & dules keped his body mōy a day after. &̄ did gret hurt to the pepull. tyll by a myracull of our lord ye bodi wos fond &̄ take a way: &̄ then the dules voydet Seneca wos this tyme maſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to Nero. Iuuenalis peeta. Lucanus poeta.
               
                  Iacobꝰ ye las ye apoſtil biſſhop of ierlm̄ wos ſlaī of ye iues ye ſext yere of nero. ye euāgeliſt marcꝰ wos mart
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed firſt yer of hī
               
            
            
               Circa annū criſtti lxxiiij.
               LInus Ytalicus wos pope of Rome x. yere and iij monethis and xiij. dayes This Linus & his ſucceſſari Cletꝰ thurgh ther holy cōu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſaciō war made to myniſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the treſur of ye cherche to the pepull. Petre beyng a liue: and pet
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   attendit to pray and prechyng It is red of this Cletus that he wrot fyrſt in hys lettris Salutē et apoſtolicā bn̄diccōem ¶Afoor this tyme wer mōy a diſcipul of petre ſlayn vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Nero Galba this tyme wos emꝑour & he regned vij. monethis. This mā wos made emꝑour bi the pouer of ſpayn ī the ſame land. Nero leuyng. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye deth of Nero brought to Rome. &̄ ther wos ſlaī of amā yt come wt whete to rome. he ſmot of his heed & bore it to him yt wos emꝑour next. ſeyng all his mē &̄ nōe of them helpyng him ¶In this mānys days com the gret retriciō to rome fro ſpayn & wos fyrſt that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   taught ye ſcience opynli. his name wos Quītilian Otho regned aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym. &̄ he regned bot iij. monethes. for on vitellus yt wos preſedent of fraunce chalanged the empyre· and in Itali be tuyx thes tow wer iij: gret batels and ī ye fourth batel Otho ſaw he ſhuld be ower cūmyn. and ī gret diſpare he kiled him ſelf. Vitellus regned aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this Otho and he regned viij. moneth for he was a foloer of Nero moſt ſpeciall ī glotony. &̄ ī ſynging of fowll ſonges. and at feſtis ettyng out of meſur that he myght not kepe it. Vaſpaſianus regned nex aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him ix. yere &̄ x monethis & xij. dayes The wele gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned men of rome ſeīg the curſit ſucceſſiō of nero: ſend aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this vaſpaſian vn to Palyſtī. for ther he wos & his ſon Titꝰ wich had beſeged ieruſalē. &̄ whē he herd yt Nero was deid by whom he wos ſend vn to Ieruſalem and herd of thes curſed men regnyng at the inſtance of the wiſe men of rome not wyllely toke vpon hym the Empire. and a none as he was commyn to Rome he ower come this tyrand Otho and let

hym be draw thurgh rome. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in tybyr tyll he wos deid. and then let hym ſaile with owt ſepulture. for this the pepull deſiered ¶This man was curit of waſpes in his noſe a none as he beleued in our lord ihū. and that wos thecauſe why he went to Ieruſalem to venge criſtes deth. xxxij tymes he fought with his enmis and died the yere of grace lxxix.
            
            
               Anno domini lxxxiiij.
               CLetus amertyr wos pope xi yere. This Cletus wos a roman and gretly he loued pylgramage to ſenctis. ſayng it wos more prophet to the helth of mannys ſowle. to viſit the place that ſent Petre wos in: then to faſt ij yere. He curſed all tho men lettyng ſych pylgramech or concellers contrari therto. at the laſt he wos martired vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Damician the emprour. Titus ſon to vaſpaſianus wos emꝑour this tyme. and regned iij. yere and he a bode ſtyll at ieruſalem aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the aleccion of his fadre. and diſtrued the cite and killed ther as the ſtori ſaieth with batall & hungyr xiC.M. Iues and an C.M. he toke. and ſould xxx for a peny. be cauſe they ſold criſt for xxx penys: and brought thens althing that wos precious. and put them in his houſe at Rome wich wos called Templum pacis. bot now is that place fall down for the moſt ꝑty: and all thes gret Iuels be diſtributit to certā cherchis in Rome. ¶This Titus w
                     •
                  s ſo full of u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tu that al men louyd hym. ſo ferforth that they clepit hym the moſt delectabull of men. he wosfull liberall to all men in ſo mych that he ſaid oftī tymes: that ther ſhuld no man go fro an emꝑour with a heuy hert. bot he ſhuld ſumwhat haue of his peticion. he wold be ſori that day in the wich he had granted no man ne no benefite. when that he wos deid eueri man that wos in Rome weppyd for hym as that they had loſt ther fadre.
               Domycian brother to Titꝰ regned aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hī xiiij yere & v. monethes. fyrſt he wos eſy. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward full vnreſonabull: for mich of the ſenate wos diſtruid bi his malis. & alſo mich of his kynrad

he began the ſecund perſecucion after Nero ayenſt criſtyn men: In the wich perſecucion Iohn̄ the Euangeliſte was exiled in to Pathius after the Emprour had put him in to an tun of oyle brinnyng and hurt hym not. So thys man was not the folower of his fadir vaſpaſian ne his brother Titus. bot rather like Nero and his kynred. And for thes wicked condicions he wos ſlayn in his own palace at Rome in xxvij. yere of his age Clemens a martir wos pope ix. yere and he ſuccedid Cletus This Clemens fyrſt of ſent Petre as it is ſaied wos ordand to be ſucceſſari to hym· And for ꝑell he wold Lynū and Cletum ſhuld be popis a for him. leſt that thurgh that enſampull prelatis ſhuld ordane vndir them who ſum euer they wold. ¶This man made the lyfe of Martirs to be wreten be regions. and he made mony bokys: he ordant that a child ſh̄uld be confirmed as ſoon os it myght manerly after it was criſtyned. and at thee laſt he was martired vndir Traian.
               Nerua wos Emprour after Domician on yere and ij. monethes. and when he was choſen he meuyd the ſenat to make a law that all thyng wich Domician commandit to be keped. ſhuld be brokyn. by wich meane ſent Iohn̄ Euangeliſt wos lowſit out of his exile and ſuffred to cum ayen to Ephaſe This man did a nother thyng right commendabull. that he aſſined ſo wiſe a man as Traian wos to gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ne the pepull after hym Nota Traianus hyſpanicus was Emprour xix. xere This Traiā mony men ſayed he wos the beſt emong all the emprours bot ī on thyng alon he was vicius. in ſo mych as he for the luff of the fals goddis wos a bout to diſtruy the criſtyn fayth: iugyng in hī ſelf ſo: moſt to pleſe god. Sum men ſayth not by hym ſelf bot by other he ꝑſued criſtē fayth. &̄ ī ye end of his lyfe he did bot few to deth. ¶And al his lauuīg I ſet at noght. bot at Sent Gregori meuyd with pytte wepyng and prayed vn to owr lord god for hym yt he wold haue marci vpō hī &̄ bi his prayer haue hī out

of hell: in to wich place he was damned. And now if he be ſaued or not. agret alteracion is emong docturs. And to vs that writes croneclis is no part of our charge to determyn. Bot all the eſt part of the world babulon. Selencia. Te vtter partes of thee ynde. Germayne the ſecund after Alexander he held vndyr ¶In all thes thinges ſo peteus and ſo mekly he gydid hym: to euery man as a kyng. he wos gentyll. &̄ to no man vngētill ye wich is red of few. All his dayes he leued that he wos the moſt worthe man in all his empyre. And he thought and ſaied eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more that no man wos more vn worthy to be emprour then he.
            
            
               Anno domini .C.iiij.
               ANacletus a martir wos pope ix yere and he was a greke he monyſchyd all criſten men. that preſtes ſhuld be worſſhipped a bown all other men. ſayng that preſtys doyng ſacrifice to god ſhuld be borne out. and not vexid bot be worſhipp
                     •
                  d. and preſtys when they ſayed maſſe they ſhuld haue witnes with them an namly biſſhoppis ¶Alſo he decreid that clerkys ſhuld wer no berdys ne long haer. alſo that a Biſſhop ſhuld be conſecrityt of iij. and diuerſe other thynges at the laſt the xij yere of Traiā he wos martyred and beried by the body of ſent Petre ¶Pleuius the ſecund oratory: &̄ pheloſophur wrot mych thynges This man meuyd Traian that he ſhuld with draw the ſentens yeffen a yene criſten folke. writtī to hym that they ſhuld do no ill bot take heed to the vertu. bot that they ſhuld riſe a foor day and worſhip ther: ſecretly in the nyght.
               Evariſtus a greke and a Martir wos x. yere vij. monethes pope after Anacletus. This man ordand that man and womā ſhuld be weddit opynly. and at the ſhuld be blyſſed opynly off thee preſt and fadre and mother And he was martired thee .iij. yere off Adrian and beried by ſent Petre Alexander a Roman was Pope viij. yere and v monethes This Alexandre the moſt parte off thee Senetours he conuerted vn to our lord
                  
And he ordant that holy water ſhold be keſt in criſtyn menys howſes. and that bred to ſyng with ſhuld be made of clere bred. & yt ī a litill quantite. At the laſt he was martird vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Adrian that wos the Emprour and mony of them he conuerted to the faythe. Sixtus a Roman wos pope x. yere and iij. monethes. This man ordant ſanctus ſanctus ſanctus etc. ſhuld be ſayed in the maſſe: and at the holy thynges of the chirche ſhuld not be towched bot of myniſteris of the cherche. Alſo that the corpraxe ſhuld not be made of ſylke. bot of puere lyn cloth wouen and not died. and that a woman ſhuld not toche the holy veſſell off the awter ne the pall. ¶Alſo he ordand that if any biſſhoprik wer vacant. that no byſhope ſhuld be reſaued in to his benefice bot wt ye popis lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  is. alſo yt no maſſe ſhuld be ſayed bot on an awter. &̄ at ye laſt he wos martred. Adrianus wos Emprour xxi: yere This adrian in mony thynges is commendit: to criſtē mē other while he was graciꝰ. &̄ certayn of them that wold not do ſacrifice to the fals godes he kylled. he was a vniuſall mā almoſt in all ſciens: pees he had all his dayes bot with the Iues: &̄ mōy a law he made ¶And than he commandet that criſtyn mē ſhold not be dampned to deth bot with dew proceſſe. Ieruſalem he ſubduid a yene: &̄ prohibyt that no Iue ſhuld dwell ther in. bi no wiſſe: Criſtyn men he ſuffred ther to dwell. ayenes his will hee come to the empire. bot he gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned him veray well. When the ſenetours prayed hym to call his ſon Emprour after hym. he ſayed it is enough to me that ayeneſt my will I haue regned. whē I haue not de
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  ued. for the empire of rome ſhuld not go bi ſucceſſiō of blod bot to ſich men as deſerues it. thurgh ther merittis. mōy tymes he regnes vn vertuiſly that is a kyng borne· and vertu ſhuld cū be foor his kyngdom Euſtachius otherwyes called Placidus. and theroſpita hys wiffe and ij. of ther ſonnys▪
                  
of whom meruelus thynges be red wer martird bi ye cōmādment of Adriā. This placidꝰ wos maſter of the emꝑours knyghtes ¶Ieruſalem wos reſtorid be Adrian and made largyr: ſo yt the place wher criſt died wos with in the wallis. the wich wos with owt befoor. And this is the thrid beldyng a yene of that cite. for it wos thries deſtrued .s. of Caldeis in the tyme of Zedechie. of Anthiacus in the tyme of Machabeorum. and of Titus in the tyme of vaſpaſian.
            
            
               Anno domini .C.xliiij.
               TEleſphorus a roman wos pope xi. yere This man ordand this Angels ymne to be ſong in the maſſe .s. Gloria in excelſis deo etc. and the goſpell to be red a fore the ſakring: and on criſtynmes day iij. maſſes to be ſongne. And he ordand ther ſhuld no maſſe be ſayed a foor iij: of the cloke. and at the laſt he wos martird: and beried at Sent Petrus Ignius a greke was pope iiij: yere This man ordand that a chyld ſhuld haue a godfather and a godmother at baptim and confirmacion ¶Alſo that no Archebyſſhop exceppit the pope ſhuld condemne his ſuffrigan bot yf that the cauſe wor ſhewed in the prouynciall cōcell of biſſhoppis. thē he wos martird & beried at petrus. Anthonius Pius wos Emprour xxij. yere with hys ſonnys Aurolio and Lucio. This man was myghtyly wyſſe: a naturalli fair of ſpeche. the wich lyghtly ī on mā is not found. nota. Excedyng men in wyſdome commynly ar not fayre ſpeched ner peeſfull namely off nature. nor contrariwyes. Excedynge men in fayer ſpechee commynly ar les then wyſe. This man was meued with bothe thes properteys. Therfor mony kyngdomys the wych recedid from other Emprours wyllely to thys man turned a yene: And to criſtī mē wos nō ſo gentyll. He ſayed thurgh the enſampull of Cipio: I had leuer kepe on heyre of a man then kyll an hundreth of my enmys. And ſū mart
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s wer made

vnder hym. bot it wos made thurgh the commandement of thee Emprours a for. ¶And the criſtyn pepull wor ſo hayetfull vn to the Biſſhopis and to the preſtes of the tempull of the fals goddys: that the prouoked the Princes all way a yenes them. For they ſuppoſid that the criſten fayth ſhuld deſtruy them. ¶Therfor it wos no meruell all though ye prīce wos ilpleſed for they ſaied all ther goddis wor dules: yf lawyr Iugis purſuit criſten folke. and martired them. ¶This tyme xM: martres wor crucified in Armenia in a hegh hill called arath Pompeꝰ trogꝰ. iſto tempore hiſtorias tocius orbis a nino vſque ad octaui a
                     •
                  um deduxit.
            
            
               Anno domini .C.liiij.
               PIus italicꝰ wos Pope xi. yere & iiij. monethes and xij. dayes This man ordend the feſt of eſter euer more ſhuld be halued on the ſonday. And alſo an heritike commyng fro the ſelite of the iues ſhuld be reſ
                     •
                  ued. &̄ be baptiſit Then he wos martired and beried in Sent po
                     •••
                  s Auicetꝰ wos pope after Pi
                     •
                  s almoſt x. yere This man made mony decrees of the canon and for biſſhopis vt ī ca· violatores etc. Galienꝰ a lech getyn ī 
                  
                     •
                  gamo wos in gret fame at rome the wich not allonli exponed the bokes of ypocras bot he put mony of them to his bokes. And of this man is ſaied for his diſcrete abſtynens the wich he huſed he leued an .C.xl yere. he neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ete ne dranke his fyll. n
                     •
                   abſ
                     •
                  inē
                  ci
                     •
                   he neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   toke raw frutis: alwa
                     •
                   he had a ſweit brethe. he died a lonli thurgh age and no ſeknes Marcus Antoniꝰ the trew. &̄ Lucius Comodꝰ wer Emprours xix. yere Thes ij toke the empire after Antoni the meke. And then began ij. ēprours to regne: bot Luciꝰ comedꝰ deceſſed. and Antoni wos empror ther a lone the wich wos a victorius man and a nobyll Bot that hee made the iiij ꝑſecucion to kyll criſtyn men. This marcus wos of ſo gret ſadnes and ſtedfaſtnes that for no chawnce he loogh neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  : ne changed no cheir: nother for gladnes ne for ſorow.

¶And when he wos a childe he wos of ſich manhoed that on a certayn tyme whē he loked his treſor &̄ had not the wich he myght giffe his knyghtes &̄ his men: when he went to fight ayenes the Germans: the Sclauos &̄ Sarmatas. he wold hurt ne greue no body: bot had leu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to ſell his wifes goldyn veſſell. & hir araymēt. hir beddyng all hir riall ſtufe: thē take tax of the ſenetours or of his ꝓuynce vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym. bot he gat the victori of his enmys: and recou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed all ayene: and releſed the ꝓuyncis of ther tributis. And thos that wold ſell hym his wefes treſor ayene· he reſtored them ther monay. and thos that wold not he neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   greued them. bot the tabuls of ther dettys be twix hym and them. he briynt opynli in the marketh place and changed them at they helped hī ī his neceſſite
            
            
               ¶How kyng Lucie regned aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his fadre that was a good mā and after he become criſten.
               AFter kyng Coill regned Lucie his ſon that was a good man to god &̄ to all the pepull. he ſent to Rome to the appoſtell Eulēthre that tho was pope and ſaied that he wold become a criſten man and reſaue baptym in the name of god. and turne to the right faieth and beleue ¶Eulenthre ſent .ij. legats that wer called Pagan an other Elibayn in to this lond and baptiſed the kyng &̄ all his mayne and after went from toune to toun and baptiſed the pepull tyll al the land was baptiſed and this wos in the yere: C.lvi. after the incarnacion of our lord Ihū criſt. And this kyng Lucie made tho in this land ij. arche biſſhoppes on at Canterberi an other at Yorke and other many byſſhoppis that yet be in this lond ¶And when thes ij. legates had baptiſed all this land they ordeyned preſtys fer to baptiſe chyldren &̄ for to make the ſacrament and after they went ayene to rome &̄ the kyng dulled in his land and regned with mekyll honour xij. yere and after died and lieth at Gloceſtre.
            
            
               ¶How this lād wos lōg wt out a kīg & how britōs choſe a kīg
               
                  THis kyng Lucie had none heire of his body begoten thatt was after ward gret harme and ſorow to the land. For aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this kīg Lucis deth none of ye gret of ye lond wold ſuffre an other to be kyng but leuyd in were and debate emonges them ſelfe .l. yere with out kyng But it befell afterward yt a gret prīce come fro rome in to this land that was called Seuerie. nought for to were: bot for to ſaue the right of rome. But nerthe les he had not duelled half a yere ī this land bot that the bretons hym kylled: and when tho of rome wiſt that Seuerie wos ſo ſlaī they ſent an other gret lord in to this lond that wos called Allec yt was a ſtrong man and a myghty of body &̄ duelled ī this land long tyme & did moch ſorow to the bretons. ſo that aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for pure malece they choſen them akyng emenges them that wos cald aſtlepades & aſſemled a gret hoſt of bretons and went to London to ſeche Allec and ther they fond him and killed hym and all hys felows & one yt wos called walon defendid hym ferſely & fought long wt the bretons but at the laſt he was diſcōfited &̄ the bretōs toke him and bond hym handes & feet and caſt hym in to awater wherfor that wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   afterward was called eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  more walbroke. ¶Tho regned Aſtlepades in pees till on of his Erles yt wos called Coill made afair toune ayenes the kynges wyll and let call the toune Colcheſtre aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his own name wherfor the kīg wos full wroth & thought to deſtruy him and begon to were vpō hym &̄ brought gret pouer of mē & yaf the erle batell & the Erle defendid hym ferſly with his power: &̄ ſlew the kyng him ſelf ī that bataill &̄ tho wos Coill crowned and made kyng of this land. ¶This Coill regned and gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned the reame well and nobilli for he wos a nobull man and welbeloued among the bretons When tho of rome herd that Aſtlepades was ſlayn they wer wō
                  der glad and ſent an other gret prince of Romans that wos called Conſtance and he come to the kyng Coill for to chalengf the tribute yt wos wōt to be payed to rome. And ye kīg anſwerd wel

and wiſely and ſayed that he wold pay to rome all that right and reſon wold with full good wyll And ſo they acorded tho with good will and with out any contake and ſo bothe they dueled to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in loue ¶The kyng Coill yaf to hym his doughter Elene vn to haue hir to his ſpouſo that wos bothe fair and wiſe and good &̄ weli lettred. And this Conſtance ſpouſed hir ther with moch honour. and it befell ſune afterward that this kyng Coill dyed in the xiij. yere of his regne and lieth at colcheſtre entired.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Conſtance that wos a Roman that was choſen kyng aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the deth of coyll for as mych that hed ſpouſed Elene yt wos kyng Coill doughter
               AFter this kyng coill Conſtance was made kyng &̄ crouned for as mych that he had ſpouſed kyng coilles doughter that wos heir of the land the wich conſtance regned well &̄ wortheli gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned the land and he begat of his wife Elene a ſon that wos called conſtantine & this kīg bore trew faieth and trewly did vn to them of Rome all his life: and when he had regned xv: yer then he died and lieth at yorke
            
            
               ¶How conſtantine yt wos kīg conſtancis ſon &̄ ye ſon of ſeynt Elin gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned and ruled the land and was Emprour of rome
               AFter kyng conſtance deth regned conſtantine his ſon and the ſon of ſent Eline that fond the holy croſe in the holy land and how conſtantine become Emprour of Rome. Hit befell ſo in that tyme ther was an emprour at rome that wos a Sarzyn &̄ a tyrant thas wos called Maxence that put to deth all that beleued in god &̄ deſtruyed holy chrche by all his pouer and ſlew all criſten men that he myght fynd. And emong all other he let marter ſent Katrin & mony other criſtī pepull that had drede of deth yt fled &̄ come in to this lond to kyng conſtantine and told hym of the ſorow that Maxence did to criſtīte wherfor Conſtātine had pitte and gret ſorew made & aſſemled a gret hoſt and agret pouer and went ouer vn to Rome and ther toke the cite and kylled all

that ther wos in. that wer of myſbeleue that he myght ther fynde And tho wos he made Emprour and was a good man and gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ned hym ſo well that all londes to hym wer attendaunt for to be vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his gouernance ¶And this duell &̄ tyrant Maxence yt tyme wos in the land of Grece and herd this tydynge hee become wode and ſodanly he died and ſo he endid his lyfe when Conſtā
                  tine went from this land vn to rome he toke with hym his mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Elyne for the moch wiſdom that ſhe coude and iij. other gret lordes that he moſt loued that on was called Hoell and an other was called Taberne and the thrid Morhin and toke all his lōd to kepe vn to the Erle of Cornwaill that was called Octauian ¶And anone as this Octauian wiſt that his lord was duellyng at Rome he ſeiſed all the land in to his hand and ther wt did all his will among hygh and law and they held hym for kīg whan this tydynges come to Conſtantine the Emprour he was wonder wroth toward the erle octauian and ſent Taberne wyth xijM. men for to deſtruye the Erle for his falſenes and they ariued at porteſmouth ¶And when octauian wiſt that: he aſſē
                  led agret pouer of bretons and diſcōfited Taberne: and taberne fled thens in to Scotland and ordened ther a gret pouer and com ayene in to this land an other tyme for to yef batell to Octauiā ¶When octauian herd tell that: he aſſemled a gret power and com ayen towardes Taberne as moch as he myght ſo that thos ij. hoſtys metten to gedre vpō ſtanyſmore and ſtrongly ſmot to gedre. and tho wos octauian diſcomfited and fled thens vn to Norway and Taberne ſeyſed all the land ī to his hand tounes &̄ caſtelles & as moch as they ther had. And ſith octauian come a yen fro norway wt a gret pouer &̄ ſeiſed all the land ī his hand & drofe out all the romans and wos tho made kyng and regned.
            
            
               ¶How Maximian that was the Emprours coſyn of Rome ſpouſed Octauians doughter and wos made kyng of this land
               
                  THis Octauian gouerned the land well and nobully but he had none heir ſaufe a doughter that was a yong chyld that he loued as moch as his lyfe: and for as mych thatt he waxed ſeke and wos ī poynt of deth & myght no longer regne he wold haue made one of his nepheus to haue ben kyng the wich was a nobull knyght and a ſtrong man yt wos called Conan meriedoke &̄ he ſhuld haue keped the kynges doghter &̄ haue maried hir whē tyme had bene but the lordes of the land wold not ſuffer it but yaf hir councell to be maried to ſum hygh mā of gret honour and than might ſhe haue all hir luſt And the cōſell of thee Emprour Conſtantyne hir lord. and at this counſell they accorded and choſe tho Cador of cornwaill for to wende to ye emꝑour for to do this meſſage &̄ he toke the way &̄ went to rome & tolde the emprour this tydyng well &̄ wyſely &̄ the emꝑour ſent in to this land wt him his own coſyn yt wos his vnkyll ſon a nobull knyght and a ſtrong that wos called Maximian and he ſpouſed Octauians doughter and wos crouned kyng of this land.
            
            
               ¶How Maximian that wos the emprours coſyn conquered the land of Amorican and yaf it to Conan meriedok.
               THis kyng Maxmian becom ſo riall that he thoght to conquere the land of Amarican for the gret riches that he herd tell that wos in that land ſo that he ne left man that wos of worthines knyght ſquyer ne none othir man that he ne toke with him to gret damage to all the lond for he left at home behynde him no man to kepe the land bot toke them with hym fro this land xxxM knyghtes that wer doughty menys bodies and went ouer ī to the land of Amorican & thor ſlew the kyng yt was called Imball & cōquered all the lond ¶And whē he had ſo done he cald Conan &̄ ſaid for as mich os kīg Octauian haue made yow kīg of bretō & thurgh me ye werlett and diſtrobled yt ye wer not kīg I yeue yow this land of amorican and yow ther of maketh the kynge

¶And for as moch as ye ben a Breton I wyll that thys land haue the ſame name and no more be called Amorican but bi called litell bretan. and the land fro whens we ben comen ſhall be called moch bretan ¶And ſo ſhall men knaw that on bretan fro that other. Conan meridok thanked him hendely and ſo wos he made kyng of lytell bretan. ¶And when all this was done Maximian went fro thens vn to Rome and was tho made Emprour after conſtantine and Conan meriedok duelled in lytell bretan with mych honour and ther let ordand ij.M. plough men of the land for to erie the land to harow it and for to ſowe it and 
                     •
                  effed hem richely after that they wer. ¶And for as miche os kyng Conan and none of his knyghtes ne none of his other pepull wold not take wyfes of the nacion of fraunce hee tho ſent in to gret breten to the Erle of cornwaill that men cald Dionothe yt he ſhuld che
                     •
                  e thurgh out all this land xiM. of madens that is to ſay viijM. for the mene pepull and iijM. for thee gretteſt lordes that ſhuld them ſpouſe. ¶And whē Dionoth vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſtode this he made acōmandement thurgh out all the land of bretan and as mony os the nōbro come to he aſſemled to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of maydens: for ther wos no man that durſt withſtonde his commandmētes for as mich that all the land was take hym to warde and to kepe to done all thinge that him good liked ¶And when thes maydens wer aſſemled he let them cum be fore iym att London and let ordan for them ſhippes haſteli &̄ os mich as thē neded to that vyage and toke his own doughter that wos called vrſula: that wos the fayreſt creature thot any man wyft and he wold haue ſent hir to kyng Conan that ſhuld haue ſpouſed hir &̄ made hir quene of the land. but ſhe had made preuali to god a vowe of chaſtyte that hir fadre not wyſt ne no other man els that wos leuyng vpon ethr.
            
            
               
               ¶How vrſula and xi.M. maydens that wer in hir company went toward litell bretan and all they wer martired at Coloyn
               THis vrſula choſe vn to hir company xi.M. maydens that of all other ſhe wos ladie and maſtreſſe and all they wēt in to ſhipp at on tyme in the water that is called thamſe and cō
                  manded hir kyn and all hir frendis to almyghty god. and ſailed toward litele breton. bot whē they wer comen in to the hygh ſee a ſtrange tempaſte aroſe as it wos goddis will. ¶and vrſula wt hir ſhippes and hir company wer driuen to Hundland thurgh tempaſt and ariued in the hauen of the cite of Colonie. & the kyng of the land that wos called Gowan was tho in the cite: & when he wiſt the tyding that ſo mony faier maydens wer ther arriued. he toke Elga his brother and other of his houſhold wt hī & wēt to the ſhippis to ſe that faire company and whan he ſaw thē ſo faire he and his companie wold haue ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  layne them &̄ a take fro them ther maydenhod but vrſula that good mayd concelled prayed warned and taught them that wer hir felowes that the ſhuld defend them with all ther myght and rather ſuffre deth than ſuffren ther bodi to be diffoylled So that all tho maydens become ſo ſtedfaſt in god that they defended them thurgh his grace ſo that nōe of them had pouer to do them ſhame ¶Wherfer the kīg Gawan wax ſore anoyed yt he for wroth ſlew them eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ichō anōe right &̄ ſower all tho maydens martred for the loue of god & lieth at coloyn
            
            
               ¶How kyng Gowan come for to deſtruy this land & how a man of gret power thot wos called Gracian defended the land.
               WHen all this wos done kyng Gowan that wos a Sarazen called his brother Elga and ſaid to hym that he ſhuld go to conquere the land that all tho fair maydens wer in borne. ¶And he ordened tho a gret pouer of Pehites of denmarke of orkenay and of norway and they come in to this land and brenttounes &̄ ſlew folke &̄ caſt a doune chirches and houſes &̄ relegiō
                  
and robed the land in length &̄ breed &̄ put to deth all tho that wold not forſake the right beleue and criſtyndom ¶For as mich os ther wos no ſouerayn that moght them helpe. For the kyng Maximian had taken with hym all the worthi men whē he wēt to conquere litell kretan And in the ſame tyme that ye here now tell was ſent Albone martired thurgh the woed tyrant Dioclician in the ſame place wher is now an abbaye made of ſent Albone whiles yt he wos apaynem ¶But he conu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ted hī to god thurgh the predicaciō of a clarke & a wiſe mā yt was called ancibell that wos herbored a nyght in his houſe And this was after the Incarnacion of Ihū criſt. ijC.xxvi. yere: and mē ſhuld vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtand that ſent albone ſuffred his martirdō be fore that ſent Edmūde wos martired. and therfor is ſent albone called the fyrſt marter of Englond. ¶This Gowans brother &̄ his folk yt wer ſarazenes wēt thurgh out the land &̄ deſtrued all thīg yt they found &̄ no thīg they ſpayred. whē this tydyng come to rome how that kyng Gowan had begon for to ſtroye this land the Emꝑour and tho of rome ſent a ſtrong mā &̄ of gret pouer yt wos called graciā with xxiiijM. men well fightīg for to caſt out thos ſarezenes of this lande. and all they ariued at porteſ mothe. ¶Maximian myght not cū hym ſelf for as moch os he wos choſen Emꝑour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the deth of Conſtantine that wos ſent Elene ſon ¶Whē this gracian wos ariued wt his hoſt he let a ſpi preueli wher the kyng gowan myght befounde and he vpō hym ſodanli as they lain ther beddes & deſcomfited hī &̄ ſlew them ī ther beddis eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ichone that none of them aſcaped ſafe gowan that fled with moch ſorow in to his cōtre ¶Sone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   it befell yt Maximian wos ſlayn at Rome thurgh treſon And when Gracian wyſt that tydyng he let croune hym kyng of this land.
            
            
               ¶How gracian made hym kyng whan Maximian was ſlaī and afterward the bretons kylled hym for his wikkedneſſe.
               
                  THis Gracian when he begone to regne he become ſo wikked and ſo ſterne and ſo moch ſorow did to the bretons yt they ſlew hī emong them ¶Tho kyng gowan had vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtond that gracian was ſlayn and done to deth he aſſembled a gret pouer &̄ come ayene ī to this land. & if he had firſt done harme tho did he moch more: for tho deſtrued he all this land & ye criſtē pepull yt wos ī moch bretan ſo yt no mā wos ſo hardi for to nempne god &̄ he yt ſo did anōe he was put to ſtrange deth ¶But the biſſhop of lōdon that wos tho yt was called goſſelin ſcaped & wēt thens to them of Rome to ſech ſocour to help to deſtru the ſarazenis yt had deſtruyed this lond ¶And ye romās ſaied yt they had be ſo oft annoyed for ther ſendyng aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   folke ī to bretan all for to help the bretens & they wold no more ſo do ¶And ſo the biſſhop goſſeline wēt thēs wt out ony ſocour or helpe And tho went he to the kīg of litell bretan yt was called Aldroie &̄ this was the thrid kyng aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   gowan meriedok as be for is ſayed ¶The biſſhop prayed this kyng Aldroie of helpe and ſocour And the kyng had pitte in his hert when he herd how the biſſhop fled &̄ how that the criſtyn men wer ſo ſlayn in gret Bretan thurgh the paynems and ſarazenes he graunted hym Conſtantine his brother hym for to helpe with pouer of folke and them did araye hors armur and ſhyppes & all thīg that them neded to that viage ¶And when all thyng was redy he called the biſſhope &̄ to hym ſayed I take you heir to helpe &̄ ſocour Cōſtantine my brother vpō this couenaut that if god yef hī grace ye paynems &̄ ye ſarazenes to ſhend & diſcomfited that than ye make hym kyng: And the biſſhop it grauntid with good will ¶Conſtantine &̄ the biſſhop toke lefe of the kīg Aldroye &̄ betoke him to god and toke ther men xijM. and went to ther ſhippes and ſailed toward gret bretan and ariued at totneſſe ¶When the Bretans herd the tidynges yt to them come ſocour they wer ſtrongly holpen &̄ ordeyned them a huge nombre of pepull and come to them and vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fenge hem with

mekyll honour. Gowan anone as he wyſt of this thynges he aſemled all the ſarezenes and come ayeneſt them & yaf them batal and Conſtantine ſlew hym with his own hondes and all tho other ſarazenes wer diſcomfited and ſlayn that nōe of them aſſcaped but tho that were conu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ted vn to god.
            
            
               ¶How Conſtantine that was the kynges brother of litell briton wos crouned kīg of myche breton for his worthenes.
               ANone after the bataill they went to london and crouned ther conſtantine and made hym kyng of this land and the byſſhoppe Goſelin ſette the croune on his heed and annoyntid hym os it befalleth for a kyng to bene and tho bigan criſtyndom ayene ī this land and anōe this kyng conſtantine when he wos creuned anone after he ſpouſed his wife thurgh counſell off the bretons and he begat iij. ſonnys on hir ¶The friſt wos cald Conſtance and that other Aurilambros and the thrid vter: this Conſtance the Eld
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   brother when he come to age he made hym a monke at wyncheſtre. This Conſtantin ther fadre thurgh treſone wos ſlayn For it befell on a tyme that a Pehite come to hym vpon a day in meſſage as it were. and ſayed that he wold ſpeke with the kyng preuali in councill The kyng let voied his chambre of the men that ther wer withyn and ther a bode no mo bot the kyng and the Pehite &̄ he made a countinance as tho hee wold haue ſpoken with ye kīg ī his ere and ther he kylled hym wt a long knyfe & after that he went quaīteli owt of the chambre in to an od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   chābre ſo at the laſt no man wyſt wher he wos bicomen ¶When the kynges men wyſt that ther lord wos ſo deid they made ſo moch ſorow they not wiſt what to done ¶For as myche as his .ij. ſonnes Aurilombros and vter wer ſo yonge that nōe of them myght be kyng & the thrid brother wos mōke at wencheſtre as is ſaied befoor But vortiger that wos Erle of weſtſexe thought priuyly in his hert thurgh quētance to be kyng and went to wyncheſtre ther that Conſtance was monke &̄ to hym

ſayed Conſtans quod he your fadre is deid and your ij. bretheren that ben with Goſſeline the biſſhope of london to noriſſh: ben ſo yong that none of them may be kyng ¶Wherfor I councell yow that ye forſake your habit and come with me &̄ I ſhall make ſych a meyn vn to the bretons that ye ſhall be made kyng.
            
            
               ¶Of Conſtans yt wos kīg Cōſtantine ſon that was mōke at wyncheſtre and how he wos made kyng after his fadres deth thurgh conſell of vortiger that wos Erle of weſtſexe for as mich as Aurilambros and vter his ij. brether wer but yong of age: And vortiger let ſle hym to be kyng hym ſelf.
               THis vortig
                     •
                  r conſceled this Conſtance ſo mych tyll he forſoke his Abbot and went with hym: and anone after he wos crouned kyng by aſſent of the Bretons.
               ¶This kyng Conſtance whan he wos crouned and made kyng he wiſt ne knew bot litell of the world na coude no thing wat knyghthod axed. and he made vortiger his chief maſtir and conceller and yaf hym all hys pouer for to ordeyne and to do as mych as to the reame apertened So that hym ſelf no thyng entermelled but onli bare the name of kyng ¶When vortiger ſaw that he had all the land in his warde and gouernall at his own wyll he thought a preuy treſon and to ſle Conſtance the kyng that he myght hym ſelf be crouned and made kyng and regne and let ſend after a hundreth knyghtes of Pehetes the worthieſt of al the land and them heeld wyth hym for to duell as to be kepers of is body as he wold wende thurgh the land to ordeyne thynges that apperteyned to a kyng ¶And this vortiger honoured ſo moch the hondred knyghtes and ſo moch yafe them of gold and ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and ſo riche iuelles robes hors and other thynges plente wherfor they held hym more lord than they did the kyng ¶And vortiger told them yf he might be kīg. ye as it wer thurgh treſon: he

wold make hem richeſt of the land So at the laſt thurgh gret yeftes that he had yefuen largeli: they cried thurgh the court thatt vortiger wer better worthy to be kyng than Conſtance. wherfor vortiger made ſemland as he had bene wroth and he departed thens from the court and ſaied he moſt gon elles where for thinges that he had to done. and ſo the tratour ſaied for encheſon that they ſhuld hym ſlee. that is to ſay conſtance. ¶When this vortiger wos gone it befell ſone after that tho hundreth knyghtes of Pehites broken the dores ef the kynges chamber and ther they hym ſlew &̄ ſmote of his heed and bore it to vortiger ther that he duelled and when vortiger ſaw that heed: he wepped full tenderly with his eye and nerthelees he wos ſomedell glad of his deth. ¶And anōe let take the houndreth knyghtes of Pehites and bynd ther handes be hynd them an led them to London & ther they wer dampned to deth as fals tratours. And anone after all the bretans of the land bi the commune aſſent crouned vortyger and made hym kyng of the land.
            
            
               Anno domini .C.lxxiiij
               SOther a martir wos pope after Auicetū ix. yere the wich decreit that a Nūne ſhuld not towch the pall of the awt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ner pit in ſence ther to. And that ſhe ſhuld were a wompull about hir heed. and mony ꝑellis he ſaw a bout matimony. ther for he ordand that no woman ſhuld be called a lefull wyfe bot if ſhe wer bleſſed of the preſt. Elentherꝰ a martir wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Sother xv yere the wich ordand that criſtyn men ſhuld fureſe no mete reſonabull that wos mannys mete. Nota. Alſo that no man vn acuſed in acrime ſhuld be put from his dignite or his degre til he was conuyckyt. thurgh enſampull of criyſt. the wich keppid ſtyll Iudas ſcaryoth not a cuſed. And criſt knaw hym gylty And what ſum euer he did among the apoſtils for the dyngnite of his ſeruis a boode firme and ſtabull. And he ſend alſo Legatis vn to Lucie the kyng of Bretan the wich baptiſed hym

and his pepull. And Fagus and Domianus legates the wich the pope ſent fyrſt preched in englond. and this criſtyndom durit in Bretan .CC. yere vn to the tyme of Diocliſion the emprour. when ſent Albone wos martired Marchus Antonius and Lucius Comodus wer emprours. bot marcus dyed anone and Lucius comodus regned: Comodus wos called profitabull of ſcorne. for he wos to eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man vnprofitabull. he wos yeffen vtterly to lechori. mony ſenetours and criſtyn men he made for to be kylled. he dampned his own wife to deth for age. he died a ſodā deth with ſtranggilling among maydens. Helius ꝑtenax after this man wos emprour ſex monethes and wos a man of gret diſcrecion. whom Iulian the gret lawyer killed. And he entrid the empire and was ſlayn the vij. moneth of Seuerꝰ. Victor a martir was pope after Elentheriū x. yere and for the diſcorde of the paſcall tyme he called a counſele in alexander wher be was preſent that tyme. & mony other. wher he decreit that Eſtyr day ſhuld be keped on the ſonday bot he moſt kepe the change of the mone of aprill. And that wos to differ fro Iues. for mony biſſhopis of the eſt a boid. that tyme the ſame day the Iues did haloe yt feſt ¶Alſo he ordand that in tyme of neede child might be criſtyned ī eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y place &̄ ī eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Zepherinꝰ a marter &̄ a Roman wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   victor ix yere This man ordaud that criſten pepull of xij yere age & a bown ſhuld reſaue his god on eſtyr day ons 
                     ••
                   yere. Alſo he ordant that all ye veſſell of the awter ſhuld be glas or tyn and not tre os ī old tyme the cōſecracion of the glorius blode wos made ī tre veſſell And this tyme paſſit and the worſhip of the chirche grew & glaſin veſſill wer ꝓhibit▪ vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   de conſe. di pri ca. Origines the nobull clarke wos this tyme & he wrot ſo mych that ſent Ierome ſaied hym ſelf to haue red of Origen warke iiijM. volumys wt out pyſtils. he tranſlatit the bybyll from hebru in to greke. and did mōy other gret thīgꝭ And of this Origene Samſon Salamon & Traian is a gret

queſtiō amonges docturs if that they be dampned or ſaued. Ther forre thos thynges that with out perrill we be not bondyn to knaw. ner the chirche is not certified of them. and therfor let them be aloynly commytted vn to god. Caliſtus a marter and a roman was pope after Zepherinus v. yere and he ordand the cimitori. in via apia. wher moni a .M. martires is beried. Alſo hee ordand the faſt of the emering dayes: to be keped Antonius Aurelius wos Empeour iij. yere And this man lacked no kīd of lechory: and at the laſt he wos martired emong a gret multitude of pepull for his myſſecheuus leuyng. Antonius macus rened after hym vij yere This man leued obſtinatl
                     •
                   and therfor he wos kylled as wos his prediceſſur Alexander wos Emprour after Antonius and regned xiij. yere This man bi inſtance of his mother a criſtin woman & the techyng of Origen the wiche come to Rome to conuert hir· wos made ſo good vn to criſtyn mē that he ſoffrid them to haue ther counſels and ther prayers by them ſelfe. bot neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the laſe in his tyme the curſed officers of hym made mony martirs.
            
            
               Anno domini .CC.xliiij.
               VRbanus wos pope after Caliſto viij. yere and old &̄ yong wos veriy vertuus. And all the halouyd veſſell to the chirche he made of gold or ſyluer. This man laft his pope heod &̄ went to Agrippam &̄ xi.M. virgins with hym &̄ the clargy ſaid he laft not his dignite for holines. bot for appetite of thos virgins &̄ wrote hym not in the boke of popis. And ther he a virgin wos martired with thos virgins Poncianus a marter ſuccedid vrbanus &̄ he ordant that pſalmys ſhuld be ſaied day & nyght in thee chirche of god. And that a preſt ſhuld ſay confiteor a fore thee maſſe. Anteros a martir wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this man This man ordand that a biſſhop myght be remeued from on vn to an other And he made the lyfe of martirs to be writtyn and he wos ſlayn and beried in the cimitory of ſeut calixt.
               
                  Maximiaꝰ wos choſin emprour̄ at Maguncia of the hoſt and not bi the ſenetours &̄ regned iij. yere and deſtruyed the chyrche myghtely and was ſlayn for Origen Gordian regned after hī ſex yere and of hym is lityll writtyn. bot he wos ſlayn. Hijs diebus Celus dux colcheſtrie in aſclepio rignat in britannia annis quaſi triginta vſque ad aduentum conſtancij. latiM vacat Philip wos emꝑour after hym: and this Philip choeſſe to hī Philip his ſon and they regned vij. yere And they wer the fyrſt Empr
                     •
                  urys that euer wer criſtyned &̄ after ſlayn of the hoſt. They bequethe all hyr treſour in ther deth that hit ſhuld be diſpoſid to poer men. And ſent Laurens at the aſſynacion of his maſter the pope deꝑtid this treſour a bowt rome. the wich was gret cauſe of his martirdome. vt quid dicunt.
               Decius wos emprour iij. yere and in all thinges a tyrant. for he entyrid the empire when he & the hoſt had ſlayn ye ij Philippis his lordis. And after that he was ſlayn wyth hys ſon. Fabianus a marter and a roman wos pope after Anteras xij. yere This wos a veray holy man. for when criſtyn men ſtood to a bide the eleccion of the pope. ſodenli a white dowe or a culuur decendid on his heed ſayng vn to hym thow ſhall be pope of rome. this man ordend that creme eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y yere ſhuld be haloid vpō ſher thurſday alſo he deuided regions to dekyns the wich ſhuld writte the lyffe of martirs. and at the laſt Decius kylled hym Cornelius a martir and a roman wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Fabius iij. yere this man toke vp the bodyes of Petre and Paule. and with gret honour put them in worſchipfull places with beata lucina Lucius wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Cornelius iij. yere and of hym lityll is writtyn Gallus with his ſon volucianus wer Emprours ij. yere. and they fought with Emilianus. and wer ſlayn. and Emilianꝰ the thrid moneth wos ſlayn. Valerian wos Emprour with his ſon Galiene xv. yere. This man wos vertuus and manly in the begīnyng bot aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos geuyn to vice. & moch wricchidnes

and ſo was his ſon Galiene. This valerian went vn to ye lōd of Perſe. and ther: for the gret blod of martirs wich he had ſpied wos takyn of the kyng of Perci. And whē he had take hym he put out bothe his euyn and kepid hym in gret bondage. and to thys intent he kepyd him. that when ſo eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he ſhuld ryde this valerian ſhuld ly doune. And he ſhuld ſet his feet vpon his bake when he wold take his horſe. This herd Galiene his ſon that wos left at rome. and yt cauſed him that he wos not ſo cruell ayenes criſtyn men ¶And here wos the viij ꝑſecucion of the chirche made by thi Emprour. and made the romans to lees ther kyngdoms thee wich wer neuer recouered ayene to the emprour. and a gen
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  all peſtelans wos thurgh out all the world for ther treſpas Stephanꝰ a merter after Lucius wos pope iij. yere This man ordaned yt no man ſhuld vſe no haloed clothis bot to the worſhip of god. Sextus a marter and a roman wos pope after Sſtephanus ij. yere This man ordant that the maſſe ſhuld be ſayed vpon an autor. the wich a fore wos not. and then he died. Dyoniſius a roman was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym ij. yere This man deuided perichys & chyrche yerdes and aſſigned to chirchis certayn preſtis. Felix a martir wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Dyoniſius ij. yere He ordaned that for the memori of martirs maſſes ſhold be ſayed. Alſo he ordant thee Dedicacion of the chirche eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y yere ſhold be ſayed
               Claudius was Emprour after valerianus: he ſubduid Goth as nobully and then he deſſeſet.
            
            
               Anno criſti .CC.lxxiiij.
               Euticianus a mertir wos pope after Felex viij yere This man ordand that corne and benys ſhuld be bliſſed on thee auter And he bereid iijC &̄ xl iiij. martirs with his own hondes Aurelius wos Emprour after Claudius v. yere This Aurelius fyrſt to criſtī men wos gentyll. wherfor he had the victori in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y place gloriuſly. And when he wos deſſaued by curſit mē and purſued criſtīmen myghttely and namly in fraunce for ther

he a bood and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that he had neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   good fortune bot was ſlayn. And this wos the ix. perſecuciō of ye cherche and criſtin fayeth. Tacitus wos Emꝓur after this man and he wos. bot he regned bot iij. monethes and then ſlayn in Ponto. Probus wos Emprour after hym .v. yere and iiij. monethes This man recou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed fraunce a yene the wych was occupyed with barbory men. &̄ he yaf them and pānonias licens to haue vynyerdes. And whē he had made almoſt all thynges well in pees he ſayed knyghttes wyth in a litell tyme ſhall not be neceſſari. And anone after hee wos ſlayn at Syrmiū. Carus and hys ij. ſonnys Carmus and Numerianus wer Emprours after Probus. bot ſoyn war they deid &̄ ther fadre wos dronchid and the .ij. ſonnys wer ſlayn all thes .iij. regned bot ij: yere Dyaclician and Maximian cō after thes iij. Emprours tho on regned in the Eſt and the other in the weſt. the fyrſt thing that Dioclecian did he brent all the criſtyn menys bokys that myght be fonden. Thes .ij. tyrantes did more harme to criſtyn men then euer did ony other. for .x. yer laſted ther perſecucion. and os we red with in .xxx: dayes xxM. men wer ſlayn for criſtis cauſe. And ī Englond all faith wos almoſt deſtruyed in that tyme of Maximian. Gaius wos pope after Enticianꝰ This man ordant that no man ſhuld accuſe a biſſhope or an other clarke to an ſeculari iuge. and that a pagon or an herityke ſhuld not accuſe a criſtyn man. alſo he ordant that he that wos worthe ſhuld aſcēde gre by gre to his ord
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s fyrſt benet then collet ſubdekī dekī &̄ then preſt. And at the laſt he wos martired vndyr Dioclicion. ¶arcellinus amartir wos pope after Gayus xi. yere and .iiij. monethes This man wos perſecutit ſoor. and for dreid of deth he offrid iij. cornys of encenſe to the ſacrifice of the ydols. And afterward he opynly repentid. and ſuffyrd the payn of deth for the fayth of the chyrche of god. His bodi lay vn beried iij. dayes for dreid of the curſe of god. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thurgh a uiſion of ſent Petre &̄ Marcell he was beried
                  
at Peturs foote. Marcellꝰ was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Marcellinus v. yere This man ordand that a gouernall conſell myght not be ordant with out the awtorite of the pope. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                  . i7.di.c. ſinodū. Alſo he choſe xv. cardinals in the cite to berie men and criſtyn. at the laſt whē he had keped beſtys longe tyme in a houſe cloſid in with them bi the commandment of Maximian he died for fawt Euſibius a marter wos after this man ij. monethes and certayn dayes. This man of a layman was made pope and he ordand that no lay man ſhuld accuſe his biſſhop bot if he went fro his fayth. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   2.9.7.c. lairos. Nota This tyme ſent Albō wos martired in Bretan this albon when he was a pagon. he loged a certayn man: the wich conuerted hym to the fayth. and after wos iuget vn to deth: and mych pepull he turned vn to our lord that wer negh the water the wich he made dri thurgh his prayer and he ſuffred deth negh the cite of verelom. vide plura ī vita ſancti albani. Melchiades a merter ſuccedid Euſibius iiij. yere This man ꝓhibit that men ſhuld faſt on ſonday or on thurſday in ſo mych as pagons faſt thos dayes. at the laſt he was martired as all his prediceſſors wos ¶And knawe ye that ther weer .xxxiij. popes of roome martired yche on after other Petre wos the fyrſt and this Melchiades wos the laſt. And thē it wos laudabull for a man after Gregori to deſire a biſſhoprik Galerius wos Emprour after Dioclicion ij. yere. and another with hym called Conſtancius. ſo wos the Empyre in tho dayes deuidee. This Conſtance aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he had conquered all Spaȳ he come in to gret breton and ther he wedded a kynges dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of whom he gat gret Conſtantine. and this ſame conſtacius died in Breton and lyeth at Yorke os martin ſays in his crounycls And left on lyue Conſtantine that wos getyn of Elyn. And wos kyng of Bretayn and of fraunce
            
            
               
               Circa annū domini .iijC.viij.
               SIlueſter wos pope aftet Melchiades This was a glorius confeſſor and mony ways he worſſhipped the chirche of god what in writyng what in myraclis. he reſauyt the patrimony of ſent Petre that is to ſay the kyngdom of Ytali wyth ye cite of Rome of Conſtantine the emprour. and to the worſſhip of the chirche of god he turned it. he baptized Helyn &̄ the Iues and then deceſſed a confeſſur Conſtantine the myghtty was Emprour this tyme. This wos a glorius man and a victorius in bataill. in gouernyng of the commyn pepull wos veray wiſſe. And in the neceſſite of the beleue he was with out compayr dewout His pytty and his holines be ſo writtyn in the bokys of holi docturs: that with out dowt he his to be nowmbred emong ſentis. & the grekys ſayn that in the end of his lyfe he wos made a monke and more ye may heir of hī in the crounyclis of englond for hee wos kyng ī englond. Helena the quene moder to Conſtantine repayred a yene the holy croſſe this tyme and ſhe made lxx. colleg and ſhe glorified the ſtate of all holi chirche. Nycholas the byſſhop of mirree cete an hole man wos this tyme. Athanaſius wos this tyme biſſhop in Alexandrin a glorius doctor made the cymbalum Quicumque vult ſaluꝰ eſſe etcc: Marcus was pope aftar Silueſter ij. yere and viij. monethes This man ordaned the cred ſhuld be opynly ſong in the chirch. And at the biſhop of hoſtienſe ſhuld conſecrate the pope. and that he ſhuld werre a pall Iulius wos pope after Marcus xi. yere This man wos exiled x. yere and after ſuffred deth vnder Conſtātyne the ſecūd Eonſtantinus with his ij. bretheren regned xxiiij. yere And in his laſt end he wos ꝑu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tit bi the heryſe of the aryanes. by a biſſhope called Euſebi and he purſued the chirche of god ſtrongly the end of this man wos this. As he ſhuld go to conſtantinople to a gret counſell ī the wich he thought to haue condempned the biſhop and the clerkys of trew beleue. he went be fore vn to a chambyr

to a voyed ſich thynges as natur requireth. and anone ſodenly his bowels fell from him. and ther he wos deid os ye now here. Liberius was pope after Iulius xix. yere &̄ vij monethes thē wos the ſecūd diſcorde of the chirch be tuix Liberyn and Felix for the heeryſi of the arrians the wich fauyrred Leberius. Then Conſtancius the Emprour called ayene liberyn from his exile be cauſe he fauered thees heriſe. and the chirch deiecit Liberyn. and toke Felix in to pope and the odir wos expulſit os an harityke of the chirch. bot felix obtenet not. for the emprour put ī Liberiꝰ and expulſit felix: Felix wos pope after the deth of this liberin and he declared Conſtantin the emprour an heritike and a none after he wos martyred ¶And here wos the fyrſt that euer thee chirche of Rome had an infamet pope. for all the prediceſſurs of all this liberin wer ſentis. and yaf holy ſampuls Iulianus apaſtota wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   conſtantyn emprour ij. yere and viij monethes he was cleped apoſtata for hee fled this Conſtantyne wiche killep his brether and for fere of deth wos made a criſtyn man and a monke. bot afterward by the counſell of a negromē
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  . he aſked the duell whether he ſhuld be emprour or not The duell ſaid that he ſhuld be emꝑour vpō a condiciō yt he ſhuld for ſake his criſtin faith. and be vttyr emny to criſtī men. and ſo he did for he yaf leue to the Iues that they ſhuld byld ayene the tempull in ſpite of the criſtyn mē. and he toke all the goodis yt criſtī mē had & diſtruied mōy of them. Ioninianꝰ wos emꝑour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym viij monethes: for when Iulian wos deid the hoſt choſe hym emꝑour. & he was a criſtī man &̄ he ſaid it wos not lefull to a criſtī mā to be a lord ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſo mōy hethī pepull. Thei anſuerd and ſaied rather thē he ſhuld forſake the empire they wold be criſtined. And thꝰ toke he the dyngnite. bot ſone he wos deid &̄ ī meruelꝰ maner. for hee wos laid ī a cloſe houſe aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his iornay made all of ſtone newly whited wt lyme. in the wich they made to his comforth as they thought a fyer of charcoill. and of the ayre of thes ij. in the mor
                     •
                  
                  
he was fond deid. Valentinian with his brother Balent was Emprour after Ioninianus xi. yere for he departed the empire &̄ yaf his brother the eſt and keped hym ſelf the weſt part. This balentinianus wos a lord with Iulian apoſtata: & it happid him on a tyme for to go in to a tempull of fals goddis for to doo ſacrifice and myniſteris ſtood therwith water haloid after ther giſe with the wich they ſtrenkilled the lordis This valentenianus ſmot the miniſter that keſt the wet
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   vpon hym. and ſayed he wos rether defouled ther bi then clenſed. be cauſe of this Iulian did exile hī. Bot our lord god for his opyn confeſſion of his name rewarded hym with the empire. His brother valent fell in to the opinyō of the arrianes and died in that herici This ſame valent leuid iiij yere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   valentinianus with Gracian the emprour ¶This tyme leuyd ſent Ambros.
            
            
               Anno domini .iijC.lxiiij.
               DAmaſꝰ wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Felix xviij. yere and ij. monethes This wos an eloquent man in metyr and he wrot mony ſtories of pepis and martirs. He ordand that gloria potri ſhuld be ſayed in the end of the pſalmes &̄ that wos at the prayer of ſent Ierom And thurgh the mocion of this pope ierom tranſlait thee bibill from hebreu in to latyn and then he diceſſed a confeſſur. Valens with Gracian and valentinianū wer emprour iiij: yere in this tyme wer chirchis opynd ayene &̄ criſtyn men had leue to renew the ſeruys of god that wos defended a fore with Emprours infecked with harecy. as wos valens and other werfor the chirche had no liberte when valens wos on liue ¶A Synodus of an. hundreth and .l. biſſhoppis was gedred vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Damaſe pope at Conſtantinople ayenes Macedomū an heritike the wich deuyed the holy goſt to be veray god. And then wos the credo made that is ſong on holydayes in the chirche. Auguſtinus a Cartaginēſ of affrica wos this time. He wos as nobull a retricion as myght be· and in all pheloſophy and poetre īcōporabull. &

all thyng that any pheloſophur fond ī his youth he vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſtood wt litill labour & a bowt this tyē he wos ſend to mediolanū wher hee was turned anone of ſent Ambroſe and baptiſed. This man grew vn to a nobull doctor of the chirche. And not long after that he wos biſſhop of Yponenſ. and ther he leuyd liij. yere and mykyll diuinite he wrote. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   in libris ſuis. Siritius wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Damaſus xv. yere. he dampned haritikis and litell els is writtyn of him. Theodoſius ſon to Gracian with valantyne his vnkell wos Emprour xxvij. yere This man wos a criſtyn man and gracius and in gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nance like to Traian. ſoon wroth and a none reconſiled. This man on a day when he wold haue gone to haue herd maſſe ſent Ambros ꝓhibit him the entre of the chirch till he had penance and made ſatiſfaccion for the ſlayng of the xxx. knyghtes the wich he ſlew in anger at Conſtantinople. wherfor they made a law that the ſentence of a prince ſhuld be deferit xxx: days of thos that ſhuld do exicucion if they myght fall in the grace of the prince with in xxx. dayes. ¶A bout thys tyme wos a child borne in the caſtell of Emons from the nauyll &̄ a bown deuyded ī to ij. bodies hauīg .ij. hedis & ij. wittis. ſo yt the on ſlepīg or etīg the oder ſlepid not ne ete not. And whē they war ij. yere of age the on deceſſid &̄ the other leued iij. dayes after. Claudianus poeta wos this tyme Arcadius &̄ Honorius regned xiij. yere &̄ in ther tyme rome wes ne diſtruyed bi an kyng called Alaticus of the wich deſtruccion roſe a gret blaſphemy of the romans for they ſayed they fared neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   well ſethyn criſt come to rome &̄ be rafeed them ther goddis by ye preching of Pet &̄ Paule. And yit this Archadius ſubduit all his emnys by the pouer of god: &̄ ſhed no blud. A yene this blaſfemy ſent Auſtyn made that ſolemp werke the wich they call. de ciuitate dei. Honorius wos emprour with Theodoſius his brother ſon xv yere and he wos a man of holy lyfe. for ij. wifes he had. and wt bothe yit he died mayden. he louyd ſpecialy ye chirch & hated haritykys

Ierom died this tyme at Bedlem the yere of his aage lxxxxi. Sanctus Herachydes the wich wrote vitas patrū to Lanſum epiſcopū wos this tyme Iohannes Criſoſtamus wos exiled of Endochia the wiffe of Archadij and thurgh heyt of the ſone he wos deid Anaſtaſius wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Siritius iij. yere. This man ordand that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man ſhuld ſtond at the redyng of the holy goſpell: and that he that wos a manyd man ſhuld not be preſt Innocencius wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Anaſtaſiꝰ. This man ordant that ſeke men ſhuld be anoynted with holy hoyl. and at maſſe the kys of pees to be yeffen: he dampned Pelagin an haritike &̄ mony other thinges did: vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   26. q. i.
            
            
               Anno domini iiijC.xiiij:
               ZOzimꝰ was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Innocent ij. yere &̄ viii. monethes This man ordant that clerkys ſhuld be no tau
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ners. ne ſel no wyne and that a bond man ſhuld not be made preſt with out the licens of his lord Bonifacius a roman wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Zoziuū iiij. yere This man ordand that a woman ſhuld not toch ye pall of the awter. ne ſhuld not waſſhe the awter Celeſtinus a roman wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Boniface viij. yere &̄ ix. dayes the wich ordand the pſalme a fore maſſe. s. Iudica me deus etcc. and at the begīnyng of the maſſe ſhold be ſaied with a verſe of a pſalme and at the graell and at the offertory ſhuld be ſaied a fore the ſakirryng. this ſame man ſend ſent Patryke to Ireland to cōu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  te that land. and Palladiū a dekyn of Rome to the ſcottys to be cōu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tid. &̄ ī the iiij. yere of this mā ther wos a genn
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  all Synody at Ephiſina of .CCC. biſſhoppis a yenes Neſtoriū an heritike Theodoſius the yonger with valentinan his neue regned xxvij yere In his tyme wos the feſt ordined wich is called Aduīcula. ſcī Petri ¶And in his tyme died ſent Auſtyn in the yere of his age lxxvi. ¶And this tyme wos raſed the vij. ſlepers the wich ſleped ·CC. yere This man died at Conſtantinople and
                  
ther wos beried ¶This tyme the Soxons entrid Englond &̄ anone be litell and litell they grew vp myghtely. And at the laſt they obtened all the land. Sextus a Roman was pope after Celeſtinꝰ viij. yere This was an holy man and a meeke and litill of hī is writtyn bot that he byld ſcā maria maior. Leo Tuſcus a confeſſur was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Sixtū xxi. yere This man was as holy as ony man .v. tymes or more in a day he wold ſay maſſe. and on a tyme aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   it be fell when a certayn woman kyſſid his hand he wos temped with hir. and for the treſpas that he had done. vn to his pennance he made his hand to be ſtrekyn of And when the noeſe roſe vpon hym that he myght not ſay maſſe os he wos wont to done. he wos right ſory: and allonly betoke hī to our lady in prayer to help hym. ¶And our lady reſtored hym his hand a yene. & than he ſayed maſſe os he was wont to done & ſo that myracull wos opynly ſhued to all pepull ¶And in the tyme of this pope Marcian the Emprour beyng ther. wos congregate at calcedeny the iiij. vniuſall Sinody of viC. & xxx biſſhoppis a yens Euſticem the Abbot of conſtantinopolitō: &̄ Alexandrinū epm̄ qui negauerūt in xp̄o veram carnem fuiſſe & eciam negabant carnis nrē reſurreccionem. And after he had made mony notabull ſarmons and epiſtils he deceſſid. Marcianꝰ and valentinianus wer emprours this tyme vij. yere. in whoys tyme wos the gret Sinody a foro reherſed when Euſticem and Dioſcurus wer condempned.
               ¶In the tyme that Marcianus wos emprour in rome vortiger wos kyng in Bretan now called Englond. in whoys tyme the Saxons come in to bretan and made mony kynges. that is to wit as is playn by the crouniclys vij. And be cauſe it is tediꝰ to mannys reſon to reherſe mony diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe namys to gedre os vij. kynges of englond & in on tyme the emprours and popys. Ther for the cronyelis of englond ſhall be ſet to geder tyll it becūmyn

vn to Alured in whoys tyme the Danys com ī to Englond and the popys and the emprours and other thynges in thee ſame tyme ſhall be ſet to gedre.
            
         
         
            
               Circa annū domini .iiijC.xl ix.
               ¶How the wardeyns that had tho childrin to kepe that were Conſtantine ſonnys lad them to lytell Bretan for the treſon &̄ the falſeneſe of vortiger.
               
                  
                     Engiſt
                     Here begīnith the fift parte during to the cōing of the danys
                   Thys tyme come the Saxons that wer pagons fyrſt in to bretōnow called englond. vnder vortiger the wich wos crouned kyng of this lond. This time tho that had thies. ij chylder in kepyng the wich was Conſtantine ſonnys that is to ſay Aurilambros and vter thurgh ordinance of Goſlī that was biſſhop of london. after ther faderes deth that is to ſay Conſtantine durſt not duell ī thys land with thos chyld but conueyd them vn to the kyng of lityll Breton: for as moch as he tho wyſe the treſon of vortiger that tho wos made kynd thurgh whom conſtance ther eldyr brother wos ſlayn. wherfor the hundreth knyghtes of Pehites wer put to deth and beren all the blame. as that vortiger had not wiſt ther of nether to conſented ¶And ſo the kepers of thos tow childer dred leſt vortiger wold put them to deth thurgh his treſon and falſnes as he had done ther brother be forne. And therfore they wer lad ouer in to litell bretan &̄ the kyng them reſaued with moch honowr and let them to noriſſh. &̄ ther they duelled till they become fair knyghtes and ſtrong and

fers and thought to be auenged vpon the deth of Conſtantine ther brother when they ſaw ther tyme and ſo they did as ye ſhall here tell afterward. ¶Hit wos not long aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt the tidīges come ouer ſee to the kynred of tho hundreth knyghttes of Pehites that wer dampned & put to deth thu
                     •
                  gh vortig
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ī this land therfor they wer wōdirly wroth & ſuore yt they wold be auenged of ther kīnes deth: and come ī to this lond wt a gret pouer &̄ robbed ī mōy places &̄ killed &̄ did all the ſorow yt they myght. Whan vortig
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   it wiſt: he made moch ſorow & was ſore anoyd. And ī an other place alſo tydynges come to hī that Aurilambros & vter his brother ordined & aſſembled a gret hoſt for to cum in to mekell bretan yt is to ſay in to this land to be auenged vpō Conſtance ther brothers deth So that ī on half & in that other he was brought in to ſo moch ſorow that he ne wiſt whider to wende.
            
            
               ¶How Engiſt and .xi. thouſand men come in to this land to the whom vortiger yafe a place that is called Thongcaſtell
               
                  ANd ſone after this ſorow tydyng come to vortig
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt a grete nauye of ſtrangers wer ariued ī the cūtre of kent he wylt not whens they wer ne wherfor they wer come in to this land ¶The kyng ſent anone a meſſenger thider that ſum of them ſhold cum & ſpeke with hym for to wit what folk they wer & what they axed & ī to what cūtre they wold goo ¶Ther wer ij. brether maſters &̄ princeſ of yt ſtrong cōpany yt on wos cald Engiſt and yt other Horſſe Engiſt went to the kyng and told him the encheſon wherfor they wer comen ī to his land ¶And ſayed ſyr we be of a cuntre that is called Saxonie that is the land of Eermayne wher in is ſo moch ſorow that of the pepull be ſo mony that the lond may not them ſuſteyne ¶And the maſters and princes that haue the lond to gouerne and to rule. they make to cum before them men and women that boldeſt ben amonges them for to fight and that beſt may trauaill ī to diuerſe landes

¶And ſo they ſhul them yef hors and hernes armuri &̄ all thing that them nedeth and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they ſhall ſay to them that they gone in to an other contre wher that they mowe lyuen as ther aunceſtres did them be fore. ¶And therfor ſir kyng yf ye haue ought to do with our company we be come in to your land &̄ wyth good wil you will ſerue and your land kepe help & defend from your enmys yf that ye nedeth. ¶When vortiger herd this tydyng he ſayed he wold gladly them withold vpon ſich couenant if they myght dalyu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his land of his emnys he wold yef them reſenable londes wher they ſhuld duell for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more Engiſt thonked goodly &̄ in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he and his companye xiM. ſhold duell with the kyng vortiger and moch they did thurgh ther boldnes they deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed the land clene of his emnys Tho prayed Engiſt the kyng of ſo mo
                     •
                  h land that he myght make to hym a cite &̄ for hys meny ¶The kyng anſuerd. it wos not to done with out conceill of his bretons. ¶Engiſt prayed hym eftſones of as moche place os he myght compaſ ſo with a thonge of a ſkyn wher vpon he myhht maake a maner for hym to duell on. ¶And the kyng hym granted frely ¶Tho toke engiſt a bull ſkyn and cut it as ſmale as he myght all in to on thuong all a round and ther with compaſſed he os mych land as he had vpon a faire caſtell and when this caſtell was made he let call it Thwong caſtell For as mych as the place wos marked wt a thwong.
            
            
               ¶Of Ronewen that was Engiſtes doughter and how the kyng vortiger ſpouſed hir for hir bowte.
               WHen this caſtell was made and full well arayed Engiſt preualy did ſend by letter in to the cuntre wher he come fro after an hondreth ſhippes fyllid with men that wos ſtrong & bold and alſo well fightyng in all batellis. and that they ſhuld alſo bryng with them Ronewen his doughter that wos the faireſt creature that a man myght ſe ¶And when thos pepull wos comē
                  
that he had ſent aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he toke them in to the caſtell with moch Ioy And hym ſelf vpon a dey went vn to the kyng and prayed hym ther worthely that he wold cum and ſee his new maner that he had made in the place that he had compaſſed with a thuong of the ſkyn ¶The kyng anone graunted hym frely and with hym went thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ wos well a payed with the caſtell &̄ with the fair werke. & to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s ther they eten and dronk wt moch ioy ¶And whan nyght come that the kyng vortiger ſhuld go ī to his chamare for to take ther his nyghtes reſt: Ronewen that wos Engiſt doughter come with a cup of gold ī hir hand and kneled be fore the kyng and ſaied to hym waſſaill. and the kyng wyſtnot what it wos to mene ne what he ſhuld anſuer for as moch as hym ſelf ne none of his bretons coud no engliſh ſpeke ne vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſtond it: but ſpekyn in the ſame longage that bretons done yit. ¶Neutheles a latimer told the kyng the full vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtondyng therof waſſale: and that other ſhold anſuer drynk haill. ¶And that wos the fyrſt tyme that waſſaill and drink haill come vp in this land. and from that tym vn to this tyme it is well vſed in this land.
               ¶The kyng vortiger ſaw the fairnes of Ronewen and his armes laid a bowt hir nec and iij. ſwetly kytſed hir. and anone right he wos a namered vpan hir: that he deſired to haue hir to wif and aſked of Engiſt hir fadre ¶And Engiſt granted hym vpon this couenant that the kyng ſhold yef hym all the cūtre of kent that thhe er myght duele in & his pepull ¶The kyng him graunted preuely with a good wyll and anone after he ſpouſed ye damyſell. and yt wos moch ꝯfuſion to him ſelf. ¶And therfore all the bretons become ſo wroth for be cauſe he ſpouſed a womā of myſbeleue. wherfor they went all from hī &̄ nothyng to him toke kepe ne help hym in thing that he had to done.
            
            
               ¶How vortimer that wos vortigers ſon was made kyng &̄ Engiſt wos driuen out. and how vortimer wos ſlayn.
               
                  THis Engiſt went in to kent and ſeiſed all the land in to his hond for hym and for hys men and by come in a lityl whyle of ſo gret pouer and ſo moch pepull had that men wyſt not in lytell tyme wich wer the kynges men and wych were Engiſt men wherfor all Bretons had of hym dred 
                  and ſayed amongꝭ them bot yf that they ne toke other counſel be twen hē all ye land ſhuld be betrayed thurgh Engiſt and his pepull vortig
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye king had be goten on his fyrſt wife iij. ſonnys the fyrſt wos called vortimer yt ſecūd Catagren & the thrid Paſſent. ¶The britons eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ychon by on aſſēt choſe vortimer to be ther lord & ſouerayne & counceller ī eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y bataill & crouned hī &̄ made hī kīg &̄ 
                  wold ſuffre vortig
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   no longer to regne for encheſō of the aliance bituix engiſt &̄ hī. The britōs ordined a gret hoſt to driue out engiſt & his cō
                  panie of the land &̄ yaf hī iij. batallis yt fyrſt wos ī Kent ther he wos lord The ſecūd wos at Tetford. &̄ the thrid ī a ſhire athiſ half Cooll ī a more. ¶And ī this botell them met Catagren &̄ horne Engiſtes brother ſo that ych of them ſlew other. Bott for as moch os the cūtre wos yef lōg by for to horne thurgh vortiger. tho he ſpouſed his coſin ther he made a fair caſtell that is called horncaſtel after his own name ¶And vortimer wos ſo annoyed for his bred deth catagrē yt he wos deid ī ſich a man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . Wherfor anōe he let fell ye caſtell to gronde ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt he ne left night ne day till he had driuē out engiſt & all his pepull of ye lād &̄ whē Engiſt wos driuē a way Ronewen his dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   made ſorow y nowe & quentely ſpek to them yt wer next ye kīg vortimer & priueyſt wt hī. & ſo moch ſhe yaf hī of yeftes yt he wos enpoiſened &̄ died at london the iiij. yere of his regne and ther he lieth.
            
            
               ¶How the bretōs choſe an other tyme vortig
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to be ther kīg &̄ Engiſt come in to this land and they fouhten to gedre.
               AFter vortimers deth the. Britons by hir commune aſſēt eft ſones made vortiger hir kyng vpon this conuenient

that he ſhold neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   after ſuffre Engiſt ne none of his. eftſones to come ī to this land ¶And whē all this wos done Ronewen the quene preuely ſent by letter to Enegiſt that ſhe had enpoiſend vortimer &̄ that vortiger hir lord ayene bare the croune &̄ rened and that he ſhuld come in to this land well arraied with moche pepull for to a venge hī vpon the britons and to wynne this land ayein: ¶And whan Engiſt herd this tydynges he made gret Ioye and apparelled him haſtely with xv. thouſand men yt wer doughty in euery bataill and come in to this land ¶And whan vortiger herd tell that engiſt was come ayene with a grett pouer in to this lond· he aſſemled his bretons and tho went ayens engiſt for to haue yef hym bataill and his folke. ¶Butt Engiſt drad him ſore of the Bretons For thei had driuen him beforne and diſcomfited hym with ſtrength wherfor this engiſt prayd hym a loue day. &̄ ſayed he wos not cūyn in to this lād for to fight. but for to haue his land ayen if he might accord wt the bretons and of them to haue luffe and grace ¶The kīg vortiger thurgh counſell of his bretons graunted a loue day & thus it wos ordeyned thurgh the bretons. that the ſaame day ſhuld be holdin faſt be ſide Saliſberi vpon an hyll. ¶And engitt ſhuld come thidre with iiij. hundreth knyghtys with out mo: And the kyng with as mony of the wiſeſt men of his land ¶And at yt day the kyng come with his counſell as it wos ordined but Engiſt had warned his knyghtys preualy and them commanded that euery of them ſhuld put a long knyfe in his hoſyn. & whan he ſaied fair ſers now is tyme to ſpeke of loue and pees euery mā a none ſhuld draw out his knyfe and ſle a breton and ſo they killed a thouſand lxi. of knyghtes and with moch ſorow mony of them aſcaped ¶And the kyng vortiger ther hym ſelf tho wos taken and lad to Thongcaſtell and put in to priſon: and ſumme of Engiſtes men wold that the kyng had bene brent all quyke.

¶And vortiger tho for to haue his lyfe granted them as moche as the wold axe and yaf vp all the land tounes Caſtelles cites and brughes to Engiſt and to his folke ¶And all the bretons fled thens in to wales &̄ ther they held them ſtyll. And Engiſt went thurgh the land and ſeyſed all the lond wt fraunchiſos and ī eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y place let caſt a doune chirches &̄ houſes of religione &̄ deſtruid criſtīdom thurgh out all this land &̄ let change the name of the land: that no man of his wer ſo hardy aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt tym to call this lond britan but call it Engiſt land &̄ he deꝑted all the land to his men & ther made vij. kīges for to ſtrenght the lād that the bretons ſhuld neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cū aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther ī ¶The fyrſt kyngdom wos kent ther that Engiſt him ſelf regned and wos lord &̄ maſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ouer all the other ¶The other kyng had ſouthſexe that now is chicheſtre. The thrid kyng had weſtſexe. ¶The iiij. king had Eſtſexe ¶The v. kyng Eſtangill that now is called Northfolk Southfolk Merchemerich that is to ſay the Erldom of Nicholl ¶The vi. had Leceſtre ſhiere Northhamtō ſhiere. Hertford and Huntyngdon ¶The vij. had Oxunford Glouceſtre Wyncheſtre Warwik and Derbyſhire.
            
            
               ¶How vortiger went in to wales and bigan ther a caſtell that wold not ſtond with out morter tempred with blod.
               WHen Engiſt had deꝑted all the land in this maner betwen his men and deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed vortiger out of priſon and 
                  ſuffred him frely to gone whidre that he wold and he toke his way and went in to wales ther that is bretons dulled for as moch as that land was ſtrong an wekked to wyn And Engiſt neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come ther ne neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   know it befor yt land. vortiger held him ther wt his bretās & axed concell what hī wos beſt to doo ¶And they yaf hī concell to make a ſtrōg caſtel yt he might hī ſelf ther ī kepe &̄ defend if nede wer ¶Maſōs ī haſt tho wer fet &̄ bigan the werk vpō ye hill of Breigh. but c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tes thꝰ it be fel all the werk yt ye maſōs made a day doun it fel the nyght &̄ thei wiſt not what it might be

ther of the kyng wos ſoro anoyed of that chance and wiſt not what to doen ¶Wherfor he let ſend after the wiſeſt clerkis and alſo lerned mē yt wer thurgh out wales that myght be found. for they ſhuld hym tell what wos beſt to done. ¶For they ſhuld tell wharfor the foundment ſo failed vnder the werke and that they ſhuld hym tell what wos beſt for to done ¶And the wiſeſt men long tyme had ſtudied they ſayed to the kyng that he ſhuld done ſeke a chylde borne of a woman that neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had with man to done and that chyld he ſhuld ſle and temꝑ with his blod the mort of the werk & ſo ſhuld the werke eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   endure with out ende.
            
            
               ¶How the kyng let ſech Merlin thurgh out all wales for to ſpeke with hym.
               WHen the kyng herd this he commanded his meſangeres anone to wend thurgh out all wales to ſeke that chyld yf he myght hym fynd. and that they ſhuld hym bring forth with thē vn to hym and in recorde and in witnes of this thyng he had tak them his lettres that they ne wer deſtrobled of no man ne lette. ¶And tho the meſſangeres went thens and ſped ſo faſt thatt they come in to a toune that was called Karmardine and os they paſſed forth ther way they funden ij. child of xxiiij. yere age chydīg yf
                     •
                  re with haſty wordes. and on of them ſayed to that other Donebat quod he ye do all wrong to chide or ſtrife wyth me. ¶For ye haue no wit ne no reſō as I haue. Certes Merlī ꝙ he of your wit ne your reſon I make no force for mē tell ꝯminly that ye haue no thyng of god almygfty ſith ye had neuer fadre but eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y mau knaweth well who was your mother ¶The meſſingers of the kynges vortiger when they herd this ſtrife be tuix the tow gromes they axed of them that ſtood beſides them whens that Marlyn wos borne and alſo who hym noriſſhed and the folke hem told that a gret gentyll woman hym bare in Karmardīe that wos called Adhan. but neuer myght man wit who was his fadre ¶When the kynges meſſangeris herd this tydyng they

went anone to hym that wos wardayne of the toune and toold hym the kynges will and his letter ſhewed hym wherfor they wer comen theder. ¶Merlyn and his moder anone wer ſent be fore the wardayne of the toune & he cōmanded them that they ſhuld gone to the kīg as it wos ordand by his maſſengers ¶Merlyn and his moder went thens &̄ come vn to the kyng &̄ ther they wer vnderfonge with moch honour and the kyng axed of that lady yf that child wer hir ſon and who hī begate ¶The lady anſuered full tendirly wepyng and ſayed ſhe had neuer company of man worldly ¶But ſir quod ſhe os I wos a yong mayden ī my faders chambre and other of gret linage wer in my cōpany: yt often tymes wont to play & ſolace. I beleft allone in my chambre & wold not gone forth for byrnyng of the ſone ¶And on a tyme ther come a fair bachelar &̄ entrid in my chambre ther that I was allone. but how he come in to me: & wher I wiſt it neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ne yit wot it not For the dores wer faſt barred & with me he did game of loue For I ne had myght ne pauer him to defend fro me. &̄ oft he come vn to me in the fore ſayed man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſo that he begot this child: but neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   myght I wit what he was
            
            
               ¶Of the anſuere of merlin wherfor the kyng axed whi his caſtille myght not ſtond that he had be gonne ner proue.
               WHen Merlin had herd all that his mother had ſaid he ſpake to the kyng in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ¶Sir how I wos begoten ax ye no more. for it falleth not to yow ne to nōe other to wit but telleth me the encheſon wherfor I am to you brought and wherfore ye haue ſent aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   me. Certis quod the kyng my wiſe cowncelers haue done me to vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtond that the mort of a werke that i haue be gone behoueth to be tempred wt your blod or the foundamēt ſhall faill for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more· ¶Sir quod Merlin will ye ſle me for my blod to temꝑ wt your mort. ye quod the kyng or els ſhall neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   my caſtell ſtand as my councelars done me to vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtand

¶Tho anſuerd merlyn to the kyng Sir he ſayed let them cum by fore me tho wiſe concelers and I wyll preue that they ſay not well ne trewly. ¶And when the wiſe mē wer com Marlī axed if his blod wer the encheſon to make the werke ſtand and endure All thos wiſe wer abaſhed and coud not anſuer ¶Merlyn tho ſayed to the kyng Sir I ſhall you tell the encheſō wherfor your werke thꝰ faleth &̄ may not thand. ¶Ther is vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the montayn ther that ye haue belden your tour a gret pond of wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & in ye botom of ye pond vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther is .ij. dragōs yt on is white that other reed yt fighten to gods ayens your werke ¶Doo ye myne depe till your men come to the pond and doth your men take a way the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   all out & then ye ſhall ſe the dragons as I haue you told that to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   fightē ayens your werke ¶And this is the encheſon wher fore the fundament faleth ¶The kyng anone let digge vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   til yt mē come to yt pond &̄ let done a way all yt wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & ther they fond ij: dragons as Marlyn had them told that egorly foughten to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s. ¶The white dragon egrely aſſayled the reed &̄ laid on hī ſo ſtrongly yt he myght not endure bot with drew him & reſted ī ye ſame caue. ¶And when he had a while reſtyd hym he went before &̄ aſſayled ye reed dragon angrely & held hī ſo ſore yt he myght not ayens hī endure but with drew hī & reſtid And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come ayen ye white dragon & ſtrongly fought wt the reed dragon & bote hym euell and hym ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  come that he fled from thens and no more come ayen.
            
            
               ¶Off the ſyngnificacion of thas .ij. dragons thot wer in thee bottom of the ponde that foughten to gedre.
               THis kyng vortig
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and his men that ſaugh this batayll had gret meruell and prayd Merlyn to telle hym what it myght betoken ¶Sir quod Merlin I ſhall yow tell. ¶The reed dragon betokeneth yourſelf and the white betokeneth the folk of Saxonie that fyrſt ye toke and held in your land thatt fightten ayens yow and yow haue driuen and enchaced.

¶But bretons of your linage ouer comen them and driuen them a way and ſithen at the commyng ayene of the ſaxons they recouered this land and held it for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more and driuen out the britons and did with this lond all ther will and deſtruyed criſtīdō thurght out this land. ¶Ye had firſt ioy with ther cūmynge but now it is turned to you gret damage & ſorow ¶For tho. ij brethern of Conſtance that wos kyng the wich ye let ſla. Shall cum bi for a quinzeme paſſed with a gret pouer from litell bretō and ſhul a venge the deth of ther brother &̄ they ſhall brin yow fyrſt with ſarow And afterward they ſhall ſle a gret part of Saxons &̄ ſhall driue out all the remenant of the land &̄ therfor abyed ye here no longer to make caſtell ne none other werke bot anone go els wher your life all for to ſaue. to god I you by take treuth I haue ſayed to you of thinges that ſhall be fall. ¶And vnderſtond ye well that Aurilanbros ſhall be kyng bot he ſhall be enpoyſened and litell tyme ſhale he regne.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Aurilambros how that he purſued vortiger and Engiſt and how they diden.
               MErlen and his modre deꝑted from the kyng and turned ayen to Karmardine. ¶And ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   tydyngꝭ come to the bretons that Aurilambros &̄ vter his brother wer ariued at Totteneſſe wyth a gret hoſt. ¶And anone thee Bretons aſſemled them and went to vnderfonge Aurilambros &̄ vter wt gret nobulnes and had them vn to london & croned aurilambros & made him kyng and did vn to hym humage And anon he axed wher vortiger that was kyng myght be founden for he wold be avenged of his brother deth and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wold were vpō paynems ¶And they told hym that vortig
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was in wales & ſo they lade hym thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward. ¶vortiger wiſt well that tho brether come hī to conquere and fled thens ī to a caſtell that wos cald Gerneth that ſtood vpon an hygh mantayn and ther hym held
                     •
                  . ¶Aurilambros and vter his brother & ther folke had beſeged thē caſtell

full long tyme for the caſtell was ſtrong & well arayed ¶Soo at the laſt they keſt wildfyre and brent houſes and men and all ther aray and os mych os was with in the caſtell. So that vortiger was brent among all other and ſo he died with moch ſorow. ¶Tho was Engiſt in Kent and regned ther and hard this tydyng and anone fled &̄ wold haue gone in to Scotland for to haue had ſocour. But aurilambros and his men met with him ī the northcuntre and yaf hym bataill and Engiſt and his men defended whiles that they myght. but he &̄ his folke wer diſcomfited &̄ ſlayn. and O
                     •
                  ta his ſon fled vn to yorke. and Aurilambros hym foloed egrely & Otta a litell while ayens him ſtod. but aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ward he put hym to his merci. ¶And arilambros vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  feng hī &̄ to him & to his men yaf the cuntre of galeway ī Scotlond and ther they duelled ¶The kyng arilambros wēt thurgh out ye lond & put away the name of Engiſtland that engiſt aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his name had called it before Tho let he it call ayen gret bretan and let make ayen chirches houſes of relegion Caſtelis cites & burghes &̄ tounes that the Saxons had deſtruyed and come to londō & let make the walles of the cite wich Engiſt and his folke had caſten doune. ¶The bretons lad hym to the mount of Anbrian ſom tyme was an houſe of religion that tho wos deſtruyed thurgh paynyms. ¶Wher of a knyght that was called Anbry that ſome tyme wos found of the houſe and therfor the hyll wos called the mount of brian and after it wos called Ambreſbury and ſhall ſo be for euermore.
            
            
               ¶How Aurilambros did redreſſe the lond of gret Bretan that was deſtrayed thurgh the Saxons.
               HOw the kyng aurilambros let a mēd &̄ redreſſe the houſe of Amleſburi and ther in put monkes but now ther bennonnys a littell from the plaace that wos called Saliſburi ther that the Saxons kylled the Bretans wher Engiſt and he ſhuld haue made a loue day ī wich tyme ther wer ſlayn a .M.lxi.

knyghtes thurgh treſon of engiſt. ¶The kyng therof had gret pitte. and th
                     •
                  ught to make ī mynd of them a monumēt of ſton that myght endure to ye wordes end. and of this thing they toke ther counſell what ther of wos beſt for to done. ¶Tho ſpake to the kyng the byſſhop of london that wos called Ternekyn that he ſhuld enquere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Marlyn. for he coud beſt tell how this thīg myght beſt be made· and merlin aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos ſought &̄ foūd &̄ come to ye kyng ¶And the kyng toold hī his will of the monumēt yt he wold haue made ¶Tho anſuerd Merlin to the kīg &̄ 
                  ſayed ther bene gret ſtonys ī Irland &̄ long vpō ye hill of kyan yt mē called Geāts karoll &̄ if they wer ī this place as thei be ther. they wold endure for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more ī remēbrance of thoo knyghtes yt heir be entered ¶Per ma
                     •
                  oy ꝙ the kīg as hard ſtones be ī my land as ī Irland ¶Soth qd merlin ¶But ī all your land ther be none ſoch For geantes ſet them for grete good of them ſelf.
               For at eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y tyme that they wer woundet or ī ony man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hurt they weſſhen the ſtones wt hote wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and than they weſſhe them ther with and anoon they wer hole.
            
            
               ¶How the bretons wēt for to ſech the gret ſtons ī 
                  Irland.
               WHen thes bretons had herd of this thing they went & ſwore emong them that they wold gonne ſeche tho ſtonnes & toke with them vter the kynges brother to be ther cheftayn &. vM men and Merlin counſelled them for to go vn to Irland and. ſo they diden. ¶And when the kyng of Irland that wos cald Guillomer herd tell that ſtrangers wer ariued ī his lond he aſſē
                  bled a gret pouer &̄ fought ayens them. but he & his folke was diſcomfited ¶The bretans went be for till they come to the moūt of Kylian and climed vp vn to the moūt. ¶But when they ſaw the ſtones & the man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   how they ſtood they had gret meruell and ſayed bitwyn them ſelf that no man ſhuld hem remeue for no ſtrength ne engyne ſo huge they wer & ſo long But merlin thurgh his craft he remeued them &̄ brought them ī to ther ſhippes &̄ come

ayene in to this land And merlin ſet the ſtones ther that the kīg wold haue them and ſet them in the ſame maner that they ſtoden in Irland ¶And when the kyng ſaugh that it was made he thanked Merlyn and richeli him rewarded at his own will and that place let call ſtonhenge for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more
            
            
               ¶How Paſſent that wos vortigers ſone & the kyng Guillomer come in to this land and how a tratour that was called Cappa enpuyſened the kyng Aurilambros.
               
                  ANd men ſhall vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſtand ſtat Paſſent that was vortigers ſone leued in the ſame tyme and come in to this land with a gret pouer and ariued in the north cuntre and wold ben a venged of his faders deth vortiger. ¶And ſtrongly truſted vpon the componye that he had brought with hym out of the land of Germayne and had conquered all the north cuntre vn to yorke. ¶And when kyng Aurilambros herd this he aſſembled a gret pouer of Bretons and went for to fight with paſſent. and he wos diſcomfited and all his pepull. but paſſent aſcapped thēs wt ſum of his men and fled thens in to Irland and come to kīg Guillomer and prayed hym of help and ſocour. The kyng granted hym with good will. and ſayed that he wold help hym vpō yt couenant that I my ſelf muſt gone with you with all my pouer in to breton. and I wold me a venge vpon the Bretons rather for they cum in to my land. and token the ſtones with ſtrength that is called Geantes karoll. The kyng guillomer let ordē his ſhippes and went to the ſee with xv.M. men and ariued in wales and be gon to rob and moch ſorow did. ¶Hit befell ſo that kyng arilombros lay ſeke at wynchſter and myght not helpe him ſelf So that he ſent in his name vter his brother with a pouer to helpe wales and thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward he went as moch os he myght The kyng of Irland and Paſſent had herd tell that Aurilambros was ſeke and to hym ther come a Sarizen that was called Coppa and ſayed Sir duell ye her all in pees with your hoſt &̄
                  
I be hyght you thurgh my quentize that I ſhall ſle the kyng aurilambros that is ſeke. Then ſayed Paſſent if ye doo ſo I ſhal yow richely auaunce This ttoraur Coppa put vpon him an abbyt of Relegion and let ſhaue hym a brod croune and come vn to the kynges court and ſayed that he wold help the kyng of hys maladie· Tho ſayed the tretour Coppa vn to the kyng Sir ben of good comforth for I ſhall yef you ſich a medicin that ye ſhall ſwete anone right and luſten to ſlepe and haue good reſt &̄ thee tratour yaf hym ſich poyſin to ſlep anone right and died in hys ſlepyng. & ye trator ſayed that he wold gone out in to the feld till he wer a waked. and ſo ſcapped he a way. for no man had to him ſuſpeccion for be cauſe of his habbit that he wos in clothed and alſo for his brood ſhauynne croune. but when the kynges men it wiſt that he wos deid they become wondir ſori and faſt ſought the tratour But they myght not fynd hym. for that Coppa turned ayene to the hoſt fro whens that he come.
               ¶When Aurilambros was deid a ſterre in the morne wos ſeī with a clere light and at the bught of the beme wos ſeyne the hed of an horribull dragon.
               WHen the kyng Aurilambros wos thus deid &̄ enpoyſened at wyncheſter. on the morne aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that he wos deid a bowt the tyme of prime ther was ſeyne a ſtere gret and clere and the beme of that ſterne wos bright
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   then the ſon and at the bought of the beem a pered a dragōs heed &̄ out of his mouth come ij. huge lightes that wer as bright as ony fier brennyng ¶And that one beme toward france and ſtryght ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee thiderward. ¶And out of that beym rome vij. bemes full clere & long as it were the light fier ¶This ſterne was ſeyn of mony a man but none of them wiſt wat it betokened ¶vter that wos the kynges brother yt wos ī wales wt his hoſt of bretōs ſaw yt ſterre &̄ ye gret light yt it yaf. he wōdred ther of gretli what it myght betokē &̄ let call Merlī & prayed hī for to tell what it myght betoken.
            
            
               
               ¶Of the betokenyng of the ſtere.
               MErlin ſaw that ſtarre &̄ beheld him long tyme and ſithen he quoke and weped tendirli And ſayed alas alas that ſo nobull a kyng and worthy is deid. ¶And I doo you to vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſtand that Aurilambros your brother is enpeyſened and that I ſe well ī this ſterre. &̄ yourſelf is betokēd bi the heed of the dragō that is ſeī at the bought of the beem. that is yourſelf that ſhal be kyng &̄ regne ¶And by the beem that ſtandeth toward the eſt is vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtōd yt ye ſhall get a ſon that ſhal conquere al fraunce & all the landes yt belongeth to the croune of fraunce that ſhal be a worthier kyng &̄ of more honour than eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos ony of his auncetours ¶And bi the beem that ſtrechys toward Irland is betokened that ye ſhall get a dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that ſhall be quene of Irland. ¶And the vij. bemes betokene that ye ſhall haue vij: ſonnis & eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ichon of them ſhall be kyng & regne wt moch honour & abyde ye no longer heir but goth & yef bataill to your enmys &̄ fight wt them bodely for ye ſhall ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cū them and haue the victori ¶vter thanked hertely Merlyn & toke his men and went toward his enmy &̄ they foughten to gedre mortali & ſo he diſcomfited his enmy & them diſtroyed. And him ſelf kylled Paſſent that wos vortig
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſon ¶And his bretons killed Guillomer yt wos kyng of Irland &̄ all his men. ¶And vter anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that bataill toke his way toward wincheſter for to done entere Aurilambros kīg that wos his brother: ¶But tho was the body borne to ſtonhē
                  ge with moch honour that he had done made in remembrance of the bretons that ther wer ſlaī thurgh treſon of Engiſt. that ſam day that they ſhuld haue bene accordid & in the ſame place they entered aurilambros the ſecūd yere of his regne with al the worſhipe that myght belong to ſich a kīg of whos ſoull god haue me
                     •
                  ci
            
            
               ¶Of vter pendragon and werfor he was called ſo ye ſhall here And how he was ouer take wyth the loue fe Igerne that was the

Erle of Cornewaill wife
               AFter ye deth of aurilambros: vter his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos crouned and regned well and worthely and in remembrance of the dragon that he wos likened to he let make ij. dragons thurgh councell of his bretons. &̄ made that one for to be borne before hī when he went in to bataill. and that other to abide at wincheſter in the biſſhoppis chyrche: ¶And for yt cauſe he wos called euer aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   vter pēdragō. ¶And Otta that was Engiſtes ſon commendid vter bot lytell. that wos made new kyng and ayens him begon to meue were. and ordined a gret company of his frendis & of his kin & of Oſſa his brother & had takē all the land frō humber vn to yorke. but tho of yorke held ſtrongly ayenes them and nold not ſuffer them to cū ī to ye cite nother to yeld the cite to hē & he beſeged the toune anōe right & yaf therto a ſtrong aſſaut bot they of the cite hem keped well &̄ ſtrōgly ¶And whē vter herd ther of he come thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wt a gret pouer for to help & reſcu the toune &̄ put away the ſege & yaf a ſtrōg bataill & Otta &̄ his cōpany them defēdid as well as they myght but at the laſt they wer diſcōfitid & the moſt ꝑt of them ſlaī. &̄ Otta & Oſſa wer takē & put ī priſon at london ¶And vter hī ſelf duelled a while at yorke &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he went to london. &̄ at the eſtir aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wold bere croune & hold a ſolempne feſt. and let ſomen all his Erles and Barons that thei ſhuld cum to that feſt and all tho that had wyfes ſhuld bringe them alſo to that feſt and all comē at the kynges cummandmēt as they wer cummaundid ¶The feſt wos richely arrayed &̄ holdyn and all worthely ſet to mete after that they wer of aſtat ſo that the erle Gorloys of Cornwaill & Igern his wif ſet
                     •
                  
                  ̄ alther next the kīg. &̄ the kīg ſaw the fairnes of that lady that ſhe had. ¶And wos rauyſſhed for hir beaute &̄ oft he made to hir nyſe ſembland ī lokīg & laughyng. ſo at the laſt the erle ꝑceyued the preue lokīg &̄ laughyng & the loue bitwen them & ros vp frō ye 
                  
                     
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     ullull ī wroth & teke is wife. &̄ called to hī his knyghtes.

&̄ went thens all in wroth with out takīg leue of the kīg The king anone ſent aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym that he ſhuld cum ayen and goo not thens in deſpite of hym. ¶And the Erle wold not cum ayene ī no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of wiſe ¶Wherfor the kyng wos full wroth and in wrath hym deffied as his deidly enmy. And the Erle went thens in to cornewaill with his wife in to the Caſtell of Tyntagell. ¶And the kyng let ordin a gret hoſt & come in to Cornwaill for to diſtruy the Erle if that he myght. but he had put hym ī ſich a caſtell that was ſtrong and well arayed of Tyntagell & wold not yeld hym to the kyng. and the kyng anone beſeged ye caſtel & ther duelled xv. dayes yt neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   myght ſped & eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thought vpō Igerne & vpō hir laid ſo moch loue yt he not wiſt to done So at ye laſt he called to hym a knyght that was callid vlfyn yt wos preue with him & told hī all his councell and axed of him what wos beſt for to done ¶Sir qd he doth ſend aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Merlyn anone for he can tell you the beſt counſell of ōny man leuyng. Merlin anone was ſent aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & come to the kyng and the kyng told him all his councell & his will ¶Sir qd Merlin I ſhall done ſo moche thurgh craft yt I can yt I ſhall make you cū this nyght ī to ye caſtell of Tyntagell & ſhall haue all your will of that lady.
            
            
               ¶How vter bigat on Igerne that wos the Erlis wife of cornewaill Arthur kyng.
               MErlyn thurgh craft that he coud changed the kynges figure ī to the likneſſe of the Erle &̄ vlfyn garlois his chā
                  berlayn in to the figure of iordan that wos the Erles chambirlayn So that yche of them wos tranſfigured to od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   lekeneſſe. ¶And when Merlyn had ſo done he ſayed to the kyng Sir qd he now may ye go ſodenly to the caſtell of Tyntagell & axen entre ther & haue your will: The kīg toke priueli all the hoſt to gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ne &̄ lede to a knyght that he mich loued & toke his way toward the caſtell & wt hī toke vlfȳ his chābirlayn &̄ merlin ¶And when they come theder the porter went that it had bene hys owne

lord &̄ when tyme come for to go to bede. ¶The kyng went to bede with Igerne the Erles wife & dyd with hir all his will and bigat vpon hir a ſon that wos called arthur. ¶And vpō the morow the kyng toke his leue of the lady and went ayen to hys hoſt: ¶And the ſame nyght that the kyng lay by Igerne in bedde yt wos the Erles wife. the kynges men yaf a gret aſſaut vn to the caſtell and the Erle and his men manli them defended But at the laſt it befell ſo that in the ſame aſſaut the Erle hym ſelf wos ſlayn and the caſtell taken. ¶And the kyng a none turned ayen to Tyntagell and ſpouſed Igerne with moch honor and made hir quene. and ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   tyme come that ſhe ſhuld be deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed and beyr a child a ſon that wos called Arthur. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he gat a doughter that was called Amya: &̄ when ſhe come of age a nobull Baron that was called Aloth that wos lord of leons wed hir ¶When vter long tyme had regned ther come vpon hī a gret ſekenes as it wer a ſorow ¶And ī the meyn tyme tho yt had to kepe Otta that wos Engiſt ſon and Oſſa his brother that tho wer in priſon: they let them gone for gret yeftes yt they hom yaf and went with them. ¶And when tho .ij. bretheren wer aſcappid and come ayen in ther own cūtre They ordined an grert pouer and begon to were eftſones vpon the kyng
            
            
               ¶How kyng vter cheſe Aloth to kepe the land of breton whiles that he wos ſeke. for as moch as he myght not for his ſeknes
               ANd for as moch as kyng vter wos ſeke and myght nott help hym ſelf he ordined Aloth ſon of Eleyn that tho was choſen for to be wardeyn and cheftayn of all his folke and ſo he anone and his bretans aſſemled a gret hoſt and yaf batell to Otta & to his folke. but Otta at the laſt wos diſcomfitid ¶Hitt befell thus afterward that thes bretons had dedignacion of Aloth & wold not to hī be attendant: wherfor the king wos anoid wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſ
                     •
                  re & let put hym in a litter in the hoſt emonges folke:

¶And they lad hī to veroloyn that tho was a fair cite. ther yt ſent Albon wos martired & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos yt cite deſtroied wt paynīs & thurgh were. &̄ thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thei had ſēt Otta & Oſſa & ther peple & entrid ī to the toune & let make faſt the yates & ther thei held them. &̄ the kīg come &̄ them beſeged & made a ſtrōg aſſaute. but tho yt wei wt in māli them defended ¶The kīg let ordeyn his gōnes and his engynes for to brek the walles &̄ the walles wer ſo ſtrōg yt nothīg myght them myſdoo ¶Otta &̄ his pepull had gret deſpite yt a kīg liggyng ī a lytter had them beſeged: & they toke concell a monges them for to ſtand vp ī the morow &̄ cū out &̄ yef batall to the kīg & ſo they did &̄ ī yt batall wer both Otta & Oſſa ſlayn. & all tho other yt aſcapped a lyue fled ī to ſcotland & made Colegū ther chyftayn. &̄ the ſaxons that wer on lyue &̄ aſcaped fro the bataill brought ayan a gret ſtrength & emōges them they ſayed. yt if kīg vter wer deid they ſhuld well cōquere ye land & amonges them they thought to enpoſin the kīg & ordeyned mē for to do this dede. and yaf them of yeftes gret plente this thyng to done and they ordined hem thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward ther yt the kīg was duellīg & clothed hem ī pouer wede the bett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   all for to ſped therlyd purpoſe but neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  theles for all ther falſnes & quātize they might neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cū to nyghthe kīg: ¶But ſo at the laſt they aſpied yt ye kīg drāknōe oth erlycour but only wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of a cler wel yt was negh beſide ¶And thes fals tratours vpō a day preuali wēt to ye wel & put therī poyſon ſo yt all ye wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was enpoyſened. and anōe aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   os the kīg had dronkyn of ye wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he begō to fuell &̄ ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he died &̄ os mōy as dronk of that wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   died alſo ¶And anōe as this wos aſpied folke of the toune let ſtop the well for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more ¶When the king wos dred his folk bere hī to Stonhenge with gret ſolempnite of biſſhoppis & of barōs that werther hī to bery beſides Aurilambros his brother & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   turned ayen tho eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ychone & ſend after Arthur his ſon &̄ they made him kīg of the land with moche reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ence after his fadres deth xvij. yere of his regne.
            
            
               
               ¶How Arthur that wos the ſon of vter was crouned after his fadre deth and how he drofe Colegrin and the Saxons and Cheldrik of almayne out of this lond
               
               WHen Arthur wos made kyng of ye lond he wos bot yong of age of xv. yere. but he wos fair and bold and doughty of body and to meke folke he wos good and curtas and large off ſpendyng and made hym wonderly well beloued among all men ther that it wos need. ¶And when he begone to regne he ſwore that ye ſaxons neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſhuld haue pees ne reſt till that he had driuē them out of the lond. and aſſembled a gret hoſt and faught wt Colegrī the wich aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the time that Otta wos deid the ſaxons mayntened. & this Colegrin wos diſcomfited & fled vn to yorke & toke the toune and ther hym held. ¶And the kyng beſeged hī ther but he myght nothyng ſped. for the cite wos ſo ſtrong. and they with in the toune kepped the cite well and orpedly. ¶And in the meyn tyme Colegrin let the toune to Bladulf & fled hym ſelf to Cheldrik that wos kyng of Almayne for to haue of him ſocour &̄ the kyng aſſemblid agret pouer &̄ come & ariued in ſcotlond with .v.C. ſhippis. and whē arthur wiſt of this tidīg that he had not pouer &̄ ſtrength y nough to fight ayens Cheldk he let be the ſege & went to london and ſent anone his letters to the king of litill bretan that was called Hoel his nepheu his ſuſtres ſon that he ſhuld cū to hī wt all the pouer yt he myght and he aſſemblid a gret hoſt & ariued at ſouthinton. ¶And when kīg arthur it wiſt he wos glad i nough &̄ went ayens them & them reſaued with moch honour ſo that thos ij. hoſtes met & aſſembled them and toke ther way euen vn to Nichol that Cheldrik had beſeged but it wos not taken ¶And they come vpō cheldrik & his pepull or they wiſt wer yt they wer &̄ them egrely aſſeilled. ¶The kīg cheldrik &̄ his meny defēdid them māly bi ther pouer. but kīg arthur & his mē kylled ſo mōny ſaxōs that neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos ſeyne ſich ſlaught
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ¶And Cheldrik &̄ his men yt wer left a

lyue fled a way. ¶And arthur them purſued and droue oute them in to a wod that they myght no ferther paſſe Cheldrik & his men ſaw well that they wer brought in to moch diſeſe &̄ them yold to arthur in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wyſe that he ſhold take ther hors and ther armur & all that they had they muſt onli gone ō fote in to ther ſhippis. and ſo they wold gone home in to ther own land and neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cū ayen in to this land. ¶And vpon aſſurance of this thyng they yeuen hym good hoſtag
                     •
                  s. ¶And arthur by coūcell of his men granted this thyng and reſaued the hoſtages and ther vpō the other wēt to ther ſhippes: ¶And when they wer in the hy ſee the wynd changed as the deuell it wold and thei turnd ther nauy and come a yen to this land and ariued at Totneſſe & wēt out of the ſhippes and toke the land & clen robbed it & moch pepull ſlew and taken all the armur that they myght find and ſo they wēt forth till thei come vn to Bathe. but the men of the toune ſhittē faſt ther yates and nold not ſuffre them to cum with in the toun and they defendit them well and orpedly ayens them.
            
            
               ¶How Arthur yaf bataill vn to the Saxons when they com ayen ī to this land &̄ beſeged the toune of bathe &̄ them ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come.
               WHen arthur herd this tydyng he let hong anone the hoſtages and left Hoel of bretan his nepheu for to kepe the marche toward Scotlond with halfe his pepull. and hym ſelf wēt to helpe and reſcu the toune of Bathe and when he come thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hee yaf a ſtrong bataill to Childrik and kylled almoſt all the peple that he had· for no man myght hym withſtond ne endure vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thee ſtroke of his ſwerd. ¶And ther bothe wer ſlayn Colegrin &̄ 
                  Bladud his brether ¶And Cheldrik fled thens and wold haue gone to his ſhippis. But when arthur it wiſt he toke .x.M knyghtis to Cador that was Erle of Cornwaill for to let &̄ ſtop his cumming. ¶And arthur hym ſelf went toward the marche of ſcotlād. for meſſing
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s told hī yt the ſcottys had beſeged Hoil of bretan ther that he lay ſeke and therfor he haſted hym thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward

¶And Cador purſued aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Cheldrik & toke him er he might come vn to his ſhyppis and kylled Cheldrik and his pepull. ¶And when Cador had done this viage: he haſted hī ayen as faſt os he myhht towardes Arthur. and fond hym in Scotland ther that he had reſcued Hoel of britan. But the ſcottys were fer wt in Mounref. And ther they held them a while but arthur them purſued &̄ they fled thens in to Lymoigne that wer in thatt cūtre lx. iles and gret plente of briddis &̄ gret plente of Egels that wer woned to cry and fight to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s and make gret noyſe whan folke come to rob that land and weren as moch os they myght & ſo they did for the Scottis wer ſo gret rauenours yt they toke al yt thei might fīd ī ye lād of Lymoign wt out ani ſparīg & ther with charged ayen the folke in to Scotland for to wende.
            
            
               ¶How kīg arthur axed of merlin the auēturs of vi. of the laſt kīgꝭ yt wer to regne ī englond & how the land ſhuld enden▪
               
               SIr qd Merlin. in the yere of the incarnacion of ihū criſt .M.CC.xv. ſhall come a Lamb out of Wyncheſtr yt ſhall haue a white tong &̄ trew lippis: &̄ he ſhall haue writē in his hert holineſſe. ¶This Lam ſhall make mony goddis houſes. & he ſhall haue pees the moſt ꝑt of his lyfe And he ſhal make on of the faireſt places of the world that in his tyme ſhall not fulli be made an end of. ¶And ī ye end of his life a wolf of a ſtrange land ſhall do hym moch harme &̄ ſorow thurgh wer but at the end the lamb ſhall be maſter thurgh help of a red fox yt ſhall cum out of the northweſt & him ſhall ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cum &̄ the wolf ſhall dy in wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . And after that tyme the Lamb ſhal lyue no while bot he ſhal die ¶His ſeede ſhall be in a ſtrange land. &̄ thee land ſhall be with out a gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nour a litel̄l̄ tyme.
               ANd after this tyme ſhall come a dragon melled wyth mercy and eke wyth wodeneſſe and that ſhall̄ haue an berde as a goot that ſhall̄ yef ī englond ſhadow & ſhall̄ kepe the land

from colde &̄ hete &̄ his on foot ſhall be ſet in wyke &̄ that other in london and he ſhall enbrace in habitacions and he ſhall opyn his mouth toward wales &̄ the trimbilyng of the hidour of his mouth his eres ſhall ſtrech toward mony habitacions and cūtres and his breth ſhall be full ſuete in ſtrange land ¶And ī his tyme ſhall the reuers renne blod and with brayn. &̄ he ſhall make ī places of his land walles that ſhall do moch harme vn to his ſeed aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his tyme ¶Then ſhall ther cum a pepull owt of the north weſt during his regne that ſhall be lad thurgh out a wikked hare that the dragon ſhall doo croune kyng that aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward ſhall fle ower the ſee with out cummyng ayene for dred of the dragon. ¶&̄ ī that tyme the ſon ſhall be as reed as blode as mē ſhall ſe thurgh out all the world yt ſhall be tokyn gret peſtylence and deth of folke thurgh dynt of ſuerd and that pepull ſhall bene fader les tile the tyme that the dragon die thurgh an hair that ſhall meue ayens hym were vn to the end of his life that ſhall not fully be endit ī his tyē ¶This dragō ſhal be hold ī his tyī the beſt bodi of the world and he ſhall die by ſides the marches of a ſtrange land & the land ſhall duell fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  les wt out a good gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  n and men ſhall wepe for his deth from the Ile of ſhepey vn to the hauen of mareil ¶Wharfor alas ſhall be ther ſong of fadroles folke that ſhall ouer lyuen in his land 
                  deſtruied.
               ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this dragon ſhall cū a goot out of kar that ſhal haue hornes and a berd of ſiluer and ther ſhall cum out of his noſthrell a domp that ſhall be tokyn hunger &̄ ſorow and gret deth of the pepull and moch of his land in the begynnyng of his regne ſhall be waſted ¶This goot ſhall go ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to france and ſhall opene the flour of his lyfe and deth In his tyme ther ſhall a riſe an Egle in Cornwaill that ſhal haue fetres of golde that of pride ſhal be with out pere of the land &̄ he ſhal deſpiſe lordes of blood and after he ſhal flee ſhamfully by a bere at Gauerſech and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſhal be made breggis of men vpon the coſtes

of the ſee and ſtonys ſhuld fall fro caſtels &̄ mony other tounes ſhall be made playn ¶In this tyme ſhall ſeme that ye bere ſhall brenne &̄ a bataill ſhall be done vpō the armes of the ſee in a feld ordeyned as a ſheld ¶And at that bataill ſhal die mōi whitte heedis wherfor his batal ſhall be called the white batiill. ¶And the forſayed bere ſhal̄ done this goot moch harme &̄ it ſhal̄ cū out of the ſouthweſt & of his blod: than ſhal̄ the goot leſe moch. &̄ of his land. till at the time that ſhendſhip ſhal̄ hī ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cū and than ſhal he clothe him in a lion ſkyn. and than ſhal̄ he wyn that he had before loſt and more ther to ¶For a pepul̄ ſhal cū out of the northweſt that ſhal̄ make the goot ſo ſoyr a drad & hee ſhal a venge him of his enmys thurgh cuncel of two owles that fyrſt ſhal̄ be in perel for to be vn done. but the old owle ſhall wend away a certayn tyme. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he ſhal cum ayen in to this land ¶Thes two owles ſhall do gret harme to mōy on & ſo thei ſhal̄ councel the goot to arere were ayens the forſayed bere. &̄ at the laſt the goot & the owles ſhal̄ cum at burton vpon trent and ſhal̄ wend ouer and for dred the bere ſhal fle. and a ſwan with him fro his company to burton toward the north & ther they ſhall be wt an hard ſhoure and than the ſuan ſhal̄ be taken & ſlayn wt ſorow and the bere taken and heded alther next his neſt that ſhall ſtand vpon a broken brige on whom the ſon ſhall caſt his bemys. and mony ſhall hym ſeke for vertu that from hym ſhall cū ¶In the ſame ſhal̄ die for ſorow and care: a pepul of his land ſo that mony landis ſhal be vpō him the more bolder afterward. and thos two owles ſhal do moch harme to the forſayd flour of lyfe &̄ hir ſh̄al̄ lede in to diſtreſſe ſo that ſhe ſhall paſſe ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee in to fraunce for to make pees betwen thee goot and the flourdeliſe and ther ſhe ſhall duell til a tyme that hir ſeed ſhal cum & ſech hir & they ſhall be ſtyl till a tyme that they ſh̄al hem clothe wt grace and they ſhall ſech. the owles &̄ ſhal put them to deſpitous deth ¶And after ſhall this goot be brought to diſeſe and grett

anguiſſh. and in ſorew he ſhall leue all his life.
               AFter this Goot ſhall cum out of wyndeſore a bore that ſhall haue an hed of a white lions hert and pytuus lokīg ¶His viſage ſhal̄ be reſte to ſeke mē. his breſt ſhal be ſtāchīg of therſt to them that be therſty. his worde ſhal be goſpell his bering ſhal be meke as a Lamb. ¶In the fyrſt yere of his regne he ſhal haue gret payne to iuſtifie them that be vn trew. And in his tyme ſhall his land be multiplied with aliandes. ¶And this bore thurgh ferſeneſſe of hert that he ſhal̄ haue ſhall make wolfes to becum lambis: and he ſh̄al̄ be called thurgh out the world bore of holines ferſnes of nobulnes &̄ of mekenes and he ſhal done meſurably all that he ſhal do vn to the burgh of Ieruſalem and he ſhal whette his teth vpon the yates of Paris and vpō iiij landes. Spayn ſhal tremble for dred Gaſcoyne ſhall ſwet. in fraunce he ſhal put his winge. his gret tayll ſhall reſt in Englond ſoftely Almayn ſhall quake for dred of him. ¶This bore ſhal yef mantels to ij. tounes of Englond and ſhall make the Reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   rene with blod and brayn. & he ſhal make mony medous reed. and he ſhall get as moch as his aunceſtres did: and or that he be deid he ſhal beyr iij. crounes and he ſh̄al put a land in to gret ſubieccion and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   it ſh̄al be releued but not in his tyme. ¶This bore aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he is deid for his doughtynes ſhal be ētered at Coloyn & his land ſhall be than fulfilled of al good AFter this boor ſhall cum a lamb that ſh̄al haue feet of leed and an heed of bras and hert of a loppe a ſwynes ſkī and an hard and ī his tyme his land ſhall be in pees the fyrſt yer of his regne he ſhal do make a cite that all the world ſh̄al ſpeke ther of ¶This Lamb ſhall leſe in his tyme a gret paart of his land thurgh an hidous wolfe but he ſhall recou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   it & yeue an lordſhip to an Egle of his land and this egle ſhal well gouerne it till the tyme that prid ſhall him ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cum Alas the ſorow For he ſhal die of his brethers ſuerd and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſhall the land fal to the

forſayd lamb yt ſhall gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ne the land ī pees all his lifes tyme &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he ſhall die and the land be fulfylled of all maner good.
               AFter this lamb ſh̄al̄ cum a moldwarp curſed of goddes mouthe a caytyfe a coward an hare. he ſh̄al̄ haue an Elderly ſkyn as a goot and vengeaunſe ſhal̄ fall vpō him for ſyn ¶In the fyrſt yere of his regne he ſhal haue of all good grett plente in his land and toward him alſo. and in his land he ſhal̄ haue gret preſyng til̄ the tyme that he ſhal̄ ſuffre his pepul̄ lyue in to mich pride with out chaſtiſyng wherfor god wyl̄ be wroth. ¶Than ſhall ariſe vp a dragon of the north that ſhall be ful̄ fers and ſhal̄ meve were ayens the forſayd Moldwarp and ſhal̄ yef him bataell vpō a ſtone ¶This dragon ſholl gadre ayen in to his company a wolf that ſhal̄ cum out of the weſt to meve were ayens tho forſayd moldwerp in his ſied and ſo ſhall the dragō and he bynd ther tayles to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ¶Than ſhal̄ cum a Lion owt of Irland that ſhal fall in companie wt hem. and than ſhall trembull the land that ſhal be called Englond as an aſpyn leef. &̄ in that tyme ſhal caſtels be fellid doune vpō Thamyſe and it ſhall ſeme that ſeuerne ſhall be dri for the bodies that ſhall fall deid therin. The iiij. cheif flodes in Englond ſhall ren in blod. &̄ gret dred ſhall be and anguiſſh yt ſhull ariſen: ¶After thee Moldwarp ſh̄al fle and the dragon ¶The lion and the wolfe ſhal thē driue a way. & the land ſhall be with out them. And ye moldwarp ſhall haue no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   pouer ſaf onli a ſhip wher to he mawend ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that he ſhall gone to lond whan the ſee is wt draw And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that he ſhall yef the thrid part of his lond for to haue the fourth part in pees and reſt. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he ſhal life in ſorow all his lifes tyme ¶And ī his tyme the hote bathes ſhal̄ becō cold. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that ſhall the molwarp die auentou
                     •
                  ſli and ſodanli A las for ſorow. for he ſhall be drowned in a flod of the ſee: his ſeed ſhall become fadreles in ſtrange lond for euermore. And
                  
than ſhall the land be deꝑted in to .iij. partes. that is to ſay to the wolfe to the dragon and to the lyon. ¶And ſo ſhal it be for euer more. and than ſhall this land be called the land of conqueſt And ſo ſhall the rightfull heyris of englond ende.
            
            
               ¶How Arthur ouer come Guillomer that was kyng of Irland and how the ſcotes become his men.
               WHen Guillomer that was kyng of Irland hard tidyngꝭ that kyng Arthur was entred at Glaſtenbury. he ordeyned a gret pouer of Iriſſh men and come to the ſee with his Iriſſh pepull and ſo come in to Scotland ouer the ſee. and ariued faſt by ther that kyng Arthur wos with his hoſt and anone as he wyſt ther of. he went towardes him. and yaf him bataill. and ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come him anone right. and guyllomer fled with his men ayen in to irland. ¶And when this was done &̄ he diſcomfited Arth• turned him ayen ther that he wos in to the place ther that he had left the Scotys and wold haue them all ſlayn. But the biſſhoppes abbotes and other folke of the cuntre and ladies open heed cō befor kyng arthur and cried him mercy and ſayed ſir gentill kȳg and myghty haue mercy and pytte vpon us. And os your ſelfe be of the right law to hold and maynten criſtindom. for full gret diſhonour it ſhuld be to kyll them that beleueth in al̄ myghty god as ye done and for goddis loue haue mercy and pytte of vs: and ſuffre vs for we haue had moch ſorow and pyne for the Saxones has mony tyme paſſed thurgh our lond. bot that is not ynough to you for often tymes they haue vs done ſerow and diſeſe. ¶For our caſteles they haue taken and our beſtes ſlain and eten. and moch harme they haue vs done: and if ye wold vs now kyll hit wer no honour to a kyng to kill them that cries him mercy. ¶For ynough ye haue done to vs and has vs ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  cūmyn and for the loue of god that ye wyll ſuffre vs for to life &̄ haueth merci of criſtē peple yt beleuen ī criſt os ye doo ¶whē kīg arthur

herd this ſorow he had pytte of them. and yaf them liyfe and lym with out any more harme. and they fell doune to his fete &̄ than kyd him and become his leige men and he toke of them homages. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that kyng arthur turned ayene with his hoſt and come vn to yorke. and ther his bydyng made during that viage ¶And tho yaf he all loegers to Aloth that had ſpouſed his ſuſtre and other yeftes gret plente and tho was Gawen his coſin bot of yong age and to all his other men that him had ſeruid in his were he yaf rich yeftes. and he thanked them moch all of ther good ſerueſſe.
            
            
               ¶How kyng arthtr ſpouſed Gūnore that wos gūnores coſī Erle of cornwaill and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he conqured of guillomer all Irland
               WHen Arthur had brought his land in pees and reſt and in good ſtate and all wos well in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y cuntre. tho toke he &̄ wedded a wife that was called Gūnor &̄ made hirquene a fair lady and a gentill that Cador the erle of Cornwaill had noriſſhid in his chambre that wos his own coſin but neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they had child to gedre and neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  theles kyng Arthur loued hir wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   well and derly ¶And anone os wynt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was paſſed he let aſſemble agret hoſt and all his barons. and ſayed that he wold wend in to Irland for to conqure the land: &̄ he taried not long that he ne paſſed ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in to Irland ¶And Guillomer the kyng let aſſemble a gret hoſt and yaf bataill to kyng arthur. But Guillom wos diſcomfited and yeld him to the kyng and become his man and to hī did feaulte and homage and of him held all that land fro yt tyme forward ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   paſſed kyng arth• forthermore and cō
                  quered Gutland & Iſland and toke homages of folke and of ye land &̄ ther duelled xij: yere in pees and regned with ioy & myrthe and ther wered no man ne woman vpon hī. ¶And he become ſo curtas and large and honorabull that the Emprours court of Rome ne none od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thurgh out all the world wos not accompted to kyng Arth• that ony man wiſt of: ne none ſo well pr
                     •
                  ſed.

¶And therfor the beſt knyghtis of all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   landes come vn to him ther for to duel̄. and he them reſſaued with good will and reuerence. ¶And all the knyghtys weren ſo good: that nomā knew the werſt: And therfor kyng Arthur made a round table that when they ſhuld ſit to ther mete: all ſhuld be elike hie and euenly ſerued at the tabull: yt none of them ſhuld make a vaūce yt on werhier than an other ¶And kyng arthur had at thatt table Britons &̄ Frenſhmē Normans &̄ Flemynges Burgōs Mauſers &̄ Loherms. & of all the landes a this half of monte go rye & of his lād of breton &̄ of ye gret Cornwail̄ of wales & of Irland &̄ of ſcotland &̄ ſhortely to tell of all the lādes yt 
                  wold worſhip cheualrie ſeche come to kyng Arthurs courte.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Arthur went in to Fraunce and conquered yt land of Froll that was a Roman and how he him kylled.
               SYth it befell that kyng Arthur thurgh conceill of his barons and lordis wold go to conquire all fraunce that tho was called Galle thurgh romans that tho held that land in ther pouer and in ther gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nance. &̄ the romans had take yt land to a nobul̄ knyght & a worthy of bodi yt wos called Froll &̄ when he wiſt yt arthur come: he ordend an hoſt & a gret pouer &̄ fought wt the kīg. and he &̄ his folke wer diſcōfyted & fled vn to Paris. &̄ entred the cite &̄ cloſed the yates & ther hem held. ¶Arthur wyſt yt frol̄ wos gone to paris he purſued aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & come thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ hī beſeged: but the Cite was ſo ſtrong & wel̄ araied & tho yt wer therin defēded them well & manli ¶Kȳg arthr duelled thermore thē a moneth & ther wos ſo moch peple ī the cite &̄ diſpēdid al̄ ther vitails yt wer with ī. &̄ ſo gret hunger bicom amōges them yt they died wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thikke withī the cite for hunger and come 
                     •
                  on to Frol and prayed him to be accorded with kyng arthur for to haue pees and they wold yelde them vn to him and the toune alſo. ¶Froll ſaw that no longer he myght hold the toune ayens ther wil̄ & truſt gretli vpō his own ſtrēgth &̄ ſēt to kīg arthur that

he ſh̄uld cum fight with him body for body. and ſo ſhuld they deꝑte fraunce betwene them two. ¶Kyng arthur anone grāted it &̄ wold not that none of his peple vndertoke the bataill for hī ¶And vpon the morn bothe come well araied with out paris ther that they ſhuld fight and anone they ſmyten to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s ſo ferſly & ſo well they foughten in both ſidis that no man coud deme the better of them ¶And ſo it befell that Froll yaf Arthur ſuch a ſtroke that he kneled to the ground wold he nold he. and os frol̄ withdrew his ſwerde he wounded kyng Arthur in the forhed that the blood fell doune by his eyn and his face: ¶Arthur anone ſtert vp hertely when he felt him hurt as a man that ſemed almoſt wo
                     •
                  d: and he toke Tabourne his good ſuerd &̄ drow it vp an high. &̄ yaf Froll ſuch a ſtroke that ther with he clafe his hed doun to the ſholdres ſo that his helme myght not be his warent. & ſo he fell doune deid in the place. ¶And thē tho of the cite made gret ſorow for froll. and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ichon yeld them to kyng Arthur & the toune alſo. and become his men and did to him humage and feaulte. &̄ he vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fenge them and toke of them good hoſtages. &̄ kyng Arthur aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that. went forth with his hoſt and conquered Augien and Angiers Gaſcoyn Pehito Nauerne & Burgon Berri Lotherne Turyn and Peithers. and all the other land of fraunce he cōquered holli ¶And whē he had all cōquerd &̄ taken bi humages & feautes he turned ayen to Paris &̄ ther he duelled long tyme. & ordined pees long tyme ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   al̄ the cūtre & thurgh out all fraunce. ¶And whē pees wos made ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   al̄ thurgh his noble kynghthod yt he had. & alſo for his own worthines. ¶And no mā werhe neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſo gret a lord durſt not meue were ayenſt hī nod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to ariſe to make ye lōd of france ī quiet. & ī pes he woned ther ix. yere & did mō
                  
                     •
                   gret wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s &̄ reproued mōy proud men & lither tirantis them chaſtiſed afterther deſeruiſe.
            
            
               ¶How kīg arthr auaūced al̄ his mē yt had trauild ī his 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uis
               
                  
                  ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward it befell thus at Eſtren ther that he held a feſt at Paris. & richly he gan auaunce his knyghtis for ther ſeruice that they had him holpen in his comqueſt ¶He yafe to his ſtoward that wos called Key Augien and Angiers. And to Bedeler his botler he yaf Normandie that tho wos called Neuſtrie. and to Holdyn his chamberlayn he yaf Flaund
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s and Mance. and to Dorell his coſyn he yaf Boloyne. and to Richard his nephu he yaf Pountif. and to all other he yaf large landis and feys after they wer of eſtate. ¶And when arthur had thus his knyghtis feffed. at auerill next after ſueyng he come ayene in to Bretan his own land and after at whitſontied nex ſewyng be councell of his barons he wold be cronned kīg of Glomergon and held a ſolempne feſt and let ſompne knyghtis Erles and Barons that they ſhuld come thedre eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ychon. &̄ ther was Scaterkyng of ſcotland Cadwere kyng of ſouthwales ¶Guillomer kyng of northwales. Maded kyng of Irland Malgamus kyng of gutlande Achilles kyng of Iſeland Aloth kyng of denmarke Gonewas kyng of norway and Hell his coſin kyng of dorkeny Cador kyng of litell breton Morwith erle of cornwaill Mauran erle of glouceſtre Guerdon erle of wynch eſ tre Boell erle of harford vrtegy erle of oxford Curſall erle of bath Ionas erle of cheſtre Eneral erle of dorſeſtre Kimare erle of ſaluſberi Waloth erle of cante
                     •
                  beri Iugerne erle of chicheſtre Arall erle of leiceſtre and the erle of werwik and mony other mo riche lordis ¶Bretons alſo ther come mo that is to ſay Dippon Donaud Gennes and mony od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that be not named heir wer at that feſt and mony afair feſt kyng arthr had holden be forne but neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   none ſuch ne ſo ſolempne. and that laſted xx. daies wt moch honour and myrth.
            
            
               ¶Of the lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that wos ſent from Rome for prid to kīg arthr
               
               THe thrid day as kyng Arthur ſat at his mete amang his kynges and amonge them that ſittyn at the feſt byfo
                     •
                  
                  
them come in xij. eldren men of age richeli arayed. and courteſli they ſalued the kyng and ſayed they come from Rome ſent os be meſſangers fro the Emprour. and toke to him a letter that thus moch was to vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtōd: ¶Gretly vs meruyleth arthur thatt thow art ons ſo hardy with eien in thi heed to make open were & contake ayens vs of Rome that owne all the world to deme for thou haſt neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yit be forne this tyme proued ne aſſayed thy ſtrength of the romans. and therfor thou it ſhall in a litell tyme: ¶For Iulius ſeſar conquered all the land of Bretan & toke ther of truage and our folke haue it long y had. and now thurgh thi prid thou witholdeſ it: ¶Wherfor we of rome commaunde the that thou it yeld ayen. and yit haſt you more foly done: that thou haſt ſlayn Froll that wos our ba
                     •
                  on of fraunce all wt wronge. ¶And therfor all the communs of Rome warneth the and commaundeth the vpon life and lymme: that thou in haſt be at rome amendis for to make of thy myſdedis that thou haſt done ¶And it be ſo that thow cum not. we ſhall paſſe the hill of Ioye with ſtrength: and we ſhall the ſech wher eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thow may bee founde and thow ſhalt not haue a fote of land of thyn own that we ne ſhatt deſtruy it. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward with thi bode we ſhall doo all our wyll: ¶When this lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was red: & al̄ men it herd: they wer annoied all at wer at that ſolempne feſt. &̄ ye bretōs wold haue ſlaī the meſſang
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s: but the kīg wold not ſuffre them. &̄ ſaid yt thee meſſangers ſhuld haue no harme: & may bi reſō nōe de
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  ue: but cō
                  māded them to be worſhipfulli 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  ued. &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   mete he toke cōcell of kyngꝭ erles & barons. what anſuer he myght yef ayen to the meſſangers &̄ they cōcelled him at onys that he ſhuld aſſemble agret pouer of all the landis of wich he had lordſhip. and māly auēge him vpō the Emprour of the diſpite that he had ſend him ſuch an lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . &̄ thei ſwore by god &̄ by his namys that they ſhuld hī purſue & brenne as moch as they myght. and ſayd that they 
                     
                        •
                     old neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   faill kȳg Arthur. & rather to be deid. And they let write a lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  
to ſend to the Emprour by the ſame meſſangers in this maner.
            
            
               ¶Off the bold anſuere that kyng Arthur ſent to the Emprour of Rome and to the romans.
               VNderſtondeth amonges you of Rome yt I am kyng arthur of Breton and frely it holdis & ſhall hold and att Rome haſtile I will be. nat to yef you truage: but for to axen truage: For Conſtātine yt was Eleyns ſon that was emporour of Rome and of all the honour that ther to belongeth. And Maximian king: cōquered all france & Almayn: & mount ioye paſſed. & cōquered all lumbardie. & thes ij. wer myne aunceſtres and that they held & had. I ſhal̄ haue thurgh goddis will.
            
            
               ¶Of ye reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ance yt kīg Arthr did to ye Emꝓurs meſſang
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s·
               WHen this letter was made and enſeled. kyng Arthur to thes meſſangers yaf gret yeftes: And after that the meſſangers toke ther leue and went thens and come to the court off Rome ayene & told the Emprour how wortheli they wer vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fong and alſo of ſich a rial companie that he had him to ſerue. and how he wos more riale ſerued than the Emprour of Romo or ony kyng leuyng in the world. ¶And when the Emprour had ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſeyne the letter and herd what was ther in and ſaw that Arthur wold not be ruled aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym. He let aſſemble and ordeyne an huge hoſt for to deſtruy kyng Arthur yf that he myght ¶And kyng arthur as touching his pouer and parti ordeyned his pouer and knyghtes of the round table.
            
            
               ¶Of ye kīgis &̄ lordis yt cō to helpe kīg arthr ayēs ye Emꝓ
                     •
                  
               
               THe kyng of Scotland and of Irland and of Gutland of Denmarke and of Almayne eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y of them had x.M. men The duke of Normandie Gaſcoyn flandres Pehito and of Boloyne had iiijM. Gerin of Charthres had xM. Hoell of bretā had xij.M. &̄ hī ſe
                     •
                  f of his own land xijM. and of arbalaſtters and of archers and of other folke in foot that no man coud the
                     •
                  
                  
nombre And when all wer redi for to wend kīg Arthur his lād & Gūnore his wife toke to kepe to on of his nephus that was a wyſe knyght and an hardi that wos called Mordred. but he was not all trew os ye ſhal̄ heir afterward. kyng Arthur toke all his reuame to this Mordred ſaf onli the croune▪ ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that kyng Arthur toke his hoſt and went to ſouthamton ther yt the ſhippis wer brought & the folke aſſembled and they did go vn to the ſee and had wynd &̄ wedre at will and os ſone as they myght they ariued at Har
                     •
                  let. and os ſone as they myght they went to lond out of ther ſhippis and ſpred all ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the cuntre:
            
            
               ¶How kyng arthur fought with a Geant in ſpayn that the wos called Dinabus that kylled Eleyn that wos kyng Hoels coſyn of litell Breton:
               KYng Arthur had not duelled in the cuntre but a lytell tyme that men him told that ther wos comen a gret Gegn
                     •
                   in to ſpayn and had rauiſſhed fair Eleyn that was coſyn vn to Hoel̄ of lytill bretan and had brought hir vpon an hill that is called the mount of ſent Barnard and ther was no man ī that cuntre ſo bold ne ſo hardy that durſt with him fight ne cum nye the place ther that the geant dulled that was called Dinabꝰ and moch ſorow he did ī the cuntre ¶When kyng Arthur herd this tydyng he called Key and Bedewere and cūmanded them to gon preuely and eſpy wher the geant myght be 
                     •
                  unden & they come to the Rinage ther that men ſhuld go to the mount that wos all encloſed about with wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and yit is and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſhal be. ¶And thei ſaw abrinnyng fire vpon the hyll. and ther was alſo an other hill nygh that. and ther wos vpon that an other fire brennyng ¶Key and Bedewere come to the next hill and 
                     •
                  ōden a widew openhed ſittīg beſides a tombe ſore wepyng &̄ gret ſorow made. & oft ſhe ſayd eleyn elein: & Key and bedewere axed what ſhe was and wherfor ſhe made ſo moch ſorow. and who ſay in that tombe

O qd ſhe what ſorow and myſauentur fair lordes ſeke ye her: for if the geant may you heir fynd: he will you ſle anone. ¶Be ſtyll good wife qd they: ther of diſmay ye not. but tell vs the ſoth whi that thow makeſt ſo moch ſorow and wepyng ¶Sirs quod ſhe: for a damyſell that I noriſſhid with my breſt yt was called Ellin: that was nece to Hoell kyng of breton. And heir lieth the body in this tombe that to me wos takn to noriſſhe. ¶And ſo ther come a deuell a geant. and rauiſſhed hir and me alſo: and lad vs both with him away. ¶And he wold haue forlayn that mayd that wos ſo yong and tend
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of age. But ſhe myght it not ſuffer. ſo gret and ſo houge as the geant was ¶And for certis if he now cū os he is wont to do. he will yow both now kill: and therfor wend ye hens. Then beſpake thes two meſſengers: and ſayed vn to hir. wherfor go ye not from hens. ¶Certis ſyrs quod ſhe when that Elin wos deid the geāt made me to abyde to done and haunte his will. and me muſt nedes it ſuffer: and god it wote I do it not with my will for me had leu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to be deid. than with him to deill. ſo moch payn & ſorow I haue when he me forlieth. ¶When Key & Bedewer had herd all that this woman them told. They turned ayene and come to kyng arthur and told him all yt they had ſeyne & he
                     •
                  d Arthur anōe toke them both wt hī & wēt preueli by nyght yt nōe of his hoſt wiſt & come on morow erli to the geant & faught wt hī ſtr
                     •
                  
                  ̄gli & at thee laſt hī ſlew ¶And arthur bad bedewer ſmyt of his heed: & bring it to ye hoſt to ſhew them for a wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for it wos ſo gret & huge ¶Whē thei come ayen to ye hoſt. they told wherfor they had be out &̄ ſhewed to hem the heed: &̄ eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y mā was glad & Ioifull of ye worthy dede yt kīg Arthur had done yt wos ther lord ¶And Hoell wos ful ſorowful̄ for his nece yt wos ſo loſt: &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   whē he had ſpace he let make a fair chapell of our ladi ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Elins tombe,
            
            
               ¶How kynh Arthur yaf bataill to the Emhrour in the wich bataill the Emprour him ſelf was ſlayn.
               
                  ARthur and his pepull had tydynges that the Emprour had aſſembled a gret pouer as well of ſaraſyns as of paynȳs & criſtī men. wher of the nombre wos lxxx.M. hors men: wt fo
                     •
                   men ¶Arthur and his pepull ordined faſt forth in ther way toward the Emprour and paſſed Normandye and fraunce: vn to Burgoyne and wold haue gone to the hoſt. for men told him yt the Empronis hoſt wold cum to Lucie. ¶The Emprour and his hoſt in the begynnyng of Auguſt remeued from Rome and cam forth right the way toward the hoſt. Tho come kīg Arthurs eſpies & ſayed if that Arthur wold he ſhuld fynd the Emprour ther faſt by. ¶But they ſayed that the Emprour had ſo gret pouer with hym of kynges of the land and of paynyms and alſo criſtyn pepull: that it wer bot foly to kyng Arthur to metē with them: for the eſpies told that the emprour had .v. men or vi ayeneſt on of his. ¶Kyng arthur wos bold and hardy and for no thyng him diſmade and ſaied. go we bodile in goddis name ayens the Romans that with them lede ſaraſens and paynyms that no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   truſt they haue in god: but only vpon ther ſtrength ¶Go we now and ſech them ſharpely in the name of almyghty god. and ſle we the paynyms and criſtyn men that be ayenes vs with them: for to diſtruy criſtyn men. And god ſhall vs help them to ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  cum. For we haue the right oppynyon. and therfor haue we truſt in god. and doo we ſo that the enmys that be to criſtī
                  dom and to god. may be deſtruyd and ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cūmyn. and that men may recorde the worthines of knyghthod ¶When kyng Arthur had thus ſaied: they cried all with an high vois. ¶God that is fadre almyghty worſſhipped be thy name with out end amen. And grante vs grece well for to do & to deſtru our enmys yt be ayens criſtīdō. In ye name of the fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſon & ye holi goſt amē. & god yef him neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   grace ne worſhip ī the world ne m̄ci of hī to haue that this day ſhall feynt wel for to ſmyt &̄ egreli &̄ ſo they riden ſofteli & ordyned his wynges well and wyſely.

¶The Emprour herd tell that kyng Arthur & his folke wer redy araied for to fight with him and thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they come and he ordined his wynges ī ye beſt man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that he myght and more truſt vpō his ſtrength than in god almyghty and that wos ſeyn aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward ¶For when tho ij. hoſtis meten the Emprour loſt iiij. of his folke ayenſt on of Arthur. and ſo mony wer ſlayn what in that on parti and in that other that it was gret pitte to wit & be hold. ¶In this bataill wer ſlayn thurgh kyng Arthur v. kynges of the paynyms and of other wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   moch pepull ¶And kȳg Arthurs men foughten ſo well that the romans & paynyms had no more ſtrength to withſtond them then xx. ſhepe ayens v. wolfes ¶And ſo it befell that in this bataill ī the ſhowre that wos wonder hard &̄ long during in that on ſide and ī that other the Emprour amonges them ther wos ſlayn. but ther wos no man that wyſt for veray ſothe who hym ſlew.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Arthur let entere his knyghtes that he had loſt ther in bataill and how he ſent the Emprours body to Rome that ther wos ſlayn in bataill.
               WHen the Romans wiſt that the Emprour wos deid they forſoke the feld and the paynems alſo. And kyng arthr after them chaſed till it wos nyght: and ſo mony of them kylled that it wos wonder to tell ¶And tho turned kyng Arthur ayen wen it wos nyght. and thanked god of his victori. And in the morow he let loke and ſee al the feld for his knyghtys that he ther loſt that is to ſay Borel erle of maunt Bedewer and Key and Ligiers erle of Boloyne vrgeti erle of baac Aloth erle of wīcheſtre Curſael erle of cheſtre and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   holden erle of flaunders thes wer the gret lordes that kyng arthur loſt in that batail wt other worthy knyghtes them emong. ¶And ſū he let entire in abbeis by the cuntre ſū he let be borne ī to ther own cūtre ¶And the Emꝑours body he let take & put vpō a bere & ſēt it to rom and ſent to ſay the romās that for briton and france wich thatt

he held: other truage wold he none pay And if they axed hī ony other truages. right ſoch truage he wold them pay ¶The kīg let ber Key to kenen his own caſtell &̄ ther him entired. &̄ Ligier wos borne to Boloyn ther he wos lord And Holden wos borne to flaundres and ther he was entered ¶And all the other he let entere with moch honour in abbais &̄ in houſes of relegion in thee cuntre ther that they werdeid. ¶And arthur him ſelf ſoiourned that ſame yere in Burgon with his hoſt. &̄ thoght the ſame yere f
                     •
                  loyng to pas the mount of Ioye: &̄ haue gone to Rome al for to take the cite and haue put the romans in ſubiecciō but thee wykked tirand Mordred him let as after ye ſhall heir.
            
            
               ¶How the tratour Mordred to whome kȳg Arthur toke his land to kepe and his Caſtelles. and he held hem ayens hym
               WHen kyng Arthur had taken to Mordred his Reame to kepe & was gone ayens the Emprour of Rome &̄ was paſſed the ſee. Mordred anone toke homages &̄ feautes of all them that wer ī this land. & wold haue had the land to his owne vſe. &̄ toke caſtels about and let them be araied ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this falſneſſe he did an other gret wrong. for a yens the law of criſtīte he toke his own emes wife os a tratour ſhuld & ordined hī a gret hoſt ayens arthurs cōyng to hold the lond ayens hī wt ſtrongth for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  more And to ſlee kyng arthur if he myght &̄ ſent by ye ſee & be land & let aſſemble panyms & criſtī pepul. & he ſent to ſaxons &̄ to Danys for to help him ¶And alſo Mordred ſent to Childrik to done men to cū to him out of ſaxoyne: yt was a worthy duke & hight hī if that he brought wt hī mich pepull he wold grante hī in heritage for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  more all the land frō beyond hūber to ſcotlād And all the land that Engiſt had of vortig
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s yeft: when that he ſpouſed his doughter ¶And Cheldrik come wt a gret ſtrength & pouer of pepull. &̄ Mordred had aſſembled alſo ī his halfe that they had xlM. of ſtrong knyghtes when that they had nede.
            
            
               
               ¶How Arthur enchaſed Mordred the tratour and how he wos ſlayn and alſo kyng Arthur wounded to deth
               WHen this tydynges come to kyng Arthur ther that he w
                     •
                   as in Burgoyne he was full ſore anoyed and toke all fraunce to hoel for to kepe with halfuendel of his men and prayed him that he wold it kepe till he come ayene: for him ſelf wold wēd ī to Breton. and a venge hī vpon Mordred that was his tratour and forth went his way. and come to whitſand and made hys men to gone in to ſhip and wold haue ariued at ſandwich. and brought with him a gret hoſt of fraunch men alſo with his owne land men. But or that he myght cum to lond with his pepull yt wer comen out of his ſhippes Mordred wos comen with all hys pouer. and yaf a ſtrong bataill. ſo that kyng Arthur loſt māy a man or that he myght cum to land ¶For ther was Gawen his nephu ſlayn and Augniſſell that held Scotland and mony other. wherof kyng Arthur wos full ſori: But aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that they wer comen to lond Mordred myght not ayens them endure. but anone wos diſcomfited and fled thens the ſame nyght with his men and vpon the morne come to london bot tho of the cite wold not ſuffre him to cum in. and from thens he fled to wincheſtre &̄ ther he him held with his pepull that come with him ¶Kyng Arthur let take the body of Gawen his coſyn and the body of Augniſſell and let them be borne in to Scotland in to ther own cuntre & ther they wer entired. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   anone kyng Arthur toke his way to diſtruy Mordred. and he fled thens in to Cornewail ¶And the quene Gūnor that wos kyng arthurs wife thatt tho ſogerned at yorke and herd that Mordred wos fled thens & that he might not endure ayens king Arthur. ſhe wos ſoradrad and had gret dout and wiſt not what wos beſt all for to done. For ſhe wyſt well that hir lord kyng Arthur wold neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of hir haue mercy For the gret ſhame that ſhe had him done. and toke h
                     ••
                   way preuali with iiij. men with out mo and come to Karlion &

ther ſhe duelled all hir lifes tyme & neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was ſeyn amonge folke hir life during. ¶Arthur wiſt that Mordred wos fled in to Cornwaill and let ſend aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his men in to ſcotland and northhū
                  berland vn to humber and let aſſemble folke with out nomber & come fro thens in to Cornwaill to ſech and purſue aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Mordred ¶And mordred had aſſembled to him all the folke of cornwail and had pepull wt out nombre and wiſt that Arthur was commyng and had leu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to die and take his chaunce th̄en longer fle. & aboid and yaf an hard bataill to kyng arthur and to his pepull ſo that ſo moch pepull was ſlayn what of that on ſide and of yt other that no man wiſt who had the bettir parti. ¶But ſo it be fell at the laſt that Mordred wos ſlayn and all his folke and ye good chiualri that kyng arthur had gadred and noriſhid of diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s landis and alſo the nobull knyghtis of the round tabull that ſo moch was praſed thurgh out all the world werther ſlayn. and arthur him ſelf was wounded to the deth. but he let him be borne in a litter to a vyoun to be heled of his woundes & yet the bretons ſuppoſen that he liueth in an other lond. and that he ſhall cum yit and conquere all breton. ¶But certis this is the propheſi of Merlin he ſayd that his deth ſhall be dowtous: and ſaied ſothe for ther of yit mē haue dout & ſhul haue for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more as mē ſayen ¶For men wot not whed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that he is on lyue or deid. ¶Arthur was borne to Auyon the xxij. yere of his regne aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   th̄e Incarnacion of our lord thū criſt vC. and xlvi. yere.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Arthur deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  yd the reame vn to Coſtantine the ſon of Cador his Niphu:
               WHen kīg Arthur wiſt that he myght regne no longer he let cum before him Coſtantine that wos Cadors ſon erle of Cornewaill his coſin & to him bitoke all his reame and to him ſayed and bad him therof to be kyng till that he come ayen for as moch os he had none heire of his body begoten and harme wos 
                     •
                  t that ſo nobull a kyng and ſo doughty os he wos had no child
                  
of his body begoten. But all thyng that god wyll haue done muſt be done. whos name be bliſſid with out end Amen.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Coſtantine was wered of Mordredes ij. ſonnis
               THys Coſtantine wos a nobull knyght and a worthy of bodi & tho ij: ſonnys that Mordred had begoten had grete envy vn to Coſtantine that tho was crouned kyng. ¶And ſo it befell that they begon to meue were ayenes hī & aſſembled a gret hoſt of them that wer be fore with mordred: and had bene driuen away: and that did moch ſorow thurgh all that land. that 
                     •
                  on brother ordeyned him to london for to take the cite· and that other to wynchiſtre: ¶But Coſtantine come to london and ſlew him that was ther. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wēt to wyncheſtre & ſlew him that ther was alſo So that bothe his enmys wer deid ¶And when Coſtantine had regned worthel
                     •
                   iiij. yere then he died and lyeth at london.
            
            
               ¶Of the kynges Adelbright and of Edell.
               AFter kyng Coſtantines deth ther wer ij. kynges ī bretan that on was called Adelbright yt wos a danoys & he held the cūtre of northfolke &̄ ſouthfolke. yt other hight Edell &̄ waas a bretō. &̄ he held Nichol̄ Līdeſei &̄ al̄ the lād vn to hūber ¶Thes ij. kīges faſt wered to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s: but aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they wer accorded & loued to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   os thei had be bore of o bodi ¶The kīg Edell had a ſuſtre that wos called Orewenne. &̄ he yaf hir thurgh gret frendſhip to kyng Adelbright to wife. And he begat vpon hir a doughter that was called Argentill. and in the thrid yere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come vpō hī a ſtronge ſekenes yt nedes he muſt die. ¶And he ſente to kyng Edell his brother in law that he ſhuld cum &̄ ſpeke wt hī &̄ he come to him wt good will ¶Tho prayed he the kyng & ꝯiured alſo ī the name of god. that aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   whē he wer deid. he ſhuld take Argentill his dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & the land: & yt he keped hir well &̄ noriſſhe hir in his chambre. ¶And when ſhe wer of age ſhe ſhuld be maried to the ſtrongeſt and worthieſt man that he myght find

and than he ſhuld yeld vp hir land ayene. ¶Edell it granted and by oth cōfermed hys prayer. & whē a delbright was deid and entered: Edell toke ye damiſell argentill: & noriſſhed hir ī his chambre. &̄ ſhe become ye faireſt creatr yt might lyue or ony mā 
                  find
               
            
            
               ¶How kīg Edell maried ye damiſell to a knaue of his kichē
               
               THis king Edell that wos vncle to the damiſell Argētil̄ bethought how that he myght falſli haue the land frō his nece for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more & falſeli ayeneſt his oth thought to diſſaue thee damiſell and to marie hir to a knaue of his kichen that wat cald Curan &̄ he become the worthieſt &̄ ſtrongeſt man of body that ony man wiſt in ony land that tho leued. and to him he thought hir ſhendfulli haue maried: for to haue had hir land aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward. bot he wos clen diſſaued. ¶For this Curan wos Hauelockes fō that wos kyng of Kyrkelane in denmarke. and this Curan cō
                  quered his wifes lond aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward. &̄ ſlew kīg Edell that wos his wifes vncle: and had all hir land: os in an other place it telleth more openli & he ne regned bot iij. yere for ſaxons & danys hī killed: and that was gret harme to all breton. &̄ bretans bore him to Stonkenge & ther they him entered with moch honour.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Conan that wos Curan coſin.
               AFter this curan regned Conan yt was his coſī that wos a wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   proud knyght and regned & coud haue no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of loue but eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he was medelyng with his pepull. and toke his vn kill with were & killed his ij. children. ¶The ſaxons wered ayens him often tymes but he them ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come. And ſo he wos in pees all his lifes tyme: & he regned xiiij. yere and after he died and lieth at London.
            
            
               ¶Of kynge Cortif and of Gurmond that come thurgh thee paynyms in to briton.
               AFter this conan regned his coſin Cortif yt was bihated of all his pepull and nothyng beloued. And this cortef loſt all Britan thurgh were. and in his tyme fell that gret

myſchef in breton that criſtyndom wos deſtroyed 
                  and all the britons wer driuen owt of the land. & the land loſt w
                     •
                  th out ony recouer. but aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward left the lōd to ſaxons. as ye aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward ſhal heir ¶For in that time ther wos a paynyme yt was called Gurmond that wos the kynges ſon Daufrikes of the paynymys folke that had the reame aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his fadre: and wos kyng ſauf he bequaeth and yaf it to his brother. & ſaied that he nold neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   be kyng but yf he myght get and conquere a reame ī a ſtrong cūtre. ¶For he wos bold & ſtrong of bodi: &̄ of him ꝓpheſied Merlȳ & ſayed that he ſhuld be a wolfe of the ſee. and he let aſſemle paynyms with out nombre and let a ꝑell ſhippis &̄ wēt by mōy landdis & toke homages &̄ feautes of mony: &̄ ſo he went bi the ſee & conquered mony diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe londis ¶So that he come to Irland and cōquered yt land. that oft tymes wered vpon bretons: and bretons vpon them. &̄ oft wonen and oft loſten: And yef hoſtages to bretons. and ſo they ſent to Gurmond ther that he was in Irlond that he ſhuld come in to Briton & help them ayens the britons. to help them to deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that land of them. &̄ thei wold him hold gladly for ther lord. for he wos a paynym and the wer paynims and the bretons wer criſtin. well ought he them for to help ſo as they wer all of on lawe: ¶When Gurmond herd this prayer he haſted hī as moch as he myght & ariued ī 
                  ſcotland & come ī to Northhūberland ther yt the ſaxons wer duellīg. & thei cōfirmed ye cōnauntes bi twen them yt wer made bi othes & be hoſtages for to beir him trew fay & hold him for lord &̄ pay to him truage by yere. ¶Tho began the ſaxons & the affricans to deſtruy rob &̄ brenne tounes & deſtru all thing ī as moch os they myght. and ſpared nether man ne woman ne chyld lered ne lewed. bot al̄ thei kylled & caſt doune tounes caſtels & chirches. ¶And ſo put they all the land ī gret deſtruccion. &̄ as ſone os thei might fleyn they fled thens as well poer as rich biſſhoppis abbotes chanons· &̄ all other gret and ſmall ſū in to litell briton and ſum in to Cornewaill.

all tho that ſhippis myght haue.
            
            
               ¶How kyns Gurmond drofe the kyng Cortif to Checheſtre and killed the bretons: and thurgh quentiſe get the toune
               COrtif the kyng ſled thens in to Checheſtre that tho was a good cite and a ſtrong: &̄ ther held him xx. dayes. And this Gurmond come and it beſeged. but the cite was ſo ſtrong yt he might not get it by no maner of wiſe ne engyn that he myghte done. ¶Tho bythought thei vpon a gret quētiſe for to brenne the toune. they made engynes with glew of nettes and toke peces of tunder and of fier and bond it to the ſparous fete and afterward let them fle. And they anone right flow and logged them in the toune ther that ther neſtis wer. and in ſtakkes & ī euyſſinges of houſes. & the fyer began to tende &̄ brend all ye toune ¶And when the britans ſaw that. ī eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſide they hied thē out & faught bot anone they wer ſlayn &̄ diſcomfited & whiles the bataill dured the kīg priueli hid hī &̄ ſtale a way ī to wales & mē wiſte neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wher he become. and ſo was the toune of chechiſtre taken and deſtruied: ¶And after Gurmond went and deſtruied cities and tounes that neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wer afterward made a yene as it is ſeyn yit in this land in mony places
            
            
               ¶How this lond was called Englond for the name of Engiſt: and how mony kenges wer made aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in the land.
               WHen Gurmond had deſtroied all the land thurgh out hee yaf the lond to the Saxons. and anone thei toke it with good will For the ſaxons long tyme had deſiered it for as moche as they wer of Engiſtes kynred that fyrſt had all the land of Breton: and lete them be called Engliſſh men for be cauſe of Engiſtes name And the lond they let call Englond in ther langage & the folke bene called engliſſhmen for os moch os ī his tyme it wos called Engiſt lond when he had conquered it of vortiger that ſpouſed his dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . but from the tyme that Brut come firſt ī to Englōd this lōd was called Breton & the folk britons

But ſith the tyme that this Gurmond eftſons conquered it & yaf it vn to the ſaxons. and thei anone right changed the name os by fore is ſayd. ¶And whē this wos done Gurmond paſſed ouer in to fraunce. & ther cōquered mony landis & deſtruyed all criſten pepull ther that he come. and the ſaxons duelled ī this land &̄ bigane faſt it to inhabit at ther own will. and they wold haue made new kynges & lordis but they myght neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   aſſenten to haue only o kīg for to be to them entendāt. &̄ therfor thei made mony kxnges in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe ſhires as it was ī Engiſtis tyme ¶The fyrſt kyng dō wos Kent &̄ that other ſouthſex &̄ the thrid weſtſex and the fourth eſtſex and the v. Northūberland & the vi. Eſtangle that is to ſay Northfolke and ſouthfolke and the vij. Me
                     •
                  
                  chenrich &̄ yt is the erldom of Nicholl huntyngdō herford glouſeſtre winchiſtre warwyke & derby. &̄ ſo deꝑted the engliſſh al̄ englond in vij. ꝑtes. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt it befell that tho kyngꝭ wered oft tyme to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he yt was ſtrongeſt toke hym that was febeleſt &̄ ſo it wos long tyme yt they had no kīg crouned emōg them ne no criſtyn man wos tho amonges them ne criſtyndom nother ¶But wer paynyms till that ſent Gregori wos pape of Rome that had ſeyn child of the naciō of Englong ī the cite of Rome that wer wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   fair creaturs &̄ had gret will & deſire them to behold. &̄ axed of the marchantis whens thei wer & of what nacion: & men told him yt thei wer of Englond. & engliſſh they wer called: bot they and all ye pepull of englond wer paynyms. &̄ beleued not vpon god ¶Alas qd ſent gregori well mow they be called englyſſh for thei haue the viſages of Angels &̄ therfor well ought thei to be criſtē ¶And for this cauſe ſent gregori ſent ther ſent Auſtin ī to englond: &̄ xl. good men wt hī yt were of good lyfe &̄ holy mē to preche & teche & to cōuert the engliſh pepull & them turne to god. & that was ī the vi. yere that ſent gregori had bene pape of Rome: yt is to ſay aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the Incarnaciō of our lord ihū criſt v.C.lxxxv. yere as the cronicles telleth.
            
            
               
               ¶How ſent Auſtyn baptiſed and conuerted kīg Adelbright and the biſſhoppis that he made his felawes.
               WHen ſent Auſtyn come fyrſt in to Englond. he ariued ī the Ile of Tenet. and ſo paſſed forthe and come vn to Cantorberi and ther ſoiourned and kyng Adelbright of kent ye wos of the lynage of Engiſt. fair vndirfenged ſent Auſtyn & his felaws with moch honour. and them fonden all that them neded And more ouer he yaf them a fair place that now is cadled the abbay of ſent Auſtin. in wich place he lieth him ſelf ſhiyned ¶This kyng Adelbright wos a good man. &̄ wyth good will herd ſent auſtyn predicacions and yaf him leue to preche thurgh out all his land of kent to turne and conu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  te to him all thee pepull that he might. ¶It befell ſo aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward thurgh goddis grace: that in litell tyme the kyng him ſelf was conu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ted to god & all his pepull of his land was baptiſid ¶And in the meyn while the pepull turned them to god: ſent Auſtyn come to Rocheſtre & ther he preched the word of god. And the paynyms therfor hī ſcorned. and caſt vpō him reigh tailles: ſo that all. is mantell was honged full of thes reigh tayles ¶And for more dyſpite they caſt vpon him the guttys of reighes and of od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   fiſche wherfor the good man ſent auſtyn wos ſore annoied and greued and prayed to god that all tho child of that cite that ſhuld be borne aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward that is to ſay ī the cite of Rocheſter. might haue tailles and ſo they had. ¶And whē the kīg herd of this vengeaunce yt wos fallen thurgh ſent auſtyns praier He let make an hous ī honour of almyghty god. wher in women ſhold be deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed of ther child at the brigges end. ī the wich houſe yit womē of the Cite bene deliuered of chyld. ¶When ſent Gregori had herd tell how the Engliſſh pepull wer turned to god & ꝯu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ted. he ſēt vn to ſent auſtyn. his pallione bi a biſſhop yt wos called Paulin and mad
                     •
                   hī premat & Erchebiſſhop of englond & ſent worde that he ſhuld ordein and make bi ſhoppis ī the land ¶And anone as

auſtyn had the palliō of the dignite of the Erſbiſhop he made: ij. biſſhoppis of his felaws yt come wt him frō rome yt on was called Mellyt & he duelled at londō. and yt other wos called Iuſtī yt held the dignite of rocheſter & this biſſhop Mellit tho wēt to preche ī to Eſſex & baptiſed the kīg of the cūtre yt wos called Sycwith yt wos kīg Adelbrightis coſin his ſuſtres ſon ¶This Iuſtī wēt to preche ī ſouthſex & turned moch of the peple to god And ſent auſtin hī ſelf preched thurgh out Englond.
            
            
               ¶How ſent auſtyn wēt ī to wales ther yt the bretons wer. & how they nold not be obedient to the Erchebiſſhop of cantorbury
               WHen all Englond wos baptiſed &̄ turned to god ſent auſtyn went in to that land ther that the bretons wer for to kepe them from engliſſhmen that is to ſay in to wales. and ther he founden monkes and abbeys and vij. biſſhoppis ¶For ye britons deſtroied all way the criſtyn pepul yt ſent auſtī had ꝯu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ted & he ſaied to the biſſhoppis yt he wos a legat of rome & p̄
                  mat of all englōd & yt thei ſhuld bi all reſō to hī be obediēt. & they ſaied they nold not ¶But to the erchebiſſhop of Carliō the wold. they nold neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thīg be obediēt to the engliſhmen ¶For the engliſhmen thei ſaid bene our adu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſaries &̄ our enmis &̄ haue driuē vs out of our cūtre & we be criſtī men &̄ eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   has bene &̄ the engliſmen haue eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   bene paynyms bot now of late yt they be cōu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ted ¶Sent auſtyn might of them none onſuer haue otherwiſe. but ſaid pertely that they nold neuer them meke to him ne to the pope of rome. ¶And ſent auſtyn turned ayene tho to kyng Adelbright that was kyng of Kent. and told him that his folke nold not be to no man obedient bot to the erchebiſſhop of karlion ¶And whē the kīg herd this he wos ſore annoied & ſaid yt he wold them deſtruy and ſent to Elfrid kyng of Northhūberlād that wos his frend that he ſhuld cum to him with all the pouer yt he myght and that he ſhuld mete him at Leyceſtre and frō thens they wold gone in to wales and ther deſtruy the Erchebiſſhopp

of Carleon and all tho that had refuſed ſent auſtyn.
            
            
               ¶How king Adelbright and the kīg Elfrid kylled brecinal that wos a kyng of bretons that held the contre of Leiceſtre
               IT befell ſo that ther wos a kyng of Breton that held the cuntre of Leiceſtre and all the cuntre about▪ his name was Brecinall ¶And this bretō herd tell yt tho ij. engli
                     •
                  h kinges wold mete ther at leiceſtre for to wend ī to wales. he let ordī all the pouer yt he had to fight with thes .ij. kīges but litell it availed hī for his folke that he had wer ſlain &̄ him ſelf fled &̄ loſt his landis for euer more. ¶And thes ij. kyngꝭ adelbright &̄ Elfrid duelled a while at Leiceſtre & deꝑtid ye land amōges them & toke homages & feautis of folkè of the cūtre: &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thei wēt toward wales & tho of wales herd tell of the ſcomfitur yt Brecinal had at Leiceſtre and wer wonder ſore a drad of tho ij. kynges. &̄ toke and choſe amonges them good men and holy. of Hermytes monkis & preſtis & of other pepull gret plenti that went barefote & wellewerd for to haue merci of thes ij· kynges ¶Bot tho kīgꝭ wer ſo ſterne &̄ ſo wicked that they nold neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſpeke with them. bot kylled them eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ychon ¶Alas for ſorew for they ne ſpared hem no more thā the wolfe doith the ſhep: but ſmyten of ther hedis eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ychon & ſo thei wer all martired that to them come that is to vnderſtand v.C. &̄ xl. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward they went from thens to Baugore for to kyll all thoos that they myght ther find of the bretons ¶And when ye bretons herd that: they aſſemled &̄ ordeined all ther pouer for to fight with them. Tho wos ther abaroū ī wales yt wos called Bledrik of cornewaill that ſū tyme was lord of Denſhyre but the kyng Adelbright had driuen him out īto wal̄es. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther he yef them bataill. & at that bataill woſ kyng adelbright ſlayn &̄ Elfrid woūded ſore & for ſoke the feld &̄ ye moſt ꝑte of his pepull ſlayn. and elfrid fled ī to northhumberland that wos his own land ¶And after the pepull of Leiceſtreſhire

made with ſtrength Cadewan yt wos Brecynals ſon kīg of Leiceſtre and he aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   regned nobulli & with gret honour.
            
            
               ¶How Cadewan kyng of Leiceſtre and Elfride kyng of northhūberland wer frendis. and of the debait that after wos betwē Edwyn and Cadwalyn that wer both ther ſonnys.
               
                  ANd after that this bataill wos done. the Bretons aſſē
                  led them and went thens. and come to Leiceſtre and made ther Cadewan that wos Brecinales ſon kyng of Leiceſtre &̄ of all the cuntre. and he toke homages &̄ feautes of al̄ ye folke of the cūtre. &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt he aſſemled a gret hoſt &̄ ſayed he wold go in to Northhūberlond to deſtruy kig Elfrid & ſle hī if he might &̄ whē he wos comē thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . frendes wēt ſo betwen them &̄ made them accorded ī this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   That Elfrid ſhuld hold all ye land frō hūber vn to ſcotland. & Cadewan ſhuld haue al̄ ye land athis ſide hūber to the ſouth. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt they become good frēdis all ther lifes tyme &̄ loued to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   as they had be ij. brether ¶And this Elfrid had a ſon ye wos called Edwyn yt had &̄ held all the land of northhū
                  berland aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s deth as his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had holde all his lifes tyme ¶And Cadewan had an other ſon yt wos caled Cadwalyn yt held his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s lond as he it hel̄d whiles he wos a liue &̄ they loued to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   as they had be brether. ¶And ye loue laſted bituix them bot only ij. yere: &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   began debate bitwen them thurgh a lither ēuyus coſin of cadwalyns yt wos caled briens. ſo thatt they aſſemled a gret hoſt ī both ꝑtes: & at the laſt it befell yt cadwalyn wos diſcomfited & edwyn hī purſued &̄ droue hī from place to place: ſo at the laſt he fle ī to Irlond ¶And this od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   deſtroyed his lōd: & caſt doune caſteles & brent his man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s &̄ deꝑted all cadwalyns lond among his frendis ¶And long tyme aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come cadwalyn ayene frō Irlond wt a ſtrong pouer & in playn bataill kylled Edwyn & all his frendis &̄ namly tho that with held his londis thurgh Edwynes yift.
            
            
               
               ¶How kyng Oſwold wos kylled thurgh kyng Cadwalyn & Peanda. and how Oſwy that wos ſent Oſwaldes brother regned after him and kylled Peanda
               WHen that Edwyn wos ſlayn Offris his ſon vndertoke the were ayens Cadwalyne his eme ſo that this Offris died during the were ¶And after the deth of Offris tho regned a gentill criſtyn man that moch loued god almyghty. that had all the land of Northhumberland by heritage that was cald Oſwald. and he wos kyng of all that land. ¶But for as moch as he wos frend to Edwyne and held a gret part of the lād of Cadwalin. this ſame cadwalyn wered vpon him and drefe him toward ſcotland ¶And when Cadwalyn ſaw that he wold not abyde Cadwalyne nold no longer hym purſew but toke ſome of his folke to Peanda his brother in law and prayed Peanda to purſew after Oſwald till that he wer taken and ſlayn And Cadwalyne turned home ayene ¶When Oſwalde herd the tyding that Cadwalin turned home ayene: he wold no longer fle but aboid Peanda & yaf him bataill & Peanda wos diſcomfited and fled and come ayen to Cadwalyn and ſayed that he wold neuer hold o fote of land of him but yf ſo were that he wold a venge him of Oſwald. ¶Cadwalyn let aſſemble a gret hoſt for to fight wt Oſwald. ſo that he & Peanda come to Northhūberland &̄ yaf bataill vn to Oſwald & in the ſame bataill was oſwald ſlayn and his heid ſmyten of. and after he wos entered at the abbay of Bardeney ī wich place god hath wrought for him mony a fair miracull both ther &̄ els where ¶And anone Oſwy his brother ſeyſed all the land in to his hond that wos thys Oſwaldis &̄ the folke of Northūberland loued hī wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   well & held him for ther lord· but he had men of his kyn worthy ynough that wold haue deꝑted the land. and they wered to gedre well and for as moch as they wer not ſtrōg ynowgh they come to Pianda

and prayed him of helpe and ſocour and biheght him of that land largely vpon this couenaunt that he wold them gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ne and helpe &̄ counceill. ¶Peanda herd ther prayer: and ſo ſpake with the kyng Cadwalin that he ſhuld ordeyn a gret hoſt and faſt ordeyn him in to Northhumberland for to fight with Oſwy ¶And Oſwy was a meke man and mich loued pees and charite & prayed Peanda of loue and pees. and ꝓferrid him of gold and ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   gret plent
                     •
                   ¶And this Peanda was ſo proud that he nold graunte him pees for no maner thyng: but for all thing he wold wt him ſight. So at the laſt ther was ſet a day of batall ¶And Oſwy eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had traſt vpon god. And Peanda traſt to moch vpon his pride and vpō his hoſt yt he had. and to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they ſmyten egrely. but Peanda anone wos diſcomfited & ſlayn. and this was aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the Incarneciō of our lord ihū criſt viC. & lv. yere And this Oſwy regned xxviij. yere. and a kyng yt wos called Oſwyne that wos Peandais coſin wered vpō king Oſwy &̄ to gedre foughten. but Oſwy had the victori of Oſwyne & oſwyne was diſcomfited & ſlayn and lieth at Tynnemouth.
            
            
               ¶How kȳg Cadwaldre that wos Cadwaleynes ſon regned aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his fadre and was the laſt kyng of Bretons.
               
                  AFt the deth of Cadwalyn regned his ſon Cadwaldre wel̄ and nobulli and his moder was the ſuſter of kyng Peanda ¶And when he had regned xij: yere. he fell in to a gret ſekeneſſe. and than wos ther a gret deſcorde by twen the lordis of the lond. that euery on of hem wered vpon other And yit in that tyme ther fell ſo gret derth and ſcarcite of corne & other vitailles ī this land yt a man might go iij. days or iiij. fro toūe to toune yt he ſhuld not fīd to bie for gold ne ſalu bred wyne ne none other vitaill: wherwith a man myght leue. but onli the pepull leued by rotes of herbis. for other lyuyng had thei nōe ſo mich wos it faillid all a bout. fiſſhis wildbeſtes & all other thing. ſo that yit to this miſſauēt
                     
                        
                     
                     ur
                   ther fell ſo gret mortalyte &̄ peſtilence emōg

the pepull. by the corupcion of the eir: that the leuyng pepull ne ſufficed not to beri the deid bodies: for they died ſo ſodenli both gret and ſmall. lord and ſarnand: os thei 
                     •
                  ten & goyng &̄ ſpekyng they fell doune &̄ died: ſo that neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos herd of more ſoden deth emonge the pepull. for he yt went for to beri the deid bodi: wt the ſame deid bodi wos beried ¶And ſo thei that might fle fled &̄ for ſoke ther landes &̄ houſes as well for the gret hunger derth &̄ ſcarcite of corne &̄ other vitall: as for the horibull mortalite &̄ peſtilence ī the land. & went ī to other landis for to ſaue ther lyues: & left the land all deſert and waſt ſo that ther wos not any man to trauell and till the land ne eir ne ſow the land· ſo yt the lond wos bareyne of cornes & al̄ other fruytes for defaute of tillers: And this miſſouētur dured .xi. yere &̄ more yt no man myght e
                     ••
                   ne ſowe.
            
            
               ¶How Cadwaldre went out of this land ī to lytel̄ britan.
               CAdwaldre ſaw gret hunger mortalite and peſtilence and the land all poer. and failyng cornes and other vitales and his folke peryſſhid and ſaw alſo the moſt pert
                     •
                   of his land all waſted and voed of pepull He apparailled him and his folke that wer left on lyue. and paſſed ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in to lytell Breton with a lytell nauye vn to kyng Aleyn that he moch loued that wos his coſin. and that his fadre had moch loued in his tyme ¶And as they ſaled in the ſee. he made gret lametacion. and ſo did all tho that wer with him. and ſayed. ¶Dediſti nos domine tanquam oues eſca
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   et in gentibus diſperſiſti nos. ANd than began Cadwaldre to complayn hym to his folk pytuuſly and ſaid ¶Alas ſaid he. to vs wrecches and Caytyfes is ſorow: for owr grett ſynnys of the wych we wold not amende vs while we had ſpace. & now repentaunce is comt vpon vs: thoro myſſauentur wich chaceth vs out of our own reame and propre ſoyle fro. &̄ out of the wich ſome tyme Romans Scottis Saxōs ne Danys might not exile vs ¶Bot what a

vailleth it now to vs that before tyme of tſythes haue gotē mony other landes ſith it is not the will of god that we abide & duell in our own land. God that is veray Iuge that all thinges knaweth befor they be done or made. he ſeith that we wold not 
                     •
                  eſſe of our ſynnys: and that our enmys myght not vs ne our linage exile fro: & out of ye reame. he wold that we amēded vs of our folies and that we ſene our proper defaultes: And ther for hath ſhewed to vs wrath and wyll chaſtiſe vs of our myſdedys Sith that he doth vs without batalll or ſtrength of our enmys bi gret companyes wricchedly to leue our own reame and ꝓper land ¶Turne ayene ye Romans. turne ayene ye Scottis. turne ayene ye Saxons: turne ayene ye Fraunſois: now ſh̄eweth to you Bretan all deſert: the wich your pouer myght neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   make deſert ne yet your pouer hath not put vs now in exile. but only the pouer of ye kīg almyghty whom we haue oft offendid by our folies the wich we wold not leuen vn till he chaſtiſed vs by his diuine pouer Among the wordes &̄ lametacion that the kyng Cadewaldre made to his folke they ariued in litell Briton and come to kyng Alyne beforſayed ¶And the kȳg reſaued him with Ioye. and made him to be ſerued wonder nobully. and ther he duelled long tyme after ¶The engliſſh pepull that wer lefte on lyue and wer aſcaped the gret hunger and mortalite lyued in the beſt wiſe that they myght. and moch pepull ſprong and come of them. ¶And they ſent in to Saxonie wher they wer borne to therfrendes for men women and chyldren to reſtore the cites with pepull. and the townes that wer all voyed of pepull and for to labour trauell and tyll the erth ¶When the ſaxons had herd this tydyng they come in to this land wondirthykke in gret companyes. and he
                     •
                  berd them ſelf in the cuntre all a boute wher that they wold: for they found no man them to lett ne wyth ſtond ¶And ſo they waxen & multiplied gretli and vſed the cuſtomes of the cuntre wher of they wer comen and the lawys

and the langage of ther own land ¶And they changed the names of citeis tounes caſtelles and burghis and yaf them names and called them os they now be called. ¶And they held the Countees the Baronages lordſhippis and trees in man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   as thee Brotons be fore tyme had compaſſed them. And among other gret ꝯpanies yt com from Germayn in to this land come the noble quene that was called Sexburga with men and women without nombre. and ariued in the cuntre of Northhumberlond and toke the lond from Albiō vn to Cornwaill: for hir and for hir folke For ther was none that myght them let· for all wos deſilat & wid of pepull: but it wer a few pouer Bretonis that wer laft on mountans and wedes vn till that tyme ¶And fro that tyme forth loſt the bretons this reame for all ther days. and the Engliſſh pepull begone to regne and deꝑted the land bitwen them and they made mony kynges about bi diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe partes of the land os heir bene deuiſed the firſt of weſtſex the ſecund Merchenrich: thee thrid Eſtangle the fourth kent: the fifth ſouthſex ¶All thos regned in this land aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Cadwaldre wos paſſed out of this land &̄ duellid in litell breton with kyng Aliyn his coſin and trewe frend ¶And when he had long dulled ther and had knawynge that the mortalite and peſtilence wos ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   paſſed and that the lond wos replenyſſhed of alyen pepull he thought to turne ayen in to his lond. and prayed kyng Alyen his coſin of ſocour and helpee that he myght be raſtored ayen to his own proper reame and fyrſt dyngnyte and kyng Aleyne graunted him his aſkyng. ¶Then did he apparrell him to take his way and viage in to this land and prayed god almyghty deuoutly that he wold make to him demonſtracion yef his prayer in to this land wer to hym pleſaunt or none ¶For ayenes the will of god almyghti he wolde no thing done. Whan he had thus deuoutly made his prayer a wis fro heuen to him ſayed: and bad him leue that Iornay a way in to Englond. and that he ſhuld go to the pope of Rome

For it was not the will of almyghty god that bretons regne more in breton ne neuer recou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the land vn to the tyme that thee prophecie that Merlin ſaied before be fulfilled. and that ſhold neuer bene vn to the tyme wer cummyn that the reliques of his body ſhall be brought fro Rome and tranſlait in to breton. And whan the reliques of other ſentis that haue bene hid for the ꝑſecucion of the paynyme folke ſhall be funden and openli ſhewed than ſhall they recou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther land ayene: the wich they haue ſo long tyme loſt thurgh ther deſertes. ¶When Cadwaldre had herd this anſuere he meruailled gretli and told it to kyng Aleyne ¶Than kyng Aleyne did ſend for the clarge of his lande and made thē to bringe the ſtories and prophecies that Merlyn and Sibill had ſayed in ther prophecies. ¶And when he knew that the ꝓpheſy that feſtome had ꝓphecied of the Egle and other ꝓphecies accorded to the dyuine anſuer that Cadwaldre had herd he councellid to leue his pepull and his naue. and ſubmitte him to the diſpoſicion of god. and done all that the angell had commanded him. ¶Than Cadwaladre called Ynor his ſon: and Yuory his coſin that was his ſuſtres ſon: and ſaydd to them: Taketh ſaied he my folke and my naue that his heir all redy and paſſe ye in to wales: and be ye lordis of bretons that no diſhonor come to them by interrupcion of the paynyms folke for defaute of lordis. ¶And then he him ſelf left his reame of Bretan and his folke for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more. and toke his way vn to the pope of Rome Sergius the wich worſſhipped him moch. and ſo he wos confeſſed and toke pennaunce for his ſynnes ¶And he had not longe duelld ther that he ne died the .xij. Kalend of May the yere of grace .v.C.lxxix.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Offa wos ſoueraxn a boue all the kynges of Englond ana how euery kyng wered vpon other.
               IT befell ſo that all the kynges in that tyme that wer in ye lond as thei of Weſtſex Merchenrich Eſtāgle of kēt

and of ſouthſex and of other coſtes eche wered vpon other and he that was moſt myghty toke the land of him that was moſt febel ¶But ther was a kyng amonges them that wos called Offa that wos ſent Oſwaldes brother. This offa conquered all the kynges of the land and regned a boue them all. ¶And ſo grete wos the were in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y cūtre bitwen kynges that no man might wit how the lond went ¶But abbotis Priours & men of relegion writen the lyues &̄ dedis of kynges and how long eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y of them regned and in what cuntre. and in what man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y kyng died. &̄ of biſſhoppis alſo And ther of made gret bokes and let call them the cronicles. And the good kyng Alured had that boke in hys warde and let bring it vn to wyncheſter and let it be faſt tached to an piler that men ſhuld it not remeue ne bere it thens. ſo that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  i man myght it ſe and ther vpon loke. ¶For ther in be the liues of all the Kīges that euer wer in Englond
               
            
            
               ¶How the kyng of Northhumberland Oſbright for lay the wyfe of Buerne bocard thurgh ſtrength. and after this buerne conquered the kyng with pouer and ſtrength.
               
                  ANd thus it befell in the ſame tyme that ther wos a king in Northhumberland that wos called Oſbright and ſoiorned at Yorke. and this kyng went hī vpon a day in to a wod him for to diſporte. and when he come ayene. he went priueli in to a good mans hous that was called Buerne. &̄ the good man of that place wos gone that tyme to the ſee. ¶For often tymes he wont ther to aſpie theues and robers that oft tymes wer wōt to cum in to the land to rob brene and ſle. ¶The lady yt was buernes wife was a wonder fair woman. and the kyng com vn to hir when that hir houſbond wos abſent. And ſo ſhe traſtid none harme vn to the kyng: and welcomed him with moch honour. and worthely him ſerued in all thing. ¶When the kyng had eten. he toke the lady by the hand & leed hir ī to a chamber & ſayd that he wold ſpeke with hir a councell: &̄ all the folke frō the

chamber he made void ſaf only the lady & he. but the lady wiſt not wherfor he it did till that he had done al his will. And whē he had done this dede he turned ayene to yorke. & the ladi he left ther wō
                  der ſore wepyng for the dede that the kyng to hir had done. ¶And whē hir lord was comē home & ſaw hir wepe & ſich ſom & mornyng make he axed of hir what ſhe had done & why ſhe made ſuch ſorow. ¶Sir qd ſhe queinteli & falſeli the kīg Oſbright me hath done ſhame & velonye ayens my will· & told hī the trewth how the kīg had hir forlayne wt ſtrength wher for ſhe ſayd ſhe had leu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to be deid than lyue. ¶Fair leef be ſtyll ꝙ he. for ayenes ſtrength febelneſſe is litell worth. & therfor of me ſhalt thou neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the laſſe be loued. and namly for thou haſt told me ye trewthe. ¶And if almyghty god grante me lyfe. I ſhall the well auenge. ¶This Buerne was a gret man & a myghty lord. & wos well beloued & gret frindis had. and let ſend for the gretteſt lordis of ye land & to them made his ꝯplayn of thee diſpite that the kyng to hī had done. & ſaid yt he wold be auengid how ſo eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt it wer. & all his frendis concelled & grented to wend vn to yorke ther that the kyng wos: ¶And buerne toke hys meyne & come to the kyng. And whē ye king hī ſaw he called hī courtaſly Buerne by name. & buerne him anſuerd and to him ſaied. Sir I you defy and yelde vp feutes hoomages and londis and os moch as I haue holden of you. and ſo fro this tyme forward I wyll neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of the nothing hold. & ſo he deꝑtid from the kyng with out more ſpeche or ony a bydyng. & toke loue of his frēdis &̄ wēt in to Denmarke: & plened to the kyng Godryne & told hī of the diſpite that kīg Oſbright to hī had done of his wyf: & praid him of ſocour. and help him to auenge. ¶When kyng Godrine of denmarke and the danois had herd the complaynt of this Buerne and of the preier that he had. they wer right wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   glad ī hert. for as moch that they myght find a cauſe for to gone in to Englond for to were vpō the Engliſh men. & alſo for to auēge

Buerne of the diſpite that the kyng Oſbright had done vn to his wife. ¶And for as moch os Buerne wos ſibbe to the king of Denmarke Anone they let ordeyne a gret hoſt of men & let ordeyne them ſhippes and as moch as them nede to haue to that viage. ¶And when all the hoſt was redy. the kyng made his ij: bretheren cheftaynes that wer nobull knyghtes of body and alſo bold. that on was called Hunger & yt other Hubba.
            
            
               ¶How the Danys toke yorke and kylled the kyng Oſbright and afterwarde kyng Elle.
               WHen all thyng wos redy tho ·ij. bred token leue of the kīge Godryn and went toward the ſee. for to wend ouer in to Englond as faſt as they myght ſpede. Now is Buerne ſo well comforthed and faſt hyed him with the Danois that they bene ariued in the north cuntre and comen thurgh out Holderneſſe. and deſtruyed all the cuntre and brenned tounnes and robbyd fol̄ke: and kylled all that myght be taken till that they comen vn to yorke. ¶And whē kyng Oſbright ſaw them cum. he toke his pepull that he had with him and come out of the cite. and faught with them. but no foyſon he nad ayens them and moch was the pepyll that ther wos ſlayn in bothe ꝑtes. and kīg Oſbright him ſelf ther wos ſlayn: and the cite anone wos take. and the danois went in. ¶And ther wos alſo an other kyng in northū
                  berland that Buernes frēdes had choſen and held him for king a man that wos called Elle: for as moch as they wold not to king Oſbright bene entendant. for the diſpite that he had done vn to buerne ther coſin ¶Hit befell thus that the kyng Elle was gone to the wode him for diſporte and of veniſon ſum he had take and os he ſat in the wode at mete to a knyght he ſayed: we haue well ſped and moch veniſan taken. ¶And with that word come in a man. and to him ſayed. yf ye ſo moch of veniſon had wonnen. an hondreth tymes ſo moch more ther ayens ye haue loſt ¶For all this cuntre the Danois haue get. and take the cite

of yorke. and ayens you ſh̄uld it hold that neuer ye ſhall not cū therin. And for ſo moch they hauen ſlayn king Oſbright. ¶When kyng Elle herd thes wordiſ. he let aſſemble all thee folke of the cuntre and ordeyned all the pouer that he myght haue and 
                  wold haue gete the toune of yorke with ſtrength but the danois comen out anone & yaf hī a ſtrong bataill and kylled the king Elle and the moſt parte of his pepull that he had brought with him: and the ſame place ther they wer ſlayn ſhall eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more be called Ellecroft and that place is a litell from yorke. ¶And tho reſted the danois neuer tyll they had conquered all northhumberland and in that cūtre they made wardeyns and went ferther in to the land and toke notyngham and ther they abyden all thee wynter and did the ſorow that they might ¶And after whē ſomer tyme come they remeued from Notingham and come ī to Nycholl and to Lyndeſey and to holand ¶For no man myght them withſtond ſo moch pouer and ſtrength they had
            
            
               ¶How ſent Edmund the kyng was mertired.
               
                  ANd ſo fer had the danois paſſed from cuntre 
                     •
                  on to cuntre and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more brennyng and robbyng and deſtruyed al̄ yt they myght till they come vn to Thetford ¶And in that cuntre they founden a criſtyn kyng that moch loued god and his werkis that wos called Edmund. And he wos a kyng of Northfol: ke anp ſouthfolke. ¶This ſent Edmund kyng ordined as moch folke as he myght and fought with the danois but he and his folke wer diſcomfited and the kynd him ſelf driuen vn to thee caſtell of framelynham. ¶And the danois him purſued and comen vn to the ſame caſtell And when kyng Edmund ſaw yt the caſtell myght nat them withſtond. he come ayens them with whom the danois firſt ſpeken· and anone they axed of him wher kyng Edmond was. now for ſothe quod he when I was ī the catf tell ther was the kyng and when I went out of the caſtell he wē out alſo and whether he ſhall aſcape or die att godis will myght

it be. ¶When ſent Edmunde had neuenid god by that they wiſten well all that it was him ſelf: and anone Hubba and Hū
                  gar toke him and ſayd that he ſhuld god for ſake and all criſtyn law as mony other had done him beforne. ¶And ſent Edmond ſaid that he nold neuer but rather he wold ſuffre deth for goddis loue and his lawis to kepe. Tho toke they king Edmund and bond him vn to a tre and made ther ardheres to him ſhote with arous till that his bodi ſtykked as full of arows as an vrchon is full of prickis but for all the payn that they him did. he nold neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   god forſake. and in the ſame payn and turment he died & betoke his ſowle to all myghty god ¶And when they ſaw that he wos deid they ſmyten of his heed: and of this maner os ye haue hard was ſent Edmond martired
            
            
               ¶How Hubba and Hungar toke the toune of Redyng.
               WHen ſent Edmond was martired hungar and hubba wēt thens with all ther danois vn to Redyng ¶And os they went thederward they brenned tounnes and cites and kylled all criſty
                     •
                   pepull that wold not god forſake and caſt doune churches and come to Redyng and toke the toune and ther held them till that the kyng Edelf of weſtſex come theder with all his pouer for to take the toune: Tho comen out the danois for to yef bataill to kyng Edelf and at that bataill wos kylled an erle of danys that was callee Cidrak. vpon the morow come the kyng Eldred & his brother Alured with a ſtronge pouer and a gret hoſt. ¶And the kyng Edelf come ayen that had foughten the day before to that bataill ¶And the danois tho comme out for to fight with them: and the bataill wos wonder ſtrong. for mony a man wos ther ſlayn. And the danois that day had the victorie and the kyng Eldred & his brother Alured that day wer diſcomfited ¶But the iiij. day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward the danois and the engliſſh-foughten to gedre an other time vpon Ekeldene And ther wos ſlayn a kyng of denmarke that wos called Rafing & iiij. erles

of gret pouer: And that day had the danois ſh̄ame for thei wer driuen vn to engilfeld. ¶And the xv. day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the danois & the engliſſhmen foughten an other tyme at Rafyng. & ther wer the engliſſhmen diſcomfited & from thens a danois yt wos called Roynt went to redyng with his hoſt and diſtroid all yt he myght take. And kyng Eldred faught with hī. but he wos woūdit ſo wherfor he was deid. &̄ he regned but v. yere &̄ lieth at wōburn
            
         
         
            Popis & ēꝓures regnīg ye time of ye ſaxōs begīne now
            
               Circa Annū dnī .iiijC.xl.ix.
               LEo the fyrſt was emprour after Marcianus xvij. yere. In his tyme wer the rogacions days ordand a fore the aſſencion of ſent Mamert biſſhop of vyenne. the pope of rome att that tyme heit leo. a nobull clerke & with hym had mony clerkys. Hillarius wos pope after Leo vij: yere this man ordant thatt no biſſhop ſhuld ordeyn his ſuccerſari. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                  . 8.9.1. Simplicius wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hī. The wich ordand yt no clarke ſhuld take no garment to be clothed in: after the ſeckit or man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of a lay man: thurgh the reſon of his office or of his benefyce. Zeno wos emprour after Leo xv. yere and this man wos an heritike and cruel ayenes criſtin men. and in this mans days the bodied of ſent Mathew the Euangeliſt & ſent Barnaby the apoſtell. wer fō
                  den and with them the goſpell that ſent Mathew wrott. ¶About this tyme ther wos a certayn comyn woman that bare vij. chylderat o byrth. of the wich on wos made aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kyng of Lumbardy. Felix the thrid wos pope after Symplicius iij. yere & viij moneches This man ordand that reſpite ſhuld be gyuen to a man that wos accuſed. that he myght a vyſe him how he ſhuld ownſuar. and that the Iuges & the accuſers ſhuld beſych. and that they ſhuld take all ſuſpeccion and ſpot. Gelaſius a romā wos pope after Felix v: yere This ordand the canō of the maſe the preface. ymnes tractus oriſons as ſent Ambros made them & that ordirs ſhuld be yefen iiij tymes of the yere Anoſtaſius

wos emproure aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Zeno xxvij. yere. & he wos a curſed man &̄ an heritike and hatfull to god and man. & he wos ſlayn wt leght tinyng. and in his tyme dred ſent Patrike the fyrſt biſſhopp of Irland in the .C: &̄ xxij: yere of his age. & his felow wos the abbot of columba & ſeynt Brigida. whom ſent patrike mode a Nū and they wer beried in on tombe &̄ at diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe times and this is ther Epitaphe. ¶Hij tres in gelido: tumulo tumulantur in vno Brigida patricius: atque columba pius.
               Anaſtacius a roman wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Gelaſius ij. yere &̄ iij. monethes The wych ordād yt no preſt for wroth ne hato ſhuld leue of to ſay his dyuine 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uys in the chirche. excepped the maſſe. and he curſed the emprour Anaſtaſy for he wos an heritike. and it is writtyn of hī: that aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward he turned for dred to the opinyon of the emprour. and he his called the ſecūd ill famed pope yt is in catholico pontificū: and a fore him wos Liberius-famed ī hereſi
            
            
               Anno domini iiijC.lxxxxiiij:
               SYmachus wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him xv: yere. &̄ with him wos ordand an other pope that wos called Laurencius &̄ be tuix them was a gret diſcencion and they bothe put thē to the Iugemēt of Theodoria the kyng. &̄ he iuged that he that wos fyrſt ordend and that moſt men of the chirche ſayd with: ſhuld be pope. & Simachus preualid. the wich louyd the clergy and poer men: and foor Paſcalius the Dekyn Cardinall held ayenes Symachum wt the part of laurens to his deth. therfor he was put to the panys of purgatori to kepe the baththes aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his deth. as Gregori ſayth in his boke of diologys. This man ordand that gloria in excelſis ſhuld be ſayd euery ſonday and feſtys of martirs Nota yt englond long tyme was criſtyn a fore fraunce. Clodanius the fyrſt criſtyn kyng of fraunce was this tyme baptiſed of ſent Remigio and he had a criſtyn woman to his wif &̄ ſhe meued him mony tymes to the faith. &̄ ſayed he ſhuld be for tunabull &̄ victorius & he wold turne. & ſo he wos & neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   a fore.

Hornuſda wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Simachū ix. yere this man wos of gret merci and gret almys to poer men. and ornamentis he yaf mony to chirchis: And he reconſiled the grekys the wich wer curſed for ther heriſi. Iuſtinus was emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Anaſtacius &̄ he regned ix. yere and wos a veray criſtyn man. And all yt eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the emprour Anaſtaſius had done ayaneſt the chirche. he reuokit & obeied the pope Hornuſda & called ayen the biſſhoppis yt wer exiled by his prediceſſurs. ¶Priſcianꝰ grāmaticꝰ wos this tyme. And this yere the wich is lxxi. fro the cūyng of ye ſaxons began the kīdom of weſt ſaxon & Cerdico wos king. Iohēs wos pope after Hornuſda iij. yere &̄ ix: monethis. and Theodoricꝰ the kyng of Itali an heritike toke the pope wt other ſenatours & ſend thē to the emprour Iuſtīyan det
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  mīyng yt &̄ he wold not let the heritikes be ī pees 
                     •
                  he ſhuld kyll all the criſtī folke in Italy And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he tuke pope iohn̄ & Symachū patriciū and Boyciū the ſenatours &̄ killed them in priſon. bot Bois defēdit him by the reſon of the autorite of the ſenatours. & he ſend hī to the cite of Papy for ꝑpetuall exile. wher he made the 
                     ••
                  ae. de ꝯſulacōe phīe. And at the laſt at the cūtre of mediolaneſis he cauſed Bois throt to be cut & ſo he deceſſed Felix pope ſuccedit iohn̄ iiij. yere This man cōmanded that ſeke men ſhuld be annelid afore ther deth. bot criſt ordand it fyrſt. Iuſtinianus wos emprour xxxviij. yere This man drew the law of the romans or of Ciuyll out of almoſt ij.M. bokis &̄ cccM. verſis ouer long & ill acording ī to on volym of xij. bokys. and called it Iuſtynyan. He made alſo the digeſtis and deuided theym in to iij. bokis Bonifacius the ſecūd wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Felix ij· yere &̄ litell of hī is writtyn Iohannes the ſecūd wos pope after Boniface and this man had a gret ſtrife with Iuſtynyan the emprour. whed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that Criſt wos ij. naturs or on. The pope ſayd he had ij. naturs on of god aij other of man. The emprour ſayd other cōſent to vs or thou ſhall goo to ꝑpetuall exile. The pope anſuerd. I deſyred

to cū to Iuſtynyan the moſt criſtyn emprour. bot os me ſemeth i haue found Dioclycion the ꝑſuer of cuſtyn. bot c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tanly I dred not thy males ne I feir not thy thretynges. Then the emprour meked hī ſelf & fell doune to ye grond &̄ aſkid merſi &̄ abſolucion.
            
            
               Anno domini .vC.xxxiiij.
               AGapitus a confeſſor wos pope after Iohn̄ ij. yere This Agapitus turned Iuſtinian fulli fro the artur of the euticetis This man ordand that ꝓceſſions ſhuld be done on ſondayes and then he died at conſtantinopolī. Siluerius a martes wos pope after this man iij. yere he was exiled fro criſtin faith & ſlayn by the proctour of Theodory. for he wold not reſtore the biſſhop of Athyns an herityke to his benefice ayene. Virgilius wos pope after him .xvij. yere And he entrid ill in to his benefice. bothe gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned him well. And he ſuffred his ꝑſecuciō paciētly. & he wos exiled from rome: and at the laſt after gret paſſions of Theodora in conſtantinopolī died.
               Synodus quarta conſtantinopolitana contra theodorum et omnes heriticos alios fuit iſto tempore. Iſta ſinodus dampnauit hereſim theodori. qui dixit alium eſſe deum verum. et alium criſtum. Et quod beata virgo non ſit dei genitrix. ſet hominis tātū Pelagius was pope after virgilius iiij: yere and x: monethis This man ordand that heritikes Saſmatykys and Renegatis ſhold be ponyſſhed by the ſecular pouer. Iohēs the thrid wos pope after this man xiij. yere Of this man lytell is writtyn bot that he reſtored the chirche yerde of the apoſtils Philip & Iacob: Iuſtinus the ſecund after iuſtinian wos emprour xi yere This man diſpiſed poer men. he robbid the ſeneturs he was yeſen to all couetuſnes. ſo that he made chyſtis of yrne for toke: pe his monay iij. then anone he fell in to hericy and waxed owt of his mynde and than wos choſen Tiberiū a good man for to gouerne the comyn pepull.
               Tybirius the ſecund wos emprour after Iuſtinus vij. yere.

This man was a vertuus man. He yaf innumerabull good to poer men: in ſo moch that his wife mony tymes chyden with hym And ſayd that he keſt a way the goodis of the empyre as ſtons. And he anſuerd ayen & ſayed I truſt in god yt owr chyſtys ſhal neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   lake of monay. and we put treſour ī to heuen. and vpon a certayn day when he went by his palaſſe at Conſtantinopolī. he ſe in the marbyll pament a cros grauen and thought it ſhuld not be trodyn vpō. and cōmanded yt ſtone to be lifted vp: for yt cros ſhuld be put ī ye hertis of foithfull men: &̄ ther he found īeſtimable treſur of gol̄d. this man ſubdued Harſas & died bliſſidly. Benedictus wos pope after Ion. iiij. yere This man ſuffred gret ꝑſecucion of hunger peſtylence &̄ enmys. This man broght mony a thouſand quartir of whete from Egipt whē Rome wos beſegid by kyng Albanac: & almoſt loſt for vetaill: wherfor they wrotte on his graue. this epitaphi. Magna tuis monimēta pater benedicte reliquis. virtutum titulus et decꝰ atque dolor. Pelagius wos emprour after benedictus v. yere. ī his tyme rome was beſeged by the Lūbardies &̄ litell he did in his days. Mauriciꝰ wos emprour after Tiberiꝰ xxi. yere This was a veray criſtī man &̄ ſubdued Parſas &̄ Armenias & ī the lat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   end of his days he deſcordyd with ſent gregorie & ītendid for to haueſlayn him: And then appered aman ī rome clothed ī a relegiꝰ habit holding a naked ſuord ī his hand: and cried about the citte· in this wiſe The emprour ſhall be deſtruyd: the wich the emprour herred & he corecked him ſelf of his treſpaſe & praid god to withdraw his ſentens: to whom our lord apered ī his ſlepe & ſaid: will thou that I ſpair the now or ī tyme to cum. And he wos a louer of wricchis & ſayd. yef me heir my rewarde. Then he wos empror aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   mony day And when he ſhuld haue corecked his knyghtis: for ther extorcion that they did that aſked him why that he wold not pay them ther wages. And ſo they fell at veryans and choſe Foca for to be the Emprour. and kylled him and his iij. ſonnis

¶This tyme ſen Auſtyn come in to englond and ordeyned ij. archebiſſhoppis. Tat is to ſay of london and of yorke. by ye cummandement of ſent gregorie. ¶And remembre that mony tymes is made mencion of diuerſe regions and cuntres that oft tyme they haue ben turned to the faith. for al way the faith a bood not ī them for diuerſe cauſes. So it is of englong fraunce. perſia. Iuri. And in this thyng rome wos preuelegit for ther thee faith of petre neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   failith.
               ¶Focas wos ēprour after Maurici his maſter whom he and other ſlew. and becauſe he began yll he endid nought. for in his dais the Romans faught ſtrongly ayeneſt the Perſes. and the romans wer diſcomfited and loſt mony a prouynce. and at thee laſt he was ower commen and ſlayn of Eraclyo. for os he did vn to other men ſo wos he done to.
            
            
               Anno domini vC.lxxxiiij.
               GRegori the fyrſt a roman and a monke was pope after Pelagius xiij. yere This man was called Gregorius magnus for mony thinges that the excedid in. he paſſed other mē in pouer in riches in uertu. in nobulnes in wiſdom in holines in fame and in experiens. And vnder this man the ill thynges off curſednes paſſed: wer ſeſed. and mony a nobull boke he wrett to the in comporabull prophet of all holy chirche. he wos on of the prī
                  cipall docturs of all the iiij. docturs of the chirche. This man for ſothe allon with ſent Fabian after ſent Petre wos choſin of god in all the ordyrs of the popis of reme· Mony thynges he ordened in the chirche as is ſhewed in his regiſter. Deꝰ ī adiutoriū for to be a fore the begynnyng of the howris he commanded to be ſayed. he renuhed & made all the officis of the chirche in a fayrer and a more compendius maner the wich abideth yit vn to this day and it is called Gregorianum. And ſchortly for to cōclude on this holy man. mannys tong cannot expreſſe lyghtly the louynges of this man. what in writtyng and alſo in exampuls

& vertuus dedis. Saninianus was pope after Gregorie on yere and v monethes. this man ordant the ryngyng of bellis at the houres of the day. bot this man bacbote ſent Gregorie for his liberalite that he had to poer men. and thought he ſe ſent grogorie rebuke him thris for it: and the fourth tyme he lie in his bed and thought ſent gregorie ſmote him on the heed and he waked and died anone. This wos the thrid pope emong all the popis the wiche is notit to die a dredfull deth. Bonefacius the thrid wos pope after Saninianus viij. monethes: he ordend that none but white clothes ſhuld be put on the auter. Bonefacius the fourthe was pope iiij. yere and viij. monethes. This man purcheſed of the emprour foca: the cherche of ſent petre of Rome ſh̄uld be the hede of all the chirches in the world. for a fore Conſtantinopol in wos the heeid cherche. Alſo he gat lyſanſe that the chirche called Panton the wich wos dedicatit to the honour of Neptimꝰ and other fals goddis: wher criſtyn men mony tymes wer ſlayn of deuel̄s: myght be dedicatit to the worſhip of all ſenttis in heuen. This man ordend that monkis myght vſe the office of prechīg criſtinyng and confeſſion: Eraclius wos emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Foca xiij. yere. And in the thrid yere of his regne. Coſdras the kīg of Perſes brent Ieruſalem and other worſhipfull places. Zachary ye patriarke wt mich pepull he toke ī to captiuite. The part of the holy cros the wich elena left ther he toke wt hī ī to his cuntre. bot the xij. yere of Heraclii Coſdras wos ſlayn of heraclij. & the cros wos brought ayen. the pepull wer deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id & whē heraclius wold haue entred ye cite proudly. ye yatis of ye cite bi pouer of god ſchet ther ſelf &̄ the emprour mekid hī to god a boue: &̄ thē ye yat opyned & thē was the feſt of the exultaciō of the cros made. Deꝰ dedit. wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   boniface iij. yere. this wos an holy mā for on a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn day whē he kyſſed a leꝑ anōe the leꝑ wos holl. This tyme: a Citiſin of London thurgh the mocion of ethylbright byldid a chyrch of ſent petre ī ye weſt ꝑte of londō ī a place that

wos called thornnye bot now it is called weſtmynſter.
            
            
               Circa annum domini .viC.xliiij.
               BOnefacius the fifth wos pope after Deus dedit v. yere the wich ordand that no man ſhuld be take out of the chirche yerd. and litell els of him is writtyn. Nota machomitū Machomite the duke of Seraſens and Turkes wos this tyme And he was the deſauer of all the world: a fals prophet. the meſſanger of the deuell. the fore goer of Antocriſt. the fulfiller of hereſy. and of all fals men the merueleſt. of whom the dominacion thus begane: ¶Ther wos a certayn famus clarke at rome and could not ſped in his maters that he deſired to haue ſped in then he reſedit from Rome ouer the ſee and procured mony a man to go with him. Emong whom was this fals machemite a grete man of witt. And this clarke promyſed him to make hī duke of his cuntre if he wold be gided after him ¶Ther he noriſſhed a dowfe and put all the corne that the dowfe eten in to machomites eire. And ſo this dowfe had neuer no mete bot in his ere ¶The certain clarke on a day called the pepull and meuede them to cheſe ſych a prince as the holy goſt wold ſhew to them in forme of an dowfe. And anone this clarke ſecretly let fly this dowfe. the wich after his old cuſtom that he wos wont to fell a none to the ſhulder of machomite. and put his byll in his eere And when the pepull ſee this. anone he wos choſen duke of that pepull. & whē he wos made duke of this pepull of coroſame he ſaid that he wos the weray prophet of god. Thē he made a boke of his law that wos called Alcharon. bot he did it by informacion of iij of his maiſters to whom the deuell myniſterid the auctorite and the cunnyng. ¶The fyrſt maſter wos a Iue: a gret aſtronomier and a negremē
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  . the ſecūd wos Iohn̄ de anthiochia. The thrid wos ſergius an heritike. And thes iij. made an vngraciꝰ law. &̄ a vn happi. and what ſum euer was harde of beleue. and

tedyus to done: thei left that out of the law. & they put that thīg ī ther law. the wich the wordly men weir ꝓne & redy to do. that is to ſay Glotonye Lecchorye rapyn and ſuch other. And alſo this machomyte ordend that a man ſhuld haue as mony wyfes as he myght ocupye and fynd and refuſe them twys or thries or iiij. tymes and take them ayen. and mony meruelus and fals thynges he mode in his law. the wich wer to long to reherſe heir bot they be playn ī his boke of Alchorō. And eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wrotte ī his boke that our lord ſpake to machomyte his prophet ſayng on this wiſſe or on this. ¶Thus by his fals menys he diſſaued the pepull. And when his maiſters and he had made this that wos ſo delectabull. He wrotte it in a boke with letters of gold. and alſo he noreſſhed a myghty Camell ſecretly in a preuey place. and alonli with the hondis of machomyte wos alway fed. and ther priuely he tyed this boke of the law that he had made: about the camales neke. and put this camell forth on a tyme in to the feldes a fore day. And this camell ioyed in his liberte for he wos neuer lowſe a fore: ¶And he wold ſuffre no man to cum and toche him. &̄ ſo ther wos a gret fame of ſuch a camell: and all the pepull ran to ſe him. Emonge whome wos this machomyte. ¶But when the camell ſe him that had fed him all way. anone he ran vn to him: and he had taught this Camell a foro tyme to fall doun on his kneis and lykke his handis. and ſo he did a fore all tho pepull. ¶The pepull then cried and ſayd that ther was a veray enſample that he wos the trew prophet of god. Then they y prayd machomyte to opyn that holy boke with his holy handis: the wich wos ſend from heuen. euer more to be kepid. in the wich boke is ſhewed how the peple ſhall woyrſhyp god. And machomyte ſayd this boke wos writtyn with angels hand. So by thes fals menis he turnd ther to his lawis all the land of Perſi. and all the Eſt imperiall a yenes Heraclyum the Emprour. and he occupyed
                  
vn to the end of Alexandre. & Egipt. Libia. Arabia. & Sirea Then after he infecked all Affrican. and bot that the grace of god with ſtode him he had infeckid all Spayn & fraunce and mony other thynges he did: that wer to moch to writte in this boke Conſtantine the thrid the ſon of Heraclij was Emprour xxvij yere This Conſtantin wos a curſed man a gret tyrant & an heritike fals ſotell &̄ odyus to criſtī men. ne he yaf no place to pope Martin and he raiſed a gret hoſt ayeneſt the Lumbardis &̄ ther he loſt the feld and fled to rome. and honorabel̄y wos reſaued of the pope vitilianus and othir of the cite. and he rewarded not them lyke after ther m̄etis as a prince ſhuld haue done. bot vſed forth tyrannydy and hereſy wherfor at the laſt he was ſlayn in a bath of his own knyghtys the wich nold no lenger ſuffre his tyrannydy And ſo he wricchedly lyued. and died vnhappely Martinꝰ th
                     •
                   fyrſt wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Theodo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   vi. yere This Martin wos a veray holy man and ſtrongly ſtrofe for the faith of god. And when he ſayng maſſe: on a certayn day at the autyr. ther purſued him to kyll hym. a man wos called Spatarius of Olymphe. &̄ whē hee wold haue ſmyte him he was blynd ſodenly. This ſame man cald a ſinody in the cite of rome. & dampned Syrū. Alexandrū ſergiū. Pyrum & Paulū heritykes. wherfor Conſtantin the empreur exiled him & he died a ſeint. Eugenius a roman wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Martyn almoſt iij. yere: &̄ was an holy man: bot of him litell actis is writtyn. Vitellianus wos pope after him xiiij: yere This man made the ſōg that the Romans vſes and accord
                     •
                  d it alſo with the organys. and he alſo had the grace of the Emprour the wich wos wroth with his prediceſſours. neuer theleſſe afterward he ſtode not in his concorde. ne hedir to I cold not find that euer the chyrche of Rome had fully after the deth of Conſtantyn the myghty. the lorſh̄yp of the cite and of other the wich he yaf to the chyrche.
            
            
               
               Anno domini viC.xliiij.
               ADeodatus a roman wos pepe aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   vitilian iiij. yere and ī his days was tranſlat the bodi of ſent benedicti with the body of his ſuſter ſcolaſtice fro the hill of caſſyn to the monaſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y of floriecens nigh aurelian. Conſtantin the faurth wos Emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his fader Conſtantin the curſed man ¶This conſtā
                  tine wos a good man. &̄ he hated heritikes ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   all thing· the chirche he repairid. &̄ grace he reconſiled ayene to the chyrch of rome. & he wt ye pope gedred to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſext gen
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  all Sinody ī the wich wos graunted to preſtes of greke to vſe ther lefull wynys. And to the priſtes of the eſt. for cauſe of gret heet: bot not to thos of thee weſt ꝑti by no menys. For they amytted chaſtite in the tyme of ſent gregori ¶And eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y mā mei adu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tiſe &̄ pond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   how moch the goodnes of a prince is worth to the quyete ſtate of the chyrche: & to the promocion of the fayth. And alſo the cōtrari. how moch the males of a prince hurtith. that thīg. thes ij. Conſtātines ye fader and the ſon ſh̄ewyed opēli. ¶For in the fadres days the chryche neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had reſt. and ī the ſonnis time it wos quiet. Yi
                     •
                   neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the 
                     •
                  es our lord ſuffred the ſariſens and the bulgars to entyr this Emprours land that he myght not them withſtond. bot that he made his pees with them: and payed yerli to them a truage. ſo mighteli p̄uailid yt curſed ſecte of machomyte. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he died bliſſedli. Nota. That ther w
                     •
                  r ſex gnal ſinodys & moſt principal̄ of the wich ye auctorite is equall to the goſpell: for the truth of the goſpell is declarid by thē: ayenes the ſex principall hereſys ye wich ſtrongly trobled the chyrche. for the ſotilty of thos heritikes. to deſaue ſympyll men. ¶This tyme died ſent Cede of lychfelde the thrid yere of his biſſhopprik. Demus a roman wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Adeodatus iij. yere. of this man litill is writtyn. Bonefacius wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him and lytill of him is writtyn bot yt he leued lyke a preſt. Agatho wos pope after him: and he wos a veray holy man. for on a day when he kyſſed a lepyr. the lepyr a none

wos made holl. Iſte &̄ de conſenſu principis iuſſit celebrari ſextā ſynodum aput cōſtāntinopolī .CC.lxxx. epō
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   in qua aſſeret duas naturas et duas voluntates eſſe in criſto: Leo the ſecund wos pope after Agatho iij. yere This leo was an holy man. and ſufficiently taught in latyn and greke. This man ordened that the pax ſhuld be yeuen aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   agnus dei. &̄ 
                  died a bliſſed man. Benedictus the ſecund was pope after Leo almoſt iij. yere: This man about al thing wos vertuꝰ: and his nam concordid with his dedis. & in his tyme was a gret peſtelence. Iuſtinianus the ſecund wos emprour this tyme &̄ he wos a veray good man a prudent and a large. & he encreſed the empire of rome myghttely. bot he charged the office of the chirche ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   moch. mony lawys he made and afterward he waxed not good. for he ītē did to haue let tid the decreis of the ſext ſinody. & to haue trubylled the chirche. wherfor the .x. yere of his empire he was taken of Leo the prince of Patricio &̄ Tybirio. & they cutten of his noſe and his tong: &̄ exiled him to criſonā: Ther wos ther then a gret turbacion in the chirche for ſtrife & heritikes. ¶And knaw al men when verians fal̄lith be twix gret lordis: then arruris be multiplied: for ther is no man that coreckith them therfor that is oft tyme preued in the chirche. Then aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   fell a verians be twix Leo and Tibere. & Tibere preualet. & he exiled Leonē &̄ cut of his noſe the thrid yere of his empire &̄ regned for him. Iuſtiniā fled to the ſaraſens & the bulgars. the wich reſtored him ayen to his empire: & kylled Leo & Tibere the wich fauored heritikis: thē this ſame Iuſtynian reformid hī ſelf to the chirche of god & haad gret repentans. bot he venged him to cruelly on his adu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſaries ſo that he wold haue kylled ther innocent child: therfor he wos ſlayn with his ſon: of Philipe whom he exiled:
            
            
               Anno domini viC.lxxxiiij.
               IOhannes the fifthe was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Benedictus on yere he wos a good man bot he deceſſed anone. Zeno wos pope

after him. and he wos a varay holi man for he wold not medill with ſeculer materis. and in bewte he was as an āgell: quiet in vertuus and meke in ſawle: and verey demure in the langage of his religius liffe. This man wos choſin at the laſt with one accorde of the chirche and laymen. bot ther wos a gret diſtynccion. for the clargi intendid to haue choſen Perys the archbiſſhopp. &̄ the hoſt of lay men wold haue had Theodo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   a preſt. Bot at the laſt the holy goſt turned the will of all this pepull in to this holy maij. Sergius wos pope ix. yere This man wos vertuus &̄ comendabull in his liffe and ī his eleccion a gret diſcorde was. for on parti of the clarge choſe Theodo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . and an other ꝑti Paſcalem. bot os our lord wold at the laſt they turned all to this man. This man tranſlatyt the body of ſent Leo. he alſo fond a grett ꝑte of the holy cros bi miracull and he criſtyned Cadwalidus the laſt kyng of bretayn He commanded agnus dei to be ſaid or ſōg thris at maſſe. & deceſſed bliſſydly▪ Nota Sent Beda the worſſhipfull priſt wos this tyme aman of gret fame in englond the wich wos take the vij. yere of his age to Benedict the abbot of Gyrwyenſ monaſteri to be taught. And then aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to Colfrido the abbot aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the deth of benedict. And at xix. yere of hys age he wos made dekyn of thebiſſhop of yorke: And at xxx yere he wos made preſt in the wich yere he began to writtē So he cō
                  tenuyd all the tyme of his lyffe in that monaſtari in geuyng his laburs to writyng and forſcriptur to be exponed .lxxviij. bokis he made the wich he nombris in the end of his engliſſh boke ¶This man wos eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in labour other ī prayer or ī ſyngyng daly in thee chirche or to lerne or to teche or to writ. for the wich thīg mē may Iuge bi reſon he wos neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   at Rome. all yef ſum men ſay that he went to rome. that he myght ſe that bokis accorded with the doctrine of the chiyrche Bot it wos certain that he wos blynd &̄ wēt to preche & had a 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uand yt was not good. and made hī to prech to a mighty multitude of ſtonnys and ſayed that thei wer men: and

when all his ſermond wos done the ſtonnys anſuerd and ſaied amen. But that he went to rome thries. &̄ fond writtī iij. arris & iij. effis & exponyt them. hit wos neuer found ī no boke of autorite. Ther wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the talkyng of the pepull ſuch a writyng on the yates of Rome: R R R. F F F. and ſuch an expoſiciō Rigna Rome Ruent. Ferro Flama & Fame. But it is certan that Bede wos deſired to cum to rome by the writyng of ſergij the pope: vn to Colfrid his abbot. And this bede tranſlatid ye goſpell of ſent Iohn̄ in to engleſh tonge and deceſſid blyſſedly: The fame ſayeth that now he lieth at Deuelyn with ſent Cuthberto And ther is beried with him the knawlege of the dedis of englond almoſt to the conqueſt. Leo the ſecund was emprour and litell of him is writtyn Liberius was emprour after him vij. yere the wich roſe ayeneſt Leo and entrid his kyngdom. and kepid him in priſon as long os he regned: In his tyme Iuſtinian the ſecund the wich in old tyme was exiled to creſonam: opynly ſayd he wold recou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his empire ayen. wherfor the pepull of that cuntre for the loue of Liberius wer about to kyll that Iuſtinian: wherfor he fled to the prince of Turco
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   and weddid his ſiſter. and thurgh the help of his brother and the Bulgares he recou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id his empire. and kylled Liberiū and Leonem the vſurꝑ of his reame: and as mony tymes almoſt as he wyped any drope from his noſe the wich they cut of. So mony tymes ne: he made on of his enmys to be kylled Leo the thrid wos pope after Sergius ij: yere This man wos made pope by the pouer of the romās and was not put in the nombre of popis: for he yll entred. bot he did no yll. Iohēs the ſex a greke wos pope after him: And he wos a martir bot of whom and wherfor the cauſe is not found in hiſtoriis. it is ſaid that it wos of the dukys of Lumbardy for thei wer emnys vn to the chirche myghtely
               Iohēs the vij. a ronan wos pope after him iij. yere bot nothing of him is writtyn. Iuſtinianꝰ the ſecūd wos emꝑour ayen

with his ſonne Tibiri vi. yere And this wos he the wich wos reued the empire a fore bi leo. And when this man wos reſtored ayen he toke him to the right faith. and worchipped the pope Conſtantin and certanly he deſtrued Creſon the place wher he wos exiled to. and all that duelled in it except child he killed them. and he come ayene an other tyme to haue kylled the Innocentis. and the men of that cuntre made ther a captayn a certayn mā wos called Philip an owtlay the wich anone went to him in bataill and kyllid him for hys cruelnes ayenes thos children. Syſynnius was pope xx. dais and then was gret ſtrife and he deceſſid bot lytill of him is writtyn. Conſtantin was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him .vij yere This man was a verey meke man & ſo bliſſid: that of all men he wos loued: he went ower the ſee to Iuſtimian the emprour. &̄ wos reſaued with gret honour and died a bliſſed maij: Philippe the ſecund wos emꝑour on yere. the wich fled ī to Sciſilya for the hoſt of the romans. and he wos an heritike. and cōmanded all picturs of ſenctis to be diſtruid wherfor the Romans keſt a way his coyn. ne wold not reſaue no monay that had his ymage or his name writtyn vpon it. Anaſtaſius the ſecund after he had kylled Philipp was emprour iij. yere. This man wos a criſtin man: and he leued well bot be cauſe he put out philippis eyn &̄ kylled him aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward. Therfor Theodoſius faught ayens hym & ower come hī. &̄ thē he wos made a preſt & leued ſo quyetly.
            
            
               Anno domini vijC.xiiij.
               GRegorius the ſecund wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Conſtantyn xvij-yere This Gregorii wos a chaſte man & an nobull man in ſcripture: And about this tyme the popis began to deell more tēꝑally with the emprours then they wer wont. for ther falſeneſſe &̄ therherici. and alſo for to remeue the empire fro oo pepull to an other. as the tyme requerid. This man curſed Leo the emprour: be cauſe he brent the ymages of ſentys. This ſame Leo commandid Gregori the pope. that he ſhuld brine chirches and deſtruy them

                  And he ſet nothing of his ſayng. bot commanded the contrari manly. And ſo it is opynli ſhewed: that the deſtruccion of the empire of roome wos the cauſe of heriſe. For certanly faithfull peple with ther prelatis with on wyll: drew to the pope. and conſtranit the Emprours to leffe ther tyrannyde and therheriſe. ¶And this tyme in the eſt parte of the world ſtrongly failed the veray faith. for that curſed law of fals machomyte.
               Theodoſius was Emprour and regned bot on yere. and he was a veray criſtyn man: and euyn os he did. ſo was he done vn to. for Leo depoſit him and made him a preſt.
               Leo the thrid with Conſtantin his ſon. wos emprour xxv yer This Leo when he wos myghty he depoſit Theodoſiū. and regned for him. and wos deſaued bi a certayn apoſtata. the wich bad him that he ſh̄uld take and brene all the ymages of ſentys. wher fore he wos ponyſſhed bothe in bataill and in peſtylence. and with other infortunes. and becauſe he wos a curſed of gregori and bode ther in the iij. days. therfore the pope with comyn pepull toke fro him all the weſt parte of his empire. commandyng that no man ſhuld obay him. ne ſocour him. be cauſe he leued like an aritike· ¶Holy men ſayd ayeneſt him: and mony bi him wos martired and exiled: and at the laſt in his myſbeleue he died writchedly ¶And in this mans dais bot that Karolus marcellus holp the criſtyn faith and faught manly ayen the ſareſens and drofe them bacward ī to ſpayn the wich they had ſubduid. Els they had entred ī to fraunce. ¶And Karolus ſlew .iijC.M. ſaraſons and mo: & of his pepull wer ſlayn bot xvM. Nō. This man for the continuall bataill toke to lay men: the treſour of the chirche. whe
                     •
                  for ſent Euchery the biſihop of Aurilian as he wos in hys prayers ſaw that ſame Karolum in ſaule and bodi payned in hell. And the angell that ſhewed the biſſhop this man. ſayd that that wos the iugement of all thos that toke away the goodis of thee chirche. or of poer men: And to fortefi that at the biſſhop ſayed

                  and to preue it. The abbot of ſent Dionis went to the ſepulc
                     •
                   ther that Karolus wos beried. and opyned the chiſt that he lay ī And ther they ſe a dragon go out bot he had no bodi. Gregory the thrid a Roman was pope after Gregori the ſecū
                  de. The wich conformed the worſhippyng of the ymages of ſentis with the cunſell almoſt of .M. biſſhoppis. and he curſed horibly all the diſpyſers of thes ymages: as the emprour and other that wer of that condicion. Conſtantinus the fifthe wos emprour after his fader Leo .xxxv. yere He was a curſed man and a pure heritike. ſo that he did ſacrifice to deuels. he purſuid the chirche: & nothyng that is good of him is writen. and ſo by the ſufferans of god the chirche wos trubelled long tyme. ¶About this tym wer mony merueles And ther wer meruelus erth quakis. and certaij cites that wer ſet on mountens: they wer remeued &̄ borne a way with the hilles in to the feldis ſex myle thens as they ſtod and the cites wer not broken ne hurt. In the land of Meſopotanyan the erth wos brokyn bi the ſpace of ij. myle. And alſo ther wos a Mule that ſpake ī a mannys voce. aſh fell from heuyn. And in the ſee of Pontico ther wos yſſe for gret froſt. that was xxx. cubittis of thykneſſe. And ſters fell from heuyn ſo myghtely: that men trowed that the end of the world had bene comen. all thes betokened meruelus thingꝭ to cum:
            
            
               Anno domini vijC.xliiij.
               ZAcharias wos pope after Gregori x. yere This Zachari wos a nobull man. and arayed with all u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tu. with all men he was loued. for his mekenes and he deſpoſed the kyng of Fraunce Hydery and put ī his place: Pippinū: for he was more ꝓphetabull. here ye may ſe what pouer the chirche had that tyme the wich tranſlatid that famus kyngdom from the verey heyres to the kyngdom of p
                     ••
                  pyn: for a lefull cauſe. vt habetur. 
                     •
                  h. q. h. alius. Stephanus the ſecund a roman wos pope after Zachari .v. yere This man in all thing wos prophetabull vn to the chirch

as well in word os in doctrine. And he gouerned the ſpiritualte and the temparalty nobully: he wos the louer and the defender of poer men. This man anoynted Pippinū the kyng of fraunce and ſend him ayenes the Lūbardis. that he ſhuld compell them to reſtore the chirche of ſuch goodis as they had with holdin from them long tyme vnrightuyſli the wich he did. He alſo tranſlat the empire of the grekis to the frenſhmen
               Paulus a roman was pope after him x yere This was a verey holy man. for he did gret almos to faderles childer & priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s wedouys and other poer men that he myght be a folower of ſent paule. Conſtantine a roman the ſecund wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Paule ij yere This Conſtantine wos a lay man. and ſodenli was made a preſt os a tyrant. and toke on him the dignite of the pope. and with a gret ſclander to the chirche he was pope a litell tyme. bot the faithfull men put him out. and put out his eeyn. And this wos the fyfth infamyd pope emong ſo mony hed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to: ſo the holy goſt yt holy apoſtyls ſeet kepid in all honour and holines. ¶Infenit martirs wer made this tyme by Conſtātin the emprour for he was ſuch an heritike. and men trowe that ther wos neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   no emꝑour ne no pagon that kylled ſo mony marters And this tyme the chirche wos trubled ſore. And verey preciuſly bought the worſhipyng of the ymages of ſentys for the gret ſheding of blod of martyrs And certanly that curſed emprour was not vn ponyſſhed for when that he died. he cried with an horabull voiſe. and ſaid I am takyn to a fyer that is vnhabull to be diſtruid. and ſo he yelden vp the goſt to eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   laſtīg payn ¶The empire of rome was deuydid about this tyme. for Stephen the pope tranlatid Itili & other to Karolum yet a yong man: And Conſtantyne held the lond of Grece wyth other landis ower the ſe with a gret labur And mony rebellyng ¶This tyme Karolus magnus wos a nobull yong man and he began for to regne vpon fraunce

                  And was the ſon of Pippini. and his mother wos called Berta Stephenus the thrid was pope iij: yere and he a mendid all the errurs of Conſtaotine. and 
                  degrated all thos ye wich that Conſtantine ordand in a gouernall ſynody
            
            
               Anno domini vijC lxxxiiij:
               ADrianus a roman wos pope after Stephyn xxiiij. yere. This man wos myghtely worſſhippid of the pepull. no man grettyr a fore him. In honour riches and byldyng: This man ſet ij. ſolom ſynodis. The friſt of iijC: and .l. fadyrs The ſecund in rome with a .C.l. fadyrs. beyng preſent Charles the kyng of fraunce: to whom it was granted the leberte of eleccion of the pope. and to ordane the apoſtils ſeet
               Leo the fourth regned emprour with the grekis v. yere This Leo was a curſed man. bot not ſo moch os his fader wos. and he was a couetus man. and he toke away a certan croune of a chirche and put it vpon his hede. and anone he was corruppid wyth an axis and ſo diceſſid. & he had a curſed wiffe the wich regned after him with hir ſon
               Conſtantine wos emprour after Leo and he wos a meke mā and put away his mother fro the kyngdom that ſhe might take heed vn to hir womens warke. botſhe with a fenyt rankyr put out his eeyn afterward: and hys childireyn alſo. and regned ayens iij: yere and at the laſt ſhe wos about to haue be weddid: &̄ whē the grekis ꝑſauyd that ſhe wold be weddid to gret Karolus. thei toke hir and ſhethir vp in a monaſtari and toke Nichofe
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   to be ther emprour ¶The v. vniuſall ſtudy the wich in old tyme was tranſlait from Athyns vn to Rome a bout thys tyme was tranlatyd vn to Paris bi Karolus kyng of fraunce. Nichoferus wos emprour after Conſtantine. He wos a vere nygoij &̄ was exaltid to his empire by the grekis. bot he ꝓfettit not. for in his tyme all the eſt impariall wos brought to nought For the Romans put them vnder Karolus magnus. ¶Ieruſalem

a bout this tyme wos recouerid by Karolum with all the holy land And the ſeckit of ſariſens wos diſtruied ſtrongly for the deſtruccion of wricchis come then.
               Michaell wos emprour ij. yere And he was a verey criſtī mā and wos well beloued and alſo he wos cunnyng in all ſcience. &̄ tho that Nichoferus had hurt and deſtreſſid of ther goodis bi his couetuſnes. this Michaell reſtorid them and made them riche ayene. Nota. Karolus magnus the friſt ſant wos emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Michaell And he wos crouned emprour by Leo the pope. from the wich tyme the empire wos tranſlatyt fro the grekis to fraūce and germane. And for the tranſlacion of that empire. the grekys all way wer defectieu vn to the Romans. And the grekys ſtrofe eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  more with them bot it wos more wt venūys wordis thē with ſtrength. and more with craft then with bataill. For thei had ſo gret enuy at the Romans that they nold not obey the chirche of Rome. For certanly when that the popis wold writt vn to them for to obey the chirche of rome. They wrot ayene and ſaid. ye haue take from our kynrad the empire: and thorfor we will yow not obey: and we vs take from you. And for this nobull emprour Karolous. it is to be vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtond. this man when he wos a yong man he wos a noynted kyng in fraunce. by Stephyn the po: pe. In the yere of our lord ihū criſt .vijC.liiij. when his fader Pyppino leued. vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   whom: and with whome he regned xv. yere to the deth of his fadre. ¶Then after his fader vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the yere of our lord 
                  god vijC.lxviij. this Karolus with his brother Karolomanna regned ij. yere Then his brother deceſſid. in thee ſecund yere. And this Karolus ther held all the hoell kyngdō xiiij. yere. to the yere of our lord vijC:lxxxiiij· in the wicch yere he went vn to Rome. that he might be crouned Emprour of pope Adrian. And ther he regned emprour xvi. yere. to the yere of our lord viijC. when pope Leo confirmed him ayen the emprour And after that he was emprour xiiij: yere. And deceſſid in the

yere of his aage lxxij the wich wos the yere of our lord viijC & xiiij: if ye will ſe more of Karolus go to the boke of Turpinꝰ & Libraminus his maſter: for they wrot thes nobull actis Leo the fourth wos pope after Adrian xx yere This man when he went on a certan day with the letany to ſent petre chirche. on ſent markis day. he wos taken with curſid pepull and bothe his eeyn put out and his tong cut of. But our lord merueluſly reſtorid him ayen his ſight & his ſpeche ſo that he ſpake wt owte tong and ſaw by myracull: Afterward he went to Karolum ī to fraunce. and he come with him vn to Rome and vengid the pope on his emnys. And then he crouned Karolum and he late a fore crouned confermyd him ayene
               Lodowike the meke the friſt gotyn ſon of Karolus wos emꝑor aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his fadre xxvi yere ī whos tyme was put away that clarkis ſhuld vſe no gyrdils with precious ſtonys ne ſtrange arayment This Lodewik of his friſt wife gat ij: child and both had an yll end In all thing that went ayeneſt him. He wos pacient and in the laſt end he eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come. for anendis god he a bo
                     •
                  d deuote. & his child foloid his condicions and he deceſſid a bliſſed man Stephanus the fourth wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   leo. iij yere This Stephanus redemid mony captiue men: and crouned Lodewik the emꝑor and then he deceſſid and was beried at Rome
               Paſchall wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Stephyn This Paſchall yaf a gret dylygens to relickis of ſentis. and he toke vp innumerabull bodis of ſentis and beried them worſhipfully as in the viſion of ſent Cicill he wos commanded
               Eugenius the fourth wos pope after Paſchall And he was a verey holy man. and thos thinges that werfor criſt he toke heid to: this man wos crounyd a marter and by the lay men of rome he wos beried in ſent petre chirche yerde.
            
            
               
               Circa annū domini viijC.xliiij
               VAlintinus wos pope after Eugeni xl: dais. and litel of him is writtyn: Gregori the fourth wos pope after him xij yere This Gregori ſaw mony heuy tymes for the plagis emonges the comyn pepull. And at this mannys petycion Lodewyk the emprour and Marchio the prince of Lumbardy flemyd all ſareſons from Italy. and at the laſt he deceſſid after īnumerabull good dedis and werkys that he had done at ſent petreis. Lotherius the fyrſt ſon of Lodewike wos emprour xv yere ī Italy & rome &̄ the ꝑtis of germane next to the hylles of alpy. This Lotherius roſe ayens his brother Lodewike and Karolom for the kyngdom of dochelond. the wich ſum tyme Pippinꝰ ther brother held. and they faught at a place called Fontanelū wher Lotheri wos diſcomfited. and ther was ſuch ſlaughter made on both the ſydis. that they had no men to reſiſt ther adu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſaries This vndirſtode a fals criſtyn man. and ſent vn to the ſowden of the ſariſeus that he ſhuld cum anone. and he toke Rome: And ſent petre chirche wos made a ſtabull for ther horſes Bot lodewik with the frennſhemen and lumbardies all that infenite multitude diſtruyd. and that with greet ſheddyng of criſtyn blod Sergius the ſecund wos pope after Gregorius ij yere Thys man wos called fyrſt os Porci in engliſh hogyſmothe: Wherfor that man &̄ after all the popis namys archanged when they bene choſyn. And that for iij cauſis. The friſt for criſt changed thee name of thos mē ye wich he made popis: ye ſecūd for os moch as thei archāged ī name ſo ſhuld thei be chāged īꝑfecciō of life ye iij leſt he ye wich is choſī to a excedīg degre ſhuld be hurte in name Leo wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Sergius viij yere This Leo wos an holy man And alſo he was in prudens as ſharpe as a ſerpent And in his dedis as meke as a dowfe: And he wos broughte forth vertuuſly in a monaſteri: and when that he was made pope he labored to repayne his chirches agayn the wych the falſe

ſaraſons on after an other had deſtruyed. This man wos a myghty writer and a gret precher. and myghtely labored in watche and prayer: and ſo died and wos beried & lies at ſent petris. Benedictus a Roman wos pope after Leo .ij. yere This benedicte had the name of the thyng: for in all thyng he wos bliſſed. This mā ordand that clarkys ſhuld go ordynately & honeſtly. Lodowicus the ſon of Lotharij wos Emprour this tyme and a noynted of Sergio the pope: and a while regned with his fadre and after he regned xxi: yere allone This man had a ſon that heght Karolus. in to whom the deuell entred. and vexed him afore his fader. and then he conſpirid his fadres deth. and in his tyme mony a meruell fell▪ Nota. Iohannes anglicus of the nacion of Magnutynne about this tyme wos pope. And ſhe wos a woman arayed in mannys garmentys: Bot ſhe profetid ſo ī holy ſcripture. that ther wos fonden none lyke hir. ¶Then ſhe was choſen pope. Bot afterward ſhe wos with child. and when ſhe ſhuld haue gone opynly in proceſſion: ſhe traueled and deceſſid. ¶And this is the ſext pope the which to this tyme had the nam of holyneſſe. and wer vecius: and this parſon as other curſed popis wer. wos punyſſhed of god. ner ſhe wos not nombred in thee boke of popis. Nicholaus a roman wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this womā ix yere This Nicholas wos of gret holynes yt ther wos no mā cōꝑabull to hī aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   gret Gregori the pope. And whē he wos made pope. Lodewik the emꝑour wos preſēt: and after he deceſſid a verey good man and wos beried ī ſent petyrchirche yerde. Adriā a roman wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   pope Nicholas. This Adrian curſed Lothariū brother to the emprour the kyng of Lotharyng for his adultery· bot when he come to rome to excuſe him for his adult
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y. he ſayd he was curſed wronguſly. and he brought wt hī all ye nobul mē of his regiō. & all wer deid wt ī on yere. & the kīg died in the way when he come to the cite of Placenciam:
            
         
         
            
            
               Anno domini .viijC.lxxiij.
               ¶Of kyng Alured and how the Danois in his tyme prayd him of merci that they myght gone out of the land.
               
                  
                     Aluredus
                     Thys tyme come the danys in to Englond
                     
                   AFter the deth of this Eldred regned his brother Alured that Dolfynes was cald ¶Tho went the danois &̄ aſſē led them: and went forth to ſoche Alured that tho wos king new made of ſouthſex. and ther they fonden him at wilton with a litel pepull: and neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the laſſe he faught wt them. but at the laſt he fled thens from the feld. and went in to weſtſex and ordeyned ſo moch pepull of his own reame and alſo of other ſo tyll that he had a ſtrong hoſt ſo that the danois had no pouer ayens hī to withſtōd And he come to london with his hoſt. and ther wer the danois ſoiourned and ther wold he haue foughten with them. bot the danois durſt not with him fight. but prayed hī of pees and that they myght go ayen in to ther own cuntre and neuermore to cū ī to englond ayen that is to ſay ony harme for to done. ¶And vpon this couenant they ſhuld yef him to plege good hoſtages & ſoch as the Engliſſh men wold axen.
            
            
               ¶How Hubba and Hunger wer kylled at Chippenham and how the Danois brought ther kyng vn to our kyng:
               
                  ANd the ſame day that the danois departed froo London ſo faſt they riden bothe nyght and day and neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   toke reſt

of goyng till that thei come vn to Exceſtre and token tho the toune and ther held them. ¶When kyng Alured herd the tydyng anone he let take the hoſtages and went from thens vn to exceſtre with all the pouer that he had. ¶And when the danois herd tell of his cummyng they went from thens vn to weſ
                     •
                  ſex and come to Chippenham and ther they did moch harme in the cuntre they robbid folke and brought them in priſon. ¶The king alured them purſued and come vpon. and ferſly them aſſailed and ther wer ſlayn bothe Hubba and Hunger his brother and Buerne bocard & in this bataill wos moch folke ſlayn in that on ꝑte and ī that other but the gree of that feld left with the danois for as moch os the kyng come with litell companye: ¶The kynge haſted him as moch os he myght for to wend ayene &̄ when ye danois fonden Hubbais body liyeng deid they entered it and made vpon hit a gret logge and let call it hubeſlow and ſo it is cald vn to thiys day. and that place is in deuenſhire. ¶The baroens of ſomerſet wilteſhire and dorſet herd tell how that ther king wos deſcomfited & ordeined all the pouer that they myght haue & come to the kyng ther he wos and thanked god that they had hym found on liue for they had went that the danois had him ſlayn. ¶Tho toke they a councell the king & his barons that they wold gone and ſeche the danois with them all for to fight and ſo ther riden all yt nyght them all for to ſeche &̄ come a morow about prime to Habyngdon ther that the danois weer. ¶The kyng Alured &̄ his barons tho aſſembled &̄ ther aſſayl
                     •
                  d the danois eg
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ly and ther yaf them a ſtrōg bataill & ye danis nobulli put them of lōg tyme yt no mā wiſt whed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ꝑte more pepull weſ ſlaī ¶But thꝰ it befell as god wold yt the king Alured had the victorie with moch honour for the danois wer ſo driuen yt they ne wiſten whid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for to turne: & xv. days the king them purſued at his wyll that glad and fayn they wer for to ſpeke of pees and of acord &̄ toke him good hoſtage· & ſayd that they nold neuer more vpon

him were ne no debate arere ¶And more ouer they behighte to the kyng Aulured that they wold go and bring ther own kīg vn to him. and that ther kyng and they all ſhuld be baptiſed. ¶And vpon this condicion kyng Alured hem granted lyfe &̄ limme: &̄ ſaid vn to them that thei ſhuld gone ther kīg for to ſeche and at a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn day to cum ayene that to them wos ſet. &̄ ſo they wenten forth faſt and come ayene at ther day that wos aſſined. and all the danoys brought ther kyng wt them. ¶The kyng Alured anon let them be baptiſed and ther names changid ſo that the kyng of danmarke wos called Athelſton. and xxx. of his felawes names wer changed alſo. and the other wer baptiſed to the right beleue. ¶And all this wos done at weſtmynſter and after that kyng Alured held with him kyng athelſton and all his danoys xij. days at ſoiourne with moch ſolempnite & yaf them gret yeftes. aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt they wer baptiſed &̄ ſo they deꝑtid. Tho wos kyng Alured all at eſe when he had his emnys ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cummyn & that they wer turned to the right beleue of almyghty god:
            
            
               ¶How the danoys that come in to fraunce with Gurmond come ayen in to Engloyd and of the deth of kyng Alured.
               
                  ANd thus it befell aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward that the danois of Northhū
                  berland that wer paynyms come with a gret ſtrength & an huge hoſt of fraunce that is to be vnderſtonde with them yt went in to fraunce: with Gurmond of Aufrike when he had cō
                  quered englond and yaf it vn to the Saxons. and tho thatt come from fraunce ariued in kent. &̄ ſent in to Northhumbirland that they ſhuld cum to them. And when thos ij. hoſtis wer comen and aſſembled. anone they went to diſtruy all ye criſtī pepull of englond from place to place & did moch ſorow. ¶Hit befell thꝰ os almyghty god wold a hard chance ī englond For the good kīg Alured that wos wont to abate the danois died in the meyn tyme. ¶This kyng Alured regned xxx. yere and a good king had bene. & well could chaſtiſe his enmys. & alſo he wos a good
                  
clerke. & let make mony bokis. And a boke he made of engliſh̄ of auentures of kynges and of batailles that had bene done in the lond. and mōy other bokes of geſtes he let them writte that wer of gret wiſdō &̄ of good lernyng· thurgh wich bokes mōy a man may hī a mēd yt will them rede & vpō loke. vpō whos ſaule almyghty god haue merci. & this kīg Alured lieth at wyncheſter.
               IOhannes the viij. was pope after Adrian viij. yere: This Iohn̄ a noynted Karolum the Emprour. and he ſufferid gret wrong of the romans. for he fauuid not the ſayd emꝑour And ther for he put the ſaid pope in kepyng. alſo he degrated the biſſhop of Portnenſe the wich wos the occaſion of all his ſorow. Karelus the ſecund wos emprour after Lodwike: This Karolus had a brother the wich was called Lodwyke & he wos the king of German. And he ordand bataill ayans his brother: but Karolus or they faght wos poyſened. & he made mony a monaſteri: Martinus wos pope after Iohn̄ on yere: this Martin lytell ꝓphetted. for he leued but lytell tyme Adrianus the thrid was pope after him on yere. and of him is nothyng writtyn Stephanus the fifthe. wos pope after him vi. yere and nothyng of him is writtyn but that he tranſlatit the body of ſent Marty
                     •
                   Karolus the thrid was emprour after the ſecund xij. yere. This Karelus peeſably had in poſſeſſion all fraunce and germā
                  
                     •
                   and was crouned Emprour of iohn̄ the pope. And after his glorius victori he turned all Normandi to the faith. And he myght no more reſiſt the fraunſhmen bot iiij: yere he regned on them and he wos vnprofitabull to them: and therfor they put him a way Arnulphus wos emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Karelus xij. yere This Arnulphus vtterly conſtrened the Normans the wich deſtruid the frenneſhmen xl. yere Then he wos ſeke and had no comforth of no leche for he was in a meruelus ſekeneſſe ſo that he wos comſumyt

with lyſe and was deid. Formoſus wos pope after Stephin v yere This man firſt wos biſſhop of Portuenſis. & of pope Iohn̄ wos depriuyt for his inobediens and was degrated to the lay fe bot by Martyn the pope he wos reſtorid. and ayens his othe he come not allonly to Rome. bot to ofer him the dingnite of the pope. for the wich ther was gret alterecacion.
               Bonefacius the ſext wos pope xv. dais Stephanus the ſext on yere and iij. monethes Iōa iij. monethes and xij dais. Theodorus the ſecund xx days. Iohannes the xi. wos ij yere & xv: dais Benedictus the iiij wos iij. yere and ij monethys Leo the iiij. wos xl dais Zpōforus the friſt vij monethys Thes viij popis wer bot litell tyme. And ther for we cannot tell of them no notabull thinges bot yf we ſhuld writ ſclander of thē that myght be found. for the vnherd ſtrife and cōtencion. ī that holy apoſtyll ſeet: for on ſtrofe ayens an other and repreued ye dedis of an other. And for to tell how they ſtrofe it wer no gret honour to ſhew: for that holy apoſtils ſeet.
               Ludowicus the thrid was emprour after Arnulphus vi 
                     〈◊〉
                   This man had not the popis bliſſing: for the vnſtabulnes of them the wich regned in Itali and he was conſtraned to expuls beryng And this man was the laſt emprour of all the kynrad of karolꝰ kīg of fraunce ¶This tyme the empire was remeued and tranſlatyt and deuyded. For the frenſhmen holp not the chirche: the wich ther faders had hedified and fortefied. bot diſtruyd them ne help not the Romans ayens Lombardis. the wich vexed the romans right ſore Therfor by the comyns aſſent they wer excludid from the empire &̄ ye Italians be gan to be emprours ī Itali. & the Almans in almany vn till Ottanem the wich regned in both the places The frenſhmen wer conſtrenyd to abide ī ther own cuntre and no more to be emprours for ther miſcheuus leuyng Beryngarius the friſt Conradus and Beringarius the ſecund and Hugo wer emprours aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Lodewike bot they ar not

nōburt emōg the emꝑours for ſū war bot ī almain &̄ ſū ī Itali.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Edward that was kyng Alured ſon.
               
                  ANd after this Alured regned Edward his ſon and was a good man and a wyſe that wos called Edward yt was wonder curtaſſe. ¶The danois did moch ſorow in the lande & ther pouer encreſed & begō for to wax from day to day: for the danois comen oft with ther companyes in to this land ¶And when the kyng ſaw that he myght no better done. then he toke pees with them and granted them his trewis ¶And notheleſſe thee trewis durid not long that the danois ne began ſtrongly for to were vpon the engliſhmen and did them moch ſorew. wherfor kyng Edward did aſſemble a gret hoſt for to fight with them ¶And tho this kyng edward died when god wold This kīg edward regned xxiiij. yere &̄ lieth at wīcheſtre beſide his fader.
            
            
               Anno domini: ixC.xiiij:
               SErgius the thrid wos pope after Xpōfer vij. yere This man wos a cardinall of rome: and wos expulſid by Formoſe the pope. and then he went to the frenſhmen. and thurgh the help of them he come ayen to rome and expulſid criſtofer the pope, & was pope him ſelf. And to a venge his exile he toke owt thee body of pope Formoſe wher as he wos beried. And arayed hym in the popis arayment and cauſid him to be hedid. and to be caſt in to the water of tibyrby rome. ¶Then fyſſhers fond him &̄ brought him in to the chirche And the holy ymages of ſentis boyed doune to him whē the bodi of him wos brought in to the chirche that all men might ſee. & honorabully him halfed. Yit Sergiꝰ diſtruyed all that thyng the wich the holiman had ordand Anaſtaſius wos pope after him ij. yere. Laudo wos pope v monethee. & litell they did. Iohēs the x. wos pope then. this Iohn̄ wos the ſon of Sergij pope. bothe of natur & of maners

                  and he by might was pope and he wos wricchedly ſlain of Guydoys knyghtys for they put on his methe a pelow and ſtopped his brethe. And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hī wos on other put in. but anone he was out and therfor he is not named os a pope.
               Henricus the duke of ſaxoni was emprour of almane xviij. yere This Herri wos a nobull man. bot he is not nombred emōg the emprours: for he regned bot allonly in almanye: And he had a veray holi woman vn to his wife and his name wos Matild
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  n whom he gat ij: ſonnys that is to ſay Ottonem and Harri & Otto ſuccedid him in the empire. & Herri had moch land ī almāy And he gat an other ſon yt heyght Brim
                     •
                  n &̄ wos a verey holi man &̄ wos biſſhop of colan. &̄ he foūded ye monaſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y of pōthaleō
               
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Adelſtone.
               AFter this Edward regned Athelſtone his ſon And when he hod regned iiij. yere he held bataill ayens the danois and drofe kyng Gaufrid yt wos kīg of the danois and all hys hoſt vn to the ſee & reſted by ſcotland and toke ſtrongly al the cū
                  tre an hoill yere. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that tho of Cumberland & the ſcottes of weſtmerland be gone to were vpon kyng athelſton &̄ he them yaf ſo ſtrong bataill that he kylled ſo mony of them. that no man coud tell the nomber of them &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt he regned bot iij. yere & he regned in all xxv. & lieth at Malmeſburi.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Edmond
               
                  ANd after this Adelſtō regned edmōd his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for kīg adelſtone had no ſone. and this edmōd wos a worthy mā and a doughty knyght of bodi & as nobull al ſo: And the iij yer after that he wos kyng he went ouer humber in to that cūtre in the wich cuntre he fond ij. kynges of danois that on wos called Enelaf that other Renant This kyng edmond drofe them bothe frō the land & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wēt &̄ toke a gret prey in Cumberland This Edmond regned but vij. yere & lieth at Glaſtenburi.
            
            
               
               ¶Of kyng Eldred.
               
                  ANd after this Edmond regned Eldred his brother that avenged edward his fader of his emnys that did him kyll and afterward he ſeyſed all Northhumberland in to his hand and made the ſcottys for to a bowe and meke vn to his wyll ¶And in the ſecund yere of his regne come Arnalaf guyran that wos kyng of denmarke and ſeyſed all Northhumberland & held that land ij. yeree and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that come kyng Eldred with an gret pouer & drofe him out of this land ¶And this kyng eldree was a nobull man and a good of whos goodneſſe ſent Dū
                  ſtane preched. & this kīg eldred regned xi. yere & lieth at wīcheſt
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Edwyne.
               
                  ANd after this eldred regnd Edwyne the ſon of edmond and he was a lither man toward god & the pepull. for he hated folke of his own land &̄ loued &̄ honored ſtrange men and ſet litell by holy chirche and he toke of holy chirche all the treſour that he might haue that was gret ſhame &̄ vylanye to him ſelf &̄ perrill to his ſaule. and therfor god wold not that he ſhuld regne no longer than iiij yere & died & lieth at wincheſter.
               Leo the ſext a roman wos pope ſex monethes: Stephanus ye vij. a roman wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him ij. yer. Iohn̄ the xi. a roman wos pope iij. yere. Stephanus the viij a germane was after hī viij yere Martin ye thrid wos after him iij. yere. and of thes ſex popis is nothyng had in ſcriptur: for what cauſe I canot tell
            
            
               Anno domini ixC.liiij.
               AGapitus a roman wos pope after Martin ij: yere & viij. monethes. and nothyng of him is writtyn Iohannes the xij: a roman wos pope after Agapite almoſt viii. yere & he had a fader that heght Alberyke & wos a worthi man in the cete of rome. He inducit the nobull men to ſwer that aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the deth of agape they ſhuld cheſe Octouianū his ſonne pope. & ſo it was

done &̄ was named Iohn̄: and he was an hunter and a lecherus man. ſo that opynli he kepid women. wherfor certayn cardinals wrot to Otthoni the emprour of ſaxon that he ſhuld cum 
                     •
                  on to rome for to help to diſtruy the ſklandir of the cherche. this the pope perſaued and the hand that wrot that pyſtyll he made to be cut of. And mony timis he was warned by the ēprour & the clarge. that he ſhuld correc him ſelf. bot he nold not for nothing. then he was depoſed and Leo wos put in. vn to his place. wherfor the emprour wos anoyed and come ayen and beſeged Rome ſo long. tyll they toke Benedict to him & reſtorid Leo.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Edgar that regned a bone the kynges of ſcotland and of wales and how that he was begyled thurgh the takyng of his wife.
               
                  ANd after this Edwyne regned Edgar his brother a mā that moch loued god and pees and holy cherche alſo And was a worthy man & a gret lord of blod & myghty &̄ mayntined well this lond in pees ¶And this Edgar wos lord &̄ king aboue all the kynges of ſcotland and of wales. from the tyme yt Arthur was a gone &̄ neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos ſithen kyng of his pouer. And this edgare wos ſent Edwardis fadre: & when edgares wif wos deid that wos ſent edwardis mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ entered. he hard ſpeke of the fairnes of Eſtrild that wos Orgarus doughter a baron of deuēſhire that wos ſo farr a woman that all men did ſpeke of hi
                     •
                  . he called on of his knyghtes that he moch loued &̄ truſtyd vpon &̄ 
                  told him Go quod he to the nobull baron Orgar of deuēſhire & ſe if that is dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   be ſo farr as men ſpekith of: & if it be ſoth I wyll haue hir vn to my wife ¶This knyght that was called Edelwold went forth his way as the kyng him had ſayd. and come ther that the lady wos. and when he ſaw hir ſo fair he thought to haue hir hīſelf to wife. and therof ſpakē to Orgar hir fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ hir fadre wos an old man and had no mo childre but only hir and ſaw

that Edel wold wos a fair yong knyght and worthi and riche and wos well beloued with the kyng. and thought his doughter ſhuld well be maried. & beſet vpon him. and granted hī is doughter if the good lord the kyng wold conſent ther to ¶Then thys Edelwold come ayene to the kyng and told him that ſhe wos fair ynough vpon to ſee. but ſhe wos wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   lothly. Tho anſuerd thee kīg & ſaid that he toke bot litell charge. Sir qd edelwold tho ſhe is hir fadres heir: and I am not riche of landis. and if ye wold cō
                  ſent and grant that I myght hir haue. than ſhuld I be rich ynowghe. In goodis name qd the kyng I conſent ther to Edelwold thankid tho the kyng moch and went ayene in to Deuenſhire and ſpouſed the damiſell & in that cuntre he duelled ¶And thꝰ it befell vpon a tyme that he told his counſell and all this thing vn to his wife howe and in what maner he had begiled his lord the kyng that wold haue had hir vn to wife. And anone as ſhe it wiſt ſhe loued him neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more afterward os ſhe did before. ¶This lady conſaued bi him a ſon. and 
                     ••
                  hē tyme wos yt ye child ſhuld be borne Edelwold come to the kyng & prayed hī to heue a ſon of his at fontſtone: the kyng him granted & let call hī Edgar of his own name ¶And when this wos done he thought that all was ſyker ynowgh for the kyng yt he wold not taken his wife for as moch as his lord wos a 
                     •
                  oly mā & an amerous.
            
            
               ¶How that kīg edgar weddid eſtrild aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the deth of edelwold
               THus it befell that all men in kyng Edgarys court thoſpeken and ſayed that edelwold was richely avaunced thurgh the mariege of his wife and yit they ſayd he was a vaunced▪ an hondreth fold more For he had ſpouſed the fairaſt woman that euer was ſeyn And the kīg herd ſpeke ſo moch of hir bewte he thoght that edelwold had him deſſaued and begiled &̄ thought priuely in his hart that he wold gone in to deuēſhire as it wer for till hūt for the hert &̄ for the hynde &̄ other wild beſtis & than he ſhuld

ſe ther the lady or he deꝑted thens And this lady wos duelling at a maner place beſide the foreſt ther that the king wold hūt and at that man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos herburghed all nyght and when tyme come that the kyng ſhuld ſope and the ſone ſhone: the kyng aſked after his goſſip and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his godſon. and edelwold made hir to cū before the kyng And neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  theles if it otherwiſe myght haue bene ſhe ſh̄uld not haue comen in his ſight by his will. ¶The lady welcō
                  ed the kyng and ſwetly him cuſſed and he toke hir by the hond &̄ tho next by him hir ſet & ſo ſoppid they to gedre: And ther was a cuſtom &̄ an vſage in this land that tyme that when on dronke to an other the drinker ſhuld ſay waſſayll. and that other ſhuld anſuer & ſay drinke haill. and thus did the kyng & the lady mony tymes &̄ alſo kyſſed. And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſopper when tyme was to go to
                     •
                  ed the kyng went to bed thynkyng hertely on the fairnes of yt lady & tho was ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   comen for hir loue. that him thought yt he ſhuld die bot if he had his wyll on hir. vpon the morne the kyng aroos & in the foreſt went him for to diſport with hertis & hyndes &̄ all other wild beſtys & of the hertis gret plente he ſent to that lady. & thris he went to ſolacen & ſpeke with that lady whilles he duelled ther in yt cūtre ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that the kyng remeued thens &̄ thought hī how he might beſt deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   edelwold from his wyfe as he had him fryſt diſſaued. ¶And the kyng anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   viij. days let ordeyn a parlament at Saleſberi of all his baronage concell to haue. &̄ for to ordeyn how the cūtre of northhūbeland myght beſt be kepid that the danois come not ther the land to deſtruy ¶And this edelwold come vn to the kynges ꝑlament & the kyng ſent him vn to yorke for to bi keꝑ of that cūtre ¶And thus it befell that men that knew him not ſlew him by the way. ¶And anone as the kyng herd tell that he wos deid he let ſend after the lady eſtrild that ſhe ſhuld cum to the cite of london & ther ben wedded to the kyng with gret ſolempnite &̄ worſhip and held a ſolempne feſte & he wered a croune that wos of gold and the quene an other

¶And ſent dunſtan amorow come vn to the kyng in to the chamber & fond the kyng ī bed and the quene alſo yfeyr And ſēt dunſtone axed the kīg who ſhe wos &̄ ye kyng anſuerd & ſayd this is the quend Eſtrild. & the erchebiſſhop ſent dunſtone ſayd yt he did gret wrong & a yens godis will. to take a woman to wif whos child ye had take at the fontſtone & the quene for yt worde neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   loued ſent dunſtone & notheles ye good mā warned of yt foly to be left bot it availled litell for the loue betwyn them was ſo moch ¶The kīg begat vpon hir a ſon wos called Eldred &̄ whē this cheild was vi yere old the kyng his fader died. & about yt tyme he had regned xvij. yere & lieth at Glaſtenburi.
               BEringariꝰ the thrid wos emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Henri vij. yer. this Berīgari wos emꝑour in Italy. ī whos tyme wos grett diuiſion & Henri ye emꝑour deceſſid &̄ Otto began to regne ī al many: Lotheriꝰ regned aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hī ij. yere & deceſſid whē Otto regned ī almany. &̄ had a wyfe that heght Dalnydam the wich after weddid otto Berīgariꝰ the iiij. wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him This man wt gret tyrannyde ſubduit Itali. wherfor the pope &̄ od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   romans called Otto yt he might deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   them. the wich he did: &̄ he toke berīgar by ſtrength. & twyes he owtlayd him &̄ he toke Lothoriꝰ wife the wich the tyrand had priſoned. Leo the viij. wos pape aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Benedictus on yere: and iiij. monethis This man was choſin wt the comyns voce: and Iohn̄ was depoſit. This Leo ordant that no pope ſhuld be made with out the conſent of the emꝑor. For ye malas of the romans the wich oppreſſid them. This man granted all the yeftis to Otto & his ſucceſſurs the wich war yef by Iuſtinian & Karolus to the chirche that he myght defend Itali from the rebilions. Iohēs the xij. wos pope after him almoſt wiij. yere This Iohn̄ ſuffrid gret wrong of the romans. for he wos take and exiled: bot Otto bare this heuely. for he kylled the nobull men of rome. and certan of them exiled for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more.
               
                  Benedictus the ſext was pope after him vi. yere. This man was take & ī caſtill angill was ſtrāgled. Nota. The empire th
                     •
                   is tyme wos tranſlatid to the almayns & the ſame cauſe is her as was be fore for the vicious leuyng. ne thes vnhapi men culd not be informit: that they cold eſchew that co vice thurgh the wich thei ſaw ſo mony nobull men ꝑiſſhed. Otto was emprour after Beringariꝰ xij. yere This Otto wot the friſt emprour of alman. & he wos all vertuus as an other kyng Karolus. for he wos the defender of the chirche of god. & the ſenguler ꝓmoter. for the wich he was worthy to be emprour. mony mē of fals beleue he cōu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ted and he held wt him pope Benedict the vſurper of the popehed in to ſaxony. and ther he deceſſid in his exile And this emprour deceſid a riche man in vertu and goodis. Otto the ſecund was emꝑor after his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  : and he was a nobull man to the chirche as his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was & mony a bataill he had ayens fals men of beleue and at the laſt he almoſt loſt all his hoſt ī Kalabur. yit he for ſ
                     •
                  th wt al his mynde be ſought ſent Peter to help. & merueluſly ſent petre deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ed him. And his wife wos the doughter of the emprour of Conſtantynopolitan of the romans blod. and this man was crouned of Benedictus the pope.
            
            
               ¶Of ſent Edward the marter how Eſtrild his ſtepm
                     •
                  ther let kyll him for to make Eldred hir own ſon kyng.
               
                  ANd after this Edgar regned Edward his ſon that hee begate vpon his friſt wife. that well and nobully gouerned the land▪ for he was full of all maner of goodneſſe and lad a full holy lyfe. and aboue all thyng he loued god and holy chirche. and the quene Eſtrild that wos his ſtepmother let him ſle for encheſon to make hir own ſon Eldred kyng and thus on aday wos he ſlayn as ye ſhall heir afterward ¶It befell thus on a day yt the kyng Edward wēt in to a wode for to play ī the ſouth cūtre beſide a toune yt is called warham ī wich foreſt wos grete

plente of hertis & hyndes. &̄ when he had ben a while ther hī for to play he thought vpō his brother Eldred that wos with his mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the quene for hir place wos nygh the foreſt. and thought for to go thider & viſet &̄ ſe his brother. & toke with him bot a litell meny and went him tho toward his ſtepmoders houſe that ī that time ſoiourned in the caſtell of Corfe: &̄ as he rode in the thiknes of the wode to aſpy his gam it befell that he went a mys & loſt his mēy that with him come. & at the laſt he come out of the wode. & as he lokid him abowt he ſaw ther faſte beſide a man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that his ſtepmod duelled in. &̄ thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward he went allone & anone it wos told the quene how that the kyng wos commyn allon with out companye &̄ therfor ſho made Ioye ynough & thought how yt ſhe myght don that he wer ſlayn as priueli as ſhe myght &̄ called to hir on of hir knyghtys to whom ſh̄e had told moch of hir conſell betwen them & both they come to the kyng &̄ courtaſly him reſaued. &̄ the kyng told yt he wos cumen hir to viſit & alſo for to ſpeke with Eldred his brother The quene mony times him thankid &̄ him prayed to alight & harburgh with hir all yt nyght ¶The kyng ſaid yt he myght not. but ayen he wold wend vn to his folke if he myghtt them find: ¶And when the quene ſaw that he wold not abid ſhe prayd him yt he wold ons drink &̄ he granted hir & anone as the drinke wos comen the quene drank vn to the kyng &̄ the kyng toke the cup &̄ ſet it to his mouthe & in the meyn tyme whiles yt he drank. the knyght yt wos with ye quene with a knyfe ſmot the kyng vn to the hert &̄ ther he felle doune deid of his palfra vn to the erth The quene for this dede yaf the knyght gold & ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   gret plenti. &̄ of other riches ynough And ye knyght anone as this wos done went him ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſe. &̄ ſo ſcappid he out of this land ¶When this kyng Edward thus wos martired. Hit was in thee yere of the Incarnacion after our lord ihū criſt ixC.lxxx· yere & he had regned xij. yere and an halfe &̄ lieth at glaſtenburi
            
            
               
               ¶Of kyng Eldred and how the kyng Swyne of denmarke held englond and how eldred that wos ſent edwardis bred was not beloued ī his reame & therfor he fled in to Normandie.
               AFter this kyng edward regned eldred his brother and ſent Dunſtan crouned him and this ſent Dunſtone died ſone after that he had for yefen the quene hir treſpaſſe eſtrild for encheſon that ſhe wos cauſe of kyng edwardis deth and ſent dūſtane had hir aſoled and pennance hir enioyned and ſhe lyued aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   chaſte life and clene ¶This kyng Eldred weddid an engliſſh woman & on hir he begate edmond Irenſide & an other ſon yt wos called edwyne And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   died the quene ther mother. And in that tyme come Swyne in to englond that was kyng of Denmarke for to chalange and conquere all that his aunceſtres had before that tyme and ſo he conquered and had it all at his axyng: ¶For the good erle Cut
                     •
                  ert of lyndeſey &̄ all the pepull of northhumberland and almoſt all the gret of englond held with Swyne that was kyng of Denmarke for os moch as they loued not kyng eldred. for encheſon that his good brother wos ſlaī edward falſely for encheſon of him. and therfor no man ſet but litell by hī wherfor kyng ſwyne had all his will and toke all the land: and eldred the kyng flede tho in to Normandie & ſo ſpake to ye duke Rechard that the duke yaf hym his ſuſtre Emma to wife vpō the wich he gat ij. ſonnys & yt on was caled Alured & yt other edward. & when Swyne had conquered all ye land he regnet nobeli & leued xv: yere &̄ then died &̄ lieth at yorke.
            
            
               ¶How kīg eldred come ayen frō Normande & how knoght ye danois regnet & of the were betwix him & edmond Irenſide
               AFter the deth of Swyne that wos a Danois: Knoght his ſon duelled in englond and wold haue be kyng and tho come ayene Eldred owt of Normandye with moch nomber of pepull & with a ſtrong menye that Knoght durſt not abide bot

fley thens in to Denmarke The kyng eldred had ayen his reame and held ſo gret lordſhip that he by gan to diſtruy all tho that holpid Swyne that wos a Danois ayens him ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward come ayen this Knoght from denmarke with a gret pouer ſo that kyng Eldred durſt not with him fight but fled fro thens vn to london and ther held hym ¶Tho come Knoght and him beſeggid ſo long tyll that kyng Eldred died in the cite of london and lieth at ſent paulus and he regned ix. yere.
               BOnus was pope after Benedictus on yere This maij abode bot litell tyme. Bonefacius wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him .v. monethes Benedictus wos after him x. yere This man crovned otto the ſecund and made mony romans to be take: & he gedrit a conſell ayens the kyng of fraunce wher Gylberd the Negramenſier wos depoſit. Iohannes the xiiij was pope after him viij. monethis and he wos put in caſtell angill and wos famed to deth. Iohannes the .xv. wos after him iiij monethis. Iohannes the xvi. wos after him almoſt xi. yere This man was taught in Armys and made mony bokys and els litell of him is writtyn Gregorius the v. wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this man almoſt iij: yere This Gregori was made pope at the inſtans of the emprour Otto the thrid. for he wos his coſin. And when he had be a litell while pope and the emprour recedid from the cite of rome. Placentinꝰ wos put in bi Creſcencio a conſull: for monay. and then was ſtrife a few dais. bot the emprour come ſone after ayen and toke Creſcenciū the conſull and ſtroke of his heed and put out the eyn of this man the wich put out his coſin of the dignite of the pope. And maymet him on odir menbyrs and his knyghtis ne his dukys holped him nothyng: For he did that thing that he ſh̄uld not haue done. and he ſuffred that at he diſerue
                     •
                  d. Nota ¶This Gregori wyth the emprour Otto ordand ther the

cheſers of the empire. the wich from thens forthe hath a bydyn vn to this day. For the frenſſhmen nor none oth
                     •
                  r myght not breke that ordinanſe. & thos cheſers of the empire by the pope and Otto wer not made for ony blame of the Saxons bot to eſchew the ꝑels to cum. aned the namys be writyn for lerned men in latyn in thes verſis. Maguntinenſis Treuerenſis Colonienſis Quili
                     
                        
                     
                     bus
                   imꝑij fit cancellarius horum. Et palatinꝰ dapifer Dux portitorenſis. Marchio prepoſitus camere. Pincerna bohemus Hij ſtatuūt dn̄m cunctis ꝑ ſecula ſūmū. Palatinꝰ eſt comes ren
                     •
                  . Marchio eſt Brandeburgenſis. Dux ſaxonū et Rex bohemo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . verum vt quidam dicūt. thurgh this occaſion the Egill has loſt mony a fether &̄ in the end he ſhall be made nakid.
               Otta the thrid wos emprour xviij: yere This man was a worthy man all the dais of his empire. & after the wiſdom of his fader he wos a veray faithfull man to the chirche. and in mony batailles he ꝓſperit be cauſe he wos deuote to almyghty god & his ſentis. and yaf mighty worſſhippyng to the Relekes of ſentis & oft tymes he veſid holy places: This man wos crouned bi gregori his coſin &̄ at the laſt he deceſſed at rome. No
            
            
               Anno domini .M.iiij.
               SIlueſter the ſecund wos pope after Gregori iiij yere And he wos made pope bi the help of the deuell. to whom he did homage· for he ſhuld yef him all thing that he deſyrid: & he wos called Hylberd & his emny gat him the grace of the kyng of fraunce and he made him the biſſhop of Remenſis: bot anone he was depoſit: and after he gat the grace of the emprour and wos made the biſhop of Rauēnie and after pope. bot he had an end anone & ſo haue all that puttys ther hope in fals deuelis. Yit men triſtin ī his ſaluacion for certayn demonſtracion of his ſepulcur. & for the gret pennance that he did in his laſt end: For he made his hād &̄ his leggis to be cut of: &̄ diſmēbyrt ī al his body & to be caſt out at ye doore to foulys & thē his bodi to be drawi wt wild beſtis & ther

to be beried wher ſū euer they reſtit as an hound. and they ſtoed ſtill at ſent Iohn̄ latronys &̄ ther he wos beried and yt wos ſign of his ſal̄uacion. Iohannes the xviij: wos pope .v. monethis Iohannes the xix wos pope after him v. yere and thes ij. did litell thynges Henricus the friſt wos emprour in almane xx yer This henri was duke of Barri and all acording he was choſen for his bliſſed fame. the wich he had. & it is red yt mony of thos dukis of barri were oly: not alōli ī abſtenīg of fleſhli deſiris bot ī vertuus leuīg And he had a ſuſtir that wos as holy as he whō he yaf to wife vn to the kyng of vngre. and ſhe brought all vngre to the criſtī faith. &̄ his wiuys name wos ſc̄a Kōnogundis with whom he leued a virgin all his days. & he did mony a bataill als well ī Italy as ī Almane ayens rebelians. & proſpert rightwyſly at the laſt wt a bliſſed end he deceſſid. And in the lyfe of ſent Laurens he & his wife be put for ſampuls
               Benedictus wos pope after Ihon .xi: yere This man had gret ſtrife in his days. for he was put out. and an other put in And this Benedict aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that he wos deid. was ſeyn of an holy biſſhope in a wricchid figure &̄ he had gret payn. And this figur ſaid he triſted nothing in the merci of god And nothing profettit him that wos done for him. for it wos getyn with extorcion &̄ vniuſtly ¶Then this biſſhop left his biſſhopprik for dred of this ſight: & wēt ī to a moneſtari & leued vertuuſly all his dayes. Iohannes the xx was pope after him xi. yere & lityt profettit
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Knoght that wos a danois.
               
                  ANd after the deth of this Eldred Knoght that was a danois begā to regne. but Edmond Irenſide that wos kīg Eldredis ſon by his fyrſt wyfe ordyned a gret pouer of men and began for to were vpon kyng Knoght and ſo he did mony tymes and oft: and the were wos ſo ſtrong & hard that wonder it was to wit & the quene Emme yt duelled tho at weſtmynſter had gret

drede of hir ij. ſonnys of the were Alured and Edward leſt they ſhuld be diffoilled and miſdone thurgh this were. wherfor ſhe ſēt them ouer ſee in to Normandie to the duke Richard hir vnkyll and ther they duelled in ſafete and pees long tyme ¶Thys Edmond Irenſide and Knoght the danois wered ſtrongly to geders but at the laſt they wer accordid in this maner. that thei ſhold depart the reame be twix them both: &̄ ſo they did. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they become good frendis and ſo well loued to gedres as thei had bene brether gettyn of on bodi and of on mother borne.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Edmond Irenſide tratourſly wos ſlayn thurgh a tratour that wos called Edrith of ſtratton.
               
                  ANd after tho regned kyng Edmond Irenſide & Knoght the danois. But thus it befell afterward that in the ſame yere that they were accordid and ſo moch loued to gedre wher for a fals thefe tratour had enuy vn to the loue that was betuix them and frendſhip. whos name wos Edrith of ſtratton that was a gret lord that wos Edmond Irenſides man and of him held all the land that he had. and nothelas he thought his lord to bitray & make Knoght kyng of the land ī ītent richely to bene auanced and with him bene welbeloued. wherfor he praied his lord edmōd Irenſide vpon a day with him for to eten and to duell &̄ the kīg courtaſly hī grantid & to him come at his prayer. & at ye mete the kyng riole wos ſerueid with diuerſe metis & drinkes And whē nyght come that he ſhuld go to beede: the kyng toke his own meny &̄ went vn to chambre ther that he ſhuld take his nyghtys reſt & as he loked him about he ſaw a fair ymage & well made & ī ſemblant as it wer an archer with a bow bent in his hand. & in the bow a fine arow ¶Kyng Edmond went tho nerre to be hold it better what it might be. &̄ anone the arow him ſmot thurgh ye body &̄ ther ſlew the kyng. for that engyn wos made to kyll his owne lord tratourſly ¶And whē kīg edmond wos thus deid & ſlayn he had regned but x. yere and his pepull for hī made moch

ſorow & his body thei bere vn to glaſtīberi. and ther they hī en
                     •
                  ed And this fals tratour Edrith anone went to the quene thatt was kyng edmondis wyfe that wiſt of hir lordis dethē anone he toke from hir ij: ſonnys that were fair and yong that hir lord had vpon hir goten. that one was called Edward and that other Edewyne and lad them with him to london and toke them vn to kyng Knought that he ſhuld do with them what his will were and told him how quently he had kylled king Edmond for encheſō and loue of him ſo that kyng knoght all englond in his pouer holly myght haue ¶O thow fals tratour haſt thou my trew brother that wos ſo trew thus ſlayn for encheſon of me a man yt I moſt loued in the world. Now be my hed I ſhall for thi trauaill the well reward as thou haſt deſerueid. and anone let him be take & bonde hand and feet in maner of a tratour and let caſt him ther in to Thamyſe. and in this maner the fals tratour endid his life: ¶The kyng toke the ij. childer and put them vn to the abbot of weſt mynſter to ward and to kepe till he wyſt what that it was beſt with them for to done.
            
            
               ¶How kyng knoght ſent kyng Edmondis ſonnys bothe in to Denmarke for to ſle and how they wer ſaued
               AIt befell ſone afterward that kyng knoght had all the land in his hand and ſpouſed the quene Emma thurgh conſent of his Baronage: for ſhe was afarr woman the wich was Eldredis wife and the dukis ſuſtre of Normandie and they leued to gedre with moch loue as reſon wold ¶The kyng axid vpō a day conſell of the quene what was beſt to done with ye ſonnys that wer Edmond Irenſides ¶Sir qd ſhe they be the right theires of the land. and if they lefen they will do you moch ſorow with were. and therfor let ſend them in to a ſtrange land afer to ſum man that may them defoull and diſtroy. ¶The kīg anone let calle a danois that was called Walgar. and commanded him that he ſhuld lede thos ij. childer in to Denmarke and
                  
ſo to do & ordeyn for them yt they ſh̄uld neuer heir more of them. ¶Sir ſayd this walgar gladly your cōmandment ſhall be done. and anone tho .ij. child he toke &̄ led them in to Denmarke and for as moch os he ſaw that the childer wer wōdir fair & alſo meke. He had of them gret pitte and rewth & wold not them ſlee but let them to the kyng of Hungri for to norrich: for this walgar wos welbeknowen with the kyng and welbeloued ¶Anone the kyng axed whens the childer wer. and walgar told him & ſayed that they wer the right heiris of englond and therfor men wold them deſtruye. and therfor ſir to you they be comen merci & help for to ſech. and for ſoth if they may lyuen your men they ſhall become. and of you they ſhall hold all ther land: ¶The kyng of hūgri them vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fōg wt moch honor & let them wortheli be keped ¶And thꝰ it befell aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward yt Edwyne ye yōger brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   died. & edward the elder broder lyued a fair man &̄ a ſtrong &̄ a la
                     •
                  ge of bodi and gentill & courtais of condicions So that all men him loued And this edward in the croniclis is called emonges engliſhmen Edward the outlay ¶And when he was made knight the kȳges douter of hungeri hī moch loued for his godnes &̄ hys fairneſſe. that ſhe him called hir derling The kyng that w
                     •
                  s hir fader ꝑceyued well the loue that wos betuyx them two &̄ had none heier bot that dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . &̄ the king wochedſafe his doughter to no mā ſo well os he did to him that ſhe loued & he hir: And yaf hir vn to him with good will and edward hir ſpouſed with moch honour. The kyng of hungeri ſent aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   all his baronage and made a ſolempne feſt and a riche wedding. &̄ made all men to vnderſtond that this edward ſhuld be kīg of that lōd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the deceſſe of hī & therfor all they made gret ioye. &̄ of that tydinges thei wer full glad ¶This edward begate vpō this ladi a ſon yt wos called edgar helyng and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward a doghter that was called Margaret that afterward wos quene of ſcotland· and by the kīg of ſcotland that was callid Mancolin ſhe had a dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that was called maud

that wos quene afterward of englond thurgh kyng Henry that wos the friſt ſon of the cōquerour that hir weddid And he begate vpon hir a dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that wos called Maude that aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos emꝑeſſe of almayn: And of this maude come the kyng of englond that vn to this day is called henri the empriſe ſon ¶And yit had this Edward an other dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   by his wife that wos called Criſtiā 
                  and ſhe wos a Nonne.
            
            
               ¶How kyng knoght that wos a proud man conquered Norway &̄ how he become aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward meke and mylde.
               NOw haue ye hard of Edmondis Irendeſhed ſonnis thatt kyng Knoght wend they had bene ſlayn as he had cōmandid walgar before. ¶And this Knaght had in his hand all ye reame of englond and denmarke: & after that he went vn to Norway that land for to conquere. But the kyng of the land that was called Elaf come with his pepull &̄ wend his land well to haue kepid and defendid. & ſo ther he faught with him. till at the laſt he was ſlayn in that bataill. And tho thys knoght toke all yt land in to his hond. ¶And when he had conquered Norway and taken feautes & homages ther. he come afterward ayen in to englond & held him ſelf ſo gret a lord that him thought in all the world his pere no man wos. & become ſo proud & hauteyn that it was gret wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ¶And ſo it befell vpon a day as he had herd maſſe at weſtmynſter & wold haue gone in to hys palais. the wawis of the thamyſe ſo ſwyftely ayens him come. that almoſt they touched his fete ¶Tho ſayd the kyng with a proud hert I cōmād the water to turne ayen or els I ſhall make the. ¶The wawes for his commandement wold not ſpare. bot fluwed ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in hie more. and more ¶The kyng wos ſo proud of hert that he wold not fle the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   but abode ſtill in the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . &̄ bet it with a yerde yt he had in his hond and commandid the water that it ſh̄uld wend no ferther but for all his ꝯmandemēt the water wold not ceſe bot

euer waxed more and more an high. ſo that the kyng was all wete and ſtod depo in the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ¶And when he ſaw that he had abiden ther to long & the water wold nothing done his commandement· tho ſone he with drew him and tho ſtod he vpon a ſtone and held his handis an high and ſayed thes wordis hering all pepull. ¶This god that maketh the ſee thus ariſe an high he is liyng of all kynges and of all mightes moſt. And I am a caytif and a man dedeli. & he may neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   die and all thyng doth his cō
                  mandement &̄ to him is obedient ¶To that god I pray thatt he be my werrand: For I knowlege me a caytif febull & of no pouer &̄ therfor I wyll go vn to rome with out ony lettyng my wikkidnes to ponyſſhe and me to a mend: for of god I clame my land for to hold &̄ of none other ¶And anone made redy his h
                     •
                  
                  yr &̄ him ſelf to rome with out ony lettyng. and by the way did many almys dedis: and when he come to rome al̄ſo. ¶And when he had bene ther &̄ for his ſynnes done pennance. he come ayene in to englond & become a good man & an holy. And leued &̄ left all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   pride & ſtoutneſſe &̄ leued an holy life aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and made. ij abbeis of ſent Benet on in englond and an other in norway for as moch os he loued ſent benet more ſpeciali then other ſantis. &̄ moch he loued alſo ſent Edmōd the kyng & of the yaf gret yeftis to the houſe wherfor it wos made rich. &̄ when he had regned xx. yere he died & lieth at wyncheſtre.
            
            
               Anno domini .M.xviij.
               BEnedictus the ix. wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   iohn̄. &̄ he wos a gret li
                  
                     •
                  hout &̄ therfor he was damned: &̄ he a perid to a certan mā vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   a meruelus figour & an horibull. His heed & his taill was like an aſſe. the other parte of his body like a bere. And he ſaid to this man to whom he apperid. be not a ferde for I wos a man os ye be now bot I appeir now for i leuyd vnhappeli in old tyme like a beſt when I wos pope. ¶In this mans tyme ther was

gret diuiſion and ſcland
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to the chirche. for he wos put out and in two tymes ¶And here Tholomeus notis that the pride of biſſhoppis had eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   an euell end. and it wos eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the occaſion of moch vnreſt &̄ bataill. Conradus the friſt wos emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Henry xx. yere. This man made mony lawys and commanded pees to bekeped moſt ſtratly of any man: bot the erle of Ludolfe. was acuſed and he fled from his land. & deſired more to liue like an karle then lyke a gentilman. & yit merueluſly his ſon wos mad emprour by the cōmandement of god. ayens the wyll of Conredy & at the laſt they wer accordid & he toke corodis dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to his wif
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Harold that leu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had gone on fote thē ride an hors
               THis Knoght of whom we haue ſpokin of before had ij: ſons by his wife Emme &̄ that on wos called Hardyknoght &̄ that other Harold. & he wos ſolyght of fote that men called hym moſt comenly harold hare fote. ¶And this harold had nothyng the condicions & man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of kyng knoght that was his fadre. for he ſet bot litell price of cheualri ne no curteſi nother worſhip. but only bi his own wil ¶And he become ſo wykkid that he exiled his mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   emma. &̄ ſhe went out of the land in to flandres & ther duelled wt the erle: wherfor aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther was neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   good loue betwix hȳ & his brother. for his brother hated him dedly. &̄ whē he had regned .ij. yere & a litell more he died & lieth at weſtmynſtre.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Hardeknoght that wos haroldis brother.
               AFter this harold harefote regned his brother hardeknoghtt ā nobull knyght and a worthy and moch loued cheualri and all maner of goodneſe. ¶And when this hardiknoght had regned a litell while he let vncouer his brother harold &̄ ſmot of his hede that wos his brother at weſtmynſter & let caſt the hede in to a gonge &̄ the body in to thamyſ
                     •
                  . and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come fiſſhers &̄ toke the body with ther nettis be night &̄ bere him to ſent clemētis

chirche. and ther him beried: ¶And in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   a venged hym hardiknoght: of his brother. for in none other man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he myght be a vengid ¶This kyng hardiknoght was ſo large a yeuer of mete and drinke that his tabullis wer ſet eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y day iij. tymes full with riall metes & drinkis for his own meny & for all yt com vn to his court to be richeli 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  ueyd of riall metis. ¶And this king hardiknoght ſent aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Emme his mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & made hir to cū ayē in to englond for ſhe was driuen out of englond. whiles that harold harefote regned thurgh cunſell of the erle goodwyn that tho wos the gretteſt lord of englond next the kīg. & moſt might do what he wold thurgh out all englond thurgh his cōmandement for as moch as he had ſpouſed the dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of the good king knoght yt wos a danois wich daught
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he had by his friſt wxfe ¶And when this quene was driuē out of englond &̄ come to the erle of flaunders that wos called Baldewyne his coſin he fond hir ther al thing that hir nedid vn to the tyme that ſhe went ayen in to englō
                  de. that the kyng hardiknoght had ſend for hir that wos hir ſone. and made hir cum ayen with moch honour ¶This kīg hardyknogh when he had regned v. yere he died &̄ lieth at weſtmīſter.
            
            
               ¶Of the velani that the danois did to the engliſh men wherfor from yt tyme aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos no danois made kyng of this land.
               AFter the deth of this kyng hardiknoght for as moch as he nad no thyng of his body begoten. The erles and barons aſſembled and made a counſell that neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more afrte no man yt wos a danois though he he wer neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſo gret a man amonges them he ſhuld neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   be kyng of englond for the diſpite that the danis had done to englismē. ¶For euer more be fore and if it wer ſo yt the engliſhmen and the danois hapened for to mete vpō a 
                     〈◊〉
                   the engliſhmen ſh̄old not be ſo hardi to meue ne ſtyr a fote. 
                     ••
                  t and ſtill till the danōis war appaſſid forth ¶And more ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   if ye engliſhmen had not bowed doune ther hedis to done reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ens vn to

the danois they ſhuld haue bene bet and defouled. & ſoch man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   deſpites & velanye diden the danois to our engliſhmen wherfor they wer driuen out of the land after tyme thet kyng hardiknoght was deid for they had no lord that them might maynten. ¶And in this maner avoided the danois englond that neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they comen ayen. ¶The erles and barons bi ther comyn aſſent and conſellees ſent vn to normandye for to ſeche tho ij. brether Alured &̄ Edward that wer duelling with the duke Richard that was ther eme in intent for to croune Alured the eld
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   brother and him make kyng of englond. and of this thing to make an end The erles and barons made ther othe: But the erle Godwyn of weſtſex falſly and tratourſly thought for to ſle thes two bretheren anone as they ſhuld cum in to englond ī intent to make his ſon harold kīg the wich ſon he had begoten vpon his wife the wich was kyng knoghtys dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that wos a danois. ¶And ſo this godwyne priuely him went vn to ſouth hamton. for to mete ther the ij. bretheren when that they ſhuld come vn to land. ¶And thus it befell that the meſſingers that went in to Normandie fond nott but only Alured that wos the elder brother. For Edward his brother wos gone to hungrie for to ſpeke with his coſin Edward the owtlaw that was Edmondis ſon with the Irenſide ¶The meſſingers told and ſaid to Alured how that the erles & barons of englond ſent aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him and that he boldely ſhold cum ī to englōd and vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fonge the reame. for kyng hardiknoght was deid. and all the danois driuen out of the land.
            
            
               ¶How Godewyn the fals tratour toke Alured vpon Gildeſdoune when that he come from Normandie to bene kyng of englond and how he did him be martired in the ile of Eli.
               WHen Alured herd this tydyng he thankid god 
                  and in to ſhipe went with all the haſt that he might and paſſed the ſee and ariued at ſouthamton ther Godwyn the fals tratour was And tho this tratour ſaw that he was cumyn he welcumed him

& vnder fonge him with moch ioye & ſayd yt he wold lede hī to lō
                  don ther that all the barens of englong hī abode for to make hī kyng &̄ ſo they went on ther way toward london ¶And when they come vpon Gildeſdone tho ſayd the tratour Godwyne vn to Alured take kepe about you both on the left ſide &̄ on the right ſide. And of all ye ſhall be kyng: and of ſuch an hūdreth more ¶Now for ſoth qd Alured I behight you &̄ if I be kīg I ſhall ordeyn &̄ make ſuch lauys wherof god &̄ mā ſhall be well apayed ¶Now had the tratour cōmanded all his mē yt werwith hī yt when they wer comē vpō gildeſdone yt they ſhuld ſle all yt were ī Alured is cōpanye yt com wt hī frō Normandie &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt take alured & led hī in to ye Ile of Eli & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   put out both his eyn of his hede & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward bring hī vn to deth ¶And ſo they did for they kylled all the companye that ther wer. the nombre of xij gentillmen that wer comē with alured frō normandie. ¶And after toke they alured and in the Ile of Eli they put out his eyn &̄ rent his wombe &̄ toke the chefe of his bouels & put a ſtake in to the grond and an end of the bouels ther to faſtined. & with nedil̄
                  les of Iren they prikked the good child & ſo made hī to go about the ſtake till that all his bouels werdrawen out of his body. &̄ ſo died Alured ther thurgh treſon of the erle godwyn. ¶When tho lordis of englond had hard & wiſt how alured that ſhuld haue bene ther kyng was put to deth thurgh the fals tratour godwin they wer wōder wroth & ſuore bitwin them god &̄ bi his holy names yt he ſhuld die a more werſe deth than did Edrith of ſtrattō yt had betraied his lord Edmōd Irenſide. &̄ they wald haue put hī to deth. bot the thefe tratour fled thens in to denmarke and ther held him iiij· yere &̄ more & loſt all his land in englond.
               SIlueſter the thrid wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Bn̄dic This Silueſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was choſī and Benedict was expulſid. And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward was

he expulſid and benedict was put vp ayene: And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he was put out and Gregori wos made pope: and he wos but a ſympull letterd man. and ther for he choſe an other pope to be cōſecrate wt hī and when mony men wer diſpleſid wt this gydyng of ij. popis: the thrid was brought in. the wich ſhuld ocupye the place of both the two. And ſo they ſtrofe emonges them ſelf. bot then Henri the emprour come to rome and depoſit them all. ond made Clement the ſecumd pope. whom he made anone to croune him. and he ſayd to the romans they ſhuld neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cheſe pope with out his aſſent. & ſo v. beyng pope the ſex wos put in. But mony men ſayth this Gregori was an holy man. Damaſus the ſecund wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Clement xxiij. days: This man was an vſurper of the pope ſeet: & he died ſodenly: And anone the Romans aſked to haue a pope and yt the almayns ſh̄uld haue none: for they wer ſo herd hertid that they myght not incline to the ītent of ye emprour. the wich ſaid ther ſh̄
                  uld be no pope choſin bot if he wold be of counſell of the eleccion. bot for all that they put in this holy man Leo. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he had of that conſciens. and refuſeyd: and anone he was choſin bi the comyn aſſent This Leo put criſt in the forme of a laſur in his own bede and in the morow he fond no thyng ther.
            
            
               ¶Of ſent Edward the confeſſour that was Alured is brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   how he wos kyng of englond.
               
                  ANd when this was done all the barons of englond ſenſē an other tyme in to Normandie. for that Edward ſhuld cum in to englond with moch honour ¶And this edward in his childhode loued almyghty god and him drad and in 
                     ••••
                  ſte and clennes lad his life and hatid ſin os deth ¶And wh
                     •
                  n he wos crouned and annoynted with a riall pouer. he for yat not his good maners &̄ condiciōs that he friſt vſed. And for yat not all good cuſtoms for no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   honour ne for no riches ne for no 
                     ••
                  
                  ner highneſſe. but euer more & more yaf him to goodnes 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
loued god & all mekeneſ: and loued god & holy chirch paſſing al maner thyng. And poer men alſo he loued and them held as they had bene his own bretheren and to them oft yaf gret almys with full good wyll.
            
            
               ¶Of the friſt ſpeciall loue yt god ſhewed to ſent edward leuīg
               IT befell on a day as he went from the chirche of weſtmynſtre and had herd maſſe of ſent Iohn̄ the Euangeliſt. for as moche as he loued ſent iohn̄ euangeliſt more ſpecially after god and our lady than he did any other ſent ¶And ſo ther come to him a pylgrame and prayed him for the loue of god & our lady and Iohn̄ euangeliſt ſome good him for to yefe ¶And the kyng priuely toke his ring of his fynger that no man ꝑſaued it. and yaf it to the pilgrame and he it vndirfenge and wēt thēs ¶This kyng Edward made all the good lawes of englond yt yit bene moſt vſed and holden And was ſo merciabull. and ſo full of pitte that no man myght be more:
            
            
               ¶How the erle godwyn come ayene in to englond and had ayē all his land & aftward ſent edward weddid his doughter.
               WHen the erle godwyn that was duellyng in Denmarke had moch herd of the goodneſſe of kyng Edwarde and yt he wos ſo full of merci and of pitte. He thought that he wold gone ayene in to englond for to ſech and to haue grace of the good king edward that 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •••
                  cifull was that he myght haue his land ayen in pees. a
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ayed hī as moch as he myght and put him toward theſe & 
                     〈◊〉
                   in to englond to london ther that the kyng was that tyme & all the lordis of englond &̄ held a parlament ¶Godewyn ſent to them that wer his frendis &̄ wer the moſt gretteſt lordis of ye land &̄ prayed thē to beſech the kynges grace for him &̄ that he wold his pees and his land grant him. This lordys ladd
                     •
                  n him before the kyng to ſee
                     •
                  e his grace ¶And anone os the kyng him ſaw he appeled hī of treſō and of the deth of alured his 
                     •••
                  ther and thes wordis vn to him ſeyed. Traytour Godewin

quod the kyng I the appele that thow haſt betrayed and ſlayn my brother Alured ¶Certis ſir quod Godwyn ſaue your grace and your pees and your lordſhip I him neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   betrayed ne yit him ſlew. And therfor I put me in reward of the court ¶Now fair lordis quod the kyng ye that bene my lieges erles & barens of the land that here bene aſſembled Full well ye hard myne appele and the anſuer alſo of godwyn And therfor I will that ye awarde and doth right ¶The Erlis and Barons tho gad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed them all to geder for to done this award by them ſelf &̄ ſo they ſpoken diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſely emonges them For ſum ſayed ther wos neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   aliaunce by homage ſerment 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uice ne by lordſhip bitwen Godwyn and alured for wich thing they myght him draw ¶And at the laſt they deuiſed & demyd that he ſhold put him in the kynges marci al to gedres. ¶Tho ſpake the erle Leuerich of Couentre a good man to god & to all the world & told his reſon in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and ſayd The erle godwyne is the beſt frendid man of englond aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kyng. and well myght it not bene gayn ſayd that with out conſell of godwyn Alured was neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   put to deth. Wherfor i award as touchīg my parte that hīſelf and his ſon & eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y of vs xij. erles that bene his frendis wend before the kyng chargid with as mich gold and ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   as we may bere be twix our handis &̄ prayng ye kīg for yefe his euell will to the erle godwyn and reſaue his homage &̄ his land yeld ayene. ¶And they accordid vn to that awarde &̄ come in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   as is aboue ſayed eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y of them with gold & ſiluer as moch as they myght bere betwen ther handis before ye kīg & thei ſaid ye forme & the man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ther acord & of ther award ¶The kyng wold not them gayn ſay but as moche as they ordeyned he graunted and confermed. And ſo wos thee Erle Godwyne accorded with the kyng and ſo he had ayen all his land. And afterward he bere him ſo well and ſo wyſely that thee kyng hym loued wonder moch and with him he was full priue And with in a litell tyme thei loued ſo mache that ther the kyng

ſpouſed Godwyns dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ made hir quene ¶And neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  theles for tho the kyng had a wife: he leued eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more ī chaſtite & ī clēnes of body with out any fleſhly dede doyng with his wife and the quene alſo in hir halfe lad an holy life ij. yere and died. ¶And afterward the kīg lyued all his lyfe with out any wife ¶The kīg yaf the erldon of Oxford to Harold that wos godwī ſone & made hī herle. ¶And ſo well they wer beloued both the fadre & he & ſo priue with the king both the fadre & the ſon yt they might done what thyng they wold by right ¶For ayens right wold he nothing done for no maner man: ſo good & trew he wos of cōſcicience. & therfor our lord Ihū criſt gret ſpecial loue to hī ſhewed
            
            
               ¶How kyng Edward ſaw Swyne kyng of denmarke drenched ī ye ſe ī the tyme of the ſacramēt as he ſtode &̄ herd maſſe.
               IT befell vpon whitſonday as kyng Edward herd his maſſe in the gret chirche of weſtmynſter right at the leuaciō of Iheſu criſtis body &̄ as all men were gadred in to the chirche & come nere the auter for to ſe the ſacring: the kyng his handis lyft vp on high. &̄ a gret laughter toke vp. wherfor all that abou
                     •
                  e him ſtod gretly gon wonder. And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   maſſe the axed why the kynges laughter was ¶Fair lordis qd the kīg edward I ſaw Swyne ye yōger yt wos kīg of dēmarke cū ī to the ſee with all his pouer for to haue comē ī to englōd vpō vs to where & I ſaw hī & all his folke drenched ī the ſee ¶And all this I ſaw ī the eleuaciō of ihū criſtis bodi bitwen the priſtis: handis &̄ I had therof ſo gret ioye. yt i might not my laught̄ withhold ¶And the erle Leuerich beſide him ſtod at the leuaciō. &̄ opēly he ſaw thee forme of brede turne ī to the liknes of a chyld yōg. & toke vp his right hond &̄ bliſſed ye kīg & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward the erle. & ye erle anone turned him toward the kyng to make hī ſe yt holy ſight: ¶And tho ſaid the kyng Sir erle qd he ī ſe well yt ye ſe thankid be god yt i haue honourd my god my ſaueour viſiblly ihū criſt in forme of man whos name be bliſſed in 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  orldes. AMEN.
            
            
               
               ¶How the ring yt ſent edward had yeuen to a poerpilgram for ye loue of god &̄ ſent iohn̄ euangeliſt come ayen to kyng edward
               THis nobull man ſent edward regned xiij. yere and thus it befell vpon a tyme before er he died that ij. men of englond were went in to the holy land and had done ther pylgramage and wer goyng ayene in to ther own cuntre wher they come fro. ¶And as they went in the way they met a pylgrame yt courtaſly them ſalued and axed of them in what land and in what cūtre they were borne. and they ſayd in englond ¶Tho axid he who was kyng of englond. and they anſured and ſayd the good kyng Edward. Fair frendis tho ſayd the pilgram when that ye cum in to your cuntre ayene: I pray you that ye wold go vn to kyng Edward and oft tymes him grete in myne name And oft tymes him thanke of his gret curtaſi that he come hath done & nā
                  
                     •
                  y for the ring that he yaf me when he had herd maſſe at weſtmynſter for ſent Iohn̄ loue Euangeleſt and toke tho the ring &̄ toke it to the pilgrames and ſayd. I pray you nou gone and bere this ring and take it vn to kyng Edward and tell him that I ſend it him and a full riche yeft I wyll him yeue For vpon the xij day he ſhall cum to me & eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more duell in bliſſe with owt any end ¶Sir ſayd the pilgremes what man be ye and in what cuntre is your duellyng ¶Fair frendis quod he I am Iohn̄ thee Euangeleſt and I am duellyng with almyghty god. and your kyng Edward is my frende and I loue him in ſpecialy for the encheſon that he hath euer more leued in clenneſſe and is a clene maid And I pray you my meſſage all for done as I haue you ſaied. ¶When that ſent Iohn̄ the Euangeleſt had them th
                     •
                   charged. ſodenly he voided out of ther ſightes bothe· ¶The pilgrames tho thankid almyghti god and wente forth in ther way. ¶And whē they had gone ij. or iij. myle they began to wax weri. & ſet them a doune them for to reſt and ſo they fel on ſtep ¶And wh
                     •
                   they had ſlepid well on of thē awoke &̄
                  
lyft vp his hede and lokyd a bout & ſayed vn to his felaw ariſe vp and wend we in our way ¶What ſayd that on felow vn to that other wher be we now. Certes ſayd that other it ſemeth me that this is not the ſame contre that we layd vs doune in for to reſt and ſlepe For we wer from Ieruſalem but iij. myles. ¶They toke vp ther handis and bliſſed them & went forth in ther way ¶And as they went in ther way they ſaw ſhepeherdes goyng with ther ſhepe yt ſpekē none other lanage bot engliſh. ¶Leue frendis qd on of the pylgryms what cuntre is this & who is lord therof ¶And on of the ſhepeherdes anſuerd &̄ ſaid this is the cuntre of kent in englond: of the wich the good kīg edward wos lord of. ¶The pylgramys thankid tho almyghty god &̄ ſent Iohn̄ euangliſt &̄ wēt forth ī ther way & come to Cantorburi & frō thēs vn to london. &̄ ther they fond the kīg: & told him all frō the begynyng vn to the endyng as moch as ſent iohn̄ had thē charged & of all thīges how thay had ſped by the way. &̄ toke the ring to kīg edward. & 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fenge it & thankid almyghti god &̄ ſent iohn̄ euangeliſt. & tho made hī a redi eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y day frō day to day for to wend out of this lyfe. when god wold for him ſend
            
            
               ¶How ſent Edward died on the xij. day.
               
                  ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   it befell thus in criſtynmas eue as the holy mā Edward was at goddis ſeruis matines for to here of that high feſt he become full ſike. and in the morw endured with moch payn the maſſe for to here. and after maſſe he let him be lad in to his chambre ther for to reſte him. but in his hall amonges his barons and his knyghtys might he not cum them for to comforth & ſolacen as he was woned for to done at that worthy feſt ¶Wherfor all ther myrth and cōforth emōgꝭ all yt wer ī ye hall wer turned ī to eare & ſorow for encheſon yt they dred for to lefe the gad lord the kyng ¶And vpō ſent Iohanes day the euangeliſt tho yt come next ye kīg vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fēge his rightes of holy churche as it faleth to eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y criſtī man. and abode the merci & the will of god &

tho ij. pylgrymes he let be fore him cum &̄ yaf them rich yeftes & betoke them to god ¶And alſo the abbot of weſtmīſter he let before him cum & toke him that ring ī honor of god &̄ ſent Marie & of ſent iohn̄ the Euangeleſt. & the abbot toke and put it emōg other reliques: ſo that it is at weſtmynſter & eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſhall be & ſo lay the kyng ſeke till the xij: euen & tho died the good king edward at weſtmīſter & ther he lieth. for whos loue god hath ſhewid mōy a fair miracull ¶And this wos ī ye yere of ye īcarnaciō of our lord ihū criſt .M.lxv. and after he wos tranſlate & put ī to ye ſhrine by 
                     〈…〉
                   Th
                     ••••
                   of 
                     •
                  to
                     ••••
                  .
               VIctor the ſecund was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Leo & lytell of him is writyn Henri the ſecund wos emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the friſt henri xvij yere This man wos coſin to Conrady &̄ he wos borne in a wode and twyes takyn to be ſlayn when he was a child. bot god defendi him eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more. When he wos made emprour he made a monaſteri in the ſame place in the wode wer he vas borne. This man wos a victorius man. And he entyrd in to Italy and ther he toke Pandulphum the prince of campony.
               Stephanus the ix. was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   victor ix monethis Benedictus after him & he toke the dignite of the pope Stephyn by ſtrength and keppid it ix monethis & then diceſſed. Henricus the thyrd wos emprour after Henri the ſecund This Herri was an in quiet man. And mony tymes troblid that holy man gregori the vij. And friſt he aſkyd foryefnes & was a ſoyled: bothe ꝑſauered not. bot brought in an other pope ayens him And ſayd he was an heritike. and Gregori curſid him. And the cheſars of the emprour. they choſe the duke of Saxon for to be Emprour. whom this Henri in bataill ower come And then he come to rome· wyth his pope: and purſued pope Gregori and the Cardinales alſo. And then anone Robert the kyng of Napyls droffe him thens And delyuered the pope. and his Cardinales: neuer the leſe yit

he wos a man of gret almys. And xij. tymes he faught in batall and at the laſt he died wricchetly. for he wos put therby his owne ſon. for ſo os he did to other men. ſo wos he done to. Nicholas the ſecund wos pope after Benedict ij. yere. Thys Nicholas called a counſell ayens the archedekyn of Turonoſēs the wich was an heritike. & he taught ayens the faith: for he arrit in the ſacrament. & after wos he conu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tid. and wos an holy man. bot he coud neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   conu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  te his decipuls. Nota. Alexander the ſecund was pope after him xij. yere This Alexander wos an holy man. And he ordend that vnder payn of curſing. that no man ſh̄
                  uld heir a preſtis maſſe whome men knew had a lemman. vt 
                     pꝪ
                     patet
                   32 diſt: preter hoc. He had ſtrife with on Codulo. bot he expulſit him as an vſorpe
                     •
                  . &̄ put hym out as a ſymoyer.
            
            
               ¶How harold that wos goodewynes ſon wos made kyng and how he ſcappid fro the Duke of bretan.
               WHen ſent edward wos gone out of this world and was paſſid to god &̄ worthely entered as it apertenyt to ſuch a gret lord for to be. The barons of the land wolde haue had edwarde Helingus ſon to edward the owtlaw that wos Edmond Irē
                  ſides ſon to be kyng. for as moch as he wos moſt kyndeſt kynges blode of the raame ¶But Haroldes ſon thurgh the erle goodwyne &̄ the ſtrength of his fadre Godewyn & thurgh other gret lordes of the reame that wer of his kyn & vn to him ſib: ſeiſed all englond in to his hand & anone let croune him kyng after ye enterment of ſent edward ¶This Harold that wos godewīs ſone the ſecund yere after that ſent Edward was deid wold haue gone in to Flaunders bot he wos dreuen thurgh tempaſt in to the cuntre of Pountife and ther he was takyn and brought vn to duke wyllyam And this Harold wened that tho this duke william wold haue bene a vēged vpon him for encheſon that the erle Godewyn yt wos haroldis fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   
                  had let kyll Alured that was

ſent edwardis brother and principally for encheſon that Alured was quene emma ſone that wos Richardus mother duke of Normandie that wos aiell to the duke william: ¶And neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  theles when the duke wyllm had harrold in priſon and vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his pouer for as moch as this harold wos a nobull wiſe knyght and a worthy of body & that his fadre and he wos a cordid with good kyng edward. &̄ therfor wold not miſdone him but all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thinges that be twix them wer ſpoken and ordeined harold by his good wil ſwore vpon a boke and vpon holy ſentis that he ſhold ſpouſe and wed duke wyllm dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the deth of ſent edward & that he ſhuld beſili done his deu for to kepe & ſaue the reame of englond vn to the profet and a vauntege of duke willm ¶And when harold had thus made his oth vn to duke willm. he let him go &̄ yaf him mony riche yeftis And he tho went thens &̄ com in to englōd & anone did in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   when ſent edward was deid & as a man falſly for ſworen he let croune him kyng of englond & falſely brake the counant that he had made before with duke willm wherfor he wos wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth with him and ſwore that he wold vpon hī ben a vengid what ſo eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him befell ¶and anone duke willm lett aſſembull a gret hoſt & come in to englond to a venge him vpō Harold & to conquere the land if that he myght ¶And in the ſame yere thot harold was crouned Harald hareſtrenge kyng of Denmarke ariued in ſcotland &̄ thought to haue be kyng of englond. &̄ he come in to englond & kylled &̄ robbid & deſtroyed all that he might till that he come to yorke &̄ ther he killed mony men of armys a thovſand. &̄ an hondreth preſtys ¶When this tydyng come to the kyng he aſſembled a ſtrong pouer & went for to fight with harold of denmarke & with his own hand hī killed &̄ the danois wer diſcomfited &̄ tho that left alyue with moch ſoreu fled to ther ſhippis. And thus kyng harold of englond kylled kyng harold of denmarke.
            
         
         
            
            
               Anno domini .M.lxvi.
               ¶How wylliam baſterd duke of Normandie come in to englond and kylled kyng Harold.
               
                  
                     Willamꝰ Cōq̄ſtor.
                     Here come Normans and expulſed Harold a ſaxon.
                  
                  ANd when this batall was done harold bicome ſo proude and wold nothing ꝑt with his pepull of thyng that he had gotē bot helde it all to ward him ſelf wherfor the moſt part of his peple weer wroth and frō hī deꝑted ſo that only wt hī left no mo bot his ſoudiuors ¶And vpon a day as he ſat at mete a meſſenger com to hym and ſayed that wylllyam baſttard thee Duke of Normandie was ariued in englond with a gret hoſt and had takē al the land about haſtynge and alſo myned the caſtell ¶When the kyng had herd this tydynge he went thider with a litell pepull in all the haſt that he might for ther wos but lytell pepull with hī left ¶And when he wos comen thider he ordryned for to yef bathill to the duke willm But the duke axed him of thes iij. thinges if that he wold haue his dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to wyfe as he had made and ſuorne his hoth &̄ 
                  behight. or that he wold hold the lōd of hī ī truage. or that he wold determyn this thyng thurgh bataill ¶This harold was a proud man and a ſtrong and triſted wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   moch vpon his ſtrength and faught with the duke willm and wt his pepull. bot harold and his men in this bataill wer diſcomfited and him ſelf ther was ſlayn. and this bataill was endid at tōbrigge in the ſecund yere of his regne vpon ſent Kalixtes day and ſo he wos beried at waltham.
            
            
               
               ¶Of kyng william baſtard & how he gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned him well & wyſeli and of the were betwen him &̄ the kyng of fraunce:
               WHen willm baſtard duke of normandie had 
                  conquered all the land. vpon criſtynmaſſe day tho next ſueng he let croune him kyng at weſtmynſter and wos a worthy kyng and yaf vn to Engliſſhmen largeli landis and to his knyghttys: ¶And afterward he went him ouer the ſee and comen in to Normadie &̄ ther duelled a while and in the ſecund yere of his regne he come ayen in to englond and brought with him Maude his wyfe and let croune hir quene of englond on withſonday: ¶And tho anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kyng of ſcotland yt wos called Mā
                  colyn began to ſtriue & were with the duke willm: ¶And he ordeyned him toward ſcotland with his men bothe by land and bi ſee for to diſtruy the kyng Mancolin. but they wer acordid & the kyng of ſcotland become his man and held all his land of him And kyng willm reſſaued of him his homage and come ayene in to englond. ¶And when kyng willm had bene kyng xvij. yere Maude the quene died on whom kīg willm had begoten many fair child: that is for to ſay Robert curthoſe william rous Richa
                     •
                  d alſo yt died Henri beauclerc. and Maude alſo that wos the erles wife of Bleynes & other iiij. fair doughters. ¶And after his wifes deth gret debate began betwix hīm &̄ the kyng of fraunce Philip but at the laaſt they weer accorded And tho duelled the kyng of englond in Normandie and no man him wered & he no man long tyme. ¶And the kyng of fraunce ſayd vpō a day in ſcorne of kyng willm: that kyng willm had long tyme lyen in child bede and long tyme had reſtid him ther. ¶And this word come to the kīg of englond ther that he did lye in Normandie at Roen: And for this word was tho ill apayed & eke wonder wroth toward the kyng of fraūce & ſuore by god that when he wer ariſe of his giſin he wold lyght a thouſand candels to the kīg of france ¶And anone let aſſēble a gret hoſt of Normā
                  die

and of engliſſmen: And in the begīyng of herueſt he come ī to fraunce· & brened all the tounes tha the come by thurgh all thee cuntre and robbid & did all the ſorow that he myght thurgh owt al fraunce &̄ at the laſt he brenid the cite of Mandos and commandid his pepull for to bere wod & as moch as he might bren & himſelf holpe ther to all that he might with a good will. ¶And ther was gret hete what of fiere that wos ſo gret & of the ſone that it wos wonder hoot. that it ſtuffid him ſo that he become & fell in to a gret diſeſe and ſekenes. ¶And whan he ſaw that he wos ſo ſtrong ſeke. he ordined and aſſigned all normandi to Robert curthos his ſone. And all englond to willm the Rouſſe and bi quathe to Henri beauclerc all his treſur And tho he thus had done. he vnderfenge all the ſacramētis of holy churche &̄ died the xxij yere of his regne & lieth at Caan in Normandie.
            
            
               Anno domini .M.lxvi.
               GRegorius the vij: wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   xij. yere. This man ordend ī a generall ſinodi that no preſt ſhold haue a wife ne ſhuld duell with women. bot tho that the holy ſinodi of Nicena or other decreis haue ſuffred. and then the preſtis ſet noght or litel pondrid his ordinans. this pope commanded that no mā ſh̄uld heir maſſe of a preſt that had a cōcubine And he on a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tan tyme whan he was cardinall and legate in to fraunce ꝓcedid ſharply ayens prelatis and preſtis that werſymonyes: And amōg other ther wos on biſſhop that wos gretly famyd with ſymonye. and thos that accuſid him. priueli he hired them to ſay the cōtrari The wich the legate conſaued. and afore all the pepull. he ſayd let this iugement of this man ſeſe at this tyme. for it is diſſauabull. And let god diſpoſe for it: and ſayd thus it is certan that ye dingnite of a biſſhop is the yefer of the holy goſt. and who ſū eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   byes a biſhopprik: doys ayens the holi goſt. Then if thow biſſhop did not ayens the holy gſt. Say opynli afore all pepull. gloria

patri et filio et ſpiritui ſancto: And mony tymes he began to ſay it bot he could neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſpeke ſpiritur ſancto. ¶Then he wos depoſit of his biſſhopprik: and after he could ſpeke it well ynough. Victor the thrid: wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him on yere: And this mā was poyſenned with vennū in the chalas. Vrbanus was pope after him ij. yere This man curſed the kyng of fraunce for his avoutre. and he called a counſell at Cla
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  . in the wich he ordined that matyns of our ladi ſh̄uld be ſaid eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y day &̄ on ſettyrday hir ſolempne maſe. & it is ſayed that this was ſheued vn to the freris of Cartuſis. Alſo he called an other counſell at Turam for the holi land to be won ayene &̄ ꝓuokid the pepull to that mat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . & with ī a litell aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that tyme. the moſt parti of the holy land wos recou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id & the glorius ſepulcur of our lord ihū criſt: and an thyochia wt mony othyr nobull cites wer takyn from the handis of the ſariſēs And it is ſayed & men beleued that ijCM. criſtyn men went to that iornay. for ther went of ſtatis old men and yonge. riche and poer. & no man compellid them. and this paſſage was made bi the viſion of our ladi: and the princes of this pepull wer diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe. On wos Godfray the bollion a nobull man of all the world &̄ a vertuus man. And an other was Beemūd the duke of Napuls The thrid wos Hugh the kynges brother of fraunce. and mony other the wich did full nobully for the faith of god: and it wer to long in this bake to reherſe the glorius actis yt they did.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng willm Roos that wos willm baſtard ſon that deſtruyed tounes & houſes of religion for to make the new foreſt.
               
                  ANd after this willm baſtard regned his ſon william the Rous and this willm was a wonder contrarious man to god and holy chirche & let amende and make the toune off Cardeis that the paynyms had deſtroyed. ¶This kyng willm deſtruyed holy chirche and ther poſſeſſions in what ꝑte he myght them find▪ ¶And therfor ther was ſo moch debate bitwen him

and the erchebiſſhop of cantorburi Ancelme for encheſon that he vndernamme him of his wickidneſſe that he deſtroied hol̄y chirch And for encheſon therof the kyng bore to him gret wrath and for that cauſe he exiled him out of this land. and the erchebiſhop tho went to the court of Rome and ther duellid wyth the pope. ¶And this king made the new foreſt. & caſt doune & diſtruid xxvi tounes. and lxxx. houſes of religion. all for to make his foreſt lenger and brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . and bicome wonder glad and proud of his wod & of his foreſt. and C the wild beſtys that werther within that it was meruell for to wit ſo that men called him keper of wodis and of paſtors and the lenger that he leued the more wekked he become bothe to god and to all holy chirche and to all his men: ¶And this kyng let make the gret hall of weſtmynſter. ſo vpon a day in the witſontyde he held ther in his friſt feſt and he lokid him a bout and ſaid that the hall wos to litell bi the haluē dele. ¶And at the laſt he become ſo contrarius that all thing that pleſed god diſpleſid him and all thing that god loued he hatid deidly. ¶And ſo it befell that he dremyd vpon a nyght a litel or that he died that he wos let blod and bled a gret quātite of blode and a ſtreme of blode lepit on eigh toward heuē more than an hundreth vethem and the clerenes of the day was turned vn to nyght and dirkeneſſe and the firmament alſo. ¶And when that he a woke he had gret drede ſo that he not wiſt what for to done &̄ told his dreme to men of his councell and ſaid that he had gret dred and ſuppoſed that to hī was ſum miſchance to cum. ¶And the ſecund night before a mōke dremed of the houſold that the kīg went in to an chirche with moch pepull &̄ he wos proud that he diſpiſed all the pepull that wos with him and that he tok the ymage of the crucifix and ſhamfully bote it with hys tethe. ¶And the crucifix mekeli ſuffred all that he did but the kyng as a wode man rent of the armys of the crucifix and caſt it vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his fete and defouled it and threw it all a brode &̄ a gret flame

of fire come out of the crucifix mouth of wich dreme mony men had gret meruell and wonder: ¶The good man that had dremmed this ſtraunge dreme told it to a knyght that wos moſt priuey with the kyng of all men: and the knyght wos called Hamū
                  des: ſoon the monke and he told the dreme to the kyng and ſaied that it ſhuld betokyn other thing than good. and neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  thelas thee kyng laughed ther at twyes or thries and litell ſet ther by and thought that he wold go and hunte & play in ye foreſt. And mē counſellid him that he ſhuld not that day for no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thīg come in the wod. ſo yt he a bood at home before mete But anone as he had heten no man might hī let bot he wold gon vn to ye wod for to haue his diſporte. ¶And ſo it befell that on of his knyghtis that heght walter Tirell wold haue ſhot to an hart. & his arew glenſid vpon a branche and thurgh miſſauēt
                     
                        
                     
                     ur
                   ſmote the kīg to ye hert. & ſo he fell doune deid to the grund wt out ony word ſpekyng and ſo endid his life days: ¶And it wos no ferli for the day that he died he had let to ferme the erchebiſſhopprich of Cantorburi and xij: abbeis alſo. & eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more did gret diſtruccion to holy chirche thurgh wrongfull takyng &̄ axinges. for no man durſte withſtond that he wold haue done. and of his letherneſſe he wold neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   withdraw. nother to amend his life & therfor god wold ſuffre hī no lenger to regne ī his wikkidnes &̄ he had bene kīg xiij: yere &̄ vi. wekis &̄ lieth at weſtmynſter
            
            
               Anno domini: M.lxxxviij.
               PAſcal̄ was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   vrbā xviij. yer v. monethis ye wich ye xiij. yere of his biſſhopprich wt his cardinales wos put ī priſō bi Henri the fourth ye emꝑour. &̄ they might not be deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id till ye pope had ſuorne yt he ſhuld kepe pees wt hī & yt he ſhuld neuer curs hī. & on yt ꝓmis ye pope yaf the emꝑour a p̄uylege. &̄ on the yere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the pope dampned yt p̄uelege. &̄ ſaid on this wiſe. lett vs cōp̄hend all holy ſcriptur ye old teſtamēt &̄ the new. the lawis &̄ the ꝓphettis the goſpell &̄ the canons of apoſtils. &̄ all the decrees

of the popis of rome. that at they held I hold. and that at thei dampnid I dampne. and moſt ſpecialy that preuylege graūtid to Henri ye emꝑour. the wich rether is grantid to venge his males: then to multiple the paciēs in vertu. for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more I dampne that ſame preuilege.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Henri beauclerke yt wos willm Rous brother &̄ of the debate betwen him & Robert Curthos his brother.
               
                  ANd when this willm Rous wos deid Henri beauclerke his brother wos made kyng for encheſon that willm Rous had no child begoten of his bodi: and this henri beauclerke was crouned kyng at london the iiij. day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that his brother was deceſſid that is to ſay the v. day of auguſt. ¶And anone as Ancel̄me that was Archebiſſhop of Cantorburi that was at ye court of rome herd tell that willm Rous wos deid he come ayen in to englond. & the kyng beauclarke welcomed him with moch honour ¶And the friſt yere that kyng henri regned &̄ wos crouned. he ſpouſed Maude that wos Margaretis dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the quene of Scotland and the erchebiſſhop Ancelme of cantorburi weddid them. ¶And this kyng begate vpon his wife ij. ſonnys and a doughter. yt is to ſay willm & Richard &̄ Maude. And this maude wos afterward the empriſſe of Almayne: ¶And in the ſecund yere of his regne his brother Robert Curthoſe that was duke of Normandie come with an huge hoſt in to englond for to chalenge the land but thurgh concell of the wiſe men of the land they wer accordid in this maner. That the kyng ſhold yeue the duke his brother a thouſand pound eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y yere and wich of them leued longeſt ſhuld be other heir and ſo bitwen them ſhuld be n
                     •
                   debate ne ſtrife. ¶And when they wer thus accordid the Duke went home ayen in to Normandie ¶And when the kyng had regned iiij. yere ther aroos a gret debate bitwen him and the erchebiſſhop of canwrburi Ancelme For becauſe that the Erchebiſhop

wold not grant him for to take talagie of chirches at his will. &̄ therfor eftſone the Erchebiſſhop went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee vn to the court of rome and ther duellid with the pope. ¶And in the ſame yere the Duke of Normandie come in to englond for to ſpeke with his brother. ¶And among all other thinges the Duke of normandie for yaf vn to the kyng hys brother the forſayed thouſand pound by yere that he ſhuld pay vn to the duke. and with good loue the kyng &̄ ye duke ꝑted &̄ ther the duke went ayen ī to normādi ¶And when tho ij: yere wer a gone thurgh enticement of the deuell & of lithermen a gret debate aroſe bitwin the kyng and the duke ſo that the kyng thurgh conſell went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee in to normandi ¶And when the kyng of Englond was cumyn in to Normā
                  die All the gret lordis of normandie turned vn to the kīg of englond and held ayens the Duke ther own lord &̄ him forſoke &̄ to the kyng them yelden and all the good caſtels and tounes of Normandie And ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos the duke taken & led with the kīg in to englond &̄ the kyng let put the duke ī to priſon. ¶And this was the vengeance of god. ¶For when the Duke was ī the holy land. god yaf him ſuch myght &̄ grace. that he was choſī for till a bene the kyng of Ieruſalem. and he forſoke it & wold not take it vppon hym. And therfor god ſend him that ſhame & deſpite for to be put ī to his brothers p̄ſon. ¶Tho ſeyſed kīg herri all Normandie in to his hand and held hit all his lifes tyme & ī the ſame yere come the biſſhop Ancelme from the cour of Rome ī to englōd ayen and the kyng & he wos accordid.
               ¶And in the yere next commyng aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther began a gret debate betwen the kyng Phillip of Fraunce: &̄ kyng Henri of Englōd ¶Wherfor kyng Herri went in to Normandie & ther wos ſtrong were betwen them two and tho died the kyng of france. and Lowys his ſon wos made kyng anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his deth. ¶And tho went kyng Henri ayen ī to englond: &̄ maried Maude his dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to Henri the emprour of almayne.
            
            
               
               ¶Of the debate yt wos betwē kīg Lowis of france &̄ kīg Hēri of ēglōd &̄ how kīg henris ij. ſonnys wer loſt ī the high ſee.
               WHen kyng henri had ben kyng xvij. yere a gret debate aroos betwyn kyng Lowys of fraunſe and kyng Hnri of Englond: for encheſon that the kyng had ſent in to Normandye to his men that they ſhuld be helpyng vn to the Erle of Bloyes as moch as they might in were ayēs the kyng of fraunce. ¶And that thei ſhuld bene as redy to him as they wer vn to ther own lord. for encheſon that the Erle had ſpouſed his ſuſtren dame Maude ¶And for this encheſon the kyng of franſe did moch ſorow to Normandie ¶Wherfore the kȳg of englōd was wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth and in haſt wēt ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee with a gret pouer and come in to Normandie for to defend that land. And the were betwyn them laſtid ij. yere till at the laſt they two faughten to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ the kyng of fraunſe wos diſcomfited & vneth ſcappid a way wt moch payn & the moſt parti of his men wer takē: & the kīg did wt them what him beſt likid ¶And ſum of them he let go frely & ſum let he be put vn to the deth. But aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward tho ij. kīges wer accordid. ¶And whan king herri had holy all the land of Normadie & ſcomfited his emnys of franſe: he turnid ayen in to englond with moch honour: ¶And his ij. ſonis Wyllm & Richard wold haue commen aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther fadre and wēt to the ſee with an gret componye of pepull: But or that they myght cum to land the ſhip come ayens a roch & brak all ī to peſes & all wer drenchid that wer ther in ſauf on man that wos in the ſame ſhipe yt aſcappid. ¶And this wos on ſent Katrines day. & thes werthe names of them yt wer drenchid. willm & Richard ye kīgꝭ ſonys ye erle of cheſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Ottonell his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Geffray ridell: walter emurci Godfray erchdekē: ye kīgꝭ dought: ye Cūtes of ꝑches. ye kīgꝭ neci. ye Coūtes of cheſtre. & mōy od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . whē kīg henri &̄ od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   lordis ariuid in englōd & herd thes tydyngꝭ: they made ſorow ynowgh. & al ther myrth & Ioye wos turned ī to mornyng & ſorow.
            
            
               
               ¶How Maude the Empriſe come ayen ī to englond &̄ how ſhe wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward weddid to Geffroi the erle of angoy
               
                  ANd when that ij. yere wer a gone that the Erle had duelled wt the kīg· the Erle went from the kȳg and began to were vpon him and did moch harme in the land of Normandie & toke ther a ſtrong caſtell and ther he duellid all that yere. & tho comme to him tydynges that Henri the Emꝑour of Almayn that had ſpouſed Maude his doughter wos deid and that ſhe duelled no longer in Almayn and that ſhe wold cum ayen in to Normandie to hir fadre ¶And when that ſhe wo
                     •
                  s comyn vn to him he toke hir tho to him and come ayen in to Englond and made the engliſhmen to done othe and feaute vn to the empriſe and the friſt man that made the otho wos willm the Erchebiſſhop of Cantorburi ¶And that other Dauid kyng of Scotlond and after him all the Erles and Barons of englond ¶Alſo after that the nobull man the erle of Angoy that was a worthy knyght ſent vn to the kyng of englond that he wold graunte him for to haue his doughter to ſpouſe that is to ſay Maude thee empriſſe ¶And for encheſon that hir fadre wiſt that he wos a nobull man. The kyng him grauntid and conſentid ther to. ¶And tho toke he his doughter and lad hir in to Normandie and come to the nobull knyght Gaufrid and ther he ſpouſed thee foreſaid Maude with moch honour And the Erle begat vpon hir a ſon that was called Henri the Empriſſe ſone.
               ¶And after when all this wos done kyng Henri duelled al that yere in Normandi And after that long tyme a greuꝰ ſekeneſſe toke him wherthurgh he died ¶And this kyng henri regned xxxv. yere and iiij. monethis. and after he died as is before ſayd in Normandie and his hert wos entered in the gret chirche of our lady in Rouen. and his body was brought with moch hoynour ī to englond and entered at Redyng ī the abbey of the wich abbey he wos begynner and founder.
               
                  HEnricus the fourth was emꝑour in Alman aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Herri ye thrid xv. yer. This mā put his own fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ī p̄ſon &̄ ther held him till he died he toke pope paſcall wt his cardinales &̄ preſent thē as it is ſaied a foro. for the wich cauſe as it is ſuppoſid: he lackid uſſu. for he weddid Maude the kyngꝭ dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of englond: bot aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward he come to grace. & all the lawys of the chirche & the landis frely he refined to Calixto the pope. & beſought him to yef hī in pennance that he ſhuld neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cum ayen to his empire. that he might haue remiſſion of his treſpaſſe. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the opinyon of mōy a man he was willely exiled. &̄ died and his wife bothe at cheſtre in englond: Gelaſius was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Paſchall ij: yere and fled frō Henri the emprour in to Burgon & ther deceſſid. This emꝑour choſe Benedicte a ſpanyard to be pope the wich ſtrofe wyth Calixto. Calixtus was pope after him ij. yere & v. monethes. This Calixt was the ſon of the duke of Burgon &̄ was choſen in the place of Gelaſii &̄ whē he ſhuld cum to rome. he toke thee forſaid Benedict & made him to ride a fore him ſhamfully. for he on a Mule turned his face to the tayll of the mule. & held the taill in his hond as a bridyll. till he come thurgh the cite. & ther he was put in priſon. and this pope made pees with the emprour. Honorius was pope after him ij. yere & litell of him is writtin Nota. Harri the fourth emprour of Alman deceſſed this tyme and wos beried with his progenytours after ſum men with ſuche an Epithapei. Filiꝰ hic: pater hic Auꝰ hic: proauꝰ iacꝪ iſtis: bot it is likly to be truyr that at Gerald ſais in Itinario wallie wher he ſays that after he had priſened his carnall fadre & his ſpirituall fadir the pope with his cardinales after he was recōſiled & willely he was made exile. And he left Maud his wyfe the kīgꝭ doghter of englond prēuely. & leued an harmytes life at Cheſtre x. yere wher he might liue as no man knew hī. & he called hī ſelf Godiſcal̄lus the wich godiſſon is cald. So the Emꝑour ſecretly y went away. And Maude his wife the Empriſſe ther ſhe

went to hir fadre Herri in to Normandie. wher anone after ſhe wos weddid to Gefferay Plantagines the duke of andegāme: vpon whome he begat Herri the ſecund aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   kyng of Englōd vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   whom ſent Thomas of Cantorburi regned and died. Lotharius wos emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   henri the fourth xij yere. and litell of him is writtyn bot that he wos man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ly to the chirche· and that he ſubduid Roger the vſurper of the kyng of Cicely. Hugo de ſancto victori was a nobull man this tyme at paris & a nobull doctor of the nacion of the ſaxons. The ordir of ſent Iohn̄ baptiſt at Ieruſalem began this time. be the worſhipfull man Raymond mightely diſpoſid to werkis of merci. all thys ordir make ther waye to 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  ue poer men
            
            
               Anno domini .M.C.xxxiiij.
               INnocencius wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Honorius xiiij. yere & vij. monethis This man was a veray deuote man. & with ſich men he ſociet him: & he had ſtriffe vij. yere ayens Pers of Lion the wich names him Anocletū. and by ſtrength he toke the popehood. the wich Innocent ſaw. & wt ij. galeys he fled in to fraūce. and wos worſſhipfully reſaued of ſent Berenard. the wich yt time had all the kynges &̄ the princes in his hand. & he ꝓuoked them for to bring this pope Innocent in to his dignite ayene: all the laſt althyng was ceſſid & his emnys wer diſtruyed thurghe the iugement of god: &̄ he wos pope ayene. and leued profetabuly and was beried at Lauronynce.
            
            
               ¶How Stephen that wos kyng Henri ſuſtres ſon wos made kyng of englond.
               AFter this kyng Henry that was the friſt was made kyng his nepheu his ſuſtres ſonne Sſtephen Erle of Bolloyn For anone as he herd the tydyng of his vncles deth. than he paſſid the ſee and come in to englond thurgh conſell & ſtrēgth

and helpe of mony gret lordis in englond ayens ther othe that they had made to Maude empriſſe toke the reame and let croune ſtephen kyng of the land. ¶And the archebiſſhop wiliam of Cantorburi that friſt made the oth of feaute to Maud ye empriſſi ſet the croune vpon kyng ſtephens hede & him anoynted. &̄ biſſhop Roger of Saliſburi mayntened the kynges partie in as moch as he myght ¶The friſt yere that kyng Stephen begā to regne he aſſembled a gret hoſt and went towward Scotland for to haue wered vpon the kīg of ſcotland: but he come ayens hī in pees and in good man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and to him truſtid. but he made to him none homage for as moche as he had made vn to the Empriſe Maude. ¶And in the iiij. yere of his regne Maude the empriſe come in to englond. and tho began debate betwin kīg Stephē &̄ maude the Empriſe: ¶This Maude went vn to the cite of Nicholl & the kīg hi
                     •
                   beſeged long time &̄ myght not ſpede. ſo well the cite was keped and defendid. and tho that wer with in the cite quantely aſcapped away with out any man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of harme. & tho toke the kyng the cite and duelled therin till candilmaſſe. And tho come the Barons that held with the emprice that is for to ſay thee erle Randulfe of Cheſtre. the erle Robert of Gloceſtre Hugh Bigot. Robert of morlay. And thes brought with them a ſtrōg pouer &̄ faught wyth the kyng & yaf him a gret bataill: in ye wich batall kīg ſtephen was takē & ſet ī priſō ī ye caſtell of briſtowe.
            
            
               ¶How maude the emprice wēt fro wīcheſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to Oxford &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſhe aſcapped to walīgford & of the ſorow & diſeſe yt ſhe had.
               WHen the kyng was taken and brought in to warde in the caſtell of Briſtow: This Maude the Empriſe anone wos made lady of all Englond and all men held hir for lady of the land. But tho of Kentheld with kyng Stephens wife. and alſo william of Pree and his reteune help them and held were ayens maude the Empriſe and anōe aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kyng of ſcotland com to them with an huge nombre of pepull. & tho went they yfere to

wyncheſter ther that the empriſe wos. & wold haue takē hir. but the Erle of glouceſtre come with his pouer &̄ faught with them &̄ the empriſe in the meyn while that the bataill dured: ſcappid from thens and went vn to Oxford & ther hir held And ī that bataill was ther the duke of Glouceſtre diſcomfited and takyn. and wyth him mony other lordis ¶And for his deleueranſe wos kyng Stephen deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id out of priſon ¶And when he wos delyuerid out of priſon he went thens vn to Oxford & beſegyd the empriſe that was tho at Oxford. &̄ the ſege endurid fro Michelmaſe vn till ſeynt Andrewes tide. ¶And the empriſe let tho clothe hir all in whit lynnen clothe. for encheſon that ſhe nat woldē be know. for in the ſame tyme ther wos moch ſnow. &̄ ſo ſhe aſcappid by the thamſe from them away that wer hir emnys. And fro thens ſhe went to walynford & ther hir held. ¶And the kyng wold haue beſegid hir. but he had ſo moch to done with the erle Rā
                  dulfe of cheſtre and with Hugh bygot that ſtrongli wered vpō hī in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y place that he not wiſt whither for to turne And the Erle of glouceſtre holp him with his pouer.
            
            
               ¶How Gaufrid the erle of Angeon yaf vp on till Herri ye empriſe ſon all Normādy.
               
                  ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this the kyng went vn to wilton. and wold haue made a Caſtell ther: but tho come to him the Erle of glouceſtre with a ſtrong pouer. & ther almoſt he had takyn the kyng. but yit the kyng aſcapid with moch payn. and willm martell ther wos take: And for whos delyu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ās thei yaf vn to the erle of Glouceſtre. the good caſtell of Shirborne. that he had taken. ¶And whan this wos done the Erle Robert & all the kingꝭ enmys went vn to Faringdone & begone ther for to make a ſtrong Caſtell. But the kyng come thedre with a ſtrong pouer and droue him thens. and in that ſame yere the Erle Randulfe of Cheſtre wos accordid wt the kyng. and come to his court at his cōmandement. and the Erle wened ſaufely for to cum &̄ the kīg

anone let take him and put him in to priſone and myght neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for thyng cum out till that he had yeld vp vn to the kyng the Caſtel of Nicholl the wych he had take from the kyng with his ſtrengthe in the xv. yere of his regne. ¶And Gaufryd the erle of angeon yaf vp vn to Henri his ſon all Normandie: And in the yere that next ſued died the erle Gaufrid and Henri his ſon tho annō turned ayen to Angeon. &̄ ther was made erle wt moch honor of his men of the land. and tho to him diden feaute and homage the moſt parte of his land ¶And tho was this Henri the emprice ſone Erle of Angew and alſo the duke of Normandie. ¶In the ſame yere was made diuorce bitwen the kīg of fraū
                  ce and the quene his wife that was right heir of Gaſcoyn for encheſon that it was know and proued that they wer ſibbe and nye of blod And tho ſpouſed hir Henri the Empriſe ſone Erle of angon &̄ the Duke of Normandie and Duke of Gaſcoyne. ¶In the xviij. yere of this Stephen. This Henri come in to englond with a ſtrong pouer and began for to were vpon thys kyng Stephen and toke the caſtell of Malmeſburi and did moch harme &̄ the kyng Stephen had ſo moch were that he not wiſt for to wende but at the laſt they wer accordid thurgh the Erchebiſſhopp Theobald. & thurgh other worthy lordis of Englond vpō this condicion that they ſhuld departe the reame of Englond bytwyn them ſo that Henri the empriſe ſon ſh̄uld holy haue the half of all the lond of englond ¶And thus they wer accordid & pees cried thurgh out all englond. ¶And when the accorde was made bitwen tho ij. lordis Kyng ſtephen become ſo ſory for becauſe that he had loſt halfe englond. and fell in to ſuch amaladie and died in the xix. yere & viij. wekes and v. days of his regne all ī were and ī contake and he lyeth in the abbay of feuereſham the wich he let make ī the vi. yere of his regne.
               
                  CEleſtinus the ſecund wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Innocent v. moneth is and litell he did. Lucius was after him and litell ꝓfettyd for they died both in a peſtylens Eugenius the ſecund was pope after him v: yere and iiij. monethes This man friſt wos the deſcipull of ſent Barnard. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the abbot of ſente Anaſtaſy by rome. and come to the chirche of ſent Ceſari & was choſin pope by the Cardinales he no thyng knawyng therof. and for dred of the ſenatours he was conſecratid with out the cite· This man was an holy man and ſuffred trubilaciō &̄ at the laſt wt moch holynes he deceſſid &̄ lieth at ſent petres. and after anone deceſſid ſent barnard. Petrus lambardus the biſſhoꝑ of Paris brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to Graciā cōpilet ye iiij bokis of ye ſētēs this tym Petiꝰ ꝯmeſtor brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to gracian & to Peris lūard made hiſtoriā ſcolaſticam & od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   bokis Fredericus primꝰ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Conrad wos emprour in almayn & ī rome xxxiij. yere This man after the deth of Adriā the pope the wich crouned him did curſedly with alexander to him gret preiudice. for he did help iiij that ſtrofe ayens the apoſtill ſe
                  
                     •
                  t. And he faught myghteli ayens the kyng of frrance thurgh pouer of the danois and other nacions. But Richard the kyng of englond holp for to expuls him. & he diſtroied Mediolanū to the gronde. of the wich cite the walles wer hyer then the wales of any other cite: This man at the laſt after he had done mōy vexacions to the pope he wos reconſiled. For he dred leſt the Lūbardis wold haue rebelled ayence him: he aſked foryefnes of the pope. & toke the cros vpon him and went vn to the loly land &̄ did mony meruelus thinges ther· almoſt as moch as eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   did Karolꝰ magnꝰ. And ther he com by a toune that men called Armenyā & ī a litell wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos drenched. &̄ at Tirū he wos beried Anaſtaſius wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Eugeny iiij yer & more. This mā wos abbot of Rufy. & thē he wos choſin cardinale & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   pope.
            
            
               
               ¶Of kyng Henri the ſecund that wos the empriſe ſon in whos tyme ſent Thomas of cantorburi wos Chaunceler.
               
                  ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this kyng Stephen regned Henri the empriſe ſō and was crouned of the Erchebiſſhop Theobald the xvij day before criſtynmes And in the ſame yere Thomas Beket of London Erchebiſſhop of Cantorburi was made the kingꝭ chanceler of englond. ¶The ſecund yere that he was crouned he let caſtdoune all the new caſtelles that wer longyng to the croune ye wiche king Sſtephen had yef vn to diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe men and them had made Erles and barouns for to hold with him & to help him ayens Hē
                  ri the empriſe ſon ¶And the iiij. yere of his regne he put vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his own lordſhip the kyng of wales And in ye ſame yere the kīg of Scotland had in his own hand that is to ſay the cite of Karlill the caſtell of Bamburgh &̄ the new caſtell vpō Tyne and the erledom of lancaſtre. ¶The ſame yere the kyng with a gret pouer went in to wales and let caſt doune wodes and make wayes and made ſtrong the Caſtell of Rutland baſingwarke. and emong the caſtels he made an houſe of the tempull. ¶And in the ſame yere was Richard his ſon borne that aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward wos erle of Oxforde and the iiij. yere of his regne he made Gaufrid erle of Bretā And in that yere he changed his monay. & ye vi. yere of his regne he lad an huge hoſt vn to Tolouſe and conquered it. ¶And the vij. yere of his regne died Theabult the Erchebiſſhop of Cantorburi And tho all the cite of Cantorburi al̄moſt thurgh meſchefe wos brenned. ¶The ix. yere of his regne Thomas Bekit that wos his chanceler wos choſen to bene Erchebiſſhop of caūtorburi. And vpon ſent Barnardis day he wos ſacred. and ī that yere wos borne Helienor the kynges doughter: ¶And in the x. yere of his regne ſent Edward the kīg was tranſlated with moch honour ¶And the xi. yere of his regne he held hys parlament at Northamtoon. And from thens fled ſent Thomas erchebiſſhop of cantorburi. for the gret debate that wos betwix ye
                  
kīg & hī. for if he had ben founde ī ye morne he had ben ſlaī. & therfor he fled thens with iij. felowes on fote onli that no man wiſten wher he wos: & went ouer the ſee to the pope of Rome. ¶And this was the principall encheſon for as moch as the kyng wold haue put clarkes to deth that wer atteyntit of felonye with out ony preuylege of holy chirch: ¶And the xij. yere of his regne was Ion his ſon borne: And the xiij. yere off his regne died Maude the emprice that was his mother. ¶The :xiiij: yere of his regne the duke Henri of Saxon ſpouſed Maude his dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . & he begat vpon hir iij: ſonis that wor called Henri Othus & Willm ¶And in the xv yere of his regne died the good erle Robert of Gloceſtre that founded the abbey of Nonnes of Eton. ¶And in the ſame yere Marike kyng of Ieruſalem cōquered Babilon ¶And the xvi yere of his regne he let croune his ſone Henri kyng at weſtmynſter. &̄ him crouned Rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Erchebiſſhop of yorke. in harmyng of Thomas erchebiſſhop of Cantorberi wherfor this ſame Roger was acurſed of the pope.
            
            
               ¶How kyng henri that was ſon of kyng henri the empriſe ſon and of the debate that wos bytwen him and his fader while thatt he wos in Normandie.
               AFter the coronacion of kyng henri the ſon of kyng henri the empriſe ſon ¶That ſame henri the empriſe ſon went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in to Normandie &̄ ther he let marie Elenour the doughter of ye Dolfyn that was kyng of Almayn ¶And in the vij. yere yt the erchebiſſhop 
                     〈◊〉
                   Thomas had bene outlawed the kyng of frunce made the kyng &̄ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Thomas accordid. & tho come thom̄s the erchebiſſhop to Cātorburi ayen to his own chirche ¶And this accord was made in the begynyng of aduent And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  warde he wos kylled 
                     〈…〉
                   the v. day of criſtynmaſſe that tho next come ¶For kyng henri thought vpon 
                     〈◊〉
                   Thomas the erchebiſſhop vpon criſtinmaſſe day os he ſat at his mete &̄ thees wordis ſaid That if he had any good knyghtys with him he had be

mony a day paſſid avengid vpon the erchebiſſhop Thomas. ¶And anone ſir willm Breton. ſir hugh Moruyle. ſir william Traci. &̄ ſir Reignold fitz vrſe beres ſon in Engliſſh preueli went vn to the ſee & comen in to englond vn to the chirche of cantorburi and ther they him 
                     〈◊〉
                   at ſent Benettes auter ī the moder chirche. ¶And that was ī the yere of ye Incarnacion of ihū criſt .M.C:lxxij. yere. ¶And anone after Henri the new kyng began for to make were vpon Henri his fadre and vpon his brether. willm & O thus ¶And ſo vpon a day the kyng of fraunce and all the kynges ſonnes and the kyng of ſcotland and the grettyſt lordis of englong were ariſen ayens thee kyng Henri the fadre and at the laſt as god wold he conquered all his emnys. ¶And the kyng of fraunce & he wer accordit & tho ſent kyng henri the fadre ſpeciali vn to the kyng of france &̄ prayed him herteli for his loue that he wold ſend to him the names by letter of them that wer the begyners of the were ayens him ¶And the kyng of fraunce ſent ayene to him bi letter the names of them that begon the were ayens him. ¶The friſt was Iohn̄ his ſon &̄ Richard his brother. and henri the new kyng his ſon Tho was henri the kyng wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth and curſid the tyme that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he him begat. ¶And while the were dured Henri his ſone the new king died ſore repentyng his miſdedis & moſt ſorow made of ony man for becauſe of 
                     〈◊〉
                   thomas deth of cantorburi. ¶And prayed his fadre with moch ſorow of hert merce for his treſpaſſe. & his fader for yaf him. and had of him gret pitte and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he died the xxxvi. yere of his regne and lieth at redīg.
            
            
               ¶How the criſtyn loſt the holy land in the forſaid kynges tyme thurgh a fals criſtyn man that bicome a ſariſen.
               
                  ANd while that kīg henri the empriſe ſon leued and regned the gret bataill wos in the holy land bitwen the criſtyn mē and the ſariſens. but the criſtyn men wer ther kylled thurgh grett

treſon of the erle Tirpe that wold haue had to wife the quene of Ieruſalem that ſom tyme wos Baldewyns wife but ſhe forſoke him and toke to hir lord a knyght a worthi man that wos called ſir Gnyꝑches wherfor the erle Tirpe wos wroth and wēt anone right to Soladyne that was ſoudeyn of Babilon &̄ bicome his man. And forſoke his criſtindom &̄ all criſtyn law and the criſtī men wiſt not of this dedis: but wened for to haue had gret help of him as they wer wont to haue before: ¶And when they comen to the bataill. This fals criſtyn man turned vn to the ſariſens & forſoke his own nacions &̄ ſo wer the criſtyn men ther kylled wt the ſariſens ¶And thus wer the criſtyn men ſlayn & put to horibull deth. &̄ the cite of Ieruſalē deſtruied. and the holy cros borne away ¶The kyng of fraunce and all the gret lordis of ye land let them cros for to go vn to the loly land ¶And amōg them went Richard kyng Henri ſon friſt aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye kīg of fraūce yt toke ye cros of ye erchebiſſhop of tours: but he toke not the viage at yt tyme for encheſon yt he wos let bi other man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   weys & nedis to be done. ¶And whā kīg henri his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had regned xxxvi. yere & v. monethis & iiij. dais he died & lieth at foundenerard.
            
            
               Anno domini. M:C.lvi.
               ADrianus the fourth wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Anaſtaſy v. yere This pope was an engliſſhman. & ye voce of the comyn pepule ſaeth he wos a bondman to ye abbot of ſent albons ī englōd And whē he deſired to be made a mōke ther. he wos expulſid & hee wēt ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee. & gaf hī to ſtudy &̄ to vertu. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos made biſſhop of Albanacens. then he wos made legate ī to the land of wormacian. & he cōu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tid it to the faith: thē he wos made pope: &̄ for the woundyng of a Cardinall he enterditit all the cite of rome: & hee curſid willm the kyng of Cecill. & cauſid him to ſubmitt him: This man the friſt of all popis with his cardinales dueld in the old cite. Alexandre the thrid wos pope after him xij. yere

This Alexander had ſtrife xvij. yere and the iiij. ſtriuers that the Emprour ſet ayens him he ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come them: and curſid them: &̄ they all dred an yll deth. ¶This man alſo accordid Frederic the emprour & Emanuell of Conſtātiōble· & the kyng of Siculo
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                  : And this man noriſſhed ſent Thomas of cantorberi ī his exile. Nota. Sent Bernard wos canoniſit bi this alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & his abbot forbad him he ſhuld do no mo myraclis. for ther wos ſo myghty cōcours of pepull. And he obeyed to hī when he wos deid & did no mo. Lucius the thrid was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Alexander iiij. yere & ij. monethes and of him litell is written ¶In this mans dais deceſſid Henri the friſt ſon of henri the ſecund &̄ this his his epytaſi. ¶Omīs honoris honos. decor et decus. vrbis et orbis Milicie ſplendor gloria lumen apex. Iulius ingenio. virtutibꝰ hector. Achilles viribꝰ. Auguſtus moribꝰ. Ore paris. Vrbanus the iij. wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Lucius ij. yere This man deceſſid for ſorow when he hard tell that Ieruſalem was take with thee ſariſens. Gregori the viij: wos pope after hī iiij mōthis & he practiſet mighteli how Ierlm̄ might be won ayen. bot anone he deceſſid. Clemēs ye iij. wos pope after hī iij. yere. &̄ litell did.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Richard that conquered all the holy land that criſtī men had loſt.
               
                  ANd after this kīg henri regned Richard his ſon a ſtout mā &̄ a ſtrong and a worthy and alſo bold and he was crouned at weſtmynſter of the erchebiſſhop Baldewyn of Cantorburi the thrid day of ſeptembre. and the ſecūd yere of his regne kyng Richard him ſelf and Baldewyn the erchebiſſhop of cantorburi &̄ Hubert biſſhop of Saliſburi & Raudulfe Erle of Glouceſtre. and other mony lordis of englond went in to the holy land and in that viage died the erchebiſſhop of cantorburi. ¶And kyng Richard went before in to the holy land &̄ reſtid not till that he come forth ī his way vn to Cipers & toke it with

gret force: and ſithen that kyng Richard went forth toward the holy land and gete ther as moch as the criſtyn men had ther before loſten. and conquered the land ayen thurgh gret myght ſaufe ōly the holy cros. ¶And when kyng Richard comen to the cite of Acres for to get the cite. ther aros a gret debate bitwen him and the kyng of fraunce ſo that the kyng of france went ayen in to fraunce &̄ wos wreth toward the kyng Richard but yit for al that or kyng richard went ayen he toke the cite of acres. ¶And when he had taken it he duelled in the cite a while. but to him come tydynges that the erle Iohn̄ of Oxford his brother wold haue ſeſed all englond in to his hand and Normandie alſo. and wold croūe him kyng of the land ¶And whan kyng richard hard tell off this tidyng he went ayen toward englond weth all the ſpede that he might. ¶But the duke of Oſtriche met with him & toke hī & brought hī vn to the Emprour of Almayn. & the emprour hī brought in to his priſon ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward he was deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id for an huge raunſum that is for to ſay an hondreth thouſand pound. And for the wich ranſon to be payed eche other 
                     •
                  hales of Englond wos molten and made in to monay and all the monkis of the order of ciſteaux yefen all ther bokes thurgh out all englond for to done them to ſell & the raunſom for to pay.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Richard come ayen from the holi land and avē
                  ged him of his emnys.
               WHyles this kyng richard wos in priſon the kyng of fraunce wereed vpon him ſtrongly in Normandie and Iohan his brother wered vpon him in Englond. ¶But the biſſhoppes and barons of englond withſtod him with all the pouer thatt they might get: and toke the caſtell of wyndoſore and other caſtelles ¶And the forſaied Iohn̄ ſaw that he had no might ne pouer ayenis the barons of englond for to fight but anone went him ouer ſee vn to the kyng of fraunce ¶And whē kyng richard
                  
come out of priſon and wos deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed and come in to englond. anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   candilmaſſe in gret haſt he went vn to notyngham and the caſtell of Notyngham to him wos yolden And tho diſcōfitid he his brother Iohan and tho that with him held ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hee went vn to the cite of wyncheſtre and ther he let him croun kyng of Englond. &̄ after he went vnto Normandie for to were vpon the kyng of fraunce. ¶And the kyng of fraunce come withe v.C. knyghtys toward Giſors and the kyng Richard met him and tho wold haue yefen him bataill but the kyng of fraūce fled tho and an hundreth knyghtys of his wer take and ijC. ſtedis were ther trappid with yren. ¶And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   went kyng richard for to beſege the caſtell of Gaillard and as he rode vpon a day by the caſtell to take auiſement of the caſtyli. an arbalaſtier ſmote him with a quarell that wos enuenyned. &̄ the kyng drofe out the ſhaft of the quarell but the quarell heed abood ſtill in his heed. & it began for to rankill yt he might not help him ſelf ne meue his armes ¶And tho he wiſt that he had dethes woūde vpō him yt he might not be hole for no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thing. he commaūded annone ſharpili all his men for to aſſaill the caſtell. So yt the caſtell was take or that he died. & ſo manli his men did that all ye pepull that wer ī ye caſtill wer takē. & the kyng did with them what he wold &̄ cōmandid his men that they ſhuld brīg before him ye man that him ſo hurt & ſo woūdid ¶And wen he come before ye kyng the kīg axed hī what was his name: &̄ he ſaid mi name is bartram gurdon. wherfor ſaid the kīg haſt tow me ſlayn· ſith that I did the neuer none harme ¶Sir ſaid he though ye did me neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   none harme. ye yourſelf with your hond killed my fadre & my brother. & therfor I haue quyte now your trauell. ¶Tho ſaid kīg Richard he that died vpon the cros to bring mans ſoule from pyne of hell: for yef the my deth. & I alſo for yef it the. ¶Tho cōmandid he that no man ſhuld him miſdo ¶But for all ye kynges defēdīg ſom of his men him folowed &̄ p̄ueli him kylled &̄
                  
the vi. day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kīg did ſhriue hī & ſore repētans hauīg of his myſdedis &̄ wos houſeled & anoynted. & this kīg regned bot ix: yer & xxxix. wekis & died &̄ lieth beſide his fadre at fountenerard.
               HEnricus the v. wos emprour viij. yere This henri was ſon to Frederik. &̄ he weddid Conſtans the kynges doughter of Cecill: And thurgh the occaſion of hir he ſubduid all the kyngdom of apulie. & he drofe all the pepull out that inhabit that land: Celeſtinꝰ the thrid wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Clemēs almoſt iij. yere This man wos crouned vpon Eſtyr day. & the day foloīg he crouned Henri the emꝑour. & he made a palas at ſent Petres & deceſid Innocencius the thrid was pope after him viij: yere. &̄ v. monnethes. This man was well lettred and he made a boke of ye wrecchidnes of mans condicion. And he made ſplm̄ miſſe. & he made mony cōſtituciōs This man dampned the boke of Iohn̄ ioachim the wich he made ayens maſtyr Pers Lumbard the maker of thee ſentans. ¶This tyme deceſid the emꝑour Henri. & the princes of Almayn diſcordid: for ſum choſe Otto & ſū choſo Philip brother to henri. then philip wos falſly ſlayn. &̄ Otto was crouned of Innocens in fraūſe. the wich anone faught wt the Romans for they yaf him no dew honor. And for yt cauſe ayens the popis will he toke the kyngdō of Apulie frō Frederik. wherfor the pope curſid him. then aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the fourth yere of his regne the prince of almayn made Fredirik emꝑour &̄ victoriuſly he ſubduid Otto. Wyllyam of Paris this tyme began the ordir of the freres auſtyn the wich be cal̄led freris mendicantes Franciſcus an Italian a man of gret ꝑfecciō &̄ a ſampill to mony a man did mony a myracull this tyme: and he ordand the frere Minores. ¶And the vi: yere of pope Innocent the thrid. The ordir of ye freris preche is began: vndir Dominik bot it myght not be cōfirmyd till the friſt yere of honory:
            
            
               
               ¶Of kyng Iohn̄ that in the friſt yere of his regne loſt all Normandie.
               WHen kyng Richard was deid for encheſon that he had non heir nother ſon ne doughter his brother Iohan was made kyng an crouned at weſtmynſter of Hubert that tho was Erchbiſſhop of Cantorburi ¶And whan he began to regne he become ſo meruelus a man and went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in to Normandie. & wered vpō the kyng of fraunce. &̄ ſo long they wered to gedre till at the laſt kyng Iohn̄ loſt all Normandie & Angeon. wherfor he was ſore anoyed & it was no meruell. ¶Tho let he aſſemble before hī at London erchebiſſhoppis biſſhoppis abbots & priors erles &̄ barons & held ther a gret ꝑlamēt &̄ axed ther of ye clerge the tenth of eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y chirche of englond for to cōquere &̄ get ayen Normandie & Angeon that he had loſt. They wold not graūt yt thīg wherfore he was wonder wroth. ¶And in yt ſame tyme died Hubert the prior & the couēt of Cantorburi choſen ayens the kīgꝭ will to be Erchebirſpop maſtyr Stephen of langton a good clerk yt woned at the court of rome & ſend to the pope ther eleccion &̄ the pope ꝯfirmid it & ſacrid him at viterbi: ¶When the kīg wiſt this tyding he wos wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth & drofe the prior & couēt fro cantorbury & exiled them out of englond & cōmandid yt no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   letter yt come frō rome ne no cōmandement ſhuld be vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fenge ne pleted in englond ¶When this tydīg come to the pope. he ſent to kīg Iohan be his letter & prayed hī wt good will & good hert yt he wold vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fenhe Stephen erchebiſſh̄op of Cantorburi to his chirche & ſuffer the prior &̄ his monkis to cū ayen to ther own duellīg bot ye kyng wold not graūte it for no thing.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Iohn̄ wold nothīg done for the popis cōmandement wherfor all englōd was enterdited and ſuſpended.
               
                  ANd at the laſt the pope ſent by his auctorite and enioyned to the biſſhoppis of englomd that if the kyng wold not vndirfenge the prior of Cantorburi and his monkis that they

ſhuld done generall interdityng thurgh out all englone and graunted full pouer to iiij. biſſhoppis to pronounce the interditing if it werned. ¶The friſt was biſſhop willm of Lōdon and that other biſſhop Euſtace of Ely &̄ the iij: was biſſhop walter of wī
                  cheſtre & the iiij. was biſſhop Giles of Herford ¶And thes iiij. biſſhoppis praied the kyng kneling on ther kneys &̄ ſore weppīg yt he wold do the popis commandemēt & ſhewed him the popis bulles of the enterditīg. bot for no prayer that they myght pray he wold not conſent ther to. ¶And whē the biſſhoppis ſaw this they wēt from the kīg. And in ye morne aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the Anūciaon of our lady they pronouced the gen
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  all enterditīg thurgh out all englond ſo that the chirche doris wer ſhit with keis and with other faſtynyng & with walles. ¶And when the enterditing was pronoūced than the kyng be gane for to wax all out of meſure &̄ anone in to his hand all the poſſeſſions of the iiij. biſſhoppis & of all the clarge thurgh out all ye land he toke. &̄ ordened men for to kepe it yt the clarkis myght not haue ther leuīg. Wherfore the biſſhoppis curſed all them that put or ſhuld medle with holy chirche goodis ayens the will of them that owed them. ¶And when the kīg wold not of his malace ſees for no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thing: Thes iiij. biſſhoppis a fore ſaid went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee & come to the biſſhop of Cātorburi &̄ told him all the thyng: ¶And the Erchebiſſh̄op to them ſaid that they ſhuld gone ayen to Cā
                  torburi & he ſhuld cum thider to them or els he wold ſend vn to them certan ꝑſons in his ſtede that ſhuld do as moch as him ſelf wer ther ¶And whē the biſſhoppis herd this. They turned ayen in to englōd &̄ come vn to Cātorburi ¶The tydīg comen to ye kīg yt the biſſhoppis wer come ayen to cantorburi & him ſelfe might not cū theder that tyme. he ſend thider biſſh̄oppis erles &̄ abbotis for to trete with them that the kyng ſh̄uld vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fenge the erchebiſſh̄op ſtephen & ye prior &̄ all ye mōkis of cantorburi & that he ſhuld neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   after that tyme no thīg take of holi chirche ayens

the will of them that awed the goodis & that the kyng ſhuld make full amendis to them of whom he had any goodis taken and that holy chirche ſhuld haue all fraunchis as ferforth as they had in ſent Edwardis tyme the confeſſour.
            
            
               ¶How Stephen of langton com in to englond thurgh the popis cōmandemnt and how he went ayen:
               When the forme of accordement thus wos ordened hit was in apayr of endenturs and thei put ther ſeales to that one part and they that comen in the kynges name put ther ſeales to that other parte of the Endentures and iiij. biſſhoppis aboue ſaid toke that on part of the endenturs to them and yt other part of the endenturs they bore with them to ſhew to the kyng ¶When the kyng ſaw the forme &̄ vnder ſtode he held him full well apayed of all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thyng as they had ordeyned ſauyng as techīg reſtitucion of the goodis for to make ayen: to yt thyng he wold not accorde & ſo he ſend word ayen to the iiij. biſſhoppis that they ſhuld do out and put a way that on poynt of reſtitucion. ¶But they anſuerd that thei wold not done on word out: Tho ſent the kyng to the erchebiſſhop by tho iiij. erchebiſſhoppis that he ſhuld cū to cātorburi for to ſpeke with him ther & ſent vn to him ſaufcondit vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   plegges that is to ſay his Iuſtices Gilbert Peitevyn willm de la Brener and Iohn be fitz Hugh that in ther conduit ſaufely he ſhuld come &̄ go ayen att his own will & ī this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the erchebiſſhop Stephen come to cantorburi ¶And when the erchebiſſhop was comē the kīg come to Chilham for he wold no ney cantorburi at yt time but he ſent bi his treſorour biſſhop of wyncheſtre yt he ſhuld done out of the endenturs the clauſe of reſtitucion for to moke of the goodys: ¶And the Erchebiſſhop made his oth that he nold not neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   don out o word therof ne yit change of that the biſſhoppis had ſpoken & ordeyned. And tho the erchebiſſhopp wēt ayen to rome wt out any more doyng ¶Kīg iohn̄ was tho

wrother then eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos before. and let make a comyn cry thurgh out all englond that all tho that had holy chirche rentis and went ouer the ſee. that thei ſhuld cum ayen in to Englond at a certan day or els they ſhuld leſe ther rentis for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more. &̄ that he cōmandid to euery ſhereue thurgh out all englond that they ſhuld enquere if any Biſſhop Abbot Prior. or ony other prelat of holy chirche fro that day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward reſaued any cōmaundemēt that comen fro the pope: That thei ſhuld take the bodi & brīg it before hī. & yt they ſhold take in to the kynges hondis all ther landis of holy chirche that wer yefen to ony man bi the erchebiſſhop Stephen or bi the prior of cantorbury from the tyme of eleccion of the erchebiſſhop. & commandid that all the woddes that wer the erchebiſſhoppis ſh̄uld be caſtyn doune vn to the gronde &̄ all ſolde.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Iohn̄ deſtruyed the ordir of Ciſteaux:
               
                  ANd ī the ſame tyme ye Iriſhmē began to were vpon kīg Iohn̄. and kyng Iohn̄ ordeyned hym for to wend in to Irland and let arere an huge taxe thurgh out all Englond that is for to ſay xxxv.M: marke. And thus he ſent thurgh out all englond vn to the monkis of the ordir of Ciſteaux that they ſhuld help him of vi.M. marke of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  : ¶And they anſuerd and ſaid yt thei durſt nothīg done wt out ther chief abbot of ciſteaux wherfor kyng Iohn̄ when he come ayen from Irland did them ſo moch ſorow & care that they not wiſt werfor to abide for he toke ſo moch ranſom of eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y houſe of them that the ſomme ammounted to ix.M.ccc. marke So that they were clene loſt &̄ deſtruid and voided ther houſes & ther landis thurgh all ēglond. &̄ ye abbot of wau
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſay dred ſo moch his manace that he for ſoke al ye abbey & wēt thēs &̄ priuoly ordeyned hī ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee to the hous of ciſteaux when the tidīg come to the pope yt the kīg had don: ſo moch malice tho was he toward the kīg full wroth. &̄ ſent ij. Legates vn to the kyng that on wos called Pandolf &̄ yt other Durāt that they ſhold warne ye kīg ī the popis name yt he ſhuld ceſe of his ꝑſecuciō yt
                  
he did vn to holy chirche and amend the wrong and the treſpaſe that he had done to the Erchebiſſhop of Cantorburi and to the priour and vn to the monk is of Cantorburi and to all the clarge of Englond and that he ſhuld reſtore all the goodis ayen that he had teken of them ayens ther will. And els they ſhuld curſe him bi name and to do this thing and to conferme the pope toke them his letters in bullis patentz. ¶Thes ij. legatis come in to englond and come to the kyng to Northamton ther that he held his parlament and full courtaſly they him ſalued and ſaied Sir we be comen fro the pope of Rome the pees of holy chirche and the land to a mend ¶And we amoneſt you friſt in the popis halfe that ye make full reſtitucion of the goodis that ye haue raueſhed and take of holy chirche and of the land. and that ye vndirfenge Stephen erchebiſſhop of Cantorburi in to his dignite and the Prior of Cantorburi and his monkis and that ye yeld ayen vn to the Erchebiſſhop all his landis and rentis wt out any wtholdyng. ¶And ſir yit more ouer that ye ſhall make reſtitucion vn to all holy chirche wherof they ſhall hold them well apayed: ¶Tho anſuerd the kyng as tochyng the priour & his monkis of Cantorburi all that ye haue ſaid I will done gladly and all thyng yt ye will ordeyn ¶But os tochyng the Erchebiſſhop I ſhull tell you in myn hert as it lieth. that the erchebiſſhop let his biſſhopprich. and that the pope than for him wold pray and than vpō a venture me ſhold like ſome other biſſhopprich for to yef him in Englond &̄ vpon this condicion I wold him reſaue and vnderfenge ¶And notheles in Englond as erchebiſſhop yef he abyde he ſhall neuer haue ſo good ſaufcondit but he ſhall be take. ¶Tho ſaid Pandolfe vn to the kyng ſir holy chirche wos woned neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to diſcharge an Erchebiſſhop with out cauſe reſonable but euer it hath be woned to chaſtyſe princes that to god and holy chirche wer inobidient ¶What how now quod the kyng manace ye me ¶Nay ſaid pandolf but ye now opēle haue told

as it ſtandeth in your hert: ¶And to yow we will telle what is the popis will. And thus it ſtandith that he has you holy enter dited and a curſed: for the wronges that ye haue done to holy chyrche and to the clarge. ¶And for as moche as ye duell & beth in will to a bide in malace & wricchednes &̄ woll not cum out ther of ne to no amēdment. ye ſhall vnderſtand that this tyme aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ward the ſentance is vpon you yeffen and holdeth ſtede and ſtrength. & vpon all tho that with you haue communed before this tym whethir they be Erles Barons or Knyghtys or any other what ſo eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that they be we them aſſoyle ſaufly vn to this day. & fro this tyme afterward of what condicion ſom eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that they be we them a curſe that with you comyn ony word. & do we ſentanſe vpon thē openly and ſpecially. ¶And we aſſoill clene Erles Barons Knyghtes & all other men of ther homages ſeruis &̄ feautes that they ſhuld vn to you done. And this tydyng to confirme. we yef playn pouer to the byſſhop of wyncheſtre &̄ to the biſthop of Norwiche. ¶And the ſame pouer we yif in to ſcotland to the biſſhoppis of Rocheſtre & of Saliſburi. ¶And in wales we yeue the ſame pouer to the biſſhoppis of ſent Dauid &̄ of Landaf &̄ of ſent Aſſe· ¶And more ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   we ſend thurgh out all criſtī
                  dom that all the biſſhoppis be yond the ſee that they done a curſſe all tho yt helpeth you or ony cōcell yefeth you in ony man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   nede yt ye haue to do in any ꝑte of the world ¶And we aſſoyell them alſo all by the actorite of the pope: and cōmand them alſo wt you for to feght as with hī that is emny to all holy chirche ¶Tho anſuerd the kyng what may ye do more to me. ¶Tho anſuerd Pandolf we ſayn to you in the word of god: that ye ne none heir yt ye haue neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this day may be crouned ¶Tho ſaid ye kīg bi him yt is almighti god & I had wiſt this or yt ye come ī to my land yt ye had me brought ſich tyding I ſh̄uld haue made you ride all on yere. ¶Tho anſuerd pādolf full well wēd we at oure friſt cōmīg yt ye wold haue be obedient to god &̄ to holi chirch. &

haue fulfillid the popis commandemēt. & now we haue ſhewed vn to you &̄ ꝓnouncid the popis will as we wer charged ther with. & as now ye haue ſaid that if ye had wiſt the cauſe of our comyng yt ye wold haue made vs ride all an hole yere. & as well ye myght haue ſaid that ye wold haue takin an hole yere of reſpit bi ye popis leue. ¶But for to ſuffre what deth ye coude ordeyn. we ſhall not ſpare for to tell you holi all the popis meſſage & his wyll yt we wer charged with.
            
            
               ¶How Pandolf deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed a clarke that had falſed &̄ cont
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  feted the kynges monay before the kyng him ſelf.
               
                  ANd anone tho commandid the kyng the ſhereues & bailies of Northamton that were in the kynges preſence that they ſhuld bring forth all the priſoners that they myght bene done to deth before Pandolf for encheſon the kyng wened that they wold haue gayn ſayed ther dedis for cauſe of deth all thing that he had ſpokin afore ¶When the priſoners wer com be fore the kīg the kyng commandid ſom to be hanged &̄ ſum to be drawen & ſum to draw out ther eyn out of ther hede ¶And among all other ther was a clarke that had falſid the kyngis monay. And the king commandid that he ſhuld be honged &̄ draw▪ ¶And whē Pandolf herd this cōmandemēt of the kīg he ſtert him vp ſmartely and anone axed a boke and a candill &̄ wold haue curſid him &̄ all them that ſet vpō ye clarke any hand. And Pandolf hī ſelf went for to ſech a cros & the kīg folowid hī & deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id hī the clarke bi the hand yt he ſhuld do wt hī what he wolde ¶And thꝰ was the clerke delyu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id &̄ wēt thēs ¶And Pandolf & Durant his felow went from the kyng Iohn̄ & come ayen to the pope of rome & told him that kyng Iohn̄ wold not amended be but eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   abiden ſo accurſed ¶And notheles the pope grantid that yere thurgh out englond that mē myght ſing maſſes in coueneble chirchis & make goddis body and yef it to ſeke mē that ſhuld paſſe out of this world 
                  And alſo that men myght criſtyn child ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   al the land
                  
¶And when the pope wiſt and ſaw that the kyng wold not ben vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the rule of holy chirche for no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thīg the pope tho ſent to the kyng of fraunce in remiſion of his ſinnes yt he ſhuld take with him all the pouer yt he myght &̄ wend ī to englond for to diſtru kyng Iohn̄. ¶When this tidyng come to kyng Iohn̄ tho wos he ſore anoyed & ſore drad leſt that he ſhuld leſe his reame & hym ſelf be done to deth. ¶Tho ſent he to the pope meſſangers and ſaid yt he wold bene iuſtyfied & cum to a mendment ī all thinges and wold make ſatiſfaccion to all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   men after ye popis ordinā
                  ce ¶Tho ſent the pope ayen in to engloted Pandolf and other meſſingers come to Cantorburi tho the king abode. And ye xiij day of May the kyng made an othe for to ſtand to the popis ordinance before Pandolf the legate ī all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of thīges in wich he wos a curſed &̄ yt he ſhuld make full reſtitucion to all men of holi chirche &̄ of relegion & of the godis yt he had taken of them ayens ther will and all the gret lordis of englōd ſwore vpon the boke &̄ bi ye holydom that if the kīg wold not hold his oth they ſaied that they wold make him hold it by ſtrength ¶Tho put the kyng him to the court of rome & to the pope & tho yaf he vp the reame of Englōd & of Irland for him and for his heires for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more that ſh̄uld cum after him So that kyng Iohn̄ and his heires ſhuld take tho ij. reames of the popes handis &̄ ſhuld eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y yere pay ferme vn to the court of rome a thouſand marke of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ¶And tho toke the kīg the croune of his hede and ſet him on his kneys and thes wordis ſaid he in hering of all the gret lordis of englond her I reſigne vp the croune and the reame of Englōd in to the popis Innocent hand the thrid. and put me holy in his merci and ī his ordinance
                     •
                   ¶Tho vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fenge Pandolf the croune of kīg Iohn̄ and kepid it v. days as for ſeſing tagyng of ij. reames of Englong and Irland and confermed all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thynges by hys chartur that foloweth after.
               
                  Of the letter obligatorie that kyng Iohan made vn to thee court of Rome. wherfore the Petres pens bene gadred thurgh owt all Englond.
               TO all criſtyn pepull thurgh out all the world duellyng Iohn̄ by the grace of god kyng of englond greting to youre vniu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſite. and be it knowyn that for as moch as we haue greued and offendid god &̄ our modre chirche of rome: & for as moch as we haue nede vn to the merci of our lord ihū criſt & alſo we may nothing ſo worthy offer as compitent ſatiſfaccion to mak to god & to holy chirche but if that it wer our own bodi. as wt our reames of englond & of Irland ¶Than bi the grace of god we deſire to meke vs for the loue of him that meked him to the deth vpon the cros. thurgh coūſell of the nobull Erles & Barons we offer and freli graūten to god & to the appoſteles ſent petre & ſent paule &̄ to our moder chirche of rome &̄ to our holy fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the pope Innocent the thrid &̄ to all the popis that cometh aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him▪ al the reame &̄ patrenages of chirches of englond &̄ of Irland with ther appertenaunces for remyſſion of our ſinnes and help &̄ helthe of our kyne ſoules & of all criſten ſoules. So that fro this da
                     •
                   aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward we will reſaue & hold of our modre chirche of rome as fe fa
                  
                     •
                  me doyng feaute to our holy fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the pope Innocent the thrid. & ſo to all the popis that cometh aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hym in the ſame man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   aboue ſaied And in preſens of the wiſe man pandolf the popis ſubdekyn. we make liege homage as it wer ī the popis p̄ſens & before him wer. & ſhall done all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thīges aboue ſaid. &̄ ther to we bynd vs & all that cometh aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   vs. &̄ our heiris for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more without any yē ſayng to the pope &̄ eke the ward of churche vacauntz & in token of this thīg eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for to laſt: we will confirme &̄ orden yt our ſpecial rentis of the forſaid reame ſauīg ſent petres pens ī all thīg to the mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   chirche of rome payng by yere a .M. mark of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   at ij. termes of the yere for all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cuſtoms that we ſhold do for the foreſaied reames that is to ſay at myhelmaſſe and at Eſtyr that is

to ſai vijC. mark for englond and iijC. mark for Irland ſauȳg to vs &̄ to our heiris our iuſtices &̄ our other fraunches & other realtes that ꝑteneth vn to the croune. And thes thynges that be fore bene ſayed we will that it be firme &̄ ſtabull with out end. & to that obligacion we & our ſucceſſours & our heirris in this maner bene bound. that if we or any of our heiris thurgh any p̄ſumpcion fall in any point ayenſt any of thes thynges aboue ſaid & he be warned &̄ will not right amēd him. he ſhall than leſe the for ſaid reame for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  more. & that this chartre of obligaciō & our warrant for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more be firme & ſtabull without gayn ſaing we ſhall fro this day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward be trew te god & to the mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   chirche of rome & to the pope Innocent ye iij. & to all yt cometh aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hī &̄ ye reames of englōd &̄ of irland we ſhall mayntē trewli ī all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   pointis ayens all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   mē by our pouer thurgh godis helpe:
            
            
               ¶How the clerkis yt wer outlawed of englond come ayenꝭ and how kyng Iohan was aſſoiled.
               WHen this chartre was made and enſeled the kyng vnderfēg ayen his croune of Pandolfes hand and ſent anone vn to the Erchebiſſhop Stephen and to all his other clerkis and lewd men▪ that he had exiled out of this land that they ſh̄uld come ayen in to Englond and haue ayen ther landes & alſo ther rentis and that he wold make reſtituciō of the gooddis that he had taken of thers ayenſt ther will. ¶The kyng him ſelf tho and Pandolf & erles and barons went vn to wyncheſtre ayens the Erchebiſſhopp Stephen &̄ when he wos come the kyng went ayenſt him and fell a doune to his fete and thus to him ſaid. fair ſir ye be wellcome and I cry you merci for encheſon that I haue treſpaſſed ayenſt you: ¶The Erchebiſſhop toke him vp tho in his armys and cuſſed him courtaſly oft tymys and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   lad hī to the dore of Sent Swythynes chirche by the hond and aſſoyled him of the ſentance &̄ hī reconſiled to god and to holy chirche and that was on Sent

Mergaretes day and the erchebiſſhop anone went for to ſynge maſſe and the kyng offered at the maſſe a marke of gold. ¶And when the maſſe was done all they went to vnderfong all ther landis with out ony maner gayn ſayng: And that day they made all myrth &̄ ioye y nowgh. but yit was not the enterdytyng releced. for encheſon the pope had ſet that the enterditing ſhold nat be vndone: till the kīg had made full reſtitucion of the goodis that he had taken of holy chirche and that him ſelf ſhuld done homage to the pope by a certayn legat that he ſhuld ſend in to englond ¶Tho toke Pandolf his leue of the kyng and of the erchebiſſhop and went ayen vn to Rome. And the erchebiſſhop anone let come before him prelatis of holy chirche at Redyng for to trete and councell how moch & whot they ſhuld axe of the kyng for to make reſtitucion of the godis that he had take of them ¶And they ordined and ſaid that the kyng ſhuld yet vn to the erchebiſſhop iij.M. marke for the wrong that the kyng had done vn to hī ¶And alſo by porcions to other clerkys xv.M. marke And the ſame tyme Nicholas biſſhop of Tuſcan Cardinall pennitancer of rome come in to englond thurgh the popis cōmandement the v. kalend of October & come to london the v. non as of Ootober for encheſon that kyng Iohn and all the kynges yt come aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him ſhuld eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more hold the reames of englone & of Irland of god & of the pope payng to the pope by yere as it is aboue ſaid.
            
            
               ¶How the ent
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  dityng wos vndone ī englōd and of the debate that wos bitwen king Iohn̄ & the barons of the reame.
               WHen kīg Iohn̄ had don his homage to the legat that ſhewed him the popes letter that he ſhuld pay to Iulian and yelde ayen that was kyng Richard wife the iij· part of the land of englond &̄ of irland that he had with hold ſith that kīg Richard died▪ ¶When kyng iohn̄ herd this he was wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth: for vtterli the enterditing myght not be vndone till that he had made

gree and reſtitucion to the forſaid Iuliane of that ſhe axed The legat went tho ayen to the pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   criſtemaſſe. &̄ the kyng ſent tho meſſangers ouer ſe to Iulian that wos kyng Richard wife for to haue a releſe of that ſhe axed of him: ¶And ſo it befell that Ivlian died anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Eſtir And in ſo moch the kīg was quyte of that thing that ſhe axed. ¶But tho at the feſt of ſent Iohan that come next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thurgh the popis commaundemēt the enterditing wos friſt releſed thurgh all englond the vij. day of Iuyll And vij: yere was the land enterdited. & ī the morne men rong & ſaid maſſe thurgh out all london &̄ ſo aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thurgh out all englōd ¶And the next yere after ther began a gret debate bitwene king Iohn̄ &̄ the lordis of englōd for encheſon that he wold not graū
                  te the lawes & hold. the wich ſent Edward had ordeyned. & had be vſed & hold vn to yt tyme yt he had them broken for he wold hold no law bot did all thīg that hī likid & deſheried mony mē with out ꝯſent of lordis &̄ peris of the land. & wold deſherite the good Erle Randulf of Cheſtre for encheſō yt he vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  toke hī of his wykkidneſſe. & for cauſe that he did ſo moch ſhame &̄ velany to god and holy chirche And alſo fer he held & hauntid his own brothers wife & lay alſo bi mony other womē gret lordis doughtres for he ſparid no woman that him liked for to haue. wherfore all the lordis of the land wer with him wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth and went to london &̄ toke the cite: ¶And for to ceſe this debate and ſorow the erchebiſhop and other gret lordis of the land aſſembled them before the feſt of ſent Iohan baptiſt in a medow beſides the toune of ſtanes yt is called Romnemede. And the kyng made them ther a chertour of fraunches ſuch as they wold axen &̄ ī ſoch man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they wer accordid and that accordemēt laſt not full longe. for the kyng him ſelfe ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   did ayens the pointis of the ſame chartre that he had made wherfor the moſt parte of the land of lordis aſſembled them and began to were vpō him ayen. and brened his tounes and robbid his folke & did all ye ſorow yt they myght &̄ made them as

ſtronge as they myght with all ther pouer & thoght to driue him out of englond. and make Lowys the kynges ſon of fraunce kyng of englond. ¶And kyng Iohn̄ ſent tho ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee and ordeyned ſo moch pepull of Normans &̄ of Piccardes &̄ of Flemmynges So that the land myght not ſuſteyn them but with moch ſorow ¶And among all thes pepull ther was a mā of Normandie that was called Faukis of brent and this Normand & his ꝯpany ſpared nother chirche ne houſe of religion bot thei brīt & robbed it &̄ bare away all that they might take. ſo that the land wos all deſtroied what on oon ſide & on other. ¶The barons & lordis of Englond ordeyned amōg them the beſt ſpekers and wyſeſt mē. & ſent them ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe to kīg Philip of fraunce and prayed him that he wold ſend lowys his ſon in to englōd to be kyng of englōd &̄ to vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fenge the croune.
            
            
               ¶How Lowys the kinges ſon of fraunce come in to englond with a ſtronge pouer of pepull to be kīg of englond:
               WHen kyng Ppilip of fraunce herd this tydyng he made certayn aliaunce bitwene them by ther commune eleccion yt Lowys kyng Pphilipes ſone of fraunce ſh̄uld go with them ī to Englond & driue out kīg Iohn̄ of the land and all that wer in preſence of Lowys made vn to him homage and bicome his men: ¶And the barons of englond held them ſtyll at londō & abiden Lowys the kīges ſon of fraūce. & this was the next ſaturday before the Aſcencion of our lord that lowys come in to englond with a ſtrong pouer & that tyme kyng Iohn̄ had takyn all the caſtels of englōd in to alyens handis ¶And tho com Lowys & be ſegid Roucheſtres caſtell & toke it with ſtrength & the thurſday in whitſon w
                     •
                  ke lethonge all ye aliens yt wer therī & ye thurſdai tho next ſuyng he come to London & ther he wos vnderfenge with mech honour of the lordis that a byden him ther & all to him made homage ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward on the tewyſday next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the Trinite

ſonday he toke the caſtell of Reigate &̄ in the morow after ye caſtell of Gilford &̄ the friday next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the caſtell of Farneham &̄ the mōday next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the cite of wyncheſtre to him was yold &̄ in the morow aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſent Iohn̄ day the man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of wolueſey and the tewiſday aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the vtas of ſent Petre & ſent paule they toke the caſtell of Odiham: and the mōday aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſent Margaretes day he ordend him toward Bawmore for to ſege the caſtell and ther he duelled xv. dais &̄ myght not get the caſtell &̄ than when the thens &̄ come to london &̄ the toure to him wos yolde.
            
            
               ¶How the pope ſend in to Englond a legat that wos called Swalo and of the deth of kīg iohn̄.
               
                  ANd in the ſame time the pope ſend in to england a legat that wos called Swalo and he wos preſt Cardinall of rome for to maynten kyng Iohans cauſe ayens the barons of Englond but the barons had ſo huge part and help thurgh Lowys the kynges ſon of fraunce. that kyng Iohn̄ wiſt not whidder for to turne ne gone. ¶And ſo it befell that he wold haue gone to Nycholl and as he wēt thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward he come by the abbey of Swyneſ hede &̄ ther he abode ij. dais ¶And as he ſat at mete he axed a monke of the houſe how moch a lofe was worth that wos ſet befor him vpō the tabull. And the mōke ſaid that the lofe was worthe but and halfpeny. ¶O quod the kyng tho here is gret chepe of brede. Now quod the kyng & I may life ſoch a lofe ſhall be worth xx. ſhillyng or half a yere be gone. ¶And whē he had ſaid this word moch he thougt & oft he ſighed & tok & ete of the bred & ſaid by god the word that I haue ſpokyn it ſhall be ſoth ¶The mōke that ſtode before the kyng was for this word full ſori in hert & thoght rather he wold him ſelf ſuffre deth. and thought if he myght ordeyn ther fore ſome man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   remedie. ¶And anone ye mō
                  ke went to his abbot &̄ wos ſhriuen of him. &̄ told the abbot all that the kyng had ſaid· and praid his abbot for to aſſoill him for he wold yef the kīg ſuch a drink that all Englond ſhuld be glad

ther of & ioyfull ¶Tho went the monke in to a gardeyn and foūd a gret to de therin. & toke hir vp &̄ put hir ī a cup &̄ prikked the tode thurgh wt a broche mōy tymes till yt the venym comen out of eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſide ī the cup. & tho toke the cup &̄ fillled it wt good ale & brought it before the kīg & knelīg ſaid. ſir qd he waſſale. for neuer the days of your life dranke ye of ſo good a cup ¶Begin monke qd the kīg: &̄ the monke dranke a gret draught &̄ toke the kyng the cup: & the kīg alſo dranke a gret draught & ſet doūe the cup ¶The monke anone right wēt ī to the farmori & ther died anone. on wh
                     ••
                   ſeule god haue merci amen. And v. mōkis ſing for his ſoule ſpecially & ſhall whiles the abbey ſtādeth. ¶The kyng a roſe vp anone full euell at eſe. & cōmande to remeue the table & axed aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the monke. & mē told him yt he wos dede for his wombe was broke. ī ſūder ¶When the kyng herd this he cōmā
                  ded to truſſe but all it wos for noght. for his belly began to ſwel ſo for the drink that he had dronkē
                  ▪ & with in ij. days he died on the morow aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſent Lukes day. ¶And this kyng Iohn̄ 
                  had mony fair child of his body begoten. that is to ſay Henri his ſon that wos kīg aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his fadre: & Richard yt wos erle of Cornewaill and Iſabell that was empriſe of rome & Elenor that wos quen of ſcotland ¶And this kyng iohn̄ whan he had regned xiiij. yere and. v: monethis and v. dais he died in the caſtell of Newarke & his bodi wos beried at wyncheſtre.
            
            
               Anno domini .M.CC.
               FRedericus the ſecund wos emprour xxxiij. yere This mā wos crouned of Honorius the pope ayens Otto yt he ſhold fight wt hī: the wich he did & expulſid hī: & friſt he nuriſſhed the chirche. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he ſpolid it. as a ſtepmod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . wherfor Honoriꝰ curſed hym &̄ all that wer ꝯtrari to his oppynyon the pope aſſoiled. &̄ the ſame ſentans Gregori the ix. renewid. and this ſame man put henri his own ſon ī p̄ſon & ther morderid him▪ wherfore when this

Emprour an other ſeſon wos ſeke bi an other ſon of his own he wos mordered. in the tyme of Innocent the fourthe. Honorius the thrie was popo aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Innocent x. yere and confirmed the ord
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of Freris prechu
                     •
                  s & mynors & made c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tā decretals·
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Henri the thrid that wos crouned at Glouceſtre
               
                  ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this kyng Iohn̄ regned his ſon Henri and was crouned at Gloceſtre whan that he was ix. yere old on ſēt Symondes day and Iude of Swalo the legat of rome thurgh councell of all the gret lordis that held with kyng Iohan his fader yt is to ſay the Erle Raudolfe of Cheſtre Willm erle Marchall erle of Penbroke willm the Brener erle of Feriers Serle the manle baron. & all other gret lordis of englond held with lowys the kyng ſon of fraunce ¶And anone after when king Henri wos crouned Swalo the legate held his councell at briſto at ſent Martins feſt and ther wer xi. biſſhoppis of englond and of wales &̄ of other prelates of holy chirche a gret nombre & erles and barons and mony knyghtys of Englōd and all tho yt wer at that counſell ſwore feaute vn to Henri the kyng that wos king Iohanes ſun ¶And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the legate enterdited walis for encheſon that they held with tha barons of Englund alſo all tho that holpen or yaf ony counſell to meve were ayen the newe kyng Henri he a curſed hem. &̄ at the begynnyng he put in the ſentance the kynges ſon of fraūce Lowys.
               ¶And notheles the ſame Lowys wold not ſpace for all that bot went and toke the caſtell of Barcamſted &̄ alſo the caſtell of Herford. ¶And from that day afterward the barons did ther ſo moch harme thurgh out all Englond and principall the frenſſhmen that wer come with king Lowys wherfor the gret lordis &̄ all the commyn pepull of englond let them dreſſe forto driue lowys and his companye out of englōd but ſum of the barons and of

the frenſſhmē wer gon to the cite of Nicholl and toke the toune &̄ held it to kyng Lowys profit ¶But thider come kyng henris men with a gret pouer that is to ſay the Erle Raudolfe of Cheſtre and willm erle Marſhall and willm the brener erle of Feriers and mony other lordie with them and yefen bataill vn to Lowys men And ther wos ſlayn the erle of Perches and Lowys men wer ther foule diſcomfited. ¶And ther wos taken Serle erle of wyncheſtre &̄ Humfrey de Bowne erle of Herford and Robert the ſon of walter and mōy other that begane were aynes the kyng ther they wer takyn and lad vn to kyng Henri thatt wos kyng Iohaanes ſon. ¶And when the tidynges come to Lowys of the diſcomfitur that was the kynges ſon of fraūce he remeued from thens and went vn to Lōdon and let ſhit the yates faſt of the cite And anone after ye kīg ſent to the burgies of lō
                  don that they ſh̄uld yeld them vn to him and the Cite alſo. and he wold them graunt all ther fraūſhis that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they wer woned to haue before and wold confirme them by his gret new chartre vnder his brode ſeall. ¶And in the ſame tyme a gret lord yt was called Euſtace the monk come out of Fraunce with a gret companye of lordis &̄ wold haue comen in to Englōd for to haue holped Lowys the kynges ſon of fraūce. But Hubert of burgh and the v: portis with viij. ſhippis tho met with them in thee high ſe and aſſailid them egreli & ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come them with ſtrength &̄ ſmyten of Euſtace the monkis heed & toke alſo x. gret lordis of fraūce & put them in to priſon. &̄ killed almoſt all the men thatt come with them & anone drenched the ſhippis in the ſee.
            
            
               ¶How Lowys turned ayen in to fraūce &̄ of the confirmacion of kyng Iohanes chartre.
               WHen Lowys herad this tydynges he drad ſore to be dede &̄ loſt and let ordoyne and ſpeke bitwen the kyng and lowys by the legat Swalo. and thurgh the erchebiſſhop of canterburi &̄ thurgh other gret lordis that all the priſoners on yt one half

and that otheer ſhuld be deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed and gone quite. & Lowys him ſelfe ſh̄uld haue for his coſtages a .M. pound of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  : & ſhuld gone out of Englond &̄ cum neuer more therin ayen. ¶And ī this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was the accorde made bitwen kyng henri & lowys. & tho wos lowys aſſoiled of the popis legat that wos called Swalo of ye ſē
                  tance yt he was in. &̄ the barons of englond alſo. ¶And after this ye king Henri &̄ Swalo the legate &̄ Lowys wēt to Merton & ther wos the pees confirmyd & bitwen them ordeyned. And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Lowys went fro thens vn to london &̄ toke his leue and was brought with moch honour vn to the ſee with the Erchebiſſhop of cantorburi. and with other biſſhoppis. &̄ alſo with erles and barons and ſo went Lowys in to fraunce: ¶And afterward the kyng and the Erchebiſſhop and erles &̄ Barouns aſſembled them at London at Mihelmaſſe that next come tho 
                     •
                  ewyng and held ther a gret parlament & ther wer tho renewid all the fraunches yt king Iohn̄ had graunted. at Romnemede &̄ kīg henri tho ꝯfirmed by his chartre the wich yit bene holdein thurgh out all englond. And in that tyme the kyng toke of eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y plough land ij. ſhillyng And Hubert of Burgh was made tho chief Iuſtice of englōd ¶And this wos in the iiij. yere of kyng henris regne· & in th
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ame yere wos ſ
                     •
                  nt Th
                     •
                  m
                     •
                  s of Cant
                     •
                  rburi 
                     〈…〉
                   after his ma
                     •
                  dō ¶And after it wos ordend by all ye lordis of englōd yt all aliēs ſhuld go out of englōd &̄ cū no more therī and kyng henri toke tho all the caſtellis in to his hond that kyng Iohn̄ his fadre had yeue and taken vn to aliens for to kepe that held with him ¶But the proud Faukes of Brent richeli let aray his Caſtell of Bedeford wich he had of king Iohans yeft and he held that caſtell ayens kyng henris will with myght and ſtrength ¶And the kyng come thider with a ſtrong poer and beſeged the caſtell And the Erchebiſſhop maſtir ſtephen of langton with a fair cōpany of knyghtys come to the kyng him for to help &̄ fro ye aſcēcion vn to the aſſumpcion of our lady laſted the

ſege And tho was the caſtell wone and take &̄ the kyng let hong all tho that wer went in to the caſtell with ther good well for to hold the caſtell that is for to ſay lxxx. men. ¶And tho aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward Faukes him ſelf wos found in a chirche of Couentre and ther he forſwore all englond with moch ſhame & went tho ayen vn to his own cūtre ¶And whiles that kīg Henri regned Edmōd of Abyndon that was treſurer of Saluſburi wos conſacred Erchebiſſhop of Cantorburi ¶And this kyng Henri ſend ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe vn to the erle of Prouynce that he ſhuld ſend him his doughter in to englond that wos called Elinore &̄ he wold ſpouſe hir and ſo ſhe come in to englond after Criſtemaſſe and in the morow after ſent Hillarie day. The erchebiſſhop Edmond ſpouſid them to geder at weſtmynſtre with moch ſolempnite And ther wos a ſwete fight bitwen theym that is to ſai. Edward that was next kyng after his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   flour of curtaſi &̄ of largeſſe. & Margaret that was afterquene of ſcotland. &̄ Beatrice that was afterward Count
                     •
                  ſſe of Britan. & Katrin that died maid in relegion.
            
            
               ¶Of the quinzeme of goodis that wer grantid for the new chartre & of the purueance of Oxford▪
               
               
                  ANd thus it befell that the lordis of englond wold hauen ſomme addicions mo in the chartre of fraunches that thei had off the kyng and ſpekyn thus bitwen them and the kyng grauntid them all ther axyng and made to them ij. chartres that on is called the gret chartre of fraunchiſes & that other is called the chartre of foreſt and for the graunt of thes ij. charters p̄latis Erles &̄ barens & all ye cōmyns of englond yaf to the kīg a. M marke of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . when kīg Henri had bene kȳg xliij. yere the ſame yere he and his lordis Erles &̄ barons of the reame went to Oxū
                  ford & ordeyned a lawe in amendement off the Reamme. And firſt ſwore the kyng him ſelfe and afterward all the lordis off the land. that they wold hold that ſtatute for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more And who

that them brake ſhuld be deid But the ſecund yere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that ordinance. the kyng thurgh councell of ſir Edward his ſone and of Richard his brother that was erle of Cornewale and alſo of od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   repentid him of that oth that he had made for to hold that law and ordenaūce. & ſent to the court of Rome to be aſſoyled of that oth ¶And in that yere next comyng aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos the gret derth of corne in englond. For a quarter of whete wos worth xx iiij. ſhillīg and the poer pepull ete nettylles & other wedis for gret honger. & died mony a thouſand for defaute of mete. ¶And in the xlviij yere of kyng Henries regne began were and debate bitwene hī &̄ his lordis for encheſen that he had broke the couenauntes that were made bitwen them at Oxford. ¶And in the ſame yere was the toune of Northamton taken & folke ſlayn that wer within for encheſon that thei had ordeyned wild fiere for to brenne the cite of london ¶And in the moneth of may that come next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   vpō ſent Pancras day was the bataill of Lewes that is to ſay the wedyniſday before ſent Dunſtones day and ther was takyn kyng Henri him ſelf and ſir Edward his ſon and Richord his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   erle of Cornewaill and mony other lordis ¶And in the ſam yere next ſewyng Sir Edward the kynges ſone brake out of ye ward of ſir Symond of Mountforth erle of Leyceſtre at herford and went vn to the Barons of the marche and they vndirfenge him with moch honour ¶And the ſame tyme Gilbert of Clarence erle of Glouceſtre that was in the warde alſo of the forſaid Symond thurgh the commaundemēt of kyng Henri that wente from him with gret hert. For encheſon that he ſaid that the forſaied Gilbert was a foole in his counſell. wherfor he ordeyned him afterward ſo and held him with kyng Henri
               ¶And on the ſatirday next after the myddes of Auguſt. Sir Edward the kynges ſone diſcomfited ſir Symond de Mountfort at Kemlworth ¶But the gret lordis that were ther with hī were taken that is to ſayen Baldewyn wake. and willyam de

Mounchenſie and mony other gret lordis And the twiſday next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos the bataill done at Euſham and ther was kylled Sir Symond de mounford Hugh the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  . and Mounforth that was Raufe Baſſettz fadre of Draiton and other mony gret lordis ¶And when this bataill wos done all the gentillmen that had bene with the Erle Symōd wer diſherited. &̄ ordeyned to gedre &̄ did moch harme to all the land. For they diſtroied ther enmys in all that they myght.
            
            
               ¶Of the ſege of Kemlworth &̄ how the gentilmē wer diſherited thurgh councell of the lordis of the reame of englond 
                  and how they come ayen and had ther landis.
               
                  ANd the next yere cōyng in may. the fourth day before the feſt of ſent Dunſtan was the bataill and ſcomfiture at Cheſterfeld of them that wer diſherited &̄ ther was mony off them kylled ¶And Robert erle of Feriers ther he was taken and alſo Baldewyn wake and Iohn̄ delahay with moch ſorow a ſcappid thens And on the ſent iohēs eue the Baptiſt tho next ſewyng began the ſege of the caſtell of Kemlworth &̄ the ſege laſt till ſent Thamas eue the appoſtell in wich day ſir Hugh haſtīg had the caſtell for to kepee that yeldid vp the caſtell vn to the kīg in this maner that him ſelf and that other that wer with in the caſtell ſhold haue ther lyues &̄ limme & as moch thyng os they had therin both horſe and & harnes &̄ 
                  ▪iiij. dais of reſpip for to deliuer clenly the caſtell of them ſelf and of all other man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thīg as they had with ī ye caſtell & ſo they wēt frō the caſtell And ſir Simō
                  de the mounteforth the yonger &̄ the Coūteſſe his mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wer flede ouer the ſee in to fraunce & ther held them os pepull that wer exiled out of englond for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more ¶And ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   it was ordeyned by the legat Octobone &̄ by other gret lordis the wiſeſt of Englond that all tho that had bene ayenſt the kyng & wer diſherited ſh̄uld haue ayen ther landis by grevous raunſuns after that it was ordeyned and thus they wer accordid with the kyng and

pees cried thurgh out Englond &̄ thus the were was endied ¶And when this was done the legate toke his leue of the kyng & of the quene &̄ of all the gret lardis of englond & wēt tho to rome the lv. yere of kyng Henris regne And Edward king Iohon ſon of Britan Iohn̄ veſſy Thomas of clare Roger of Clifford Othes of Graunſton Robert le Brus Iohn̄ of verdō &̄ mony other lordis of englond and of by yond the ſee token ther way toward the holy land &̄ the kyng Henri died in the ſame tyme at weſtmynſter when he had be kīg lv. yere & xix. wokis on ſent Edmondis day the Erchebiſhop of Cantorburi. & he was entered att weſtmynſter on ſent edmondes day the kyng. in the yere of incarnacion of our lord ihū criſt .M.CC.lxxij.
            
            
               ¶Profecie of Merlin of the kyng Henri ye friſt expouned that was Kyng 
                     •
                  hohan ſon.
               
                  ANd of this Henri profecied Merlin & ſaied that a lomb ſhold come out of wyncheſtre ī ye yere of the Incarnaciō of our lord ihū criſt. M: CC. and xvi. with trew lippis &̄ holynes written in his hert &̄ he ſaid ſoth for the good Henri the kyng wos borne in wyncheſtre in the yere aboue ſayd & he ſpake good wordis and ſwete and wos an holy man & of good concience. ¶And Merlyn ſaid that this henri ſh̄old make the faireſt place of ye world that in his tyme ſhuld not be fully endid ¶And he ſaid ſoth for he made the new werke of the abbey of ſent Petris chirch at weſtmynſter that is fairer of ſight then ony other place that ony men knaweth thurgh out all criſtyndom. but kīg henri died or that werke wer fully at an end & that wos gret harme. ¶And yit ſaid Merlyn that this Lambe ſhuld haue pees the moſt tyme of his regne. And he ſaid full ſoth for he w
                     •
                  s neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   annoyed thurgh were ne deſeſed ī no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wiſe till a lytell before his deth. & Merlyn ſaid ī his ꝓfecie more. &̄ ī the regne & end of the forſaid lābe a wolfe of a ſtrāge land ſh̄uld do hī moch harme thorow his were: & that he ſhuld at the laſt bene maſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thurgh help of

a reed fox that ſhuld cum forth of the northweſt and ſhuld him ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  cum And that he ſhuld driue him out of the water and that ꝓfecy full well was knawen. for within a litell tyme or the kyng died Symōd of Mounteford erle of Leiceſtre that was borne in fraūſe began ayenſt him ſtrong were thurgh which doyng mony a good bacheler was ſhent & deid &̄ diſherite. ¶And when kyng Henri had the victori at Euſham &̄ Symōd the erle wos ſlayn thurgh help & might of Gilbert of Clare erle of Glouceſtre that wos in kepīg & ward of the forſaid Symōd thurgh ordinance of kyng Henri that wēt ayen vn to the kyng with moch pouer ¶Wherfor the forſaid Symōd wos ſh̄ent and that wos gret harme to the ꝯmynes of Englond that ſo good a man was ſhēt for the trouth and died in charite and for the commyns profite of the ſame folke and therfor almyghty god for him hath ſithens ſhewed mony a full fair myracull vn to diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe men and women of the ſekenes &̄ diſeſe that they haue had for the loue of him. ¶And Merlyn alſo told and ſaid in his propheci that after that tyme the Lambe ſhuld leue no while and than his ſeed ſhuld bene in ſtrange land wt out any paſture ¶And he ſaid ſo the. for kyng Henri leued no while aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   when that Symond moūfort wos deid that kyng Henri ne died anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him: ¶And in the meyn tyme Sir Edward his ſon that wos the beſt kyng of the world of honour wos tho in the holy land & gat there Acres ¶And in that cantre he begate on dame Elenour his wife iohan of acres his doughtre that aftward wos Countaſſe of Gloceſtre: And made ſuch a viage in the holy land. that all the world ſpake of his knyghthod. and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  i man drad him. high and low thurgh out all criſtyndom. as the ſtori of him telleth as afterward ye ſhall here more openli And from the tyme that kyng Henri died till that ſir Edward wos crouned kīg. all the gret lordis of englōd were as fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  les children without any ſocour yt thē might maīten &̄ gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ne & defend ayens ther dedely emnys.

GRegririus the ix. was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Honori. This man canonyſit mony ſaintis. &̄ defendit mighteli the chirche ayenes Frideric. therfor he toke mony p̄latis and ij. cardinalis the wich went to coūſell ayens hȳ. This pope wos ſeged ī the cite of Rome by the emprour. &̄ he ſaw the romans wer corruppid by the monay of the emprour. Then he toke in his handis the hedes of the appoſtils Petur & Paule. and went with preceſſion fro the chirche of ſent Iohn̄ latronens. to ſent petres chirche. And ſo he gat the hertis of the romans: and then tho emprour went far a way fro the cite. This pope made frere Iaymond to ꝯpill ye .v. bokis of the decretals of mony piſtils & docreis· And after with mony tribulacions of this tyrand and other: he deceſſid. and 
                     〈…〉
                   Celeſtinus the iiij. was pope after Gregori almoſt a mōthe and he was in his lyfe and in his conyng laudabull And he was an old mā & a febull &̄ deceſſid. and ther was no pope after him almoſt a xij monthes: Innocenciꝰ the iiij. was pope after him xi. yere & ſex mōthes. This man canonyſit mony ſentis &̄ Frederik the emprour he depoſid &̄ curſed as a emny to god & the chirch in the thrid yere that he was made pope. &̄ he was holpen by the ianuencis. ¶Then was henri the ſex choſen & willm. by the popis commandement ayens Frederic on after an other. bot they ꝓualid not to ower cum his tyrannyde. for he was ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   mighti: ne thes wer not crouned for they deceſſid anōe. Thomas de aquino an holy doctor. Albartus magnus the biſſhop of Ratiſponēs Euſtacius. Boneauentur a deuote doctor wer this tyme the wich diſtruied moch hereſi enfeckid by the Emprour. Alexander was pope after Innocent vij. yere & litell of him is writyn Vrbanus was after him iij. yere. & iij. mōthes. This mā drofe a way the hoſt of the ſariſens by men merkid with the cros. thee wich Maufred had ſend ayens the chirche. &̄ the pope toke the kīgdome of Cicill to ye kīgis brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of fraunce. that he ſhuld fight with Maufrede. and then he deceſſid. and Manfrid after loſten

his life &̄ his kīgdō by Karolus. Alphonſus the kīg of caſtell Richardus brother to the king of englōd erle of cornewell wer choſin emprours aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the long vacacion of the empire. for the che
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s of ye emꝑour wer deuyded inſondir and ther wos gret ſtrife mōy yere. at the laſt deceſſid Richard: & Alphōſus the other emprour cō a fore Gregori the ix. bi the ſigne of pees & vtterly renoūſit al his titill of the empire. & he had ony: for he wos a veray witty mā and a nobull aſtranomier. & his tabuls be veray famoſe the wich he made for they be compendioſe. Clemens the iiij wos pope after vrbane iij· yere & ix monethis this Clement wos an holy mā and ſaid thurgh the ſprete of ꝓpheſi. yt the enmys of the chirche ſhuld parych as the ſmoke. & it is to be leuyd yt god ſeſ
                     •
                  id the tribulacions of the chirch thurgh his meritis. this man a fore had a wife &̄ 
                  child. & when he was preſt and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   biſſhop he wos ſent ī to englond legate & he nothyng knawyng wos choſyn pope and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   diceſſid bliſſidly for his vertuus leuīg
               Gregori the x. was pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him iiij. yere. aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos made pope for the deſire that he had to the holy land the wich he entendit to vyſit ꝑſonaly at loduū in fraūce he made a ſolempne counſell. ī the wich the conſell of the grekis & the Tarturs wer. &̄ ther the grekis ꝓmyſit to be reformid bi the vnite of the chirche. And the Tarturs wer but a litell a fore baptiſed & ꝓmyſid the ſame. &̄ ther wer ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id viC. biſſhoppis & a thouſand p̄latis▪ And therfor a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tā man ſaid. Gregori gedirth to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   all kynd of pepull. And ther was decreid that all ꝑſons and vekerys ſhuld be called preſtis &̄ no p̄latis. And that no man ſh̄uld aſſygne his tythis to what chirche him wold os thei did a fore but they ſh̄uld be paid to his modir chirche. &̄ he dampned the pluralite of beneficis: and deceſed a bliſſid man. Innocent the v. wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him v. monethis and litell did. Adrian was after him on moneth &̄ did las. Iohannes the xxi. wos after him viij. monethis &̄ he was in diuſe ſciens a famus man. bot in man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s a fooill: and deceſſid anone.

Nicholas the thrid wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Iohn̄ on yer. This ma was ī his dais a noble man ī bildīg. & well gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned ye cite all his dais & ye ſecūd yer he deceſſed. Rodulphꝰ wos emꝑour xviij: yere. this man wos erle of Haneſburgh a wiſe man ī armys & nobull & victoriꝰ. &̄ wos choſin at Baſilian. & he toke the cros on him for the holy lond. the imꝑiall bliſſing he had not. bot the pope a lowed the eleccion for fauour of the holy land.
            
            
               Anno domini .M.CC. & lxxiiij.
               MArtin the iiij. wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Nicholas iiij yere· This mā wos a gret lou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of religiꝰ mē. &̄ gret attending to vertuꝰ werkis This man curſid the emꝑour of ꝯſtantinopolon. ī ſo moch as he ꝓmyſed to turne to the fayth ī the gen
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  all counſell &̄ did not for the wich he ſuffrid mich paſſions and all holy chirche. Alſo hee curſid the kīg of Aragon for he expulſed the kīg of Cicill fro his kyngdō & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he had done mony batailles ayens mē of miſbeleue & mōy tribulaciōs ſuffrid. he deceſſid & did mony myracules· Nicholas de Lira a nobull doctor of diuinite wos this tyme at Paris. This man wos a Iue of nacion. and he wos conu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ted and myghteli ꝓfetid ī the ordir of frere mynors and he wrot ouer all the bybell. or els he wos ī the yere of our lord a thouſand .ccc. &̄ xxx: And ſū men ſays he wos a brabon & yt his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & his mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wer criſtyn. but for pouerty he viſet the ſcoles of the Iues: & ſo he lerned the Iues langage. or els this Nocholas wos īformid of the Iues ī his yong age. Honoriꝰ the fourth wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Martin ij: yere and litell of him his writtyn bot that he was a tē
                  ꝑate man and a diſcret Nicholaus the fourth was pope after hym iiij. yere This man wos a frere mynor. and all though he wos a good man in him ſelf: yit mony vnhappy thynges fell in his tyme to the chirche. for mony a bataill wos ī the cite thurgh his occaſion for he drew tomoch to the on ꝑte. And after him ther was no pope .ij. yere and ſex monethis.
            
            
               
               ¶Of kyng Edward that wos kyng Henris ſon.
               
                  ANd after this kyng Henri regned Edward his ſon the worthieſt knyght of all the world of honour: For goddis grace was in him. for he had the victorie of his enmys ¶And as ſone as his fadre wos dede he come to london with a fair companye of prelatis and of erles and barons and all maner mē did him moch honour For in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y place that ſir Edward rode in london the ſtretis wer couerid ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his hede with riche clothes of ſylke of tapites and with riche couering. ¶And for ioye of his cū
                  myng the nobull burgeis of the cite caſt out at ther wyndowes gold and ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hondis full in tokynyng of loue and worſhip & ſeruis & reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ens. ¶And out of the ꝯdith of chepe ran white wyne & rede as ſtremis doth of the water &̄ eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man dranke therof that wold at ther own will. ¶And this kyng edward wos cr
                     •
                  ūed & annoynted as right hair of englond with moch honour. and after maſſe the kyng went in to his palas for to hold a riall feſt a monges them that did him honour. ¶And when he wos ſet vn to mete. the kīg Alexander of ſcotland come for to done him honour and reuerence with a quentize and an hondreth knyghtis with him well horſed and arayed. And when they wer lighted doune of ther ſtedis they let them gone widder that they wold &̄ who that myght take them toke at ther own will with out any chalenge. ¶And afterward come ſir Edmond kynd Edwardes brother a curtas knyght and a gentill of renoune. and the erle of Cornewaill and the erle of Glouceſtre. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   them cōe the erle of Penbroke. &̄ the erle of Garenne: ¶And ech of thē by ther ſelf lad in ther hand an hondreth knyghtis gayl
                     •
                   diſgiſed in ther armes: ¶And when they wer light of ther hors they let them go whider that they wold and who that myght them cache them to haue ſtill with out ony chalenge ¶And when all thys wos done. Kyng Edward did his diligence & his might for to a mende &̄ redreſſe the wronges in the beſt maner that he myght to

the honour of god & holy chirche & to maynten his honour & to a mēd the noyance of the comyn pepull
            
            
               ¶How Ydeyne yt wos Lewelyns dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of wales p̄nce & aymer yt wos ye erles brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of moūford wer takē ī the ſee.
               THe friſt yere afterward that kyng Edward was crouned Lewelin prince of wales ſent in to fraunce to the erle moū
                  fort that thurgh counſell of his frendis the Erle ſhuld wedde his dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and the erle tho a viſed him vpon this thyng and ſent vn to Lewelyne and ſaid that he wold ſend aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his doughter ¶And ſo he ſent Aymer his brother aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the damiſell and Lewelyn arayed ſhippis for his doughter and for ſir aymer and for hir fair companye that ſhuld gone with hir. ¶And this lewelyn did gret wrong for it was couenand that he ſhuld yef his doughter to no maner man with out councell and conſent of kīg edward ¶And ſo it befell that a burgies of Briſtow come in the ſee with wyne laden and met them and toke them with might and pouer. &̄ anōe the burgeis ſent them to the kyng. ¶And when Lewelyn herd this tydyng he was wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth &̄ alſo ſorowfull & gan for to were vpō kyng edward &̄ did moch harme vn to the engliſſhmen and bet doūe the kynges caſtelles and began faſt for to diſtroy kīg Edwardis landys: ¶And whē tiding come vn to kyng edward of this thing he went in to wales & ſo moch he did thurgh goddis grace and his gret pouer that he drofe Lewelyn vn to moch miſcheif that he fled all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſtrength &̄ come and yeld him vn to the kīg edward and yaf him .l.M: marke of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to haue pees &̄ toke the Damiſell &̄ all his heritage &̄ made an obligacion to kyng edward to cum to his parlament ij tymes of the yere ¶And in the ſecund yere after that kyng edward wos crouned he held a generall parlamēt at weſtmynſtre &̄ ther he made the ſtatutis for defaute of law by ye ꝯmune aſſent of all his baronage And at eſtre next ſewyng the kyng ſent by hys letter vn to Lewelyn Prince of wales that he ſhuld cum to hys

parlament for his land and for his holding in wales as the ſtrength of the letter obligatorye witneſſid. ¶Tho Lewelin had ſcorne &̄ diſpite of the kynges commaundement. and for poer wrath ayen began were vpō kyng Edward and diſtroyed his landis ¶And tho when that kyng Edward herd of this tidynges he waxed wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth vn to Lewelin & in haſt aſſembled his pepull and went him toward wales and werid ſo vpon Lewelin the prince till that he brought him in mych ſorow and diſeſe. ¶And Lewelyn ſaw that his defence might him not a vaill and come ayen & yelde him to the kynges grace· and cried him merci and long tyme knelid before the kynges fote. ¶The king had of him pitte & cōmandid him for to ariſe. & for his mekeneſſe for yaf hym his wroth & to him ſaid. that if he treſpaſſid ayen him an other tyme that he wold diſtroy him for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more. ¶Dauid that wos lewelins brother that ſame tyme duellid with the kyng edward and was a fell man & a ſotill &̄ enuyous and alſo farre caſtyng and moch treſon thought. &̄ eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more held him ſtill for to wit and aſpi the kīges will. &̄ eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more made good ſembland & ſemid ſo trew yt no man might ꝑſaue his falſeneſſe.
            
            
               ¶How Lewelin thurgh eggyng of Dauid his brother werid ayen vpō kyng edward.
               IT wos not long aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that time that kyng Edward did yef to Dauid Lewelins brother the lordſhip of Frodeſhā 
                  and made him a knyght. And ſo moch honour did he neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to no man of wales for encheſon of hī ¶Kyng edward held his ꝑlament at londō when he had done in wales all that he wold and chā
                  gid his monay that tho wos fouyll cut and roundid. wherfore the romyn pepull plenyd them wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſore. So that the kyng let enquere of them that ſuch treſpoces did. ¶And .ccc. wer atteynt
                     •
                  d of ſuch mon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   falſenes. wherfore ſom wer honged &̄ ſom drawe and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward honged. ¶And afterward the kyng ordeyned that ye ſterling half penne and ferthyng ſhuld gone thurgh out his lād

and commanded that no man fro that day afteerward yaf ne ſeffed hous of religion with land tenement with out ſpeciall leue of the kīg: & he that did ſhuld be ponyſſhed at the kynges will. &̄ the yift ſhuld be for nought ¶And it wos not long after that Lewelin Prince of wales thurgh the ticement of Dauid his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and by both ther conſent they thought to diſherite kyng Edward ī as moch as they myght. ſo that thurgh them both the kingꝭ pees wos broken. ¶And whē kyng edward herd this: anone he ſent his barons in to Northūberland and the furreis alſo that they ſhuld go & take ther viage vpōn the tratours Lewelī & Dauid &̄ wonder herd it was for to were tho. for it is wynter in wales whē in other cūtres is ſomer ¶And Lewelin let ordeyn and well araye & vitolle his good caſtell of Swandon & wos therin an huge nombre of pepull & plente of vitales ſo that kīg edward wyſte not wherfor to entre ¶And wen the kīges mē it ꝑſaued & alſo the ſtrength of wales they let come in the ſe barges and botes and gret plankis as mony os they myght ordeyn and haue for to gon to the forſaid caſtell of Swandō with men on fote & eke on horſe ¶But the walſhmen had ſo moch peple & wer ſo ſtrong yt they driuen the engliſſhmen ayen ſo that ther was ſo moch preſe of peple at the turnyng ayen that the charge &̄ the burthen of them made ye barges and botis to ſinke. ¶And ther wos drenched full mony a good knyght that is to ſay Sir Roger Clifford ſir willm of lȳ
                  deſey that wos ſir Iohn̄ ſon fitz Robert &̄ ſir Richard Tanny &̄ an huge nombre of other & all wos thurgh ther own folie. for yf they had had good eſpies they had not be harmed ¶When kyng Edward herd tell that his pepull wer ſo drenched he made ſorow ynough ¶But tho come ſir Iohan of veſſye from the kyng of Aragon and brought with him moch pepull of bachilars and of Gaſcoyns & wer ſowdiours and duellyng with the forſaid Iohan of veſſie & vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fong of him wages & wyth him wer withold and nobull men they wer for to fight and brent mony tounes & kylled

moch pepull of walſhmen all that they myght take ¶And all tho with ſtrength and myght made aſſaute vn to the Caſtell of Swandon and get the caſtell ¶And when Dauid the prīce brother herd this tydyng he ordeyned him to flight. ¶And Lewelin the prince ſaw that his brother was fled. Then he was ſore abaſſed for he had no pouer to his were for to maynten ¶And ſo Lewelin gan for to fle and wened well for to haue ſcappid. But in a morow ſir Roger Mortemer met with him only with x. knyghtis and ſet him round about &̄ to him went & ſmoten of his hede & preſentid it vn to the kyng Edward ¶And in this maner the prince of wales was taken & his hede ſmyten of &̄ al his heiris diſherited for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more thurgh rightfull dome all the landis of the reame.
            
            
               ¶How Dauid that was Lewelins brother prince of wales wos put to the deth.
               DAuid that was the Prīces brother of wales thurgh prid wened for to haue bene prince of wales after his brothers deth ¶And vpon this he ſent after walſhmen to his parlament at Dinbigh &̄ foliſhly made walis for to ariſe ayens the kyng and began to meue were ayens kīg Edward &̄ did all the ſorowe & diſeſe that he myght bi his pouer ¶When kīg Edward herde of this thyng he ordeyned men to purſue vpō him. And Dauid ferſly him defendid till that he come to the toune of ſent Morice & ther wos Dauid take as he fled. & lad to the kyng ¶And ye kīg commaūdid that he ſhuld be honged &̄ draw and ſmyte of his hede & quartir him & ſend his hede to londō & the iiij quartirs ſend to the iiij. chief toūes of wales. for they ſhuld take exampull therof &̄ beware. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward kyng Edward let cry his pes thurgh out all walis &̄ ſeiſed all the land in to his hond. and all the gret lordis that wer left a liue come to done feaute &̄ homage to the kyng Edward. as to ther kynde lord. ¶And tho let kīg edward amēd the lawis of walis yt wer defectiue. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  
he ſent to all the lordis of wales bi his letter patent. that they ſh̄
                  uld cū all to his ꝑlament. & when they wer comen the kyng ſaid to them full curteſly Lordynges ye be welcome. and me behoueth your coūcell and your help for to wend in to Gaſcoyn for to amē
                  de the treſpaces that me wos dene when I wos ther and for to entret of pees bitwen the kyng of Aragon and the prince of Morrey. ¶And all the kynges liege men Erles and Barons conſentid and grauntid therto: ¶And tho made him kyng edward redy & went in to Gaſcoyn and let amend all the treſpaces that him wos done in gaſcoyn And of the debate that wos betwen the kyng of Aragon & the prince of Morrey he ceſid & made them accordid. ¶And whyle good kyng edward & the quene Elienore his wife were in gaſcoyn. The good erle of Cornewaill wos made wardeyn of englond till that kyng Edward come ayen· ¶And tho enquerid he of his traitours that congetten falſeneſſe ayens him. and eche of them all vnderfenge ther dome aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that they had deſerued. ¶But in the mene tyme while that the good kyng edward was beyond the ſe to done them for to make amendis that ayens him had trepaſſid ther was a fals thefe a tratour that wos called Riſap Meridoc began for to make were ayens kyng Edward and that wos for encheſon of Sir Payne Tiptot wrongfully greued and diſeſed the forſaid Riſap Meridoc: ¶And when kyng edward herd all this he ſent bi his letter to Riſap meridoc that he ſhold begynne for to make no were but that he ſhuld be in pees for his loue and when he come ayen in to englond he wold vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   take the quarell and amēd all that wos myſdone ¶This forſaid riſap meridoc deſpiſid the kynges cō
                  mandemēt &̄ ſparid not to do all the ſorow yt he myght to ye kīgꝭ men of englond but anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos takyn & lad to yorke and ther he wos draw &̄ honged for his felonye.
            
            
               ¶Of the redreſſing that kyng edward made of his Ioſtices &

of his clerkis that they had done for ther falſenes & how he drofe the Iues out of englōd for ther vſeri &̄ miſbeleue.
               WHen kyng Edward had duelled iij. yere in gaſcoyn wylle come to him for to wend ayen in to englond and wen he wos cume ayen he fonden ſo mony playntes made to him of his Iuſtices &̄ of his clerkis that had done ſo mōy wronges &̄ falſeneſſe that wondir it wos to here. ¶And for wich falſnes Sir Thomas weylond the kīges Iuſtice forſwore englōd at ye toure of lundō for falſenes that men put vpō him. wherof he wos atteint & proued fals. ¶And anōe after when the kyng had do his wyll of the Iuſtices. ¶Tho let he enquere & aſpi how the Iues deſaued &̄ begiled his pepull thurgh ther ſine of falſeneſſe & of vſerie & let ordeyn a priue parlamēt among his lordis & they ordeynid emōg them that all the Iues ſhuld void out of englōd for ther miſbeleue and alſo for ther fals vſeri that they did vntill criſtyn men ¶And for to ſped & to make an end of this thīg all the communite of englond yaf vn to the king the xv. peny of all ther goodis meuabull. &̄ ſo wer the Iues driuē out of englōd ¶And tho went the Iues in to fraūce &̄ ther they duellid thurgh leue of kīg Philip that tho wos kīg of fraūce.
            
            
               ¶How king Edward wos ſeiſed in all the land of ſcotland thurgh ꝯſent &̄ graūt of all the lordis of Scotland.
               IT was not long after that Aleſander kyng of Scotlōd was deid and Dauid the Erle of Huntindone that was the kynges brother of Scotland axed and clymed the kyndom of Scotland after that his brother wos deid for encheſō that he was rightfull heir But mony gret lordis of Scotland ſaiden nay wherfore gret debate aroſe bitwen them and ther frendis for as moch that they wold not conſent to his coronacion & the mene tyme the forſaid Dauid died ¶And ſo it befell yt the ſame dauid had iij. doughtres yt worthely wer maried. The friſt dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos marid to Bailloll: the ſecūd to Brus & ye thrid to Haſtīg· & the forſaid

Bailloll &̄ Brus chalenged the land of ſcotland and gret debate & ſtrife aroſe bitwen them iij. for encheſon that ych of them wold haue bene kyng. ¶And when the lordis of ſcotland ſaw the debate bitwen them iij. They come to kyng Edward of englōd &̄ ſeiſid him in all the land of ſcotland as chefe lord. ¶And when the kīg wos ſeiſed of the forſaid lordis of ſcotland. The forſaid Bailloll Brus & Haſtynges come to the kynges court and axed of the kyng wich of them ſhuld be kyng of ſcotland. ¶And kyng Edward that wos full gentill &̄ trew let enquere by the Croniclis of ſcotland & of the gret lordis of ſcotland wich of them wos of the eldeſt blod. And it wos foūde that Bailloll wos the eldiſt And that the kyng of Scotland ſhuld hold of the kyng of englond. &̄ do him feaute & homage ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thys wos done Bailloll went in to Scotland &̄ ther wos croūed kyng of ſcotland. ¶And the ſame tyme was vpō the ſee gret were bitwen the ēgliſhmē & the Normās. but vpō a time ye normās arriued all at Dou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & ther they martired an holy man that was called Thomas of Dou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward wer the normans kylled that ther aſcappid not on of thē. ¶And ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   kīg edward ſhuld leſe the duchie of Gaſcoyn thurgh kīg Philip of fraunce thurgh his fals caſtyng of the douſeperis of the land. wherfor ſir Edmond that wos kīg Edwards brother yaf vp his homage vn to the kyng of fraūce. ¶And in that tyme the clerkis off englond graūtid to kyng Edward halfendele of holy chirch gooddis in helpyng to recou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his land ayen in Gaſcoyn ¶And the kīg ſent thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   a nobull company of his bachilers & him ſelf wold haue gone to Porteſmouth. but he wos let thurgh on Maddoc of wales that had ſeiſed the caſtell of Swandō in to his hand: &̄ for that encheſō ye kīg turned to wales at criſtemaſe. And for encheſō yt ye nobull lordis of englōd yt wer ſēt ī to gaſcoyn had no cōforth of ther lord ye kīg they wer take of ſir Charles of fraūce yt is to ſay ſir Iohn̄ of bretā: ſir robert Tiptot▪ ſir Raufe tāny ſir hugh

Bardolf &̄ ſir Adam of Creting. &̄ yit at the aſcenciō was Madoke take in wales & an other yt wos called Morgan: & they wer ſent to the tour of londō &̄ ther they wer heded.
            
            
               ¶How ſir Iohn̄ Bailloll kīg of ſcotlād withſaid his homage
               
                  ANd when ſir Iohn̄ bailloll kyng of ſcotland vnderſtode yt kyng Edward wos wered in Gaſcoyn to whom the reame of Scotland was delyu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed. Falſely tho ayen his oth with ſaid his homage thurgh procuring of his folke· And ſent vn to the court of rome thurgh a fals ſuggeſtion to be aſſoiled of that othe that he ſwore vn to the kyng of Englōd. & ſo he wos by letter enbulled. ¶Tho choſen they of ſcotland Douſſpers for to be nymme edward of his right: ¶And in that tyme come ij. cardinales from the court of rome fro the pope Celeſtine to trete of accorde bitwen the kng of fraūce &̄ the kyng of englond ¶And as tho two Cardinales ſpeke of accorde Thomas Turbeluill was take at Liouns &̄ made feaute & homage to the warden of Paris &̄ to hī put his ij. ſonys in hoſtage. for that he thought to go ī to englond for till aſpie the cuntre &̄ tell them when he come in to englond that he had brokyn the kynges priſon of fraūce by nyght & ſaid that he wold done yt al engliſſhmē &̄ walſh̄men ſh̄old a bow to the king of fraūce. &̄ this thyng for to bring to the ende he ſwore. &̄ vpō this couenant dedis wer made betwen thēm. and that he ſh̄uld haue by yere a .M· poūdes worth of lond to bring this thing to an ende ¶This fals tratour toke his leue &̄ wēt thēs and come in to englond vn to the kyng & ſaid that he wos brokyn out of priſō & that he had put him in ſuch ꝑill for his loue. wherfore the kyng coude him moch thanke and full glad wos of his commyng ¶And the fals tratour fro that day aſpied all the doyng of the kyng &̄ alſo his coūſell for the kyng loued him wel &̄ was with him full priue But a clerke of englond that wos in the kynges houſe of fraunce herd of this treſon & of the falſnes & wrot to an other clerke that tho wos duellyng with edward

kyng of englond all how Thomas Turbeluill had done his falſe coniectyng & all the councell of englōd wos writte for to haue ſent vn to the kyng of fraūce. & thurgh the foreſaid letter that the clerke had ſent fro fraūce hit wos foūde vpō him wherfor he wos lad to londō & honged & draw ther for his treſō. and his ij. ſonys yt he had put in fraūce for hoſtage wer tho beheded:
            
            
               ¶Of the counqueſt of Berewyke
               WHen tho two Cardinales wer went ayene in to Fraunce for to trete of the pees at Cambrey the kyng ſent thider of his erlis and barouns. That is to ſay ſir Edmond his brother erle of Lancaſtre and of Leyceſtre ſir Henri Lacy erle of Nichol & Willm veſſy a baron. and of other baronettis about xiiij. of the beſt &̄ wiſeſt of englōd ¶And ī the ſame tyme the king Edward toke his viage to Scotland for to were vpō Iohn̄ Bailloll kyng of ſcotland. ¶And ſir Robert Roos of Berewyke fled fro the engliſſhmē & went to the ſcottys And kyng Edward went him toward berewike &̄ beſeged ye toūe &̄ tho yt wer within manly them defendid and ſet a fire and brint ij. of kyng Edwardis ſhippis and ſaid in diſpite and reproue of him ¶Weneth kyng edward with his long ſhankis to haue get berewike al our vnthankis Gas pikes him. And when he has done Gas dikes him. ¶When kyng Edward herd this ſcorne anone thurgh his myghtynes he paſſid ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the dikes &̄ aſſailed the toūe & come to the yates and gat and conquerid the toūe. and thurgh his gracious pouer kylled xxv. thouſand &̄ .vijC. ſcottys And kyng Edward loſt no man of renoune ſaufe ſir Richard of Cornewaill and him kylled a Flemmyng out of the reed hall with a quarell as the foreſaid Richard did of his helme and commaūdid them for to yeld them and put them to the kynges grace and the ſcottis wold not. wherfor that hall was brent and caſtyn doune and all tho that wer therin wer brant ¶And king Edward loſt no mo men at that viage of ſymple eſtate but xxvij. Engliſſhmen

And the wardeyn of the caſtell yaf vp the keys with out any aſſaute ¶And ther wos takyn willm Douglas and Sir Symond Friſell &̄ the erle Patrike yeld them to the pees. bot Inghm̄ of Humſremille & Robert the Brus that wer with the kyng Edward forſoke kyng edward and held with the ſcottis and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward they wer takyn and put in to priſon and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that the king for yaf them ther treſpaſſe and deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id them out of priſon. ¶And tho let kyng edward cloſe in Berwik with wallys & with dychis. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward Robert Rous went to Tindale and ſet wuyebrugge a fire & Exham &̄ Lamerſtok and kyllid and robbed the folke of that cuntre ¶And after that he went from thens vn to Dumbarre ¶And the friſt wedeneſday of Marche the kyng ſent the erle of Garenne Sir hugh Perci and ſir hugh Spen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   with a fair companye for to beſege the caſtell ¶But on that wos called ſir Richard Syward a traitour and a fals man ymagyned for to begile the engliſſhnen & ſent to the engliſſhmen them for to diſſaue And ſaid that he wold yelde vn to them the caſtell yf they wold graūte them viij· dais of reſpit. that he myght ſend &̄ tell to ſir Iohan Bailoll that wos kyng of Scotland how his men faired that wer with in the caſtell & ſend hī word bot if he wold remeue the ſege of the engliſſhmen· that they wold yelde the caſtell vn to the engliſſhmē. ¶The meſſinger tho come vn to ſir Iohan bailoll that tho wos the kyng of Scotland wher that he wos with his hoſt and the meſſing
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   told hī al ye caſe. ¶And ſir Iohan toke tho his hoſt &̄ come in the morow erly toward the caſtell. ¶And ſir Richard Siward ſaw him cum that wos maſter of the counſell & keꝑ of the caſtell &̄ ſaid vn to the engliſſmen O qd he now I ſe a fare cōpanye & well appariled I will gon ayens them &̄ with them to mette & them aſſaill ¶And ſir hugh Spen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   ſaw the falſeneſſe of him & the treſon & ſaid to him O tratour take &̄ proued your falſeneſſe ſhall not a vaill you. And hugh ye ſpē
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   cōmādid anone for to bynde hī & ī all haſt wēt ayens ther

enmys and killid of the ſcottys xxijM. For the ſcottys had that time no man with them of honour ſauf ſir Patrik graham yt manli faught &̄ long &̄ at the laſt he was kylled. And tho ſaid the engliſſhmen ī reproue of the ſcottys ¶Thes ſcaterand ſcottys hold I for ſottis of wrenches vn ware. Erli in a mornyng in an euell tymyng went ye fro Dunbare.
               WHen tho that were in the caſtell ſaw the ſcomfiture they yolden vp the caſtell vn to the engliſſhmen and boūdē hir bodies londis & caſtellis to the kīg Edward. & ſo thei wer take ther in the caſtell iij. erles and vij. barons &̄ xxviij. knyghtis and xi. clerkis & vij. Picardis &̄ all wer preſentid to kyng Edward and he ſent them vn to the toure of londō to be keped ther
            
            
               ¶How kyng edward of his gret grace deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed ayeij the ſcotis out of priſon that wer chieftens of that land and they drew thē to the frenſſhmen thurgh coūſell of willm waleis.
               WHen kyng edward had made tho an end of the were and taken the chefetayns of ſcotland. Tho come ſir Iohane bailloll and yelde him vn to kyng Edward and put him in his grace & he was lad to london. And when kyng Edward was comē thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . they wer brought before him. and the kīg axed of them how they wold make amendis of that treſpaſſe and loſſe that thei had done him & thei put them ī his merci. ¶Lordīges qd the kīg I wyll not your landis ne your goodis. But I wyll that ye make to me an oth vpon goddis body to be trew to me & neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   after thys tyme ayenſt me bere armys. And all they ꝯſentid to the kynges will & ſwore vpō goddis body. ¶That is to ſay ſir Iohan of Comyn & the erle of the ſtrathorne the erle of Carrik & alſo. iiij biſſhoppis vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  toke for all the clarge & ſo the kīg deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id them & yaf them ſaufe condithys to wend ī to ther own land. And it was not long aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward that they ne ariſen ayen kyng Edward for encheſon that they wiſt well that kyng Edwardis folke was take in Gaſcoyne as before is ſayed but ſir Iohn̄ bailloill kīg of ſcotland

wiſt well that his land ſhuld haue ſorow and ſhame for ther falſeneſſe & in haſt went him ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe to his own landes and ther he held him and come neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ayen wherfor the Scottys choſin vn to ther kīg willm waleis a ribaud and an harlot cumen vp of noght &̄ moch harme did to the engliſſhmen. ¶And kyng Edward thought how he myght haue deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ance of his pepull that wer take in gaſcoyn. &̄ ī haſt went him ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee in to Flaūdres for to were vpon the kīg of fraunce. And the erle of flaundres vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fenge him with moch honour &̄ graūted him all his landis at his own will. ¶And when the king of fraūce herd tell that the kynge of englond wos ariued in flaūdres &̄ come with an huge pouer hī for to diſtruye. he praied him of trews for ij. yere ſo that engliſſh marchantis &̄ alſo frenſſh might ſaufely go & cum in bothe ſidis ¶The king Edward graūted it ſo that he muſt haue his men out of p̄ſon that wer ī gaſcoyn &̄ ye kīg of fraūce graūtid anone &̄ ſo they wer deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id ¶And ī ye ſame tyme the ſcottys ſent by the biſſhop of ſent Andrews in to fraūce to the kīg & to ſir Charles his brother that ſir charles ſhuld cum with his pouer &̄ they of ſcotland wold cum with ther pouer and ſo they ſhuld go in to englond that land for to diſtruy from ſcotland vn to they comen to kent. and the ſcottys traſtid moch vpō the frenſſhmē but of that thyng they had no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   graūte. ¶And notheles the ſcottis began to robbe &̄ kill in northumberlōd & did moch harme
            
            
               ¶How willm waleis let ſle ſir Hugh of Creſſingham and of the bataill of fonkirke.
               WHen this tidyng was comen te kȳg Edward that willm waleis had ordeyned ſuch a ſtrong pouer and alſo that all Scotlond vn to him wos entendant and redy for to kyll engliſſh men and to diſtroye the land: he was ſore annoyed and ſent annone by letter to the erle of Garren and to ſir henri ꝑcy and to ſir Willm Latomer and to ſir Hugh of Creſſingham his treſorer that they ſhuld take pouer and wend in to Northumberland &̄
                  
ſo forth in to ſcotland for to kepe the cuntris. ¶And when william waleis herd of hir commyng he gan for to fle and the engliſhmen him folewid and drefe him till he come to Striuelyn. & ther he held him in the caſtell ¶And the walſſhmen eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y day them eſcried and manaced. & did all the diſpite that they myght: So that ye engliſſhmē vpō a tyme in a mornyng wēt out from the caſtell the moūtenāce of x. mile &̄ paſſid ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   a brigge And willm waleis come with a ſtrong pouer &̄ drofe them a bake. for the Engliſſhmē had ayens him tho no myght but fled & they yt myght take the brigge aſcappid. but ſir Hugh the kynges treſorour ther was ſlain and mony other alſo. wherfore wos made mich ſorow. ¶Tho had kyng Edwar ſped all his nedis in Flaūdris and wos ayen comen in to englond. and in haſt he toke his way in to ſcotland and come thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   at the Aſcenciō tide: And all that he foūd he ſet a fire & brent ¶But the poer pepull of ſcotland cō to him wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thyke & prayd him for goddis loue that he wold on them haue merci & pitte. ¶Wherfor the kyng 
                     •
                  ho commandid that no man ſh̄old do them harme that wer yoldin to him ne to no man of ordir ner to no houſe of religion ne no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   chirche But let aſpie all that he myght wher that he myght find ony of his enmys. ¶Tho come aſpi vn to the kyng and told him wher the Scottys wer aſſembled for to a bide bataill. ¶And on ſent mari Magdelene day the kyng come to fonkirke and yaf bataill to the ſcottis: and at that bataill wer kylled xxxiij. thouſand ſcottys. and of engliſhe men but xxviij. & no mo of the wich was a worthy knyght ſlayn that wos a knyght an hoſpiteler that wos callid Freri brian Iay. ¶For when willm wales fled from the bataill. thatt ſame frere Brian him purſued ferſly & as his hors ran it ſtart in to a myere of a maries vp to the bely ¶And willm walis turned tho ayene &̄ there kylled the forſaid Brian. & yt wos moche harme ¶And that while kyng Edward wēt thurgh ſcotlād for to enquere if he myght find any of his enmys And ī yt land

he duelled as long as him likyd. and ther wos none enmye yt durſt him abide ¶And ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward kīg Edward wēt to ſouth hamtō for he wold not abyde in ſcotland in wynt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſeſon for eſemēt of his pepull And when he come to londō he let amēd mony miſdedis that wer done ayens his pees and his law while yt he wos in Flaundres.
            
            
               ¶Of the laſt mariege of king Edward and how he went the thrid tyme in to Scotland.
               
                  ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward it was ordeyned thurgh the court of rome yt kīg edward ſhuld wedde dame Margaret that was kīg Philip ſuſtre of fraūce and ye Erchebiſſhop Robert of wynchelſe ſpouſed thē to gedre thurgh the wich mariege ther wos made pes betwen kyng Edward of englond & kyng Philip of fraunce. ¶Kyng edward went tho the thrid tyme in to Scotland & tho within the firſt yere he had enfamined the land ſo that ther left not on that he ne come to his merci ſauf tho yt wer in the caſtell of Eſtreuelin yt wos well vetaled &̄ aſtorid for vij. yere.
            
            
               ¶How the caſtell of eſtreuelin wos beſeged.
               KYng Edward come with an huge pouer to the caſtell of eſtreuelin and beſeged the caſtell. but it litell a vailed for he might do the ſcottis none harme For the caſtell wos ſo ſtrong & well kepid ¶And kyng edward ſaw that & thought him vpō a queyntize &̄ let make anone ther .ij. paire of high galews before the tour of ye caſtell &̄ made his oth that as mōy as wer ī the caſtell wer he erle or baron & he wer take with ſtrength but if he wold the rather him yold he ſh̄uld be honged vpō the galewis ¶And when tho that wer within the caſtell heerd this they come & yeld them all to the kyngꝭ grace &̄ merci. And the kīg for yaf them all his maletalent ¶And ther wer all the gret lordis of ſcotland ſwore to kyng edward that they ſhuld cum to london to eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y parlament & ſhuld ſtond to his ordynance.
            
            
               
               ¶How Troylebaſtonne wos firſt ordeyned.
               THe kyng Edward went thens to londō and wenet for to haue had reſt &̄ pees of his were ī the wich were he wos ocupied xx. yere That is to ſay in wales in Gaſcoyn and in Scotlād And thught how he myght recouer his treſour that he had ſpendid about his were & let enquere thurgh the reame of all the tyme yt he had bene out of his reame that men called Troillebaſton And ordeyned ther to Iuſtices &̄ in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he recou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  yed treſour with out nombre. ¶And his encheſō wos for he had thought for till haue gone ī to the holy land for to haue werid vpon goddis enmis For encheſō that he was croſſid long tyme before ¶And neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thelas that law that he had ordeyned did moch good thurgh all englond to them that wer myſbode For tho that treſpaſſid wer well chaſtiſed and afterward the moch more meker &̄ the better. &̄ thee poer commyns wer in reſt &̄ in pees ¶And the ſame tyme kīg Edward priſoned his own ſon edward for encheſō that Walter of langtō biſſhop of Cheſtre that wos the kynges treſorar had made vpō him complayn. & ſaid that the forſaid edward thurghe coūſell &̄ ꝓcurment of on Pers of Ganaſton a ſquyer of gaſcoī had brokyn the parkis of the forſaid biſſhapois: &̄ this Pers coū
                  cellid and lad this ſame edward. ¶And for this cauſe kyng odward exiled his ſon out of englond for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more.
            
            
               ¶Of the deth of willm waleis the fals tratour.
               
                  ANd whē this kyng Edward had his enmys ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cummyn in wales Gaſcoyn and in Scotland and diſtroyd his traitours all but only that ribaud willm wales that neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to the kīg wold him yeld and at the laſt in the toune of ſent Dominic ī the yere of kyng Edwards regne xxxiij. That fals tratour wos take &̄ preſentid to the kyng. but the kyng wold not ſe him and ſent him to london to und
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fenge his Iugement & vpon ſent Bartholomes eue he wos honged and draw. & his hede ſmyten of & hys

bowelis take out of his bodi and brint. &̄ his bodi quartired and ſent vn to iiij. of the beſt tounes of ſcotlad. and his hede put vpō a ſpere & ſet vpon london brigge. in exampull that the ſcottis ſhuld haue in mynd for to do amys ayens ther leige lord eftſones.
            
            
               ¶How the ſcottis come to kyng edward for to amēd ther treſpaſſe that they had done ayens him.
               
                  ANd at Mihelmaſſe tho next commyng kyng Edward helde his parlament at weſtmynſtre and thider come the ſcots that is to ſay the biſſhop of ſent Andrewes Robert the Brus erle of Carik. Simōd ye 
                  Friſell Iohū ye erle of Athell. & thei wer accordid with the kīg and bounde and by oth ſwore that they aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward if any of them miſbore them ayens kyng Edward that they ſhuld be diſherited for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more. ¶And whan ther pees was thus made. They toke ther leue priueli and wēt home vn to ther own cuntre.
            
            
               ¶How Robert the Brus chalenged ſcotland
               
                  ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this Robert the Brus erle of carik ſent by his letter to the erles and barons of Scotland that they ſhulde come to him to Scone in the morow after the concepcion of our lady. for hegh nedes of the land. and the lordis come at the day aſſined. ¶And the ſame day ſir Robert the Brus ſaid fair lordis full well ye know that in my ꝑſon duelled the right of the reame of ſcotland & os ye wate well i am rightfull heir ſith that ſir iohan Bailoll that wos our kyng vs hath forſaken &̄ left his land ¶And though it ſo be that kyng Edward of englond with wrongfull pouer hath made me to him aſſent ayens my wyll if that ye wyll graunt that I may be kyng of ſcotland I ſhall kepe you ayens kyng edward of englond & ayens all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   men and with yt word the abbot of Scon aroſe vp and before them all ſaid that it was reſon for to helpe him &̄ the land ta kepe and defend And tho ſaid in preſens of them all that he wold yef him a thouſand pound

for to maynten that land &̄ all the other graūted the land to hī & with ther pouer him for to help. & defied kyng edward of englond &̄ ſaid that Robert the Brus▪ ſh̄uld be kīg of englond.
            
            
               ¶How ſir Iohn̄ of Comyn yen ſaid the crounyng of ſir Robert the Brus:
               LOrdynges ſaid ſir Iohn̄ of Comyn thenketh vpon the truth and the oth that ye made vn to kyng Edward of englond and touchyng my ſelf I will not breke myne oth for no man and ſo he went from that company at that tyme: wherfore robert the Brus and all tho that to him conſentit wer wonder wroth and tho manaced ſir Iohn̄ of Comyn ¶Tho ordeyned they an other councell at Domfris to the wich come the forſaid ſir Iahan Comyn. for he duelled but .ij. myle from Domfris ther yt he was woned for to ſodiorne and a bide.
            
            
               ¶How ſir Iohn̄ was traitourſ
                     •
                  y kylled.
               WHen Robert the brus wiſt that all the grete lordis of ſcotland wer commyn to Scone ſauf ſir iohn̄ Comyn that ſodiorned tho nygh Scone he ſent aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him ſpecialli that ſir Iohan Comyn ſhuld cum and ſpeke with him and vpon that he come &̄ ſpeke with him at the gray freris in Damfres and that was the thurſday aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Candilmaſday and ſir Iohn̄ grauntid him for to wend him with ¶And when he had herd maſſe he toke a ſoppe &̄ drank and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward he beſtrod his palfray and rode his way and ſo come to Domfres. And robert the brus ſaw him cum at a wī
                  daw as he was in his chambre. and tho made ioye ynough and come ayens him and coled him about the nec and made with hī goode ſemblant. ¶And when all the erles and barons of ſcotlād wer preſent ther. ¶Robert the Bruſe ſpake and ſaid Sirres ſaid he ye wot well the encheſon of this commyng and wherfore it is if ye will graunte that I might be kyng of Scotland as right heir of the land· And all the lordis that wer ther ſaid with on

vois that he ſhuld be crouned kyng of ſcotland and that they wold him helpe and maynten ayens all maner men on liue and for him if it wer nede for to die. ¶The gentill knyght tho Iohan of Comyn anſwerid and ſaid Certis neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for me ne for to haue of me as moch help as the vaill of an boton. For that oth that I haue made vn to kyng Edward of englond I ſhall hold whil my lefe will laſt. and with that worde he went from the companie &̄ wold haue wened vpon his palfrie And Robert the Brus purſued him with a drawen ſword and bare him thurgh the bodi and ſir Iohan Comyn fell doune vn to the erthe But whenne Rogier that wos ſir Iohn̄ Comyns brether ſaw the falſeneſſe: he ſtarit to ſir robert the Brus and ſmote hym wyth a knyfe but the falſe tratour wos armyd vndir ſo that the ſtroke myght done him no harme An̄d ſo moch help come a bout ſir robert the Brus. ſo that Rogier Comyn was ther kylled and all to hew in to peſes. ¶And robert the Brus turned ayen ther that ſir iohon Comyn the nobull baron lay wounded and pyned towarde his deth by ſides the high auter in the chirche of the gray freris and ſaid vn to ſir iohan Comyn O traytour thou ſhall be deid and neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   after let myne a vauncement and ſhoke his ſwerde at the high auter & ſmote him on the hede that the brayn fell doune vpon the grounde and the blod ſtert an high vpon the walles And yit vn to this day is that blod ſeyn ther that no water may waſhe it a way &̄ ſo died that nobull knyght in holy chirche.
               
                  ANd when this tratour robert the Brus ſaw that no man wold let his coronacion he commaunded all them that were of pouer ſhuld cum vn to his crounyng to ſant Iohanes toūe in Scotland. ¶And ſo it befell that vpon our lady day of the Annuncion the biſſhop of Glaſton and the biſſhop of ſente Andrewes crouned for ther kyng this Robert the Brus in ſent iohanes toune and made him kīg ¶And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he drofe

all the engliſſhmen cut of ſcotland and they fled and come and plened them vn to kyng Edward how that Robert the Brus had driuen them out of the land and diſherited them.
            
            
               ¶How that kyng Edward dubbed at weſtmynſtre .xxiiij. ſcore knyghttis.
               
                  ANd when kīg edward hered of this myſcheef he ſwore yt he ſhuld bene a venged therof. And ſaid that all the tratours of Scotland ſh̄uld bene honged and draw and that they ſhuld neuer be raunſomed. ¶And kyng edward thought vpō this falſeneſſe that the ſcottis had to him done. and ſent after all the bachelars of englond that thei ſhuld cum to londō at witſontide· & he dubbed at weſtmynſtre xxiiij. ſcore knyghtis ¶Th
                     •
                   ordeyned him the nobull kīg edward for to wend in to ſcotland to were vpon Robert the brus. & ſent before hī ī to ſcotland ſir Aymer the valaūce erle of penbruke &̄ ſir henri Percy baron wt afair cōpanye that purſued the ſcotis & brend toūes &̄ caſtels. &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward come the kīg hī ſelf wt erles & barons a fair companye.
            
            
               ¶How Robert the Brus wos diſcomfited in bataill &̄ how Symond Friſell was ſlayn.
               THe friday next before the Aſſumcion of our lady kyng Edward met robert the Brus beſide ſent Iohanes toune in ſcotland and with his componye. of the wich companye kyng Edward kylled .vij. thouſand. ¶When robert the brus ſawe this miſchief he gan to fle & hid him that no man might him fīd but ſir Symond friſell purſued him ſore. ſo that he turned ayene &̄ a bode bataill. for he wos a worthi knyght &̄ a bold of body. and ye engliſſhmē purſued eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſore in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſide and kylled the ſtede that ſir Symond friſell rode vpon. and they toke him & lad him vn to the hoſt. ¶And ſir Symond began for to flater & ſpeke fair & ſaid lordis I ſhall yef you iiij: M▪ marke of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and myn horſe myne harnes & all myne armure. and becum a beggar ¶Tho anſuered Theobaude of Peuenes that wos the kinges archier.

Now ſo god me helpe it is for nought that thou ſpeketh. for all the gold in englond I wold not let the go wt out ꝯmaundement of kīg Edward. ¶And tho wos he had vn to king edward and the kyng wold not ſe him but commaūded to lede him a way to haue his dome at London. ¶And on our ladies eue na
                     ••
                  te he wos honged and drow dnd his hede ſmyten of and honged ayē with chynes of yren vpon the galowes And his hede was ſet vpō london brigge vpō a ſpere: and ayenſt criſtemaſſe the body wos brenned. for encheſon that the men that keped the body by nyght they ſaw ſo mony deuels rampaand with gret yren crokys rennyng vpon the galowes and orabuli turmented the body and mony that them ſaw anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they died for drede and ſome waxen mad or ſore ſekeneſſe they had. ¶And in that bataill was take the biſſhop of Baſton & the biſſhop of ſent Andrewes & the abbot of Sconne all armed with yren as men of armes as fals traitors and fals prelatis ayens ther oth &̄ they wer brought to the kyng & the kyng ſent them vn to the pope of rome that he ſhuld done wt them what his will were.
            
            
               ¶How Iohn erle of Atheles wos taken &̄ put to deth.
               
                  ANd at that bataill fled ſir Iohan Erle of Atheles and went in to a chirche and ther hid him for drede but he myght haue ther no refute for encheſan that the chirche wos enterdited thurgh a generall ſentens and in the ſame chirche he wos taken. ¶And this ſir Iohan went well to haue ſcapped from the deth for encheſon that he clamed kynrad of kyng Edward And the king nold no longer be trayed of his traitours but ſent hī to london ī haſt & ther he wos honged &̄ his hede ſmyten of &̄ his body brend all to aſſis but at the prayer of ye quene Margaret for encheſō yt he clamed of kīg edwar kynred his drawyng wos foryeue him.
            
            
               ¶How Iohn̄ yt wos willm waleis brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos put to deth.
               WHen the greteſt maſters of Scotland wer thus done to euell deth and ſhendid for ther falſeneſſe Iohan that wos

                  willm waleis brother wos take and done vn to deth as ſir Iohn̄ erle of Atheles wos.
            
            
               ¶How Robert the Brus fled from ſcotland to Norway
               
                  ANd at that ſame tyme wos Robert the Brus moch hated among the pepull of Scotland ſo that he wyſt not what he wos beſt for to done & for to hide hī he wēt ī to Norway to thee kyng that had ſpouſed his ſuſtre &̄ ther held him ſocour for to haue ¶And robert the Brus might not be foūde in ſcotland. ſo kȳg Edward tho let crie his pees thurgh out all the lād & his lawes wer vſid & his miniſtres ſerued thurgh out all the land.
            
            
               ¶How kyng edward died.
               WHen kyng Edward had abated his enmys he turned ayene ſouthward and a maladie toke him at Burgh vpſand in the marche of Scotland and he wiſt well that his deth was full nigh: & called to hī ſir Henri the laci erle of Nicholl. ſir Guy erle of werwik. ſir Aymer valēce erle of Penbroke. & ſir robert of Clifford barone. &̄ prayd them vpō the faith that they him owed that they ſhuld make Edward of Carnariuan kyng of englond as raathe os they myght. & that they ſhuld nat ſuffre Pers of Ganaſton cum ayen in to englōd for to make his ſon to riot. &̄ they graūted him wt good will. ¶And the kīg toke his ſacrement of holy chirche as a good criſte man ſh̄uld. & died ī veray repētance. & whē he had bene kīg xxxv. yere he died & wos buried at weſtmīſtre wt moch ſolempnite vpō whos ſoule god haue mercy.
            
            
               ¶Of Merlin ꝓphecies that wer declarid of kyng edward that wos kyng Henri ſon.
               
                  ANd of this kyng Edward ꝓphecied Merlin and called him a dragon the ſecund of the vi. kynges that ſhuld be for to regne in englond. and ſaid that he ſh̄uld be medeled wyth merci and alſo with ſtrength and ſterneſſe that ſhuld kepe englond from cold & hete: & that he ſhuld open his mouth toward wales

& that he ſhuld ſet his fote in wyke. & that he ſhuld cloſen wt walles that ſhuld do moch harme to his ſede ¶And he ſaid ſoth for the good kyng Edward was medled with merci &̄ with ferſeneſſe wt merci ayens his enmys of wales &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of Scotland with ferſeneſſe whē he put them to deth for ther falſeneſſe & tratori as they had deſeruied it. ¶And well keped he englond from colde & hete ſith he keped it from all maner enmys that ronne vpon hym to done him any wronge: ¶And well he opyned his mouth toward wales &̄ made it quake thurgh the hidour of his mouth whē he cōquerid it thurgh dynt of ſwerde· for the prince Leuelin & Dauid his brother Ris & Morgan wer put to deth for ther falſenes & ther foly. ¶And he ſet his fote in to wike and conquered berewyke at the wich conqueſt wer ſlayn xxv. thouſand and vij. hondreth out take them that wer brend in the reed hall. ¶And the walles that he let make ſhall be noyous vn to his ſede as mē ſhal here aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee in the lifee of Sir Edward of Camarauan his ſon. ¶And yit ſaid Merlin that he ſhuld make riueris ren ī blod and with brayn. & that ſemed well in his weris ther that he had the maſtrie. ¶And yit Merlin ſaid that ther ſh̄uld cum a pepull out of the north weſt during the regne of the forſaid dragon that ſhuld be lad by an yll grehound that ſhuld the dragō croune king that afterward ſhuld fle ouer the ſee for drede of the dragon with out cummyng ayen. &̄ that wos proued by ſir Iohan Bailloll that kyng Edward made for to be kyng of Scotland that falſely aroſe ayens him and after he fled vn to his own landes of fraunce and neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he come ayen in to Scotland for drede of kīg Edward ¶And yit ſaid Merlin that pepull that ſhuld lede the forſaid grehond ſhuld be fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  les vn till a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tan tyme &̄ he ſaid ſoth for the pepull of ſcotlād gretly wer diſeſed ſiith yt ſir Iohn̄ bailloll ther kīg fled frō ſcotland. ¶And yit ſaid Merlin yt the ſon ſhulde become in his tyme as reed as ony blode in tokenyng of gret mortalite of pepull & yt was well knaw when ye ſcottis wer

ſlayn. ¶And ſith ſaid Merlin that ylke dragoij ſhuld noriſh a fox that ſhuld meue gret were ayens him that ſhuld not ī his tyme be endid: ¶And that ſemed well by Robert the Brus yt kyng Edward noriſhed in his chambre that ſithene ſtale a way and meued gret were ayenſt him wich were wos not endid ī hys tyme ¶And afterward Merlin told that this dragon ſhuld bene hold the beſt body of all the world· and he ſaid ſothe for the good kīg Edward wos the worthieſt knyght of all the world in his tyme ¶And yit ſaid Merlin yt the dragon ſh̄uld die in the marche of an other land and that his land ſhuld be long without ony good keꝑ & yt mē ſh̄uld wepe for his deth frō the Ile of ſhepei vn to the Ile of marcill. ¶Wherfor alas ſhold be ther ſonge emong the comyn pepull fadetlas in the land waſted. ¶And that profecie wos knowe ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  all full well For the good kīg edwarde died at Burgh vp ſandis that is vpō the marche of ſcotland wherfor the engliſſhmē wer diſcomforted &̄ ſorowed in northhūberland ¶For encheſō that kīg Edwardis ſon ſet by the ſcottis no force for the riot of Perys of Ganaſton wherfore Alas wos the ſong thurgh out all englond for defaute of theyre good werdeyn. frō the Ile of ſhepey vn to the Ile of marcill ye pepull made moch ſorow for good kīg Edwardis deth. ¶For they wened yt good kīg edward ſhuld haue gone ī to the holy land for yt was holy his purpoſe. vpon whos ſoule god for his high grace haue inci
            
            
               Anno domini .M.CC.lxxxiiij.
               CEleſtinus wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Nicholas v. monethis and nothynh nobull of him is written bot that he wos a vertuus man. Bonefacius the .viij. wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him viij. yere This Bonefaci wos a man ī thos thinges the wich ꝑteneth to court for he wos vere exparte in ſuch maters. And becauſe he had no peer he put no meſurneſſe to his prudens. And toke ſo gret pride vpon

him that he ſaid he wos lord of all the world 
                  and mony thyngꝭ he did with his myght. the wich failed wriechedly in the end he yaf a ſampull to all prelatis. that they ſhuld not be proude. but vnder the forme of a veray ſchepard of god they ſhuld more ſtudy for to be loued of ther ſubiectis then to be drad. This man is he of whome it is ſaid. that he entred as a fox. he leued as a Lyon and died as a dog. ¶This tyme the yere of grace was ordeyned from an hondreth yere to an hondreth yere. And the friſt Iubile was in the yere of our lord Ihū criſt a .M.ccc.. Benedictus the xi. was aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Boneface xi. monethis: This mā wos an holi man of order of the frere prechours: & litill wile liued but deceſſid anone. Adulphus wos emprour vi. yere this mā was the erle of anoxone. And wos not crouned by the pope for he wos ſlayn in bataill. Albertus was emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him x. yere. This man wos the duke of Anſtrie. and friſt was repreued of the pope. and after wos confirmed by the ſame pope. for the male
                     ••
                   of the kyng of fraunce the wich wos an enmy vn to the chirche. And to that Albert the ſame pope yaf the kyngdom of fraunce. as he did other kyngdoms: bot it profettid not. for at the laſt he wos ſlayn of his nevu: Clemens was pope after Benedictus almoſt ix. yere And he was a gret bylder of caſtelles and other thinges and he dampned the order of templaries and he ordeyned the vij: boke of the decretalis: the wich be called the queſtions off Clementyns: And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ī a counſell the wich he held at vienna. he reuokid yt ſame boke· the wich his ſucceſſari Iohn̄ called ayen & īcorporit it & pupplicit it. This Clemēt firſt of all popis tranſlatid the popis ſeet fro rome to the Auīnon· & whed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   it was done bi the mocion of god or the boldenes of man. diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe mē merueleth. Iohan the xxij. was pope after him xviij: yere. This man was all glorious as for thos thynges that wer to be vſid thurgh the actyue liffe. And he puppliſhit the conſtitucōis

of the Clementines. and ſend them to all the vniu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſites. and mōy ſantis he canoniſed. & thes fat biſſhopbriches he deuidid. & he ordined mony thinges ayens the pluralite of benefices and mōy heritikes he dampned. bot whed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos ſaued or not oure lord wold not ſhew to thos he louyd veray well. Henri the .vij. was emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Albert v. yere This Henri was a nobull man in were and he coueted to haue pees by land and water. he wos a glorius mā in bataill. And neuer ouercummyn with enmys. And at the laſt he wos poyſened of a frere when that he houſelid him bi reſauīg of the ſacrament.
            
            
               ¶Of kyng Edward that wos kyng Edwardis ſon.
               
                  ANd after this kyng Edward regned Edward his ſon that was borne in Carnariuan. and this Edward went him in to fraunce and ther he ſpouſed Iſabell the kynges dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of Fraunce the xxv. day of Ianiuer at the chirche of our ladi at Boloyn in the yere of our lord iheſu criſt a .M.ccc.vij. And ye xx. day of Feuyer the next yere yt come aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos crouned ſolempli at weſtmynſtre of the Erchebiſſhop Robert of wynchelſe and of the erchebiſſhop off Cantorburi. And ther wos ſo gret prece of pepull that ſir iohan bakwell wos deid and mordred: ¶And anone as the good kyng Edward was deid ſir Edeward his ſon kyng of englond ſent after Pers of Ganaſtane in to Gaſcoyn and ſo moch loued him that he called him his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   And anone after he yaf vn to him the lordſhip of walyngforde and it wos not long after that he ne yaf him the erldom of Cornewaill ayens all the lordis wyll of the reame of englond. ¶And tho brought he ſir Walter of Langton biſſhop of Cheſtre in to priſon in to the tour of london with two knaues allone him to ſerue. For the kyng was wroth with him for becauſe yt ſir walter made complaynte vpon him to his fader. wherfor he was

put in to priſon in the tyme of Troilebaſton. ¶And the forſaid Pers of Ganaſton made ſo gret maſtries that he went in to the kynges treſorie in the abbey of weſtmynſter and toke the table of gold with the triſtyls of the ſame. & mony other riche Iewels that ſum tyme wer the nobull and good kīg Arthurs &̄ toke thē to a marchand that was called Aymeri of Friſcombaand. For he ſhulde bere them ouer ſee ī to Gaſcoyne and ſo he went thens. and they come neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ayen after. wherfore it wos a gret looſe vn to this land. ¶And when this Pers wos ſo richeli auaunced he be come ſo proud and ſo ſtout. wherfor all the gret lordis of the reame had him ī diſpite for his gret bering. wherfore ſir Hēri the laci erle of Nicholl. and ſyr Guy erle of warrewik the wich good lordis the goode kyng Edward ſir Edwardis fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   kyng of Englond charged that Peris of Ganaſton ſhuld not cum in to englond for to bring his ſon Edward in to riot. ¶And all the lordis of Englond aſſemled them a certayn day at the freris prechours at London and ther they ſpekyn of the diſhonour that kyng Edward did vn to his reame and to his croune ¶And ſo they aſſentid all bothe erles and barons and all the commyns that the foreſaid Pers of Ganaſtone ſhuld be exiled out of Englond for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more and ſo it wos done for he forſwore Englond and went in to Irlond and ther the kyng made hym chiuetayn and gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nour of the land by his commiſſion and theer this pers was cheuetayne of all the land. and did ther all that hī liked and had pouer what he wold and that tyme wer the templars exiled thurgh all criſtinte for encheſon that men put vpon them that they ſhuld done thynges ayens the faith and good beleue· ¶Kyng Edward loued Pers of Ganaſtone ſo moch thatt he myght not forlet his componye and ſo moch the kyng yaf and behight to the pepull of englond that the exiling of the foreſaid peris ſhuld be reuoked at ſtamford thurgh them that him had exiled wherfore peres of ganaſton come ayen in to englond and when

he was come ayen in to his land he diſpiſed the grettiſt lordis of this land and called ſir Robert of Clare erle of gloceſtre horeſon And the erle of Nicholl ſir henri the Lacy bruſtynbely. and ſir Guy erle of warwik the blak hound of Arderne. &̄ alſo he called the nobull erle and Thomas of Lancaſtre Churle and mony od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſcornes and ſhame them ſaid and mony other gret lordis of englond ¶Wherfor they were toward hī full angri & wroth & right ſore annoyed ¶And ī the ſame time died the erle of Nicholl bot he charged or that he wos deid Thomas of Lancaſtre erle that was his ſon in law that he ſhuld maynten his quarell ayens this ſame Pers of Ganaſton vpō his bliſſing. ¶And ſo it befell thurgh help of the erle of Lancaſtre and alſo of the erll of werwic that the forſaid ſir Pers wos hedid at Gauſich beſide werwyk ī the xix. day of Iune in the yere of grace a .M.ccc. & .xij. ¶Wkrfor the kȳg was ſore annoyed & prayd god that he myght ſe that day to be a venged vpō the deth of the forſaid Pers. ¶And ſo it befell afteerward as ye ſhall here. Alas the tyme for the forſaid erle of Lancaſtre and mony other gret barons wer put to pytuus deth and martired for encheſō of the forſaid quarell ¶The kyng wos tho at london and held a ꝑlament and ordeyned the lawes of ſir Symond Mounford wherfor the erle of Lancaſtre and the erles and all clerge of englond made an othe thurgh counſell of Robert of wynchelſe for to maynten tho ordinaū
                  ces for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more.
            
            
               ¶How Robert the Brus come ayen in to ſcotland &̄ gadered a gret pouer of men for to were vpon kyng Edward.
               ANd when ſir Robert the Brus that made him kyng of ſcotland that before wos fled in to Norway for dreed of deth off the good kyng Edward and alſo he herid of the debate that tho was in Englond bi twene the kyng and his lordis he ordeyned an hoſt & come ī to englond ī to Northūberland & cleyn diſtruid

the contre. ¶And when kyng Edward herd this tidyng he let aſſembull his hoſt and met the ſcottis at edſtreuelin in the day of natiuite of ſent Iohn̄ baptiſt in the iij: yere of his regne. & in the yere of our lord Ihū criſt a .M.CCC. & xiiij. Alas the ſorow &̄ loſſe that ther wos done ¶For ther wos ſlayn thee u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y nobull erle Gilbert of Clare ſir Robert of Clifford baroun· & ther kyng Edward was ſcomfited: and edmōd of maule the kingꝭ ſtewerd for dred went and drenched him ſelf ī a freſh riuer that is called Bannokeſborne. wherfor thei ſaid ī reproue & diſpite of kīg Edward for as moch as he loued to gon bi wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . & alſo for he wos diſcomfited at bannokeſborne. Therfor the maidens made a ſong therof ī that cūtre of kyng edward of englond & ī this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they ſong. ¶Maydens of englond ſore may ye morne. for tiȝt haue loſt your lemmans at bannokeſborne. with heuelogh. what weneth the kīg of englōd to haue geten ſcotland. wt rombilogh·
               WHen kyng Edward diſcomfited was. wondir ſore and faſt he fled with his folke that was left on lyue and went vn to Berewik and ther held him. And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he toke hoſtages thatt is to ſay ij. child of the richeſt of the toune and the kyng wentē to lundon &̄ toke counſell of thinges that wer nedefull vn to thee reame of englond ¶And in the ſame tyme it befell that tho was ī 
                  englond a ribaude that was called Iohan Tanner: and he went & ſaid that he wos the good kyng edwardis ſon and let him call edward of Carnariuan and therfore he wos take at Oxforde: and ther he chalanged the frere carmes churche that kyng Edwarad had yefen them. the wich chirch ſum tyme was the kynges hall. ¶And afterward was this Iohn̄ lad vn to Northm̄tō and draw and honged for his falſeneſſe: and or that he wos dede he confeſſid and ſaid before all tho that ther war. That the deuell behight him that he ſh̄uld be kyng of englond and that he had ſerued the deuell .iij. yere.
            
            
               
               ¶How the toune of Berewyc wos taken thurgh treſō &̄ how ij. Cardinales wer robbid in englond
               ANd in mydlentyn ſonday in the yere of our lord Ihū criſt a .M.CCC.xvi. Berewyc wos loſt thurgh fals treſon of on Pers of Spaldyng the wich pers the kyng had put ther for to kepe that ſame toune with mony burgeis of the ſame toune: ¶Werfor the children that wer put in hoſtage thurgh the burgeis of Berewyk folowed the kīges marchalſie moni dais fetered in ſtrong yrans. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt tyme ther come ij. Cardinales in to englond as the pope had them ſent for to make pees bitwen englōd &̄ ſcotland. ¶And as they went toward Doram for to haue ſacrid maſtyr Lowys of Beaumont biſſhop of Doram and os they went they wer taken &̄ robbid vpō the more of wyngleſdō of wich robbery ſir Gilbert of Middelton wos atteint & take and honged &̄ draw at londō. &̄ his hede ſmyten of and ſet vpō a ſpere and ſet vpō new gate. & the iiij. quartres ſent to iiij cites of englond ¶And that ſame tyme befell mony miſchefes in englōd for the poer pepull died in englond for hunger & ſo moch & ſo faſt died that vnneth men migh them berie for a quart of whete wos worth xl. ſhilling and ij. yere & an half a quarter whete was worth ·x. marke. And oft times the poer pepull ſtole children & ete them. & ete alſo al ye houndis that thei might take &̄ alſo horſe & cattis And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther fell a gret moreyn among beſtis in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe cūtres of Englond during kīg Edwardis lifes time.
            
            
               ¶How the Scottis robbid Northumberland.
               ANd in the ſame time come the ſcottis ayen in to Englond and diſtruyd Northumberland and brend that land &̄ robbid it. and kylled men and womē and children that didly in ther cradeles. and brend alſo holy chirche and deſtruyd criſtyndō and toke and bore Engliſſhmens goodis as they had be ſariſens or paynyms and of the wikkidneſſe that they did all the world ſpaken thurgh all criſtyndome.
            
            
               
               ¶How the ſcottis wold not a mend ther treſpaſe. &̄ therfor ſcotland wos enterdited.
               
                  ANd when pope Iohaij the xxij. aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſent Petre herd of the gret ſorow and miſchief that the ſcottis wrought he wos wonder ſori that criſtindom was ſo diſtroid thurgh the Scottis. &̄ namly they diſtruyed ſo holy chirche wherfor the pope ſent a generall ſentence vnder his bulles of lede vn to the erchebiſſhop of cantorburi and to the erchebiſſhop of yorke. that if Robert the brus of ſcotland wold not be Iuſtified and make a mendes vn to the kyng of englond Edward ther lord and make amendis of his loſſe and of his harmes that they had done in englond and alſo to reſtore the goodis that they had taken of holy chirche that the ſentence ſhuld be prenounced thurgh out all englond. ¶And whē ye ſcottis herd this they wold not leue ther malece for the popis commaundement. ¶Wherfor robert the Brus Iames Douglas and Thomas Raudulfe erle of Moref and all tho that with them comuned or them help in worde or dede wer curſed in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y chirche thurgh out all englond eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y day at maſſe .iij. tymes and no maſſe ſh̄uld be ſonge in holy chirche thurgh out all ſcotland bot if the ſcottis wold make reſtitucion of the harms that they had made vn to holy chirche werfor mony a good preſt and holy men therfor wer ſlayn thurgh the reame of ſcotland for encheſon that thei wolde not ſing no maſſe ayens the popes commandemēt & ayens his will &̄ to done &̄ fulfill the tirantes will:
            
            
               ¶How ſir Hugh the ſpenſers ſon wos made the kynges chamberlayn and of the bataill of Mitone
               
                  ANd it was not long aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward that the kyng ne ordened a parlament at yorke and ther was ſir hugh the ſpencers ſone made chambrelayn and the meyn tyme while the were laſted the kyng went ayen in to ſcotland that it wos wonder for to witte and beſeged the toune of Berewik but the ſcottis went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye water of Solewath that wos iij. myle from the kyngꝭ hoſt & priueli

they ſtele a way by nyght and come in to Englond & robbed & deſtruyd all that they myght &̄ ſparid no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thing till yt they come vn to yorke ¶And when the Engliſſhmē that wer left at home herd this tidyng all tho that myght trauell as well mōkes and preſtis &̄ freris & chanons & ſeculars come & met wt the ſcotis at Miton vpſwale ye xij. day of October ¶Alas that ſorow for the engliſh huſbondmen yt coud no thīg of the were that ther wer kylled and drenched in an arme of the ſee. And ther chiefteynes ſir willm of Melton Erchebiſſhop of yorke and the abbot of Selby with ther ſtedis fled and come to yorke. and that was ther own folie that they had that myſchance for they paſſid the water of ſwale and the ſcottis ſet a fier the ſtakkis of hey & the ſmok ther of wos ſo huge that the engliſſmē myght not ſee the ſcottis. ¶And when the engliſmen wer gone ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   tho come thee Scottis with ther wynge in maner of a ſhelde and come toward the engliſhmen in a ray &̄ the engliſſhmen fled for vnneth they had any men of armes. for the kyng had them almoſt loſt at thee ſege of Berewyk. and the ſcottis hobilers went bitwix the brige & the engliſmen. ¶And when the gret hoſt them met the engliſhmen fled bitwen the hobilers & ye gret hoſt. and the engliſhmē almoſt wer ther kylled ¶And he yt might wend ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was ſaued bout mōy wer drēchid ¶Alas for ther wos ſlaī mōy mē of religiō &̄ ſeculers & preſtis & clerkis & wt moch ſorow the erchebiſſhep aſcapid. & therfore yt ſcottis called the bataill ye white bateill
            
            
               ¶How kīg edward did all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thīg yt ſir hugh ſpenſer wold
               
                  ANd when kyng edward herd this tidyng he remeued his ſege from Berewik and come ayen to englond. but ſir hug the ſpenſer the ſon that wos the kynges chambrelayn kepid ſo ye kynges chamber that no man might ſpeke with the kīg ¶Bot he had made with him a fret for to done all his nede &̄ that ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   meſur: ¶And this hugh bare him ſo ſtout that all men had of

him ſcoornne &̄ deſpite. And the kyng hī ſelf wold not be gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned ne ruled by no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   man but only bi his fadre &̄ bi him. &̄ if ony knyght of englond had woddis maneres or lordis that they wold couet: anone the kīg muſt yef it them. or els the mā that ought it ſhuld be falſely endited of forfit or felonye. And thurgh ſuch doyng they deſherited mony a good bachiler &̄ ſo moch land getten yt it was wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  · ¶And when the lordis of englond ſaw the grete couetiſe & the faſſeneſſe of ſir hugh the ſpenſer the fadre &̄ of ſir hugh the ſon they come to the gentill erle of Lancaſtre. and axed hī of ꝯcell of the diſeſe that wos ī the reame thurgh ſir hugh the ſpenſer &̄ his ſon. And in haſt by one aſſent they made a p̄ue aſſembull at ſhirborne ī Elmede. &̄ they made ther an oth for to breke and deſtroble the doyng bitwen the king &̄ ſir hugh ſpenſer &̄ his ſon vpon ther pouer. ¶And they went in to the march of wales &̄ deſtruid the land of the forſaid ſir hughes.
            
            
               ¶How ſir hugh Spen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   & his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wer exiled out of englod.
               WHen kyng edward ſaw the gret harme and deſtruccion yt the barons of Englond did vn to ſir hugh the ſpenſers lande and to his ſones in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y place that they come vpon. ¶And the kyng tho thurgh his counſell exiled ſir Iohn̄ monbray ſir rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Clifford and ſir Goſſelin dauill. and mony other lordis yt wer to them concent wherfore the barons did tho more harme then thei diden before. ¶And when the kyng ſaw that the barons wold not ſeſe of ther cruelte the king wos ſore adrad leſt they wold deſtruy him and his reame for his meyntenance but if that he aſcented to them. ¶And ſo he ſent for them by letters that they ſhuld cum to london to his parlament at a certan day as in his letters wos contened ¶And they come with iij. batailles well armed at all pointis and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y bataill had cote armures of grene cloth & ther of the right quart wos yalow with whit bendis. wherfore yt that parlament wos called the parlament of the white bend. And in that companye was ſir vmfrcey of Boh
                     •
                  ne erle of herford and ſir

Roger of Clifford ſir Iohn̄ Mombray ſir Gecelin dauill ſir Roger Mortimer vncull of ſir Roger Mortimer of wigmore ſir hē
                  ri of Trais ſir Iohan Giffard and ſir Bartholomew of badeleſ more that wos the kynges ſtiward that the kyng had ſent to ſhirborne in elmede to the erle of Lancaſtre and to all that with him wer for to tret of accorde that him allied to the barons and come with that companye ¶And ſir roger Dammorie &̄ ſir hugh Dandale that had ſpouſed the kinges neces ſuſtre and ſir Gyllebert of Clare erle of Gloceſtre that wos killed in ſcotland as before is ſaid ¶And tho ij: lordis had tho two ꝑties of the erledom of gloceſtre &̄ ſir hugh the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the ſon had the thrid ꝑte in his wifes half the iij. ſuſtre & tho ij. lordis went to the barons with al ther pouer ayens ſir hugh ther brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in law and ſo ther come wt them ſir Rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of Clifford ſir Iohn̄ Mombrey ſir Goſelin dauill ſir rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Mortimer of werke ſir roger mortimei of wigmore his nepheu ſir Henri Trais ſir Iohn̄ Giffrad ſir Bartholemew of badelſmore. with all ther companye and mony od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that to them were conſent all the gret lordis comen vn to weſtmynſtre to the kyngꝭ ꝑlament and ſo they ſpoken and did that bothe ſir huge Spen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the fadre and alſo the ſon were outlawed of Englond for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more ¶And ſo ſir hugh the fadre went vn to Dou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and made moch ſorow and fell doune vpon the ground by the ſee banke acros with his armes and ſore wepīg ſaid Now fair englond & good englond to all myghty god I the betake and thries cuſſid the groūd and wened neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for to haue comen ayen and wepyng full ſore curſed the tyme that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he begat ſir Hugh his ſon. And ſaid for hī he had loſt all Englond and tho in preſence of them all thatt were about him he yaf him his curſe and went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee to his landis ¶But hugh the ſon wold not gone out of Englond bot held him in the ſee. & he and his companye robbed .ij. Dromōdis beſide Sandewich and toke and bare away all the goodis that wos on them the value of xl.M. pound:
            
            
               
               ¶How the kyng exiled Erle Thomas of Lancaſtre &̄ all yt held with him and how the Mortimer come yeld him to the king. and of the lordis.
               HIt wos not long aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that the kyng ne made ſir Hugh ſpenſer the fadre and ſir hugh the ſon cum ayen in to englōd ayens the lordis will of the reame. ¶And ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kyng with a ſtrong pouer come and beſeged the caſtell of Ledes. &̄ in the caſtell was the lady of Badeleſmore for encheſon that ſhe wolde not graunte that caſtell to quene Iſabell kīg Edwardis wife. ¶But the principall cauſe was for encheſon that ſir Bartholomew badeleſmere was ayens the kīg & held with the lordis of englond. & notheles the kīg by help & ſocour of mē of londō &̄ alſo of help of ſoutheren men gat the caſtell maugre of them all that wer therin &̄ toke with them all yt thei might find. ¶And when the barons of englōd herd this tidyng ſir Rogere Mortimer and other mony lordis toke the toūe of burggeworth with ſtrength wherfore the kīg was wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth & let outlaw thomas of Lancaſtre &̄ vmfra de Bohoune erle of herford &̄ all tho yt wer aſſentant to the ſame quarell ¶And the kyng aſſēbled an huge hoſt &̄ come ayenſt the lordis of englōd wherfor the Mortimers put thē in the kīgꝭ merci &̄ his grace &̄ anōe they wer ſent to the toure of london &̄ ther kept ī priſō. ¶And when the barons herd this thyng they comen to Pountfret ther that the erle Thomas ſodiourned &̄ told him how that Mortimers both had yeld them to the kyng &̄ put them in his grace.
            
            
               ¶Of the ſege of Tykhill.
               WHen Thomas erle of Lancaſtre herd this. they wer wonder wroth and all that wer of his companie. &̄ gretly they wer diſcomfited and ordeyned theyr pouer to geder & beſeged thee caſtell of Tykhill. but tho that wer within ſo manly defēdid hē that the barons might not get the caſtell. & whē the kīg herd that his caſtel was beſeged he ſwore by god &̄ bi his names yt the ſege

ſh̄old be remeued and aſſemaled an huge pouer of pepull & went thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward to reſkewe the caſtell & his pouer encreſid frō day to dai ¶When the erle of Lancaſtre &̄ the erle of Herford & the barones of ther companye herd of this thīg they aſſembled all ther pouer & went them to Burton vpō Trent & kept the brigge yt the king ſhold not paſſe ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ¶But it befell ſo on the x. day of march in the yere of grace .M.ccc. &̄ xxi· The kyng & the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   ſir Aymer valaunce erle of Pēbroke & Iohn̄ erle of Arūdall &̄ hir pouer wēt ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & diſcomfited the erle Thomas & his companye and they fled to the caſtell of Tutberi and from thens they wēt vn to Pountfret ¶And in that viage died ſir Roger Danmore in the abbey of tutberi ¶And in that ſame time the Erle Thomas had a traytour wt him yt wos called Robert of Holād a knyght that the erle had brought vp of nought & had noriſſhed him ī his botelerie & had yeue him a thouſand marke of land by yere. & ſo moch the erle loued him yt he myght do in the erles courte all thīg that him liked bothe among hie & lawe and ſo quenteli tho theſe bare him ayens his lorde that he triſted more vpon him then he did vpon ony man a liue. ¶And the erle had ordened by his letters for to wend in to the erledom of Lancaſtre to make men ariſe to helpe him that viage that is to ſay v.C: men of armes ¶But the fals traytur come not ther no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   men for to warne ne for to make ariſe to help his lord ¶And whē that the fals traitour hard tell that his lord was diſcomfited at burt
                     •
                  n vpon trent as a fals traytour thefe ſtole a way and robbed ī Rauenſdele his lordis men that come from the ſcomfiture. and toke of them hors and harnes and al that they had & killid of them all that he myght take & come & yeld hī to the kīg ¶Whē ye 
                  good erle Thomas wiſt yt he wos ſo betraied he wos ſore abaſhed &̄ ſaid to hī ſelf O all mighty god how myght Robert Holand find in his hert me to betray ſithens that I haue loued hī ſo moch O god well may naw a man ſee bi him that no man may diſſaue an od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  
rather than he that he truſtis moſt vpon. he hath full euell yeld me my goodneſſe and the worſh̄ip that I haue to him done and thurgh my kyndeneſſe haue him a vaunced and made hie wher that he wos lowe: And he maketh me go from high vn to l
                     •
                  w but yit ſhall he die an euell deth.
            
            
               ¶Of the ſcomfiture of Burbrugge.
               THe good Erle Thomas of Lancaſtre Humfrey de bohoūe Erle of Herford and the barons that with hem were tokē councell bitwen them at the frere prechours in Pountfret Tho thought Tomas vpō the traitorie of robert Holand and ſeied in reproue. Alas holand had me betraied. ay is the reed of ſome euell ſhreed. and by the commune aſſent they ſhuld all wend to the caſtell of Dunſtanburgh the wich ꝑteyned to the erldom of Lancaſtre & that they ſhold abide ther till that the kīg had foryef them ther maletalent. ¶But whē the good erle Thomas this herd he anſuerd in this maner and ſaid. lordis quod he if we gone toward the north the northeren men will ſay that we go toward the ſcottis &̄ ſo we ſhall be holden traitours. for cauſe of diſtance that is betwen kyng edward &̄ Robert the brus that made him kīg of ſcotland. and ther fore I ſai as touchyng my ſelf that I will not go no ferther in to the north than to myn own caſtell of Poū
                  fret ¶And wen ſir roger Clifford herd this he aroſe vp anone in wroth and drew his ſwerde on high & ſuore by almyghty god and by his holi names but if that he wold go with them he ſhuld him ſle ther. ¶The nobull and gentill erle Thomas of Lancaſtre was ſore adrad. & ſaid fair ſirs I will gon wt you whither ſo eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye me bidde. ¶Tho went they to gedres in to the north &̄ wt them they had vij.C. men of armes and come to Burbrugge ¶And when ſir Andrew of herkela that was in the north cū
                  tre thurgh ordynaunce of the kyng for to kepe the cuntre of ſcotland herd tell how that Thomas of lancaſtre wos diſcomfited and his ꝯpanye at Burton vpon trent he ordyned him a ſtrong pouer

and ſir Symond ward alſo. that was tho ſhereue of yorke and met the baronnes at burbrugge and anone they breke the brugge that wos made of tre ¶And whan ſir thomas of Lancaſtre herde that ſir Andrew of herkela had brought with him ſuch a pouer he was ſore a drad and ſent for ſir andrew of herkela and wt him ſpake· and ſaid to him in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ¶Sir andrew quod he ye mow well vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtond how that our lord the kyng is lad and miſgou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned by moch fals councell thurgh ſir hugh the Spenſer the fadre and ſir hugh his ſon. and ſir Iohn̄ erle of Arundell and thurgh maſter Robert Baldoke a fals piled clerke that now is in the kynges court duelling. Wherfore I pray yow that ye wold cum with vs with all the pouer that ye haue ordened and help to diſtro the venym of England and the tratours that bene therin and we will yeue vn to yow all the beſt parte of .v. erledoms that we haue and holdeth: and we will make vn to you an oth that we wil neuer done thyng with out your councell and ſo ye ſhall bene eft as well with vs as eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos Robert of Holand. ¶Tho anſuerd ſir Andrew of herkela and ſaid ſir Thomas that wolde not I done ne conſent ther to for no maner thing ye might me yeffe without the will and commaūdement of our lore the kyng for than ſhuld I be holden a tratour for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more. ¶And when that the nobull Erle Thomas of Lancaſtre ſaw that he wold not conſent vn to him for no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thing. ſir Androw he ſaid will ye not conſent for to diſtroye the venym of the reame as we be conſent now at one worde ſir Androw I tell the that or this yere be gone that ye ſhall be take and hold for a traitor and more than ony of yow hold vs now and in wors deth ye ſhall die than eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   did any knyght of Englond And vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtand well that ye did neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thyng that ſorer ye ſhall you repente. and now goth &̄ dothe what you good liketh And I wyll put me in to the mercy of god ¶And ſo went the fals traytour tirant and as a fals for ſworin maij. for thurgh the noble Erle Thomas of Lancaſtre he vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fenge the armes

of chiualri and thurgh hī he wos made a knyght ¶Tho myght men ſee archeris drawe them in that one ſide and in that other. and knyghtes alſo and foughten tho to gedre wonder ſore and alſo among other ſir Humfrey de Boughon Erle of herford a worthy knyght of renoune thurgh all criſtyndome ſtode & fought with his enmys vpon the bruge and as the nobull lord ſtode and faught vpon the brugge a thefe a ribaude ſkulked vnder the brugge & ferſly with a ſpere ſmote the nobull knyght in to the foūdement ſo that his bouell is comen out a bout his fete ther. ¶Alas for ſorow for ther was ſlayn the flour of ſolace & of comforth and alſo of curteſie. ¶And ſir Roger of Clifford a nobull knyght ſtode eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and faught & well & worthely him defendid as a nobull baron. But at the laſt he was ſore wounded in his hede & ſir willm of Sullay and ſir Roger of bernefeld wer ſlayn at that bataill ¶When ſir Androw of herkela ſaw that ſir Thomas men of lancaſtre laſſed and ſlaked anone he and his compani comen vn to the gentill knyght ſir Thomas of Lancaſtre & ſaid vn to him in high yelde the tratoure yeld the. ¶The gentill Erle anſuerid tho and ſaid. Nay lordis trators be we none and to you will we neuer vs yeld while that our lyues laſt but leu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   we haue to be ſlain in our treuth than yeld vs vn to yow: ¶And ſir Androw ayen gard vpon ſir Thomas componi yollyng as a wode wolfe &̄ ſaied yelde you tratours takē yeld you. And ſaid with an high vois beth war ſires that none of yow be ſo hardy vpon lyfe and limme to myſdone Thomas bodi of Lancaſtre ¶And with that word the good Erle Thomas wēt ī to the chapell & ſaid kneling vpon his knees &̄ turned his viſage towardes the croſſe and ſaid Almyghty god to the I me yelde & holli I put me vn to thy merci. And with that the vileyns and ribaudes leped a boute him on eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſyde as tirantis & wode turmē
                  tours and diſpolid him of his armurie and clothed him in a robe

of rey that was of his ſquyers liueira and forth lad him vn to yorke by wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ¶Tho myght men ſe moch ſorow &̄ care. for thee gentill knyghtis fled in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſide &̄ the ribaudis &̄ the vileyns egreli them diſcried and gried an high yeld yow tratours yeld you. ¶And when they wer yolden they wer robbed & bounde as thefues Alas the ſhame and diſpite that the gentill ordir of knyghthod ther had at that bataill and the land was tho with out law: for holy chirche tho had no more reuerance than it had bene a brodell hous and in that bataill was the fadre ayens the ſone. and the vncle ayens his nepheu For ſo moch vnkyn denes was neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſeyn before in Englond as wos that tyme among folke of one nacion. ¶For on kynrad had no more pitte of that other than an hungri wolfe hath of a ſhepe and it wos no wonder ¶For the gret lordis of englond wer not all of one nacion but wer medled with other nacions that is for to ſay ſome Bretans ſome Saxōs ſom Danys ſome Pehites ſom Frenſſhemen ſome Normans ſome Spanyardis ſome Romans ſome Henaudes ſome Flemmyng and other diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe nacions the which nacions accordid not to the kind blod of englond And if ſo gret lordis had bene onli weddid to engliſh pepull than ſhuld pees haue bene and reſt amonges them with owt any enuy. ¶And at that bataill was roger Clifford take ſir Iohn̄ monbray ſir willm Tuchit ſir willm Fitz willm &̄ mōy other worthy knyghtys ther wer take at yt bataill And ſir hugh Dandell the next day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos taken &̄ put ī to priſon and ſhuld haue be done to deth if he had not ſpouſed the kyngꝭ nece that was erle Gilbertis ſuſtre of Gloceſtre ¶And anōe aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos ſir Bartholomew of badelſmere taken at ſtowe paarke a maner of the biſſhoppis of Lyncolne yt wos his nepheu. &̄ mony other barons &̄ baner
                     •
                  ttz wherfore wos made moch ſorow.
            
            
               ¶How Thomas of Lancaſtre wos heded at poun
                     •
                  fret & .v. barons honged and drawen ther.
               
                  
                  ANd now I ſhall tell yow of the nobull erle Thomas of Lancaſtre. when he wos taken and brought to yorke mōy of the Cite wer full glad. and vpon him cried with an high vois O ſir traitour ye er welcome bliſſid be god. for now ſhall ye haue the reward that long tyme ye haue deſerued. & caſt vpon him mony ſnowe balles and mony other reproues they did him. bot the gentill erle all ſuffred &̄ ſaid nothir on word ne other: ¶And in the ſame tyme the king herd of this ſame ſcomfiture and wos full glad &̄ in haſt come to Poūtfret & ſir hugh ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   & ſir hugh his ſon & ſir Iohn̄ erle of Arundell. &̄ ſir Edmond of wodeſtoke the kynges brother erle of Kent: and ſir Aymer of valaunce erle of Penbroke and maſter Robert Baldoke a fals piled clarke that was priue & duellid in the kynges courte. & all come thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wt the kyng. and the kyng entred ī to the caſtell ¶And ſir Andrew of Herkela a fals tirant thurgh the kynges commaundement toke with him the gentill erle Thomas to Poūtfret. &̄ ther he was priſoned in his own caſtell that he had new made that ſtode ayen the abbey of kyng Edward. ¶And ſir hugh the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & his ſon caſt &̄ thought how & in what man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the good erle Thomas of Lancaſtre ſh̄uld be dede with out ony Iugement of hys perys ¶Wherfore it was ordened thurgh the kyngꝭ Iuſtices yt the kīg ſhold put vpon him pointes of treſon. ¶And ſo it befell yt he was led to barre before the kīgis Iuſtis barehed as a thef in a fair hall in his own caſtell yt he had made ther in mōy a fair feſt both to rich and to poer. ¶And thes wer his Iuſtiſes ſir Hugh ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the father. & Aymer of valaūce erle of peenbroke. ſir Edmōd of wodeſtoke erle of kent. ſir Iohn̄ of Bretan erle of Richemond & ſir Robert of Malemethrop Iuſtice. & ſir roberte him a coulpid in this maner. ¶Thomas at the friſt. owr lord the kyng & this court excludeth you of all maner anſuere. ¶Thomas our lord the kyng putteth vpon yow that ye haue in his land riden with banner diſplayed ayens his pes as a tratoure

And with that worde the gentill erle Thomas wt an high vois ſaid nay lordis forſoth & bi ſent Thomas I was neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   traytour ¶The Iuſtice ſaid ayen tho. ¶Thomas our lord the kyng puteth vpon you that ye haue robbed his folk and mordred his pepull as a thefe. ¶Thomas alſo the kyng put vpon you that he diſcomfited you and your pepull with his folkd in his own reame. wherfor ye went and fled to the wodde as an outlawe. ¶And alſo ye were taken as an outlawe. ¶And Thomas as a traitour ye ſhall be hanged by reſon. but the kīg hath for yef you that Iewes for loue of quene Iſabell ¶And thomas reſon wold alſo that ye ſhuld be hanged but the kīg hath for yef you that Iewes for cauſe and loue of your linage ¶But Thomas For os moch as ye wer take fleyng &̄ as an outlaw the king wyll that your hede ſhall be ſmyte of as ye haue well de
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  ued Anone doth him out of prece and anone bring him to his iugement. ¶The gentill knyght Thomas had herd all thes wordis with an high vois he cried ſore wepyng and ſaid alas ſent thomas fair fader Alas ſhall I be dede thus ¶Graunte me now bliſſidfoll god anſuer: but all a vailled him nothyng: For the curſed Gaſcoyns put him hither & thedder and on him cried with an high vois O kyng Arthur moſt dredfull well knawen is now thyn open traitorie an euell dethe ſhalt thow die has thow haſt it well diſeruyed ¶And tho they ſet vpen his hede in ſcorn an hold chapelet that wos all to rent that wos not worth an half penne. ¶And after that they ſet him vpon a leue white palfra full vn ſemeli and eke all bare and with an hold bridell and with an horribul noiſe they droue him out of the Caſtell toward his deth and they caſt vpon him mony balles of ſnowe ī diſſpite ¶And as the traitoris lad him out of the Caſtell tho ſaied he this pytouſe wordis and his handes held vp on hight toward the heuen: Now the kyng of heuen yef vs merci. for the erthely kyng hath vs forſakyn. And a frere prechour wenten with him

out of the caſtell till that he com to the place that he endid his lyfe vn to whom he ſhrofe him all his life ¶And the gentill erle held the frere wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   faſt by the clothis and ſaid to him fair fadre abide with vs till that I be dede. for my fleſh quaketh for drede of deth. ¶And the ſoth for to ſay the gentill erle ſet him vpon his knees and turned him toward the eſt. but a ribaud that was called Higone of Moſton ſet hand vpon the gentill erle and ſaied in deſpite of him. Sir traytour turne the toward the ſcottes thy ſoule dede to vnderfenge. and turned him toward the Northe. ¶The nobull erle Thomas anſuered tho with a myld vois & ſaid now fair lordis I ſhall done your will. And with that woide the frere went from him ſore wepyng. and anone a ribaude went to him and ſmote of his hede. the xi. Kal. of Auerell in the yere of grece .M.ccc. & xxi. ¶Alas that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſuch a gētill blod ſhall be done to deth with out cauſe and reſon. ¶And tratorſly wos the kyng coūcellid whē he thurgh the fals counſell of ye ſpē
                  ſers ſuffred ſir Thomas his vncles ſon to be put to ſuch a deth & ſo bene heded ayens all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of reſon. and gret pitte it was alſo that ſuch a nobull kyng ſh̄uld be deſceiued & myſgou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned thurgh counſell of the fallis ſpenſeres the wich tho he maīteneyd thorow loſelrie ayens his honour and eke ꝓfite. For aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward ther fell gret vengeaunce in englond for encheſon of the foreſaid Thomas deth. ¶When the gentill erle of his life was paſſid. The priour and the monkis of Pountfret getten the body of ſir Thom̄s of the kīg and they beried it before the high aut
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   on the right ſide
                     •
                   ¶That ſame day that this gentill knyght was dede. ther were honged & draw for the ſame quarell at Pountfret ſir willm tuchet ſir willm Fitz willm. ſir warreyn of yſell. ſir Hēri of brad borne. and ſir william cheynye barons all· and Iohane Page eſquyre ¶And ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   at Yorke were draw and honged ſir Rogeri Clifford: Sir Iohan of Mambray barons And ſir Goſelin dauill knyght ¶And at Briſtow were drawe &

honged ſir henri of wemyngton & ſir henri Mounfort barons and at Gloceſtre wer draw and honged Sir Iohan Geffard and ſir willm of Elmebrugge barons ¶And at london wer honged and drow ſir henri Tyes baron And at wynchelſe ſir Thomas Colepepir knyght. And at windeſore ſir Fraunces of waldenham baron: And at Cantorburi wos draw &̄ honged ſir Bertholome of Badeleſmere. & ſir Bartholomewe of aſſhebourneham barons. And at kerdyfe ī wales ſir willm Flemmīg baron
            
            
               ¶How kyng Edward wēt in to ſcotland with an hondreth thouſand men of armes &̄ might not ſpede.
               
                  ANd when kyng edward of englond had brought the flour of Chiualrie vn to ther deth thurgh councell and conſent of ſir hugh ſpenſer the fadre and ſir hugh the ſon he become as wode as any Lyon ¶And what ſo eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the Spenſers wold haue it was done. ſo well the kyng loued them that they might done wt him all thyng that them liked. Wherfor the kyng yaf vn to ſir hugh ſpenſer the fadre. the erledom of wyncheſtre and vn to ſir Andrewe of Herkela the erdom of Cardoill in preiudice and in harmyng of his croune: ¶And kyng Edward tho thurgh ꝯſell of the ſpenſers diſherited all them that had bene ayens him in any quarell with Thomas of Lancaſtre & mony oder wer diſherited alſo for encheſon ſtat the ſpenſers couetted for to haue ther landes and ſo they had all that they wold deſire with wrong and ayens all reſon ¶Tho made the kyng Robert of Baldok a fals piled clerke Chauncelar of englond thurgh caunſell of the forſaid ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s & he was a fals ribaud and a couetiſe &̄ ſo they coūceled the kyng moch that the kyng let take to his own warde all the goodis of the lordis that were put wrongfully to the deth in to his own hond and as well they token the goodis that wer in holy chirche as the goodis that were wythout. And let them bene put in to his treſorie in london and let them call his forfaittis & bi ther councell the kyng wrought for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  more he dyſherite them that the

goodis owghten. ¶And thurgh ther counſell let a rere a talliage of all the goodis of englond ¶Wherfor he was the richeſt kyng that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos in englond after willm baſterd of Normā
                  die that conquerid Englond▪ ¶And yit thurgh councell of them him ſemed that he had not ynough. bot made yit eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y toune of Englond for to find a man of armys vpon ther own coſtages for to gone and were vpon the ſcottis that wer his enmys wherfore the kyng wēt in to ſcotland with an hondreth thauſand mē of armes at witſontide in the yere of our lord Ihū criſt .M.ccc. & xxij. ¶But the ſcottis went and hid them in moūtayns &̄ in woddis & taried the engliſhmen fro day to day that the kīg myght for no maner thyng them find in playn feld ¶Wherfor mony engliſhmē yt had litell vitayles died ther for hunger wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   faſt and ſodenly in goyng and in comyng. and namly tho that had bene ayens Thomas of Lancaſtre and robbed his men vpon his landis: ¶When kyng Edward ſaw that vitayles failed him he wos tho wonderfore diſcomforted for encheſon alſo that his men died and for he myght not ſpeed of his enmys So at the laſt he come ayen in to Englond. ¶And anone after come Iames Douglas & alſo Thomas Randulph with an hoge hoſt in to Englond in to Northumberland & with them the engliſhmen that wer driuē out of englōd & come & robbed the cūtre & kylled the pepull. & alſo brend the toune that wos called northallerton &̄ mony other toūes to yorke. ¶And when the kīg herd this tidyng he let ſompne all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   men that might trauell. And ſo the engliſhmen mett the ſcottis at the abbey of Beigheland the xv. day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Mihelmaſſe in the ſame yere aboueſaid. And the engliſhmen wer ther diſcomfited. ¶And at yt ſcomfiture wos toke ſir Iohan of Bretan Erle of Rochemond that helde the cuntre and the Erldom of Lancaſtre. ¶And after he paied an huge raunſome and wos let go. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that he wente in to fraūce and come neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   afterward ayen.
            
            
               
               ¶How ſir Andrewe of Herkela was take &̄ put vn to the deth that wos erle of Cardoill.
               
                  ANd at that tyme ſir Andrew of herkela that new was made erle of Cardoill for cauſe that he had taken the good erle Thomas of Lancaſtre. he had ordeyned thurgh the kynges ꝯmandement of englond for to bring him all the pouer that he might for to help him ayenſt the ſcottis at the abbey of Beigheland ¶And when the fals tratour had gadred all the pepull that he myght and ſhuld haue come to the kyng vn to the abbey of Beigheland ¶The fals tratour lad them by an other cuntre thurgh Copeland & thurgh the erledom of Lancaſtre. & went thurgh the cuntre & robbed &̄ killed folke all that he myght ¶And forther more the fals tratour had taken a gret ſoume of gold and ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſir Iames Douglas for to be ayens the kyng of englond and to bene helpyng & holdyng with the ſcottis thurgh whos treſon the kyng of englond wos diſcomfited at Beigheland or that he come thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ¶Wherfor the kyng wos toward him wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth. and let priueli enquere by the cuntre about. how that it wos· ¶And ſo men enquerid and aſpied ſo at the laſt trewth was foūd and ſought & he atteynt & take as a fals tratour. as ye good erle Thoms of Lancaſtre him told. or that he wer put vn to deth at his takyng at burbrugge: ¶And to him ſaid or that yere wer done he ſhuld be take and hold a tratour ¶And ſo it wos as the holy man ſaid. wherfor the kyng ſent preueli to ſir Anthoyn of Lucy a knight of the cuntre of Cardoill that he ſhuld take ſir Andrew of Harkela and put him vn to the deth ¶And to bring thys thyng vn to the end the kyng ſent his comiſſion. So that this ſame Andrew was take at Cardoill &̄ led vn to the barre in the maner of an erle worthely arrayed &̄ with a ſwerde gurt aboute hī & hoſed &̄ ſpored. ¶Tho ſpak ſir Anthoyn in this maner ſir Andrew ꝙ he. the king put vpon the for as moch as thou haſt bene orped in thy dedis he ded to the moch honour and made the erle of

Cardoill & thou as a traytour to thi lord the kyng & ladeſt his pepull of his cuntre that ſhuld haue holpe him at the bataill of Beiland and thou ladeſt them a way by the cuntre of Copeland and thurgh the Erledom of of lancaſtre. Wherfor our lord the kyng was diſcomfited ther of the ſcottis thurgh thy treſon and falſeneſſe And if thou hadeſt comen be tymes he had had the bataill. and treſō thou diddeſt for the gret ſoume of gold and ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that thou vnderfenge of Iames Douglas a ſcot the kynges enmye. ¶And our lord the kyng will that the ordir of knyghod by the which thou vnderfeng all thyn honoor and worſhip vpon thy body be al brought to nought & thi eſtate vndone. that other knyghttes of lawer degre mow aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   be war: the wich lord hath the a vaūced hugli in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe cuntreis in Englond. & yt all may take exſample by ye ther lord aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward trewly for to 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  ue. ¶Tho commanded he a knaue anone to hewe of his ſpors on his heles And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he let brake the ſwerd ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his hede the wich the kyng yaf him to kepe &̄ defēd his land ther with when he had made him erle of Cardoill. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he let him be vnclothed of his furred tabard &̄ of his hode & of his furred cotes and of his gurdel. & when this wos don ſir Antonye ſaid vn to him Andrew quod he now art thow no knyght bot a knaue &̄ for thi treſon the kyng will that thow ſhalt bene honged and drawe &̄ thyn hede ſmyten of. &̄ thi bowelels taken out of thy body &̄ brent before the & thy body quartired & thyn he deſent to london and ther it ſhall ſtond vpō londō brigge and the .iiij. quarters ſhall be ſent to iiij. toūes of englond that all other may be war &̄ chaſtiſed bi the. ¶And as Antonye ſaid ſo it was done all maner thyng in the laſt day of October. In the yere of grace .M:ccc. & xxij. yere. ¶And the ſone turned in to blod as the pepull it ſaw & that durid from the morne till it was xi: of the cloke of the day.
            
            
               ¶Of the myracles that god wrought for ſent thomas of Lancaſtre

wherfore the kyng let cloſe in the chirche doris of the Priore of pountfret yt no mā ſhuld cum therin to the body for to offren.
               
                  ANd ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that the good erle Thomas of Lancaſtre was martired. ther was a preſt that long tyme had be blind dremed in his ſlepyng that he ſhuld gone vn to the hill ther yt the good erle thomas of lancaſtre wos done vn to deth and he ſhold haue his ſight ayen. and ſo he dremed .iij: nyghtis fewyng. ¶And the preſt let lede him to the ſame hill. And when he com to that place that he was martirid on. full deuoutly he made ther his praiers &̄ prayed god &̄ ſent Thomas that he myght haue his ſight ayen. & os he was in his praiers he laid his right hand vpō the ſame place yt the good man was martired on. &̄ a drope of dry blod & ſmale ſand cleued on his hand & ther with ſtriked his eeyn And anone thurgh the might of god & of ſent Thomas of Lancaſtre he had his ſight ayen. and thanked tho almyghty god and ſent Thomas ¶And whē this miracle wos knowen among men. the pepull come thider on eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſide and knelid & made ther praiers at his toumbe that is in the priorie of pountfret. and praied that holy merter of ſocour and of help & god herd ther prayer. ¶Alſo ther wos a yong child drenched in a well in the toune of poūtfret & wos dede .iij. dais &̄ iij. nyghtis & men come &̄ 
                  laid the deid child vpō ſent Thomas tombe the holy marter. & the childe aroſe from deth to liue: as mony a man it ſaw. ¶And alſo moch pepull wer owt of ther mynd and god hath ſent them ther mynd ayen thurgh u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tu of that holy martir. ¶And alſo god hath yeuen ther alſo to crippils ther goyng &̄ to crokid ther handis & ther fete and to blind alſo ther ſight· &̄ to mony ſeke folke ther helth of diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe maladies for the loue of this good martir. ¶Alſo ther wos a rich mā in Coundom in gaſcoyn. &̄ ſuch a maladie he had that all his right ſide roted and fell away frō hī. yt men myght ſe his liu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & his hert. & ſo he ſtonke that vnneth men might cū ny hī. wherfor his frēdis wer for hī wōd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſori. bot at the laſt as

god wold they praid to ſent Thomas of lancaſtre yt he wold prai to almyghty god for that priſoner &̄ behight to go to Pountfret for to done ther pilgrimage he thoht yt the mertir ſent Thomas cō to him & annoynted ouer all his ſike body. ¶And ther with the good man awoke & wos all hole. & his fleſhe wos reſtorid ayen that before wos roted & fallen away. ¶For wich miracle the good man & his frēdis loued god & ſent Thomas eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   mere after. ¶And this good man come ī to englōd &̄ toke wt hī. iiij: felowes & come to poūtfret vn to yt holy mart
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ did ther pilgrimage &̄ the good man yt was ſeke come thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   all naked ſafe his priue clothis. ¶And whē they had done they turned home ayen ī to ther own cūtre & told of the miracle wher ſo eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that they come. ¶And alſo ij. mē haue be heled ther of the mormale thurgh helpe of yt holy mart
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   though yt euell be holdē incurabull ¶ And whē ye ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s herd yt god did ſuch miracles for this holi mā & they nold be leue it ī no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wiſe▪ bot ſaid opēli yt it was grete hereſi ſuch vertu of hī to beleue. ¶And when ſir hugh ye ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the ſon ſaw all this doyng anōe he ſent his meſſang
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   frō pountfret ther that he duellid to ye kīg Edward that tho wos at Grauen at Scipton for cauſe that the kīg ſhold vndo that pilgrimage. ¶And os the ribaud the meſſīger went toward the kīg for to done his meſſage he come bi the hill ther the good mart
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was don to deth. &̄ in the ſame place he made his ordure. And when he had don he went toward the kīg. & a ſtrong flix come vpō him or that he come to yorke. & tho he ſhedde all his bowels at his foūdement. ¶And when ſir hugh the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   herd this tydīg ſomedele he was a drad. &̄ thought for to vn do the pilgrimage if he myght by ony man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   way. ¶And anōe to the kīg he went & ſaid that they ſhuld be in gret ſkland
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thurgh out all criſtīdom for the deth of Thomas of Lancaſtre if that he ſuffred the peple to do ther pilgrimage at pountfret. &̄ ſo he coūcelled the kīg that he cōmaūded to cloſſe the chirche dores of pountfret in the wich chirche the holi marter

ſent Thomas was entered. & thus they did ayen all fraūchiſes of holy chirche. ſo that· iiij. yere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   might no pilgrime cū vn to yt holy body ¶And for encheſon that the monkis ſuffred men to cū & honour that holy body of ſent Thomas the martir. thurgh cō
                  cell of ſir hugh ſpenſer the ſon. and thurgh coūcell alſo of maſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Robert Baldoke the fals piled clarke that wos the kīges chauncelar the kyng conſentid that they ſhuld be ſet to ther wages and let make wardeyns ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther own good long time: & thurgh cōmā
                  dement of the forſaid ſir hugh the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   xiiij. Gaſcoynes well armed kept the hill ther that the good man ſent Thomas was done vn to his deth ſo that no pilgrame might cum by that way. ¶Full well went he to haue be take criſtis myght: &̄ his pouer and the gret boos of miracles that he ſhewed for his marter Sent Thomas thurgh all criſtyndom ¶And that ſame tyme ye kyng made Robert of Baldok the fals piled clarke thurgh praier of ſir hugh the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the ſon Chaūcelar of englond. ¶And in the ſame tyme was the caſtell of Walynford holdē ayens the kyng thurgh the priſoners that wer within the caſtell for ſent Thomas quarell of Lancaſtre. ¶Wherfor the pepull of the c
                     •
                  ntre come and toke the caſtell vpon the priſoners ¶Wherfore Sir Iohn̄ of Goldington knyght & ſir Edmond of beche priſoners &̄ a ſquyer that was called Roger of walton· wer take and ſent vn to the kyng to Pountfret and ther they werdone in to priſon. and the forſaid Roger was ſent vn to yorke &̄ ther he was draw & honged ¶And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſir roger Mortimer of wygmore brake out of the tour of London in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ¶The forſaid reg herd that he ſh̄uld be draw &̄ honged at londō. in the morow after ſent Laurence day &̄ on the day before. he held a fair feſt in the tour of londō & ther wos ſir Stephen ſegraue conſtable of the tour & mōy gret men with them. ¶And when they ſhuld ſope. the forſaid Stephen ſent for all the offiſers of the tour and they come & ſopid with him. And when they ſhuld take ther leue of him. a ſquyer

that was called Stephen that was full priue wt the forſaid Rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thurgh his coūſell yaf them all ſuch a drinke that the leſt of them all ſlept ij. dais & ij. nyghtis & ī the meyn tyme he ſcappid away by wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt is to ſay bi the Thamſe & wēt ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee & held him in fraunce. ¶Wherfor the kīg wos ſore annoyed & tho put thee ſame Stephen out of his cōſtablerie.
            
            
               ¶How the quene Iſabell went in to fraunce for to treten of pees bytwen hir lord the kyng of Englond and the king of fraunce hir brother.
               THe kyng went tho vn to london & ther thurgh cōcell of ſir hugh the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ of his ſon & of maſter robert baldoke a fals piled clarke his Chanceler let ſeiſe tho all the quenes landes ī to his handis &̄ alſo all the landis that wer ſir Edward his ſon & wer ſo put to hir wages ayenſt all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   reſō & yt wos thurgh the falſeneſſe of ye ſpēſers ¶And whē the kīg of fraūce yt wos quene Iſabelles brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   herd of this falſenes he was ſore annoyed ayens the kīg of englond &̄ his fals coūcelers. ¶Wherfor he ſent a lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to kīg edward vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his ſeal yt he ſhuld cū ī to fraūce at a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ten day for to done his homage & ther to he ſomened hī &̄ elles he ſhold leſe all Gaſcoyn. ¶And ſo it was ordeyned in englond thurgh the kīg & his coūcell yt quene Iſabell ſhold wend in to fraūce for to tret of pees bitwen hir lord & hir brother And that oliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of Yngham ſhuld wēd in to gaſcoyn & haue with him vij. thouſand men &̄ mo of armes to be ſeneſhall &̄ wardeyne of gaſcoyn & ſo it wos orddyned yt quene Iſabel wēt ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe & come in to fraūce. & wt hir went ſir Aymer of valāce erle of pēbrok yt wos ther mordred ſodēli īpue ſege bot yt wos thurgh godis vēgeaunce. for he wos on of ye Iuſtices yt ꝯſentid to ſent Thomas deth of lācaſtre &̄ wold neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   repēte hī of yt wikkid dede: &̄ at yt tim ſir oliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ynghā went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ī to gaſcoī & did moch harme to ye kīg of Fraunca and tho he gat ayen that kyng Edward had loſt and moch more ther to.
            
            
               
               ¶How kyng Edward ſent ſir Edward his ſon the eldeſt in to fraunce.
               THe quene Iſabell had but a quart of a yere duelled ī fraū
                  ce bot ſir Edward hir eldeſt ſon axed leue tho for to wende in to fraunce for to ſpeke with his mother Iſabell the quene. ¶And his fader the kyng graūted him with a good will. and ſaid to him Go my fair ſone in goddis bliſſing & myne. & thīke for to cū ayen as haſtely as thou may. ¶And he went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee &̄ come in to fraūce. ¶And the king of fraūce his vncle vnderfenge him with moch honour & ſaid vn to him fair ſon ye be welcō & for be cauſe that your fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come not to done his homage for the duchie of Gnyhene as his aunceſtres wer wont for to do. I yeue you yt lordſhip to hold it of me in heritage as all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   aūceſtres did be fore you. wher fore he was called duke of Gnyhenne.
            
            
               ¶How the kīg exiled his quene Iſabel & edward his heldeſt ſon
               WHen kyng Edward of englond herd tell how the kyng of fraunce had yeue the duchie of Gnyhen vn to ſir Edwarde his ſon with out conſent &̄ will of him &̄ that his ſone had vnderfonge the duchie. he become wonder wroth &̄ ſent to his ſone by letter & to his wyfe alſo that they ſhuld cum ayen in to englond in all the haſt that they myght: And the quene Iſabell and ſir Edward hir ſone wer wōder ſore adrad of the kynges manace. and of his wroth. & principally for the falſenes of the ſpenſers both of the father &̄ eke the ſon: & at his commaundement they wold not cum. ¶Wherfore kyng edward wos full ſore annoyed. &̄ let make a crie at londō that if quene Iſabell and edward hir eldeſt ſone come not in to englond that they ſhuld bene holde as our enmys both to the reame and eke to the croun of englōd. ¶And for that thei nol̄d cum in to englond. bot both wer exiled the moder and hir ſon ¶When the quene Iſabell herd this tidinges ſhe wos ſore adrad to be ſh̄ent thurgh the fals congettyng of the ſpencers

¶And wēt with the knyghtys that wer exiled out of englond for ſent Thomas cauſe of Lancaſtre yt is to ſay ſir Rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of wigmore ſir willm Truſſell ſir Iohn̄ of Cromewell &̄ mōy od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   good knyghtys. ¶Wherfor thei toke ther coūcell &̄ ordeyned amōges them for to make a mariege bitwen ye duke of gnyhē ye kīgys ſon of englōd &̄ the erles dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of henaud yt was a nobul knyght of name & a doughty ī his time: ¶And if yt thīg myght be brought about than ſtode they trowyng wt the help of god & with his help to recou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther heritage in englōd wer of they wer put out thurgh the fals congettynges of ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s.
            
            
               ¶How kyng edwar thurgh coūcell of the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s ſent to the douzeꝑs of fraūce yt they ſh̄uld help yt the quene Iſabell & hir ſon ſir edward wer exiled out of fraūce.
               WHen kyng edward &̄ the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s herd how that quene Iſabell and ſir Edward hir ſon had alied them to the erle of Henaud and to them that wer exiled owt of englond for encheſon of Thomas of Lancaſtre. they wer ſo ſori that thei not wiſt what for to done. ¶Wherfor ſir hugh ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the ſon ſaid vn to ſir hugh his fadre in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wyſe. ¶Fadre curſed be the tim and the coūcell that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye conſentid that quene Iſabell ſhuld go vn to fraunce for to trete of accord bitwen the kyng of englond and hir brother the kyng of fraūce for that was your councell. for at that tyme forſoth your wit failed. ¶For I drede me ſore leſt thurgh hir and hir ſon we ſhall be ſh̄ent bot yf we take the better councell ¶Now fair ſirres vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtond how meruelus felonie & falſhed th̄e ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s ymagened and caſt for priuely they let fill v. barellis ferrors with ſylu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   tho ſoume amounted v. thouſand pound and they ſent tho barrels ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe priuely by an alien that wos called Arnold of Spayn that was a brocour of London that he ſhuld gone to the d
                     •
                  uſepers of Fraunce that they ſhuld procuren & ſpeke to the kyng of fraunce that quene Iſabell and hir ſon Edward wer driuen and exiled out of Fraunce.
               
                  ¶And among all other thynges that they wer brought to the deth as priuely as they myght. ¶But almighty god wold not ſo: for when this Arnold wos in the high ſee he wos take with ſe land res that met him in the high ſee & toke him & lad him to ther lord the erle of henaud &̄ moch ioye was made for that taking. &̄ at the laſt this Arnold priueli ſtole away fro thens & come to london ¶And of this takīg & of od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thīges the erle of henaud ſaid to the quene Iſabell Dame maketh you meri. & be of good chere for ye be richer than ye wened to haue bene. & take thes v. barell is full of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that wer ſent to the douzeꝑs of fraūce for to kyll yow and your ſon Edward. & thinketh haſteli for to wend in to englond & taketh ye with you ſir Iohan of henaud my brother & v.C mē of armes for mony of thē of fraūce ī whome ye haue had grett truſt. done you for to ſcorne. ¶And almyghti god graunte you grace your enmys to ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cum. ¶The quene Iſabell ſent tho thurgh henaud and Flaūdres for hir ſaudiowrs and ordeyned hir eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y day for to wend in to Englond ayen and ſo ſhe had in hir cō
                  panye ſir edmond of wodſtoke that was erle of kent that was ſir Edwardis brother of englond.
            
            
               ¶How kyng edward let kepe the coſtes by the ſee &̄ let trie all the priſe men of armes & fote men thurgh englond
               WHen kyng Edward herd tell that quene Iſibell and Edward hir ſon wold cum in to Englond with a gret pouer of aliens and with them that wer outlawed owt of Englond for hir rebelneſſe he was ſore adrad to be put doūe and for to leſe his kyngdom. ¶Wherfor he ordeyned to kepe his caſtels ī wales as well as in englond with vitales and ther apparile and let kepe his riu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  es and alſo the ſee coſtes. Wherof the v. portes toke to kepe them and alſo the ſee. ¶And at the feſt of Decolaciō of ſent Iohn̄ Bapteſt. the Citizenis of london ſent to the kyng to porcheſtre an hondreth men of armes. ¶And alſo he commaū
                  ded bi his letters ordeyned yt eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y hondreth and wapentake of englond

to triours as well of men of armmes os men of fote: &̄ that they ſhold bene put in xx. ſome &̄ in an hondreth ſome. & cōmāded that all tho men wer redy when any outeſe or crie wer made for to purſue and take the aliens that come to englond for to benomme him the land for to put him owt of his kyngdom· ¶And more ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he let crie thurgh his patent in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y faire and in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y marketh of Englond that the quene Iſabell and ſir Edward his eldeſt ſon & the erle of kent that they wer take and ſaufely keped wt out any man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   harme vn to them doyng and all other man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   pepull that come with them anone ſmyten of ther hedis with out any man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ranſome takyng of them ¶And what man that might bringe ſir Roger hede Mortimer of wygmore ſhuld haue an hondreth poūde of monay for his trauell ¶And forthermore he ordend by his patent and cōmaūded to make a fire vpon eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y hyll beſide the riu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  es and in law cuntres for to make hie beekenes of tymbbre that if it ſo wer that the aliens come vn to the land by nyght that men ſhuld tend the bekenes that the contre might be warned and cum and mete ther enmys. and in the tyme died ſir Roger Mortimer his vncle in the tour of london.
            
            
               ¶How the quene Iſabell and ſir Edward duke of Gnyhene his ſon com in to lond at herewich and how they did.
               WHen quene Iſabell and ſir Edward hir ſone Duke of gnyhenne ſir Edward of wodſtoke erle of Kent and ſir Iohan the erles brother of Henaud and ther company: drad not thee manace of the kyng ne of his traitours. for they truſtid all in goddis grace &̄ com vn to herewich in ſauthfolke the xxiiij. day of Septembre & in the yere of grace .M.ccc.xxvi. And the quene &̄ ſir edward hir ſon ſent lettres to the maire &̄ cōmmalte of londō requiring them that they ſhuld be helpyng in the quarell &̄ cauſa yt they had begonne that is to ſay to diſtroy the tratours of the ream. bot none anſuer was ſent ayen. wherfore the quene & ſyr Edward hir ſon ſentē an other patent lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther ſeales the tenour

of wich lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   here foloweth in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ¶Iſabell by thee grace of god quene of englond lady of Irland & Countes of pountyf & we Edward the eldeſt ſon of the kyng of englond Duke of gnyhen erle of cheſtre of Pauntif & of Mouſtroill to ye maire & to all the cominalte of the cite of london ſendeth gretyng. For as moch as we haue before the tyme ſent to yow by our lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s how we be cū in to this land with good aray and ī good man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for the honour and profet of holy chirche and of our right dere lord the kīg and all the reame with all oure myght and pouer to kepe and maynten as we and all the good folkis of the forſaid reame ar holden to done ¶And vpon that we pray you that ye wold be helpīg to vs ī as moch as ye may ī this quarell that is for the comune profet of all the forſaid reame. And we haue had to this tyme none anſuer of the forſaid lettres ne know not your will in that partie. ¶Wherfor we ſend to you ayen and pray & charge you that ye bere you ſo ayens vs that we haue no cauſe to greue you bot that ye bene vn to vs helpyng by all the wayes that ye may or may knowe. For wyte ye well in certayn that we and all tho yt be comen with vs in to this reame thynke not to done any thyng: but that thyng that ſhall be for the commune ꝓfet of all the reame bot onli to diſtroy hugh ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   our enmy &̄ enmy te all the ream as ye it well knowith ¶Wherfor we pray you & charge you in the faith that ye owe on to our lord the kīg & to vs: and vpon all that ye ſhull mow forfet agayn vs that if the ſaid hugh ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   our enmy come with in your pouer that ye don him haſteli to ben takyn and ſaufli keped vn till we haue ordeyned of him our wyll. and that ye leue it not in no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wyſe as ye deſire honor and profit of vs all and of all the ream. ¶vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtondyn ye well that if ye doo our prayer and commandemēt we will the more be holdē vn to you. And alſo ye ſhall get you worſhip and profet yf ye ſend vs haſtely anſuer of all your will ayen at Baldok the vi. day of October. ¶Which letter erly in the dawyng of

the day of ſent Denis wos takked vpon the new croſſe in chepe. and mony copies of the ſame letter wer tacked vpō wyndowes and doris and vpon other places in the Cite of london that all men paſſing by the way myght them ſee and rede: ¶And in the ſame tyme kyng Edward was at london in the tour at his mete. ¶And ameſſinger come in to the hall and ſaid that the quene Iſabell wos comen to land at Herewich. & hath brought in hir companie ſir iohn̄ of Henaud &̄ with him men of armes without nombre. ¶And with that word ſir Hugh the ſpenſer the fadre ſpake. and thus vn to the kyng ſaid. My moſt worſhipfull lord and king of englond now we make good chere for c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tanly they ben̄ all ours. ¶The kyng ſaw this word comfortable yit he was full ſorowfull &̄ penſife ī his hert. ¶And the kīg had not fully eten bot ther come in to the hall an other meſſinger and ſaid yt the quene iſabell was ariued at herewich beſide yepſwyche in ſouthfolke. ¶Sir hugh the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the fadre ſpake to the meſſinger and ſaid tell ſoth in good faith to the meſſinger my fair frende is ſhe come wt a gret ſtrength: ¶Now ſertis ſir the ſoth for to ſay ſhe ne hath in hir componye but vij. houndreth men of armes ¶And wt that word ſir hugh ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cried with an high vois &̄ ſaid Alas alas we bene all betrayed. for c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tis with ſo litil pouer ſhe had neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   comen to land but if folke of this lond wer vn to hir conſent. ¶And therfor aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the mete they token ther coū
                  cell and went toward wales for to arere the walſhmen ayenſt the quene iſabell and Edward hir ſone. all for to fight and ſo they wer in purpoſed eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ychone.
            
            
               ¶How maſter walt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Stapilton biſſhop of exceſtre that was the kynges treſorer wos heded at london.
               
                  ANd in the ſame tyme kyng Edward wos ſore adrad leſt that men of london wold yeld them vn to the quene Iſabel and to hir ſon Edward. ¶Wherfor he ſet maſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   walt ſtapiltō his treſorer for to be wardeyn and keper of the cite of londō wt
                  
the maire. ¶And ſo come to the gyldehall of london and axid the keyes of the yates of the cite thurgh vertu and ſtrength of his cōmiſſion and wold haue had the kepyng of the Cite And the comuners anſuered and ſaid yt they wold kepe the cite to the honor of kyng Edward and of Iſabell the quene and of the duke the kynges ſon with out ony more the biſſhop wos tho ſore annoyed & ſwore othes that they all ſhuld abie it anone as the kyng edward wer comen out of wales. ¶And the communers all anone of the cite toke the biſſhop &̄ lad him a myddes of ye chepe & ther they ſmyten of his hede and ſet his hede in his right hand. ¶And after they heded ij. of his ſquyers that held with the biſſh̄op and on of them was called willm of waile that was the biſſhopis nepheu ¶And that other was called Iohan of Padyngton. And alſo they toke a burgeis of london that wos called Iohn̄ Marchall that wos ſir hugh ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s aſpie the fader & ſmoten of his hede alſo ¶And ī that ſame tyme that biſſhoop had ī londō a fair tour ī makīg ī his cloſe vpō the riu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of the Thameſe yt wos with out tempull barre and he failed ſtone to make ther of an end wher for he cōmaūded his men to go to the chirche of the frere Carmes and ther they toke ſtone to make ther with the touer & moch ſand &̄ 
                  mort & old robous that wos left ¶And for the diſpite yt the biſſhop had done vn to holy chirche he & his ij. ſquyers wer beried in that ſand os though they had bene houndes ¶And ther they lay a xi. wekis till that the quene Iſabell ſent hir lettres to the comuners & praid them yt they wold ſuffre &̄ graūte yt the biſſhop myght be take out of that place & be beried at exceſtre at his owne chirche. ¶And ſo he was & his ij. ſquyers wer beried at ſent Clementis chirch with out tempull barre &̄ it wos no wōd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   though that biſſhop died an euell deth ¶For he was a couetous mā &̄ had wt hī no merci & euell coūcelled the kīg. ¶And ſone aftar was Arnold of ſpayn taken that was aſſentant to haue lad vM. pound of ſiluer ī .v. bareles ferriers vn to ye douzeꝑs of

fraunce for to help and haſt the quene Iſabell to hir deth and Edward hir ſon alſo. And this Arnold wos put to deth with owt the cite of london.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Edward and ſir hugh ſpenſer and the erle of Arundell wer taken.
               WHen kyng Edward had ſent maſter walter Stapilton his treſorer in to london for to kepe the Cite vn to him ayen the quene Iſabell his wyfe and ayens edward his ſone anone hī ſelf toke with him ſir hugh ſpenſer the ſon and ſir Iohan erle of Arundell and maſter Robert Baldoke his Chancelar a fals piled preſt and token ther way toward Briſtow. ¶And ther the kyng abode a litell tyme and made ſir hugh the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   as coneſtable and keꝑ of the caſtell ¶And the kyng & thatt other ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   went in to ſhip &̄ ſailed toward wales & toke no leue of the ſtiward ne of none in the kingꝭ houſold. &̄ went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ī to wales for to arere the walſhmen ayen dame Iſabell the quene & thee duke hir ſon & the erle of Kent &̄ ſir Iohan of Henaud and thei went &̄ purſued aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   them. and ther pouer encreſid eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y day. So at the laſt the kyng was taken vpon a hill in wales & ſir hugh thee ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the ſon in that other ſide of the ſame hill. and the fals pilede clarke maſter Robert Baldoke ther faſt beſides them &̄ wer brought ayen in to englond as almighti god wold ¶And the kyng him ſelf was put in ſauf kepyng in the caſtell of Kemlworth & hī kept ſir Hēri yt was ſent Thomas brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of Lancaſtre. ¶And ſir hugh the fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come & put him ī the quenes grace and ſir Edward hir ſun duke of Gnyhenne. ¶But ſir hugh thee ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the tyme that he was taken nold neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ete no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   mete ne drinke no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   drinke. frō he wiſt to haue no mercy ſauf only to be dede ¶And the quene & hir counſell tho had ordeyned that he ſhuld haue be do to deth at londō. bot he was ſo febull for hys moch faſtyng yt he was ny dede. And therfor it wos ordend yt he ſhuld haue his Iugemet at herford &̄ at a place of the toure

his hood wos take from his hede and alſo from Robert of Baldoke that wos a fals piled clarkd and the kynges Chauncelare and men ſet vpon ther hedis chappelettis of ſharpe netteles and two ſquyers blew in ther eres with .ij. gret bugles hornes vpō tho ij. priſoners that men might here ther blowyng out with hornes. more than a myle
                     •
                   ¶And on Symond of Ridyng the kyngꝭ marchall bare before them ther armes vpō a ſpere reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſed ī tokē yt they ſh̄uld be vndone for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more ¶And vpō the morew was ſir hugh ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the ſone dampned to deth & wos draw & honged &̄ heded &̄ his bowels takin out of his body & brent and after thatt he was quartired. &̄ his .iiij. quarters wer ſent to iiij. tounes of englond and his hede ſent to London brigge. ¶And this Simond for encheſon that he diſpiſed quene Iſabell he was draw & honged in a ſtage made. a myddeſt the forſaid ſir hugh galewes ¶And the ſame day a litell from thens wos ſir Iohn̄ of arū
                  dell beheded for encheſon that he wos on of ſir hugh ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s councelers. ¶And anōe aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos ſir hugh ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   honged & draw and heded at Briſtow. &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   honged ayen bi the armes wt ij. ſtrong ropes: & the iiij· day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he was hewen all to peces and houndes eten him. and for that encheſon that the kyng had yeffen him the erledom of wyncheſtre his hede wos ſent thider &̄ put vpō a ſpere ¶And the fals Baldoke wos ſent to londō &̄ ther he died ī priſon amonges thefes. for men did hī no more reuerens than they wold done vn to an hound: &̄ ſo died the traitours of englond bliſſed be almyghty god. ¶And it wos no wōder for thurgh ther councell the good erle Thomas of lancaſtre wos don to deth. and all that held with Thomas of lancaſtre thurgh the traitours wer vndone & all ther heires diſherred.
            
            
               ¶Hw kīg edward was put doūe & his dignite take frō him.
               ANd anone after as all this was done. The quene Iſabel and Edward hir ſone and all the grett lordis of Englond at one aſſent ſent to kīg Edward to the caſtell of kenilworth

ther that he was in kepyng vnder the ward of ſir Iohan Hachī that wos the biſſhop of Ely. &̄ of ſir Iohan of Percy a baroun for encheſon that he ſhuld ordeyn his parlament at a certain place in england for to rodreſſe &̄ amend the ſtate of the reame. ¶And kyng Edward them anſuerd and ſaid lordis quod he. ye ſee full well how it is. Lo haueth here my ſeal. and I yef yow all my pouer for to ordeyn a parlament wher yt ye will ¶And they toke ther leue of him & come ayen to the barons of englond ¶And when they had the kīges patent of this thyng they ſhewed it to the lordis ¶And tho was ordeyned that the parlamēt ſhuld be at weſtmynſtre at the vtas of ſent Hillarie ¶And all the gret lordis of englond let ordeyn for them ther ayens yt tyme that the parlament ſhuld be ¶And at wich day that parlament wos. the kīg wold not cum ther for no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thyng as he had ſet him ſelf and aſſigned. ¶And notheles the barons ſent vn to him o tyme & other. And he ſuore by godis ſoule that he nold not cū ther on fote. Wherfore it wos ordeyned by all the gret lordis of englōd yt he ſhuld no longer be kyng but be depoſid & ſaid that they wold croune Edward his ſone the elder king. yt wos ye duke of Gnyhenne. & ſent tydyng vn to the kyng ther yt he was in ward vnder ſir Iohan erle of Garen and ſir Iohan of Bothun that was biſſhopp of Ely and ſir Henri Percy a barone and ſir willm Truſſell a knyght that wos with the erle ſir Thomas of Lancaſter for to yeld vp ther homages vn to him for all them of englond: ¶And ſir willm Truſſell ſaid thes wordis: Sir Edward for encheſon that ye haue traied your pepull of englond and haue vndone mony gret lordis of englond with outen any cauſe ye ſhall be depoſid. & now ye be withſtond thanked be god ¶And alſo for encheſon that ye wold not cū to the ꝑlamēt as ye ordeyned at weſtmynſtre as in your own lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   patent is contend for to tret with your lege men as a kyng ſh̄uld. ¶And therfore thurgh all the comuns aſſent &̄ of all the lordis of englond

I tell vn to yow thes wordis ye ſhall vnder ſtond ſir that the barons of englond at on aſſent will that ye be no more kyng of Englond but vtterly haue put yow out of your rialte for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more. ¶And the biſſhop of Ely ſaid tho to the kyng ¶Sir edward heri I yeld vp feaute and homage for all the erchebiſſhoppis & biſſhoppis of englond & for all the clerge. ¶Tho ſaid ſir Iohan erle of Garenne ſir edward I yeld vp here vn to yow feaute & homage for me &̄ for all Erles of englond: ¶And ſir Hēri Percy yaf vp alſo ther his homage for him & for all the barons of englond. ¶And tho ſaid ſir willm Truſſell I yeld vp now vn to you ſir myne homage for me & alſo for all the knyghtes of englond & for all them that holden by ſeriauntre or by any other man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thyng of you. ¶So that from this day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward ye ſhall not be clamed kyng nother for kyng be holde. ¶But frō thys tyme afterward. ye ſhall bene holden for a ſinguler man of all the pepull. And ſo they went thens to London ther that the lordis of englond them abode. And ſir edward abade in priſonne in good kepīg & that wos the day of Conu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſion of ſent Paule in thee xx. yere of his regne
            
            
               ¶Of the ꝓphecie of Merlin declarid of kīg edward the ſone of kyng edward the friſt.
               OF this kyng Edward ꝓphecied Merlin and ſaid that ther ſhuld cum a Goot out of Carre that ſhuld haue horns of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & a berd as white as ſnow▪ and a doppe ſh̄uld cum out of his noſethriles that ſhuld betoken moch harme hounger & dethe of the pepull. &̄ gret loſſe of his land: and that in the begynnyng of his regne ſhuld be haūted moch lechorie. ¶And he ſaid ſoth alas the tyme for kyng edward that was kyng edward ſon was bonre at Carnariuan in wales. for ſoth he had hornes of ſylu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & a berd as white os ſnow. when he was made prince of walis. to moche he yaf hī to riot &̄ to folie. ¶And ſoth ſaid Merlin in his prophecie that ther ſhulde cum out of his noſe a doppe. for in

his tyme was gret honger among the poer pepull. and ſtrong deth among the riche that died in ſtrange land with moch ſorow &̄ ī were in ſcotland. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward he loſt ſcotland & gaſcoyn. & whiles that him ſelf wos kīg ther wos moch lechori haūted: ¶And alſo Merlin told & ſaid that this Goot ſh̄uld ſeche the flour of lyfe and of deth. And he ſaid ſoth. for he ſpouſed Iſabell the kynges ſuſtre of fraunce. ¶And in his tyme Merlin ſaid that thei ſhuld be made brigges of folke vpō diches of the ſe. And that was well ſeyn at Banokkeſ borne in ſcotland whan he was diſcomfited ther of the ſcottis ¶And Merlin told alſo that ſtones ſhuld fall from caſtels and mony tounes ſhuld be made playn. ¶And he ſaid ſoth for whan kyng Edward wos diſcomfited in ſcotland and come tho ſouthward the ſcottis beſeged tho caſtels & did them moch harme and brend tounes vn to the herd erthe: ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward Merlin told that an Egle ſhuld cum out of Cornwaill that ſhold haue fetherris of gold that of pride ſhuld haue no peir. and he ſhuld deſpiſe lordis of blod. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he ſhuld die thurgh a bere at Gauſich: and that propheci was full wel know and found ſoth. ¶For by the egle is vnderſtond ſir Pers of Ganaſton that tho wos erle of Cornewaill that was a wonder proud man that diſpiſed the baronage of englōd. but aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward he was heded at gauſich thurgh the erle of Lancaſtre and thurgh the erle of werwik. ¶And Merlin told that ī his tyme it ſholde ſeme that the bere ſhuld brenne and that bataill ſh̄old be vpon an arme of the ſee in a feld araied like a ſh̄eld wher ſhuld die mony whit hedis. ¶And he ſaid ſoth for bi the brennīg of the bere is betokened gret dred thurgh cuttyng of ſwerdis at that bataill of miton for ther come the ſcottis in maner of a ſheld in man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of a wynge & ſlew vpō ſwale men of religion preſtis &̄ ſeculers wherfore the Scottis called that bataill in diſpite of engliſhmē the white bataill. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   merlī ſaid yt ye forſaid bere ſh̄uld do the Goot moch harme and that ſhuld be vpon the ſouthweſt and alſo

vpon his blod and ſaid alſo that the goot ſhuld leſe mich dele of his land till the tyme that ſhame ſhuld him ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cum and than he ſhuld cloth him in a Lyon ſkyn &̄ ſhuld wyn ayen that he had loſt and more thurgh pepull that ſh̄uld cum out of the northweſt that ſhold make him to bene adrad & him a venge vpon his enmys thurgh councell of ij. Owles that friſt ſh̄old be in ꝑell to be vndone ¶And that tho two Owles ſhuld wend ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee in to a ſtrange land and ther they ſhuld duell vn till a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tan time &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they ſh̄
                  uld cum ī to englōd ayen. ¶And tho two Owles ſhuld do moch harme vn to mōy on &̄ yt they ſhold cōcell the goot to meue were ayens the foreſaid bere. ¶And ye got & the owles ſhold cū to an arme of the ſee at borton vp Trent &̄ ſhuld wend ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ yt for drede ye bere ſhold fle wt a Swan ī his cōpanye to Buri toward the north thurgh an vnkind outpul̄ter & that the Swan than ſhall be ſlayn with ſorow & the Bere ſhuld be ſlayn full ny his owne neſt that ſh̄old ſtond vpō Poūtfret vpon whom the ſonne ſhall ſhed his bemes and mony folke him ſhall ſeke for vertu & he ſaid ſoth for the good erle Thomas of Lancaſtre was borne in the northweſt &̄ coſin to the kīg and his vncle ſon. ¶And by law he made the kyng leſe moch land the wich he had purcheſed wilfulli till at the laſt the kyng ther of toke ſhame & him ſelf filled wyth cruelte ¶And after he gat ayen yt he had loſt & moch more thurgh folke that he let aſſemble out of the northweſt yt made him to be adrad and a venged him of his barons thurgh coūcell of ſir hugh the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the fadre and of ſir hugh the ſon that be fore wer owt lawed of englond for ther wikkednes ¶Bot afterward they cume ayen in to engloed ſir hugh ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the fadre out of fraunce And ſo moch cōceled the kyng that he ſhuld were vpon Thomas of Lancaſtre ¶So that the kyng and the ſpenſers and the erle of Arundell and ther pouer met with Thomas of Lancaſtre at Burton vpon Trent and him ther diſcomfited and ſir Humfry

Erle of Herford wos in his companye. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   fled the forſaid Thomas and Humfrey with ther company at Burbruge with ſir Andrew of erkela that is called the vnkind outpulter ¶And alſo ſir Symondward erle of yorke they come & mete with Thomas of lancaſtre with an huge companye & them ther diſcomfited. &̄ in that ſcomfiture the erle of herford wos ſlayn vpō the bruge couherdly with a ſpere in the foundement And the erle Thomas wos take and lad vn to Paūtfret. & tho was heded beſide his own caſtell. But aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward mony men him ſought for miracles that god did for him. ¶And in that tyme Merlī ſaid for ſorow and harme ſhuld die a pepull of his land. wherfore mony other landis ſhuld be vpō him the more bolder ¶And he ſaid ſoth for by encheſon of his barons that wer done to deth. for ſent thomas quarell of lancaſtre pepull of mony landis become the bold for to meue were vpō the kyng: for ther blod wos turned to mōy nacions ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward Merlin told &̄ ſaid that the forſaid Owles ſhuld do moch harme vn to the floor of life & deth. & they ſhuld bring hir to moch diſeſe. ſo yt ſhe ſh̄uld wēd ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe ī to fraū
                  ce for to make pees to ye flour deliſe. &̄ ther ſhuld a bide till on a tyme hir ſede ſhuld cum and ſech hir. And tho they ſh̄uld a biden bothe till the tyme that they ſhuld cloth them with grace: &̄ tho two Owles ſhe ſhold ſeke &̄ put them vn to pytuus deth. & that ꝓphecie wos well know and was full ſoth. ¶For ſir Hugh ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   the fadre and ſir hugh the ſone did moch ſorow and perſecucion vn to the quene Iſabell thurgh her procurment to hir lord the kyng. ¶So they ordeyned amonges that ſhe was put vn to hir wages that is to ſay .xx. ſh̄ylling in the day. ¶Wherfor the kyng of fraūce hir brother was ſore annoyed and ſent in to englond by his letters vn to kyng Edward that he ſhold come vn to hys ꝑlament to Paris in fraunce. but kyng Edward was ſore adrade to cum ther. for he wened to haue bene areſted till that he had made amendis for the treſpaſe that ſir hugh ſpenſer the fadre & the

ſone had done. And for the harme that they had done vn to thee quene Iſabell his ſuſtre. ¶Wherfor thurgh hir ordeynaunce &̄ conſent of the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s the quene Iſabell went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe ī to fraūce for to make accorde bitwen kyng Edward & the kīg of fraūce hir brother ¶And ther duel̄led ſhe in fraūce till edward hir eldeſt ſon come hir to ſech &̄ ſo they duelled ther both till yt aliance was made bitwen them & the gentill erle of Henaud. that if they wt ther help might deſtroi &̄ ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cū the venym &̄ the falſenes of the ſpenſers yt ſir edward ſhuld ſpouſe Dame Philip the worſſhipfull lady &̄ the erles dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of henaud. ¶Wherfor the quene Iſabell &̄ ſir edward hir ſon & ſir edward of wodſtoke the kynges brother of Englond & ſir Iohn̄ of henaud &̄ ſir Roger Mortimer of wigmore and ſir Thomas Rocelin & ſir Iohn̄ of Crōwell & ſir willm Truſſell and mony other of the a liaunce of the gētill erle Thomas of Lancaſtre that wer exiled out of englond for his quaril & wer diſherited of ther landis ordeyned them a gret pouer and ariued at herewich in ſouthfolke. ¶And ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they purſued the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s till that they wer takyn & put vn to ſpitouſe deth as before is ſaid and ther company a
                     •
                   alſo for the gret falſenes yt thei did to kīg edward & to his pepull. ¶And Merlin ſaid alſo more that the goot ſh̄uld be put īto gret diſeſe & in gret anguyſh &̄ in gret ſorow he ſh̄uld lede his lyfe. ¶And he ſaid ſoth for aftir the tyme that kyng edward wos take he was put in to ward till that the ſpenſers wer put vn to the deth. ¶And alſo for encheſon that he wold not cum vn to his own ꝑlament at london as he had ordened and aſſigned himſelf and to his baronage and alſo wold not gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ne and rule his pepull ne his ream as a king ſhold done: ¶Wherfore ſum of the barons of englond come &̄ yeld vp ther hamages vn to him for them and all the other of the ream in the day of ꝯu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſion of ſent paule in the yere of his regne xx &̄ they put him out of his rialte for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more & eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he leued his lyfe afterward in moch ſorow & anguyſſh.
               
                  LOdewicus the fourth wos emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Henri iiij. yere This Lodewic wos duke of Banare & he diſpiſed the coronacion of the pope. wherfore the pope depoſit him. and moch labour and mony ꝑell he had aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  : And he trubled gretly the vnite of holy chirch. &̄ then wos choſin ayens him Frederik the duke of Auſtrich. & he ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come the duke. and boid a rebelion to his end. &̄ in gret parell to his ſoule and at the laſt Karolus wos choſin ayens him the wich p̄uayled. and ſodenly Lodewik fell doūe of his horſe &̄ deceſſed: Iohan Maundevill a doctor of feſike & a knyght borne wos in englond a bout this tyme. &̄ he made a meruelus pilgrimage. for he went almoſt a bowt all the world. and he wrot his dedis in .iij. langages & deceſid & wos buried at ſent Albons Benedictus the xxij. wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Iohn̄ vij. yere and more. This man wos a monke. & in all his youth he wos of good conu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſacion & a doctor of diuinite. And wē he wos made pope he reformed the ordir of ſent Benet in that thyng yt was neceſſari: And he wos an hard man to graūt benefice leſt he had graūted it to an vnconyng man. he made a decretall the wich began Benedictus deus in donis ſuis. & he wos veray cruell in his faithe: And for that of ſom men litell loued. he wos ſo ſtout a man that almoſt he wold not know his own coſyns:
            
            
               Anno domini .M.iijC xxvij.
               ¶Of kyng Edward the thrid after the conqueſt
               
                  ANd after this king Edward Carnariuan regned ſir edward of windeſore his ſon the wich wos crouned kyng & annoynted at weſtmynſtre thurgh councell and conſent and will of all the gret lordis of the Reame the ſonday in Candelmaſſe eue in the yere of grace .M:CCC.xxvi. that w
                     •
                  s of age at yt tyme but xv. yere. and for encheſon that his fadre was in warde

in the caſtell of kenilworth and eke wos put doune of his rialte. the reame of englond was with out king fromme the feſt of ſent Katerin in the yere aboueſaid vn to the feſt of Candelmaſſe &̄ tho wer all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   plees of the kynges bynch aſtent. ¶And tho wos cōmanded to all the ſhereues of englond thurgh writ to warn the ꝑties to defendaūtis thurgh ſomnyng ayen ¶And alſo forthermore that all priſoners that wer in the kynge gail̄les yt wer attached thurgh ſhereues ſh̄uld be let gone quyte. ¶The kīg Edward aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his coronacion at the praier & beſechīg of his liege of the reame graūtid them a chartre of ſtedfaſt pees to all them yt wold it axe. ¶And ſir iohn̄ of Henaud &̄ his cōpanye toke ther leue of ye kīg &̄ of the lordis of the reame: & turned home to ther own cōtre ayen: & eche of them had full rich yeftes eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ych mā as he wos of value & eſtate ¶And tho wos englond ī pees &̄ ī reſt &̄ gret loue bitwene the kīg & his lordis: & comynly engliſh men ſaid amōges them that the deuell was dede. But the treſour of the kīg his fadre & the treſour of ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s both the fadre & of the ſon & of the erle of Arundell &̄ of maſter Robert baldok yt wos the kinges chancelar was deꝑtid after the quene Iſabellis ordenaunce and Sir Roger Mortimers of wigmore. ſo that the kyng had nothyng ther of but at hir will &̄ hir deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ance ne of ther landis as aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward ye ſhall here.
            
            
               ¶How kīg Edward wēt to ſtanthop for to mete the ſcottis.
               
                  ANd yit in the ſame tyme was kyng Edward in the Caſtell of Kenilworth vnder the kepyng of ſir Henri that was Erle Thomas brother of Lancaſtre that tho wos erle of Leyceſtre and the kyng grauntid him the Erledom of Lancaſtre that the kyng his fadre had ſeiſed in to his hand & put out Thomas of Lancaſtre his brother. ¶And ſo was he erle of Lancaſtre &̄ of Leiceſtre &̄ eke ſtiward of englond as his brother wos in his tyme. but ſir Edward that wos kīg edwardis fadre made ſorow with out end. for becauſe he myght not ſpeke with his wyfe ne wt
                  
his ſone wherfor he wos ī moch miſchief. for though it wer ſo that he wos lad &̄ ruled by fals councell yit he wos kyng Edwardis ſo ne called edward with long ſchankis &̄ come of the worthieſt blode of the world ¶And they to whome he wos woned to yeue gret yeftes &̄ large wer moſt p̄ue wt the kīg his own ſon: &̄ they wer his enmys both bi nyght & bi day &̄ procurid to make debate & cōtake bytwen hī and his ſon. &̄ Iſabell his wife. bot the frere prechours to hī wer good frēdis eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  more & caſt both bi nyght &̄ bi day how they myght bring hī out of priſō ¶And amōg ther cōpany yt the freris had priueli brought ther wos a frere that was called Dunhened &̄ he had ordeyned & gadred a gret cōpanye of folke to kepe at yt nede. but the frer wos take & put ī the caſtel of poūfret & ther he died in priſon. ¶And ſir henri erle of Lancaſtre that had the kinges fadre ī keping thurgh cōmandemēt of the kīg deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed Edward the kīges fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   bi endētur to ſir Thomas of berkeley. And ſo ſir Iohn̄ 
                  Mautreus &̄ they led him from the caſtell of kemlworth to the caſtyll of Berkeley & kept him ther ſaufly. ¶And at Eſtren next after his coronaciō the kīg ordyned a huge hoſt for to fight ayens the ſcottis. And ſir Iohn̄ ye Erles brother of heenaud frō be yond the ſe come for to help kyng Edwarde & brought with hī vij. houdreth men of armes & ariued at dou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & they had leue for to go forth till they come to yorke ther yt thee kyng them abode ¶And the ſcottis come thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to the kyng for to make pees & accorde· but the accordement laſted not bitwein tham bot a litell tyme. ¶And at that tyme the engliſſhmen wer clothed all in cotes &̄ hodes peynted with lettres &̄ with floures full ſemeli with long berdes And therfor the ſcottis made a bill that wos faſtyned vpō the chirch doris of ſent Petre toward ſtangate & thꝰ ſaid the ſcripture in diſpite of engliſhmen.
               ¶Long berde hertles: Paynted hod witles. Gay cote gracelas makes englond thriftles.
               
                  ANd ī the Trinite day next after began the ꝯtake in the cite of yorke bitwen the engliſſhmen and the Henaudires. & in that debate wer kylled of the erledom of Nycholl and mordred lxxx. and after they wer buried vnder a ſtone in ſent Clementis chirchhawe in foſgate ¶And for encheſō that the henauders come to hel̄p the kyng. ther pees wos cried on payn of life &̄ limme ¶And in that other halfe it wos found bi an enqueſt of the cite that the engliſhmen began the debate:
            
            
               ¶How the engliſhmen ſtoppid the ſcottis in the parke of ſtanhope and how they turned ayen in to ſcotland.
               
                  ANd at that tyme the ſcottis had aſſembled all ther pouer and comen in to englond and kylled and robbed all thatt they myght take and alſo brennet and diſtroid all the north cuntre thurgh out till that they come vn to the parke of ſtanhope in wyredall and ther the Scottis held them in a buſchement. ¶But when the kyng had herd thurgh certayn aſpies wher the Scottis wer anone right with his hoſt beſeged them within the forſaid parke ſo that the ſcottit wiſt not wher to gone out but only vn to ther harmis and they abiden in the parke xv. days &̄ vitales them failed in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſide ſo that they wer gretli appaired of ther bodies. ¶And ſith that Brut come fyrſt in to bretan vn to this tym wos ther neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſeyn ſo fair an hoſt what of Engliſſhmen and of a lyens and of men of fote the wich ordeyned them for to fight with the ſcottis thurgh eggyng of ſir Henri erle of Lancaſtre and of ſir Iohan henaude that wold haue gone ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of with for to haue foughten with the ſcottis ¶But ſir Roger Mortimer cō
                  ſentid not ther to. For he had priuely takyn mede of the ſcottis thē for to help that they myght wend away ayen in to ther own cuntre. ¶And this ſame Mortimer councelled ſo moch Thomas of Brotherton the erle marſhall that was kyng Edwardis vncle that the ferſaid Thomas ſhuld not aſſembull at that tyme vn to the ſcottis and he aſſentid. but he wiſt not the doyng bitwene

the ſcottis and the forſaid Mortimer ¶And for encheſon that he was marſhall of Englond and to him ꝑteyned eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the vauntward he ſent haſteli to the erle of Lancaſtre and to ſir Iohan of henaud that they ſhuld not fight with the Scottis in preiudice and harmyng of him and his fee. And if they did that they ſhuld ſtond to ther own perrill ¶And the forſaid erle marſhall was al araied with his bateill at the reredoos of the erle of Lancaſtre for to haue fought with him and with his folke if he had meued for to fight with the proud ſcottis ¶And in this maner he was deceyued and wiſt nothing of this treſon. And thus was the kyng principalli diſſaued. ¶And when it wos nyght Mortimer that had the wach for to kepe of the hoſt that nyght diſtrobled the wach that nothyng myght be done ¶And ī the meī while the ſcottys ſtole be nyght toward ther own cuntre as faſt as they myght ¶And ſo wos the kyng falſly betraied that wened that all the traitours of his land had bene brought to an end as it wos ſaid before ¶Now here ye lordis how tratourſly kīg Edward was diſſaued &̄ how merueluſly &̄ boldly the ſcottis did of were. for Iamys Douglas with .CC. men of armes riden thurgh aut all the hoſt of gyng Edward the ſame nyght the ſcottis wer aſcaped toward ther own cuntre as is aboue ſaid till that they com to the kynges pauilon &̄ killed ther mony men in ther beddis & cried ſome Naward naward. & an od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   time a Douglos a douglas. Wherfor the kyng that wos in his pauilon & mech od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   folk were wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſore afraied. but blyſſid be almyghty god ye kyng wos not taken & in gret parell was tho the ream of englond ¶And yt nyght the mone ſhone full clere & bright. & for all the kīgꝭ mē the ſcottis aſcappid harmeles ¶And ī ye morow whā ye kyng wiſt yt the ſcottis wer a ſcappid ī to ther own cuntre. he wos wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſori &̄ full hertely wepid with his yong eyn. &̄ yit wiſt he nott who had hī done yt treſon. bot yt fal̄s treſoun was full well knaw a good while aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   as the ſtori telleth ¶Tho kīg edward come ayen to

yorke full ſorowfull & his hoſt deꝑted and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man went in to his own cuntre with full heuy chere and mornyng ſemblant & the henaudes toke ther leue &̄ went ī to ther own cuntre. & the kynge for ther trauell hugeli them rewardid ¶And for encheſon of that viage the kyng had diſpendid moch of his treſour & waſted ¶And in that tyme wer ſeyn ij: mones in the firmament that on was clere & that other was derke as men might ſe thurgh out the world and a gret debate wos yt ſame tyme ayens pope Iohan the xxij: aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſent petre. &̄ the Emprour of Almayn tho made him Emprour ayens the popis wyll that tho held his ſee at Auinion ¶Wherfor the ēpror made his crie at Rome & ordeyned an od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   pope yt hight Nycholas yt wos a frere mynor. and yt was ayens the right of holy chirch ¶Wherfor he wos curſed & the pouer of that od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   pope ſone wos leid: And for encheſō that ſuche meruellis wer ſeyn mē ſaid that the world was nygh at an end.
            
            
               ¶Of the deth of kyng Edward Carnariuan.
               
                  ANd now go we ayen to ſir Edward of Carnariuan yt was kyng Edward fadre ſum tyme kyng of englond & put doune of his dyngnite: Alas for his tribulacion and ſorow that him befell thurgh fals councell that he loued and triftid vpō to moch that aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward wer deſtroyed thugh ther falſeneſſe as god wold. ¶And this Edward of Carnariuan wos in the caſtell of Berkelay vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kepyng of Sir Moris of Berkeley & ſir Iohan of Mautreus and to them he made his complaynt of his ſorow and of his diſeſe and oft tyme he axed of his wardens what he had treſpaſed ayens Dame Iſabell his wife and Sir edward his ſon yt was made new king yt they wold not viſet him ¶And tho anſuerid on of his wardeynes and ſaid: my worthy lord diſpleſe yow not that I ſhall tell you the encheſon is for it is done them to vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtond that if my lady your wife come any thing ny you that ye wold hir ſtrangle and kyll and alſo that ye wold do to my lord your ſon the ſame ¶Tho anſuered he with

ſimple chere. Alas alas am I not ī priſon and all at your own will. now god hit wote I thought it neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and now I wold that I wer dede ſo wold god if that I wer. for than wer all my ſorow paſſed ¶Hit was not long tyme after that the kyng thurgh ꝯcell of Roger Mortimer graūtid the ward & kepīg of ſir edward his fadre vn to ſir Thomas Toiourney &̄ to the forſaid ſir Iohn̄ Mautreuers thurgh the kynges lettre & put out holy the forſaid ſir Morice of the ward of the kyng & they toke &̄ led the kyng vn to the caſtell of Corfe the wich caſtell the kyng hated as any deth & they keped hī ther till it come vn to ſent Mathewes day ī ſeptē
                  bre in ye yere of grace .M.ccc.xxvij. yt the forſaid ſir Roger Mortimer ſent the man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of the deth how &̄ in what wiſe he ſh̄old be done to deth. ¶And anone as the forſaid Thomas & Iohan had ſeyn the letter &̄ commaundemēt they made kīg Edward Carnariuan good chere & good ſo las as they myght at that ſoper & nothīg ye kīg wiſt of ye tratorie. ¶And whē time wos for to go to bedde the kīg went vn to his bed &̄ lay & ſlept faſt & as the king lay & ſlept ye tratourys fals for ſworne ayens ther homage & ther feaute come priueli in to the kynges chambre &̄ ther company with them and laid an huge tabull vpō his wombe & with men preſſed & held faſt doūe the .iiij: corners of the tabull vpon his body wherwith the good man awoke &̄ wos wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſore a drad to be dede ther and ſlayn and turned his body tho vpſedoune:. ¶Tho toke ye fals traitours and wode tirantis an horne and put it in to hys fundement as depe as they myght & toke a ſpit of coper brennyng & put it thurgh the horne in to his body and oft tymes roulled ther with his bowels and ſo they kylled ther lord that nothyng wos ꝑſaued &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he was entered at gloceſtre.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Edward ſpouſed Philip the Erles doughter of Henaud at Yorke:
               
                  ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Criſtemaſſe tho next ſwyng ſir Iohn̄ of henaud brought wt hī Phelip his brothers dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt was erle of

Henaud his nece in to englond· &̄ kīg edward ſpouſed hir at york with moch honour. ¶And ſir Iohn̄ of Bothum biſſhop of Ely and ſir wyllm of melton Erchebiſſhop of yorke ſongen thee maſſe ye ſonday in the eue of ꝯu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſion of ſent Paule In the yere of grace a .M.ccc.xxvij. but for encheſon that the kyng wos bot yong & tendre of age: when he wos crouned full mony wronges wer done while that his fadre leued. for encheſon that he trowed the councelers that wer fals a bout him that counceled him to done other wiſe than reſon wold wherfor gret harme was done to the reame & to the kyng & all mē directid it the kīes dede. &̄ it was not ſo almighty god it wote. Wher fore it wos ordeyned at the kynges crouning yt the kyng for his tendre age ſhuld be gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned by xij. of the greteſt lordis of englond wt out wich no thīg ſh̄uld be done: that is to ſai The erchebiſſhop of Cantorburi the erchebiſhop of yorke the biſſhop of wyncheſtre &̄ the biſſhop of herthforth the erle of Lancaſtre the erle marſhall. & the erle of Kent yt wer the kīges vnches. & the erle of Garenne: ſir Thomas wake. ſir hēri of Perci. ſir oliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of yngham & Iohn̄ of Roos barons. ¶All thes wer ſworne trewly for to councell the kyng. And they ſhuld anſuer eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y yere in the ꝑlament of yt that ſhuld be don in the tyme of yt gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nall. bot that ordeynance wos ſone vndone &̄ yt wos moch harme to all englond· ¶For the kīg & all ye lordis that ſhuld gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ne hī wer gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned &̄ ruled after the kyngꝭ mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Dame Iſabell: & by ſir Roger Mortimer ¶And as they wold all thyng wos done both emong high and low. And they token vn to them Caſtels tounes landis &̄ rentis in gret harme & loſſe to the croune &̄ of the kynges eſtate out of meſure.
            
            
               ¶How the pees was made bitwene the engliſh men and thee ſcottis &̄ alſo of Iuſtifieng of Troylebaſtone.
               THe kyng Edward at witſontide in the ſecund yere of his ragne thurgh the councell of his modre & ſir Roger Mortimer ordeyned a parlament at Northamton. And at that ꝑlament

the kyng thurgh hir councell and none other of the land wt in age graunted to be accordid with the Scottis in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . yt all the feautes and homages that the ſcottis ſhuld do vn to thee croune of Enlond for yaf them vn to the ſcottis for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more by his chartre enſeled: ¶And forthermore an endēture wos made of the ſcottis vn to kyng edward that wos kyng Henris ſon wich endenture they called it rageman in the wich wer contenyd all thee homagis and feautes Friſt of the kyng of Scotland and of all the prelatis erles and barons of the reame of ſcotland with ther ſeales ſet theron and other chartres and remembraunces that kyng Edward and his barons had of ther right in the foreſaid reame of Scotland it wos for yeue them ayen holy chirche And alſo with the blake croſſe of ſcotland the wich the good kyng edward conquerid in Scotland and brought it owt of the Abbey of Scone that is a full preciouſe relique. ¶And alſo forthermore he releſid and for yaf all the landis that thebarons of englond had in ſcotland by old conqueſt. ¶And this pees for to be hold and laſt the ſcottis wer boūd vn to the kyng in xxx: thouſand pound of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to be paid with in .iij. yere that is eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y yere x. thouſand pound by evyne porcions. ¶And forthermore aboue all this they ſpeke bitwen the ꝑteis aboue ſaid that Dauid dritonautier that was kyng Robert the Bruit ſon the fals tyrant and fals forſworin ayenſt his othe that aroſe ayens his liege lord the nobull and good kyng Edward and falſely made him kyng of Scotland that was of age of .v. yere ¶And ſo thurgh this curſed councell Dauid ſpouſed at Barewik Dame Iohane of the toure thatt was kyng Edwardis ſuſtre as the geeſt telleth. vpō mare Magdalene day In the yere of grace a ·M.ccc. and xxviij. to gret harme and empeiring to all the kynges blod. wher of that gentill lady come. Alas the tyme For wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   moch was that fair damiſell diſꝑaged ſith that ſhe was maried ayens all the commune aſſent of Englond And frō the tyme that Brut had cōquered Albion

and named the land aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his own name Bretan that now is called Englond after the name of Engeſt: ¶And ſo the reame of Scotland wos holden of the reame of englond and of the croune bi feaute and by homage. ¶For Brut conquered that land and yaf it vn to Albanak that wos his ſecund ſon and he called that land Albayn after his own name. So that the heires yt comen after him ſhuld hold of Brut and of his heires that is to ſai of the kynges of Bretan by feaute and homage and frō that tyme vn to this tyme of kyng Edward the reame of ſcotland wos holden of the reame of Englod by feautes and ſeruices as aboue is ſaid ī the crenicles of Englond and of ſcotland. & bereth witneſſe more planarly: ¶And acurſed be the tyme that this parlament was ordeyned at Northamton. For ther thurgh fal̄s councell the kyng was ther falſly diſherited and yet he was with in age. ¶And yit whan that kyng Edward wos put out of his rialte of englond. Yit men put not him out of the feautes & ſeruices of the Reame of Scotland ne of the fraunchiſes diſherited him fer euermore. ¶And neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  thelas the gret lordis of englond wer ayens to confirme the pees and the trew
                     •
                  s abaue ſayd ſauf only quene Iſabell that tho was the kynges mother Edward and the biſſhop of Ely and the lord Mortimer. bot reſon and law wold not that a finall pees ſhuld be made by twene them with out the cōmune aſſent of englond
            
            
               ¶Of the debate yt was bitwen quene Iſabell & ſir Hēri erle of Lancaſtre & of Leyceſtre &̄ of the ridīg of Bedford:
               WHen the forſaid Dauid had ſpouſed Dame Iohane of the t
                     •
                  ur in the toune of Berrewik as be fore is ſayed the ſcottis in deſpite of the Engliſſhmen called Dame Iohane the Coū
                  teſſe make pees. For the cowardyſe pees that tho wos ordeyned. but the kīges ꝑſon bare all the wite and the blame with wronge of the makyng of the accorde. And all wos done thurgh the quen and Roger Mortimer. ¶And it was not long after

that the quene Iſabell ne toke in to hir own hand all the lordſhip of Pountfret. almoſt all the landis that wer of any value that apperteyned to the croune of Englond· ¶So that the kīg had not for to diſpende bot of his vſes &̄ of his Eſcheker. For the quene Iſabell and Mortimer had a gret menye of ther retenaūce yt folowed euermore the kynges court: And went and toke the kynges priſes for hir peny worthes at good chepe. ¶Wherfore the contre that thei comen ī. wer full ſore a drad and almoſt diſtroid of them ¶Tho began the comminalte of englond for to haue enuy to Iſabell the quene that ſo moch loued hir before. wen ſhe come ayen for to purſue the fals traitours the ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s from fraunce ¶And in that ſame tyme the fals traitour Robert of Holand that betraied his lord ſir Thomas of Lancaſtre was tho deliuered owt of priſon: and was wonder priue with the quene Iſabell and alſo with Roger the Mortimer ¶Bot that auailed not him but litell. for he was taken at myhelmaſſe that tho come next ſewyng after as he rode toward the quene Iſabell to londō & ſir Thomas wither ſmote of his heed beſides the toune of ſent Albons ¶And this ſir Thomas duelled wt ſir Hēri erle of Lancaſtre and he put him ī hidīg for dred of the quene for ſhe loued him wonder moch & prayed vn to the kyng for him that the ſame Thomas myght be exiled out of Englond. ¶And the nobull erle ſir Henri of Lancaſtre had oft tymys herd the comune clamor of the Engliſhmē of the diſeſe that wer done in Englōd and alſo for diuerſe wronges that wer done among the comune pepull. of the wich the kyng bare the blame with wrong. For he was bot full yong and tender of age. And thought as a good man for to done a way and ſlake the ſklandre of the kynges parſon if that he myght in any maner of wiſe: So as the kyng was ther of nothyng gylty. wherfor he was in perell of lyfe and lyme ¶And ſo he aſſembled all his retenaūces and went and ſpake vn to them of the kynges honour and alſo for to amend his eſtate

And ſir Thomas brotherton erle Marchall and ſir Edmond of wodſtoke that wer the kynges vncles and alſo men of londō made ther othe him for to maynten in that ſame quarell. ¶And ther cauſe wos this that the kyng ſhuld hold his houſe and his meny as a kyng ought for to done and haue all his riallti and yt the quene Iſabell ſhuld deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   out of hir hand in to the kynges hād all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   lordſhippis rentis tounes caſtels that apꝑtened vn to the croune of englond as other quenes did hir before and medle with none other thyng ¶And alſo that ſir Rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Mortimer ſhuld duell vpon his own landis for the wich landis he had holpe to diſherited moch pepull ſo that comune pepull wer diſtroyd thurgh wrongfull takyng: ¶And alſo to enquere how &̄ by whom thee king was betraied and falſly diſceyued at Stanhop and thurgh whois councell that the Scottis went a way by nyght from thee kyng. ¶And alſo how &̄ thurgh whos coūcell the ordenaunce that was made at the kynges coronacion was put doune that is to ſai that the kyng for amendement and helpyng of the reame & in honour of him ſhuld be gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned and ruled by xij. of the greteſt &̄ wiſeſt lordis of the reame &̄ with out them ſh̄uld no thyng ben graunted ne done as before is ſaid the wich couenantis maliciuſli wer put doūe fro the kīg. werfor moni harmes ſhames & reꝓues haue falle to the kyng and his ream. And that is vnderſtond for as moch as Edward ſum tyme kyng of englon was ordeyned by aſſent of the cominalte in playn ꝑlamēt for to be vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the warde &̄ gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  naunce of Henri erle of Lancaſtre his coſin for ſaluaciō of his body he was take out of the caſtell of Kemlworth ther that he was in ward. and thurgh colour of quene Iſabell and of the Mortimer with out conſent of any ꝑlament they toke & lad him ther that neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   none of his kynrad myght with him ſpeke ne ſe and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   tretourſl̄y toke and him mordred. For whos deth aroſe a ſclandre thurgh all criſtendō when it was done. ¶And alſo the treſour that ſir edward of Carnariuan had left ī mōy places

in Englond and in wales wer waſted and borne away without the will of kyng Edward his ſon in deſtruccion of him & all his folke Alſo thurgh whos councell that the kyng yaf vp the kīgdō of ſcotland For the wich reame the kynges anceſtres had full ſore trauaill and ſo did mony a nobull man for ther right &̄ was deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed vn to Dauid that wos Robert the Brus ſon all the right that no right had to the reame as all the world it wiſt. ¶And alſo bi whom the chartres & remembrances yt they had of ye right of Scotland wer take out of the treſorie and taken vn to the ſcottis ye kynges enmys to diſherityng of him and of hys ſucceſſours & to gret harme vn to his lieges &̄ gret reproue vn to all engliſſhmen for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more ¶Alſo wherfor Dame Iohana of the tour the kynges ſuſtre Edward wos diſꝑaged and marid vn to Dauid yt wos Robert the Brus ſon yt was a traitour and enmye vn to englond &̄ thurgh whos councell ſhe wos take in to our enmys handis out of englond ¶And in the meyn while the good erle Henri of Lancaſtre & his companie toke councell how thes pointes aboue ſaid myght be amendid vn to the worſſhip of the kīg &̄ to his ꝓfet &̄ to the ꝓfite alſo of his lieges ¶And the quene Iſabell thurgh coniecting & ſotelti & alſo of the Mortimer let ordeyn a parlament at Saliſberi ¶And at yt ſame ꝑlamēt the Mortimer was made erle of the march ayenſt all the barons will of englōd in preiudice of the kyng &̄ of his croune. &̄ ſir Iohn̄ of Eltham the kyngꝭ brother was gurt with a ſwerd of Cornwaill & tho wos called erle of Cornewaill And eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more quene Iſabell ſo moch pracurid ayens hir ſon the kyng that ſhe had the ward of the forſaid ſir Edward &̄ of his landis· ¶And at that ꝑlament the erle of Lancaſtre wold not cum but ordeyned al his pouer ayens quene Iſabell & the mortimer & men of londō ordened them with v. hondreth men of armes. ¶Whē quene Iſabell wyſt of the doyng ſhe ſwore by god & bi his names full angrely that in euell tyme he thought vpō tho pointes. ¶Tho ſent

the quene Iſabell & the Mortimer aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther retene. &̄ after the kynges retenue. ſo that they had ordeyned amonge theem an huge hoſt & they councelled the kyng ſo yt vpō a nyght they riden xxiij myle toward bedford the
                     •
                   that the erle of lancaſtre wos with his ꝯpani & thought to haue hī deſtroied And yt nyght ſhe rode bi ſide the king hir ſon as a knyght armed for dred of deth. ¶And it was done the kyng to vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtond yt the erle henri of lancaſtre & his companie wold haue diſtroid the kyng and his coūcell for euer more wherfor the kīg wos ſomdele towardis hī heuy & annyed. ¶Whan the erle marſhall and the erle of kent the kīges brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   herd of this tyding they riden ſo ī meſſage bitwen them that the king graūted him his pees to erle henri of lancaſtre for a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tan raū
                  ſone of xi.M. pound. but yt wos neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   paied aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward. ¶And thes wer the lordis that held with ſir henri of Lancaſtre. ſir Henri beamōt ſir Fouke fitzwaren: ſir Thomas Rocelyn ſir willm truſſell ſir Thomas wyther. and about an hondreth knyggtis mo yt wer to him concentid. & all tho wer exiled thurgh coūcell of quene Iſabell &̄ of the Mortimer. for the mortimer weited for to haue ther landis if that he myght thurgh ony maner ꝯiecting for he was to couetous &̄ had to moch his will &̄ that wos gret pitte.
            
            
               ¶How kyng edward went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee for to do his homage vn to the kyng of fraūce for the duchie of Gnyhen.
               IT wos not long aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that the kyng of fraunce thurgh cō
                  cell of his douſepe is ſent to kyng Edward of englond that he ſhuld cume to Paris and done his homage as reſon it wold for the duchie of Gnyhen ¶And ſo thurgh counſell of the lordis of englond kyng edward went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee & at the aſcencion tide he come vn to Paris the thrid yere of his regne for to do his homage vn to the kyng of fraūce and the kyng vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  fenge his homage & made of hī moch ioye & worſſhip ¶But when kīg Edward had made his homage haſteli he was ſent for in to englōd

thurgh the quene Iſabell his moder. &̄ anone haſtely he come ayen in to englond vpon witſonday with out any takyng leue of the kīg of fraūce wherfore he wos wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth.
            
            
               ¶How ſir Roger Mortimer bare him proudly &̄ ſo hie.
               
                  ANd now ſhall ye here of ſir Roger Mortimer of wygmore that diſſired and couyted to be at an high a ſtate ſo yt the kyng graunted him to be called erle of marche thurgh out all his lordſhip. ¶And he become ſo proud and ſo hauteyne that he wold leſe & forſake the name that his anceſtres had euer before ¶And for that encheſon he let him call the erle of marche and none of the comuns of englond durſt call him bi name other name for he was called ſo thurgh the kyngꝭ crie that men ſhuld call him erle of the marche ¶And the Mortimer bare him ſo hauteyne &̄ ſo proud that wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   it was for to wit. & alſo diſgiſed hī wt wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   rich clothes out of all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   reſon both of ſhapping & of wering Wher of the engliſſhmen had gret wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   how &̄ in whot maner he myght contreue or find ſuch man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   pride and they ſaid amō
                  ges them all comenli that his prid ſh̄old not long endure: ¶And the ſame tyme ſir Geffrey Mortimer the yong yt was the mortimer ſon let him call kyng of folie & ſo it befell aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward in dede for he wos ſo full of pride &̄ of writchedneſſe that he held a roū
                  de tabull in wales to all men that thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come & contrefete the doīg &̄ the man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of kyng Arthurs tabull bot openli he failed For the nobull kyng Arthur wos the moſt worthy lord of renoune yt was in all the world in his tyme & yit come neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   none ſuch aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . For al the nobull knyghtis in all criſtendome of dede of armes aſayed duellid with kyng Arthur &̄ held him for ther lord and ſoferen. ¶And that wos well ſayn for he ꝯquered in bataill a roman that wos called Froll &̄ get of him the reame of fraūce and kylled him with his own handis ¶And alſo he faught with a geant that wos called Dinabus & kylled him that had raueſſhed fair Eleyn that wos kyng Hocles nece kyng of litell bretan.

¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward he kylled in bataill the emprour of Rome that wos called Lucie that had aſſembled ayens king Arthur for to fight with him ſo moch pepull of romās & Phethis & ſariſens yt no man coud them nōbre &̄ he diſcomfited them all as the ſtori telleth ¶And in ye ſame tyme cōmune loos ſprong in englōd thurgh coniecting & ordinaūce of the freres prechours that ſir Edward of Carnariuan that wos kyng edward fadre of whom the geeſt telleth ſaid that he was on liue in the caſtell of Corf. wherfor all the cōmyns all moſt of englond wer in ſorow & ī dred wherfor that it wer ſo or not For they wiſt not how traitourſly the mortimer had him done mordrid.
            
            
               ¶How Edmōd of wodſtok yt wos erle of kent & the kinges brother edward of Carnariuan was heded at wyncheſtre.
               
                  ANd vpō a tyme it befell ſo that ſir edmond of wodſtoke erle of Kent ſpake vn to the pope Iohan the xxij. at Auinion & ſaid that almyght good had oft tymes done for Thomas loue of Lancaſtre mony gret miraclls to mony men and women that wer thurgh diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe maladies undone as vn to the world and thurgh his praier they wer brought vn to ther hel̄th. ¶And ſo ſir edmond praied the pope herteli that he wold graūte him grace yt the forſaid Thomas myght be tranſlatid. But the pope ſaid nay that he ſhuld not be tranſlatid vn to the tyme that he wer bett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tefied of the clargie of englond & ſeyn by ther obedēce what thyng god had done for the loue of Thomas of lancaſtre after the ſuggeſtion that the forſaid edmōd erle of kent had vn to him made ¶And whan this edmond ſaw that he myght not ſpede of his purpoſe as tochyng the tranſlacion he praied him of his coūcell as toching ſir edward of Carnariuan his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & ſaid that not long a gone he wos kyng of englond what thīg might beſt be done as toching his deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ance ſith that a comune fame is thurgh englōd that he his on liue & hole &̄ ſauf. ¶Whan the pope herd hī tell that ſir edward was on liue he cōmaūded the erle vpō his beniſon

that he ſh̄uld help wt all the pouer yt he myght yt he wer deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed out of priſun & ſ
                     •
                  ue his body ī all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt he might. & for to bring this thīg to an end he aſſoyled hī & his cōpani a pena & culpa & all tho that holp to his deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ance. ¶Tho toke edmōd of wodſtoke his leue of the pope & come ayen ī to englōd. And whā ſir edmond wos comē ſū of the frere precheurs come &̄ ſaid yt ſir edward his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yit wos on liue ī the caſtell of Corf vnder the kepīg of Sir Thomas Gurnay. ¶Tho ſped him the forſaid Edmōd as faſt os he might till he come to the caſtell of Corf &̄ a queynted hī &̄ ſpak ſo fair wt Iohn̄ Dauerell yt was ꝯſtable of the ſame caſtell and yaf him rich yeftes to haue acqueyntance of him and to knaw of his coūcell. ¶And thus it befell that the forſaid ſir edmōd praied ſpecially to tell him priuely of his lord his brother ſir Edward if that he leued or wer dede. and if he wer on liue he praied of him ons to haue a ſight ¶And this ſir Iohan Dauerill was an high herted man and full of curage &̄ anſuerid ſhortely vn to ſir Edmond and ſad that ſir edward his brother was in helth and vnder his kepyng and durſt ſhew him vn to no man ſith it was defended him in the kynges half edward that was edwardis ſon of Carnariuan and alſo thurgh commaundement of the quene Iſabell the kynges modre &̄ of ſir Rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Mortimer that he ſh̄uld ſhew his body vn to no maner man of the world ſauf only vn to them vpon leſyng life and limme &̄ diſherityng of his heiris for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more. ¶But the fals traitour falſly lied for he was not in his ward but he wos take thens & lad vn to the caſtell of berkeley thurgh ſir Thomas Gurnay thurgh ꝯmaūdemēt of the Mortimer til that he wos dede as before is ſaid but ſir edmōd of wodſtoke wiſt nothyng that Edward his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was dede wher vpon he toke a lettre vn to the kīg edward his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   as to his worthi lord. ¶And vnderfeng the letter of him & be hight him for to do his meſſage with out any man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   faill & with that ſir edmōd

toke leue of the forſaid Iohn̄ & wēt ī to his own ꝯtre & lordſhip ī kent that he had ther ¶And anone as this ſame iohn̄ wiſt yt ſir edmond wos gone ī to kent his own lordſhip anone he went ī all the haſt that he myght fro the caſtell of Corf & comen vn to ſir Roger mortimer & toke him the letter that ſir edmōd of wodſtoke erle of kent had takē him cloſed &̄ enſeled with his own ſeale ¶And wē ſir rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   mortimer had vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  feng the letter he vncloſid it &̄ ſaw what was cōteyned therī &̄ began it for to rede wherof the begynnyng wos this ¶Worſhippes & reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ens with brothers legeaunce & ſubieccion. Sir knyght worſſhipfull & dere brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   if it you pleſe I pray you hertely yt ye be in good cōforth for I ſhall ſo ordeyn for you that ye ſhall cum out of priſon & be deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed of that diſeſe that ye be in. And vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtondeth of your gret lordſhip that I haue to me aſſentant almoſt all ye gret lordis of englond with all ther apparaill that is to ſai wt armure wt treſour with out nombre for to maynten yor quarell ſo ferforth that ye ſhall be kyng ayen as ye wer before and that they haue ſuorne to me vpon a boke &̄ as well prelatis as erles and barons: ¶When ſir Roger the Mortimer ſaw and vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtode the myght and thee ſtrength of the lettre anone his hert for wroth gan boll and euel hert bare toward ſir Edmond of wodſtoke that was the erle of kent And with all the haſt that he myght he went vn to Dame Iſabell the quene that wos the kīges mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ ſhewed hir ſir edwardes lettre and his will and his purpoſe. And how that he had coniected and ordeynde to put doune kyng edward of wyndeſore hir ſon of his rialte and of his kyngdom. ¶Now certis ſir Rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   
                  qd ſhe hath ſir edmond done ſo now: by my fadre ſoule quod ſhe I will bene therof auenged if that god graunte me life and that in a ſhorte tyme ¶And with that the quene Iſabell went vn to ye kyng edward hir ſon ther he was: at thee ꝑlament at wyncheſtre for to haue a mende the wronges and the treſpaces that were doon among the pepull in his reame. ¶And tho toke ſhe & ſhewed

him the letter that ſir Edmond of wodſtoke erle of kent had made and enſeled with his own ſeale. And bad him vpon hir benyſon that he ſh̄uld be a venged vpon edmond: as vpon his dedely enmye ¶Tho was the quene ſo wroth toward ſir edmond the erle of kent. & ceſſid neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to pray vn to hir ſon till that he had ſent in all the haſt after him ¶And vpon that the kyng ſent by his lettres aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſir Edmond of wodſtoke that he ſhuld cum and ſpeke with him at wyncheſtre all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thyng left ¶And whan ſir edmond ſaw that the kyng ſent aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him with his lettres enſelid he haſted him in all that he myght till that he come vn to wyncheſtre. but wen the quene wiſt that 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   edward wos cumyn to wyncheſtre tho anone ſhe praied and ſo faſt went vn to the kyng edward hir ſon that the good erle wos a reſtid anone and lad vn to the barre before Robert of Hamond that wos coroner of the kynges houſe hold and he aſſocied vn to him ſir Roger the Mortimer &̄ tho ſpake the foreſaid Robert and ſaid. ¶Sir Edmond erle of kent ye ſhall vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtond that it is done vs to witt and principally vn to our liege lord the kyn Edward of englond all myghty god him ſaue and kepe. that ye be his dedely enmye & a tratour: &̄ alſo a comune enmye vn to the reame. and that ye haue ben a bout mony day for to make priue deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  aunce of ſir edward ſum tyme kyng of englond your brother the wich was put doune of his rialte by the comun aſſent of all the lordis of englond in peſyng of our lord the kyng eſtate and alſo of his reame. ¶Tho anſuerid the good man &̄ ſaid. forſoth ſir vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtondeth well that I was neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   traitour to my kyng ne to the ream. & that I do me on god and on all the world. &̄ therfore be my kinges leue I ſh̄all it p̄ue and defend as a man aught for to do. ¶Tho ſaid Mortimer ſir edmōd it is ſo ferforth know that it may not be well gaynſaid & yt ī preſens of all that here be it ſhal be well proued. Now had this fals Mortimer the ſame lettre that ſir Edmond had taken vn to ſir Iohan Dauerill in the caſtell of Corf for to take to kyng

Edward his brother that ſir edmond wiſt not of ne ſuppoſed no thyng that ſir Iohn̄ Dauerell had bene ſo fals to deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his letter in ſuch wiſe vn to the Mortimer and thought no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thing of yt letter. thā mortimer ſaid to ſir edmōd & ſhewed a lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſeled & axed him if yt he knew yt letter & the ſeal. ¶This ſir edmond loked ther on &̄ a viſed him long tyme on the printe of the ſeal for he might not ſe the lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   with in what wos therī & wiſt well that it was his ſeal and thought that it had be ſome letter yt had bore no gret charge and thought no thing of that od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and ſaid openly in hering of them all ye forſoth this is my ſeall: & I will it not forſake ¶Lo quod the mortimer ſires ye hereth all what he has ſaid & that he knowleches hī yt this is his lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and his ſeal and now ye ſhall here all what is conteyued ther in ¶And than this mortimer opened the letter that he had folden afore to gedre and red it openli word be word in hering of them all ¶And whē the lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   was red he ſaid lo ſires ye haue herid all that here is written &̄ yt he hath knowlecheth that this is his letter and his ſeal &̄ he may not go ther fro ¶And than they cried & yaf dome that he ſhuld be honged and draw and his hede ſmyten of in man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of a trator and he and his heiris diſherited for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more And ſo he was lad forth and put in to priſon ¶And when this wos done and the quene wiſt that he wos dampned by way of law both of life and limme and his heires diſherited for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more thurgh opyn knowle chyng in playn court. ¶Wherfore them thought that it wer good that the forſaid ſir edmond wer haſteli kylled with out wittīg of the kyng or els the kyng lyghtly wold for yef him his deth and than it ſhuld turne them to moch ſorow ſo os he wos enpeched. ¶And anone the quene thurgh councell of the Mortimer and with out ony other councell ſent in haſt to the Balifs of wyncheſter that they ſhuld ſmyte of ſir Edmond hede of wodſtoke erle of Kent with out any maner of bydyng or reſpite vp payn of lyfe and lyme and that he ſhuld haue none other execucion be cauſe

of tarieng not withſtonding the Iugemēt. Tho tokē the balifs ſir Edmond out of priſō and lad him beſide the caſtell of wyncheſtre and ther they made a gong fermer ſmyte of his hede for none other durſt it done & ſo died he ther Alas the while. that is to ſai the x. day of October the iij. yere of kyng Edwardis regne and whan the kyng wiſt ther of. he wos wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſori &̄ let entier him at the frere mynors at wyncheſtre.
            
            
               ¶Of the deth of ſir Roger mortimer erle of march.
               
                  ANd ſo it befell at that tyme that ſir Roger Mortimer erle of the marche was ſo proud and ſe hauteyn that he helde no lord of the reame his pere. and tho become he ſo couetous yt he folowed Dame Iſabell the quenes court that wos kyng Edwardis modre and beſet his penyworthis wt the offics of the quenes houſold in the ſame man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that the kynges officers did and ſo he made his takyng as tochyng vitalles and alſo of cariagis. & all he did for becauſe of ſpenſis and for to gadre treſur and ſo he did with out nombre in all yt he myght ¶Tho made he hym wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   priue with the quene Iſabell &̄ ſo moch lorſhip &̄ reteneu had: ſo yt al the gret lordis of englond of him wer adrad. Wherfore ye kyng & his cōcell towardis hī wer agreued &̄ ordeyned among them to vndo hī thurgh pure reſō & law for cauſe yt king edward yt was the kyngꝭ fadre traitourſly thurgh him was mordred in the caſtell of Berkeley as bofore is ſaid more planly ī ye ſame part of this boke of his deth ¶And ſū that wer of ye kynges cōcell loued ye martimer: and told him in priuete how that the kīg &̄ his coūcell wer about frō day to day hī for to ſhend and vndon. wherfor the Mortimer was ſore annoyed &̄ angri as ye deuell ayens them yt wer of the kīges coūcell & ſaid he wold of thā bene avenged how ſo euer he toke on. ¶It was not long aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ward that kynd Edward &̄ Dame Phelip his wife &̄ Dame Iſabell the kyngꝭ modre & ſir Rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   mortimer ne went vn to Notyngham ther for to ſodiorne. & ſo it befell that the quene Iſabell

thurgh councell of the Mortimer toke to hir the keys of the yatis of the caſtell of Notingham ſo that no man mygh cum nother in ne out by nyght but thurgh commaundement of the Mortimer ne the kyng ne none of his councell. ¶And that t
                     •
                  me it fell ſo that the Mortimer as a deuell for wroth bolled. and alſo for wrath that he had ayens the kyngꝭ men edward &̄ principally ayeneſt them that had him accuſed to the kyng of ye deth of ſir Edward his fadre ¶And p̄uely a coūcell was take bitwen quene iſabell &̄ the Mortimer & the biſſh̄op of Lyncoln & ſir Symond of Beford & ſir Hugh of Trumpyngton and od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   priue of ther coū
                  cell for to vndone them all that had accuſed the Mortimer vn to the kyng of his fadres deth of treſon and of felonie: ¶Wherfore al tho that wer of the kynges councell whan they wyſtē of thee mortimers caſtyng priuely come to kīg edward &̄ ſaid yt the mortimer wold them deſtroy for cauſe yt they had him accuſed of kīg edwardis deth his fadre. & praid him yt he wold maynten them ī ther right. ¶And thes were the lordis to purſue this quarell ſir william of mountagu ſir Humfrey de bo
                     •
                  hun ſir william his brother ſir Rauf of Stafford ſir Robert of Hereford ſir willm of Clinton ſir Iohn̄ Neuil of hornby & mōy othre of ther conſēt and al̄l thes ſworen vpon a boke to maȳten the quaril in as moch as they myght. ¶And it befell ſo aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that ſir william mō
                  tagu ne none of the kīges frendis muſt nat be herbrugged in the Caſtel for the mortimer· but went and toke ther herbrughe in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe places in the toune of Notyngham. ¶And tho were they ſore adrad leſt that mortimer ſhuld them deſtroy And ī haſt thei come vn to kyng Edward 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   william mountagu tho yt he wos in the caſtell. and priueli him told that he ne none of his companie ſhuld not take the mortimer with out coūcell & help of will̄m of Eland ꝯſtabul of the ſame Caſtel. Now c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tes ꝙ the kīg I loue you wel: and therfore I councel you yt ye go to the forſaid ꝯſtabull and commaund him in my name that he be your fiend and
                  
your help for to take the Mortimer all thing I left vpon parill of life and limme. ¶Tho ſaid mountaygu ſir my lord groūt mercy. ¶Tho went forth the forſaid montaygu & come to the cūſtabull of the caſtell &̄ told him ye kyngꝭ will. ¶And he anſurid &̄ ſaid ye kynges will ſhuld be done in as moch as he myght. and yt he wold not ſpare fore no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   deth and ſo he ſwore & made his oth ¶Tho ſaid ſir willm mountagu to the coneſtabull ī hering of all them that were helpyng vn to the ſame quarell. ¶Now c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tis dere frend vs behoueth to worch & do by your quentyſe for to take the mortimer ſith that ye be keꝑ of the caſtell and haueth the keyes in your ward ſir quod the conſtabull will ye vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtond that the gates of the caſtell ben lokked with the lockis that Dame iſabell ſend hider and be nyght ſhe hath the keys therof & lieth them vnder the leueſell of the bed vn to the morow and ſo ye may not cū in to the caſtell bi ye yates in no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of wiſe. ¶But I knowe an aley that ſtretcheth out of the ward vnder the erth in to ye forſaid caſtell that goth in to the weſt. wich aley Dame Iſabell the quene ne none of hir men ne the Mortimer ne none of his companie knoweth it not: ¶And ſo I ſhall lede you thurgh that aley and ſo ye ſhall cum in to thee caſtell with out aſpieng of oni mā yt ben your emnys ¶And thee ſame nyght ſir willm moū
                  tagu & all ye lordis of his quarel & the ſame ꝯſtabul alſo wēt them to horſe &̄ made ſemblāt as it wer for to wend out of the mortimer ſight. ¶But anone as ye mortimer herd this tydyng he wēt yt they wold haue gon ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee for dred of hī and anone he & his companie token councell amonges them for to let ther paſſage & ſent lettres anone to thee portes ſo that none of ye gret lordis ſhuld wēd home to ther own cūtre bot if they were areſtid &̄ take: ¶And amōg od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thingꝭ willm Eland coneſtable of ye foreſaid caſtel priueli lad ſir william mountagu and his compain by the foreſaid way vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the erth ſo til̄ they com ī to ye caſtell and went vp in to the toure there that Mortimer was in.

¶But ſir hugh of Trumpyngton them aſcried hidouſly and ſaid. A traitours it is all for nought that ye be comen vn to this caſtell. ye ſhall die yit an euell deth eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ychon. and anone on of them that was in Mountagu is companie vp with a mace and ſmote the ſame hugh vpō the heed that the brayn breſt out and fel on the ground and ſo was he dede an euell deth. ¶Tho toke they the Mortimer as he armed him at the toures dore when he hard the noyſe of them for dred And when the quene Iſabell ſaw that the Mortimer was taken ſhe made moch ſorow in hert and thes wordes vn to them ſaid: ¶Now fair ſires I pray you that ye don no ne harme to his body a worthy knyght our welbeloued frend & our dere coſyn. ¶Tho went they thens and come and brought the mortimer and preſentid him vn to the kyng Edward and he commaunded to bring him in ſauf ward But anone as they yt wer conſent vn to the Mortimers doyng herd tell that he was taken they went and hid them and priuely by nyght went out of the toune eche in his ſide with heuy hert and mornyng and leued vpon ther landis as well as they myght ¶And ſo that ſame yere that the Mortimer was take he had at his retene ix. ſcore knyghtis with out ſquyers and ſergiauntys of armes and fote men ¶And tho was the mortimer lad to london And ſir Symōd of Beford was lad with him and was take to the coneſtabull of the toure to kepe. ¶But aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward wos the mortimers liif examined at weſtmynſtre before the kīg and before al the gret lordis of englōd for ꝑill yt might fall to the reame & to enquere alſo wich were aſſentyng to ſir edwardis deth the kīges fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . & alſo thurgh whom the ſcottis aſcappid from ſtanhope in to ſcotland with out the will of kyng edward. ¶And alſo how the chartre of ragman was deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed vn to the ſcottis wherin the homag & feautes of ſcotland were conteyned: yt the ſcottis ſhuld done eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more to the engliſh̄ kīg for the reame of ſcotland wherfore in his abſēs he was dampned to be draw and honged for his treſon: & this myſchief

come vn to him on ſent Andrewes euen in ye yere of incarnaciō of our lord Ihū criſt .M.ccc. & xxx.
            
            
               ¶How kyng edward get ayen vn to him grociouſly the homages and feautes of Scotlād wher of he was put out thurgh fals coūcell of Iſabell his modre and ſir Roger Mortimer that was new made erle of marche.
               NOw ye haue hard lordis how ſir Iohan Bailloll in the time of pees was choſen to be kyng of Scotland for encheſon that he come of the eldeſt doughter of the erle Dauid of Hontīgton thas wos kyng Alexandre brether of Scotland that died with out heir of his body begoten. And how this Iohan made feaute & homage to kyng Edward Henris ſon the iij. for his land
                     •
                  s of ſcotland And how he aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward withſaid his homage thurgh councell of the ſcottis in the yere of our lord a .M.cc: & lxxiiij. &̄ ſent vn to ye pope thurgh a fals ſuggeſtion yt he made his oth vn to the forſaid kyng edward ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his aſtate &̄ his will of wich othe the pope him aſſoilled thurgh his bulſis to hī y ſent: ¶And a none as kīg edward wiſt ther of he ordeyned anōe his barons & come vn to Berewike &̄ ꝯquerid the toūe. at wich cōqueſt ther were ſloyn xxvM. &̄ vijC. and the bailloll that was kīg of ſcotland cō & yeld hī to good kīg edward. &̄ the kīg aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed hī out of the tour of londō. And all the gret lordis of Scotlād with him that tho were taken at Berewik and yaf them ſauf condithis to gone in to ſcotland. ¶And the ſcottis ſith thurgh ther falſeneſſe wered vpon good kyng edward. ¶And when ſir Iohan bailloll kīg of ſcotland ſaw all this he went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee vn to Dunpier and leued ther vpō his own landis as well as he myght till that the ſcottis wold amend them of thermiſdedis and treſpace: &̄ lad with him ſir edward his ſon wherfore the Scot
                     •
                  s in diſpite of him called him ſir Iohan Turnlabard for beca
                     •
                   that he wold not offende ne treſpace ayens the good kyng edward of englond ¶And ſo he for ſoke his Reame of Scotland & ſet

thar of but litell price: ¶And this ſir Iohn̄ long tyme duelled in fraunce till that he died ther: And ſir Edward his ſon vnderfeng his heritage and did homage vn to the kyng of fraunce for his landis of Dunpier and ſo it fell aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward that Edward yt wos Iohn̄ Bailloll ſon had with hī a ſquyer of englōd that wos borne in yorkſhire that was called Iohn̄ of Barnabi & this Edward bailloll loued him moch & wos ny him & full priue. ¶And ſo this Iohn̄ of barnaby was in debate with a frenſh man in the toune of Dunpier &̄ ſo he killed him & wēt in his wai in all the haſt that he myght in to the Caſtell for to haue ſocour & help of his lord ¶And anōe come ye officers of the toūe to take iohan of Barnaby as a felon & ſir edward his lord holp hym &̄ reſcued him &̄ by nyght made hī wēd out of the caſtell & ſo he went his way & come ī to englōd with out any harme. ¶And when the kyng of fraūce ſaw that ſir Edward had reſcued his felon he become wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth ayens ſir Edward and anōe let him be areſtid & toke in to his hand all his landis ¶Tho duelled ſir Edwar in priſon vn to the tyme that ſir Henri of Beaumont come in to fraunce the wich Henri ſum tyme was erle of angos in ſcotland thurgh his wife & wos put out of the forſaid erldom whē the accordemēt was bitwen Englond and Scotland thurhh the quene iſabell and ſir Rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Mortimer and ther copani for the mariage that ſhe made bitwen Dauid that wos Robert the Brus ſon & Dame Iohana atte Toure kyng Edwardis ſuſtre of englōd & well vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtode this yt at the end he ſh̄uld cum to his right but if it wer thurgh ſir edward Bailloll that was right heir of the reame of Scotland ¶And the kyng of fraūce Lowys loued moch this ſir Henri and he was with him full priue and thought for to make a deliueraunce of ſir Edward Baillolls body if he migh in any man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of wyſe. ¶Tho praied he the kyng yt he wold graunte him of his grace ſir Edward Baillolls body vn to the next ꝑlament that he myght lyue with his own rentis in the meyn tym

and that he myght ſtand to be Iuged bi his peris at the parlamēt ¶And the kyng graūtid him his praier and made the forſaid Edward to be deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed out of priſon in the man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   aboue ſaid. And anone as he wos out of priſō. ſir Henri toke him forth with him and lad him to englond and made him duell priuely at the maner of ſandhall vp onſe in yorkeſhire with the lady veſcy & ſo he ordeined him ther an houge retenaunce of pepul of engliſſhmen &̄ alſo of aliens for to conquere ayen his heritage. ¶And ſo he yaf moch ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   vn to the ſowdiours &̄ to aliens for to help hī: ¶And they behight for to help him in that they myght. but they failed hī at his moſt nede. ¶And at that tyme Donald erle of Morrif herd tell how that ſir Edward bailloll wos priuely cum in to englond and come to him and made with him gret ioye of his comīg ayen and ſaid vn to him &̄ behight him that all the gret lordis of englond ſhuld be to him entendant and ſh̄uld him hold for hyng as right heir of ſcotland and did to him homage & feaute. ¶Tho come ſir Henri of Beaumont to kyng Edward of englond &̄ praied him in way of charite that he wold graūt of his grace vn to ſir Edward bailloll that he myght ſaufl̄y gone bi land from Sandhall vn to ſcotlond for to cōquere his right heritage in ſcotland: ¶The kyng anſuerid & ſaid. if that I ſuffre ye Bailloll wend thurgh my land in to ſcotland than the pepull wold ſay that I ſhuld be aſſentyng vn to the compani ¶Now ſir I pray yow that ye wold yef him leue to tak wt hī ſoudiours of engliſhmen that they myght ſaufly lede him thurgh yowr land vn to ſcotland. ¶And ſir vpon this couenaūt that if it ſo befal that god it forbide that he be diſcomfited in batell thurgh the Scottis. that I and alſo all the lordis that holden wt Bailloll bene for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  more out of your rentis that we haue in englond ¶And ther the kyng vpon thys couenaunt graunted ther bone as tochyng him & tho that wer of the ſame quarell the wich

clamed for to haue landis or rentis in the ream of Englond. ¶And thes wer the names of the lordis that purſued this mater: that is to ſay ſir Edward the Bailloll that chalenged the reame of Scotland ſir Henri Beammont erle of Angos ſir Dauid of Stroboly erle of Atheles ſir Geffrey of monbray: Walt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Comyn &̄ mony od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt wer put out of ther heritage in Scotland whan the pees wos made bitwen englond and ſcotland as before is ſaid. ¶And ye ſhall vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtond yt thes lordis toke wt them v. hondreth men of armes & ij. thouſand archers and of fote men &̄ tho wēt ī to ſhip at rauenſpore and ſayled by the ſe till yt they come vn to ſcotland & come to land at kynkehorne xij. myle frō ſent Iohanes toune: and anone ſent out ther ſhippis ayen for they ſh̄uld not be hurte ne empayrid nether yt no man ſh̄uld go ī to the ſhippis ayen though yt they had nede bot a bidē all ꝑrillis & not fle but ſtād and rather ſuffre deth than flee for to maynten ther trew quarell ¶When the Erle of Fiffe a fers man & a ſterne herd yt the Bailloll was comyn for to take the land of ſcotland he come ī haſt to kynghorn with xij. thouſand ſcottis to deſtroy hī that he ſh̄uld not cum to land. ¶But ſir Edward Bailloll & his compani ther him deſcomfited at ye wich diſcomfiture ſir Aleſand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſeton wos ther kyllid & mony od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ¶The erle of Fiffe was tho ſore & full yll a ſhamed that ſo litell a compani had him diſcomfited &̄ ſhamly put him & al his compani yt was a lyue for to flee. ¶Tho come ſir Edward bailloll &̄ token the cuntre all about him till he com vn to the Abbey of Dunfermilyn & ther he found vitallis for him & for his folke &̄ among all other thyngꝭ he fond ī a chambre a bout v. hondreth of gret ſtauis of fine oke with long pykis of yren & of ſtele: & he toke them & deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed them to the moſt ſtrongeſt men of his compani ¶And anone after he went fro thens and logged him ī a felde ij: myle from ſent Iohanes toune and when the burgies of the toune herd how the Erle of Fiffe was diſcōfited thurgh the Bailloll they wer ſore adr
                     •
                  d

and br
                     •
                  ken ther brugges that they hed made ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the water of erne ſo that the Bailloll myght not gone ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wherfore he loged hī ther all that nyght but litell hede he toke of reſt and ſaid vn to his pepull ¶Now dere lordis ye know full well that we be now logged bitwen our enmys and if they may vs hampre ther is no bote but deth wherfore if we abide here ſtill all this nyght I leue that it ſhall turne vs to moch ſorow and harme. For the pouer of ſcotland may eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y day wax and encrece & we may not ſo done And we be bot litell pepull as ayenſt them. ¶Wherfor I pray you for the loue of almyghty god make we vs bold and hardy and yt we may mighteli take the ſcottis this nyght and boldely were vpon them and let vs purſue them this night &̄ if they be traueled thurgh vs and ſe oure heidines: od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſcottis yt ſe them ſo traueled and wery the ſorer will they be adrad with vs for to fight and ferſely than we ſhall fight with them &̄ on them purſue ſo that thurgh the grece of god almyghty all the world ſhall ſpeke of the doughtyneſſe of our chiualrie. ¶And ſires vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtondeth wel yt all ye companye yt comen with ſir Edward Bailloll graūted wel vn to that councell and werther of right glad: and anone purſued vpon the ſcottis that they becomen wonder wery. ¶And the Bailloll & his companie ſore folowed them &̄ did then moch harme &̄ ſorow. thurgh ther aſſaut ſo that they might not for febull them help and for litell pepull ¶But tho ſaid the ſcottis amonges them what is now befall that ſo litell a pepull as the bailloll hath in wynge done vs ſo moch trauell and ſorow. ¶Now certes it ſemeth vs that he wyrketh bi grace. for he is wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   gracious in his quarell & we c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tes ſhall be dede or that we may cum to hī vs for to yeld ſith that his fadre ſet of vs no price. ¶And among all other thinges the Bail̄loll & his pepull paſſed the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of Erne ſo that ſir Roger of Swynerton the ſon wos fers and angri and went forth. & they ſaw pepull of armes ful well araied and forth they went vn to them & with them faught and kyled or

take as mony as wold abide ¶And nothles at that aſſaute they wend it had bene the gret hoſt of ſcotland ¶And whē it come to the morow they gadred them to gedre and reſtid them a while. but ye while yt the engliſſhmē reſted thē the nobull baron Thomas of veſcy and the nobull baron of ſtafford prikked ther hors vp & doūe by the hilles for to kepe the Eſtres of the cūtre And as they pricked vp and doūe they ſaw a gret oſt of good aray ordeyned in ther wynges wt helmys &̄ ſheldis ſhynyng cōīg vpon them ¶And ther come tho two lordis ayen vn to Baillollis folke. &̄ ſaid. Now for the loue of god almyghty bene of good cō: forth. for ye ſhal haue bataill anone right ¶And tho ſpak ſir Fouk the ſon of Gareyne a baron of gret renowne & of dede of armes ¶Sirris lordinges vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtōd what I will ſay. I haue ſeyn mony diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe wīges as well amōg ſariſēs &̄ Iues as amōg the ſcottis. And yit ſaw I neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the fourth ꝑte of the wynge fight & ther far if ye will abide our enmys we be ynow for to fight ayēs them. But if we be not of good hert and of good will for to fight wt them. for c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tis we bene full few ayens this compani ¶And therfore for the loue of god take to vs good hert &̄ let vs bene bold & thynke we neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   on our wifes ne on our childre. bot onli to conquere our enmys ī bataill. ¶And thurgh the help of our lord god we ſhall them ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cum. ¶And with yt come the hoſt of the ſcottis towardis them full ſerely & ayens ſir Edward Bailloll ī iij. batai
                     •
                  les well araied in armure ¶And wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ferſly they come toward the bailluls compani. But whan ſir Donald erle of Marcill yt was with the ſcottis ſaw all this he ſaid vn to Robert Brus the ſon of Robert the brus thes wordis: ¶Sir Robert ꝙ he full ſore me forthynketh at my hart yt thes pepull yt the bailloll hath brought with him ſhuld die wt dynt of ſcottis ſwerdis ſith that they be criſtyn men as well as we ben. ¶And therfor me thynke that it wer gret charite to ſend vn to them for to yeld them vn to our mercy & raunſon them thurgh grevos ranſon for

as moch as they haue taken our land and done ill. ¶Now certes quod ſir Robert the Brus I haue well ꝑſaued yt thou art an enmy & a traytour vn to ſcotland ſith yt thou will ꝯſent to ſaue our dedeli enmys yt hath done vs moch ſorow &̄ ſhame & now it ſemeth well that ye bene of ther aſſent ¶Now c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tes Robert quod ſir Donald falſly ye lie: I am not of ther cōpani ne of ther ꝯſent and that haſtely ye ſhall ſee. For I will fight with them rather than any of this ꝯpani. ¶And c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tis ſir Robert ſaid he I ſhall ī maugri of thy hede aſſaill them or thou: ¶And wt yt they pricked ther ſtedis ferſly vpō Caſkemore. &̄ ther wyng them folewed on a renge. & tho come they & met the bailloll & his cōpani at a hongyng bough of the more ī a ſtrat paſſage &̄ ſo faſt they haſted them vn to ye engliſſhmen: ſo yt thouſandis fell to the groūd ech ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   other ī to an hepe both hors & man. ¶The bailloll & his men myghtely ſtode ayens them & faſt killed the ſcottis to the groūd &̄ mony they ſore woūded ſo lōg till yt they ſtod vpō them &̄ foyned them with ther ſuerdis & ſperis thurgh the
                     •
                   bodies &̄ ſo ſore traualed vpō thē till yt thei become wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   weri & wiſt not what for to do and the ſcottis that wer left an liue fled away for to ſaue them ſelf ī ye beſt man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that they myght ¶And tho purſued them ſir edward Bailloll & his men and killed of them till it was nyght. & fro thēs thei went to ſent iohanes toūe &̄ toke it & held them ther & vitailed them ſelf at ther own will for they foūden inough wherwith to make them meri. ¶Tho made the bailloll his men yt wer wōdid go to ſhip for to wend ī to englōd to hele ther woūdes ¶And ī yt time ther was a flemīg ī the ſee a ſtrong thefe & a robber that wos caled Crabbe. ¶And this flemmyng was driuen out of flaūdres for his wikkednes. & therfore he come ī to ſcotland to hold with the Scottis and did as moch harme vn to thee engliſſh̄men as he myght: ¶And this Crabbe met the bailloll men in the ſe that wer wounded before in bataill that wer ſent ayen in to englond for to hele ther wound
                     •
                  s. & this Crabbe yaf vn

to them a gret aſſaute and wold haue killed them euerychon bot the engliſhmen defendid them well & manly and diſcomfited crab and his companie. ¶And tho gan he fle in to ſcotland and as he come toward ſent Iohanes toune he fond a gret cōpany of ſcottis that wer comen ayen to gedre after the diſcomfiture of Gaſkemore the wich beſeged Bailloll and his men in the ſame toune of ſent Iohn̄ and anone told the ſcottis how that he wos diſcō
                  fited of the engliſſhmen that wer woūdid at gaſkemore that wēt toward englōd for to hele ther woūdes and ſaid to the ſcottis that they ſhuld haue no pouer ne myght ne grace a yens edward Bailloll for encheſon that he ſcomfited & empired all the chiualri of Scotland with an handfull of men as to accompt as a yens the Scottis that wer ſlayn. Wherfor he coūcelled to remeue the ſege from ſent Iohanes toune and kepe them in the beſt maner yt thei coude and might. ¶The ſcottis vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtod yt crab ſaid ſothe & forſoke ye ſege and wēt thens by night &̄ helpe them ſelf ī the beſt man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt thei might ¶When this thing wos know thurgh ſcotland how that the lordis &̄ knyghtis wer diſcomfited at gaſkemore of ſcotland thurgh ſir edward the bailloll. ¶Ye ſhall vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ſtond that the lordes & ladies & the gentils of Scotland com wō
                  der faſt to ſent Iohanes toune and yel̄d them vn to the Baillol and to him did homage and feaute for ther landis & yelde them to his pees. and he them reſaued frely. ¶And fro thēs he wēt to the abbey of Scone and ther he was crouned kyng of ſcotland And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he let crie his pees thurgh out all the land ¶And at that ſame tyme it befell that kyng Edward held his ꝑlament among his lieges at the new caſtell vp Tyne for to amēd the treſpaces and the wronges that had be done in his land. &̄ ſir edward the bailloll kyng of ſcotland come to him thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and did to him feaute and homage for the reame of ſcotland. ¶And in this maner kyng edward of englond gadred ayen his homages and feautes of ſcotland wher of he was put out thurgh councell and
                  
aſſent of Dame Iſabell his modre and of ſir Roger Mortimer erle of the marche. Tho toke bailloll kyng of ſcotland his leue of kyng Edward of englond & went thens in to his own land of Sotland and ſet bot litell by them that had counceled him and holpen him in his quarell. wherfore they went fro him and went and leued by ther landes and rentis in ſcotland ¶And ſo it befell afterward not long that the kyng of Scotland ne remeued and come to the toune of Anand: &̄ ther token his duelling and thidder come to him a company of knyghtes ſtrong men and worthy and yeld them vn to the kyng. and bere them ſo fair in dede & in countinaunce. ſo yt he truſtid moch vpō them. ¶And anone as the traytours ſaw that he truſt moch vpon them▪ they ordeyned amonges them .l. in a compani. & wold haue kyled ther lord the kyng ¶But thurgh the grace of almighty god he brakē thurgh a walle an hole in his chambre. and os god wold aſcappid theyr trecherie and all his men wer kylled. and he aſcappid with moch dred vn to the toune of Cardoil and ther held him ſore anoyed. and this befell in our ladies eue the concepcion· ¶Tho ſent kyng Edward the Bailloll to kyng Edward of englond how falſely & tratoursly he was in litell tyme put to ſhame & ſorow thurgh his liege men. vpon whom he truſtid wōd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   moch. & praid him for the loue of god yt he wold maynten him &̄ help him ayens his enmys. ¶The kyng of englond had of him gret pitte. & behight to helpe him and ſocour him: &̄ ſent him word that he ſhuld hold him in pees ſtill in the forſaid Cite of Cardoill till that he had gadred his pouer: ¶Tho ordeyned kyng Edward of Englond a coūcell at london and let gadre his men in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe ſhires of englond. and whan he wos all redi he went toward thee toune of Berewill vpon Twede and thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come vn to him kīg Edward bailloll of Scotland with his pouer and beſeged the toune. and made with out the toune a fair toune of pauilons. and 
                  
                     •
                  iked them all about ſo that they had no dred of thee ſcottis: and

made mony aſſaute with gonnys and with other engynes to the toune. wherwith they diſtroid mony fair houſes and chirches alſo wer bet doune vn to the erth with gret ſtones that ſpituuſly come out of gonnys and of other engynes. And notheles the ſcottis kept well the toūe that tho two kynges might not come therī long tyme. ¶And notheles the kīges abyde ther ſo lōg till tho that were in the toune failed vitales. and alſo they wer ſo wery of wakyng that they wiſt what for to done. ¶And ye ſhall vnderſtād thas tho ſcottis that wer in the toune of Berewik thurgh commune coūcell and ther aſſent let crie vpon the walles of the toune that they might haue pees of the engliſhmen. & ther of they praied the kyng of his grace and merci and praied him of trewes for viij. days vpō this couenaunt that if they wer not reſcued in that ſide of the toune toward ſcotland of the ſcottis with in viij daies that they wold yeld them vn to the kyng and the toune alſo. ¶And to hold this couenant they proferid to ye kyng xij hoſtages out of the toune of berewik. ¶When the hoſtages wer deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed vn to the kyng anone tho of the toūe ſend vn to the ſcottis and told them of ther ſorow and miſchief. ¶And thee ſcottis come tho priuely ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of Twed to the bought of the abbey And ſir willm Dyket that wos tho ſtiward of ſcotland and mony other yt come with him put them ther in gret ꝑill of them ſelf at yt tyme of ther life. For they come ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   a brugge that wos to broken and the ſtones away and mony of ther cōpani wer ther drenched but the forſaid willm went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and other of his companie and come bi the ſhippis of englond & kylled ī a barge of hul xvi. men And after they went in to the toune of berrewik by the water ſide. ¶Wherfore the ſcottis held tho the toune reſcued & aſked ther hoſtages ayen of the kyng of englond. ¶And thee kyng ſent them word ayen that they axed the hoſtages with wrong ſith that they come in to the toune of englond ſide. for couenant was bitwen them that the toune ſhuld be reſcued by the half of

Scotland ¶And anone kyng Edward tho cōmaunded to yeld the toune or he wold haue the hoſtage. ¶And the ſcottis ſaid the toune was reſcuyd wel ynowgh and ther to they wold them hold. ¶When kyng Edward ſaw the ſcottis brek ther couenaunt that they made he wos wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wroth and anone let take ſir Thomas fitzwillm & ſir Alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſeton wardeyn of Berewik the wich Thomas wos perſon of Dunbar and let them be take fyrſt a fore that other hoſtages For encheſon that ſir Alexander fadre wos keꝑ of the toūe. ¶And tho commaunded eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y day ij. hoſtages of the toune till that they wer all done to deth but if they yeld the toune. ¶And ſo he ſhuld teche them for to breke ther couenauntes ¶And when tho of the toune herd thes thingꝭ they becomen wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſori and ſent to the kyng of englōd that he wold graunte them other viij. dais of reſpet. ſo that bitwē tho hondreth men of armes and xx· men of armes myght be ſtrength gone bytwen them to the toune of Berewyk them for to vital that the toune muſt be holde for reſcued ¶And if ſo wer that. xxi. or xxij. or more wer ſlayn of tho hundreth beforeſaid that the toune ſhuld not be holden for reſcued. And this couenaunt to be holden they ſent to him other xij. of the forſaid toune in hoſtage ¶The kyng of englond graunted them ther praier and token the hoſtages on ſent Margaretis eue. In the yere of grace a M.CCC. & xxxij. the ſcottis com ferſely in iiij. wengis well a raid ī armys for to mete kīg Edward of englōd &̄ Edward the kīg of ſcotland & wt ther pouer & com faſt & ſharpely ayens euenſong tyme &̄ ye ſame tyme wos flode at berewik ī the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of twed yt no man myght wend ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   on his hors nor on fote. and the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos betwen the ij. kyngꝭ and the reame of englond. & yt tyme abidē the ſcortis ī yt othir ſide for encheſon yt the engliſſhmen ſh̄old haue ben drenched or ſlayn
               ¶This wos ye aray of the Scottis how yt they comē ī bataill

ayens the ij. kynges of englond and ſcottelaund. In the vaunt ward of ſcotland wer thes lordis.
               THe erle of Morif. Iames Friſell. Symōd Friſell: walter Stiward. Reynold Cheyn. Patrik of graham Iohan le graunt. Iames of Cardoill. Patrik Parkers. Robert Caldecottes. Phelip of Melledrum. Thamas Gilbert. Raufe wiſeman. Adam Gurdon Iamis Gramat. Robert Boid. hugh parke. with xl. knyghtis new dubbed. & viC. men of armes and iijM. of communes. ¶In the friſt parte of the halfe batail wer thies lordis ¶The ſtiward of ſcotland. The erle of morie iamis his vncle. Willm Duglas. dauid of Lyndeſei Mā
                  colin flemīg. Willm of Kethe Dūken Kamboke wt xxx. bacheleris new dubbed ¶In the ſecōd part of the bataill wer thes lordis ¶Iames ſtiward of Colden Aleyn ſtiward willm Abbrehyn. willm Morice. iohn̄ fitz willm. Adam le moſe. walt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   fitz Gilbert. iohn̄ of Cerlton Robert walham with vijC. men of armes and xvijM. of communes ¶In the iij. part of the bataill of ſcotland wer thes lordis: The erle of Ma
                     •
                  rethe erle of Rof the erle of Straherne the erle of ſotherland: willm of kyrkkeley. iohn̄ Cambron Gilbert of Hay willm of Ramſey willm prendegeſt Kyrſtyn hardde willm Gurdon Arnold Garde Tomas Dolphyn with xl. knyghtes new dubbed ixC. men of armes & xvM. of communes ¶In the iiij ward of the bataill of ſcotland werthes lordis. Archebald Douglas the erle of Leneuax Aliſand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   librus the erle of Fif iohn̄ Cambell erle of atheles Robert Lawether Willm of uipount willm of Lonſtone iohan de Label̄s Groos de Sherenlawe iohan de Lyndeſey Aliſander de gray. In gram de vmfreville Patrik de Polleſworth Dauid de wymes Michell ſcot Willm Landy Thomas de boys Roger the Mortimer with xx. Bachelers new dubbed ix. hondreth men of armes xviijM. and iiij. hondreth of comunes ¶The erle of Dunbar keꝑ of the caſtell of Be
                     •
                  rewik holp the ſcottis with .l. men of a
                     •
                  
                  mes

¶And ſir Alexāder of ſeten keper of ye forſaid toune of Berrewike with an hondreth men of armes. & alſo the ꝯmune: ris of ye toune with iiij. hondreth mē of armes and wt them viij hondreth of fote men: ¶The ſoume of the erles and lorddis aboue ſaid ammounteth lxvi: ¶The ſoume of bachelers new dubbed ammounteth to an hondreth and .xl. ¶The ſoume of men of armes ammouteth to iijM.C. ¶the ſomme of of the comuners ammounteth to liijM. & ijC: ¶The ſomme totall of the pepull aboue ſaied ammounteth lviM.vijC.xlv. ¶And thes lxvi: gret lordis laden al the other gret lordis aboue ſaid in iiij. batailles as it is told before all on fote ¶And kyng edward of englond &̄ edward bailloll king of ſcotland had well appareiled ther folke in iiij. batailles for to fight on fote ayens the ſcottis ther enmys: ¶And the engliſſhmen mynſtrelles blew ther trumpes and ther pipes and hidouſly aſcried the ſcottis: ¶And tho had eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y engliſſh bataill ij. wynges of price Archiers the wich at that bataill ſhot arowes ſo faſt and ſo ſore yt the ſcottis myght not help them ſelf. and they ſmyten the ſcottis thouſandis vn to the ground And they gun for to fle fro the engliſhmen for to ſaue ther lifes: ¶And when the engliſh knaues ſaw the ſcomfiture and the ſcottis fall faſt to the ground they priked ther maſtres horſe with the ſpores for to kepe them fro ꝑill & ſet ther maſtres at no force ¶And wen ye engliſhmē ſaw yt they lepten on ther hors and faſt purſued the ſcottis and all that abyden they kylled doune rigth. Ther men might ſe the doughtineſſe of the nobull kyng edward and of his men how manly they purſued the ſcottis that flowen for dred: ¶And ther men myght ſee mony a ſcottiſhman caſt doune vn to the ground dede &̄ ther baners diſplaied hacked in to peces: and mony a good haberione of ſtele in ther blod bath ¶And mony a tyme the Scottis wer gadred in to companies but euer more they wer deſcomfited ¶And ſo it be fell as god almyghty wold that the ſcottes

had that day no more foyſon ne myght ayens the engliſſhme than xx: ſhepe ſhuld haue ayens v: wolfes and ſo were the Scottis diſcomfited. And yit the Scottis had wele: v. men ayens on Engliſhman. ¶And that bataill was done on Halidounhill▪ beſide the toune of Berewik at the wich bataill wer ſlayn of the Scottis xxxv.M. &̄ .vijC.xij. &̄ of engliſſhmen but onli xiiij. and tho wer fotmen ¶And this victori befell to the engliſhmen on ſent Margaretis eue. In the yere of the Incarnacion of our lord Ihū criſt a .M.CCC.xxxij: ¶And while this doyng laſtid the Engliſh pages toke the pilfry of the Scottis yt wer killed eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man that he myght take with out ony chalengyng of any man. ¶And ſo after this gracious victori the kyng turnyd him ayen vn to the ſame ſege of berewik. And whan they beſegid ſaw &̄ herd how kīg Edward had ſped. They yolden to hī the toune with the caſtell on the morn aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſent Margaretis day. ¶And than the kyng ordeyned ſir Edward Bailloll wyth other nobull and worthy men to be kepers and gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ners of Scotland in his abſence. & him ſelf turned ayen & come in to Englond aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this victori with moch ioye and worſhip. ¶And in ye next yere ſewyng that is for to ſay in the yere of Incarnacion of our lord Ihū criſt a thouſand CCC. &̄ xxxiij. and of kyng Edward vij· he went ayen in to ſcotland in wint
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   tyme. at wich viage the Caſtill of Kilbrigge in ſcotland for him & his men that wt hī com he recou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  yd and had ayens the Scottis. all at his own luſt: ¶And in that ſame yere ſir Edward Bailloll kyng of Scotland held his parlament in ſcotlād with moni nobull lordes of Englōd that wer at yt ſame parlament for encheſon of ther landes &̄ alſo lordſhippis that they had in the reame of ſcotland &̄ helden all of that ſame Bailloll. ¶And in the viij. yere of his regne about the feſt of ſent Iohan baptiſt ſir Edwarde Bailloll the veray and trew kyng of ſcotland as by heritage and right lyne made his homage and feaute vn to kīg edward

of englond for the Reame of Scotland at the new caſtell vpon Tyne in the preſence of mony a man worthy lordis & alſo of comunes both of the reame of englond and alſo of ſcotland. and a none after in the ſame yere kyng Edward of englond reſaued of the Duke of Bretan his homage for the erldom &̄ lordſhip of Richemond ¶And ſo folowyng in the ix. yere of his rene after Mihelmaſſe Kyng Edward rode in to ſcotland and ther was faſt by ſent Iohanes toune almoſt all the wynter tyme and ſo he held his Criſtemaſſe at the Caſtell of Rokeſburgh. ¶And in the ſame yere thurgh out all Englond about ſent Clementis tyde in wynter ther aroſen ſuch a ſpringyng and welling vp of watres and alſo of ſlodis both of the ſee and alſo of freſh reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ys & ſpringꝭ yt the ſee bankes walles &̄ coſtes brekē vp yt mē beſtis &̄ houſes ī mōy places & namly ī low cūtres violētli &̄ ſodēly wer drenchid. ¶And frutis driuē away of ye erth thurgh ꝯtinuance &̄ habūdaūce of wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s of the ſee eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  warde wer turned ī to more ſaltenes & ſowrnes of ſauour. The x. yer of kīg edward regne kīg edward entred ye ſcottis ſe aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   midſomer & to mōy of the ſcottis he yaf bataill &̄ ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cō them & mōe he treted and boued vn to his pes thurgh his doughtyneſſe· ¶And after mihelmaſſe thā next foloyng wos the erle of Morif take at Edenburgh & brough ī to englōd &̄ put ī to priſon. ¶And ī the monethes of Iune & Iulij than next foloyng ī the xi yere of his regne wos ſeyn &̄ aperid ī the firmament a bemed ſterre the wych clarkys calle ſtella Comata & yt ſterre wos ſeyn in diuerſe ꝑtes af the firmament. ¶Where after anone ther folowed ī englond good chepe and wonder gret plente of all cheffar vitaill and marchandiſe. and ther ayens honger ſcarcite miſchief & nede off monay ¶In ſo moch that a quarter of whete at london was ſold for ij. ſhillyng and a good fat ox at a nobull & v: good doue briddis for a pene in which yere died ſir Iohn̄ of eltham erle off Cornewaill yt wos kīg edwardis brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & lieth at weſtmīſtre.
            
            
               
               ¶How king Edward made a duchie of the Erldom of Cornwaill & alſo of vi. other erles that weer new made &̄ of the friſt chalenge of the kyngdō of fraunce.
               IN the yere of our lord a. thouſand CCC. &̄ xxxvij. & of kyng Edward xij. in the month of march during the ꝑlament at weſtmynſtre in lent tym kyng Edward made of the erledom of Cornwaill a duchie and let it call the duchie of Cornewaill the wich duchie he yaf vn to Edward his friſt ſon with ye erledom of Cheſtre. ¶And alſo kyng Edward made at yt ſame tyme .vi. other erll: that is for to ſay ſir Henri erle of Lā
                  caſtre ſon erle of Leyceſtre willm of Boghun erle of Northhamton villm of Mountagu erle of Saluſberi. ¶Hugh of Awdell erle of Gloceſtre ¶Robert of vfford erle of Southfolke and willm of Clyton erle of Huntyngton: ¶And in that ſame yere it wos ordeyned in the ſame parlament that no mā ſhuld were no clothe that wos wrought out of Englond as clothe of gold ne of ſilke or veluet or Damaſke or Satin Baudkin ne none ſuch other ne none wilde ware ne Furrure of beyond the ſe. but ſuch as myght ſpendē .C. pounde of rent by yere: But this ordinance and ſtatute wos but of litell effect. For it was nothyng holden. ¶In the .xiij: yere of his regne kīg Edward went ouer ſe in to Braban with quene Philip his wyfe ther bering a child at Andewerp ther he duelled more than a yere for to trete with the duke of Braban &̄ other allied vn to him of thee chalanging of the kyngdom of Fraūce to kīg Edward of englond by right & by heritage after the deth of Karoll the gret kyng of Fraūce brother Germayne of quene Iſabell kīg edwardis mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wich was holden & occupied vnrightfull by Philip of valoys the emes ſone of the kyng Karoll the wich Duke & all his. ī the forſaid thynges and all other longyng ther to with all his men &̄ goodis kīg edward fonde redy vn to him and made & beheighten him ſeurte by good feith and truſt. and after that the kīg

haſted him in to Englond ayen and left ther the quene ſtyll behynd him in Braban. ¶Than in the xiiij: yere of his regne whan all the lordis of his ream and other that fallen to be at his parlament wer called and aſſembled to gedre in the ſame parlament holden at london after the feſt of ſent helarie. ¶The kynges nedes wer put forth and promoted as touching the kīgdō of fraunce. For which nedis to be ſped the kyng axed the fifth ꝑte of all the meuable goodis of englond and the wulles & the .ix: ſheef of eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y corne. And all lordis of eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y toune wher ſich thyngꝭ ſhuld be taxed and gadred. ſhuld anſuer to the kyng ther of. and he had it and held it at his own luſt and will. Wherfore if I ſhall knowlech the veray trewth. the ynner loue of the pepull was turned in to hate and the comyn prayers in to curſing. for cauſe that the comune pepull wer ſo ſtrongly greued. ¶Alſo the forſaid Phelip valois of fraunce had gadred vn te him a gret hoſt &̄ deſtruid ther in his ꝑties and kyngdome mony of the kīgꝭ frendis of englond wt tounes and Caſtels and mony other of ther lordeſhippis and mony harmes ſhames and diſpites did vn to thee quene. Wherfore kyng Edward whan he herd this tdyng wos ſtrongly meued and therwith an angred. and ſent diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe lettres ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee to the quene and to other that wer his frendis gladyng them certefieng them that he wold be ther him ſelf in all the haſt that he myght ¶And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Eſter wan he had ſped of al thynges that to him neded to haue. he went ouer the ſe ayen. ¶Of whos comyng the quene and all his frendis wer wonder glad and made moch ioye. And all that wer his enmys and ayens him held. made as moch ſorow. ¶In the ſame tyme thee kyng thurgh councell of his trew lieges and coūcell of his lords that ther wer preſent with him toke the kyng of fraunces name. and toke &̄ medled the kynges armes of fraunce quartled wt the armes of englond. & commaundid forth with his coyen of gold vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   deſcripcion and writīg of the name of englōd &̄ of fraūce

to be made beſt that myght be and that is to ſay the floreyn that was called the nobull pris of vi. ſhillīg & viij. pens & the ſterlīg & the half nobull of the value of iij. ſhillīges &̄ iiij. pens and the farthynges of value xx. pens.
            
            
               ¶How Kyng Edward come vn to the ſcluys and diſcomfited all the pouer of fraunce in the hauen.
               ANd in the next yere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . that is to ſay the xv yere of his rene. he cōmandid & let writ ī his chartres writtis & other lettres the date of the regne of fraūce friſt. And while that he wos thus doīg &̄ traueling ī fraūce thurgh his coūcell he wrot to al ye p̄latis Dukis erles &̄ barons. & the nobull lordis of the cūtre. & alſo to diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe of the commune pepull diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe lettres & maūdementis bering date at Gandaūe the viij. dai of februari. And anōe aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   with ī a litell tyme he come ayen ī to englōd wt the quene &̄ hir childer ¶And ī the ſame yere on mydſomer eue he begā to ſail toward fraūce ayen. & māly & ſtifly fell vpō Phelip of valois thee wich long tyme lay &̄ had gadred to hī a full long & bouſtous menye of diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe nacions ī the hauen of Scluys. & ther they foughten to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kīg of fraūce & he wt ther hoſtes fro midday to iij. of the cloke ī ye morn. ī which bataill wer ſlayn xxx. thouſand men of the kīgꝭ cōpani of fraūce &̄ mōy ſh̄ippis &̄ cogges wer taken. And ſo thurgh goddis help he had ther the victori &̄ bere thens a gloriꝰ chiualri. ¶And ī the ſame yere about ſent Iamis tide without ye yates of ſent Omers Robert of Artheis wt mē of englōd & flaūdres bitterly faught ayens the duke of burgō & ye frenſhmen at wich bataill wer ſlayn &̄ take of the frenſſhmen xv. barons lxxx. knyghtis. & ſh̄ippis & barges wer take vn to the nō
                  bre of CC: and xxx. ¶The ſame yere ye kīg makyng and abidyng vpon the ſege of Turney the erle of Henaude wyth Engliſſh archers made aſſaute vn to the toūe of ſent Amād wher they ſlow .l. knyghtys and mony other and alſo deſtroied the toune. ¶And in the xvi. yere of his regne folowyng in the

wynter tyme the ſame kyng duelled ſtill vpon the forſaid ſege and ſent oft tyme in to Englond vn to his treſorer and other puru
                     •
                  
                  iours for gold and monay that ſhuld be ſent vn to him ther ī his nede. but his proctours and meſſingers curſedly and full ſlouli ſerued him at his nede and him deceyued on whos defaute and laches the kyng toke trewes be twen him &̄ the kyng of fraūce And the kyng Edward full of ſorow &̄ ſhame ī his hert withdrow hī fro the ſege and come in to bretan and ther wos ſo gret ſtrife for vitaill that he loſt mony of his pepull. ¶And when he had done ther that he come for he dreſſed him ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee in to englond ward. ¶And os he ſailed toward englōd ī the high ſee the moſt myſhappis ſtormes and tempeſtes thundre and lightynynges fell to him in the ſee the wich wos ſaid that it wos done and arayſed thurgh iuell ſpretes made by ſorſorie and nygromanci of them of fraunce wherfore the kynges hert was full of ſorow and anguyſſh wellyng and ſighyng and ſaid vn to our lady in this wiſe. ¶O bliſſed lady ſent Mari what is the cauſe that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more goyng in to fraunce all thynges and wethers falen to me Ioyfull and lyking &̄ gladſum and os I wold haue them bot al way turnyng in to Englond 
                  ward all thynges falen vnprofitabully and u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  i harmfull neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  the lat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he ſcapyng al ꝑrels of the ſee as god wold come to the tour of london by nyght ¶And the ſame yere the kyng held his criſtēmaſſe at Men̄es and ſent word to the ſcottis by his meſſingers that he wos redy & wold fight wt them. bot the ſcottis wold not abide that but fled ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the Scottis ſee and hid thē as wel̄ as thei myght ¶And ī the xvij. yere of his regne about the feſt of Conuerſion of ſent Paule. kyng Edward wen he had bene in ſcotland and ſaw that the ſcottis wer fled tho he come ayen in to englonde ¶And a litell before lent was the turnement at Dunſtabull to the wich turnement come al the yong bachelary and chiualrie of Englond with mony other Erles and lordis At the wich turnement kyng Edward him

ſelf was ther preſent ¶And the next yere folewyng ī the xviij yere of his regne at his ꝑlament holden at weſtmynſtre the auynzeme of Paſke the kyng Edward the thrid made Edward hys friſt ſon prince of wales ¶And in the xix. yere of his regne anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in Ianiu by fore lent the ſame kyng edward let make full nobul Iuſtes and gret feſtis in the place of his birth at windeſore. that ther wos neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   nōe ſuch ſeyn ther a fore. At wich feſt and rialte wer ij. kynges & ij: quenes the prince of wales. the duk of Cornewaill x. erles ix. Coūteſſes barons & mony burgeis the wich myght not lightly be nombrid. And of diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe landis beyōd the ſee weren mony ſtrangers ¶And at the ſame tyme whan the Iuſtis wer done. kyng Edward made a gret ſoꝑ in the wich he ordeyned friſt and began his rouud tabul and ordeyned & ſtedfaſted the day of the round tabull to be holden ther at wyndeſore in the witſon weke eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more yerly ¶And in this time engliſhmē ſo moch haunted &̄ cleued to the wodneſſe &̄ foly of the ſtrangers That frō tyme of comyng of the Henaudres xviij. yere paſſed▪ they ordeyned & changid them eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y yere diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe ſhappis &̄ 
                  diſgiſing of clothing of long large & wide clothis deſtitut & diſert. from al old honeſte & good vſage. ¶And an other tyme ſhort clothis and ſtrayt waſted dagged & kyt & on eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſide ſlatered & botoned with ſleues &̄ tapitis of ſurcotes & hodis ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   long & ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   moch hangyng. that if I the ſoth ſhall ſay. they wer more like to tormentouris & deuels in ther clothing & ſhoyng &̄ other aray. than to men. ¶And the women more nyſely yit paſſid the men in aray &̄ coriouſloker. for they wer ſo ſtrait clothid that they let hang fox tailles ſewed by neth within ther clothis for to hele & hide ther arſes. the wich diſgyſynges and pride ꝑauentur aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward brought forth & cauſed mony myſhappis &̄ myſchief in the reame of englond. ¶The xx yere of kyng Edward he went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in to Britan and Gaſcoyn in whos companie went the erle of warwyk. the erle of Suffolke. the erle of Hūtyngton. & the erle of Arundel &̄ mony

other lordis and comune pepull in a gret multitude with a gret nauye of CC. & xl. ſhippis. anone after midſomer for to a venge him of mony wronges and harmes to him done by Philip of valois kyng of fraunce ayens the trews before hand graunted. the wich trews he falſely &̄ vntrewli by cauelaciōs loſed &̄ diſquatte.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Edward ſailed in to Normandie and ariued at Hogges with a gret hoſt.
               IN the xxi. yere of his regne kyng Edward thurgh councell of all the gret lordis of the reame of englond called &̄ gadred to geder in his perlament at weſtmynſter be fore Eſter ordeyned him for to paſſe ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee ayen for to diſeſe & deſtrobull the rebelles of fraūce. ¶And when his nauye wos come to gedre and made redy he went with an huge hoſt the xij. day of Iulij and ſailed in to Normandie and a riued at hogges ¶And when he had reſted him ther vi. dais for by cauſe of trauelyng of the ſe and for to haue out all his men with all ther neceſſaries out of ther ſhippis he went toward Cadomū brennyng waſtyng and diſtroyng all the tounes that he fond in his way ¶And the xxvi. day of Iulij at the brugge of Cadony manli and orpedly ſtrengthed and defended with Normans he had ther a ſtrong bataill and a long during. thurgh wich a gret multitude of peple wer ſlayn ¶And ther war take priſoners The erle of ewe the lord of Tankervill and an hondreth of other knyghtis and mē of armes &̄ vi. hondreth foot men nombred & the toune &̄ the ſubbarbes vn to the bare walle. of all thing that they myght be bore & caried out wos rebbed and diſpoyled. ¶After the kyng paſſed forth by the cuntre about the brede of xx. myle he waſted all maner thyng that he fond ¶When Philip of valois ꝑceuid this. all though he wer faſt by with a ſtrong hoſt yit he wold not cum no nye but breke all the brugges by yond the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſeyn fro Royn vn to Paris. and him ſelf fled vn to the ſame cite of

paris with all the haſt that he myght. ¶For ſoth the nobull kyng Edward when he com to Paris brugge and fond it broken with in two dayes he let make it ayen And in the morn aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thee Aſſumcioō of our lady: kyng Edward paſſed ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſeyn goyng toward Creſcy and diſtroyed by the way tounes with the pepull duelling ther in. And in the feſt of ſent Bartholomew he paſſid ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſomme vnhurt with all his hoſt ther as neuer before hand wos ony man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   way ne paſſage wher ij.M. wer ſlaī of them that lettid ther paſſage ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . Therfor the xxvi: day of auguſt kyng Edward in a feld faſt by Creſcy hauyng iij batailles of engliſhmen countred and met with Philip of valois hauyng with him iiij. bataillis. of wich the leſt paſſed gretly the nombre of engliſh pepull. ¶And when thes ij. hoſtes mete to gedre. ther fell vpon hī the kīg of Beme the Duke of Loren. and erles alſo of Flaundres Dalaunſon Bloys Harecourt Aumarle and Neuers. and mony other erles barons lordis knyghttis &̄ mē of armes ye nombre of a .M.v.C.xlij. with out fote men & other men armed that wer nothīg rekened. ¶And for all this the vnglorius Philip with drew him with the reſidew of his pepull ¶Wherfor it was ſaid in commune among his own pepull. Nrē beal ſoy retreyt: that is to ſay our fair with draweth him. ¶Than kyng Edward and our engliſſhmen thanked god almyghti for ſuch a victori aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther gret labour taken to them all thyng nedefull to ther ſuſtinance and ſauyng of ther lyues. and for dred of ther enmys reſted them ther. ¶And full erly in the mornyng aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the frenſhmen with an hugh paſſing hoſt come ayen for to yef bataill and fight with the Engl̄iſhmē. with whom met and countred the erll of Werwik Northamton and Northfolke with ther companie and ſlew ij. thouſand and toke mony priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s of the gentils of them. ¶And the remenant of the ſame hoſt fled iij: mile thens And the thrid day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the bataill the kīg wēt to Calaysward deſtroyng all the tounes as he rode thidd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . whā
                  
that he was comen that is for to ſay the thrid day of September he began to beſege ye toune wt the caſtele and continued his ſege fro the forſaid therid day of ſeptembre to ye thrid day of Auguſt the next yere after ¶And in the ſame yere during the ſege of Calys the kyng of Scotland with a full gret multitude of Scottis comen in to Englond to Neuiles croſſe about ſent Lukes day the euangeliſt hopyng and truſtyng for to haue found all the land deſtitute and void of pepull. For as moch as the kyng of englond wos by yond the ſee. ſauf onli preſtis and men of holy chirche &̄ women &̄ children and plowmen and ſuch other labourers and ther they come and robbed and did moch priue ſorow ¶But yit fond they ynow that them with ſtode by the grace of almyghty god. ¶And ſo a day of bataill wos aſſigned bitwen them and certan lordis and men of holi chirche that wer of yt cuntre with other commune pepull faſt by the cite of Dureſme. At wich day thurgh the grace and help of almyghti god the ſcottis wer ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   comen. and yit wer ther iij. ſold ſo mony of them as of Engliſhmen: ¶And ther wos ſlayn all the Chiualri and knyghthod of the reame of ſcotland. ¶And ther wer taken as thei wold haue fled thens Dauid the kyng of Scotland him ſelfe and the erle of Mentif. ſir Willm Douglas and mony other gret men of ſcotland. ¶And after that our Engliſhmen whā they had reſted them a few dais and had ordeyned ther kepers of the north cuntre thei comen to london. and brought with them ſir Dauid kyng of ſcotland and all thes other lordis that were taken priſoners vn to the toure of londō with all the haſt that they myght: ¶And ther left hem in ſauf kepīg vn to ye kīgꝭ cū
                  mīg & wēt home ayen ī to ther own cūtre. &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward was the kīgꝭ r
                     •
                  ūſon of ſcotland taxed vn to an C.M. marke of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to be paied in .x. yere that is to ſay eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y yere x.M. marke.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Edward beſeged Calays and how it wos wone

and yold to him.
               IN the xxij. yere of kyng Edwardis regne he went ouer the ſee in the wynter tyme and lay all the wynter at the ſege of Calays the wich yere the while the ſege laſted and endurid Philip the kyng of fraunce caſt and purpoſed trechoureſly & wt fraud to put a way the ſege &̄ come the xxvij: day of Iuyll in ye ſame yere with a gret hoſt and a ſtrong pouer &̄ neyghed to the ſege of Calais ¶The wich Philip the laſt day of Iulij ſent to kyng Edward word that he wold yef him playn bataill the iij: day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that about euenſong tyme if he durſt cum fro the ſeege &̄ abide. ¶And when kyng edward herd that with out ony lōg tarieng or long a viſement he accepte gladly the day and houre of bataill yt Philip had aſſigned. ¶And when the kyng of fraū
                  ce herd that the next nyght aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he ſet his tentis a fire &̄ remeued &̄ went away thens cowardly. ¶Than they that wer ī the toune & in the caſtell beſeged ſeyng all this how that they had none other help ne ſocour of the kyng of fraunce ne of his men. ¶And alſo that ther vitales within them wer ſpendit and waſted & forfaut of vitales and of refriſhing they eten hors houndes cattes & myce for to kepe ther trewth as long as they myght ¶And when they ſaw and wos found among them. at the laſt that thei had no thyng among them for to ete ne lyue by ne no ſocour ne reſcueng of the frenſhmen of that other ſide they wiſt well that they moſt nedis die for defaut or el̄s yeld the toune. and anone tho thei wenten and token downe the baners and the armes of fraunce on eueri ſide that wer hongen out. and wenten on the walles of the forſaid toune on diuerſe places as naked as ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they wer borne ſauf onli ther ſhertis and ther priue clothes and held ther ſwerdis naked & ye point donward in thi
                     •
                   hondis and puten ropes & halters about ther nekkis and yelden vp the keys of the toun and of the Caſtill to kyng Edward of englond with gret fere and dred of hert ¶And when kyng Edward ſaw this as a marciabul

kyng and lord receued all to grace and a few of the greteſt perſoners of ſtate and of gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  naūce of the toune he ſent in to englōd ther to abide ther ranſon and the kynges grace. And all the comminalte of the toune the kyng let go whider they wold in pees. & with out ony harme. and let them bere with them all ther thynges that they myght bere and carie away kepyng the toune and the Caſtell to hym ſelf. ¶Than thurgh mediacion of Cardinales that wer ſent from the pope trews was teke ther bitwen fraūce and englond for ix. monethes than next foloyng. & about mihelmaſſe kyng edward come ayen in to englond with a glorius victorie. ¶And in the xxiij. yere of his regne in the eſt parties of the world ther aroſe and began a peſtilence and deth of ſariſēs and paynyms that ſo gret a deth wos neuer herd of a fore. And that waſted away the peple ſo. that vnneth the tenth ꝑſō wos left on liue ¶And in the ſame yere about the ſouth cuntres alſo in the weſt contres ther fell ſo moch rayn and ſo gret watres. yt from criſtemaſſe vn to midſomer ther was vnnethes day ne nyght but that it rayned ſumwhat. thurgh wich waters the peſtilē
                  ce wos ſo enfecked and ſo habundand in all cuntres and namli about the court of rome and other places & ſee coſtis. that vnneth ther wer left leuyng fulke for to beri them that wer dede honeſtly. But made gret diches and pittes that wer wonder brod &̄ depe. &̄ therin beried them. & made a renge of dede bodis. &̄ caſt a litell erthe to hele them aboue. & than caſt in an othe regne of dede bodis & an other regne aboue them. And thus wer they beried & nōe od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wiſe: but if it wer the fewer that wer men of gret eſtate that were beraid as honeſtly as they myght ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   all this in the xxiiij yere of kīg Edwardis regne it was don him to wit & vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ſtond of a treſon that wos begun at Calais. &̄ ordeyned for to ſell that toune for a gret ſomme of florens vn to kīg Philip of Fraūce thurgh the falſeneſſe &̄ ordynaūce of a knyght that wos

called ſir Gefferey of Cherney that wos wonder priue with king Philip of fraunce. ¶And when kyng Edward herd this he toke with hī ye nobles and gentils lordis. and mony other worthy and 
                  orped men of armes that wer ther preſent with him for the ſolēpnite of that high feſt. ¶And well and wiſel̄y in all the haſt that he myght and as priuely os he myght he wenten ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee toward calais. ¶And that ſame yere the good kyng edward held his criſtemaſſe at Hauering. ¶And the morn after newyeres day the kyng wos in the caſtell of Calays wt his men of armes that none of the aliens wiſt ther of. And that fals conſpiratour and traitour Geffri of Charney ſeth yt he myghte not openli haue his purpeſe of the caſtell. priuely & ſtelynly he com in and held the toune with a gret hoſt. ¶And when he with his men wer comen in. he paied the forſaid ſomme of floreyns as couenaunt was bitwen them to a Genewey in the toune that was keper of the caſtell and conſenting to the ſame geffri in all this falſeneſſe and trechorie and bounden the engliſſh mynſtrels &̄ ſeruantis that wer in ye caſtell that they myght not help them ſelf ne let them of ther purpoſe And than wenyng that they had be ſiker ynough. thei ſpeken all ther wikkednes & falſeneſſe opē
                  ly an high that all men myght here. ¶And now ſhall ye here how they wer deceyued. for they comen in by a priue poſtterne ouer a litell brugge of tre and when they wer comen in ſotaly and priuely the brigge wos draw vp and kept that none of them that comen in myght go out ne no mo cū in to them ¶And anone our englyſhmen went out at priue holes and wyndous and ouer the walles of the toune & of the caſtell and went and faughte mā
                  ly with the frenſhmen that wer with out and had the better of them the wich when they wer occupied by them ſel̄f on ther ſide The king that was with in the toune hauyng with him ſcarſly but xxx. men of armes drew out his ſwerd and with a loud vois he cried vp an high A ſent Edward A ſent George.

¶And when folke herd that. they comen rennyng to him & yaf ther to ther enmys ſo gret aſſaut that ther wer mo than two hondrith men of armes and mony mo other ſlayn and mony fleden away. And ſo by the grace of god almyghty the victorie fell vn to the Engliſhmen. Than the kyng toke with hym this Geffry that was finder of this trechorie: and alſo mony other frenſh priſoners. &̄ with in a while after he come ayen in to englond. ¶And in this ſame yere & in the yere afore and in thee yere next after was ſo gret peſtilence of men from the eſt in to the weſt and namli thurgh botches that tho that ſekīd on this day died on the iij. day after to the wich men that ſo died in this peſtilence had but litell reſpite of liggyng ¶The pope Clement of his goodneſſe &̄ grace yaf them full remiſſion and foryefneſſe of all ther ſinnes that they wer ſhriuen of. and this peſtilence laſted in london fro Mihelmaſſe vn to Auguſt next folewyng almoſt an hole yere ¶And thes days wos deth without ſorow weddyngis with out frenſhip wilfull penaunce & derth without ſcarcite & fleyng without refute or ſocour. for mony fled from place to place be cauſe of the peſtilence. but they wer enfeckid & myght not aſcap the deth: after that the ꝓphet Iſae ſaieth who that fleith fro the face of dred he ſhall fall in to the diche. And he that windeth him out of the diche he ſhall be hold &̄ tied with a grenne. but whē this peſtilence wos ceſed as god wold. vnnethes the tenth parte of the pepull wos left on liue. ¶And in the ſame yere began a wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thyng yt all yt eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wer borne aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt peſtilence had .ij. chekteth ī ther hede las than they had a fore.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Edward had a gret bataill with ſpanyardis in the ſe faſt by wynchelſee.
               
                  ANd in the .xxv. yere of his regne about the ſent Iohannes day in harueſt ī the ſee faſt by winchelſe king Edwarde had a gret bataill with men of ſpayn wher that ther ſhippis and nauye lay chaned to gedre that other they muſt fight or be drēched

¶And ſo when all our worthy men of armes &̄ the ſee coſtes faſt by wynchelſe & Romeny wer gadred to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & our nauye & ſhippis all redy to the were the engliſſhmen met manly &̄ ſtifly wt ther enmys comyng ferſly ayens them ¶And whē the ſpanys veſſailles & nauy wer cloſed ī all about. ther mē might ſe a ſtrōg bataill on both ſides & lōg during ī ye wich bataill wos but few that faught but they wer ſpitouſly hurt: And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the batail ther wer xxiij. ſhippis of thers take: &̄ ſo the engliſhmen had the better. And in the next yere folowyng of his regne yt is to ſay the xxvi. yere ye kīg thugh his coūcell let orden &̄ make hys new monay yt is to ſay ye peny the grot value of iiij pens. & the half grot of ij. pens. bot it wos of les weight than the old ſterlīg wos. be v. ſhillyng in the poūde. ¶And in the xxvij. yere of his regne wos the gret derth of vitailles the wich was called thee dere ſomer ¶And in the xxviij. yere of his regne ī ye ꝑlament holden at weſtmīſtre aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Eſter ſir Henri erle of Lancaſtre wos made duke of lancaſtre & ī this yere wos ſo gret a drought that frō the moneth of marche to the mōeth of Iuyll ther fell no rayn on the erthe. wherfore all frutis ſedis and herbes for the moſt ꝑtie wer loſt in defaute. ¶Wherof ther come ſo gret diſeſe of men and beſtes & derthe of vitales in englond ſo that this land that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   afore had bene plenteous had nede that tyme to feke his vitalis and refreſſſyng of other out Iles & cūtres: ¶And ī the xxix yere of kyng edward it was accordid graunted and ſworne bytwen the kyng of fraunce and kyng Edward of englond that he ſhuld houe ayen all his landis and lordeſhippis that longed to the duchie of Gnyhen of old tyme the wich had bene with draw and wrōgfulli occupied bi diuerſe kynges of fraunce before hand to haue and to hold to kyng Edward and to his heires and ſucceſſours for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more frely peſabully and in good quiet vpō thys couenaunt that the kyng of Englond ſhuld leue of. and releſen all his right and claym that he had claymed of the kyngdom of

fraunce. and of the titell that he toke ther of. vpō wich ſpeche & couenauntis it wos ſent to the court of Rome on both ſides of the kynges. that the forſaid couenaūt ſh̄uld be enbulled. bot god ordeyned better for the kīges worſſhip of englōd· for what thurgh fraud & diſcert of the frenſhmen &̄ what thurgh lettyng of the pope &̄ of ye court of rome the forſaid couenaūtis wer diſquat & left of. ¶And ī the ſame yere the kīg reuoked bi his wiſe &̄ diſcret coū
                  cell the ſtapull of wol̄les out of flaūdres ī to englond with all the libertes fraūches &̄ fre cuſtomys yt longed ther to· &̄ 
                  ordeyned it in englōd in diuerſe places that is for to ſay at weſtmynſtre. Cantorberi Chicheſtre Briſtow Lyncolne & Hull with all the forſaid thynges that longen ther to. ¶And that this thing that ſhuld thus be done the kyng ſwore him ſelf ther to And. prince edward his ſone with other mōy gret witneſſes that ther wer preſent ¶And the xxx. yere of his regne anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   witſontide in the parlament ordeyned at weſtmynſtre it wos told and c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tefied to the king that Philip that tho held the kīgdō of fraūce was dede: And that Iohn̄ his ſon wos creuned kīg. & that this Iohn̄ had yeuen Karoll his ſon the Duchie of Gnyhen· of thee wich thyng kyng Edward when he wiſt ther of had gret indignacion vn to him and was wonder wroth and ſtrongly meued. ¶And therfor afore all the worthy lordis yt ther wer aſſembulled at that parlament he called edward his ſon vn to hym to whome the duchid of Gnyhen by right heritage ſhuld long to &̄ yaf it him ther. byddyng and ſtrengthyng him that he ſhuld ordene him for to defende him and a venge him vpon his enmys and ſaue maynten his right. ¶And afterward kyng edward hī ſelf & his eldeſt ſon Edward wente to diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe places &̄ ſeintes in englond on pilgrimage for to haue the more help &̄ grace of god & of his ſeintes. and ij. Kal̄
                  ▪ of Iuyll when all thyng wos redy to that viage & bataill & all his retenue & pouer aſſembled & his nauye alſo redy he toke wt hī the erle of warwike the erle of ſuffolk

the erle of Saluſberi & the erle of Oxford and a thouſand mē of armes and as mony archiers. &̄ in the Natiuite of our lady tok ther ſhippis at Plymmouth &̄ began to ſaill. ¶And when hee come and wos ariued in Gnyhen. he was ther worſſhipfully take receyued of the moſt nobull men & lordis of that cūtre ¶And anone after kyng Edward toke with him his ij. ſonys that is to ſay ſir Leonell erle of vlton & ſir Iohn̄ his brother erle of Richemond & ſir Henri duke of Lancaſtre. with mony erles & lordis &̄ men of armes and ij. thouſand archiers &̄ failed toward fraūce & reſtid hī a while at Calais. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward the kīg wēt wt his folke aforſaid and with other ſoudiours of beyond the ſe that ther abide the kynges comyng the ſecund day of Nouember and toke his iourney toward kīg Iohn̄ of fraunce ther as he trowed to haue founden him faſt by Odoma
                     
                        
                     
                     rum
                   as his lettres & couenaunt made mencion that he wold a bide him ther with his hoſt. ¶And whē king Iohan of fraunce herd tell of the kynges ꝯyng of englond he went away with his men & cariege cowerdly & ſhamfully fleyng and waſtyng all vitales that the engliſhmen ſhuld not haue ther of. ¶And when kyng edward herd tell that he fled. he purſued him with all his hoſt till Hedene. &̄ than he beholdyng the wāting and ſcarcite of vitales &̄ alſo the cowerdiſe of the kīg of fraūce he turned ayen waſtyng all the cuntre. ¶And while all thes thynges were a doyng the ſcottis priueli and by nyght token the toune of Berewike ſlayng them yt withſtode them & no man els but bliſſed be god the caſtell wos ſaued & kept by engliſhmē yt wer therī. Than the kīg ꝑſaued all this. he turned ayen ī to englond as wroth as he myght be. wherfor ī ꝑlament at weſtmynſtre wos graūtid to the kīg of eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſake of wolle .l. ſhillyng during the terme of vi. yere that he myght the myghtelyer fight &̄ defend the reame ayens the ſcottis & othir miſdoers ¶And ſo whē all thynges wer redy the kyng haſted hī to the ſege ward.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Edward wos crouned king of ſcotland & how

Prince Edward toke the kyng of fraunce & ſir Philip his yong
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſon at the bata
                     •
                  ll of Peyters.
               
                  ANd in the xxxi: yere of his regne the xiij. day of Ianiuer the kyng in the Caſtill of Berewik with a few men but hauyng ther faſt by a grett hoſt. The toune wos yolden vn to him with outen ony maner defence or difficulte· than the kyng of ſcotland that is for to ſay ſir Iohan Bailloll conſidering how that god did mony merue
                     •
                  les and gracious thīges for king Edward at his own will fro day to day. he toke & yaf vp the reame of Scotland and the croūe of ſcotland at Rokiſburgh in the kinges handis of englond vnder his patent lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther made ¶And anone after king Edward in preſence of all the prelatis & othir worthy men and lordis that wer ther let croūe him kīg ther of the reame of Scotland: ¶And when all thynges wer done &̄ ordened in thike contres at his luſt. he turned ayen ī to Englond wt an hugh worſhip· And while this viage wos a doyng in Scotland ſir Edward prince of wales as a man enſpired in god was ī Guyhen in the Cite of Burdeux treting &̄ ſpekīg of the chalengyng. and of the kynges right of Englond that he had of the reame of Fraunce and that he wold a vengid be with ſtrōghond & the prelatis peres &̄ myghti men of that cuntre conſented well to him ¶Than ſir Edward the prince with a gret hoſt gadred to him the ſext day of Iuyll went from Burdeux goyng and trauelyng by mony diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe cuntres &̄ he toke mōy priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s mo than .vi. thouſand men of armes by the cuntre as he iournyed & toke thee toune of Remorantī ī ſaloigne & beſeged the Caſtell vi: days And at the vi. day end they yolde the caſtell vn to him. And ther wer take the lord of Croūe & ſir Burſigaud & mony other knyghttis & men of armes moo than lxxx. ¶And fro thens by Toren &̄ peten faſt by chmeney his nobull men yt wer wt him had a ſtrong bataill wt frenſhmen &̄ an .c. of ther men of armes wer ſlayn And the erle of Daunce &̄ the ſtiward of fraūce wer

take with an hondreth men of armes. ¶In the wich yere thee xix: day of September faſt by Peightres the ſame prince with a thouſand and ix. hondrith men of armes and archiers ordeynid a bataill to kyng Iohn̄ of Fraūce comyng to the prince ward with vij. thouſand choſen men of armes & other moch pepull in an huge paſſing nombur. of the wich ther wer ſlayn the duke of Burybon and the duke of Athenes and mony othir nobull men. and of the prince men of armes a thouſand &̄ of other aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the trew accompte and rekenyng viij. hondrith. And the kyng of fraunce wos ther take and ſir Philip his yonger ſon &̄ mōy Dukis and nobull mē & worthy knyghtis &̄ mē of armes about ij. thouſād And ſo the victori fell ther to the prince & to the pepull of englond by the grace of god. And mōy that wer taken priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s wer ſet at ther raūſon and vpō ther trougth & knyghthod wer chargid & had leue to go. But the prince toke with him the kyng of fraunce & Philip his ſon with all the reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ence that he myght & went ayen to Burdeux with a glorius victorie▪ The ſomme of the men that ther wer take priſoners & of them yt wer ſlaī the day of bataill wos iiij.M.iiijC.xl. ¶And in the xxxij yere of kyng Edward ye v. day of May prince Edward with kyng Iohn̄ of fraūce & Philip his ſon and mōy othir worthy priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s ariued graciouſly ī the hauē of Plummouth & the xxiiij. day of the ſame moneth aboute iij· aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   none they com to london by londō brugge & ſo wēt forth to the kīgꝭ palace of weſtmīſtre & ther fell ſo gret a multitude &̄ prees of peple about them to behold and ſe that wonder &̄ that riall ſight yt vnnethes fro midday till nyght they myght not cū to weſtmynſtre. &̄ the kīgꝭ ranſon of fraūce wos taxed and ſet to iij myllions of ſcutis of whom ij▪ ſhuld beworth a nobull & ye ſh̄all vnderſtond yt a myllion is a .M.M. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſomme mē his raunſome wos ſat at .iij.M.M florens & all is on effect. And this ſame yere wer made ſolēpne Iuſtis ī ſmythfeld beīg ther p̄ſent the kyng of englond the kīg of fraunce and the kyng of Scotland

and mony other worthy and nobull lordis. ¶The xxxiij yere of his regne the ſame kyng Edward at wyndeſore as well for loue of knyghhod as for his own worſſhip & at the reuerence of the kyng of fraunce and of other lordis that wer ther at that time he held a wonder riall and coſtle feſt of ſent George paſſing any that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos holdyn a fore. ¶Wherfor the kyng of fraū
                  ce in ſcornyng ſaid that he ſaw neuer ne herd ſuch ſolempne feſtis ne rialtes holdin ne done wt tailles with out paīg of gold or ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ¶And ī the xxxiiij. yere of his regne the x iiij. Kal̄. of Iulij ſir Iohn̄ Erle of Richemond kyng Edwardis ſon. wedded dame Blaunch duke Henris doughter of Lncaſtre coſin to the ſame iohan by diſpenſacion of the pope. and in the mein tyme wer ordened Iuſtes at london iij. daies of rogacions that is for to ſai the mair of London with his xxiiij. aldermen ayenes all yt wold cum. in whos name &̄ ſted the kyng priuely with his iiij. ſonys Edward Leonell Iohn̄ and Edmond and other xix gret lordis helden the feld with worſh̄ip ¶And this ſame yere as it wos told & ſaid of them that ſaw it: ther come blod out of the tombe of Thomas ſome tyme erle of Lancaſtre as freſh as that day yt he was done to deth. And in the ſame yere kīg Edward choſe his ſepulture and his liggyng at weſtmynſtre faſt by the ſhrine of ſent Edward. ¶And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the xxvij· day of October he went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee to Calais makyng proteſtacion yt he wold neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cum ayen in to englond till he had full endid the were bitwen fraunce & him ¶And ſo in the xxxvi. yere of his regne in the wynt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   tym kyng Edward wos. and traueled in the Ryne coſtes & about ſent Hil̄larie tide he departid his hoſt and went to Burgoyn ward with whom than met peſibely the Duke of Burgoyn behighting him lxx. thouſand floreyns that he ſhuld ſpare his men and hys p
                     •
                  pull. and the kyng graūted at his requeſt. and duelled ther vn to the xvij. day of Marche· the wich tyme come to kīg Edward ere that ſtrōg theues wer on ye ſe vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the erle of ſent Poule the

xv. day of Marche liggyng a wayt vpon the tounes of haſtyng Rie and other places and villages on the ſee coſt haddyn entred as enmys in to thee toune of wynchelſe. and ſlewen all that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   withſtoden them and withſaid ther comyng. Wherfore the kyng was gretly meued and wratthed. and he turned ayen to Paris ward and commaunded his hoſt to deſtroy and ſle with dynt and ſtrength of ſwerd them that he had before hand ſparid. ¶And the xij. day of Aprill the kyng come to Paris and ther departed his hoſt in diuerſe batailles with iiij.C. of knyghtis new dubbed on that one ſide of him. ¶And ſir Henri duke of Lancaſtre vnder pees and trews went vn to the yates of the Cite. profering to them that wold abyde a bataill in the feld vnder ſuch condicion that if the kyng of englond wer ouer comen ther as god forbede it ſhuld that than he ſhuld neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   chalenge the kyngdom of fraūce ¶And ther he had of them but ſh̄ort and ſcornfull anſuer and come and told it to the kyng and his lordis what he had herd and what they ſayd. ¶And than went forth the new knyghtys wt mōy other making aſſaut to the cite to they deſtroyd hougeli the ſubbarbis of the Cite. ¶And while all thes thynges wer in doīg the Engliſhmen made them aredy for to be a venged vpon thee ſhame and deſpite that was done that yere at wynchelſee and ordeyned a nauye of lxxx. ſhippis of men of Landon and of other marchauntis and xiiij. thouſand of men of armes and archiers and went and ſerched and ſkummed the ſee and manly tokē and helde thee Ile of Caux. Wherfore the Frenſhmen that is for to ſay the Abbot of Cluyn the Erle of Tankeruill and burſygand that tho was Stiward of Fraūce with mōy other men of the ſame cūtre by thee commūe aſſent of the lord Charles that tho wos regēt of fraūce thei haſted them & went to the kīg of englōd aſkīg & beſechīg him ſtedfaſt pees &̄ eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   laſtīg vpō certan ꝯdicions that ther wer ſhewed writtin ¶The wich when the kyng &̄ his ꝯcell had it ſeī
                  ▪ it pleſed hī neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   a dele. but ſith it wold be none

othir in tyme of better accord and deliberacion the frenſhmen beſely and with gret inſtaunce aſked trews for ther ſee coſtes and the king grauntid them. ¶And in the morow aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the vtas of paſche the kyng turned him with his hoſt toward Orliaūce deſtroyeng and waſtyng all the cuntre by the way: ¶And os thei wēt thiderward ther fell vpon them ſuch a ſtorme & tempaſt that nōe of our nacion herd ne ſaw neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   none ſuch. thurgh the wich thouſā
                  des of our men and of ther horſe in ther iourneyng as it wer thurgh vengeaunce ſodenly wer ſlayn &̄ periſſhed: the wich tempaſtes full moch yit fered not the kyng ne moch of his pepull that they ne went forth in ther viage that they had begun. wherfor about the feſt of fililp & iacob in May faſt by incarnocum the forſaid lordis of fraunce metīg ther with the kyng of englond a peſable accord &̄ a finall vpō c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tan condicions & graūtes articularly gad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed & writen to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more for to laſt full diſcretly made & to bothe the kynges ꝓfetabul & to ther reames both wt on aſſēt of Charles the regent & gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nour of fraūce & of Paris of ye ſame reame writen &̄ made vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   date of Carnocū ye xv. day of May they offerid & ꝓferd to the kīg of englōd riquiring his grace ī all thīgꝭ writin yt he wold benyngly admitte them &̄ hold them firme & ſtabull to them &̄ to ther heiris for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more thens forth the wich thīgꝭ & articles whan kīg edward had ſeyn them he graūted them ſo that bothe parties ſhuld be ſuorne on goddis body &̄ on the euangeliſt that the forſaid couenaūt ſhuld be ſtabulihed and ſo they accordid graciouſly. ¶Therfor ther wer ordeyned & draſſid on eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſide ij. barons ij. banerettis & ij. knyghtis to admitte & receue yt hothes of ye lord Charles reget of fraūce &̄ of ſir edward ye friſt ſō & heir of kīg Edward of englōd ¶And the x. day of May ther was ſongen a ſolempne maſſe at paris. & after the iij. Agnꝰ dei ſaid wt dona nobis pacem ī preſens of the forſaid men that were ordeyned to admitte & receyue the othes & of al other that ther myght be. ¶Tho Charles laid his right hand on ye patent wt goddes

bodi & his left hond on the miſſale & ſaied we. N. ſuereth on godis body & the holy goſpels. that we ſhall trewli &̄ ſtedfaſtli hold toward vs the pees & the accord made bitwen the ij kynges &̄ ī no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to do the contrarie. And ther among all his lordis for more loue & ſtrength of witneſſe he deled &̄ deꝑted the reliques of the croune of criſte to the knyghtis of englond. & they courteſli token ther leue· And in the fryday next the ſame othe in preſence of the forſaid knyghtis &̄ of other worthy mē. prince Edward made at louers ¶Afterward both kynges & ther ſonnys & the moſt nobull men of both reames with in the ſame yere made the ſame oth. & for to ſtrength all thes thynges a forſaid: the kyng of englond axed the greteſt men of fraūce: and had his axyng that is for to ſay vi. dukis viij: erles &̄ xij. lordis that is to ſay barons &̄ worthy knyghtis. ¶And when the place &̄ the tyme was aſſined in wich both kynges with ther councell ſhuld cum to gedre. all the forſaid thynges bitwen them ſpoke for to ratifie & maken firme and ſtabull. the kyng of englond anone went toward the ſee & at Hounflet began to ſaill leuyng to his hoſtes that wer left behynd him by cauſe of his abſence moch heueneſſe ¶And after the xix· day of May he come in to englond & went to his paleys at weſtmynſtre on ſent Dunſtane day & the thrid day after he viſeted Iohn̄ kyng of fraunce that wos in the tour of london & deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed him frely from all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   priſon ſauf friſt they wer accordid of iij. myllions of floreyns for his raunſon. &̄ the kyng cōforthed him & cherid him in all places with all ſolace &̄ myrthes that longen to a kyng in his goyng homward. ¶And the ix day of Iulij in the ſame yere this ſame Iohn̄ kyng of fraunce that afore hand lay here in hoſtage went home ayen in to his oun land to tret of tho thynges and of other that longed and fellen to thee gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nance of his reame. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward mett &̄ come to gedre at Calays both ij. kynges with bothe ther councell about all haluw tide. & ther wer ſhewed the condicions and the pointis of thee

pees &̄ of the accorde of bothe ſides writtyn. & ther without any withſayng of both ſides graciouſly they wer accorded. And ther was done & ſongen a ſolempne maſſe & after the iij Agnꝰ det vpon godis body & alſo vpō the maſſe boke bothe kynges & ther ſonnys & the greteſt lordis of both remes & of ther ꝯcell that ther wer preſent: & had not ſworne be fore the forſaid oth that they had made & titelled bitwene them they behighten to kepe & all other couenaūtes that wer bitwene them ordeyned. ¶And in thys ſame yere mens beſtis tres &̄ houſes with ſoden tempaſt &̄ ſtrong lightenyng wer ꝑiſſed. & the deuell apperid bodely in mannys likenes to moch pepull as they went in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe places in the cuntres and ſpake to them in that likeneſſe.
            
            
               ¶How the gret companie aroſe in fraunce &̄ the white companie in Lumbardie & of other mony meruailles.
               KYng Edward in the xxxvi. yere of his regne anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   criſtemaſſe in the feſt of conu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſion of ſent Paule held his ꝑlament at weſtmynſtre in the wich ꝑlament wos put furth and ſhewed ye accord &̄ the tretis that wos ſtabiliſſhed &̄ made bitwen tho ij. kynges wich accord pleſid to moch pepull. and therfore by the kynges commaundement ther wer gadred &̄ come to gedre in weſt mynſtre church the friſt ſonday of lent that is to ſay the ij. Kal̄. of Februer the forſaid engliſhmen and fraūſhemun where was ſong a ſolempne maſſe of the Trinite of the arche biſſhop of cantorburi maſter Simond Iſlepe. ¶And when the agnꝰ dei wos done the kyng beyng ther with his ſonnys and alſo the kyng ſonnys of fraunce & othir nobull and gret lordis with candell light &̄ croſſes broght forth. all that wer called ther to yt wer not ſworne a fore ſwore that ſame oth that wos writtyn vpō goddis body & on the maſſe boke in this wiſe: we. N. &̄ N. ſwerin vpon goddis body &̄ on the holy goſpelles ſtedfaſtly to hold & kepe toward vs the pees & the accord made bitwen the ij. kynges and neuer for to do the cōtrarie. & whan they had thus ſworne they tokē
                  
ther ſcroues that ther othis wer comprehendid in to the notaries. & this ſame yere in the aſcencion eue about mydday was ſeyn the clipes of the ſon. & ther folowed ſoch a drought that for defaut of reyn ther wos gret barneſſe of corne frute and hey. ¶And in the ſame moneth the vi. Kal̄. of Iune ther fell a ſanguyn rain almoſt like blode at Burgon. And a ſangwyne cros from morne vn to prime wos ſeyn & aperid at Boloyn in the heier the which mony men ſaw· and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   it meued and fell in the midde ſee. ¶And in the ſame tyme in fraūce & englōd & mōy other land as they yt wer ī playn cūtres & deſert baren witneſſe ſodenli ther apperid ij. Caſtels of the wich went out ij. hoſtes of armed mē ¶And yt one hoſt wos clothed ī white &̄ yt other ī blake. and when bataill wos betwne them be gun· ye white ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  come the blake And anone after the blake toke hert vn to them and ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  come the white. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that they went ayen in to ther caſtels. & than the caſtels and all the hoſt vaneſſhed away ¶And in this ſame yere wos a gret and an huge peſtilence of pepull and namly of men. whos wifes as women out of gouernaūce toke houſbandis as well ſtrangers as other lewde and ſimpull pepull. ye which foryeting ther honour &̄ worſſhip and berthe coupled and maried them with them that wer of low dedre &̄ litell repitacion in this ſame yere died Henri duke of Lancaſtre. &̄ alſo in this yere Edward prince of wales weddid the countes of kent that wos Sir Thomas wife holand the wich wos deꝑted ſome time and deuorced fro the erle of Saliſberi for cauſe of that ſame knyght. ¶And about this tyme began and aroſe a gret companie of diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe nacions gadred to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of whome ther leders & gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nours wer engliſſh pepull And they wer called a pepull with out any hede the wich did moch harme in the ꝑtie of fraūce And not long after ther aroſe an other companie of diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe nacions yt wos called the whit companie the wich in the parties &̄ cuntres of Lumbardie did moch ſorow. ¶This ſame yere ſir Iohan of Gaunt the

ſone of kyng Edward the thrid wos made duke of Lancaſtre by reſon &̄ cauſe of his wife yt was the doughter & heir of Henri ſum tyme duke of lancaſtre
            
            
               ¶Of the gret wynd and how prince edward toke the lordſhyp of Gnyhen of his fadre & went thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  .
               ANd in the xxxvij. yere of kyng edward the xv: day of Ianiu that is to ſai on ſent Maures day about eu
                     •
                  
                  ̄ſ
                     •
                  ng tyme ther aroſe and come ſuch a wynd out of the ſouth with ſuch a ferſeneſſe and ſtrength that it briſted and blew doune to thee ground high houſes and ſtrong bildynges toures churches and ſtepulles and other ſtronges and all other ſtrong werkes that ſtoden ſtill wer ſhake ther with that they ben yit and ſhall be euer more the febuller & weykir while they ſtond And this wind laſted without any ceſſing vij. dais continually. ¶And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther folowed ſuch waters in hey tyme &̄ in harueſt tyme that all felde werkis wer ſtrongly let & left vn don. ¶And ī the ſame yere prince edward toke the lordſhip of Guyhen and did to kyng Edward his fadre homage and feaute therfore &̄ wend ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee in to Gaſcoyn with his wife & children. And anōe aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   kīg edward made ſir Leonell his ſon duke of Clarence & ſir edmond his other ſon erle of Cambrigge. ¶And in the xxxviij. yere of his regne it wos ordeyned in the ꝑlament that men of law both of the chirche and temꝑall law ſh̄uld fro that time forth plete ī ther mother tong. ¶And in the ſame yere comen in to englond iij kynges that is for to ſai The kyng of Fraunce the kyng of Cipres and the kyng of Scotland by cauſe to viſet and for to ſpeke with the kyng of englond. Of whome they wer wonder wel come and moch worſſh̄ippid. ¶And after that they had be here long time. two of them went ayen home in to ther own cuntres &̄ kyngdomes. But the kyng of fraunce thurgh gret ſekeneſſe & maladie that he had abode ſtill in englond. ¶And ī the xxxix yere of his regne was a ſtrong &̄ an huge froſt &̄ yt laſted long

yt is to ſay fro ſent Andrewes tide to the .xiiij. Kal̄. of aprill that the tylth & ſawyng of the erth &̄ other ſuch feld warkie and hand werkes wer moch let & left vn done for cold &̄ hardeneſſe of the erth ¶And at Orray in bretan that tyme wos ordeyned a gret dedely bataill bitwene ſir Iohn̄ of Mounfort duke of Britan & ſir Charles of bloys. but the victorie fell to the forſaid ſir Iohn̄ thurgh help and ſocour of the engliſſhmen. And ther were taken mony knyghtis &̄ ſquyers and other men that wer vnnombred. in the wich bataill wos ſlayn Charles him ſelf with all that ſtode aboute him & of the engliſhmen wer ſlayn but vij. And in this yere died at Sauoy Iohn̄ the kyng of fraunce. whos ſeruice &̄ exequies kīg edward let ordeyn & did in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe places worſſh̄ipfully to be don. &̄ to Dou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of worſhipfull men ordeyned him worthely to be led with his own coſtis &̄ expens. & frō thēs he was fet in to fraunce. &̄ beried at ſent Denys. ¶In the xl. yere of kyng Edward the vij. Kal̄. of Februer wos borne Edward prince edward ſon the wich wan he wos vij. yere of old he died. ¶And in the ſame yere it wos ordeyned that ſent Petres pēs fro that tyme forth ſhuld not be payed the wich kīg· Yuo. ſometyme kīg of englōd of the cūtre of weſt ſaxons yt began to regne in the yere of our lord god ¶C.lxxix. firſt greunted to Rome for the ſcole of englond ther to be continued. ¶And ī this ſame yere ther fell ſo moch rayn ī hey tyme that it waſtid &̄ diſtroyed bothe corne and hey. And ther wos ſuch a debate & fightīg of ſparous by diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe places ī thes dais yt men fond innumerable of thē deid ī feldis as they went. & ther fell alſo ſuch a peſtilence yt neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos ſeyn ſuch in no mannys tyme that leued than. for mē yt went to bede hole & in good point· ſedenly they died. ¶Alſo yt tyme a ſekenes yt mē called the pokkis ſlow both men &̄ womē thurgh ther enfectyng ¶And in the xli. yere of kīg edward was borne at Burdeux Richard the ſecund ſon of prince edward of Englond the wich Richard kyng Richard of Amorican heued

at the fountſtone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   whom he wos called Richard. And this ſame Richard whan his fadre wos dede and kīg Edward alſo: wos crouned kīg of englond the xi. yere of his age thurgh right lyne and heritage and alſo by the comunes aſſent and deſire of the cominalte of the reame ¶About this tyme at kīg edwardis cō
                  maūdement of englond when all the caſtelles and tounes were yold to him that long wer holde in fraūce by a gret companie aſſembled to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſir Bartram Cleykyn knyght an orped man and a good weriour went and purpoſed him to put out Pers kyng of Spayn out of his kyngdom with help of the moſt ꝑtie of the forſaid gret companie truſtyng alſo vpon help and fauour of the pope for as moch as it come to his heir that the ſame Pers ſhuld lede and vſe the moſt werſt and ſinfulleſt life out. the wich Pers ſmiten with drede of this tidyng fled ī to Gaſcoyn to prince Edwarde for to haue help and ſocour of him. ¶And when he wos fled out of Spayn Henri his brother that was a baſterd by aſſent of the moſt parta
                     •
                   of Spayn and thurgh help of that ferrefull companie that I ſpake of erſte was made and crouned kyng of ſpayn And the nombre of that ſame companie wos rekened and ſette at the nombre of lx.M. fighting men ¶This ſame yere ī the moneth of Iune ther come a gret companie and a nauye of thee danes and gadred them to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in the north ſe purpoſing them to cū in to englond to reue &̄ robbe and alſo to ſle with whome they countrid and met in the ſee Mariners and othir orped fighting men of the cuntre and diſꝑpeled them And they aſſhamed wente home ayen in to ther own cuntre ¶But among all other ther wos a bouſtous veſſell and a ſtrong of ther nauye that wos ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſayled bi the Engliſſhmen and wos pariſſhid and drenchid. In the wich the Stiward and other worthi and gret men of Denmarke wer take priſoners and the kyng of englond and his councell priſoned the wich lordis the danois aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward come & ſoughten all a bout for to haue had with ther goodis that they had loſt and
                  
thay not wele apaied ne pleſed of the anſuer that they had ther turned homewardis ayen leuyng be hind them in ther innes priuely writen in ſcrowes and on wallis Yit ſhall Danois waſt thee wanes. Than happid ther an engliſh writ
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ wrot ayenſt the dane in this maner wiſe. Here ſhall danys fet ther banes ¶And in this tyme Pers kyng of Spayn with other kyngꝭ yt is to ſay the kyng of Naune and the kyng of Malogre beyng menes wē
                  ten bitwen and praied coūcell and help of ſir Edward the prince thurgh whos coūcel when he had vnderſtond ther articles and deſire that he wos required of tho kyngꝭ loth he wos and aſhamed to ſay nay and cōtrarie them. bot notheles he wos a gaſt leſt it ſhuld be ony preiudice ayens the pope and long time taried them or that he wold graūto or conſent ther to till he had better councell and aviſement with good deliberacion of kyng Edward his fader ¶But whan he wos with euery dais and continuall beſechīg of mony nobull men requirid and ſpoken to. and withe mony praiers ſent and made bitwen them. Than prince edward ſent to his fader both be pleynyng letteers and alſo be confortabull contenyng all ther ſuggeſtions and cauſes with all that other kynges Epeſteles & letters for to haue comforth and help of the wronges not onli to the kyng of ſpayn doo. but alſo for ſuch thyngꝭ as myght fall to other kynges ¶Alſo if it wer not the ſonner holpē and amendid thurgh the dome and help of knyghthod to them yt it aſkid &̄ deſirid. ¶The wich letter whan the kyng and his wiſe councele had ſeyn ſuch a kyngꝭ ſpoyling and robbyng with moch maruell. ¶And ſent ayen comfortable letters to prince Edward his ſon and to that other forſaid kyngꝭ. & warned them for to arme them and ordeyn them ayens that miſdoer. &̄ to withſtond them by the help of good that wer ſuch enmys to kyngꝭ. whā this nobull prince had receyued thes letters him ſelf with that od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   kynges before ſaid all ther councell called to gedre or that he wold vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  take the quarell: he bonde & knytt ſore the kīg yt was depoſed
                  
wt a gret oth yt is to ſay yt he ſh̄uld eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   after maīten the right beleue & feith of holi chirche & holy chirche alſo wt all ther mīſtres rightis &̄ lebertis to defēd frō all ther enmys & all euels ¶And all that wer ther ayens bitt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  li to pūyſh & deſtrobull. & all the rightes libertes p̄ueleges of holy chirch encreſe &̄ maīten & amend all thīges yt wer wrongfully takē. wt draw &̄ bore away by hī or by ony od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   bi cauſe of him. haſtely to reſtore ayen. &̄ to driue & put out ſariſens &̄ al other miſbeleued pepull out of his kīgdom with all his ſtrength & pouer & ſuffre ne admitte nōe ſoch for no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thīg ne cauſe to duell ther in. ¶And yt whan he had take a criſten womā he ſhuld neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   cū ī none other womans bed. ne nōe other mannys wife to defoule ¶Al thes forſaid thingꝭ trewly for to kepe ꝯtinu &̄ fulfill as all his life time he wos boūd by oth a fore notaries in preſons & wytneſſe of tho kynges wt other princes ¶And than that gracious prince prince Edward vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   toke the cauſe and the quarell of the king that wos depoſid and be hight him with the grace of almighty god to reſtore him ayen to his kyngdom and let ordeyn &̄ gadre to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   forthwt ī al haſt his nauy with men of armes for to were &̄ fight ī his forſaid cauſe ¶And in this ſame tyme vpon ſond of the ſcottis fe that mōy a man it ſaw iij. days to gedre ther wer ſeyn ij. Egles of ye wich that on come out of the ſouth & that other out of the north. & cruelli & ſtrōgly they foughten to gedre &̄ wraſteled to gedre and the ſouth egle friſt ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come the north egle and all to rent and tore him with his bill & his clawys that he ſhuld not reſt ne take no breth. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſouth egle fligh home to his own coſtes. ¶And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther folowed & wos ſeyn in the morn a fore the ſon riſing and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ī thee laſt day of October ſaue on day mony ſterris gadred to gedre on an hepe fell doune to the erth leuyng behynd them fery bemys in man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of lightynyng whos flaumes brent and ꝯſumed mens clothis & mens here walkyng on the erth as it was ſeyn and knwen of mony a man ¶And yit

yt northeren wynd yt is eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   redy & deſtinat to all ill fro ſent Kat mes euē till iij. days aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   loſt good wt out nōbre vnrecou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  abull And ī the ſame days ther fell & come alſo ſuch lightīyng thūder ſnow & haill yt it waſted & deſtroid mē beſtis houſes &̄ trees.
            
            
               ¶Of the bataill of ſpayn beſide the water of Nazers that was bitwen prince Edward &̄ ſir Henri baſterd of ſpayn.
               IN the yere of our lord a .M.ccc.lxvij. & of kyng Edward xlij· the iij. day of Aprill ther wos a ſtrong batall and a gret in a large feld called Priazers faſt bi the water of Nazers in ſpayn bitwen ſir edward the prince & Henri the baſtard of ſpayn. but the victori fell to prince edward bi the grace of god. ¶And this ſame prince edward had wt hī ſir Iohn̄ duke of lancaſtre his brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  : & other worthi mē of armes about the nomber of xxx.M. ¶And the kīg of ſpayn had on his ſide men of diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe naciōs to the nōbre of an .C.M· &̄ mo wherfor the ſharpeneſſe &̄ ferſenes of his aduſarie with his full boyſtous & gret ſtrength made & driuen the rightfull ꝑtie a bak a gret way but thurgh the grace of almyghty god paſſing any mans ſtrength that huge hoſt wos diſꝑbled myghtfully be the nobull duke of Lancaſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & his hoſt or thot the prince Edward come nigh him ¶And whan Henri the baſtard ſaw that he turned with his men in ſo grete haſte and ſtrength to fle. that an huge companie of them ī the forſaid flode and of the brigge therof fellen doune &̄ 
                  pariſſhed. ¶And alſo ther wer take the erle of Dene and ſir Bartram Clekyn that wos chief maker and cauſer of the were & alſo chiuetayn of the vaunt ward of the bataill with mōy other gret lorddis and knyghtis to the nombur of ij. thouſand of whom ij. hondrith wer of fraūce. and mōy alſo of ſcotland And ther wer felled in the feld on our enmys ſide of lordis and knyghtis with od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   meyn pepull to the nombre of vi. thouſand and moo. and of engliſhmen bot a few ¶And after this The nobull prince edward reſtorid thee ſame Pers to his kyngdom ayen. the wich Pers afterward

thurgh trechery and falſeneſſe of the forſaid baſtard of Spayn as he ſat at his mete was ſtrangled and deid. But after this victori mony nobull and hardy men and nobull of englond in Spayn thurgh the fl
                     •
                  x and other diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe ſeknes toke ther deth. ¶And alſo in the ſame yere ī the Marche wos ſeyn ſtella Comata bitwen the North coſtis and the weſt. whos bemes ſtretched toward Fraunce. ¶And in the next yere ſuyng of kyng Edwardis regne xliij. in Aprill Sir Leonell kyng Edwardis ſon that was Duke of Clarence went toward Mileyne with a choſe meyne of the gentils of Enlond for to wedde Galoys doughter and haue hir to his wife. by whom he ſhuld haue half the lordſhip of Mileyn. But after that they wer ſolemply wedded and a bout the Natiuite of our lady the ſame duke of Mileī died. And in the ſame yere the frenſhmen breken the pees. and the trews ridyng on the kynges ground and lordſhip of Englond in the ſh̄ire and cuntre of Pountife. And token and held Caſtelles and tounes. And bere the Engliſhmen on hond falſely and ſotelly. that they wer cauſe of brekyng of the trewes. ¶And in this ſame yere died the duches of Lancaſter: And is beried worſhipfully in ſent Paules chirche. ¶The xl iiij. yere of kyng Edwardis regne was the greteſt peſtilence of mē and of gret beſtes and by the gret fallyng of waters that fell at that tyme. ther fell gret hyndring and deſtroyeng of corne in ſo moch that the next yere after a buſſhell of whet was ſold for xl: pens. ¶And in this ſame yere about thee laſte ende of May kyng Edward held tho his parlament at weſtmynſter in the whiche parlament wos tretid and ſpoken of the oth and the trewes yt was broke betwen him and the kyng of fraunce and how he myght beſt vpō his wrōg be auēgid ¶In this ſame yer ī ye aſſū
                  cion of our lady died quene Philip of englond a full nobull and good woman & at weſtmīſter full worſſhipfully is beried & entered & about midſomer the duke of lancaſtre &̄ ye erle of Herford
                  
wt a gret cōpanie of knyghtis wēt ī to fraūce wher they get them but litell worſhip & name. for ther wos an huge oſt of frēſhmen vpō chalkhull brigge & an other oſt of engliſhmen faſt by the ſam brige that lōg tyme had leued ther. And mōy worthi men & gret of the engliſſhmen ordeyned & yaf coūcell for to fight &̄ yaf botaill to the frenſhmen. but the forſaid lordis wold nothing ꝯſent ther to ne aſſent for no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thing. ¶Ther anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   it happid that the erle of werwike come thederward for to were. & when the frenſhmen herd of his comyng or that he come fully to land they left the
                     •
                   tentis &̄ pauilyons with all ther vitales &̄ fled and went a way priuely. And when the erle was comyn to land with his men he went in all haſt toward Normandie &̄ deſtroyed the Ile of caws thurgh dynt of ſwerd and thurgh fier ¶But alas in his returnyng to englondward home ayen at Calais he wos taken wt ſekeneſſe of the peſtilence & died not leuyng behind hī aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his daies ſo nobull a knyght and orped of armes ¶In wich tyme rened &̄ wered thilk orped knyght ſir Iohn̄ Hawkewod yt was an engliſhmā borne hauyng with hī at his gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  naūce thilk white cō
                  panie that is aforſaid the wich o tyme ayens holy chirche and an other time ayens lordis werid &̄ ordeyned gret batailles and ther in that ſame cuntre he did mony meruelus thynges ¶And a bout the conuerſion of ſent Paule the kyng when he had endid and done the entering and the exiquies with gret coſtes and rialtes a bout the ſepulture & berieng of quene Philip his wife he held a ꝑlament at weſtmynſtre in wich ꝑlament was axed of the clargie a thre yeres dyme that is for to ſay a gret dyme to be payed iij. yere during ¶And the clargi put it of & wold not graunte vn to Eſter next comīg & than they greūted well that ī iij. yere by c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tan termes yt dyme ſhuld be payd. &̄ alſo of the lay fe wos a iij. yeres xv. graūted to the kyng.
            
            
               ¶How ſir Robert Knol̄les wt other c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn lordis of the reame wēt ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee in to fraūce· &̄ of ther gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  naūce.
               
                  
                  ANd in the xlv. yere of kyng Edward in the begynnyng kyng Edward with vn wyſe counſell and vn diſcrete borawed a gret ſoume of gold of the prelatis lordis marchantis and other rich men of his reame ſayng that it ſhuld be diſpendid in defendyng of holy chirche and of his reame. ¶Neuerthelatter it profited nought· wherfor about midſomer after he made a gret hoſt of the worthieſt men of his reame Amonges whome wer ſom lordis that is for to ſay the lord Fitzwater and the lord Graunſon & other worthy knyghtis of wich knyghtis the kyng ordeyned ſir Robert Knolles a prouede knyght &̄ a well aſ ſaid in dede of armes for to be gouernour and that thurgh his coūcel and gouernaunce all thyng ſhuld be gouerned &̄ dreſſed. ¶And wen thei come ī to fraūce: as long as thei duelled & helde them hole to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye fraūſhmen durſt not fall vppon theym ¶And at the laſt about the begynnyng of winter for enuy & coueteys that wos amōg them. And alſo diſcorde they ſondred & partid them in to diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe companies vn wiſely & folely. But ſir Robert knolles & his men wente and keped them ſauf within an Caſtell in Bretan ¶And when the frenſhmē ſaw that our mē wer deuidid in to diuerſe companies &̄ places not holdīg ne ſtrengthyng them to gedres as them ought for to do. they fell ferſly on our men. And for the moſt partie toke them or ſlowen them & tho that they myght take led with them priſoners ¶And ī thee ſame yere pope vrbane come fro rome to Auiniō for ēcheſō & cauſe yt he ſhuld accord & make pees bitwen the kīg of fraūce & ye king of Englond for euer more. But alas or he began his tretis he died with ſekeneſſe the ·xxi. day of December & wos beried as for the time ī the cathedrall chirche of Auiniō faſt by the high aut
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ¶And the next yere after whan he had lyne ſo his bones wer taken out of the erth and beried new in the abbey of ſent victorie faſt by marcile of the wich abbey he wos ſum tyne Abbot him ſelf ¶And ī both places yt he was beried in ther be mōy grete

miracles done and wrought thurgh the grace of almighty god to mony a mannys help and to the worſhip of god almyghty. ¶And after whom folewed next and wos made pope Gregorie Cardinall Deken that before wos caled Pers Roger ¶In this ſame yere the cite of Lymoge rebellid and faught ayens the prince as othir Cites in Gnyhenne did for gret taxes coſtages and raunſons that they wer put and ſet to by prince edward wich charges weren Inportable and to chargeabull wher for they turned fro him and fellen to the kyng of fraūce. And whan prince edward ſaw this he wos ſore a chafed and greued. & in turnyng homward ayen ī to englond with ſoro ſkarmiſſhes and fighting & gret aſſautes fought with them & toke the forſaid cite and diſtroied it almoſt to the grund and ſlew all that wer foūd in the cite And than for to ſay the ſoth for diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe ſikeneſſe and maladies that he had &̄ alſo for defaute of monay yt he not might wt ſtond ne tari on his enmys he hied him ayen in to englond wt his wife & his menye leuyng behind him in gaſcoyn the duke of Lancaſtre & ſir edmond erle of Cambrigge with othir worthy and orped men of armes ¶In the xlvi. yere of kīg edward at the ordinaunce &̄ ſendyng of king edward. the kyng of Naune com to him to Claringdon to tret with hī of c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tain thinges touchyng his were ī Normandie wher kīg Edward had left certayn ſeges in his ſtede till he come ayen. ¶But kyng edward myght not ſped of that. that he aſkid him. And ſo the kyng of Naun with gret worſhip & gret yeftes toke his leue & wēt home ayene ¶And about begīnyng of marche when ye ꝑlament at weſtmī
                  ſtre wos begun the kīg aſkid of the clargi a ſubſidie of .l.M. pound the wich by a good aviſement &̄ bi a gen
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  all ꝯuocaciō of thee clargie it wos graūted and ordeyned that it ſh̄uld be paied & reſed of the lay fee. ¶And ī this ꝑlament at the requeſt &̄ aſkīg of the lordis in hatered of men of holy chirch. the Chanceler &̄ the treſorer yt wer biſſhoppis & the clarke of the priue ſeale wer remeued

and put out of office and in ther ſtede wer ſecular men put in. ¶And while this ꝑlament laſted ther come ſolempne embaſſatours ſent fro the pope to trete with the kīg of pees. & ſaid yt the pope deſired to fulfill his prediceſſours will. but for all ther comyng they ſped not of ther purpoſe.
            
            
               ¶Of the beſegyng of Rochell and how the Erle of penbruke and his companie wos ther take in the hauen with Spanyardis & all his ſhippis brent·
               THe ix. day of Iune kyng Edward ī xlvij. yere of his rene held his parlament at wyncheſtre and it laſted but viiij. days to the parlament wer ſompned by writ of men of holy chirche iiij. biſſhoppis &̄ iiij abbotes with out any mo ¶This parlament wos holdē for marchantis of london of Norwich. & of other diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe places in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe thingꝭ and pointes of treſon that they wer defamed of. that is to ſay that they wer rebell and wold riſe ayens the kyng ¶This ſame yere the duke of Lancaſtre and the erle of Cambrege his brother come out of Goſcoyn in to englond & toke and weddid to ther wifes Petres doght
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s ſū tim kīg of ſpayn Of wich ij. doughtris the duke had the elder and the erle the yonger. ¶And that ſame time ther wer ſent ij. Cardinales fro the pope. That is to ſay an engliſh cardinall & a cardinale of paris to tret of pees bitwen thes ij. reames ye wich when they had bene both long eche ī his ꝓuinces &̄ ī his places &̄ cūtres faſt bi: tretyng of the forſaid pees. at ye laſt they toke wt them thee lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s of ꝓcuracie & went ayen to rome wt out ony effect of ther purpoſe. ¶In this yere ther wos a ſtrong bataill on ye ſe bitwen engliſhmē & flemmīg & the engliſſhme had ye victori & toke xxv. ſhippis wt ſalt &̄ ſleyng & drenchīg all the men yt wer therin vn wyttyng them that they wer of that cuntre And redely moch harme had fallen bi cauſe ther of ne had pees & accord ye ſon̄ be bitwen thē And ī this ſame yere the frenſhmen beſegie ye toūe of Rochell wherfor the erle of penbroke wos ſent ī to gaſcoyn wt
                  
a gret companie of men of armes for to diſtro the ſege the wich paſſed the ſee and comen ſauf to the hauen of Rochell &̄ whan they wer ther at the hauen mouth or that they myght entre. ſodenly come vpon them a ſtrong nauy of Spayn the wich tho ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  come thee engliſhmen in moch blemyſſhyng hurtyng & ſlayng of mōy peple for as moch as theengliſh men wer not than redi for to fight ne warned of them. And in the cūmyng vpō the Spanyardis all ye engliſh men othir they wer take or ſlayn & x. of them wer woūdid to the deth &̄ all ther ſhipis brint. & ther they toke the erle wt an huge treſour of the reame of englōd & mōy other noble men alſo on midſomer eue the wich is ſent Edeldredis day &̄ led them with them in to ſpayn. ¶And of this miſchief wos no gret wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for this erle wos a full ill liuer as an open lichour And alſo in a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  tayn parlament he ſtod & was ayens the rightis and fraūches of holy chirch And alſo he coūceled the kyng and his councell that hee ſhuld ax more of men of holy chirch than other ꝑſons of the lay fe. ¶And for the kyng & other of his counſell acceppid & toke rather ill opinions & cauſes ayens men of holy chirch. than he did for to defend &̄ maynten the right of holy chirch. it wos ſeyn after mony tymes for lake of fortun & grace they had not ne bare away ſo gret victorie ne pouer ayens ther emnys as they did before. ¶This ſam yere the kīg wt a gret hoſt entred the ſe to remeue theſeege of Rochell: but the wind wos euen contrari vn to him & ſuffred him not long time to go ferfro the land: wherfor he abode a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn tyme vpon the ſee coſtes abidyng after a good wynde for them &̄ yit come it not. ſo at the laſt he come thens wt his men to lond ward ayen. & anone as he wos on land the wynd began for to turne & wos in an other coſt than he wos afore.
            
            
               ¶How the duke of Lancaſtre with a gret hoſt went in to flaunders & paſſed by Paris thurgh Burgon &̄ thurgh all fraūce till he come to Burdeux.
               
                  SOne after in the xlviij. yere of the regne of kyng edward the duke of Lancaſtre with a gret pouer went in to flaunders and paſſed by Paris thurgh Burgon and thurgh all fraunce till he come vn to burdeux with out ony man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   withſtōdīg of the frenſſhmen &̄ he did them but litell harme ſauf he toke & ranſoned mony places & toūes & mōy men & let them aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   gon frely· ¶The ſame yere the kyng ſent certayn enbaſſetoure to the pope prayng him that he ſh̄uld leue of. and medle not in his court of ye 
                  kepyng & re
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uacions of benefices in englond. &̄ that tho yt wer choſen to biſſhoppes ſees & dignites frely &̄ wt ful right might ioy & haue & be confermed to the ſame of ther metropolitans &̄ erchebiſhoppis as they wer wont to be of old tyme. ¶of thes poyntes & of othir touchyng the kyng & his reame whan they had ther anſuer of the pope. the pope enioyned them that they ſhuld c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tefi him ayen by ther lettir of the kynges will and of his reame or they det
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  mined ought of the forſaid articles. ¶In the ſame yere died Iohan the Erchebiſſhop of yorke Iohan̄ biſſhop of Ely. willm biſſh̄hop of Worceſtre In whos ſtedis folowed & were made biſhoppis be auctorite of the pope maſtir Alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Neuyll to the erchebiſhoprich of york Thomas of Arundell to thee biſſh̄oprich of Ely. & ſir Henri wakſeld to the biſſhop of worceſtre ¶In the wich tym it wos ordeyned in the ꝑlamēt that all cathedrall churches ſhuld ioy & haue ther eleccions hole &̄ that the kīg fro yt tym aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward ſhuld not write ayens them that wer choſē bot rather help thē by his lett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to ther ꝯfirmaciō. & this ſtatuti did moch ꝓfit ¶And ī this ꝑlamēt wos grātid to ye kīg a dyme of ye clergi &̄ a xv. of lay fe. In the xlix yere of the kīg edward died maſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   
                  willm witleſey erchbiſhoo of cantorberi & the mōkes of the ſame church aſkid &̄ deſierid a Cardinale of englōd to be erchebiſhop And therfor the kyng wos agreuid &̄ had mēt & purpoſed to haue exilid the monkis of the ſame houſe And they ſpēdid moch good or they myght haue the kyngꝭ graci ayen and his loue

but yit wold the kyng not conſent ne graunte to ther eleccion of the Cardinall ne of the pope alſo ne his Cardinales. ¶And at the begynnyng of Auguſt it wos tretid &̄ ſpoken at burges of certayn pointes and articles hanging bitwene the pope & the kīg of englond and this tretis laſted almoſt ij. yere ¶At the laſt it wos accordid bitwen them that the pope fro that time forth ſhuld not vſe ne dele with the reſeruacions of benefices in englond and that the kyng ſh̄uld not graunte ne let no benefices bi hys write that is called Quare impidit. But as toching the eletcion aboue ſaid ther wos no thyng touched ne do. ¶And that was wyted and put vpon certayn clerkis the wich rather ſuppoſid and hoped to be avaunced & promotid to biſſhoppriches wich they deſired &̄ couetid bi the court of rome rather than by any other eleccions ¶This ſame yere about candelmaſſe ther met to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   at Bruges mony nobull & worthy men of both ſides and reames to trete of pees bitwen tho ij. kynges ¶And this tretis laſted ij. yere with gret coſtes & huge expenſis of both ꝑties And at ye laſt they went and deꝑted thens with out ony accord or effect. the next yere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the .l. yere of kyng Edward iiij. Non̄ of May beyng yit void and vacand the Erchebiſſhoprich of cantorburi maſter Symond ſudberi biſſhop of london wos made Erchebiſſhop & maſter willm Courtney that was biſſhop of Herford was than made biſſh̄op of london and the biſſhap of Bangore wos made biſſhop of Herford. ¶And this ſame tyme in a certayn tretis and ſpekyng of pees trews wos taken bitwen them of fraunce & englond fro midſomer to midſomer come ayen all an hole yere. and about the begynnyg of Aprill the duke of Bretan with mony erles barons and other worthi lordis & men of englond went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe in to Bretan wher he hath had all his luſt deſire and purpoſe ne had the forſaid trwys be ſo ſone take ye wich lettid them moch. this ſame tyme the Ile of Conſtantine wher that the caſtell of ſent Saueour is in: that long tyme was fought at: and beſeged of

the frenſhmen wos than yoldē to the frenſhmē with all the appotenaunces in to gret harme and hindring of the reame of englond. ¶And this ſame yere ther wer ſo gret and ſo paſſing hetes and ther with all a gret peſtilence in englond and ī other diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ſe parties of the world that it diſtruyd and ſlew violently and ſtrongly both men and women with outnombur ¶This ſom yere died ſir edward the lord ſpenſer a worthy knyght and a bolde And in the mynſter of Teukeſburi worſſhipfully is beried And laſtyng this peſtilence ye pope at the inſtance & prayer of a engliſh Cardinall graunted to all pepull that died in englond that wer ſori & repentant for ther ſinnys and alſo ſh̄riuen full remiſſion bi .ij. bulles vnder lede .vi. monethis than next to laſt ¶In this ſame yere the erle of penbroke was take and ranſo
                  
                     •
                  ed bi Bartram Clekyn bitwen Paris and Calais as he come toward englond vpon ſent Etheldredis day the wich ſent as it wos ſaid the erle often tymes had offendid. & wt ī a litell while aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he died. ¶And in Nouember next after ther met at burges the duke of Lancaſtre & the duke of Angoy wt mony other lordis & p̄lates of both reames for to tret of pees.
            
            
               ¶Of the deth of prince Edward and of the lord Latimer & da
                  
                     •
                  e Alice peres thurgh whom & hir maītenau
                     •
                  es the reame mōy aday wos miſgou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned.
               NOt long after the .li. yere of kyng Edwardis regne hee let ordeyne &̄ hold at weſtmīſtre the greteſt ꝑlamēt yt was ſeyn mony ayere afrre. ¶In the wich ꝑlament he axed of the comynalte of the reame as he had done be fore a gret ſubſidi to be gr
                     •
                  ūted to him for defendyng of him &̄ of his reame but the communes anſuerd that they wer ſo oft day bi day greued and charged with ſo mony talages & ſubſidies that they might no longer ſuffer no ſuch burthous & charges. and that they knew & wiſt wel ynough that the kyng had ynough for ſauīg of hī & of his reame if the reame wer well &̄ trewly gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned. but that it had be ſo lōg

euell gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned bi euell officers· that the reame myght nother ben plenteous of chaffre &̄ marchandiſe ne alſo with riches. And in thes thinges they proferd them ſelf. if the kyng wold certanly to preue and ſtand bi. ¶And if it wer founden & priued aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward that the kyng had nede. they wold gladly eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man after hys pouer and ſtate him help and len. ¶And after this wer publiſſhid & ſhewed in the ꝑlament mony playntes and defautis of diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe officers of the reame and namly af the lord Latimer thee kynges chambrelayn both to the kyng and eke to the reame. ¶And alſo at the laſt ther wos ſpoken and treted of Dame Alice Pers for the gret wronges and euell gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  naūce that was done by hir coūcell in the reame. the wich dame Alice Pers that the kyng had holdin mony day &̄ long tyme to his lemā. wherfor it wos the las wondir though thurgh the frealte of the wamanys exciting and hir ſteryng he conſentid to hir leudeneſſe and euell coūcell the wich dame Alice &̄ alſo the lord latimer & othir ſuche that meued the kyng to euell gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  naunce ayens his profet & ye reames alſo all the comynalte axed & deſirid that they ſhold be meued & put away & in ther ſtedis wiſe men & worthy that wer trewe &̄ well aſſayed & proued & of good gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  naunce ſhuld be put in ther ſtedis. ¶So among all other ther wos on amōg the communes that wos a wyſe knyght and a trew & an eloquent man whos name wos Pers delamare ¶And this ſame pers was choſen to be ſpeker for the comunes in the ꝑlament ¶And forth is ſame pers told & publeſſhed the trouth &̄ reherſed the wronges ayens the forſaid Dame Alice & other c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tan ꝑſons &̄ the kynges councell as he was bod by the comuns And alſo truſtyng moch for to be ſupportid & mayntened in this mater by help and &̄ fauor of the prince: anone as the prince wos deid at the inſtance and requeſt of the forſaid dame Alice. This Pers delamare wos Iuged to ꝑpetuall priſon in the caſtell of Notyngham in the wich he wos ij yere &̄ in the vi. Kal̄. of Iule laſtyng that ſame ꝑlament

died prince Edward kyng edwardis friſt ſon that is to ſay in trinite ſonday in the worſſhip of wich feſt he wos wont euery yere wher that euer he wer in the world to hold and make the moſt ſolē
                  pnite that he myght ¶Whos name & fortune of knyghthood but if it had be of an other Ector al men both criſten and hethen while that he leued & wos in good point wondred moch &̄ drad him wonder ſore whos body is worſſhipfully buried in Crichirche at Cantorburi ¶And ī this ſame yere the mē &̄ the erles tenaū
                  tes of werwik ariſe maliciouſly ayens the abbot & couēt of Eueſham &̄ ther tenaūtis & diſtroid ferſly the abbot &̄ the toūe and woūdid & bet ther men and ſlew of them mōy. &̄ wēt to thir man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   places & did moch harme & breken doūe thir ꝑkis &̄ ther cloſes &̄ breken & ſlew ther wild beſtes & chaſid them: brekyng ther fiſhe pondis hedes & let the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of thir pondis ſtewes & riu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s renne out & token the fiſh & bere it with them And did them all the ſorow yt they myght In ſo ferforth yt forſoth they had diſtroid ꝑpetually yt abbey wt all ther mēbres & apportenaūs but if the kīg the ſon had holpen it & take hede ther to. ¶And therfore the kyng ſent his letters to the erle of warwik chargyng him & cōmaūdīg him yt he ſhuld ſtynt redreſſe & amend tho euell doers &̄ bakers of his pees. ¶And ſo by menys of lordis & other frendis of both ſides pes & good accord & loue was made bitwen them ¶And for this hurling as it wos ſaid the kyng wold not be gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned at that tyme by his lordis yt ther wer in the ꝑlamēt but he toke & made his ſon the duke of lancaſtre his gouernour of the reame the wich ſtode ſo ſtill as gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nour till the tyme that he died. ¶The ſame yere anōe aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Candilmaſſe or the ꝑlamēt wos done ye kyng aſked a ſubſidie of the clargie &̄ of the lay fe: & it wos graūted hī yt is to ſay yt he ſhuld haue of eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ꝑſon of the lafee. both man &̄ womā yt paſſed xiiij. yere of age iiij. pens out take poer beggers yt wer knowen openly for nedy poer beggers. And that he ſh̄uld haue of eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man of holy chirch yt wos beneficed

or ꝓmoted xij. pens. & of all other that wer not ꝓmoted iiij. pens out take the iiij. orders of the freris beggers. ¶Thi
                     •
                   ſame yere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   mihelmaſſe Richard prince edwardis ſon wos made prince of wales to whom the kīg yaf alſo the duchie of Cornwal wt ye erledō of Cheſtre. &̄ about this time the cardinall of englō
                  de the iiij. day befor marie magdelene day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   met ſodenly wos ſmyten wt a palaſie & loſt his ſpeche & on marie magdelene dai died
            
            
               ¶Of the deth of kyng edward & how ſir Iohn̄ Monſterwarth knyght wos drawen & honged for his falſeneſſe.
               RYght anone after in the lij. yere of kyng Edward in the begynnyng of october Pope Gregarie the xi. brought & remeued his court with him from Auinion to rome. ¶And the xij. day of Aprill Iohan Monſterworth knyght at london was draw &̄ honged & than quartired & ſent to iiij chief toūes of englond and his hede ſmyten of & ſet vpon london brigge. for this ſame Iohn̄ wos full vn trew to the kyng & to the reame &̄ couetous & vnſtabull. for he toke oft tymes gret ſoumes of monay of the kyng & his councell for men of armes wagis that hee ſh̄uld haue paid them. & toke it to his own vſe. & he dred that at the laſt he ſhold be ſhent & acuſed for the ſame cauſe &̄ fled priuely to the kyng of fraunce &̄ wos ſuore to him &̄ bicome his man &̄ behight him a gret nauy out of ſpayn in to confuſion & diſtroyng of englōd. ¶But rightfull god to whom no priuite is vnknowne ſuffrid him friſt to be ſhend &̄ ſpilt or that he ſo tratourſly & falſly his lige lord the kyng of englong &̄ his pepull in his ream in the wich ground the ſame Iohan wos bore wykkedly thurgh bataill deſtroie or bring his curſed purpoſe about ¶In ye feſt of ſent George tho next after kyng Edward yaf to Richard of Burdeux his heir that wos prince edwardis ſon. at wyndeſor the ordir of knyghthod & made him knyght the wich kyng edward whan he had regned li. yere and more the xi. Kal̄. of Iune he died at Shene and is buried worſhipfulli at weſtmynſtre on whois

ſoule god haue merci amen. ¶This kyng edward was forſothe of a paſſing goodneſſe & full grecious among all the worthy men of the world for he paſſid & ſhone by vertu of grace yef to him fro god a boue all his prediceſſours that wer nobull men & worthy. & he wos a well herted mā & a hardy. for he drad neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   no miſh
                     •
                  ppis ne harmes ne euell fortun that might fall a nobull weri our and a fortunat. for both on land & ſe & in all batailles and aſſembles wt a paſſing glorie & ioye he had the victorie. he was meke & benyngne homeli ſobre & ſoft to all maner of men as well to ſtrāgers os to his own ſubgectis &̄ to od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt wer vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  naūce ¶He wos deuout & holy both to god &̄ holy chirch. for he worſhipped holpe &̄ mayntened holy chirche &̄ ther myniſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  res wt all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  aunce he wos tretabull & well auiſed in temꝑall and wordly nedes wiſe ī coūcell & diſcret & meke to ſpeke wt. ī his dedis &̄ man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s gētill & wel taught hauīg pitte of them yt wer ī diſeſe plentious in yeueng of benefaites & almoſe: biſi &̄ curious ī bylddyng &̄ lighili he bere & ſuffred wrōges &̄ harmis & whē he was yeue to any ocupaciō he left all od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thīg for the tyme & tent ther to ſemly of body & a meyn ſtature hauīg all way to high & to lawe a good chere ¶And ther ſprong & ſhone ſo moch grace of hī yt what man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   man had behold his face or had dremed of hī: he hoped yt day yt all thīg ſh̄uld hap to hī ioyfull & likīg. ¶And he gouned his kyngdō gloriouſly vn to his age he was large ī yeuēg & wiſe ī ſpēces he was fulfilled wt all honeſte of good man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s &̄ vertues. vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   whō to liue it wos as for to regne wherfor his fame & his loos ſprong ſo fer yt it come ī to hethenneſſe & barborie ſhewīg &̄ telling his worthenes &̄ manhod ī all landis & yt no land vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   heuen had brought forth ſo nobull a kīg ſo gentill & ſo bleſſid. or myght raſe ſuch an other whan he wos dede: ¶Neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the latt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   lechorie and meuyng of his fleſh haunted him in his age. wherfor the rather as it is to ſuppoſe for vnmeſurable fulfillīg of his luſt his lyfe ſhorted the ſonn. ¶And here of take good hede lyke as

his dedis berith witneſſe· for as in his begynnyng all thīges were ioyfull and likyng to hī &̄ to all pepull. ¶And ī his midde age he paſſid all pepull in high Ioye worſhip and bliſſedneſſe. right ſo when he drew in to age drawyng doūward thurgh lechori & othir ſinnes litell and litell all tho ioyfull and bliſſid thyngꝭ and ꝓſparite decreced and miſhappid &̄ infortunat thyngꝭ &̄ vnꝓfitable harmes with mony euels began for to ſpring & the more harme is it continued long time after.
               CLemens the ſext wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Bendict x. yere. this mā in name & dede was vertuus & mony thyngꝭ yt benedict was rigus ī. he made eſe. & c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tan that he depriuyt he reſtorid. and the riguſneſſe of the faith of Benedict was laudabull. But moch more laudabull wos the mekeneſſe of Clement. ¶This man wos a nobull prechour. and mony ſermones he geddrid. & he let no man paaſſe from him bot he yaf him good councell. And deceſſid a bliſſid man. Karolus the iiij. wos Emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Lodewik xxxi. yere This man wos the kyng of Beeme. a wiſe man & a myghty. And this man wos choſin Emprour by the cō
                  maundement of Clemens: Lodewik beyng on liue in his cōtemacy. & be cauſe he aſked mekely the popes bliſſing &̄ to be crouned of him. as ather good kynges did. Therfor he wos proteckid of god and preualed ouer all his enmys. And mony fau
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  abull lawes he made to ſpirituall men the wich yit er called Karolma. at the laſt he deceſſid a rich man ī vertu and goodis. Innocencius the ſext wos pope after Clement x. yere And he wos a gret louer of religious men and he founded a monaſtery in fraūce of the ordir of Cartuſiens and was a gret canonyſt. Vrbanus the v. wos pape after Innocent This man was abbot of Miſſolens of the ordir of ſent Benet. a doctur and is take for a ſeint. He made the croſſe to be prechit ayens the turkis. And he made a paſage to the Turkis· And to him ſent Brygit wos ſente

from criſt for the confirmacion of ther rule. And then he wos poyſenned and deceſſid. Gregorie the xi wos pope after hī viij: yere This Gregorie did litell. And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hī foloyd the tribulaciō the wich our lord ſhewed to ſent Brigit for the ſinne of the clargie. Venſelans ſon to Karolus a forſaid was Emprour xiiij. yere. And he wos a child and was choſen when his fadre wos on liue: but he toke no kepe of the empire and when he wos warned mony tymes to take heid vn to it and wold not. he was depoſed For he yaf all his delite and luſt vn to lecherie. & the end wos wt out honour for he went gretly from the maners and the vertuus of his nobull fadre And he wos crouned with the impariall dyodeme and the wiſdom of his father paſſed in to Sygmunde his brother as after ſhall apeyr.
               Vrbanus was pope after Gregarie vi. yere. This vrbane wos choſen in the cite of Rome by the ſtrength of the Romans. but the Cardinalles did that for dred. and not willengly. wher fore they fled vn to the Cite of Fundorum. And they ſaied that he was not Pope. And choſe in his place ſir Robert of Gebennys the ſame yere the wich was called Clement the vij. Nota ¶And here began the xxij. ſtriffe in the chirch And it was more wors then euer wos ony other before. for it was ſo ſotell that the wiſeſt men that wer and the beſt conciencied culd not diſcerne with whom it wos beſt to ſay and hold. ¶And this ſtriffe durit xl. yere with a gret ſclaunder vnto all the clargie and gret parell vn to men ſowles for heriſees and other yll thynges thee wich wer brought in then. In ſo moch that ther wos no doctrine in the chirch for miſdoyng· And ther for from this vrbane the vij: vn to Martine I know not who was pope ¶The feſt of the viſitacion of our lady was ordeyned by vrbane the ſext. after the forme of the Sacrament of the auter for a pees and a vnite for to be had among them thurgh the merites of oure bliſſid lady. Bonefacius the ix. was pope after vrbane xv. yere This boneface

was choſen at Rome in the ſtede of vrbane. and the ſtriffe continued for Benedictus was choſen in Auinion in the place of Clement and wos called petrue deluna. and he durid to the cō
                  cell of Conſtantineys. and then he wold not abey bot eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   abode obſtenat. And at the laſt he deceſſid in the kyngdō of Aragon. And he comanded his cardinailes to chefe an othir pope the wich they did anone. and ſet vp an Ydoll and named him Clement bot they ꝓfettid not.
            
            
               Circa annū domini .M.ccc. &̄ lxxx.
               ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   kyng Edward the iij. that wos borne in wyndeſore regned Richard of burdeux that wos prince Edwardis ſone of wales wich prince edward was kīg edward ſone.
               
                  ANd after the good kīg Edward the thrid that wos born at wyndeſore regned Richard the ſecund that wos the good ſir Edwardis ſone prince of wales wich kyng Richard was borne in the cite of burdeux in gaſcoyn and wos crouned at weſtmynſtre in the xi. yere of his age▪ ¶And in the ſecond yere of his regne for debate that wos betwen the lord latimer & ſir raufe Feriers knyght that weren ayens Hawell & ſhakell ſquiers for the priſoner that was take in ſpayn bi thes ij. ſquiers and the wich the lord Latimer & ſir raufe Feriers wold haue had. the wich priſoner was the erle of dene yt thay toke in the bataill of Spayne wherfor thes ij. lordis come in to the chirch at weſtmynſtre and fond this one ſquier hering his maſſe beſide ſent Edwardis ſhrine and ther they ſlew him the wich was called hawell. And Shakell was areſtid & put in the tour of londō And ther he was long time for he wold not deliuer the Erle of Dene his priſoner vn to thes ij. lordis bi ſir Aleyn Buxhill conſtable of the tour and by ſir rauf ferriers on of his adu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſariers till the kyng graūtid him grace. In the iij. yere of kyng richard com the galayes of fraunce

in to englond vn to diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe portes & brent and robbed &̄ ſlew moch pepull of englond that is to ſay at wynchelſerie and haſtyng Porteſmouth Hamton ſtormore and graueſend. and did moch harme and went home ayene· ¶And in this ſame yere was a parlament holdē at weſtmynſtre And at that ſame ꝑlament wos ordeyned that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man woman and child that wer at the age of xiiij yere and a boue thurgh out all the reame poer folk & other ſhuld pay to the talage iiij: pens. Wherfor come &̄ befell afterward gret miſchief and moch diſeſe to all the comynalte of the reame ¶And in the iiij. yere of kyng Rechardis regne ye comunes ariſen vp in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe ꝑties of the reame & did moch harme the wich they called the builing tyme. ¶And they of kent &̄ of eſtſex made them ij. chiuetayns to rule & gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ne the compani of kēt & of eſtſex That on wos called Iak ſtraw & yt od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wat tyler. and they come & aſſembled them vpō the blak heth ī kent And on the Corpus xp̄i day & after they come doune ī ſouthward &̄ breken vp the priſon hous. that is to ſay the kynges benche &̄ the marchalſie &̄ deliuered out all the priſoners ¶And ſo the ſame day they com in to londō & ther they robbed the pepull & ſlew all aliens yt they myght find in the cite & about the cite &̄ diſpoiled all ther goodis and made hauoke. ¶And on the fryday nex aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt was on the morne. &̄ they come than to the tour of londō &̄ the kyng beyng ther ī they fet out of ye tour the Erchebiſſhop of Cātorberi ſir edmond ſudbery & ſir Robert halys hoſpitiler priour & maſter of ſent Iohanes houſe. and a white frere that was confeſſour vn to kyng Richard &̄ brought them to the tour &̄ they ſmyten of the
                     •
                   hedis and come ayen to londō and ſlew moch pepull of the Cite. ¶And than they wēt vn to the dukes place of lancaſtre beyō
                  de ſent mari ſtrond yt wos called the ſauoy. &̄ ther they deuourid &̄ deſtroied all the goodis that they might find ther &̄ bare them a wa and brent vp the places ¶And than aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they went to ſent iohanes with out ſmythfeld & deſtroied the goodis ther &̄ brent vp

that hous▪ and went to weſtmynſter and ſeint Martins graunte and made them gone out of the ſent were all that wer with in for any maner of gyrth: ¶And than come vn to the tempull & to all other yns of men of law and diſpoiled them & robbed them of ther goodis & alſo tore ther bokis of law. & than they come to london & brake vp the priſon of new gate and drofe out all the priſoners felons & other. and of both countours and all the pepull yt were with in them and diſtroied all the bokis of the countres. ¶And thus they continued both ſatirday & ſonday vn to the mōday next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in all ther malace &̄ wikkidneſſe. ¶And than on mōday kīg Richard with his lordis yt wer with hī yt tym and with the maire of london willm walworth that wos that tyme: come with the aldermen and the comunes of the cite and comen in to ſouthwarke to here and to know the entencion of thes rebeles and miſgouerned pepull. And this Iak ſtraw than made annoye ī the feld that all the pepull of accord ſhuld cum nere &̄ here his clamours and his crie and his wyll. ¶And the lordis & the maire and the aldermen with the comynalte hauyng indignacion of his couetize and falſenes and his foull preſumcion And anone willm walworth that tyme beyng maire drew out his knife and ſlew Iak ſtraw. And anone right ther did ſmyte of his hede and ſet it vpon a ſpere ſh̄aft &̄ ſo it wos bore thurgh london & ſet an high vpō londō brigge. ¶Anon thes riſers & miſgou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ned mē wer void & clene vaniſſhed as it had nought be they. And than the king of his gret goodneſſe & by prayer of his lords made ther vi: knightis of good & worthy men of the Cite of londō That is to ſay willm walworth that at that tyme wos maire & ſlew Iak ſtrawe. And the ſecund was Nicholas brembre &̄ the iij. Iohn̄ Philipot & the iiij. Nicholas twif
                     ••
                  d & the v: Robert laūdes the vi: Robert gaytō. And thā the kīg wt his lordis & his knyghtis retourned ayen to the toure of londō &̄ ther he reſtid hī till this pepull wer better ſeced & ſet in reſt and pees And than

by ꝓceſſe of tyme as they myght get and toke thes rebelles &̄ riſers they hong them vpō the next galois ī eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y lordſhip thurghout the reame of englond by xl. &̄ bi xxx. bi x. & by xij. euer as they myght be geten &̄ taken ī ony ꝑties ¶And in the v. yere of kīg Richardis regne wos the gret erth quake & was gen
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  all thurgh out the world the wedeneſday aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   witſonday ī the yere of our lord a .M.ccc.lxxxxi. Wherfor all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   pepull wer ſore a gaſt &̄ dredfull lōg tyme for dred of vēgeaūs yt our lord ſh̄ewid and did. ¶And in the vi. yere of kyng Richard ſir Henri ſpen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   biſſhop of Norwich went with a Croiſerie ouer the ſee in to the cuntre of Flaunders and ther they gat the toune of Grauenyng and the toune of broburgh Dunkerk & Newport and ther thei laded and fraughtid li. ſhippis with pelage for to haue comē in to englond with thes ſhyppes and goodis. ¶And the biſſhop of Norwich and his coūcell let brenne thes ſhippis with all the pelage in the ſame hauen all in to hard aſſhes and at Dunkerke wos done a gret bataill bitwen the Flemmynges and the Engliſhhmen And at that bataill wer ſlayn a gret multitude of thes Flemmynges & an huge nombure ¶And than went thee biſſhop with his retenew to Ypers and beſeged it a long tyme but it myght not be geten. And ſo lefte that ſege and comen ayen in to Englond For our engliſhmen wer fowly deſtroyed and mony died on the flix. ¶And in this ſame yere come the Quene Anne in to englond for to be ſpouſed to kyng Richard And hir fadre wos Emprour of Almayne And kyng of Beme ¶And with hir come the Duke of Taſſi hir vncle and mony other worthy lordis and knyghtis of hir cūtre of beme and of other duche tonges to do hir reuerraūce & worſhip And ſir Symond beuerle a worthy knyght of the garter & other knyghtis & ſquyers that wer the kynges embaſſetours brought hir ī to englond & ſo forth to londō And the pele of ye cite yt is to ſey the mare & the aldermen and all the comunes riden ayens hir to welcū hir

and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man in good aray and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y craft with his mynſtral ſee in the beſt maner mette with hir on the blake heth in Kent and ſo brought hir vn to London thurgh the cite and ſo forth vn to weſt mynſter vn to the kynges palais. And ther ſhe was ſpouſed vn to kyng Richard well and worthely in the abbey of weſtmynſtre & ther ſhe wos crouned quene of englond▪ And all hir frendis that come with hir. had gret yeftes and weren well cherid and refreſhed as long tyme as they byden ther. ¶And in this ſame yere ther was a bataill done in the kynges palays at weſtmynſter for certayn pointes of treſon bitwen ſir Iohan Anſley knyght defendant. And Carton ſquier the appellaunt. But this ſir Iohn̄ of Anſley ouer come this Carton. and made him to yeld him withī the lyſtes. ¶And anone wos this Carton diſpoiled of hys harnes and draw out of the liſtes and ſo forth to Tyburne &̄ ther he wos honged for his falſeneſe ¶And ī the viij. yer of ye regne of kyng Richard. ſir Edmond of Langley Erle of Cambrige the kynges vncle went in to portyngal̄e with a fair m
                     •
                  ny of men of armes and archiers in ſtrengthing and helpyng of thee kyng of Portingale ayens the kyng of Spayn and his pouer. & ther the kyng of portingale had the vyctorie of his enmys thurghe help and comforth of our engliſſhmen· ¶And whan that iorney wos done the erle of Cambrigge come home ayen with hys pepull in to englond in haſt bliſſid be god and his bliſſid yeft amē ¶And this ſame yere kyng Richa
                     •
                  d held his Criſtemaſſe in the maner of Eltham ¶And the ſame tyme the kyng of Ermoyne fled out of his own land and come in to englond for to haue help an ſocour of our kyng ayens his enmys that had driuē him out of his own reame. And ſo he wos brought vn to the kyng to Eltham ther as the kyng held his riall feſt of Criſtemaſe ¶And ther our kyng welcomed him and did him moch reuerence and worſſhip and commaundid all his lordis to make him all the chere that they coud. And than he beſought the kyng of

grace and of help and of his comforth in his nede ¶And that he myght be brought ayen to his kyngdom and land. For the Turkes had deuoured and deſtroid moch parte of his land. and for drede how he fled and come hidder for ſocour and helppe· ¶And then the kyng hauyng on hī pitte and cōpaſſiō of his gret miſchief and greuous diſeſe anone he toke his councell and aſked what wos beſt to done ¶And they anſuerd and ſaid yif it liked him to yef him ony good it wer well done. And as touchyng his pepull for to trauell ſo fer ī to out landes it wer a grete iuꝑdie And ſo the kyng yaf him gold & ſiluer and mony riche yeftes and iewelles and betaught him to god. And ſo he paſſed ayen out of Englond ¶And in this ſame yere kyng Richard with a riall pouer went in to ſcotland for to were vpon the ſcottis for the falſeneſſe and deſtruccion that the ſcottis had done vn to engliſhmen in the marches And than the ſcottis come doūe vn to the kyng for to tret with him &̄ with his lordis for trews as for certayn yeres. ¶And ſo our kyng &̄ his coūcell graūt them trews c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn yeres to ther aſkyng. & our kīg turned him ayen in to englond And when he wos cumyn vn to yorke ther he a bode and reſted him ther ¶And ther ſir Iohn̄ Holand the erle of kentis brother ſlew the erle ſone of Stafford &̄ his heir wt a daggar in the cite of Yorke werfor the kyng wos ſore anoyed & greued and remeued thens &̄ com to londō ¶And ye maire with ye ald
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  men & ye cōmyns with all the ſolempnite yt might be done riden ayens ye kīg and brought him rialli thurgh the cite and ſo forth vn to weſtmīſter vn to his own palais: ¶And ī the ix. yere of kyng Richardis regne he held a ꝑlament at weſtmynſter & ther he made ij. dukes & a marqueyes and v· Erles. ¶The fyrſt that was made duke was the kynges vncle ſir Edmond of lāglee erle of Cambrigge & hī he made duke of york ¶And his other vncle ſir Thamas of wodſtoke that was erle of Bukkyngham him he made duke of glouceſtre & ſir Lyon

ue
                     •
                   yt was erle of Oxford him he made markeys of Dyuelyne. ¶And Henri of Balynbroke the duke ſon of Lancaſtre hī he made erle of Derby. ¶And ſir Edward the dukes ſon of yorke him he made erle of Ruttelond ſir Iohn̄ Holand that was the erle of kentis brother him he made erle of Hontingdon. ¶And ſir Thomas Mombray erle of Notingham and erle Marſhall of Englond. And ſir Michell de la pole knyght him he made erle of Southfolke & Chancelar of Englōd ¶And the erle of the march at that ſame parlament holden at weſtmynſtre in playn parlament amongis all the lordis and communes was proclamed erle of the march and heir Parent to the croune of englond after kyng Richard the wich erle of the march wēt ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee in to Irland vn to his lordſhippis and landis. For thee erle of marche is erl̄e of vlſter ī Irland &̄ bi rightline & heritage ¶And ther at the caſtell of his he lay yt tym. & thir come vpō hym a gret multitude in buſſhementis of wild Iriſhmen hī for to take and deſtroy And he com out ferſly of his caſtill wt his pepull & māli faught wt them. &̄ ther he was take & he wall to peces & ther he died on whos ſoule god haue merci. ¶And ī the .x. yere of kyng Richardis regne. the erle of Arundell went to ye ſe wt a gret nauy of ſhippis enarmid wt men of armis. & good archiers And whan they com ī thee brod ſee they met with thee hole 
                     •
                  lete that com with wyn lade from Rochill ye wich wyne were enmys goodis. And ther our nauy ſet vpon them and toke thē all and brought them vn to diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe portes &̄ hauens of Englond &̄ ſum to london. and ther ye myght haue had a ton of Rochill wyne of ye beſt for xx. ſhillyng ſterling and ſo we had gret chep wyne ī Englōd yt tym thankid be god almyghty.
            
            
               ¶How ye v. lordis ariſen at Rattecot brigge
               ANd in thee regne of kīg Richard thee xi. yere thee v. lordis ariſen at Rattecot bruggee in thee diſtrucion of rebelles that weren yt tym ī all thee ream. ¶The friſt of v. lordis

was ſir Thomas of wodſtoke the kynges vncle. & duke of gloceſtre. & the ſecund wos ſir Richard erle of Arundell. &̄ the .iij. wos ſir Richard erle of werwik. the iiij. wos ſir Henri bolinbroke erle of Derby. the v. was ſir Thomas Mombray erle of Notingham. ¶And thes v. lordie ſaw the myſchef &̄ myſgouernaunce & ye falſeneſſe of the kyngꝭ coūcell. wherfor they that wer that tyme chief of the kynges coūcell fled out of this land ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee that is to ſay ſir Aliſander Neuell the erchebiſſhop of yorke & ſir Robert leweermarkis of deuelyn & erle of Oxford. and ſir mychell de la Pobe erle of Southfolke & chancellr of Englond And thes iij. lordis went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee· and come neuer ayen for ther they died. ¶And than thes v. lordis aboue ſaid made a ꝑlament at weſtmynſter And ther they toke ſir Robert Treſiliam the Iuſtice and ſer Nicholl Brembre knyght and citeſen of london and ſir Iohan Saluſburi a knyght of the kynges houſold and vſke ſergeaunt of armes and mony moo of othir pepull wer taken and Iuged vn to the deth by the councell of thes v. lordis in ther parlament at weſtmynſter for the treſon that they put vpon them to be drawen from the toure of London thurgh out the Cite and ſo forth vn to Tyburne and ther they ſhuld be honged and ther throtis to be cut and thus they wer ſerued & died. ¶And after that in this ſame parlament at weſtmynſtre wos ſir Symond Beule that was a knyght of the garter & ſir Iohan beauchamp knyght that wos ſtiward of the kyngꝭ houſold. and ſir Iames Berners wer foriugged vn to the deth and than they wer led on fote to the toure hill and ther wer ther hedes ſmyten of and mony other moo. by thes v· lordis ¶In this ſame parlament and in the xij. yere of kyng Richardis regne he let cri & ordeyn a gen
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  all Iuſtis that is called a turnement of lords knyghtis &̄ ſquiers And this Iuſtis and turnement war holdē at london in ſmythfeld of all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſtrangers of what land or cuntre that euer they wer and thidder they wer right wolcum and

to them and to all other wos holden vpen houſold And gret feſtes and alſo gret yeftes ther yefen to all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſtraungers. ¶And of the kynges ſide wer all of ſute ther cotes ther armur ſheldis hors trappure And all wos white hertis wt crounes aboute ther neckis and chaynes of gold hangyng ther vpon &̄ ye croune hangyng law before the hertis body the wich hert wos the kyngꝭ leueray that he yaf to lordis &̄ ladies knyghtis & ſquiers for to know his howſeold from othir pepull ¶And in this feſt comyng to ther Iuſtis xxiiij. ladies led thes xxiiij. lordis of the garther with chynes of gold and all the ſame ſutes of hertes as is before ſaid from the toure on horſbake thurgh the cite of london in to ſmythfeld ther that the Iuſtis ſhuld be holden. ¶And this feſt &̄ iuſtis wos hold gen
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  all for all tho that wold cum thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of what land or nacion that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   th
                     •
                  y wer. ¶And this was hold during xxiiij dais of the kyngꝭ coſt: And thes xxiiij. lordis to anſuer all maner pepull that wold cum thid
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ▪ ¶And thied
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come thee erle of ſent Paul of fraūce and mony othir worthy knyghtis wt him of diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe parties full well arayed: and out of Holand &̄ Henaud come the lord Oſt reuaunt that wos the dukes ſon of holād and mony othir worthy knyghtis with hī of Holand & full wel araied ¶And when this feſt & iuſtīg was endid the kīg thākid thes ſtrangers & yaf them mony rich yeftes ¶And than they token ther leue of the kyng &̄ of othir lordis &̄ ladies & wenten home ayen in to ther own cuntres with gret loue and moch thanke. ¶And in the xiij. yere of kyng Richardis regne ther was a bataill done in the kynges palais at weſtmīſtre bitwen a ſquyer of Nauerne that wos with the kyng Richard. and an othir ſquier that wos called Iohn̄ walſh for pointee of treſon that this Naune put vpon this walſhman. but this naune wos ouer comen & yeld him creaunt to his aduſarie. ¶And anone he wos deſpoled of his armur & draw out of the Palays to tiburne &̄ ther wos hanged for his falſeneſſe ¶And the xiiij. yere of

kyng Richardis regne ſir Iohn̄ of Gaunte duke of Lanc
                     •
                  ſtre went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee in to Spayn for to chalenge his right that he had bi his wifes titell vn to the croun of Spayn with a gret hoſt of pepull of men of armes and archiers: ¶And he had with him the Duchiſſe his wife and his iij· doughters ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee in to Spayn And ther they wer a gret while. & at the laſt the kyng of Spayn began for to tret with the duke of Lancaſtre & they wer accerded to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thurgh ther both councell in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that the kīg of ſpaī ſhuld wedde the dukis doughter of lancaſtre that was the right heir of ſpayn and he ſh̄uld yef vn to the Duke of lancaſtre gold and ſelu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that wer caſt in to gret wegges &̄ mōy other iewelles as mony as viij. charietes myght carie ¶And eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y yere after during the life of the duke of Lancaſtre & of the duch
                     •
                  ſ his wyf x.M. marke of gold Of wich gold the auenture & charges they of ſpayn ſhuld au
                     •
                  
                  ̄ture & bring yerly vn to Bayon to the dukis aſſignes by ſurite made: ¶And alſo the duke maried an od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of his doughters vn to the kyng of Portingale the ſame tyme. And whan he had done thus he come home ayen in to englond & the good lady his wyfe alſo. but mony a worthy man vpon the flix died. ¶And in the xv. yere of kyng Richardis regne hee held his criſtēmaſe ī the man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of wodſtoke. & the erle of Penbroke a yong lord & tendre of age wold lerne to Iuſt with a knyght that was called ſir Iohn̄ ſent Iohn̄ & riden to gedre in the parke of wodſtoke And ther this worthi erle of penbroke was ſlayn with that othir knyghtis ſpere as he keſt it from him whan they had coupled. and thus this good erle made ther his end and ther for the kyng &̄ the quene made moch ſorow for his dethe ¶And in the xvi. yere of kyng Richardis regne Iohn̄ hende beyng that tyme maire of london & Iohan walworth & Henri 
                     •
                  anner beyng ſhereues of london that ſame time a bakers man bare a baſket of horſbred in to fletſtret toward on hoſtre & ther come a yong man of the biſſhoppis of Saliſberi that wos called romayn

and he toke an hors lofe out of the baſkit of the bakers. &̄ he aſkid him why he did ſo. and this romayn turned ayen & brak the bakerhede. And neghbours come out and wold haue a reſted this romayn & he brake from them & fled to the lordis place & the ꝯſtabull wold haue had him out but the biſſhoppis men ſhet faſt the yates & keped the place that no man might entre And than moch more pepull gadred thidder and ſaid that they wold haue hī out or elles they wold brenne vp the place and all that wer therī ¶And than come the maire and ſheriues with other moch pepull & ceſſed the malice of the comunes &̄ made eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man to go hom to ther houſes & kepe the pees: ¶And this romayns lord ther biſſhop of Saliſburi maſter Iohan waltham yt at that tyme wos treſorer of englond went to ſir Thomas Arundell erchebiſſhop of yorke & chanceler of englōd &̄ ther the biſhop made his cō
                  plaint vn to the chanceler vpō ye pepull of the cite of london. ¶And than thes ij. biſſhoppis of gret malace & vēgeaūce cō vn to the kyng to wyndeſore &̄ made a gret complaīte vpō the maire &̄ ſheriues And anon all the cite aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward wer before the kīg & his coūcell. &̄ they caſt vn to the cite a greuous hert and wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   gret malice ¶And anōe ſodēli the kīg ſent aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the maire of londō & for the .ij· ſheriues &̄ thei come to him vn to the caſtell of wyndeſore And the kyng rebukid the maire & ſh̄eriues full foule for the offence that they had done ayens him and his officers in his chambur at londō. Wherfor he depoſit and put out the mare and bothe ſheriues &̄ this wos done a xiiij daies afore the feſte of ſent Iohan bapteſt ¶And than the kyng called to him a knyght that wos called ſir Edward dalingrigge &̄ made hī wardeyn & gaunour of the cite &̄ chambur of londō &̄ ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   all his peple therī. ¶And ſo he kepid that office but iiij wekis be cauſe yt he wos ſo gentill and tendir to the citiſens of londō. Wherfor the kyng depoſit him and made ſir Baudwyn radyngton knyght yt wos courtrouller of the kng houſold wardeyn &̄ gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nour of hys

chambre and of his pepull therin. and cheſe to him ij. worthy men of the cite to be ſhiriues with him for to gaune and kepe the kyngee lawes in the cite· on was called Gilbert mawefeld and that other Thomas Newenton ſhereues: and than the maire and the ij ſhereues and all the aldermen with all the worthy craftes of lō
                  don went on fote vn to the tour. and ther come out the Conſtable of the tour & yaf the maire and the ſheriues ther oth &̄ charge as they ſhuld haue take in the Eſcheker of weſtmynſtre in the kingꝭ court of his Iuſtices and Barons of the Eſcheker and than went they home ayen. ¶And than the kyng and his councell for the gret malace and deſpite that they had to the cite of londō remeued all his courtis from weſtmynſtre vn to the cite of yorke that is to ſay the Chaunceler the Eſcheker the kyngꝭ bench and the comune place· & ther they held all thes courtes of law fro midſomer that is to ſay the feſt of ſent Iohn̄ baptiſt vn to the feſt of criſtemaſe next ſuyng And than the kyng and his councell ſaw it not ſo ꝓfitabull ther as it wos at londō: than anōe he remeued it ayen vn to londō & ſo to weſtminſtre for gret eſe of his offics & a vaūtage to the kyng and all the comunes of the reame ¶And when the pepull of londō ſaw &̄ knew that thes courtes wer come ayen ¶And the kyng & his pepull alſo. than ye maire &̄ the ald
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  men with thee chief comunes of the cite let gad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   a gret ſomme of gold of all the comunes of the cite And ordeyned & made gret rialte ayens his comyng to londō for to haue hys grace & good lordſhip & alſo ther liberties & fraūchies graūtid vn to them ayen as they wer wont to haue afore tyme ¶And thoru gret inſtance &̄ prayr of the quene and of othhir lordis and ladies the kyng graūtid them grace & this wos don at ſhene ī ſutherei. ¶And thā the kyng with in ij. dais aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   com to londō And the maire of the cite with ſhereues ald
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  mē & all the worthy mē of the cite aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward ridden ayens him in good aray vn to the heth on this ſide the man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſhene ſubmyttyng them hūb
                     •
                  ly and
                  
mekely with all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   obeiſſaunce vn to him as they ought to do ¶And thus they brought the kyng &̄ the quene to londō And than the kyng come to the yate of thee brugge of londō ther they preſented him with a mylke white ſtedeſadiled & brideled & trapped with cloth of gold & rede ꝑtied to gedre And the quene a palfrey all white in the ſame aray trappid with white and rede & all the condites of london ranne with wyne both white and rede for all maner pepull to drinke that wold ¶And bitwen ſent poules & the croſſe in cheppe ther was made a ſtage a riall ſtandīg vpon high &̄ therin wer mony angels with diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe melodies &̄ ſonge ¶And than an Angell come doune frō the ſtage an high by a viſe and ſet a croūe of gold pight with rich perle and precious ſtonys vpō the kyngꝭ hede and an othir vpō the quenes hede And ſo the citiſens brought thee kyng and the quene vn to weſt mynſtre ī to ther palais And than on the morne after the mayre and the ſhereues and the aldermen of london come vn to the kīg in to his palays at weſtminſtre and preſentid him with ij. baſīs of ſiluer and ouer gilted full of coyned gold the ſoum of xx. hondreth pound prayng him of his high merci and grace and lordſhip and ſpeciall grace that they myght haue his good loue wt the liberties and fraūcheſes like wiſe as they wer wond for to haue be fore tymes &̄ by his lettres patentis and his chartri confermed. ¶And ye quene & othir worthy lordis & ladies fell on knees & beſought the kyng of grace to cōferme this ¶Than the kyng toke vp the quene &̄ graūted hir all hir aſkīg. &̄ than they thankid the kyng & ye quene & went home ayen ¶And in the xvi. yere of kyng Richardis regne certayn lordis of ſcotlond come in to englond for to get worſhip as be feet of armes. Thes wer the ꝑſons the erle of Marre & he chalēgid the erle Marchall of englond to iuſt with him c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn pointes on horſbake with ſh̄arp ſperis &̄ they riden to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   as ij worthi knyghtis & lordis certayn courſes. but not the full chalenge that the ſcottis erle mado.

for he was coſt both hors and man: & ij. of his ribbes broken wt that fall and ſo he was borne then out of ſmygthefeld hom vn to his yn. And with in a litell tyme aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos caried homward ī a litter and at yorke ther he died And ſir willm Darell knyght & tho the baner of ſcotland than made an other chalenge with Sir Pers courtayn knyght and the kyngꝭ banerer of englond of c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  taī courſes yit on hors bake in the ſame feld. &̄ when he had riden c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn curſeſ &̄ aſſayd he myght not haue the better. he yaf it ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & wold no more of his chalenge with ſir Pers courtayn knyght and the kynges baner of englond and turned his hors & rode home vn to his own yn: ¶And one Cokkeborne a ſquier of ſcotland chalenged ſir Nicholl hawbarke knyght of c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn courſes yet with ſharp ſperis on horſbake &̄ riden v. courſes to geder &̄ at eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y courſe the ſcot wos caſten doune both hors and man. & thus our engliſh lordis thankid be god had the feld ¶And ī the xvij. yere of kyng Richardes regne died the good gracious quene Anne that wos wife to kyng Richard in the man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſhene in the ſhire of furre vpō witſonday. and than wos ſhe brought to londō & ſo to weſtmynſtre and ther 
                     •
                  os ſhe beried & worthely entered beſide ſent edwardis ſhrine. on whos ſoule almyghty god haue pitte and in his merci amen
            
            
               ¶How kyng Richard ſpouſed dame Iſabell the kyngꝭ dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of fraunce ī the toune of Calais & brought hir in to englōd & let hir be croūed quene ī the abbey of ſent Petres of weſtmynſtre:
               IN the xx· yere of kyng richardis regne he went him ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee vn to Calais with Dukis Erles Lordis and Barons and mony other worthy ſquiers with gret aray & comune pepull of ye reame ī good aray as lōged to ſuch a kīg &̄ p̄nce of his nobley & of his own ꝑſon to do hī reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ence &̄ ob
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uaūce as ought to be done to ther liege lord & ſo mighti a kīg &̄ emꝑour ī his own. to abide & reſaue ther that worthy & gracious lady yt ſhuld be his wyfe a yong creature of xix. yere of age dame Iſabell the kingꝭ

doughter of fraunce and mony othir worthy lordis of gret name both barons and knyghtis with moch other pepull that comen vn to the toune of Grauenyng and ij. dukis of fraunce. yt on was the duke of Burgoyn and that othir the duke of Barre yt wold no ferther leſſe than they had plegges for them ¶And thā the kyng Richard deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed ij. plegges for them to go ſauf and cum ſauf his two worthi vncles the duke of Glouceſtre & the duke of yorke ¶And thes two went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of Grauenyng and abeden ther as for plegges vn to the time that the mariage & the feſt was done & that thes ij. dukis of fraunce wer comen ayen vn to Grauenyng water. ¶And when thes ij. worthy dukis comen ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   at grauenyng and ſo to Calays wt this worſſhipfull lady Dame Iſabell that wos the kynges dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of fraū
                  ce and with hir come mony a worthy lord & eke lady and knyghtes and ſquiers in the beſt aray that myght be And ther they met with our menay at Calais the wich welcomed hir & hir meny wt the beſt honor and reuerence that myght be. and ſo brought hir ī to the toune of Calais. ¶And ther ſhe wos reſaued with all the ſolempnite and worſhip that myght be done vn to ſuch a lady And than they brought hir vn to the kyng & the kyng toke hir &̄ welcomed hir and all hir fair companie and made ther all the ſolempnite that myght be done. ¶And than the kyng and his coūncell aſkit of the frenſh lordis whethir al the couenaūtes & forwardes with the compoſicion that wer ordeyned & made on both parties ſhuld be trewly keped and hold bitwen them. ¶And they ſaid ye. and ther they ſwore & toke ther charge vpō a boke & made ther oth well &̄ trewly it to hold in all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of pointes & couenaūtis with out contradiccion or delay in ony man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wiſe. ¶And thā wos ſhe brought vn to ſent Nicholas chirche in Calais &̄ ther ſhe wos worthely weddid with the moſt ſolempnite that ony kyng or quene myght be. with Erchebiſſhoppis & biſſhoppis &̄ all the miniſters of holi chirch And than they wer brought home vn to the

Caſtell and ſet to mete ¶And wer ſerued with all maner of delicaſie of riall metis and drinkes plenteuouſli to all maner of ſtraungeis and all othir and no creature warned that feſt. bot all wer welcum. for ther wer gret halles and tentis ſet vpon the grene with out the caſtil to receyue all maner of pepull and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y office redy for to ſerue them all. and thus this worthy mariage wos ſolemply done: and endid with all rialte. ¶Than thes: ij dukes of fraunce with ther pepull token ther leue of the kyng and the quene and went ayen vn to Grauenyng water. And ther ye frenſh lordis that is to ſay the ij. dukis and all ther menye weren come ouer the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to Grauenyng and ther they met. and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ichō toke leue at othir and ſo they deꝑted. and our lordis comen ayen vn to Calais & the frenſh lordis wenten ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the water and ſo home in to fraunce ayen· ¶And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kyng made him redy with the quene and all his lordis and ladies & all ther peple with them and come ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thee ſee in to Englond and ſo vn to london. And the maire and the ſheriues with all the ald
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  men ond worthy communes ridden ayens them vn to the blak heth in Kent: &̄ ther they met with thee kyng and the quene and wolcomed them & that in good aray and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man in the clothyng of his craft &̄ ther minſtrelles before them. ¶And ſo they brought them vn to ſent Gregoris barre in ſouthwarke and ther they token ther leue And the kyng and the quene ridden to Kenyngton & than the pepull of londō turned home ayen. ¶And in turnyng ayen to londō brigge ther was ſo gret p̄ſe of peple both on hors &̄ on fote. that therwer dede on the brigge xi· ꝑſons of mē & women &̄ of children on whos ſoules almighty god haue pited and merci amen. ¶And than aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward the quene wos broght vn to the tour of londoō &̄ ther ſhe was all nyght. and on the morow ſhe wos brought thurgh the cite of londō all ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſo forth vn to weſtmynſtre & ther ſhe wos croūed quene of Englōd. & than ſhe wos brought ayen to the kyngꝭ palais & ther wos holdē an opē and riall feſt

at hir coronacion of all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   pepull that thidder come. and this wos done the ſonday next after the feſt of ſent Clement in the xx yere of kyng Richardis regne. ¶And than the xxv. day of Auguſt next after by euell excitacion & fals councell & for gret wrath and malice that the kyng had of old tyme vn to his vncle the good duke of Glouceſtre and to the erle of Arundell and to the erle of warwik. Anone the kyng by his euell excitacion &̄ his euell councell and malice. late ī the euenyng on the ſame dai aboue ſaid made him redy with his ſtrength & rode in to Eſtſex vn to the toūe of Chelmeſford & ſo come to plaſſhe ſodenly ther ſir Thomas of wodſtok the good duke of glouceſtre lay. And the good duke come to welcum the kyng anone. ¶And the kīg a reſtid the good duke him ſelf his own body. &̄ ſo he was lad doun to the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and annone put to a ſhipp & anone had to calais and brought in to the capitayns ward to be kepid in hold by the kyngꝭ commaundement of englond. ¶And that tyme the erle Marchall wos capitayn of Calis And anone after by commaūdemēt of the kyng and by his fals councell commaunded the capitayn to put him to the deth ¶And anōe c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn yomen that had the good duke in kepyng toke thir councell how that they ſhuld put him vn to deth ¶And this was ther oppoyntment that they ſhuld cum vpō him when he wer ī his bedde and a ſlepe on a fether bedde And anōe they bond him hand & fote & charged him to lie ſtill. & whan that they had done thus they token two ſmale towellis and made on them ij. rid knottis &̄ caſt the towellis about his nee & than thei toke the fethir bede that lay vndir him &̄ caſt it aboue hī and than they drew ther towellis eche weis and ſum lay vpon the fethir bede vpō him vn to the tyme that he wos dede by cauſe that he ſhuld make nonoyſe and thus they ſtrangled this worthy duke vn to the deth on whos ſaule god for his high pitte haue merci amen. ¶And when the kyng had a reſtid this worthy duke and his vncle &̄ ſent him to Calais he come ayen vn to londō
                  
in all the haſt with an wonder gret pepull And os ſone as he wos comen he ſent for the erle of Arundell & for the good Erle of warwike: ¶And anone as they come he areſtid them him ſelf ſir Iohn̄ Cobham & ſir Iohn̄ Cheyn knyghtis he areſtid them in the ſame man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   till he made his ꝑlament. & anone they werput in to hold but the erle of Arundell went at large vn to the ꝑlamēt time For he fonde ſufficient ſureti to abide the law & to anſuer to all maner pointes that the kyng and his councell wold put vp on him. ¶And in the xxi. yere of kyng Richardis regne he ordeyned him a ꝑlament at weſtmynſtre the wich wos called the gret parlament And this ꝑlament wos made for to Iugge this iij. worthy lordis & othir mo as them liſt at this tyme ¶And for that Iuggement the kyng let make in all the haſt alōg houſe &̄ a large of tymbre the wich wos called an hall & couerid wt tyles ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & it was oppī all about on both ſides & at the endis yt all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of men myght ſee thurgh out and ther the dome was holden vpon thes forſaid lordis & Iuggement yef at this forſaid parlament ¶And for to cum vn to this ꝑlament the kīg ſent his writtis to eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y lord barō knight & eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſquier in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſhire thurgh out englōd that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y lord gadre &̄ bring his retenew with him in as ſhort time &̄ in the beſt aray that they myght gete in mayntenyng & ī ſtrengthīg of the kīg ayens them yt wer his enmys &̄ yt this wer done ī all the haſt. & they come to him ī payn of deth ¶And the kīg him ſelf ſent in to Cheſterſhire to chiuetās of that cuntre. & they gadred & brought a gret & a huge multitude of pepull both of knightis & ſquiers &̄ principalli of yemen of Cheſterſhire the wich yomen and archiers the kyng toke to hys own courte &̄ yaf them bowge of court &̄ good wages to be keꝑs of his own body both by nyght &̄ by day aboue al othir ꝑſons &̄ moſt loued & beſt truſt The wich ſone afterward turned the kīg to gret loſſe &̄ ſhame hyndring &̄ his vtterly vndoyng & deſtruciō as ye ſhall here after. & that tyme come ſir Henri of Derby with a

gret menye of men of armes & archiers and the erle of Rutlād come with a ſtronge pouer of pepull both of men of armes & archiers ¶And the erle of Kent brought a gret pouer of men of armes &̄ archiers. The erle Marchall come in the ſame man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . the lorde Spē
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   in the ſame man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ye erle of northumberland & ſir Henri Percy his ſon. & ſir Thomas Percy the erlis brod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . And all thes worthy lordis brought a fair menye &̄ a ſtrong pouer & ech mā in his beſt aray: &̄ the duk of lancaſtre & the duke of yorke comē in the ſame man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   with men of armes and archiers folowyng the kyng. ¶And ſir willyam ſtrop treſorer of englond come in the ſame man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   
                  And thus in this aray come all the worthy mē of this land vn to our kyng. &̄ all thes pepull com to londō ī on day. in ſo moch yt euery ſtret & lane ī londō & ī the ſubarbes were full of them logged & x. or xij. myle about londō eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y way: And thees pepull brought the kyng at weſtmynſtre & went homi ayen to ther loggyng both hors and man. &̄ than on the mōday the xij. day of September the ꝑlamēt began at weſtmīſtre the wich was callid the gret ꝑlament. ¶And on the friday next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the erle of arundel̄ wos brought in to the ꝑlament among all the lordis and that wos on ſent Matheues day the apoſtill and euangeliſt ther he wos for Iugged vn to the deth in this hall yt wos made ī. the palays at weſtmynſtre. And this wos his Iugement. he ſhuld go on fote with his handis bound behynde him from thee place that he wos Iuggid in. and ſo forth thurgh the Cite of londō vn to the toure hill and his hede to be ſmyten of and ſo it was do in dede in the ſame place. And vi. of thee gret lordis yt ſat on his Iuggement ridden with him vn to the place ther he wos do vn to thee deth. & ſo to ſee the execucion wer don aftar ther dome. ¶And bi the kynges commaundement with them went on fote of men of armis and archiers a gret multitude of Cheſtre ſhire men in ſtrengthyng of thee lordis that brought this Erle to his deth for they dred leſt thee Erle ſhuld be reſeued & takin frō them

whan they com in to london. Thus he paſſed forth thurgh the cite vnto his deth. and ther 
                     •
                  e toke it full paciencli on whos ſoul god haue mercy amen. ¶And than come the freris Auſtyns and toke vp the body & the hede of this good erle &̄ bare it home vn to ther place and beried him in ther quere. And in the morow after wos ſir Richard erle of werwike brought in to the parlamēt ther as the erle of Arundell wos for iugged. and they yaf the erle of Werwike the ſame Iugement that the forſaid erle had but the lordis had compaſſion of him be cauſe he was of more age and releſed him to perpetuall priſon and put him in thee Ile of man. ¶And than the mōday next after. The lord Cobhan of kēt &̄ ſir Iohn̄ Cheyn knyghtie wer brought in to the parlament ī to the ſame hall and ther they wer Iugged to be honged and drawē but thurgh the prayer and gret inſtance of all the lordis that Iuggement wos foryeuen them and releſed to perpatuall priſon ¶And this ſame time was Richard Whittyngdon maire of Londoni. &̄ Iohn̄ wodecoke & willm Aſkam ſhereues of london ¶And they ordeyned at eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y yate of londō during this ſame parlament ſtrong watche of men of armes & archiers & thurgh out eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ward alſo. ¶And the kyng made .v. Dukis on Duchiſſe and a Markeys and .iiij. Erles &̄ thee friſt of them wos the Erle of Derby &̄ he wos made duke of Herford. & thee ſecund was the Erle of rutland and he wos made Duke of Awe marle. and the thrid wos Erle of Kent &̄ wos made thee Duke of Surre. and the iiij: wos thee erle of Huntingdone &̄ he wos made duke of Exceſtre. &̄ the fifthe wos the erle of Notīgham & he wos made thee Duke of Northfolke. and the erle of Somerſet he wos made the Marquies of Dorſet. & the lord Spen
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   was made erle of Glouceſtre. &̄ ye lord Neuill of raby wos made erle of weſtmerland. &̄ ſir Thomas Percy wos made erle of worceſtre. ¶And ſir Willm Scrope that was treſorer of englond he wos made erle of wilteſhire and ſir Iohan Montagu erle

of ſaliſburi ¶And whan the kyng had thus don he held the parlament and riall feſt vn to all his lordis and to all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of pepull yt thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wold cū ¶And this ſame yere died ſir Iohan of gaunte the kinges vncle and duke of Lancaſtre in the biſſhoppis yn in holborne & wos brought frō thēs to ſent Paules and ther the kyng made and held his enterement well &̄ worthely with all hys lordis in the chirch of ſent Paules ī londō & ther he wos beried beſide Dame blaunch his wife that wos dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & heir to the good Henri yt wos duke of Lancaſtre. ¶And ī the ſame yere ther fell a diſcenciō bitwen the duke of Herford & duke of Norfolk ī ſo moche that they waged bataill &̄ caſten doune ther gloues and than they wer taken vp and enſeled & the bataill ioyned & the day ſet & the place aſſigned wher & when. And this ſhuld be at Couentre And theder come the kyng with all his lordis at that day & wos ſet in the feld. and than thees two worthi lordis comen in to the feld well and cleen armed and well arayed with all ther wapen & redy to done ther bataill and weren redy in the place for to fight at vtteraunce. ¶But the kyng bad them ceſe and toke thee quarell in to his hand. ¶And forth with right ther preſent exiled the duke of Herford for terme of x. yere & the duke of norfolke for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   more ¶And ſir Thomas arundell erchebiſſhopp of Cantorbury wos exiled the ſame tyme for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ depeſit out of his ſee for malice of the kyng: and anone thes iij. worthy lordis wer commaunded and defendid the kynges reame And anone they gat them ſhippis at diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe hauens & went ouer the ſee in to diuerſe landis eche his way. ¶And the duke of norfolke wēt to venice and ther he died on whos ſoule god haue merci amen. ¶And than kyng Richard made a clarke of his ſir rogier Walden Ercheaiſſhop of Cantorburi ¶And in the xxij. yere of kyng Richardis regned by fals councell ymaginacion of Couetous men that wer about him wer made and ordeyned blanke chartres and made them to be enſeled of all maner rich mē thurgh

out the reame In ſo moch that they compelled diuerſe pepull to ſet ther ſeall ther to. And this wos done for gret couetiſe wherfore all good hertis of the reame wer clene turned away from him that was kyng eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   after. ¶And that was vttirly deſtrucciō and end to him that was ſo high and excellent prince &̄ king and thurgh couetous & fals coūcell falſely betrayd Alas for pitte yt ſuch a kīg myght not ſe ¶And thā king Richaid ſet his kīgdome and his riall land of englond to ferme vn to iiij. ꝑſons ye wich wer thes. Sir willm ſtrop erle of wyl̄teſhire &̄ treſorer of englond. & ſir Iohn̄ Buſſh & Henri Grene & ſir Iohn̄ Bagot knyghtis wich that turnid them to miſchief &̄ deth with in a litill tyme. as ye ſhall aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward find here writtyn ¶And thā king Richard made gret ordynaūce & wēt him ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe in to Irland &̄ moni gret lordis with him with gret hoſtis for to ſtrength ther king with men of armes archiers & moch gret ſtuf & right good ordynaūce as longed vn to were ¶And or he paſſed ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſe he ordand &̄ made ſir Edmōd of Langley his vncle the duke of yorke his liuetenaūt of englond in his abſent with the gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nance &̄ coūcell ōf thes iiij: knyghtis that had take Englōd to ferme of the kyng And thā he paſſed the ſe. & come in to Irland & ther wos well &̄ worthely reſeyued ¶And thees rebelles that ben called wild Iriſhmē cō doūe to the kyng &̄ yeld them to him bothe body and goodis all at his own will. & ſuore vn to him to be his liege men. & ther to him did ther homage &̄ feaute &̄ good ſeruice. And thus he conquered the moſt partie of Irland ī litell time ¶And while that kyng Richard was thus in Irland ſir Henri of Bolingbroke erle of Derby that the kīg had made before Duke of Herford the wich duke the kyng had exiled owt of this land was comen ayen in to Englond for to chalenge thee dukedom of Lancaſtre as for his right &̄ trew heritage. And he come doune out of fraunce by land vn to Calays ¶And ther met him Sir Thomas of arundell that wos Erchebiſſhopp

of Cantorburi that wos exiled out of englond. &̄ with him com the erle of Arundell his ſon & heir the wiche wos in ward and kepīg of ſir Ion ſhelley knyght ſum tyme wt the Erle of Huntīgdone and with the Duke of Exceſtre thee wich wos tho in thee Caſtell of Reigate in Southſex. And ther he ſtole him away and come to Calais and ther he wos kepid well and worthely till thees othir two lordis wercomen to Calais. And than this worthy Duke and the Erchebiſſhop of Cantorburi Arundell ſhippid in the hauen of Calais and drew ther courſe northward and ariued in Yorke ſhire at Rauenſporne faſt by wydelyngtō and ther he come and entred thee land and two lordis with him and ther manye. ¶And than moche pepull of the reame yt herd of his commyng and knewen wher that he wos anane they drew vn to him and welcomed theſe lordis and ſo coraged them in all maner thyng and paſſed forth in to the land and gadred. moch pepull ¶And whan kyng Richard herd and wiſt that thees ij. lordis wer cumen ayen in to englond and wer londid. ¶Than the kyng left his ordynaūce in Irland & come in to englondward in all the haſt yt he myght & come to thee caſtell of flint and ther he abode for to take his councell & what myght be don but to him com none: ¶And than ſir Thomas Percy Erle of worceſtre yt was the kīges Stiwarde wyſt & knew this. anone he come in to the hall amōges all the pepull. and he brake thee yerde of the riall kynges houſold and anone euery man wos diſꝑ bled and euery man went his way and for ſoke ther maſtir & ſouerayne lord &̄ left him alloyn. ¶And thus wos kīg Richard brought doune and deſtroid and ſtoden him ſelf allone without comforth or ſocour or ani good councell of any man alas for pite of this riall kyng. ¶And anone come tidynges yt ſir Henri of Bolīgbroke wos vp wt a wonder ſtrong pouer of pepull & that all the ſquiers of englond riſen vp thee ſhires in ſtrēgthīg of hī ayen thee kyng Richard And thus ſone wos come out of thee

north cuntre to Briſtow and ther he met with ſir willm Scrope Erle of wylteſhire Treſorer of englond and with ſir Iohan Buſſh and ſir Henri Grene and Iohan Bagot but he aſcapid from them & went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   theſe in to Irland and thes iij. knyghtis wer taken and thir hedis ſmyten of And thus they died for ther falſe couetiſe ¶And than wos kyng Richard take and brought vn to the duke. and anone the duke put him in faſt ward and ſtrong hold vn to his comyng to londō. And than was ther a romer ī londō &̄ a ſtrong noyſe that kyng Richard com to weſtmynſtre. &̄ the pepull of londō ranne thidder & wold haue done moch harme and ſcathe in ther wodeneſſe had not the maire &̄ the aldermen & othir worthy men ſeced them with fair wordis &̄ turned them home ayen vn to London. ¶And ther wos ſir Iohan Slake deyn of the kynges chapell of weſtmīſter take & brought to londō & put in priſon in Ludgate. ¶And bagot was take in Irland & brought to london & put in priſon ī newgate ther to bekeped and to abide his anſuer. ¶And ſone aftir thee Duke brought kyng Richard priuely vn to londō and put him in the tour vnder ſuer kepyng as a priſoner And thā come the lordis of the reame with all ther coūcell vn to the tour to kīg Richard & ſaied to him of his myſgouernaūce &̄ extorciō that he had done made & ordeyned to oppreſſe all the comīe pepull & alſo to all the reame. ¶Wherfor all the comyn peple of his ream wold haue hī depoſit of his kīgdō. And ſo he wos depoſit at yt tyme in the tour of londō by all his lordis coūcell. & comune aſſent of all the reame ¶And ther he wos put frō the tour vn to the caſtell of ledes in kent & ther he wos kepeid a while &̄ thā was he had from thēs vn to the caſtell of Poūfret in the north cūtre to be kepid ī priſō & ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward right ther he made his end. And thē whan kyng Richard was depoſit and had reſyned his croūe and his kyndō and was kepid faſt ī h
                     •
                  ld. thā all the lordis of ye reame with the comunes aſſent and bi accord choſē this worthy lord

Sir Henri of Bolingbroke erle of Derbi duke of Herford and duke of Lancaſtre bi right lyne and heritage & for his rightfoll manhode that the pepull fond in him before all other they choſe hī & made him kīg of Englond amongꝭ them
               INnocencius the vij. wos choſin at Rome and leued bot ij. yere & then Gregorie the xij. wos aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him xij: yere. & euer was debate. Then wos Alexander choſen in the counſell of Pyſan. and he wos called friſt Petrus de Candia. & ſo wos put ſtrife to ſtrife eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ychon of thos iij. ſayd they wer pope. Then was ther a councell at Pyſan wher they began to make a ꝯcorde &̄ ther they depoſit ij. and the thrid ſtode &̄ ſo wors diuiſion was made then before: for that they ordant preualid not. Robart wos Empraur after Wenſolans ix. yere This man wos the duke of Banary and the erle of Palatyn a iuſt man and a good. and wos crouned of Boneface the ix. This man entred Italy with a gret hoſt of Almayns ayens Iohn̄ the duke of Galias. but with an heuy boſt he turnid ayen. & wos had worthy to ſuffre for his rightwyſneſſe: Iohan the xxiij. ſuccedit Alexand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   iiij· yere and friſt he began well. for a vnite. & hee wos in the counſel̄ at Conſtant and offred him to reſine the pope hood and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſecretly and vntrewly he fled away. bot it profited not him. for he wos take and conſtrened to pees. and wos made a Cardinalle & beried at Florens. Sigiſmūdus wos emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   robert xxvij yere And he wos ſon to Karolus &̄ kīg of vngarie and moſt criſtyn prince: & he wos ſo deuoute to god that he de
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  
                  uied to be cannonyſit. This man holp the chirch thurgh his meruelus prudens and wit. for he ſparid no labour ne nothyng that he had till he had made a full pees among the clargie. And he had ix. batailles ayens the Turke. and he eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had the victorie. &̄ what more. all thyng that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos written in louyng to Conſtantine Theodoſio Karolo Otto may trewly be writtyn of him And he

was crouned in vngrie & deceſſed a bliſſid man.
            
            
               Circa annum domini .M.iiijC.
                     •
                  .
               ¶Of ſir Henri of Bolinbroke erle of Derby yt regned aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   kīg Richard wich wos the iiij. henri aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ꝯqueſt
               
                  ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   kyng richard the ij· wos depoſid and out of his kyngdome The lordis and the comunes all with one aſſent and all othir worthy of the reame choſen ſir Henri of Bolingbroke erle of Derby ſon and heir of Iohn̄ the duke of Lancare for his worthy manhood that oft tyme had be found in him &̄ in dede preued vpō ſent Edwardis day the confeſſor he wos crouned kyng of englond at weſtmynſtre by all the reame aſſent next after the depoſing of kyng Richard ¶Than he made Henri his heldiſt ſon prince of wales and duke of Cornwaill and erle of Cheſtre. ¶And he made ſir Thomas of Arundell erchebiſſhop of Cantorburi ayen as he wos before. ¶And ſir rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Walden that kīg Richard had made Erchebiſhop of Cantorberi he made hī biſſhop of londō. for that tyme it ſtod void And he made the erles ſon of Arundell that come with him ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſe from Calais in to englond. He made him erle of Arundell as his fadre had bene and put him in poſſeſſion of all his londis. ¶And he made homage and feaute vn to his liege lord thee kyng as all othir lordis had done. ¶And than anone died kyng rechard in the caſtell of Poūtfret in the north cuntre For ther he wos enfamed vn to the deth by his keꝑ For he wos kepid ther iiij. or v. dais from mete & drinke and ſo he made his ende ī this world. yit moch pepull in englond &̄ ī other landis ſaid that he wos on liue mony a yere after his deth. But whether he were a liue or dede forth they held thir fals oppynions &̄ beleue that men haddee in moch pepull wich come to gret myſchief & foull deth as ye ſhall here afterward. ¶And whan kyng Henri wiſt and knew veraly that he was dede he let ſere him in the beſ man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   
                  and
                  
cloſed it in a fair cheſt with diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe ſpeceries and baumes & cloſed him in a linnen clothe all ſauf his viſage and that wos left opē that al men myght ſe his parſoon from all othir men. And ſo he was brought to london with torche light brinnyng to ſent Poules chirch and ther he had his maſſe &̄ his dirige with moch reuerence and ſolempnite of ſeruice ¶And when all this wos don he wos brought from ſent paules in to the abbey of weſtmynſtre and therhe had all his hole 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uice ayen. ¶And from weſtmiſter he wos brought to Langeley and ther he wos beried on whos ſoule god haue merci. ¶And in the firſt yere of king Henris regne he held his criſtimaſſe in the caſtell of wyndeſore and on the xij. euen come the duke of Awemarle vn to the kyng &̄ 
                  told him that he and the duke of Surre &̄ the duke of Exceſtre and the erle of Saluſburi and the erle of Glouceſtre and othir mo of ther affinite wer accordid to make a mommyng vn to the kyng on xij. day at nyght. &̄ ther they purpoſed for to ſle the kyng in thee reueling. & thus the duke of Awemarle warned the kyng ¶And than the kīg come that ſame nyght to londō priueli in all the haſt that he myght to get him help ſocour and comforth & coūcell. ¶And anone thes other that wold haue do the king to deth fled in all the haſt that they myght for they knew well yt ther coūcell wos bewried. ¶And than fled the duke of Surre and the erle of Saliſberi with all ther menye vn to the toūe of Ceceſter ¶And ther pepull of the toune wold haue areſtid thē and they wold not ſtand to ther areſt bot ſtode at defence &̄ faught manli. ¶But at the laſt they wer ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   comen and take And ther they ſmyten of the dukis hede of Surri &̄ the erles hede of ſaliſburi & mony othir mo and thar they put the quarters in to ſ
                     •
                  kkes and ther hedis on poles borne on high. and ſo they wer brought thurgh the cite of londō to london brigge. and ther thes hedis wer ſet vpon high and ther quarters wer ſenten vn to other good tounes and Cities of englond and ſet vp ther:
               
                  At Oxford wer take Blounte knyght. and Benet Cely knyght: and Thomas Wynterſell ſquyer. and thes wer behedid and quartired and the knyghtis hedis wer ſet vpon polles &̄ brought to london and ſet vpō the brugge. and the quarters ſēt forth to othir good tounes And in the ſame yere at Prittelwell in a Mille in Eſtſex ther ſir Iohn̄ Holand the duke of exceſtre wos take with the comunes of the cuntre. and they brought him from the Mille vn to Plaſſhe. And to the ſame place that kyng Richard had a reſtid ſir Thamas of wodſtok the Duke of Glouceſtre & right ther in thee ſame place they ſmyten of ye dukis hede of Exceſtre. &̄ brought it vn to londō vpon a polle▪ and it was ſet vpon londō brigge. And in the ſame yere at Briſtow wos taken the lord Speenſer. that kyng Richard had made erle of Glouceſtre and the comunes of the toūe of Briſtow toke him and brought him in to the market plaſe of the toune. & ther they ſmyten of his hede and ſent it vn to london. and there it was ſet vpon london brugge. And in this ſame yere was ſir Barnard Brokeye knyght taken and areſtid and put in to thee tour of london and ſir Iohn̄ Shelly knyght and ſir Iohn̄ Maudelyn. and ſir willm Feribe perſons of kyng Richardis & they wer areſtid and put in to the tour of london· And the der come the kyngꝭ Iuſtices and ſat vpon them in the tour of london and ther they wer dampnid all .iiij. vn to thee deth. and the dome wos yeuen vn to ſir Barnard Brekeys that he ſhuld gon on fote from thee tour thurgh london vn to Tiburn and ther be honged and after his hede ſmyten of· and ſir Iohn̄ Shelly knyghte and ſir Iohan Maudelyn and ſir willm Feribe parſone wer draw thurgh out thee cite of London to Tyburn and ther they wer honged and ther hedis ſmyten of and ſet on London brigge.
               And in this ſame yere kyng Henri ſentquene Iſabell home ayen in to fraunce thee wich wos kyng Richardis weddid wife and yaf hir gold and ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and mony othir iewellis & ſo ſhe was

diſcharged of all hir dower &̄ ſent out of englond ¶And ī the ſecund yere of the regne of kynn Henri the iiij. wos ſir Roger of Claryngton knyght and two of his men & the priour of laūde &̄ .viij frere mynors & ſum maſters of diuinite & othir for treſō that they wrought ayenſt the kyng. wer draw & hanged at Tyburne all xij. ꝑſons ¶And ther began a gret diſcencion & debate in the cuntre of wales bitwen the lord Grey rithen & Owen of glendere ſquier of wales. &̄ this Owen arered a gret nombre of walſhmen & kepid all yt cuntre about. right ſtrong & did moch harme & deſtroid the kīges toūes & lordſhippis thurgh out wales &̄ robbed & ſlew the kīges pepull both engliſſh &̄ walſh. &̄ thꝰ he endurid a xij. yere largely. ¶And he toke the lord Grey rithen priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ kept him faſt in hold till he wos ranſomed of priſonerres of the march. & kept him long time in hold. And at thee laſt he made him wedde on of his doughtres & kepid him therſt ill with his wife and ſone after he died ¶And than the kyng Hēri knowyng this miſchief deſtrucciō & treſō that this Owen had wrought than anone he ordeyned a ſtrong pouer of mē of armes &̄ of archiers &̄ moch other ſtuf yt longed to were for to abate & deſtroy ye malace of this fals walſhmē. ¶And than the kyng come in to wales with his pouer for to deſtroy this Owen and othir rebellis fals walſhmē ¶And anone they fled in to the moūtayns and ther might the kyng do them no harme in no maner wiſe for the moūtayns. ¶And ſo the kīg come ayen in to englōd for leſing of mo of his pepull And thus he ſped not ther ¶In this ſame yere wos gret ſcarcite of whete in englond for a quartir of whete wos at xvi: ſhilling. And ther was marchandis of englond ſent in to Pruce for whete. &̄ anōe they had lade and freght ſhippis y now and come home ī ſaufte bleſſib be god of all his yeftis ¶And in the iiij. yere of kyng Henries regne ther was a ſterre ſeyn in the firmament yt ſhewed him ſelf thurgh all the world for diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe tokenynges yt ſh̄uld befall ſone

after the wich ſterre wos named and called by clargie Stella Comata. and on ſent marie Magdelenes day next folowyng ī the ſame yere wos the bataill of ſhroweſbury. And thidd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come ſir Henri Percy the erles ſon of northumberland wt a gret multitude of men of armes &̄ archiers & yaf a bataid to kyng henri the iiij. thurgh the fals coūcell & wykked rede of ſir Thomas percy his vncle erle of wurceſtre & ther wos ſir henri Perci ſl
                     •
                  yn & the moſt partie of his pepull in the feld. And ſir Thomas Percy taken and kept faſt in hold ij. days till the kyng had ſet reſt among his pepull on both ſides ¶And than ſir Thomas Perci was Iugged to be dede draw honged &̄ his hede ſmyten of for his fals treſon at ſhroweſburi & his hede brought to londō & ſet on londō brigge. ¶And the othir pepule yt ther wer ſlayn on both ꝑtis the kyng let berie. And ther wos ſlayn on the kīges ſide in that bataill the erle of Stafford &̄ ſir walt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Bloūt in the kyngꝭ cote armure vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kyngꝭ ban
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & mōy mo worthy mē on whos ſoules god haue mercy amen. ¶And ī the iiij▪ yere of kīg henri regne come the emprour of Cōſtantinoble with mony gret lordis & knyghtes &̄ moch othir pepull of his cuntre ī to englond to kīg henri wt him to ſpeke & to diſporte & to ſe the good gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nance &̄ ꝯdicions of our pepull & to knaw the comodites of englond. & our kyng wt all his lordis goodly &̄ worſhipfully him receyued &̄ 
                  welcomed him & all his menye yt come with him and did him all reuerence & worſhip yt they coud and myght. ¶And anone the kīg commaūded all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   officers that he ſhuld be ſerueid as worthely &̄ rially as it longed to ſuch a worthy lord and Emprour on his own coſt as lōg as the Emprour wos in englōd & all his men yt com wt hī ¶And in this ſame yere come Dame Iane the duchiſſe of Britan ī to englōd &̄ landid at fallemouth in Cornwale and from thēs ſh̄e wos brought to the cite of wyncheſtre And ther ſh̄e wos weddid vn to kyng henri the iiij. in the abbey of ſent Swythynes of wyncheſtre with all the ſolempnite that myght be

done and made ¶And ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward ſhe wos brought from thens to london. And the maire and the aldermen and the communes of the cite of london ridden ayens hir & hir welcomed and brought hir thurgh the cite of Londō to weſtmynſtre and ther ſhe wos crouned quene of englond & ther ye kyng made ariall and ſolempne feſt for hir and for all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of men that thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wold cum ¶And in this ſame yere Dame Blaunche the eldeſt dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of kyng Henri the iiij. wos ſent ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſe with the erle of ſomerſet hir vncle and with maſtir Richard Clifford thā biſſhop of wurceſtre and with mony othir worthy lordis knyghtis and ladies &̄ worthy ſquiers as longed to ſuch a worthy kyngꝭ dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and come vn to Colayn ¶And thidd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come the dukis ſone of barre with a fair menye and reſſaued this worthy lady. and the biſſhope of wurceſtre weddid and ſacred them to geder as holi chirche it wold. ¶And ther was made ariall feſt and a gret Iuſtīg in the reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ence and wo
                     ••
                  h̄ip of them and all pepull that thedd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   com ¶And whan this mariage and feſt wos done the Erle and the biſſhop and all ther menye token ther leue of lord and lady &̄ come home ayen in to englond in ſaufte thanked be god almyghty. ¶And in the v: yere of kyng Henris regne the lord Thomas his ſon wēt ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee and the erle of Kent. and mony othir lordis and knyghtis with men of armes and archiers a gret nō bur to chaſtiſe the rebellis that a fore had done moch harme to our engliſhmen & marchantis: & to mony tounes and port
                     •
                  s in Englond on the ſee coſtis ¶And the lord Thomas the kynges ſō come in to Flaundres be fore a toune that is called the Skluſe among all the ſhippis of diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe nacions that wer ther. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther they ridden with ther ſhippis among them &̄ went on land & ſported them ther ij. dais and come ayen to ther ſhippis and toke the brode ſee. &̄ ther they met with iij. Carikkis of I
                     •
                  ne that wer 
                     •
                  aden with diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe marchandize and well mannyd & they foughten to gedres long time but the engliſhmen had the victori and brought

the Carrikkis in to the Cambre befor wynchelſe and ther they cā
                  ted thees goodis. and one of thees Carrikkes was ſodēli brent ther ¶And the lordis and ther pepull turned them home ayē and went no ferthir at that tyme. ¶And ī the ſame tyme ſerle yoman of kyng Richerd robes come in to englōd out of ſcotland and told to diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe pepull that kyng Richard wos on liue in Scotland. and ſo moch pepull beleued in his wordis wherfor gret ꝑtie of thee pepull of the reame wer in gret errour and grutchyng ayeneſt the kyng thurgh informacion of lies and fals leſinges that this Serle had made. ¶For moch pepull truſtid &̄ beleued in his ſeyng. But at the laſt he wos taken in the northcuntre and by law Iugged to be drawe thurgh eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y cite and good burgh tounes in englond and ſo he wos ſerued. and at the laſt he wos brought to londō vn to the gild hall before the Iuſtice. & ther he was Iugged for to be brought to the toure of london. and ther to be laid on a hurdell. and than to be drawen thurgh the cite of londō to Tyborne &̄ ther to be honged & than quartired &̄ his hede ſmytē of and ſet on Londō brigge and his quarters to be ſent to iiij. good tounes of englond and ther ſet vp. & thus endid he for his falſe treſon &̄ deſſeyd. ¶And in the ſext yere of kyng Henris regne the iiij. The erle of Marre of ſcotland by ſaifcondit come ī to Englōd to chalenge ſir Edmand the erle of Kent to certayn courſes of were on horſbake: ¶And ſo this chalange wos acceppid and graūted & the place taken in ſmythfeld at londō. & this Erle of Marre the ſcot com proudly ī to the feld as his chalenge aſket ¶And anone come in the erll of Kent and rode vn to the ſcot and manfulli rode to geder with ſharpe ſperis diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe courſes but the erle of Kent had the feld and gat him moch worſhip and thanke of all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of men for his manfull dedis. ¶And ī the vij yere of kyng Henris regne the iiij. Sir Richard Scrop erchebiſſhop of Yorke and the Erle Marchall of Englond gadred vn to them a ſtrong power ayens kyng Henri. ¶And the kyng

hering ther of in all the haſt that he myght come with his pouer northward and met with them at yorke &̄ ther wer thes ij. lordis take and brought to the kyng. ¶And anone the Iugges wer ſet & thes ij. lordis brought forth and ther they wer dampned vn to the deth and both ther hedis ſmyten of and ther they maden ther end on whos ſoules god for his pite haue mercy Amen. ¶And whan this was done the kyng come to londō ayen and ther reſtid him. Anone god of his gret goodneſſe wrought and ſhewed mony gret miracles for this worthy clerke Erchebiſhop of yorke that thus wos done to deth ¶And ī the vij. yere of kīg Henris regne Dame Luce the dukis ſuſter of Milane come ī to englond & ſo to londō &̄ ther wos wedid to ſir Edmond Holand erle of Kent in the priori of ſent marie oueis in ſuthwarke wyth moch ſolempnite and gret worſhip ¶The kyng was ther him ſelf and yaf hir at the chirch dore: &̄ whan that they wer weddid and maſſe was done the kyng his own parſon brought and lad this worthy lady in to the biſſhoppis place of wyncheſtre and ther wos a wonder gret feſt holdyn to all maner of pepull yt wold cum ¶And the ſame yere ſir Robert Knolles bnyght a worthi weriour died at his man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in Northfolk and from thens he was brought to london vpō a hors bere with moch torch light &̄ ſo he wos brought vn to the white freris in fleetſtret and ther wos do and made for him a ſolempne feſt and ariall enterement for tho that thidder wold cume both rich and poer and ther he lieth beried by Dame Conſtance his wife in the midde of the body of the chirche on whos ſoule god for his pitte haue merci amen. ¶And thus ī this ſame yere ſir Thomas Rampſton knyght Conſtabull of the tour of london wos drenchid at londō brugge as he com fro weſtmynſtre inwardis to the tour ī a barge and al thurgh lewdeneſſe. ¶And in the ſama yere Dame Philip the yonger dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of kīg henri wos lad ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee with ſir Richard thee dukis brother of yorke and ſir Edmond Courteney biſſhop of

Norwych and mony other lordis knyghtis and ſquiers ladies & gentilwomen that apparteyned to ſuch a worthy kynges dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and come in to Denmarke. and the kyng reſceyued this worthi lady for his wyfe. and welcomed thes worthy lordis and did vn to them moch worſh̄ipp. and they wer brought vn to a toune yt wos called London in Denmarke and ther wos this lady weddid and ſacrid to the kyng of Denmarke Norway and Swythē and ther was crouned quene of Denmarke with moch ſolempnite and ther wos made ariall feſt. ¶And whan this feſt &̄ mariage wos done and endid thes lordis and ladies toke thir leue of the kīg & the quene and come ayen in to Englond in haſt thā 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   be Ihū ¶And in the viij. yere of kīg Henris regne ther wos a man that wos called the walſh klarke. & he oppell
                     •
                  d a knyght that wos callid ſir Perceuall Sowdone of treſon. &̄ ther they wer Ioyned to fight vn to vtteraunce withyn Liſtes. & the day & place & tyme aſſigned and lymitted to be done &̄ end ī ſmygthfeld. at the wich day tho. two parſons comen in to the feld &̄ foughten ſ
                     •
                  re and myghteli to gedre. but at the laſt the knyght ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  com the clarke. & made him yeld him creaunt of his fals enpechemēt yt he had ſaid on him. & than was he diſpoyled of his armure & drawe out of the feld to Tyborne &̄ ther he wos honged & the knyght take to grace: and wos a good man. ¶And in this ſame yere ſir Henri erle of Northumberland & the lord Bardolf come out of Scotland in preiudece & deſtruccion of kyng henri. wherfore they of the northcuntre ariſen vpon them and faugit with them and ſcomfitid them and toke them. &̄ ſmyten of ther hedis &̄ 
                  quartrid ther bodies. & ſent the hede of the erle &̄ a quartir of ye lord bardolf to londō and ther they wer ſet vpon london brigge for fals treſon that they had purpoſed ayenſt the kyng ¶And in ye ix. yere of kyng henris regne was ſir Edmond Holand erle of kēt made Amirell of englond for to kepe the ſee & he went to the ſee with mony riall ſhippis that wer full well arayed and enparelled

and enarmed with mony a good man of armes and archiers and of good defence of weyr in the kynges name of Englond and ſo he landid at the laſt in the coſt of Bretan in the Ile of Briak with all his pepull: and he beſeged thee Caſtell and ſautid it and they withſtode him with gret defence and ſtrength. ¶And anōe he leyed his ordynaūce. And in the leyng of a gone come a quarell &̄ ſmote the good erle Edmōd in the hede and ther he caught his dethis wounde. but yit they left not till that they had geten the Caſtill and all that wer ther in. ¶And ther this good lord died on whos ſoule god haue mercy amen. ¶And than this menie come home ayen in to Englond with the erlis body & wos beried amōgꝭ his aūceſtres right worthely. ¶And in thee ſame yere was a gret froſt in Englond that durid xv. wekis ¶And in the x· yere of kyng Hēris regne the iiij. com the Seneſchall of henaud with othir meni to ſeke aū
                  tres and to get him worſhipp ī dedis of armys both on hors and on fote at all maner of pointes of were. ¶And the Seneſchall chalenged thee erle of Somerſet. and the erle deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed hī ful manfulli of all his chalenges &̄ put his aduſarie vn to the worſe ī all pointes and wanne him ther gret worſh̄ypp and the degre of thee feld ¶And the next day aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come ī to thee feld an other man of armes of the ſeneſchallis partie. ¶And ayens him come ſir Richard of arundell knight. and the henaud had the better of him on fote ī on poīte for he brought hī on his kne ¶And the thrid day come ī an othir man of armes ī to the feld and ayēs him ther come ſir Iohn̄ Cornewaill knight & manly and knightely he quitte him in all maner poyntis ayēs his aduſarie and had the better ī thee feld. ¶And on thee iiij. day come an other mā of armes of Henaude ī to the feld. and ayens him come ſir Iohan Cheynes ſon & manly quitte him ayens his aduſarie for he caſt hors &̄ man ī to the feld And the kyng for his manhod at yt tyme dubbed hī knyght. ¶And the v. day ther come an other

man of armes of the henaudis partie in to the feld and to him come in ſir Iohan ſtiward knyght and manfulli he quitte him ther in all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of pointes and had the better. ¶And the ſext day after come an other henaud & to him come willm porter ſquyer &̄ manfulli he quitte him &̄ had the better in the feld. &̄ the kyng dubbed him knyght the ſame tyme. ¶And the vij: day after come an othir henaud in to the feld and to him come Iohn̄ ſtandiſſh ſquier & manly he quitte him on his aduſarie & had the better in tho feld and the kyng dubbed him knyght the ſame day. ¶And on the ſame day come an othir henaud & to him come a ſquyer of Gaſcoyn and proudly and manli he quitte him on his aduſarie &̄ had the better and anone the kyng dubbed hī knyght. ¶And on the viij: day come in to the feld ij. men of armes of henaude and to them come ij. ſoudiours of Calais that were brether that wer called Burghes &̄ well and māly quitte them on ther adu*aber;ſiries and had the better in the feld. & thus endid the chalenges with moni worſhippes. ¶And the kyng at the reuerence of the ſtringers made a gret feſt and yaf them rich yeftes & they token ther leue and wēt home in to ther own cuntre. ¶And in the xi. yere of kyng Hēris regne the iiij. ther was a gret bataill do in ſmythfeld bitwen two ſquiers. yt on wos called Glouceſtre yt was appelaūt. Arthur wos the defendaūt. &̄ well and manfulli foughten to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   long time. & the kyng for ther manfulneſſe &̄ of his grace toke ther quarell in to his hand. &̄ made them to go out of the feld at ons & ſo they wer deuided of ther batailles & thee kyng yaf them grace ¶And the xij. yere of kyng hēris regne the fourth Risdie a ſquier of wales that was a rebell a riſer & ſupporter to Owen of Glendre that did moch deſtruccion to pepull of wales wos taken and brought to London and ther he come a fore the Iuſtices and wos dampned for his treſon. and than he wos laid on an hurdell and ſo draw forth vn to Tyborne thurgh the cite. & ther he wos hanged and let doune a

yen and his hede ſmyten of & ye body quartired and ſent vn to iiij. tounes: and his hede ſet on london brigge ¶And in the xiij. yere of kyng Henris regne tho died ſir Iohn̄ 
                  Beauford the erle of ſomerſet that wos capitayn of Calais and wos beried at the abbey of the tour hill. on whos ſoule god haue merci amen· ¶And in the ſame yere thee lord Thomas kyng Henris ſon wedded thee coūtoſſe of ſomerſet. ¶And in this ſame yere com thee embaſſatours of fraūce in to englond from the duke of Burgoyn vn to the prince of englond kyng henris ſon and heir for to haue help and ſocour of men of armes & archiers ayenſt the duke of Orliaunce. And tho went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſe the erle of Arundell. ſir Guillebert vmfreuill Erle of Keme and the lord Cobham Sir Iohan Oldecaſtell. and mony othir good knyghtis and worthy ſquiers and men of armes and good archiers in to fraunce and come to Paris to the duke of burgoyn. ¶And ther he reſaued & welcomed thes Engliſhmen the lordis and all other meny. ¶And than it wos done him to wit that the duke of Orliaū
                  ce was comen to ſemtclowe faſt by Paris with a gret nombur of men of armys & arbalaſters. and thidd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   went our Engliſhmen & fought with them. & gat the brigge of ſemtclow & ther they ſlew moch pepull of frenſhmē· and arminakis and thee remenaunt fled and wold no longer abide. ¶And than our Engliſhmen come ayen vn to Paris. and ther they token thir leue of the Duke and come home ayen in to Englond in ſaufte and the Duke yaf them gret yeftes. & anone folowyng the duke of Orliaūce ſent embaſſatours ī to Englōd to kīg Henri the iiij. beſechyng hī of his help & ſocour ayens his dedly enmy ye duke of burgoyn ¶And than the kīg made Thomas his ſon duke of Clarence & his othir ſone Iohan duke of Bedford. &̄ his othir ſone Humfrey duke of Glouceſtre and ſir Thamas Beauford erle of Dorſet & the duke of awemarle he made duk of yorke. & tha the kīg ordeyned his ſon ſir Thomas duke of clarence ſir Thom̄s

                  Beauford Erle of Dorſet and ſir Iohn̄ Cornwill with many othir lordis knyghtis and ſquyers men of armes & archiers to go ouer the ſee in to fraunce in helpyng and ſtrengthyng of the duke of Orliaūce. ¶And thes worthy lordis with ther retenue ſhippid at Hamptō & ſailed ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ī to Normādie &̄ landid at hogges And ther met with them the lord Hambe at ther landyng wt vijM. men of armes of frenſhmen & iij▪ ſergauntis of armes wt them and all wer put to flight and takē of them vijC men of armes: &̄ iiij. hondreth hors wt out tho that wer ſlain ī the feld ¶And ſo they riden forch thurgh out fraūce & toke caſtellis &̄ toūes &̄ ſlew moch pepull of frenſhmen yt withſtode thē &̄ toke mony priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s as they riden And ſo they paſſed forth till they come to Burdeux &̄ ther they reſtid them a while & ſet the cū
                  tre in pees and reſtid till the vyntage wer redy to ſaill. And thā the duke with his menye come home in to Englond in ſaufte thā
                  ked be god: ¶And in the ſame yere wos the kynges coyn changed thurgh out englond by the kyng and his councell that is to ſay the nobull half nobull & ferthyng of gold: ¶And the xiiij yere of kyng Henris regne the .iiij. he let moke Galeys of were for he had hoped to haue paſſed the gret ſee & ſo forth to Ieruſalē. & ther to haue endid his liffe. but god viſeted him ſo ſone after wt infirmites and gret ſikeneſſe that he myght not well endure no while ſo feruently he wos take and brought in bed at weſtmīſter in a fair chambur ¶And os he lay in his bede he aſkid his chamberlayn what they called yt chamber yt he lay in: & he anſuerid & ſaid Ieruſalem. & than he ſaid that the ꝓphecie ſaid that he ſhuld make an ende and die in Ieraſalem: And than he made him redy vn to god and diſpoſed all his will. And ſone after he died &̄ wos caried by water from weſtmynſter in a barge vn to Feuerſham. And from thens he wos caried to cantorberi by land with moch torche light brinnyng in to the abbey of Crichurch & ther he wos entered & beried 
                     〈…〉
                   &

thus endid ye worthy kīg Henri about midlentyn ſonday ī the yere of our lord a. M.cccc.xiij. on whos ſovle god haue merci anen.
               Artī the v. wos 
                     〈◊〉
                   aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Iohn̄ xiiij. yere. This mā was choſen by thee coūcell of Cōſtantinoplī & othir wos depoſit yt ſtreffe. and ſo come pes in the chirch the wich long tyme afore wos deſyrid and neceſſari for thee defence of the faith. This was the myghtieſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos of riches and a gret Iugge he edefied tounys wallis ſtretis and he diſtroyd heriſes and he did moch good thurgh the nobull prince Sygmunde. And he gadred moch monay for the holy land to geten ayen. bot deth come oppon him and lettid him. and he made a coūcell afore his deth for that mater and ther deceſſed. ugeniꝰ wos 
                     〈◊〉
                   aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Martin xvij yere This Eugeny wos choſen peſablie after the deth of Martin & no man dowtid bot he wos 
                     〈◊〉
                  . bot after ſhortly he wos expulſit from Rome. for it wos ſo that he fled nakid. Alſo he wos cited to the coūncell of Baſiliens. and depoſit bothe chargid not. & for that ayen began thee ſtriffe the wich ſtode to his deth &̄ thos that fauoured him ſaid he was worthy moch louyng. and the cō
                  trari ſaid thos yt wer ayens him. bot what ſum eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos after hee had takyn the dignite vpō hī a fore he wos of gret abſtenēs & of good fame &̄ yt he did aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   I leue to thee Iugemēt of god.
            
            
               Circa annum domini .M.iiijC.xiij.
               Of kyng Henri thee fifth that wos kyng Henris ſone.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     Nd after the deth of kyng Henri the iiij. regned kyng Henri his ſone that was borne at Monmouth in wales that was a worthy kyng and a gracious man and a gret conquerour. And in thee friſt yere of his regne for gret loue & goodneſſe he ſent to the freris of Langely ther as his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had do berie kyng Richard the ſecūd. and let take his body out of the erth 
                     •
                  yen & did bring it to weſtmynſter ī a riall chare cou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed wt blake

veluet and baners of diuerſe armes about and all the hors drawyng the chare wer trappid in blake and beten with diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe armes. &̄ many a torche brennyng by all the way till he come to weſtmī
                  ſtre: and ther he let make for him a riall and a ſolempne enterement▪ &̄ beried hī by quene Anne his wife as his own deſire was on the ferther ſide of ſent Edwardis ſhrine in the abbey of ſeint Petris of weſtmynſtre on whos ſoule god haue merci ¶And in this ſame yere wer a certayn of lollers taken and fals heritikis that had purpoſed thurgh fals treſon for to haue ſlayn our king &̄ for to haue diſtroid all the clargie of the reame. & they myght haue had ther fals purpoſe. ¶But our lord god wold not ſuffre it. for in haſt our kyng had warnyng ther of & of all ther falſe ordynaūce & wurchyng & come ſodēly wt his pouer to ſent Iohanes without ſmythfeld & anone they toke a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn of the lollerres & fals heritikes & brought them vn to the kīges priſence. &̄ ther told all ther fals purpoſe & ordynaūce how they wold haue do & wrought & they myght haue regned & had ther will: & ther they told wich wer ther capitayns &̄ gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nours. &̄ than the kīg comaunded them to the tour of londō & than toke mo of them both wt in the cite & with out &̄ ſent them to Newgate &̄ to both coūtres &̄ than they wer brought ī examinacion before the clargie &̄ the kinges Iuſtices. & ther they wer conuicted before the clargie for thir fals heriſi and dampned before the Iuſtice for ther fals treſō ¶& this wos ther iugemēt yt they ſhuld be draw frō the toure of london to ſent Gilesfeld &̄ ther to be honged & brēt on the galewes ¶And alſo ther was taken ſir Rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Acto
                     •
                   knyght for hereſi & eke for treſō ayens the kyng & the reame. & he come a fore the clargi & was ꝯuicte for his hereſi to be brēt: & dampnid before the Iuſtices to be draw frō the tour of londō thurgh ye cite to ſent Gilesfeld &̄ to be honged &̄ brent ¶And ī the ſecūd yere of kyng Hēris regne ye fifth he held a coūcell of all the lordis of the reame at weſtmynſter & ther he put hī this demaūde: & praye
                     •
                  
                  
and beſought them of ther goodneſſe &̄ of ther good councell and good will to ſhew him as touchyng the titell & the right that he had to Normandie Gaſcoyn and Guyhenue. the wich the kyng of fraunce withheld wrongfully and vnrightfully: the wich his aunceſtres before him had be trew titell of conqueſt & right heritage ye wich Normandie Gaſcoyn and Guyhenne the good kyng edwarde of wyndeſore and his aunceſtres before him had holdyn all ther lifes tyme. ¶And his lordis yaf him coūcell to ſend enbaſſetours vn to the kyng of fraunce &̄ his coūcell and that he ſh̄uld yeue vp vn to him his right heritage that is to ſay Normandye Gaſcoyn & Guyhenne the wich his prediceſſours had hold afore▪ hī· or els he wold it wynne with dynt of ſwerd in ſhort tyme wt the help of almyghti god ¶And than the Dolphyn of fraunce anſuerid to our embaſfatours &̄ ſaid in this man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that ye kyng was ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yong and to tendre of age to make any were as ayens him &̄ wos not like yet to be no good weriour to do & to make ſuch a cō
                  queſt ther vpon him: ¶And ſomwhat in ſcorne and deſpite he ſent to him a Tone full of tenys baules. be cauſe he wold haue ſū what for to play with all. for him and for his lordis. for that be come hī bettir thā for to maynten ony were. ¶And than anōe our lordis that wer embaſſatours token ther leue and come in to Englond ayen and told the kyng & his coūcell of the vngodli anſuer that they had of the Dolphyn. and of the preſent the wich he had ſent vn to our kyng. ¶And whan the kyng had herd ther wordis and the anſuere of the Dolphyn he wos wond
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſore agreued & right euell apayed toward the frenſhmen &̄ toward the kīg & the Dolphyn. & thought to avenge hī vpō them as ſone as god wold ſend him grace & myght. and anōe let make tēnys balles for the Dolphyn in all the haſt that myght be. And they wer gret gonſtonys for the Dolphyn to play with all. ¶And than anone the kyng ſent for all his lordis and held a gret coūcell at weſtmynſter and told vn to them the anſuer that they had of

the Dolphyn and of his worthy preſent that he ſent to him and to his lordis to play with all ¶And ther the kyng &̄ his lordis wer accordid that they ſhuld be redy ī armes with ther pouer in the beſt aray that myght be done. &̄ get men of armis and ar
                  
                     •
                  hiers that myght be geten and all othir ſtuf that longed to were &̄ to be redy with all ther retenue to mete at ſouthampton be Lammaſſe next ſuyng with out ony del
                     •
                  y wherfore the kyng ordeyned his nauy of ſhippis with all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſtuff &̄ vitaill that longed to ſuch a weriour of all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ordenaūce in the hauen of ſouthampton ī to the nombre of .ccc. & xx. ſailles ¶And than fell ther a gret diſſeſe & a foull miſchief. for ther wer iij. lordis wich that the kyng truſtid moch on And thurgh fals couetiſe they had purpoſed and ymagined the kīgꝭ deth & thought to haue ſlayn him and all his brethir or he had take the ſee The wich wer named thus ſir Richard erle of Cambrigge brothir to the duke of yorke. The ſecund was the lord Scrope treſorer of englond. The thrid wos ſir Thomas Gray knyght of the northcuntre· ¶And thees lordis afore ſaid for lucrie of mony had made ꝓmiſſe vn to the frenſhmen for to haue ſlayn kyng Henri the fifth and all his brethir by a fallis trayn ſodenli or they had be war. ¶But all myghti god of his gret grace held his holi hand ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   them & ſaued them frō thees ꝑllous menye. ¶And for to haue done this they reſaued of the frenſhmen a Million of gold. & that wos ther openli pruued ¶And for thir fals treſon they wer all ther Iuggid vn to the deth & this was the Iugemēt that they ſhuld be lad thurgh Hampton and without north gate ther to be heded. &̄ thus they endid ther lifes for ther fals couetiſe & treſon. ¶And anone as this wos done the kyng and all his menye made them redy & went to ſhippe & ſailled forth with xv. hondred ſhippis and ariued within Seyn at Kydecauſe vpō our ladies eue the Aſſumpcion in Normandie with all his ordinaūce. And ſo went him forth to Harflet & he beſeged the toune all about by lād

and eke by wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . and ſent to the capitayn of the toune and charged him to deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the toune. And the capitayn ſaid that he deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id him none. ne none he wold him yeld: but bad him do his beſt. ¶And than our kyng laid his ordinaūce vn to the toūe that is for to ſay Gonnys Engynes &̄ Tripgettes & ſhetten &̄ caſt to the walles &̄ eke vn to the toūe. &̄ caſt doune both toures and toune & laid them on the erth. and ther be played at the tennys wt his hard gonſtonys ¶And they that wer within the toūe whā they ſhuld play. ther ſong wos wellaway &̄ alas that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   any ſuch tennys balles wer made. & curſid all tho that were began. & the tyme that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they wer borne. ¶And on the morow the kīg did crie at eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   gate of the toūe that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man ſh̄uld be redy on thee morow erly to make aſſaute vn to the toune ¶And willyam Bouchier and Iohn̄ Graunt with xij. othir worthy burgies come to the kyng and beſought him of his riall princehode &̄ power to withdraw his malice and deſtruccion that he did vn to them and beſought him of viij dayes of reſpite and trews if ony reſcu might cum vn to them: and els to yeld vp the toūe vn to hī wt all ther goodis. and than the kyng ſent forth the capitayn and kepid the remenaūt ſtill with him. ¶And the lord Gaucorte that was capitayn of the toune went forth to Royn in all ye haſt vn to the Dolphyn for help & ſocour bot thir was none ne no mā of reſcue. for the Dolphyn wold not abide ¶And thꝰ this capitayn come ayen vn to the kyng and yild vp ye toune and deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  ed him the keis. And than he called his vncle ye erle of Dorſet and made him capitayn of ye toune of Harflet and deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed hī ye keis. and bad him go &̄ put out all the frenſh peple both mē women and child and ſtuff his toūe of harflet with engliſh pepull. ¶And than the kyng ſent in to Englond and did crie ī eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y good toune of Englond that what crafti man wold cum thidd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and inhabite him ther in that toune he ſh̄uld haue houſe and
                  
houſhold to hī and to his heiris for euer more ¶And ſo thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   went mony diuerſe marchantis and crafti men and enhabyted them ther to ſtrength the toune And were welcome. ¶And whan the kyng ſaw that this toune wos well ſtuffed both of vitaill and of men. this worthy prince toke his leue. and went to Calais ward by land. and the frenſhmen herd of his commyng they thought for to ſtop
                     •
                  e him his way that he ſh̄uld not paſſe yt way and in all the haſt that they myght brekyn all the brigges ther wher ony peſſage wos for hors and man in ſo moch that ther myght no man paſſe ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the Riuers nothir on hors ne on fote: bot if he ſh̄uld be drenchid. ¶And therfore our kīg with all his pepull went and ſought his way ferre vp to paris ward. And ther wos all the riall pouer of fraunce aſſembled and redy to yef him bataill & for to diſtroy all his pepull. But almyghti god wos his gyde and ſaued him and all his menye and defendid hī of his enmys pouer and purpoſe thanked be god that ſaued ſo his own knight & king in his rightfull titell. ¶And than our kyng beholdīg & ſeyng the multitude &̄ nombre of his enmys to with ſtond his way and yef him bataill. Than the kīg with a meke herte and a good ſpirit liften vp his handis to almyghti god and beſought him of his help and ſocour and that day to ſaue his trew ſeruaūtis. ¶And than our kīg gadred all his lordis & od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   pepull about & bad them all be on good chere· For they ſhold haue a fair day &̄ a gracious victorie &̄ the bettir of all thir enmys &̄ prayed them all to make them redy vn to the bataill for he wold rathir be dede that day in the feld than to be take of his enmys for he wold neuer put the reame of englond to ranſome for his parſon. ¶And the duke of yorke fell on knees &̄ beſought the kīg of abone. yt he wold graūt him that day the avaūteward in his batall and the kyng graūted him his aſkyng. &̄ ſaid graunte merci coſī of yorke & prayed him to make him redy ¶And than he had euery man to ordeyn him a ſtake of tre & ſharp both endis that the

ſtake myght be pight in the erth a ſlope that ther enmys ſhuld not ouer cum them on hors bake. For that wos ther fals purpoſe and araied them all ther for to ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ride our menye ſodenli at the friſt commyng on of them at the friſt brunt. ¶And all nyght before the bataill the frenſhmen made mony gret fiers and moch reuel with howting & ſhowting and plaid our kīg and his lordis at ye diſe &̄ an archier alway for a blanke of ther mony. For they wend all had bene theris. the morne aroſe the day gune ſpringe. ¶And the kyng by good auiſe let aray his bataill &̄ his wenges and chargid eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man to kepe them hole to gedres and praid them all to be of good chere: ¶And whan they wer redy he aſkid what time of the day it wos. &̄ they ſaid prime Than ſaid our kyng now is good time. for all Englond prais for vs and thir fore be good of chere and let vs go to our Iournay. And than he ſaid with an high vois in the name of almyghti god and ſent Georgy a vaunte Baner and ſent Georgy this day thyn help ¶And than thees frenſhmen come prickyng doune as thei wold haue over ridden all our meny▪ bot god & our archiers made them right ſone to ſcombull: for our archiers ſhot neuer arow amys but it pariſſhed and brought vn to the ground both hors &̄ man. ¶For they ſhot that day for a wager And our ſtakes made them toppe our terue eche on ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   othir. that they lay on heps two ſpere length of hight. ¶And our kyng with his meny &̄ with his men of armes & archiers that thakkid an them ſo thike with arowes and layed on with ſtakis and our kyng with hys handis faught manly yt day. ¶And thus almyghty god and ſent Georgi brought our enmys to groūd and yaf vs that day the victorie. ¶Ther wer ſlayn of frenſhmen that day ī the felde of Agincourt mo than xi. thouſand wtout priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s yt wer take &̄ ther wer nombred that day of frenſhmē in the feld mo than ſex ſcore thouſand. and of engliſhmē not vij. thouſand. but god yt day faught for vs ¶And after come ther tydynges to owr

kyng that ther wos new bataill of frenſhmen ordeyned redy for to ſtele on him &̄ come towardis him. And anone our kyng let cri that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man ſhuld ſle his priſoners that he had taken. and anone aray the bataill ayen redy to fight wt the frenſhmē ¶And whan they ſaw that our men killed doune his priſoners. than thei with drew them and brake ther bataill and all ther aray·
               ¶And thus our kyng as a worthy conquerour had that day the victori in the feld of Agencourt in picardie. ¶And thā our kyng retourned ayen ther that the bataill wos for to ſe what pepull wer ſlayn of Engliſhmen. and if ony wer hurt that myght be holped And ther wer dede in the feld the Duke of Barrie the duke of Alaunſome the duke of Braban the Erle of Nauer ne the chief Conſtabull of fraunce and viij. othir erles. and the Erchebiſſhop of Saunce. and of good barons an hondreth and mo and of worthy knightis of gret aliaunce of cote armures a thouſand and v: hondreth ¶And ſo of engliſhmen was dede that day the good duke of Yorke and the erle of ſouthfolke. and of all othir Engliſſhmen ther wer not dede paſſing xxvi. bodyes thankid be god· ¶And this bataill wos on a friday wich wos Criſpine Criſpinianes day in ye monith of Octobre &̄ a none the kyng commaūdid to beri them and the duke of yorke to be caried forth with him and the erle of Southfolk▪ ¶And ther wer priſoners the Duke of Orliaunce the duke of Burbon. the Erle of vendome. the erle of Ewe. the erle of Richemond and ſir Burſigaūte Marchall of fraunce and mony othir worthy lordis weren take ther in this bataill of agencourt and wer brought vn to the toūe of Calais. and ſo ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   theſe with the kyng ī to Englond and landid at Douer in kent with all his priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s in ſaufte thankid be god all myghti And ſo com to Cantorberi 
                     〈…〉
                   ¶And ſo forth he rode thurgh ye cuntre of Kent the next way vn to Eltham and ther he reſtid till that he wold cum to londō ¶And than the maire of london &

the aldermen ſhireues with all the worthy communs and craftis come to blake heth well &̄ worthely araied to welcum our kīg wt diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe melodies. ¶And thankid almyghti god of his gracious victorie that he had ſhewed for him. ¶And ſo the kyng &̄ his priſoners paſſed forth by them till he come to ſent Thomas watering: and ther met with him all religious with proceſſion &̄ wel comed him and ſo the kīg come ridyng with his priſoners thurgh the cite of london wher that ther wos ſhewed mony a fair ſight at all the condithes and at the croſſe in chepe as in heuenli aray of angeles arcangeles patriarches prophetis & virgines with diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe melodies ſenſing and ſingyng to welcum our kyng and all the condithes rennyng with wyne And the kyng paſſed forth vn to Seint Poules and ther met with him xiiij. biſſhoppis reueſſed and miterid with ſenſers to welcum the kyng And ther they ſong for his gracious victori Te deum laudamus ¶And ther thee kyng offred and toke & rode to weſtmynſtre and than the maire toke his leue of the kyng and rode home ayen ¶And ī the thrid yere of kyng Henris regne the v. com the Emꝓour of Almayn kīg of Rome &̄ of hūgri ī to englōd & ſo to the Cite of london ¶And the maire and the aldermen with thee ſhereues and worthy craftis of londō by the kynges commaundement met with him on the blake hath in the beſt aray that they coud on horſbake. ¶And ther they welcomed him &̄ brought him vn to londō with moch honour and gret reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ence. ¶And at ſent thomas watring ther met with him the king with all his lordis in good aray. ¶And ther wos a worthy metyng bitwen the emprour and the kyng Henri the v. and ther they kiſſed to gedres enbrached eche othir and than the kyng toke thee Emprour by the hand and ſo they come ridyng thurgh the cite of Londō vn to ſent Poules and ther they alightid and offrid and all the biſſhoppis ſtod reueſſed with ſenſers in ther handis ſenſing to them. ¶And than they toke ther hors and riden vn to weſtmīſter

And the kyng logged the Emprour in his oune palais and ther he reſttid him agret while and all at the kynges coſt. &̄ ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come the duke of Holand in to englond to cum and ſe ther ye Emprour and to ſpeke with him and with our kyng Henri of englond. & he wortheli reſſaued and loggid in the biſſhoppis yn of Ely and all at the kynges coſt ¶And whan the emprour had well reſtid him and ſeyn the land in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe perties and know the commodites than by ꝓceſſe of tyme he toke his leue of the kyng but or he yed he was made knyght of the garter &̄ reſeyued &̄ we rid the liueray. And than he thankid ye king & all his lordis. & than ye kīg &̄ he wēt ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee vn to Calais &̄ abiden ther long tyme to haue an anſuer of the frenſh kyng. &̄ at the laſt it come & pleſed him right noght. ¶And the emprour toke his leue of ye kyng &̄ paſſid forth in goddis name. and our kyng come ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ayen in to englond in all the haſt that he myght & that was on ſent Lukis eue that he come to Lambithe. & on the monday next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he come ī to the ꝑlamēt at weſtmynſtre ¶And ī this ſame yere was a gret derth of corne ī englond. bot thankid be god it laſted not long time
               ANd in the .iiij. yere of kīg Henris regne the v▪ he held his ꝑlament at weſtmynſtre ī the begīnyng of October & laſt vn to ye Purificaciō of our ladi thā next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ¶And ther wos graūted vn to him to mayten his weris both of ſpiritualte & of temꝑalte an hole tax and a dieme. And than anone the kīg prayed all his lordis to make them redy to ſtrength him ī his right And anone he let make a new retenue &̄ chargid all mē to be redy at hamton in witſon weke thā next aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   with out any delay. ¶And ther the kyng made the duke of Bedford ꝓtector and 
                  defend of his reame of englond ī his abſens & chargid him to kepe his lawes & mayntē both ſpirituall & temꝑall ¶And whā the kīg had thꝰ do & ſet all thīg ī his kynde On ſent Marke day he toke his hors at weſtmynſtre and come ridyng to Poules and

ther he offred and toke his leue. & ſo rode forth thurgh the cite takyng his leue of all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of pepull as well of poer as of rich prayng them all in gen
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  all to pray for him. ¶And ſo he rode forth to ſent Georges &̄ ther offred & toke his leue of the maire chargyng him to kepe well his chambur ¶And ſo he rode forth to Hampton & ther abode till his retenue wer redy &̄ comē. for ther wos all his nauy of ſhippis with his ordinaūce gadred to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & well ſtuffid as longed to ſoch a riall kīg wt all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of vitailles for ſuch a riall pepull as well for hors as for man. as longed for ſuch a weriour. yt is for to ſay armur gonnys Tripgites engynes ſowes baſtiles brigges of lether ſcaling laddres malles &̄ ſpadis ſhoueles pickis paueys Bowes & arowes bowſtringes & tonnys cheſtis & pypis full of arowes as nedid for ſuch a worthi weriour that no thing wos to ſeche whan time come. thidd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come to him ſhippis ladē with gonnes & gonpowder ¶And whan this wos redy and his retenue come the kyng and al his lordis wt all his riall hoſt went to ſh̄ip and toke the ſee and ſailed in to normandie and landid at Touke vpon Lammaſſe day than next after And ther he made xlviij knyghtis at his landyng ¶And than the kyng hering of mōy enmys vpō the ſe that is to ſay ix. gret carickes hulkis galeis and ſhippis that wer cumē to diſtroy his nauy And anone he commaundid the erle of march to be chief chiuetayn and mony othir worthy lordis with him with men of armes and archiers to go to the ſee that none enmys defoulid his nauy ne entred his land in no partie for to diſtrouble his viage ne his iourney. ¶And anone the erle toke his menye and went to ſhip and ſcummed the ſee and kepid the ſe coſtis that no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of enmye durſt rowt vpon the ſee & anone the king ſent his heraudes vn to the capitayn of Touke and charged him for to deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him his caſtell and his toune & els he wold nothir leue man ne child a liue. ¶And anone the capitayn and iiij. othir burgeſis of the toune brought the keis vn to the kyng and
                  
beſought him of grace. And the kyng deleuered the keis to ſir Iohan Kekeley and made him capitayn and commaundid him for to put out all frenſhmen both of the caſtell and alſo of the toune ¶And ther beſide wos ye caſtell of lous &̄ thidd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye kīg ſēt ye erle marchal wt a fair meny &̄ ſauted the toūe & anōeit wos yolde to the erle &̄ brought hī the keis. &̄ he brought them to ye kīg and the kyng toke him ayen & made him capitayn of the caſtell of Louers & of all yt longed ther to &̄ chargid him to deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   out all the frenſhmē ¶And than the kīg held forth his way to Cane yt was a ſtrōg toūe & afair & a riall caſtell ther in. & anōe he ſent his heroudis to the capitayn & chargid him to deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the toune and his caſtell or els he wold them get with ſtrength of hand. And they anſuered and ſayd that he toke them none for to kepe ne nōe they wold deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   vn to him: ¶And than anone he laid his ſege vn to the toune and laid gonnys on eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y ſide and bet doune both walles and toures and ſlew moch pepull in thir houſes & alſo in the ſtretis And the good duke of Clarence laid doune the walles on his ſide vn to the groūd And ſo within a while ye kyng by his councell ſawted the toune all about. ¶And anone the duke of Clarence had entred in to the toune and ſlew do un right till he come to the king and ſparid nothir man ne childe and euer they cried a Clarence a Clarence and ſent George. ¶And ther wos dede on the walles on the kyngis ſide a worthy man that wos called Springes the wich the king commaundid to be beried in the abbey of Cane faſt by wyllm cōquerour on whos ſoule god haue merci ameij. ¶And than ye king come ī to the toūe with his brothir the duke of Clarence and mony othir worthy lordis with moch ſolempnite & mirth ¶And than the king commaūdid the Capitayn to deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him his caſtell and he be ſought the kyng to yef him xiiij. dais of reſpit if any reſcue wold cum and yf none wold cum to delyuer him the keis and thee Caſtell at his cōmaūdement ¶And vnder this compoſiciō was

the toūe & the caſtell of Baious with othir toūes fortreſſes and villages in to the nombre of xiiij. vpō the hill before the caſtell of Cane our kyng pight all his tentis that ſemed a toūe as moch as cane & by yt tyme com tidingꝭ yt no reſcu wold cum ther. ¶And ſo at the xiiij. days end the capitayn of the caſtell com out and deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id the keis &̄ the caſtell to our kyng & Baious & ye othir xiiij· toūes wer deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id vn to him alſo. & anone the kyng deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed the keis to the duke of Clarence &̄ made him capitatn both of the toūe and alſo of the caſtell and made him Capitayn of baious and of all the othir tounes alſo. ¶And ſo he entrid thee toune and the caſtell and ther he held Sent Georgi feſt. & ther he made xv. knightis of the bath ther wos ſir Lowys Roberſart ſalyn Chaynye Mougomery and mony othir worthy men· and the kyng commaundid them for to put out all the frenſhmen and women. & no man ſo hardy to difoule no woman ne take no maner of good away from them but let them paſſe in pees ī payn of deth ¶And ther paſſid out of the toune in on day mo than xv.C women. ¶And than our kyng let ſtuffe the toune and Caſtell with Engliſhmen and ordeyned ther two Capitayns on for the toune and an othir for the Caſtell and chargid them vpon ther lifes for to kepe well thee toune and the Caſtell
               ¶And or our kyng went thens he gatte valeys Newelyn &̄ laid a ſege to Chirburgh. and that ſege laid the Duke of Glouceſtre with a ſtrong power and myghti and be proceſſe of tyme gate it and made ther a capitayn of the ſame toune. and this ſame tyme the Erle of Warwic leid a ſege vn to Dounfraunte and gat it and put therin a capitayn. ¶And for to ſpeke more of the Erle of marche that the kyng ordeyned tho for to ſcum the ſee and to kepe the coſtes of Englond for all maner of enmis the wind aroſe vpon them· that they wend all to haue be loſt. but thurgh the grace of god almyghty and good gouernaunce they riddī afore wyhte all yt ſtorme ¶And ther wer loſt ij▪ Carik

kis and two balingers with marchondize and othir gret goodis and all the pepull that wer within them. and an othir Carrokke droue before hampton. and thr
                     •
                  w his maſt ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the toune walles and this was on ſent Bartholomews day ¶And whan all this ſtorme wos ſeſed this worthy Erle of march toke his ſhippis with his meme and went to the ſe and landit in Normandie at hogges and ſo ridden forth towardis the kyng. & euer as he come the frēſhmen fled ¶And ther come to them an Anthony pigge and folowed the hoſt all that way till they come to a gret water and theer they drad for to haue bene drenched thee water cloſed them ſo that they myght no wher get out But at the laſt god almyghti and this pigge brought them out all ſaufe and ther they caught a gide that knew all the cuntre about and hee brought thē thurgh a quike ſand &̄ ſo in to an Ile. and thei toke mony priſoners in ther way toward thee kyng in ther iournay &̄ ſo they comē vn to Cane And ther the kyng welcomed him and toke his Iournay at Argentun and anone tho it wos yoldē vn to thee kyng and they had ther liues and went ther way. ¶And than our king remeued to a ſtrong toune that was tho called Ceſe and ther wos a fair mynſter and they yeld it anone vn to the king. & than the king went him from thens to alaū ſome &̄ wan thee toūe and the brigge. and thee kyng ſent the Erle of Warwike to a toune that wos called Beleſme with a huge & a ſtrong power and anone they yeld and put them all in to the kinges good grace an in his merci. &̄ ſo did moni mo ſtrong tounes and Caſtellis that wer in tho parties. ¶And from thēs they went to vermill in Perche and anone it wos yolden vn to the king both the toūe & the Caſtill & bodis & goodis at the kīgꝭ good grace▪ & ſo the kīg gate & conquered all the tounes and Caſſtellis Pyles ſtrenthes &̄ Abbeys vn to Poūtlarge. and from thens vn to the Cite of Rone ¶And in the fifth yere of kīg Hēries regne the v. ſir Iohn̄ Oldcaſtell that was the lord Cobham
 wos areſtid for hereſi and brought vn to the toure of londō and anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he brake out of the tour &̄ wēt in to wales &̄ there keped him long time ¶And at the laſt the lorde powys toke him▪ bot he ſtode at gret defence long time &̄ wos ſore woūded or he wold be take and ſo the lord Powys men broght him out of wales to londō in a wherlecole & ſo he wos brought to weſtmynſtre & ther was examined of c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn pointes that wer put vpon him. & he ſayd not nay and ſo he wos conuycte of the clargie for his hereſi & dampned before the Iuttices vn to the deth for treſon. ¶And ſo he wos lad vn to the toure ayen. and ther he was laid on an hurdell and draw thurgh the cite to ſent Giles feld and ther wos made a new pair of galowes and a ſtrong chine and a coler of yrē for him and ther he wos hongid and brent on the galowes &̄ all for his lewdneſſe &̄ his fals opinions.
               
                  ANd in the vi. yere of kyng Henris regne the fifth he ſent his vncle ſir Thomas Beaufort duke of Exceſtre wyth a fair menye of men of armes and archiers be for the cite of Rone and ther diſplayed his ban
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and ſent heroudes vn to the toune and bad them yelde that cite vn to owr kyng ther liege lord. and they ſayd he toke them none for to kepe ne none he ſhuld haue ther but if it wer dere bought and meued with ther hondis for othir anſuere wold they none yef but gonnys. ¶And ther the duke toke good auiſement of the ground all about. And anōe ther iſſued out of the cite a gret meny of men of armes both on horſebake and on foot and anone owr meni met with them & ouer threw an hepe of them and ther wer taken &̄ ſlain xxx: parſons of full right good mennis bodis and the remenaūte fled ayen in to the toune & the Duke went vn to Pountlarge vn to the king an told hym all how that he had ſpede an how he liked the ground·
               ¶And anone as he was go they caſt doune all ther ſubarbis about the cite vn to the harde groūd. for the king ther no refreſſhing ſh̄uld haue at his comyng. And the friday before lāmeſda

than next folowyng our kyng with his hoſt come before Rone & anone he ſet his ſege roūd a bout that Cite. and anone let lay to his ordinaunce vn to the toune. And the kyng and his lordis wer logged in the chartre houſe and gret ſtrength about them & that was in the eſt perte of the cite. ¶And the duke of Clarence logged him at the weſt ende in a waſt abbey before the porte Chanx. &̄ the Duke of Exceſtre in the North ſide before thee Porte Beauueſyn. and bitwen the duke of Clarence and thee duke of Exceſtre wos the Erle Marchall logged with a ſtrong power before the caſtell gate. ¶And than was the erle of Ormond the lord Harington and the lord Talbot with ther retenu next him. ¶And than ſir Iohan Cornwaill and mony od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   nobull knyghtis of name with ther retenue lay with ye duke of Clarence. ¶And frō the duke of Exceſtre toward the kīg wer logged ye lord Roos the lord of wylluby the lord phehew &̄ ſir william Port knight with ther retenue before the port of ſent Hillarie: ¶And thā wos ye erle of mortayn wt his retenue logged in the abbey of ſent Katrines. ¶And the erle of ſal
                     •
                  ſberi wt his retenue lay on yt othir ſide of ſent Katrins. & ſir Iohn̄ Gray knyght wos logged at the abbey yt is called moūt ſent michell ¶And ſir Phelip Lech knyght ye kīgꝭ treſorer wos logged bitwen the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of Seyn and the abbey & kepid the ward vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the hill. & the baron of Carow wos logged vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſide to kepe the paſſage. And Ienico the ſquyer lay next him on the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſide and thos two ſquiers kepid manli the wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of Seyn and faughte with ther enmys oft tymes ¶And on that othir ſide of ſeyn lay the erle of Hontingdon. & maſter Neuill the erles ſon of weſtmerland. & ſir Gilbert vmfreuill erle of Keme. and ſir Richard of arundell and the lord Feriers with ther retenue before Port du pounte and eche of thees lordis had ſtrōg ordinaunce. & the kyng did make at Pountlarge ouer the water of ſiyn a ſtronge and a mygity chyen of Iren and put it thurgh gret Pyles

faſt pyght in thee grounde and that went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the reuer of Seyne that no veſſell myght paſſe that in no kynde. And about that cheyne the kyng litt make a brigge ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thee water of Seyn thatt man and hors and all othir cariage myght go to and fro at all tymes whan nede wer. And than come the erle of warwike & had gote Dounfront vn to the king Henri of Englond. ¶And anone the kyng ſent the Erle of Warwike to Cawdebeke to beſege it. And whan that he come before the toune he ſent his heraudes vn to the capitaine and bad him yeld vp the toune vpon pe in of deth &̄ anone he laid his ſege. & ye capitayn beſought the Erle that the myght come vn to his preſens and it pleſed him and ſpeke with him. &̄ ſo the good erle graunted him ſor to cum. &̄ than he come out &̄ foure othir burgeis come with him· &̄ entreted ſo wt this Erle that this ſame toune was vnder compoſicion to done as the cite of Rone did and the Erle graūted and conſentid ther to vpon this condicion that the kingꝭ nauy of englōd with his ordinaūce myght paſſe vp by them in ſaufte with out any man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of lette or deſtrubaūce. & to his compoſiciō they ſet to ther ſeales. ¶And the ſhippis paſſed vp by them in ſaufte & come before the cite of rone in to an hondreth ſhippis and ther they caſt ther ankers & than this cite wos beſeged both by land & by watir. And whan all this wos done &̄ ſhippis comen vp. thā cume the Erle of Warwik ayen to the kyng. &̄ logged him bitwen the abbey of Seint Katerins and the knig till that the abbey entreted and tho was yold vn to the kyng: ¶And than he remeued him thēs & logged him before Porte martenuylle & tho was the Erle of Saliſberi commaūdid by the king to make him redy to ride▪ but thi
                     •
                   come haſty tidinges & made him to abide. & ſo he returned ayen and logged him beſide the erle of Huntingdon till the ſege was endid. ¶And than come the duke of glouceſtre the kingꝭ brother from the ſege of Chirbourgh the wich he had wone and geten and ſtuffed ayen vn to the kynges behoue and profit vn to the

croune of Englond and whan he wos comen to the kyng be fore Rone anone he loggid with gret ordinaūce before port ſeint Hillari more nere the toune & his enmys than any othir lay. by xl roddes of length with in ſhot of quarell: And with him lay the Erle of Southfolke and the lord of Bergeyeney with all ther retenue. and ſtrong ordinaunce. and manly and prowdly faught eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y day with ther enmys. ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   whon they iſſued owt of the cite. ¶And than come the Priour of Kilmayn of Irland ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ye ſee to the kyng wt a fair meny of mē of armis of thir own cuntre gyſe the ſomme of xv. hondreth good mēnys bodis and the kyng welcoaed them and made them right good chere ¶And thā come tidingꝭ vn to the king that the kyng of fraūce and the dolphyn and the duke of Borgoyn wold cum doūe and reſcue the citi of Rone with a ſtrong power of all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of nacions and breke the ſege. and he caſt him to entre on the north ſide of the hoſt. be cauſe that ther wos the beſt entre and moſt plain grond. And therfore the kyng aſſigned the Priour of kylmayn with his power and loggid him on the Northſide of the hoſt to ſtope ther paſſage. and was by the foreſt of Lyous And of this ordinaunce they wer full glad and ſo they went forth in haſt: and kepid thee groūd and the place that the kyng and his councell had aſſignid ¶And they quitte them as good weriours vn to their kyng ¶Now will I tell yow wich were thee chief Capitayns and the gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nours of thee Cite of Rone ¶Mon ſir Gny Botiler was chief Capitayn both of thee Cite and of the Caſtill. And Mon ſir Termegan he was Capitayn of Port de Canx Mō ſir de la Roche he wos capitain of the Diſns. Mō ſir Anthonie he was Leuetenant to mō ſir Gni botiller Hēri chantfiē he was the Capitain of the Porte de la pount Iohn̄ Mantreuas he was capitain of the porte de la Chaſtell Mō ſir de Preanx he was Capitain of the porte of ſent Hillarie. the baſtard of Tyne he wos Capitain of the port marteniulle. And graunt Iakes a worthyweriour he wos Capitayn of all men of were &̄ he wos gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nour outward both on horſbake and on foot of all men of armes whan they eſſued out of the Cite of all the portes he them arayed as they shuld coūtre with our menie: And eche of thee capitayns lad. v. M. men of armes and ſum moo. ¶And at ye friſt comyng of our kyng ther wer nombred by heraudes in to .ccc. M. of men & women and children what yong & old. And amōg all thes was mony a manfull man of his handis &̄ ſo they preued them whan they eſſued out of the cite both on hors bake and on foot. for they come neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   at on gate out alone. but at iij. or iiij. gates and at eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y gate ij. or iij. M. of good mennys bodies armed and manful coūtred with our engliſhmen and moch pepull ſlayn diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe tymes with gonnes quarellis and othir ordinaūce. ¶And this ſege durid xx. wekis and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they of the toune traſtid to haue be reſcued bot ther come none: so at the laſt they kepid ſo long ye toūe yt ther died mony thouſandis with in the toūe for defaute of mete of men &̄ womē & children. for they had heten ther hors dogges & cattis yt wer in the toūe. ¶And oft tymes the men of armes drofe out the poer pepull out at the gates of the toūe for ſpending of vitaill. & anone our engliſhmē drofe them in to the toūe ayen ¶So at the laſt the capitayn of the toūe ſaw the miſchief yt they wer not reſcued. & alſo the ſcarcite of vitaill. &̄ yt the pepull died ſo for defaute of mete eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y day mōy thouſandis. & alſo ſaw yong children lie and ſouke ther moders pappis &̄ wer dede. Than anōe they ſent to the kīg beſechyng him of his grace & merſci & broughte the keis of the toūe vn to the kyng &̄ delyu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed the toūe to him: & all  the ſoudiours voided the toūe with ther hors &̄ harnes and tho comunes of the toune for to abide and duell still in the toune yerly to pay to him &̄ to his ſucceſſours for all maner cuſtomes and fee fermes and kateremes. ¶And than thee kyng entred in to the toune and reſtid him in the Caſtell till the toune was ſet in rewle and in gouernaunce.
            
            
               
               ¶How the kyng of england was made heritier & regent of fraunce &̄ how he weddid quene Katrine.
               
                  ANd anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that Rone wos goten Depe & mony od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   tounes in the baas Normandi yaf them ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   with out ſtroke or ſege whan they vnder ſtode that the king had goten rone Alſo this ſame yere had bene a pees made and ſuorne bitwen the Duke of Burgō &̄ the Dolphin wich wer ſworen on godis bodi that they ſhuld loue and aſſiſte ech othir ayenſt ther enmys. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this ꝯtrari to this oth. the duke Iohan of Burgoyn was ſlayn &̄ pituyſly mordred in the preſence of the dolphī wherfore the frenſhmē wer gretli deuidid &̄ of verray neceſſite laborid to haue a trayttye with the kyng of englond For the king of Englond wan dayli of them tounys caſtillis & fortreſſes. ¶Alſo this ſame yere wos quene Iane areſtid &̄ brought in to the caſtell of Ledis in Kent. And oone frere Randolf a doctor of diuinite hir confeſſour wich aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward wos ſlayn by the ꝑſō of the tour falling at wordis &̄ debate. & after quene Iane was deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed ¶And in the vij. yere both kīgis of fraūce & of Englond wer accordid & kyng Henri was made heir and regent of fraunce and weddid Dame Katrin the kyngꝭ dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of fraunſe at Troyes in Champain on Trinite ſondai ¶And this was made by the meyn of Phelip new made duke of Burgoyn wich wos ſworn to kyng Henri. for to a venge his fadres deth & was becomē Engliſh. ¶And than the kyng with his new wife went to Paris wher he wos rially reſſaued And from thens he wt his lordis and the duke of Burgon & mony othir lordis of fraū laid ſege to diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe tounes and Caſtelles that held of the Dolphyns partie &̄ wā them But ye toūe of Melun held lōg time. for ther in wer good defendours ¶In the viij. yere the kyng & the quene come ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe and landid on Candilmaſſe day in the morou at Dou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ¶And the xiiij. day of Feueryer the kīg com to london And the xxi. day of the ſame moneth the quene come. And
                  
the xxiiij. day of the ſame ſhe wos crouned at weſtmynſtre Alſo the ſame yere anone after Eſter the kyng held a ꝑlament at weſtmynſtre at wich ꝑlament it wos ordined that the gold in engliſh coyn ſhuld be weid. & none reſayued but by weyght ¶And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   witſontide the king ſailled to Calais and paſſid ſo forth in to fraūce And ī marche the xxij· day. before the kyng come ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the duke of Clarence wos ſlayn in fraunce and diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe othir lordis taken priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s as the erle of Huntindon. the erle of ſomerſet with diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe othir And all wos becauſe they wold not take wt thē archiers but thought to haue do with the frenſhmē them ſelf. wt out them. ¶And yit whan he was ſlayn the archiers come and reſcued the body of the duke wich they wold haue caried with them god haue merci on his ſoule. he wos a valiaūt man. ¶And the ſame yere bitwen criſtemaſſe & Candilmaſſe the toūe of Melun wos yoldē to the kyng ¶In the ix. yere on ſent Nicholas day in December was borne Henri the kyngꝭ firſt begoten ſone at wyndeſore. whos godfadres at fontſtone wos henri biſſhop of wyncheſtre & Iohn̄ duke of of Bedford &̄ the ducheſſe of holand wos godmod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . & hen
                     •
                  i Chicheley erchebiſſhop of cantorberi wos godfad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   at ꝯfirmyng ¶And in the x. yere the cite of Mews ī brie wos goten. wich had long beſeged. And this ſame yere ye quene ſh̄ippid at hampton & ſailed ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to the king ī fraūce wher ſhe was worſhipfulli receyued of the kyng: & ſo of the kyng of fraūce hir fadre & of hir mod
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ¶And thꝰ kīg Henri wan faſt ī fraūſe &̄ held gret aſtate & ſat at dyn
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   at a gret feſt in Paris croned & the quene alſo. wich had not bene ſeyn be fore. &̄ all pepull reſorted vn to his court. but as to the kyng of fraūce he heeld none aſtate ne rule but wos left almoſt alone▪ ¶Alſo this yere the wethercok wos ſet vpō poules ſtepull at londō And this yere in the moneth of auguſt the kyng waxed ſeke at boys de vyncēt. &̄ whan he ſaw he ſhuld die he made his teſtament. & ordaned mōy thynges nobull for his ſoule &̄ deuoutli reſſaued all the rightis of

holi chirch. ī ſo fer forth that whan he wos anoynted he ſaid the ſeruice with the preſt. and at the vers of the pſalme Miſerere mei deus that wos Benigne fac dn̄e in bona volūtate tua ſyn vt edificentur muri ieruſalem. he bad tarie ther &̄ ſayd thus. O good lord thou knoweſt that myne entent hath bene &̄ yit is if I myght leue to reidyfie the wallis of Ieruſalem. ¶And then thee preſt procedid forth and made an end. ¶And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this moſt nobull prince & victorious kīg flour in his time of criſtyn chiualri whom all the world douted. yaf his ſoule in to the hondis of god & died &̄ made an ende of his naturall life at the forſaied Boys de vyncent beſide Paris the xxxvi. yere of his age. on whos ſoule god haue merci amen. ¶Then wos the body enbamed & cerid & laied in a riall chare and an ymage like to him waas laid vpō the corps open with diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe ban
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s & hors cou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id richeli with armes of englond & fraūce. and alſo thold armes of ſeint Edward ſent Edmōd and othir with gret multitude af torchis. wt whom went the kyng of ſcotland &̄ mony othir lordis wich accompanid the body till it come vn to weſtmynſtre by londō in Englōd ¶And in eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y toūe by the way he had ſolempli his dirige on the euen and maſſe on the morn. and moch almis wos yef to poer pepull by the way And the vij day of Nouēbre aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the corps was brought thurgh londō with gret reu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ens &̄ ſolempnite to weſtmynſtre wher he now lieth. it wos worſhipfulli beried. and after was laid on his tombe a riall ymage lyke to him ſelf of ſilu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and gild wich wos made at the coſt of quene Katrin ¶And thus endid & is entered &̄ beried the nobull kyng Hēri the fifth on whos ſoule & all criſtyn god haue merci amen·
            
            
               ¶Of the law of kīg henri the v. & what he ordeyned for kīg Richard & for him ſelf aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his deth.
               HEre is to be notid that this kyng Henri the v. wos a nobull prince aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos kyng & crouned. how be it be fore in his yougth he had bene wild recheles &̄ ſparid no thing of his luſt

ne deſires: but accompliſſhed them after hrs likyng. but as ſone as he wos crouned ennoynted & ſacred anone ſodenli he was chaū
                  ged in to a new man & ſet all his entent to liue vertuuſly in mayntenyng of holy chirch. deſtroyng of heritikis. Kepyng Iuſtice &̄ dofendyng of his reame & ſubiettis ¶And for as moch as his fadre had depoſid by his labour the good kyng Richard. & pytouſly made him to die. and for the ofence done to him ayneſt his legeaunce. he had ſent to rome to be aſoyled therof. For wich offence the pope our holi fadre enioyned him to make him be prayed fore ꝑpetually. &̄ like as he had done to be taken from him his naturall life ther fore he ſh̄uld do found iiij. tapers to brene ꝑpetually about his body. that for the extinccion of his bodyli lyfe his ſoule may eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   be remembrid &̄ liue in heuen in ſpirituall life ¶And alſo yt he ſhold eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y weke on the day as it com about of his deth h
                     •
                  ue a ſolempne maſſe of requiem &̄ on the euen before a dirige with ix. leſſons and a dole to poer pepull alway on that day of a xi ſhillynges and viij. pens to be deled peny mele. and ons in the yere at his annyu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſarie his terment to be holdyn in the moſt honeſt wiſe. & be deled that day xx. pound in pens to poer pepull. ¶And to eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y monke to haue xx· ſhillyng wich all thes thyngꝭ ꝑfurmed this noble kyng for his fadre. for kyng Hēri the iiij. his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ꝑformed it not during his life. whom as it was ſaid god touchid & wos a lepre or he died ¶Alſo than this nobull prince let do calle all the abbotes &̄ priours of ſent Benet ord
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ī englōd & had them in the chapiture hous of weſtmīſter for the reformaciō of the ord
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wherin he had comynicaciō. & alſo with biſſhoppis and mē of the ſpiritualte. in ſo fer forth yt they doutid ſore he wold haue had the temꝑaltes out of ther handis. wherfore by thauys. labour & ꝓcuring of the ſpūalte encoraged the kyng to chalenge Normandy &̄ his right in fraūce. to thentēt to ſet hī a werke ther yt he ſhuld not ſeke occaſiōs to entre ī to ſuch mat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s ¶And all his life aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he laboured ī the weris ī ꝯquering gret

ꝑte of the reame of fraūce. yt bi the a gremēt of the kīg Charles he had all ye gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nāce of the reame of fraūce. &̄ wos ꝓclamid regent & heir of fraūce. & ſo not withſtōdyng all this gret were yt he had yit he remembrid his ſoule & alſo yt he was mortall & muſt die. for wich he ordined bi his liue the place of his ſepultur wher he is beried &̄ eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y day iij. maſſis ꝑpetualli ſōgen ī a chapell ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his ſepultur. of wich the middill maſſe &̄ ye fyrſt &̄ laaſt maſſe ſhall be as his aſſigned by hī as it apperith by thes u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſis foloīg.
               
                  Henrici miſſe quinti ſunt hic tabulate
                  Que ſucceſſiue ſunt per monachos celebrate
                  
                      Prima ſit aſſup̄te. de feſto virginis alme·
                  Poſcit poſtremam criſtus de morte reſurgens.
                  
                      Prima ſalutate de feſto virginis extat
                  Nunciat angelicis. laudem poſtrema choreis.
                  
                      Eſſe deum natū. de virgine prima fatetur.
                  Commemorat natam. ſic vltima miſſa mariam.
                  
                      Prima celebretur. ad honorem neupmatis almi.
                  vltima conceptam. denūciat eſſe mariam
                  
                      Semꝑ prima coli. debet de corꝑe criſti.
                  vltima ſit facta. de virgine purificata
                  
                      Condecet vt prima. celebretur de cruce ſancta
                  Atque ſalutate· fiet poſtrema marie.
                  
                      Omnes ad ſanctos. eſt prima colenda ſuꝑnos.
                  vltima de requie. pro defunctie petit eſſe
                  Semper erit media. de proprietate diei.
               
               ¶And yit ye nobull kīg Henri the v. foūdid ij. houſes of religiō on called Syō beſide braynford of the ord
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſent Brigitte both of men & women. &̄ on yt othir ſide of the riu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of tamiſe an hous of mōkis of chartrehous ī wich two places he is ꝯtinually praid for nyght & day. for eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   whā they of Syō reſtis they of the chartrehous do ther 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uice. & in like wiſe whā they of ye chart
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  hous reſtis the othir goeth to. & by ryngyng of the bellis of eythir place

eche knoweth whan they haue endid ther 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uiſe wich be nobli endowed. & do dayli ther gret almuſſe dedis. as ī chart
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  hous c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn child be fondē to ſcole &̄ at ſiō c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn almiſſe yefuen dali. & yit beſide al this he had foūdid a recluſe with ſhall be alway a preſt to p̄y for hī by ye ſaid chartrehous wich preſt is ſufficiently endewed for hī & a 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uaūt. Lo here may all princes take enſample by this nobull prince yt regned ſo litell time not fully .x. yere did ſo mōy nobull actis as well for his ſoule to be ꝑpetually remēbrid & praid for as ī his worldly ꝯqueſtis & he beīg in his moſt luſti age diſpiſed &̄ eſchewid ſynne &̄ wos u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tuꝰ & a gret Iuſti
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                   ī ſo moch yt all ye prī
                  ces of criſtēdō drad hī & alſo of hetheneſe. & he had det
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  mīed ī hī ſelfe if god wold haue ſparid hī to haue werid on the ſariſēs &̄ for to know the ayde of od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   princes & all ye 
                  paſſag ī yt iournay he ſēt a knight of henaud named ſir hugh de lanoye vn to Ieruſalem. but or he returned he died at Boys du vyncent in the xxxvi. yer of his age on whos ſoule god haue merci Amen.
               FElix the v. wos pope when Eugeny was depoſid ix. yere This Felix wos the duke of ſubandie a devoute prince & an old man. &̄ he ſaw his childis child. This man when he leuid an hole life wos choſin pope of the coūcell of baſiliens. &̄ Eugeyn wos depoſit. &̄ ther wos ſtrife lōg time &̄ he had no gret obedience for the depoſicion of Eugeyn: And at the laſt eugeyn deceſſed & then felix reſined to Nicholas for fauour of the pees to be had and he wos made legate of fraūce &̄ cardinale of ſabianus. ¶This wos the xxiij. ſtrife betwix Eugen & felix &̄ it durid xvi. yere· & this wos a new cauſe &̄ neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   be fore ſeyn. for the ꝯcel of baſilien depoſid eugeyn the veray pope & ther wos no moo: for he obeyd not the decreys of the councell of Conſtantinopolyn as they ſayd ne he charged not to obey the concell of Baſien bothe ſaed rather the contrarie ſh̄uld be done then ſo as they decreid. wherfor ther roos a gret altricacion in that mat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . for ſum ſayd on

way and ſum an othir. and coud not accord vn to this day for the ton ꝑti ſayd that the coūcell wos aboue ye pope. & an othir ꝑtie ſaid the contrari that the pope wos aboue the coūcell. but they left it vndetermined & therfore god muſt diſpoſe for the beſt.
               Albertus was Emprour aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Sygmonde on yere. This Albert wos the duke of Anſtre &̄ nevew to Sigmond and ther for he wos kyng of Beem and of vngri for his dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for othir heir he left not. This man wos choſin Emprour of Almayn. bot anone he wos poyſened and died. and he wos in al thyngꝭ a vertuus man that all mē ſaid he wos a preſidēt to all kynges. Fredericus the thrid wos Emprour after him. This Frederik wos the duke of Anrieſt and choſin of Almayn bot it was lōg or he wos crouned of the pope for diuiſion. at the laſt ther wos made a vnite and he was crouned wt a gret honour of the pope in the cite and wos a peſabull man and a quiet &̄ of a ſinguler pete. and he hated not the clargi he weddid ye kyngꝭ doughter of Portingale And in hys tyme whyles that he regned he made a gret conuocacion of princes in ratiſpona. for the in cors of the Turkis and ſhewed vn to them that now with in this xx. yere criſtīdom wos made laſſe by two hondreth mile. and he warned them that they ſhuld be redy to reſiſt him. ¶And the cite imꝑiall of Conſtantinobull was taken of the miſbeleuyng Turkis and betrayed be a Ianuens. whom for his labour the turke made a kyng as he ꝓmyſed him and the iiij. day he callid home and he did him for his diſſayt to his maſtir. And ther wos gret ſorow and wepyng among criſtyn pepull for the loſſe of yt nobull Cite and of criſtyn men and women. for mony a criſtyn man was ſlayn and innumerable wer ſoſld. and the Emprour wos ſlayn. & for enuy the Turke cauſid his hede to be ſmyt of when he wos dede And almoſt all the faith in the land of greke failed. Nicholaus the fifth a Ianuens wos pope after felix viij· yere This Nycholas was choſin at rome in the plais of Euggyny

& yit the ſtrife hengit. And a litell & litell they obeyed him. and all men meruellid. that a man of ſo poer a nacion ſhuld obtene ayens the duke of Subandy ye wich wos coſin and alied almoſt to all the princes of criſtyndō and eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ychon left him. Then ī the yere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ther wos a pees made. & Felix reſauid for it pleſid our lord his name to be glorified by a obiect of the world as wos yt Ianuens· in comꝑiſon to the duke the pope. This Nicholas was a maiſter in diuinite and actiue man. & a rich man ī ꝯſaites. & mōy thyngꝭ yt wer fallen he bildid ayen. & all the wallis of rome he renewed for dred of the Turke. And ther was a u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe made of this vnite and publiſit in the cite. Lux fulſit mūdo: ceſſit felix nicholao. And that ī the yere of our lord .M.iiijC.xlix. The yer of grece wt a gret deuocion was ꝯfirmid &̄ innumerabull pepull wēt to the apoſtill ſetis.
            
            
               ¶How kyng Henri the vi. regned beyng a child not oon yere of age & of the bataill of vernaill in Perche.
               AFter kyng Henri the v. regned henri his ſon but a child and not fulli on yere of age. whos regne began the friſt day of Septembre in the yere of our lord M.cccc.xxij. This king beyng ī his cradell wos moch dowtid and drad by cauſe of the gret ꝯqueſt of his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   &̄ alſo the wyſdō & guydyng of his vncles the duke of Bedford &̄ the duke of Glouceſtre. ¶This yere the xxi. day of October dyed Charles the kyng of fraūce. & lieth beried at ſent Denys. And than wos the duke of bedford made regent of fraunce. And the duke of Glouceſtre wos made ꝓtector and defendour of englond. ¶And the friſt day of march aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos ſir willm Taillour preſt degradid of his preſthode and on the morow aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos brint ī ſmythfeld for heriſe ¶Thys yere ſir Iames ſtiward kyng of ſcottis maried Dame Iane the duches dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of Clarence of hir friſt houſband the erle of ſomerſet at ſent mari ouays ¶Alſo this yere the xvij. day of Auguſt

wos the bataill of vernaill in perche bitwen the duke of bedford regēt of fraūce &̄ ye duke of Alaūſone wich was a gret bataill. The duke of Bedford had• on his ſid wt hī the erle of ſaluſberi Moūtagu & the lord Talbot & all the pouer yt they coud make in Normandie the garyſouns kept. And alſo mony Capitayns wt moch pepull of the duke of Borgoyns ¶And on that other ſide was the duke of Alaunſon. ye duke of Turon yt wos therle douglas. the erle Boughan wt mōy lordis of fraūce &̄ gret cō
                  ponie of ſcottis and Armynakis And than the Erle douglas called the duke of Bedford Iohan with the leden ſwerd. And he ſent him word ayen that he ſh̄old find that day that his ſwerde wos of ſtele. ¶And ſo the bataill ioyned on both ſides and faught long tyme that ther wiſt no man who ſh̄old haue the bett
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   a gret while. bot at the laſt as god wold the victori fell vn to the Engliſh partie. For ther wer ſlaī. the erle douglas wich a litel before wos made duke of Turon. the erle of boughan the erle of Almarre. the erle of Toūar. the erle of vaūtedor and the viſcount of Nerbonne wich was on of them that ſlew duke Iohn̄ of Borgoyn knelyng before the Dolphyn &̄ mony mo vn to the nombre of x. thoſand and mo And ther wos taken priſoners thee duke of Alaūſon and mony othir lordid and gentillis of fraūce bot ſcottis that day wer ſlayn doune right the ſubſtance of them all. ¶And the thrid yere of kyng henri the ſext the Duke of Glouceſtre maried the duchiſſe of holand & wēt ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſe wt hir in to henaude for to take poſſeſſion of hys wyfes heritance wher he wos honorably receyuid and taken for lord of the land bot ſone after he was fayn to returne home ayen tho and left his wyfe &̄ all his treſour that he had broght with him in a toune yt is called Mounſe in henaud. wich promiſed him for to be trew to him. Notwithſtondyng they deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed the lady vn to the duke of borgoyn wich ſent hir to Gaunt And from thens ſhe aſcapid in a man nys clothyng and come in to Zeland to a toūe of hir own callid

Ziorixee And from thens ſhe went to a toune in holand called the Ghowde and ther ſh̄e wos ſtrong ynowgh and withſtode the ſaid duke of Burgoyn. ¶And ſone after the duke of glouceſtre ſent ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in to Zeland the lord fitzwater with c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn men of were and archiers for to help and ſocour the forſaid duchefſe of holand. wich 
                     •
                  andit at a place in Zeland called brewers hauen. wher the lordis of the contre come doūe and faght with him. and in concloſion he wos fayn to with draw him and his meny to the ſee ayen. But yit he ſlew and hurt diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe lordis and moch pepull of that ſame cuntre And ſo retourned home ayen with his meny and preuaylid no thyng. ¶And alſo this ſame yere the
                     •
                   Erle of Saluſberi. the erle of ſuffolke. the lord Wylby and thee lord ſcalis with ther retenue laid ſege to the cite of Manus. the wich cite wos yolden to them with mony othir ſtrong toūes and Caſtellis to the nombre of xxxvi: ¶This tyme all Normā
                  die and a gret part of fraūce vn to Orliaunce wos vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the obeyſſaunce of the kyng of englond And all the remenaūt of fraunce wos in gret tribulacion and miſchief.
            
            
               ¶How ther wos a gret fray lyke to haue bene bitwene the cardinall & the duke of Glouceſtre. And of the coronacion of king Henri the ſext both in englond & in fraūce.
               IN the iiij. yere the ſame nyght that the maire of london Iohan Couentre had takyn his charge. was a gret watch in London for a fray that wos betwen the biſſhop of wyncheſtre and the Duke of Glouceſtre protectour &c ¶For ye maire with the pepull of the cite wold abide bi ye duke of glouceſtre as ꝓtectour of the reame. bot by labour of lordis yt went bitwen & in ſpeciall by the labour of the prince of Portyngale. ther was a pointement taken that ther was no harme done. And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the bataill of verneyll in perche thee duke of bedford com ouer in to Englond And on witſonday this ſame yere at Layceſtre he dubbed kyng Henri knyght. And forthwith the ſaid kyng Henry dubbed

all thes knyghtis. whos names folowith. that is to wit ſir Richard duke of yorke. alſo the ſon and heir of the duke of Norfolke. the erle of Oxford. the Erle of weſtmerland. the ſon and heir of the erle of Northumburland. the ſon &̄ heir of the erle of vrmond. the lord Roos. ſir Iamys buttelar the lord martrauas ſir Henry gray of Tankeruile ſir willm Neuill lord fawconbrigge ſir George Neulll lorde latimer. the lord wellis. the lord berkle the ſon and heir of the lord Talbot. ſir Raufe gray of werk Sir robert veer. ſir Richad gray ſir Edmond hongerford. Sir Robert Wynkfeld. ſir Iohan bottell̄er. Sir Raynold Cobham ſir Ioha
                     •
                   paſſheley ſir Thomas Tunſtall Sir Iohn̄ Chidiok ſir Raufe langford ſir wyllm drury ſir willm ap Thomas ſir Richard Carbonell Sir Richard Wydeuile Sir Iohan ſhridelew ſir Wyllyām Cheyn. ſir Wyllyam Babyngton. ſir Iohn̄ Iune ſir Gil̄bert Beauchamp. ¶Item in the v. yere the duke of Bedford with the ducheſe hys wyfe went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſee to Calays. & a lytell before went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Henri biſhop of wīcheſtre And on our lady day anūciacion ī our lady chyrche at Calais the biſhop of wī
                  cheſtre whan that he had ſongen maſſe wos made Cardinall. & he knelyng before the hygh auter the duke of Bedford ſet the hat vpon hys hede. and ther wer hys bulles red as well of hys charge as the reioyſſing of his benefices ſpirituel and temperill ¶ And thys ſame yere was gret habundaunce of rayn. that the ſubſtanſe of heye and alſo of corne was deſtruyed. for it rayned almoſt eueri other day ¶And thys ſame yere the good erle of ſaluſberi ſir Thomas Montague layd ſege vn to Orlyaunce at wych ſege he wos ſlayn wt a gonne. that come out of the toune on whos ſowle god haue merci. for ſyth that he wos ſlayn Engliſhmen neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   gat ni preuayled ī fraūce: bot euer after began to leſe lytell and lytell till all wos loſt ¶Alſo this ſame yere a bretō murdred a good wedow in hir bedde without algate wich wedow fond him for almeſſe And he bare away all yt ſhe bad.

¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this he toke the gyrth of holy chirch at ſent Georgis in ſouthwark. and ther token the croſſe and forſuore this lande And os he went it happened that he com by the plaſe wher he did this curſed dede in the ſubbarbes of london. And the women of the ſame pariſſh com out with ſtonys and canel dung and ſlew and made an end of him ther. Notwithſtandyng the conſtabules and mony othir men beyng preſent for to kepe him. for ther wer mony women. and had no pitte: ¶Alſo this ſame yere the Duke of Northfolke with mony gentill men and yemen toke his barge the viij. day of Nouembre at ſent mari oueyes for to haue go thurgh londō brugge: and thurgh miſgydyng of the barge. it ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  threw on the pyles and mony men drownyd: but the duke him ſelf with ij. or iij. leped vpon the piles and ſo wer ſauid with help of men yt wer aboue the brugge wich caſten doun ropis by the wich roppis they ſauyd them ſelf ¶This ſame yere on ſent Leonardis dai kyng Henri beyng vij. yere of age wos crouned at weſtmynſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   at whos coronacion wer made xxxvi. knightis This yere on ſent Georgis day he paſſid ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee to Calays toward fraūce Aboute this tyme and a fore the reame beyng in gret miſerie and tribulacion: the Dolphyn with his parte began to make were and gate certayn places and made diſtreſſes vpon engliſh men by ye meyn of his capitayns that is to ſay la heer & poton de ſeyntraylles and iſpeciall a mayd wich they namyd la pucelle de dien. This maid rood lyke a man &̄ wos a valiant capitayn among thē and toke vpon hir mony gret enterpriſes in ſo moch that they had a beleue for to haue recouerid all ther loſſies by hir. ¶Not wt
                  ſtondyng at the laſt after mony gret feates. by thee helpe and prouieſſe of ſir Iohan Luxemburgh the wich was a nobull Capitayn of the Dukes of Burgoyn and mony engliſhmen picardes and Burgoygnous wich weren of our partie before the toune of Compyne the xxiij. day of May the forſaid pucelle was taken in the feld armed like a man and mony othir capitayns with

hir. & wer all brought to Roan and ther ſhe wos put in to priſon And ther ſhe was Iugged bi the law to be brent. and then ſhe ſaid that ſhe wos with child. wherby ſhe wos reſpited a while: But in concluſion it was founde that ſh̄e wos not with child And then ſhe was brenned in Roan. And the od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Capitayns wer put to raunſome and entreated as men of wer bene acuſtmed &c. ¶And this ſame yere about Candilmaſſe Richard hunder a woll̄epacker wos dampned for an heritike and brent at tour hyll And about midlentin ſir Thomas Baggeli preſt and vicarie of Mauen in Eſtſex beſide Walden wos diſgratid and dampned for an heritike and brent in ſmyth felde ¶And alſo in this ſame yere whiles the kyng wos in fraunce ther wer moni heritikis & loulars that had purpoſid to make a riſing & caſt billis in mony places. bot bliſſid be god almyghty the Capitayn of them wos taken whos name was willm Maundeuill a weuer of Abendon and balif of the ſame toune wich named him ſelf Iak Sharp of Wigmoreſland in wal̄es And afterward he wos be hedid at the forſaid Abendon in the witſon weke on the tewiſday ¶This ſame yere the ſext day of December kīg Hēri the ſext was crouned kīg of fraunce at Paris ī the chirch of our lady wt gret ſolempnite. ther beyng preſent the Cardinall of Englond the duke of bedford and mony othir lordis of fraunce &̄ of Englond ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this coronacion &̄ gret feſt holdē at Paris the kīg retourned frō thēs to roan &̄ ſo toward Calais. & the ix. day of Feuerer londed at Dou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . whom all the comunes of kente met at beramdoū bitwen Cātorberi & dou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   all ī reed hodis. & ſo come forth till he come to the blake heth. wher he wos met with the Maire Iohan wellis with all the craftis of london clothed all ī white And ſo they brought hym vn to London the xxi: day of the ſame moneth. ¶And this ſame yere was a reſtraīt of the wollis of Calays made by the ſoudiou
                     •
                  s by cauſe they wer not payed of ther wages wherfor the Duke of bedford regent of Fraunce

beyng then capitayn come to Calais the tewiſday in the eſter weke And on the morne aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   mōy ſoudiours of ye toūe wer areſtid &̄ put ī ward And in the ſame weke he rode to Terewyn. & bi ye meyn of the biſſhop of Terewyn he weddid the erles dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ſēt Poule & come ayen to Calais. ¶And the xi. day of Iune on ſent Barnabeis day ther wer iiij. ſoudiours of Calais yt wer chief cau
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  s of the reſtreynt hedid yt is to wit Iohn̄ Maddeley Iohan Lunday Thomas Palmer &̄ Thomas Talbot. & an hondreth &̄ x. banyſſhed the toune that ſame tyme. & before wer banyſſhed an hondreth & xx. ſoudiours And on midſomer euen after com the lord regent &̄ his wife to london.
               ABowt this tyme pope martin died And after him Eugeyne thee fourth wos Pope. This man was peſabuly choſin in Rome by the Cardinales and was u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y & indubytate pope· But ſhortly after he was put and expulſid out of Rome in ſuch maner that he wos fayn to flee nakid. In this ſame tyme wos the councill of Baſilie to wich councell he wos tho cited to cum And be cauſe he com not they depoſit him. but he rought not ne ſet not ther by but gat the cite of Rome and abode ſtyll Pope xvij: yere. This yere about witſontide the heritikes of Praghe wer deſtruyd For at two Iournays wer diſtruyd of them mo thā xxij thouſand with ther capitayns· that is to wyt Procapiꝰ Saplico & Lupꝰ preſbiter. Alſo ther wos takyn on lyue maſter pers clarke an Engliſhmā and an heritike ¶Alſo this ſame yere wos a gret froſt & a ſtrong during xi. wekis For it began on ſeint Katrines euen & laſted vn to ſeint Scolaſticais day ī Feuerer ī wich tyme the vyntage that com fro Burdeux come ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſhotres hill ¶This yer wos the coūcell of Aras & a gret trayte bitwene the kyng of Englōd and the kīg of fraunce. wher was aſſembled mony gret lordis of both parties at wich councell wos offrid to the kyng of Englond gret thynges by the meyen of a Legate that come from rome wich wos Cardinale of ſent croſſe

wich offres wer refuſid by the Cardinall of Englond and othir lordis that wer ther for the kyng. wherfor the duke of Burgoyn the wich had bene long engliſh ſworn. for ſoke our partie and retourned frenſh by the meyn of the forſaid legat and made a pees with the frenſh kyng reſauyng of the kyng for recompenſing of his fadris deth the counte pontiu. the lordſh̄ip of Ma
                     •
                  o
                     ••
                   wt moch od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   as is ſpecified in ye ſaid trayttie. And ſo our embaſſatouris come home ayen in warſe caas than they went out For thei loſt ther the duke of burgoyn wich had bene with his bourgoynous and Picardes a ſinguler help in all the conqueſt of Normadie & of Fraūce ¶This ſame yere wos a gret bataill on the ſee betwen the Ienewes and the kyng of Aragon. of wich bataill the Ienewes had the victorie. for they toke the kyng of Aragon. the kyng of Naune 
                  and thee gret maſtir of ſent Iames in Galiſe with iij. hondrith knyghtis and ſquiers and moch othir pepull. And this was on ſent dominikys day ¶And this ſame yere wer ſeyn iij: ſonnys at ons. and anone folowid the threfold gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  nance ī the chirch that is to wit of Eugenye of the concell & of neutralite. ¶Alſo this ſame yere M.cccc.xxxiiij. wos a paſſing gret wynd by wich ſtepillis houſes & treis wer ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   throwen About this tyme wos an holi maid in holand called Lydwith. wich liued onli by miracle not etyng any mete. This yere the duke of Burgoyn began his ordre at lyle of the golden Flyes. & ordeyned c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn knightis of the order and made ſtatutis and ordinaūces moch accordyng vn to the ord
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of the gart
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ¶Alſo this ſame yer the frenſhmē had ent
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  priſed to haue ſtole Calais ī the fiſſhīg tyme. for mony botis of fraunce had ſafecōdithes to cum to Calais for to take hering And the ſoudiours of the toune had a cuſtō to cū to the chirch & leue ther ſtaffis ſtandīg at the chirche dore wich ſtaffis the frenſhmen wich wer arayd like fiſſhers purpoſid to haue taken ther wapen and for to have won the toune bot on of them lay with a comyn woman the nyght be fore and
                  
told to hir ther coūcell And ſh̄e on the morow told the leuetenaunt wich forthwith commaundid that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man ſhuld kepe his wapen in his hand ſakring time and othir ¶And whan they ꝑſauyd this that they wer miſpoynted they ſayled ſtreght to Depe and ſtole and toke that toune ¶And on the Newyeres euen after they tokē Harflet· and thus the engliſhmē began to leſe a litell and a litell in Normandie.
            
            
               ¶How Calais & guynes wer beſegid by ye duke of Burgō & how they wer reſcued by the duke of Glouceſtre.
               THys yere wos a gret noyſe thurgh all englond how the duke of Burgoyn wold cum and beſege Calais. wherfore thee Erle of Mortayn with his armye that he had for to haue go with in to fraūce wos contremaūdid &̄ chargid that he ſhold go to Calais. wich wos at that time well vitailled &̄ mānyd. for ſir Iohn̄ Ratclife wos leuetenaūt of the kyng in that toune. & ye baron of Duddeley liuetenaūt of the caſtell ¶And the ix. day of Iulij the duke of Borgoyn with all the power of Flaundres and moch othir pepull com before Calays and ſet his ſege about the toūe. & eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y toūe of Flaundres had ther tentis by them ſelf ¶And this ſege endurid iij. wekis. In the meyn while ye duke of Glouceſtre beyng ꝓtector of englond toke ye moſt ꝑtie of the lordis of Englond & went ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thee ſee to Calays for to reſcue the toūe or to fight with thee duke & his hoſt yf they wold haue byden. this time london &̄ eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y good toūe of Englond ſent ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe to thys reſcu c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn pepull well arayd of the beſt and choſin men for the were. ¶And the ſecund day of auguſt the forſayd duke of Glouceſtre ariuid at Calays wyth all his armie and v. hondreth ſhippis &̄ mo. ¶And the Duke and all his hoſt yt lay in the ſege as ſone as they aſpied the ſaylles in thee ſee. before they apporched Calays hauen. ſodenly in a mornyng deꝑtid from the ſege. leuyng behynd him moch ſtuffe and vitall. & fled in to Flaūdres and Picardye and in lyke wyſe dide the ſege that lay

be fore Guyns. wher as they of guyns token the gret gonne of braſſe called digeon and mony othir gret gonnys and ſerpentins ¶And then whan the duke of glouceſtre wos ariued with al his hoſt. he went in to flaundres and wos ther xij. dayis and did but litell harmi except. he brent two fair vilages Popering and Belle. and othir houſes wich wer of no ſtrength. & ſo he retourned home ayen ¶And this ſame yere the kyng of ſcotland beſeged Rokeſburgh with moch pepull But ſir Raufe Gray deꝑted fram the caſtell and ordined for reſcu But os ſone as the kyng vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtode his deꝑting he ſedenli brake his ſege and wēt his wa and left moch ordinaūce behynd him wher he gat no worſſhipp. ¶This ſame yere the ſecund day of Ianuer quene katrine wich wos the gynges moder and wyfe to kyng henri the fift died 
                  and deꝑtid out of this world and wos brought rially thurgh london & ſo to weſtmīſter and ther ſhe lieth worchipfully buried in our lady chapell ¶And alſo this ſame yere the iiij. day of Ianuer fell doune the gate with the toure on it on londō brigge toward ſouthwerk with two arches and all that ſtode ther on. ¶This ſame yere wos a gret traitte holdyn betwen Grauenyng and Calais bitwen the kyng and the duke of bourgoyn wherfor the kyng wos the Cardinall of Englond the duke of Norfolk and mony othir lordis and for the duke wos the duchiſſe hauīg full pouer of hir lord as regent & ladi of his landis wher wos takē by thauys of both perties an abſtinence of were for a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn tyme in the name of the Ducheſſe & not of duke becauſe he had gon frō his othe & legeaunce that he had made to kyng Henri therfore the kyng neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wold write ne oppointe ne haue to do wt hī after. bot al in the ducheſſe name ¶Alſo this ſame yere quene Iane died the ſecund day of Iule wich had bene kyng Henri the fourthis wife and wos caried fro Bermondſey vn to Cauntorberi wher ſhe lieth beried bikyng Henri the iiij. hir houſbond. ¶This ſame yere died all the lions in the toure of london. the wich had not ben

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
ſeyn mony yeres before out of mynde.
            
            
               ¶How Owayn a ſquier of wales that had weddid quene Katerine wos areſtid. And of the ſciſme bitwen Eugenie &̄ felix.
               IN the xvi. yere of kyng Henri died Sigiſmond Emprour of Almayn & knyght of the garter. whos terment the kyng keped at ſent poules in london rialli wher was made a riall heerſe. and the kyng in his aſtate clad in blew wos at euen at dirige and on the morow at maſſe &c. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him wos elect and choſin Albert duke of Oſtrich wich had weddid Sigiſmōdꝰ dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   for to be ep̄rour. This mā wos taken & reſaued to be kīg of beme & vngari be cauſe of his wife that was ſigiſmondꝰ doughter wich left aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him none othir heir ¶This Albert wos emprour but on yere for he wos poyſened & ſo died. ſum ſaieth he died of a flix. bot he wos a vertuus man & petifull ſo moch that all the pepull yt knew him ſaid yt the world wos not worthy to haue his preſens. ¶This ſame yere on Owayn a ſquier of walis a man of law byrth. wich had mony a day before ſecretly weddid quene Katerine and had by hir iij. ſonnys and on dought
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos taken &̄ commaūdid to newgate to priſon be my lord of Glouceſtre ꝓtectour of the reame ¶And this yere he brake priſon by the meyn of a preſt that wos his chapelayn and after he was takī ayen by my lord Bemond and brought ayen to newgate. wich afterward wos deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed at large. And on of his ſonnys aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  warde was made erle of richemond and an othir erle of penbroke. &̄ the thrid a monke of weſtmynſtre wich monke died ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   This ſame yere alſo on Newyeres day at baynardis caſtell fell doune a ſtake of wod ſodenli at afternone & ſlew iij. mē miſcheuiſli and foule hurt othir. Alſo at bedford on a ſhrireday wer xviij. men murtherid with out ſtroke by fallīg doune of a ſtair as they com out of ther comune hall. & mony foule hurt ¶In the xviij. yer ſir Richard Beauchamp the good erle of werwike died at Roon

he beyng that tyme leuetenaunt of the kyng in Normandie. & from thens his body wos brought to warwike. wher he lieth worſſhipfully in a new chapell on the ſouth ſide of the quere ¶Alſo this yere wos a gret derth of corne in all englond for a buſſhell of whete wos worth xl. pens in mony places of englōd & yit men myght not haue y nough wherfor Steuen broune that tyme mare of londō ſēt ī to pruce & broght to londō c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tain ſhippis ladē wt rie. wich did moch good to the poer pepull for corne wos ſo ſcarce ī englōd yt ī ſū places of englōd poer pepull made them bred of fern rotes ¶This yere the generall councell of Baſilie depoſid eugenye And they choſe Felix wich wos duke of Sauoye. And than began the ſciſme wich endurid vn to the yere of our lord ihū criſt .M.cccc.xlviij This felix wos a deuoute prīce &̄ ſawe his ſonnys ſon. & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   leued an holi life & wos choſin pope of the councell of Baſile Eugenye depoſed. And ſo the ſciſme wos long time and this Felix had not moch obedience be cauce of the neutralite for the moſt parte and well nygh all criſtyndome obeied & reputid Eugenye for veray pope god knawoth who was veray pope of them both for both occupied during the life of Eugeny. ¶This ſame yere ſir Richard wiche vecarie of hermetteſworth wos degratid of his preſthode at Poules & brint at toure hill as for on heritike on ſent Botulphus day. how well at his deth he died a good criſtyn man. wher for aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his deth moch pepull come to the place wher he wos brent and offrid & made a heppe of ſtonys &̄ ſet vp a croſſe of tre &̄ held him for a ſent till the maire & ſheriues by the kyngꝭ commaūdemēt &̄ of biſſhoppis deſtruyed it & made ther an dong hill. ¶Alſo this ſame yere the ſhireues of london ſet out of ſent Martins the graūt the ſentorie v. ꝑſons. wich afterward wer reſtorid ayen to the ſentorie by the kīgꝭ Iuſtices. ¶After albert the thrid Frederike wos choſin Emprour This Frederik duk of Oſterik wos long Emprour &̄ differid for to be crouned at rome becauſe of the ſciſme but after that

vnite wos had he wos crouned with imꝑiall diademe with gret glorie and triumphe of pope Nicholas the iiij. This wos a peſabull man. quiet and of ſīgular paciens not hating the chirch he weddid the kyng of Portingales doughter &c.
            
            
               ¶How the ducheſſe of glouceſtre wos areſtid for treſon. & committed to ꝑpetuall priſon in the Ile of mā. And of the deth of maſtir Rog
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Bolingbroke.
               IN this yere Elinour Cobham ducheſſe of glouceſtre was areſtid for certayn pointes of treſon laid ayen hir. wher vpō ſhe was examined in ſent Stephenys chepell at weſtmynſter before the Erchebiſſhop of Cantorburi And ther ſhe wos enioyned to open penaunce for to go thurgh chepe bering a taper in hir hand and after to ꝑpetuall priſon in the Ile of man vnder the kepyng of ſir Thomas ſtanley ¶Alſo that ſame tyme wos areſtid maſter Thomas ſouthwell a chanon of weſtmynſter maſtir Iohan Hume a chapelayn of the ſaid lady. maſtir Roger bolingbroke a clarke vſing nigromancie. & on mariorie Iurdemayn called the wicch of Eye beſide weſtmynſtre. Thes wer areſtid as for beyng of councell with the ſaid ducheſſe of glouceſtre And as for maſtir Thomas ſouthwell he died ī the toure the nyght before he ſh̄uld haue be reyned on the morne For he him ſelf ſayd yt he ſhold die ī his bed & not by Iuſtices ¶And ī the xx. yere maiſtir Iohn̄ hume and maſtir Roger bolingbroke wer brought to the gild hall in london and ther before the mair the lordis & chief iuſtices of englond wer rayned and dampned both to be drowen & hanged & quartired: but maſter iohn̄ hume had his chartre and wos ꝑdoned by the kyngo· bot maſtir Roger wos drawen to Tyburne wher he confeſſid that he died giltles & neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   had treſpaſid in that he died fore. Notwithſtondyng he wos honged hedid & quartired on whos ſoule god haue mercy ¶And margeri iurdmain wos brent in ſmythfeld. ¶Alſo this yere wos a gret fray in london in flete ſtrete by nyghtis tyme bytwen men of court and

men of london and diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe men ſlayn and ſum hurt And on herbotell was chief cauſer of the miſgou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  naunce &̄ affray ¶Alſo this yere at cheſing of the maire of londō the comūes named Robert Clopton & Raulin holand taliour And the ald
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  men toke robert clopton and brough him at the right hand of the meirs as the cuſtom is. And than c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn tailours and othir hond craftis men cried nay nay not this man bot Raulyn Holand. wherfore the maire that wos padyſly ſent them that ſo cried to newgate. where they abode agret while and wer poniſſhed. ¶In this ſame yere wer diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe enbaſſatours ſent in to Guyan for a mariage for the kyng for the Erles doughter of Armynake. wich wos ꝯcludid. but by the meyn of the erle of ſuffolke it was let and put a parte. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this the ſaid erle of Suffolke went him ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee in to fraunce and ther he tretid the mariage bitwen the kyng of Englond and the kynges doughter of Cecile and of Ieruſalem And the next yere it wos concludid fully that mariage by wich mariage the kyng ſhold deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to hir fadre the duchie of Angeo. and the Erledom of Mayn wich wos the keye of Normandie ¶Then departid the Erle of ſuffolke with his wife & diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe lordis and knyghtis in the moſt raal aſtate that myght be out of Englond with new chares and palfreys wich went thurgh Chepe. and ſo went ouer the ſe. and reſaued hir and ſithen brought hir in the lent after vn to hampton wher ſhe landid. and was rially reſaued. ¶And on Candilmaſſe euen before by a gret tempeſt of thound
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   and lightenyng at aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  none Poules ſteple wos ſet on fire on the middis of the ſhaft in the timbur wich was quenched by force of labour. and ſpecially by the labour of the morow maſſe preſt of the bow in chepe. with was thought impoſſible ſayf onli the grace of god. ¶This yere wos the erle of ſtafford made & create duke of Bokyngham: the erle of werwik: duke of warwyke the erle of Dorſet marquis of Dorſet. &̄ the erle of ſuffolke wos made marquies of ſuffolke.
            
            
               
               ¶How kyng Henri weddid quene Margarete and of hir coronacion.
               IN this yere kyng Henri maried at ſouthwik quene Margaret And ſhe com· to london the xviij. day of May & by the way all the lordis of englond reſſayued hir worſhipfully in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe places. And ī eſpeciall the duke of glouceſtre. and on thee blake heth the maire with the aldermen and all the craftis in blewe gounys browderd with the deuiſe of his craft that thei myght be bi knowen mette with hir with reed hodis and brought hir to london wher wer diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe pagentis and countinaunce of diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe hiſtories ſhewed in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe places of the cite rially and coſtely ¶And the xxx. day of May the forſayd quene wos crouned at weſtmynſter And ther wos Iuſtis iij. days during. within the ſentorie be fore the abbey ¶This yere the priour of kylmian appellid the erle of vrmond of treſon. wich had a day aſſigned to them for to fight in ſmythfeld. And the liſtis wer made and feld draſſid. but whan it come to point the kyng commaundid that they ſhuld not fight. but toke the quarell in to his hand. And this wos done at the inſtance &̄ labour of c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn prechours and doctours of london as maſtir Gilbert worthyngton parſon of ſent Andrewes ī holborne and othir. ¶Alſo this ſame yere come a gret enbaſſade in to Englond out of fraūce. for to haue concludid a ꝑpetuall pees. but in concluſion it turned vn to a trews of a yere ¶About this tyme dred ſent Barnardyn a gray frere wich began the new reformacion of that ordir in mony places in ſo moche that they that wer reformed bene called obſeruauntes. wich ob
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uaū
                  tes bene encreſid gretli ī Ytali & ī Almayn ¶This Bernardyn was Canonyſed by pope Nicholas the .v. In the yere of our lord .M.cccc.l. ¶Iohannes de Capiſtrano wos his deſciple wich ꝓfited moch to the reformacion of yt order for whom god hath ſhewed mony a fair miracle. alſo here is to be notid that frō this tyme forward kyng Henri neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ꝓfited ne went forward. bot

fortune began te turne from him on all ſides as well in fraunce Normandie Guyan as in englōd. Sum men holden opinion yt kyng Henri yaf comyſſion plenery to ſir Edward hull ſir Robert Roos Dene of ſent ſauerins and othir to conclude a mariage for him with the erle of armynakis ſuſtre. wich wos ꝓmiſed as it wos ſeid &̄ ꝯcludid. but afterward it wos brokyn: & he wedded quene margaret as afore is ſaid. wich wos a dere mariage for the reame of englond For it wos knowen verili yt for to haue hir wos deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed the duchie of Angeo and the erledō of mayne wich wos the keye of Normandie for the frenſhmen to entre. ¶And about this the ſaid marquies of ſuffolke axed in plaī ꝑlamēt a xv. &̄ an halfe for to fetch hir out of fraūce. Lo what a mariage wos this. as to the compariſon of that othir mariage of armynake. For ther ſhuld haue bene deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed ſo mony caſtels &̄ tounes ī Guyan and ſo moch good ſh̄uld haue be yeuen wt hir yt all englond ſh̄uld haue bene ther by enriched. but ꝯtrari wyſe fell. wherfore eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y gret prince ought to kepe his ꝓmiſſe. for be cauſa of brekyng of this ꝓmiſſe and for mariage of quene margaret what loſſe hath the reame of englond had by loſing of normandie and guyan▪ by diuiſion in the reame. the rebellyng of comunes ayenſt ther prince &̄ lordis. what diuiſion among the lordis. what murder & ſleyng of them: what feldis foughten and made: in concluſion ſo mony that mony a man hath loſt his life and in concluſion the kyng depoſed & the quene with hir ſon fayn to flee in to ſcotland and from thens ī to fraūce and ſo to loriyn ye place that ſhe come friſt fro. ¶Mony men demeth that the brekīg of ye kīges promiſe to the ſuſtre of the erle of armynake was cauſe of this gret loſſe and adu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſite.
            
            
               ¶How the duke of glouceſtre ye kīgꝭ vncle wos areſtid at the ꝑlamēt of bury. & his deth. & how angeo ī mayn wos deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed.
               IN the xxv. yere of kyng Henri wos a ꝑlament at Bur
                     •
                   called ſent Edmondis buri about wich was commaūdid

all the comunes of the cuntre to be ther in ther moſt beſt defenſabull aray for to await vpon the kyng To wich ꝑlament come ye duke of Glouceſtre vmfrey the kyngꝭ vncle. wich had bene ꝓtectour of englond all the none age of the kyng. and anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   hee wos ī his loggīg he wos areſtid by the viſcoūte bemōd the cōſt a bull of englōd whom accompanied the duke of Bokyngham and mony othir lordis And forthwith all his 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  uaūtes wer cōmaū
                  did for to deꝑte frō him. & xxxij. of the chief of them wer areſted &̄ ſent to diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe priſons and anone after this ſaid areſt. the ſaid duke wos on the morow dede on whos ſoule god haue merci amen But how he dred & in what man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn is not to be knowen: ſū ſaid he died for ſorow: ſū ſaid he wos murdrid bitwen two fethir beddis. othir ſum ſaid that an hote ſpite wos put ī his foundemet but how he died god knoweth· to whom is nothīg hid. ¶And then when he wos dede he wos laid oppen that all men myght hī ſe ¶And ſo both lordis and knyghtis of the ſhires with burgiſes come and ſaw him lie dede. but woūde ne token coud they ꝑſaue how he died. here may men marke what this world is. This duke wos a nobull mā & a gret clarke. & had worſh̄ipfully ruled this reame to the kīgꝭ behoue. & neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   coude befound faute to him. ¶But enuy of them that were gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  nours &̄ had ꝓmiſed the duchie of Angeo and the erledom of mayn cauſed the deſtrucciō of this nobull man. for they drad that he wold haue enpeched that deliueraunce And after they ſent his body to ſent Albons wyth certayn lightis for to be beried. ¶And ſo ſir Geruays of Cliftō had than the charge to ꝯuay the corps. & ſo it was buried at ſent albons in the Abbey. & v. parſons of his houſold wer ſent to london. and ther wer reyned and Iugged to be drawen hanged and alſo quartired. of whom the names wer ſir Roger Chamburlain a knyght and on Miedelton a ſquier Herbard a ſquier Arthur a ſquier and Richard Nedham. wich v. perſons wer drawen frō the tour of londō thorow chepe to Tyborne & ther honged and lat

doune quyke. and then ſtriped to haue bene hedid and quartired. & then the marquies of ſuffolke ſhewed ther for them the kyngis perdon vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   his gret ſeall. and ſo they wer pardonned of the remenaunt of the exicucion & had ther liues. &̄ ſo they wer brought ayen to londō. and after frely deliuerid ¶Thꝰ began the trubull in the reame of Englond for the deth of this noble duke of Glouceſtre All the comunes of the reame began for to murmur for it and wer not content. ¶Aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that Pope Eugeny wos dede Nicholas the v. wos electe pope. This Nicholas wos choſon for Eugeyn yit hauīg the ſciſme Notwithſtondyng he gat the obedience of all criſtyn reames For aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he w
                     •
                  s electe &̄ ſacred pope. c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  tayn lordis of fraunce and of Englōd we
                     •
                   ſent in to Sauoye to pope Felix. for to entrete him to ceeſe of the papacie. And by the ſpeciall labour of the biſſhop of Norwich & the lord of ſent Iōhes he ceſſid the ſecund yere aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that the pope Nicholas wos ſacred. ¶And the ſaid Felix was made Legate of fraunce and Cardinall of Sauoye. And reſigned the hole papacie to Nicholas &̄ after leued an holy lyfe and died an holy man and as it is ſaied almyghti god ſheweth miracles for hī. ¶This wos the xxiij ſciſme bitwen Eugeny and felix. and durid xvi. yere. the cauſe wos this. The generall councell of Baſile depoſed Eugeny wich was only pope and indubitate for as moch as he obſerued not and keped the decrees &̄ ſtatutis of the councell of Conſtance as it is afore ſaied. Nothir he rought not to yef obedience to that genall councell in no maner wiſe. wherfore aroſe agret altricacion amonges writers of this mater pro and contra. wych can not accord vn to this day. ¶On partie ſayth that the councell is aboue the pope. & that othir parti ſayd nay. but the pope is aboue ye coūcell. god bliſſed aboue all thingꝭ yeue & graūt his pees in holy chirche ſpouſe of criſt anen. This Nicholas wos of Iene comen of low burth. a doctour of diuinite. an actif mā· he reedefied mōy places that wer brokyn and ruynous. and did do make a gret

walle about the palais & made the walle new about rome for drede of ye Turkis. ¶And the pepull wondred of the ceeſing & reſynyng of Felix to him: conſidered that he wos a man of ſo homly a burth. And that othir wos of a affinite to all the moſt ꝑtie of criſtyn princes wherof ther wos a u
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe publiſſhed as afore ſayde
            
            
               ¶How ſir Franceys aragonoys toke fogiers in Normādie And of the loſſe of Conſtantinoble by the Turke.
               IN the yere of kīg henri xxvij. beyng trews bitwen fraūce & englōd a knight of the engliſh ꝑti named ſir Fraūces aragonis toke a toūe of Normandi named fogiers ayens the trews of wich takīg begā moch ſorow & loſſe. For this was the occaſiō by wich the frenſhmen gat all Normandie &c. ¶About this tyme the cite of Cōnſtantinople wich wos impariall Cite in all gr
                     •
                  ce was taken by the Turkis infidels. wich wos betrayed as ſū holde oppinion and the emprour taken and ſlayn. And yt riall chirch of ſent Sophia robbed and deſpoiled and the relyquis & ymages and the Rode drawen about the ſtretis wich was done in ſpite of criſtyn faith. And ſone after all criſtyn ſaith in Grece ꝑiſſhed and ceſſid. Ther wer mony criſtyn men ſlayn and innumerabull ſold and put in captiuite. by the takyng of this toune thee Turke his gretly enhaūſed ī pride. & it is a gret loſſe to all criſtendome. ¶In the xxviij. yere wos a ꝑlamēt holdī at weſtmī
                  ſter. &̄ from thens adiourned to the blake freris at londō. & after criſtemaſſe to weſtmynſter ayen· And this ſame yere Robert of Cane a mā of the weſtcuntre wyth a few ſhippis toke a gret flet of ſhippis comyng out of ye baye ladē wt ſalt: wich ſh̄ippis wer of pruce flaūders holand & zeland &̄ brought them to hampton. wherfor ye marchādis of englōd beīg ī flaūd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s wer areſted ī bruges I pre & od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   places might not be deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed ne ther dettis diſcharged till they had made a poītemēt for to pay for the hurtis of thos ſhippis wich wos payed by the marchantis of the ſtapull euery

penny. And in like wiſe the marchantes and goodis beyng in danſke wer alſo areſtid and made gret amendis. ¶This ſame yere the frenſhmen in a mornyng toke by a trayn the toune of pount al arche and therin the lord Fauconbrige wos take priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   that in decembre Roan wos take and loſt beyng ther in the duke of Somerſete Edmond: the erle of Shrewſberi. wich by a pointement left plegges and loſt all Normandie and come home ī to englond. And during the ſaid parlament the duke of ſoffolke wos areſted and ſent ī to the toure & ther he was a moneth and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kyng did do fetche him out. for wich cauſe all the cō
                  munes of Englond wer in a gret rumer. what for the deliueraū
                  ce of Angeo and mayn and after loſing of all Normandie & ī eſpeciall for the deth of the good duke of Glouceſtre ī ſo moch that ī ſome places men gadred to geders and made them Captayns as blew berd and othir. wich wer taken and reſiſtid and had Iuſtices and died. ¶And than the ſaid ꝑlament wos adiourned to leyceſtre. And theder the kyng brought with him the duke of ſuffolke ¶And when the comunes vnderſtode that he was out of ye tour &̄ comyn thidd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they deſiered to haue execucion on them that wer cauſe of the deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  aunce of Normandie and had ben cauſe of the deth of the duke of Glouceſtre. & had ſold Gaſcoyn and guyen. of wich they named to begilt
                     •
                   the duke of ſuffolke as chief. the lord ſaye. the biſſhop of ſaliſberi. Daniell & mon
                     •
                   mo: ¶And for to peaſe the comyns the duke of ſuffolke was exiled out of englond v. yere. ¶And ſo durīg the ꝑlament hee went ī to Norfolke and ther toke ſhippyng for to go out of thee reame of englōd ī to fraūce. ¶And this yere as he ſailid on ye ſe aſhip of were callid the Nicholas of tour met with his ſhipp and fond him therin. whom they token out and brought hym ī to ther ſhippe to the maiſter and the Capitayns and ther he was examined and at the laſt Iugged to deth. And ſo they put him in a Cabon and his chapelayn for to ſhriue him And that done

they brought him in to Dou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   rode. and ther ſet him in to the bote And ther ſmoten of his hede and brought the body on land vpon the ſandis and ſet the hede ther by. ¶And this wos done thee friſt day of May ¶Lo what auayl̄ed him now all his deliueraunce of Normandie &c. And here ye may here how he was rewardid for the deth of the duke of Glouceſtre Thus began ſorowe vpō ſorow and deth for deth &c.
               
            
            
               ¶How this yere wos the inſurrexcion ī Kēt of the comunys of whom Iak Cade an Iriſhman wos capitayn.
               THis yere of our lord M.cccc.l. wos the gret grace of ye Iubile at Rome. wher wos gret perdone in ſo moch that from all places in criſtyndome gret multitude of pepull reſorted thidder. ¶And this yere wos a gret aſſemble and gadrīg to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of the comunes of kent in gret nombur &̄ made an inſurrexcion & rebelled ayen the kyng & his lawes. & ordeyned them a capitayn called iohn̄ Cade an Yriſhman. wich named him ſelf Mortimer coſin to the duke of yorke ¶And this capitayn held thes mē to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & made ordinaunce among them & brought them to ye blake heth. wher he made a bill of peticions to the kyng & his councell & ſh̄ewed what iniuries & oppreſſiōs the poer comīs ſuffrid. &̄ all vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   colour for to cū to his abone. & he had a gret multitude of pepull. ¶And the xvij. day of Iune ye kīg & mōy lordis capitayns &̄ mē of were wēt toward him to the blake heth. & whan the Capitayn of Kent vnderſtode the comyng of the kyng wt ſo gret puiſſaunce. he withdrew hī with his pepull to ſeuenoke a litell village ¶And the xxviij. day of Iune he beyng withdrawen &̄ gon. the kīg come with his armie ſet in order & enbatailled to the blake heth And by aduys of his coūcell ſent ſir vmfrey ſtafford knight. & willm ſtafford ſquier two valiaūt capitaīs wt c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  taī pepull to feght wt the capitayn &̄ to take him &̄ bring hī & his acceſſaries to the kyng. wich wēt to ſouenoke & ther ye capitayn wt his felyſhip met with them and fought ayens them and in concluſion

ſlew them both & as mony as abode & wold not yeld him wer ſlain During this ſkarmuſh fell a gret variaunce among the lordis men and comyn pepull beyng on blake heth ayenſt ther lordis &̄ capitayns ſayng playnli that they wold go vn to the capitayn of Kent to aſſiſte and help him but if they might haue execucion on the traytours beyng about the kyng. wher to the kyng ſaid nay. & thei ſaied playnli that the lord ſaye treſorer of englōd. the biſhope of Saliſburi the baron of dudby the abbot of glouceturdameſ & treuilian &̄ mony mo wer traytours &̄ worthy to be dede herfore for to pleſe the lordis meny & alſo ſum of the kīges hous. the lord ſaye wos areſtie & ſent to the toure of londō And then the kyng hering tydynges of the deth and ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  throwyng of the ſtaffordis. he with drew him to london. and from thens to kylingworth. For the kyng ne ye lordis durſt not truſt ther own houſold men ¶Then aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   yt the capitayn had had this victori vpō thes ſtaffordis. anone he toke ſir vmfrey ſalat and his brigantins ſmyten full of giltnales. And alſo his gilt ſporris &̄ arayed him like a lord and a capitayn and reſorted with all his meny and alſo mo than he had before to thee blake heth ayen to whom come ye Erchebiſſhop of Cantorberi. and the duke of bokyngham to thee blake heth and ſpake with him. and as it wos ſaid they fond him witty in his talkyng and his requeſt And ſo they departed ¶And thee thrid day of Iuyll he come and entred in to London with all his pepull. and ther did make cries in the kynges name and in his name that noman ſhuld robbe ne take no man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of goodis. but if he payed for it. and come ridyng thurgh the cite in gret pride. and ſmote his ſwerd vpon londō ſton in Canwyk ſtrete. ¶And he beīg ī the cite ſent to ye tour for to haue the lorde ſaye. and ſo they ſet him and brought him to the Guyldhall before the Maire &̄ the Aldermen. wher that he was examined and he ſaid he wold and ought to be Iuged by his peris. And the communes of Kend toke him by force fro the maire and officers

that kepid him. and toke him to a preſt to ſhriue him. and or he myght be half ſhriuen they brought him to the ſtandart in Chepe. and ther ſmote of his hede. on whos ſeule god haue marci Amen. ¶And thus died the lord ſaye treſorer of Englond After this they ſet his hede on a ſpere and bare it about in the rite And the ſame day about the myle ende Crowmer wos beheded ¶And the day before at afternone the capitayn with certayn of his menye went to Philip Malpas houſe &̄ robbed him & toke away moch good And from thens he went to ſent margaret patyns to on gherſtis houſe & robbed him &̄ toke away from him moch good alſo. at wich robbyng diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe men of london of ther neyghbours wer at and toke part with them ¶For this robbyng the pepull hertis fell from him. &̄ eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y thrifty mā wos aferd for to be ſeruied in like wyſe. ¶For ther wos mony a man in londō that awayted and wold fayn haue ſeyn a comune roberie. wich almyghty god forbed for it is to ſuppoſe if he had not robbid he myght haue gon fer or he had bene withſtonde ¶For the kyng &̄ all the lordis of the ream of Englond wer departed except the lorde Scales that kepid the tour of london ¶And the fifth day of Iuyll he did done ſmyte of a mannys hede in ſouthwark. and the nyght after the 
                     •
                  naire of london with the ald
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  men and the communes of the cite concludid to driue a way the capitayn & his hoſt & ſent to the lord ſcalis to the toure &̄ to mathew gohe a copitayn of Normandie. yt they wold that nyght aſaille the capitayn with them of Kent ¶And ſo they did y come to londō brige ī to ſouthwarke or the capitayn had ony knowlege ther of. & ther they ſought wt them yt keped the brigge And the Kentiſhmen went to harnes and come to the brigge &̄ ſhot & faught with them & gat the brigge. & made them of londō to fle & ſlow mony of them. & this endurid all the nyght to &̄ fro. to ix of the cloke on the more And at the laſt they brent the draw brigge wher mony of them of londō wer drowned: In wich nyght Sutton an ald
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  mā was

ſlayn Roger heyſant and Mathew gohe and mony othir And after this the Chancilar of Englond ſent to the Capitayn a pardone generall for him & othir for all his menye And then they deꝑted from ſouthwarke euery man home vn to his own hous. ¶And when they wer all deꝑtid and goon· ther wer ꝓclamacions madem Kent ſouthſex and othir places. yt what man coude take the captayn quike or dede ſh̄old haue a M. mark. And aftir this on Alixand
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Iden a ſquier of Kent toke him in a gardē in ſouthſex & ī the takīg ye Captā Iohn̄ Cade wos ſlaī: &̄ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   behedid & his hede ſet on londō brigge ¶And anone after then ye kyng come in to Kent. and did his Iuſtices ſitte at Cauntorberi and enquered who wer cauſaries & chief cauſe of this Inſurreccion ¶And ther wer viij. men Iuged to deth in on day & in othir places mo. And from thens the kyng wēt in to ſouthſex and in to the weſtcuntre. wher a litell before wos ſlayn the biſſhop of Saliſberi. ¶And this ſame yere wer ſo mony iugged to deth yt xxiij. hedes ſtode vpon londō brigge at ons.
            
            
               ¶Of the feld yt the duke of york toke at brentheth ī Kēt. and of the burth of prince Edward. & of the friſt bataill at ſent Albons wher the duke of Somerſete wos ſlayn.
               IN the xxx yere of ye kīg. The duke of yorke com out of ye march of wales wt therle of Deuīſhire & the lord Cobham & gret puiſſaunce for reformacion of certayn Iniuries and wrōges. & alſo to haue Iuſtice on certayn lordis beyng about ye kyng &̄ toke a feld at brontheth beſide dertford in Kent wich wos a ſtrōgfeld. for wich cauſe the kyng with all the lordis of the lande went vn to the blake heth with a gret and ſtrong multitude of pepull armed and ordeyned for the were in the beſt wyſe. And when they had muſtred on the heth. Certayn lordis wer tho ſent vn to him for to tret and make appointement with him. wich were the biſſhop of Ely and the biſſhop of wyncheſtre and the erles of Saliſberi and of werewyke. And they concludid that the duke of

Somerſete ſhold be had to ward &̄ to anſuer to ſuch articles as the duke of yorke ſhold put on him and than the duke of yorke ſh̄uſd breke his feld and cum to the kyng. wich wos all promiſed by tho kyng. ¶And ſo the kyng commaundid that the duke of Somerſete ſhold be had in ward. And than the duke of york brake vp his feld and come to the kyng. and whan he was comen ꝯtrarie to the promiſſe afore made. the duke of ſomerſet was preſēt in the feld a waytyng and chief about the kyng. & made the duke of yorke ride before as a priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thurgh londō. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they wold haue put him ī hold. But anoyſe aroſo that the erle of march his ſon was commyng with x. thouſand men to londonward wherfore the kyng and his coūcell ferid. and than they concludid that thee duke of yorke ſhold deꝑte at his own will. ¶About this tym began gret diuiſion in Spruce bitwen the gret maſtir and the knyghtis of the duche ordre wich wer lordis of that cuntre. For the comunes and toūes rebellid ayenſt the lordis and made ſo grete were that at the laſt they called the kyng of Pole to be ther lord the wich kyng come and wos worſhipfully reſaued and laid ſege to the caſtell of Marienburgh wich was the chief caſtell of ſtrength of all the land. & wan it and drofe out the maſtir of danſk &̄ all othir places of that land And ſo they that had ben lordis mony yeres loſt all thirſeygnorie and poſſeſſions in tho landis. ¶And the yere of the Incarnacion of our lord M.cccc:liij. on ſent Edwardis day the quene Margaret wos deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed of a fair prince wich wos named Edward That ſame day Iohn̄ Norman wos choſin for to be maire of londō. And the day that hee ſhuld take his oth at weſtmynſire he went thed
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   by wat
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   with all the craftis: wher afore tyme the maire aldermen and the craftes rode on horſbake wich wos neu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   vſed aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . For ſen that tyme. they haue gone eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   by water in barges ¶Ye haue well vnderſtond before how that contrari to the promiſſe of the kyng and alſo the ꝯcluſiōs taken bitwen the kyng & the duke of yorke at brentheth

the duke of Somerſet went not to ward. but abode about the kyng and had gret rule. and anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he wos made capitayn of calais. & ruled the kyng & his reame as he wold. wherfore the gret lordis of the reame &̄ alſo the comunes wer not pleſid For wiche cauſe the duke of yorke the erle of warwyk & the erle of ſaliſburi with mony knyghtis and ſquiers and moch pepull come for to remeue the ſaid duke of ſomerſete & othir fro the kyng ¶And the kīg hering of ther comyng thought by his coūcell for to haue gon weſtward and not for to haue met with them &̄ had with him the duke of ſomerſet the duke of Bokyngham the erle of ſtafford the erle of Northūberland the lord Clifford & mony othir ¶And what tyme that the duke of yorke &̄ his feliſhip vnd
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſtode that the kyng wos deꝑted with thes lordis from london. Anone he changed his way and coſte the cūtre & come to ſent Albonys the xxiij day of May: &̄ ther met with ye kyng. to whom the kyng ſent c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn lordis & deſired them to kepe the pees and deꝑte. but in concluſion whils they treted on yt on ſide· the erle of warwik wt the march men & od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   entred the toune on that od
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  : ſide & fought ayēſt the kyng and his ꝑtie. and ſo began the bataill &̄ fighting wiche endurid a gret wyle. but in concluſion the duke of yorke obtened & had the victorie of that iournay. ¶In wich wos ſlayn the duke of ſomerſet the erle of Northūberland the lord Clifoord & mony knyghtis & ſquiers & mōy mo hurt. ¶And on the morne aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they brought the kyng in gret aſtate to londō. wich was logged in the biſſhoppis palais of london. ¶And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wos a gretꝑlament. In wich ꝑlament the duke of yorke wos made ꝓtectour of Englond. & the erle of werwike Capitoyn of Calais & the erle of Saliſberi Chancelar of englond. And all ſuch parſons as had the rewle be fore about the kīg wer ſet a part & myght not rule as they did be fore ¶And this ſame yere died pope Nicholas the v. and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him was Calixte the thrid. This calixt wos a catalane and thactis of him ſhall be ſhewyd ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  
                  
¶In this ſame yere fell a gret affray in London ayenſt the Lumbardes. The cauſe began becauſe a yong man toke a dagger from a lumbard and brake it. wherfore the yong man on thee morne wos ſent fore: to cum before the mayre and the aldermē. and ther for the offence he wos comytted to warde. ¶And then the maire deꝑted from the gyldhall for to go home vn to his dynner. but in the Chepe the yong men of the mercerie for the moſt part prē
                  tiſes: held the maire and ſheriues ſtyll in ch
                     •
                  pe and wold not ſuffre them to depart vn to the tyme that ther felow wich wos comitted to ward wer deliuered. and ſo bi force they reſcued ther felow from priſon. and that done the maire and ſheriues departed &̄ the priſoner deliu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ed. wich if he had bene put to priſon had be in iupardie of his life ¶And than began a romur in the cite ayenſt ye lumbardis and the ſame euenyng the handcraftimen of the toune aroſe and ran to the lumbardis houſes and deſpoiled &̄ robbed diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe of them. wherfore the maire and aldermen come with the honeſt pepull of the cite & drofe them thens and ſent ſum of them that had ſtolen to newgate ¶And the yong man that wos reſcued by his felowes ſaw this gret romur afray and roborie enſhewed of his friſt meuyng to the lumbard. deꝑtid and went to weſtmynſtre to ſentorie. or els it had coſt him his life. For anōe aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   come doune an Oeyr determyne for to do Iuſtice on all them that ſo rebelled in the cite ayens the Lumbardis. on wich ſat with the maire that time willm Marow. the duke of Bakyngham and mony othir lordis for to ſee execucion done. ¶But the comunes of the cite ſecretly made them redy and did arme them in ther houſes: & wer inpurpoſed for to haue rongyn the comune bell: wich is called bow bell. but they wer let by ſad men. wich come to the knowleche of the duke of Bokyngham and othir lordis. and incontinente they aroſe for they durſt nolanger abide. For they doutid yt the hole cite ſh̄uld haue ariſen ayenſt them. ¶But yit neuertheleſſe two or iij. of the cite wer Iugged to deth for this robborie. &̄
                  
wer honged at Tiborne ¶Anone after the kyng &̄ the quene and othir lordis rode vn to Couentre and withdrew them frō london for thies cauſe. &̄ a litell before ye duke of yorke wos ſēt fore to Grenwich & ther wos diſcharged of the ꝓtectourſhip. And my lord of Saliſberi of his Chancelarſhip. &̄ after this thei wer ſent fore by priue ſeale for to cum vn to couentre. wher they wer almoſt deceyued & the erle of werwike alſo. and ſhuld haue bene deſtruyed if they had not ſeyn well to.
            
            
               ¶How the lord Egremond was taken by the erle of Saliſberi ſonnys. and of the robbyng of Sandwich.
               THis yere wer takyn iiij. gret fiſſhes bitwen Eereth and london. that on wos called mors marine. the ſecund was a ſwerd fiſſhe. and the othir twayn wer whales. ¶In this ſame yere for certan affrayes done in the northcuntre bitwen the lord Egremond and the Erle of Saliſburi ſonnys. the ſaid lord Egremond whom they had takyn was condempned in a gret ſoum of monay to the ſaid Erle of ſaliſburi. and therfore comittid ī to priſon in newgate in london. wher when he had bee a c
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  tayn ſpace he brake thee priſun and iij. priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s with him. and aſcapid and went his way. ¶Alſo this yere thee Erle of werwik and his wyfe went to Calais with a fair feliſhip and toke poſſeſſion of his office. ¶About this tyme was a gret reformacion of mony monaſteries of religion in diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe parties of the world: wich wer reformid after the friſt inſtitucion. & continued in mōy places. ¶This ſame yere wos a gret bataill in the marches bytwen the land of Hungrie and the Turkye at a place called ſeptedrad. wher innumerabull Turkis wer ſlayn more by miracle thā by mannys hond. For only the hand of god ſmote them. ſent Iohn̄ of capiſtrane wos ther preſent and prouoked the criſtyn pepull beyng then aferd after to porſue the Turkis. wher an infinite

multitude wer ſlayn and deſtroyed. And the Turkis ſaid yt a gret nombre of armed men folowed them. that they wer aferd to turne ayen. and they wer holi angellis. ¶This ſame yere the priſoners of newgate in london brake ther priſon & went vp on the leedis & fought ayens them of the cite &̄ kepid the gate a long while. but at the laſt the toune gat the priſon on them. & than they wer put in fetrris &̄ Irons & wer ſore punyſſhed menſamof othir ¶In this yere alſo ther wos a gret erthquake in Naples in ſo moch that ther periſſhed xl· thouſand pepull that ſanke ther in to the erth: ¶Item in the yere xxxvi. ſent Oſmond ſum tyme biſſhop of Saliſberi wos canoniſed at Reme by pope Caliſte: And the xvi. day of Iuyll he was tranſlated at Saliſbery by the biſſhop of Cantorburie and mony othir biſſhoppis. ¶And in Auguſt after ſir Pers de Breſay ſeneſchall of Normandi with the Capitayn of Depe and mony othir Capitayns and men of were went to the ſee with a gret nauy. and come in to ye Downes by nyght. & on the morne erly before day they londid and come vn to Sandwych both by land and water. and token the toune and Rifled and deſpoiled it. and toke mony priſoners: And left the toune all bare. wich wos a rich place and moche good therin. And lad with them mony rich priſoners ¶In this ſame yere in mony places of fraunce Almayn flaū
                  dris Holand and Zeland Childer gadrid them to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   by gret companies for to go on pylgrimage to ſent Mihele mount ī Normandie wich come from fer cuntries. wherof the pepull maruellid and mony ſuppoſid that ſum wickid ſpret meued them to do ſo. bot it endurid not long be cauſe of the long way and alſo for lake of vitaill as they went. ¶In this yere Rainold pecok biſſhop of Cheieſter wos fonden an heritike. & the iij. day of December was abiurid at Lambheth in the preſens of the Erchebiſſhop of cantorbery and mony othir biſſhoppis & doctours and lordis temperall And his bokys brint at Poules croſſe. Ye haue hard before how

certayn lordis wer ſlayn at ſent albons. wherfore wos alway a grutche and wroth had by theyres of them that wer ſo ſlaī ayens the duke of yorke the erles of warwik and of ſaliſberi. wherfore ye kyng by thauys of his councell ſent for them vn to london: to wich place the duke of yorke come the xxvi. day of Ianuer wt .cccc men &̄ logged at baynardes caſtell in his own place. ¶And the xv. day of Ianuer come the erle of ſaliſburi with v hondred men and was loggid in ther
                     ••
                   his own place ¶And then come the dukis of Exceſtre and of ſomerſet with viij. hondreth men & lay without temple barre ¶And the erle of northumbarland the lord Egremond and the lord Clifford with xv. hondreth mē and loggid without tonne ¶And the maire that time Gefferey Boleyn kept gret watch with the comunes of the cite and rode aboute the cite by hol borne and flet ſtrete with a v thouſand men well arayed and armed for to kepe the pees. ¶And thee xiiij. day of Feuerer the erle of warwik come to london frō Calais well be ſeyn and worſh̄ipfully with vi. hondreth men in rede iakkettis brodderd with a ragged ſtafe be hynd & be fore. & was logged at grafreris ¶And the xvij. day of march thee kyng come to london and the quene. and ther wos a concorde &̄ a pees made amonges thes lordis. and they wer ſet in pees. ¶And on our lady day the xv. day of Marche in the yere of our lord a: M.cccc. & lviij: the kyng & the quene and all thes lordis went preceſſiōn at poules in londō & anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kīg & ye lordis deꝑted. ¶And in this yere was a gret affray in fleteſtrete bitwen men of court and men of the ſame ſtrete. In wich affray the quenys attorney wos ſlayn.
            
            
               ¶How the kynges houſold made afray ayenſt the erle of warwike &̄ of the Iourney at bloreheth.
               ALſo this ſame yere as therle of warwike wos at councell at weſtmynſtre All the kynges houſold menye gadred
                  
them to geder for to haue ſlayn the ſaid Erle. but by the helpe of god and his frendis he recouerid his barge &̄ eſcapped ther euell enterpriſe. How well the Cokis come runnyg out with ſpittis & peſtels ayens him· And the ſame day he rode toward warwike and ſone after he gat him a comiſſion and wenten ouer the ſee to Calais. ¶Sone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this the erle of Saliſberi comyng to london wos encountred at Blureheth with the lord Awdeley and moch othir pepull ordeyned for to diſtroy him. but he hauyng knawlech that he ſhuld be met with. wos accomponied with his two ſonnys ſir Thomas and ſir Iohn̄ Neuill and a gret feliſhip of good men. ¶And ſo they faught to gedres. wher therle of Saliſberi whan the feld: and the lord Awdeley wos ſlayn and mōy gentilmen of Cheſſhire and moch pepull hurt. and therles two ſonnys wer hurt and goyng homward afterward they wer taken and had to cheſtre by the quemes menye. ¶After Calixt Pius wos pope and was choſin this yere a M.cccc. &̄ lviij. And he wos called be fore Eneas an eloquent man and a poete laureate: He was embaſſatour of the emprours a fore tyme And he wrote in the coūcell of baſilie a nobull traittie for the auctorite of the ſame. ¶Alſo he canoniſed ſent Katherine of ſenys. This pope ordined gret indulgens and pardon to them that wold go and were ayenſt the turke. & wrote an epiſtle to the gret turke. exorting him to becum criſtyn. &̄ ī the end he ordined a paſſage ayenſt thee Turke at Ankone. to wich moch pepull drew out of all ꝑties of criſtyndō. of wich pepull he ſent mony home ayen becauſe thei ſuffiſed not. & anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he died at the ſaid place of Ankone the yere of our lord a .M.cccc.lxiiij. the xiiij. day of auguſt:
            
            
               ¶How Andrew Trollop &̄ the ſoudiours of calais forſoke ye duke of yorke & ther maſtir therle of warwik ī the weſt cuntre
               THe duke of yorke the erles of warwike and of Saliſbiri ſaw the gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  naunce of the reame ſtode moſt by the quene &

hir councell. & how the gret princes of ye land wer not callid to councell but ſet a ꝑte. & not onli ſo bot it wos ſaid thurgh the reame that tho ſaid lordis ſhuld be deſtroyed vtterli as it openli was ſhewed at Bloreheth by them that wold haue ſlayn the erle of ſaliſberi. ¶Than thei for ſauacion of ther lyues. and alſo for ye comyn well of the reame thoght for to remedie thes thyngꝭ aſſembled them to gedre with moch pepull and toke a feld in thee weſt cuntre. to wich the erle of warwike come from calais wt mony of thold ſoudgers. as Andrew trowlop & othir. in whos wiſedom as for the were he moch truſted. ¶And whan they werē thus aſſembled and made ther feld The king ſent out his comiſſions and priue ſeals vn to all the lordis of his reame to cum & await on him in ther moſt beſt defenſable aray. and ſo eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y man come in ſuch wiſe that the kyng wos ſtronger and had moch more pepull than the duke of yorke &̄ the erles of warwik and ſaliſberi. For it is here to be noted that eu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  y lord in englond at this time durſt not diſobey the quene: for ſhe rewled peaſibly all that was done about the kyng wich wos a good ſimple and an Innocent man ¶And than when the kyng wos comen to the place wher as they wer. the duke of yorke &̄ his feliſhip had made ther felde in the ſtrongeſt wiſe▪ and had purpoſid verely to haue byden and haue foughten. but in the nyght Andrew Trollop &̄ all the old ſoudiours of Calais with a gret feliſhip ſodenly deꝑted out of ye dukis hoſt &̄ went ſtreght vn to the kynges feld ther they wer reſſaued ioyouſly for they knew thentent of the othir lordis & alſo the man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   of ther feldis ¶And than the duke of york with the othir lordis ſeyng them diſſaued. toke a coūcell ſhortely in that ſame nyght & deꝑtid frō thee feld leuyng behynd them the moſt parti of ther pepull to kepe the feld till on thee morn ¶Then the duke of yorke with his ſecund ſon deꝑtid thurgh wales toward Irland leuyng his eldeſt ſon the Erle of the march with the erles of warwik & of Saluſberi. wich rode to ged
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   wt iij. or iiij. ꝑſons ſtreght

in to Deuenſhire: & ther bi help and ayde of on Denham a ſquier wich gate for them a ſhip wich coſt .cc.xx. nobles & with thee ſame ſhip ſailed from thens in to garneſey. And ther refreſſhid them and from thens ſailed to Calais. wher they wer reſaued in to the caſtell by the poſtren. or they of the toune wiſt of it And the duke of yorke toke ſhippyng in walis and ſailed ouer in to Irland wher he wos well reſayued.
            
            
               ¶How therles of march warwik &̄ ſaliſberi entrid in to Calais. & how therle of warwik went in to Irland
               THen kyng Henri beyng with his hoſt in the feld not knowyng of this ſoden deꝑting on the morne fonde none in ye felde of the ſaid lordis: ſent owt in all the haſt men for to folowe & purſue aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to take them. but they met not with them as god wold and then the kyng went to Ludlowe &̄ diſpoiled the caſtell and the toune. and ſent the duches of yorke with hir child to my lady of Bokyngham hir ſuſtre· wher ſhe wos kepid long tyme after. ¶And forthwith the kyng ordeyned the duke of Somerſete to be capitayn of Calais. And thes othir lordis ſo deꝑted as afore is ſaid wer ꝓclamid rebellis & gret traytours ¶Then thee duke of Somerſet 
                     •
                  oke to him all the ſoudiours that deꝑted frō the feld and made him redy in all ye haſt to go to calais &̄ take poceſſion of his office. &̄ whan he come he fond therle of warwike therin as Capitain. &̄ therles of march & of Saliſberi alſo. &̄ than he landid by ſcales & went to Guiſnes: &̄ ther he wos reſaued & it fortoned that ſum of tho ſh̄ippis that come ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   with him come ī to calais hauen by ther fre will. for the ſhipmen ought more fauour to therle of warwike than to the duke of ſomerſet. in wich ſh̄ippis wer takin diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe mē as Ienyn finkhill Iohn̄ felow. Kailles and purſer: wich wer behedid ſone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   in Calais· ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this come men daly ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the ſee to thies lordis to calais. and began to wax ſtronger &̄ ſtronger. And they borowed moch good

of the ſtaple. ¶And on that othir ſide the duke of ſomerſete beyng in Guyſnes gat pepull to him. wich come out and ſcarmuſſhed with them of Calais and they of Calais with them wiche endurid mony dayes. During thus this ſame ſcarmuſſhyng moch pepull dayly come ouer vn to thes lordis. ¶Than on a tyme by the aviſe of counſell the lordis at Calais ſent ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   maſt
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Denham with a gret feliſhip to ſandwich. wich toke the toune &̄ therī the lord Riu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  is & the lord Scalis his ſon & toke mōi ſhippis in the hauē. & brought them all to Calais. with wich ſhippis mony marinere of ther fre will come to calais to 
                     
                        
                     
                     ser
                  ue the erle of warwike. ¶And aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this the erle of werwike by thauys of the lordis toke all his ſhippis & mannyd them well & ſailed him ſelf in to Irland for to ſpeke with the duke of yorke. & to take his aviſe how they ſh̄uld entre ī to englōd ayen ¶And when he had be ther & done his erandis he returned ayen toward Calais and brought with him his modre the counteſſe of ſaliſberi. ¶And comyng in the weſt cuntre vpon the ſe the duke of Exceſtre amirell of englond beyng in the grace of Due accompanied with mony ſhippis of were. met with therle of warwik and his flete. but they faught not. for the ſubſtance of the pepull beyng with the duke of Exceſtre ought bettir will & more fauour to the erle of warwike thā to him. and they deꝑted & come to calais in ſaufte bliſſid be god ¶Then the kyngꝭ councell ſeyng that thes lordis 
                     •
                  ad getin thos ſhippis frō ſandwich & takyn the lord Riuers & his ſon· ordined a garnyſon at ſandwich to abide and kepe the toune & made on Moūtford capitayn of the toūe. & that no man ne vitaill ne marchand that ſhuld go in to flaūdres ſhuld go in to Calais. ¶Then they of calais ſeyng this. made out maſter Denhā & mony othir to go to ſandwych. & ſo they did and aſſailed the toūe by water & by lond & gat it & brought Moūtford ther capitayn ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe to Ryſebanke & ther ſmoti of hys hede. & yit dayly men com ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   to them out of all ꝑties of englond.
            
            
               
               ¶How the erles of march and of warwike & of ſaliſberi ent
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  id in to englond. And of the feld of Northamton wher diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe lordis wer ſlayn.
               
                  ANd aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   this the fore ſaid erles of March warwik and of Saliſberi come ouer to Dou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   with moch pepull and their landid▪ to whom all the cuntre drew and come to Londō 
                  armed ¶And for to let the lordis of the kynges councell know their treuth and alſo ther entent: aſſembled them &̄ told them yt they entendit no harme vn to the kyngꝭ parſon. ſauf that thei wold put from him ſuch ꝑſons as wer about him. And ſo deꝑted frō londō with a gret puiſſaunce toward Northamton. wher the kyng was accompanied with mony lordis and had made a ſtrong feld wyth out the toune. and ther both parties met and wos foughten a grete bataill: In wich bataill wer ſlayn the duke of Bokyngham & the erle of Shroweſberi the viſcounte Beamond. the lord Egremond and mony knyghtis and ſquiers & othir alſo. and the kīg him ſelf wos taken in the feld and aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ward brought to london· ¶And anone after wos a parlament at weſtmynſtre during wich parlament the duke of yorke come out of Irland with the erle of Rutland ridyng with a gret feliſh̄ip ī to the palais at weſtmynſtre and toke the kynges palais. And come in to the parlament chambre &̄ ther toke the kynges place. and clamed the crouned as his propre enheritaunce and right. and caſt forth in writīg his titell &̄ alſo how he wos rightfull heir. wherfore was moch to do. but in concluſion it was appointed and ꝯcludid that kyng henri ſh̄old regne and be kyng during his naturall life. For as moch as he had be kyng ſo long and wos poſſeſſid. and after hys deth the duke of yorke ſhuld be kyng and his heiris kyngꝭ aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   him And forthwith ſhuld be ꝓclamed heire apparaunt· and ſh̄uld alſo be protectour and regent of Englond during the kynges life. wt mony othir thyngis ordeyned in the ſame parlament and yf kyng Henri during his life went from this oppoynttement or ony article

concludid in the ſaid parlament. he ſhuld be depoſid. and the duke ſhuld take the croune and be kyng all wich thyngꝭ wer enacted by the auctorite of the ſaid parlament att wich parlamen̄t the comunes of the reame beyng aſſembled in the comune hous comonyng and treating vpō the titell of the ſaid duke of yorke ſodenli fell doun the croune: wich honge then in the middes of the ſaid hous wich is the frayter of the abbey of weſtmynſtre. wich was taken for a ꝓdige or token that the regne of kyng Henri was endid. And alſo the croune wich ſtode on the hygheſt toure of the ſtepull in ye caſtell of Dou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   fell doūe this ſame yere.
            
            
               ¶How the noble duke of yorke wos ſlayn and of the feld of wakefeld and of the ſecund Iourney at ſent Albons by the quene and the prince:
               THen for as moch os the quene wt ye prince hir ſon was ī the Northcuntre and abſent hir from the kyng and wold not obeye ſuch thynges as wos concludid in the parlament. it was ordeyned that the duke of Yorke as protectour ſhuld go Northward for to bring in the quene & ſubdue ſuche as wold not obeye wyth whom wēt the erle of Saliſberi ſir Thomas Neuill his ſone with moche pepull· And at wakefeld in Criſtemaſſe weke they wer all ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  throwen and ſlayn by the lordis of the quenis partie that is to wit the Duke of yorke wos ſlayn. the erle of Rutland ſir Thomas Neuill and mony mo. and therle of ſaliſburi wos takyn & othir as Iohn̄ harow of London Captayn and rewlar of the foot men. and hanſon of hull. wich wer brought to poū
                  fret and ther aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   behedid and ther hedis ſenten to yorke &̄ ſet vpon the yatis. ¶And thus wos that nobull prince ſlayn the duke of yorke. on whos ſoule and all criſtyn ſoules god haue mercy. And this tyme therle of marche beīg ī ſhrowſberi hering the deth of his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   deſired aſſiſtence & ayde of the toūe to avēge his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s deth ¶And from thens went to wales. wher at Candilmaſe

aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he had a bataill at mortimers croſſe ayenſt therles of Penbroke and of wylſhire. wher therle of march had the victorie. Then the quene wyth tho lordis of the north aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   they had diſtreſſ
                     •
                  d and ſlayn thee Duke of Yo
                     •
                  ke and his feliſh̄ip com ſouthward with a gret multitude and puiſſaunce of pepull. for to cum to the kīg and defete ſuch concluſions as had ben taken before by the parlament. ayens whos commyng. the duke of Norfolke the Erle of warwik wyth moch papull and ordinaunce went to ſent Albons and ſad kyng Henri wyth them And ther encountred to gedre in ſuch wyſe and faught: ſo that the duke of Norffolke and the Erle of warwyke wyth mony othir of ther partie fled and loſt y• Iourney. wher that kyng Henri was taken and with the quene and wyth the prince Edward his ſon. wych two had geten that feld ¶Then the quene and hir pertie beyng at ther aboue ſent anone to london wych wos on aſkiſwedineday the firſt day of Lente for vitaill: for wych the mayre ordined by thauys of the Aldermen that certayn cartis laden with vitaill ſhuld be ſent to Seint Albons vn to them. ¶And when that tho cartis come to Crepylgate: the comunes of the cite that keped that gate token the vitaillis from the cartis and wold not ſuffre it to paſſe. ¶Then wer th
                     ••
                   certayn Aldermen and comuners appoyntid to go vn to Barnet for to ſpeke wyth the quenes counſell. for to entreyt that the Northerin men ſhuld be ſent home in to their cuntre ayen. For the cite of London dred ſore to be robbed and deſpoyled yf they had comen ¶And thus during this trayte tydynges comen that the Erle of Warwike had met wyth thee Erle of the Marche on Cottyſwold comyng out of walis wyth a gret menye of walſſhmen. And that they both wer commyng vn to londonward. ¶Anone as thes tidyngꝭ wer knowē. th
                     •
                   tray
                     •
                  te was broken. for ye kyng quene prince and all thee othir lordis that weren with them departid from Seint Albons northward wyth all the
                     •
                   pepull. Yit or they departid from thens they

hedid the lord bonuyle & ſir Thomas Kiriell wich wer taken in the iourney done on ſhroftewiſday. ¶Then the duchis of yorke beyng at london hering of the loſſe of the feld at ſ
                     •
                  nt albonis ſent ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ſe hir two yong ſonnys George & Richard wich went to vtrecht ¶And Ph
                     •
                  lip malpas a rich marchant of lōdō Thomas vaghan ſquier maſtir willm hatteclif & mony othir. fering of the comyng of the quene to londō toke a ſhip of andwarp for to haue gone in to Zeland· and on that other cooſt wer taken of on Colompne a franſhmā a ſhip of were. &̄ he toke them priſon
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  s & brought them in to fraunce wher they paied gret good for their ranſum: & ther wos moch good & riches ī that ſhip.
            
            
               ¶Of the depoſiocion of kyng Henri the ſext. and how kyng Edward the fourth toke poſſeſſion: And of the bataill on palmeſon
                     •
                  ay & how he wos crouned
               THen whan the erle of March and the Erle of warwike had mette to gedres on Cotiſwold. in continente they conclud for to go vn to london: And ſent word anone vn to the maire & to the cite that they ſhuld cum. and anane the cite was glad of their comyng hopyng to be releuyd by them ¶And ſo they comen to london. & whā they wer comyn &̄ had ſpokī wt the lordis & eſtates thē beīg ther ꝯcludid for as moch as kīg Henri was gone wt them norward yt he had forfited his croune &̄ aught for to be depoſed accordyng vn to the actes made and paſſid in the laſt parlament ¶And ſo by thauys of the lordis ſpirituall and temperall then beyng at londō the erle of the march Edward by thee grace of god oldeſt ſun of Richard duke of yorke as rightfull heire & next enheritour to his fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  . ye iiij. day of march ye yer of our lord .M.cccc:lix. toke poſſeſſiō of the reame of englōd at weſtmī
                  ſter ī the gret hall & aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ī the chirch of the abbey & offerd as king wt the ſeptre royall: to whō all the lordis both ſpirituall & tēꝑall did homage & obeyſſaūce as to ther ſoferayn liege lord and kyng

And forthwith it wos ꝓclamid thurgh the cite kyng Edward the fourth of that name And anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the kyng rood ī his rii
                     •
                  ll aſtate northward wt all his lordis to ſubdue his ſubiectis yt tyme beyng in the north &̄ to avenge his fadres deth. ¶And on Palme ſonday aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he had a gret bataill in the northcuntre at a place called Towton not fer from yorke. wher with the help of god he gat thee feld and had the victorie wher wer ſlayn of his adu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſaries xxx. thouſand men and mo as it wos ſaid by them that wer ther. ¶In wich bataill wos ſlayn the Erle of Northumberland. the lord Clifford. ſir Iohn̄ Neuill the erle of weſtmerlandis brother. Andrew Trollop
                     •
                   & mony knyghtis & ſquiers. ¶Then kyng Henri that had bene kyng beyng with the quene & the prince at yorke hering the loſſe of that feld and ſo moch peple ſlam & ou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  throwen anone forthwith deꝑtid all thre wt ye duke of ſumerſet the lord Roos & othir toward Scotland. ¶And thee next day kyng Edward with all his armye entrid in to yorke. & wos ther proclamed kīg & obeyed as he ought to be. And the mair ald
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  men and comuns ſworen to be his lege men And when he had taried a while in the north. & that all the northcuntre had turned to him he returned ſouthward. leuyng behynd him therle of warwike in tho ꝑties for to kepe & gou
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ne yt cuntre ¶And about mydſomer aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   thee yere of our lord .M.cccc.lx: and thee friſt yere of his regne he wos crouned at weſtmynſtre & anoynted kyng of Englōd hauyng poſſeſſion of all thee reame.
               CAlixtus thee thrid wos Pope after Nicholas iij. yere & v. monethis This Calixt was an hold man whē he was choſen pope· and wos continually ſeke. ne he myght not fulfill his deſire the wich he entendit to do ayens the miſbeleuyng Turkis for deth come vpon him. And he wos choſin ī the yere of our lord a .M.cccc.lv. and he died the ſext day in ye wich he made the fyguracion. and alſo he canoniſed Seint vincent a

frere precher ¶And ther wos a gret reformacion of many moneſteries ī diu
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                  ſe parties of the world. And theis reformaciōs wer made mony times. but almoſt none abode but they returned ayen as they wer a fore. by ſucceſſion of tyme aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   the deth of thee worſhipfull fadris▪ ¶The feſt of the tranſfiguracion wos ordined of Calixt for ye yeft of grace of the meruelꝰ victorie done ayens the turke ī hūgarie on ſent Sextis day .M.cccc.lvij for ther was a meruelus victorie yeuen to the criſtyn men in hungri ayenſt the gret turke. & ther he loſt mony a man and fled ſhamfully for drede of enmys and no man folowid them: bot alone the hande of god ferid the turke and his hoſt on ſent Calixtis day ſent Iohan de Capeſtrano was ther ſeyn preſent· And he ꝓuokid thee pepull that wer a ferd to folow thos miſbeleuyng turkis. and ther was a grot vengeauns on them· for the Turkis ſaied that ther wos ſo gret a nombre of knyghtis that foloed them that vn nethis they durſt loke bacward: And therfore they flede and leften all ther treſour be hynd them. and they wer holy angellis that cauſed them to fle.
               Nota. Printerys of bokis wer this tyme mightely multeplied in maguncie & thurgh out the world. and thei began friſt and ther held the craftis. And this time mony men began for to be more ſotell in craftis and ſuyfter then euer they wer a fore
               PIus the ſecund wos pope aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   Calixt vi. yere This Piꝰ wos choſin in the yer of our lord M.iiij. hondrith &̄ lviij & he was called Eneas an eloquent man &̄ a gret oretor a laurittit poet: &̄ a fore he wos the Emprour embaſſatour. and in the coū
                  ſell of Baſilien he wrot a nobull tretis for thee auctorite of thee ſame. This man deſirid to haue a paſſage to thee Turke: And mony of all man
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   ꝯtres com to Rome & he yaf them his bliſſīg and ſent them hom ayen for thay wer not ſufficent for the Turkis hoſt: &̄ anone aft
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   he deceſſid
               
                  PAulus a venicion wos pope after Pius vij yere. This Paule wos choſin in the yere of our lord Ihū criſt a .M iiij hondreth and lxiiij And anone he aloyed the feſt of the preſentaciau of our Lady as Pius did. This man wos a tought man in rightwiſeneſſe and he ſaied it wos better for to make few thynges and kepe them ſtedfaſtli thā for to make mony & ſone reuoke them. And he made a gret palais at ſent Markes and he deceſſed or that he had endid it. In the yere of our lord Iheſu criſt .M.iiijC.lxxi. ¶Leodiū ye land of luke wos appreſſid wt mony tribulacions. and after in the yere of our lord iheſu criſt a thouſand iiij. hondreth and lxviij. vtterly it wos deſtroyed. bi caro lum the duke of Burgoyn. ye wich weddid Dame Margaret ſuſtre to kyng Edward the myghti the fourth of englond. ¶Alſo the ſame duke Karolus entred in the land of Geldyr. & conquerid it holy. ¶The yere of grace alſo wos changed bi pope Paule for fauour of mannys ſoule from xxv yere vn to xxv. And becauſe that curſedneſſe haboundid ſo ſore: grace haboundid alſo ſore.
               SIxtus the iiij. a Ianuens and a frere minore wos Pope after Paule. and is yit at the makyng of this boke. This man wos generall in the order of thee frere Minoris or he wos Cardinale. And he wos choſin in the yere of our lord god a ·M.iiij. hondreth lxxi. And wos called afore Fraunciſcꝰ de ſanona of good fame and vertues. he wos choſin Cardinall without his knaulech till he wos made. and the ſame yere that he wos choſen pope. the turke had taken from criſten men ij. Empiris and iiij. kyngdoms .xx. ꝓuyncis &̄ tow. hondreth cites· and had deſtroyed men and women with out nombre. And yt meued the pope yt he ſhuld diſpoſe hī to go to withſtōd him and for an army to be made ayens the Turke. the pope yaf gret indulgens of pardon of the treſour of the chirch vn to all the criſtyn reames

that he myght ordayn ſum treſure to withſtande that myſbyleuabull turke. And in the lande of Englonde the worſhipful fad
                     
                        
                     
                     er
                   & doctor Ihon̄ thabbot of habīgdon was the popys legate to diſpoſe thys godli treſure: of the chirch to eueri faythfull man yt was diſpoſed and that wolde habull him to reſayue it.
            
            ¶Here ende the Croniclis of englōde with the frute of timis
         
      
      
         
            
               
            
            Sanctus albanus.
         
      
   