
      
         
            
            
            PAGANISME AND PAPISME: PARALLEL'D AND SET forth in a Sermon at the Temple-Church, vpon the Feaſt day of All-Saints. 1623.
            BY THOMAS AILESBVRY Student in Diuinitie.
            
               LACTAN.
               Primus ſapientla gradus eſt falſa cognoſcere.
            
            LONDON, Printed by George Eld, for Leonard Becket.
            
            1624.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY EARLE OF Southampton, Baron of Tichfield, Knight of the moſt Noble order of the Garter, Captaine of the Ile of Weight, and one of his Maieſties moſt honorable Priuy Councell.
            
               
                  I
                Preſent vnto your Lordſhips view, the Modell of a Sermon, vnworthy I confeſſe, either of their publike life, or of ſo tranſcendent a protection; modeſtly framed for the Pulpit, not curiouſly adorned for the Preſſe: wherein your Lordſhip may behold Pagan and Papal Rome, ſo mutually intertexed and folded vp into one Maſſe or Chaos, that you may ſafely pronounce the Heathen City to liue in this they call Chriſtian: Yea, ſuch is the dependancy, that if this Iezabel were ſtripped out of thoſe Robes of Paganiſme, ſhe would well-nigh goe naked.
            Many nations were conuerted to Chriſt by the preaching of S. Paul. Yet wee finde not ſuch an honorable attribute giuen to any of his Auditors, as to thoſe who are ſaid, To haue
               
               receiued the Word with readineſſe, and to haue ſearched the Scriptures dayly, to ſee whether the things preached by S. Paul were ſo or not: For they are ſtiled by the beſt Record Noble men. And nothing (Sir) hath added, or can adde more true nobleneſſe to all your other great Titles of Honour, then the like Zealous affections and actions in you to the Word of God, deliuered by his Miniſters.
            The dayly enlargement whereof in your Lordſhip, being Zealouſly coueted by my ſelfe: who although I am the weakeſt Labourer in Gods Vineyard, yet I haue preſumed humbly to offer to your Lordſhip this little cluſter of Grapes gathered from thence, and which I did lately in a Sermon deliuer vnto the Auditory then preſent: which if your Lordſhip will vouchſafe to take into your hands, to bruiſe it a little more, and to ſee and taſte whether it ſprung from the true Vine or not: I ſhall haue good hope that yet a little iuyce may thereby flow from thence to refreſh ſome weake ones in the Church of God.
            Which being the onely buſineſſe that God hath ſet mee about, by any meanes to ſaue ſome; And all I haue to ſay to your Lordſhip at this time: With my humble acknowledgement of your Lordſhips great fauours, and my hearty prayers to God to encreaſe dayly your Zeale to his true worſhip: I reſt
            
               Your Lordſhips moſt humbly deuoted,
THOMAS AILESBVRY.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            PAGANISME AND PAPISME PARALLEL'D.
            
               1. COR. 10. 19, 20.
               
                  What ſay I then? that the Idol is any thing? Or that which is offered in ſacrifice to Idols is any thing?
                  But I ſay, the thing which the Gentiles ſacrifice, they ſacrifice to Deuils, and not to God: and I would not that you ſhould haue fellowſhip with deuils.
               
            
            
               
                  WHen the Apoſtle Lectured at Athens, the Inſcription of an Altar was his Theame; the ſaying of a Poet was his explication. The Altar was ſacred vnto the vnknowne God, whoſe influence to all his Creatures was made knowne by the Poet; In him we liue, moue, and haue our being.
               
               As God is the Efficient, ſo is he the finall cauſe to all his Creatures, not the leaſt worke that paſſed his hands, but he ſtampt perfection vpon it, yet that perfection is finite, and limited, as hauing a being after a not-being, and a neceſſity of ceaſing to be, if the hand be withdrawne wherewith it is ſupported, Perfectio ordinis is communicated to the Creatures, but perfectio Eſſentiae reſideth in the Almighty,

and of that the Creature falling infinitely ſhort, doth aſpire & reflect vpon the infinitely perfect Creator.
               The iſſuing of the Creatures from the Creator, is like to a right line drawne out in length which of all other is the weakeſt, neither can it be ſtrengthened but by redoubling, and ſo becommeth in a manner Circular. The creature feares to remoue too farre from the Creator: therefore lookes backe, and makes haſte to returne to that firſt being, for whoſe ſake they are, and haue beene created; Man eſpecially like Noahs Doue finds no reſting but in this Arke, doth center his reſtleſſe motions vpon nothing but the Almighties fruition. And thus by nature directed to the high Deity of Heauen, doth preſcribe to himſelfe a meane called Religion, to winne the fauour of that high perfection: That ſpeech of Tully preſcribes againſt all Atheiſts, There is no Nation ſo barbarous but takes notice of heauens Ruler. The Indigitamenta ſtored with diuers Deities proclaime the Gentiles to bee no Atheiſts, yet their 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   error in the erection of many, ſheweth their Religion to be waſte. Deum vnum non vnice colunt, branching out this one God into diuers fragments of Religious Deities.
               
               Inexplicable I ſuppoſe is that which the Apoſtle relateth of the religious knowledge and practice of the Gentiles,Rom. 1. 19. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   they were not ignorant of that which may be knowne of God. And the reaſon thereof was a celeſtiall illumination. God hath manifeſted it vnto them. For without a ſupernall Reuelation they could not vnderſtand the Idiom of the Creatures when they ſpake of a Deity▪
                   And Saint Auguſtine traceth in their writings ſome footſteps of the ſacred Trinitie; though with iudiciousDe Ciui
                        •
                     . Dei 10▪ 23.
                   
                  Viues, Loquntos eos, potius quam intellexiſſe exiſtimo, I ſuppoſe that high ſubiect to tranſcend humane capacity.Rom▪ 2▪ 15. And for their practice, The Gentiles doe the workes of the
                  
                  Law written in their hearts. For I demand how they did thoſe workes. If as Gentiles, 'tis Pelagianiſme; and if as Chriſtians, why doth the Apoſtle ſay by nature? I bury old Clemens, who in 7o 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   teacheth that ſauing knowledge was couched in Philoſophy, or elſe let the great Caſaubon candidly interpret him; That ſo Explicit a knowledge of our Sauiour before the Incarnation, was not ſo neceſſarily required, as ſince his manifeſtation in the fleſh.
               Thus we ſee Religion inſerted by Nature, yet without Grace but an aberration; Eadem ſpectamus astra, Coelum nobis commune eſt, idem nos involuit mundus; (as he ſpake in Ambroſe) we all ſtand vpon the ſame earth, vnder one coeleſtiall Roofe imbroidered with Starres; Our deſires tend to the ſame heauen, yet wee ſeeke not to mount by the ſame Ladder; to the Gentiles, Iewes, and Chriſtians heauen is the Goale, though the race be diuers. The Apoſtle cenſureth Gentiliſme to be deuiliſh; Iudaiſme, Superſtitious; but Chriſtianitie Deuotion: this truth to be imbraced, thoſe Deuiations to be ſhunned; What ſay I then that the Idol is any thing, &c. Therefore I would not you ſhould haue fellowſhip with Deuils.
               
               
                  The oceaſion. The Apoſtle returneth to his diſpute begunne Chap. 8. concerning things ſacrificed to Idols, wherof thoſe Chriſtians that did participate, were a racke and Scandall to their conſciences, that out of tenderneſſe refuſed to eate of the Idol-ſacrifices: here both their reaſons are produced: Firſt, for thoſe which abſtained, in regard of that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which dependeth betwixt the Religion, and the meats ſet apart to thoſe Religious obſeruances, that they could not touch the Idol-Hoſts without contracting pollution from the profane Religion; for euery ſacrifice confines the ſuppliant to that excellency which thereby is celebrated; The bread which we breake, is it not the Communion

of Chriſts body? And are not they which eate of the ſacrifices, partakers of the Altar? So that by Antitheſis, as ſanctitie doth ſtreame from the ſeruice of the God of heauen, muſt corruption be traduced from the Altar of an Infernall Idol: therefore they abſtained.
               Other Chriſtians wel knowing an Idoll to be nothing, and by conſequence of no power to infect, did eate of the meat taken from the profane Altars, becauſe the earth was the Lords, & the fulnes therof. The Apoſtle grants this foundation to be true. What ſay I then, that an Idol is any thing? but ſheweth that they built ſtubble thereupon, becauſe in ſo eating they gaue offence, and withall addeth, Though the Idol be nothing to pollute Gods Creatures; yet the end and intent of the Sacrificers was impious, and therefore might well defile the aſſociates; and enioynes a forbearing for perill of Idolatry. I would not that you ſhould haue fellowſhip with deuils.
               
               
                  Aquinas deriues this Text another way. That S. Paul did thus determine, in reſpect of thoſe that were without. The blind Gentiles thought all meats vnclean, vnles conſecrated at the Altar, by the touch whereof the ſuperſtitious Iewes thought them defiled; both falſe: for an Idol being nothing, had neither vertue to ſanctifie, nor power to pollute any of Gods Creatures. Thus you ſee the Text ingulphed in difficulties, yet with Gods grace, and your fauour, I deſpaire not to fadome the depth thereof.
               The Subiect whereof is Gentile Theology: it begins in an Idol, and ends in Deuils, the true obiect, and intent of Paganiſme: the one Idolatrous, the other Deuiliſh: And it ſeparates it ſelfe into two parts; the Obiect, and the Subiect. The Obiect about which, was an Idol: the Subiect in which, were the Aeditui, or Idol-Sacrificers: vpon both of which lyeth the Apoſtolicall Cenſure, that the Idoll, and the Sacrifice is nothing; but the Sacrificers, and their intent

is deuilliſh, then is the queſtion vmpierd in this compaſſionate Concluſion, I would not you ſhould haue fellowſhip with Deuils. And the former of theſe ſhall I conſider; 1. Abſolutely, the Idol, and the Sacrifice; 2, with relation to the Apoſtolicall Cenſure, that they are nothing.
               
               In the later, of the Sacrificers, I ſhall take theſe ſteppes. 1. Their Adoration of falſe gods, Damonijs immolant, they ſacrifice to Deuils: 2, the dereliction of the True God, and not vnto God: and ſo ſhut-vp in the Apoſtles Concluſion: I would not you ſhould, &c.
               
                  Firſt, the Idoll. 
                  Though the Gentiles at Natures ſchoole had learnt to pacific God with Religion; yet when they expected not further inſtructions from heauen, they became vaine inRom.▪ 1. 23 their thoughts and changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like corruptible man.
               The Eaſterne Sages had two Guides to conduct to Chriſt, humane wiſedome, they were wiſemen: and heauens direction, a Starre chalked out their way to Bethlehem; which no ſooner diſpeared, but put them to ſeeke their way. God will be ſerued according to his owne directions. The Heathen would doe him homage, but after their owne humour; and pourtrait out his Deity by an earthly Idol. A miſpreſon of the High God firſt occaſioned Idols. And when Religion was cut-out according to the rules of fleſh and blood, there was no God thought on, except the eye could witneſſe it. The Lord when hee gaue the Law in the Mount, appeared in no ſhape, leſt man thereby ſhould take a patterne to delineate his Image. It was vncouth in Iſrael (ſuch was their breeding in Egypt) to adore an vnſeene God▪
                   therefore they became ſuitors to Aaron for an Inſtauration of the Egyptian gods, Make vs gods that may goe before vs. When Man became vaine in his thoughts, Idols were not erected till then, and then they were.
               
                  
And theſe Idols were of two ſorts. 1. Either the repreſentations of falſe gods: 2, or falſe repreſentations of the true. The firſt time that we meet with Idols in the ScriptureGen. 31. 19. we finde them in Labans Family, Rahel thought her fathers Teraphim a faire portion for her Iacob. And ▪tis cleare, thoſe Images were his Gods, for hee accuſeth his Daughter of Sacriledge, Why haſt thou ſtolne my gods?
               
               
                  Idols of the first ſort. The Heathen to continue the memory of their deceaſed Worthies, erected Columnas, & Simulacra to outface the Iniquitie of after-times, that obliterate and intombe all things in the graue of obliuion. And at thoſe Statues did they performe their Anniuerſarie Deuotions with ſuch Solemnitie, that the vulgar conceiued them to be more then men. Who had read in the Roman Annals the Iuſta, and exequies ſacred to the honour of Germanicus, celebrated Saliari Carmine with an Hymne (if Lypſius ſay true) appropriated to the Gods, his Sedes curules, and Effegies erected in the Capitall, would not (if an high illumination ſhould not checke him) regiſter him in his thoughts for a god; to this purpoſe their moſt ancient Columnes, and Altars were conſecrated, and bore this inſcription Diis Manibus; and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is deriued ſaithIn Fulgentii Mythologis. 
                  Diophantus of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is a Species of griefe; and a late Criticke remembers vs of the like in the Hebrew Dialect, where 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   ſignifies both griefe, and Idols: And though the Gentiles are not ignorant, that their owne Apollodorus hath deſcribed the liues, recorded the deaths, and pointed at the very Sepulchres of their gods, yet their Commemoratiue Statues haue gained ſuch credit in the breſts of the Vulgar, that their thoughts haue inrolled them in heauen; whom they know to bee putrified in earth. Theſe Idols are repreſentations of falſe gods.
               Secondly, the Pagans erected falſe Images of the True God. This the Apoſtle toucheth, The Gentiles, did not
                  
                  change God into Man, but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  into the likeneſse of Man. And how euer the wiſer Heathen were caried away with the Streames of the furious Vulgar, it is manifeſt, they reputed thoſe Idols, but as Symbols of that high Deity they comprehended not. The Iſraelites infected with the Egyptian aire, and imbrued with Idolatry, learnt no more but to erect Calues in memory of the great God. They could not on the ſudden fall off from the Lord, ſo lately catechized with his wonders, but thought to ſet vp Calues to his honour: So runnes the Tenor of Aarons Proclamation: To morrow ſhall bee a Feaſt to Iehouah: being wiſer then the Vulgar Idolatrous; but as Idolatrous as the wiſer Heathen, to ſerue God before an Idoll.
               
               The Papall Rome at this day out-bids the Pagan for Idols of this ſort, and ſcornes the old City ſhould exceed the new in Pluralitie of Images. She hath forged Images to Saints, to Chriſt, and dares appeare by her Champion Cardinall Bellarmine, (though timorouſly I confeſſe) in defence of thoſe Images, that limme out the Sacred Trinitie. Impudent man to make any compariſon of God, whereas the Prophet demandeth in his name, To whom will yee compare me? The Lord did reſerue himſelfe in the Mount that he might not occaſion Idolatry, and ſlacken the reines of that ſpirituall concupiſcence. S. Auguſtine lib. 4. de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 31. relateth out of Varro, that the ancient Romans for an hundred and ſeuenty yeares, A. V. C. had no Idol in their Capitall, which cuſtome had it ſtill continued Caſtiùs Dij obſeruarentur, our deuotions had beene celebrated with greater Chaſtitie, prudenter exiſtimans ſaith that indicious Father, Deospoſſein ſimulacrorum ſtoliditate contemni, That the Deity would grow into contempt, if figured by an Idol: Thus much for the firſt branch, the Idol. Remoue your attention to the

                  Idol-ſacrifice: which is the next in order.
               
                  Sacrifices I omit their Hymns, Inuocations, &c. wherein conſiſted their profane ſeruice, though as groſſe as their Idols. No Gods would downe with the Heathen, but thoſe before their eyes; no ſupplications could pierce the clouds, and haue the hearing, except they ſpeake out. Cry aloud, ſaid Elias, in a holy deriſion to the Prieſts of Baal, which 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is perſtringed by our Sauiour: Vſe no vaine repetitions as the Heathen, who thinke to be heard for their much babling.
               
               As Nature did prompt Religion, ſo hath ſhe taught to ſolemnize it with Sacrifice. The firſt paire of Brethren Cain and Abel though not both good; yet both were ſacrificers,
                  Chryſoſt. 
                  V
                        •
                     er
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      conſcientiae ſuae magiſterio, by intimation from the Conſcience. And ſeeing all bleſſings ſtreame downe from heauen to vs, 'tis moſt reaſonable to reflect vpon God the fountaine by ſacrifice: And as the beames of his bleſsings fall, ſuch is the reflection. Good Iacob hadGen. 27. 28. 39. for his ſhare in his fathers bleſsing, the dew of Heauen, and the fatneſse of the earth. Profane Eſau, the fatneſse of the earth, and the dew of Heauen: Vide ſtructuram benedictionis, ſaith Chryſoſtome: Marke how theſe bleſsings were compacted, Iacob had the dew of heauen ſeconded with the fatnes of the earth, which in Eſaus bleſsing is poſt-poſed. And ſuch is the returne, Abel immolates with a free heart, Cain with murmuring: therefore reſpexit Dominus ad Abel & eius munera; the Lord loued the fruit for the tree that bare them.
               The Church of Rome hath made bold to turne ouer all the reſt of Gods worſhip to the Saints his ſeruants, but hath reſerued ſacrifice to the Higheſt; and did neuer as yet make a breach thereupon, leſt the Heathen ſhould whiſper in their eares, and tell them that ſacrifice is an Embleme of a Deity. The men of Lyſtra no ſooner ſuppoſed Paul,
                  
and Barnabas to bee Gods, but Iupiters Prieſts ſhall welcome them with ſacrifice. And with this ſolemnitie was the God of Heauen truely honoured, till all Sacrifices determined in that great one of our Sauior vpon the Croſſe.
               Superſtition is the Canker of Religion, and as Religion is not faith, but a proteſtation thereof: ſo Superſtition is not, but a proteſtation of Infidelitie; Religion ſcarce euer exiſted without this bane, and hath no ſooner ſeized vpon a heart, but Superſtition knocketh at the doore, and calls for admittance. The Holy Ghoſt hath left it doubtfull, Gen. 4. Com. 20. If men did call, or profane in calling on the Name of the Lord; the Hebrew 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   will beare both ſignifications. And whether reading is to bee imbraced, they beganne to call, or profane in calling, let our Criticks ſee that.
               The Gentile-Theologie was three-fold. 1, Phyſicalis: 2, Fabularis. 3, and Ciuilis: The firſt was read in ſchooles, and that had in it ſome notions of the True God: the ſecond was repreſented on Theaters, the Seges and matter of Poetry: the third had religious adoration in the Temples; which Adoration was two-fold, internall, and externall. The firſt was the act of ſacrificing preſcribed by nature: the ſecond the manner of the ſacrifices indicted by man. And hence it came to paſſe, that as all Nations agreed in Sacrifice, ſo did they diſſent in the manner; an Oxe was ſacred to Oſyris, an Eagle vnto Iupiter, a Porket to Ceres, the Phoenix to Apollo, a Peacock to Iuno, &c.
               I conceale their Groues, high-places, and coſtly apparatus, of which the Scripture is full, all dedicated to Idol-deuotion. The fury of their Prieſts, neither in ſparing themſelues from lancing, & ſcourging; nor their children from ſending them vp in ſmoake, to thoſe helliſh Deities.
               
               Tantum Religio potuit ſuadere malorum.
               Better it were to liue as beaſts, Quā Deos tam impios, profanos,
                  
& ſanguinarios colere; then to proſtrate themſelues as Vaſſals to ſuch blood-ſucking Gods. Know you Heathen, that the God of mercy delights not in effuſion of blood. Is it poſsible that murder ſhould become piety? or can you not be faithfull, except you be vnnaturall? I will not load your patience further with their trifles, and had here ſtepped to the third part, had not Rome called me to a conſideration of her Helen the ſacrifice of the Maſſe; neither is it ſtrange, that in this Text to finde a ſhelter, which may be reduced to no other head then Idols, and their Sacrifices. We enuy not Bellarmine this proofe, but ſmile to ſee the Popiſh Maſſe warranted from Pagan I dolatry. It was for want of better furniture, when he implored aide of this place.
               
                  —Vos mihi manes
                  Eſteboni, Quoniam ſuperis averſa voluntas.
               
               The Ieſuite will fetch his doctrine from Hell, if Heauen oppoſe it.
               The bleſſed Sacrament of the Euchariſt wee deny not to be a Sacrifice, but onely Commemoratiue, with the Maſter of the Sentences. And ſay with Cyprian, Chriſt is offered, Iugiter in myſterium, ſemclin pretium; dayly in a myſtery, once in price and propitiation for our ſinnes. And we take that ample confeſsion which the Cardinall giues vs. Saint Thomas and the Schoolemen, were ſo intent on the bloody ſacrifice of the Croſſe, that they ſeldome mentioned that propitiatory one in the Maſſe, but relatiuely as it reflected on the other; but wee diſauow that abomination which defeateth the merits of our Sauiours paſsion; and diſanulleth the benefit of our Redemption.
               Thus farre goe the Idol, and the ſacrifice, both

which the Apoſtle cenſureth for naught, that's the third thing. Miſtake me not, that I ſay an Idol is any thing; for wee know that an Idol is nothing, and that in three reſpects.
               Firſt, becauſe of no forme, their Images were imaginations of their owne fancie, their pictures Chymaera's, and had no ground in Nature. The Rabbins ſay, that Dagon the great tutelary Idol of the Philiſtims, bore in ſhape halfe a Fiſh, and halfe a Man. So God gaue the matter, but folly inuented the forme. A Similitude is rei exiſtentis, the likeneſſe of a thing that is, an Idol is non entis, that reſembleth nothing: both prohibited in the Decalogue; Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelfe any grauen Image, nor the likeneſſe of any thing.
               
               Secondly, the Schoolemen obſerue in an Idol, a twofold compoſition. Firſt, formae artis ad materiam. Secondly; Diuinitatis ad artificium. The firſt is the externall ſhape of the materials; the ſecond is the fiction of a Deity to that Idol. In the former ſenſe an Idol is ſomthing; in the later it is nothing.
               Thirdly, nothing in the Gentiles eſtimate; for though they yeelded to the vulgar in practiſe; yet the learned attributed ſmall Deity to them, elſe how durſt Lucian flout at their religious obſeruances, Quae Religio dicenda eſt? (ſaith Lactantius,) quae adoratur in templis, illuditur in Theatris? What Religion may that bee which is adored in the Temples, and flouted at in Theaters? The Principles in Paganiſme are by themſelues mutually deſtroyed: How could Iupiter be hominum ſator at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Deorum, that had Saturne to his father? Alſo their Gods were not onely conſpicuous for their Vertues, but infamous for their Vices. Iupiter was an Adulterer; Mercury, a thiefe; Venus a wanton; Quirinus a murderer; Flora a Curtizan. Now, quis eſt tam excors, qui hunc in coelo regnare 
                  Lactantius.
                  
                  putet, qui ne in terra quidem debuit? What folly is it to admit them for Rulers in Heauen, who are not worthy to liue vpon this earth? And the practice of their Religion was as vicious; the ſame Lactantius relateth of the Lacedemonians, the deuouter Heathen, who vpon a foule occaſion (which modeſty ſilenceth) dedicated an Altar to Armata Venus. Holy Scripture doth intimate the foule practice of the Moabites to Baal-Peor (which was Idolum turpitudinis; ſo Origen: or Priapus, as Hierome ſuppoſeth) and that Iſrael was conſpurcated by being their AſſociatesNumb. 25. 3. 
                  who committed whoredome with the Daughters of Moab, and coupled himſelfe to Baal-Peor. Some gods found deuotion, ne noceant, that they might not bee preiudiciall to them; of which ſort were Rhamnuſia, Rubigo, Febris, Tempeſtas, and mala Fortuna, all which found entertainment in Pagan-Rome. Yet euery trifle was recorded for a God. Gluttony is Idolatry ſaith the Apoſtle; and the Heathen did practiſe it in adoring the very Ouen. Quis non rideat Fornacem Deam? ſaith Lactantius. But who may abſtaine from laughter to heare of Deamuta? ſtiled Lara, and Larunda, Quid praeſtare colenti poteſt, quae loqui non potest? Beſotted Heathen, thus to put themſelues vnder the protection of a dumbe Goddeſſe; hath ſhe a hand to protect, that wants a tongue for direction? Add hereunto the abſtract Vertues and Vices, which with them found Altarroome: Hence were thoſe Fana erected to Victoria, Contumelia, and Impudentia. Phyſicke made Aeſculapius 2 God; and Valour, Mars another; euery Art deifying the Inuentor, as if ſuch honour were due to euery Inuention. Nonne Milites, & Medici egregii declarant ipſos Deos non eſſe Deos? ſaith Cyril vnto Iulian. Men on earth dare contend with the gods in heauen for excellency in Phyſicke, and warfare, which ſhew your gods to be no gods: yea, they haue not onely made gods of eminent men; but

of the baſeſt Creatures, as Allium, Cepe, &c. perſtringed by him in Statius.
               
               Vilia cur magnos aequent animalia Diuos?
               By all which it appeareth, there was no daintineſſe in the Gentile Religion: that they reputed their gods to bee trifles, and Idols nothing.
               
               Here muſt I vindicate our Diuines from the Calumnies of the Ieſuite; who for affirming the Gentiles not to reckon of their Idols as gods; but to adore them in an Idol, are falſly charged with lying by the Cardinall. Indeed this toucheth the quicke, and remoueth all differences betwixt popiſh Images, and Pagan Idols. Holy Auguſtine in Pſalm. 96. brings in the popiſh Pagan obiection; We adore not the Idol, ſaid the Heathen, but the inuiſible Numen there preſent; yet Idola non colunt, ſed colunt Daemonia; (ſaith the Father) you worſhip not Idols, yet Deuils. And ſo am I tranſported to the ſecond generall branch of my Text: viz. the Sacrificers and their intention. But that which the Gentiles ſacrifice, they ſacrifice to Deuils.
               
            
            
               The ſecond Part.
               THe Idolatry confiſted not in the Sacrifice, and Idol, but in the deordinate intent of the Sacrificers. The Will is the ſubiect and foundation of Iuſtice, or ſinne; and as it euer tendeth to the end, ſo from thence it traduceth either good, or euill. Moſes numbred the people with thankes; Dauid with heauens diſpleaſure. The act offendeth not, but the miſ affection. Indifferent actions receiue their life or bane from the intention of the agent. S. Auguſtine obſerueth, that Zachary the Prieſt, and the bleſſed Virgin queſtioned alike of the like ſubiect; How ſhall I know this? ſaid the Prieſt. How ſhall this bee? replyed the Virgin. Si verba attendamus, haud ambo crediderunt: the words in both gaue the like ſound: Sed Deus poteſt & corda
                  
                  interrogare; they ſtreamed not from the ſame fountaine: Miſtruſt of the fact had ſeized vpon the heart of the Prieſt, whereas the bleſſed Virgin beleeues the fact, but deſireth a further reſolution of the manner: the end is the touchſtone of our doings; the intention qualifieth, and interprets them. The Patriarks before the Law offered ſacrifice, as did the Gentiles; the practicke Religion was alike, but the ſcope was diuers; they directed their ſacrifice to the True God: theſe to deuils.
               
               Sinne is a priuation; but euery priuation is not meerely a non ens: yea Aquinas diſputeth, if ſinne may be ſaid to be a habite: and reſolueth, that it may; like ſickneſſe where there is a priuation of health, and an euill diſpoſition of the humors; ſo in ſinne there is a want of Rectitude, and an inordinate diſpoſition of the affections to euill. Bee it then, that the Idol and Sacrifice be a priuation, yet the intent of the Gentiles was ſet vpon Idolatry, in doing deuotion vnto deuils.
               
               Firſt, they did ſacrifice to Deuils: for what elſe were all their Heathen Deities, but deuils, with change of appellations; the ſlyneſſe of the euil Spirit, deluding thoſe miſerable Clients.
               There are two opinions of the Gentiles. Firſt, of Hermes Triſmegiſtus, that the Idols were as bodies, & the Demons as ſoules to informe them: the reaſon of this coniecture was, becauſe the Deuils did confine themſelues to particular Statues, as at Delphos, &c. The god of Eckron was vp in Ahaziahs time, which made him ſend Ambaſſadors to conſult with that Idol-Baalzebub (whom the learned coniecture to be Iupiter Belas) either for cure, or for intelligence; that King was the firſt that brought his Oracle in requeſt, or that paid him the tribute of deuotion. But vpon the apparition of our Lord in the fleſh, they were forced from their Altars, & diſpoſſeſſed of thoſe habitations.
               
                  
The ſecond is of Plato and the Academicks, who as S. Auguſtine mentioneth, l. s. de Ciuit. Dei, c. 14. ranked his gods into three ſquadrons, Deos, Damones, and Heroas, and aſsigned them three places to reſide in; Heauen, the aire, and earth. And thoſe Demons he fained to be made vp of a middle nature betwixt the Gods, and men, and deſcribes them to be animalia, in animo paſsiua, mente rationalia, corpore aëria, & tempore aeterna; and ſo makes them ſhare of euery eſſence; as liuing creatures, common to beaſts; as indowed with vnderſtanding, and ſubiect to paſsion, like vnto men; as immortall, reſembling his gods; but as conſiſting of an aeriall body, proper to themſelues.
               And as the ſame Father witneſſeth, cap. 18. hee placed them as Mediators, betwixt the greater gods and mankind, vt ad Deos perferant preces hominum, to conuey the prayers of men to the gods, and to giue anſwers to them againe. Rome, ſee from whence thy doctrine of Saints mediation is traduced. Firſt, hatched in the Schoole of Paganiſme; next, ſet on foot by thy Diſciples. But, O multum dolenda neceſsitas, & deteſtanda vanitas, ne ſit vana Diuinitas, as the B. Father burſteth out in cap. 21. We deteſt the vanity of that doctrine, which makes a vaine Diuinity. How euer the Heathen agreed in their deuotion. They ſacrificed not to the True God. So goeth the Text. They ſacrificed to Deuils, and not vnto God.
               
               Which words are an Hebraiſme, like that of the Prophet to Ezekiah: Thou ſhalt dye, and not line. And a reflection of that in Moſes prayer, Deut. 32. Com. 17. Yet in adoring deuils, by conſequent they loſt the Almighty, The God of Heauen is then neglected, and bid ſtand aſide, when the heart ſhall but complement with an Infernall Riuall.
               But this conſequent ſheweth that Religion admits of no Ambi dexters, and halters betwixt two opinions. Our

God is iealous, and diſdaines a Riuall in his ſeruice, and taketh the erection of another God, an affront vnto his Maieſty. Dagon ſhall fall at the preſence of the Arke. Illi ſoli ſeruies, replyed our Sauiour to the Deuill, when hee was a ſuiter to be worſhipfull, wee may not retaine two Maſters, nor weare any other Liuery beſides our Gods. In vaine was that plea of Symachus in Ambroſe, that God is infinite; therefore may all wayes of worſhip bee permitted: for vno itinere non poteſt perveniri ad tam grande ſecretum, there may be more wayes to that great myſtery then one. But as Chriſt is the Life, ſo is he the Way; Nadab and Abihu were turned into aſhes, for offering ſtrange fire before the Lord. Man may not preſcribe a law to the Almighty, but expect it from him.
               
                  I will deſtroy thoſe that ſweare by God and Melchom, ſaith the Prophet Zephan. 1. 4▪ Heare this, ye Atheiſts, that haue the Art to comply and keepe-in with all religions; yet not ſo touched with any, but can put it off vpon occaſion. Irreſolute men that dare laugh God in the face, and deeme it weakeneſſe to beleeue, wiſedome to profeſſe, any Religion.
               All Morall vertues are compriſed in an vniuerſall Iuſtice, and all religious Theology ſhuts-vp in one Verity: and that ſolid and entire truth, admitteth no rupture. As he that breaketh one precept, is guilty of all: ſo the letting in of one hereſie euerteth the whole truth. Iuſtly therefore doth the Apoſtle cut off all aſſociation with Idolaters. I would not that you ſhould haue fellowſhip with Deuils.
               
               Hitherto my diſcourſe hath been Senticetum: I need no other Apology to the ſame, then that the Apoſtle premiſeth: Sapicntibus loquor, &c. I ſpeake to thoſe that are wiſe, Iudge ye what I ſay. And ſhall cloſe with the Apoſtles concluſion, I would not, &c.
            
            
               
               The Concluſion.
               There is a three-fold ſociety with Deuils. Firſt, ſpirituall;  when we haue no fellowſhip with the vnfruitfull works of darkneſſe. So Chriſt tels the Iewes, Ioh. 8. when they conſpired with Satan to act the workes of darkneſſe, You are of your father the Deuill. And in that eruption of the Prodigall ſonne from his Father: he claue to a man of that Country. The ſecond is penall, in that fearfull ſentence to  paſſe vpon the wicked; Goeyecurſed, &c. With the Deuill and his Angels.
               
               The third ſacramentall, and here intended which is  combined by the practiſe of a helliſh Religion. No bonds to thoſe which Religion knits: Forgine the treſpaſſe of the ſeruants of thy fathers God, ſaid the Patriarks to their brother Ioſeph. What a Petition for pardon was that? They ſay not, the ſonnes of thy father; but the ſeruants of thy fathers God. How much ſtronger are the cords of Religion, then thoſe of nature, which in it ſelf is a formal difference from Atheiſts. Chriſtus patri omnes Gentes in crucis titulo
                  Hieron. 
                  dedicauit; Chriſtianitie dedicates her Profeſſors to heauen; whereas Idolatry chaines hers with Deuils.
               It carieth with it a ſpeciall Emphaſis, that Iſrael coupled himſelfe with Baal-Peor: this wicked fleſh courteth nothing ſo much, as this ſpirituall fornication; Procliuis eſt
                  Hieron. 
                  malorum imitatio, eſt quorum virtutes aſſequi nequeas, cito imitaris vitia: Our nature is like Iett, which omitting gold, and ſiluer, & ſuch precious obiects, licks vp nothing but ſtraw, and duſt. Infidelitie ſpreads her pleaſing nets to inchant, Chriſtianity makes ſhew of nothing but the Croſſe. Truth is ſolid, and hates all ſuperficiall gloſſes; whereas Error is crafty, and with her painted deluſions, oft-times robs Truth of probability. The Iezabel of Rome ſets out her ſelfe to ſale in a moſt tempting faſhion, whereas the Spouſe of Chriſt comes forth clad in the

Robes of modeſtie; I am blacke, but comely; Negra foris, formoſa intus, 
                        •
                     igra veſtro, formoſa divine, Angelico
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      conſpectu; ſaith mellifluous Bernard.
               
               'Tis not ſafe to inſiſt vpon the borders of euils. Dinah in curioſitie went out to ſee the maids of that Countrey: Otioſe ſpectat, ſed non Otioſe ſpectatur; farre was it from her to thinke that ſuch curioſitie ſhould forfeit her Chaſtitie, and that ſhut vp in ſo fearfull a Tragedy. Our Grandam Eue expreſt more then an inclination to fall, in that ſhee preſumed to hold chat with the Serpent. Peter the Champion of our Lord (whoſe ſword was out in his Maſters quarrell) is ſo infected with the aire of the High Prieſts Hall, that he throwes downe his Liuery, and there denies him; and as he warmed at the fire, ſo did he coole in deuotion to his Maſter.
               But moſt dangerous it is to come within the ſmell of falſe Religion. Tertullian in his booke de Corona Militis, cuts off all appearance of fellowſhip with Idolatry, in not permitting Chriſtian ſouldiers to weare a Laurell, becauſe the Heathen Victims were encircled with ſuch garlands. The Apoſtle (ſaith he) magnū divortium mandat ab Idololatria, inioynes a diuorcement from Idolatry. And Saint Iohn, fly from Idols, not from Idolatry, but Idols thatTertullian. may occaſion it; etiam Draco terrenus de longinquo non minus ſpiritu abſorbet alites: The Babylonian Dragon will
                     
                        •
                     rom. infect with his breath afarre off. Non neceſſe habes aurum in luto quaerere, ſaith Hieroms, No need to rake the dungfor gold. Will any except mad-men, runne into a houſe infected to rifle for a rich ſuit? or dip his hand into a fiery Crucible to pull out gold? or hazard his foule for acquaintance with all Religions? and damne himſelfe in a vaine curioſitie? How many for all this dare breathe in Italianated aire, and touch the very pomell of the Chaire of peſtilence. Hee that will be ſafe from the act of euill,

muſt wiſely preuent the occaſions.
               Some indeed by a ſpirituall Antiperiſtaſis haue thriued in Religion, by being inuironed with hereſie, and infidelitie; but theſe men are preſidents for wonder more then imitation; and their paths are not for ordinary treadings. Will any aduenture vpon the mercy of Lyons, becauſe Daniel in the den found a guard? or commit himſelfe to a flaming furnace, becauſe the three children eſcaped ſcorching? 'Tis mercy aboue expectation, to deliuer that man, who willingly caſts himſelfe into the mouth of a temptation.
               Let vs therefore be fearfull to blend Religion and hereſie together. The Iewes might not plow with an Oxe and an Aſſe in the ſame yoake. The Church of Galatia might not indure the copartnerſhip of the Iewiſh Ceremonies, the fulneſſe of time was their diminution. If Moſes & Chriſt might not ſtand together, much leſſe Chriſt and Belial; the Lords Table, and the Altar of Deuils. Let vs be vnited with our ſelues, and bequeath oppoſitions to Rome: Pray for the peace of Ieruſalem, O let them proſper that loue her. Follow after peace (O Iſraelites of God) and make not the enemy happy with your ciuill diſſentions; our diſcord is their muſicke; and our ruine would bee their glory: learne to defie Rome, and Hell. Come not within the pale or ſent of her Idolatry. And be euer zealous for that Religion, whereof Truth is the Circumference, and Chriſt Ieſus the Center; that you may liue in his truth, dye in his fauour, and reigne with him in his glory; which God grant, &c.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   