
      
         
            
            
               ❧: The Cronycle of all the Kynges: that haue Reygned in Englande: Sythe the Conqueſt of Wyllyam Conqueroure. And Sheweth the Dayes of theyr Crownacion. And howe many Yeres They dyd Reygne. With the Dayes of theyr Death. And where they were buryed.
            
               
                  Wylliam Conqueroure
               
            
            
               ¶ Wyllyam Conqueroure.
               
                  THis myghtye Wyllyam / 
               Duke of Normandye
               As Bokes olde, maketh mencion
               By Juſt tytle, and by his Cheualrye
               Made Kynge by Conqueſt of Brutes Albion
               Put out Harolde, and toke Poſſeſſyon
               And bare his Crowne xx. yere. xi. mōthes, and. xxii. dayes
               And buryed at Cane as the Cronycle ſayes,
               ¶ Crowned the. xxv. daye of Decembre,
               The yere of our Lorde God a. M. lxvi.
               And dyed the. xi daye of Septembre,
               The yere of our lorde a. M. lxxxvii.
            
            
               ¶ Wyllyam Rufus.
               NExte hym in ordre, by Succeſſyon
               Was wyllyam Rufus his ſonne crowned Kynge
               Whiche to Godwarde had no deuocion
               Deſtroyed Churches, of newe and olde buyldynge
               To make a Foreſt pleaſaunt for huntynge
               Bare the Crowne. xii. yere. xi. mōthes, &. xvi. dayes in dede
               Buryed at weſtmynſter, the Cronycle ye may rede
               ¶ Crowned the xxvii. daye of Septembre,
               The yere of our lorde a M. lxxxvii.
               And dyed the fyrſt day of Auguſt▪
               
               The yere of our lorde a M. and a C.
            
            
               ¶ Henrye the Fyrſte.
               THan his brother nexte, called the fyrſte Henrye
               Was at London Crowned as I fynde
               Whoſe brother, Robert Duke of Normandye
               Made hym warre, the Cronycle maketh mynde
               Reconſyled, all rancoure ſet behynde
               XXXv. yere iiii. monthes, and. xi. daies, by recorde of wrytynge
               He reygned and lyeth buryed at Redynge,
               ¶ Crowned the. v. daye of Auguſt,
               The yere of our lorde a M. a C.
               And dyed the ſeconde daye of Decembre,
               The yere of our lorde a M. a C. xxxv.
            
            
               ¶ Stephen his Coſen.
               STephen his Coſen, when Henry was deade
               Towarde Englande gan to croſſe his ſayle
               The Arche byſſhop ſet vpon his heade
               A ryche Crowne, beynge of his Counſayle
               And xviii. yere xi. monthes, and xiiii. dayes with trauayle
               Hare his Crowne, and had neuer reſt
               And lyeth at Feuerſam buryed in a cheſt,
               ¶ Crowned the. xxvi. day of Decembre
               The yere of our lorde a M. a C. xxxvi▪
               
               And dyed the xxv. daye of Octobre
               The yere of our lorde a M. a C. liiii.
            
            
               
                  
                     IHS
                  
               
               
                  PRVDENTIA
               
               
                  FIDES
               
               
                  CHARITAS
               
               
                  SPES
               
               
                  IVSTITIA
               
               
                  TEMPERANTIA
               
               
                  FORTITVDO
               
            
            
               ¶ Edwarde the Thyrde.
               THe thyrde Edwarde, borne at Wyndſore
               Whiche in Knyghthode had, ſo great a pryce
               Enherytoure of Fraunce, withouten more
               Bare in his Armes quarterlye, thre Flowerdelyce
               And he gat Calys by his prudent deuyce
               He reygned in Englande l. yere v. monthes, and vii. dayes
               And lyeth at weſtmynſter, as the Cronycle ſayes.
               ¶ Crowned the ſeconde daye of Februarye,
               The yere of our lorde a M. iii. C. xxv.
               And dyed the xxi. daye of June,
               The yere of our lorde a M. iii. C. lxxvii.
            
            
               ¶ Rycharde the Seconde.
               SOnne of Edwarde, Rycharde the ſeconde
               In whoſe tyme was peace great plentye
               Wedded Quene Anne of Ceame, as it is founde
               Elyzabeth of Fraunce, after who lyſt to ſe
               And. xxii. yere. iiii. monthes, and ii. dayes he reygned parde
               And at Langley buryed fyrſt, ſo ſtode the cas
               And after to weſtmynſter his body caryed was,
               ¶ Crowned the xvi. day of Julye
               The yere of our lorde a M. iii. C. lxxvii.
               And dyed the xxix. day of Septembre
               The yere of our lorde a M. iii. C. lxxxxix.
            
            
               ¶ Henrye the Fourth.
               HEnry the fourth, next crowned in certayne
               A famous knyght, and of great ſemelynes
               From his exyle whan he came home agayne
               Trauayled after, with warre and great ſycknes
               Xiii. yere. v. monthes, and. xviii. dayes in ſothenes
               He reygned and lyeth in Cauntorbury in that holy place
               God of his mercy do his ſoule grace,
               ¶ Crowned the xiii. daye of Octobre
               The yere of our lorde a M. iii. C. lxxxxix.
               And dyed the. xx. daye of Marche
               The yere of our lorde a M. iiii. C. xii.
            
            
               ¶ Henrye the Fyfte.
               THe fyfte Henry of Knyghthed lode ſtarre
               Wyſe and ryght manly, playnely to termyne
               Ryght fortunate, proued, in peace and warre
               Greatly experte, in marcyall dyſſyplyne
               Able to ſtande amonge the worthyes nyne
               Reygned ix. yere v. monthes, & xxiiii. daies who lyſt regarde
               Lyeth at weſtmynſter, not farre fro S. Edwarde.
               ¶ Crowned the. ix. daye of Auguſt,
               The yere of our lorde a M. iiii. C. xiii.
               And dyed the xxxi. daye of Auguſt
               The yere of our lorde a M. iiii. C. xxii.
            
            
               ¶ Henrye the Syxte.
               HEnrye the ſyxte, that in his tendre age
               
                  
                     ••
                  owned was kynge of realmes twayne
               Endewed with grace, and heauenly wyſdom ſage
               Drade and doudted, he was for certayne
               And ouer that, as it is wrytten playne
               He reygned. xxxviii. yere vi. monthes, and xviii. dayes
               And lyeth at wyndſore as the Cronycle ſayes,
               ¶ Crowned the. xvi. day of Nouembre
               The yere of our lorde a M. iiii. C. xxiii▪
               
               And dyed the. iiii. day of Marche
               The yere of our lorde a M. iiii. C. lx.
            
            
               ¶ Edwarde the Fourth.
               AFter whom, of noble memorye
               Was Edwarde the. iiii. of that name
               A noble prynce, a gouernoure moſt worthye
               Full excellent were his actes withouten blame
               And enrolled within the houſe of fame
               He reygned xxii. yere. one month. viii▪ dayes and no more
               And his body lyeth buryed at Wyndſore,
               ¶ Crowned the. xxviii. daye of June,
               The yere of our lorde a M. iiii. C. lxi.
               And dyed the. ix. day of Apryll,
               The yere of our lorde a M. iiii. C. lxxxiii.
            
         
      
   