
      
         
            
            SHORT MEMOIRS FOR THE Natural Experimental HISTORY OF Mineral Waters.
            Addreſſed By way of Letter to a Friend.
            By the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE, Fellow of the Royal Society.
            
               LONDON, Printed for. Samuel Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Pauls Church-Yard. 1684/5.
         
         
            
            
            Advertiſement OF THE PUBLISHER.
            I Find by ſome diſcourſe I lately had with the Author, that his deſign in drawing up his Memoirs, being to ſet down what had occurr'd to him of his own Obſervation and Experiments, he purpoſely forbore to conſult the Authors that have profeſſedly written upon Medical Waters, he would by no means have it thought, that he undervalued thoſe Learned Writers that he forb
                  ••
               e to cite, becauſe he had them not at hand, as well as becauſe his deſign did not require he ſhould tranſcribe from them. And therefore he deſires, that his Readers ſhould not be kept, by any thing he has written, from conſulting other Writers that have treated of Mineral Waters,

eſpecially the late Ingenious Exercitations, of the Learned Doctor Liſter De Fontibus Medicatis Angliae (after mentioned by our Author,) and the curious little Tract of the French Mineral Waters, that was brought our Author in Engliſh, after his Memoirs were come to him from the Preſs, publiſh'd by the Virtuoſi of the famous Royal Academy, of Sciences at Paris, eſpecially where they curioſly examine the Saline and earthly. Reſidences of Waters, which our Author has not done to the remains of our Engliſh Acidulae, of which Liquors he had for the moſt part ſuch incompetent quantities as concurr'd with another reaſon to diſcourag'd him from publiſhing his Tryals on them. Yet I may ſafely ſay what he offers here to the Reader is far beyond any thing that has been publiſh'd in this kind; for the Virtuoſi as well as the Water-drinkers may reap no ſmall benefit by the peruſal of this learned Treatiſe, as containing a great number both of uſeful Obſervations, and unuſual Experiments.
         
         
            
            Advertiſement.
            
               THe Author of the following Papers had thoughts of reviewing and inlarging them before he parted with them; and at leaſt, of an annexing Notes to ſeveral of thoſe Titles of the hiſtorical Platform, that are yet left untouch'd. But, beſides his want of health and leiſure, he was, by the ſupervening of ſome urgent occaſions, oblig'd abruptly enough to lay aſide this work he was about, and apply himſelf to others, that concern'd him more than the Scrutiny of Mineral Waters could. Wherefore conſidering, that he had already made Annotations, though but ſhort ones, upon moſt of the conſiderableſt Titles or Topicks of inquiry, enumerated in the Second and Principal Part of his

Schemes above them, he was content to give the enſuing writing unfiniſhed as it was, to the Solicitations of ſome Vertuoſi, who rather than tarry till he ſhould have an opportunity, which he knows not how long he ſhall want, were deſirous to take what they ſound ready, with all its imperfections. Which preſſingneſs of theirs he could not deny to be the more excuſable, on this occaſion, becauſe the communicated writing is not pretended to be a full and methodical Hiſtory of Mineral Waters, but only a bundle of Short Memoirs, contributed towards the compiling of ſuch a Work.
            
            
               Theſe, that they may be the more conveniently cited or referr'd to, I thought ſit to divide into ſix Sections; where of the Firſt is introductory, and and contains ſome General Conſiderations about the Occaſion, the Subject, and ſome other things relating to thoſe Memoirs. The Second contains only a ſet of Titles for the Firſt Part of the propoſed Work, becauſe urgent occaſions kept me from making, as I

intended, ſome Marginal Notes, upon ſeveral of the particular Articles. The third exhibits a Scheme of Titles for the Second Part of the propos'd work, viz. The way of experimentally exploring portions of a Mineral Water ſever'd from the Spring or Receptacle. And becauſe the Second Part is that which I mainly deſign'd, I have referr'd to it two other Sections, one, which is the Fourth, containing a Collection of Experiments and Obſervations relating to the uſual way of examining Mineral Waters by Galls, as a Specimen given on the 13th Title of larger Annotations on the Titles of the Second Part; and the other conſiſting of leſs copious Annotations, and ſometimes much ſhorter Notes on divers other Articles of the ſame Second Part. To which Laſtly is ſubjoyn'd the ſixth Section, conſiſting only of a Set of Articles, referrable to the Medicinal uſe of Mineral Waters; together with a Concluſion addreſs'd to the ingenious Dr. that ſet me upon this Task. In proſecuting of which I deſire

it may not be thought ſtrange, that I have not cited Authors that have written of Thermae or of Acidulae. For in the diſadvantageous Circumſtances wherein I wrote, I ſhould have been kept from conſulting them, if I had had them at hand. And I thought it enough for for me at that time, to impart to my Friends, what my own Experiments and Thoughts had furniſh'd me with, how little or mean ſoever that was. Which Advertiſement is therefore the more fit to be here given, that I may not divert any from ſtudying thoſe more elaborate Pieces, that have within no long time been publiſh'd by skilful Men, and eſpecially by the very learned, Dr. Liſter.
         
         
            
            The moſt Material Heads contained in the foregoing Treatiſe.
            
               1. THE Advertiſement to the Reader, containing the Diviſion, Method and Scope of this preſent Treatiſe.
               2. The occaſion of this Treatiſe, and its importance. page 1, 2
               3. That the beſt way of diſcovering the Qualities of Mineral Waters, is a long and ſufficient Experience. 3
               4. What may encourage us to undertake the Natural Hiſtory of Mineral Waters? 4
               5. What things are fit to be taken notice of by him that would give an hiſtorical account of Mineral Waters. 5, 6
               6. That the Author hath both qualified Practical and Speculative Phyſicians by this Treatiſe. 7
               
               7. What hindred the Author from illuſtrating all the ſets of Titles with a kind of Rationale. 8
               8. Wherefore the Author hath propoſed ſo many different inquiries about Mineral Waters. 9, 10, 11, 12
               9. Ʋpon what account the Examin of the properties of Mineral Waters is of ſo great importance. 13, 14
               10. That men ſhould make ſearch both after Subterraneal Springs and Wells, and their operations upon Humane Bodies. 15, 16
               11. Titles for the Natural Hiſtory of a Mineral Water propoſed conſidered as being gilt in its Channel or Receptacles, being the firſt or Mineralogical part of the deſigned Work. 17
               12. Titles for the Natural Hiſtory of a Mineral Water propoſed conſider'd as drawn out of the Spring or Receptacle, being the Second or Phyſico Chymical part of the deſigned work. 24
               13. An Appendix containing Paralipomena, and a Chaos of obſervations

and Experiments. 32
               14. The powder of Galls fitter to produce a new colour in Mineral Wa
                  
                     ••••
                   than their infuſion. 33
               15. The parts of the infuſion of Galls that produce the new colour with ferruginous Waters are apt to fly away; neither the tincture nor the powder muſt be ſtale. 34, 35
               16. The beſt way for producing of new colours with Mineral Waters is to make the infuſion of Galls with a certain weight of the Powder in a determinate weight of Water. 35, 36
               17. Oaken leaves, dryed red Roſe leaves, the Juice, the Peel of Pomegranates, the Bloſſoms called commonly Callauſtia, and ſome other aſtringent vegetables may be ſubſtituted to Galls. 38
               18. The Eye muſt be Judge of the Impregnation of the Water by the infuſion or Powder of Galls. 37
               19. The way of trying Mineral Waters by the change of colours that Galls produce in them, is neither of that extent, nor of that certainty 'tis vulgarly

preſumed to be of 39
               20. There are divers Metalline Oars, and other Mineral Bodies, which not particpating of Iron, will not be diſcoverable by the infuſion of Galls. ib.
               
               21. A Body of a Metalline Nature and not participating of Iron, may, with infuſion of Galls, afford a very dark colour. 40
               22. 'Tis not certain if all the Liquors impregnated with Iron will be diſcovered to be ſo by the colour they afford with Galls. ib.
               
               23. That it is a miſtake generally taken for granted, viz. That the infuſion of Galls will certainly diſcover by becoming black, or Purple of a Mineral Water that is mix'd with it be to vitriolate. 41
               24. An odd kind of whitiſh Earth to be found in the Northern Countreys of England where there come divers Mineral Waters. 42
               25. Galls being caſt into the ſolutions of ſeveral Metals produc'd no blackiſh colour, except with the ſolution

of Gold. 44
               26. A Sulphureous Liquor proclaiming notable changes of colours with ſeveral ſolutions of Metals. ib.
               
               27. 'Tis fit, if not neceſſary, that the experimenter look upon the change of colours made by Galls both while'tis a producing, and where'tis produced in a good light, and with a heedful eye. 46
               28. That there may be a kind of Phyſiognogmy of natural Bodies, as well as of Humane faces. ib.
               
               29. A way to vary the Shades and other Phoenomena of Colours produc'd with Mineral Liquors. 47
               30. Another way ſomewhat differing from the former. 48
               31. 'Tis convenient to uſe beſides Galls or Oaken-leaves, for the producing of new Colours with Mineral Waters, Red-Roſes, Baleruſtium, Leolewood, Braſil, and other aſtringent Pigments. 50
               32. A way of making a Liquor which will turn black with a ſolution either of Martial or Capreous Vitriol. 51.
               
                  
33. Many Waters may partake of Sulphur, without being taken notice of to do ſo. 54
               34. That Copper that hath been melted into a body, may be ſo ſubtiliſed and diſguiſed, as to have a multitude of its metalline parts made aſcend with others in the form of a tranſparent Liquor like common Water, and yet by putting to it another ſubſtance, as volatile and colourleſs as it ſelf, it will preſently diſcover the Copper it contain'd by turning as blew as Saphire. 55
               35. Experiments diſcovering the inexiſtence of Arſenick in Water, and ſomewhat of the nature of that dangerous Mineral. 56
               36. The deleterious nature of Arſenick conſiſts not only, or mainly in a tranſcendently Acid, nor in a lixiviate cauſticle quality, but in a corroſiveneſs ſui generis. ib.
               
               37. An uſeful way for Water-drinkers, of examining a Mineral Water ſuſpected to contain Arſenick. 60
               38. Why the Author hath inſiſted ſo

much upon the Thirteenth Article of the ſet of Titles. 61
               39. To what the knowledge of the degree of coldneſs in the Water, eſpecially if it be extraordinary may be uſeful. 63
               40. Divers ways of eſtimating the degrees of coldneſs, and heat in the Water. 64
               41. The uſefulneſs of the knowledge of the ſpecifick gravity of a Mineral Water. ib.
               
               42. The difficulty of weighing exactly Liquors. 67
               43. The moſt exact way of meaſuring the weight of Waters. 68
               44. The determinate weights of moſt Mineral Waters, and others about London, as likewiſe of the German Spaw-water. 69
               45. How to diſcover the kind of Soil through which the Water hath paſſed. 71
               46. No difference obſerved between Mineral Waters, and common Water look'd upon through good Microſcopes. 72
               
                  
47. That the little Creatures we diſcover through magnifying Glaſſes in Water, wherein Pepper has been infuſed, are not inanimate concretions, but really living creatures. 73
               48. Where the Scent of ſeveral Mineral Waters are beſt judged of. 74
               49. That there are ſome Springs of 
                     ••
                  l Viny odour. ib.
               
               50. That men are apt to take all ſtinking Waters for ſulphureous, whereas ſometimes they are bituminous, tho the Spring may ſometimes partake both of Sulphur and Bitumen. 75
               51. That there is a manifeſt difference in reference to tranſportation in ſuch Ferruginous Waters as are lighter than common Water. 76
               52. how we may gheſs at the Saltneſs of Waters. 79
               53. That it is not eaſy to diſcover the accidity of Liquors. 81
               54. By what waies we may know the predominancy of Acidity in the Salt propoſed? 85
               55. How we may know the predominancy of an Alcaly in the Salt of a

Mineral Water. 86
               56. Salt afforded by the famous Waters of Bourben in France found to be Alcaliſate. 88
               57. Several ways of diſcovering Vitriol to be predominant in the Saline part of a Mineral Water. ib.
               
               56. What Salts our Engliſh waters are impregnated with, and from what Salt the purgative vertue that is found in many of them, as in Epſom, Barnet, and Acton Waters, &c. does proceed. 90
               57. That two Bodies, which are neither of them Cathartick, may by change of texture wrought in one another, compoſe a third Body, that is briskly purgative. 92
               58. How great an inequality may be ſometimes met with in the proportion that the ſame quantity of two differing Mineral Waters bear to the Caput Mortuum, they reſpectively afford. 94
               59. That a ſmall quantity of matter of which perhaps not one half is Saline, or Metalline (the reſt being terreſſtrial)

may impart a manifeſt vertue to a great proportion of Water. 95
               60. A Spirit richly, impregnated with volatiliz'd Sulphur, produceth with Vitriol, in a trice whether in the form of a powder, or ſolution, a very dark, or blackiſh colour. 99
               61. Titles for the natural Hiſtory of a Mineral Water propos'd conſider'd as a Medicine being the third part of the deſign'd work. 102
               62. A ſhort diſcourſe of the Author relating to this preſent Treatiſe. 110
               63. If the fall of Rains weakneth the Vertue of the Mineral Waters. 6, 113.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Short Memoirs FOR THE Natural and Experimental HISTORY OF Particular Mineral Waters, Addreſs'd to his Learned Friend, Dr. S. L▪
               
            
            
               SECT. I.
               SO many years, Sir, have paſt, ſince I had occaſion to conſider Mineral Waters, and opportunity to make Tryals on them with any Application of Mind;

that, tho' ſince that time ſome Virtuoſi have been pleas'd publickly to declare, that they found ſome directions they received from me not unuſeful to the Examen of ſuch Waters; yet having ſorgotten many of my paſt thoughts, and loſt on miſlaid moſt of my Memorials about matters of fact relating to thoſe Liquors, I fear I ſhall not be able to ſatisfy either you, or my ſelf, by what I now write about them. But how ever, ſince you will needs have me ſay ſomething upon this Subject ſince it is a noble one, as that where in the health of thouſands is concern'd; ſince 'tis of late grown to be more priz'd and diſcours'd of, than ever; and ſince I have obſerved mens curioſity about it to have been confin'd to very narrow Limits, moſt men contenting themſelves with the diſcoveries they can make by the Infuſion of Galls (or their Body,) and perhaps a ſlightly improv'd evaporation: Since, I ſay, I have theſe invitations to obey you, I am content

to offer you my Advices, ſuch as they are, for the drawing up of ſuch a natural Hiſtory of a Mineral Water propos'd as, being comprehenſive of many Inquiries and Wayes of Indagation that even Phyſicians have either not known or overlook'd, may probably afford a more reaching notice, and inlarg'd knowledge of the Subject treated of. Upon which account I have, I confeſs, a deſire and an aim, tho' no great hope, that this rude Eſſay may, by your Improvements and thoſe of your Learned Friends, be made of ſome ſervice to the Publick.
               2. But here I muſt ingenuouſly own to you, that notwithſtanding the many wayes I propoſe, of diſcovering the natures or Qualities of Mineral Waters, yet I think the ſureſt way of knowing them, is a long and ſufficient Experience of their good and bad effects. For I ſtrongly ſuſpect, and it may be partly know, that there are, beneath the ſurface of the Earth, divers Mineral Subſtances,

                  ſome fix'd, and ſome volatile, ſome in the form of hard Bodies, ſome of ſoft ones, ſome of Liquors, and ſome of Fumes, divers of which the generality, even of Learned men, are altogether ſtrangers to; beſides thoſe that, tho' ſome men may chance to have ſeen, have their natures ſo little known, that they have not ſo much as names aſſign'd to them. So that when I conſider, that of the Ingredients we are unacquainted with (to paſs by all the reſt that the Earth may conceal) the proportions wherein they are mingled may be numberleſs, and the Qualities reſulting from theſe Commixtures may be very differing from thoſe of the ſeparate Ingredients, I am apt too look upon the difficulty, of Securely determining the Effects of Mineral Waters à priori, as little, if at all, leſs than inſuperable to Humane Underſtandings.
               3. But this difficulty is not ſuch, as ought to make us think it uſeleſs, to have a good Project of the natural

Hiſtory of a Mineral Water. For 'tis no ſmall advantage, to know what particulars are fit for our Inquiry, to be furniſh'd with a Sett of heads, to which one may conveniently refer whatever he tries, or obſerves, about the Subject propos'd. And (which is yet more conſiderable) to be furniſh'd with variety of Methods or ways, to make Tryals fit for inveſtigating the Nature, or examining the Qualities, of the propos'd Water; ſince by the number and variety of purpoſely and fitly devis'd Experiments, he that makes them may, as it were, view his ſubject on all ſides, and be much aſſiſted to conjecture, what Saline, or other Minerals known to us, and what quantities of them, do impregnate the Water he examines, and conſequently what effects they are like to produce in Humane Bodies.
               4. Though there be three ſorts of things, fit to be taken notice of by him that would give an Hiſtorical account of a Mineral Water, whether

cold or hot, yet contenting my ſelf to treat but very curſorily of thoſe that belong to the firſt, and to the third of the three ſorts, I have made a more full and particular Enumeration of the Titles that peculiarly belong to the ſecond ſort of obſervables, namely thoſe that mention the various Tryals, Chymical and Mechanical, that are to be made with the Water after 'tis taken out of the Spring. This I purpoſely did, chiefly becauſe 'twas only of this ſort of particulars that you deſir'd my thoughts, and partly alſo becauſe they are moſt wanted and deſir'd by Naturaliſts and Phyſicians, and are like to prove the moſt inſtructive to them; having alſo this to recommend them, that, to make the greateſt part of them by far, it is not neceſſary that a man repair to the place where the Spring riſes, but he may at leiſure examine the Water at home, where he may be accommodated with Furnaces, veſſels, and other conveniences, to make his Tryals upon it.
               
                  
5. A much leſs diſcerning Reader, than you, may perceive that in ſorming the inſuing Project of a Natural Hiſtory, I aim'd much more to aſſiſt practical Phyſicians to find the vertues and effects of Mineral Waters, than to inform Speculative Naturaliſts of their cauſes and manner of being generated. But yet a heedful peruſer may find, that I have ſo endeavour'd to gratify Phyſicians that I have not been altogether 
                     •
                  anting [eſpecially in the Firſt Part, which is almoſt wholly Mineralogical,] to the curioſity of Philoſophers, as it relates to all ſorts of Mineral Waters: Tho' you may eaſily enough diſcern, and readily confeſs it, that the following Paper does much more regard thoſe cold ones, that from the Acid Taſt that is found in moſt of them are call'd Acidulae, than thoſe other Waters, that from their heat are commonly ſtyl'd Thermae, becauſe the former ſort of Mineral Waters is that, which I have had the opportunity to be the more converſant in, as well as

that, about which alone you have deſir'd my Obſervations.
               6. I had once thoughts of illuſtrating the following Setts of Titles with a kind of Rationale, briefly declaring the reaſon of their order and their number (ſor both theſe were conſiderately pitch'd upon, not lighted on by chance.) But I was obliged to omit it, when I ſound (as I quickly did) that I had too little leiſure and health, to imploy much of either upon a troubleſom work of no greater importance. And therefore, knowing your Perſpicacity to be more than ſufficient to make you diſcern ſome reaſon for the order wherein I have marſhall'd the Articles of the laſt Sett of Titles which fall under the Cognizance of your own Profeſſion, I have not been ſolicitous to aſſign that Reaſon. And I preſume 'twill be no great harm, if my haſt have made me alſo omit to perform at preſent the Intention I had to make here and there ſome Brief Marginal Notes upon ſome of the Articles of the firſt Part. And

I thought it ſufficient (if not alſo capable of making ſome amends for the newly mentioned Omiſſions) to make them ſomewhat numerous, and ſome of them large Annotations upon the Titles or Articles of the II Part: This being indeed the chief that I deſign'd to inſiſt on, and preſent you.
               7. I expect it will be wonder'd at, that ſo many Inquiries ſhould be propos'd, and ſo many things directed to be taken notice of, about a Subject that hath been thought ſo barren, that men are wont to think their curioſity great enough, if they inquire what colours the Mineral Water will ſtrike with Galls, or Oaken leaves; and do obſerve what kind and quantity of Salt will remain after the evaporation of the Liquor: And I much fear, that ſome, even of your profeſſion, will think I cut them out a great deal too much work, by ſo many troubleſome Queries and Tryals. But I confeſs that nature or long experience having made me, tho'not a Sceptical, yet a ſuſpicious and diffident

Philoſophiſer, I think my ſelf obliged, on difficult occaſions, to ask more than ten Queſtions before I preſume to anſwer one. Nor do I think that the ſlightneſs of anothers curioſity diſpenſes me from induſtriouſly exerciſing mine. I might on this occaſion repreſent, that tho' the greateſt Naturaliſts, and Phyſicians among the Ancients, did not only mention, but admire and diſcourſe of the Loadſtone; yet our Gilbert thought fit to examine it further, and was thereby able to diſcover far more numerous Phaenomena, than all them put together had taken notice of. And I might add other inſtances to the ſame purpoſe; but to anſwer more cloſely, and directly, I ſay, that, to diſcover the nature of Mineral Waters, being a thing far more difficult than thoſe, that have not try'd, do imagine, I think we ought to view the Subject in as many differing lights as we can expoſe it to, and take in as many helps to diſcovery as we can; ſince a great many particulars, that ſingly, or at

the firſt view, ſeem not very pertinent, if they be ſurvey'd in conjunction, and be skilfully apply'd, may much conduce to the deſir'd end. And perhaps hereafter it will be found uſeful, if not neceſſary, to make large additions to the Topicks, whoſe number is now thought redundant: For the more qualities and other particulars, we are acquainted with in any Subject, the better grounded, and the more enlarged knowledge we have of it. As for the trouble it may coſt, to make the propoſed Enquiries and Tryals, it may be ſaid, 1. That they are not all neceſſary (though uſeful) nor yet of equal moment, and therefore the omiſſion of ſome, that are leſs important, may not diſappoint the main Searches. 2. I have purpoſely made moſt of the Tryals as eaſy and ſhort, as the matter and Scope will permit; and thoſe, that will not undergo ſome trouble in ſeeking an uſeful truth, do not deſerve to find it, eſpecially ſince, in the chaſe of noble diſcoveries,

as in hunting the nobler game, the toyl oftentimes makes a part of the pleaſure. And I have made the leſs ſcruple, to be ſomewhat ample in the enquiries I propound, becauſe divers obſervations have perſwaded me, that Phyſicians ought to conſider very well both the nature of the Waters they ordain, and to what perſons, for what Diſeaſes, and in what manner, they preſcribe the uſe of them: For tho' many look upon them as ſuch innocent Medicines, as, if they do no good, can at leaſt do no harm, yet the effects, that have too often inſu'd the unskilful uſe of them, eſpecially when it was long continued, allow me not to look upon the drinking of Mineral Waters as a ſlight thing, that may ſafely be plaid with, but as that whereby we have ſeen, as very much good, ſo a great deal of miſchief, done, eſpecially ſome time after the operation is thought to be quite over, and perhaps almoſt forgotten.
               8. I look upon the examen of the

Properties, and other Qualities, of Mineral Waters, as a thing that is therefore of the greater importance, becauſe I am apt to think, upon probable grounds that, by a diligent inquiry, there may be diſcover'd in England (and in divers other Countries too) a far greater number than is yet imagin'd of Mineral Waters, eſpecially Ferruginous ones; which I therefore gueſs will be found very numerous, becauſe, by ſome uncommon wayes of Tryal that I have imploy'd, I have found that divers Minerals that either men knew not what to make of, or by reaſon of their paſſing under other names did not ſuſpect to be Martial, did yet partake of, and perhaps abound with, parts of a Martial Nature. And I ſhew in another Paper [about the Magnetiſm of the Earth] that kindly provident Nature, or rather its Divine Author has, under various diſguiſes, furniſh'd our Globe with a far greater plenty and variety of Iron Ores and Minerals, that partake of that Metal, the moſt uſeful by far

to mankind, than of any other Metal. And as Martial Minerals do thus abound in the Earth, ſo they are more diſpoſ'd, than one would ſuſpect ſuch hard Bodies could be, to impregnate even ſuch Liquors as are not manifeſtly acid, and ſeem unlikely to be able to work upon Minerals far leſs hard than they. To make this probable, we took not Iron Ore, or Embryonated Mars, but pure Steel it ſelf, the ſame as Needles were made of; and upon the minute Filings of it, we put ſome Tincture of Galls made with common Water, and filtred through Cap-paper, that the preſent colour of the Liquor, and the change we expected to be made in it, might the better appear: And by this Tryal we found that, in leſs than an hour, the tranſparent infuſion of Galls was ſo alter'd, as to be grown not only opacous, but of a dark and almoſt inky colour, which it retain'd even after Filtration; and this tho' the Vial, that contain'd it, was very ſlender. A not unlike effect was produc'd by ſmall

Filings of ſteel, but ſomewhat ſlow: lier in the red Tincture of Brazil, and in that of Logwood, made with common Water.
               9. I know not whether it may not be fit to be repreſented, on this occaſion, that, in Countries manifeſtly abounding with Metalline and other Minerals, it may perhaps be worth while, that mens Curioſity deſcend much lower than the ſuperficies or Turf of the ground, and make ſearch both after Subterraneal Springs, and Wells, and their operations upon Humane Bodies. For I have upon Inquiry been aſſur'd, by thoſe that in ſeveral places have viſited Mines, that they have met with in them, and ſometimes at very great Depths, running, as well as Stagnant, Waters, of differing Taſts, and ſometimes other Qualitie; and that the Diggers, venturing to make uſe of them to quench their Thirſt, as they found ſome of them miſchievous (as Corroſive, Petrific,) &c. ſo they met with others that were not only innocently.

Potable, but Medicinal. Of both theſe ſorts we have Inſtances in our Tin-Mines of Cornwal in Devonſhire. And of the latter ſort I receiv'd from an ingenious Gentleman, that has the overſight of ſome Corniſh Waterworks, this memorable Anſwer to an Inquiry I ſent him. The ſtrangeſt Account, ſaies he, of Mineral Waters that I have yet had, was of that in the bottom of a Tin-work call'd Karnkey, wrought above 60 fathom [that is 360 foot deep;] the Mineral being a mixture of Tin and Iron, and the Water Red and Puddle, yet drunk was cool and not nauſeous, and would paſs by Urine, near as Red as it was drunk, as I have been inform'd by thoſe that drunk of it whilſt it [the Mine] was working, being now ſtruck out, [that is, the vein of Ore being degenerated, or loſt.] However I believe Experiments might yet be made with Water much of the ſame nature. Thus far he, from whom notwithſtanding the remoteneſs of the place he lives in, I hope to get

ſome of this Liquor, to make Tryal of; which if I do, I deſign you an account of the Effects.
               I could enlarge upon the Subjects of theſe two laſt (the 8th and the 9th) Numbers. But after ſo long an Introduction to ſhort Memoirs, 'tis high time that I come at length to ſet down the Topicks themſelves that I deſign to propoſe.
            
            
               SECT. II.
               
                  TITLES
                  For the Natural Hiſtory of a Mineral Water propos'd, conſider'd as being yet in its Channel or Receptacles: (Being the firſt or mineralogical part of the deſigned work.)
               
               HE that would draw up the Hiſtory of a Mineral Water. [to have its qualities ſome examin'd and ſome inveſtigated,] ſhould, in my opinion, make three ſorts of obſervations about it. For firſt he ought

to take notice of thoſe particulars that relate to it whilſt 'tis yet under ground, or in its native receptacles▪ Next he is to examine the properties and other qualities of it, when 'tis drawn up by men at the Springhead or other receptacle: Laſtly he is to conſider the operations and effects of it upon Humane Bodies, whether ſick or ſound, according to the ſeveral ways and circumſtances made uſe of in adminiſtring it.
               To the firſt of theſe three ſorts of obſervations may be referr'd ſuch heads or titles as theſe.
               1. In what climate and parallel, or in what degree of Latitude, the Mineral Water do's ſpring up, or ſtagnate?
               2. Whether the Spring-head, or other receptacle, do chiefly regard the Eaſt, the Weſt, the North, or the South?
               3. Whether the Water be found in a Plain or Valley? And if not whether it ariſe in a Hillock, a Hill, or a Mountain?
               
                  
4. And whether it be found at or near the top, the middle, or the bottom, of the riſing ground.
               5. Whether the waters leave any ſecrement, or other unuſual ſubſtance, upon the Stones, or other Bodies that lie in the Channels they paſs through as they glide along, or the Receptacles that contain them?
               6. Whether there be beneath or near the Medicinal Water, any ſubterraneal fire, that hath manifeſt chimney's or vents and viſibly (by night only, or alſo by day,) burns or ſmoaks, either conſtantly, or at certain periods of time?
               7. Whether at or near the mouth, or orifice, of the abovementioned chimneys or vents, there be found either flowers of Brimſtone, or a Salt like Sal-Armoniac, or ſome other Mineral Exhalations in a dry Form?
               8. Whether there be under or near the courſe or channel of the Water, any ſubterraneal Aeſtuary, or latent maſs, of hot, but not actually, or at leaſt viſibly, burning matters? And

whether ſuch Aeſtuary afford an uniform heat as to ſenſe, or have periodical hot fits, as it were; and if ſo, whether theſe come at certain and ſtated times, or uncertainly or irregularly?
               9. Whether it be obſerved that over the Aeſtuary, or in ſome other neighbouring part of the place, where the Mineral Water ſprings, there ariſe any viſible Mineral fumes on ſmoak, (which when they do appear are wont to do it early in the Morning, or late in the evening,) and if ſuch fumes aſcend, how plentiful they are, of what colour and of what ſmell▪
               
               10. What is the more obvious nature of the not manifeſtly Metalline, nor Marcaſitical part of the Soil, which the Medicinal Water paſſes through or touches? And what are the Qualities of the neighbouring Soil, and the adjacent Country? As whether it be rocky, ſtony, clayiſh, ſandy, chalky, &c.
               
               11. Whether there be any Ores, marcaſites, or Earths, (eſpecially highly colour'd ones) impregnated with

Mineral Juices, to be met with in the courſe of the medicinal Spring, or in the receptacle of the ſame water ſtagnant? And what theſe Minerals are, whether copperiſh, ferrugineous, Marcaſitical, &c. And whether the Ores do, or do not, abound in the Metalline portion? As alſo with what other Ingredient as ſpar, cauke, Sulphur, Orpiment, Arſenick, &c (Whether Innocent or hurtful) they are mingled, or elſe compacted together?
               12. Whether it can be diſcover'd, that the Spring of the Medicinal Water was common Water before it came to ſuch a place, or part of the ſoil it runs through, & there begins to be manifeſtly impregnated with Mineral Bodies?
               13. And whether in this caſe, it makes any efferveſcence, or other conflict, with the Mineral it imbibes, or with any other Water or Liquor that it meets with in its way; and whether the conflict produce any manifeſt heat or no?
               14. Whether, if the Mineral Water

propoſ'd be manifeſtly hot, or extraordinarily cold; the Springs it flows out at, or the Receptacle it ſtagnates in, have near it (and if it have how near) a Spring, or well of Water, of a contrary quality, as 'tis obſerv'd in very neighbouring Springs in ſome few places of France, and elſewhere?
               15. Whether, when the Water appears in the Spring or Receptacle there appear alſo, either floting at the Top, or lying at the bottom, or ſwimming between both, any drops or greater quantity of Oyl, (like Naphta or Petroleum,) or ſome other bituminous & inflammable ſubſtance.
               16. Whether the Water be conſiderably altered in quantity or quality, bythe different ſeaſons of the year, as Summer, Winter, &c. By the much varying Temperatures of the Air, as to heat, coldneſs, drought, &c. By the plenty, or paucity, frequency, or unfrequency, of falling Rains, or Snows: And what may be the bounds, and meaſures of theſe alterations of the Mineral Water?
               
                  
17. Whether any thing conſiderable can be certainly diſcover'd, or any very probable conjecture made of the nature and qualities of the ſubſtances, that impregnate the Water, by Chymically and Mechanically examining the Mineral Earths, through which it flows, or in which it Stagnates? And particularly, by obſerving their colour, whether native, or acquir'd by being kept in the fire; their ſpecifick gravity; their affording, or not affording, any Salt, or other ſoluble ſubſtance, by decoction; their being ſoluble, or indiſſoluble, in particular Chymical Menſtruums of ſeveral ſorts, as Aqua fortis, Spirit of Salt, &c. And their being committed to deſtillation in Veſſels of differing ſorts, and various degrees of fire, with care to receive ſeparately the differing ſubſtances they afford, whether in the form of Liquors, or of Flowers; and by examining theſe ſubſtances by fit and proper wayes as alſo the Cap. Mort. by calcination, elixiviation,

and (if it will bear ſuch a fire) vitrification?
            
            
               SECT. III. 
               
                  TITLES
                  For the Natural Hiſtory of a Mineral Water propoſ'd, conſider'd as being drawn out of its Spring or Receptacle: (Being the II. or Phyſico Chymical part of the deſigned work.)
               
               THat this Scheme of Titles may be the better underſtood, and the more inſtructive and uſeful tho' I have not time to write an ample com ment upon it all, yet I thought fit to illuſtrate moſt of its Particular Articles by ſuch Notes as may either explicate the meaning of what is but briefly couch'd, or deliver ſome of the practical ways of Tryal, that I make uſe of, on occaſion

of the Subject mention'd in the Title or Article, whereto the Notes belong. Theſe being divers of them too large to be conveniently plac'd the Margin, are all of them ſet down together after this Sett of Titles.
               
                  TITLE.
                  1. Of the actual coldneſs or heat of the Mineral Water propos'd.
                  2. Of the ſpecific Gravity of the Mineral Water propos'd.
                  3. Of the Tranſparency, the Muddineſs, or the Opacity of the Mineral Water.
                  4. Whether the Mineral Water will, by ſlading for a competent time, let fall of it ſelf any Oker, or other earthy ſubſtance, eſpecially tho' the Liquor be kept from the Air.
                  5. Whether any thing, and if any thing, what can be diſcover'd in the Mineral Water by the help of the beſt Microſcopes adapted to view Liquors?
                  
                     
6. Of the colour or colournes of the Mineral Water.
                  7. Of the odour of the Mineral Water, as Acetous, Winy, Sulphureous. Bituminous, &c.
                  
                  8. Of the taſt of the Mineral Water, as Acid, Ferruginous, Vitriolate, Lixivial, Sulphureous, &c.
                  
                  9. Whether any change will be produc'd in the tranſparency, colour, odour, or taſt of the Mineral Water, by its being taken up at the Spring-head or other Receptacle, or remov'd to ſome diſtance, by its being kept ſtop'd or unſtop'd for a greater or leſſer ſpace of time; and by its being much warm'd or refrigerated, and alſo, by naturally or artificially, produc'd cold, turn'd into Ice, and thaw'd again?
                  10. Of the thinneſs or viſcoſity of the Mineral Water.
                  11. Whether the Mineral Water be more eaſy to be heated and cool'd, and to be dilated and

condens'd than common Water?
                  12. Whether the Mineral Water will of it ſelf putrify, and if it will, whether ſooner or later than common Water, and with what kind or degree of ſtink and other Phaenomena?
                  
                  13. Of the change of colours producible in the Mineral Water by aſtringent Drugs, as Galls, Pomgranate-peels, Balauſtium, red Roſes, Myrobolans, OakenLeaves, &c. as alſo by ſome Liquors or Juices of the Body.
                  14. Whether any thing will be precipitated out of the Mineral Waters by Salts or Saline Liquors, whether they be Acid, as Spirit of Salt, of Niter, Aqua Fortis, &c. Or volatile Alcali's, as ſtrong Spirit of Urine, Sal-armoniac, &c. Or Lixiviate Salts, as Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, fixt Niter, &c.
                  
                  15. How to examine with evaporation, whether the Mineral Water contain common Salt, and if it do,

whether it contains but little or much?
                  16. How to examine, without evaporation, whether the Mineral Water have any acidity, tho' it be but very little.
                  17. Of the Liquor or Liquors afforded by the Mineral Water by Deſtillation in Balneo, and other wayes.
                  18. Of the reſidence, Cap. Mort. of the Mineral Water, when the Liquor is totally evaporated or diſtill'd off; and whether the Cap. Mort. be the ſame in quantity and quality, if produc'd by either of thoſe wayes?
                  19. Whether the propos'd Water, being in Glaſs-Veſſels exactly luted together ſlowly and warily abſtracted to a thickiſh ſubſtance; This being reconjoin'd to the diſtill'd Liquor, the Mineral Water will be redintegrated, and have again the ſame Texture and Qualities it had at firſt?
                  20. Whether a Glaſs-full of the Mineral

Water, being Hermetically ſeal'd and boil'd in common Water, deep enough to keep it always cover'd, will have its Texture ſo alter'd as to ſuffer an obſervable change in any of its manifeſt Qualities? And if it do, in what Qualities, and to what degree of alteration?
                  21. Of the proportion of the dry Cap. Mort. to the Mineral Water that affords it.
                  22. Of the diviſion of the Cap. Mort. into ſaline and terreſtrial and other parts not diſſoluble in Water, in caſe it contain both or more ſorts.
                  23. Of the proportion of the Saline part of the Cap. Mort. to the Terreſtrial.
                  24. Of the fixity or volatility of the Saline part in ſtrong fires.
                  25. Whether the Saline part will ſhoot into Cryſtals or no? and if it will, what figure the grains will be of? and if it will not whether, being combin'd with a Salt that will

(as purify'd Sea-Salt Peter &c.) it will then chryſtallize; and if it do, into what figures it will ſhoot, eſpecially if any of them be reducible to thoſe of any ſpecies of Salt known to us?
                  26. To examine whether the Saline part be, ex praedominio, acid, alcalizate, or adiaphorous?
                  27. Of the obſervables in the Tereſtrial portion of the Cap. Mort. as beſides its quantity in reference to the Saline, its colour, odour, volatility or fixity in a ſtrong fire; its being ſoluble, or not diſſoluble by divers Menſtruum's, as Spirit of Vinegar, Spirit of Urine, Oyl of Tartar, &c.
                  
                  28. Whether, and (if any thing) how much the mineral waters Earth looſes by ſtrong and laſting Ignition? What changes of colour, &c. it thereby receives? whether it be capable of Vitrification perſe? and what colour, (if any,) it will impart to fine and well powder'd Venice glaſs if they be exactly mix'd,

and flux'd into a Tranſparent Glaſs?
                  29. Of the Oeconomical, and Mechanical uſes of the Mineral Water, as in Brewing, Baking, VVaſhing of Linnen, Tanning of Leather, or Dying of Cloth, Callico's, Silks, &c, as theſe may aſſiſt in diſcovering the Ingredients and Qualities of the Liquor propos'd.
                  30. Of the imitation of Natural Medicinal Waters, by Chymical and other artificial wayes, as that may help the Phyſician to gueſs at the quality and quantity of the Ingredients that impregnate the Natural Water propos'd.
               
            
         
         
            
            An Appendix
            
               Containing

                     1. PAralipomena, or things directly belonging to the Hiſtory and pretermitted in it.
                     2. A Chaos of Obſervations and Experiments, remotely or indirectly referable either to one or more of the foregoing Titles, or to the common Subject of them all.
                  
               
            
            
               
               SECT. IV.
               
                  Experimental Remarks upon the (uſual) way of examining Mineral Waters, by the help of Galls: Deliver'd by way of Larger Annotations upon the XIII. Article of the II. Part.
               
               SInce the change of colour that Mineral Waters produce in the Infuſion or Tincture of Galls, is the moſt uſual way that many Phyſicians, and the almoſt only that ſome of them, endeavour to diſcover or examine Mineral Waters by; it may be worth while, in this place, to ſet down ſome remarks, that I have made about this way of probation; & the rather becauſe it may, mutatis mutandis, be not unuſefully apply'd to the exploring the Quality's of Mineral Waters by Colorations, tho' made with other Materials than Galls. Firſt then it may be obſerv'd, that one need not make an Infuſion

or Tncture of Galls in common Water, to try if by their means a new colour will be produc'd. For I am wont to beat them to Powder, and keep them in a Glaſs (not too big) exactly ſtop'd, by which means I have them alwaies in readineſs to mingle with the Mineral Water, and alter the colour of it, if Galls be able to do it, almoſt in atrice: whereas to draw the Tincture of Galls with Simple Water, often takes up ſeveral hours, and the tinging parts are much weakn'd by being diluted by the Menſtruum. If you would have a Tincture, the Powder of Galls, ty'd up cloſe in a Ragg, and with it hung in the Liquor, makes the Infuſion leſs muddy. If you be in haſt, and have none of the Powder at hand, you may ſcrape as much of a Gall-Apple, as you need into the Mineral Water.
               2. I have obſerv'd thoſe Parts of the Infuſion of Galls (eſpecially it made by heat) that produce the new Colour with Ferruginous Waters,

to be more apt to fly away than one would think, the Infuſion becoming often unfit to alter the Colour of the Martial Waters, whilſt yet it ſelf appears ſufficiently high colour'd. Upon which account, I chooſe to make a Tincture of Galls not long before I mind to uſe it; And if I imploy dry Galls, to take Powder that is not ſtale.
               3. 'Tis no ſafe way, and may be very erroneous, that is uſually taken in mixing Galls or their Infuſion with the Water to be explor'd ſo careleſly, as is wont to be done. For thoſe that are curious to make good Ink, will eaſily believe, that much of the deepneſs of the Colour depends upon the Proportion of Galls to the other Ingredient; and accordingly that by putting a much greater, or a much leſſer, quantity of Galls, into ſuch a quantity of the Mineral Water, the reſulting Colour may be more or leſs intenſe. To obviate which inconvenience, I take this courſe when the occaſion deſerves it; I make

my Infuſion of Galls with a certain weight of the Powder in a determinate weight of Water. As for inſtance I put about five gr. of powder'd Galls, to ſleep for ſo many hours in an Ounce of Water. But if I make uſe of the dry Powder, then I am wont to put three or four grains into an Ounce of the Liquor to be examin'd; which is a way far more certain than the Common, wherein the Ingredients are aeſtimated but by Gueſs. I have have mention'd various proportions of powder'd Galls to the ſame quantity of Liquor, becauſe I have obſerv'd that there is really a great inequality among the Mineral VVaters in which it may be put; and I have found by Tryal, that in an Ounce of the German Spaw, a ſingle grain of Powder would immediately produce a ſufficiently deep purple colour.
               'Tis an inconvenience, that not only Galls, but the other Drugs hereafter to be mention'd, impart a high Tincture of their own to the common VVater they are infus'd in; and

therefore it were to be wiſh'd, and is fit to be endeavour'd, that we had ſome Drugg, that without imparting a colour to the common VVater it impregnates, would afford an Infuſion fit to ſtrike a blackiſh or a purple colour with Martial VVaters.
               Though it be uſeful, yet 'tis not neceſſary, to imploy Galls to produce a colour in the Mineral VVater propos'd. For beſides that 'tis known that uſually, (tho' not alwayes, as I have try'd,) the ſame thing may be done, but ſomewhat more faintly, with Oaken Leaves, we may ſucceſſfully enough ſubſtitute, for the ſame purpoſe, ſome other aſtringent vegetables, as dry'd Red-Roſe Leaves, the Peel, and, (as we have try'd) the Juice of Pomegranates; and (what I find to be a notable ſtiptick) the bloſſoms of the ſame plant, (which are vulgarly call'd in the Shops Ballauſtium.) To which may be added Myrobolans, Logwood, and ſome others that need not now be mention'd, whoſe ſtrong Infuſions

have yielded me a Tincture very dark and blackiſh with ſome Martial Liquors.
               6. In regard that the Galls, or other Drugs, to be infus'd in common VVater, are not alwayes of the ſame goodneſs or ſtrength, 'tis adviſeable not ſo to truſt to any determinate proportion of the Pigment to the VVater, as not to take in the help of the Eye, to judge by the Colour of the Tincture, whether the Liquor be duely (and not too much or too little) impregnated.
               8. Whereas there is an intimation in the Cloſe of this thirteenth Article of the preſent Sett of Titles, that Animal Liquors may be imploy'd to produce new colours with Mineral VVaters, I gave that hint, not only becauſe 'tis uſually obſerv'd in Martial VVaters, ſuch as thoſe of Tunbridge the Spaw, &c. that the groſs excrements of the lower belly are blacken'd by a commixture of their Metalline Parts; but in Tunbridge VVaters particularly I have obſerv'd, that after the drinking of

larger doſes of them, the root of the tongue, and perhaps ſome neighbouring parts, would alſo acquire a dark colour, by the operation of the tranſient Liquor.
               Though the way of trying Mineral VVaters, by the change of colours that Galls produce in them, be uſeful and recommended by being eaſy, cheap, and expeditious, yet I do not take it to be either of that extent, or of that certainty, that 'tis vulgarly preſum'd to be of: For its main, if not only conſiderable, uſe is, to diſcover by ſtriking, or not affording, a black or blackiſh, or at leaſt a purple or a purpliſh, colour with a Mineral Water, to manifeſt the Liquor to be, or not to be, either of a vitriolate, or a ferruginous nature. But there are divers Metalline Ores, and other Mineral Bodies, which not participating of Iron, will not by this way be diſcoverable and yet may ſtrongly impregnate the VVater propos'd: As for example, to try whether if Arſenic were mingl'd with VVater, Galls

would diſcover it by producing with it a dark colour, I put ſome of the Powder of them into a Decoction of arſenic, but did not perceive that it gave the Liquor any deeper colour, than it would have done to common VVater. And as the extent of this explorer of VVaters is not very great, ſo neither do I find the informations it gives us to be ſo certain, as they are preſum'd. For, if I much miſremember not, I long ſince found upon tryal purpoſely made that another Body of a Metalline nature, and that did not partake of Iron, would with infuſion of Galls afford a very dark colour, that might eaſily, among ordinary Beholders, paſs for the colour produc'd by a Martial VVater; and I do ſomewhat doubt, whether ſo much as all Liquors impregnated with Iron, will de diſcover'd to be ſo, by the colour they afford with Galls; for I have ſometimes made ſuch a Liquor with no Mineral Subſtance in it, ſave ſteel or Iron but I did not find it would turn the Infuſion of Galls either

blackiſh or purple, which made me ſuſpect, that theſe colours are afforded only by ſuch Martial VVaters, as have been wrought upon more or leſs by ſome Acid Salts or Fumes.
               9. Unto theſe things I ſhall add, that I found that to be a miſtake, which is generally taken for granted, viz. That the infuſion of Galls will certainly diſcover, by becoming black, (or purple,) if a Mineral Water, that is mix'd with it, be vitriolate; for, tho' it be true that if, in the vitriolated VVater, Iron be the only or predominant Mineral, or be at leaſt conſiderably participated by the Liquor, yet if the diſſolv'd vit riol be altogether copperiſh, I found by ſeveral Tryals purpoſely made with a ſtrong ſolution of Roman vitriol, (wherein Copper is affirm'd to be the only, or to be very much the predominant, Metal,) that it would not with inſuſion or Tincture of Galls, afford either a black or a blackiſh colour, but only a thick and muddy one, that was not ſo much purpliſh.
               
                  
It comes into my mind upon this occaſion that from one of the Northern Countreys of England, where there are divers Mineral VVaters, there was brought me by a Virtuoſo, a good quantity of very whitiſh Earth, which he ſuſpected to be of a peculiar nature, but could not tell of what. This odd earth being examin'd, I concluded it to contain a conſiderable proportion of Lead Ore, corroded by ſome Mineral Salts, and imbody'd with the Soyl; ſo that if it had been in a place where people had ſought for Mineral VVaters, 'tis probable that, finding ſome peculiarity in the taſt of thoſe that paſs'd through this Earth, they would have taken it for a Mineral Water, but had been at a great loſs to determine what Mineralit did partake of; and perhaps, in endeavouring to reſolve the doubt by drinking it, they would have found very bad effects of it. But probably the Sulphureous Spirit to be ere long deſcrib'd in this Paper would have inform'd them, that the Water was

impregnated with a Body of the nature of vitriol, but not of common vitriol. For tho' Galls do not give a black, or very blackiſh, colour with a ſolution of Saecharum Saturni, (which is indeed the vitriol of Lead) reſolv'd in diſtill'd or rain Water. Yet I found by Tryal, that this volatile Sulphur did manifeſtly and preſently do it; which Tryal I was fain to take up with, becauſe when I had occaſion to conſider this matter I had not at hand the ores of Lead, Copper, &c. And therefore was fain to content my ſelf with the ſolutions of the Metals themſelves in their proper Menſtruums; it being probable, that the Metalline parts of the Ores would have afforded either the ſame ſolutions, or ſome very like them, in the ſame Menſtruums; which conſiſting of Niter, Sea-Salt, & Vitriol, Bodies that abound in diverſe places of the Earth through which Springs flow, the impregnated Water would afford Phaenomena of the ſame kind. I made tryals alſo upon a ſomewhat fine ſolution of refin'd

Gold made in an Aqua Regalis, and upon a ſolution of common running Mercury, made with Aqua fortis, and in a clear ſolution of Tin, made, not with either of the foregoing Menſtruums (for I have not found them to diſſolve it genuinely) but in a peculiar Solvent, (which I have communicated in another Paper,) that does not only diſſolve it readily, but keep it permanently diſſolv'd, as Aqua fortis do's Silver, but not Tin. To theſe ſolutions I put Galls, without obtaining any blackiſh colour except from that which contain'd Gold. But with our Sulphureous Liquor we produc'd notable changes of colour, and thoſe in all the ſolutions but one a dark one or tending to blackneſs, and tho' for that reaſon a careleſs eye might judge them indiſcriminately to be blackiſh; yet ſince I well remember that the degrees, or ſome other modification, of the ſame dark colour ſeem'd plainly enough not to be the ſame in all of them, I do not think it impoſſible but that a very heedful Beholder

(which when I made thoſe Tryals I had no great motive to be) may diſcern between thoſe obſcure colours ſome little differences, that may much aſſiſt him to gueſs, what metalline ſubſtance is contain'd in the Liquor, or at leaſt is predominant in it, if it be a compounded one. And I particularly remember, that the colour that ſprang from our Sulphureous Liquor and ſolution of Tin, was manifeſtly diſtinguiſhable from thoſe produc'd in that of any of the other ſolutions, being not black or blackiſh, nor ſo much as purple, but of a kind of browniſh yellow.
               Though I am content that the things, I come from mentioning, ſhould make men cautious and diffident, yet not only I do not deſpiſe or ſlight the uſe of Galls, &c. even as it it is vulgarly practis'd, but I am apt to think that the way of exploring Mineral Waters by the changes of colour, that may be produc'd in them or by them, when they are mingled with convenient Drugs or Additaments,

may be made of greater extent and uſe than he, that has read what I have written in the foregoing number, will perhaps be forward to expect. But to make the way of exploring Mineral Waters by colorations, of ſomewhat more general uſe and leſs uncertainty, I would recommend theſe things to the experimenter,
               (1.) It ſeems very fit, if not neceſſary, that he look upon the change of colours, both while 'tis producing, and when 'tis produce in a good light and with a heedful Eye. For by this means he may diſcover ſeveral ſhades or varietys of the more principal colours, and ſome other circumſtances that he could not elſe take notice of; and which yet may afford good hints (in reference to other Minerals, as well as Martial ones,) to a ſagacious obſerver. And I have ſometimes fancy'd, that there may be a kind of Phyſio gnomy of many, if not moſt, other natural Bodies as well as of humane faces, whereby an attentive

and experienc'd conſiderer may himſelf diſcern in them many inſtructive things, that he cannot ſo declare to another man, as to make him diſcern them too.
               (2.) The Attention here encourag'd may perhaps be made more inſtructive, by a way that I have ſometimes practis'd to vary the Shades, and other Phaenomena of Colours produc'd with Mineral Liquors. This way conſiſts chieflly in preparing Sheets of White Paper by drenching them in a ſtrong Infuſion of Braſil, Log-wood, or ſome other convenient dying ſtuff, and then letting them dry leaſurely in the Air, which may give ſome of them, as I have obſerv'd, a colour differing enough from that of the Liquor look'd upon in a Vial or drinking Glaſs. Upon this dry'd Paper ye may let fall, but not all on the ſame place, ſome drops of the Mineral Liquor to be examin'd, eſpecially if it be of a Saline nature, and by the Changes of Colour, effected by theſe Drops on the

Parts of the Paper, they fell and ſpread themſelves upon, a heedful obſerver may be aſſiſted to gueſs, what kind of Mineral impregnates the Liquor, and how much it does ſo; eſpecially if on the ſame Sheet of Paper ſome other fit Mineral Water or idoneous Liquor be likewiſe dropt, that the changes of colour produc'd by the two Fluids, may be ſurvey'd and compar'd together. I alſo practis'd another way ſomewhat differing from this; as the main part of which we prepar'd white Paper, by rubbing well upon it, with a hares foot or ſome ſuch thing, ſome idoneous Powders, eſpecially that of vitriol (whereof for this purpoſe Engliſh ſeem'd the beſt) lightly calcin'd in a gentle heat till it became of a grayiſh colour and friable between the Fingers. By this means 'twas eaſy to make the Paper fit for our turn. For the finer parts having lodg'd themſelves in its Pores, without much diſcolouring it when the ſuperſluous duſt was ſtruck off, it

became capable of affording a variety of Colours, or rather ſhades, ſome deeper and ſome fainter, when I let fall on it ſome drops of differing Martial Liquors. But of the Examen of the Materia medica, by the changes of colour produc'd in it or by it, more is ſaid in another Paper; and therefore, inſtead of transferring that hither, I ſhall here briefly intimate, that divers variations of colour may be made, either by infuſing or otherwiſe mixing, as I have ſometimes done ſomething in the Mineral Water before the tinging ſtuff be put to it: or by putting ſomewhat in the Infuſion or Powder of Galls, before it be mix'd with the Mineral Water, or elſe by dropping fit Liquors (ſuch as Spirit of Salt ſirſt; and then Spirit of Urine, or Oyl of Tartar) into the Blackiſh or Purple Mixture of Galls and the Medicinal Water to be examin'd. For by theſe means diverſe variations of colours may be obſerv'd; which, together with ſome other wayes that I have

made uſe of to multiply them, I have not now leiſure to ſet down.
               (3.) It is not convenient to confine ones ſelf to the uſe either of Galls or Oaken Leaves, but to make uſe alſo of Red Roſes, Balauſtium, Log-wood, Braſil, and other aſtringent vegetable Pigments. For, though ſome of theſe give a deeper Tincture than Galls yet, by the diverſity of colours produc'd by them in Mineral Waters, an attentive Beholder may, as was lately intimated where I mention'd diverſity of Lights and Shades, diſcover ſome things that he would not be informed of, or receive any hints of, by the help of Galls of Oaken Leaves alone. Nay I would not have our experimenter imploy none but vegetable ſubſtances about his colorations, but ſometimes make uſe of Animal ones, and (more often) of Minerals: Since by this means he may much diverſify his Tryals, and increaſe the number of Phaenomena, ſome of which he may probably find inſtructive. Beſides aſtringent Plants

I have found, and ſometimes devis'd, other ſubſtances that will turn black as well as Galls, with vitriolated Water; and that not only with thoſe that are richly impregnated with Iron, but alſo with thoſe wherein Copper alone abounds, as in Roman vitriol. And tho', for certain reaſons, I muſt not now ſet down a way I have, to diſcover in a trice both theſe vitriols, without any Liquor or Tangible Body, yet I ſhall ſubjoin, as a kind of Succedaneum that may ſuffice for the preſent occaſion, the way of making a Liquor that will preſently turn black with a ſolution either of Martial or Cupreous vitriol.
               
                  Take equal parts of pure Salt of Tartar, and either Flowers of Sulphur, or at leaſt Sulphur finely powder'd, and good Sal-armoniac, reduce the firſt and the laſt to powder ſeparately, melt the Sulphur over a gentle fire, and by degrees put to it the Salt of Tartar, ſtirring them well, to make

them incorporate and grow red (or reddiſh.) Then put this mixture pulveriz'd into a Glaſs Retort, or a cucurbite, and pour on it the Sal-Armoniac diſſolv'd in fair Water, and cloſing well the Junctures, diſtill all in ſand by degrees of a moderate fire, ſhifting the receiver once or twice, becauſe the Liquors will be differingly ting'd and ſtrong; and that which aſcends laſt, may bring over but very little of the Sulphur, whoſe volatile Tincture is yet the main thing we aim at in this operation.
               
               (4.) I do not deſpair but that he, who were able to make a skilful uſe of the ſeveral Drugs and other Body's, Vegetable, Animal and Mineral, that may produce new colours in or with Mineral Waters, (or in ſome caſes with the ſubſtances that impregnate them,) may by their means be alſo inabled to diſcover the preſence or inexiſtence of divers other Minerals, ſome of them ſalubrious, or at leaſt ſafe, and ſome others

either hurtfull, or at leaſt dangerous, that are not taken notice of by thoſe that content themſelves to imploy Galls and Oaken Leaves, in the exploration of the Waters they examine. For ſome of theſe Liquors contain Salts, that having not corroded either Martial or Cupreous Ores or Marcaſites, do not betray themſelves by producing either an Inky or a fainter degree of Blackneſs, or elſe a Purple, with the Drugs made uſe of to change their Colours. Oftheſe Salts I have met with more than one ſort, which may be more properly take notice of, when we conſider the Mineral Water and its contents.
               12. I think it likewiſe very poſſible, that induſtrious men ſhould find wayes to diſcover, by the help of the change of colours, whether Orpiment or native Arſenick, or the like poiſonous Minerals, do ſo impregnate the Water propos'd, as to make it very hurtful or dangerous, thô not abſolutely pernicious. And as for Sulphur,

there may be ſeveral Waters that partake of it, without being taken notice of to do ſo. For I remember, that I have ſometimes purpoſely made a Liquor, that was limpid and colourleſs like Spring Water, and which would totally fly up, even with a gentle heat; and yet this Liquor was richly impregnated with a Mineral Sulphur, as I convinc'd ſeveral virtuoſi by manifeſt and ocular proofs. So that if Sulphur chanc'd to be combin'd with any Salt or Mineral, of thoſe many ſubterraneal ones that nature hath hid from us, that can ſuppreſs or diſguiſe its peculiar odour, the Water may be conſiderably, and yet unobſervedly, impregnated with it. And yet 'tis like this may eaſily be diſcover'd by the change of colour, producible in ſuch a Sulphureous Liquor by vitriolate Bodies, and, other appropriate additaments: Which may be thought the more probable, becauſe, thô the Spirit lately deſcrib'd be very tranſparent and totally volatile in the form of a Liquor

ſometimes pale enough, yet common Engliſh Vitriol, as alſo that of Danzick which is Venereal, will preſently turn it of a black or very dark colour. And to add here ſomething more difficult to be perform'd, I have devis'd a way, which A Paper refer'd to contain; Obſervations, about the Salubrity and Inſalubrity of the Air, under whoſe 4th Propoſition this Proceſs is rang'd. I elſewhere deliver, whereby it may appear that even Copper, that hath been melted into a Body, may be ſo ſubtiliz'd and diſguiſ'd, as to have a multitude of its metalline Parts made to aſcend, with others, in the form of a Tranſparent Liquor like common Water: And yet by putting to it a little of another ſubſtance, as volatile and colourleſs as it ſelf, it would preſently diſcloſe the Copper it contain'd by turning blew as a Saphire.
               13. Becauſe Arſenic is a very pernicious Drug, and yet has been ſuſpected to be clandeſtinely mingled with ſome Mineral Waters, which I thought the leſs improbable, becauſe

ſome of the Marcaſitical Bodies by which ſome Mineral Waters paſs, are judg'd not to be devoid of Arſenic, for theſe reaſons, I ſay, and for this other which makes the mention of it pertinent in this place, that Galls did not (as I elſewhere note,) diſcover at all the inexiſtence of this poyſonous Drug in Water, thô the Liquor were copiouſly impregnated with it, I thought fit to make ſome Trials, that ſeem'd to me likely to diſcover at once the in exiſtence of Arſenic in Water, and ſomewhat of the nature of that dangerous Mineral.
               Happening ſome years ago to taſt Arſenic, not without ſome little danger and inconvenience, the Taſt of it did not ſeem to me to favour the vulgar ſuppoſition, that its poyſonous nature conſiſts in a highly Acid Salt; whereas its Taſt agrees well with my Conjecture, who ſuſpect it to be of an exceeding corroding or fretting nature, but whoſe corroſiveneſs is ſui generis, that is, of a peculiar

kind. Having then made a ſtrong ſolution of Arſenic in common Water, [which does not without ſome skill eaſily diſſolve it,] we mix'd a ſmall proportion of it with the German-Spaw Water, and then dropping into this mixture ſome highly dephlegm'd Spirit of Urine, we perceiv'd a light Lacteſcence to be produc'd, and a whitiſh Precipitate very ſlowly to ſubſide.
               We found alſo that a little (excellent) Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, being drop'd into ſome of the lately mention'd ſolution of Arſenic, produc'd a heavy whitiſh cloud, which preſently ſettled at the lower part of the Glaſs. We alſo put Oyl of vitriol, as one of the ſtrongeſt Acids we know, into the ſolution of Arſenic, but did not perceive, that the Oyl made a Precipitation, or wrought much otherwiſe on it than it would have done upon common Water. And by theſe three Tryals one would ſuſpect, that Arſenic is, at leaſt ex praedominio, an Acid Body.
               
                  
But not content with theſe, we put ſome of the Arſenical Liquor upon ſome Syrup of Violets, and found it to change the Syrup, thô but ſlowly, rather to a Green than a Red or Purple Colour.
               We put, to another portion of the ſame Liquor, ſome of our volatile ſulphureous Spirit, but took notice of no Precipitation that enſued.
               For a ſeverer Examen we imploy'd a Tryal that we ſucceſsfully make uſe of (and have deliver'd in another Paper) to diſcover ſuch ſlight degrees of Acidity in Liquors, as by ordinary Tryals are not diſcoverable; but we could not by this way diſcern the leaſt Acidity in our Arſenical Solution, but rather a manifeſt token of an Urinous or Lixiviate Quality.
               With the former Experiment agreed very well that which we aftewards made, by putting ſome of the Arſenical Liquor into a ſtrong ſolution of common Sublimate made in

fair Water. For by this means we had a copious Precipitate, ſuch as might have been expected from an Alkaline Precipitant. And this was not brick-colour'd, as fix'd Alcali's produce with diſſolv'd Sublimate, but white, ſuch as Urinous or Volatile Alcalies, (as they call them,) are wont to make with the ſame Liquor.
               The forgoing Tryals having been made at one time, when I was in haſt, and not at all fond of having to do with Arſenic (for which reaſon I caus'd the ſolution to be preſently thrown away to prevent dangerous miſtakes;) thô what I have hitherto try'd ſeems very favourable to our propos'd conjecture; That thô Arſenic be a very corroſive Body, and perhaps upon that ſcore poyſonous, yet its deleterious nature does not conſiſt only or mainly in a tranſcendently Acid, nor in a lixiviate cauſtick Quality, but in a corroſiveneſs ſui generis, I mean peculiar and diſtinct: Yet I ſhall forbear to be poſitive in this conjecture till further

Tryal, pretending only, by what has been ſaid, to ſhew the need of examining the vulgar ſuppoſition by further Inquiries, and to give ſome hints towards the finding of Antidotes againſt this cruel Poyſon.
               I ſhall now add that, for the ſake of Water-drinkers, I caſt about in my Thoughts for ſome way that might be of ſome uſe, thô of no certainty, in examining a Mineral Water ſuſpected to contain Arſenic. To which purpoſe, for Reaſons which haſt forbids me to mention, I pitch'd upon vitriolate Bodies and found that if a little ſolution of Dantzick Vitriol were put to a convenient quantity of Arſenical Liquor, there would preſently inſue a great change of colour, and a dark Subſtance would by degrees precipitate it ſelf and ſettle in the lower part of the Glaſs. The like effect we found, when we put Engliſh vitriol, which (having no Copper added in the making, as that of Dantzick has,) is either altogether or almoſt totally Martial, into a conſiderable

proportion of the Arſenical Solution.
               I fear I ſhall be thought to have dwelt by far too long upon this one (13) Article of our Sett of Titles: But I was tempted to do it, Partly, becauſe I thought the Subject ſeem'd both to merit and to need it, Partly, becauſe I thought fit to give an Inſtance that may ſhew that even that part of the Exploration of Mineral Waters, that is judg'd to be the moſt cultivated, hath been but ſuperficially enough conſider'd. And Partly, too, becauſe my want of health, and my preingagement to ſome Subjects that I am more concern'd for then I am for that I now treat of, permitting me to make few other than ſhorter Notes upon the particular Articles and clauſes of this Scheme of Titles; I thought it not amiſs, by referring all the foregoing Obſervations and Tryals to the ſame Topick, to give one Specimen (thô but an imperfect one) of thoſe that, for diſtinctions ſake, I ſtyle Large Annotations. And though

the Title, theſe belong to, be the Thirteenth in the Scheme (of the II Part,) yet I thought fit to premiſe theſe Notes to all the reſt? though divers of them be on Titles antecedent to the Thirteenth, becauſe one or other, of the many Particulars refer'd to this laſt nam'd Title, may probably be of uſe to you in conſidering many of the other Articles of this Scheme, whether they follow the Thirteenth, or precede it.
            
         
         
            
            
               Marginal Notes For the II. Or Phyſico-Chymical Part of the Natural Hiſtory of a Mineral Water propos'd.
            
               Notes on the firſt Title.
               I. 1. THe Article mentions Actual coldneſs and Heat, becauſe we do not here conſider that which the Schools call Potential.
               
               2. The knowledge of the degree of Coldneſs in the Water, eſpecially if it be extraordinary, may ſomewhat aſſiſt the Examiner to gueſs, whether the Spring come from ſome notable depth under ground before it aſcends, or whether it runs through a ſoyl abounding with Salt-Peter or Sal-armoniac,

or ſome ſuch very refrigerating ſubſtance.
               3. The degree of Coldneſs or Heat may be eſtimated ſeveral wayes as, if the Water be cold, by its having, or not having, the power to coagulate Eſſential Oyl of Anis ſeeds, or that of Fennell ſeed; & if it be that, by its being, or not being, able to melt Bodies of ſomewhat differing diſpoſitions to Fuſion, as Butte, Tallow, Bees-was, &c. Or to coagulate the whites of Eggs, or to boyl Eggs in the Shell, &c. But the beſt way is to plunge into the Water propos'd, or leaſt the whole Ball or globulous part of a good hermetically ſeal'd Thermoſcope, whereon the degrees of cold and heat are carefully mark'd.
            
            
               Notes on the Second Title.
               II. The knowledge of the ſpecifick Gravity of a Mineral Water, may be of great uſe to him that endeavonrs to diſcover its nature, not only as this knowledge inables him to diſtinguiſh

the propos'd Water from others, but becauſe it may afford him a conſiderable and double information. For, by comparing the weight of the propos'd Liquor with that of common Water, he may be, in caſe the former be heavier (as it uſually happens to be) aſſiſted to eſtimate what proportion of Salt, or Martial, or other Mineral Subſtance, it is impregnated with. And if it be very light, and much more if it be lighter than common Water, he may probably conclude that the Subſtance, that impregnates it, is either very ſmall in quantity or proportion, or is not near ſo groſs as is to be found in other Mineral Waters, but of a Spirituous and Volatile nature which is a diſcovery of no ſmall moment in this affair. And thó that may ſeem a paradox which I here ſuppoſe, that a Water impregnated with a Metalline or Mineral Subſtance ſhould be as light or even lighter than common Water. Yet upon Tryal carefully made I have found ſome Mineral Waters,

as particularly that of Tunbridge well taken up, and (thô they be ſomewhat leſs light) that of the German Spaw, and of ſome of the Iſlington Springs, to be manifeſtly lighter than common Water, and ſome taken up at Tun bridge I found to be lighter than common Water, even purified by Diſtillation.
               And thô it be very hard to conceive, yet I think it not impoſſible, that a Subterreneal Subſtance, that impregnates Water, ſhould be lighter in Specie than it: but yet I would not refer this ſurprizing Levity, in all caſes, nor all of it in moſt caſes, to the admixture of lighter Corpuſcles, becauſe ſome Tryals juſtify'd the ſuſpicion I had, that much of the Comparative Lightneſs proceeded from this, That the Mineral Water was imbued with a ſmaller quantity of vulgar or culinary Salt, than common Water uſes to contain. But yet theſe Tryals did not ſatisfy me, that this paucity of common Salt was the ſole or adequate cauſe of the lightneſs of the mentioned Waters.
               
                  
But, to diſcover ſuch minute differences, one muſt have good Inſtruments, and indeed, to ſpeak freely, there are few, upon whoſe Reports I durſt confidently relye, for the Specific Gravity of Mineral Waters. For to weigh Liquors any thing exactly there is requiſite more Heedfulneſs, and more Skill, and better Inſtruments, than are eaſy to be met with together, and than we uſually imagine. And, when Phyſicians and others weigh Mineral Waters, they are wont to do it in ſome Apothecary or other Trades▪mans Shop, where, if the Ballances be ſmall, the Veſſels and the Water are commonly too heavy for them, and oftentimes wrong them. And if, as is uſual, the Bottles or other veſſels be great, they require far better Ballances than are uſually imploy'd in the Shops of Apothecaries or Grocers, whoſe Ballances a Critical Examiner will too often find to be far from being accurate, inſomuch that uſually, without at all altering the weights, thô perhaps not

great ones, he may eaſily make which Scale he pleaſes manifeſtly preponderate, and continue in that poſition, and may as eaſily afterwards give the other Scale the ſame advantage: The diligent and experienced Mathematician Merſennus much complains of the difficulty he found to weigh Liquors exactly, even by the help of his Nicer Inſtruments. The accurateſt way, I know, is by comparing the differing weights that the ſame ſinking Body has in common Water, and in the Liquor propos'd. But this way (which I elſewhere circumſtantially deliver) requiring, beſides good Inſtruments, skill in Hydroſtaticks, is practicable but by few. And the way of comparing Waters, by the greater or leſſer ſinking of the ſame Cylinder or other ſwiming Body into them, is ſcarce accurate enough. Wherefore I choſe to make a very skilfull Artiſt blow, at the flame of a great Lamp, a thin round vial with a flattiſh bottom, that it might ſtand upright, and be

very light, and this was furniſh'd with a neck as large as a Gooſe quil drawn very even into a hollow Cylinder of above 3 Inches long, and fitted at the top with a little Gap, that hinder'd the Water from aſcending above the due height.
               This Glaſs contain'd ℥iiiſs and 43 grains of common Water, and yet when empty, weigh'd but ʒvi+ 42 grains: So that I could uſe it, when full of Liquor, in ſuch a Ballance, that the addition or detraction of half a Grain, or leſs, would make either Scale preponderate. The length and evenneſs of the ſtem was deſign'd for uſes not needful to be mention'd here; where it may ſuffice for my purpoſe to ſay, that this Glaſs was judged capable of holding Water enough for not uncurious Tryals, and yet not to be, thô well fill'd, too heavy for a tender Ballance. In this Veſſel herefore we carefully weighed ſeveral Liquors (whoſe Gravity belongs not to this place) and among them diverſe Mineral Waters, ſome

of which, at leaſt known here at London, were found to be of the annexed weights.
               The Glaſs being fill'd with ſeveral Liquors to the ſame height, and weighed in the ſame Ballances.
               
                  
                     
                         
                        
                           Ounces
                        
                        
                           dr.
                        
                        
                           gr.
                        
                     
                     
                        Common Water was found to weigh
                        3
                        4
                        43
                     
                     
                        Common Water diſtill'd
                        3
                        4
                        41
                     
                     
                        
                           Acton Water
                        3
                        4
                        48 ½
                     
                     
                        
                           Epſom Water
                        3
                        4
                        51
                     
                     
                        
                           Dulledge Water
                        2
                        4
                        54
                     
                     
                        
                           Straton Water
                        3
                        4
                        55
                     
                     
                        
                           Barnet Water
                        3
                        4
                        52
                     
                     
                        
                           North-Hall Water
                        3
                        4
                        50
                     
                     
                        The German Spaw Water
                        3
                        4
                        40
                     
                     
                        
                           Tunbridge Water
                        3
                        4
                        38
                     
                     
                        
                           Iſlington Water from the Muſick Houſe
                        3
                        4
                        36
                     
                     
                        
                           Iſlington Water from the Vault with Steps
                        3
                        4
                        39
                     
                     
                        
                           Iſlington Water from the Cellar
                        3
                        4
                        39
                     
                  
               
               By this ſhort account it may appear, that, as divers Mineral Waters (that contain Salts in them) are conſiderably heavier than Common Water,

ſo ſome, eſpecially Ferruginous Waters, are impregnated with ſo fine a ſubſtance, as to be lighter than common Water.
            
            
               Notes on the Fourth Title.
               IV. This Article may, in divers caſes, give ſome light to the diſcovery of the kind of Soyl, through which the Water has paſs'd; and is alſo uſeful to diſtinguiſh the Spontaneous reſidence, if I may ſo call it, that the Liquor lets fall by meer ſtanding, from that which they call the Caput Mortuum, that remains after the total evaporation of the Water; by which means alſo the weight of this laſt reſidence may be more truly known. Beſides ſome other Mineral Waters, I found that the German Spaw Waters, brought very well ſtop't to London, afforded by long ſtanding a pretty quantity of Terreſtrial ſubſtance, that look'd almoſt like yellow Oke
                     •
                  , and perhaps was of great affinity to it in nature. 3. That clauſe in the Article,

                  thô the Liquor be kept from the Air, was therefore ſet down, becauſe I had found by Tryals, that ſome Liquors, by being expos'd to the free Air, would have copious, and ſometimes ſurprizing, ſubſtances ſeparated from them; as if the Air contain'd ſome Precipitating Salts, fit to work on the Liquors, ſo as to make in them ſuch notable ſeparations.
            
            
               Notes on the Fifth Title.
               V. An accidental weakneſs I had, in my eyes, when I had the beſt opportunity to endeavour ſatisfying my ſelf about this Inquiry, forc'd me to leave the proſecution of it to others. Only two things I ſhall take notice of on this occaſion: One is that, having caus'd one that had young Eyes, and was accuſtom'd to make uſe of ſuch Microſcopes as are mention'd in the Article, to look upon ſome Mineral Waters through them, he ſaid he could diſcern no difference between them and common Water. Notwithſtanding

which the Tryal ought to be repeated by various perſons, on ſeveral Waters, with differing Engyſcopes, and in differing Lights, and other circumſtances. The other is, that whereas it is by divers learned men objected, againſt the goodneſs of theſe magnifying Glaſſes we now make uſe of to look on Liquors, that the little Bodies that the ingenious, Mr. Lewenhoeck, and ſince him divers other Virtuoſi, have obſerv'd in Water wherein Pepper has been infus'd, are not, as he pretends, living creatures, but little inanimate concretions, that are caſually form'd, and carry'd to and fro in the Liquor: To convince theſe Doubters, of whoſe number I was my ſelf at firſt inclin'd to be, I deviſ'd the following experiment: Having laid, upon the magnifying Glaſs, a part of a drop of Water, wherein I could ſee ſtore of theſe little Animals frisking up and down, we put to the Liquor, with a briſtle or ſome ſuch very ſlender thing, part of a drop of Spirit of Salt, which, as

was expected, preſently kill'd theſe little tender creatures, and depriving them of their Animal Motion, left them to be carry'd ſo ſlowly to and fro in the Liquor, as to make it viſible that they were then dead and had been before alive.
            
            
               Notes on the Seventh Title.
               VII 1. The Odours of divers Mineral Waters are beſt judg'd of at the Spring head or other Receptacle, whence ſome of them being remov'd ſcarce afford any Odour at all (perceptible by us men.)
               2. Perhaps the Sulphureous ſcent, that is ſometimes, perceiv'd in Tunbridge and ſome other Waters in their ſources, may in part proceed from looſe Exhalations, that caſually happen to be mingled with the Waters, but do not conſtantly belong to it.
               3. The winy odour is mention'd among others: Becauſe I am credibly

inform'd that, in France, there is a Mineral Spring, if not more or leſs than one, that has ſuch a ſmell.
               4. I mention the Bituminous Odour, diſtinctly from the Sulphureous becauſe men are too apt to confound them, and take all ſtinking Mineral▪ Waters for Sulphureous, whereas divers are manifeſtly Bituminous; as may be gather'd, to omit other ſigns, not only from their proper odours, but from more or fewer drops of Petroleum, or a kind of courſe Naphtha, that are found ſwimming upon the Water.
               5. I think it alſo not unlikely, that ſometimes a Spring may partake both of Sulphur and Bitumen, mingl'd together by the Subterraneal Heat, ſince I have found that I could eaſily enough melt and incorporate theſe two ſubſtances here above ground.
            
            
               
               Notes on Ninth Title.
               IX. 1. This is an almoſt neceſſary Article becauſe many Perſons, that drink Mineral Waters, cannot well, either for want of ſtrength or conveniency, repair immediately to the Spring head, but are oblig'd to drink them in their Beds or their Lodgings, and perhaps to have them tranſported to a great diſtance, or even to another country. 2. Many Purging Waters are found to retain their Laxative vertue, and that perhaps for a conſiderable time, thô they be tranſported to places diſtant from thoſe they riſe in. 3. In ſuch Ferruginous Waters, as are lighter than common Water, I found a manifeſt difference in reference to tranſportation: For moſt of them, even ſuch as will bear removing, have ſomething of freſhneſs and quickneſs at the Spring head, (perhaps from ſome Spirituous and Fugitive Exhalations, that there ariſe with them, but preſently vaniſh,) that

they have not any where elſe. And ſome do not only loſe this briskneſs by being remov'd, thô in veſſels well ſtop'd, but they loſe alſo the power of producing, with the powder of Galls, a Purple colour, as I found by Tryal purpoſely made in more than one of theſe Mineral Waters, which, to prevent fraud, I ſent for to the Springs themſelves by ſervants of my own: For thô theſe carryed their Glaſs Bottles along with them, and had no other Errand there but to fill and ſtop them carefully yet, by being tranſported leſs than one league, I found them ſo alter'd, that they would no longer make a Purpliſh colour with powder'd Galls, but a deep reddiſh one; whereas the German Spaw Waters did almoſt alwayes here in London afford me, with the ſame Powder of Galls, a rich Purple Colour. And Tunbridge Waters afforded me the like, but not ſo deep a one. when I receiv'd them at London very well ſtopt. 4. This laſt clauſe was not to be omitted, becauſe the exact

or negligent cloſing of the veſſels, wherein ſuch Waters are tranſported, is a circumſtance of great moment. For more than once I receiv'd at London, Waters ſent me from Tunbridge by Phyſicians themſelves, (who us'd at leaſt a moderate care in putting them up,) which yet would by no means afford with Galls a purpliſh Colour. And I found that even the German Spaw-Water would almoſt preſently loſe its capacity of being made Purple by Galls, if it were conſiderably heated. 5. But the ſame Spaw-Water being, in Summer time, kept all night in an open Veſſel, did the next morning till it was late, if not till Noon, retain a diſpoſition to be made Purple by the admixture of Galls; but that diſpoſition it loſt before the next day.
            
            
               
               Notes on the Fifteenth Title.
               XV. 1. Becauſe it often happens, that men have not the leiſure and the conveniency totally to evaporate the propoſed Mineral Water, it may be an uſeful thing, to be able without evaporation to diſcover, whether it contain any common Salt and, if it do, to make ſome eſtimate, how copiouſly or ſparingly the Liquor is impregnated with it. This might eaſily be done, with nicety enough, if I were not by very juſt Reaſons reſtrain'd, for a while, from communicating that way of examining the ſaltneſs and freſhneſs of Waters, of which I did, by the Kings command, ſhow his Majeſty ſome proofs, whereof mention was preſently after made in the printed Gazets. But till it be free for me to impart that way to the publick, I ſhall only intimate, that ſome gueſs may be made at the Saltneſs of Waters, by obſerving, whether they will lather with waſh-balls or Soap,

and, if they will not, what quantity of curdled matter they will produce; as alſo, whether the Waters will ſerve for waſhing of Linnen, and will boil Peas tender? Which two are the moſt uſual wayes that many Sea men take to examine the goodneſs of unknown Waters by. In divers Purging Waters this way may be difficult to be practis'd with certainty, becauſe of other Salts that may be predominant in them; but in the Examen of lightly Ferruginous Springs it may be more rely'd upon. 2. It may not be unworthy obſervation that, when I made uſe of my own way of examining the Saltneſs of Mineral Springs, I did not find even the lighteſt ſort of them devoid of common Salt; which I found, but not in equal proportions, to be contain'd, not only in the ſeveral Waters of Iſlington, Hamſtead VVater, and, if I miſremember not, in ſome others, but alſo particularly in Tunbridge VVaters, and thoſe of the German-Spaw, which I did not much wonder at, becauſe I had long

known, that more or leſs of common Salt is very uſually harbour'd, thô not obſerved, in many Soils, through which all ſorts of Springs, and conſequently Mineral ones, have their courſe.
            
            
               Notes on the Sixteenth Title.
               XVI. Thô Acidity be ſo uſually a manifeſt Quality of Mineral Waters, that Authors are wont to divide them into Acidulae and Thermae, yet I have found, by ſeveral Tryals, that 'tis not near ſo eaſy as men preſume, to find a manifeſt Acidity in all Mineral Waters, that are not Sulphureous or Hot. For ſeveral Ferruginous Waters, having probably ſpent the Acidity they had upon the Iron Ore, which they diſſolv'd in their paſſage, retain ſo little Acidity, that 'tis hard to diſcover they have any, either by their working upon Coral, or by any conflict with Spirit of Urine, or the like, or by mixing them with Syrup of Violets, to change the colour of it;

inſomuch that ſometimes I ſhould have concluded ſome ſuch Waters to have no Acidity at all, if I had not had a way of diſcovering a far leſs degree of it, than I could diſcern it to have by other Tryals. The circumſtances, that made this way of examining ſo critical, will coſt me too many words to ſet down here, and I have done it in another Paper expreſly written, of the way of diſcovering the Qualities of divers Bodies, by changes of colour made in or with them: And therefore I ſhall here but briefly tell you, that I diſcover the Acidity of Liquors by their operation upon the colours of an Infuſion of Lignum Nephriticum made in Lympid Water, (and order'd after a certain manner.) By this means I found the German Spaw Water to retain a little Acidity, even here at London; but more than one of our own Ferruginous Springs did not, even upon this Tryal, appear to have any. And (which ſome may think ſtrange) I did not find even ſome of the Purging Springs, particularly

that of Acton, to have any diſcernible Acidity.
            
            
               Notes on the Twentieth Title.
               XX. The Scope of this Inquiry was twofold: The firſt, to diſcover whether a change of Texture would notably alter the Qualities of the Liquor, when the Hermetical Seal hinder'd the Avolation of any Saline, Ferruginous, or Spirituous parts: And the other was, to ſee whether ſuch an Agitation, by heat, as in the open Air would, as I had found, deprive the Spaw Water of the vertue of making a Purple colour with Galls, would cauſe any manifeſt ſeparation of parts in the Liquor, and make any groſſer ſubſtance to precipitate or ſubſide. But thô we did twice (not without difficulty) make the experiment with Spaw Water, yet we made it without ſucceſs. For the firſt time the Glaſs broke at the bottom, before the Water we immers'd it in was near boyling hot. And thô the other Glaſs reſiſted

longer, and indur'd a greater heat, yet in not very many Minutes that alſo broke at the bottom. Which diſappointments a faithful Hiſtorian ought as little to conceal, as better ſucceſſes. And I chuſe to leave this 20th Article of Inquiry in its place, among the reſt of the Titles, becauſe poſſibly ſome other may be more happy, than I was, in endeavouring to anſwer it. And I hold it not amiſs, in drawing up Platforms of Natural Hiſtory, to ſet down what Queſtions we think fit to be propos'd to nature; becauſe we cannot be ſure, before Endeavours for Tryal be us'd, whether the thing to be attempted be practically performable or not.
            
            
               
               Notes on the Twenty ſixth Title.
               XXVI. 1. Divers wayes may be propounded to diſcover which of the Qualities, mention'd in this Article, is predominant in the Salt to be examin'd; but I confeſs I ſomewhat doubt, whether theſe waies of Tryal be ſo certain, as many will be forward to think them. 2. If Acidity be gueſs'd to be predominant in the Salt propos'd it will probably appear by ſuch waies as theſe. By the Taſt, odour, or both: By working upon Coral or Crabs eyes finely powder'd: By curdling of Milk; By making Syrup of violets reddiſh: By the power of deſtroying the blew colour of the Infuſion of Lignum Nephriticum: By not being Precipitable by Potent Acid Liquors as Oyl of Vitriol, Spirit of Salt; and by being Precipitable by Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, as alſo by ſtrong Spirit of Urine, and other volatile Alcaly's, as they are call'd. But, as I was noting above, I doubt whether theſe proofs be

abſolutely certain; for, if I miſtake not, I found ſome Purging Mineral Waters that would not give even ſo ſlight a proof of acidity, as to deſtroy the blewneſs of the Nephritic Tincture: Which yet would curdle Milk, and turn it to a kind of Poſſet; and, on the contrary, I found that ſome German Spaw Water would not curdle Milk, & yet would readily deprive the newly mention'd Tincture of its ceruleous colour; which yet I did not find that ſome of our Engliſh Ferruginous Waters were, at leaſt when brought me to London, able to do. 3. The predominancy of an Alcaly, in the Salt of a Mineral Water, may be probably diſcover'd by ſuch waies as theſe. By the Lixiviate Taſt, Smell, or both; the former of which may be obſerv'd in the true Niter of the Ancients, (which I have had brought me from Aegypt, and a neighbouring Country, whoſe name I do not now remember:) By the turning of Syrup of violets green: By the Precipitation

of ſolution of ſublimate made in Spring-Water: By an efferveſcence or conflict with ſome potent Acid, as Aqua fortis, or well dephlegm'd Sprit of Salt: By heightning the red Tincture of Logwood or Brazil, drawn with common Water, to which, may be added a Nicer way or two that I have elſewhere mention'd. But I propoſe theſe waies but as appearing rational, upon the ſcore of my having ſucceſsfully try'd them with other Saline Bodies that were Alcaliſate. For as to thoſe Mineral Waters, I have had occaſion to examine, I do not remember I have yet met with any, wherein an Alcaly was predominant. 4. But perhaps farther Inquiry will diſcover to others here in England, what I have not yet met with: And I doubt not but that there are, in divers places of the Earth, Salts of an Alcaliſate nature. And I preſume that, if the Egyptians were any thing curious of ſuch things, they would find, among their Springs or Wells, divers Waters impregnated

with them. For I found by Tryals, purpoſely made upon Latron, as ſome knowing men call the true Egyptian Niter, preſented me by an inquiſitive Ambaſſador who came out of the Eaſt, that the native Salt exhibited divers of the ſame Phaenomena that other factitious Alcali's do. And ſome Salt, afforded by the famous Waters of Bourbon in France, being brought me thence, with a deſire that I would examine it, I found it to be evidently Alcaliſate; inſomuch that it would make a conflict with Acids, and preſently turn Syrup of violets green. 5. If we ſuſpect Vitriol to be much predominant in the Saline part of a Mineral Water, we may endeavour to diſcover it by ſuch wayes as theſe. By its blackning a Solution of Galls: By its vomitive operation upon the Drinkers, thô this may ſometimes be an uncertain way eſpecially becauſe an inviſible permixture of Arſenic, or or perhaps Arſenical Fumes, may give the Water they impregnate an Emetic Quality: By putting Alcali's

to a ſtrong ſolution of the ſuppos'd Vitriol, and obſerving whether it will afford a yellow or yellowiſh Precipitate, if Salt of Tartar or Spirit of Urine be dropt into it. By taking notice, whether a Sulphureous Spirit, eſpecially▪ ſuch an one as I formerly told I had made thô not here deſcrib'd, will make a blackiſh or a very dark colour with it, as I firſt gueſs'd, and then found it would do with ſeveral vitriolate Liquors, and even with one, to make which we had diſſolv'd but one grain of a Natural Vitriolate ſubſtance in above four or five thouſand times its weight of Syrup or Water. But in the parts about London I remember not that, in any of the Waters I have made Tryals on, I have found Vitriol to be predominant, or to be ſo much as a manifeſt Ingredient: Which ſeem'd to me the more remarkable, becauſe ſeveral parts about this City are not deſtitute of Marcaſites, the Parents or Wombs of Vitriol. Since the writing of theſe Papers, being caſually viſited by a diſcerning

Stranger, who had a particular occaſion to take notice of the Reſidences of many of the Mineral Waters of France, his native Country; he anſwer'd me that he never met with any that was manifeſtly Vitriolate; and he ſeem'd to be of opinion, that no Vitriolate Spring had yet been diſcover'd, among the many Mineral ones that are known to be in that Country. 7. Since we ſo rarely meet with either manifeſtly Acid, or evidently Alcaliſate, Salts in our Engliſh Mineral Waters, it may deſerve a ſerious Inquiry, what other Salts they may be impregnated with; and eſpecially from what Salts, the Purgative vertue, that is found to belong to many of them, as Epſom, Barnet, Acton, &c. do's proceed? Common Salt indeed, as is already noted, I have found tokens of in the German Spaw Water; and in all the Engliſh Mineral Waters, I had occaſion to try, not one that I remember excepted. But I did not find that common Salt was ſo copious in any of them, as to diſcloſe it

ſelf by Chryſtallizing in Cubical grains. And the way, I made uſe of, to examine the Saltneſs of the Water without Cryſtallization, is not equally certain in all ſorts of them. And becauſe I had not ſtore enough of theſe Liquors, to evaporate them in large quantities, thô I could not diſcern, in the clear Salts they afforded, either Vitriol, or Salt Peter, or Allom, or even common Salt, by their peculiar and genuine Figures; yet I dare not confidently ſay, that none of our Engliſh Mineral Springs abounds with any of thoſe Salts. But as far as I can gueſs, by the Tryals that I have hitherto had opportunity to make, I am apt to think that the Salt, that is found in our Purgative Waters, and and in ſome of them copiouſly enough, dos not belong to any one known ſort of Salts, but is either of a ſort, for which as for many other Minerals, we have yet no name: or, which ſeems more probable, is a Salt of a compounded Nature, made up by the coalitions of ſome or all of

the Salts above mention'd, and perhaps of ſome other, as yet nameleſs, Subterraneal Salt that the Spring inſſolves in its paſſage, That two Bodies, which are neither of them Cathartic, may, by a change of Texture, wrought in one another, compoſe a third Body, that is briskly purgative, I have ſhewn in another Paper. Beſides having formerly had occaſion, in order to the reſolution of a certain doubt I had entertain'd, to burn Salt of Tartar with about a double weight of common Sulphur, I thence obtain'd, as I expected, a Neutral Salt, that had peculiar Qualities differing from thoſe of the Bodies imploy'd to make it up: And talking of this Salt with an ingenious Empyrick, he told me it had a Quality I had not mention'd, and that a very uſeful one, ſince in the doſe of half a dram, or in ſome Bodies, being taken in Wine or Broth, it would conſiderably, and yet gently and without gripings, purge. And without the help of Salt of Tartar have ſometimes

made out of common Sulphur, a Chryſtalline Salt of a ſomewhat Vitriolate Taſt, the like to which might poſſibly be made under ground, where there are Subterraneal fires, tho perhaps not obſerved nor ſuſpected, ſince we made this Salt without adding any thing to the Sulphur, only by the help of Fire and common Water. And I remember that a great Virtuoſo, ſeveral years ago, brought me, in order to an Examen he deſir'd I ſhould make of it, a certain Salt afforded by a Spring in or near his land, which I remember was in the Weſt of England, tho I have forgot the name of the County: Which Salt no Body knew what to make of, but I quickly told him, I took it to be of the nature of the Sal mirabile Glauberi, and predicted that in ſuch Tryals it would afford ſuch and ſuch Phaenomena, which accordingly came to paſs. And I thought that, if opportunity had not been wanting this Salt would have appear'd Purgative, as ſome factitious Salts that reſemble it in

tranſparency, colourleſneſs, and Figure have been obſerv'd to be.
            
            
               Notes on the Twenty ſeventh Title.
               1. 'Tis ſurprizing to obſerve, how great an inequality one may ſometimes meet with in the proportion that the ſame quantity, of two▪ differing Mineral Waters, bear to the Caput Mortuum they reſpectively afford: For a pound, for inſtance, of one may, after evaporation, leave behind it perhaps more drams of dry ſubſtance, than a pound of the other will leave behind it grains. But becauſe I have no notes of the conſiderableſt Inſtances of this kind, that came to my knowledge, I ſhall add only by and by the Product of a more recent Tryal. 2. As far as I have hitherto obſerv'd, thoſe Ferruginous Waters, that are not heavier than common Water, and in moſt Drinkers prove but diuretick, afford but very little Caput Mortuum, or dry Subſtance upon the total Evaporation of the Liquor,

whereas Mineral Waters, that are purging and manifeſtly more ponderous in Specie than common Water, leave, upon Evaporation, a conſiderable quantity of reſidence, thô ſome far leſs than others. 3. At once to explain, and partly prove, what I have been ſaying, I ſhall here recite that, from a pound of Barnet VVater (which is known to be purgative) ſlowly evaporated, we obtain'd a Dram of VVhite Powder. But from the like quantity of Tunbridge VVater, we obtain'd but about one grain of Caput Mortuum: And, if I miſremember not, we had but about a grain and a half from 25. Ounces of the German Spaw Water. 4. It may ſeem ſcarce credible to many, that ſo ſmall a quantity of matter, of which perhaps not one half is Saline, or Metalline, (the reſt being tereſſtrial,) ſhould impart a manifeſt vertue to ſo great a proportion of VVater. But this difficulty did not much trouble me, who have purpoſely made divers Experiments, to diſcover how

ſmall a proportion of Mineral matter may ſuffice, when diſſolv'd, to impregnate common VVater. I remember I took one grain of Iron ſtone, caſually found near the Springs at Iſlington, (from which Mineral 'tis probable thoſe VVaters derive their vertue,) this being open'd by the fire, and diſſolv'd as far as it would be in a little Spirit of Salt, we let fall a drop or two of the yellowiſh ſolution into a great proportion of Infuſion of Galls, to which it preſently gave a deeper colour than Tunbridge Water, or even the German Spaw VVater, was wont to give here at London, with the Powder of Galls: So that we gueſs'd that, if we had then had at hand a competent quantity of the infuſion, the remaining part of the Martial Solution would have been able to colour ten times a greater quantity of the Infuſion, than our Tryal was made upon. This will be eaſily believ'd by him, that ſhall conſider an Experiment, we afterwards made to the ſame purpoſe,

which was this, VVe diſſolv'd a half grain of a good Marcaſite, taken up not far from London, in a ſmall quantity of Spirit of Niter, (which for a certain Reaſon I made choice of, thô other Acid Menſtruums, as Aquafortis, and Spirit of Salt would have diſſolved the Mineral.) This ſmall ſolution we put into a pound of pretty high Tincture of Galls, made by infuſing them in common Water, and finding, as we expected, that this mixture, grew very dark, we fill'd a Vial with it, and emptying that Vial into a larger Glaſs, we fill'd the ſame Vial three times with common Water to dilute it; notwithſtanding which this new mixture, being put into one of our uſual Glaſſes, appeared of a colour much deeper than that which the Water of Tunbridge, or the German Spaw, had formerly given with the Powder of Galls: So that probably, if another Vial of common Water had been added, it would yet have afforded a purple colour, if not a deeper; ſo that one part of diſſolv'd Marcaſite

communicated a Tincture to (61440) ſixty one thouſand four hundred and forty parts of Infuſion of Galls. And that which makes this Experiment more conſiderable is, that this ſmall quantity of Marcaſite was not it ſelf all Martial or Metalline: For from our Engliſh Marcaſites, as well as others, I have obtain'd a pretty quantity of Sulphur like common Sulphur; beſides that they afford a not deſpicable quantity of Terreſtrial Subſtance, about whoſe nature I have not yet ſatisfy'd my ſelf. 5. I ſhall now add this reflexion that, ſince the Marcaſite impregnated ſo much Water with its corporeal Parts, if I may ſo call them, obtain'd by bare diſſolution, it ſeems highly probable, that the ſame quantity of Liquor may be impregnated by a far leſs quantity of Mineral matter, attenuated into a kind of Spirituous ſlate, by being rais'd in the form of Fumes or exhalations; and that imperfect or embryonated Iron may be ſo, will ſcarce be deny'd by

them that conſider the way that I have, in another Paper, deliver'd to make Iron manifeſtly emit copious Fumes, without the help of external Fire. And if it be with ſome ſuch Spirituous and volatile Exhalations, that a Mineral Water, as that of Tunbridge or of Iſlington, is impregnated, 'tis not hard to conceive that they may eaſily loſe their chief vertue, by the avolation of moſt or many of their fugitive Parts, upon their being remov'd to a diſtance from the Spring head. And to make it probable, that vitriolate Corpuſcles may be made to aſcend, without loſing their nature, I ſhall here mention an Experiment, that I devis'd to give ſome light in this matter. I had often found by Tryal, that a Spirit, richly impregnated with volatiliz'd Sulphur, would with vitriol, whether in the form of a powder or a ſolution, produce in a trice a very dark or blackiſh colour; And gueſſing that, in Mercury turn'd by the addition of Salt and Vitriol into corroſive ſublimate, many of the Vitriolate

Corpuſcles might aſcend with the Mercurial ones, I took ſuch a Volatile Sulphureous Tincture as I have been mentioning, (which for this purpoſe ought to be deep,) and having dropt it upon good Sublimate, I found it turn preſently of a very opacous colour. To ſhow alſo that, to make a great dilatation or diſperſion of the Martial Corpuſcles of an Ore or Mineral, there needs no Spirit of Salt, or the like diſtill'd Menſtruum, I procur'd from a copperas-work, (or place where vitriol is made by art,) ſome of the Liquor they imploy, before they caſt in Iron, that being corroded by it, it may increaſe the weight, and give ſolidity and ſome other Qualities to the deſigned Vitriol. Now thó this Liquor be made, without any Chymical Menſtruum, barely by Rain or Snow-Water, that impregnates it ſelf with Saline or Metalline Particles in its paſſage through Beds of Marcaſites, that lye expos'd to the Sun and Air; yet in this Water ſuch numbers of Martial Corpuſcles

are diſpers'd that, having ſhaken four drops of it into 12 Ounces and a half of common Water, this Liquor, as I expected, was thereby ſo impregnated, that with powder of Galls it preſently produc'd as deep a colour as good Tunbridge Water would have done. So that, ſuppoſing a drop of this Liquor to weigh about a grain, (as by ſome Tryals purpoſely made we found it to do,) it appears that one part of the vitriolate Water was able manifeſtly to impregnate 1500 Parts of common water. And yet of theſe 4 drops or Grains of Vitriolate Liquor, a conſiderable part may very probably be concluded, from the way of its production, to have been Rain Water, as will eaſily be granted when I ſhall have added, that, to examine this ſuppoſition or conjecture, we ſlowly evaporated ſome Ounces of the Vitriolate Liquor, and found that the remaining dry Subſtance did not fully amount to the 4th part of the weight of the whole. At which rate 'twas eaſy to conclude, that one

grain of Vitriolate ſubſtance would have been ſound capable of ſo impregnating ſix thouſand times its weight of common Water, as to make it ſit to produce with Galls a purple tincture. We afterwards found, upon Tryal purpoſely and warily made, that the experiment will hold, thô the proportion of the Water, to the grain of tinging ſubſtance, ſhould exceed that lately mention'd, by the weight of ſome hundreds of grains.
            
            
               
                  TITLES.
                  For the Natural Hiſtory of a Mineral water propos'd. Conſider'd as a Medicine.
                  
                     (Being the III. Part of the deſigned work.)
                  
               
               SECT. VI.
               
                  THough the effects of a Mineral Water upon Humane Bodies, as well as upon other Subjects, may

challenge a place in the Natural Hiſtory of it, yet becauſe the Titles of this Third Part of this Scheme, for the moſt part, directly regard the cure or prevention of diſeaſes, which are held to be the proper Offices of Phyſicians as ſuch; I forbore to make any comments upon the particular Titles of this Part of our Hiſtorical Idea, contenting my ſelf, for the ſake of thoſe that are ſtrangers to Platforms of Natural Hiſtory, to have ſet down a ſeries of Titles, which may point out to them what particulars may be fit for their Inquiry, and furniſh them with heads whereto they may refer, and Receptacles wherein they may lodge what, upon Tryals or otherwiſe, they ſhall meet with worthy of obſervation. And ſo the accounts, that ſhall be given on theſe Subjects, may be ſomewhat more diſtinct, and leſs incompleat.
               To what Temperaments and conſtitutions the Mineral Water propos'd is the moſt proper, to what leſs proper,

and to what noxious or inconvenient?
               In what ſtated Diſeaſes, and in what particular caſes, the Mineral Water is proper, or to be ſuſpected of being dangerous, if not certainly hurtful?
               What difference there is, if any, between the Water taken up and preſently drunk at the Spring it ſelf or other receptacle, and that which is carryed to ſome diſtance off, whether in open, or in well ſtop'd Veſſels?
               Of the manifeſt Operations of the Water in thoſe that take it, whether it be by vomit, by ſeige, by Urine, by ſeveral, or by two, or all of theſe waves.
               Whether any, occult vertues, or other hidden Qualities, can be diſcovered in the Mineral Water? And if any, what?
               What variation, in the effects of the Mineral Water, proceeds from its being drunk all of it quite cold, or hot, or lukewarm, or one part when 'tis in

one of thoſe tempers, and the reſt when in another?
               Of promoting or facilitating the operation of the Water, in ſome by taking it in Bed, and in others by Moderate exerciſe.
               What aſſiſtance may be given to the operation of the Water, by giving with it, eſpecially in the firſt draught, ſomething to make it paſs the better, or to correct its Crudity, or to ſtrengthen the ſtomach and Bowels?
               What advantages may accrue, from preparing the Patients Body before he enters upon his courſe of drinking the Waters? And what inconveniences may attend the neglect of ſuch preparation eſpecially in groſs, foul, or much obſtructed Bodies?
               Of the aſſiſtance the Water may receive by gently purging Medicines, diſcreetly given from time to time.
               Of the beſt Doſe, or quantity of the Water, to be taken at once; of the compaſs

of time wherein it ſhould be all drunk; and of the gradual increaſing and leſſening the Doſe at the beginning, and ſometimes before the end, of the whole ſpace of time appointed for the taking it.
               How much the greater or leſſer length of time, ſpent in taking the Water, conduces to its good Effects? and what is the fitteſt meaſure of time to continue the drinking of it, reſpect being had to the Patients ſtrength, Diſeaſe, the time of the year, the accidental temperature of the Air, and other conſiderable circumſtances.
               Whether the drinking of the Mineral Water, for ſeveral years together, be found almoſt neceſſary, or more beneficial than to intermit it ſometimes for a year or two, or perhaps longer, and then to return to the uſe of it?
               Of the Diet, as to meat, drink, exerciſe, ſleep, &c. That ought to be obſerv'd by thoſe that take the Water, and of the inconveniences that

are wont to follow the neglect of it.
               Of the ſignes that declare the Water to work kindly and effectually, and of the Tokens of not doing ſo, and thoſe of its being already hurtful or likely to prove ſo.
               Of the Inconveniences or unwelcome accidents (if there be any, as uſually there is) that have been obſerv'd to happen, during, or ſome time after, the drinking of the Mineral Water, eſpecially to Perſons of ſuch conſtitutions, or that are in ſuch and ſuch circumſtances, and of the waies to prevent or remedy ſuch inconveniences.
               Whether there be any neceſſity, or great uſe, of taking Phyſick after one has done drinking the Water? And if there be, what are the fitteſt times and medicines to be imploy'd for the prevention of any bad effects of it, and what is the danger of neglect to make uſe of them?
               VVhether and how the Mineral VVater may be uſefully given by

being ſimply commix'd with other Liquors or Bodies, as by boiling meat in it; or by receiving, together with the Additament, a further preparation, as when the VVater is mingled with VVine, or ſome other Drink; when with Milk 'tis made into Poſſet drink; when brewed with Mault alone, or with that and hopps, 'tis turn'd into Ale or Beer?
               VVhether any ſuch ſaline, or other, ſubſtance may by evaporation Inſpiſſation, Calcination, &c. be extracted, or obtained, from the Mineral VVater, as being given in a ſmall Doſe, may be ſubſtituted, as a Succedaneum to large quantities of the Water as nature affords it?
               Of what uſes (if of any) the Mineral VVater is, when outwardly apply'd, as by waſhing ſore Eyes or Ulcers, bathing in it, &c. And whether the mud, or Sediment it leaves, where it paſſes or ſtagnates, being externally apply'd, have the ſame or other Medicinal vertues, and, if ſo, how the mud is to be adminiſtred

to make it exert them.
               Of ſome Mechanico-Medical Trials, that may be made upon Animals, to help us to gueſs at the Qualities of the Mineral VVaters, as by injecting it into the veins of a Dog, to try whether it will coagulate his Blood, or make it more fluid, or operate powerfully by Vomit, Siege, or Urine: as alſo by keeping a Dog very long without allowing him any other Drink at all than the Mineral VVater.
               But I propoſe ſuch Particulars, as are mention'd in this Article, but as Analogous Experiments, or Succedaneums to Tryals that ſhould, but cannot well, becauſe of the worthineſs of the Subject, be try'd in living Humane Bodies. And indeed all the Titles of this third part of our deſign'd Hiſtory, belong porperly to Phyſicians; many of whom (at leaſt if they reſemble you) are far better qualifi'd, to cultivate this Medicinal Subject, than I, who being as little deſirous, as fit, to

incroach upon their Province, ſhall not inlarge upon this third member of our Hiſtory, but willingly reſign it into their, and eſpecially into your own, more skilful hands.
            
            
               The Concluſion.
               ANd now, Sir, it may be ſeaſonable to put an end, at leaſt for the preſent, ſo this Rhapſody of Papers, by telling you, That theforegoing Idea or Platform of a Hiſtory of Mineral VVaters, being a draught of, or a Firſt eſſay upon, ſo difficult and and uncultivated a Subject, as I have ventur'd to treat of; as I know you are too Iudicious to expect any thing of exactneſs and compleatneſs, in what I now preſent you, ſo I hope you will be ſo equitable, or ſo favourable, a Reader, as to forgive thoſe omiſſions and other imperfections, that I cannot doubt, but you, (and even I my ſelf upon a review,) ſhall diſcover in the firſt edition of the foregoing Papers. And thô, if hereafter they

ſhall be thought worthy of a Second, I may poſſibly be able, if God be pleas'd to grant me health and Leiſure, to rectify ſome overſights, and ſupply ſome omiſſions; yet, to deal freely with you, I much fear, that it will be very difficult for far skilfuller Pensthan mine to deliver ſuch Hiſtories of Mineral VVaters, as the curious would wiſh, and thoſe Criticks, that have never made Tryal of the difficulty of attempts of this nature, will be forward to require. And this difficulty will, I preſume, be found a great one, not only, (as I have already noted,) by him that ſhall undertake to give a good account of Mineral VVaters á priori, but to him alſo that ſhall take in all the help he can obtain à poſteriori. For there are ſo many circumſtances, of ſeaſons, VVeather, place, and a multitude of contingencies, that may vary the Phaenomena and effects of Mineral VVaters, that 'tis extreamly difficult, either to comprize ſo many different things at once, and as it were ſurvey them at one view, or

without having ſuch a comprehenſion and multitude of various regards, to be able to pronounce with certainty about the nature, the Medicinal Operations, and the other effects, of a Subject that may be influenc'd and diverſify'd by ſo many cauſes and accidents, as a Mineral VVater may. And therefore, till further diſquiſitions and Tryals ſhall have better clear'd up the Subject, I ſhall, without pretending to more, think the paſt diſcourſe not altogether uſeleſs, if it can well perform the office of the virgula divinatoria; which, (ſuppoſing the truth of what many Chymiſts and Metalliſts deliver,) of how little value ſoever it be of it ſelf, is fit to point at Mineral treaſures, and ſhow men the places where they are to ſeek for them. Farewel.
               
            
            
               
               This belongeth to the 16th Title of the firſt Part.
               'TIs known, that the drinking of Ferruginous Waters, ſuch as thoſe of the German-Spaw and our Tunbridge, is uſually preſcrib'd for many Weeks, during which time it often enough happens, that the Fall of Rains makes men doubt whether the Mineral Water be not ſo much diluted, as to be ſpoil'd in its Medicinal Capacity. And indeed I have more than once obſerv'd, that ſome ſuch Martial Waters, after conſiderable Rains loſt their Power of producing the wonted Colour with Galls. And therefore it may in ſome caſes be of good uſe, to be aſſiſted to Conjecture, whether or no the Rain have made the Mineral Water unfit for Drinking. In order to this I ſhall take notice, that uſually a ſmall Rain does little or no harm to the Medicinal Spring. And ſometimes even a moderate Rain, eſpecially after a long Drought, may, inſtead of weakning it, increaſe its vertue, by waſhing down into its Channel ſome Salts, that during the dry weather, were concreted in the Pores of the Ground, and perhaps alſo by heightning the Water in the Channel, ſo as to diſſolve

ſome Salts concreted there, which it could not reach before. But if the Rain have long continu'd, the Eſtimate may beſt be made, partly by the greater or leſſer depth of the Spring beneath the ſurface of the Ground, and partly and indeed chiefly, by the peculiar nature or ſtrength of the Mineral Water. For ſome Springs are much more copiouſly impregnated than others, and therefore will bear a greater dilution by Rain-Water, of which I ſhall give you this notable Inſtance. That, whereas I found (as I lately noted) that more than one of our Engliſh Martial Springs, eſpecially thoſe near London, were too much weakned by the Water that Rained into them; I had the Curioſity to try, how much of that kind of Liquor, ſome German-Spaw-Water, that came to me to London very well conditioned, would bear. In purſuit of which deſign I warily made ſome Tryals, which ſhowed, (what probably will be thought ſtrange, that when the Mineral Water was diluted with no leſs than thrice its Weight of Rain-Water, it yet retained ſtrength enough to produce with newly powdered Galls, a Purpliſh colour.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            A Catalogue of late Phyſick Books ſold by Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Pauls Churchyard.
            
            
               Fol.
               BOueti Anatomia, 2. Vol. 1680.
               —Mercurius, 1682.
               —Medicina Septentrionalis, 1684.
               Breinii Plantarum Exoticar. Cent. cum Figuris, 1680.
               Fabritii Hildani opera cum Severino, 1682.
               Hippocratis Opera Foetii.
               Hartmanni Opera omnia, 1684.
               Paracelſi Opera, 2 vol.
               
               Dioſcoridis Opera, G. Lat.
               
               Saxoniae Opera Med. 1680.
               Piſo Hiſt, naturalis de rebus Indiae.
               Schenkii Obſervat. Med.
               Mentzelii Index Plant. cum Figuris, 1683.
               Lepenii Bibliotheca Med. 1683.
               Riverii Opera, 1679.
               Zwelferii Pharmacopeia.
            
            
               Quartoes.
               Alpinus Medicina Aegypt.
               Borrichius de ortu & progreſſu Chimiae.
               —Hermetis Aegyptiorum & Chym. Sapientia.
               Bauhini Pinax cum Prodromo.
               Broeckhuyſen Oeconomia Corporis Anim. 1683.
               Boyle Opera omina, 2 vol.
               
               Blaſii Anatomia, 1681.
               Borellus de motu Animalium, 2 vol.
               
               
                  
Blegny Zodiacus Galen. Med. Chymic. 1682▪
               
               Bartholini Acta Medica. 4 vol.
               
               Caſtelli Lexicon Med. 1682.
               Cardilucii Officina Sanitatis.
               Clauderi Methodus Balſamandi.
               Collect anea Chymica Leydenſia, 1684.
               Clauderi Inventum cinnabaricum, 1684.
               Cleyer Specimina Medicinae Sinicae, 1682.
               Charas Pharmacopeia Regia, 1683.
               Charas Theri ca Andromachi, 1684.
               Diemerbroeck Anatomia.
               Daviſſomi Comment▪ in Medicinam Severini.
               Dolaei Encyclopedia Med. 1684.
               Fernelii Opera, 1683.
               Van Helmontii Opera, 1682.
               Gliſſon de Naturae Subſtantia.
               Hoffmanni Praxis Med. 1680.
               Helwigii Obſervationes Med. 1680.
               Hoffmannus in Schroderum.
               Joel Opera medica.
               Kyperi Anthropologia corporis humani▪
               
               Konig Regnum Animale, 1682.
               Kirckringii Specilegium Anatom.
               Licetus de Monſtris.
               Muſeum Hermetic.
               Miſcellanea Curioſa M. Phyſica, 7 vol. 1682.
               —Id. Decuria ſecunda Anni Primi, 1683.
               Margravi Materia Medica.
               —Prodromus.
               Pauli Quadriparti tum Botanicum.
               Plateri praxis.
               Pechilinus de potu Theae, 1684.
               
                  
Regii Medicina.
               Rolfinchius de purgantibus, 1683▪
               
               —Ordo & Methodus Med. Specialis.
               —Conoilia Med.
               Sacra Eleuſinia patefacta, 1684.
               Schonckii Hiſtde humor, totius corporis, 1684▪
               
               Salamandrae Deſcriptio, 1683.
               Sylvii Opera Med.
               Schorkii Pharmacopeia.
               —Hiſi. Moſchi.
               Ang. Salae Opera Med. 1682.
               Swammerdam miraculum Natura.
               Vigerii Opera med.
               Verſaſchae de Apoplexia.
               Waltheri Sylva medica▪
               
               Welſchii Decades X. med.
               Wedelii Opiologia.
               —Phyſiologia Med.
               —Pharmacia.
               —de medicam. facultatiam▪
               
               —de medicam. compoſitione.
               —Amaenitates Materiae Med. 1684.
               Weidenfeld de uſu Spir. Vini Lulliani, 1684▪
               
               Wepfericicut
                     •
                   Aquatica.
               Zwelferi Pharmacop.
            
            
               Octavoc
                     •
                  .
               Bartholini de ductu Salivali, 1685.
               Bruelis praxis Med.
               Bontekoe de Febribus, 1683.
               Tho. Bartholini Hiſt. Anatomica.
               Becke de Procidentia Uteri, 1683.
               Borelli Obſervat. Med.
               
                  
Briggs de Oculo.
               Barthol. Anatomia.
               Beck. Experimenta, 1684.
               Beckeri Phyſica ſubterr anea cum ſupplemento, 1681.
               Brunneri Experimenta nova circa Pancreas, 1682.
               Camerarii Sylloges memorabilium M
                     〈…〉
                   2 vol. 1683.
               Deckeri Exercitationis Med pract.
               Dodonai Praxis Medica.
               Franchimont Lithotomia Med. 1683.
               Funerwalfi Anatomia.
               Gockelii Concilia & obſervat. Med. 1683.
               De Graaf Opera.
               Grulichius de Hydrope, 1681.
               —De Bile, 1682.
               Grimm Compend. Med. Chym. 1684.
               Guiberti Opera Med.
               Hartmanni Praxis Chymiatrica, 1682.
               Heide Anatome inytuli & obſervat. Med. 1684.
               Hippocratis Opera, 2 vol.
               
               Juncken Chymia Experimentalis, 1681.
               —Medicus praſenti Seculo Accom. 1682.
               Juventa a nova Antiqua Med. 1684.
               Le Mort Pharmacia & Chimia, 1684.
               Loſſii Concil. Med. 1684.
               Liſter de Fontibus Med. Angliae.
               —De Inſectis, 1685.
               Liſeri Culter Anatomicus:
               Marchetti Anatomi:
               
                  
Meekren Obſervat. Med. Chyruri 1682:
               Mereti Pinax:
               Plateri Obſervat. Med.
               Peonis & Pythagor. Exercit. Anat. & Med. 1682:
               Plot de Origine Fontium, 1685:
               Riverii Inſtitutiones:
               —Praxis, 2 vol.
               
               —Obſervat.
               Rulandi Curationes Emperica, 1680.
               Sydenhami Opera Univerſa Londini, 1685.
               Strauſſii Iſagoge Phyſica, 1684.
               Schroderi Pharmacopeia:
               Sculteti Chyrurgia cum Append.
               Sthal Aetioiogia Phyſ. Chym. 1683.
               Tilingii Lilium Curioſum, 1683:
               Tilingii Prodromus, med.
               —De Laudano opiato.
               Verſaſchae Obſervat. med.
               Welſch rationale Vulnerum Lethalium, 1685.
               Wepferi de Apoplexia:
               Witten memoria medicor.
               Zypaei Fundamentu med. 1683:
            
            
               Twelves.
               Bayle Tract. de Apoplexia.
               —Diſſertationes Phyſicae.
               —Diſſertationes Medicae.
               —Problemata Phyſica Med.
               Blondel Thermarum Aquis granen. & porcet, deſcript. 1685.
               Barbetti Chyrurgia:
               —Praxis cum notis Deckerii:
               
                  
Barthol. De Ovariis
               —De Unicornu:
               —De Pulmonum ſubſt
                     〈…〉
                  :
               Beughen Bibliographia Med. & Phyſica, 1682:
               Beguini Tyrocinium Chymicum:
               Comelini Catalogus Plantarum, 1682:
               Drelincourt Praeludium Anat.
               —Experimenta Anat. 1684.
               Guiuri Arcanum Acidular. 1682:
               Gliſſoni Opuſcula, 3 vol.
               
               Van Helmont. Fundamenta Med. 1682:
               Hoffmanus de uſu Li
                     •
                  nis, &c. 1682:
               Harvey de Gener. Animal.
               —De motu cordis:
               Hoffman de Cinnabari Antimonii, 1685.
               Ab Heer Fons Spadanus & Obſerv. Med. 1685.
               Kirchim de Peſte, 1681.
               Kirckring▪ in Baſil Valent. currum Triumph.
               Kunckelii Obſervat. Chymiae, 1681:
               Le Mort Compendium Chymicum, 1682.
               Muralti Vade mecum Anat. 1682.
               Myſteria Phyſico-Medica, 1681.
               Maurocordatus de motu Pulmonum, 1682.
               Macaſii Promptuarium Materiae Med.
               Matthaei Experimenta Chymica, 1683.
               Muis Praxis Chyrurgica duabus partibus, 1684.
               Morelli Methodus perſcribendi formulas Remedior.
               Primeroſe ars Pharmac.
               
                  
Pecket Anatomia:
               Redus de Inſectiss
               Reidlini Obſerv. med.
               Rivinus de peſte lipſ
                     •
                  enſi. 1680:
               Riverii Arcana.
               St. Romani Phyſica, 1684.
               Recueil de Curioſitez en Medicine, 1685.
               Smitzii Compend. med. 1682:
               Stockhameri Microcoſmographia,
               Swalve Quarelae Ventriculi:
               —Alcali & acidum:
               Tilingius de Renum ſtructura.
               Verla Anat Oculi:
               Vigani Medulla Chymiae:
               Du Verney traite de L'organe de L'ouie, 1683
               Spon Obſervations Sur les Fieures, 1684.
               Wedelii Theoremata Med.
               —De Sale Volat. Plantarum.
            
         
         
            
            Advertiſement.
            THat theſe afore mentioned Books in Phyſick and Chymiſtry, with many other Forreign Books, are ſold by Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Pauls Church-yard; and that he will furniſh himſelf with much variety of new Books in that kind, from time to time, as they ſhall come from Franckfort Mart; and likewiſe he can procure ſuch other Books for Gentlemen, whichperhaps are not to be met with here, from his Correſpondents, if to be had, beyond Sea.
            Books Printed for, and ſold by Samuel Smith.
            
            THe Philoſophical Tranſactions publiſhed by the Royal Society Monthly, beginning January 1683:
            
               Jo. Goedartius de Inſectis in methodum redactus cum Notalurum Additione Opera M. Liſter, item Appendicis ad Hiſt. Animalium Angliae, cum 21 Figuris Aeneis illuſtrata, 1685.
            Enquiry after Happineſs by the Author of Practical Chriſtianity, 1685.
            
               R. Boyl's Memoirs for the Nat. Hiſtory of Human Blood, eſpecially the Spirit of that Liquor, 1684. Price 2 s.
            
            —Experiments and Conſiderations about

the Poroſity of Bodies, in two Eſſays, 1684. Price 1 s.—6 d.
            
            —Of the Reconcileableneſs of Specifick Medicines to the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, is now in the Preſs.
            
               Tuta an Efficax Luis Venerea, 
                     •
                  ſepe abſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mercurio ac ſemper abſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Salivatione mercuriali curandae Methodus Authore D. A. M. D. 1614.
            
               De variatione, ac varietate ppulſus obſervationes, acceſſit ejuſdem Author is nova Medicine tum Speculativae, tum practicae claevis. Sive Ars Explorandi medicas plantarum ac corporum quorumcumque facultates ex Solo Sapore 16q85.
            
               The whole Art of the Stage, &c. Tranſlated out of French: In Quarto, 1684 price 5. s.
            
            A new Hiſtory of Ethiopia, being a full and Accurate Deſcription of the Kingdom of Abeſſinia, vulgarly, though erroneouſly, called the Empire of Preſter John in four Books (illuſtrated with many Copper Plates) and alſo a new and exact Map of the Countrey, and a Preface ſhe wing the uſefulneſs of this Hiſtory; with the life of Gregorius Abba, &c. By the learned Job Ludolphus Councellour to his Imperial Majeſty and the Dukes of Saxony, and Treaſurer to his Highneſs, the Elector Palatine, in Fol. 1684. Price 12. s.
            
            
               Guideon's Fleece, or a vindication of the

Colledge of Phyſlcians in anſwer to a Book intituled the Conclave of Phyſicians. By Dr. Harvey, in Quarto, 1684. Pr. 6. 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            An Anatomical account of an Elephant which was lately Diſſected in Dublin, June 17, in the year 1681. By A. M. Med. of Trinity Colledge near Dublin, illuſtrated with Cuts, in Quarto, 1682. Price 1. s.
            
            
               Swammerdami (Johan.) Amſt. M. D. Miraculum Naturae. In Octavo.
            A Philoſophical Account of the hard Froſt, with what Effects it may probably have upon Human Bodies, as to Health and Sickneſs, in Quarto. 2 d. Stitcht.
            The true method of curing Conſumptions. By S. H. Med. D. 1683. Price 1. s.
            
            A Diſcourſe about Bagnio's, and Mineral Baths, and of the drinking of Spaw Water, with an Account of the Medicinal Vertues of them, and alſo ſhewing the uſefulneſs of Sweating, Rubbing, and Bathing, and the great benefit many here received from them in various Diſtempers. By S. H. Med. Doct. 1683.
            Miracles, Works above and contrary to Nature; or an Anſwer to a late Tranſlation out of Spinoſa's Tractatus Theologice-politicus, Mr. Hobs Leviathan, &c. in Quarto, 1683. Price 1. s.
            A Treatiſe of Self Examination, in order to the worthy receiving the Holy Communion. By Monſieur John Clade Miniſter of the

Reformed Church at Paris: Tranſlated from the French Original, in Twelves, 1683.
            
               Proteſtancy to be Embraced; or a new and infallible Method to reduce Romaniſts from Popery to Proteſtancy. 1683. pr. 1. s.
            
            
               The Art of Divine Converſe, being a New Years-Gift, directing how to walk with God all the year long, in Twelves, pr. 6. d.
            
            The Councils of Wiſdom, or the Maxims of Solomon, in Twelves, 1683. pr. 1. s.
            
            The Ten Pleaſures of Marriage. In Twelves.
            
            The Dutch Rogue: or Guſman of Amſterdam, traced from the Cradle to the Gallows, 1683. In Twelves.
            
            Dr. Thomas Smith's Sermon about frequent Communion, 1685.
            Mr. Fiſh's Sermon on the 9th of May, 1684.
            Hiſtory of the Original and Progreſs of Eccleſiaſtical Revenues, by the Learned P. Simon, 1685.
            
               Contra Hiſt. Ariſteae de LXX Interpretibus diſſertatio, ſive reſponſio ad D. Iſaac Voſſium de Septuaginta, &c. per H. Hoddy A. M. 1685.
            FINIS.
         
      
   