
      
         
            
            
            The Great Meſſenger of MORTALITY: Or, A Dialogue betwixt DEATH and a LADY.
            
               
            
            
               DEATH.
               FAIR Lady, lay your coſtly Robes aſide,
               No longer may you glory in your Pride:
               Take Leave of all your carnal vain Delight,
               I'm come to ſummon you away this Night.
            
            
               LADY.
               What bold Attempt is this? pray let me know,
               From whence you come, and whither I muſt go.
               Shall I, who am a Lady, ſtoop or bow
               To ſuch a pale-faced Viſage, Who art Thou?
            
            
               DEATH.
               Do you not know me? Well, I'll tell you then,
               'Tis I that conquer all the Sons of Men.
               No Pitch of Honour from my Dart is free;
               My Name is Death, have you not heard of me?
            
            
               LADY.
               Yes, I have heard of thee, Time after Time,
               But being in the Glory of my Prime,
               I did not think you would have call'd ſo ſoon.
               Why muſt my Morning Sun go down at Noon?
            
            
               DEATH.
               Talk not of Noon, you may as well be mute,
               This is no Time at all for to diſpute.
               Your Riches, Jewels, Gold, and Garments brave;
               Your Houſes, Lands, muſt all new Maſters have.
               Tho' thy vain Heart to Riches was inclin'd
               Yet thou muſt die, and leave them all behind.
            
            
               LADY.
               My Heart is cold, I tremble at the News.
               Here's Bags of Gold, if thou wilt me excuſe,
               And ſeize on thoſe (thus finiſh thou the Strife)
               On ſuch as are a weary of their Life.
               Are there not many bound in Priſon ſtrong,
               In bitter Grief of Soul have languiſh'd long,
               From all would find a Grave, a Place of Reſt,
               From all their Grief, in which they are oppreſt.
               Beſides, there's many with their hoary Head.
               And Palſy Joints, by which their Joys are fled,
               Releaſe thou them whoſe Sorrows are ſo great.
               But ſpare my Life to have a longer Date.
            
            
               DEATH.
               Tho' they by Age are full of Grief and Pain,
               Yet their appointed Time they muſt remain.
               I come to none before my Warrant's ſeal'd,
               And when it is, they muſt ſubmit and yield.
               I take no Bribe, believe me, this is true,
               Prepare yourſelf to go, I come for you.
            
            
               LADY.
               
                  Death, be not ſo ſevere, let me obtain
               A little longer Time to live and reign.
               Fain would I ſtay, if thou my Life wilt ſpare,
               I have a Daughter beautiful and fair,
               I'd live to ſee her wed, whom I adore.
               Grant me but this, and I will ask no more.
            
            
               DEATH.
               This is a ſlender frivolous Excuſe.
               I have you faſt, and will not let you looſe.
               Leave her to Providence, for you muſt go
               A long with me, whether you will or no.
               I, Death, command Kings to leave their Crowns,
               And at my Feet they lay their Sceptres down.
               If unto Kings this Favour I not give,
               But cut them off, can you expect to live
               Beyond the Limit of your Time and Space
               No, I muſt ſend you to another Place.
            
            
               LADY.
               You learned Doctors, now expreſs your Skill,
               And let not Death of me obtain his Will.
               Prepare your Cordials, let me Comfort find.
               My Gold ſhall fly like Chaſt before the Wind.
            
            
               DEATH.
               Forbear to call, their Skill will never do,
               They are but Mortals here, as well as you.
               I give the fatal Wound, my Dart is ſure,
               'I is far beyond the Doctor's Skill to cure.
               How freely can you let your Riches fly.
               To purchaſe Death, rather than yield to die.
               But while you flouriſh'd here in all your Store,
               You would not give one Penny to the Poor,
               Tho' in God's Name they Suit to you did make,
               You would not ſpare one Penny for his Sake.
               My Lord beheld wherein you did amiſs,
               And calls you hence to give Account for this.
            
            
               LADY.
               Oh, heavy News! muſt I no longer ſtay?
               How ſhall I ſtand in the great Judgment Day?
               Down from her Eyes the cryſtal Tears did flow.
               She ſaid, None knows what I do undergo.
               Upon a Bed of Sorrow here I lie,
               My carnal Life makes me afraid to die.
               My Sins, alas! are many, groſs, and ſoul.
               Lord Jeſus Chriſt have Mercy on my Soul.
               And tho' I do deſerve thy righteous Frown,
               Yet pardon, Lord, and pour a Bleſſing down.
               Then with a dying Sigh her Heart did break,
               And did the Pleaſures of this World forſake.
               Thus may we ſee the High and Mighty fall.
               For cruel Death ſhews no Reſpect at all,
               To any one of high or low Degree.
               Great Men ſubmit to Death as well as we.
               Tho' they are gay, their Lives are but a Span.
               A Lump of Clay, ſo vile a Creature's Marl
            
         
      
      
         
            Printed and Sold in Bow-Church-Yard, London.
            
         
      
   