
      
         
            
            
            
               〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
            
            THE FAMILIE OF DAVID, FOR THE SONNES OF THE KINGDOME, VVITH A CHROnicle vnto the redemtion.
            
               〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
            
            Printed at Amstelredam a city of Marchandise knowen vnto India and all limites of the Earth
            By Zacharias Heyns. 1605.
         
         
            
               
               TO THE RENOVVNED IN IEVVISH LEARNING, ABRAHAM RVBEN ARCHISYNAGOGE IN CONstantinople, vvordes of peace and truth,
               FAMOVS sir, I promised to shevv you the vvays of our favth largely, vvhen the King of Scotland should be King of England. The day is come, and vvhat I longed for I haue seene. And novv I vvil declare in print what I did before in vvriting. And I vvil beginn from the house of Dauid, and the Chronicle For herein the heart of the most is deceyved and wandereth. Aftervvards (if God wil,) I vvil shevv the joynctes of al the holy Bible, and the superfluity of the Thalmud. God giue you knowledge for Dauids house: where the sonnes of Salomon fayle: and vvhere the seede of Nathan his brother doth come hey
                     •
                  e to the Kingdome. In Iechonias Solomons seede fayleth: according to the vvord of the Eternall, by Ieremy both of Iehoiachim and Iechonias, of Iehoiakim thus speaketh God. He shall haue none to sitt vppon the throne of Dauid▪ And of Iehoiachin thus sayth the Eternall: O earth earth, earth heare the vvord of the Eternal▪ vvrite this man childles: a man that shall not prosper in his dayes. For none shall euer prosper of his seede: to sitt vppon the throne of Dauid; and to rule in Iudah; This is the oath of God vvhich is neuer called back by no repentance: as the repentance of Moses could not call back Gods oath for his going into the land of Chanan
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               And now I will shew you the tvvo houses of Dauid vnto the captiuity in the one table, and in the second, vnto the redemption.
               
                  
                     Dauid.
                     
                        Salomon.
                        Nathan,
                     
                     
                        Roboam.
                        Mattatha
                     
                     
                        Abia.
                        Mainan.
                     
                     
                        Asa.
                        Melea,
                     
                     
                        Iosaphat.
                        Eliakim
                     
                     
                        Ioram.
                        Ionan.
                     
                     
                        Ochozias.
                        Ioseph.
                     
                     
                        Ioas.
                        Iudah.
                     
                     
                        Amasias.
                        Symeon
                     
                     
                        Ozias.
                        Leuj.
                     
                     
                        Ioatham.
                        Matthat.
                     
                     
                        Achaz.
                        Iorim.
                     
                     
                        Ezekias
                        Eliezer.
                     
                     
                        Manasses.
                        Iose.
                     
                     
                        Amon.
                        Er.
                     
                     
                        Iosias.
                        Elmodad.
                     
                     
                        Ioakim.
                        Cosam
                     
                     
                        Iechonias.
                        Addj.
                     
                     
                         
                        Melchj.
                     
                     
                         
                        Nerj,
                     
                     
                         
                        Salathiel.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
               Obseruationes vpon the destruction of the Kingdome.
               IN the begining of the captiuitie before the death of Iehoiakim Nabucadnezar saw a great image resē
                  blinge the kingdomes of the heathen: as Babel, and Paras, & Alexanders house, and the kingdomes of his princes which reigned in Egypt, and in the north Also Christ was sene as a stone cut out without handes, which smote the image vpon the legges of iron and clay, and brused them: and they became as chaff frō a barne flore, and the winde toke them away and no place was found for thē: and the stone which stroke the image became a great mountain and filled all the earth. Both true is the vision and the exposition is sure, And as the holy Ghost seauen times expoundeth In the book of the gracious man, † these kinges, the kinges that persecuted, so he recordeth the familie of Christ by Nathan his ancestor, from Salathiel and Zorobabel (whom the kinges of Babel robbed) in two houses of Zerobbabel whose name was in Babel, Glad-in-sorow bicause he was glad in sorow, and beleued (Ier. 51.) till Zaru (they, fanned) Babel, as chaff frō Corne, and Bel-she-Azar. 1. Bel L. of store, became Bel a fyer of sorow: and fire ate him vp: so his sonnes had two names: Mesullam was called Abihud; and Ananias, Rhesa; and these were persecuted by the kinges of Elam, and Iauah, The house of Alexander, and the house, of Ptolomy in Egypt: also by the house of Seleucus in the northe: He reigned ouer 72. kingdomes. And the same yere that Christ Iehoua our righteousnes was borne in Beth-Lechē now the Romane had bestript them from al kingdomes vnder heauē: and the kingdome of heaue which cannot be corrupted, was knowen: and from the East Persian wisemen came to Ierusalem to worship Christ and to kisse the sonne, in whom all that trust are happy. And this is his family,
               
                  
                     
                     Zorobabel, S. of Salathiel.
                     
                        Abiud or Mesullam
                        Rhesa, or Ananias
                     
                     
                        Eliakim▪
                        
                        Iohanna.
                     
                     
                        Azor
                        Iudah.
                     
                     
                        Sadoc
                        Ioseph.
                     
                     
                        Achim.
                        Semej
                     
                     
                        Elihud.
                        Mattathias▪
                        
                     
                     
                        Eleazer.
                        Mahath.
                     
                     
                        Matthan.
                        Nagge.
                     
                     
                        Iacob.
                        Chesli.
                     
                     
                        Ioseph: the husband of Mary, the mother of Christ: therfore he is called the sonne of Ely the father of Mary.
                        Nachum.
                     
                     
                         
                        Amos.
                     
                     
                         
                        Mattathias.
                     
                     
                         
                        Ioseph.
                     
                     
                         
                        Ianna.
                     
                     
                         
                        Melcj,
                     
                     
                         
                        Leuj.
                     
                     
                         
                        Matthat.
                     
                     
                         
                        Ely.
                     
                     
                         
                        Mary.
                     
                     
                         
                        Iesus.
                     
                  
               
               And this is the name vvherby they shall call him: Iehoua our righteousnes Ier 23. and 33.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
               
            
         
         
            
               
               And novv, remember the dayes of old consider the yeres of all generations.
               FROM Adam vnto Tharaes departure to paradise are 2083. yeres. And the Lord toke Thara to him before Abraham went forth vnto the lād of Chanaan. This shineth cleare by the plain nes of the text. And Philo of Alexandria is a witnes, in peregrinat: fol 284, And Bresith Rabba vpon gen. Also the holy ghost in the new Testament, in the actes of the Apostles. And Abraham was seauenty fiue yeres old when his father died at 205. And he begate Abraham at 130. as Adam at that age begate Seth, & Iacob, at that age, went into Egypt. So god dealeth in wonderfull sort, for ease to our remembrance in matters of like dignity. And al is settled, & the order goodly, & there is nothing croked or writhen of all this: Behold it, we haue serched it heare, it and know for thy good. And hitherto the yeres are fastened together. The number of the yeares is sealed sure: they touch one another, & no spirit can come betwixt them, they cleaue one to an other, they hold fast & will not be separated.
               Also these be equally sure. Presently after 
                     •
                  hara went to the Paradise of God, the Lord sayd vnto Abraham, Goe thou &c & all families of the earth shalbe blessed in thee: meaning in Christ, the iust King, & King of peace & sacrificer for euer after the order of Melchisedek. Now then conceaue the worde & perceaue that which the eye may see From the calling of Abraham, vnto the Passeover Kept in Aegypt, are 430. yeres. So the Seuenty interpreters ex pound. Ex 12. 40. And the Thalmud Ierusalemy in Megila. Also these times folowing are past al doubt:
               
                  
                  In the 480. yere after the children of Israel left Aegypt, Salomon built an house to the Lord. Now the dayes that Salomon reigned at Ierusalem over all Israel were 40. yeres. At theyr end the yeres of the world were 3029. The Siluer chayne will not be loosed: & the Golden revolution of time will not be brokē of: and the bucket of the holy spring will not be burst, nor the wheele duly turning the heauens wilbe rent at the cisterne of the story house, for any whit of these times. Now come & see the yeres of the Kingdome of Iudah. The sin of Israel was fastened to their head 390. yeres. For here many agree, Iewes & Christians. And these wordes hath Don Isaak Barbinel vpon Ezek. 4. It is well knowen that since the time that the Kingdomes were devided they reigned in Iuda from Roboam vnto the destruction of the temple 390. yeres exactly, according to the testimony of the scriptures. And vnto the same effect it is sayd in cabala of Dauid Ben▪ Abraham, the tēple stood 427. yeres. Subduct thence the 37 of Salomons kingdome, & there remayne 390. for the kingdome of Asa. And many of vs Christianes haue in tables set forth lernedly this iust summe with all the particulars. So the yeres of the world before the destruction of the temple amount vnto 3418. And then there had passed 18. of Babels 70. Adde 52. & you shal come vnto the end of the transmigration in 3470 And this place maketh an end of reckoning by the date of earthly kinges. Now Israel wold not beleaue that all was vanity vnder the sunne, vntill they saw the kingdome of Salomon spent & rent vp:
               
                  
Also they saw the kinges of Babel how they came to nought in a moment, ended, wasted with horronr. And now men of sagenes wold cōsider, & pereccaue, and beleve, that the kingdome of Christ is a kingdome of the world to come.
               And the Angel Gabriel is sent from heauen, to shew the time of this kingodme vnto Daniel full of Grace. He sone told Cyrus the sone of great Sem, & told Darius S. of Iapheth when God wold persuade Iapheth to dwel in the house of Sē. Also all their king domes had heard of this mattter that a king should be manifested at Ierusalem which should rule from sea to sea, & from the riuer to the endes of the earth: & the time was prefixed, to be 490, yeres, from the decree of Cyrus to restore & build Ierusalem. And the begining of this time had sene the fall of Babel, the house of Nemrod, likewise the mouth of lions was stopped, & a decree vvas published to worship Daniels God, & this decree did Darius the sonne of Iapheth publish. Cyrus also, his felow in kingdome, published in letters patentes, the God of heauen, & his People, & theire returne to Ierusalem, & the building of the tem ple. In the same sort, Iuda loved Ierusalem, & left the land of the north for mount Sion. All these Poinctes renowmed the beginning of the time whence rekoning should be taken, for the kingdome shewed by the Angel Gabriel. But the end was more honored fiō God by the death of Messias: when he powred out his soule a sacrfice for sin and darkened the Sun at none day: & the earth trembled & quaked: & they who slept in the dust of the earth awaked: & Christ arose the third day: who 40. dayes viewed the assemblies of the faithfull: & was taken vp into heauen: & at Pentecost, he sent downe to his disciples a fierie law: whe reby the fishers of Galilie spake eloquently in all tongues. Their writinges testify, thatin the tōgue of Iauan they passed all the dwellers in the Isles of Elisa, & the vvord of God nedeth not mortal mans testimonie.
            
            
               
               
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            To the most noble lady, our gracious Queene Anne.
            
               FRom the citie (most gracious Queene) of Constantin, son to Brettish Helen, a very lerned Iew wrotte vnto Britanie to haue Hebrew instruction of Christianiiie. And I haue in a litle book comprised for him in few wordes, the greatest matters to stay, Christianes in there groundes: & to stay Iewes from longer misbeliefe. And this part, in Ebrem & English for English matrones, I commend, with all that shall come such fro me, to your Graces care & charges. As you are engraffed into the nobilitie of Helens house, the spirituall, reparing of her sonnes towne is a kind of debt layd vpon our nation: and none in the world be so likely to driue thence the Turk, as your Maiesties familie may be thought: layng the Gospell, as Constantin did, the foundation of all successe, & teacing the east to take a better Gouvernour.
            
            
               Your Graces most humble HVGH BROVGHTON▪
               
            
         
      
   