
      
         
            
            
            THE RVLE
OF PERFECTION
CONTAYNING
A BREIF AND PERSPICVOVS
ABRIDGEMENT OF ALL THE WHOLLE
ſpirituall life, reduced to this only
point of the (vvill of God.)
Diuided into three Partes.
            THE FIRST TREATING OF THE EXTERIOVR
WILL OF GOD, CONTAYNING
the Actiue life.
            THE SECOND OF THE INTERIOVR VVILL
contayning the Contemplatiue life.
            THE THIRD OF THE ESSENTIALL VVILL
CONCERNING THE LIFE SVPEREMINENT.
            COMPOSED BY THE R. F. BENET CAPVCIN
Preacher, of the holie Order of Saint Francis, novv of the Prouince
of France, heertofore called VV. Fitch, of Canfeld in Eſſex.
            Vita in voluntate eius. Pſal. 29.
            
               Printed at ROAN,
By CARDIN HAMILLION.
            An. 1609.
         
         
            
            
               
                  bookplate
               
            
         
         
            
            APPROBATIONS OF THIS
Rule of Perfection.
            ASVVELLIN LATIN BY THE VERY
vvords vvherin they vvere vvritten, as alſo in English;
that ſo it may paſſe vvithout ſuſpition, not only amongſt
thoſe of the English tongue, but alſo in Countries vvhear
it is not vnderſtood; vvhich ſo much the more ſeemeth neceſſarie,
for that it is dedicated to thoſe vvhich liue in
ſuch Countries.
            
               
                  VVEE the ſubſigned Doctours in Diuinitie
of the Vniuerſitie of Paris haue diligently
read the Rule of Perfection contayning
a breif and perſpicuous abridgement of
the wholle ſpirituall lyfe Actiue, Contemplatiue, and
Supereminent, all reduced to this one point of the vvill
of God, compoſed by the R. F. Benet Engliſhman, of the
Order of Capuchins, and haue approued it; which no
man will doubt to doe, whoeſoeuer following the way
of lyfe and of the diuine vvill of God ſhall practice this
Compendium of pietie, which though it be breif yet is it
moſt full of inſtruction.
               
                  Dated the 20. of September in
the yeare of our Lord. 1608.
                  
                  
                     
                        GVYION Vicar generall
to the Illuſtriſsime
Cardinall, and most Reuerend
Archebiſshop of
Roan.
                        BOVCHIER, Chanceller
of the Vniuerſitie
of Orleans, and Vicar
generall to the moſt Reue,
Biſshop of Orleans.
                        
                        The Kings Readers in Diuinitie,

                              A. du VAL.
                              GAMACH.
                           
                        
                        P. L'ENGLES.
                        C. le BEL.
                        GESLIN.
                        M. M. AVCLERC.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               I Subſigned, B. Rapbael Prouinciall of the Order
of Capuchins in the Prouince of Paris
(though vnworthy) haue moſt diligently peruſed
this Rule of Perfection, or breif and perſpicuous
abridgement of the wholle ſpirituall
lyfe (to weet) Actiue, Contemplatiue, and
Supereminent, reduced vnto one point of the
only vvill of God, compoſed by the V. F. F. Benet
of our Order; and haue fownd nothing in
it contrarie to the true fayth and decrees of
the Church; yea, haue moſt cleerly ſeene it to
be the ſolid food, and ſtable foundation of
pietie, and a perfect Rule of the wholle ſpirituall
lyfe. VVherfore, it will be moſt profitable
for the pietie and merit of all Chriſtians,
and the ſpirituall aduancement of Religious
perſōs, and (particularly) will fully ſatisfie the
deſire of ſuch as aſpire to true Perfection, and
the practice of myſtical Diuinitie. It is (doubtles)
a true guide for thoſe which begin, for
ſuch as haue made ſome progreſſe, and for
thoſe which haue attayned vnto Perfection.
               
                  In teſtimonie wherof, wee haue put to our ſigne,
this Eeue of all Saints. 
Anno. 1596.
                  
                  B. RAPHAEL, as aboue.
            
            
               I Subſigned, vnworthy Prior of the Carthuſians
of Cahors, haue peruſed with as much
diligence, attention of mind, and intention as
I could, this Rule of Perfection or breif abridgement

of the wholle ſpirituall lyfe, (to weet)
of the Actiue, Contemplatiue, and Supereminent,
conforme to the three-fold vvill of God
Exteriour, Interiour, and Eſſentiall. I (certainly)
admired to ſee the holie ſecrets of the perfection
of lyfe gathered together, and expownded
with wonderfull order and facilitie;
inſomuch as like vnto that great Eagle in Ezechiel,
it may worthily ſeeme to haue carryed
away the pith of the myſticall Cedar, and
eſteeme that the lecture therof will be moſt
profitable, ſeeing it is in all points no leſſe
conforme vnto true Fayth then to Pietie, and
moſt fitting the capacitie of deuout and religious
minds of Beginners, Proficients, and of
the Perfect, entring by order into the practice
therof, as Qweene Hester paſſed through
euery doore to the preſence of King Aſſuerus,
               
               
                  Dated the 20. of September. Anno. 1608.
                  
                  F. A. Beaucouſin.
               
            
            
               I Subſigned Bacheler of Diuinitie in the Vniuerſitie
of Paris, doe certifie, that I haue
moſt diligently peruſed this Rule of Perfection
and perſpicuous abridgement of the wholle
ſpirituall lyfe (to weet) of the Actiue, Contemplatiue,
and Supereminent, reduced vnto
one point of the onlie vvill of God, the which is
moſt profitable to all Chriſtians, and ſpecially

for the aduancement and merit of Religious
perſons; for, it layeth open a moſt cleer way to
the acquiring of perfection, in that it manifeſteth
diuers hidden errors, which being to
many a Rocke of ſcandall, made ſome to leaue
of, others to contemne, and ſome to ſclander
the ſpirituall life: ſeing alſo that it openeth the
moſt pure fountaines of wiſdome, explicating
the excellent ſuper-anagogicall Doctrine,
through ignorance wherof, ſome are damnably
infected with moſt corrupt maners; ſome
doe ignominiouſly betake themſelfes to the
ciſternes of heathen bookes, not hable to containe
the waters of grace; others as blind doe
doubt in the Catholike fayth; others to theyr
great ſhame make litle progreſſe in the knowledge
of God; others to no ſmall detriment of
the hear ers doe teath Diuinitie with great
negligence; others adhearing to the killing
letter, and ſpēding all theyr labour in the outward
barke of VViſdome, neither goe forward
to reap the fruit therof, neither haſtning to the
Abnegation of themſelfes, are viuified with
the vnitiue ſpirit of God. All which being in
this Rule ſweetly refrayned, truly directed,
wiſely illuminated, deiformely perfectioned,
it is worthy to be put to the Preſſe, and publiſhed
to the glorie of allmightie God, augmentation
of the Fayth, to the conuerſion of ſinners,
conſolation of Religious, and perſeuerance
of the perfect, in whoes mindes it ought

to be day and night ruminated. Finally, it
containeth nothing contrarie to the Catholike,
Apoſtolike, and Romaine Church.
               
                  Dated the 8. of May 1596.
                  
                  Poullet.
               
            
         
         
            APPROBATIONES REGVLAE
Perfectionis.
            
               
                  NOS ſubſignati Doctores Theologiae facultatis
Pariſienſis, ſeriò legimus Regulam Perfectionis
continentem breue & dilucidum Enchiridion
vitae ſpiritualis, Actiuae, Contemplatiuae, & Supereminentis
(id eſt) Voluntatis diuinae, a R. P. Benedicto
Anglo, Ordinis Capucinorum compoſitum; &
probauimus: quod & pleniſsimè faciet, quiſquis breue
hoc pietatis Compendium, ſed cumulatiſsimè inſtructum,
ſecutus viam Vitae & Voluntatis diuinae,
inſiſtet.
               
                  Datum 20. Septem. An. ſaeculari ſacro. 1608.
                  
                  
                     
                        GVYION, Vicarius
Generalis Illuſtriſsimi
Cardinalis, &
Reuerendiſs. Archiepiſcopi
Rhotomagenſis.
                        BOVCHIER, Cancellarius
Vniuerſitatis
Aurelianenſis, & Vicarius
Generalis Reuerendiſs.
Epiſcopi Aurelianenſis.
                        Lectores Regij
in Theologia.

                              A. du VAL.
                              GAMACH.
                           
                        
                        P. L'ENGLES.
                        C. le BEL.
                        GESLIN.
                        M. MAVCLERC.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  EGO ſubſignatus F. Raphael Prouincialis prouinciae
Pariſienſis Fratrum Minorum Capucinorum
licet immeritus, breue hoc & dilucidum Enchiridion
totius vitae ſpiritualis (ſcilicet) Actiuae,
Contemplatiuae, & Supereminentis, ad vnicum inſtar
ſolius Voluntatis diuinae directum, & a V. P. P. Benedicto
noſtri Inſti
                        •
                     uti compoſitum, diligentiſsimè perlegi;
nihilquè in eo inueni quod fidei Orthodoxae aut
decretis Eccleſiae repugnet; quinimò illud cibum eſſe
ſolidum, ſtabileque fundamentum pietatis, & normam
perfectam totius vitae ſpiritualis clariſsimè comprehendi:
vndè ad pietatem & meritum omnium Chriſtianorum,
& ad ſpiritualem profectum Religioſorum
conducet plurimum, eorum verò de ſiderio qui ad vera
perfectionem, & myſticae Theologiae praxim aſpirant,
abundè quidèm ſatisfaciet. Eſtſanè Incipientium,
Proficientium, & Perfectorum verus praeceptor.
               
               
                  In
cuius rei teſtimonium ſignum noſtrum appoſuimus,
Vigiliâ omnium Sanctorum. 
Anno. 1597.
                  
                  F. RAPHAEL, vt ſuprà.
               
            
            
               
                  EGO ſubſignatus Cartbuſiae Cadurcinae Prior
immeritus, hoc breue Enchiridion vitae ſpiritualis,
Actiuae, Contemplatiuae, & Supereminent is, vnitrinae
voluntati diuinae Exteriori, Interiori, &
Eſſentiali conſonum, à V. P. Benedicto Anglo,
Ordinis Capucinorum D. Franciſci compoſitum,
quantâ potui diligentia, attentione animi, & intentione
perlegi. Suſpexi vtiquè ſacratiora vitae perfectionis
arcana miro ordine & facilitate deligi & delucidari,

ita vt quaſi Aqui
                        •
                     a illa grandis in Ezechiele
Cedri myſtic
                        •
                      medullā tuliſſe meritiſsimè videatur.
Et quià non orthodoxè minùs quàm piè per omnia
ſ
                        •
                     riptum eſt, & ad piarum & religioſarum mentium,
Incipientium, Proficientium, & Perfectorum captum
maximè accommodatum (dummodò vt Eſter cum
ad Aſſueri conſpectum, ingrediantur cuncta per ordinem
oſtia) ſummá cum vtilitate legi poſſe cenſeo.
               
               
                  Datum 20. September. anno a partu virgineo. 1608.
                  
                  F. A. BEAVCOVSIN.
               
            
            
               
                  EGO ſubſignatus Baccalaureus in facultate
Theologiae Pariſienſi, certum facio me breue hoc
& perlucidum Enchiridion totius vttae ſpiritualis
(ſcilieet) Actiuae, Contemplatiuae, & Supereminentis,
ad vnicum inſtar ſolius voluntatis
diuinae directae, diligentiſsimê perlegi. Quod ad vtilitatem
omnium Chriſtianorum, tum maximé Religioſorum
pùfectum & meritum confert plurimum, &
perfectioni acquirendae clariſsimum praebet iter, cùm
peruios errores occultos deſignet, qui ſuerunt permultis
lapis offenſionis derelinquendae, nonnullis contemnendae,
alijs etiàm probris inſectandae ſpiritualis vitae:
ſapientiae limpidiſsimos fontes aperit, illustrem
ſuperanagogicam doctrinam & veram Theologiam
explicando, cuius ignorantia alii corruptiſsimis moribus
damnabiliter ſe coinquinant, alii ad ciſternas librorum
Gentilium (non valentes continere aquas
gratiae) turpiter ſecedunt, alij in fide Catholica mente

capti haeſitant; alij in cognitione Dei cum magno dedecore
minùs proficiunt; alij negligentiùs Theologiam
cum magno detrimento pertractant; alij litterae
occidenti adhaerentes, & corticibus ſapientiae inſudantes,
neque progrediuntur ad illius carpendos fructus,
neque ad ſuijpſorum Abnegationem properantes,
ſpiritu Dei vnitiuo viuificantur. Quae omnia cùm in
hoc Enchiridio ſuauiter coerceantur, verè dirig antur,
ſapientèr illuminentur, deiformitèr perficiantur; typis
& omnium lumini mandari dignum eſt, ad Dei
Omnipotent is gloriam, Fidei augmentum, Peccatorum
conuerſionem, Religioſorum conſolationem, Perfectorum
perſeuerantiam; quorum omnium animis
diurno nocturnoque labore verſari debet. Caeterùm Fidei
Catholicae, Apoſtolicae, Romanae, nihil contrarium
continet.
               
               
                  Datum 8. Maij. An. 1596.
                  
                  POVLLET.
               
            
            
               Licentia Superiorum.
               EGO frater Leonardus Pariſienſis, Ordinis fratrum
Minorum Capucinorum nuncupatorum, in
prouincia Pariſienſi Commiſſarius (licet immeritus)
poteſtate ad id mihi factâ a Reuerendo admodum Patre
Silueſtro ab Aſsiſio, Miniſtro noſtro generali; facultatem
concedo vt liber inſcriptus Regula Perfectionis,
vel, Voluntas diuina continens tres partes;
Item liber inſcriptus Eques Chriſtianus, continens
duas partes; Item denique, vt libri duo diuerſorum
Opuſculorum ſpiritualium, vnus Tractatuum, alter

Epiſtolarum, a Re. Patre Benedicto Anglo, Predicatore
eiuſdem Ordinis, & Conuentus Rhotomagenſis
Guardiano, nec non Nouitiorum magiſtro, typis
mandentur, grauium priùs & doctorum in Theologia
hominum iudicio approbatus; ſeruatis
inſuper omnibus de iure ſeruandis.
               
               
                  In quorum fidem, has litteras
manu noſtra ſubſcriptas, ſigilloque
noſtro munitas
dedimus.
Rothomagi
23. Iunij.
1608.
                  
                  F. Leonardus, qui ſupra.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE. R. AND MOST DEVOVT
Lady Abbeſſe of the Religious companie of English
-vvomen of the Order of S. Briget; to
his tvvoe coſins (vviſemans) of the
ſame Order, and to all the rest
of that holie familie at
Lysbone.
            
               IF the light of Natures lamp hath ſo
ſhined in the obſcure cloſet of a
Pagans breaſt, that therby hee
brought forth this no leſſe true
then worthy ſentence, Non nobis ſolùm nati ſumus,
ſed ortus noſtri partem amici, partem parentes,
part emquè patria vendicat, VVee are not borne
for our ſelfes alone, but of our birth our kinſfolk
muſt haue parte, our freinds likewiſe
muſt haue their due, our Countrie alſo challengeth
therin her right; how much more
ought the ſhining Sun of Grace and Fayth
illuminate the Chriſtian heart, wherby to
bring forth a like or better Sentence? as
did hee whoe ſayd, Optabamego ipſe Anathema
eſſe â Chriſto pro fratribus meis, qui ſunt cognati
mei ſecundum carnem, qui ſunt Iſraelitae, I deſired
to be Anathema my ſelf from Chriſt for my brethrē,

which be my kinsfolke according to the
fleaſh, whoe be Iſraelites. And if Nature could
bind vs with ſo ſtrong a band to our Freinds,
Parents, and Country, how much more ſhould
the link of Grace, and chayne of Charitie tie
vs therunto? Seing then ſuch is my Obligation,
and that the reuolution of ſome yeares
calleth vpon mee for performance therof, I
was glad now to haue fownd out a meanes,
wherby at once to diſcharge three duties,
and by one payment to cancell a threefold
obligation; by preſenting this Rule of Perfection
to ſuch a houſe and companie, which is compoſed
of my deer freinds, neereſt kinsfolke,
and natiue Countrie. Not, for that I think the
weakneſſe of ſo ſmall a matter can haue
ſtrength enough to diſſolue ſo ſtrong a band,
or ſo ſmall a preſent can ſatisfie ſo great a
debt; but that I hope yow will take it as a token,
and meſſanger of a mind more willing
then hable to performe her obligation; which
Rule I hauing ſquared out according to mine
owne interiour practice ſince my calling to
Religion (though truly, with great negligence)
and hauing participated the ſame, and
therwith informed others of my calling
though not of my Countrie; I thought good
now to communicate it vnto others of my
Countrie, though not of my calling; and for
that purpoſe haue tranſlated it into Engliſh,
though with more difficultie then I writ it in

the language wherin I made it. For eloquent
words and flowing diſcourſe (I know) yow
expect none, aſwell becauſe that our calling auoideth
curioſitie and profeſſeth plaine ſimplicitie,
and that my ſo long diſcontinuance
of the tongue can afford no ſmooth diſcourſe;
as alſo (eſpecially) for that in ſpirituall Rules,
and documēts touching interiour exerciſe, it
fareth not as in other books which chiefly (or
at leaſt, partly) tend to delight the eare by
pleaſant wordes, or moue affection by pleaſing
tearmes, but by plaineſſe of Documents,
and cleerneſſe of Doctrine to lay open the
way to Perfection, and an eaſie and familiar
meanes to practice the ſame. Thus heartily
wiſhing your dayly progreſſe in all vertue, I
commend yow to Gods holie protection, and
my ſelf (poor ſinner) by your prayers to his
ſweet mercie.
            
               Your poor Brother and Coſin in Chriſt
Ieſus, B. Benet, called heertoſore. VV.
Fitche.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE DEVOVT RELIGIOVS
English-vvomen of the Couent of S. Vrſula at
Louayn, and of S. Benet at Bruxells,
and particularly to his deuout Coſins
VViſemans in both hovvſes,
and to all other Religious
of our Nation in
Flanders.
            
               DEVOVT ſiſters in Chriſt, and deer
Coſins. Many yeares haue paſſed
ſince this booke was dedicated to
the aboue ſayd of S. Briget, but being
twoe ſundry tymes put to print in England
(whear I was then in Priſon) it was both
tymes taken, though it doth not in any wiſe
touch either Controuerſies or matters of State.
Since which tyme hath bein erected that
your Religious howſe at Bruxells, and aſwell
the ſame as that of Louayne hath bein better
knowne vnto mee, for the entercourſe of letters
betwixt yow and mee (my louing Coſins
at Louayne) and by your rendition (my good
Coſin at Bruxells.) And becauſe I owe yow
and your howſes the like office as to the aboue
ſayd (for the ſame cauſes of kinred and
Countrie) and that, as ſayth the Philoſopher,
Bonum quò communius eo melius, The good is
ſo much the better, by how much it is

more common: and (finally) for that the
ſubiect of the booke particularly fitteth thoſe
of your vocation; I haue thought good to
direct it alſo vnto yow, the reſpect of the
ſmallneſſe of the worke diſſwading therfrom,
wayeng leſſe in the one ſcale of the ballance
of my conſideration, then the ponderouſneſſe
of the ſayd cauſes put againſt it in the other,
eſpecially the Ballance being held in the hand
of that charitable affection which ſhall neuer
ceaſe to worke, and doe the office which kinne
and Countrie call vpon mee to performe.
And though the thing both in reſpect of it
ſelf, and of ſo ſinfull and vile a wretch from
whome it cometh, be of ſo ſmall valew and
ſo vnworthy the printing, that I haue often
tymes hindred the ſame (howſoeuer the
great perſuaſion of others, and due affection
to the aboue named, made mee conſent therunto
in England) yet in tyme perceiuing it is ſo
acceptable in theſe partes to all ſortes, aſwell
of authoritie as of learning and perfection;
and ſeing it ſo much publiſhed throughout
France though paynfully by writing; I haue
bein more encouraged to preſent the ſame
vnto yow: though for the third part therof, it
is not thought meet to be publiſhed, as treating
of matters ſomewhat high for the capacitie
of the common ſort. And if it bring
yow any ſpirituall profit, I beſeech yow recompenſe
mee with this prayer, that I be not

like the candle which whilſt it lighteneth
others conſumeth it ſelf; nor as the Conduict
pipe, which conuayeth water
from the fountaine to others,
not retayning any for it
ſelf. Fare yee
well.
            Your poor Brother and Coſsin in
Chriſt Ieſus, B. Benet, called
heertofore VV. Fitch.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               GENTLE Reader, There is a certaine
booke intituled the Method
to ſerue God in Latin, Franch, and English
which in the beginning, ſpeaketh
of the vvill of God: Leaſt therfore thow
mayſt think that this booke be (as it were)
the ſame, or not much different, and ſo thy affection
to read this be diminiſhed, thow ſhalt
vnderſtand, that they differre in all matters;
in ſubiect, method, and pretended ſcope: For,
that booke hath but ſome one Chapter or document
of the vvill of God, but this, three bookes
or partes; that goeth to other diſcourſes
of vertues and vices, but this purſueth this
only point of the vvill of God; that propowndeth
it as the end of our actions, but this as
the beginning, progreſſe, and ending, of the
wholle ſpirituall life, geuing precepts for euery
one: Yea, that booke in the place where it
toucheth the vvill of God, ſheweth not how to
know it, but this geueth meanes how to know
the ſame; that, ſpeaketh of the vvill of God, without
diſtinction, but this diſtinguiſheth it myſtically
into three; Finally, that booke ſpeaketh
of the Exteriour will, but this entreth

into the knowledge, taſt, and feeling of the Internall
will as it is ſpirit and life, yea, and eſſentially
God himſelf, as is ſhewed in the third
part. But it is needleſſe to ſpeak of all the differences
which by reading thow ſhalt find to
be ſuch, as that there is no conueniencie betwixt
them: only the vvill of God which is heer
taught throughout the Actiue, Contemplatiue,
and Supereminent lyfe, is thear touched
in the beginning of that booke of Actiue lyfe.
And if this had affinitie with that, it would
neuer haue bein ſo required and publiſhed in
France, eſpecially ſo paynfully by writing before
it was printed, and (particularly) amongſt
religious Orders, whear that booke is ſo common.
As for the other three bookes mentioned,
they be not yet printed, though readie to
goe to the prefle. And if this or they
bring vnto thy ſowlle any profit
or conſolation, I deſire for recompenſe
ſome memorie
of mee in thy holie
prayers. Fare
well.
            
               Thine in Chriſt Ieſus
B. Benet.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
RVLE OF PERFECTION
CONTAYNING
A BREIFE AND PERSPICVOVS
ABRIDGEMENT OF ALL THE
whole ſpirituall life, reduced to
this only point of the
(vvill of God.)
Diuided into three partes.
            
               THE FIRST PARTE
OF THE EXTERIOR VVILL OF GOD
COMPREHENDING THE ACTIVE LIFE.
               
                  OF THE EXCELLENCY AND VTIlitie
of this exerciſe, compared vvith others.
                  CHAP. I.
                  
                     HAVING well conſidered the
diuerſitie of wayes, and multitude
of exerciſes fownd out and practiſed
by many learned and deuoute
perſons, for the obtaining of true perfection;
and in fine, finding that as they tend all to one
end, ſo in themſelues they are not muche different,

but rather in ſubſtance all one, how
differet̄ ſoeuer they ſeeme; I haue deſired for
the greater light and profit of deuout ſoules
and more facilitie,1. Abridgement of the vvhole ſpirituall life. to abridge and reduce them
all to one only point, in which may ſhine and
cleerly be ſeene all the others, and which (not
withſtanding ſuch breuitie) might be eaſie to
comprehend, and perſpicuous to vnderſtand:
to which effect I could find no point ſo fit as
this of the vvill of God; for though the perfect
ſoule and illuminated ſpirit cleerly doth ſee
and diſcerne all wayes and exerciſes in euery
one, and euery one in all, principally in the
higheſt and moſt ſublime; yet is this verified
rather in this exerciſe and point of the vvill of
God then in any other; for that heer in all the
other exerciſes are ſo cleerly ſeene, that not
only the perfect and illuminated perſon, but
alſo the beginner (if hee will a little conſider)
may ſee them all, and how in the ſame conſiſteth
all kind of perfections of ſpirituall life,
as in the next chapter ſhall appear.
                  Secondly,2. Breuitie. this exerciſe of the vvill of God
ſhall be found without all cōpariſon to be more
ſhort then any other; for, that which others
doe effect by many circumſtances, multiplicities,
changings, and degrees, this effecteth at
once by one only application of intention.
As for example, one that following any other
practiſe would be humble, patient, obedient,
or would be diſpiſed, to imitate the paſsion of

our Sauiour, would imitate the paſsion to be
conformable to the Sonne of God; would be
conformable vnto him to pleaſe God and
doe his will; but according to this exerciſe
hee ſhould at the firſt only applie his intention
to the ſaid vvill of God. Likewiſe, he that
would eſchew euill company to auoid temptation,
would auoid temptation to flie ſynne;
would fly ſynne to eſcape hell; would eſcape
hell to be ſaued; would be ſaued becauſe it is
the will of God: but according to this exerciſe
hee ſhould cutt of all theſe multiplicities and
degrees, and euen at firſt applie his intentiō to
the vvill of God, propownding and ſayeng this
in his heart; I will auoid euill cōpany becauſe
it is the vvill of God; wherby alone the ſoule approcheth
neeer to God without compariſon
then with all the other good intentions together:
whear many may note and ſee their ſpirituall
deceipt, whoe doing any good thing
ſpirituall or corporall, doe not at the firſt,
nay nor ſcarce at the laſt applie their whole
intention to this vvill of God.
                  
                  Further,3. Meritorious. the practiſe of this rule is
more meritorious as ſhalbe ſhewed then
the others, yea though (without this vvill of
God) they ſhould ioyne with other ſpirituall
exerciſes, faſting, diſcipline, lamenting
their ſyns and ſuch like, although
(perhaps) to ſome it ſeeme not ſo, whoe
meaſure merit by their ſenſible deuotion, and

ſpirituall ſweetnes.
                  Moreouer,End of others. this rule of the will of God is
the true end and ſcope of all others, thoſe ſeruing
but as degrees to mount, and as meanes
to attaine vnto this, namely to doe the will of
God: ſo that this will of God ought to be ſo
muche preferred before other exerciſes, as
the end before the meanes.
                  Againe,Fitt for all. this exerciſe is more proper and
conuement to all ſorts of people then any
other, being fitt as well for the perfect as the
imperfect, for the ſpirit illuminated, as for
the obſcured; becauſe it is as well ſubtile and
ſublime as ſimple and eaſie.
                  Alſo,vvithout multiplicitie. it is wholy denudated and void of
all multiplicitie, diuerſitie, and curioſitie of
diſcours or ſpeculation of the witt, ſo that
without difficultie it may be practiſed by the
only feruent will.
                  It is likewiſe more aſſured from deceipts,Sure from deceipts.
becauſe it is a continuall abnegation of the
proper will, fountaine of all errors, and roote
of all euils. VVhich abnegation though it
be in all other exerciſes, yet not ſo direct nor
ſo ſtrong and violēt as in this, ſeing nothing
is ſo contrary to the proper will as the vvill of
God; the one being common reſpecting the
common good; the other proper ſeeking priuate
gaine. And wheras in other exerciſes often
tymes the curio
                        •
                     itie of Intelligence doth
pleaſe, in this the feruency of the will muſt

faythfully worke; In others one contenteth
him ſelfe often with a feeble deuotion ſenſible,
but in this operateth the ſtrong Intellectual
deuotion.
                  But aboue all,The end and the meanes. this point of the vvill of God
excelleth all others in as much as it ſerueth
for a rule, and for the end of our actiōs, wheras
the others ſerue but for the one or the
other onely: it is (I ſay) the rule of our actions,
not onely exterior, but alſo interior,
declaring by his rectitude the obliquitie as
well of the one as of the others: of the exterior,
becauſe it declareth which are to be
done, and which to be leſt vndone, how and at
what tyme to take anything in hand, how
and in what ſeaſon to endure: of the interior,
in as much as it ſheweth how to will and how
to nill; when to deſire and when to refuſe; in
what manner to chooſe and accept; in what
ſort to omitt and re
                        •
                     ect. To be breif, this doth
leuell all our exterior, and illuſtrate our interior,
rectifieng and cutting of all the crookednes
and tortuoſitie of our actions as well
interne, as externe. It is alſo the end of the ſame
actiōs; end (I ſay) proportioned to euery
mans capacitie, ſhewing it ſelf to ſome as
externe, to others as interne, and to others as
eſſentiall, which is God himſelf: end (I ſay
againe) to which the ſoule commes and adheres,
not by the interruptiō of the meanes,
but by the continuation of the ſame; not as to

another thing different from the meanes, (as
it happens in the other exrciſes) but as to the
ſame and one thing with the meanes, which
is proper to this exerciſe:Similie. it being like a ſea
the water wherof is all one at the ſhore and
beginning as in the maine Ocean and end
therof, wherin our ſoule doth nauigate and
mount by continuation of the ſame tract
without any variation, change of obiect, or
multiplicitie.
                  And no leſſe hath it this excellencie in
particular aboue all others;6. Permanent. namely, that
wheras others are not durable, nor can be
allwayes vſed and practiſed during a mans
whole life, but muſt be left and laid a ſide
and others practiſed according as a man
goeth forward in perfection; this contrariewiſe
is permanent and ſerueth a man, and is
alwayes continued aſwell in the actiue as
in the contemplatiue and vnitiue life without
changing or interrupting his courſe of
exerciſe, or breaking the thread of his
ſpirituall practiſe; which is no little ſpirituall
good nor ſmalle profit, ſeeing that
therby much diſtraction and hndrance
is auoided, proceeding from the change and
multiplicitie of exerciſe.Similie. For, euen as the
child that goeth from one booke or ſchoole
to another is much troubled and new to
ſeeke; ſo is hee which changeth from one
exerciſe to another; yea, ſome tymes

and that often, man that changeth often, or
hath many exerciſes knoweth not well how
to practiſe any of them all, and that eſpecialie
in tyme of tēptation and ſpirituall warre:Similie. for
as he which will learne to ſence with many
kinds of weapons, commonly is not cunning
at any, in ſo much that the enimy aſſayling
him he is eaſilie hurt or killed for want of ſkill,
ſo he that hath diuers exerciſes, ordinarilie
knoweth not the perfect practiſe of any of thē
and therfore the enimies, the world, the fleſh
and the deuell aſſalting him, foorthwith
is either ſlaine or maymed. The reaſon is, becauſe
the ſoule hauing her will already infeebled
by the impulſion of the temptation
flieng to her exerciſe and ſpirituall weapon,
and not being skillfull in handling the ſame,
the enimy whoe ſeeth and knoweth it well, is
more encouraged to purſue and follow the
weakned will, and ſhee diſcouraged and vnabled
to reſiſt. Yea, ſome men haue ſo many
exerciſes that in tyme of battayle they know
not which to betake thē to, and ſo many wayes
to perfectiō that they follow none; ſo accō
                     pliſhing
the prouerbe that ſayth, Qui duos inſectatur
lepores, neutrū capit, He that hunteth two
hares cacheth neither. But otherwiſe it is with
him that hath cōtinually one only exerciſe, for
that without diſtractio of ſpirit, or diſsipation
of ſēces heere and thear in diuerſitie of exerciſes
he remaineth alwayes recollected, and his

with all his powers gathered togeather, and
fixed in one, ſo that he penetrateth the ſame
euen to the bottome and profunditie therof,
and ſo walketh cōtinually in the light therof,
practiſing the ſame and conforming his life
therunto, and ſo when the enemy commes to
aſſaulte him he is not vnprouided of his weapōs,
nor doubtfull which to betake him vnto,
becauſe he hath but one at which he is very
cunning as beīg his daylie practiſe. And finaly,
is reſolute and ſtable in his way, and maner
of the purſute of perfectiō, as not knowing any
but that by which he rūneth the right way
with all aſſurance. Heerin therfore doth this
exerciſe in particular excell all others, becauſe
none of them may be continually practiſed
all a mans life, but muſt be changed according
as the ſoule changeth eſtate and ariſeth
in perfection, vſing ſome at the beginning,
others in the progreſſe, and others in the end,
but in this exerciſe a mā muſt begin, proceed,
and end: ſo that this vvill of God is a ſpirituall
Sea in which each one may ſaile according to
the burthen of his veſſell; ſo as the ſhallops of
the weake ſoules of beginners doe flote in the
roade of the ſhallow waters of the exterior vill;
the barks of ſuche as be aduāced doe hoiſt ſaile;
and lāche far ther into the depth of the interior
will;and the huge ſhipps of the perfecteſt
ſorte hauing loſt all ſight of land are retired
into the maine ſea of the Eſſentiall vvill.
                  
                  
                     
And as this will of God is like the ſea,Similie notand. ſo
the obſcuritie of our proper will is like the
lande; and as he which is in the midſt of the
land ſeeth not the ſea at all, ſo he that is in the
midſt of obſcure proper will ſeeth not this
celeſtial Ocean. And as the greater and more
ſpacious the lande is, ſo much farther one is
from ſeing the ſea; ſo how much greater is
this proper will ſo muche farther is he from
ſeing this vvill of God. Againe, as where the ſea
gaineth the land, ther is nothing ſeene but the
ſea, and as according to the meaſure that it
ouerfloweth the land the ſea appeareth; ſo
wher the vvill of God getteth the vpper hand,
ther is ſo farr nothing but that will; and according
as the vvill of God ouerfloweth the
darknes of our proper will, it taketh place,
and is plainly ſeene. Finaly, as if ther were no
land at all thear would be nothing but ſea; ſo if
wee had no darknes at all of proper will, we
ſhould ſee nothing but the vvill of God; and
as he that is in the mideſt of the maine ſea
ſeeth no land; ſo he that hath attained to perfection,
and is in the depth of this will ſeeth
no darknes, but in all things, tymes, and places,
ſoeth this heauenly ſhining light, as in the
third parte ſhalbe ſhewed.
               
               
                  Of the excellency of this exerciſe in reſpect of it ſelf,
vvher is shevved hovv all other vvayes and
perfections are heerin contained.
                  
                     CHAP. II.
                  
                     HAVING ſhewed the profit and
excellencie of this vvill of God in
compariſon of other exerciſes, it
followeth alſo that wee breifly declare
the ſame in regard of it ſelf, all which excellency
is comprehended in this, that this rule
and exerciſe containeth all others, and all
kind of perfection.
                  For,1. Renouncing of him ſelf. Matt. 16. Luc. 9. if one conſtitute perfection in the renouncing
of him ſelf as our Sauiour teacheth,
Qui vult poſt me venire abneget ſemetipſum, Hee
which will follow mee let him renounce him
ſelf, it is in this vvill of God; ſeing one can not
doe the ſame but by renouncing himſelf and
his owne will.
                  Secondly,2. Reſignation. if one thinke that perfectiō conſiſteth
in reſignatiō, as Chriſt teacheth, Fiat volunt
as tua, Thy will be done, it is in this exerciſe;
becauſe hee that doth the vvill of God is reſigned,Matt. 26.
ſeing that reſignatiō is nothing els but
a diſpoſition and perfect preparation to receiue
willingly whatſoeuer that diuine will
ſhall ordaine or diſpoſe of himſelf, either in
ſuffering or doing things hard or eaſie, pleaſant
or bitter, honorable or diſhonorable and
abiect, all which hee muſt needs haue whoe
accompliſheth the vvill of God.
                  
                  Moreouer,3. Puritie of heart. Matt. 5. if you eſteeme puritie of heart
to be perfection, as it is written, Beati mūdo corde,
Happie are the pure of heart, it is heer alſo;

for what can make the heart more pure
then the vvill of God which ſo violently plucketh
vp, and exſtirpateth out of it the roote
of all impuritie, namely, proper will, whence
ſpringeth as from their Origin all affections,
paſsions, and impurities, and whatſoeuer other
ſpirituall darknes: for, as two contraries can
not be togeather in one ſubiect, as fire and
water can not be togeather in the ſameveſſell,
ſo can not proper will and the vvill of God be
togeather in the ſame ſoule; and no more then
the obſcuritie of the darke night can abide
the brightnes of the ſhining Son, no more can
the darke night and obſcuritie of proper will
endure the ſplendour of this ſhining ſon of
Gods vvill, but flyeth as ſoone as it appeareth,
and preſently is diſsipated and vaniſheth
away.
                  Further,4. Preſence of God. if perfection conſiſt in the preſence
of God,Pſal 15. and hauing him allwayes before
our eyes, as it is written, Prouidebam dominum
in conſpectu meo ſemper, quoniam
                           ••
                         dextris eſt mihi
ne commouear, I alwayes haue God in my ſight
becauſe hee aſsiſteth at my right hand leaſt I
ſhould be moued; it is likewiſe in this will, becauſe
(as ſhalbe declared) this vvill of God
is God himſelf; ſo that when by doing his will
wee haue it preſent, wee muſt needs haue God
preſent.
                  Againe,5. Knovvledge of himſelf. if perfectiō conſiſt in the knowledge
of himſelf, which not only by the Chriſtiā but

by the heathen Philoſopher is ſo much inculcated
by this ſo commonſentence, Noſce teipſum,
know thy ſelfe; it is heer moſt perſpicious:
for by the ſtraight line of this vvill of
God we come to the perfect knowledge of our
ſelfes (that is) of our obſure paſsions, tortuous
affections, inordinate deſires, and
brutiſh motions, which before we could not
ſee; for, as the ſtaffe or chalked line ſeemeth
wholie ſtraight or little crooked vntill it be
examined by the Ioiners rule by which appeereth
the crokednes therof; ſo our will and
deſire ſeemeth to be right or to haue but very
little obliquitie, but as ſoone as this right rule
of Gods vvill (the only lawfull and approued
meaſure of mans deſire) is applied therunto,
preſently appeareth the diſordered and deformed
obliquitie therof. And by this will we
may not onely know our ſelfes as touching
the old man repleniſhed with imperfections
and darkenes, but alſo as touching the new,
(namely) perfection and light; his will being
that light and perfection which communicateth
vnto our ſoule all her lights and perfections;
ſo that by the one we ſee and know
the other, for the greate likenes and ſympathie
which is betwixt them; a man being
made by this diuine will Nouus homo qui ſecundum
Deumc
                           •
                        ea rus eſt in iuſtitia & ſanctitate veritatis,
                     Ephe. 4.
A new man, created according to God
in iuſtice and ſanctitie of veritie.
                  
                     
Alſo,Knovvledge of God. Ioan. 17. if the knowledge of God be Chriſtian
perfection, according as is written, Haeec eſt
vita aeterna vt cognoſcant te ſolum Deum verum &
quem miſisti Ieſum Chriſtum, This is euerlaſting
life, to know thee the onely true God, and
whom thow haſt ſent Ieſus Chriſt, it is euident
in this will, ſeing the vvill of God is God
him ſelf, as in the third part ſhall appeare, ſo
that who knoweth and doth his will, by conſequence
knoweth God, which perfection of
the knowledge of God, with the other of the
knowledge of him ſelf was ſo earneſtly deſired,
and deeplie ingraffed in the heart of our
father S. Francis, that he continued all a night
long in prayer, repeating continually theſe
only two ſentences, O my God, let me know
thee, let me knowe my ſelf.
                  
                     
                        •
                     Likewiſe,Annihilation. Pſal. 72. if one deſire to attaine to perfect
annihillation wherof it is ſaid ad nihilum redactus
ſum, &▪ neſciui, I am brought to nothing
and knew it not, let him imbrace this exerciſe,
for by the liuelie and efficatious operation
of this diuine will, a man is reduced and
brought to nothing, and that both in reſpect
of the old man and the new: In reſpect of the
old, wholy and entierely, ſo that he is no more;
in reſpect of the new, ſo is he annihilated
that he worketh no more, nor produceth
any operation as of himſelf, but by God, with
God and in God, and doth nothing actiuely
but paſsiuely; for although what one doth

hee muſt needs doe it himſelf, yet not as of hī
                     ſelf
though hee that operates is preſuppoſed
needs to operate, yet not as agēt but as patiēt
(that is) that though hee hath his will, act, and
operation in the worke, be it exterior or interior,
yet by this perfectiō of Annihillatiō hee
ſeeth they are not of them ſelfes, but are acted
and produced by a higher eſſence and power
thē thēſelfs, which is God; yea, in the perfectiō
of this annihilatiō in this diuine will the ſoule
is ſo abſtracted and fixed in God, and ſo high
lifted aboue herſelf, that ſhee feeleth not her
owne operatiō though moſt vehemēt, but only
the interior operatiō of God, and ouerflowing
of thoſe heauēly influences and eternall
lights, which are ſo mighie and haue ſuch power
ouer her, that in cōpariſō therof her operation
is nothing; and ſo ſhee is rather ſaid to
ſuffer the doe, and to be wrought the to worke;
and this eſpecially in the operatiōs intrinſecall:
and though in the acts and operations
ſēſible and exterior ſhee doth ſome thing, yet
loſeth ſhe not this annihilatiō, but remaineth
ſtill annihilated, becauſe (as is aboue ſaid) ſhee
knoweth by the light of this will that it is not
ſhee as of herſelf, but Chriſt that liueth in her
that doth thoſe good operations, who ſaid,
VVithout mee yovv can doe nothing.
                  
                  As for the perfectiō of Vniō of which is written,
Qui adhaeret Deo vnus ſpiritus eſt,
                     Vnion. 1. Corin. 6. Hee that
adhereth to God is one ſpirit with him; that
ſhineth cleerly in this vvill of God, becauſe that

by forſaking ones owne will and doing his,
wee adheare vnto him, and become one will
and ſpirit with him.
                  Touching the perfectiō of diuine cōtēplatiō
wherof the Pſalmiſt ſaith,9. Contemplation. Pſal. 54. 
                     Quismihi dabit pennas
ſicut colūba, & volabo, & requieſcā? whoe ſhall giue
mee wings like a doue, and I will fly and repoſe;
it is heer in full perfection, and that by a
neceſſarie cōſequēce, as well becauſe that (as is
ſaid) this will purifieth the ſoule from all proper
will, immortificatiōs, paſsiōs, affectiōs, and
frō all other darkenes, blinding her cleer ſight
and detayning her flight of cōtēplation; as alſo
becauſe that (as is likewiſe ſhewed) this will is
the very light of heauē and God himſelf, illuminating
and moſt admirablie eleuating and
nobilitating the ſoule which it ſo poſſeſſeth.
                  Again,10. Loue of God. if yow deſire the true loue of God and
charitie (Quod eſt vinculū perfectionis) the bond
of perfection; who ſo doth Gods will keepeth
his cōmaundemēts, and ſo poſſeſſeth the treaſure
of his loue,Ioan. 14. himſelf ſayeng, Qui amat me,
mādata mea ſeruabit, hee which loues mee, keeps
my cōmandemēts; and again, In hoc cognoſcetis ſi
me amatis, ſi mandata mea ſeruaueritis, By this
meanes yow ſhall knowe whither yow loue
mee or no, if yow keepe my cōmaundements.
                  Finally,11. Trāsformation. if perfectiō conſiſt in the trāsformation
and totall chāge of himſelf into God, and
putting on Chriſt, as the Apoſtle witneſſeth
ſayeng,Rom. 13. 
                     Induite Dominū Teſā
                      Put on Ieſus Chriſt,
and,Coloſſ. 3. 
                     Vos mortuveſtis, & vita veſtra abſcondita est

cum Chriſto in Deo. Yow are dead and your life
is hidden with Chriſt in God; and,Gal. 2. 
                     Viuo ego
iam non ego, viuit vero
                           •
                         in me Chriſtus, I liue now,
not I, but Chriſt in me. This perfection (I ſay)
is heerin contained: for that when a man putteth
of his owne will for the vvill of God, he
putteth of himſelfe, and putteth on God, according
to S. Paule ſayeng,Epheſ. 4. 
                     Exuite veterem
hominem cum actibus ſuis, & induimini nouum qui
ſecundum Deum creatus eſt in iuſtitia & ſanctitate
ueritatis. Put of the old man with his works
and put on the new which is created according
vnto God in iuſtice and holines of truthe;
for this will being wholy celeſtiall and
diuine, ſo filleth and poſſeſſeth the harte, penetrating
the verie bottome and moſt intimate
parte therof, and by an vnſpeakable
ſweetnes, true taſt, and perfect feeling of eternall
life, and of the delitious preſence of the
heauenly ſpouſe, doth ſo drawe, allure, intice,
and melt the ſoule in the loue and admiration
therof, that as being molten, and as hauing
loſt all her forces, and languiſhing with loue,
ſhe remaineth rauiſhed, loſt, and drowned in
the bottomles ſea of heauenly ioyes and eternall
light, wher ſhe may iuſtly ſay with S. Paule
as aboue ſayd,Galas. 2. 
                     Viuo ego iam non ego, viuit verō
in me Chriſtus. I liue now, not I, but Chriſt
in me; God the father ſayeng vnto her,
Haee est filia mea dilecta in qua mihi bene complacui.
This is my louing daughter in whom I

am well pleaſed,Pſal. 131. 
                     Haec requies mea in ſaeculum ſaeculi,
hic habitabo quoniam elegi eam, This is my
reſting place for euer, and heer will I dwell
becauſe I haue choſen her.
                  Thus then may appeare how all the aboue
ſaid perfections are contained in this exerciſe
of the vvill of God, as alſo any whatſoeuer or
wherinſoeuer the whole or any parte of perfection
doth conſiſt; and therfore rightly
and not without iuſt cauſe is this vvill of God
ſo muche praiſed, and recommended vnto vs
in holie ſcripture, at when it is ſaidIoan. 4. 
                     Meus
cibus eſt vt faciam voluntatem eius qui miſit me,
This is my meat to doe the will of him whoe
ſent me; and
                        Matt. 26. 
                     Spiritus quidem promptus eſt, caro
autem infirma, fiat voluntas tua, The ſpirit is
prompt but the fleaſh is infirme, thy will be
done; and
                        Theſſ. 4. 
                     Haec eſt volunt as Dei ſanctificatio
veſtra, This is the vvill of God your ſanctification;
and
                        Ioan. 6. Deſcendi de coelo non vt faciam voluntatem
meam ſed voluntatem eius qui miſit me, I
came downe from heauen, not to doe my
owne will but the will of him whoe ſent mee;
and the Pſalmiſt,
                        Pſal. 29 
                     Vita in voluntate eius, Life
is in his will; and againe,
                        Pſal. 8
                           •
                        
                      
                     Domine in voluntate
tua praeſtitiſti decori meo virtutem, O Lord in
thy will thow haſt giuen vertue to my beautie,
And our Sauyour
                        Mat. 12. Marc 3. Quicunque fecerit voluntatem
patris mei qui in coelis est, ipſe meus frater,
& ſoror, & mater eſt, VVhoſoeuer doth the will
of my father which is in heauen, hee is my

brother, ſiſter, and mother. And although this
vvill of God be incōprehenſible in itſelfe, yet
being in our ſoule it is made comprehenſible;
and though in it ſelf it be hiddē, yet being ioined
with ours it is made knowne: for as God
which was incōprehēſible, being in our fleaſh
was made comprehenſible, and which was
inuiſible, by ioyning himſelf with our humanitie
was made viſible; ſo it is of his will which
is his ſpirit and himſelfe; for before it be in
our will it is hidden and vnknown, but being
ioyned therwith it is ſeene and manifeſtly
known to the ſoule; and as before the Incarnation
hee was only God, but after the vnion
with our humanitie was God and man, ſo the
vvill of God which was only diuine, after the
vnion with ours is diuine and humaine; and
as that man by that vnion might ſay, I am
God, ſo the will of man by ſuch an vnion may
ſay,Epiſt. 1. ad Elidoniū inter pri. & mid. August. lib. 1. de Trinit. 13. circa prin. tomo. 2. I ame the vvill of God, according to Saint
Gregorie Nazian. ſayeng, Deus humanatus eſt, homo
autem Deificatus, God is made humaine,
and man is made diuine; And Saint Auguſtine
ſayeng, Talis erat illa ſuſceptio quae Deum hominem
faceret, & hominem Deum, That was
ſuch an aſſumption or coniunction, as made
God man and man God: for as when
God was made man man was made God,
ſo when once the vvill of God is made the
will of man, the will of man is the vvill of
God; and as the diuinitie was not obſcu
                     
                        •
                     red

by, nor in, the humanitie, ſo neither
is the vvill of God by, nor in, the will of man;
but as the humanitie is illuminated, exalted,
magnified, glorified, and deified by the
diuinitie, ſo is the will of man by the vvill
of God: yet not that this vnion of wills is
hypoſtaticall as was that of thoſe twoe naturs,
but is made by the linke of loue and
light of grace: and heerehence commeth it
that the vertuous perſon hath the ſpirit
illuminated, penetratiue, magnanimous, and
couragious; heerehence is it that his whole
ioy is in heauenly things; heerehence it
proceedeth that hee treadeth vnder foot
as moſt baſe, that which before hee admired
and aſpired vnto as his cheefe felicitie;
his ſpirit being no more humaine
but eleuated and magnified in God and
made one with him.
                  And though ſome things in this chapter
will not be well vnderſtood by the beginner
vntill ſuch tyme as hee hath practiſed
the third parte, yet will hee vnderſtand
it ſufficiently for attayning to the
knowledge of the end for which I haue
written it; namely, to ſhewe the excellency
of this Rule, and how all other exerciſes
are contained heerin. Neither ought any to
thinke that wee attribute too much to this exerciſe
or praiſe it beyond her deſert, for that
not ſo much it praiſed, as the ſubiect therof

(to weet) the vvill of God, as moſt worthily
preferred before all other points, as that wher
in ſuccinctly, plainly, eaſily, ſecurely, and
without change to any other, all other points
and exerciſes are fownded, and wherby wee
attaine to all perfections, being practiſed as is
breefly taught in this treatiſe following.
               
               
                  The ſumme or generall practiſe of all
this Rule.
                  CHAP. III.
                  
                     HAVING ſeene the excellency
and perfection of this rule of the
vvill of God, it followeth that wee
now ſhewe the practiſe therof,
touching which wee will heer at the beginning
lay downe an ample and generall document,
which breifly ſhall containe the whole
matter;The ſumme of the vvhole practiſe of this Rule. namely, that wee doe all our actions
only for the vvill of God and becauſe hee will
that ſo wee doe; I ſay (all our works and actions)
as well to containe corporall as ſpiritual;
as well thoughts as words and deeds; no
leſſe the reſiſtance to temptations, then the
acceptance of inſpirations: In like manner in
caſting of any vice or imperfection, as in labouring
for any vertue or perfection; as well

in ſpeaking, as in ſilence; in accepting labour
as repoſe; ſicknes as health; affliction as conſolation;
and finally, no leſſe in doeng the
thing naturall then ſupernaturall; litle then
great; vile and baſe then excellent and glorious;
and in ſomme, whatſoeuer is done or
ſuffered by any part or power of the body or
ſoule; all (I ſay) muſt be with this only end
of the vvill of God and with this ſole intention,
becauſe God will ſo haue it; and this without
any exception of thing, tyme, place, or perſon.
This general practiſe of the vvill of God
comprehending all ſortes of actions good and
euill, ſeemeth to be ſignified by that myſticall
nett of the ghoſpell gathering all kinds of fiſh
good and bad, of which our Sauiour ſayth thus
The kingdome of heauen is like a nett caſt into the
ſea, And S. Gregorie,
                     Matt 13. Gregor. Hom. 11. in Euan. that Regnum coelorum coeleſtis
eſt diſciplina, The kingdome of heauen is the
celeſtiall diſcipline. Now, what other thing is
this diuine will ruling all our actions, and
mortifieng all our paſsions, then this heauenly
diſcipline? and ſo is like a nett caſt into the
ſea (to weet) into this inſtable, wauering, bitter
and dangerous life, as a vaſt Oceane into
which the good and religious Chriſtian by
faythfull practiſe caſteth this diuine nett,
which gathereth togeather all ſortes of fiſhe,
which are our thoughts, deſires, diſſignes, and
actions which liue, and haue their mouing in
this ſea of our life. Hee taketh them when by

(applicatiō of intentiō) he caſteth it vpō them,
and gathereth them togeather, when (by diligent
care) hee chaſeth them vnder the nett forcing
thē to ſwim vnder this diuine will: VVhich
being full (by Action) hee draweth it vpp
(by Contemplation) vpon the ſhore or banke
of the ſolid earh (of perdurable repoſe, according
to S. Gregory) and ſitting downe,Greg. homil. in loan. 21. Pſal. 45. and reſting
after his trauail, and retiring himſelf frō
multiplicitie of affaires, as the Pſalmiſt counſaileth,
Vacate & videte, Take yee leaſure and
ſee, putting the good fiſh (of works and inſpiratiōs)
in theirveſſell (of hearts) and caſting forth
(by reſiſtance) the bad. For, though this nett
of the vvill of God take aſwell the good as the
bad fiſhe, yet it doth it with cōtrary intentiōs;
the good to be reſerued for the ſuſtētation of
the ſoule, the bad to be caſt out for her exerciſe;
the one and the other in this diuine will
which would ſo haue it. The cauſe why wee
ought to doe all with this ſole intētiō of Gods
will is, becauſe it is better without cōpariſon
then any other, containing all perfections and
making ourworks more perfect, meritorious,
and agreable vnto God then all others, as by
the ſecond Chapter before hath bein ſhewed,
and as by this one argument
may appear.
                  Our worke taketh her goodnes of the end for
which it is done,Argument. hauing in itſelf nomore good
thē it receaueth from her end, ſo that if it bee
done for ſome end that is baſe, or of little moment,
the worke alſo is baſe and of little worth

if the end be high, the worke is high, if it be
higher and better the worke is higher and better;
if finally, higheſt and beſt, the worke is
beſt and moſt ſublime. Now, ſo it is that a higher
and better end thear can be none them this
of the vvill of God, nor any like vnto it, and
therfore a better or nobler worke thear can be
none then that which is done with this end of
the vvill of God nor any like vnto it; yea, as ther
is no end equall vnto it, ſo is thear no worke
comparable ther vnto. That no other end can
be better or equall vnto this is manifeſt, becauſe
this end is immediatly▪ God himſelf
which is Summūbonū, The foueraigne good; for
which without any other end is done immediatly
for the vvill of God is immediatly done
for God who hath no equall. A man may doe
his worke for diuers intētiōs, as to exterminate
vice, to attaine vnto vertue, to auoid hell, to
come to heauē, to imitate our Sauiours exāple
all which are good though ſome more perfect
then others: but to doe his worke only for
the vvill of God, and only to pleaſe him, is an
intention farr excelling them all, the others
hauing their end and object only to the Creature
directly, and to the Creator indirectly;
yea ſo farr excelleth this intention the others,
as hee that doth things natural with
this intention, as to walke, yea though they
bee pleaſant, as to eate and drink, doth more
merit and pleaſe God then hee which

without this end ſhould faſt, doe pennance,
diſcipline, or other painfull works, with any
other intention.
                  VVhear may be noted certaine deceipts and
abuſes:1. Deceipt. firſt, of thoſe whoe meaſure all their
works, and eſteeme their merit only or principally
by their exterior, they taking contrariewiſe
their merit from the interior, or end
wherfore they be done.
                  Secondly,2. Deceipt. by this rule appeareth the loſſe
of merit, light, and grace, of the moſt part of
men which doe their naturall works naturally,
and not ſupernaturally as they might doe
by this intention, which maketh ſuch works
naturall and humaine, ſupernaturall and diuine.
                  Thirdly,3. Deceipt. of thoſe which not only in naturall
things but alſo in ſupernaturall and good
works, as almes, faſting, ſayeng diuine ſeruice
etc, forget to addreſſe their intention to God,

                        〈◊〉
                      doing them either becauſe they can not
auoid them, or els of cuſtome not thinking
wherfore.
                  Fourthlie,4. Deceipt. of thoſe which doe their works
for reward in heauen, for though they ſhalbe
rewarded, and though it be good ſo to doe
them, yet is it better without compariſon to
doe them only for Gods will and to pleaſe
him, not thinking (as much as is poſsible) of
any reward; and how much the leſſe hee ſo
worketh, ſo much the more ſhall hee be rewarded,

as approching ſo much the neerer to
the nature of a Sonne; and contrariewiſe
how muche the more hee ſo worketh for
reward, ſo much the leſſe ſhall hee be rewarded,
as ſo much more approching to the nature
of a mercenarie or ſeruant.
                  Finally,5. Deceipt. by this rule may appeare the common
blindnes of men, whoe for the moſt part
doe their works for other ends, and not for
this of the vvill of God.
                  
                  But ſome may heer obiect and ſay;Objectiō. that if ſo
it be (as wee ſay) that the worke taketh her
merit only of the interior, and that an ordinarie
and naturall worke with this intention
of the vvill of God is more noble and meritorious
then the greateſt worke done with any
other intention, then conſequently to receiue
that diuine Sacrament of the Altar or any
other, is not a better worke then to walke,
eate, or drinke.
                  I anſwer,Anſvver. that in receiuing the Sacraments
thear be twoe things to be conſidered; one is
the Sacrament as a Sacrament inſtituted by
God to conferre grace; the other is the ſimple
receauing therof, as being our worke and wee
the Author therof. If then wee haue reſpect
vnto the firſt, it is a better worke without
compariſon then our ordinarie works, hauing
an excellency in it ſelfe as of it ſelfe; but if
wee haue regard vnto the other, it is nothing
better, hauing no excellency in it ſelf as of it

ſelf but is good, better, or beſt of all according
to the intention, yea euell alſo, for in Iudas it
was bad,2. Obiection. and in the other Apoſtles verie good.
                  If any one obiect that if the worke take
her merit only of the end, then at leaſt as touching
the works of penance, as diſcipline, faſting,
almeſdeeds, they are no better then ordinarie
works being done with this good end
and intention of the vvill of God aſwell as
they.Ansvver. I anſwer, that it followeth not; for
though the worke take her merit only of the
end for which it is done, yet are not common
works equall with the works of penance if
both haue the ſame end, but the penall works
merit more, becauſe that beſides the good intention
for which they be done, they containe
and haue in them ſelfes both ſatisfaction
for the ſynns paſt, for (as ſayth S. Thomas) Licet
Deus non delectetur penis noſtris,
                     In ſupplemen. qu. 15. art. 
                           •
                        . 
                     delectatur tamen
ijs vt ſunt iuſtae, Though God be not delighted
in our pains, not withſtanding hee is delighted
in them as they are iuſt; and are alſo a
preſeruation from the ſynns to come, for (as
ſayth the Philoſopher) Paenae medicinae ſunt,
pains are medicins. VVherfore, when wee ſay
that the worke taketh all her good of the end,
wee meane all the good which it hath more
then it had before in it ſelfe; ſo that, if two
works de done for this vvill of God, wherof the
one is good in it ſelfe, as almes or faſting; the
other neither good nor bad in it ſelfe, as to

walke or talke; the firſt of theſe works ſhalbe
the better, namely ſo much the better as almes
or faſting is better then walking or talking;
but if twoe works that be equall in them
ſelfes be done, one for this ſaid end of the
vvill of God, the other for another, as to goe
to heauen; the firſt without compariſon ſhall
be the beſt: yea which is more, if twoe works
wherof the one is very good in it ſelfe, as faſting;
the other neither good nor bad, as
walking, bee done, the firſt for to auoid hell,
or to come to heauen, the other for the vvill
of God and only to pleaſe him; this walking
ſhalbe much more meritorious and agreeable

                        •
                     o God then that ſaſting as is aboue ſaid; for
though that worke of faſting doth much excell
this of walking, yet this intention of walning
doth much more excell that of faſting,
and by conſequence makes the worke much
better; for euen as a ſmall quantitie of gold
excelleth a great maſſe of lead, ſo puritie of
intention doth farr exceed the valew of corporall
things, as penance which is great in

                        •
                     hew; though no man muſt leaue the better
deed to doe the leſſer good vnder pretext of

                        •
                     uch an intention, for this were to deceiue
him ſelfe, wherof and of ſuch like deceipts
ſhalbe ſpoaken heerafter in the fift chapter.
               
               
                  
                  The diuiſion of this vvill into three
partes.
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     BVT for the better vnderſtanding
of this matter, and for more
eaſie conceiuing of all the reſt
which ſhalbe ſaid in theſe three
partes of this treatiſe, it ſeemeth heere neceſſarie
to make a diuiſion of this vvill of God, not
an they diuide it in ſchools into the will preſent
and the will ſubſequent according to
S. Damaſcene; nor into the will of the ſigne and
the will of his pleaſure according to ſome
others; nor into precept, prohibition, and
counſaile as it pleaſeth other doctors; nor finally,
according to others diuiding this will
of his pleaſure into his will efficatious and
permiſſiue: I meane not (I ſay) to diuide it into
to theſe ſcholaſticall diuiſions, but into a myſticall
diuiſion, namely into the Interior, Exterior
and Eſſentiall vvill.
                  
                  The Exterior vvill is a light and rule vvherby 
                        〈◊〉
                     
direct vs in the Active life.
                  
                     The Interior like wiſe is a light and rule to direct
our ſoule in the Contemplatiue life.
                  
                  The Eſſentiall, is a light and guide vvherby to

direct our ſpirit in the ſuperemment life.
                  The firſt being actiue, the ſecond contemplatiue
the third, ſupereminent: the firſt diſpoſing to the
ſecond and the ſecond to the third: the firſt is
for Beginners, the ſecond for Proficients,
the third for the Perfect. Neither is this myſticall,
and threefold diuiſion new or without
fundatiō, but is grownded vpon the doctrine of
S. Paule, and ſeemeth rather his diuiſiō then myne
whear hee ſayth,Rom. 12. 
                     Vt probetis que ſit voluntas Dei
bona, & beneplacens, & perfecta, That yee may trie
vvhich is the vvill of God, good, pleaſing, and perfect.
Vpon which words Lyranus ſayth,Lyra. in Rō. 12. that, Voluntas
Dei eſt bona, quantum ad 
                           〈◊〉
                        , The vvill of God is
good for the Beginners, pleaſing for the Proficients and
perfect for the Perfect. According wherunto the
vvill of God which wee call Exteriour or Actiue is
that which S. Paule calleth Good, ſeing it is that
wherin the beginners doe exerciſe them ſelfes:
the vvill of God which wee call Interiour, or Contemplatiue,
is that which hee calleth Pleaſing,
ſeing it is that which the Proficiēts doe practice:
And that which wee call Eſſentiall, or Supereminent,
is the ſame which hee calleth Perfect,
ſeing that the Perfect employe themſelfes therin;
though theſe three taken eſſentially as they
are in God, are but one and the ſame will, and
God himſelf; but are heer deuided for the better
vnderſtanding of ſuch as tend to perfection; for
as in the triumphant church the ſuperior Angels
receaue a more ample and vniuerſall knowledge
of the diuine pleaſure, wherof their 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
our are not capable, till they diuide, and proportion
the ſame according to theyr capacitie,
and ſo proportioned ſhew it thē (as ſayeth S. Deniſe;
ſo in the Church militant,De cael. hier. c. 15. the holie and illuminated
Doctours, receiuing a more ample,
and ſublime knowledg of the way of God, wherof
wee are not capable, haue diuided the ſame
and proportioned it to our capacitie;S Th. in opd
                           •
                        hu. Chriſti poſt init. And S. Thomas
ſayth: Lex diuinitatis, &c. God vvill that higheſt
things being made leſſe, and proportioned, should dravv
vp thoſe which are in the meane degree; and thoſe
which are in the meane degree, should eleuare thoſe
vvhich are in the lovveſt, becauſe this light is not equall
in the inferiour nature and the
                           •
                         ſuperiour; and the fore the
guif
                           •
                        s aſvvell naturall as ſupernaturall are ſaid to deſcend.
For ſayth S. Ieames,
                     Iac. 1. 
                     Euery good and perfect guift
commeth from aboue, deſcending from the Father of lights.
VVherfore following this doctrine and example
of the Fathers, wee haue diuided (as aboue
ſaid) this diuine light and will; for though wee
be altogeather vnlike to them in light, yet ought
wee to imitate them in communication of doctrine,
which though it haue no proportion with
theirs, yet ought our method to bee the ſame.
               
               
                  Of the Exteriour vvill, vvhat it is.
                  CHAP. V.
                  NOVV to come to the definition or deſcription
of the Exterior vvill of God it is the diuine
                     The exterior vvill.
                     
                     pleaſure knovvne by the lavve, and by reaſon, being
the rule of all our thoughts, words, and deeds
in the Actiue life. I ſay, it is (the diuine pleaſure)
becauſe though God hath no need of our
good deeds as the Pſalmiſt teſtifieth,Pſal. 15. 
                     Quoniam

                           •
                        onorum meorū non indiges, Becauſe thow haſt no
need of my good works, nor hath any loſſe if
wee doe euill, nor gaine if wee doe well; yet in

                        •
                     is bountie and goodnes hee taketh pleaſure
when wee doe well and keepe his commaun
                     
                        ••
                     ements,
as contrariewiſe by his iuſtice hee 
                        〈◊〉
                     
diſpleaſed when wee breake them. I ſay (it
knowne) that is, not only hee hath a will

                        •
                     nd pleaſure, but hee hath made it known vn
                     
                        ••
                     
vs, hauing geuen vs to vnderſtand wherin

                        〈◊〉
                      is vvill and pleaſure conſiſteth. Farther, I ſay
by the lawe) for therby he hath made kno
                     
                        •
                     en
his will. I ſay (by the lawe) in generall,

                        〈◊〉
                      of God only, to comprehend all kinds of

                        ••
                     od lawes, namely the lawe of God wherof 
                        〈◊〉
                     
written,Matt. 19. 
                     Si vis ad vitam ingredi ſerua manda
                        
                           •
                        ,
If thow wilt enter into life keepe the commaundements;
alſo the lawe of the Church, it
being written,Matt. 15. 
                     Si non uult eccleſiam audire, ſit tibi

                           •
                        ut ethnicus & pnblicanus, If hee will not heare

                        •
                     e church, accompt him no better then an

                        •
                     thnicke or Publicane; likewiſe the lawe and
commaundement of the ſpirituall Paſtor
therof is written,Hebrae. 13. 
                     Obedite praepoſitis ueſtris &

                           •
                        biacete eis, Obay your ſuperiours and be ſub

                        ••
                     ct vnto them; Moreouer, the lawe of Princes

it being ſaid,Luc. 20. 
                     Reddite quae ſunt Caeſaris Caeſari,
Giue vnto Ceſar that which is Ceſars. Further,
the lawe of magiſtrats,Rom. 13. for, Non eſt potestas niſi a
Deo, Thear is no power but of God; and Qui
potestatireſistit, Dei ordinationi reſiſtit, Hee that
reſiſteth the Power, reſiſteth the ordinance of
God. Finally, the law of euery mans eſtate,
qualitie, and condition, be hee Lord or ſubiect,
maſter or ſeruant, Lay or religious; Moreouer,
I ſay (and by Reaſon) which I add not
without great cauſe, for that in many things
this vvill of God is not knowne by the lawe,
thear being many things which the lawe doth
not extend it ſelf vnto, neither forbidding
nor commaunding them; as (for example)
whither to take holie Orders or not, to marrie
or to liue ſingle, to take a voyage or to
ſtay at home, to ſitt or to ſtand, to ſpeake o
                        •
                     
to be ſilēt, and a thowſand other things which
dayly come in practiſe neither commaunded
nor forbidden but left indifferent, and a man
knoweth not therin which is the vvill of God,
which ſeemeth a hindrance or let to our
aboue ſaid Rule, teaching that in all things
wee muſt do it. In this caſe therfore, whear no
lawe reſolueth the matter but leaueth it indifferent,
Reaſon muſt beare the ſway, by
which word (Reaſon) is meant Diſcretion,
piety, and counſaile. How in particular this
Reaſon muſt reſolue euery ſuch doubtfull
thing, ſhall forthwith in the next chapter be

declared. Further I ſay, it is a (Rule) of all our
thoughts, words, and deeds, becauſe that as the
materiall rule is the thing wherby to drawe a
line ſtraight, and wherby wee trie whether
any thing be right or crooked; ſo the vvill of
God is that wherby wee may drawe only the
courſe of our life, and the intention of our
works, words, or thoughts, and wherby wee
may knowe whether they bee ſtraight by
right intention, or crooked by any blind affection.
I ſay (in the Actiue life) which comprehendeth
not only the exterior action, but
alſo the interior intention; not only the outward
conuerſation, but alſo the inward reformation.
                  If one ſay,Obiectiō. Anſvver. why then doe yow call it the
vvill Exterior ſeing it toucheth and reformeth
the interior? I anſwer, becauſe it receiueth
her light and direction from the exterior; namely
by the lawe, and ſo is moſt conuerſant
in the exterior, in doing things or leauing thē
vndon, in accepting or reiecting according to
the ſame lawe, and finally, becauſe though it
be ſomething interior by reaſon of the rectifieng
of the intention, yet may it be well called
exterior, in reſpect of the other twoe wills
which are wholie conuerſant in the interior.
               
               
                  
                  Rules hovv to knovve and practiſe this
(vvill of God) in all things.
                  CHAP. VI.
                  
                     IT is neceſſarie that after hauing
declared what this will is by the
aboue ſaid definition in generall,
wee ſhewe it in euery thing by
ſome rule more particular, that
ſo knowing what is to be done and what left
vndone, what to be accepted and what reiected,
wee may in all things doe the vvill of
God as before hath bein taught by the aboue
ſaid generall rule in the third chapter. This
particular rule is this, and may eaſilie be gathered
of that which is ſaid.
                  All things whatſoeuer offer or preſent them
ſelfes vnto vs to be done or ſuffered, admitted
or reiected, be they corporall or ſpirituall
are of three ſorts, namely commaunded, forbidden,
or 
                        〈◊〉
                      indifferent, 
                        〈◊〉
                      neither commaunded
nor forbidden; and nothing can
come or happen but is contained in one of
theſe three kindes.
                  As touching the firſt kinde,1. Of things commanded. if the thing be
commaunded, the vvill of God is knowne (to
weet) that wee doe it; wee muſt therfore doe

it and that according to the aboue ſaid generall
rule (to weet) only becauſe God will haue
it ſo, and for no other end whatſoeuer.
                  For the ſecond ſort,2. Of things forbidden. if the thing be forbidden,
the vvill of God is likewiſe knowne that
wee doe it not; and therfore wee muſt reiect
it and leaue it vndone, and this for the ſame
only intention of Gods vvill all other intentiōs
reiected, and as much as is poſsible forgotten.
                  As concerning the third,3. Of things indifferent. namely of things
indifferent; they are of three ſorts (to weet)
agreeable to nature or ſenſualitie, as hearing,
curious talke or newes, viewing the beautie of
ſome perſon, ſtately buildings, and ſuch like;
or contrarie to nature and ſenſualitie, as keeping
ſilence, geuing almes, faſting not commaunded
 or in different to nature and
ſenſualitie, as to goe this way or another, to
ſitt or to walke, or finally, whatſoeuer hee
findeth no more inclination to doe then to
leaue vndone. If the thing offered or that
preſenteth it ſelf be of the firſt kinde, according
to ſenſualitie or affection; the vvill of God
is, that wee refuſe and reiect it: if it bee of the
ſecond, repugnant to ſenſualitie or affection;
the vvill of God is, that wee accept it: both
which are Propoſitions manifeſt by the ſcripture,
euery leafe wherof almoſt doth exhorte
vs to mortification of the old man, as
Mortificate membra veſtra quae ſunt ſuper terram,
                     Coll. 3.
Mortifie your members that are

on the earth,Rom. 8. VVhen the thing is difficile vvhat is to be done. and, Siautem ſpiritu facta carnis
mortificaueritis, viuetis, If by the ſpirit yow
mortifie the act
                        •
                      of the fleaſh yow ſhall liue,
yet with this exception, if true and vnfained
diſcretion require not the contrarie, hauing
reſpect to health, perſon, qualitie, tyme, and
place, with other like circumſtances; but if
ſuch be the circumſtances and ſo indifferent
the reaſons on both ſides, as in veritie a man
knoweth not which to doe or chooſe, either
to doe or leaue vndone, to reſiſt or admit the
thing, then muſt hee diſpatche and chooſe the
one or the other, allwayes with the intention
aboue ſaid of the vvill of God, rather then with
diſtraction,VVhen the matter is of importance. and breaking his braines, and loſſe
of tyme, make too long diſcuſsion; except
(which happeneth ſeldom) the matter bee
of ſuch conſequence that it deſerueth it, in
which caſe hee muſt vſe prayer and counfaile
of godly men, and ſuch as are of mature iudgement.
                  If the thing be of the third kind, namely
indifferent, neither according nor yet againſt
ſenſualitie to doe or to leaue vndone; a man
may chooſe which ſide hee will, alwayes with
this intention of the vvill of God, and ſayeng
in his heart and mynd vnto him ſelfe; I will
doe or accept, or I will not doe or reiect this
for thy will and pleaſure; which doing, the
thing that ſo hee ſhall leaue or doe with this
intention, ſhalbe as well the vvill of God as if it

had bein commaunded or forbidden: the reaſon
is, becauſe the worke followeth the intention;
ſo that ſuch things not commaunded or
forbidden but in themſelfes indifferent, are
made good or bad by their good or bad intention.
                  For better intelligence wherof muſt be
vnderſtood, that as all the fruit of the tree as
well little as great appertaineth to him that is
maſter therof; ſo all the fruits of works, words,
and thoughts of a man appertaine vnto his
Lord and God; and by conſequence hee
ought to doe nothing be it neuer ſo little, either
in accepting or reiecting, conſenting or
reſiſting, doing or ſuffering, but for him and
his glorie,Coloſſ. 3. the Apoſtle ſayeng, Quodcunque facitis
in verbo aui in opere, omnia in nomine Domini
noſtri Ieſu Chriſti facite, VVhatſoeuer yow doe
either in word or worke, doe it all in the name
of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
                  Further, though all our life muſt be for
God, yet all our life is not limited; though all
our works muſt be for him either in doing or
ſuffering, accepting or reiecting, conſenting
or reſiſting, yet hath hee not limited all, nor
commaunded which wee ſhall accept or reiect,
reſiſt or conſent vnto, but hath left the
moſt parte of our life and works in our owne
choiſe, to doe or to leaue vndone, accept or
reiect without any ſynne; namely, all thoſe
things of this claſſe or order which heer wee

call indifferent, as being free from commaundement
or prohibition. Heervpon then, this
our purpoſe is eaſilie proued (to weet) that
by ſuch intention theſe works indifferent
are the vvill of God.
                  
                  For,1. Argument. whatſoeuer God will haue vs knowe
and doe, hee giueth vs meanes to knowe and
doe the ſame; but in all theſe things indifferent
hee will haue vs knowe and doe his will
as by the Apoſtle alleaged appeareth, and
hath giuen no other meanes to knowe and
doe the ſame but by our application of intention,
ſeing they are not commaunded or prohibited
by any lawe; therfore this application
of intention in ſuch things is the meanes
to knowe and doe the vvill of God.
                  
                  Moreouer,2. hee doth the vvill of God whoe exhibiteth
vnto him his honor in the beſt manner
poſſible; but in all theſe things indifferent
thear is no better māner to exhibite his honor
vnto him thē by applicatiō of intentiō; therfore
hee that in theſe things indifferent will
vſe ſuch application of intention to God, ſhall
(doubtles) execute his will.
                  Alſo,3. in all works that bee lawfull, ſuch is the
worke exterior as God ſeeth to be the heart
and intention interior; but God ſeeth in thes
indifferent things which be lawfull, the heart
interior thus directed to be according to his
will; therfore the worke exterior is likewiſe
according to his will.
                  Likewiſe,4. when in doing anything the vvill

of God and ours pretend one end, the worke is
done for the ſame end; but in doing theſe
things indifferent the vvill of God pretendeth
his honor (as is proued) and by application of
intentiō our will pretēds alſo the ſame; therfor
in doing ſuch things indifferēt with ſuch application
of intention they are the vvill of God.
                  
                  Alſo,5. thoſe things are the vvill of God which
are don according as he demandeth of vs; but
God demaunds of vs that theſe things indifferent
be done for his honor (as is proued by the
Apoſtle) and by ſuch applicatiō of intentiō to
God wee doe thē for his honor; therfore whē
wee doe theſe things indifferēt with applicatiō
of intētiō to God, they are the vvill of God.
                  
                  Againe,6. thoſe things are the vvill of God in
which Gods intention and mans are but one;
but in theſe things indifferēt done with rectificatiō
of intention Gods intention and ours
are but one (to weet, his glorie) therfore when
in theſe things indifferent wee haue this rectification
of intention, they are the vvill of God.
                  
                  It is then plaine that theſe works indifferent
done with this end and intentiō are as well the
vvill of God as the things that wee doe becauſe
they are commaunded, or reiect becauſe they
are forbidden, though in thoſe our intention
muſt follow the worke, but in theſe the worke
our intentiō; for in things cōmaunded or forbiddē,
our intentiō muſt bee cōformed to the
work which the law hath limited but in things
indifferēt the work muſt be cōformed to our

intention which the lawe hath left at libertie.
On which point I haue bein ſomewhat the
longer, for that I haue knowne ſome which
doubted in the practiſe therof.
                  By this therfore yow ſee the rule of things
commaunded, forbidden, and indifferent,
which are the three myſticall dayes of which
is ſaid,Exod. 3. 
                     Iter trium dierum ibimus in deſertum, & ſacrificabimus
domino, VVee will goe tbree dayes
iourney into the deſert, and offer ſacrifice vnto
our Lord. For, what is this iourney els
then the vvill of God by which a man trauaileth
toward Paradiſe and diſcouereth the life
eternall,Pſal. 49. as is ſaid? Illîc iter quò oſtendam illi ſalutare
Dei, Thear is the iourney whear I will
ſhewe him the ſaluation of God: and what
may be theſe three dayes of this iourney but
theſe three points wherin the vvill of God is
fownd? and worthily they are called (dayes)
for the great light which they bring. This deſert
is the penitent life, or voyage of the vvill
of God in the light of theſe three dayes as it is
written;Pſal. 8
                           •
                        . 
                     Domine, in lumine vultus tui ambulabunt,
& in virtute tua exultabunt tota die, O Lord, in
the light of thy face they will walke, and in
thy vertue they will exult all day long: and
during theſe three dayes, and by theſe three
things is offered (as is commaunded) ſelf will
by mortification of the ſame, of which ſacrifice
it is ſaid, Sacrificium Deo ſpiritus contribulatus,
The afflicted ſpirit is to God a ſacrifice,Pſal. 50.
                     
which is more pleaſing vnto him, yea then
the ſacrifices of beaſts; for (ſayth S. Gregorie)
In ſacrificus aliena caro, in obedientia autem propria
voluntas mactatur, By ſacrifices is offered the
fleaſh of beaſts, but by obedience ſelfwill is
killed.
               
               
                  Exceptions from this rule, and ſolutions of
certaine obiections touching things
commaunded, forbidden,
and indifferent.
                  CHAP. VII.
                  
                     IF one aske touching theſe things
indifferent in reſpect of the lawe
yet not in reſpect of ſenſualitie,I. Doubt, and the ſolution. but
are agreeable therunto, whither
one may not chooſe the ſide which is according
to ſenſualitie, and ſo reiect that which is
bitter, and admitt that which is pleaſant; I
anſwer, if it be by true diſcretion, as for health
or otherwiſe, then it is no queſtion but hee
may (as alreadie is ſaid) but without ſuch iuſt
occaſion, though it be poſsible to doe it for
the vvill of God, yet is it impoſsible to doe it
only and purely for the vvill of God, without
ſomme mixture of affection or ſenſualitie; and
ſo to doe is verie dangerous. I ſay (it is dangerous)

aſwell becauſe in ſo chooſing that
ſide which pleaſeth ſenſualitie, hee doth not
mortifie the ſame as hee ought; as alſo becauſe
it is to be feared that in ſo doing hee deceiueth
himſelf, doing the thing either wholie or
partly to pleaſe ſenſualitie, though hee both
ſay and thinke to doe it for Gods vvill. I ſay it
alſo (impoſsible) to doe it ſimplie and purely
for God, eſpecially when deliberatly and of
ſett purpoſe hee ſo chooſeth according to
ſenſualitie; becauſe no reaſon can moue him
ſo to chooſe: for ſeing a man ought allwayes
to bend to mortification, what reaſon is
thear why hee ſhould willingly, wittingly,
and deliberatly, without any reſpect of health
or other matter of diſcretion chooſe the
things delightfull to ſenſualitie? and ſo doing
it not according to the true light of reaſon, it
is impoſſible that his intention ſhould bee
pure and only for God, without ſome mixture
of ſenſualitie or ſelf loue, though more
or leſſe according as the perſon is more or
leſſe imperfect: yet if it be done by ſurpriſe,
ſuddainly, or for want of taking heed, it may
be done for the only vvill of God; namely if remembring
himſelf, hee therunto purely and
wholly addreſſe and leuell his intention.
                  As for the things commaunded which ſeeme
agreable to nature and ſenſualitie,2. Doubt, and the ſolution. as to eate
or drinke, play or recreat himſelf, walke or
viſit ſome place or perſon wherin he taketh

pleaſure and contentment; as likewiſe for the
things forbidden diſagreeable to ſenſualitie
and affection, as to leaue of faſting, working,
diſcipline, or any other painfull, bitter, difficile,
or vnpleaſant thing, a man muſt fortifie and
ſtrengthen his intention, leaſt it be ouerthrowne
or wounded and weakned by the
force of ſenſualitie, or the impulſion of vnbridled
affection; which hee muſt doe by
producing contrarie acts, namely, by caſting
of and turning away his mind from the contētmēt
and pleaſure of ſuch a thing, and ſtopping
all his ſpirituall powres and vnderſtanding
againſt the ſenſualitie therof; and contrarywiſe
by fixing his heart and mind and all
his powers on God, and ſo offer himſelf vnto
him as his veſſell or inſtrument, wherby hee
may doe that work only for his honor and
will, without any pleaſure or proper cōmoditie
of this his creature; and ſo doing it cometh
to paſſe in thoſe that vſe it, that wheras before
the ſoule tooke her repoſe and delight rather
in the ſenſualitie and contentment of ſuch a
thing, then in the vvill of God, after ſuch a ſpiritual
act, ſhee taketh her whole ioy and delight
in the only vvill of God.
                  
                  But ſome will demaund,3. Doubt. if after ſuch diligēce
hee findeth ſtill himſelf drawne and allured
by ſenſualitie or affection, what is to be done.
                  A man muſt proceed in another manner
vſing more ſubtiltie,Solution. and making of neceſſitie
a vertue in accepting the ſame ſenſualitie or

affection (which hee can not be rid of) togeather
with ſuch a worke euen at the hands
of God as his will; not as a pleaſure but as a
paine, not as ſenſualitie but as the croſſe of
Chriſt, as in verie deed to ſuch a ſoule it is.
                  For better intelligence wherof, becauſe this
point is of great conſequence, as being euen
the verie knott of the ſpiritual life; and becauſe
it is a block wherat many ſtumble, and a
ditch which almoſt all fall into, not knowing
how to behaue themſelfes in this battaile, I
will ſay ſomewhat farther therof.
                  VVee muſt then knowe and remember,Note vvell.
that thear be twoe partes of our ſoule, ſenſible
or ſenſitiue; and ſpirituall or reaſonable;
wherof the one is allwayes contrarie to the
other and haue their contrarie deſirs; the ſenſible
part deſiring ſenſible things againſt the
ſpirit, and contrariewiſe the ſpirituall part
ſpirituall things againſt the ſenſible, as ſayth
S.Galat. 5. 
                     Paule, Spiritus concupiſcit aduerſus carnem, caro
autem aduerſus ſpiritum, The ſpirit coueteth againſt
the fleaſh, and the fleaſh againſt the
ſpirit. Moreouer, that the one of theſe
partes, namely the ſpirituall, is allwayes
in our power to make it ſuiect to God and
his lawe, becauſe of her free will which is naturall,
and grace which is all wayes readie: but
the part which is ſenſible is not ſo allwayes
ſubiect, nor in our power to make it obey
God, and followe that which is good, but often

reſiſteth the good which by our reaſon
wee would doe, and followeth the euill which
wee would not doe;Rom. 7. wherfore S. Paule ſayth
heerof, Non quod volo bonum hoc facio, ſed quod nolo
malūhoc ago, I doe not the good which I would,
but the euill which I would not, that doe I.
                  Further, becauſe God is not vniuſt, tyrannicall,
and cruell, but contrariewiſe iuſt, ſweet
and mercifull, hee hath not commaunded vs
things vnpoſsible and aboue our power, or
impoſed a burthen heauie to be caried, but
contrariewiſe hath commaunded that which
is eaſie,1. Ioan. 5. Matt. 11. as is ſaid, Mādata eius non ſunt grauia, His
commaundements are not heauie, And Iugum
meum ſuaue eſt, & onus meum leue, My yoake is
ſweet, and my burthen light. And therfore by
conſequence though hee hath commaunded
vs to keepe this ſpirituall part wholy ſubiect
to his lawe being (as is ſayd) a thing poſsible,
yet hah hee not commaunded ſo to keepe
ſubiect the ſenſible, being (as is ſhewed) a
thing impoſsible, but only to keepe it ſo
much ſubiect as wee can, by due mortification
and by the rule of reaſon: wherfore this rebellion
of the inferior part is neuer any ſynne
ſo long as the ſuperior part doth her indeuor,
and be the rebellion neuer ſo vnreaſonable, if
it preuaile not againſt reaſon, it ſhall neuer be
imputed to the partie reaſonable,2. Tim. 2. but contrarywiſe
it ſhalbe crowned, as hauing lawfully
fought. VVherfore when in theſe things

cōmaunded or in any other done by true diſcuſſiō,
a man feeleth any delight or ſenſualitie
little or great againſt reaſō and this puritie of
intentiō of Gods vvill, and hauing reſiſted in
bringing forth contrarie interior acts, and yet
ſuch motion or rebellion remaineth, he ought
not to diſpaire or looſe courage as many doe
thinking that all is loſt, and that hee is not able
to reſiſt ſufficiently; but (as is ſaid) hee ought
with courage to perſeuer,Great cō
                        fort for the tempted. aſſuring himſelf that
hee ſhall not be ouercome except hee will
himſelf by conſent of the partie ſuperior and
ſpirituall. Therfore (as is aboue ſaid) let him
take and accept ſuch an interior battaile as frō
the hand of God (that is) as his will, and as the
croſſe of Chriſt, knowing that his croſſe cometh
not only by exterior iniuries (as many think)
but alſo by interior warrs as heer is ſeene, and
as hee knewe fullwell which ſaid,Rom. 7. 
                     Video autem
aliam legem in membris meis repugnamē legi mētis
meae, & captiuantē me in legem peccati, I perceiue
another lawe within mee repugnant to the
lawe of my mind, and drawing mee to the law
of ſynne; and likewiſe hee which ſaid,Iob. 7. 
                     Factus
ſum mihimet ipſi grauis, I ame made burthenſom
vnto my ſelf.
                  But heer againe in this conflict againſt carnall
and ſenſuall motions thear ſeemeth yet an
other doubt and obſcuritie to be brought to
light;4. Doubt. which is, that though by this which is
ſaid a man may know that if the partie ſuperior

conſent not but doe her endeuour, the rebellion
or motion of the partie inferior can
neuer hurt him, yet knoweth hee not ſome
tymes when it is ſo, and when not. For, ſo great
is the motion ſenſuall or carnall that often tymes
it ſo troubleth reaſon, and obſcureth the
light and ſerenitie of the ſpirituall part, that
ſhee is not able to iudge whether ſhee hath
conſented or not.
                  I anſwer,Solution. that neither is it neceſſarie that
wee know it aſſuredly, but only probably, for
the better preſeruatiō of humilitie: for if wee
knewe aſſuredly that wee had ouercome it,
wee ſhould be in more danger to fall by pride
then before by the fight, and were like by elatiō
of mynd to looſe more in peace then by
valiant fight wee had gained in warre: but yet
may wee know it aſmuch as is for our good,Hovv to knovv yf a ma haue conſented.
and aſmuch as God ſeeth to be healthfull for
vs, namely by coniecture and probabilitie;
which knowledge and aſſurance cometh two
wayes; firſt, if hee haue this firme purpoſe and
general reſolutiō habitualy, neuer at any tyme
to cōmitt mortall ſynne; ſecōdly, if in his cō
                     ſcience
hee thinke that hee neuer gaue ouer
the fight but ſtill reſiſted, though this reſiſtāce
ſeemed not ſo ſtrong; for though it ſeemed
weake,Tvvoe cauſes of vveaknes. this weaknes might come of twoe cauſes;
firſt, for want of good will to reſiſt, and
then it is in deed ſuch as it ſeemeth, namely
weake; and ſo is very like to haue
offended. Secondly, this weaknes may come

by reaſon of the impulſion of the temptation
cauſing great feeling and delectation in the
inferior parte drowning (as it were) the ſenſible
feeling and knowledge, of reſiſtance, and
goodwill; which notwithſtanding liueth and
keepeth entire in the ſuperior parte, and then
this want of reſiſtance is not ſuch is it ſeemeth,
but is in deed verie great, and ſo hee offendeth
not.
                  But how ſhall I knowe (ſay yow) of which
of theſe twoe cauſes this feeble reſiſtance cometh?5. Doubt. Reſolutiō.
I aunſwer, by the aboue ſaid habituall
and continuall firme purpoſe and reſolution
neuer to commit ſynne; for if hee be not accuſtomed
to haue this purpoſe, hee may know
when hee feeleth none or almoſt no will to
reſiſt the temptation, that hee hath none in
deed; but if hee haue this generall purpoſe
hee may verily thinke that hee hath reſiſted
and kept pure his ſpirit and the powers therof,
though like the three children in the glowing
fornace, flaming with the fire of concupiſcēce
ſo heated by Nabuchodonoſor the diuell,Dan. 3. king
of all Babylon and confuſion.
                  Moreouer, it muſt heer be noted that
when wee ſpeake of things commaunded or
forbidden, wee intend not only the great
things which were mortall ſynne to committ
them or to leaue them vndone, but alſo little
matters which being commaunded were veniall
ſynne or imperfection to omit, or being

forbidden were the like to committ, for heer
wee treat not only of the obſeruing of Gods
commandements, but principally of the way
to perfection, which conſiſteth in auoyding of
imperfections: and heer alſo muſt alwayes be
remembred that (as is aboue ſaid) by this word
(lawe or commaundement) I meane not only
the lawe of God and of his church, but of ſuperiors
ſpirituall and tēporall, as likewiſe of the
order, ſtate, and condition of euery one, and
finally of the commaundement or intention
(not contrarie to God) of father, mother, or
any other to whom wee are bownd to obay;
ſo that whenas by any of theſe kind of lawes,
commaundements, or intentions wee ought
to doe or leaue vndone any thing, hee ſhould
much deceiue himſelfe which ſhould doe the
contrarie be the thing neuer ſo ſmall, though
vnder pretext of perfection or cōtemplation,
becauſe (as is written) Melior eſt obedientia quàm
victimae,
                     1. Reg. 11. Obedience is better then ſacrifices.
And whoeſoeuer ſhould ſo doe willingly and
wittingly, ordinarily is in great dāger through
inobedience by little and little to fall into
ſome great error and ruine of his ſoule; and alſo
if hee were of any particular order of Religion,
by ſuch leauing of little cuſtoms and
ceremonies, to help (for his part) to ruinate
his Order fenced in and defended with ſuch
cuſtoms as a gardin with a hedge. VVherfore,
I wiſh him to heare what Eccleſiaſtes ſayth vnto

him,Eccl. 10. 
                     Qui diſsipat ſepem, mordebit eum coluber, Hee
which pulleth downe the hedge, the ſnake
will bite him; and to receiue this admonition
from the wiſe man,Prou. 28. 
                     Ne tranſgrediaris terminos
antiquos quos poſuerunt Patres tui, Paſſe not the
ancient bownds which thy fathers haue putt
before thee. For, how can that tend to perfection
that nouriſheth proper will, and leaueth
of obedience? or how can that tend to
perfection that diminiſheth true performance
of profeſsion? But what more diminiſheth
true performance of his profeſsion
then to abandon the good cuſtoms and conſtitutions
of his Religion, which though they
be not the eſſentiall or verie ſubſtance throf,
yet are they the wall, trenche,Similie. or bulwarke
to defend the ſame? For as no Captaine of a
caſtle or Gouernour of a towne is ſo fooliſh
as to beat downe the walles or bullwarks,
or to fill vp the trenches or ditches
of the ſame which defendeth the
towne, and maketh the enemy employ
his forces and ſpend his munition, ſhott,
and powder to win the ſame, and to beate
them downe before hee can aſſalt the caſtle
or towne it ſelfe: ſo is hee no wiſer who
beateth downe and aboliſheth ſuch ceremonies
and cuſtomes which keepe in ſafetie
the eſſentiall of his Rule (namely his three
vowes and other things commaunded vnder
paine of ſynne) and which make the

ſpirituall enemies to ſpend their forces in expugning
the ſame before they can come to
that which is of greater conſequence. For, as
when ſuch defences of the towne be deſtroyed,
the enemy layeng his ſeige againſt it
forthwith planteth his Canons and beateth
at his will and pleaſure againſt the very howſes
of the ſame euen vnto the heart therof,
and ſo it is in great danger to be taken and
ſubdued: in like manner when ſuch ceremonies
be abrogated, the enemy beſeiging the
cittie of the ſoule, without any lett layeth on
his whole forces, and with his fierie arrowes
ſhooteth full butt againſt the naked eſſentiall
poynts and vndefēded vowes of his profeſsiō;
ſo that hee ought to be ſo far from ſuch contempt
of thoſe things, that though he were in
great ſublime contemplation, yet if hee knew
that ſuch things were to be done, hee ought
for the cauſes aboue ſaid to leaue the ſame.
                  But herein lieth the ſore and imperfection
in this caſe, that they thinke they ſhould be
farther frō God, and diminiſhe their ſpirituall
light whiles they are employed in the accompliſhmēt
of ſuch little things and ceremonies;
ſo that they doe not only omit them by frailtie,
but alſo wittinglie and of ſett purpoſe. But

                        •
                     f ſo it be that by theſe meanes they be ſequeſ
                     
                        •
                     red
from God, and their light decreaſed, it
is either becauſe they doe it vnwillinglie,

namely exteriorlie, and not in mynd; which
in effect before God whoe regardeth the will,
is as much as to leaue it vndone: or els if they
doe it willinglie, it is not (as heer is taught)
for the vvill of God only; for if this were their
end, ſo far ſhould they be from being alienated
from God, and their light diminiſhed, that
they ſhould therby be neerer vnto him, and
their light much encreaſed; becauſe this will
(which is ſpirit and life) doth illuminate,
illuſtrate, and ſo change the works, that of
corporall they become ſpirituall, of darke and
exterior, cleere and interior; and therfore of
thoſe that ſo doe them it is written,Pſal. 38. 
                     Quia tenebraenon
obſcurabuntur a te, & nox ſicut dies illuminabitur;
ſicut tenebrae eius it a & lumen eius, Darknes
ſhall not be hidden to thee, and the night
ſhall ſhine as the day; the light and the darknes
ſhall bee alike:Abac. 3. and Egredietur diabolus ante ped
                           ••
                        
eius, The diuell ſhall goe foorth before his feef
as being troden vnder the ſame by ſuch obedience,Ibid.
                     Ante faciem eius ibit mors, Death ſhall
goe before his face, as being beaten away by
the life (which is this will) and by the great
light wherwith hee is cloathed, and life wherwith
his ſpirit is filled. And this is the true
actiue and contemplatiue life (to weet) not
ſeparated (as many take it) but ioined togeather,
making of works exterior, interior▪
of temporall, ſpirituall; of obſcure, illuminated;
and finally, which ſo ioineth in one and

the ſame worke contemplation with the
action, and that without preiudice or hinderance
one of another, wherof wee will ſpeake
more amply in her due place.
               
               
                  Hovv ſix degrees are contained in this Intention,
that ſayth; I vvill doe this for
the only vvill of God. Of the
firſt degree.
                  CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     THIS rule therfore thus obſerued
of things commaunded, forbidden,
and indifferent, with thoſe other
obſeruations therunto adioyned,
the vvill of God ſhall euery whear in all
things appeare moſt plainly; and ſo it reſteth
that wee doe the ſame by the practiſe of the
aboue ſaid generall rule in the third chapter
expreſſed; namely, that wee doe all things for
this end of the vvill of God, and neuer begin
any worke, whether it be exterior or interior,
corporall or ſpirituall, in repelling vice or acquiring
vertue; be it a thing commaunded,
forbidden, or indifferēt, be it naturall or ſupernaturall,
little or greate, finally be it whatſoeuer;
wee neuer (I ſay) begin to doe it till
wee haue firſt addreſſed our intention vnto

God, ſayeng by word and thought, or at leaſt
by thought from the bottome of our heart: O
Lord, I will doe this or I will ſuffer, I will reſiſt
or will purſue &c. this thing only for thy
will and pleaſure.
                  But that the puritie and perfection of this
intention may be the better vnderſtood, and
the deuout ſoule may more cleerly diſcerne,
and more eaſily expell all impuritie, which no
leſſe ſecretly then commonly doth contaminate
the ſame, wee will declare it more
plainly.
                  This intention therfore which ſaith, I will
doe or ſuffer this or that only for the vvill of
God, containeth ſix degrees or perfections (to
weet) Actually, Onely, VVillingly, Cleerly, Aſſuredly,
Speedily.
                  
                  And this intention with theſe ſix degrees,
hath bein figured by the ſix degrees of Salomōs
Throne in theſe words;3. Reg. c. 10. 
                     King Salomon built a
Throne of Iuory, and couered it vvith shining gold,
vvhich had ſix degrees, and the topp therof vvas
rovvnd in the hinder part, and tvvoe handles on
each ſide vpholding the ſeat, and on each handle
tvvoe lyons, and on each ſide of the degrees tvvelue
little 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſuch a vvorke vvas not to be fovvnd in
any kingdome. This king Salomon is Ieſus Chriſt,
whoe worthily may attribute vnto himſelfe
this name Salomō
                      which ſignifieth (peaceable)
ſeing hee bringeth peace to the ſoule wherin
hee maketh his aboad,Pſal. 75. for Factus eſt in pace locus

eius, His dwelling is in peace. Now, in the
ſoule as in his pallace hee hath made a
throne of white Iuory of (pure intention
and diuine will) large, to be capable of his
diuine maieſtie, garniſhing it with fine
gold of (perfect charitie) This throne hath
the ſix foreſaid degrees, of which wee are to
treat. The topp of this Throne or (compleat
perfection of intention) is rownd
without end or limit (to weet) Perpetuall
in the hinder part, which looketh towards
the other world and life eternall: for
though the fore parte of the Intention
which regardeth vs hath a beginning, yet
that which is behind hidden from vs which
looketh towards God and eternitie ſhall neuer
haue end,1. Cor. 13 for Charitas non excidit, Charitie
hath no fall. But which is the ſeate of this
thone wherin God repoſeth himſelf, if not
(conſtant perſeuerance?) of which ſeate is
ſaid,Pſal. 44. 
                     Sedes tua Deus in ſaeculum ſaeculi, Thy ſeat
(ô God) remaineth for euer. The twoe
handles which vphold the ſeate, are the twoe
parts of ſtrength, which are (according to S.
Thomas) Aggredi and Suſtinere,
                     2. 2. q. 128 art. 4. To vndertake
and ſuſtaine, or, to doe and ſuffer; which handles
firmely ſupport this ſeate of (Perſeuerance)
not permitting it to fall. One was
at the one end, to weet (to Vndertake)
at the beginning; the other at the other
end, to weet (to Suſtaine) at the end. The

fower lyons are the fower Cardinall vertues,
or rather the fowre principall partes of the
ſoule, the vnderſtanding, the will, the powers
iraſcible and concupiſcible: the twelue little
lyons are the eleuen Paſsions of the mind
with Diſcretion which doth tame them, and
of lyons and furious beaſts make them domeſticall
and ſeruiceable. They were vpon
the degrees, becauſe (being well gouerned)
they maintaine and preſerue them. They were
ſix on each ſide, becauſe ſix of theſe paſsions
haue their reſidence in the Concupiſcible
powre, and ſix in the Iraſcible, placing thear
Diſcretion. Loe then this myſticall throne: O
glorious thone! ô maieſticall ſeate! ô ſublime
intention! ô diuine worke of great Salomon!
It is not without good reaſon ſaid of thee,
that no kingdome can afford they like; ô
throne which beautifieth the ſoule geuing her
to vnderſtand this ſweet inuitation of God
ſayeng, Veni (electa mea) & ponam in te thronum
meum, Come (my elect) and I will place
my throne in thee. Oh holie intention and
throne of God, whear hee ſitteth to renue in
the ſoule all things therin contained, according
as is written, Dixit qui ſedebat in throno;
Ecce noua facio omnia, Hee whoe ſate in the
throne, ſayd, Behold, I make all things new.
Lett vs conſider therfore the compleat perfection
of this throne, aſcending by order
the degrees therof.
                  
                     
The firſt wherof is Actually,
                     Actually, 1. degte. by which is
meant an actuall remembrance of this vvill of
God, which conſiſteth in lifting vp our mynd
to the ſame, and rectifieng our intention according
therunto: by which degree of (Remembrance)
is excluded all obliuion of this
will,Faultes againſt this degree. whenſoeuer wee begin any thing ſpirituall
or corporall; which is a common fault,
cauſing an infinit loſſe, and depriuing vs of an
vnſpeakable treaſure of the light of grace, and
of an vnknowne waight of merit. Yet to eſchew
this extremitie of Obliuion, a man muſt
not fall into the contrarie exceſſe of ouermuch
Remembrance, in multiplyeng ſo many
acts, and rectifieng ſo often his intention as to
trouble the braine. And therfore when I
ſay that a man muſt direct his intention in
all works, I meane not of euery little action
done by euery part and ſence of the body or
power of the ſoule, but of ſuch works as are
diſtinguiſhed and ſeparated in them ſelfes; but
particularly and aboue all, wee muſt not forget
thoſe which wee feele to pleaſe or diſpleaſe
nature very much; for it is thear (as
they ſay) whear the Hare goeth away, and
wherin conſiſteth true aduancement.
                  Note alſo, that though allwayes hee ought
ſo to direct his intention whenſoeuer hee beginneth
to doe or ſuffer any thing, ſayeng, I
will doe or ſuffer this (oh Lord) for thy will;
this is to be vnderſtood of all thoſe tymes

when hee is diſtracted, and thinketh not already
of the ſame will, nor hath his ſpirit lifted
vp to God; and not when hee hath it ſo
eleuated as it may happen, eſpecially if hee be
diligent, and the worke be ſhorte and not diſtractiue
of it ſelf. For if after ſuch direction
of intention at the beginning hee be diligent
in turning away his mind togeather with
his eyes and other ſences from all exterior
things, and fixing his ſpirit in this will and diuine
pleaſure, and be attētiue only vnto God,
hee may ſtill remaine vnited vnto him, vntill
hee take in hand ſome other thing. Likewiſe,
the worke being ſoone done, or els being
not diſtractiue, but rather drawing the ſoule
to deuotion and towards God, as in ſinging
hymnes or diuine ſeruice; a man may haue
his mind ſtill lifted vp, which if ſo it be, I
ſay not that hee direct a new his intention
taking in hand a new thing, but that hee ſo
ſtill remaine with his mind ſo eleuated vnto
God: for if hee doe otherwiſe, hee ſhould rather
deſcend lower then be raiſed higher,
though (perhaps) this caſe falleth not out
often, but that hee hath his mind diſtracted
and the intention crooked, or at leaſt
not ſo vpright but that the mind may be
more recollected, and the intention more
rectified. Neuertheleſſe, a man muſt not be
ſcrupulous if hee faile in this degree and
ſome others, as though hee had committed

ſome ſynne, ſeing the deſire hee hath to
practiſe this Rule doth add no new obligation.
               
               
                  Of the ſecond degree of perfect
Intention.
                  CHAP. IX.
                  
                     THE ſecond degree of this myſticall
Throne of pure intention and
diuine will is Only (that is) that
this will be theyr only,Onely. 2. degree. ſimple,
and alone the end which moueth the mind
to doe or ſuffer the thing.Faultes againſt this degree. VVhich degree
excludeth all other ends and intentions
whatſoeuer; and firſt the euill and malitious
intentions as to doe the thing for pride,
enuie, couetouſnes, gluttonie &c. Secondy,
all imperfect end and intentions, as to
doe the thing for humaine reſpect, fauor of
men, ſelf loue, proper complacence, ſeruile
feare, ſenſualitie, particular profit, and the
like; and (in ſomme) all veniall ſynnes, and
whatſoeuer is abſolutlie of her owne nature
imperfection. Finally, heerby is excluded not
only the euill intētion, and that which is of it

owne nature imperfect, but alſo that which
is of her nature good, but comparatiuely bad,
namely compared with a better, as to doe penance,
diſcipline, faſt, to eſchew the paines of
hell, to merit to be rewarded, to goe to heauen,
and the like; which intentions though
they be good in them ſelfes, yet are they not
ſo, compared with the only vvill of God which
is farr better (as hath bein ſhewed) and are
therfore heer excluded.
                  VVherfore this degree and perfection eſpecially
appertaineth and is referred to the
mortification of all our paſsions and affections,
ſelfe loue, vntemperate deſires, and
all other imperfections; all which as bad
weedes ſpringing vp in the fertile grownd of
our good works, are rooted out with this fitt
inſtrument or degree of (Onely) and as crooked
boughes ſhooting out of the ſtraight tree
of our intention, are cutt of with the ſharpe
ſword of the onely vvill of God; the ſame
being (as is ſaid) a right rule to meaſure whether
the line of our intention be drawne
ſtraight or no.
                  VVherfore let the deuout Reader take this
for a generall and infallible Rule, that whenſoeuer
in his worke he hath not this ſole intention
and onely vvill of God for his end without
any mixture of other intention whatſoeuer,
it hath in it imperfection be it neuer
ſo ſecretly hidden, yea from the partie himſelf;

but aſſoone as this only will beareth ſway
and taketh entire poſſeſsion of the heart, all
darknes is diſcouered by the light therof, and
all obſcuritie of imperfection is caſt out by
the ſhining brightnes of the ſame. Oh how
often are wee deceiued for want of this light!
how ſtraight thinke wee to be our intention!
how holie our deſire! how excellent our
worke! how good an opinion haue wee of
our ſelfes! but aſſoone as this light cometh,
downe muſt goe the Peacocks feathers ſeing
now her fowlle feet ſo ſoyled, and loaden with
earthly affections, durtie paſsions, muddie
proprietie, and ſwiniſhe ſelf loue; for ſo ſoone
as this right Rule of Gods vvill is applied vnto
our intention, wee ſee the crookednes of
intēperance and diſordinate deſire therof. All
the world goeth awry, becauſe they will not
by this Rule ſquare their intentions, nor by
this light examin their actions. In this point
therfore let the deuout perſon labour, heerin
let his whole ſtuddie be, in this worke let
him recollect and employ all his forces, namely
in thus examining his intention in all his
affaires, for heerin conſiſteth all true ſpirituall
profitt; this is the infallible fowndation
in the beginning, the ſecure way in proceeding,
and the conſummated perfection in the
end of all the Actiue life.
               
               
                  
                  The third degree of perfect Intention.
                  CHAP. X.
                  
                     THE third degree of this Throne
is,VVillingly, 3. Degree. that this intention be vvillingly
(that is) that the work be done not
only for Gods only will, but alſo
willingly, and with full conſent, with a certaine
repoſe, peace, trāquillitie, and ſpirituall
contentment therin, that the ſoule may be
made capable of the preſence of God and influence
of his holie ſpirit, Quia factus eſt in pace
locus eius,
                     Pſal. 75. His place and abode is in peace
(that is) in the ſoule not diſquieted with
the noiſe of troubleſome affections and contradicting
paſsions, nor with the tract of contrarie
deſires drawing her another way.
                  By this degree therfore of vvillingneſſe
and contentment,Faultesagainſt this degree. is excluded and ſhutt out
all ſadneſſe, heauineſſe, and vnwillingneſſe in
doing, leauing vndone, or ſuffering any thing
commaunded by any of the lawes aboue ſaid,
of what cauſe ſoeuer ſuch vnwillingneſſe proceed.
                  Farther, this vnwillingneſſe and contradiction
may ſpring of diuers cauſes,The first kind of 
                           •
                        ontradiction in doing the vvill of God. and
namely of the thing commaunded, as
when it is baſe, abiect, and vile, as to viſit priſons

to attend the ſicke, or doe the offices of
the houſe: alſo when the thing is vnpleaſant,
ſharpe, and bitter, as diſcipline, abſtinence,
or faſting: likewiſe when it is againſt our profit,
as reſtitution, hoſpitalitie, or almeſdeeds;
and finally, when it is againſt our worldly honor,
as to ſupport patiently euill, ſpightfull, or
ſlanderous words, reproches, and all kind
of iniuries.
                  Againe,2. this Vnwillingneſſe may come by
occaſion of the partie that commaundeth,
as becauſe hee is, or is thought to be ſimple,
poore, or vnlearned; or that hee is his enemy
or at leaſt not his freind, or hath done or ſpoken
ſomewhat vnkindly to him.
                  Likewiſe it may come in reſpect of the
tyme when hee ſhould doe the thing,3. as when
hee is commaunded to doe it when hee would
reſt, take his refection, recreation, or doe
ſome other thing of his owne; or when contrariewiſe
hee hath a mind to doe it and is cō
                     maunded
to repoſe, eate, or reſt from labour,
or ſhould doe ſome other particular thing
then that.
                  Alſo,4. this Vnwillingneſſe may come in reſpect
of the maner of the worke, as when it
muſt be done ſpeedily, laboriouſly, and diligently;
or meekly, humbly, and to his owne
confufion and to the abating of his pride.
                  Finally,5. it may happen in reſpect of the
place, as when it is publicke, vnpleaſant,

loathſome. By all theſe occaſions (I ſay)
with the like, this ſadnes creepeth into the
worke when wee doe the ſame, though they
all ſpring of one only cauſe, namely proper
will; and muſt be remoued and caſt out by
this degree of (willingneſſe and contentment)
remembring that ſuch is the pleaſure and will
of that ſoueraigne will whoe for his owne delight
and ſeruice created ours.
                  Moreouer,The 2. kinde of cōtradiction. thear is an other kind of wnwillingneſſe
in doing the vvill of God which is
more ſecret, and proceedeth of cauſes leſſe
known, but no leſſe contrarie to the ſame vvill
of God and degree of (willingneſſe) and theſe
cauſes are commonly couered with pretence
of pietie, as of prayer, faſting, teaching, ſtuddyeng,
preaching, and the like; ſo that many
when by their ſuperior they are commanded
any thing which may interrupt their exerciſe,
they doe it not willingly but vnwillingly
and with ſadneſſe, proper will perſuading
them that they were better occupied before,
and blinding them ſo, that they can not ſee
how much Obedientia melior eſt quàm victima,
                     1. Reg. 11.
Obedience is better then ſacrifices; nor knowe,
that though in themſelfes ſuch works be
good, yet are they nought worth, done
againſt the vvill of God manifeſted vnto vs by
his lawe, and the commaunding or knowne
intention of the lawfull ſuperior, namely, ſo
long as hee commaundeth not againſt the fame

lawe.
                  A third kinde of vnwillingneſſe ariſeth
from another cauſe yet more ſecret and vnknowne;The 3. kind of contrndiction.
namely, when a man knoweth that
it is the vvill of God, and alſo willingly taketh
it in hand, but vnwillingly beſtoweth his ſpirit,
his endeuour, and tyme vpon it to doe it
well and faythfully, but turning his mind
from the ſame, caſteth it on God and his will,
and ſo neglecteth the worke, making it not ſo
perfect as hee ought; which is a notable and
moſt ſecret deceipt; for, caſting ſo his mind
from the worke to the vvill of God, hee diuideth
the ſaid worke and will which are but
one, making the worke one thing and the
will another: and ſo when hee ſeeketh God
but of the worke, hee ſeeketh him out of his
will; and turning from the worke, hee turneth
from his will, caſting of his mind from the
worke hee caſteth it from his will, and (finally)
going out of his worke hee goeth out of
his will and pleaſure, becauſe the worke is his
will; and though ſtill hee doth the worke,
yet if it be hot willingly, hee doth it not before
God, whoe ſeeth the heart, and iudgeth
according to the will: and therfore how much
the more hee ſo feeketh God, ſo much the
leſſe doth hee find him, becauſe God is neuer
fownd by doing againſt his diuine will; but
the more vnwillingly hee doth that which
hee commaundeth, and the more hee turneth

his interior eyes from it as being wearie therof,
the more doth hee againſt his will, and
by conſequence the leſſe hee findeth him. But
God is fownd only by his will (that is) by
doing that which hee commaundeth; in his
will, which is his worke; by meanes of his will,
which is by meanes of doing the thing which
hee willeth, and that willingly and with all
our heart and all our ſtrength, as wee are
bownd to ſerue him which all our heart and
our ſtrength, not with ſlownes or faſtidiouſneſſe,Hier. 48.
for Maledictus homo qui facit opus Deinegligenter,
Accurſed is that man whoe doth the
worke of God negligenly; nor yet ſadly, or
(as it were) by conſtraint,2. Cor. 9. for Non ex triſtitiae
aut nece ſsitate, Not with ſadneſſe or neceſsitie,
but willingly and with contentment,Ibid. 
                     Hilarem
enim datorē diligit Deus, For God loueth a ioyfull
giuer; but (as is ſaid) hee doth not ioyfully
the worke, whoe in doing it, vnwillingly
thinketh therof: Hee doth not (I ſay)
willingly the vvill of God whoe doing the
worke will not thinke therof, but only of
his will, as though his worke were not
his will, or as if his will were other then
his worke; fynally, as though his worke
and his will were not one and the ſelf ſame
thing: ſo that when to thinke of the will
hee will not thinke of the worke, hee thinketh
in deed neither of the worke nor of the

will; and the ſoule that will be ſo out of the
worke to be in God, is neither in deed in God,
nor yet in his worke.
                  Let vs therfore lay downe heer for a ſure
grownd to build vpon, for an infallible Maxime
to reſolue this matter, and for a ſhining
light to diſsipat and diſſolue this cloud (namely)
that when any worke preſenteth it ſelfe to
be done, following the Rules aboue ſaid, the
ſame verie worke it ſelf, be it corporall or ſpirituall,
inaſmuch as it appertaineth to mee, is
the verie vvill of God, and to mee is ſpirit and
life.
                  I ſay (the verie worke it ſelfe) to ſignifie
the thing done, and to exclude all imaginations
of any other thing, either in heauen, or
in earth, or in our ſoule, excepting as that
thing it ſelfe is in our ſoule. I ſay (both corporall
and ſpirituall) that none may think
the corporall to be leſſe then the ſpirituall;
and to touche the deceipt and common error
heerin of many ſpirituall men, which doe
more willingly the ſpirituall then the corporall,
eſteeming the one kind more noble
then the other, and deeming to find more
life and light in the one then in the other;
which though it be true in reſpect only of
themſelfes, and good ſo to doe, preferring the
one before the other when a man hath libertie
to take his choiſe; yet is it otherwiſe when

the vvill of God inter poſeth it ſelf by meanes
of any obligation or commādement; for then
it is ill done, and a man deceiueth himſelf in
preferring the ſpirituall before the corporall,
obedience being (as is ſaid) better then ſacrifice.
I ſay (in as much as it appertaineth
vnto me) to exclude the ſubſtance of the thing
be it corporall or ſpirituall ſubſtance togeather
alſo with all her Accidents, as the whitenes,
blacknes, and all kind of colours; ſweetnes
or bitternes and all kind of taſtes; greatnes,
ſmallnes and all kind of proportions; and
finally, all the qualities and accidents, as not
being this vvill of God, but as it appertaineth
vnto mee (that is) in as much as it ought to be
in my ſoule, as being brought vnto the ſame
by the corporall powers and fiue ſences, Nihil
eſt enim in Intellectu quod non fuerit prius in Senſu,
Thear is nothing in the vnderſtanding which
was not firſt of all in ſome of the fiue Sences;
which fiue Sences bring it into the three Powers
of the ſoule, Intelligence, Memorie, and
VVill, which keepe, retaine, and (as it were)
digeſt, worke, and metamorphoſe the ſame
into another forme by taking away the vayle
therof, putting of the corporall Image; and ſo
bringing it to a pure abſtraction doth lodge
it in the eſſence of the ſoule: Thus (I ſay) the
worke is in our ſoule, and thus it appertaineth
vnto vs. Taking therfore the worke in this
forte, it is the verie vvill of God, and to him

that ſo doth it ſpirit and life. For, though thear
be ſome darknes by reaſon of the Image or
imagination of the worke in my ſpirit, yet is
the ſame turned into light by the feruour and
light of this diuine will, wherby the ſoule
ſeeth, nor taſteth ought els but God and his
ſweet will and pleaſure: and how much more
willingly the worke is done in this order
(to weet) in not diuiding the worke and the
will, but eſteeming the verie worke to be the
verie will, ſo much the more cleerly doth the
ſoule ſee this will, and perfectly enioy God;
the worke that ſeemed corporall being ſo
turned wholie into ſpirituall.
                  And note, that when I ſay one muſt not
looke on the vvill of God but on the worke,
my meaning is (as I haue ſaid) that hee ought
not to looke or behold the will a parte, as it
is not; but as one and the ſelf ſame thing with
the worke, as it is; nor that hee ſhould turne
his ſpirit and affection from the worke, but
contrariewiſe fix it ſtill in the ſame, yet alwayes,
as in his will.
                  VVhear is to be noted, that as ſome are in
this extremitie to turne their mind from the
worke, and fix it on the vvill of God; ſo are
they in farre greater number which leane to
the contrarie, turning their mind from the
vvill of God to fix it on the worke; ſo that as
the one (which be ſpirituall) find not the
vvill of God becauſe they ſeeke it not in his

worke; ſo the others (which are the worldlings,
and vndeuout) doe not the worke of
God, becauſe they ſeeke it not in his will: for,
as wee doe but lie to God and in vayne ſeduce
our ſelfes, in thinking to loue his will and
yet neglect his worke; ſo doe wee no leſſe,
when wee thinke to doe his worke and yet
neglect his will.
                  It is therfore euident, that to vnite both
theſe extremities, and amend theſe twoe contrarie
imperfections, the vvill of God (according
to the aboue ſaid Maxime) muſt be
ioyned with his worke, and his worke with
his will, and neuer make them twoe, but perfectly
one and the ſelf ſame thing; acknowledging
that the accompliſhing of the worke
is his verie will, and that his will is the verie
accompliſhing of the worke, though the reformatiō
of this latter imperfection of doing
the worke without hauing regard to the vvill
of God, appertaineth to the firſt degree of
Actuall remembrance.
               
               
                  Of the fourth degree of perfect
Intention.
                  CHAP. XI.
                  
                     
                     THE fourth degree of this Throne,Aſſuredly, the fourth degree.
or perſection of this intention is,
Certainty, or Aſſurance, with which
it ought to be munited and fortified,
namely, that when one hath directed
his intention to doe the worke for the only
vvill of God, hee aſſure himſelf that in veritie
it is the vvill of God.
                  
                  By this degree and perfection of Aſſurance
is excluded all doubts and heſitations,Faults againſt this degree. which
becauſe in this poynt they often intrude
them ſelfs, to the great preiudice of the true
and faythfull practiſe therof, I will endeuour
to reſolue them, by declaring and taking away
the cauſes wherof they ſpring.
                  The firſt cauſe then,The first cauſe. wherof theſe doubts
doe ſpring, is becauſe in matters indifferent
a man knoweth not whether hee hath choſen
that ſide which pleaſeth God or nor, in doing
or leauing vndone any thing; which happeneth
becauſe forgetting his rule hee knoweth
not how to diſcerne the matter, taking
a wrong meanes of diſcerning the ſame (to
weet) in wayghing the exterior thing, and cō
                     ſidering
whether it be more agreable to God
to leaue or doe it, to doe this or to doe that.
                  For remedy therfore heerof,Remedy. hee muſt knowe
that this is not the meanes in things indifferent;
but muſt iudge therof by an interior
diſcuſsiō, and not by the exterior thing, namely,
by a view or examen of the intētion; which

if it tend directly to the vvill of God, hee hath
in veritie choſen that which is his will; becauſe
in ſuch indifferent things the worke followeth
the intention, and not the intention
the worke.
                  The ſecond doubt is in little matters,2. Cauſe. and
proceeds from the ſmallnes and little valew
therof, perſwading ſome that God eſteemeth
not ſuch things, ſayeng (as it were) in them
ſelfes: God careth much for this or that; or,
hath God need, or maketh hee accompt of
theſe ſmalle things?
                  The remedie wherof is,Remedy. to remember that
as wee muſt not ſerue God only with a parte
but with all our forces, ſo muſt wee not only
doe ſome of our actions but all for him; and
therfore the little aſwell as the great. Alſo, that
God meaſureth the goodneſſe of the worke,
not by the exterior valew but by the inward
intention, and a little thing in our eyes may
be great before God:Simlie. For, like as the garment
of ruſſet embroadred with gold and ſett
with perles, is richer then that of veluet without
any ornament; the cloake lined with veluet
is more coſtly then one of taffata lined
with ſearge; ſo the leaſt worke exterior with
perfect intention, is better then the greateſt
with an imperfect intentiō. Finally, the remedie
of this doubt is, to remember to what the
Apoſtle exhorteth vs ſayeng,Coloſſ. 3. 
                     Omne quodcunque
facitis in verbo aut in opere, omnia in nomine domininoſtri

Ieſu Chriſti facite, All whatſoeuer yow
doe or ſay, doe it in the name of our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt: for, ſayeng that all our workes
ſhould be done for God, hee excepteth not
the leaſt worke, yea includeth the leaſt word.
And S. Auguſtin to this purpoſe ſayth,Aug. ſup. Pſal. 46. Thow
doeſt prayſe God when thow doeſt thy buſynes.
                  The third kinde of things wherof theſe
doubts and this heſitation commeth;3. Cauſae. are
things pleaſant and ſenſuall, as eating, drinking,
recreations, and the like; becauſe that
being ſo agreable vnto nature and ſenſualitie
ſome will thinke (perhaps) that they ſay not
ſyncerely, but rather faine, and mocke (as it
were) God, in ſayeng they doe them for his
only will and to pleaſe him, feeling that it
pleaſeth theyr nature and ſenſualitie: which
error proceedeth from the euill cuſtome
wherunto a man hath giuen himſelf, to doe
ſuch things only by the motion, tract, and
impulſion of pleaſure and ſenſualitie, without
intention or regard had to the vvill of
God: for, hauing contracted ſuch a long cuſtome
to doe them ſo, to ſatisfie theyr inſatiable
and brutiſh ſenſualitie, not lifting vp theyr
mind, nor looking vp to God no more then
hoggs in the trowgh, they think ſuch things
ſhould be no otherwiſe done, nor that in deed
a man hath the power to rectifie the ſame, and
to doe them for the vvill of God.
                  
                  
                     
But to reforme this error, and diſsipate this
obſcuritie, I referr the Reader aſwell to the
reaſons aboue ſayd againſt the ſecond doubt,
as alſo to the expreſſe words of the Apoſtle
ſayeng,1. Cor. 10. 
                     Siue manducatis, ſiue bibitis, ſiue quid alind
facitis, omnia in gloria Dei facite, VVhether yow
eate or drinke, or doe any thing els, doe it all
to the glorie of God: And S. Auguſtine ſayth
to the ſowlle well ordered, Thow doeſt
prayſe God when thow takeſt they refection,
when thow doeſt eate, when thow doeſt
drinke; thow doeſt prayſe him when thow
doeſt repoſe in thy bed, thow doeſt alſo
prayſe him when thow doeſt ſleepe.
                  The fourth and laſt doubt and heſitation
proceeds from naturall things which ſeeme
abiect,4. Cauſe. and wherof a man hath ſome ſhamefaſtneſſe.
                  For remedie againſt which heſitation and
error, ſerue very fitly aſwell all thoſe reaſons
againſt the ſecond and third doubts, as alſo
theſe words of S. Paul which ſeemeth to touche
the ſame,1. Cor. 12. 
                     Quae putamus ignobiliora a membra
corporis eſſe, his honorem abundantiorem circundamus;
& quae inhoneſta ſunt noſtra, abundantiorem
honeſtatem habent; that is to ſay, Thoſe partes
which wee think to be the baſer and moſt
diſhoneſt members of the bodie, wee couer
and adorne with greater care and diligence;
and thoſe that are our moſt vnhoneſt parter
are more ſumptuouſly decked: wherfore no

man in ſuche caſe ought to looſe the preſence
of God, knowing that the Sonne beating
on the dunghill, is no more obſcured then
when it ſhineth on the greene meddowe or
fayre feild.
               
               
                  Of the fift degree of perfect
Intention.
                  CHAP. XII.
                  
                     THE fift degree of this Throne or
perfectiō of this Intention is Cleerly
(that is) that it be accompained
with a liuely fayth,Cleerly the 5. degree. namely that according
as one knoweth that the worke ſo
done is the vvill of God, ſo with a liuely fayth,
and a cleer ſight caſting his eyes theron, and
firmely fixing them in the ſame, hee ſteadfaſtly
behold it as the ſame very vvill of God, which
in deed in it ſelf is no other but God himſelf.
Hee muſt (I ſay) in ſpirit behold the worke,
not as that worke, but as this will; looking not
on the thing exteriour, but on the diuine pleaſure
interiour; not as any thing created, but as
the vvill of God and God himſelf vncreated: for
though therin thear be ſomething created, yet
that is nothing in reſpect of him that is thear
vncreated; and though thear be both the
one and the other, yet wee muſt not ſee both,

but turne from the one, and contemplate the
other; becauſe that as it is created and a humaine
worke, it bringeth no light, but as it is
vncreated and the vvill of God; ſo ought wee
not to fix our ſpirit on it as it is a humaine
worke, but as it is the vvill of God; becauſe our
ſpirit can neuer ſee the beautie, light, and perfection
of the one, whiles it is cloathed with
the obſcure Image of the other: for though
hee ſee by this light of the vvill of God, that hee
muſt doe the worke exteriour or interiour
which it requireth, yet muſt hee not fix his
ſpirit in the worke but in this will; for as none
can ſee the light of this will which will not
doe the worke, ſo none can ſee the ſame light
which will only ſee the worke; but as the
ſoule is well inſpired to doe the worke by
motion of that will, ſo is ſhee well illuminated
when fixed in this will, ſhee ſeeth not the
worke as a worke, but as the vvill of God.
                  
                  Heer how will ſay,Obiectiō. Anſvver. if ſhee behold not the
worke, how can ſhee doe it well? I anſwer,
that I ſay not ſimplie that ſhee ſhould not behold
the worke; but, that ſhee ſhould not behold
it as the worke, but as the vvill of God: for
as it is his will that ſhee doe the worke, ſo is it
that ſhee doe it not as the worke, but as his
will; and therfore in the worke muſt only
looke vpon his will.
                  But ſhee cannot chooſe (ſay yow) but
behold the worke in doing it,Obiectiō. though ſhee

doe what ſhee can to the contrarie.Anſvver. I anſwer,
that though ſhee cannot chooſe but ſee the
worke, yet can ſhee chooſe whether ſhee will
ſee it as the work or as the vvill of God, namely,
by this degree of liuely fayth: And if
ſhee doe what ſhee can, not to ſee the worke
as the worke, but to fix herſelfe only in the
vvill of God, all the reſt of the worke which by
imagination or otherwiſe remaineth in the
mind is the vvill of God whoe ſo will haue it;
and therfore as his will ſhee muſt accept of it,
and as ſuch behold it; and ſo doing ſhee ſeeth
nothing but the vvill of God. But of this hath
bein ſpoaken in the third degree.
                  By this degree which wee call Cleerly operating
with liuely Fayth,Fault againſt this degree. is excluded all dullneſſe
or (as it were) ſleepineſſe or ſlowneſſe
of Fayth, which ordinarily heerin hindreth
vs of much ſpirituall profit, and depriueth vs
of great lightand knowledge of God: by which
dullneſſe of Fayth I meane not a totall vnbeleiuing,
as though one beleiued not that the
worke ſo done with ſuch direction of intention
were the vvill of God, but I meane a certaine
drowſines, ſlacknes, and negligence of
ſpirit in producing aninterior act of the fayth
which hee hath, wherby actually to behold
and contemplat the ſame as the very vvill of
God, and not as any humaine operation and
worke of his owne; ſo that not practiſing the
fayth which hee hath, nor extending the ſame

any farther then to humaine operation, nor
lifting vp his mind with full aſſurance to his
diuine will, it happeneth that neither his Intelligēce
is illuminated by this cleer light, nor
his will inflamed by this burning loue, nor his
ſoule allured by this perfect beauty, nor enlarged
by this gretnes, nor eleuated by this highnes,
nor innobled by this maieſty, nor (finally)
viuified by this qwickning ſpirit of God; but
for want of practiſing that which he knoweth
and extēding actually his fayth to that which
hee beleiueth, liveth in the penurie, pouerty,
and obſcuritie of his ſoule; ſo being like to him
that hath a ſword at his ſide,Sim
                           •
                        lies. but for want
drawing it forth letteth him ſelf be killed;
or to him whoe hath a ſoueraigne medecineth
his ſhop, but for want of applyeng the ſame
dyeth of his diſeaſe; or finally, whoe hath
prouiſion ſufficient in his howſe, and wyne
enough in his celler, but for want of dreſsing
the one ſtarueth for hunger, and of drawing
the other dyeth for thirſt. But contrarie wiſe
By this degre of viuacitie or liuelines of fayth,
by this actuall ſeing, and fixed contemplation
and beholding of this vvill of God, all ſuch miſerie
goeth away, all ſuch darknes flyeth away,
all ſuch obſcuritie vaniſheth out of ſight,
and the ſoule remaineth vnited to his will
and conioyned with God, illuminated, viuified,
and eleuated in an vnſpeakable manner.
               
               
                  
                  
                     The ſixt degree of perfect
Intention.
                  CHAP. XIII.
                  THE ſixt degree of this Throne
is Speedily (that is) that this
intetion adorned with the foreſaid
ſiue perfections be quickly
directed,Speedily, the ſixt degree. not at the end of the
worke, nor in the midſt, but before wee take
the ſame in hand.Faulter againſt this degree. By which degree is excluded
all ſlownes and ſlacknes of rectifyeng our
intention when wee begin to doe or ſuffer
any thing; wherby vntill our intention be
rectified wee are depriued ſome tymes of the
profit and merit of the worke, as1. doing
the ſame ſome tymes with ſome leſſe intention
then for the only vvill of God, and ſome
tymes2. with no good intention at all, yea
and ſometymes wee demerit and offend by
the ſame, as3. doing or ſuffering it with an
euill intention, and to an euill end and purpoſe;
and all for want of this diligence and
ſpeedines in directing our intention at the
beginning, as this degree requireth.
                  Yet if ſo wee offend againſt this degree,
wee muſt repaire the fault aſwell as wee can,

in directing our intention aſſoone as wee remember
our ſelfes.
                  Moreouer,A man fayling in the former degrees, muſt neds fayle in the latter, but not contrarievviſe. it is to be noted, that a man may
fayle or offend againſt ſome of theſe degrees
which be laſt in order, and yet not againſt
others which are precedent, as a man may be
deſtitute of the greater perfection, yet not of
the leſſer; but a man can not fayle in any one
of the firſt degrees in order, without fayling
in all the reſt which followe, becauſe one cannot
lacke the leſſer perfection without wanting
the greater.
                  And therfore our intention by ſlownes
may offend againſt this ſixt degree of Speedines,
being directed late, and towards the end
of the work to the vvill of God, and yet may be
furniſhed with the other fiue.
                  It may alſo with this ſixt fayle in the ſixt
degree of Cleernes by a ſleepines of fay th, no
beholding the worke as the verie vvill of God
and yet maybe fortified with the other
foure.
                  As it may alſo with the ſixt and fift degree
fayle in the fourth of Aſſurance by heſitation
not firmely beleiuing that the worke done
with the intention heer taught is the veri
                        •
                     
                     vvill of God, and yet may be furniſhed with the
other three, and ſo of the reſt.
                  But contrariewiſe our intention can no
fayle in any of the degrees which are firſt 
                        〈◊〉
                     
order, without fayling in all which followe
                        •
                     
                     
for it can not offend againſt the fift without
offending againſt the ſixt; nor againſt the
fourth without offending againſt the fift and
ſixt; and ſo forth vnto the firſt degree, which
if it fayle, all the reſt doe likewiſe fayle: ſo as
yow may ſee, thear is more danger and loſſe
to fayle in the firſt then in the laſt.
                  Now, if a man be fallen into any one of
theſe defaults in the beginning of the worke,
hee muſt not perſeuer and caſt all away, but
rather remember the common ſayeng, Better
late then neuer; and ſo at leaſt in proſecuting
or finiſhing the worke, hee muſt rectifie his
crooked intention by theſe degrees, and by
the ſtraight line of Gods loue, cutting of euerie
imperfection by the particular degree againſt
which it millitateth.
                  And heerin a man ought to employ all his
ſpirit and diligence,Devv occupation during the vvorke. all his care and vigilance
during the worke, examining and purifieng
his intention by theſe degrees, and to take
heed if all be therin comprehended, or whether
for want of any of them it be contaminated
with any ſpot of ſelf loue obſcuring her
beautie, or vayled with any clowd of proper
will couering her radious ſplendour; whith
examen and rectification of intention is ſo
good, ſo excellent, and ſo profitable an occupation
of the mind, that I wiſh and deſire all
that practiſe this exerciſe to employ themſelves
wholy therin; as being of all others the

moſt direct, ſhort, and readieſt way to all
perfection, leading vs (as it were) by the
hand to the knowledge of our ſelfes, and diſplayeng
all our hidden ſelf loue, bewrayeng
all our ſecret paſsions, layeng open all our incloſed
affections, and poynting out as with her
finger all our vnknown imperfections. And
for want of this continuall occupation of our
ſelfes in our interior, for lacke of this due
examination of our intention, and vigilant
watch ouer our heart, it harboureth many
paſsions iudging them to be inſpirations, yeildeth
to many affections thinking them to be
holie actions, is filled with ſelf loue eſteeming
it the loue of God, and (finally) doth the will
of the old man, yet beleiuing it is the diſire of
the new.Note. In which examination of our intention
I admoniſh this, that no man truſt himſelf,
and beleiue his firſt ſight or inſpection
into the ſame, nor think that all goeth well if at
the firſt hee ſee nothing amiſſe, becauſe this
cometh for the moſt part, not for want of
fault but of light, nor for lacke of abundance
of ſelf loue or proper will to be diſcouered,
but for want of knowledge and a ſharpe ſight
wherby to diſcerne it; which ſight and light
hee ſhall (doubtles) haue, whoe ſtill will remaine
in his interior: for,Similie. as hee that cometh
from abroad out of the Sunne into ſome obſcure
place or chamber, ſeeth nothing at the
firſt, but if hee remaine thear awhile hee ſeeth

whatſoeuer is therin; ſo the mind that cometh
from abroad, and from exterior affayres
into the interior or inward cloſet of the
ſoule ſeeth nothing therin, but ſtayeng thear
while ſco
                        •
                     reth whatſoeuer lyeth hidden
imper
                        ••
                     : Loe then the ſix degrees of this
miſtical Throne.
               
               
                  Hovv to continue this puritie of
Intention.
                  CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     HAVING aſcended by order all
the degrees of the Throne, we muſt
now conſider her topp and ſeate of
ſtable Perſeuerance, wherin this
great Salomon ſitteth and repoſeth; and hauing
ſeene how the mind is ſixed in the only vvill
of God, wee muſt know how it may preſeuer
therin;Tvvoe meanes to continue the purified Intention. which to effect thear be twoe wayes
and meanes, the firſt wherof is for Beginners
the other for thoſe which haue made ſome
good progreſſe, though (if diligent endeuour
ſupplie the want in Beginners) both they and
the others may vſe both meanes, as their denotion
ſhall ſerue them.
                  
                  The firſt is practiſed by diuers internall
acts of the mind,Meanes. as firſt by an act of filiall

feare or profownd reuerence of God ſeing
himſelf ſo neer vnto him, ſo illuminated by
his preſence, ſo enuironed with his ſplendour,
and) as it were) on euerie ſide compaſſed
about with the bright beames and illuſtration
of his diuinitie.
                  Some tymes by an abyſſall Humilitie and
abaſing of him ſelf, ſeing his miſerie honored
with the actuall aſsiſtance, and his indigni
                        ••
                     
accompanied with the true preſence of God;
and ſo rightly crieng out with S. Peter ſayeng,Luc. 5.
                     Exi â me quia homo peccator ſum (Domine) Depart
from mee (ô Lord) becauſe I ame a ſinfull
man.
                  Againe, by a great Admiration, ſeing God
to cooperate ſo familiarlie with him in that
which hee doth.
                  Likewiſe, by an extreame Ioy and exultation
of heart, ſeing himſelf made the liuely
inſtrument and temple of God.
                  In like maner, by a ſweet and amorous inclination
towards the celeſtiall Bridegroome,
taſting his great clemencie and goodnes.
                  Farther, by an inward Iubilation and heartie
ioy in the ſoule, perceiuing her ſelf, to be
deliuered from the ſeruitude of her ſelf, and
ſet free from the bondage of proper will.
                  Moreouer, by a totall reſignation and deliuering
vp of the ſoule into the hands of her
ſpouſe to enioy him more fully.
                  Againe, by acts of perpetuall Abnegation

of him ſelf, as hauing fownd by experience
the perfect conſolation, and happie fruit
which immediatly ſpringeth, and infallibly
cometh therof.
                  Alſo, by a true Annihilation of him ſelf,
proceeding from the propinquitie and neernes
of the Allmightie and infinit eſſence of
God.
                  In like ſort, by holie and heauenly deſires,
wiſhes, and ſuſpires, to be alwayes conuerſant
in heauen; ſeing now the chaines of his
proper will to be broken which tied him ſo
before vnto the earth.
                  Finally, by a moſt intimate Loue of God,
feeling the ardour and ſweet burning flame
of his diuine loue.
                  And to conclude, by an Attention to the
ſtraight vnion already made betwixt God
and the ſoule by vnitie of their wills in the
worke, entertaining, nouriſhing, and cheatiſhing
the ſame vnion by diligently hearing,
willingly obayeng, and ioyfully following
the tract of the ſame ſpirit of God.
                  The ſecond and more eſſentiall meanes to
conſerue entier the pure and perfect intention,2. Meanes.
is to make an expropriatiō of the worke
that is) 
                        •
                     that when a man hath ſo rectified
and purified his intention according to theſe
degrees, hee ought to put of (as it were) the
worke both exterior and interior, as not
being his owne, but knowing that (in veritie)

after ſuch rectification it is not his will that
doth the worke, but the vvill of God; nor his
ſpirit, but the ſpirit of God; and by conſequence
that it is not himſelf but God that
doth the ſame, hee being only the meer Inſtrument
(though free) nay nor that Inſtrument
neither as of him ſelf, but the ſame giuen
him by God: and therfore (I ſay) hee
ought to eſteeme, and firmely behold the verie
worke ſo done, as the verie will, operatiō,
and ſpirit of God, as hath bein touched in
the fourth degre. And not only the ſoule muſt
ſo eſteeme and behold it as the verie vvill
of God, but alſo (all other things ſet apart) muſt
adheare therunto, and with all her power remaine
recollected therin; ſo that being wholie
eſtabliſhed and immoueablie ſetled in the
ſame, keeping forth all bruit and noiſe of the
world, and all clowds of paſsions and diſtracting
thoughts, ſhee ſhall diſcouer this light of
heauen in a quiet and profownd ſilence, and
taſt this verie life, and viuifieng ſpirit of
Gods vvill in great abundance.
                  VVhear muſt be noted that wee ſay (hee
muſt behold the worke as the verie vvill of
God,
                     Note. and not that hee behold the ſaid will in
the worke) and that to eſchew many errors,
blindnes, and deceipts, which proceed from
ſuch kind of ſpeach and practiſe.
                  For firſt,The firſt error. wee ſay that wee muſt behold

God or his will in our worke or in our intention;
it is ſo conceiued and vnderſtood, as if
one ſhould behold the ſame will as contayned
and incloſed in the worke, as in ſome veſſell,
place, ſpace, or circuit corporall, imaginarie,
or intellectuall; hee, nor his will hauing neither
place nor ſituation, as contayned therin.
                  Secondly,2. in ſo ſayeng, diuers doe
endeuour to ſee or conſider the will and
the worke both togeather, and not the vvill
of God only and alone; and ſo (indeed)
the ſoule can not know nor taſt the liuely
vvill of God; for it being ſpirit and life,
it is impoſsible that ſhee ſhould be capable
therof in any perfection, whiles ſhee is
filled and poſſeſſed with the worke be it
exterior or interior, but when ſhee taketh the
verie worke for the verie will.
                  Thirdly,3. by ſuch an imagination of ſeing
the vvill of God in the worke or in the intention,
is hindred the vnion with the ſame will,
as making the will one thing, and the intention
another.
                  Finally,4. when ſo wee conſider or contemplate
God or his will in our work or intention,
the ſame worke or intention is the
principall obiect of our contemplation or ſpirituall
ſight, wheras (indeed) it ſhould be the
only vvill of God.
                  
                  
                     
For theſe cauſes therfore I ſay not that we
                        •
                     
muſt behold the vvill of God in our worke or
intention, but I ſay wee muſt behold the
worke or intention as the verie vvill of God,
which is God himſelf, whoe by his preſence
doth anihillate in this reſpect both the worke,
and intention or will of man; not that indeed
they are nothing (hauing alwayes their eſſence)
but that they are ſo little that in compariſon
and the preſence of God they are nothing;
and though they be ſome thing, yet
muſt they not heer be ſeene as ſuch, but as
nothing; becauſe though in it ſelf the worke
be ſome thing, yet conſidered in the vvill of
God, it is nothing, but euen the ſame vvill of
God into which it is transformed, and ſo of
death and darknes is made life and brightne
                        •
                     s
and that which in it ſelf was corporall, in the
vvill of God is made ſpirituall.
                  VVherfore, ſo taking the worke whether
exterior or interior, not as his owne, but as
the verie pure vvill of God without any heſitation,
excluding all other thoughts and diſtractions,
let the ſoule fix her ſelf in the ſame
with all her forces, with all ſimplicitie, conſtancie,
veritie, and viuacitie of fayth; let her
adheare therunto, incloſe, plunge, and tranſforme
her ſelfe therinto, being her light, life,
peace, and ioy, her center and repoſe; as being
her rule and perfection, her treaſure and richeſſe,
her beginning and end; and ſo ſhall

ſhee accompliſh the continuation of 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſix
degrees of perfect Intention, and by ſtabilitie
of perſeuerance ſhall eſtabliſh in her ſelf this
ſeat, and ſhall make great king Salomon her
celeſtiall ſpouſe ſweetly repoſe therin.
               
               
                  Hovv the celeſtiall Bridegroome and his ſpouſe
in their Dialogue in the Canticles
make mention of this ſeat or
ſpirituall Throne vvith
her ſix degrees.
                  CHAP. XV.
                  
                     OF this Throne with her ſix myſticall
degrees is made mention in
the Canticles of Salomon.
                  
                  For,1. Actually. Cant. 8. of the firſt of Remembrance
is ſpoken, when the celeſtiall Bridegroome
ſayth to his ſpouſe, Pone me vt ſignaculum ſuper
cor tuum, vt ſignaculum ſuper brachium tuum, Put
mee as a ſignet vpon thy heart, and as a ſignet
vpon thine arme: for, a ſignet maketh impreſſion,
and impreſsion ſignifies Remembrance
againſt Obliuion; by the heart is meant the
intention or affection; by the arme the action;
the heart and the arme together doth ſignifie
the actuall intention. VVhen then the bridegroome
ſayth to his ſpouſe that ſhee imprint

him as a ſignet, hee will haue her to be mindfull
of him: when hee ſayth to her that ſhee
print him in her heart, hee deſires that ſhee
remember him in her affection or intention:
and when hee wiſheth her to imprint him
alſo on her Arme, hee will haue her in her intention
to haue an actuall Remembrance of
him; which actuall Remembrance is this firſt
degree called Actually.
                  
                  The ſecond degree which is Onely,
                     2. Onely. Cant. 1. & 3. is toucht
when the Bridegroome ſpeaking to his ſpouſe
ſayth vnto her, Oculi tui columbarum, Thine
eyes are like vnto the eyes of doues; for, by
the doue is ſignified the ſoule; by the eyes of
the one, the ſight of the other; and by the
ſimplicitie of that, the ſimple ſight of this.
Now, the ſight of the ſoule is her intention
which is ſimple when it is not double; and it
is not double when it hath not twoe obiects,
the Creator and the Creature, but one
alone (to weet) the Creator, for them the intention
is ſimple when it hath for her ſole and
ſimple obiect God only.
                  The ſame is ſignified when hee ſayth,Cant. 4. 
                     Vulneraſti
cor meuin (ſoror meaſponſa) vulneraſti cormeum
in vno oculorum tuorum, Thow haſt
wownded my heart (my ſiſter, my ſpouſe)
thow haſt wownded my heart by one of
thine eyes: for, the ſoule hauing twoe eyes
or ſights, the one ſeing the Creature, the
other the Creator, ſhee ſeemeth exceeding

fayr in the preſence of God, when hauing put
out that, ſhee ſeeth only with this; for then
ſhee wowndeth his heart with her loue. Of this
only intention and ſimple eyeſight our Sauiour
ſpeaketh,Matt. 6. when hee ſayth, Sioculus tuus ſimplex
fuerit, totum corpus tuum lucidum erit, If thine
eye be ſimple, all thy body ſhall be lightſome.
                  Of the third degree which is (willingly) is
made mention when the ſpouſe ſayth,3. vvilligly. Cant. 5. 
                     Peſſulum
oftij mei aperui dilecto meo, I vnbolted my
doore to my welbeloued; for, which is this
bolt which barreth our doore againſt our
Sauiour but our proper will? and how is it taken
away but by the renunciation therof for
the vvill of God? and when is it taken away willingly,
if not when the ſoule doth it herſelf?
VVhen then the ſpouſe ſayth that herſelf vnbolted
her doore to her welbeloued, her meaning
is, that renouncing herſelf ſhee did willingly
the vvill of God, and not by conſtraint.
The ſame are wee giuen to vnderſtand when
The ſayth,Cant. 4. 
                     Vadam ad montē Myrrhae, I will goe to
the mountaine of myrrhe: for, by bitter myrrhe
is repreſented vnto vs the bitternes of
Abnegation, to doe the vvill of God: by the
Mountaine, the ſublimitie of this Abnegatiō,
eleuating a man aboue himſelf in God, as is
ſaid,Thren. 3. 
                     Sedebit ſolitarius & tacebit, quia leuauit ſe ſupraſe,
Hee ſhall remaine ſolitarie and be ſilent,
becauſe hee hath lifted himſelf aboue himſelf.
By that which is ſaid that ſhe went, is ſignified

that it was freely and of her owne good will,
without any conſtraint, repugnance, or ſadnes,
ſo willingly renouncing herſelf for the
vvill of God as hee whoe ſaid,Pſal. 53. 
                     Voluntarie ſacrificabotibi,
I will offer ſacrifice vnto the willingly.
                  The fourth degree which is (Aſſuredly) is
touched by the ſpouſe when ſhee ſayth,4. Aſſuredly. 
                     Ego
dilecto meo,
                     Cant. 7. 
                     & ad me conuerſio illius, I belong to
my welbeloued, and hee turneth himſelf towards
mee: for, by the firſt part of this ſentence
ſhee comprehendeth all the degrees before
rehearſed, and by the other ſhee toucheth
this degree of Aſſurance; for in ſayeng (I appertaine
to my welbeloued) it is as much as if
ſhee ſaid, I haue purified my ſoule and intention,
eleuating and addreſsing it vnto him actually
without obliuion, only, without any
other end, and willingly, without ſadnes, and
ſo I ame wholy his, he entirely poſſeſſeth mee,
hee hath taken mee for his owne,Apoc. 21. 
                     Sicut ſponſam
ornatam viro ſuo, As a ſpouſe adorned for her
bridegroome: and as I ame his, ſo reciprocally
his conuerſion is vnto mee; as I ame his,
ſo likewiſe is hee mine; for the ſame internall
acts which make mee his, make him alſo
myne; as the bond or lawe of loue doth giue
mee vnto him, ſo doth it giue him vnto mee;
and as by the other degrees hee hath aſſurance
of mee, ſo by this which neceſſarily followeth
them, haue I aſſurance of him. Behold

then wherfored ſay, that Aſſuredly I belong
to my welbeloued, and that his conuerſion is
to mee; which I know, not only aſſuredly
without heſitation, but alſo ſee cleerly without
ſleepines of fayth, wherby I knowe him
and ſee him, which is
                  The fift degree to which I did ſo ardently
aſpire,5. Cleerly. Cant. 1. which
                        •
                      ſo long tyme deſired, and often
demaunded of my ſpouſe ſayeng, Indica mihi
quem dil 
                           〈◊〉
                         ima mea, vbi paſcas, vbi cubas in
meridie, O whom my ſoule doth loue, declare
vnto mee whear thow doeſt feed, whear
thow doeſt repoſe at Nooneday (that is to
ſay) in the ardour and liuely flames of loue
and meridian light, whear by vnion with him
I may be inflamed and burned with his diuine
fire, lightned and illuminated with his celeſtiall
ſplendour. I ſay (whear doth hee repoſe)
for the great quietnes which hee hath
in my ſoule, when hee is thear by my abſence,
and maketh his aboad thear by my abnegation;
for it is then that hee repoſeth thear
as in his bed,Cant. 3. of which is ſaid. En lectulum Salomonis
ſexaginta fortes ambiunt, Behold, threeſcore
ſtrong men which compaſſe about Salomons
bed: this bed being no other then my
heart; for,Pſal. 72. hee is Deus cordis mei, the God of my
heart,Pſal. 45. and Deus in medio eius non common
                           •
                        bitur,
God ſhall not be moued from the midſt therof:
and, to make mee attaine to this happy

eſtate, and to the haight of theſe degrees, Esdilectus
meus loquitur mihi, Behold,Cant. 2. my welbeloued
ſpeaketh to mee, and maketh mee haſten,
inuiting mee often, and inceſſantly diſtilling
thes ſweet words in the eare of my
ſoule.
                  6. Surge, propera (amica mea, formoſa mea) 
                           〈◊〉
                        
veni.
                     6. Speedily. Cant. 2. Ariſe, haſten (my dea
                        ••
                      
                     
                        ••
                     y beautifull
and come. In which gratious inuitation 
                        〈◊〉
                     
calleth mee ſweetly to his fam
                        ••
                     ties, and
will haue mee come vnto him, and to that
end, firſt hee wiſheth me
                        ••
                      ariſe (to weet)
from the baſe and abiect condition of my
corrupt nature by theſe degrees aſore ſayd; afterwards,
that I doe it ſpeedily, becauſe they
goe not to him, which goe with drowſines or
ſlownes,Ambr. hom. in Luc. for Neſcit molimina tarda ſancti ſpiritual
gratia, The holy ghoſt loues not the ſlacke
operation. And therfore the mother
of God hauing conceiued him, repreſenting
the ſoule which by inſpiration doth
the ſame,Luc. 1. 
                     Abiit in montana, went vnto
the mountaine, which is Ieſus Chriſt, in perfection,
Cum feſtinatione, ſpeedily, which is the
ſixt and laſt degree.
                  And that wee may not think that ſhee
hath forgotten the ſeat of this throne,The ſeat of continuation.
which is the continuation of all theſe degrees,
whear ſhee maketh her ſpouſe repoſe
after hauing fownd him ſo happily, behold

what ſhee ſayth,Cant. 3. 
                     Tenui eum, nec dimittam
donec introducam in domum matris mea, & in
cubiculum genitricis meae, I haue caught him,
and will not let him goe, vntill I bring him
into my mothers houſe, and into her
chamber which brought mee forth. I haue
caught him, (to weet, by the ſix internall
acts and degrees aforeſaid) and will not let
him goe (by my negligence and coldnes)
but will keepe him with great vigilance,
and will cheriſh him by intimate affection
and ardent loue, vntill I bring him into my
mothers houſe (the churche, by vertuous

                        •
                     ife, good example, or preaching) and 
                        ••
                     
                     to
her chamber which brought mee forth
namely, into my particular Order, by a

                        •
                     eligious life and celeſtiall contemplation)
and ſo cheriſhing him dayly in my ſoule,
will make him repoſe on this ſeat of
Continuation, and I ſhall prepare this
Throne, with the ſix degrees for my

                        ••
                     rue king Salomon, Quem laudant ſimul aſtra maatina,
                     Iob. 38.
VVhom the morning ſtars together do
raiſe, Loe how this holie ſoule ſpeaketh for
the inſtruction, conſolation, and encouragement
of others which are not as yet ſo perfect
and ſo farre aduanced.
                  Neither ought any man to think that

                        •
                     ee put or conſtitut too many degrees in
his intention,VVhy theſe ſix degrees be heer putt devvne. becauſe that euen of it ſelf

(being perfect) it hath them all, and that without
them it can not be perfect: though in
liew of their being thear implicitè or obſcurely.1. Cauſe.
wee haue declared them explicitè and more
cleerly, to the end wee may well and perfectly
diſcerne of our interiour, which is the
point of greateſt importance of all, and for
want of which, verie ſpirituall men often remaine
in darknes;2. ſeing alſo (2) they bring ſo
great profit and light, eleuating the ſoule to
ſuch a high degree as may appear by what is
aboue ſaid in this chapter;3. ſeing finally (3)
though wee haue thus diſtinguiſhed them
the better to diſcerne of the ſaid intention
and to examin the ſame therby, yet notwithſtanding
by one only feruent and vertuou
act, they be all effected and brought forth togeather;
and that with the ſame facilitie and
no otherwiſe, then if wee had not diſtinguiſhed
them.
               
               
                  Hovv all mortifications and virtues, and the
true imitation of Chriſts life and paſsion,
are perfectly practiſed by this
rule and exerciſe.
                  CHAP. XVI.
                  
                     
                     CONCERNING the mortifications
and vertues, and likewiſe
touching the imitation of our Sauiour
in his life and paſsion (which
are ſo neceſſarie as without them in vaine a
man aſpireth to ſpirituall life) as the breuitie
of this abridgement doth not permit to treat
of them directly, but onely indirectly; ſo is it
not neceſſarie, ſeing they are cleerly ſeene,
and moſt perfectly practiſed in this vvill of
God; which though it be manifeſt by the ſecond
chapter, declaring how all perfections
are heerin contained (euerie one wherof
containeth all mortifications and vertues) yet
for better ſatisfaction of all men that would
ſollow this rule,Demonſtrations by example. it ſeemeth not amiſſe to ſhew
it by examples.
                  VVhoeſoeuer then is greiuouſly and iniuſtly 
perſecuted, and ſupporteth and patiently
endureth the ſame according to the foreſaid
documēts of the vvill of God whoe would
haue it ſo; ſuch a one ſhall mortifie the paſsion
of enuie, practiſe the vertue of patience,
and imitate our Sauiour, whoe in like perſecution
had like patience.
                  Likewiſe, hee that being mocked and with 
                     
                        •
                     utragious ſpeaches reuiled, and keepeth ſilence
for this only will and pleaſure of God;
hall mortifie the paſsion of anger, practiſe

                        •
                     he vertue of meeknes, and imitate our Sauiour,
whoe when hee was blaſpheamed and

mocked of the Iewes behaued him ſelf in like
manner.
                  
                      So alſo, hee that waſheth the feet of ſome
poore Pilgrim or of his brethren (as the cuſtome
is in religious houſes) with this pure
intention; hee ſhall mortifie the vice of pride,
practiſe the vertue of humilitie, and imitate
our Sauiour, waſhing the feet of his Apoſtles.
                  
                      Againe, whoe for the only pleaſure of God
prayeth for thoſe that doe him open iniurie,
and ſeeke his death; ſhall mortifie the
paſsion of Reuenge, exerciſe the virtue of
charitie, and imitate our Sauiour, whoe prayed
for thoſe that perſecuted him and put
him to death.
                  
                      Moreouer, hee that with this only end
and motiue of Gods vvill, anſwereth not when
hee is falſly accuſed (diſcretion alwayes preſuppoſed)
ſhall mortifie ſelf loue, practiſe
the vertue of ſilence, and followe heerin
Ieſus Chriſt, whoe anſwered nothing to the
falſe witneſſe brought in againſt him.
                  
                      I might bring infinite other like example
to this end, but wee will conclude with this
which comprehendeth all others; namely,
that whenſoeuer a man according to this
Rule, doth any thing diſagreable to ſenſualit
                        ••
                     
or affection, and leaueth any thing pleaſant
or agreable to the ſame, for to doe the vvill

of God, hee mortifieth the proper will, practiſeth
the vertue of Reſignation, and imitateth
our ſweet Sauiour whoe ſaid, I come not to
doe myne ovvne vvill,
                     Ioan. 6 
                     but the vvill of my father
vvhoe ſent mee.
                  
                  Behold then, how it appeareth that whenſoeuer
a man doth practiſe this exerciſe or
rule of life, hee perfectly practiſeth therwith
all the mortification, vertue, and imitation
of the life and paſsion of our Sauiour
Chriſt, whoe in all things ſought to doe the
will of his father.
                  VVhear is to be noted,Tvvoe things in generall in the lyfe of our Sauiour to imitate. that in the ſaid
life and paſsion of our Sauiour are twoe
things (to weet) the paines or torments
which hee ſuffered, and the end wherfore hee
ſuffered them; namely, to doe the will of
his father; both which wee ought to imitate
as a paterne and example of our life, himſelf
ſayeng,Ioan. 13. 
                     Exemplum dedi vobis, I haue giuen
yow an example: and if it had not bein to
haue giuen vs an example, what needed hee
to haue ſuffered ſo much, ſeing one only
dropp of his blood, yea his only will had
bein ſufficient to haue redeemed vs.Somefayle in the one, and ſome in the other. Now,
of theſe twoe things ſome want the one,
and ſome the other. As for thoſe that want the
firſt (namely) ſuffering with Chriſt; I wiſh them
to heare the wordes of Sainct Peter ſayeng,1.
                     Chriſtus paſſus est pro nobis,
                     1. Petr. 2. 
                     vobis relinquens

exemplum vt ſequamini veſtigia eius, Chriſt hath
ſuffered for vs, leauing to yow an example
that yow might followe his ſtepps; and of S.
Paule,Rom. 8. 
                     St compatimur, & conglorificabimur, If wee
ſuffer togeather, wee ſhall alſo be glorIfied
togeather:1. Ioan. 2. and likewiſe of S. iohn, Qui dicit ſe in
ipſo manere, debet ſi
                           •
                        ut ille ambulauit & ipſe ambulare,
VVhoe ſayth that hee remaineth in him;
 ought to walke as hee hath walked. As for
thoſe which fayle in the other (to weet) in
hauing that intention of the only vvill of God,
in that they doe or ſuffer, they muſt knowe
that they are not ſo perfect imitators of Ieſus
Chriſt as (perhaps) they thinke, though they
doe or ſuffer much, becauſe they want one of
theſe twoe things of his imitation (namely)
the end and intention, which is without compariſon
the cheefeſt of the twoe; and ſo they
followe the exterior works of his body, but
not the interior acts of his ſoule; and conforme
themſelfes to the exterior humanitie,
but not to the interior, nor to the diuinitie,
partlie doing or ſuffering that which hee did
or ſuffered, but not as hee did or ſuffered, enduring
in ſome ſort with the Sonne heer on
earth, but not for the will of the father which
is in heauen, becauſe they haue not this end
of Gods will, which is ſo excellent that the
Angells haue no better, nor any other end
then that; and is ſuch that it maketh not only
our prayers and painfull works or ſuffrings

agreable to God, but alſo our works that be
pleaſant and delightfull (as is aboue ſaid) being
done ſyncerely without all fayning for this
end and intention.
                  VVherfore, when any hard thing preſenteth
it ſelf to be done or ſuffered, let a man
doe or ſuffer the ſame for this diuine will; and
ſo hee ſhall cloath himſelf with the Paſsion of
our Sauiour, as being the ſame verie will in
ſuch things difficile; and ſhall perfectly imitate
him in both the ſayd poynts of ſuffering,
and of the true end of ſuffering.
               
               
                  A particular meanes for Beginners hovv to
enter into the practiſe of this rule, and
hovv a man may keepe himſelf therin,
and greatly fructifie and goe
for vvard in the
ſame.
                  CHAP. XVII.
                  
                     BVT becauſe this rule and exerciſe
conſiſteth cheifly in interior
practiſe, and in the diſcerning of
the motions of our heart, which
are hardly diſcouered at the beginning; and
becauſe through ſlowth and forgetfulnes aſwell
the Beginners as others let paſſe much

tyme, yea ſometymes many howres of the
day without practiſing the ſame: Therfore aſwell
to open the way to Beginners and to
make them an entrance to the practiſe therof,
as alſo to excitate the ſlacknes, and help
the forgetfulnes of others, I will in fewe lines
lay downe ſome particular meanes wherin all
may profitably exerciſe themſelfes,Means to enter and continue in this practiſe. as leading
the beginners (as it were) by the
hand, to the true knowledge of their heart
and interiour, and to the perfect practiſe of
the ſame exerciſe, putting both them and the
others in mind of their dutie and fidelitie,
inciting and ſpurring them forward to the
faythfull practiſe therof.
                  Let him therfore that practiſeth this Rule
lay downe a taske euerie day, binding himſelf
therto, not by the band of any kind of
ſynne mortall or veniall, but by a full and
reſolute purpoſe to mortifie, and renounce
himſelf for the vvill of God ſome certaine tymes,
as thrice, fiue, or ten tymes, according
to his ſeruour and deuotion; which abnegations
or mortifications ſhalbe taken or practiſed
by any ſence, facultie, or power either
of body or ſoule:Practiſe upon the 5. Senſes. Of the body, as by the fiue
ſences, ſeing, hearing, ſmelling, taſting, and
touching; by doing or ſuffering that which is
contrarie or vnpleaſant to the ſame: as when
hee deſireth to ſee any curious thing, behold
any beautifull perſon, looke on any delightfull

place, as pleaſant gardins, faire caſtles,
ſumptuous and coſtly buildings; or (finally)
any other thing gratefull to the ſight; yea,
and when hee deſireth curiouſly to caſt his
eyes this way or that way, wherby hee is diſtracted
from thinking of God: in all which
caſes hee ought to mortifie his ſight by renouncing
therin his will for the only vvill of
God.
                  
                  In like maner, when hee deſireth, to heare
any pleaſant muſick, ſweet inſtrument, delightfull
ſong, curious and ſtrange newes and
reports, and whatſoeuer is agreable to the
eare.
                  Alſo, when hee would taſt ſome delicate
meats, delicious drinkes, pleaſant fruits, or
whatſoeuer hee findeth to be delightfull to
the taſt, though in it ſelf the thing be not pretious
or rare.
                  The like wee ſay touching ſmelling, to which
a man ought to denie all perfumes, and other
extraordinarie pleaſant things.
                  In all which caſes (I ſay) a man may haue
matter and take occaſion, often in the day to
renounce himſelf for the vvill of God, in leauing
the pleaſure of ſuch things according
to the Rules aboue ſaid; offering them vp
willingly as a ſacrifice to God, ſayeng with
the Prophet,pſal. 53. 
                     Voluntarè ſacriſicabotibi, I will
voluntarily offer vp ſacrifice vnto thee.
                  
                     
And the ſame wee ſay of the things which
are contrarie to the ſaid ſences (namely)
which be vnpleaſant to be ſeene, diſagreable
to the 
                        •
                     are, noyſome to ſmell, vnſauorie to
taſt, rude and auſtere to touche. And to this
purpoſe our father S. Francis ſayd, that hee
was ſo dayly conuerſant with the leapers, exhibiting
vnto them offices of charitie, that
both according to reaſon and to his exterior
ſences it ſeemed to him a pleaſant and ſweet
thing to be amongſt them, whoſe ſight in the
beginning hee did abhorre.S. Elizabeth. And wee reade
alſo of diuers Saints of both ſexes,S. Catherine of Siena. which did
kiſſe and licke the ſores and vlcers of poor
men, though (perhaps) theſe examples be
left vs rather to be admired then imitated
except it be by like particular diuine inſpiration:
but although they doe not ſerue vs for
imitation, yet at leaſt may they ſuffice for
condemnation of the delicat niceneſſe, and
alſo of the diſdaine and hard heartedneſſe of
thoſe of this tyme, whoe can not abide to ſee
them, much leſſe aſsiſt them.
                  
                      As touching the powers of the ſoule,Vpon the povvers of the Soulle. one
may likewiſe take ther of his exerciſe of mortification;
as of the Intelligence, in renouncing
for this vvill of God ſome curious diſcours
 or ſpeculation, or ſome mundaine, idle, and
vaine thoughts wherin hee taketh pleaſure
and delight.
                  
                      Alſo, of the Memorie, in expelling all thoughts

of iniuries, contempts, diſgraces, and
mockeries; as alſo of all diſhoneſt words, diſcourſes,
ſports, pleaſures, and paſtimes, and
all diſhoneſt acts.
                  Likewiſe, by mortifieng the VVill in all her 
intemperate paſsions, and diſordinate affectiōs
which (according to the Philoſopher) are
eleuen (to weet) loue, deſire, ioy reſpecting
good; hatred, deteſtation, and ſadnes reſpecting
euill; which ſix paſsiōs appertaine to the
partie Concupiſcible. Alſo, hope, diſpaire,
feare, audacitie, and wrath; which fiue haue
their reſidēce in the Iraſcible parte. All which
paſsions,Boett. de conſol. Phil. Met. 2. S. Tho. 1. a 2. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     Boetius and S. Thomas after him, doe
reduce to 
                        •
                     oure (namely) vaine Ioy, vaine
feare, vaine hope, and vaine Sadnes in theſe
verſes.
                  
                     Tu quoquè ſi vis
                     Lumine claro
                     Cernere verum;
                     Gaudia pelle,
                     Pelle timorem,
                     Spemquè fugato,
                     Nec dolor adſit.
                  
                  That is, if thow wilt cleerly ſee the truth, driue
away Ioy, put of Feare, flie Hope, and auoid
Greife.
                  To this mortification of the will appertaineth
alſo reſiſtance to all temptation of ſynne

(to weet) of the capitall ſynnes with all their
branches. As of pride which is the head
of all the other ſeuen deadly ſynns; of vaine
glorie with all her branches, which are boſting,
hypocriſie, contention, pertinacie,
diſcord, ſuſurration, detraction, ioy of the
euill, and ſadnes of the good of his neighbour;
of wrath with her ofſpring of indignation,
heart ſwelling, clamour, blaſphemie,
contumely, debate, and fighting; of Sloath
with her progenie of malice, rancor, puſillanimitie,
diſpaire, negligence, and diſtraction;
of Couetouſnes with her euill race of treaſon,
fraud in trafficke, violence, deceipt in words,
periurie, vnquietnes, and hardnes of heart, of
gluttonie with her children of fooliſh ioy,
ſcurrilitie, immundicitie, babbling, and dullnes
of witt; finally, of lechery with her vncleane
brood of blyndnes of heart, inconſideration,
precipitation, incontinencie, loue of
himſelf, hatred of God, affection of this
world, and horror of the next. Of all
which kinds of ſynnes or temptations of
them, one may take occaſion to renounced
his will; and ſo vpon all theſe matters
rehearſed touching the body or the ſoule,
a man may haue ſufficient matter to practiſe
this exerciſe; of ſuch (I ſay) and ſo palpable
things, as the verie Nouice and beginner
can not but find out, and clerly diſcerne.
                  
                     
Aſwell therfore the Beginners for their
inſtruction and entrance, as the others for
their excitation and diligence, muſt limit to
themſelfes euerie day a certaine number
of mortifications taken of theſe things aboue
ſaid, and eſpecially of thoſe wherin
they find them ſelfes moſt weake, renouncing
themſelfes therin for the vvill of God,
not forgetting ſtill to view and examin
in euery one, if their pure intention
(Throne of Iuory, whear God great
Salomon ſitteth) be eleuated and eſtabliſhed
on the ſix degrees aboue ſaid. And ſo,
both the Beginners ſhall eaſilie be brought
to the true diſcerning and knowledge of
their interiour, which is a thing of great
importance and altogeather neceſſarie;
and the others ſhalbe continually kept
profitablie in their exerciſe; and both
the one and the other ſhall make great
aduancement and progreſſe in the ſame.
                  VVhear notwithſtanding is to be noted,
that our meaning is not by the particular
practiſe of this chapter, to acquit
them of the generall and continuall

                        •
                     in all other things, as though it were ſuffi
                     
                        •
                     tiēt
for a man to practiſe this rule only at thoſe
tymes, and in thoſe things which hee hath

                        •
                     in this order limitted out and bownd himſelf

vnto: for, our meaning is, that hee ſhould
continually in all things practiſe the ſame (
                        〈◊〉
                     
hath bein taught) as well, and as diligently
as hee can, and that ouer and beſides that generall
care, and practiſe incertaine and vnlimitted,
hee ſhould haue this particular carefull
practiſe therof, thus tasked and limited
out, and that for the cauſes in the beginning
of this chapter aboue alleaged.
               
               
                  Of tvvoe errors vvhich may happen in this
exerciſe, vvith their remedies.
                  CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                     VVEE think it heer neceſſarie
                        •
                     
to giue an aduertiſment of
twoe errors, and contrarie
extremities which may happen
in the practiſe of this
Rule.
                  
                      The firſt is,Error. of thoſe which may be likened
to Iacob, whoe aſſoone as hee was married vnto
Rachel figuring the contemplatiue life, diſpiſed
Lia repreſenting the actiue life: for; ſeing
cleerly and perfectly the whole actiue life ſo
breifly in this Compendium, they may eaſily
comprehend the ſame, and ſo (perchance
                        •
                     
may think that that ſuffiſeth without any farther

practiſe therof. Againe, ſeing themſelfes
ſo eleuated euen at the firſt true and ſaythfull
practiſe of this Rule, and tranſported (as it
were) into the contemplatiue life, they would
willingly remaine therin, for the ſweetnes
they find in ſuch contemplation.
                  For remedie wherof they muſt vnderſtand,Remedie.
that it is not inough to haue the Actiue life by
only ſpeculation, but muſt alſo haue it by
practiſe, and that it is not ſufficient to know
what they ought to doe, and how they ought
to practiſe vertue or extirpate vice (which
knowledge by this Rule is eaſily had) but they
muſt alſo put the ſame in practiſe, by rooting
but vice and planting vertue, vntill ſuch tyme
as they haue acquired ſome good habit therof.
For, though this Rule and way aboue all
other, giueth a merueilous aduantage and
aduancement both in the knowledge and
practiſe of the Actiue life, yet can it not make
a man perfect therin, vnleſſe hee ioyne therto
faythfull practiſe. So that though by the

                        •
                     ight of this exerciſe a man knoweth the actiue
life, and ſeeth (as it were) preſently a
gate open to the contemplatiue, for the great
affinitie and likenes of this kind of actiue life
with that which is comtemplatiue; yet muſt
hee not at the firſt enter ſo farre therin, as to
caſt of the actiue, as if hee had not any more
need to practiſe himſelf therin; but muſt ſtill
purſue the mortification of himſelf and his
paſsions, which hee ſhall more ſufficiently and

ſpeedily doe by this rule then any other,
the faythfull practiſe wherof effecteth in
twoe or three moonthes, that which ſome
others doe not in ſo many yeares.
                  
                      The other error and contrarie extremitie
which heer may happen is,Error. of
thoſe whoe being too much addicted to
the adminiſtration of Mariea, will not
chooſe the better parte with Martha, hauing
ſo great affection to the actiue life
that they would not proceed to the contemplatiue,
and all becauſe they know
not the excellency therof; whear we
                        •
                     
meane not only of the exterior actiue life
but eſpeciallie of the interior, conſiſting
in the acts of the intelligence and of the
will. For, ſome ſeing themſelfes draw
(as it were) by the hand out of the
actiue life, and from their accuſtomed
acts of diſcourſes, meditation, and aſpirations,
and (as it were) forced by
this right Rule to fix the full force of
their mind in this only vvill of God, and
wholie to adhear therto (wherin conſiſteth
the pure and eſſentiall contemplation)
they know not whear they are
nor how to behaue themſelfes, and ſo
turne away and caſt of ſuch naked and
pure contemplation, eſteeming that the
ſpirituall practiſe of the mind hath neither
profit, nor yet any veritie, which is not

accompanied with ſuch their accuſtomed
acts, and diſcourſes of the wit.
                  For remedie then of this error,Remedie for the Intelligence. and
for the caſting of of theſe ſuperfluous acts,
and firſt for thoſe of the Intelligence, the
practiſer of this Rule muſt know that our
interiour is not made perfect, nor the true
contemplation gotten by ſuch diſcourſes
and ſpeculation, which are the acts of the vnderſtanding,
but by feruour, loue, and
affection, which are the acts of the will, becauſe
that no ſpeculation of the Intelligence
can poſſeſſe or enioy God, but the loue of the
will;S. Dionys 3. ep. ad Caium Mon. and therfore S. Denis ſayth, Suppoſitae
Deitenebrae cooperiuntur omni lumine, & abſconduntur
omni cognitioni, & ſi aliquis videns Deum
intellexit quod vidit, non it ſum vidit, ſed aliquid
quod eſt eius. The hidden darknes of God
(which hee calleth the abundance of light)
are vnknowne to all lights, and kept ſecret
from all knowledge; and if any one ſeing
God hath vnderſtood what hee ſawe, hee
hath not ſeene him, but ſomewhat appertayning
vnto him; for, the ſpeculation
of the Intelligence doth proportion
God allmightie, infinite, and incomprehenſible
to our ſmalle capacitie; but contrariewiſe
the will by loue proportioneth it ſelf in ſome
degree to the immenſitie, infinitie, and omnipotencie
of God; ſo that the operation of the

Intelligence maketh God like vnto man, cauſing
him (as it were) to deſcend vnto vs; but
the loue of the VVill maketh man like vnto
God, eleuating the ſoule vnto him. Finally,
this ſpeculation of the Intelligence is a humaine
thing, making vs remaine in our ſelfes;
but the affection of the VVill is a druine thing,
eleuating and drawing vs out of our ſelfes to
be transformed into God. And therfore it is
cleere that ſuch ſpeculations and diſcourſes
of the Intelligence, are not perfection no
                        •
                     
true contemplation, conſiſting in a certaine
kind of viſion of God, ſo farr as this mortalltie
permitteth, wherunto the ſpeculation of
the Intelligence is preiudiciall. And therefore
the heauenly Bridegroome admoniſheth therof
the ſpouſe in the Canticle when hee ſayth
Auerte oculos tuos a me,
                     Cant. 6. Turne away thine eye
from mee (that is) of curious diſcours and
ſpeculation of the Intelligence, Quia ipſi
                           •
                        e
auolare fecerunt, Becauſe they haue made mee
flie away (namely) from the ſight and viey
which obſcured by ſuch diſcourſes can not
behold mee. The ſame are wee taught myſticallie
by the Angell,Geneſ. 32. whoe made Iacob lame of
one of his leggs; for, by the twoe leggs are ſignified
the twoe principall powers of the
ſoule, Intelligence and VVill, wher of the one
muſt be made lame (to weet) the Intelligence,
that the ſoule may walke as ſhee ought
towards God. The verie ſame alſo is ſignified

when the Bridegroome ſayth vnto the ſpouſe,
Vulner aſti cor meum (ſor or mea, ſponſa) in vno oculorum
tuorum,
                     Cant. 4. Thow haſt wownded my heart
(my ſiſter, my ſpouſe) in one of thine eyes
(to weet) by thy VVill enflamed, which is
but one alone, when the other of the Vnderſtanding
is put out.Similie. For, theſe twoe powers
of the ſoule be like the twoe horſes ofa coach,
wher of the one is too ſlowe, the other too
ſwift, the VVill being ſo dull and ſlowe for
want of loue, that it will ſcarſe goe, and the
Vnderſtanding ſo ſwift and ſpeedy through
curioſitie that it will alwayes runne; ſo that
the one hath need of the goad, and the other
of the bridle. VVherfore it muſt be ſtopped,
and his curious courſe cutt of, when by the
tract of the holie ghoſt the ſoule is drawne,
and lifted vp to the eſſentiall contemplation
of God; and this is that which S. Denis writing
to Timothy ſayth, Derelinque intellectuales operationes,
& omnia ſenſibilia, & ſicut eſt poſ
                           •
                        bile, ig notè
conſurge ad eius viſionem qui eſt ſuper omnem ſubſtantiam
& cognitionem, Lay a ſide intellectuall
operations and all things ſenſible, and a ſmuch
as poſsible may be, vnknowne ariſe thow
to the viſion of him which is aboue all
ſubſtance and knowledge. Not withſtanding,
I ſay not that at the verie beginning of
the contemplatiue life, one ought wholy to
caſt of all diſcourſes of the Vnderſtanding,
this belonging to the perfectiō of the ſupreeminent

life; but I thought it neceſſarie to aduertiſe
this much therof, that knowing that
perfection conſiſteth not in ſuch meditations
and diſcourſes, a man ſhould not wholie relie
on them, and alſo vnderſtanding that the pure
and perfect contemplation is without ſuch imaginarie
diſcourſes, he ſhould not refuſe the
doore to enter therinto when in due tyme
it ſhalbe opened vnto him, which is, when hee
hath well practiſed the Actiue life; and that (finally)
hee ſhutt not the doore againſt the holie
ghoſt, as ſome doe whoe determin not to
leaue of ſuch diſcourſes for any better thing
which may happē vnto them: And thus much
touching the acts of the Vnderſtanding.
                  As for the acts of the VVill, they may alſo
haue their exceſſe and extremitie; not that
loue and feruour can be too great, for they of
neuer be great enough, but that ſuch feruour
may be ill gouerned, and by too many acts
much hindred, as when the ſoule feeling the
draught and attractiō of the heauenly ſpouſe,
ſhe behaueth her ſelf too actiuely in his preſē
                     ce,
multiplieng acts, and producing too many
aſpiratiōs, or little ſhort prayers, and affection
of the hearte, wherby the holie ghoſt can not
ſo well enter into the ſoule, nor ſo fully and
wholy poſſeſſe her, and by perfect vnion with
her make his abode, and take his peaceable repoſe
in her; ſo that truſting more to the induſtrie
of her owne naturall acts, then to the ſupernaturall
attractiō of her ſpouſe, ſhee is nei
                     
                        •
                     ier

drawne out of her ſelf, and hauing more
cōfidēce in her owne operatiō then in the eleuation
of the holie ghoſt, ſhee is neuer lifted
aboue her ſelf, but remaineth ſtill at one ſtay.
For remedy therfore of this incōuenience,Remedie for the vvill. the
deuout ſoule muſt vnderſtād, that though generally
ſuch aſpirations &c. be verie good, yet
not ſo good, but that at ſom tyme, inſom particular
point, thear is ſome other exerciſe better
thē they. And as their true and propre vſe
is in the actiue life, and at ſuch tymes as wee be
in ſterilitie, and without ay de of the wind or
tide of the holie ghoſt, ſo (ſpeaking generally)
their infructuous abuſe is in the contēplatiue
life, and when the ſoule is alreadie inflamed
with the loue of God, and actuallie drawn by
the holie ghoſt; and as in tyme of ſterility our
coldnes is therby inflamed, ſo, vſed in tyme of
feruour, our loue is therby rather quenched;
and as being vſed in our actiō, they lift the ſou
le vpwards to contēplation, ſo being vſed in
contemplation, they drawe her downwards
to action, which alwayes is meant when they
are too exceſsiue or too frequent.
                  VVhen therfore the contēplatiue ſoule shall
find her ſelf inflamed and drawn with the
ſoue and tract of her ſpouſe, let her with all
ſweetnes, and humilitie follow the ſame, and
giuing place to the ſupernaturall operations
of God, let her lay a ſide all theſe her naturall
operations and acts, excepting ſo farre
forth as may only ſerue her to follow the ſaid

tract, and firmely adhear vnto her ſpouſe,
which ſhee muſt doe by ſuch kind of acts as
be much more interior and ſpirituall then the
accuſtomed, ſo to haue correſpondence as
much as ſhee may, with the ſame operation
of God, farre more ſpirituall then her accuſtomed; yea, ſo much more ſpirituall muſt
they be and ſo far from ſence, that the ſame
ſhould make no noyſe in her interior, but remaining
(as it were) in ſtill and profound
ſilence, ſhee ſhould not ſo much worke as be
wrought, nor ſo much doe by and of her ſelf
as ſuffer the ſweet operation of God, nor (finally)
ſo much ſpeake to God, as to heare
what God ſpeaketh in her ſayeng,Pſal. 84. 
                     Audiā
                        
                           •
                         qui
loquatur in me Dominus Deus, I will hear what my
Lord God ſpeaketh within mee; and ſo following
the attraction of her ſpouſe, and light
of the holie ghoſt, ſhee ſhall be eaſily ſo farre
drawne out of her ſelf, and ſo highly eleuated
into God, as thoſe which haue not proued in
by experience can not conceiue.
               
               
                  An Aduertiſment touching Prayer.
                  CHAP. XIX.
                  
                     
                     VVEE will conclude this firſt part
with an Aduertiſment of the
meanes how to pray, according
to the practiſe of this exerciſe.Fovvre ſorts of prayer. A man therfore
may chooſe any of theſe fower wayes agreeing
to his vnderſtanding and capacitie
(to weet) Vocall prayer, which is the moſt 
vnperfect, as hauing leaſt ſpirituall light, and
ſerueth for the verie firſt Beginners: Secondly,
Mentall prayer which is better, as hauing
more light, and ſerueth for thoſe that are paſt
the beginning: Thirdly, Aſpirations, which 
are little, ſhort, ſeruent prayers, and enflamed
ſuſpires or deſires, comming ſome tymes only
from the heart, ſome tymes from the mouth,
and is for the moſt part a more perfect kind,
as hauing leſſe ſpeculation, and ſerueth for
thoſe that haue made ſome good progreſſe.
Finally, the Prayer made in this only vvill of 
God by adhearing only vnto him, which is the
beſt kind of all, as being only grownded vpon
and mayntained by the pure loue and charitie
of God, and is fit for thoſe whoe haue their
ſpirit enflamed, ſimplified, and purged from
all images and imaginations, or for ſuch as
(perhaps) haue not wholy attained therunto,
but yet their courage and patience in exſpecting
the tract of the holie ghoſt doth ſupplie
their want. Thoſe therfore which by their
Confeſſors or directors ſhalbe iudged to be
ſuch, let them take this laſt meanes, and ſo

they ſhall find themſelfes ſuddainly illuminated,
and eleuated vnto the true and eſſentiall
contemplation; neither let them loſe courage,
nor thinke it idlenes or tyme loſt, ſo to exſpect
and remaine in the preſence of God, and
at the foote of the Crucifix; for ſo the ſoule
profiteth more, brīgeth forth more profownd
and ſpirituall acts, maketh a greater offering of
herſelf, and a ſweeter holocauſt of the whole
man, and (finally) pleaſeth God more then
when ſhee flieth through heauen, diſcourſing
of diuine and deepe myſteries: and whenſoeuer
after ſuch attending and due diſpoſition,
God ſhall come and viſit her, ſhee ſhalbe more
illuminated at one tyme, then not doing ſo, in
a hundred. As for the others which are not as
yet ſufficient to practiſe this way, but take
ſome of the others according to their capacitie,
they muſt notwithſtanding alwayes remember,
that they vſe ſuch meanes according
to this Rule (namely) in this only vvill of God
as hath bein taught (that is to ſay) that in
all ſuch vocall prayers, meditations, and aſpirations,
they haue this vvill of God ſo fully,
ſoly, and wholy for their obiect and hearts
deſire, that they feele no will nor affection to
be comforted, illuminated, or conſolated in
that their prayer, but only as farre forth as
ſhall pleaſe God; which whoeſoeuer will doe,
ſhall find exceſsiue comfort and ioy, becauſe
hee findeth the vvill of God, which is his only
comfort and ioy: and therfore ſo it cometh

to paſſe, that hee which ſeeketh moſt his owne
comfort, ſhall leaſt find it, and contrarie wiſe
hee that for the only vvill of God ſeeketh it
leaſt, ſhall moſt amply find the ſame.
                  Six points therfore or interiour acts are neceſſarie
for them which make their meditations,Six interiour Poīts neceſſary for prayer.
aſpirations, or contemplatiōs according
to this practiſe.
                  The firſt is,1. to proteſt that they come to pray
only for the vvill of God and to pleaſe him,
without ſeeking conſolation, illumination, or
any ſatisfaction: But heer the fearfull and
ſcrupulous ſoules muſt not think, that they
are tyed heereto vnder paine of any ſynne either
mortall or veniall, becauſe this proteſtation
is in nature of a good purpoſe, and not of
any obligatorie promiſſe.
                  The ſecond,2. to reflect on their interiour, and
in ſownding the depth therof, to examin and
diſcerne without any partiality, whether
they haue proteſted the truth or no; in which
examen they ought to be verie diligent, and
iudges indifferēt; and hee which ſhalbe faythfull
in this point in ſownding well his interiour,
ſhall open the gate to perfect contēplatiō.
                  The third,3. to amend and correct what they
find cōtrarie to the ſaid proteſtation, maiſtering
proper loue, which ſolliciteth alwayes to
deſire ſenſible cōſolation, or at leaſt ſpirituall.
                  The fourth,4. to relie cōtinually on this diuine
pleaſure,4. as on the grownd and principall end

of their prayer, not caring ſo much to make
any curious diſcourſes and meditation, nor
to haue feruours and deuotions, nor (finally)
to make their prayer according to ſelf liking,
as to conforme them ſelfes to this diuine will,
and to be vnited therunto by a totall reſignation,
to cheariſh the ſame in their heart with
loue, and to adore it with profownd reuerence.
                  
                      The fift, to diſcerne and examin ſome tymes,
the foreſaid proteſtation by a ſimple reflexion
theron, to ſee if it be not fallen from
her puritie, and in particular, if the tyme ſeeme
not tedious.
                  
                      The ſixt, to reſt contented, yea and to
reioyce in heart, with a profownd Ioy and
tranquility at the end of their prayer (whether
it be ſterile or feruent) that they haue
obtained what they deſired (to weet) the accompliſhment
of the diuine pleaſure.
                  And note,Once entred by abnegation, difficultie is taken avvay. that the ſoule which is once well
entred, and eleuated by this meanes of Abnegation
for the vvill of God, both in and out of
prayer, ſhall find no great difficultie afterwards,
but ſhall at all tymes enter in again, as
hauing vndone the knott, fownd the ſecret,
and diued to the depth of this whole matter;
and as hauing by experience fownd God the
true light, ioy, and life, not whear ſhee
thought, nor whear ordinarily men ſeeke him
(namely) in our ſelfes, or in our owne proper

will, nor in ſeeking our owne delight, ioy,
light, and comfort; but whear ſhee thought
him not to be, and whear commonly men neuer
ſeeke him (to weet) in renouncing our
ſelfes, yea and our ſpirituall ioy, conſolation,
and light, poſtpoſing them all and putting
them (as it were) out of mind for the actuall
remembrance, and great ioy which ſhee hath
of the vvill of God and to doe his pleaſure; for,
the cauſe why wee can not ſo renounce ourſelfes
abſolutely for the vvill of God, is for no
other thing but that wee thinke wee ſhould
ſo leaue and looſe both that which wee deſire,
and our owne contentment; but when once
by ſuch experience the ſoule hath fownd out
the contrarie, and that by renouncing, yea and
forgetting her owne will and ioy for the diuine
will; her will and ioy is not annihilated
nor loſt, but is fownd in God according
to his promiſſe with an hundred tymes more;
find ſhe feeleth now no more repugnance, nor
ſadnes to renounce her ſelfe, and offer vp to
God her deer and only ſonne Iſaac, her proper
will and joy; knowing aſſuredly that though

                        ••
                     eé be bownd, and layd vpon the Altar of

                        •
                     er heart, in the mountaine of prayer, and by
the ſword of Iuſtice readie to be beheaded,
and in the fire of charitie ſhee be willing to
conſume him, yet ſhall hee not die but liue,

                        •
                     nd according to his name, ſhal be changed into
ioy and laughter. And of this ſubiect of

prayer, a man may ſee the little table or direction
which wee haue made for a method, and
entry to Meditation.
               
               
                  A daylie Examination to be made by the practiſer
of this exerciſe, vvherin is contained the ſumme
or abridgement of all this parte, in as
much as concerneth the practiſe
therof.
                  
                     FIRST, let him examin whether
hee hath gouerned himſelf, and
ordred his actions according to
the Rule of things commaunded▪
forbidden, and indifferent.
                  For the firſt ſort;Chap. 6. whether hee hath don
                        •
                     
the things cōmaunded by any lawe, cuſtome▪
commandement, or intention of his ſuperior
                        •
                     
maſter, father, or mother; and the ſame we
                        ••
                     
ſay in like maner of things forbidden.
                  But as touching the third ſort of thing
                        •
                     
(namely) indifferent, being neither commaunded
nor forbidden by any ſuch lawe, le
                        ••
                     
him examin himſelf whether hee hath done
admitted, or receiued thoſe whic
                        •
                      were againſt
proper will and ſenſualitie, and contrariewiſe
reiected and forſaken thoſe which
were agreable to the ſame, true diſcretion alwayes
preſuppoſed.
                  Farther,Chap. 7. touching things indifferent, aſw
                        ••
                     
in reſpect of commaundement as of proper

will and ſenſualitie (as being neither commaunded,
nor yet contrarie, nor agreable to
proper will and ſenſualitie) let him take heed
whether hee hath therin directed his intention
according to this Rule, and not done
them without any intention.
                  For the things commaunded which are
pleaſant to ſenſualitie or ſelf loue, as to eate,
drinke, to viſit ſuch places or perſons as hee
deſireth, and the like, let him examin himſelf
whether hee hath produced interiour acts of
the will againſt ſuch pleaſure and contentment.
And the like touching the things forbidden
which are diſagreable to ſence, and
ſelfe will, whether he hath produced ſuch acts,
and ſo hath done the one, and left vndone the
other for the vvill of God. But if after ſuch interior
acts, ſuch delectation and contentment
remaine; then whether hee hath ſtill remayned
firme in the ſuperior part of his ſoule in
doing the ſame for the vvill of God; and taken
ſuch pleaſure for paine and as the croſſe of
Chriſt and true vvill of God, as is taught after
the midſt of the ſeauenth Chapter.
                  Moreouer,Chap. 8. let him examin him ſelf touching
the ſix degrees of the myſticall throne
of pure intention; and firſt, if hee haue actually
eleuated his intention in all theſe things, or
whether hee hath forgottē the ſame, yet without
his cōtrarie exceſſe of multiplieng to many

acts, to the preiudice of the ſtomacke or braine;
alſo without troubling himſelf with ſcruples
and anxietie of mind, as though hee had
committed ſome great ſynne when hee findeth
himſelf to haue much failed therin; for,
this falte will happen verie often.
                  Secondly,Chap. 9. whether hee hath done them
only for this will, or whether it hath bein
                        •
                     
mingled with ſome other end, either bad or
imperfect.
                  Thirdlie,Chap. 10. whether it hath bein willingly
with alacritie of mind, or with ſadnes and heauines.
                  Fourthly,Chap. 11. whether it hath bein accompanied
with aſſurance, or whether with heſitation,
doubting whether the things ſo done
were the verie vvill of God, becauſe it ſeemed
of ſmall valew; or els agreable to ſence; on
(finally) becauſe it ſeemed vile and abiect.
                  Fiftly,Chap. 12. if hee beheld this vvill of God cleerly
with a liuely fayth without dullnes, or (as it
were) ſleepines or ſlownes of fayth.
                  Sixtly,Chap. 13. if all theſe degrees of perfection
were ſpeedily accompliſhed (that is) if at the
beginning of the worke hee thus directed his
intention; or if not, whether hee did it as
leaſt before the worke was finiſhed.
                  Seauenthly,Chap. 14. if by ſtable perſeuerance o
                        •
                     
this perfect intention, the ſoule hath prepare
                        •
                     
in herſelf a ſeat for king Salomon her celeſtia
                        •
                     
ſpouſe; and that by meanes of the twoe waye
                        •
                     
                     
layd downe to that effect.
                  Alſo, if in doing or ſuffering the foreſaid
things, hee employed himſelf in examining
his intention, ſifting out continually the imperfections
therof; and (finally) in viewing
whether it was eſtabliſhed on theſe ſix degres
and thus much touching the generall and
continuall practiſe of this part.
                  Beſides the which,Chap. 16. let him examin whether
hee hath taken in hand, and vſed the
meanes taught in the ſixteenth chapter, wherby
to enter the better into this practiſe, according
to which meanes let him ſee if hee
hath ſtinted himſelf euery day to a certaine
number of mortifications, either touching
the fiue ſences of the boddie, or the three powers
of the ſoule according as is thear taught,
taking thoſe occaſions of this mortification
which are thear layd downe.
                  As touching Prayer,Chap. 18. let him examin himſelf
whether therin hee hath taken this only
vvill of God for the end of his intention, not
ſeeking any proper pleaſure or contentment.
                  And if any man at the firſt vnderſtand not,
or in practiſe doe not remember any of the
points of this examination, let him ſee it more
at large in the exerciſe it ſelf, which hee ſhall
eaſily find out by the chapters heer noted in
the margin.
                  VVhich examination whoeſoeuer ſhall
dayly vſe, ſo exacting of himſelf continually

the due and faythfull practiſe of this exerciſe▪
ſhall (no doubt) in verie ſhort tyme attaine
to true perfection.
                  But it is a thing moſt aſsured, that by this
examination a man ſhall find himſelf to haue
often tymes fayled heerin, in forgetting this
vvill of God, and not directing his intention
in his works; yea, ſome ſhall find that all day
long they haue verie ſeldome ſo done, and
verie little practiſed this exerciſe, wherof (experimented
practiſe in others affording foreknowledge)
I admoniſh and aduiſe the Reader
before hand, that when hee findeth it in hi
                        •
                     
ſelf, hee think it not ſtrange, nor be any whi
                        ••
                     
diſcouraged therat; but with all conſtanci
                        •
                     
goe forward, aſwell becauſe that dayly
exerciſe will yeild the faythfull habit of ſuch
practiſe▪ more familiar in him, as alſo becauſe
that though hee ſo often forget this practiſe
yet ſhall hee doe much more good, and profit
ſpiritually by thoſe few tymes in which he
                        •
                     
shall ſo direct his intention, and shalbe more
illuminated in the knowledge of God and
himſelf, then by any other practiſed all day
long, by reaſon of the great merit of ſuch 
                        〈◊〉
                     
deiforme intention, and the light therof
                        •
                     
which like vnto a Sonne being in our interiour
howſe, leadeth vs vnto the ſight
of God, aud diſcouereth all the fowllnes 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
the paſsions, affections, and diſorder of our
ſoule.
               
               Heer endeth the firſt parte
of the Rule of Perfection.
Laus Deo.
            
            
               
               THE
RVLE OF PERFECTION
                     •
                  
OF THE INTERIOVR
(VVILL OF GOD.)
               CONTAYNING
THE CONTEMTLATIVE
LYFE.
               THE SECOND PARTE.
               
                  VVHAT IS THE INTERIOV
                        •
                     
vvill of God, and vvherin it differeth
from the Exteriour.
                  CHAP. I.
                  
                     HAVING finiſhed the firſt parts
of this Rule, treating of the Exteriour
vvill of God (namely) what 
                        〈◊〉
                     
is, how to be knowne, and by whe
meanes to be accompliſhed; it followeth now
that wee likewiſe deliuer the ſecond part
                        ••
                     
the which conſiſteth of the Interiour vvill 
                           〈◊〉
                        
God; ſhewing what it is, the way to knowe it
                        •
                     
and the meanes how to practice it.
                  
                     
This Interiour vvill of God then,Deſcription of the interiour vvill of God. is the diuine
pleaſure knowne vnto vs by a perfect,
manifeſt, and expert interiour knowledge, illumining
the ſowlle in the Interiour or Contemplatiue
life (that is) when ſhee ſeeth and
contemplateth her God, and inwardly experimenteth,
perceiueth, and taſteth the diuine
will (to weet) the pleaſure, and contentment
God taketh in ſuch or ſuch a thing.
                  And to the end to diue lower into the depth
of this will, and to diſcouer more eſſentially
how this actuall will, deſire, and contentment
in our works is fownd in God, in whom is no
Accident, and to whome nothing can happen
a nue; I ſaye that it is by the meanes of man,
God vſing humaine will; which will (as touching
good works) is common to God and
man, by reaſon of the vnion of God and man.
God (I ſaye) in this worke vſeth humayne
will, in aſmuch as it is a 
                        •
                     nue will and deſire,
and humayne contentation as an Accident,
or a thing nuely felt or taſted; not that God
himſelf hath not alſo his will and contentation
in euery worke (as being the principall author
therof) but as ſuche, this will is not nue or
accidentall, or perceiuable of man; but is made
perceiuable and nue to the nue will and
contentation humayne, conioyned and conformed
to the diuine: by which conformitie
and coniunction, the diuine externall will and
contentation, communicateth and manifeſteth

it ſelf to the humaine and temporall
will and contentation; in ſuch ſort that man
in this Interiour will, relliſheth no whit his
owne humayne will and contentation but
Gods only, his owne being wholy ſwallowed
vp, and transformed into Gods: For, this transformation
requireth that all the powres and
forces of ourſowlle be abſolutely employed in
God, and conſequently, not any of them vpon
himſelf; and by another conſequence (as ſo
transformed) feeleth no will of his owne but
only that of God: I meane, that by this Deiforme
Intention and diuine will, the ſowlle is
ſo ſtraightly vnited with God, and ſo repleniſhed
with ſpirit and lyfe, ſo eleuated, magnified,
glorified, and deified, breif, ſo drowned
in the abyſſe of the inacceſsible eternall light,
that ſhee feeleth no will or motion as her owne,
but only as Gods, in whom only ſhee vieweth
and feeleth her ſelf, and all her motions.
                  This will,The ſueetnes of this vvill. pleaſure, and contentment of God,
is ſo delitious a thing, and ſo pleaſant to the
ſowlle when ſo ſhee taſteth it perfectly, that
it draweth, illuminateth, dilateth, extendeth,
exalteth, rauiſheth, and inebriateth her in ſuch
ſort that ſhee feeleth no more any will, affection,
or inclination of her owne, but wholy
deſpoyled of her ſelf, and all ſelf-will, intreſt,
and commoditie, is plunged into the bottomleſſe
gulfe of this will and the abyſſall pleaſure
therof, and ſo is become one and the ſame

ſpirit with God.
                  The difference betwixt the Interiour and
Exteriour will is,The difference betvvixt the Exteriour and Interiour vvill. that the Exteriour taketh
her light from abrode, and the Interiour from
within (that is) the former is knowne by
Exteriour things, as by the commaundements
of God, of the church, of the Prelate, by cuſtomes,
&c. but the other by Interiour things,
as inſpirations, illuminations, eleuations, and
other the like attractions of God: The one is
ſhaddowed with corporall things or by theyr
images, and the other is wholly diſcouered in
ſpirit and truth; the one hath in it accidentall
things, but the other is in a maner wholy
eſſentiall; the one conſiſteth of the ryne
and pith (to weet) both of the Exteriour and
interiour, but the other of the interiour only.
All which notwithſtanding is meant according
to our capacitie, (to weet) that the will
diuine is different, which in it ſelf is alwayes
but one and the ſame, as wee haue ſhewn in
the beginning of the firſt parte, Chap. 4. but
that our capacitie apprehendeth it ſo; and that
in ſuch maner, and by ſuch degrees it diſcloſeth
and manifeſteth it ſelf vnto vs, as not hable
to comprehend it at the very firſt otherwiſe,
nor all at once, for, Nemo repētè fit ſummus,
No man becometh perfect on the ſuddaine
ſayth Saint Bernard.
                     S. Bernard. So that this diuine will
and heauenly light deſcendeth vnto vs by

degrees, and wee therby aſcend vp to God by
like degrees: and this is it which S. Thomas
ſayth,In opuſc. de humanit. Chriſti &c. 
                     Sicut diuinum lumen gradatim decreſcendo
in nos deſcendit gradatim, it a contrario modo per ipſum
lumen, in Deum reducimur gradatim & creſcendo,
As the diuine light decreaſing by degrees
deſcendeth vnto vs by degrees, ſo on the
contrary are wee drawne backe into God by
the ſame light increaſing, and by degrees; and
that according to the Pſalmiſt ſayeng, They
shall proceed from vertue to vertue,
                     Pſal. 83. 
                     the God of Gods
shalbe ſeen in Sion (that is) in perfect contemplation
(ſayth the Gloſe) And in the Prouerbs
alſo,Prou. 4. 
                     Iuſtorum ſemita ſicut lux ſplendens procedit,
& creſcit vſquè ad perfectum diem, The way
of the Iuſt proceedeth like a reſplendēt light,
and groweth to noone-daye; which day (according
to the Gloſe) is lyfe euerlaſting. So
that this Interiour will diſcouereth not it ſelf
after one ſorte, but diuerſly and by degrees,
like as neither wee doe comprehend it all at
once, but by little and little and by the ſame
degrees; wherof though one might ſet downe
a great many, yet for breuitie I will reduce
them all to fiue (that is) Manifeſtation, Admiration,
Humiliation, Exultation, and Eleuation.
               
               
                  
                  Of Manifeſtation, the firſt degree.
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     AS touching the firſt degree then;Manifeſtatiō the. I. Degree.
this Manifestation of the Interiour
will proceedeth of the pure intention
of the Exteriour will,It proceedeth of a pure intention. for the
one ſpringeth of the other as the effect of the
cauſe, and the one followeth the other, and is
tranſported therinto immediately, if ſo be this
intention be trulie pure, wee doing our worke
with this only end of the vvill of God, all other
intents and ends (though good) ſett aſyde,
and (in fine) if it be accompanied with the
ſix degrees ſpecified in the firſt parte. For, after
ſuch puritie of intention, it cannot be but
the ſowlle muſt taſt of the Interiour will, and
feele her internall touch, ſeing it is a Maxime
in Philoſophy, that VVhatſoeuer is moued, is
moued of her end: now, a man cannot be moued
of any end, but that hee muſt needes ſee
or feele that end; yf then hee be moued by
this only end of the vvill of God, hee ſeeth and
feeleth it within himſelf.VVhy it is not taſted. But note this word
(only) for if ſo be hee be moued by any other
end, not only ſiniſter, but good, hee cannot
feele it be it neuer ſo good.
                  
                     
And (loe) heer the poynt wherin many
fayle, the ditch wherinto many fall, and
the rocke wheragainſt many wracke, the
which ſo ſtoppeth this ſpacious Oceane of
the vvill of God, and maketh it ſo ſtraight and
vnnauigable, that the ſhipps of theyr ſowlles
cannot make ſayle therin (namely) becauſe
they haue ſome other end, although often
tymes ſo ſecret, that they themſelfes know
not, neither can diſcerne it, the which abuſe
is manifeſtly diſplayed in the 9. and other
chapters enſuing of the firſt parte.
                  But to the end to ſpeake ſomewhat more
eſſentially of this puritie of intention, which
thus manifeſteth the vvill of God; it is nothing
els then a pure, and free choice which the
ſowlle maketh by her free will of this diuine
will and pleaſure, in ſteed of her owne affection,
paſsion,Hovv this choyce is made. or will, and alſo of her worke;
the which choice conſiſteth in an auerſion
from the Creature, and in a ſimple conuerſion
to the Creator; and is made by a true, faythfull,
and ſimple regard of the vvill of God (that
is) when in our worke, affection, or paſsion,
wee caſt our thought and ſpirituall ſight on
God, with all tranquilitie and repoſe, ſweetly,
ſerenely, and without all maner of ſtreſſe or
violence; which thought or ſight is free and
in our powre, ſeated in the ſuperiour parte of
our ſowlle amidſt all our affections, paſsions,
afflictions, annoyes, and actions. And this

ought to be a great comfort,Note. and encouragement
to all ſuch as are combated with theyr
paſsions, and agitated with temptations. And
now, by how much more quietly, ſimply, and
without multiplicitie we make and direct this
reſpect, ſo much more manifeſtly ſhall wee
ſee and taſt this diuine will; and alſo ſo much
the ſooner ſhall our ſpirit be ſimplyfied, by
looſing all impreſsion of the paſsion, and image
of the worke. And this poynt ought to be
well and maturely conſidered, as being the
key to the contemplatiue life; wherfore I
wiſh it may be well heeded.
                  Now then,The ſovvlle muſt plunge her ſelf more deeply in the vvill of God hauing once fovvnd it. hauing by puritie of intention
in the Exterior will diſcouered this Interiour,
and the vvill of God being thus manifeſted
vnto the ſowlle by his ſweet and ſecret
touche, and (finally) being thus come to the
firſt degree of Manifeſtation, one ought not
preſently to ſtart from thence, but to the end
to come to the other degrees, and more
plainly and eſſentially diſcover the ſame, hee
muſt diligently attend vnto this ſecret operation
and inward touch of God, and withdrawing
himſelf into his interiour, endeuour
to augment ſuch ſweet attractions, by cutting
of all ſuperfluitie of exteriour and ineriour
occupation, togeather with all manner
of motions, multitude and multiplicitie of
thoughts, the noyſe wherof may interrupt

the repoſe of the ſpouſe, and theyr clam ours
hinder the ſowlle from hearing his ſweet
voyce, his delicious and mellifluous ſpeaches
vnto her, or from reioycing in his amorous
and alluring aſpect, ſweet kiſſes, chaſt embracements,
or (finally) from feeling this efficatious
inaction, and liuely touch of his good
pleaſure and will, the which hee ought ſtill to
nouriſh, conſerue, and cheariſh within him
in obayeng and correſponding to his attraction
and illumination, vntill the ſowlle attayne
to ſee him (as it were) at Noone-daye,
and that ſhee being become and made the
ſelf ſame with him, ſhee may haue no other
will, ioye, or lyfe, then this vvill of God, the
which is the perfection of the Interiour will:
and by how much more purely a man addreſſeth
his intention in the Exteriour will, ſo
much more profowndly ſhall hee diue into
the Interiour will.
                  And therfore thoſe that taſt not this interiour,Letts of the interiour vvill.
ought to examyn and looke how they
behaue themſelfes in the Exteriour (namely)
whether they haue theyr Intention dulie
ordered (that is) whether they haue not any
paſsion or affection in the worke in hand;
whether they doe it meerly for that ſuch is
Gods will, without other end or intention
whatſoeuer; in ſomme, whether ſuch theyr
intention be accompanied with the ſix degrees
taught in the firſt parte: And ſo ſhall

they diſcouer the impediments withholding
them from entring into the Interiour.
                  Now (loe) this Manifeſtation and feeling proceedeth
from the puritie of Intention in
this manner:Hovv this degre proceedech from puritie of intentsion. Puritie bringeth a mortification
of paſsions and affections in the ſowlle; mortificatiō
breedeth a great tranquility, trāquilitie
a profownd ſilence; and in this profownd
ſilence the ſowlle ſayth, Audiā quid loquatur in
me Dominus Deus,
                     Pſal. 84. I will hearken what my
Lord God ſpeaketh within mee: and withall
hearing and knowing like a true ſheepe his
ſweet voyce, ſhee cannot contayne her but as
his true ſpouſe, in abundance of hearts-eaſe
breaketh out and ſayth,Cant. 5. 
                     Vox dilecti pulſantis
                           •
                        , a
                        
                           ••
                        eri
mihi (ſoror mea, ſponſa) Loe, the voyce of
my deerly beloued knocking and ſayeng,
Open vnto mee (my ſiſter, my ſpouſe) And,
Sonet vox tua in auribus noſtris,
                     Cant. 2. 
                     vox enim tua dulcis
& faciestua decora, Let thy voyce ſownd with
                     
                        •
                     n
myne eares, for (loe) they voyce is ſweet,
and they face beautifull: And being (as it we
                     
                        •
                     e)
inebriated with this ſweet inuitation ſhee

                        •
                     nſwereth him and ſayth,Pſal. 118. 
                     Quàm dulcia faucibus
neis eloquia tua, ſuper me
                           •
                        ori meo, How ſweet
are thy words to my pallate, more ſweet then

                        •
                     onny to my mouth; And againe,Ibid. 
                     Ignitum elo
                        
                           •
                        uium
tuum vehementèr, & ſeruus tuus dilexit illud,
Thy ſpeach is vehemently inflamed, and thy

                        •
                     eruant delighteth therin. Breif, hauing well
knowne his voyce and the ſweetneſſe therof,

ſhee cannot refrayne from breaking forth into
his prayſes,Cant. 5.ſayeng, Gutiur illius ſuauiſſimum,
His throat or voyce is moſt ſweet; inſomuch
that,Cant. 5. 
                     Anima mea liquefacta eſt vt dilectus
loquutus eſt, My ſowlle did melt and diſſolue
aſſoone as my beloued ſpake vnto mee.
                  In like manner this puritie of Intention
bringeth with it (as is ſayd) a diſsipation
of paſsions and affections; and this diſsipation
worketh a ſerenitie in the ſowlle, which
ſerenitie maketh the Sun of Iuſtice to ſhine
in our interiour Horizon, and manifeſt himſelf
vnto vs.
                  Againe, this puritie of intention doth driue
away the appetits and concupiſcences of
our owne will, which being caſt of, their contraries
take vp theyr place; ſo that wheras before
a man had no appetite but to his owne
peruerſe will, now relliſheth hee nothing el
                        •
                     
then the vvill of God; and therfore the Pſalmiſt
ſayth,Pſal. 33. 
                     Guſtate & videte quàm ſuauis eſt Dominus▪
                     
Taſt and ſee how ſweet our Lord is.
                  Finally, this puritie of intention perceth and
beateth downe the wall of ſelf-will, behind
which the ſpouſe diſcrieth her heauēly Groome,
as ſhee affirmeth ſayeng,Cant. 2. 
                     En, ipſe flat pos
                           •
                        
parietem noſtram, proſpiciens per cancellos, reſpiciem
per feneſtras, Behold, whear hee ſtandeth behind
our wall, caſting his eye in at the grates▪
looking in at the windowes. For, what other

                     
                        •
                     word 
                        •
                     this thick wall which hindreth vs to ſee
God though neer vs, but our ſelf-will which
ſeparateth vs frō him, according as it is ſayd,

                        
                           •
                        niquitates veſtrae diuiſerunt inter vos & Deum,
                     Iſay. 59.
Your iniquities haue made a diuiſion or a
wall betwixt yow and God? And what are

                        •
                     he grates in this wall through which hee beholdeth
the ſpouſe, but the breaches and
gapps which ſhee maketh in this her ſelf-will,
by the heauy hammer of Abnegation? Alſo
what are theſe windowes in the wall wherat

                        •
                     ee vieweth her, but pure intentions through
brenunciation of all vncleaneſſe?
                  It is then the puritie of Intention that diſ
                     
                        •
                     ouereth
God, and manifeſteth vnto the ſowle

                        •
                     nd maketh her taſt his will; ſo as by this

                        •
                     anifeſtation ſhee plainly ſeeth, and experinenteth
that which before ſhee but only poſ
                     
                        •
                     eſſed:
ſhee vnderſtandeth (I ſay) ſeeth, and

                        •
                     aſteth this diuine will in her owne capacitie,

                        •
                     yeng therin as in her owne, and that with 
                        〈◊〉
                     
much more pleaſure as ſhee feeleth the one
be more delitious, penetratiue, and ine
                        •
                     riating
then the other; 
                        •
                     nd alſo plungeth,
and transformeth her ſelf therinto with ſo

                        •
                     uch more force, and violence of ardent

                        •
                     oue, by how much ſhee diſcouereth it to be

                        •
                     etter to liue therin, then in her owne will; the

                        •
                     hich hauing once taken full, faſt, and peacea
                     
                        •
                     le
poſſeſsion of her, draweth, exalteth, raui
                     
                        •
                     eth,
and cōioyneth her inſeparably to it ſelf,

and lifteth her vp as Amber doth the ſtrawe;
and like a torrent of delights breaking out
vpon her and ouerflowing her, doth ſo water
and inebriate her, and ſo wholy repleniſh her
interiour, that like as melted and diſſolued
into a ſea of ſweetneſſe, ſhee remaineth ſo
cleane depriued of her owne forces and powers,
that the diuine will taketh plenary poſſeſsion
of her, through an abſolute mayſterie,
and without all manner of contradiction; impelling
her onward to all goodneſſe, and
working in her, by her, and with her, all theſe
holie and amorous interiour operations and
effects.
                  And note, that betwixt this Manifeſtation
and puritie of intention, thear is a mutuall
augmentation and reciprocall encreaſe; for▪
as that ſpringeth of this, ſo this augmenteth
by that; wherfore how much greater is the
puritie of Intention, ſo much cleerer alſo will
be the Manifeſtation; and how much cleerer
is this Manifeſtation, ſo much greater will
be that puritie of Intention; and how much
ſooner the ſoule ſhall haue attayned this puritie,
ſo much the ſpeedier ſhall ſhee likewiſe
enioy that Manifeſtation. Finally, when the
ſowlle hath once fownd this treaſor and taſted
this pleaſure, it ſhall not be hard for her
to renounce from thenceforth her ſelf, and to
continue this puritie of Intention, ſeeing
that a man eaſily forgoeth the leſſer good and

pleaſure, to enjoy the greater.
               
               
                  Of Admiration the ſecond Degree.
                  CHAP. III.
                  
                     AFTER this Manifeſtation of the
pleaſure which God taketh in the
execution of his will,Admiration the 2. degree. ſucceedeth another
degree (to weet) Admiration,
                     It proceedeth of 3. cauſes. proceeding
of three principall cauſes: the firſt wherof
is the greatnes of God; the ſecond a mans
owne Nothing; the third the admirable familiaritie
of God with the ſowlle.
                  As touching the firſt;The greatnes of God. 1. Cauſe. the vnmeaſurable
greatnes of God almightie beginneth heer to
diſcouer it ſelf ſo wonderfully, that it wholy
aſtoniſheth the ſowlle; for this interiour will
by which ſhee is abſorbed, and with which
ſhee is become one and the ſelf ſame thing,
geueth her ſo true knowledge of God, that
ſhee knoweth and ſeeth that thear is nothing
elſe but hee, and that thear is but one being or
Eſſence which is true, and that all things els
but it are nothing: which although they haue
ſome certaine borrowed being in thē, yet they
haue it not ſo, as that thear is any compariſon
to be made betwixt their being and that
of Gods, from which it all proceedeth; whoe
ſhould not be infinit if thear were any other

then hee; for thear ſhould hee end whear that
other ſhould beginne. Now then the ſowlle
knowing, and ſeeing this veritie by her owne
experience, ſhee is ſo grownded and eſtabliſhed
therin (not by particular diſcourſe of
the vnderſtanding, but by a generall and ſimple
view and by her inheaſion to God) as that
ſhee neither ſeeth, knoweth, nor feeleth any
other thing then this infinite eſſence, and incomprehenſible
beautie; wherwith aſtoniſhed,
shee heerhence beginneth to taſt the immenſitie
or infinitie which shee had but only
heard tell of afore; and this experimentall
knowledge of the infinitie of God ingendreth
this Admiration in the ſowlle.
                  Furthermore,Our nothing. this Admiration is augmented
by the contrarie cauſe (to weet) our Nothing,2. Cauſe.
which is as great an extremitie on the
other ſide, and no leſſe profownd gulf; the
perfect knowledge of which poynt cometh
by the knowledge of the other, for Cōtraria iuxta
ſe poſita magis eluceſcunt, Contraries ſet one
by another are more euident: ſo that like as
black is more perſpicuous ſet by white, ſo
doth mans Nothing appeare more cleerly,
being compared with the immenſitie of God;
as alſo on the other ſide the immenſitie of
God, by compariſon with mans Nothing,
yea, theſe twoe poynts are ſo incident one to
the other, that without the one yow can not
knowe the other, inſomuch that a man can

neuer ſee the infinite Eſſence of God, till firſt
hee knowe his owne Nothing; neither yet
his owne nothing, before hee haue the true
knowledge of this diuine immenſitie; but the
ſowlle once knowing it, knoweth forthwith
right perfectly her owne Nothing; the ſight
wherof putting her into an aſtonishment and
admiration, maketh her to break forth and
ſay with the Prophet,Pſal. 7 2. 
                     Ad nihilum redactus ſum
& neſciui, I ame brought to nothing and wiſt
it not; for why shee hath ſo long contemplated,
and ſo intimately embraced this infinite
Eſſence in this will, that when shee retorneth
to behold her ſelf in conference, and
compariſon with this infinitie, shee acknowledgeth
her ſelf meer vanitie and a very Nothing;
the which acknowledgement freeth
her, and geueth her a frank acceſſe to God,
and free egreſſe and regreſſe vnto him at her
pleaſure, as hee himſelf witneſſeth ſayeng,
Egredietur & ingredietur, & paſcua inueniet,
                     Ioan. 10. Shee
shall goe forth and enter, and shall find
paſture.
                  But theſe twoe diuine illuſtrations and
operations are followed by a third (to
weet) by a great familiaritie and ſweetneſſe
which our Sauiour vſeth toward the
ſowlle, wherat shee remayneth yet more
aſtonished, for that commonly, like
ſeek and accompanie with theyr like, as
Noblemen with Noblemen, gentlemen with

gentlemen, ploughmen with ploughmen, beggers
with beggers, inſomuch as to ſee a Lord
conuerſe with a begger, were a note of Heroycall
and admirable goodneſſe in him; but
if a king ſhould be ſeene to doe it, it would be
reputed an humilitie and condeſcent worthy
of immortall memorie: now what were all
this goodneſſe and humilitie compared with
Gods, whoe ſo vouchſafeth to conuerſe with
man? truly, nothing els but mallice, and pride.
If then it ſeemeth ſo greate goodnes, one
worme of the earth to conuerſe with another,
what bountie (trow yee) is it to ſee the king
of kings and God of Gods familiar with a
worme,Pſal. 49. and which hath nothing but commeth
from him? yea, which is moſt of all, with
a ſyn full ſowlle and his enemie? ſeeking her,
wooing her, chearing her, ſhewing her all
louely and gratious regard, and inceſſantly
honoring her with ſome particular grace or
other; in fine, making ſhewe as though hee
had ſome ſpeciall need of her; yea ſeeking her
grace with ſuch inſtance, loue, and humilitie,
as though all his good depended on her conſent,
and all his felicitie conſiſted in her fauor.
                  The ſowlle (loe) mounted to this degree,
and ſeing with an illuminat eye the extent of
ſo infinit goodnes of God toward her, not
only falleth into a profownd admiration
therof, but departeth euen out of her ſelf

through extreame aſtoniſhment, ſo farre forth
as falling therby as into a trance or Extaſie,
in exceſſe of loue and ioy ſhee crieth out
ſayeng,Cant. 2. 
                     Fulcite me floribus, ſtipate me malis, quia
amore langueo, Prop mee vp with flowres,
beſet mee rownd with apples, for (loe) I languiſh
for loue. If the twoe Qweenes, Heſter
and ſhee of Saba fell into an extaſie, the one in
beholding the glorie of king Aſſuerus, the other
in viewing that of Salomon, what marueill
may it ſeeme to the ſowlle, to ſee ſo exceſsiue
loue and goodnes of Allmightie God himſelf
toward her? But what are theſe flowres which
may ſo ſupport and prop her vp in her languiſhment,
but the examples of Ieſus Chriſt, the
which ſhee deſireth to imitate? ſayeng within
her ſelf: I deſire to forgoe and renounce my
owne will by his example, for the vvill of God,
and be obedient therunto vntill death as hee
was, and to annihilate my ſelf like him, to the
end I may render ſome parte of my debts to
that vnmeaſurable goodnes: I languiſh of the
wownds which loue hath made in my heart
with the arrowe called Sagitta electa the choiſe
arrowe,Iſay. 49. the which that diuine Archer (whoe
is Charitie) hath ſhot into my heart eſtoſoones
vpon his Manifeſtation vnto mee, and
whoe alſo like a good Archer hath followed
his arrowe, ſo that both are fixed in my heart,
and lodged in my bowells as it is ſayd,Pſal. 14. 
                     Ad
                           •
                        eum

                           •
                        eniemus, & manſionem apud eum faciemus, VVee

will come,Luc. 12. and will abide with him. Behold, this
arrowe is all on fier, and neuer cometh but to
kindle this fier in our land; the heat therof
burneth mee, the loue inflameth mee, the ardour
melteth and diſſolueth mee like wax
before the fier,Pſal. 77. conſuming all my forces, and
(in fine) maketh mee to die vnto my ſelf and
liue to God; and how farther this arrowe perceth
and my wownd is greater, ſo much more
incurable is my languor, and holsome my
hurt. And therefore is it that I entreat yow to
ſupport mee with the flowres and examples
of Ieſus Chriſt, and to ſtrengthen mee with the
apples of odoriferant prayers; for (loe) theſe
flowres and frutes are as pillars wheron I reſt
mee and ame borne vp, as being as hard as
Adamant, high as heauen, of depth bottomleſſe,
of durance endleſſe.
                  See heer, how this holie ſowlle ſpeaketh,
rapt in admiration of this infinite goodneſſe,
and wholly infiered and inflamed with the ardēt
loue of her heauenly ſpouſe; and not hable
to containe any lōger, breaketh out through
exceſſe of feruor into inward tearmes and
boyling acts, tearmes and acts vnderſtood
rather of God then of herſelf; and is by this
meanes highly lifted vp to God: and by how
much the more ſhee admireth him, ſo much
more is her eleuation, and ſo much the cleerer
and eſſentiall her diſcouerie, and view of the
diuine will and ſweete pleaſure of God; and

by how much more ſhee admireth him, ſo
much the higher is her eleuation; and reciprocally
how much higher is her eleuation,
ſo much the more ſhee admireth him, and is
made therby ſo much the more capable of
that goodneſſe.
                  But note,Theſe degrees be not conſiderations. that I meane not that explicitè the
ſowlle reſt and ſtay on theſe three poynts,
nor that ſhee practice them by way of conſideration;
but rather that they preſent them
ſelfes generally vnto her as diuine lights, ſhee
not leauing of the Contemplation of the diuine
will to ſeeke them, but wholly and continually
remayning fixed therin.
               
               
                  Of Humiliation, the 3. degree.
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     AFTER this Admiration enſueth Humiliation,
                     Humiliation. 3. Degree.
a degree which followeth
immediately after hauing diſcried
and admired the diuine immenſity and omnipotencie,
in that the ſowlle hath cleerly ſeene
that God is euery whear, as hauing ſeene him
without and within her, aboue and belowe
her, on euery ſide and rownd about her,
and after hauing perfectly perceiued that
God is more inwardly within her then ſhee
herſelf: moreouer, hauing knowne his goodneſſe,
taſted his ſweetneſſe, ſeene his beauty, enioyed

his familiaritie, and experimented in
her his liuely and efficacious Inaction, his
ſweet and ſecret operation, his ſtrong and
violent attraction, and (finally) after hauing
compared her vilitie, her mallice, her nothing,
with the immenſe glorie and goodneſſe
of God, ſhee beginneth to produce profownd
(though moſt ſecret and ſubtile) acts of
humilitie, ſayeng one while with S. Peter, Recede
â me quia homo peccator ſum,
                     Luc. 5. Depart from
mee, for (loe) I ame a ſinfull wight; And anon
with S. Elizabeth,Luc. 1. 
                     Et vndê hoc mihi? VVhence
and from what goodneſſe cometh it, that God
voucheſafeth thus to come and viſit mee? Otherwhiles
againe with S. Peter,Ioan. 13. 
                     Tu mihi lauas
pedes? Comeſt thow to waſh the feete of my
muddy and earthly affections through thy
heauenly and familiar condeſcent and cheariſhings?Apoc. 19.
thow (my Lord and God of all glorie)
wilt thow through the familiar and delitious
operation of thy diuine will, thus daigne
to diſguſt mee of myne owne bitter and
abiect will? what! thow that art the king of
kings and Lord of Lords, wilt thow abaſe thy
ſelf ſo lowe as to conioyne thy will with myne,
and operate ſo familiarly with, in, and by
it, and endure that it doe one and the fame
act with, in, and by thy diuine will. Lord, I
ame affrighted at this noueltie, aſtoniſhed at
this bounty, and ouerwhelmed with this glorie
and maieſtie, and ame not hable to endure

ſo great abatement of thy greatneſſe, nor ſuſtaine
ſo great a flaſhe of thy ſplendure, nor
comprehend ſuch exceſſe of goodneſſe, nor
abide ſo ſtrong aſſalt of ſo infinit loue; Recede
â me,
                     Iob. 10. Lord, depart from mee a ſinner, Et dimitte
me paululùm vt plangam dolorem meum, And
leaue mee a while to wayle my ſinnes; els,Ioan. 13. 
                     Non
lauabis mihi pedes in aeternum, Thow ſhalt not
waſh the feete (of my paſsions and affections)
with thy familiar blandiſhments and heauenly
delices. To whom as to her that vnderſtandeth
not as yet that myſterie, God anſwereth,
Quod ego facio tu neſcis modò,
                     Ibid. 
                     ſcies autem poſtea,
VVhat I doe, thow knoweſt not now, thow
ſhalt know it heerafter. As if hee would ſaye,
My ſpouſe, thow vnderſtandeſt not the effect
and conſequence of this my worke; thinke
not that I doe it only to manifeſt vnto thee
my benignitie, but alſo to releiue thy neceſſitie,
for why,Ibid. 
                     Si non lauero te non habebis partem
mecum, Vnleſſe I waſhe thee thow ſhalt haue
no parte with mee; if by the tract of my ſpirit
I plucke thee not out of thy fleſhe; if by the
taſt of my true pleaſure I make thee not forgoe
the falſe; if with the relliſh of my heauenly
ſweetnes I make thee not diſtaſt the
earthly; if by the peace of my will and pleaſure
I free thee not from the warre of thy paſſions;
if by a ioy in my will I make thee not
forſake thine owne; if (finally) by a ſupernaturall
contentment and repoſe I make thee

not caſt of that of nature, thow ſhalt remaine
euer thine owne, and allwayes in thy ſelf, hauing
the feet of thy affections ſtill fowlle and
ſoyled with earthly myer, and conſequently
canſt haue no parte with mee in that goodly
Citty of mine,Apoc. 21. wherinto Nuliū intrabit coinquinatum,
No defiled thing shall enter: and therfore
by this my liuely, efficatious, ſweet, and
familiar operation in, and with thee, it pleaſeth
mee to waſh and make cleane thy feete
(to weet) the inferiour parte of thy ſowlle,
from all ſpot of paſsion and diſordinate affection,
and radically to plant my will in thee,
wherby to make thee my liuely temple, holie
tabernacle, Paradiſe of pleaſure, and (brief) to
make thee one ſpirit with mee, yea myne owne
ſweet ſpouſe for euer and euer,Oſee. 2. for Sponſabo
te mihi in aeternum, I will eſpouſe thee for euer.
                  The ſowlle thus ſeing that ſuch is his diuine
will, which is her only lyfe and ioye, and to
the which ſhee aſpireth from the bottome of
her heart, with an vnſatiable deſier to reſigne
herſelf wholly therunto,Ioan. 13. anſwereth, Domine
non tan
                           •
                        um pedes meos, ſed & manus & caput, O
Lord, waſh not only my feet, but my hands
and head alſo, that I may not only haue cleane
feet for to walk in thy wayes, but alſo an illumined
vnderſtanding to knowe thy lawe, and
innocent hands to doe good workes, wherby
being wholly deſpoyled of the old man, I may
from henceforth ſay,Cant. 5. not only Laui pedes meos,

quomodò coinquinabo eos? I haue waſht my feet,
how ſhall I now fowlle thē any more? but alſo,
Exui me tunica mea,
                     Ibid. 
                     quomodò induam illam? I haue
put of my garmēt, how ſhall I put it on againe?
wherunto the ſpouſe anſwereth,Ioan. 13. 
                     Qui lotus eſt,
non indiget niſi vt lauet pedes, ſed eſt mundus totus,
Hee that is waſhed, needeth not but only to
waſh his feet, but is wholly cleane: for, if thow
haue no vaine affections thow ſhalt be cleane
all ouer, Et macula non erit in te,
                     Cant. 4. And thear ſhalbe
no ſpot in thee: and therfore let me doe my
will in thee, let mee operate like a true ſpouſe,
let my ſpirit repoſe in thee, let mee labour
together with thee, for that according to the
word I haue paſſed vnto thee,Oſee. 2. 
                     Sponſabo te mihi
in fide, I will eſpouſe thee in fayth.
                  The ſowlle hauing vnderſtood this myſterie,
as one wholly diſſolued into ſweetnes, and
inflamed with loue,Cant. 5. ſayth, Anima mea liquefacta
eſt vt dilectus loquutus eſt, I was wholly diſſolued
aſſoone as I heard my beloued ſpeake;
and goeth on in ſpirit with the virgin Marie
ſayeng,Luc. 1. 
                     Ecce ancilla Domini, fiat mihi ſecundum
verbum tuum, Loe heer thy handmayd (oh
Lord) be it vnto mee as thow haſt ſayd. And
heerupon, by ſuch her ſweet conſent and
hearty reſignation to the vvill of God, ſhee becometh
ſtraightly vnited therunto, receiueth
it into her, and (finally) is become therby
the mother of Ieſus Chriſt, for (quoth hee)

                     Quicunque fecerit voluntatem patris mei qui eſt in
coelis, hic frater, & ſoror, & mater mea eſt, VVhoe
ſo doth the will of my father whoe is in heauen,
hee is my Brother, my Siſter, and my
Mother. And the ſowlle hauing ſo ſpiritually
conceiued him, and being become great of
him, ſhee charily keepeth, cheriſheth, nouriſheth,
worſhippeth, and adoreth him in her
heart, like as the virgin Marie did in her boddie;
and ſo (to be ſhort) ſhee is bleſſed, not
for being the wombe which beareth him, or
the teates which nurſeth him, but for being
ſhee whoe hath heard the word of God and
kept it.Luc. 11.
                  
                  Now,This dialogue paſſeth in ſpirit. albeit this Dialogue paſſe not betwixt
God and the ſowlle in theſe expreſſe and formall
tearmes, yet ſilently and in ſpirit they
paſſe in effect and ſubſtance within the ſowlle
in this her deſire of Humiliation; the which
ſpirituall effect a man cannot expreſſe but by
ſuch articulate words. And thus by this degree
of Humiliation ought the ſowlle learne
to humble herſelf amid the familiar viſitations
and blandiſhments of her heauenly
ſpouſe (that is to ſay) behaue her with as
profownd reuerence toward that great maieſtie,
as it daigneth to ſtoope in ſo great familiaritie
to her; and ought to take great heed
not to render herſelf reciprocally familiar
vnto him as to her equall, for ſo ſhould ſhee
make of this familiaritie a wall betwixt God

and her, and a very thick clowd which would
hinder her from the cleer aſpect of the ſpouſe,
and from wading forward into his greatneſſe;
a poynt wherin many ſpirituall perſons doe
very much preiudice themſelfes, forgetting
through Gods great familiaritie with them,
to render vnto him a due and profownd
reuerence.
                  The reaſon why ſuch familiaritie of the
ſowlle toward God is ſuch an obſtacle and
clowd,VVhy faemiliarity maketh a vvall bevvixt God and the Souls is becauſe that therby ſhee accomodateth
the greatneſſe of God to her ſmallneſſe,
and his diuinitie to her humanitie, and ſo
ſeeth allmoſt nothing at all out of her ſelf, nor
any greatneſſe aboue her owne; wheras by
profownd reuerence ſhee is rayſed vp aboue
her ſelf to the greatnes of God, and proportionateth
herſelf in ſome ſort to him, and her
humanitie to his Dietie, and ſo ſhee ſeeth
things which are aboue her; in the one God
is proportionated to the ſowlle, in the other
the ſowlle to God; in the one God is abaſed
without that the ſowlle is any whit lifted vp,
in the other the ſowlle is lifted vp, without
that God is any whit abaſed: And ſo yow ſee
the one ſerueth as a clowd to vayle the greatneſſe
of God from the ſowlle, and the other
as a light wherby to diſcerne it.
               
               
                  
                  Of Exultation, the 4. degree.
                  CHAP. V.
                  
                     
                        EXVLTATION of heart enſueth
incidently the degree of Humiliation;
                     Exultation. 5. Degree.
for, the ſame cauſes which doe
humble her, doe like wiſe make her
exuit,VVherof it cometh. becauſe her ſmallneſſe which ſheweth
her that ſhee is nothing of her ſelf, doth likewiſe
 ſhewe her how ſhee is all in God; and
how in leauing a being finite, ſhee vniteth
her to an infinite, knowing well that ſeing
ſhee is nothing of her ſelf, but of that which is
(to weet) God; and if then ſhee ſubſiſt of
him whoe ſuſtaineth her, that conſequently
hee is in her and ſhee in him: and heerin conſiſteth
 the true Exultation of the heart. The
greatneſſe alſo, and magnificence of God as
they doe humble her, ſo likewiſe doe they
rayſe in her this Iubilation, ſeing herſelf made
 one and the ſame with them. Moreouer,
the familiaritie of God, or ſpirituall conception
aforeſayd of Ieſus Chriſt cauſeth this humilitie
in her, and that humilitie is accompanied
with Exultation, inſomuch as after that
humble conception ſhee ſingeth with the virgin
Marie,
                     Luc. 1. 
                     Exultauit ſpiritus meus in Deo Salutari

meo, quia reſpexit humilitatem ancillae ſuae, My ſpirit
exulteth in God my Sauiour, becauſe hee
hath reſpected the humilitie of his handmayd.
Finally, another more eſſentiall cauſe 
then theſe which produceth this extreame
Exultation, is, the marueillous and inſeparable
vnion of the ſpirit of man with God: wherof
for that I haue already treated in the 2. chapter
of the firſt Parte, I forbeare heer to ſpeak,
referring the Reader therunto.
                  Of this Iubilie and Exultation of ſpirit ſpake
ſhee whoe hauing taſted it ſayd,Cant. 1. 
                     Exultabimus,
& laetabim
                           •
                        r inte, memores vberum tuorum ſuper
vinum, VVee will exult and reioyce in thee,
remembring (that is) hauing experimented
that thy teates are better then wyne: Shee
ſayth better then wyne,Ephe. 5. 
                     In quo eſt Luxuria,
VVherin is Luxurie, wherunto this Exultation
is contrarie,Zach. 6. as being Vinum germinans virgines,
The wyne which engendreth virgins or the
celibate lyfe, and making a man for the fruition
of theſe ſpirituall delights, to deſpiſe all
the pleaſures of the fleſh, for, Guſtato ſpiritu deficit
omnis Caro, The ſpirit once taſted, all fleſh
fayleth.
                  The effects of this Exultation are,The effects of Exultation. that
it withdraweth vs from all vagaries, retayneth
vs at home within our Interiour,
aſſwageth the dolour of Abnegation, encourageth
Puſillanimitie, commaundeth affections
and bridleth Paſsions; alſo, it is an

oyle which ſuppleth the ſtubburnes of mynd,
ſweetneth the bitternes of the heart, ſollageth
the tediouſnes of lyfe, and reioyceth the ſpirit;
it is a ſaulce which maketh toothſome the
vnſauorie morſell of mortification, a medicine
which healeth the wownds of affliction;
a water which ſtrengthneth the debilitie of
the ſpirituall ſight: In fine, it maketh vs deſpiſe
all carnall conſolation, forget all worldly
delights, ſurmount our calamities, to ſit at
eaſe amid our toyles and trauayles, and to
triumphe ouer our infernall foes: it maketh
eaſie, things ſeeming impoſsible, it geueth
courage to perſeuere, it openeth Paradiſe, and
wafting the ſowlle ouer a ſea of miſeries, lifteth
her vp to heauen, as ſhee of whome is
ſayd,Cant. 3. 
                     Quae eſt iſta quae aſcendit de deſerto, de lit ijs affluens,
innixa ſuper dilectum ſuum? VVhoe is this
that aſcendeth from the deſert, abounding in
delights, leaning vpon her beloued, and firmly
vnited to him?
               
               
                  Of Eleuation, the 5. degree.
                  CHAP. VI.
                  
                     
                     AFTER this degree of Exultation
ſucceedeth the laſt of Eleuation of
the will and mind into God;Eleuatiō
                        ▪ 5. Degree. the cauſes
wherof are all the former degrees
(to weet) Manifestation, Admiration, Humiliation,
and Exultation.
                  
                  For firſt,Effects. 1. that of Manifeſtation ſheweth the
ſowlle as farre as her reach extēdeth the vvill
of God, and how ſhee is in God, making her
truly, really, and experimentally to taſt it in
her owne capacitie (namely) that it is ſpirit
and lyfe; a thing ſo ſurpaſsing all vnderſtanding,
as that no witt or doctrine can comprehend
it, ſeing that naturally none can exceed
the bownds of Nature, but to know what is
ſpirit and lyfe a man muſt be in ſpirit and lyfe,
which is aboue nature and beyond the actiuitie
of her Sphear, and ſo not naturally to be
knowne; but this degree of Manifeſtation diſcloſeth
vnto vs the vvill of God (ſpirit and lyfe)
in that it lyfteth vs vp aboue nature; yet notwithſtanding
foraſmuch as this degree diſcouereth
not the vvill of God ſo plainly as the
others in theyr order, ſo neither doth it lift
vp the ſowlle ſo much as they, but as it doth
but only begin the diſcouerie, ſo doth it but
begin to lift vp the ſowlle into God.
                  
                     Admiration, likewiſe as is manifeſt,2. lifteth
vp the ſowlle, for that Admiration being nothing
els but a totall extenſion of the ſowlle,
and all her powers vpon an obiect beyond

and aboue her capacitie, it muſt of neceſsitie
lift vp the admiring ſowlle, for that ſuch extenſion
of her ſelf, and totall application of
her powers to this will, cauſeth conſequently
on the one ſide an auerſion from exteriour
things, by a totall intraction of her powers
and ſenſes, and on the other a perfect inherence
or adheſion therunto wherby to comprehend
it; the which auerſion, and conuerſion
or adheſion to the ſupernaturall obiect
work this Eleuation.
                  
                  The like is of Humiliation,
                     3. Luc. 1. eleuating the
ſowlle as is ſhewne, Quia reſpexit humilitatem
ancillae ſuae, For that hee hath reſpected the humilitie
of his hand-mayd: and a whyle after,
Et exaltauit humiles, And hath exalted the humble:
It eleuateth her (I ſay) not only in grace,
vertue, and fauor of God, but alſo in actuall
Contemplation and experimētall knowledge
of him; for that by ſuch act of Humiliation
(as is ſhewed) a man reducing himſelf with
all other things to nothing, hee ſeeth God in
all things, or rather all things to be God, and
conſequently can ſee nothing but God euery
whear; and this is the true Eleuation.
                  
                  Then for Exultation,
                     4. the like alſo is of it;
being but an exceſſiue ſpirituall ioy, the plenarie
abundance wherof repleniſheth wholly
the ſowlle, and with her extreame ſweetnes
ſo inebriateth her, as that cleane forgetting
the world and all creatures, yea her ſelf, ſhee

remaineth wholly fixed in this fountaine of
ioye (to weet) God, whoe hath totally ſeazed
vpon all her powres, and ſo ſtrooken and
wownded her heart, and taken a full poſſeſſion
therof, that ſhee hauing now no more
dominion ouer herſelf, followeth his inflaming
inſtincts and attractions all in all, and
(as it were) hand in hand, geueth eare to his
wordes, embraceth his doctrine, and (finally)
geueth herſelf wholly ouer vnto him, ſubmitting
and ſubiecting her to his good pleaſure;
followeth him like as doth the ſhaddowe
the boddie, adheareth to him like the
Accident to the Subſtance, like the Circumference
to the Center, the member to the boddie,
the branche to the vine, and the parte to
the wholle; and ſo is perfectly becom one and
the ſame ſpirit with God,Corin. 6. for, Qui adhaeret Deo,
vnus ſpiritus eſt, VVhoe ſo adheareth to God,
is one ſpirit with him.
                  Thus then it appeareth how the Interiour
vvill of God cometh not all at once but by little
and little, and how the ſowlle feeleth it by
degrees, ſhee being without this diuine will likevnto
the world, wholly repleat and couered
all ouer with the darkneſſe of the night, and it
on the other ſide like vnto the Sun or day,Similie notan.
the which as it approcheth, expelleth and baniſheth
all that darkneſſe, leauing her like a
little world all ouer illumined; but as the daye
commeth not all at once but by degrees,

and ſucceſsiuely, ſo likewiſe doth this will:
For,1. Degree. as in the morning the day beginneth to
appear, and ſhew it ſelf by little and little, ſo
alſo doth this diuine will in the beginning of
Pure intention.
                  After followeth the dawne or breake of
day,2. Degree. which ſheweth manifeſtly that the day
is entred into the word; wherunto reſembleth
the degree of Manifeſtation, which in like maner
manifeſteth that the vvill of God is entred
into the ſowlle.3. Degree. Then afterward the sun
beginneth to ryſe, lightning the world ſomwhat
more, and this reſembleth the degree of
Admiration, by which the fowlle apprehen
deth more perſpicuouſly the vvill of God, and
is therby more illuminated then before.4. Degree After
this the Sun diſchaſeth all the darkneſſe of
the night, the which is the degree of Humiliation,
wherby (namely) by the great abaſement
and annihilation of the ſowlle ſhee diſcouereth
more eſſentially this vvill of God, and
vniting her ſelf perfectly therunto, diſperſeth
all her ſpirituall fogg and darkneſſe.5. Degree After
all this, the Sun ſheweth himſelf in his
full and compleat beautie and brightneſſe,
ſuche, as that therby it cheereth and cheriſheth
all creatures both reaſonable and vnreaſonable;
which office appertaineth to this
degree of Exultation, wherin the vvill of God
ſheweth it ſelf ſo fayer and admirable, that
the ſplendure therof cheereth and reioyceth

the reaſonable and vnreaſonable parte of
man. Finally,6. Degree. the Sun after all the foreſayd
degrees, riſeth ſo high and very bright, that
therby the world is likewiſe cleane eleuated
out of the deepe darkneſſe of the night, vnto
that ſplendure which wee ſee at Noone day;
the which repreſenteth this laſt degree of Eleuation;
the vvill of God bringing at laſt ſo great
light and ſplendure with it, as that the ſowlle
is quite exalted out of the abyſſe of her ſpirituall
darkneſſe, euen to the perfect contemplation
of God her true Sun, with whome
being arrayed like the woman in the Apocalypſe,
and,Apoc 12. 
                     Amicta lumine ſicut veſtimento,
                     Pſal. 103. Clad
all in light like as with a garment, the Angells
fall on admiring her,Cant. 6. ſayeng, Quae eſt iſta quae
progreditur quaſi aurora conſurgens, pulchra vt luna,
electa vt ſol terribilis vt caſtrorum Acies ordinata?
VVhoe is this that cometh forth like the riſing
morning, beautifull as the Moone, choyce
as the Sun, and terrible like an Armay in
battayle array?
               
               
                  Certaine Aduiſes touching the
premiſses.
                  CHAP. VII.
                  
                     
                     NOTE,Aduiſes. 1. that I propoſe not theſe degrees
as poynts or conſiderations
to meditate vpon, but as effects
which this diuine will operateth in
the ſowlle, the ſame effects not arriuing ſo
much by her owne induſtrie, as by the operation
and illuſtration of that will within her,
ſhee only diſpoſing herſelf therunto by the
cutting of of all affections and paſsions, and
by pure intention, liſtning in all peace and repoſe
of heart, profownd ſilence, and tranquilitie
of ſpirit to this diuine will.
                  Moreouer,2. thear are ſome whoe for being
too actiue and exteriour, attayne only to the
actiue will, without taſting at all the contemplatiue
or interiour.3. Others ſome thear are
that attayne to ſo high degree, that they ſee
almoſt continually the interiour will; and ſuche
ſee not the Exteriour, becauſe that the
Exteriour they haue made the Interiour. Againe,4.
ſome haue attained the perfection to
abyde in the ſupereminent will, and thoſe ſee
neither the Exteriour nor the Interiour will,
for, of both they haue made the ſupereminent;
not that the one and the others doe not the
work contayned in the firſt parte, according
to the rules of things commaunded or forbidden,
for that (loe) were a very groſſe errour,
wherof I haue aduertiſed yow in the ſayd
firſt parte, as likewiſe doe heer againe; but
that they doe thoſe works interiourly with an

other manner of intention, and more eminent
meanes.
                  To conclude, yow muſt be admoniſhed not
to retayne preciſly in your mind the Ideaes of
thoſe degrees and diuiſions of the diuine will,
to ſtay thervpon; but as that will is in it ſelf
ſpirit and lyfe without all maner of image or
Idaea, ſo and in ſuch ſort muſt yee endeuor (as
neer as may be) to contēplate it, theſe degrees
and diuiſions ſeruing only to help and make
capable therof, the ſowlles that haue not yet
taſted the ſame, and which without ſuch diuiſion
are not hable to cōprehend it, as is ſhewed
afore in the firſt and fowrth chapter of
the firſt parte;Similie. for, as the light of the day may
be diſtinguiſhed by degrees, according to his
ſucceſsiue and peece-meale coming into the
world, and yet in it ſelf is ſimple and without
diſtinction and multiplicitie; ſo the light of
this diuine will may be diſtinguiſhed by that
it ſheweth it ſelf ſucceſsiuely vnto the ſowlle,
and yet for all that is moſt ſimple, vniforme,
and voyd of degrees and multiplicities; for like
as the Sun ſheweth himſelf in one degree of
light at breake of day; at his vpriſing in an
other, at Noone in another, and yet is but all
one light; euen ſo this diuine will diſcouereth
it ſelf in one degree of light to Beginners, in
another to Proficients, and in a third to the
Perfect.
                  Note alſo, that although I ſay, that yow

muſt feele and taſt in your ſelf this will and
pleaſure of God,Note vvell. yet muſt yow neuer byde
vpon that feeling, yea though grownded on
the Abnegation of your owne will, and vpon
the vvill of God; for, although it be right good
to take a taſt and contentment in the abnegation
of your ſelf, and in the vvill of God, yet
muſt yow not for all that inſiſt and dwell vpon
that taſt and contentment, but meerly in
the vvill of God. For better vnderſtanding
wherof yow are to weet, that in this act of
Abnegation thear concurre twoe things, Renunciation
and Contentment; on the firſt
wherof yow are to inſiſt and reſt, but not
vpon the latter. So likewiſe in the act of Reſignation
vnto the vvill of God thear are twoe
things (to weet) the Reſignation it ſelf, and
the Taſt that one taketh therin; on the former
wherof yow are to repoſe, but not on the
other. For defalt of which obſeruation and
due diſcouerie of this deceipt, I haue knowne
ſome very much abuſed; and that ſo
much the more, by how much this error is
ſubtile, and couered with a fayer pretext
of Abnegation or Reſignation.
                  Finally,7. yow muſt not think your ſelf hable
to attayne to this ſecond parte of the vvill
of God, till yow haue firſt well and dulie practiſed
the firſt by true and long mortifications;
as hath bein touched in the 18. chap. of the
firſt parte.
               
               
                  
                  An Examination neceſſarie to be vſed by
the Practiſer of this ſecond Parte of
the vvill of God.
                  CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     AS for this ſecond Parte,Poynts to be examined. it needeth
no exact Examination, for that it
conſiſteth rather of effects of the
ſpirit then of any induſtrie of ours;
only it ſhall ſuffize to examin.
                  Firſt, whether (hauing fownd by the firſt 
degree of Manifeſtation this Interiour will)
yow haue conſerued, cheariſhed, and entertayned
it, without being diſtracted; reiecting
all paſsions, and mortifieng all affections, ſo
farre forth as that yow haue had no other
ioye, conſolation, and lyfe, then in the ſame.
                  If when yow could not haue this Manifeſtation
                     
nor taſt of this diuine will, yow haue
ſearched in the bottome of your heart the
cauſe therof, with a ſtrict examination whether
yow haue not had any paſsion of ioy, or
ſadneſſe, feare, loue, hatred, or any affection
of willing or nilling; and hauing fownd any
ſuch, whether yow haue faythfully repelled it
or no.
                  Furthermore, for as much as the degree 
                     
of Admiration dependeth and proceedeth
of three poynts (to weet) of the Immenſitie
of God, of his Familiaritie, and of our owne
Nothing, as hath bein ſhewne, examin whether
yow haue duely annihilated your ſelf;
for that, of this annihilation dependeth the
perfect familiaritie, and knowledge of the
immenſitie of God.
                  
                      As touching the 3. degree of Humiliation,
yow are to reuiſe whether toward the familiaritie
and blandiſhment of the heauenly
Spouſe, your ſowlle haue carried and comported
herſelf humbly (that is) with as profownd
reuerence toward ſo great maieſtie,
as it hath daigned to ſtoope ſo familiarly to
her; or whether contrariewiſe ſhee haue forgotten
her ſelf, in rendring him reciprocall
familiaritie as to her equall, and ſo haue made
of ſuch her preſumption a wall (as it were)
betwixt God and her, or a vayle or thick
clowde, wherby ſhee is hindred truly to contemplate
her Spouſe, and diue into his greatneſſe;
a falte which many ſpirituall perſons
commit to theyr great domage, not knowing
with the familiarity of God, to reſerue and
render vnto him a due and profownd reuerence.
                  
                      Examin alſo, whether yow haue duely
vſed the ioy and Exultation of Spirit, in infu
                     
                        •
                     ing
and plunging your ſowlle farther into
the vvill of God, and made vſe therof toward a

more intenſe and profownd Renunciation of
your ſelf, in driuing away all puſillanimitie
and yrkſomneſſe of mind, and all imagined
difficultie of mortification, without repoſing
ſenſually theron. As for Eleuation, that is a degree 
or effect dependant of the fowre former.
                  Finally, whether yow haue continually
borne in mind, that yow are not expreſly to 
retaine therin, the images or repreſentations
of the degrees related in the ſecond parte, nor
the diuiſions of the vvill of God, but rather
whether yow haue endeuored according to
your powre and capacitie, to knowe and contemplate
it ſuch as it is in it ſelf (to weet) ſimple,
and without all maner of image or diuiſion;
though to declare it vnto yow it hath
bein neceſſarie to diuide it as yow haue
ſeene. Likewiſe, whether yow haue 
taken the ſame 5. degrees, not
for your owne acts, but for
operations and effects
of the Spirit of
God in yow.
               
               Heer endeth the Second parte of the
Rule of Perfection.
Laus Deo.
            
         
         
            
            THE COPPIE OF AN
ADVISE TOVCHING PRAYER,
giuen vnto one, afflicted by reaſon of the
great ſterilitie vvhich hee
fovvnd therin.
            
               THE firſt and principalln3. Principall things in Prayr. thing
which a man ought in Prayer to
 doe, is to rectifie his intention
(that is) to take it in hand only
becauſe God would haue it ſo, without any
other end or motiue whatſoeuer; and to continue
the ſame only end and motiue.
            
                The ſecond is, after ſuch Proteſtation, to
examin his interiour, and diſcerne if (hauing
proteſted ſuch intention) hee hath ſayd true
or no; and this by a ſimple view or reflexion
on himſelf, examining his heart and ſownding
the bottome of his interiour, whether thear
be not any other thing beſids this will lodged
therin; as, if hee deſire the end of Prayer; if
hee feele any tediouſneſſe therin; if hee ſeek
occaſion to depart or to be called away; if hee
wiſh to be illuminated, enflamed, or conſolated
in any ſort whatſoeuer, aſwell in the ſuperiour
or ſpirituall parte of the ſowlle, as in

the inferiour or ſenſible; and finding by the
examen any of theſe things or other whatſoeuer,
hee muſt reiect it as a pernitious and venimous
ſerpent, and as oppoſite to the foreſayd
proteſtation and vvill of God. Now, this
reflexion and examen is nothing els,Hovv to examin the intention. but to
iudge and feele wherto his mind is drawne,
what hee wiſheth, deſireth, and taketh pleaſure
in, or contrariewiſe in what hee is diſpleaſed,
diſcomforted, and what hee flieth.
            The third thing is,For prayr grovvnded vpon the only vvill of God, continuation of examē. the continuance of this 
               examen and reflexion, if ſo be that hee taketh
only for his Prayer and ſubiect this vvill of
God, to the end that the ſowlle remaining in
her puritie, diſcharged of all affaires, and not
being hindred by any other ſight, may continually
view, fixedly and ſoly contemplate,
and ſweetly taſt this pleaſure and delitious
contentment of God.For other ſorte of Prayer, frequent reflexion. Or els, hee ought often
to viſit it by a frequent reflexion, if hee take
for his ſubiect meditations and aſpirations; to
the end that perceiuing any other thing to intrude
it ſelf into his interiour, hee may reiect
it as oppoſite and contrarie to this puritie of
intention, yea, the very deſire of illumination
and of high contemplation: and this reiection
muſt be no otherwiſe done then by the ſame
will, in turning by a ſimple conuerſion therunto,
and by a contempt, auerſion, and obliuion
of all creatures.
            And note,Secret deceptions. that for the moſt parte, the hindrance

of the puritie of intention, and deception
of well minded perſons, are the good deſires,
which doe hinder, retayne, and ruine ſo
much the more this integritie of intention, by
how much the leſſe they are diſcouered and
held for ſuch, as (for example) the deſires of
feruour, deuotion, teares, contrition, and illumination;
for, inaſmuch as they are diſguiſed
with the cloake of pietie, one taketh no
heed of them, ſo that without ſuſpition, the
deſire of them entreth into the bottome of
the heart, and wholly poſſeſſeth and ruleth it,
not leauing roome for the vvill of God, the
which often tymes is quite cōtrarie (to weet)
that hee be not conſolated nor illuminated,
neither that hee haue teares and ſenſible deuotion;
for,VVhat is true deuotion. 2. 2. qu. 82. art. 1. true deuotion conſiſteth only in
contenting himſelf with this vvill of God, or (as
ſaith S. Thomas) promptly to doe that which
appertaineth to his ſeruice.
            This blindneſſe continually commeth,
becauſe (as is ſayd) a man looketh only on
the cloak and exteriour of ſuch deſires, and
not on their interiour true ſubſtance and effects,
which indeed are nothing els but conſolation
and illumination; yea, proper will,
naturall contentment,The grovvnd of all perfecction. and ſelf loue. For, yow
muſt knowe that the wholle ſtable ſowndation
and grownd of perfection, is the vvill of
God, which ought alwayes to be ſeene and ſhine
in our interiour, and neuer to vaniſhe away

nor be left of either by affliction or conſolation;
no more in ariditie, ſterilitie, and contradiction,
then in deuotion, conſolation, and
perfect reſignation; becauſe that this will is a
thing ſo celeſtiall and tranſcendent, that it reformeth
all deformitie, and rectifieth all crookednes,
and as a thing firme and ſtable, diſchaſeth
and (as it were) abſorbeth all vacillation
and inſtabilitie, and is no leſſe in our pouertie,
ſterilitie, and fragilitie, then in our abundance,
deuotion, and perfection, though not according
to ſence, but to reaſon; wherof wee
are aſſured by the diuine powre and prouidence
gouerning all things.
            VVhoe then deſireth true contentment of
mind,Hovv to repoſe cō
                  tinually in God. and to liue with quietneſſe in God, it is
neceſſarie that hee alwayes eſtabliſh himſelf
vpon this vnmoueable fowndation, and cornerſtone
of the vvill of God, repoſing cōtinually
theron, and that, by way of Reſignatiō. But
as this fowdation is not alwayes ſenſible, but
often hath reſidence only in the Reaſon, ſo likewiſe
ſome tymes a man can not haue this
Reſignation ſenſible; but only the reaſonable;
the which hee may alwayes haue, euen when
the ſenſe is quite contrarie to the Reſignatiō;
for, one may be reſigned when hee hath any
contradiction, ſterilitie, or ſubſtraction of
deuotion, notwithſtanding the contradiction
of the ſence, all the which hee may accept
as the vvill of God: yea, if hee feele not
in himſelf the courage ſo to accept it and

reſigne himſelf, hee muſt mount higher, and
take as the vvill of God this Irreſignation; and
if yet the darkenes be ſo great that hee can
not thus doe, hee muſt alſo reſigne his darkeneſſe:
if (finally) by reaſon of tediouſneſſe
hee hath not the will to performe any of theſe
things, hee muſt offer to God this tediouſnes
and defect of good will, and take it at his
hands as his will in this maner, reducing to
Reſignation the letts of Reſignation which
may occurre; to the end that in this ſort, allwayes
and inceſſantly the vvill of God may (as
is aboue ſayd) deuoure all things, and that a
man may dwell allwayes therin: and this kind
of Reſignation of Irreſignation is farre more
frutefull,A perfect Reſignation. meritorious, and ſublime, and leading
more directly to the true vnion with
God, mortification of himſelf, and tranſcendence
ouer all things, then that which is done
according to ſence; and a man may ſay that
the one is ſimple, and the other dubble; yea,
that the one is ſo many tymes dubbled as it
doth abſorb and ſurmount intrinſecall obſtacles.
            And note,Note. that this Rule of accepting all
things at the hands of God is ſo generall, that
it hath no exception, in ſuch ſort that a man
muſt accept not only the extrinſecall croſſes
and afflictions of the world, and of his neighbour
at the hands of God, but alſo the very
intrinſecall, proceeding from his imperfections,

for,Rom. 8. 
               Omnia cooperantur in bonum diligentibus
Deum.
            
            The three points of this aduertiſment are
more particularly diſtinguiſhed into 6. in the
9. chapter of this rule of Perfection, and are
not only fit for the perfect but alſo for the
Beginners, that therby perceiuing the true
end of Prayer, they may tend therunto by a
more ſtraight line; the want wherof cauſeth
diuers (euen ſpirituall men) to paſſe many
yeares, yea ſome theyr wholle lyfe,
not only without attayning to any
perfection in Prayer, but alſo
without knowing the true
end therof, which is
the will and
pleaſure of
God.
         
         
            
            A LETTER CONTAYNING
AN ANSVVER TO A
doubt touching the Obiect of the vvill
of God.
            
               DEAR Brother; this preſent ſhalbe
for your ſatisfaction, and to reſolue
yow touching a certaine
doubt which yow fownd in reading
the exerciſe of the vvill of God. And as
cōcerning that which yow ſay; firſt, that thear
is great difference betwixt God and his will;
for my part I acknowledge no ſuch: For, I
think that hee which ſeeth this eſſentiall will
(to weet) conſidered only in God, by conſequence
hath ſeen God, and that as one and
the ſame thing, not as diuerſe; for in God
thear is nothing but God. And touching this
point and the elucidation therof, thear is nere
a whole chapter in the third part, whear thear
are not too many arguments which proue it,
and too many Doctours thear alleaged which
with one conſent affirme not the ſame: concerning
which alſo, I haue had heertofore the
aduiſe of ſome Diuines, though the thing be
of it ſelf too cleer, and likewiſe the Method
ſayth the ſame. But I ſee your error heerin

proceedeth from this cauſe (to weet) that
yow haue not well marked how I haue diuided
it into three ſorts of wills, yow hauing no
reſpect to the difference therof; not that in it
ſelf, but in vs it is diſtinguiſhed. Now, yow
notwithſtanding write to mee of the vvill of
God in generall, not expreſsing which of the
3. yow ſpeake of. And it is no marueil if yow
know not the ſublimitie, and nuditie which I
attribute to the eſſetiall vvill of God, ſeing yow
haue not read what I haue written therof; and
therfore yow ought not to condemne a thing
which yow neuer haue but halfe ſeen. For,
whoe ſo hath read the third part, I doubt, rather
will reprehend the contrarie fault (namely)
that it is too naked, abſtract, and ſpirituall,
and nothing els but God.
            Now, yow alleage that this exerciſe admitteth
ſome Obiect, wherof is no particular one
in God. To which I anſwer, that this word
(Obiect) may be vnderſtood twoe maner
of wayes; for a generall, or for a particular obiect.
As concerning the generall which is God
himſelf, I anſwer that the third or ſupereminent
will admitteth alſo no other but him,
though not ſo in the firſt and ſecond part,
whear thear is ſome particular obiect which
to the Beginners ſeemeth to cauſe ſome difference
betwixt God and this VVill; but it
is becauſe that at the firſt this diuine will ſheweth
it ſelf as exteriour, and then after as interiour,

and finally, as eſſentiall; not that in it
ſelf it is variable or different, for that cometh
of our part whoe ſo doe contemplate it proportionably
to our light which is ſmall, and
not wholy abſtract from an obiect in the Actiue
life. Now, this light is greater in the Contemplatiue
life, and moſt great in the Supereminēt,
whear this will is ſeen to be God himſelf,
which appeareth more plaine by the ſimilitude
which followeth.
            Yow muſt knowe then,Similie notan. that this exterior
will is like a riuer which runneth into the ſea,
for ſo doth this will carrie our ſoule to God:
and as the riuer-water is not called the ſea
though it be the ſame water, ſo this exterior
will is not properly called God though it be
but one and the ſame ſpirit; and as the limits
only, and not the ſubſtance cauſeth it to be
called a Riuer and not the Sea, ſo the limits of
this will, and not the ſubſtance giueth it the
name of VVill, and not of God; and as the limits
of the riuer haue not their Originall frō
the ſame, ſo the limits of this will proceed not
therof but from our darknes; and as, if thear
were no land wee ſhould ſee no riuer but all
ſea, becauſe thear would be no limit, ſo if thear
were in vs no clowd of darknes, wee ſhould
ſee no more this will as ſuch, but only God, as
is declared in the ninth Chapter of the 3. parte:
And as the ſhipp in this riuer being not
hindred, neceſſarily is tranſported by the

ſtreame therof into the ſea, ſo the ſoule hauing
no impediment, is caried by the courſe
of this will vnto the naked Eſſence of God;
and as when one is ſo led into the maine Ocean,
hee ſeeth no more the riuer (though the
ſame in ſubſtance) but the ſea, ſo hee which is
tranſported into the eſſentiall will, ſeeth no
more this (as ſuch) but God only.
            Yf yow demand why in the beginning a
man taketh not God for the Object of this
exerciſe without this vvill, I aske why doth
not one leape ouer the ſtile before hee come
at it? or why the ſhip which is at Roan doth
not ride in the ſea at Nevvhauen, rather then
in the riuer of Roan? If yow ſay becauſe it is
at Roan and not at Nevvhuaen, I anſwer the
like; that the Beginners are not in this ample
and ſpatious eſſentiall ſea of God, but in this
riuer of his vvill which will leade thē therto.
And I hold it a point of great indiſcretion to
ſet a little bote on the maine ſea, and a Beginner
in the naked Ocean of the diuine eſſence.
Yow may ſee therfore, why at the beginning
I haue not denudated this exerciſe of an Obiect:
yow may alſo perceiue in ſome ſort that
it was the only, perfect, ſuccinct point, and
that which bringeth moſt light, which I could
chooſe wherinto compendiouſly to reduce
the whole ſpirituall life, without euer leauing
it of, or ſeeking others, no leſſe then the ſhip
which to goe into the ſea, neuer leaueth the

riuer wherin ſhee rideth. In the beginning I
only call it vvill and not God, becauſe one of
theſe twoe words fitteth better the Actiue life
thē the other, becauſe more properly wee ſay
in the Actiue life; I will doe this thing becauſe
it is the vvill of God, thē to ſay, becauſe it is God:
alſo that would be too ſublime a doctrine, and
(litterally taken) ſcarſe to be admitted: likewiſe
becauſe all exerciſes, wayes, vertues, and
perfections, are better reduced to this, then
to any other point. In the Contemplatiue
life alſo or ſecond part, I doe not take this
word God, becauſe thear is yet ſome image
though verie ſubtile and ſecret. Finally, in the
Supereminent life or third part, I doe not alter
this word vvill, fearing leaſt a man might
think that I had chāged the point or obiect of
this exerciſe; but I keep allwayes the ſame
word, keeping ſtill the diſtinction of three
Epithets (to weet) Exteriour, for the Actiue
life; Interiour, for the Contemplatiue,
and Eſſentiall, for the Supereminent; VVhich
muſt be noted for auoyding in this exerciſe
both error and confuſion. And thus much for
the reſolution of your doubt.
            
               From Orleans,
                  this 16. of Auguſt. 1593.
               
               Your Brother in Chriſt Ieſus B. Benet
            
         
         
            
            FOraſmuch as the third part mentioned of this Rule,
treateth only of things abſtract, of high contemplatiō
of the Eſſence of God; it is thought vnfitting the
common ſort, and therfore not conuenient to be publiſhed,
vnleſſe (perchance) heerafter vpon ſome farher
reaſons or experience of theſe tvvoe parts, it shall
othervviſe ſeeme meet. Meane tyme theſe ſo abundantly,
plainly, and ſuccinctly shevve the
meanes and lay open the vvay to perfection
that the diligent Practiſer of
them, vvithout the other shall
quickly attayne therunto.
         
      
   