
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     Iniunctions Geuen by the Quenes Maiestie. Anno Domini. 1.5.5.9. The first yere of the raigne of our ſoueraigne Lady Quene Elizabeth.
                  
                     Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
                  
                  
                     R.I.
                     OMNIA DESVPER
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Iniunctions geuen by the Quenes Maieſtie, aſwell to the Clergie as to the laitie of this Realme.
                  
                     THe Queenes moſte Royall Maieſtie, by thaduiſe of her moſt honorable counſayle, intendyng thaduauncement of the true honour of almyghtye God, the ſuppreſſion of ſuperſticion, through all her hyghneſſe Realme and dominions, and to plant true religion, to thertirpation of al hipocriſie, enormities, and abuſes (as to her duetie apperteineth) doth miniſter vnto her louing ſubiectes theſe Godly iniunctions hereafter folowyng. All which Iniunctions, her highneſſe wylleth and commaundeth her louyng ſubiectes obediently to receaue, and truely to obſerue and kepe, euery man in theyr offices, degrees and ſtates, as they wyll auoyde her hyghneſſe diſpleaſure, and the paynes of the ſame hereafter expreſſed.
                  
                     
                     THe firſt is, that all Deanes, Archedeacons, Perſons, Vicars,Vſurped and forrayne auctoritie. and all other eccleſiaſticall perſons, ſhal faith fully kepe & obſerue, and as farre as in them may lye, ſhal cauſe to be obſerued and kept of other all and ſinguler lawes & ſtatutes made for the reſtoring to the crowne the auncient iuriſdiction ouer the ſtate eccleſiaſticall, and abolyſhyng of all forrayne power repugnaunt to the ſame. And furthermore all eccleſiaſticall perſons, hauing cure of ſoule, ſhal to thuttermoſt of theyr wytte, knowledge, and learnyng, purely, ſincerely, and without anye colour or diſſimulation, declare, manifeſt & open foure tymes euery yere at the leaſt in their Sermons and other collations, that al vſurped and forraine power hauyng no eſtablyſhement nor grounde by the lawe of God, is for moſte iuſte cauſes taken awaye and abolyſhed. And that therefore no maner of obedience or ſubiection within her highneſſe Realmes and dominions is due vnto any ſuch forrayne power. And that the Quenes power within her Realmes and dominions, is the hygheſt power vnder God, to whom all men within the ſame Realmes and dominions, by Gods lawes owe moſte loyaltie and obedience, afore and aboue al other powers and potentates in earth.
                  Beſydes this, to thintent that all ſuperſtition and hypocryſye,Images. crepte into dyuers mennes heartes, may vanyſhe away, they ſhall not ſette foorth or extoll the dignitie of any Images, Reliques,

or miracles, but declaryng the abuſe of the ſame, they ſhall teache that all goodneſſe, health and grace ought to be both aſked and loked for onely of God, as of the verye aucthour and geuer of the ſame, and of none other.
                  
                     
                     A ſermō euery moneth.  Item that they the perſons aboue rehearſed ſhall preach in theyr Churches,  and euery other cure they haue, one Sermon euery moneth of the yere at the leaſt, wherein they ſhall purelye and ſincerely declare the worde of God: and in the ſame exhorte theyr hearers to the workes of fayth,VVorkes of fayth. as mercye and charitie, ſpecially preſcrybed and commaūded in ſcripture, and that workes deuyſed by mans phantaſies beſydes ſcripture:vvorks of mans deuice. As wandryng of Pylgrimages, ſettynge vp of Candels, praying vpon bedes, or ſuch like ſuperſtition, haue not onely no promyſe of rewarde in ſcripture for doing of them: but contrarywyſe greate threatnynges and maledictions of God, for that they be thynges tendyng to Idolatry and ſuperſtition, which of al other offences, God almyghty doth moſt deteſt and abhorre, for that the ſame diminiſhe moſte his honour and glory.
                  
                     Quarter ſermon or Homyly.Item that they the perſons aboue rehearſed ſhall preach in theyr owne perſons once in euery quarter of the yere at the leaſt one Sermon beyng licenced ſpecially therunto, as is ſpecified hereafter: or els ſhall reade ſome Homelye preſcribed to be vſed by the Quenes aucthoritie euery Sundaye at the leaſt, vnleſſe ſome other preacher ſufficiētly lycenſed as hereafter chaūce

to come to the paryſhe for the ſame purpoſe of preachyng.
                  
                     
                     The pater noſter, Crede and ten commaundementes.   Item that euery holy day through the yere, when they haue no Sermon, they ſhal immediatly after the Goſpell, openly and playnely reſyte to theyr paryſhioners in the Pulpitte, the Pater noſter, the Crede, and the ten commaundementes in Englyſhe, to thintent the people may learne the ſame by heart, exhortyng all parentes and houſeholders, to teach their children and ſeruauntes the ſame, as they are bound by the lawe of God and conſcience to do.
                  
                     
                     The Bible and paraphraſes,   Alſo that they ſhall prouide within three monethes next after this viſitacion at the charges of the paryſhe, one booke of the whole Byble of the largeſt volume in Engliſhe. And within one xii. monethes next after the ſaide viſitacion, the Paraphraſes of Eraſmus alſo in Englyſhe, vpon the Goſpels, and the ſame ſet vp in ſome conuenient place within the ſayde Churche that they haue cure of, where as theyr paryſhioners may moſt commodiouſly reſort vnto the ſame, and reade the ſame, out of the tyme of common ſeruice. The charges of the Paraphraſes ſhalbe by the perſon or proprietarie and paryſhioners borne by equall portions. And they ſhall diſcorage no man frō the readyng of any part of the Byble, eyther in Latin or in Englyſhe, but ſhal rather exhorte euery perſon to reade the ſame, with great humilitie and reuerence, as the very lyuely worde of God, and the ſpeciall foode of mans ſoule, whiche all Chryſtian perſons are

bounde to embrace, beleue, and followe, yf they looke to be ſaued: Whereby they maye the better knowe theyr dueties to God, to theyr Soueraigne Lady the Quene, and their neyghbour, euer gentely and charitably exhortyng them, & in her Maieſties name ſtrayghtly chargynge and commaundyng them, that in the readynge therof, no man to reaſon or contende, but quietly to heare the reader.
                  
                     
                     Haunting of alehouſes hy Eccleſiaſtical perſons.   Alſo the ſayde Eccleſiaſticall perſons ſhall in no wyſe at any vnlawefull tyme, nor for any other cauſe, then for theyr honeſte neceſſities, haunt or reſort to any Tauernes or Alehouſes. And after theyr meates, they ſhal not geue them ſelues to drynkyng or ryot, ſpendyng their time idelly by daye or by nyght, at dyſe, cardes, or tables playing, or any other vnlawfull game:
                  But at al tymes as they ſhall haue leyſure, they ſhall heare or reade ſomewhat of holy ſcripture, or ſhall occupye them ſelues with ſome other honeſt ſtudye or exercyſe, and that they alwayes do the thynges whiche apperteyne to honeſtie, and endeuour to profyte the common wealth, hauyng alwayes in mynde that they ought to excell all other in puritie of lyfe, and ſhoulde be examples to the people to lyue well and Chriſtianly.
                  
                     
                     preachers not lycenſed.   Alſo that they ſhall admitte no manne to preache within any theyr cures, but ſuche as ſhall appeare vnto them to be ſufficientlye lycenſed

thereunto by the Quenes Maieſtie, or the Archebyſhoppe of Caunterburye, or the Archebiſhoppe of Yorke, in eyther theyr prouinces, or the Byſhoppe of the Dioceſe, or by the Quenes Maieſties viſitours: and ſuch as ſhall be ſo lycenſed, they ſhall gladlye receaue to declare the worde of God, at conuenient tymes, without any reſyſtaunce or contradiction. And that no other be ſuffred to preache out of his owne cure or paryſhe, than ſuch as ſhalbe licenſed, as is aboue expreſſed.
                  
                     
                     Letters of the vvord   Alſo yf they do or ſhall know any man within theyr paryſhe, or els where, that is a letter of the worde of God to be read in Englyſhe, or ſincerelye preached, or of thexecution of theſe the Quenes Maieſties Iniunctions,Favvtors of the vſurped povver. or a fawter of any vſurped and forrayne power, nowe by the lawes of this Realme iuſtly reiected and taken away, they ſhall detect and preſent the ſame to the Quenes Maieſtie, or to her counſayle, or to the Ordinarye, or to the Iuſtyce of peace nexte adioynyng.
                  
                     
                     A regeſter   Alſo that the Perſon, Vycar, or Curate and paryſhyoners of euery paryſhe within this Realme: ſhal in theyr Churches and Chappels kepe one booke or Regeſter, wherein they ſhall wryte the daye and yeare of euerye weddynge, Chryſtenynge, and Buryall, made within the Paryſhe, for theyr tyme, and ſo euerye manne ſucceadynge theym lykewyſe, and

alſo therein ſhall wryte euery perſonnes name that ſhalbe ſo wedded, chryſtened, and buryed. And for the ſafe kepyng of the ſame booke, the Paryſhe ſhalbe bounde to prouyde of theyr common charges one ſuer coffer with two lockes and keyes, wherof the one to remayne with the Perſon, Vicar, or Curate, and thother with the Wardens of euery paryſhe Church or chappell, wherin the ſayde booke ſhalbe layde vp, whiche booke they ſhall euery Sunday take foorth, and in the preſens of the ſayde Wardens or one of them, wryte and recorde in the ſame al the weddynges, chryſtenynges, and buryals, made the whole weke before. And that done to lay vp the boke in the ſayde coffer, as afore. And for euery tyme that the ſame ſhalbe omitted, the partie that ſhalbe in the fault therof, ſhall forfeite to the ſayd Church .iii. s .iii. d. to be employed, the one halfe to the poore mens boxe of that Paryſhe, the other halfe towardes the repayre of the Churche.
                  
                     
                     Diſtributiō of the xl. part.   Furthermore, becauſe the goodes of the Churche, are called the goodes of the poore, and at theſe dayes, nothyng is leſſe ſeene then the poore to be ſuſtayned with the ſame: All perſons, Vicars, Pentionaries, Prebendaries, and other benefyced men within this Deanrye not beyng reſydent vppon theyr benefyces, whiche may diſpende yearely twenty pounde or aboue, eyther within this Deanry, or els where, ſhall diſtribute heareafter amonge theyr poore

pariſhioners or other inhabitauntes there, in the preſence of the churchwardens or ſome other honeſt men of the paryſhe, the fortie part of the fruites and reuenues of theyr ſayd benefice, leſt they be worthely noted of ingratitude, whiche reſeruynge ſo many partes to them ſelues can not vouchſafe to impart the fortie portion therof emonge the poore people of that pariſhe, that is ſo fruitefull and profitable vnto them.
                  
                     
                     Exhibition for ſcollers.   And to thintent that learned men may hereafter ſpring the more for thexecution of the premiſſes, euery perſon, vycar, clerke, or benefyced man within this Deanry, hauyng yerely to diſpende in benefyces and other promocions of the Church an hundreth poundes, ſhall geue .iii.li.vi. s .viii. d. in exhibicion to one ſcoler in any of the vniuerſities, and for as many .C.li. more, as he may diſpende, to ſo many ſcolers more ſhall giue like exhibicion in the vniuerſitie of Oxford or Cambridge, or ſome gramer ſchole, which after they haue profyted in good learning, may be parteners of their patrones, cure and charge, as well in preachinge as otherwiſe in execution of theyr offices, or maye when neade ſhalbe otherwiſe profite the common weale, with theyr coū
                     ſayle and wiſedome.
                  
                     
                     The fyft part for reparaciō.  Alſo that all proprietaries, perſons, vycars, and clearkes hauing churches,  cappeles or manſions within this deanry, ſhall beſtowe yearely heareafter vppon the ſame manſions or chaunſelles of theyr churches, beynge in decay, the fift part of that theyr benefices, tyll they be fullye

repayred, and ſhal alwaies kepe and maintaine in good eſtate.
                  
                     
                     Reading of the Iniunctions Alſo that the ſayd perſons, vycars, & clearkes ſhall once euery quarter of the yeare reade theſe Iniunctions geuen vnto them,  openly and deliberatly before al theyr pariſhioners, at one time or at two ſeuerall times in one day, to thentent that both they may be the better admonyſhed of theyr duetie, and theyr ſayde pariſhioners the more moued to folowe the ſame for theyr part.
                  
                     
                     payment of Tithes Alſo foraſmuche as by lawes eſtabliſhed, euery man is bounde to pay his tithes,  no man ſhal by colour of duetie omitted by theyr curates, deteyne theyr tythes, and ſo requite one wronge with another, or be his owne iudge: but ſhall truely pay the ſame, as he hath ben accuſtomed to theyr perſons, vycars, and curates, without any reſtraynte or diminucion. And ſuche lacke and default as they can iuſtely fynde in theyr perſonnes and curates, to call for reformacion thereof, at theyr ordinaries & other ſuperiours, who vpon complaint and due profe therof, ſhall reforme the ſame accordyngly.
                  
                     
                     The nevv Teſtamēt and paraphraſis. Alſo that euery perſonne, vycar, curate, and Stipendary prieſt,  beynge vnder the degree of a maſter of art, ſhall prouyde and haue of hys owne within three monethes after thys viſitacion, the newe Teſtament both in Latin and in Englyſh with Paraphraſes vpon the ſame, conferryng thone with thother. And the Byſhops & other Ordinaries by them ſelues or theyr offycers

in theyr Sinodes and viſitations, ſhal examine the ſayde Eccleſiaſticall perſonnes, howe they haue profyted in the ſtudye of holy ſcrypture.
                  
                     
                     Comfortable ſentences for the ſicke. Alſo that the vyce of damnable diſpayre, may be clearely taken away,  and that fyrme beliefe and ſtedfaſt hope may be ſurely conceaued of all theyr paryſhioners beynge in a daunger, they ſhall learne and haue alwayes in a redyneſſe, ſuch comfortable places and ſentences of ſcripture, as do ſette foorth the mercy, benefytes and goodneſſe of almyghtie God, towardes all penitent and beleauynge perſons, that they may at all tymes when neceſſitie ſhall require, promptlye comfort theyr flocke with the lyuely woorde of God, whiche is the onely ſtaye of mans conſcience.
                  
                     
                     proceſſion to be left. Alſo to auoyde all contencion and ſtryfe which heretofore hath riſen emong the Quenes Maieſties ſubiectes in ſundrye places of her Realmes and dominions,  by reaſon of fond curteſy, and chalengynge of places in proceſſion: and alſo that they maye the more quietly heare that whiche is ſayd or ſonge to theyr edyfyinge, they ſhall not from hencefoorth in anye paryſhe Churche, at any tyme vſe any proceſſion about the Churche or Churche yarde, or other place, but immediatly before the time of Communion of the Sacrament, the Prieſtes with other of the Quyre, ſhall kneele in the myddes of the Church, and ſyng or ſay playnely and diſtinctly

the Letany which is ſet forth in Engliſhe with al the Suffrages folowing,The Letany. to thintent the people may heare and anſwere, and none other proceſſion or Letany to be had or vſed, but the ſayd Letany in Englyſhe, addynge nothinge thereto but as it is nowe appoynted. And in Cathedral or Collegiat Churches, the ſame ſhalbe done in ſuche places and in ſuch ſort, as our commiſſioners in our viſitacion ſhall appoynt. And in the tyme of the Letany, of the cōmon prayer, of the Sermon,Let hearinge of diuine ſeruice. and when the prieſt readeth the ſcripture to the pariſhioners, no maner of perſonnes without a iuſt and vrgent cauſe ſhall vſe anye walkyng in the Churche, ne ſhall depart out of the Church, and all ryngynge and knollynge of belles ſhalbe vtterly forborne for that tyme, except one bell in conuenient tyme to be ronge or knolled before the Sermon. But yet for the reteynyng of the perambulation of the Circuites of pariſhes, thei ſhal once in the yere at the time acuſtomed, with the curate and the ſubſtanciall men of the paryſhe, walke about theyr paryſhes as they were accuſtomed, and at theyr returne to the Church, make theyr common prayers.
                  
                     
                     perambulation of pariſhes. Prouyded that the curate in theyr ſaide common perambulations vſed heretofore in the daies of Rogations,  at certein cōuenient places ſhall admonyſhe the people to geue thankes to God in the beholdyng of Gods benefites for the encreaſe and aboundaunce of hys fruites vpon the face of the earth, with the ſayinge the .C iii. Pſalme: Benedic anima mea, &c. or ſuch like, at which

tyme alſo the ſame miniſter ſhall inculke theſe or ſuch Sentences. Curſed be he whiche tranſlateth the bondes and dolles of his neyghbour, or ſuch other order of prayers as ſhalbe hereafter appointed.
                  
                     
                     Spending all the holy day. Item all the Quenes faythfull and louynge ſubiectes,  ſhall from henceforth celebrate and kepe theyr holly day, accordynge to Gods holy wyll and pleaſure: that is in hearyng the worde of god read and taught: in priuate and publique prayers: in knowledgyng theyr offences to God, and amendement of the ſame, in reconcylynge theyr ſelues charitably to theyr neyghboures, where diſpleaſure hath bene, in oftentymes receauynge the Communion of the very body and bloud of Chryſte, in viſitinge of the poore and ſicke, in vſinge all ſoberneſſe and Godly conuerſation: yet notwithſtandinge all perſonnes, vycares and Curates, ſhal teache and declare vnto theyr pariſhioners, that they maye with a ſafe and quiet conſcience after their common prayer in the tyme of harueſt, laboure vppon the holly and feſtiuall dayes, and ſaue that thynge which God hath ſent. And yf for any Scrupuloſitie or grudge of conſcience, men ſhoulde ſuperſticiouſly abſtaine from workyng vpon thoſe dayes: that then they ſhould greuouſly offende and diſpleaſe God.
                  
                     
                     Open cō
                        tenders to be reconciled openlye. Alſo foraſmuche as varyaunce and contencion is a thinge that moſte diſpleaſeth God,  and is moſte contrary to the bleſſed Communion of the body and bloud of our Sauiour Chryſt, Curates

ſhall in no wiſe admitte to the receauinge therof any of their cure or flocke, which be openly knowē to liue in ſinne notorious without repentaunce, or who hath maliouſlye and openlye contended with his neyghboure, vnleſſe the ſame do fyrſte charitably and openlye reconcyle him ſelfe agayne, remittynge all rancoure and mallyce, whatſoeuer controuerſie hath bene betwene them, and neuertheleſſe theyr iuſte tytles and ryghtes, they may charitably proſecute before ſuch as haue aucthoritie to heare the ſame.
                  
                     
                     Contemners of laudable ceremonies. Alſo that they ſhall inſtructe and teache in theyr cures,  that no man ought obſtinately and maliciouſlye breake and violate the lawedable Ceremonyes of the Church cōmaunded by publique aucthoritie to be obſerued.
                  
                     
                     The aboliſhment of thinges ſuperſticious. Alſo that they ſhall take awaye, vtterlye extinct & deſtroy all ſhrynes, coueryng of ſhrynes, al tables,  candelſtickes, tryndalles, and rolles of waxe, pictures, paintinges, and all other monumentes of fayned myracles, pilgrimages, ydolatry and ſuperſticion, ſo that there remayne no memory of the ſame in walles, glaſſes, wyndow or els where within theyr churches and houſes, preſeruyng neuertheleſſe or repayryng both the walles and glaſſe wyndowes. And they ſhall exhorte all theyr paryſhioners to do the lyke with in theyr ſeuerall houſes.
                  
                     
                     The pulpit.  And that the churchwardens at the common charge of the pariſhioners in euery Church ſhal prouyde a comely and honeſt Pulpit to be ſet in a conueniēt place within the ſame, & to be there

ſemely kept, for the preachinge of Gods worde.
                  
                     
                     The cheſt for the poore. Alſo they ſhall prouyde and haue within thre monethes after this viſitacion,  a ſtronge cheſte with a hole in the vpper part thereof, to be prouyded at the coſte and charge of the paryſhe, hauynge three keyes, whereof one ſhall remayne in the cuſtody of the perſonne, vycar, or curate, and the other two in the cuſtody of the churchwardens, or any other two honeſt menne, to be appoynted by the paryſhe from yeare to yeare, whiche cheſte you ſhall ſet and faſten in a moſte conuenient place, to thintent the pariſhyoners ſhoulde putte into it theyr oblacions and almes for theyr poore neyghbours. And the perſonne, vycar, and curate, ſhall diligently from tyme to time, and ſpecially when men make their Teſtamentes, call vppon, exhort and moue theyr neybours to conferre and geue, as they maye well ſpare, to the ſayde cheſte, declarynge vnto them, whereas heretofore they haue ben diligent to beſtowe muche ſubſtaunce otherwyſe than God commaunded, vpon pardons, pilgrimages, trentalles, deckynge of Images, offerynge of Candelles, geuynge to Fryers, and vpon other lyke blynde deuocions: they ought at thys tyme to be much more ready to helpe the poore and nedy, knowing that to relieue the poore is a true worſhipping of God, required earneſtly vpon payne of euerlaynge dampnation, & that alſo whatſoeuer is geuē for their comfort, is geuen to Chriſt him ſelfe, and ſo is accepted of him, that he wyll mercifully reward the ſame wt euerlaſtyng lyfe.

The whiche almes and deuotion of the people, the kepers of the keyes,The diſtribution of the almes. ſhall at times conueniēt take out of the cheſte, and diſtribute the ſame in the preſence of the whole paryſh or ſyxe of them, to be truely and faythfully delyuered to theyr moſt nedye neighbours, and yf they be prouided for, then to the reparacion of hygh wayes next adioynynge, or to the poore people of ſuche pariſhes nere, as ſhalbe thought beſt to the ſaid kepers of the keyes. And alſo the money which ryſeth of fraternities, guildes, and other ſtockes of the Church (except by the Quenes Maieſties aucthoritie it be otherwyſe appoynted) ſhalbe put into the ſayde cheſt, & conuerted to the ſayde vſe, and alſo the rentes of landes, the profite of cattaile, and money geuen or bequethed to obittes and diriges, or to the finding of torches. lightes, tapers and lampes, ſhalbe conuerted to the ſaid vſe, ſauinge that it ſhalbe lawfull for them to beſtowe part of the ſaid profites vpon the reparacion of the ſaid Churche, yf great nede require, and where as the paryſhe is very poore, & not able otherwiſe to repayre the ſame.
                  
                     
                     Symony. Alſo to auoyde the deteſtable ſynne of Simonye,  becauſe buyinge and ſellynge of benefyces is execrable before God, therefore all ſuche perſons as buye any benefices, or come to them by fraude or deceite, ſhalbe depriued of ſuche benefices, and be made vnable at any tyme after, to receiue any other Spirituall promocion. And ſuch as do ſell them, or by any colour do beſtowe them for theyr owne gayne and profite, ſhal loſe

theyr right and tytle of patronage, and preſentment for that tyme, and the gyft therof for that vacation, ſhall appertayne to the Quenes Maieſtie.
                  
                     
                     Homelies to be read Alſo becauſe through lacke of preachers in many places of the Quenes Realmes and dominions,  the people continue in ignoraunce and blyndnes, all Perſons, Vicars, & Curates, ſhall reade in theyr Churches euery Sunday, one of the Homelies which are and ſhalbe ſet forth for the ſame purpoſe, by the Quenes aucthoritie, in ſuche ſort as they ſhalbe appoynted to do in the preface of the ſame.
                  
                     
                     Cōtempt of miniſters. Alſo whereas many indiſcrete perſons do at thys day, vncharitably contemne and abuſe prieſtes and miniſters of the Churche,  becauſe ſome of them (hauyng ſmall learnynge) haue of longe tyme fauoured fonde phantaſies, rather than Gods trueth: yet foraſmuche as theyr offyce and function is appoynted of Godde: the Quenes Maieſtie wylleth and chargeth all her louynge ſubiectes, that from hencefoorth they ſhall vſe them charitablye and reuerently, for theyr offyce and miniſtracion ſake, and eſpecially ſuche as labour in the ſettynge forth of Gods holy worde.
                  
                      Item although there be no prohibicion by the worde of God, nor any example of the prymatiue Churche, but that the prieſtes and miniſters of the Church may lawefully, for the aduoydynge of fornication, haue an honeſt and ſober wyfe, & that for the ſame purpoſe, the ſame

was by act of Parliament in tyme of our deare brother king Edwarde the ſyxt, made lawefull, whervpon a great number of the clergie of this Realme were then maryed, and ſo yet continue. yet becauſe there hath growen offence, and ſome ſlaunder to the Church, by lacke of diſcrete and ſober behauyoure in manye miniſters of the Churche, both in choſynge of theyr wyues, and in vndiſcrete lyuynge with theym, the remedye wherof is neceſſary to be ſought. It is thought therfore very neceſſary, that no maner of Prieſt or Deacon, ſhall hereafter take to his wife any maner of woman without the aduyce and allowaunce fyrſt had vpon good examination by the Byſhop of the ſame Dioceſſe, and two Iuſtices of peace of the ſame ſhyre, dwellynge next to the place where the ſame woman hath made her moſte abode, before her marryge, nor without the good wyll of the parentes of the ſayde woman, yf ſhe haue any lyuyng, or two of the next of her kynſefolkes, or for lacke of knowledge of ſuch, of her maſter or maſtres where ſhe ſerueth. And before he ſhalbe contracted in any place, he ſhal make a good and certeyn profe therof to the miniſter, or to the congregation aſſembled for that purpoſe, which ſhalbe vpon ſome holy day where dyuers may be preſent. And yf any ſhall do otherwyſe: that then they ſhall not be permitted to miniſter eyther the worde, or the Sacramentes of the Churche, nor ſhalbe capable of anye Eccleſiaſticall benefyce. And for the maner of mariages of any Byſhoppes, the ſame

ſhalbe allowed and approued by the Metropolitane of the prouince, and alſo by ſuche commiſſioners as the Quenes Maieſtie ſhall therevnto appoynt. And yf any maſter or Deane, or any head of any colledge, ſhall purpoſe to mary, the ſame ſhall not be allowed, but by ſuche to whom the viſitation of the ſame doth properly belonge, who ſhall in anye wyſe prouyde that the ſame tende not to the hynderaunce of theyr houſe.
                  
                     
                     Of apparell of miniſters. Item her Maieſtie beynge deſyrous to haue the Prelacye and Cleargie of thys Realme to be hadde aſwell in outwarde reuerence,  as otherwyſe regarded for the woorthyneſſe of theyr miniſteries, and thynkynge it neceſſary to haue them knowen to the people, in all places and aſſembles, both in the Churche and without, and thereby to receyue the honoure and eſtimacion due to the ſpecyall meſſengers and mynyſters of almyghtye Godde: wylleth and commaundeth that all Archebyſhoppes and Byſſhoppes, and all other that be called or admytted to preachynge or mynyſterye of the Sacramentes, or that bee admytted into anye vocation Eccleſiaſticall, or into anye ſocietie of learning in eyther of the vniuerſities, or els where, ſhall vſe and weare ſuche ſemely habites, garmentes, and ſuche ſquare cappes, and were mooſte commonly and orderlye receyued in the latter yeare of the raygne of Kynge Edwarde the ſyxt, not thereby meanynge to attrybute

any holyneſſe or ſpeciall worthineſſe to the ſayde garmentes. But as ſaint Paule wryteth: Omnia decenter & ſecundum ordinem fiant. 1 Cor. 14. Cap.
                  
                  
                     
                     Hereſies. Item that no man ſhall wylfully and obſtinately defende or mayntayne any hereſies, errours or falſe doctrine,  contrary to the fayth of Chriſt and his holy ſcripture.
                  
                     
                     Charmes. Item that no perſons ſhall vſe charmes, ſorcery,  enchauntmentes, witchcraftes, ſouthſayinge, or any like deueliſhe deuyſe, nor ſhal reſort at any time to the ſame for counſell or helpe.
                  
                     
                     Abſence from common prayer. Item that no perſon ſhall, neglectynge theyr owne paryſhe Church,  reſort to any other churche in tyme of common prayer or preaching, except it be by the occaſion of ſome extraordinary ſermon, in ſome paryſhe of the ſame towne.
                  
                     
                     Inholders and ale-houſes.  Item that no Inneholders or ale houſe kepers ſhall vſe to ſell meate or drinke in the tyme of common prayer, preachynge, readynge of the Homelies or Scriptures.
                  
                     
                     Images in houſes. Item that no perſonnes kepe in theyr houſes any abuſed images,  table, pictures, payntinges and other monumentes of fayned miracles, pylgrymages, Idolatry, or ſuperſticion.
                  
                     
                     Diſturbers of ſermons or ſeruice Item that no man ſhall wyllyngly let or dyſturbe the preacher in tyme of hys Sermon,  or let or diſcourage any curate or miniſter to ſinge or ſay the diuine ſeruyce nowe ſette foorth, nor mocke or reſt at the miniſters of ſuch ſeruice.
                  
                     
                     Raſhe talkers of ſcripture.  Item that no man ſhall talke or reaſon of the holy ſcriptures, raſhely or contentiouſlye,

nor maintayne any falſe doctrine or errour, but ſhal commune of the ſame when occaſion is geuen, reuerently, humbly, & in the feare of God, for his comfort and better vnderſtandinge.
                  
                     
                     Attendaunt to the ſeruice Item that no man, woman, or chylde, ſhalbe otherwiſe occupyed in the tyme of the Seruice,  then in quiete attendaunce to heare, marke and vnderſtande that is read, preached, and miniſtred.
                  
                     
                     The gramer of king Henry theight Item that euery ſcolemaſter and teacher, ſhal teache the Gramer ſet foorth by king Henry the eyght of noble memorye, and contynued in the tyme of kyng Edward the ſyxt and none other.
                  
                     
                     Allovvaunce of ſcolemaſters. Item that no man ſhall take vppon hym to teache,  but ſuch as ſhalbe allowed by thordinary, and founde meete, aſwell for hys learnyng & dexteritie in teachinge, as for ſober and honeſt conuerſation, and alſo for ryght vnderſtandyng of Gods true religion.
                  
                     
                     Duetie of ſcolemaſters. Item that all teachers of chyldren ſhall ſtirre and moue them to the loue and due reuerence of gods true religion,  now truely ſet forth by publyke aucthoritie.
                  
                     
                     ſentences of ſcripture for ſcollers Item that they ſhall accuſtome theyr Scollers reuerently to learne ſuch ſentences of ſcriptures,  as ſhalbe moſte expedient to enduce them to all Godlyneſſe.
                  
                     
                     vnlearned prieſtes. Item foraſmuche as in theſe latter dayes many haue ben made prieſtes, beynge chyldren,  and otherwyſe vtterly vnlearned, ſo that they coulde reade to ſay mattens and maſſe: The Ordinaryes

ſhall not admit any ſuche to any cure or ſpirituall function.
                  
                     
                     The Cathechiſme Item, euery Parſon, Vycar, and Curate ſhal vpon euery holy day,  and euery ſecond Sunday in the yeare, heare and inſtruct all the youth of the paryſhe, for halfe an houre at the leaſt, before Euenynge prayer, in the ten commaundementes, the Articles of the beliefe, and in the Lordes prayer, and diligently examine theim, & teache the Cathechiſme, ſet forth in the booke of publique prayer.
                  
                     
                     The boke of the afflictions for religiō
                       Item that the Ordinaries do exhibite vnto our viſitours theyr bookes, or a true copy of the ſame, conteynynge the cauſes why any perſon was impryſoned, famyſhed, or put to death, for religion.
                  
                     
                     Ouerſeers for ſeruice on the holy dayes.  Item that in euery paryſhe, three or foure diſcrete men which tender Gods glory, and hys true Religion, ſhalbe appoynted by the Ordynaries, diligently to ſee that all the paryſhyoners duely reſort to theyr Churche, vppon all Sundayes and holy dayes, and there to contynue the whole tyme of the Godly ſeruyce. And all ſuche as ſhalbe founde ſtacke or negligent in reſortynge to the Churche, hauynge no greate nor vrgent cauſe of abſence, they ſhall ſtrayghtly call vppon them, and after due monicion, yf they amende not, they ſhall denounce them to the Ordinary.
                  
                     
                     Inuētories of Church goodes.  Item that the Churchwardens of euery paryſhe ſhal delyuer vnto our viſitours the inuentories

of veſtmentes, copes, and other ornamentes, plate, bokes, and ſpecially of Grayles, Couchers, Legendes, Proceſſionalles, Hymnalles, Manuelles, Portueſſes, and ſuch lyke apperteynyng to theyr Church.
                  
                     
                     Seruice on vvedneſdayes and frydayes. Item that weekely vppon Wedneſdayes and Frydayes, not beynge holy dayes,  the curate at the accuſtomed houres of ſeruyce, ſhall reſort to Churche, and cauſe warnyng to be geuen to the people, by knollyng of the bell, and ſaye the Letany and prayers.
                  
                     
                     Continuaunce of ſynginge in the church. Item becauſe dyuers Collegiate, and alſo ſome paryſhe Churches heretofore,  there hath ben lyuynges appoynted for the mayntenaunce of menne and chyldren, to vſe ſyngynge in the Churche, by meanes whereof the lawdable ſcyence of muſicke hath ben had in eſtimation, and preſerued in knowledge: The Quenes Maieſtie neyther meanynge in any wyſe the decaye of any thynge that myght conueniently tende to the vſe and continuaunce of the ſayde ſcience, neyther to haue the ſame in any parte ſo abuſed in the Churche, that thereby the common prayer ſhoulde be the worſe vnderſtande of the hearers: Wylleth and commaundeth, that fyrſt no alteration be made of ſuch aſſignementes of lyuynge, as heretofore hath bene appoynted to the vſe of ſyngynge or muſycke in the Churche, but that the ſame ſo remayne. And that there bee a modeſte and deſtyncte ſonge ſo vſed, in all partes of the common prayers in the

Churche, that the ſame may be as playnely vnderſtanded, as yf it were read without ſynging. And yet neuertheleſſe for the comforting of ſuch as delite in muſicke, it maye be permytted that in the beginninge, or in thend of common prayers, eyther at mornynge or euenynge, there may be ſonge an hymne, or ſuche lyke ſonge, to the prayſe of almyghty God, in the beſte ſort of melodye, and muſicke that maye be conueniently deuyſed, hauynge reſpecte that the ſentence of the hymne maye bee vnderſtanded and perceyued.
                  
                     
                     Againſt ſlaūderus and infamus vvordes. Item becauſe in al alteracions, and ſpecially in rytes and Ceremonies,  there happeneth dyſcorde emonges the people, and thervpon ſlaunderous wordes and raylynges, wherby charitie the knot of all chriſtian ſocietie is looſed. The Quenes Maieſtie beyng moſte deſyrous of al other earthly thynges, that her people ſhoulde lyue in charitie, both towardes God and man, and therein abounde in good woorkes: wylleth and ſtraightly commaundeth al maner her ſubiectes, to forbeare al vayne and contencious diſputacions in matters of Religion, and not to vſe in deſpite or rebuke of any perſon, theſe conuitious wordes, papiſt, or papiſticall hereticke, ſciſmaticke, or ſacramentary, or any ſuche lyke wordes of reproche. But yf any maner of perſon, ſhall deſerue the accuſation of anye ſuche, that fyrſte he bee charitablye admonyſſhed thereof. And yf that ſhall not amende hym,

then to denounce the offendours to the Ordinary, or to ſome higher power hauing aucthoritie to correcte the ſame.
                  
                     
                     Againſte heriticall and ſedicious bokes Item becauſe there is a great abuſe in the printers of bokes:  which for couetouſnes chiefly, regard not what thei print, ſo they may haue gayne, whereby arryſeth great diſorder by publication of vnfruitfull, vayne, and infamous bokes and papers: The Quenes maieſtie ſtraitly chargeth and commaundeth, that no maner of perſon ſhall print any maner of boke or paper of what ſorte, nature, or in what language ſoeuer it be, except the ſame be firſt licenſed by her maieſtie by expreſſe wordes in writing, or by .vi. of her priuie counſel: or be peruſed & licenſed by the archbyſhops of Cantorbury and yorke, the byſhop of London, the Chauncelours of both vniuerſities, the biſhop beyng Ordinary, & the Archdeacon alſo of the place where anye ſuche ſhalbe printed, or by two of them, wherof the ordinary of the place to be alwayes one. And that the names of ſuch as ſhal alowe the ſame, to be added in thende of euery ſuch worke, for a teſtimonye of the alowaunce thereof. And becauſe many pampheletes, playes and balettes, be often times printed, wherin regard would be had that nothing therin ſhould be eyther hereticall, ſedicious, or vnſemely for Chriſtian eares: Her maieſtie likewiſe commaundeth, that no maner of perſon ſhall enterpryſe to print any ſuche, except the ſame be to him licenſed by ſuch her maieſties commiſſioners, or .iii. of them, as be appointed

appoynted in the citie of London to heare and determine diuers cauſes eccleſiaſticall, tending to the execution of certayne ſtatutes, made the laſt parliament for vniformitie of order in religion. And yf any ſhall ſell or vtter any maner of bookes or papers, beyng not licenſed as is aboueſaid: that the ſame partie ſhalbe punyſhed by order of the ſayde commiſſioners, as to the qualitie of the fault ſhalbe thought meete. And touchyng all other bookes of matters of religion, or policie or gouernaunce, that hath bene prynted eyther on thiſſide the Seas, or on thother ſide, becauſe the diuerſitie of them is great and that there nedeth good conſideration to be had of the particularities therof: her Maieſtie referreth the prohibition or permiſſion thereof to thorder which her ſayd commiſſioners within the citie of London ſhall take, and notifie.
                  According to the which her Maieſtie ſtrayghtly commaundeth all maner her ſubiectes, and ſpecially the Wardens & companye of Stacioners to be obedient.
                  Prouided that theſe orders do not extende to any prophane aucthours, and workes in anye language, that hath ben heretofore commonly receaued or allowed in anye the vniuerſities or Scoles: but the ſame may be prynted and vſed as by good order they were accuſtomed.
                  
                     
                     Reuerēce at praiers.  Item, although almyghtie God is at all tymes to be honoured with all maner of reuerence that maye be deuyſed: yet of all other tymes, in tyme of common prayer, the ſame is

moſt to be regarded. Therfore, it is to be neceſſarely receiued, that in tyme of the Letany, and of all other Collectes and common ſupplications to almyghty God, all maner of people ſhall deuoutly and humbly knele vpon their knees,Honor to the name of Ieſus. and geue eare thereunto. And that whenſoeuer the name of Ieſus ſhalbe in any Leſſō, Sermon, or otherwyſe in the Church pronounced: That due reuerence be made of all perſons yong and olde, with lowlyneſſe of curſye, and vncoueryng of heades of the men kynde, as thereunto doth neceſſarely belong, and heretofore hath ben accuſtomed.
                  
                     
                     Curats to reade dyſtinctly. Item that all miniſters and readers of publique prayers, Chapiters and Homylies, ſhalbe charged to reade leyſurely, playnly, & diſtinctly,  and alſo ſuch as are but meane readers, ſhall peruſe ouer before once or twyſe the Chapiters and Homylies, to thintent they may reade to the better vnderſtandyng of the people, and the more encoragement to godlyneſſe.
                  
                     An admonition to ſimple men, deceaued by malicious.
                     
                        THe Quenes maieſtie being informed that in certein places of this Realm, ſundry of her natiue ſubiectes being called to Eccleſiaſticall miniſterye in the Churche, be by ſiniſter perſwaſion and peruerſe conſtruction induced to fynde ſome ſcruple in the fourme of an othe,

whiche by an Act of the laſt Parliament is preſcribed to be required of diuers perſons, for the recognitiō of theyr allegiaunce to her Maieſtie, which certeinly neither was euer meant, ne by any equitie of wordes or good ſence can be therof gathered: Would that all her louyng ſubiectes ſhoulde vnderſtande, that nothyng was, is, or ſhalbe meant or intended by the ſame oth, to haue any other duetie, allegiaunce, or bonde required by the ſame othe, then was acknowleged to be due to the moſt noble kynges of famous memory kyng Henry theyght, her Maieſties father, or king Edward the .vi. her Maieſties brother.
                     And further her Maieſtie forbyddeth all maner her ſubiectes to geue eare or credite to ſuch peruerſe and malicious perſons, which moſt ſiniſterly and maliciouſly labour to notifie to her louyng ſubiectes, how by the wordes of the ſaid othe, it may be collected yt the kynges or quenes of this Realme, poſſeſſours of the crowne, maye chalenge aucthoritie and power of miniſtery of diuine offices in the Church, wherein her ſayde ſubiectes be much abuſed by ſuch euyll diſpoſed perſons. For certeinly her Maieſtie neyther doth, ne euer wyll chalenge any other aucthoritie, than that was chalenged and lately vſed by the ſayde noble kynges of famous memory king Henry the .viii. and king Edward the .vi. which is and was of auncient tyme due to the Imperial crowne of this Realme. That is, vnder god to haue the ſoueraintie and rule ouer all maner

perſons borne within theſe her Realmes, dominions, and countreys, of what eſtate eyther Eccleſiaſticall or temporall ſoeuer they be, ſo as no other forraigne power ſhall or ought to haue any ſuperioritie ouer them. And yf any perſon that hath cōceaued any other ſence of the forme of the ſaid othe, ſhall accept the ſame othe with this interpretation, ſence, or meaning, her Maieſtie is well pleaſed to accept euery ſuch in that behalfe, as her good and obedient ſubiectes, and ſhal acquite them of al maner penalties conteyned in the ſaid act, againſt ſuch as ſhall peremptoryly or obſtinatly refuſe to take the ſame oth.
                  
                  
                     For the tables in the Church.
                     
                        WHereas her Maieſtie vnderſtandeth that in manye and ſundrye partes of the Realme, the Alters of the Churches be remoued, and tables placed for miniſtration of the holy Sacrament, accordyng to the fourme of the law therfore prouided, and in ſome other places the Alters be not yet remoued, vpon opinion conceaued of ſome other order therin to be takē by her Maieſties viſitours. In thorder wherof, ſauing for an vniformitie, ther ſemeth no matter of great moment, ſo that the Sacrament be duely and reuerently miniſtred. Yet for obſeruation of one vniformitie through the whole Realme, and for the better imitacion of the lawe in that behalfe, it is ordered

that no alter be taken downe, but by ouerſyght of the Curate of the Churche, and the Churchwardens, or one of them at the leaſte, wherein no riotous or diſordred maner to be vſed: and that the holy table in euery Church be decently made, and ſette in the place where the Alter ſtoode, and there commonly couered as thereto belongeth, and as ſhalbe appoynted by the viſitours, and ſo to ſtand, ſauyng when the Communion of the Sacrament is to be diſtributed, at which tyme the ſame ſhalbe ſo placed in good ſort within the Chauncell, as whereby the miniſter may be more conueniently hearde of the communicantes, in his prayer and miniſtration, and the communicantes alſo more conuenientlye and in more nomber communicate with the ſayde miniſter, and after the Communion done, from tyme to tyme the ſame holy table to be placed where it ſtode before.
                     
                        The ſacramentall bread.Item where alſo it was in the tyme of kyng Edwarde the .vi. vſed to haue the ſacramentall breade of common fine breade: It is ordered for the more reuerence to be geuen to theſe holy miſteries, being the Sacramentes of the body and bloud of our ſauior Ieſus Chriſt, that the fame ſacramentall bread be made and fourmed plain without any figure therupon, of the ſame fineneſſe and faſhion rounde, though ſomwhat bigger in compaſſe and thickeneſſe, as the vſuall breade and wafer heretofore named ſyngyng cakes, whiche ſerued for the vſe of the priuate maſſe.
                  
                  
                     
                     The fourme of byddyng the prayers to be vſed generally in this vniforme ſort.
                     
                        YE ſhall pray for Chriſtes holy Catholyke Churche, that is, for the whole congregation of Chriſten people, diſperſed throughout the whole world, and ſpecially for the Church of Englande and Irelande. And herein I require you moſte ſpecially to pray for the Quenes moſt excellent Maieſtie, our ſoueraigne lady Elizabeth Quene of Englande, Fraunce and Ireland, defendour of the fayth, and ſupreme gouernour of this Realme, aſwell in cauſes Eccleſiaſticall as Temporall.
                     You ſhal alſo pray for the miniſters of gods holy word and Sacramentes, aſwel Archbyſhops and Byſhops, as other paſtours and curates.
                     You ſhall alſo pray for the Quenes moſte honorable counſayle, and for all the nobilitie of this Realme, that all and euery of theſe in their callyng, may ſerue truely and paynfully, to the glory of God and edifying of his people, remembryng thaccompt that they muſt make.
                     Alſo you ſhal pray for the whole commons of this Realme, that they may lyue in true fayth and feare of God, in humble obedience and brotherly charitie one to another.
                     Finally, let vs prayſe God for all thoſe whiche are departed out of this life in the faith of chriſt and pray vnto God, that we may haue grace ſo

to direct our liues after their good example, that after this lyfe, we with them may be made partakers of the glorious reſurrection, in the lyfe euerlaſtyng.
                     ¶ And this done, ſhewe the holy dayes and faſtyng dayes.
                  
                  
                     ALl whiche and ſinguler Iniunctions, the Quenes Maieſtie miniſtreth vnto her clergie, and to all other her louyng ſubiectes, ſtraightly charging and commaunding them to obſerue and kepe the ſame, vpon payne of depriuation, ſequeſtration of fruites and benefices, ſuſpention, excommunication and ſuche other cohertion, as to Ordinaries or other hauynge Eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction, whom her Maieſtie hath apoynted, or ſhall appoynt for the due executiō of the ſame, ſhalbe ſene conuenient. Chargyng and commaundyng them to ſee theſe Iniunctions obſerued and kepte of all perſons beyng vnder theyr iuriſdiction, as they wyll aunſwere to her Maieſtie for the contrary. And her hyghnes pleaſure is, that euery Iuſtice of peace beyng required, ſhall aſſiſte the Ordinaries and euery of them, for the due execution of the ſayde Iniunctions.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Imprinted at London in Powles Church yarde by Richard Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Quenes Maieſtie.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  Articles to be enquired in the viſitacion, in the firſt yere of the raigne of our moſt dread ſoueraigne Ladye, Elizabeth by the grace of God, of England Fraunce, and Ireland Quene, defender of the fayth. &c. Anno 1559.
                  
                     
                        R.I.
                        OMNIA DESVPER
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  ARTICLES.
                  
                     
                     Reſidenci    
                     FYrſt, whether any perſon, Vicar, or Curate be reſidēt continually vpon his benefice, doyng his duetie in preachynge, readyng, and duelye mynyſtrynge the holye Sacramentes.
                  
                     
                     Falſe miracles.    Item, whether in theyr Churches and chappels, all ymages, ſhrynes, all tables, Candelſtickes, trindelles, or rolles of waxe, pictures, payntynges, and all other monumentes of fayned and falſe miracles, pilgrimages, ydolatry, and ſuperſtition be remoued, abolyſhed, and deſtroyed.
                  
                     
                     Lordes prayer.   Item, whether they do not euery holy daye when they haue no Sermon,  immediatly after the goſpell, openly, playnely, and diſtinctly, reſite to theyr paryſhioners in the pulpitte, the Lordes prayer, the beliefe, and the ten cōmaundementes in Englyſhe.
                  
                     
                     To bring vp youth Item, whether they do charge fathers, and mothers, maiſters, and gouernours of youth,  to bryng them vp in ſome vertuous ſtudye and occupation.
                  
                     
                     
                     Curates. Item, whether ſuche beneficed men as be lawfully abſent from theyr benefices, do leaue their cures to a rude and vnlearned parſon, and not to an honeſt wel learned and expert Curate whiche can and wyll teache you holeſome doctrine.
                  
                     
                     Readyng the ſcriptures.  Item, whether they do diſcourage any perſon from readyng of any part of the Byble, eyther in Latin or Englyſhe, and do not rather comforte and exhorte euery perſon to reade the ſame at conuenient tymes, as the very lyuelye word of God, and the ſpecial fode of mans ſoul.
                  
                     
                     Tauernes & games. Item, whether parſons, vicars, curates, and other miniſters,  be common haunters and reſorters to tauernes or alehouſes, geuyng them ſelues to drynking, ryotyng, and playing at vnlawfull games, and do not occupie them ſelues in the readyng or hearyng of ſome part of holy Scripture, or in ſome other godly exercyſe.
                  
                     
                     prechers. Item, whether they haue admitted any man to preache in theyr cures, not beyng lawfully licenſed therunto,  or haue ben licenſed accordyngly.
                  
                     
                     Superſtition.  Item, whether they vſe to declare to theyr paryſhioners any thyng to the extollyng or ſettyng forth of vayne and ſuperſtitious religion, pilgrimages, reliques, or images, or lyghtyng

of candelles, kyſſyng, knelyng, deckyng of the ſame images.
                  
                     
                     regeſter. Item, whether they haue one booke or Regiſter kept,  wherein they wryte the daye of euery weddyng, chryſtenyng, and burying.
                  
                     
                     Obedien
                           •
                        
                      Item, whether they haue exhorted the people to obedience to the Quenes Maieſtie, & miniſters, and to charitie and loue one to another. 
                  
                     
                     The ſacrament. Item, whether they haue admonyſhed theyr pariſhioners,  that thei ought not to preſume to receiue the ſacrament of the body and bloud of Chriſt before they can perfectly the lordes prayer, tharticles of the fayth, and the .x. commaundementes in Englyſhe.
                  
                     
                     Hoſpitalitie. Item, whether they be reſident vpon theyr benefices, & kepe hoſpitalitie or no.  And yf they be abſent & kepe no hoſpitalitie, whether they do relieue theyr pariſhioners, and what they geue them.
                  
                     
                     reparations. Item, whether proprietaries, parſons, vycars, and clarkes, hauyng Churches, chappels,  or manſions, do kepe their chauncels, rectories, vycarages, and all other houſes apperteynyng to them, in due reparations.
                  
                     
                     prayer in Englyſhe. Item, whether they do counſayle or moue their pariſhioners rather to praye in a tongue not knowen, then in Englyſhe,  or put theyr

truſt in any certeine numbre of prayers, as in ſaying ouer a numbre of Beades,Beades. or other lyke.
                  
                     
                     Diffamed perſons. Item, whether they haue receaued any perſons to the communion,  beyng openly knowen to be out of charitie with theyr neighbours, or dyffamed with anye notorious cryme, and not refourmed.
                  
                     
                     poore mens box Item, whether they haue prouided and haue a ſtronge cheſt for the poore mens boxe,  and ſet and faſtened the ſame in a place of the Churche moſt conuenient.
                  
                     
                     Teſtamē
                        tes. Item, whether they haue diligently called vpon,  exhorted and moued theyr pariſhioners, and eſpecially when they make theyr teſtamentes, to geue to the ſayd poore mens boxe, and to beſtowe that vpon the poore,poore mens box whiche they were wont to beſtowe vpon pilgrimages, pardons, trentalles, & vpon other lyke blynd deuocions.
                  
                     
                     Sycke. Buryall. Item, whether they haue denyed to viſite the ſicke,  or burye the deade, beynge brought to the Churche.
                  
                     
                     ſymony. Item, whether they haue bought theyr benefices,  or come to them by fraude, guyle, deceit or ſymonye.
                  
                     
                     Adultrers Item, whether they haue geuen open monition to their pariſhioners,  to detect and preſent

to theyr Ordinary, all adulterers and fornicatours, and ſuch men as haue two wiues liuing within theyr paryſhes.
                  
                     
                     Church goodes. Item, whether they haue moniſhed their pariſhioners openly, that they ſhould not ſel,  geue nor otherwyſe alienate anye of theyr Churche goodes.
                  
                     
                     Many benefices. Item, whether they or any of them do kepe mo benefices and other eccleſiaſticall promotions, then they ought to do,  not hauyng ſufficient licences and diſpenſations thereunto, and howe many they be, and theyr names.
                  
                     
                     Communion. Item, whether they miniſter the holy Communion any otherwyſe,  then onely after ſuche fourme and maner as it is ſet forth by the common aucthoritie of the Quenes Maieſtie, and the parliament.
                  
                     
                     Letters of the vvord or preachyng. Item, whether you know any perſon within your paryſhe, or els where, that is a letter of the worde of God to be read in Englyſhe,  or ſincerely preached in place and times conuenient.
                  
                     
                     goers out of the Church. Item, whether in the tyme of the Letanye, or any other common prayer,  in the time of the Sermon or Homyly, & when the prieſt readeth the ſcriptures to the pariſhners, any perſō haue departed out of the Church, without iuſte and

neceſſarye cauſe, or diſturbe the miniſter otherwyſe.
                  
                     
                     Church money.  Item, whether the money commyng and ryſyng of any cattel or other moueable ſtockes of the church, and mony geuen and bequeathed to the fyndyng of torches, lyghtes, tapers, or lampes not payde out of any landes, haue not bene employed to the poore mens cheſte.
                  
                     
                     Kepers of the churche mony  Item, who hath the ſayd ſtockes and money in theyr handes, and what be theyr names.
                  
                     
                     Contēpte of prieſts. Item, whether anye indiſcrete perſones do vncharitably contemne and abuſe prieſtes and miniſters of the Churche. 
                  
                     
                     The kings Grāmer. Item, whether there be any other Grammer taught in any ſcoole within this dioceſſe,  then that which is ſet forth by the auctoritie of king Henry theyght.
                  
                     
                     The tyme of ſeruice  Item, whether the ſeruice of the Church be done at due and conuenient houres.
                  
                     
                     Talkers in the church Item, whether any haue vſed to common, iangle,  and talke in the Churche in the time of the prayer, readyng of the Homyly, preachyng, readyng, or declaryng of the Scripture.
                  
                     
                     Hereſies.  Item, whether any haue wylfully mainteyned and defended any hereſyes, errors or falſe opinions contrary to the faith of Chryſt and holy Scripture.
                  
                     
                     
                     Dronkardes. Item, whether any be common dronkardes, ſwearers, or blaſphemers of the name of GOD.
                  
                     
                     Adulterers. Item, whether any haue committed adulterye, fornication, or inceſt,  or be common baudes or receiuers of ſuch euil perſons, or vehemently ſuſpected of any of the premiſſes.
                  
                     
                     Bravvlers Item, whether any be brawlers, ſclaunderers, chyders, ſcoldes, and ſowers of diſcorde betwene one perſon and another. 
                  
                     
                     Sorcerers. Item, whether you knowe any that doe vſe charmes, ſorcery, enchauntmentes,  inuocations circles, witchcraftes, ſouthſayinge, or any lyke craftes or imaginacions inuented by the deuill, and ſpecyally in the tyme of womens trauayle.
                  
                     
                     pulpittes. Item, whether the Churches, Pulpittes, and other neceſſaries apperteyninge to the ſame,  be ſufficiently repayred, & yf they be not, in whoſe default the ſame is.
                  
                     
                     Reſorters to other Churches. Item, whether you knowe any that in contempt of theyr owne paryſhe Churche,  do reſort to any other Church.
                  
                     
                     Inholders Item, whether anye Inholders or ale houſe kepers, do vſe commonly to ſel meate and drinke in the time of common prayer, preachinge,  readyng of the Homelies or Scripture.
                  
                     
                     
                     Diuorſe.Item, whether you knowe any to be maryed within the degrees prohibited by the lawes of God, or that be ſeparated or dyuorſed withoute the degrees prohibited by the lawe of God, and whether any ſuch haue maryed agayne.
                  
                     
                     priuie contractes. Item, whether you knowe any to haue made priuie contractes of matrymonye, not callynge two or mo wytneſſes thereunto,  nor hauynge therto the conſent of theyr parentes.
                  
                     
                     Banes. Item, whether they haue maryed ſolempnely,  the banes not firſt lawefully aſked.
                  
                     
                     Executors. Item, whether you know any executours or adminiſtratours of dead mens goods,  which do not duely beſtowe ſuche of the ſayde goodes as were geuen and bequethed, or appoynted to bee diſtributed amonge the poore people, repayring of high wayes, fyndyng of poore ſcolers, or marying of poore maydens, or ſuche other lyke charitable dedes.
                  
                     
                     Images. Item whether you knowe any that kepe in theyr houſes,  vndefaced any Images, tables, pictures, paintynges, or other monumentes of fayned and falſe miracles, pilgrimages, Idolatry, or ſuperſticion, and do adore them, and ſpecially ſuch as haue ben ſet vp in Churches, chapelles, or oratories.
                  
                     
                     Bookes.  Item, what bokes of Goddes Scripture you

haue deliuered to be burnt, or otherwiſe deſtroied, and to whom ye haue deliuered the ſame.
                  
                     
                     Bribes. Item, what brybes the accuſers, promoters, perſecutors, eccleſiaſticall iudges,  and other the commiſſioners appointed within the ſeueral dioceſſe of this Realme, haue receiued by them ſelues, or other, of thoſe perſons whiche were in trouble, apprehēded or impriſoned for Religion.
                  
                     
                     Loſſe of goodes. Item, what goodes, moueable landes, fees,  offyces or promocions hath ben wrongfully taken away, in the time of Quene Maries raigne from any perſon, which fauoured the Religion nowe ſet forth.
                  
                     
                     Hovv many burnt. Item howe many perſons for religion haue dyed by fyre, famine, or otherwiſe,  or haue bene impryſoned for the ſame.
                  
                     
                     Certificat of the dead. Item, that you make a true preſentment of the nomber of al the perſons,  whiche died within your pariſhes, ſithen the feaſt of Saint Iohn the Baptiſt, which was in the yeare of our lorde God, a thouſande, fyue hundred, fiftie and eight vnto the ſame feaſt laſt paſt. Makynge therein a playne diſtynct declaracion, howe many men, women, and men chyldren the ſame were. And the names of the men.
                  
                     
                     Secrete maſſes. Item, whether ye knowe any man in youre paryſhe, ſecretely,  or in vnlawfull conuenticles

ſay or heare maſſe, or any other ſeruyce prohibited by the lawe.
                  
                     
                     Falſe rumours. Item, whether you knowe anye perſon in youre paryſhe, to be a ſlaunderer of hys neyghbours,  or a fower of dyſcorde, betwene partye and partie, man and wyfe, parentes, and theyr chyldren,Vnlavvfull bokes or that hath inuented, bruted, or ſette foorth any rumours, falſe and ſedicious tales, ſclaunders, or makers, bryngers, byers, ſellers, kepers or conueyers of any vnlawfull bookes, which might ſtyrre or prouoke ſedicion, or maintaine ſuperſticious ſeruice within this Realme, or anye aydours, counſaylours, procurers, or mayntayners therunto.
                  
                     
                     patron Tithes. Vacacion Item, whether the Churche of your paryſhe be nowe vacant or no,  who is the Patrone therof, howe longe it hath ben vacant, who doth receyue the tythes, oblations, and other commodities duringe the tyme of the vacation, and by what aucthoritie, and in what eſtate the ſayde Church is at this time, and howe longe the perſon or vycar hath had that benefice.
                  
                     
                     Minſtrels  Item, whether any mynſtrelles, or any other perſons do vſe to ſynge or ſay any ſonges or ditties that be vyle or vncleane, and eſpeciallye in deriſion of any godly order, nowe ſet forth and eſtablyſhed.
                  
                     
                     Letany in Engliſhe.  Item, whether the Letanye in Englyſhe,

with the Epiſtle and Goſpell which was by the Quenes hyghneſſe Proclamation wylled to be readde to the people, were putte in vſe in youre Churches, and yf not, who were the letters therof.
                  
                     
                     Diſtinct readinge. Item, whether the Curates and miniſters do leaſurely, plainely, and diſtinctly, reade the publique prayers, Chapters and Homelies,  as they ought to do.
                  ¶ GOD SAVE THE QVENE.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Imprinted at LonDON IN POVVLES CHVRCH yarde by Rycharde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Quenes Maieſtie.
                  
                     Cum priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
                  
               
            
         
      
   