
      
         
            
            
            A demonstration of the trueth of that Discipline
which Christ hath prescribed in his worde for the
gouernment of his Church, in all times and places, vntill
the end of the world.
            
               
                  Wherein are gathered into a plain forme of reasoning, the prooft
thereof out of the Scriptures, the euidence of it by the light of reason
rightlie ruled, and the testimonies that haue been giuen thereunto, by
the course of the Church certaine hundreths of yeares after the Apostles
time: and the generall consent of the Churches rightly reformed
in these latter times: according as they are alleadged and
maintained, in those seuerall bookes that haue been written concerning
the same.
            
            
               Math. 21. 38.
               The husbandmen said among themselues, this is the heire, come
let vs kill him, and let vs take his inheritance.
            
            
               Luke 19. 27.
               Those mine enemies vvhich vvould not that I should raigne ouer
them, bring hither, and flea them before me.
            
            To the supposed Gouernors of the Church
of England, the Archbishops, Lord Bishops, Archdeacons
and the rest of that order.
            MANY and most euident haue our declarations
been concerning the trueth of that gouernment,
which Christe hath prescribed in his worde for the
ruling of the Church, which we haue manifested vnto you,
both by our writings and speeches, as occasion hath been offered:
neuer hath any one of you taken in hande to say anie
thing against it, but it hath made his eyes to dazle, as the
clearest Sun-shining, whereby hee hath been driuen to wander
hither and thither, groping for euasions, and yet coulde
not escape, but hath falne into infinite most mostrous absurdities,
and blasphemous assertions, (as by their writinges yet
extant it may appeare) so forcible is the trueth, to amaze the
painesayers thereof, and so pregnant is falshood to beget and

bring foorth thousands of absurdities, and euery one worse
then other. And will you still continue in your damnable,
and most diuelishe course? Haue you solde your selues vnto
Satan, to fight for him vntill you bee dammed in hell with
him? Haue you morgaged the saluation of your soules
and bodies, for the present fruition of your pompe and pleasure,
is it because you see not what you should doe? It may be
so, for many are so blinde, that they grope euen at noone day:
but me thinkes it can hardly be so, vnlesse you bee they that
haue eyes & see not, for the cause hath been (by the blessing
of God) so managed, that many plough-men, artificers, and
children doe see it, and know it, and are able by the worde of
God to iustifie it, and condemne you to bee aduersaries vnto
the Gospell in resisting it. But you thinke that gouernment
not so needfull, and your fault but small (if it be any) in continuing
your course begunne. The necessitie of the thing is
many wayes apparant, both in that it hath so plentifull warrant
from Gods own word, (as the course of this booke doth
uidently declare,) and also in that the Gospell can take no
roote, nor haue any free passage, for want of it: and the greatnesse
of your fault appeareth by this, that in so doing, you are
the cause of all the ignorance, Atheisme, schismes, treasons,
poperie and vngodlinesse, that is to be founde in this lande,
which we challenge to proue to your faces, if we may indifferently
be heard, & wherof in the meane while we will giue
you a taste: for the first it is cleare, that you are the causers of
that damnable ignorance, wherein the people are so generallie
wrapped, for that you haue from time to time stopped the
streames of knowledge, in those places where the Lorde in
mercie bestowed the same, and in steed of able and painefull
Ministers, haue pestered the Churche, eyther with presumptuous
proude persons, that are esteemed learned and take no
paines to bringe the people vnto the knowledge of Iesus
Christe, or (which is the greatest number) suche ignoraunt
Asses, and filthie swine, as are not worthie to liue in a well ordered
common-wealth: and that you are the cause of all Atheisme,
it is plaine, for one may (as in deede many doe) professe
it, and you say nothing to him for it. If the most filthie

liuer will fawne vpon you, and bribe your seruants, you will
not only fauour him, but assist him against any godly Minister
or other: but if any that feare God, refuse to come vnder
the least of your popish ceremonies, hee shall bee molested,
till his purse be emptie, or els by your tyrannous dealing, he
haue made shipwrack of a good censcience. And are not you
the cause of all schismes, that make a hotch-pot of true religion
and poperie, and so giue some occasion to fall into this
course, and others into that? And it is as cleare, that you are
so farre the cause of all treasons, as without you they had not
bin: for if euery Church had had her gouernment according
to Christes institution, our young Gentlemen, and students,
had not bin (for want of teaching & careful ouersight) made
a pray vnto the seducers, and consequently to those practises
which haue brought the bodies of so manie vnto Tyborne,
and their soules into hell: and who but you be the causes of
Poperie, whilest you vse them so well, let them doe wat they
list, yea, and keepe them in office & authoritie vnder you, yea
(which more is) giue them such offices as none that is not popish
can execute: I speak not of the ignorance which by your
meanes raigneth euerie where, which (as they confesse) is the
mother of their deuotion, and you are the wretched fathers
of that filthie mother, whereby you must needes be grandfathers
(at the least) to all kind of poperie. And who can (without
blushing) denie you to bee the cause of all vngodlines,
seeing your gouernment is that which giueth leaue to a man
to be any thing, sauing a sounde Christian. For certainely it
is more free in these dayes,Omnia tum liceant, non licet esse bonum. to bee a Papist, Anabaptist, of the
famely of loue, yea any most wicked one wahtsoeuer, then
that which we should be, and I could liue these twenty yeres
any such in Englande (yea in a Bishops house it may bee) and
neuer bee muche molested for it, so true is that which
you are charged with, in a Dialogue lately come foorth against
you, & since burned by you, that you care for nothing,
but the maintenance of your dignities, bee it to the damnation
of your owne soules, and infinite millions moe: Enter
therefore nowe at the last, into the serious confideration of
these thinges: remember that one day, you must bee presented

before the tribunall seate of Iesus Christe, to bee arraigned
for all the soules that haue gone to hell (seeing you
will needes bee the rulers of the Churche) since the Gospell
first appeared in this land, then shall you not be excused with
this, the Queene and Counsell will haue it so: not with that,
our state cannot beare it. For it shall be said vnto you, why do
you not informe thē better of my will, why taught you them
not to worship with trembling and feare, and to kisse the
sonne least he be angrie: why did you not tell them, that all
states must be ruled by my worde, and not my word by them
and their pollicies. When these thinges shall be laied to your
charge, your consciences shall answere: that if you had done
so, you should haue lost your dignities, which you loued and
sought for especially: then shall you wishe, that the mountaines
woulde fall vppon you, and the hilles couer you from
the presence of the lambe, and from the presence of him that
sitteth vppon the throne. And I am perswaded, that you are
in league with hell, and haue made a couenant with death:
yea, you doe perswade your selues, that there is no God, neyther
shall there be any such day of account: or it were vnpossible,
that you should giue your eyes any sleepe, or take any
rest in your beds, vntill you had vnto the Lord by repentance
and the Churche by confession, vuburdened your soules of
these hellish wayes, wherein you haue so long walked. Repent,
repent, be not ashamed to amende, though others haue
founde you out the way, iudge your selues while you haue
time, least you be made fire brands of hell beyonde all time.
Let our challendges that wee haue made in the name of the
Lord be hearkened vnto: Let vs be disputed with before indifferent
Iudges, let the holy word of God be the touch-stone
to trie our disputations by, and then shall it easilie appeare,
who hath the Lorde on his side, and who not. The trueth wil
preuaile in spite of your teeth, and all other aduersaries vnto
it, (for God disdaineth to be crossed by dust and ashes.) Therfore
bee not obstinate so long, as vntill you will bee founde
fighters with God, but preuent his wrath, least it break forth
against you like fire that none can quenche, because of the
wickednesse of your inuentions. Venture your Bishoprickes

vpon a disputation, and wee will venture our liues, take the
challendge if you dare. If the truth be on your side, you may
heereby be restored to your dignities, and bee no more troubled
by vs: but if the trueth be against you, what shall it profite
you to winne the whole world, and afterward loose your
owne soules. If you refuse still our offer, then must you needs
be guiltie either of this, that you knowe your cause will not
abide the triall, or of this, that you wil take no paines to confute
vs that keepe such a sturre in the Church: doe not think
that because you haue humane authoritie on your side, therfore
you are safe, for hee whose authoritie is on our side, is
the greatest, to whose voyce all the Diuels in hell shall stoup,
much more the sielie arme of sinfull flesh. Wet haue sought
to aduance this cause of God, by humble suite to the Parliament,
by supplication to your Conuocation house, by writing
in defence of it, and by challendging to dispute for it,
seeing none of these meanes vsed by vs haue preuailed: If it
come in by that meanes, which will make all your heartes to
ake, blame your selues, for it must preuaile, maugre the malice
of all that stande against it, or such a iudgement must ouertake
this lande, as shall cause the eares that heare thereof
to tingle, and make vs bee a by-worde to all that passe by vs.
The Lorde open your eyes, that you may see the confusions
whereof you are the cause, and giue you true repentance, or
confound you in all your purposes, that bee against him and
the regiment of his sonne Iesus Christe. The same Lorde, for
the loue he beareth to his people, open the eyes of her Maiestie,
and the Honorable Counsellers, that they may see your
godlesse practises, and in pitie to Gods people, ridde vs from
you, and turne away his iudgements, which the reiecting
of his holie yoke hath deserued, not punishing them
that mourne for the desolation of Sion, with
those that spoyle and make hauocke
of the Lordes inheritance.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            INfinite and vnspeakeable (Christian Reader) are the miseries
from which Jesus Christ our Sauiour hath freed vs, and
the benefites and blessings, wherewith in this life he beginneth
and for euer will continue to adorne vs. The consideration wherof
(if our vnthankfulnes vnto his Maiesty, were any way proporcionable,
to that which we indeuour vnto towards men) should
make vs continually to deuise, and all the dayes of our life to studie
how we might shew our selues (at least in some sort) carefull to
glorifie his blessed name, aboue all thinges that we desire, by how
much as his loue towardes vs, excelleth whatsoeuer can els (according
to our wish) befall vnto vs: but if wee doe with equall ballance
(on the other side) looke into the course of mans life, how wel
this duetie is performed, we shall see, that men declare themselues
rather bent to spit in his face, & to defie him, then any way to honour
him as their head and Soueraigne: for (to say nothing of
the prophane life, and godlesse conuersation, wherewith the generall
number, that professeth Iesus Christ, is wholy defiled (wee
see that many nations, people, and languages are very willing to
receiue Iesus Christe as their Priest to sacrifice for their sinnes,
but that hee shoulde become their King, to prescribe lawes vnto
them, whereby they may be ruled, is of all other thinges the moste
vnsauorie, yea (if it offered) the most grieuous tidings, and vnreasonable
request: wherein, albeit manie nations that haue renounced
that whoore of Rome, are heynously sinnefull against his
glorious Maiestie: yet is there none in the whole worlde so
farre out of square as England, in reteyning that Popish Hierarchie,
first coyned in the midst of the Mysterie of iniquitie, and
that filthie sincke of the Canon law, which was inuented & patched
togeather for the confirming and increasing of the kingdome
of Antichriste: Wherein as great indignitie is offered vnto Jesus
Christe, in committing his Churche vnto the gouernment of
the same, as can bee, by meane vnderlinges vnto a King, in committing
his beloued spouse vnto the direction of the Mystresse of
the Stewes, and inforcing her to liue after the orders of a Brothel
house. For the reformation whereof, while some haue written,
and others according to their callinges, carefully stoode, how heynously

it hath been taken, howe hardly they haue been vsed, and
what shamefull reproches haue been offered (euen vnto the course
of the Gospell) for spite that hath beene borne vnto reformation,
almost by all estates and degrees, lamentable experience hath
taught many of vs: but our posteritie shall knowe it more particularlie,
and the Church throughout the world shall discorne and
iudge of it more euidently, when their bodies are rotten in the
dust, and their soules (if they repent not) in eternall and intollerable
torments, who haue rezected a request so holy, profitable and
reasonable, yea, & handeled the intreaters for the same so cruelly,
vnchristianly, and vnlawfully: but they would gladly perswade
themselues (if their conscience would let them) that they haue onlie
executed iustice vpon vs as malefactors, and they perswade
men that we desire a thing, not warranted by the worde, not heard
of in the Church of God, vntill within this fewyeares, nor tollerable
in any Christian Common-weal whatsoeuer: The which
monstrous slaunders, albeit they haue been many wayes, and by
many men of moste worthie giftes detected, and made knowne in
those seuerall bookes that haue beene published concerning the
same: yet haue I thought it necessarie (in an other course) to write
also of it. The course of my enterprise, is first in respect of the fauorers
of the desired reformation: secondlie of the aduersaries of
the saeme: the fauorers of it, are also of two sorts, Ministers of the
word, & priuate persons, & both I hope may haue profit by it. Concerning
the former, when these woefull troublees that were renued
vppon vs (by that wretched subscription, that was euery where
vrged) did begin to increase, I thought it meete to betake my selfe
vnto that which I had read, or might any way by studie finde
out, concerning the cause, and collected all into a briefe summe, &
referred euery thing vnto some head, which beeing euer present
with mee, might furnishe mee to aunswere in the defence of the
trueth, though it were of a sodaine, by which (thorow the blessing
of God) I found such profit in my seuerall troubles, that I thought
it a course not altogether vnprofitable for others also, and vpon
that occasion betooke my selfe vnto a more serious meditation about
the matter, and communicating the thing with diuers verie
worthie men, I founde encouragement and heartening on, generallie
by all whom I made acquainted therewith: so that I trust (the

iudgements, yea and wishes also of others so iumping with mine)
manie Ministers that loue the cause, and haue not so throughlie
studied as were meet they should, may reape some profite therby.
Now concerning priuate men that loue the cause, some haue
great affaires in hande, and haue no leasure to reade the seuerall
bookes of this argument: some when they reade, are not of sufficient
capacitie to conceiue the force of a reason, or to make vse of it,
to informe themselues in the grounded knowledge of the cause
thereby: some (which is the generall fault of our religious Gentlemen)
will take no paines to reade, some are poore, and not able to
buye the bookes, which might let them see the cause, all these (I
hoope) may finde helpe in some measure heereby. Nowe concerning
the aduersaries vnto the cause, they are of two sortes also,
they that know it, and they that are ignorant of it: the former, if
they write any thing against it, are contented to deale in so rouing
a course as may rather arise vnto great volumes, then soundlie to
say any thing against the cause: Wherein D. Whitgift, but especially.
D. Bridges, haue giuen vs an euident example: and these
with others of their iudgement (though none in these latter dayes
haue written more vnlearnedly then they, of any argument of diuinitie
what soeuer) are contented to make the world beleeue (if
men will be so wilfully seduced) that our argumentes bee no arguments,
that they be grounded vpon false foundations, and that we
are not able to conclude our cause in any forme of reasoning. The
course that is heere taken (I trust) shall shewe that they are lyers:
the other sort of aduersaries be they that be meerly ignorant of anie
thing, either for it or against it, and perswading themselues
that the sway and shew of the worlde must needes carry the truth
with it, doe (like blinde bayardes) boldly venture to say any thing
against it, and thinke they doe well. Now of all these sorts of people,
I haue to request some thing I hope I shall obtaine my request
(at the least) at the handes of some of them. The first sort of fauorers
(which be the Ministers) I intreate, that as they tender
the glory of God, and honour of the cause which they stand in, so
they would diligently employ themselues in this, that they may
be found able to defend the same by sounde and euident groundes
out of the worde, and so much the rather, for that the aduersaries
doe greatly triumph, when they meete with one that professeth the

cause, and is not able to defend it, and confute the gaine sayers of
it. The second sort of fauourers, be the priuate persons that loue
the cause, whom I beseech to be carefull (as of all other pointes of
religion) of this, that they grow in the knowledge of the worde of
God, whereby they may be able, vpon their owne knowledge to defende
the trueth, and not giue the enemie any occasion to thinke or
say, that they be of that minde, because such and such Ministers,
whom they doe affect, doe thinke so. Now concerning the former
sort of aduersaries, to wit, they that know it, I pray them to looke
into their own hearts, & they shall finde they mislike it, either because
it correcteth their excessiue pompe and maintenance, or requireth
more trauaile in their Ministerie, then they are willing
to vndergoe, or at the least, controlleth that dissolutenesse of
behauiour, wherein they willingly wallow: and if it would please
God to bring them to a serious meditation of this, that it is the
will of the mightie God (before whom they must be called to giue
an account) which they doe resist, they would (I doubt not) more
carefully looke about them. And lastly for them that be ignorant
of the cause, speake euill of that they knowe not: let them (if
they will be admonished) vouchsafe to reade this little booke, and
wey the reasons with an vpright iudgement, which shall cause
them (at the least) to suspend their sharpe censures, which so vsuallie
appeare in their ordinarie communication: and concerning
vs all, let vs know (for one day we shall be sure to feele it) that the
controuersie is not about goates wooll (as the Prouerbe faith) neither
light & trifling matters, which may safely be followed or reiected
(as in deed the enemies of this cause do confidentlie affirm)
but about no lesse matter then this, whether Iesus Christ shall be
King or no: For if none is said to be a King but he that ruleth by
the scepter of his lawes, thē the turning out of these orders which
Christ hath prescribed in his word, for the ruling of the church,
is to giue him the title, and denie him the authoritie belonging to
the same, and so (in trueth) to make him an Idoll, making him to
carrie a shew of that which hee is not, and (with the crucifiers of
him) to put a reede in his hand, in steed of his yron rod, and crowning
him with thornes, in steede of the crowne of greatest glorie,
which is the cause that so many Atheistes spit in his face, and so
many godlesse persons, doe make but a iest of him: but when hee

commeth to shewe him self in his glorious maiestie, it shalbe said
vnto all these sortes of aduersaries: Those mine enimies which
would not that I should raigne ouer them, bring hither, and
slea them before me, Luke 19. 27. The whiche fearefull sentence,
that we may auoide, let euery one of vs (ae may stande with
our seuerall callings) carefully endeuour, to aduaunce this kingdome
here, whiche (among other assurances giuen vs from the
Lord) shalbe a testimonie vnto vs, that we shall haue part in that
glorie, which shalbe reuealed hereafter. Nowe concerning the
order of this booke, to direst thee (good Reader) vnto thy further
instruction, in the pointes therof: Thou hast in euery chapter diuers
proofes out of the holy worde of God, whiche must bee the
things wherewith thou mayest safely informe thy conscience: thē
shalt thou finde (also) argumentes drawen from reason rightlie
ruled by the same word: & lastly, (because our aduersaries charg
vs, that we desire a thing not knowen vnto the olde writers, nor agreed
vpon among the newe) thou hast here the witnes of them
both, in so plentifull and vniforme wise as may plainly declare,
that all godly learned men of all times, haue giuen testimonie vnto
the trueth of it. The most of the things that are here expressed,
I acknowledge to be gathered out of the bookes that haue bin published,
and are extant (purposelie) concerning this argument, as
may appeare in the seuerall points, wherein thou art sent vnto
them. Nowe least eyther thou shouldest bee deceyued with a diuers
impression, or thinke me to misalleadge the authours, I am
to shew thee what bookees I haue followed. The 1. booke of T. C.
twise printed, I follow the latter, of Ecclesiasticall Discipline
I followe the Latine, printed 1574. and the last booke of D.
Whitgift, which containeth all the former in it. The rest (as I
take it) haue beene but once printed, and therefore carrie no doubt
in them. If thou be satisfied herewith, giue God the glory: and
promote the cause by prayer, & all other good means that
thy calling may affoord: and pray for vs, that
we may neuer shrinke, nor be ouerthrowen
by the strength of them
that fight against it.
         
         
            
            A Table of Discipline, the particular heads whereof,
are handled in the seuerall Chapters, according to the
number wherewith they are noted as followeth.
            The Discipline of the Churche is, the order that God hath prescribed in his word
                  •
               , for the ruling of the same. cap. 1. The offices and officers of whiche are to bee considered in 
                  Generall, the calling,

                        whereunto to wit, to

                              A certaine office, Chap. 2.
                              Execute his office faithfully. Chap. 3.
                           
                        
                        how it muste be by

                              Election whiche must

                                    be done by

                                          The people, chap. 4.
                                          Examination, chap. 5.
                                       
                                    
                                    Consent (onely) to a man fit for the place, chap. 6.
                                 
                              
                              ordination

                                    By whom it must be: by the eldership, Chap. 7.
                                    The maner how, by

                                          publik praier with the people. cap. 8.
                                          laying on of hands, chap. 9.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Particular, the officers & offices,

                        Simple by thēselues,

                              Bishops

                                    Pastours, chap. 10.
                                    Doctours, chap. 11.
                                 
                              
                              Deacons or church seruants,

                                    Ouerseers, chap. 12.
                                    Distributers, chap. 13.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Compound the Synode Ecclesiasticall,

                              what

                                    Be the parties: Pastours, Doctours, and Elders, chap. 14.
                                    Is the authoritie thereof, chap. 15.
                                 
                              
                              wherein it consisteth: in

                                    placing and displacing, chap. 16.
                                    Cēsures by

                                          VVord, chap. 17.
                                          deed

                                                Suspention, cap 18.
                                                Excommunication, cap. 19.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A DEMONSTRATION
of Discipline.
            CHAP. 1.
            
               The diffinition of Discipline, containeth this
proposition holden by vs.
               THE worde of God describeth perfectly vnto vs, that
forme of gouerning the Church which is lawfull, and
the officers that are to execute the same, frō the which
no Christian Churche ought to swarue. Admonition in the
Preface: Ecclesiasticall discipl. fol. 5. T. C. first booke, pag. 26.
Counter-poyson pag. 8 Discourse of gouernment, pag. 1. &c.
            
            
               The assertion of the BB. and their adherents.
               THe word of God describeth not any exact forme of Discipline,
neither are the offices and officers, namely, particularly
expressed in the Scriptures, but in some points left to
the discretion and libertie of the Churche. Whitgift in preface,
and page 84. to the answere to the Abstract. pag. 33.
               The proofe of the former is the disproofe of the latter,
which is thus declared.
               1 These things write I vnto thee, &c. out of which place
I reason thus. That end which Paul respected in writing vnto
Timothie,1. Tim. 3. 14. 15. doth the holy ghost direct all Ministers vnto for
euer, for it must be kept. 1. Tim. 6. 14. But he wrote to direct
him in the establishing and building of the Church. Therefore
that worde must direct Ministers for euer: and consequently
they neither may adde to, nor take from it, but gouerne
it onely by the rules that be there prescribed.
               2 Euery house ought to be ruled by the orders of the skil
full, wise, and carefull housholder onely: But the Churche is
the house of God, and God is such a housholder: Therefore
the Churche ought to bee ruled by the orders of God onely,
which are no where to be had, but in his word.
               3 That which teacheth euery good way, teacheth also

how the Church must bee gouerned: But the worde of God
teacheth euerie good way: Pro. 2. 9.Pro. 2. 9. therefore it teacheth how
the Church must be gouerned.
               4 We cannot glorifie God, but by obedience to his word,
in all that we doe,1. Cor. 10. 11. we must glorifie God. 1. Cor. 10. 31. Therfore
in all that we doe, there must be obedience to the word,
and consequently in gouerning his Church.
               5 If meate and drinke bee not sanctified vnto vs, but by
the word and prayer, then much l
                     •
                  sse is any thing holy which
is done in the gouernment of the Church besides the worde:
But the former is true by the testimonie of the Apostle, 1.
Tim. 4. 5.1. Tim. 4. 5. therefore the latter must be true also.
               6 All lawfull things are of faith.Rom. 14. 23. Rom. 14. 23. All lawfull
things that are of faith, haue a warrant from the word, for the
worde is the foundation of faith: therefore all things lawfull
haue their warrant from the worde: and consequently euery
lawfull action in the gouernment of the Church.
               7 Either hath God left a prescript forme of gouernment
for the Church, vnder the new Testament: or he is lesse carefull
for it now, then hee was vnder the lawe, for his care is in
guiding it: But hee is as carefull nowe for his Church as hee
was then: Therefore hath hee left a prescript forme to gouerne
it.
               8 Hee that was as faithfull as Moses,Heb. 3. 2. left as cleare instruction,
both for the building of faith, and gouernment of the
Churche, as Moses did: But Christe was as faithfull in Gods
house. Heb. 3. 2. therfore he left as cleare instruction for them
both as Moses, but Moses gaue direction euen for euery particular,
as appeareth in the building of the Tabernacle, and
order of the Priesthood: Therfore hath Christ also giuen particular
direction for the gouernment of the Church.
               9 If the worde of God haue described sufficient Ministers
and Ministeries, for the building of the Church, and keeping
it in good order,Rom. 12. 5. 6. 7. then is out assertion true: But it hath set
downe sufficient for doctrine,1. Co. 12. 28 exhortation, ouerseeing, distributing,Ephe. 4. 11. &c.
and ordering of euery particular Church or generall
Synode: Therefore is our assertion true.
               10 That gouernment which the Apostles taught & planted,See Connterp. pag. 11
                  
is expressed in the word of God: But the Apostles taught
and planted, Pastors and Teachers for instruction, Elders for
ouersight, and Deacons to distribute, and that vniformely in
euery Churche, as appeareth by their writinges and practises:
Therfore a certaine forme of gouernment is expressed in the
worde.
               11 Euery lawfull office and action in the building of the
church, is from heauen. Mat. 21. 25. 26.Matth. 21. 25. 26. Euery thing that is (in
the ordinarie building) from heauen, is reuealed in the word:
Therefore euerie lawfull office and action is reuealed in the
worde.
               12 If God continued (in regarde of the substaunce) the
Church administration, as well as the thinges to bee administred,
then is the forme of Discipline described in the word:
But the former is true, as appeareth by the particulars: for
Priestes, Pastors: for teaching Leuites, or Doctors of the law,
Teachers: for rulers of the Synagogue, Elders: for Leuiticall
lookers to the treasurie, Deacons: for the Sanedrim, the Eldership:
therefore the forme of gouernment is prescribed in
the worde.
               13 Euery wise King that is carefull for his subiectes, setteth
downe lawes for the gouernment of the same, and will
haue them tyed to none other: But Christ is such a King vnto
his Church: Therefore hath hee prescribed lawes vnto his
Church, which none therein can alter or disobey: and consequently,
the certaine forme of gouernment of the Church
is described in the worde.
               14 That which the Ministers must teach the people to obserue,
is set downe in the worde of God, for they may teache
nothing but that which is there,Math. 28. 20 Math. 28. 20. But they are to
teach them to obserue, and bee obedient vnto, the particular
forme of the Church gouernment: Therefore the particular
forme is set downe in the worde.
               15 Euery gouernment consisteth in the gouernours, matter
whereabout they are to be imployed, and maner of doing
it: But in the worde are described all these particulars, as it is
shewed in the ninth reason: Therefore the worde prescribeth
a prescript forme of gouernment.
               
                  
16 The Christian religion shal find,Cyprian in sermone de baptismo Christi. that out of this scripture,
rules of all doctrine haue sprong, and that from hence
doth spring, and hither doth returne, whatsoeuer the Ecclesiasticall
discipline doth containe.
               17 Wee may not giue our selues the libertie to bring in
any thing that other men bring of their will,Cyprian de prescrip. aduersus h
                        •
                     ret. we haue the Apostles
for authours, which themselues brought nothing of
their owne will, but the Discipline which they receiued of
Christ, they deliuered faithfully to the people.
               18 It is adulterous,Cyprian li. 1. Epist. 8. it is sacrilegious, whatsoeuer is ordained
by humane furie, that the diuine dispositon shoulde bee
violated.
               Therefore if Timothie was written vnto, that he might be
directed by the worde,The conclusion. in disposing of the Churches: if the
lawes of God only being the housholder, must bee followed
in the Church, his House: if the worde of God teach vs in euerie
good way, whereof the gouernment of the Churche is
one: if God must be glorified in the ruling of his Churche,
which cannot be, but by obedience to his worde: if nothing
be lawfull, but that which is of faith, warranted by the word:
if God haue shewed himselfe as carefull for his Church vnder
the Gospell, as vnder the law: if Christ was as faithful to
giue direction as Moses: if in the worde bee described sufficient
Ministers and Ministeries, to build vp the Churche: if
that gouernment, which the Apostles taught and practized,
be in the worde: if euery lawfull office and action man ordinarie
building, be from heauen, & reuealed thence by the
worde: if God continued the same forme (in respect of the
substance) in the time of the Gospell that was vnder the laws
if euery wise carefull King, doe set downe lawes for the direction
of his subiects: if the Apostles haue taught vs to obey
that which Christe commaunded: if both the gouernours
matter of gouernment, and maner of doing it bee set downe
in the word: if all that pertaineth to Ecclesiastical Discipline
spring from the scriptures: if wee may bring nothing into
the Discipline of the Churche, but that which the Apostles
haue deliuered vs. Lastly, if that bee adulterous and sacrilegious,
that is not according to the worde: then it muste

needes followe, that God doth describe perfectly vnto vs out
of his worde, that forme of gouernment which is lawfull, &
the officers that are to execute the same: from the which it is
not lawfull for any christian Churche to swarue. And contrariwise,
that is a most vntrue assertion to say, that the officers
and offices are not particularly expressed, but left to the
discretion of the Churche. The reasons that they alleage against
this, are in effect none, and their obiections to these
reasons, not worthie to bee mentioned.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 2.
            EVerie officer in the Churche, must bee placed in some
calling warranted by the word of God, and some congregation
must haue neede of such a one, before hee
be called to any function. Wherein are these propositions.
            1 No calling is lawfull in the Churche,The first proposition. but that which is
directly warraunted out of the worde, vnto him that executeth
it.
            The BB. and their adherents thinke otherwise, as their
practise in ordeyning Archbishops, L. Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons,
Chauncellours, Officials, &c. doth plainly declare.
            2 The name and office of an Archb.The second proposition is contrarie to the
word of God.
            3 No man may be ordained vnto any office in the church
vntill there be such a place voide as he is fit for: T. C. 1. booke
page 61.
            They thinke otherwise, as their making of so many Ministers
at once prooueth, and as is holden, Whitgift, page 222.
            1 The first is prooued thus:Reason for the first proposition. Ioh. 1. 23. 25. If Iohn was constrained to
prooue his Ministerie out of the scriptures when the Priestes
accused him: then is no calling lawfull, that hath not his
warrant in the worde, for if any bee priuiledged, the extraordinarie
Ministers (whereof he was one) are specially excepted:
But hee proueth his Ministerie by the worde, as appeareth by
his answere vnto them, in the 23. verse. Therefore no calling
is lawful in the Church, that hath not his warrant in the
worde.
            2 The callinges vnder the Gospell must haue as good

warrant as they had vnder the lawe, because the light of the
Gospell is (at the least) as cleare as that of the lawe. But there
was neuer any lawfull calling vnder the law (excepting those
that were by myraculous manner confirmed from heauen)
which had not his direct warrant out of the word. Therefore
no calling is lawfull in the Churche, which is not directlie
warranted in the worde.
            3 If Corath, Dathan,Numb. 16. and Abiram (thoughe they were
Leuites) were punished for that they had no warrant for that
which they presumed to take in hand, then is euerie lawfull
calling, both in generall warranted out of the word, and particularly
laid vpon the parties from the Lorde: But the former
is true, as the Historie teacheth vs: Therefore must the
latter needes be true also.
            4 That which giueth comfort vnto a man in the time
of his troubles, must haue a warrant out of Gods worde: But
euery lawfull calling giueth comfort vnto a man in the time
of his troubles: Therefore euerie lawfull calling hath a warrant
out of Gods word.
            5 That which helpeth Gods people forward in godlines,
must haue a warrant out of Gods worde: for God hath promised
a blessing to his owne ordinance onlie: But euery lawfull
calling in the Church, helpeth Gods people forwarde in
godlines: Therefore euerie lawfull calling hath a warrant out
of Gods worde.
            Therefore if Iohn did prooue his calling out of the Scriptures,The cōclusion.
if euerie calling vnder the lawe, was warranted out of
the scriptures: if Corath, &c. were punished for enterprising
that which they had no warrant for out of the scriptures: if
comfort in troubles commeth onely from the scriptures: and
lastly, if euery help to godlines is warranted in the scriptures:
then, &c.
            They confesse all these reasons to bee true, but doe denie
that the Archbish. lord Bish. &c. bee distinct Ministers
from others. Whitgift pag. 303. which wee hold T. C. 2.
booke pag. 438. and proue it thus.
            1 Those thinges that haue diuers efficient causes, are diuers:
Our BB. and the Ministers of the worde haue diuers

efficient causes, for the one is the ordinance of God, the other
the constitution of humane pollicie, as themselues doe confesse:
Therefore they are distinct Ministers from others.
            2 A diuers forme maketh diuers things: the Ministers of
the word, and the Lord Bishops haue diuers formes: for their
ordination (euen in the Church of England) is diuers, seeing
one Lord Bishop may ordaine a Minister: But there must be
three to ordaine one of them: therefore they are distinct Ministers.
            3 Members of one diuision are distinct one from another:
the L. Bishops and ordinarie ministers bee members
of one diuision: for vsually the Ministers bee diuided into
the rulers, and them that are to bee ruled: therefore they are
distinct Ministers.
            4 The things that haue diuers effects, are diuers in them
selues one from another: the L.BB. and other Ministers haue
diuers effects, for the one effecteth rule and gouernment, the
other subiection and obedience: Therefore they are diuers
and distinct Ministers.
            5 They that be imployed about diuers thinges are diuers
one from another: The L.BB. and the ordinarie Ministers, be
imployed about diuers things, for the one is exercised in generall
view of many congregations, and the other in the particular
direction of one: Therefore they bee distinct Ministers.
            6 That which is perpetuall, and that which may be taken
away by men, are distinct one from another: The office of
the Minister is perpetuall, Ephes. 4. 13. and the Bishops may
be taken away as themselues doe confesse: Therfore they are
diuers, and distinct Ministers.
            Therfore if the Ministers of the worde, and Lord BB. proceede
from diuers causes:The conclusion. if they haue their being by diuers
formes: if they be members of one diuision, which (in nature)
cannot bee one: if they produce diuers effects: if they
bee exercised about diuers subiectes: Lastly, if the one bee
perpetuall, and the other but for a time, then must it needes
follow, that they are diuers and distinct Ministers one from
another.
            
               
               The name of an Archbishop,The 2. proposition & reasons for the proofe of it. That the name of archb may be giuen no man. 1. Pet. 5. 4. Heb. 13. 20. Actes. 3. 15. 5. 31. Hebr. 12. 2. and also the office that
he executeth, is contrarie to the worde
of God.
               First the reasons that prooue it vnlawful to giue the name
vnto any man in the church, are these.
               1 No man may haue the name giuen him, which is proper
to our Sauiour Iesus Christe: But the name of Archbishop
is proper vnto our Sauiour Iesus Christe, as appeareth
in the places quoted: therefore no man may haue the name
of Archb. giuen vnto him.
               2 If the name of Pope be therefore odious, because of that
Antichriste, who is intituled therewith, then must also the
name of Archbishop, when it is ascribed vnto any mortall
man, for so much as it is the title of a speciall member of that
kingdome of Antichrist: But the former is true euen by their
owne confession. Whitgift pag. 300. Therefore must the latter
be true also.
               But they obiect diuers things against this, for the proouing
of the name Archb.Obiections for the name of Archb. and answeres thereunto. VVhitegift page. 318. to bee lawfully giuen vnto some
men, which together with their answeres doe brieflie followe.
               1 Obiection. Clemens alloweth of those names, as Polydor
reporteth, lib. 4. cap. 12.
               
                  Answere. Polydor is but the reporter, and M. Iewel hath
prooued euidently against Harding, that Clemens is counterfeite,
and worthie of no credite.
               
                  Obiection. Erasmus saith that Titus was an Archbishop.
               
                  Answere. He spake as the times were wherein hee liued:
but that proueth not that he helde him one in deed, no more
then our naming of the Archbishop of Canterbury, when
wee speake of him, proueth that wee like and allow his authoritie.
               3 Obiection. Anacletus saith that Iames was the first Archbishop
of Ierusalem.
               
                  Answere. He is forged (as our answeres to the Papists haue
shewed) but a witnes of better credite calleth him only a Bishop,
Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 23. and Simon bishop after him, lib. 3.
ca. 22. And Iraen. saith lib. 4. ca. 63. that the Apostles ordained

Bishops euerie where, making no mention of Archbishop.
               4 Obiection. The Councell of Nice Canon 6. mentioneth
a Metropolitan Bishop.
               
                  Answere. That proueth nothing, for it was only as much
as to say, the Bishop of the chiefe citie.
               Secondly the reasons that prooue the office of the Archbishop
vnlawfull be these:That the office of an Archb. is vnlawfull.
               
               1 Euerie Ministerie that is lawfull, must be of God: The
office of the Archbishop is not of God, for that he is not described
in the worde, and them selues confesse that hee is of
humane pollicie: Therefore the office of the Archbishop is
vnlawfull.
               2 That Ministerie whose originall is vnknowen, hath no
warrant from Gods worde, and consequently is vnlawfull:
The originall of the Archb. is vnknowne as they confesse,
Whitegift pag. 351. Therefore it is vnlawfull.
               3 That office which is needles in the church is also vnlawfull
to bee exercised in the same: The office of the Archbishop
is needlesse, for the Ministerie is perfect without it, as
the Apostle proueth, Ephes. 4. 13. Therefore the office of an
Archb. is vnlawfull.
               4 If all the gifts needfull for the prefecting of the church,
be appropriated vnto other Ministeries, then is his Ministerie
vnlawfull: But all the needefull giftes are appropriated vnto
Pastours, Doctours, Elders and Deacons, whereof he is none:
Therefore his office is vnlawfull.
               5 That office is vnlawful, which none may lawfully giue:
But none may lawfully bestowe the office of an Archbishop,
because none can giue any new gifts to adorne him withal:
Therefore his office is vnlawfull.
               This reason beeing vsed of all founde diuines against the
Pope, is of the same value against the Archbishop.
               6 If the office of an Archbishop bee lawefull, then it is either
in respect of his excellēcie aboue other men, or the place
whereof he is aboue other places: But neither of these haue
euer been, neither hereafter can bee: Therefore that office is
vnlawfull.
               Therefore if the office of the Archbishop be not of God:The conclusion.
                  
if the originall of it bee vnknowne: if in the Churche it
be needlesse: if all the giftes that God hath bestowed vppon
his Ministerie bee appropriated vnto those Church officers,
whereof he is none: if none may lawfully bestowe such an
office vpon any: if it can neither bee incident vnto any one
man for his excellencie, nor his place for preheminence:
then must it needes follow, that his office is vnlawfull.
               Caluin in his Institut. booke 4. cap. 11. sect. 7. alleadgeth
diuers reasons to this purpose, and Beza in his booke of Diuorcements,
stretcheth the same to all the inferiour officers
vnder him, saying: Officials, Proctours, Promotours, and all
that swinish filth, now of long time hath wasted the church.
So doth Peter Martyr vppon the Rom. 13. speaking against
ciuill Iurisdiction in Bishops, doth by the same reasons condemne
it in their substitutes.
               But this being the corner stone of their building, they labour
to support it with many props the most speciall wherof
are these.
               1 Obiection. Cypran saith, lib 1. Epist. ad Cornelium,
                  Obiections for the office of the Archb. and answeres thereunto. Neither
haue heresies and schismes risen of any other occasion,
then of that, that the Priest of God is not obeyed, neither one
Priest for the time, and one Iudge for the time in steede of
Christ thought vppon, to whome if the whole brotherhood
woulde bee obedient according to Gods teaching, no man
woulde mooue any thing against the Colledge of Priests.
               
                  Answere. This place is alleadged for the Pope, and the
answere that M. Iewel and others make to it, serueth our
turne: onely let this be noted, that Cyprian speaketh of the
people at Rome, that had receiued another Bishop (besides
Cornelius) who was an heretike: for all the course of his
writings, condemneth this superioritie. It is expoounded by
M. Iewel, booke 1. sect. 4. diuision 5. of euery Bishop: and so
is it by M. Nowel against Dorman, booke 1. pag. 25. and also
by M. Foxe, tom. 1. fol. 93. See T. C. in his 1. replie, page.
98. &c.
               2 Obiection. The authoritie of the Archbishop preserueth
vnitie.
               
                  Answere. Cyprian lib. 4. Epist. 9. saith that vnitie is reserued

by the agreement of Bishoppes, that is of Ministers, one
with another.
               3 Obiection. It compoundeth cōtrouersies, that els would
grow to many heades without any speciall remedie.
               
                  Answere. Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. 13. saith that the plentifull
bodie and companie of Elders, are (as it were) the glewe of
mutuall concord, that if any of our company be authour of
heresie the rest should helpe.
               4 Obiection. Ierome vppon Tit. 1. saith, that in the beginning
a Bishop and Priest (meaning a teaching Elder) were all
one: but when men began to say, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo,
&c. It was decreed that one shoulde bee chosen to beare
rule ouer the rest.
               
                  Answere. From the beginning it was not so: the saying
of Tertul. contra Prax. is fit for this: that is true whatsoeuer
is first, and that is false whatsoeuer is latter: and Ierome saith
in the place alleaged, that this authoritie is by custome and
not by any institution of God, if it had been the best waye
to take away diuisions, the Apostles (in whose times the controuersies
did arise) would haue taken the same order.
               5 Obiectiō. Caluin saith that the Apostles had one among
them to gouerne the rest.
               
                  Answere. That was not in superioritie, but for order to
propound the matters, gather the voyces & such like, which
is meete to be in euery well ordered meeting: but his authoritie
is no more ouer the rest, then the speaker in the Parliament
hath ouer the other knights and Burgesses.
               6 Obiection. Paul was superior to Timothie and Titus.
               
                  Answere. Paul and they had diuers offices, whereof the Apostles
office was the chiefe, the like is to bee saide of Timothie
and Titus, hauing superioritie ouer the other Ministers,
for that they were Euangelists, a degree aboue ordinarie Ministers.
               Therefore if the place alleaged out of Cyprian,The conclusion. make nothing
for the Archb. if vnitie be not preserued by him, but by
the Bishops among themselues: if his authoritie make nothing
to the taking away of controuersies: if it bee meerely
inuented by man, and not from the beginning: if it bee by

custome, and not by any ordinaunce of God: if neither one
Apostle ouer the rest, nor any of them ouer the Euangelistes,
nor of the Euangelists ouer the Pastours and Teachers, will
serue to proue their authoritie: then must it needes followe,
that it is vtterly vnlawfull.
               No man may be ordained vnto any office in the Church,
vntill there be such a place voide as hee is fit for,The 3. proposition & reasons for it. T. C. booke
1. pag. 61. Whitgift, pag. 222.
               1 As was the 12. place for Matthias, so is a certain church,
to euery Church officer: But Matthias was not ordained vnto
the place of an Apostle,Act. 1. 20. vntill Iudas by hanging himselfe
had made it voide, Act. 1. 20. Therefore may none be ordained
vnto any office in the Church, before the place where he
may be imployed, be destitute of such a one.
               2 As the Apostles did in planting of the churches, so must
it be done in the building thereof for euer: But they ordeined
neither Pastour, Teacher, Elder, or Deacon, butto some
certaine church that had need thereof: Therfore may none
be ordained vnto any office, vntill a place be voide that hath
need of him.
               3 Those thinges that be of one beginning, continuance,
and ending, cannot bee one, before or after another: But a
Minister, and the execution of his Ministerie in a lawful standing
be so, for they be relatiues, and haue reference one vnto
the other: Therfore a Minister ought not to be ordained before
there be a Ministerie whereunto he is to be allotted.
               4 If none ought to be called to be a shepheard, that hath
no flocke of sheepe to keepe: neither any watchman, that is
not allotted to some place to watch: then may none bee ordained
to any office, before there be a place void for him: for
Ministers are in this sense tearmed shepheards and watchmen:
But the former is true, as euery simple man can easilie
perceiue: Therefore the latter is true also.
               5 To doe contrary to the precepts and practise of the Apostles
is vnlawfull: But to ordaine any officer, without a
certaine place wherein he may bee imployed, is contrarie to
the precepts and practise of the Apostles, as it appeareth, Tit.
1. 5. Act. 14. 23. Therfore to ordaine any officer of the church

without a certaine place whereunto he is to be allotted, is vnlawfull.
               6 It was ordained that no Elder,Councel Calced. ca. 6. art. 15. Deacon, or any other Ecclesiasticall
officer, should be ordained a Apolelymenos, that
is loosely, or let at randone (but as afterwarde is expounded)
specially in a Church, citie or towne.
               7 The ordination that is made without a title,Concil Vrbanum test. Grat. di. 70. let it bee
voide: and in what Church one is intituled, let him there remaine.
               8 Hee complaineth that Ministers were ordained, beeing
chosen by no church, and so went here and there,Ierom ad Nepotian. hauing no
certaine place.
               9 That action, which neuer is read to be practised, but by
idolators is vnlawfull: To haue wandering officers, is onely
found to be in idolaters, as appeareth Iudg 17. 8. Therefore it
is vnlawfull.
               Therefore, If the Apostles ordained not Matthias,The conclusion. vntill the
place was voide: if in planting of Churches, they euer allotted
officers to their proper places, if Minister and Ministerie
be of one beginning, continuance and ending: if it bee with
a Minister and his ministerie, as with a shephearde and his
flocke, that hee cannot bee the one, but in respect of hauing
the other: if it be lawfull to transgresse the precepts and practise
of the Apostles: if no Minister in the church bee ordained
at randone: if the ordination that is without a title
bee voide: if Ierome complained of it, as a great fault in his
time: if no example be found of it, but in Idolaters: then it
must needes followe, that to ordaine any Church-officer,
vntill there be such a place voide as he is fit for, is vtterly vnlawful:
and so the Bb. making of manie Ministers at once, &
licencing of wandering Preachers, is contrarie to the worde
of God.
               They will haue something to say for euery action they do
be it neuer so shameful: that which they alleagde for this, is,
that Paul and Barnabas did wander.
               The Apostles office (and so the Euangelists as assistants vnto
them) was to preach the worde, and plant Churches in euery
part of the worlde: but the order that they left, is a president

for vs, which is that euerie Churche haue their proper
officers, and that there be no other els where to be found.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 3.
            EVerie church-officer,Our assertion. ought to execute the office committed
vnto him, with all faithfull diligence, and consequently
bee continuallie resident vppon his charge,
T. C. booke 1. page 65.
            The denie not the proposition,Their assertion. but the consequent that is
inferted vpon it, as appeareth by their writings, Whitgift pag.
246. and by their daylie practise in giuing dispensations for
many benefices. The reasons we alleage to proue the necessitie
of perpetuall residence, and the vnlawfulnes of nonresidence
be these that follow.
            1 A shepheard hath a flocke to the ende to feede it continually:
The Minister is a shepheard, and his charge a flocke:
Therefore he ought to feede it continually, and consequently
to be perpetually resident, for how can he feede them frō
whom he is absent.
            2 Where God doth place any man, there his continuall
trauaile is needfull, for God is most wise in disposing euerie
thing: But God placeth euery right Minister ouer that people
which is his charge: Therefore his continuall trauaile is
needful there, and consequently he may not discontinue.
            3 Flockes that are in danger, are (by carefull shepheards)
watched night and day, Luke 2. 8. Euery congregation is a
flocke in danger, for the enemie goeth about like a roaring
lyon, 1. Pet. 5. 8. and soweth tares whilest men sleepe. Matth.
13. 25. Therefore euery congregation is to be watched night
and day by the Minister thereof, and consequently hee may
not be nonresident.
            4 If his duetie to them requireth so muche trauaile, as
may continually set him on work, then may he not bee nonresident:
But it is euident (that it doth so) to all them that either
know by the worde of God, what studie, prayer, doctrine
exhortation, &c. bee required of him, or maketh any conscience
of giuing account for the soules committed to their
charge: Therefore may not they be nonresident.
            
               
5 If the Minister cannot apply himselfe fruitfully, to the
capacity of his people, vnlesse he haue particular knowledge
of their disposition, and capacitie, then is it not lawfull for
him to be nonresident: for by continuall residence among
them, he may know them and not els: But the former is true,
as the small knowledge that the people get by generall teaching,
doth euidently declare: Therefore it is not lawfull for
him to be nonresident.
            6 If the Ministers of the Gospell, bee as narrowly tied to
their charges, as the Priests vnder the law, then may they not
be nonresident: For they were alwaies readie in the Temple,
to answere the doubts, 1. Sam. 1. 9. But it is cleare that they
are, because men are now as hardly trained vnto godlinesse,
and the enemie is as wrathfull as hee was then: Therefore
they may not be nonresident.
            7 If the Minister must be an example to his people, then
must he bee daily present with them, that they may beholde
him: But the former is true, 1. Tim. 4. 12. Therfore is the latter
true also.
            8 Hee whom the sheepe are to follow in and out, & must
know by the voyce, ought to bee continually among them:
A good Minister of the worde is such a one, Ioh. 10. 4. Therfore
he must be resident among them.
            9 None can bee alwayes readie to feede his flocke, that is
absent from it: Euery Minister must be alwaies ready to feed
his flocke, because it dependeth vpon him, 1. Pet. 5. 2. Therefore
euery Minister is to be resident with his flocke.
            10 Hee that must take heede to his flocke, watch ouer it,
and feede it, must be resident continually with it: Euery Minister
must doe so, Actes 20. 28. Therefore, &c.
            11 If Satan be the cause of nonresidence, then is it vtterlie
vnlawfull: But Satan is the cause of it, 1. Thes. 2. 17. 18.
Therefore it is vtterly vnlawfull.
            12 That which abridgeth the loue of God to his people,
and comfort to the Minister, that same is vnlawfull: But not
to be resident doth both: Therefore it is vnlawfull.
            13 That which hindereth the louing familiaritie that
shoulde bee betwixt the Minister and his people, that same is

vnlawfull: But nonresidence doth so, for it maketh them
straunge one to another, and argueth small loue in him towards
them: Therefore it is vnlawfull.
            14 To be absent from them that haue interest in vs, and
continuall need of vs, is vnlawfull, which wee can see to bee
true in our seruants, &c. But the congregation hath an interest
in the Minister, and continuall neede of him: Therefore
it is vnlawfull for him to be absent from them.
            15 If the Priestes might not dwell farre from the Temple,
then may not Ministers bee nonresident: But the former is
true, as appeareth by this, that they had houses builded close
to the Temple, 1. Chron. 28. 13. Therefore the latter is true
also, seeing the residence of the one is as needful as the other,
as appeareth in the sixt reason.
            16 Let no Clarke be placed in two charges,Concil Ni. canon 15. for it is filthie
marchandize, and no man can serue two maisters, and
euery one must tarrie in that place wherevnto he is called.
            17 Damasus compareth them that set ouer their charges
to others,Conc. to. 2. to harlottes that put out their children, that they
may giue them selues to lust the sooner.
            18 It was ordayned that none,Theod. lib. 1. cap. 19. eyther B or Elder, shoulde
goe from citie to citie.
            Therefore, if a Minister haue the charge of a flocke committed
vnto him,The conclusion. to the ende to feede it: if God place men, to
the ende to haue them there imployed: if flockes in daunger
haue neede of continuall watche: if the Ministers duetie to
his flocke requireth all that trauayle that he can performe: if
he can not be fruitfullie profitable vnto them, without continuall
residence: if his residence be as strictlie required as
theirs vnder the lawe: if he cannot be a paterne vnto them
without he be resident: if they can not follow him, nor know
him if he be absent: if he cannot bee alwayes readie to feede
his flocke, vnles he be there: if he cannot take heede to them,
feede them, and watche ouer them, without his presence: if
Satan be the authour of nonresidencie: if his absence abridge
Gods loue to them, and comfort from him selfe: if absence
be an hinderance to the louing familiaritie that shoulde bee
betwixt him and them: if they haue interest in him, & continuall

neede of him: if he may no more be absent, then the
priestes dwell from the Temple: if the Councell of Nice did
vpon good grounds forbid it: if absence bee like to the practise
of an harlot: if it be not lawfull to goe frō place to place,
then is nonresidence vnlawful, and the practize thereof contrarie
to the worde of God.
            The bellie (for which nonresidencie is defended and practized)
hath no eares, therefore it is that they heare not
these euident soundes, yet haue they verie little to say for
it, so grosse is the error thereof: so much as hath any shew
of reason, is here set downe and answered.
            1 Obiection. Two parishes may bee vnited, why then may
not one haue charge of them both before, when they be two.
            
               Answere. Because one shephearde may keepe one flocke
though it be great, but he can not keepe two, being very little,
and going in diuers pastures, agayne, one man may haue
so many flockes as he can lead in and out euery Sabboth, to
the exercises of religion, which is very playne that he cannot
doe, to more then one Congregation.
            2 Obiection Parishes were deuided by men, as especially by
Denis the Monke, Pope of Rome.
            
               Aunswere. That is vntrue, for the Apostles deuided the
Church into Congregations, and placed Elders ouer euerie
one of them, as the whole course of the Actes and Epistles of
the Apostles prooueth: and Whitgift confesseth page 250.
Therefore these mistes, notwithstanding nonresidencie, must
needes be vnlawfull: and certainly those that haue any sparkle
of conscience, feare of God, or loue to their flockes, will
neuer defende it, much lesse enter into the practize of it.
         
         
            CHAP. 4.
            IT belongeth to the Church,Our assertion. to make choise of those officers
which Christ would haue placed in the same: T. C.
2. booke 1. part. pag. 193. Ecclesiast. Discip. fo. 40. & Whitgift
confesseth it pag. 164.
            They denie this, as their denying of all the arguments that
be brought for it doeth prooue, Whitgift pag. 154. 166. &c.
and their practize of allowinge patrons, and also being such

them selues doeth euidentlie declare.
            If the former be proued true, then the latter must returne
to Antichrist, which is thus declared.
            1 That which was the continuall and constant practise of
the Church in the time of the Apostles, that same is to be followed
for euer, which appeareth by this, that the ordinances
giuen from God by Paule. 1. Tim. 6. 14. are enioyned to bee
kept vntill Christ come to iudgement: But it was the cōstant
and the continuall practize of the Churches, them to haue a
stroke in the choyse of their owne ecclesiasticall officers, Act.
1. and 26. where the Apostles presented two, to the peoples liking:
whereof God was to be prayed vnto, to make one an Apostle,
Act. 6. 3. where the Church is willed to choose their
Deacons, and Act. 14. 25. where they gaue their consent in the
choosing of their Elders, by the stretching foorth of their
handes: Therefore it belongeth to the church to thoose their
owne Church-officers.
            2 If the people had an interest in their liking of their teaching
Leuites,Num. 8. 9. (which were of the tribe of Aaron) then much
more must the people now, for there was greater likelihood,
that they were sent of God, then any of the common sorte of
men: But the former is true, as appereth by the maner of the
setting of them aside vnto that office in the lawe: Therefore
must the latter needes be true also.
            3 That which partayneth vnto all, ought to be approued
of all the Congregation: But euery Ministerie in the Church
pertayneth to all the congregation: Therefore, authoritie to
approoue of them, pertayneth to all the congregation.
            4 That election which is most effectuall to bring the people
to obedience, is of all other the best, and to abridge it, is
vnlawfull: But election by common consent, is most effectuall
to bring the people to obedience, when they shall see
him teache or rule, whome they them selues haue chosen:
Therefore election by the Church, is the best, and all other
kindes of elections vnlawfull.
            5 That election whiche procureth greatest reuerence of
the people to their Teachers and Rulers is meetest, and all others
vnlawfull: But for the people to consent in the election

of their Gouuernours, procureth greatest reuerence, in
their heartes towardes them: Therefore election by the people
is the best, and all others be vnlawfull.
            
               Testimonies of the ancient writers.
               6 The Minister should be chosen (the people beeing present)
in the eyes of all,Cyprian booke 1. epist. 3. and should be by the common iudgement
and testimonie approoued worthie and fitte, &c. Therfore
this is the lawfull vocation by the word of God, where
those which are chosen, bee appointed by the consent and
approbation of the people. For which also, hee bringeth diuers
authorities out of the Scriptures.
               7 That is truely and certainlie a diuine election of a Bishop,Ambrose epist 82. Ierome ad Ruffinum.
which is made by the whole Church.
               8 Let the people haue authoritie to choose their Clarkes
and Ministers.
               9 They runne (speaking of the life of the Clarkes) to Bishops
suffragans certaine times of the yeare,Ad Nepotianum. and bringinge
some summe of money,This is right our English fashion. they are anoynted and ordayned,
being chosen of none, and afterwarde the Bishop without anie
lawfull election, is chosen in huggermuger of the Canons,
or Prebendaries onely, without the knowledge of the
people.
               10 In the Oration of the death of his Father,Nazianze. approueth
the election by the people, at large, and confuteth them that
would hinder it.
               11 When he appointed Eradius to succeede him,Augustin. sayeth,
it was the approued right & custome, that the whole church
should eyther choose or consent vnto their Bishop.
               12 Antimius choosing a Bishop without the peoples cō
                  sent,Basil. epi. 58
filled all Armenia with sedition.
               13 Why did Peter cōmunicate the election with the Disciples?
least the matter should haue turned to a braule,Chrisost. in Act. 1. and
haue fallen to a contention.
            
            
               Testimonies of the generall Councels.
               14 It is meete that you should haue power,Concil. Ni. teste Theo. both to choose
and to giue their names that are worthie to bee amonge the
Cleargie, and to doe all thinges absolutely according to the

lawes and decrees of the Church, and if it happen any to dye
in the Church, then those which were last taken, are to bee
promoted, to the honour of him that is dead, if they be worthie,
and if the people choose them.
               15 Let the people choose, and the Bishop approoue, and
seale vp the election with them.The same Conc test. hist. tripart. lib. 2.
               
               16 In an Epistle to Damasus,Conc. constan. test. tri par. hist. lib. 9. cap. 14. Ambrose, &c. sayeth, Wee
haue ordayned Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, &c. the
whole citie decreeing the same: and Fl
                     •
                  uianus was appointed
Bishop of Antioch, the whole citie appointing him.
               17 When he hath bin examined in all these,Concil. car. tag. can. 1. and founde
fullie instructed, then let him bee ordayned Bishop, by the
common consent of the Clearkes and lay people.
               18 Let not him be counted a priest in the Church,Conci. Toletan. test. dist. 51. whom
the Cleargie, and people of that Citie, where he is, doe not
choose.
               19 If any Bishop after the death of his predecessor,Concil. Gabil. can. 10. be chosen
of any, but of the Bishops of the same prouince, & of the
Cleargie and Citizens, let another be chosen: and if it bee otherwise,
let the ordination be voyde and of none effect.
            
            
               Testimonies out of the Emperours lawes.
               20 Following the doctrine of the holy Apostles,Iusti. in co. &c. wee
ordayne, that as oft as it shall fall out, that the Ministers place
shalbe voyde in any citie, that voyces be giuen of the inhabiters
of that citie, that hee (of three whiche for their right
faith, holines of life, & other things, are most approoued) bee
chosen to the Bishopricke which is moste meete of them.
               21 Being not ignorant of the holy canons: that the holy
Church should vse her honour the more freely,Carol. magnus dist. 63. sacrorū canonum. we assent vnto
the ecclesiasticall order, that the Bishops be chosen, by the
election of the Cleargie and people.
               22 He decreed, that he should be Bishop of Rome,Lodouicus Caro. filius whom
all the people of Rome should consent to choose.
               23 Lodouicke the seconde,Platina in vita Adriani secundi. commaunded by his letters,
the Romanes to choose their owne Bishop, not looking for
other mens voyces, which (being straungers) could not so
well tell what was done in the common wealth, where they
were straungers, and that it appartayned to the citizens.
               
                  
24 Let the people (sayeth Otho the Emperour) choose,
and I will approoue it.
            
            
               The testimonies of the newe writers.
               25 The newe writers, as Musculus, in his common places,
in the title of Magistrates: Bullinger vpon 1. Tim. 4. Caluin
Institut. booke 4. chap. 3. sect. 15. Harmon. confes. Heluet.
chap. 18. and many others are on our side in this behalf.
               26 If there be none that write against it, but the papistes,
and no argumentes vsed against it, but those whiche be borrowed
out of the popishe writers: then doeth it belong to the
Church, to choose their owne Church-officers: But the former
is true, as all that doe read them, that write of this argument
doe knowe, and as is manifest, by comparing Pighius,
Hosius, &c. with Whitgift: Therefore the latter is true also.
               Therefore seeing the interest of the Church in choosing of
their Church-officers,The cōclusion. T. C. secōd booke, 1. part. pa. 212. is grounded vpon the worde of God,
both in commaundement, and continuall practize, both in
the olde and newe Testament, seeing it is warranted by the
light of common reason, seeinge it is commended vnto vs
by the manifolde practize of all auncient times, so long as anie
sinceritie remayned, not only in the time of persecution,
but also of peace: seeing it hath bin confirmed by so manie
generall Councells, and ratified by the decrees of so manie
Emperours: seeing it hath such a cloude of witnesses, both
of ancient and latter times, of the best approued writers: seeing
none doe set them selues against it, but the papistes, or
they that invade it onely with the same weapons that are fetched
out of the popes armorie: it must needes followe, that
it belongeth vnto the Church to choose their Church-officers:
and that the taking away of this freedom, abridgeth the
libertie that Christe hath endowed his Church withall, and
bringeth her into great bōdage, as Musculus truly affirmeth.
            
            
               Their obiections against those things, are these:
               1 Obiection. They were then vnder the crosse, fewe in number,
and therefore it was easilie knowen who were fit.
               
                  Answere. The Gospell was dispersed thorowe out all Asia,
Africa, and much of Europe, and they could lesse keepe
togither, or meete, and therfore that maketh rather for vs.
               
                  
2 Obiection. We haue many hypocrites, to whom it were
daungerous to committ such waightie actions.
               
                  Answere. It is true, that we haue many: but it is a principle
in hypocrisie, to bee forwardest in such publike actions,
that they may get fame thereby.
               3 Obiection. They had knowledge to doe it, but our people
be ignoranted.
               
                  Answere. We should also finde our people to haue knowledge,
if they had teaching: but howsoeuer they choose, they
can not haue worse then ordinarily are chosen by the Bishops
and patrons.
               4 Obiection. The Church was not then established.
               
                  Answere. That is vntrue, for though it wanted the helpe
of Magistrates, yet the Apostles could and did better establish
without them, then we can with the helpe of them: but if this
order might be altered, it had bene fitter then, for nowe the
Magistracie may compounde the differences of the Elders,
which helpe then they lacked.
               5 Obiection. Drunkards, papistes, &c. will choose them
that be like them selues, and we knowe the best disposed bee
alwayes the fewest.
               
                  Aunswere. Such are not of the Church, but without, 1.
Cor. 5. 12. and therefore are not to meddle in any holy action:
but if the people should choose an vnmeete man, the eldershippe
that gouerneth the action, is to reforme them: besides
this, if Gods order had hir place, the schooles of the prophetes
would sende them none, (for the ministers especially)
to make choyse of, but meete men, that whomsoeuer they
tooke, he should be founde sufficient.
               6 Obiection. Paule commaundeth 1. Timo. 5. 22. to laye
his handes on no man rashlie: therefore one did it.
               
                  Answere. He teacheth what to doe for his part, & though
others would be rashe, yet he should not ioyne with them in
it, as appeareth in the latter ende of that same verse, for that
is asscribed vnto him, whiche also belonged vnto others, because
he was the director: Caluine and Musculus expounde
the place so.
               7 Obiection. The Councell of Laodicea, decreed, that the

people should not elect.
               
                  Answere. That is, as Caluin taketh it vpon Actes 16. they
might not elect alone, without the direction of some graue
and good minister, which should be the maner in the elections,
that (according to Gods worde) we desire.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 5.
            NOne is to be admitted vnto any publike office in the
Church, vntill he be thorowly examined by the Eldership,
both concerning his state of Christianitie, &
abilitie to that place whereto he is to be called, T. C. 1. book,
page 38. Disci. Ecclesiast. fol. 46. They thinke one may doe
it, as appeareth by the booke of ordering, &c. Whitgift page
134. and 135. and their slight passing it ouer, thorowe the
Archdeacons handes.
            
               The former is prooued, and the latter disprooued thus:
               1 Those that are to ordayne, must haue particular knowledge
of the parties to bee ordayned, (or els they breake the
rule prescribed them, 1. Tim. 5. 22.) whiche cannot be without
examination: But the Eldershippe is to ordayne euerie
Church-officer, as shall appeare in the Chap. of Ordination:
Therefore it belongeth to the Eldership to examine, &c.
               2 The matter of greatest importance in the gouernment
of the Church, must be done by the most able gouuernours
of the same: The approuing or disprouing of Church-officers,
is the matter of greatest importance, because the consequence
of ruling well is the best, or ill the worst: and the Eldership
is the Senate of most able gouernours in the church,
as shall appeare in the chap. of Eldership: Therefore the Eldership
is to examine, &c.
               3 The way whereby a mans insufficiencie is best espied,
and his abilitie discerned, is the fittest to examine them that
are to be admitted: But by the Eldership (consisting of diuers)
his insufficiencie is best espied, and his abilitie best discerned,
for the common prouerbe telleth vs, That many eyes doe see
more then one: Therefore it belongeth to the Eldership. &c.
               4 They are to examine Church-officers, that are least subiect
to be blinded with partialitie: But the Eldershipp is least

subiect to partialitie, both for that they be many, who are not
so easilie ouer-ruled by affection or fauour, as one, as also
(and that especially) for that it being the Lordes owne ordinance
(as shall appeare) wee are to perswade our selues, that
his spirit shall guyde them: Therefore it belongeth to the Eldership,
&c.
               5 The way that was vsed in the Apostles time in examining,
is of vs to bee followed, vnles some reason out of the
worde to perswade the conscience, can be alleadged to the
contrarie, which none haue euer yet done: But many vsed in
the Apostles time to examine, as appeareth in choosinge out
one to be in the place of Iudas, Act. 1. 22. 23. and fit men for
Deacons, Actes. 6. 5. whereof the gouuernours especially
were some, for that they were to ordayne vpon knowledge,
as is saide in the first reason: Therefore it belongeth to the
Eldership, &c.
               6 They whose testimonie the people may best credit, are
to examine them that are to be admitted: but the people may
best credite the iudgement of a companie of able and sufficient
men, which the Eldershippe rightlie established, must
needes be: Therefore it belongeth to the Eldership, &c.
               7 Examination belongeth vnto them which may moste
perswade the people of his sufficiencie, and so procure greatest
reuerence vnto him in his place: But the examination by
the Eldership is such: Therefore it belongeth to the Eldershippe,
&c.
               Therefore if they that are to ordayne, must examine: if it
be a matter of greatest waight in the gouuernement of the
Church, and they the most able to dispatch it: if by them his
sufficiencie or insufficiencie be best founde out: if they bee
hardliest carried away with affection or partialitie: if the examination
was such in the Apostles time: if the people may
(in reason) giue most credite to the examination that is by
such: if that kinde of examination perswade the people best
of his sufficiencie, and procure him greatest reuerence in his
place: then must it needes followe, that it partayneth to the
Eldership to examine those that are to be admitted to anie
office in the Church.
               
                  
There is nothing obiected against this, that hath anie
shewe of reason in it, and therefore it were needles to set
anie thing downe.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 6
            BEfore consent be giuen to any man vnto any calling in
the Church, it must appeare (by sufficient triall, & due
examination) that he is qualified with those giftes, that
the worde of God requireth in one of that place, Discip. Ecclesiast.
fol. 44. T. C. 2. booke, 1. part, page 368. and in manie
other places.
            They gainsay this in two points: first, in maintayning their
reading ministerie: secondlie, in gouerninge the Church, by
their commissaries and officialls: whiche both shalbe ouerthrowen,
if we prooue these two propositions followinge, to
be true by the worde of God.
            No man ought to bee receyued vnto the ministerie,The 1. proposition. but
such as be able to teache the trueth and conuince the gainesayers.
            The Church ought not to be gouerned by commissaries,The 2. proposition.
officialls and chauncellors.
            1 He that may be receyued into the ministerie,The 1. proposition is thus prooued. must bee
able to teache the people, whatsoeuer Christ hath commaunded,
Matth. 28. 20. Onely he that is able to teache the trueth,
and conuince the gainsayers, can teache the people whatsoeuer
Christ hath commaunded: Therefore none must bee receiued
into the the ministerie, but such as be able to teache, &c.
            2 That which is to be done conditionally, may not bee
done, if that condition be not kept: Men are to bee receyued
into the ministerie conditionally, that is, if they be vnreproueable,
Tit. 1. 5. 6. Therefore if they be not such as bee there
described, they may not bee receyued: and consequentlie,
none may be receyued, but such as be able to teach, &c.
            3 That which cannot be done without the manifest breach
of Gods commaundement, may not bee done at all: To receyue
any that be not able to teache, is a manifest breache of
Gods commaundement, 1. Tim. 3. 1. Tit. 1. 9. Therefore no
man ought to be receiued into the ministerie, that is not able
to teache, &c.
            
               
4 They whom the Lord refuseth to be his ministers, may
not be receyued into the ministerie: for the ministerie beeing
the Lordes haruest, wee may admit none to labour therein,
but onely such, as he hath giuen liking of, by the rules of his
worde: The Lorde refuseth to be his ministers, all those that
can not teache, Hosea 4. 6. Therefore such as are not able to
teache, may not bee receyued, and consequentlie none may
be receyued, but those that be able to teache, &c.
            5 He that may be admitted into the ministerie, must bee
able to diuide the worde of God aright, 2. Tim. 2. 15. Onelie
he that is able to teache and conuince the gainsayers, can diuide
the worde of God aright: Therefore none may bee admitted
into the ministerie, but he that is able to teache, &c.
            6 He that may be admitted into the ministerie, must haue
a treasurie, furnished with olde thinges and newe, and must
be able to bring it foorth as occasion shall serue, Mat. 13. 25.
Onely he that is able to teache, &c. is such a one: Therefore
onely he may be admitted, &c.
            7 He that can espie the enimie, and giue warning aforehande
howe to resist him, may bee receyued into the ministerie,
Ezek. 33. 7. None can espye the enimie, and giue warning
aforehande howe to resiste him, but he that is able to
teache, &c. Therefore none may be admitted into the ministerie,
but he that is able to teache. &c.
            8 He that leadeth him selfe, and his people into hell, may
not be admitted into the ministerie: Hee that is not able to
teache and conuince the gainsayer, leadeth him selfe and his
people into hell, Mat. 15. 14. Therefore he that is not able to
teache, &c. may not be admitted into the ministerie.
            9 He that preacheth not,August. lib. de past. but holdeth his peace, murdereth
            10 He that preacheth not,Gregor. 1. epist. 33. is not sent, and so he begetteth
no fayth in man.
            11 In that S. Paule requireth that a Bishoppe should bee
wise, he barreth those, that vnder the name of simplicitie,Ierome ad Oecumen. excuse
the follie of ministers.
            12 We condemne all vnmeete Ministers,Confes. Heluet. not endued with
giftes necessarie for a shephearde that should feed his flocke.
Therefore, if a Minister must teache vnto his people all

that Christ hath commaunded, if none may be made ministers,
but conditionally, if they be qualified with giftes meete
for the same, if vnpreaching Ministers can not be made without
the manifest breach of the commaundement of God: if
they may not be made ministers, whom the Lorde refuseth
to haue: if euery minister must haue a treasurie well furnished,
and be able to bring foorth of it when need requireth:
if euery minister must haue skill to see the enemie, and to
giue warning aforehande howe to resiste him: if vnlearned
ministers draw their people to hell after them: if he that preacheth
not, be a murtherer: if he be not sent, and so doe no
good: if he be barred from the ministerie: lastlie, if hee bee
condemned, as not to be in such a place: then must it needes
followe, that none many be receyued into the ministerie, but
such as be able to teache the trueth, and to conuince the
gainsayer.
            Many are the argumentes that be alleadged to this purpose,
and many moe may be alleadged, (for the whole course
of the scriptures tende therevnto) the testimonie of all sortes
of writers, is very plentifull for this purpose: yea of the verie
Canon lawe, (as the authour of the Abstract hath learnedlie
prooued) and yet doe not our Prelates rest in the same,
but haue sett them selues (though in a sillie maner) against
it, in this sorte that followeth.
            1 Obiection. There must be reading in the Church, therfore
a reading ministerie, Whitgift pag. 252.
            
               Answer. By that reason we must haue an officer for euerie
particular action, for there must be breaking of bread in
the Church, and powring of water: but it followeth not, that
therefore there must be one, whose office must bee onely to
breake bread, or to powre water.
            2 Obiection. It is better to haue readers then none, for
preachers can not be had for euery congregation.
            
               Answere. It is not better, for if they had none, they would
seeke for him that they should haue: whereas now, they that
haue a reader onely, think them selues in case good inought;
but if there be such wante of preachers, why are so many of
the most diligent and able ones turned out?
            
               
3 Obiection. It is impossible to haue Preachers eueriewhere,
and such as can be had, must be taken.
            
               Answere. Sometimes you say all is well: and is it now impossible
that our state should obey the Lordes ordinaunces:
this is the greatest disgrace to it that can be: and yet it followeth
not, for no necessitie may warrant vs, to violate the decrees
of the highest.
            4 Obiection. It were vncharitablenes to turne them out
that bee bare readers, for so they, their wiues and children
might begge.
            
               Answere. This is to sell mens souls for morsels of bread:
shall we rather feare the begging of three or foure, then the
damnation of 1000. but they may bee otherwayes prouided
for: they neede not begge, many of them may returne to
their occupations againe.
            So that all these obiections notwithstanding, the conclusion
remaineth sure, which is grounded vppon so many certaine
and vnmoueable foundations.
            
               The Churche ought not to be gouerned by Commissaries,
and Officialls, and Chauncellors.
               1 They which are no Elders of the Church,The 2. proposition is thus prooued. haue nothing
to doe in the gouernement of the same, 1. Tim. 5. 17. These
Chauncellours, Commissaries and officialls, are no Elders in
the Church: whether we expounde Elder for a minister, and
him also, that is assistant vnto the minister in ouerseeing the
Church, or for a minister onely as they do: for none of them
be ministers, and if they be, they doe not rule in this respect,
that they are ministers: Therefore the Church ought not to
be gouerned by them.
               2 They that must gouerne the Church of God, must haue
a warraunt for their so doing, from Iesus Christ the head of
the Church: But Chauncellors, &c. haue no warraunt so to
doe, from Iesus Christ the head of the Church: Therefore the
Church ought not to be gouerned by them.
               3 Those whose names, office, and practize, be deriued frō
Antichrist, may haue nothing to doe in the gouuernement of
the Church: for who will suffer his wife to be gouuerned by
the master of a brothelhouse: But the names, offices, and practize

of Chauncellours, officialles, and commissaries be such,
which is plaine by this, that they haue their grounde in that
filthie dunghill the Cannon lawe: Therefore they may haue
nothing to doe in the gouernement of the Church.
               4 They that being inferiours, doe proudly tyrannize ouer
their superiours, ought not to rule the Church of God, for it
is meete it should be ruled by modest, humble and orderlie
men: But such are they (for being inferiours to the ministers
of the worde, as our aduersaries doe confesse, and is plaine also
by the cannon lawe, they crowe ouer them as if they were
their slaues:) and if they doe not so, they can doe nothinge:
Therefore they ought not to rule the Church of God.
               5 They that liue by the faultes of men, are not fitt to rule
the Church of God: for they will rather increase offences,
(that their gayne may increase) then orderlie lessen them, as
experience (also) prooueth: But such are all Chauncellours,
commissaries and officialls: Therefore they ought not to rule
the Church of God.
               Therefore, if Chauncellours, commissaries, and officialls
be no Elders of the Church: if they haue no warraunt from
Iesus Christe, the head of the Church: if their names, offices,
and practize, be deriued from Antichrist: if their office compell
them (being inferiours) to tyrannize ouer their superiours:
if they liue onely by the faultes and offences of men:
then it must needes followe, that the Church of God ought
not to be gouerned by them.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 7.
            EVerie officer of the Church must bee ordayned by the
laying on of the handes of the Eldershippe, T. C. 2.
booke, 1. part pag. 274. Discip. Eccle. fol. 53.
            They say it ought to be done by the Bishop alone, Whitg.
pag. 196. their daily practize doeth likewise shewe it.
            The former is prooued, and the latter disprooued by these
reasons following.
            1 As Churchofficers were ordayned in the Apostles time,
so must they be continually, for they did lay the plot, according
wherevnto the Church must bee built vnto the ende:

but they were ordayned in the Apostles time by the layinge
on of the handes of the Eldershippe, Actes 6. 6. and 13. 3.
Therefore the Church-officers must be ordained by layinge
on of the handes of the Eldership.
            2 Church-officers must be ordayned by them that haue
warrant from the worde, to assure the parties ordayned, that
they are called of God: Onely the Eldershippe hath such a
warraunt, 1. Tim. 4. 14. Therefore they ought to be ordained
by the Eldership.
            3 Many of the sentences alleadged before, out of Councells,
Emperours, lawes, histories, and sounde writers, both
olde and newe, for election not to be by one, but by diuers:
speake also of ordination, and so are forcible to this purpose.
            4 Euagrius came to the office of a Bishoppe vnlawfullie,Theodoret. booke 5. ca. 23.
because onely Paulinus ordayned him, contrarie to the tenure
of many Cannons, whiche prouide, that they should
not be ordained, but by all the Bishoppes of the prouince, or
(at the least) by three.
            5 When a Bishop is to be ordayned, &c. one Bishop shall
pronounce the blessing,4. Concil. Carthag. cap. 23. and the rest of the Bishops with the
Elders present, shall all lay on their handes.
            6 When a Bishop was to be ordayned,Cyprian li. 1. epist. 4. the Bishops adioyning,
did ordayne him.
            Therefore if Church-officers were ordayned in the Apostles
time,The cōclusion. not by one, but by the Eldershippe, consistinge of
manie: if they be to ordayne, that haue warraunt out of the
worde, to assure the parties ordayned, that they are called of
God: if ordination by one Bishop be vnlawfull and contrarie
to many canons of Councells: if the Bishops & Elders were
to laye on their hands: lastlie, if the Bishops adioyning were
to ordayne: then must it needes followe, that Church-officers
are not to be ordayned by one man, but by the laying on
of the handes of the Eldership.
            But they fight harde against this, because it striketh at
a maine pillar of their kingdome, their chiefe groundes
be these:
            1 Obiection. Paule and Barnabas ordayned Elders, where

is no mention of any Eldership.
            
               Aunswere. They are saide to ordayne, because they being
the chiefe, procured it: so is Ioshua 5. 3. saide to circumcise,
which was the Leuites office, so saye wee, The Queene hath
made a lawe, and yet not she alone maketh any.
            2 Obiection. Though it were so then, yet is it not so required
nowe, no more then the cōmunitie in the Apostles time.
            
               Answere. There was no more communitie then (for they
that thinke otherwise, are in that point Anabaptistes) then is
to be required now, so that instance maketh for vs.
            3 Obiection. Examples are no generall rules to bee followed.
            
               Answere. Examples not contrarying any rule, or reason of
the Scripture, be to be followed, as if they were commaundementes,
so that notwithstanding any thinge alleadged to the
contrarie, it remayneth vpon the former groundes most stedfast,
that it belōgeth to the Eldership to ordayne those church
officers that are to be imployed in the publike seruice of god.
         
         
            CHAP. 8.
            THE ordayning of Church-officers must be done with
humble prayer of the Eldership, & the congregation,
Discipl. Ecclesiast. fol. 50.
            Their vnreuerent beginning and proceeding therewith in
a corner, is contrarie to this: whiche is condemned by the
proofe of our assertion, by these reasons.
            1 We are to behaue our selues in these actions, as they by
whom we haue direction to doe them, haue set vs an example:
But the Apostles & Elders, when they ordayned church-officers,
did alwayes commende the action to God by prayer,
togither with those congregations, ouer whiche they placed
them, Actes 6. 6. and 14. 23. Therefore the ordayninge of
Church-officers must bee done by humble prayer of the Eldership,
and congregation.
            2 The greater the action is that is in hande, the more carefull
must they be that haue it in hande, to humble them selues
by prayer, for the Lordes assistance therein: but the ordayning

of Church-officers, is an action of moste weightie
importance: Therefore they that haue it in hande (which be
the Eldershipp to ordaine him, and congregation to receyue
him) ought to humble them selues in earnest prayer before
hande.
            3 They that shall haue part in the comfort or discomfort
of the action, are to ioyne togither in prayer vnto GOD for
the better euent, and against the worse: But the Eldershippe
and people, shall both haue part in the euent of the action:
Therefore they are to ioyne togither in humble prayer before
hande, &c.
         
         
            CHAP. 9.
            CHurch-officers must bee ordayned by layinge on of
handes: in this they agree with vs, concerning the ceremonie
it selfe, albeit neyther in the parties by whō,
nor on whom it must be conferred. The profit of this ceremonie
appeareth in the reasons following.
            1 That which stirreth vp euerie partie, to pray with more
feruencie, is profitable to be vsed: But such is this ceremonie,
for it affecteth the ordeyners, when they feele him for
whom they pray: and the ordeyned when he feeleth a calling
and charge from God (as it were) sensiblie comming vppon
him, and the congregation, when they see him separated frō
the rest, by whom they shall reape much comfort or griefe:
Therefore the vse of it is very profitable.
            2 That which helpeth forward the partie ordayned in his
care, to walke with a good conscience in his calling, is profitable
to be vsed: Such is the imposition of handes, for both
it declareth vnto him, that he is separated of God for that purpose,
and also giueth him hope, that his hande, who allotted
him therevnto, will alwayes assist him in the course of that
calling: Therefore it is of a profitable vse.
            3 That which worketh a more acknowledgment of Gods
ordinance in the heartes of the people, is profitable to be vsed:
Such is the layinge on of handes, for it declareth vnto
them, that the Lorde hath placed him in that callinge ouer

them: Therefore it is profitable to be vsed.
            Therefore seeing the ceremonie of the laying on handes,The conclusion.
is forcible, to increase the feruencie of euery partie, when
they pray: seeing it assureth the callinge to the partie ordayned,
and giueth him an argument of good hope, for the blessing
of God vpon him in the course of the same: and seeinge
it procureth a more perswasion in the people, that hee is allotted
vnto them from the Lord him selfe: it is euident, that
it is not a vaine and idle ceremonie (as many doe imagine)
but of good and profitable vse, in all ordinations.
         
         
            CHAP. 10.
            THe Lorde hath ordayned that there should be one Bishopp
or Pastor (at the least) president ouer euery congregation,
who are of equal authoritie in their seueral
charges, and in the generall gouernement of the Church, T.
C. 1. booke, page 22. and 2. booke, 1. part, page 515.
            They mainteyne contrarie vnto this, these two.
            1 That one may haue two or moe charges,Reasons against the 1. propofit. and be absent
from them, as their dispensations and practize doe prooue.
            2 That one minister may haue a Soueraingtie and Lordship
ouer his fellowe ministers, which both beeing disprooued,
the former assertion will remaine still sure.
            1 One man may not haue moe charges then he is able in
any measure to discharge: No man is able in any measure, to
discharge the duetie that is belonging vnto moe flockes then
one, seeing he can not preache vnto them, both in season &
out of season: Therefore no man may haue moe charges
then one.
            2 That which maketh an open entrance to the enimie to
spoile, can not be lawfull: for one to haue moe charges then
one, maketh an open entrance for the enimie to spoyle, for
the wolffe watcheth to deuoure, whilest the shepheard is absent:
Therefore no man may haue moe charges then one.
            3 That which hath neyther precepte, nor president for it,
eyther in Gods worde, or any approoued writer, but onelie
from Antichrist, is vnlawfull: But such is the hauing of moe
charges then one: Therefore it is vnlawfull.
            
               
4 That which declareth a minister to be more desirous of
the fleece, then to profite the flocke, that same is vnlawfull:
But such is the hauing of mo charges then one, for were it
not for the gaine, they would thinke one a burden as heauie
as they could beare: Therefore it is vnlawfull.
            5 All the reasons that be alleadged in the thirde chapter,
against nonresidence, are forcible to this purpose, for if hee
may not be nonresident, he may not haue mo charges, vnles
he be willing to be quartered, that euery charge may haue a
piece of him.
            He reckoneth them among theeues, and their action to
be theeuerie,Hooper vpon the 8. commandement. condemned by that commaundement.
            Therefore, if one man cannot in any tollerable measure
discharge mo charges then one: if to haue mo maketh an open
entrance to the enimie to spoyle:The conclusion. if it haue neyther precept,
nor president for it, but onely in the kingdome of Antichrist:
if it declare the practizers to be more desirous of the
fleece, then to feede the flocke: if all the reasons that condemne
nonresidencie, be against it: lastlie, if it be plain theeuerie,
then must it needs follow, that one may not haue two,
or mo charges.
            Their obiections (such as they be) are set downe in the 3.
chapter, and the aunsweres vnto them.
            
               The seconde proposition that they holde is thus:
               One minister may haue a soueraigne authoritie,The 2. propositiō that they holde, and reasons against it. Lordship
ouer his fellowe ministers, which is thus disproued.
               1 They that haue their commission indifferentlie giuen
them, without difference betweene one and another, are of
equall authoritie, and may not be one ouer another: But such
is the commission of all Gods ministers indifferentlie, as appeareth,
Mat. 28. 19. 20. Therefore they are of equall authoritie,
and may not haue anie dominion one ouer another.
               2 That which Christ hath directlie forbidden, that maye
not in any case be allowed, but is euer vnlawfull: But Christ
hath directlie forbidden, that one minister shoulde haue dominion
ouer another, Matth. 20. 25. Luke 22. 25. Therefore
one minister may not haue superioritie or dominion ouer
another.
               
                  
3 They that may not be Lordes ouer the people of God,
may much lesse be Lordes ouer the Ministers, for the Ministers
bee (in respect of the ministerie) aboue the people: But
a Minister may not be Lordly ouer Gods people (as is testified
by him on whom they would father the greatest lordlines)
1. Pet. 5. 3. Therefore one minister may not be Lord, or
haue superioritie ouer another.
               4 It is ordayned, and is equall and right,Cyprian li. 1. Epist. 3. that euery mans
cause bee hearde, where the faulte was committed: and it is
meete to handle the matter there, where they may haue both
the accusers, and witnesses of the faulte: which sheweth that
euerie minister had authoritie ouer his owne flocke, and no
other to meddle.
               5 Bishops, wheresoeuer they be in all the worlde,Luther aduertus pap. &c. are equall
to our Bishops, or parishe ministers and preachers: of
none it can be sayde one is Lorde, another is seruaunt: whatsoeuer
belongeth to the Church, belongeth equallie to all,
sauing that some are of better giftes then others, howebeit
such giftes cause no inequalitie or lordship in the church.
               6 In the Apostolike Church,Museul. lot. com. de minist. verbi. the Ministers of the Worde,
were none aboue another, and were subiect to no heade or
president, &c.
               7 The honor of a Bishop, being taken from the rest of the
ministers, and giuen to one, was the first step to papacie.Idem vpon 2. Thes. 2.
               
               8 Christ did most feuerilie forbid vnto the Apostles and
their successors, primacie and dominion.Conf. Helu. cap. 17.
               
               9 Equall power and function is giuen to all ministers of
the Church,Idem ca. 18. and that from the beginning, no one preferred
him selfe before another, sauinge onely that for order, some
one did call them togither, propounded the matters that
were to be consulted off, and gathered the voyces.
               Therefore, if all Ministers haue their commission indifferentlie
giuen vnto them:The conclusion. if Christ haue forbidden, that one
Minister should haue dominion ouer another: if no Minister
may exercise dominion ouer Gods people: if authoritie
to handdle controuersies, belonged to euerie seuerall Congregation:
if a Bishoppe and parishe minister bee all one: if
in the Apostles time, no minister was aboue another: if the

superioritie of one aboue another, was the firste steppe to the
papacie: lastlie, if they haue equal power and function from
the beginning: then must it needes followe, that no minister
may haue superioritie, or exercise dominion ouer another.
               Their obiections herevnto (so many as are worthie anie
answere) be these:
               1 Obiection. Christ, Matth. 20. 25. forbiddeth onely ambition,
and not dominion, as Musculus expoundeth it.
               
                  Answere. Musculus his iudgement appeareth in the
6. and 7. reasons, the place is expounded against superioritie
by Caluin, Bullinger, Zwinglius, Gualter, Hemingius,
&c. But let it bee so expounded: that dominion is ambition,
because it causeth a man to aspire aboue his fellowe ministers.
               2 Obiection. The Greeke worde signifieth rule with oppression,
which is the thing that is forbidden.
               
                  Answere. That is not so, for Luke 22. 25. vseth the single
verbe Keurieuem, whiche signifieth simplie to rule: The
sonnes of Zebedeus desired not to oppresse but to rule, which
desire he reprooued.
               3 Obiection. Christ sayeth not, no man shalbe so, but hee
that will be so, desiring it.
               
                  Answere. But Luke sayth, Let the greatest be as your seruant,
and therefore that is but a sillie shifte.
               So that their assertions being ouerthrowen,A Bishoppe should bee in euerie congrega. and their obiections
aunswered, it remayneth, that wee prooue yet more
directlie, that the Lorde hath ordayned, that there should be
a Bishoppe resident ouer euerie Congregation: which is proued
thus.
               1 If a Bishop and Minister be all one, then must there be
a Bishoppe in euery Congregation, for euery man will confesse
that euerie Congregation ought to haue a minister: But
a Bishoppe and a Minister is all one, as appeareth by this that
Saint Paule describeth not one qualitie for the Bishopp, but
it is also the qualitie of euery good minister: and also in that
hee describeth no other minister but the Bishoppe: Therefore
there ought to be a Bishop in euerie congregation.
               
                  
2 S. Paules bishoppes and his deacons, were appointed to
one place, as appeareth both in the description of them, and
the practise of the Apostles: But the Deacons were in euerie
congregation, which appeareth Phil. 1. 1. Act. 6. 2. that office
being needfull euery where: and in that it continued so, longer
then the office of Bishoppes, Athanasius Apol. 2. Ierome
contra Luciferianos, &c. Therefore there ought to be a Bishop
in euery congregation.
               3 That which Paule enioyned to Titus, is also to be practised
alwayes in the like case: But he commaunded him to
ordaine Elders in euery Citie, Tit. 1. 5. which are expounded
in the next verse to be Bishops: Therefore there must bee a
Bishop in euery congregation.
               4 Euery Church should haue her Communion table,Ignat. ad Philadel. &
euery Church her Bishop.
               5 Where there was founde anie worthie to be a Bishopp,Epipha li. 3. tom. 1. haere. 75.
there a bishoppe was appointed, and where there was not to
furnishe both bishop and preaching Elder, (he meaneth the
Doctor) there the Apostles made a bishoppe▪ and left the Elder.
               6 If a Bishop run into a slaunder,2. Concil. Cartha. to. 1. cap. 10. and many Bishops can
not suddenlie be gathered, his cause shalbe hearde of twelue
Bishops, &c.
               7 If an Elder bee accused,3. Concil. tom. 1. ca. 8. hee may call sixe Bishops from
the places harde by.
               8 Stories make mention of Bishoppes of little townes, as
Euseb. li. 5. cap. 16. Soticus bishop of the village Cuman:Theodo. lib. 5. cap. 4. Mares, bishopp
of a small towne called Solicha:Socrat. 4, 26. Gregorie bishoppe of a
small citie, called Nazianzum:Quest. 16 dilt. 
                        •
                     0. The bishop of a Castle.
               9 A minister, that is to saye, a bishopp, and (a little after)
the Apostle doeth plainely teache, that a minister and a Bishop
is all one, and (vpon Titus) a bishop and a minister are
the same:Ierome ad Euag
                        •
                     um. and (ad Oceanū
                  ) with the ancient fathers, Bishops
and Elders were all one.
               10 D. Barnes (in his sixt article) sayeth, I will neuer beleeue,Acts & monumentes, fol. 216.
neyther can I euer beleeue, that one man may by the
lawe of God, be a bishop of two or three cities, yea of a whole
countrie, for that it is contrarie to the doctrine of S. Paule,

who writing to Titus, commaundeth that he should ordaine
a bishop in euerie towne.
               11 It is pitie to see howe farre the office of a Bishop is degenerated
from the originall in the Scripture:Hooper vpon 8. com. pag. 90. it was not so
in the beginning, when Bishops were at the best, as the Epistle
to Titus testifieth, that willeth him, to ordayne in euerie
citie, &c. They knowe the primitiue Churche had no such
Bishops as we haue, vntill the time of Siluester the first.
               Therefore, if a Bishop and a Minister be all one: if bishops
were to bee where Deacons are, who were in euery congregation:
if Paule enioyned Titus to ordayne bishops in euery
citie: and if euerie Church had her Bishop a long time after
the Apostles, as appeareth by the testimonies of Councelles,
Histories, and learned writers, both olde and newe: then must
it needes followe, that there ought to bee a Bishop in euerie
Congregation.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 11.
            FOr the further reuealing of the trueth, God hath ordayned,
that there should be in the Church, Doctours,
whose office is to be employed in teaching of doctrine,
and is an office different from that of the Pastour.
            The latter parte of this proposition, is the thing whiche
especiallie they doe denie, whiche is thus prooued to bee
true.
            1 Those which the Apostle (in speaking of distinct officers)
doeth distinguishe one from another, are seuerall and
distinct one from another: But the Apostle doeth distinguish
the Pastour and Teacher, one from another, Rom. 12. 7. 8.
and Ephes. 4. 11. euen as hee distinguisheth man and woman,
Gal. 3. 28. See the Greeke of them both: Therefore
the office of Pastour and Doctour are distinct one from another.
            2 As are the giftes that adorne offices, so are the officers
them selues, for the execution of the office, consisteth in the
employing of the giftes: But the giftes of the Pastour & Doctour
are diuers, as appeareth 1. Cor. 12. 8. and by experience

for some hath an excellent gifte in doctrine, and not in application,
and others excell in application and exhortation, that
are verie meane in deliuering of doctrine: Therefore the office
of a Pastour and Teacher, are distinct one from another.
            3 Those that are to take a diuers course in teachinge, are
diuers, and different in their functions, for els why shoulde
they be enioyned to take a diuers course: But the Pastour is
to take one course, and the Doctour another, for the one is
to direct him selfe principallie to exhorte, and the other to
attende vpon doctrine, Rom. 12. 7. 8. Therefore the office of
Pastour and Doctour, be distinct offices the one from the other.
            4 The ecclesiasticall stories (especiallie speakinge of the
Church of Alexandria) doe vsuallie make a difference betwixt
the Bishop and the Doctor.
            5 Cathedrall Churches haue yet some shewe thereof left
in them, who (besides the Bishop) haue also one that readeth
a Lecture in diuinitie.
            6 If the distinguishing of them, make more for the building
of the church, then the vniting of them, then are they
to be distinguished, and not made all one: But the former is
true, as appeareth by this, that hardlie is a people brought to
a sounde knowledge of godlines, by him that instructeth in
doctrine continuallie, and as hardlie are wee stirred vppe to a
zealous care of our duetie, though we be exhorted continuallie:
which both should bee with lesse continuance, if one
man were to performe all: Therefore they are to bee esteemed
distinct offices, and not partes of one office, whiche one
is to performe.
            Therefore, if the Apostle Paul distinguisheth them one
from another:The conclusion. if God doe vsuallie bestowe doctrine and exhortation
vpon seuerall persons, wherein eche is founde to
excell, and to bee no bodie in the other: if the Pastour bee
commaunded to take one course in teaching, and the Doctor
another: if Ecclesiasticall stories doe vsuallie distinguish
them: if Cathedrall Churches haue yet some steppes lefte of
the distinction: if to distinguish them, maketh more to the
building of the Church, then to vnite them: then must it

needes followe, that the office of Pastor and Doctour be distinct,
and different the one from the other.
         
         
            CHAP. 12.
            EVerie congregation ought to haue Elders to see into
the maners of the people, and to bee assistant vnto the
Ministers, in the gouernement Ecclesiasticall. T. C.
booke 1. pag. 174. Dise. fol. 120. which they denie, Whitgift
pag. 627. and their practize in keepinge them out of the
Church: but it is prooued to be true, by these reasons following.
            1 That which the Apostles established in euery Congregation,
ought still to continue, seeing the Church must bee
ruled by the same lawes that it was ruled by then, and needeth
as great furtherance nowe, as it did then: But the Apostles
established Elders in euery congregation, Actes. 14. 23.
which can not be vnderstoode of preachinge Elders onelie,
considering that the scarcitie of them was such, as Paule was
constrayned to sende Timothie and Titus to great cities, whiche
he could hardlie spare, as hee often testifieth: Therefore
there ought to be such Elders, as are onely to assiste in gouuernement
in euery congregation.
            2 Those which God hath ordayned to helpe forwarde the
building of the Church, ought to bee in euery congregation,
vnles it may appeare that some cōgregation needeth not
so much helpe as Christ hath appointed: But Christ hath ordained
Elders in the Church, for the helping forwarde of the
building of the Church, 1. Cor. 12. 28. Therefore such Elders
ought to be in euery congregation.
            3 That whiche being wanting, the bodie can not be entiere,
that same must be in euery congregation: But the Elders
can not be wanting, and the church be an entiere body,
Rom. 12. 8. which euery congregation should be, Rom. 12. 4.
Therefore there ought to bee such Elders in euerie congregation.
            5 If the worde of God doe describe such Elders in the
church, then ought they to bee in euerie congregation, whiche

is cleare by this, that euery Congregation hath neede of
them, as well as any: and that euery congregation must haue
all the other officers of the church: and that euery congregation
is of equall dignitie in the bodie of Christ: But the word
of God describeth vnto vs such Elders, 1. Ti. 5. 17. Therfore
they ought to be in euery congregation.
            5 There is no Church that can stande without hir Eldership
or Councell.Igna. ad Tral.
            
            6 It belongeth onely to the Bishop to baptize,Tertul. de Bapt. and the Elder
& Deacon may not doe it, but vpon the bishops licence.
            7 Neither Elder nor Deacon haue right,Ierome contra Lucif. but vppon the
Bishops commaundement (so much as) to baptize.
            8 Elders fell awaye thorough the ambition of the teachers.Ambr. vpō 1. Tim. 5.
            
            9 Valerius the bishop did contrarie to the custome of
the Apostolicall churches, in appointing Augustin to preach,Possidon. in vita Augu.
being but an Elder.
            10 After that Arrius was conuicted of heresie,Socrat. libr. 5. cap. 22. it was decreed
that Elders should no more preache.
            11 The number of the Elders of euery Church,Bucer de regno Christ. ought to
be encreased according to the multitude of the people.
            12 Speaking of the Elders that were to assist the minister,P. Mar. vpō Rom. 12.
he lamenteth that it is so fallen out of the church, that the
name doeth scarse remaine.
            13 Certaine of the people were ioyned with the pastour,Idem, 1. Cor. 12.
in the gouernement of the Church, because the pastour was
not able to doe all him selfe.
            14 There were Elders that did assist the Minister,Caluin Institut. lib. 4. cap. 3. se. 8. in the
gouernement of the church, &c.
            15 Whitgift confesseth, that in the primitiue Churche,
they had in euery Church certaine Seniors, pag. 638. Lett it
then appeare out of the worde, to satisfie the conscience how
it may be left out.
            16 If the platforme set downe to Timothie and Titus bee
for all Churches, then must Elders be in all: for these Elders
are there described: But it is a platforme for all Churches, &
that to the ende of the worlde, 1. Tim. 6. 14. Therefore they
ought to be in euery congregation.
            
               
17 That which is contayned in euery Ministers commission
to teache and practise, must be in euerie congregation:
but the ordination and practize of that office, is in euery ministers
commission, Matth. 28. 20. or els they ordayned Elders
without warrant from Christ, which none dare affirme:
Therefore there must be Elders in euery congregation.
            18 Wheresoeuer a Bishop must be, there must also the Elders
be, which appeareth by this, that where the one is described,
there is the other also: But a Bishoppe must be in euery
congregation, as I haue prooued sufficiently in the 10. chap.
Therefore there ought to be Elders in euery congregation.
            19 If the Apostles laboured for vniformitie in the least
things, and established in all Churches one order, then must
there bee Elders in euery Congregation, for they were in
some, as all men doe confesse: But the former is true, as not
onely the viewe of their practize declareth, but also the Apostles
expresse wordes, Thus I teache in all Churches: Therefore
the latter is true also, that in euery Congregation there
must be such Elders.
            Therefore,The conclusion. if the Apostles established Elders in euery congregation:
if Christ hath esteemed their helpe needefull to
further the building of his Church: if without them a congregation
can not be entiere: if the worde of God saye, that
they ought to be in the Church: if it was continued so long
after the Apostles time: and bee approoued by the testimonie
of manie verie learned, both old & newe writers, & confessed
by the greatest aduersarie vnto them: if they bee within
the compasse of euerie ministers commission: if they are to
bee, wheresoeuer a Bishop must be: if the Apostles established
vniformitie, euen in the meanest things: then must it needes
followe, that there ought to be such Elders in euery congregation,
as are to assiste the Minister in the gouuernement of
the same.
            They confesse it was so in the Apostles time, but seeme
to saye somewhat that it can not be vnder a christian Magistrate,
thus:
            1 Obiection. God hath giuen the soueraigne authoritie
ouer his Church to the christian Magistrate, which these Elders

would abridge.
            
               Answere. No more then the Eldership abridged the souueraingrie
of Dauid oner Israell, for his gouernement is temporall,
and theirs spirituall.
            2 Obiection. Gualter vpon the 1. Cor. 5. denieth it to bee
needfull vnder a christian Magistrate.
            
               Answere. Gualter denieth excommunication vnder a
christian Magistrate, hee is as partiall in this argument as
Whitgift.
            
            3 Obiection. The Prince hath the authoritie that the Elders
had.
            
               Answere. That is no truer, then to saye, the Prince hath
authoritie to preache the worde, &c. for these be thinges, that
his high authoritie must see done, but he may doe none of
them him selfe.
            But there be many reasons which may bee alleadged,Reasons prouing elders as necessarie vnder a Christian Magistrate, as in the Apostles time. to
prooue that they are (at the least) as necessarie vnder a christian
Magistrate in these dayes, as they were in the time of the
Apostles, as namely these:
            1 The lesse able that Ministers are to direct their people
in the wayes of godlines, the more neede they haue of the assistaunce
that God hath allowed them in his worde: But Ministers
are nowe lesse able (especially vnder Christian Magistrates,
when men are ouertaken with ease and peace, whiche
quench good things) then they were in the time of the Apostles:
Therefore there is as great (if not greater) neede of Elders
nowe, then was in the time of the Apostles.
            2 If christian Magistrates be to maintayne the order that
Christ hath set downe for the gouernement of his Churche,
then must there be Elders in it vnder a christian Magistrate,
for Elders are appoynted of Christ, 1. Cor. 12. 8. But christian
Magistrates are to maintaine the order that Christ hath sette
downe for the ruling of his Church, Isai 49. 23. Therefore
there must be Elders in the church, vnder a christian Magistrate.
            3 If the rule of Christe can not bee perpetnally obserued,
tell the Church, vnles there be Elders: then must there
be such vnder a christian Magistrate: But the former is true,

for by the Church is there meant the Senate of Ministers &
Elders, as shalbe prooued in the chapter of Excommunication:
Therefore there must be Elders vnder a christian Magistrate.
            4 If the whole gouernement of the Church described in
the Epistles to Timothie and Titus, be to be obserued vntill
the ende, then must there bee Elders vnder christian Magistrates,
for they are contayned in those Epistles: But the former
is true, 1. Tim. 6. 14. Therefore there must be Elders vnder
a christian Magistrate.
            5 Where sinners are more outragious, and the best most
subiect to waxe colde, there is greatest neede of all the helpes
that God hath ordayned to punishe sinne, and to cherish wel
dooing: But so it is vnder a christian Magistrate, especially in
the peace of the Church, as Whitgift confesseth, page, 643.
Therefore there is (at the least) as great neede of Elders (seeing
they are helpers appointed of God) vnder a Christian
Magistrate, as at any other time.
            Therefore if Ministers be lesse able nowe, then in the Apostles
time: if christian Magistrates must mainteyne the order
prescribed by Christ: if els the rule of Christ (Tel the church)
can not be still obserued: if the whole gouernement described
by S. Paule, must be kept for euer: lastlie, if there bee (at
the least) as great neede of all the helpers that can be, as euer
there was: then must it needes followe, that Elders are as necessarie
in the Church vnder a christian Magistrate, as in the
time of persecution.
         
         
            CHAP. 13.
            THere ought to be in euery congregation certaine Deacons,
endued with those qualities, whiche the worde
of God describeth: whose office is onely in receyuing
the liberalitie of the Saintes, and distributing it vnto the needie,
T. C. 1. booke, pag. 190. Disci. Eccle. fol. 119.
            This assertion hath two braunches, which both are gainsaide
by our aduersaries, the first whereof is this:The firste propositiō. The office
of the Deacon, consisteth onely in receiuing and distributing
vnto the poore, the liberalitie of the Saintes, whiche they denie,

               Whitgift pag. 582. The booke of ordering, &c. that maketh
it a degree of the ministerie: but the proposition being
prooued true, maketh their opinion and practize appeare
false, which is thus:
            1 That wherein Steuen and the rest were imployed, is
the office of a Deacon: for the first institution of them by the
Apostles, is in that example: But they were onely to attende
vpon the prouision for the poore, Act. 6. 4. Therefore the office
of the Deacon, is onely to attende vpon the distributinge
vnto the poore, from the liberalitie of the Saintes.
            2 That whiche the Apostle maketh an ordinarie and distinct
office from others in the Church, must be attended vpon
by them that are in the same office, and not be mingled
with any other: But the Apostle Rom. 12. 8. maketh distributing
in simplicitie, such as office as it is expounded by M.
Caluin, Beza, Bucer, Martyr, &c. Therefore the Deacons office
must be attended vpon, and consequentlie, it consisteth
onelie in distributing &c.
            3 That which the Apostles founde them selues insufficient
for, that can no man nowe discharge in any tollerable
measure, for they were more adorned with giftes then anie
be nowe: But they founde them selues insufficient for the
ministerie of the worde, and distributing vnto the poore also,
Act. 6. 2. Therefore no man can in any tollerable measure
discharge the office of a Minister and Deacon also, and consequentlie
the Deacon is to attende vpon distributing only.
            4 If the ministeries of the worde be perfect, without the
Deacon, then may he not meddle in the same, for howe may
one lawfullie labour, in that wherein there is no neede of
him: But such is the ministerie of the worde, where the seuerall
ministers thereof are named, Ephes. 4. 11. wherein the
Deacon is not contayned, as Whitgift confesseth, pag. 308. &
309. Therefore the Deacon may not meddle with the ministerie
of the worde, and consequentlie must be imployed onlie
in distributing, &c.
            5 If there be no qualitie required in the perfect description
of the Deacon, which is proper to the ministerie of the
worde, then is not he to meddle with the same: But the former

is true, as appeareth, 1. Tim. 3. 8. Therefore the latter is
true also, and consequentlie, he must attende onely vppon
distributing, &c.
            6 If it belong to the Deacons office, to meddle with the
ministerie of the worde and Sacramentes, then is it greater
then that of the Pastor, for that the doing of both, requireth
greater giftes then the one: But it is not a greater, but inferiour
office to the pastor, as appeareth by all those places wherin
they are described, that the Deacon is described after the
Bishop: Therefore his office is not to meddle with both, and
consequentlie he must attende vpon distributing,6. Concil. Con. ca. 16. Concil. va. Can. 4. &c.
            7 Deacons are ministers of tables, and not of holy things.
            8 In the ministers sicknes, the Deacons shall reade the
Homilies of the Fathers.
            9 The Deacons haue neede of great wisedome,Chrisost. vpon Act. 6. although
the preaching of the worde be not committed vnto them: &
further, it is absurde that they should doe both the offices of
preaching, and caring for the poore, consideringe that they
be not able to doe both thorowly.
            10 Although (the goodes of the Church increasing) there
were besides the Deacons,Bulling decad. 5. ser. 2. subdeacons, and archdeacons, yet
the Deacons remayned still in their charge for the poore, and
were not as yet mingled with the Bishops or priestes, & with
the order of them which taught.
            11 The office of Deaconship was religiouslie kept in the
Church,Bucer de re. Christi 14. vntill it was driuen out by Antichrist.
            12 This office must of necessitie be restored as it is described,
Act. 6. if England (for he speaketh it in the behalfe of
our Church) will receyue the Discipline of Christ.
            13 Speaking of these Deacons,P. Mart. Rom. 12. lamenteth that this order
is so fallen out of the Church, that the name doth scarce
remayne.
            14 Describing the Deacons of the Apostles time,Caluin in. li. 4. ca. 3. s. 9 sayeth,
that we after their example, ought to haue the like.
            15 The office of distributing the goodes of the church,Beza confe. cap. 5. se. 23. is
an ordinarie function in a church lawfully constituted: the
which, sect. 30. he calleth the Deaconship.
            
               
Therefore, if Steuen and the rest were imployed, onely in
distributing the goodes of the church: if the Apostle maketh
the Deacons office, an ordinarie and distinct office from all
others in the church: if the Apostles were not sufficient for
the ministerie of the worde, and distributing: if the ministeries
of the worde be perfect without the Deacon: if in the description
of the Deacon, no quallitie be required, that is proper
to a minister of the worde: if to deale in both would make
the Deacon a greater officer then the Pastor: if the Councels,
auncient writers, and the sounde writers of latter times, doe
declare that the Deacons were to bee wholy imployed in the
distributing of the goodes of the Church, then must it needes
followe, that his office is not to meddle with any parte of
the ministerie of the worde and Sacramentes, but to attende
onelie vpon the distributing of the liberalitie of the Church,
vnto them that stande in neede thereof.
            Their obiections herevnto be these two that followe.
            1 Obiection. Philip one of the seuen Deacons, did preach,
Act. 8. 8. Therefore Deacons may preach the worde.
            
               Answere. Philip was a Deacon of the Church at Ierusalem,
while they aboade togither, but nowe hee was not anie
more so, but an Euangelist, as he is euer tearmed after, by vertue
of which office he did preache.
            2 Obiection. Steuen, being a Deacon, preached, Act. 7. 2.
            
               Answere. He preached not, for all that is there, was but
his Apologie at the seate of iudgement, which euery man in
the like case may doe, and which manie of the Martyrs haue
done.
            So that the former proposition beeing true, vppon the
groundes alleadged, notwithstanding these obiections, wee
are to proceede to the seconde, which is this:
            There ought to be such Deacons (as are described in the
former proposition) in euerie congregation, whiche is thus
prooued:
            1 That office which euerie congregation hath neede of,
ought to be in euerie congregation: But euery congregation
hath neede of the Deacons office, whiche appeareth by this,
that they haue poore to prouide for, (or els they must regard

the necessitie of others) and the liberalitie of others to distribute:
Therefore Deacons ought to be in euery congregation.
            2 That whiche is indefinitely appointed for the good
of the Churche, belongeth vnto euery Congregation, as
well as to anie one: But such is the appointment of the Deacons,
1. Tim. 3. 8. Therefore there must be Deacons in euery
Congregation.
            3 Euery Church ought to haue their office of Deaconshippe.Igna. ad Philadel.
            
            4 All the reasons (or the most of them) that are alleadged
chap. 10. for a Bishop in euery congregation, and chap. 12. for
Elders in euery congregation, are forcible herevnto.
            Therefore, if there bee the like neede of Deacons in one
congregation,The conclusion. that is in another: if they be appointed indefinitely
for the good of the Church: if euery church must haue
their office of Deaconship: and lastlie, if there be like reasons
to prooue them belong to euery Church, that be for Bishops
and Elders: then must it needes followe, that there ought to
be Deacons in euery congregation.
         
         
            CHAP. 14.
            THere ought to bee in euery Congregation, an Eldershipp,
consisting of a pastor or pastors, Doctor (if there
be anie) and Elders, whose authoritie Christ hath ordayned
to be perpetuall in his church, to gouuerne the same
onely by the rules of Gods worde, T. C. 1. booke, pag. 175.
Discip. Ecclesiast. 123. which contayneth these 3. particular
propositions, defended by vs, and gaynesayde by the Bishops
and their adherents.
            
               1 The Eldership ought to be in euery Congregation.
               2 The office of the Eldership is perpetuall.
               3 The Church must be gouerned, onely by the rules of Gods
worde.
            
            The first is denyed by them,The proofe of the firste propositiō. 
               Whitgift page 627. and by
their practize, in tying the gouernement of many churches
to the Bb. sea, it is thus prooued:
            
               
1 Whatsoeuer Christ hath ordayned, as a meane, to keepe
men in obedience to the gospell, that same must be in euerie
congregation, for particular men are in particular congregations:
But Christ hath ordayned the Eldership for that end,
as appeareth, Matth. 18. 15. &c. where Chrisost, expoundeth,
Tell the Church, that is sayeth hee, the Gouuernours of the
Church: Therefore the Eldershippe ought to bee in euery
Church.
            2 Where all sortes of Elders ought to be, there must be also
the ioyning of their offices in one, for the good of that cō
               gregation
ouer which they are placed: But all sortes of Elders
ought to be in euerie congregation, as is prooued in the
10. chapter for Bishops, the 12. for Elders, &c. Therfore there
must be an Eldership in euery congregation.
            3 If no particular congregation haue greater priuiledges
giuen therevnto by the worde of God, then others haue, then
must there eyther be no Eldershipp at all (whiche is false, in
that Elders are prooued to bee by the worde of God in the
Church) or els it must be in euery congregation: But euerie
congregation is of like priuiledge, whiche appeareth by this,
that it is a perfect bodie of it selfe: Therefore there must bee
an Eldership in euery congregation.
            4 The same warrant that is in the worde of God, for to
haue an Eldership in one place, is a warraunt for it in all: for
the worde of God tyeth it, not to Churches in cities, but indefinitely
to the church: But there is warrant for it out of the
worde to be somewhere, as appeareth by this, that the Apostles
are sayd to establishe it, and make mention of it: Therefore
it must be in euery congregation.
            Therefore, if the Eldership bee ordayned by Christ, as a
meanes to keepe men in obedience vnto the Gospell: if all
sortes of Elders must be in euery church: if euery congregation
be of equall priuiledges: lastly, if there be the like warrant
for it in euery church, that is in any: then must it needes followe,
that there ought to be an Eldershipp in euerie Congregation.
            What soeuer is obiected against this, that hath any shew in
it, is answered in the 12. chap. of Elders.
            
               
The office of the Eldership is ordayned by Christe to bee
perpetual,The second propositiō. and ordinarie for the gouernement of his church,
T. C. 1. booke, 177. denied by them, Whitgift 627. and by
their practize in keeping it out: but the trueth of it appeareth
by these reasons that doe follow:
            1 If the causes why Christ would haue an Eldershippe in
his Church be perpetuall,See the answere to D. Bridges. pag. 132. then must also the thing it selfe be
perpetuall: But the causes are perpetuall, which bee to gouuerne
the church by the rules of his worde, and that ecclesiastically:
Therefore the Eldership is perpetuall.
            2 If Christ be the author of the Eldership, and left it by the
Apostles to be established in the Church, then it is perpetual:
for his commission giuen to the Apostles, is to bee obserued
vnto the ende of the worlde: But Christ is the author of it, as
appeareth both by his giuing of the giftes for the particular
members thereof, and the whole body of it. as also in that
the Apostles did establishe it in the church, who went not frō
their commission, 1. Cor. 11. 12. Therefore the Eldershippe is
perpetuall.
            3 Whatsoeuer is the commandement of God, once deliuered
by him, is neuer repealed againe, and to be acknoweledged
of euery spirituall man: that same is to be receyued by
the Church of God to be perpetuall: But such is the gouernment
of the church by Pastors, Doctors, and Elders, and so of
the whole Eldership, as appeareth in that they are all mentioned
in the writings of S. Paule, whiche are so esteemed, 1.
Cor. 14. 37. Therefore the gouuernement of the Church by
an Eldership is perpetuall.
            4 That whose seuerall partes is perpetuall, and whiche
hath perpetuall giftes giuen, for the furnishing thereof for euer:
that same must needes be perpetuall: But the seuerall
partes of the Eldership, as Pastour, Doctor, and Elders, be perpetuall,
as is prooued in the 10. and 12. chap. Therefore the
Eldership is perpetuall.
            5 Whatsoeuer is grounded vpon the generall commandementes,
and rules of the Scriptures, that same is perpetuall:
But the gouerning of the church by the Eldershippe, is
such, as hath partlie bin prooued in election and ordination,

and execution of the seuerall Church-offices, whiche is the
greatest part of gouernement, and shall further appeare, in
the censures of the church hereafter: Therefore the gouernment
of the Church by the Eldership, is perpetuall.
            6 What soeuer manner of gouernement hath sufficient
power, and that from God, to begin, continue, & strengthen,
both the gouernours of the church in their callings, and the
people in the course of obedience vnto Christ, that same gouernement
is to be perpetuall: But such is the gouernement
by the Eldership, as appeareth by this, that the Apostles vsed
no other: Therefore the Eldershippe is to be perpetuall.
            7 That gouernement which the 12. Apostles, and Paule,
before they consulted togither, did vniformly agree in, that
same must needes bee of God, and consequently perpetuall,
vnlesse the repealing of it doe appeare: but such is the gouuernement
by the Eldership, (for all the aduersaries therevnto,
confesse that it was in the Apostles time:) Therefore it is
perpetuall.
            8 Whatsoeuer hath the same groundes, that the preaching
of the Worde and ministration of the Sacramentes haue, the
same is perpetuall: But such is the gouernement of the Eldership,
for it is grounded vppon the commaundementes of
Christ, and practize of the Apostles: Therefore it is perpetuall.
            9 That which hath the like groundes to bee perpetuall,
that the Apostles, Prophetes, and Euangelistes, had to bee for
a time, the same is perpetuall: But such is the gouernement
of the Church by an Eldership, which appeareth by this, that
they are therefore ceased, because their giftes of immediate
calling, &c. be gone, and the giftes of these, iointly and seuerally
doe remaine: Therefore it is perpetuall.
            10 Whatsoeuer is the perpetuall and ordinarie remedie to
cure diseases of the Church, and strengthen the health of the
same, that same is perpetuall: But such is the gouernement
by the Eldership, as appeareth by the necessitie, and profite of
the seuerall offices thereof, and of this, that we are still to obserue
in causes of extremities: Tell the Church, Matth. 18. 17.
Therefore it is perpetuall.
            
               
11 That gouernement which was in the Church appointed
of God vnder the Lawe, and continued (in respect of the
substance) by Christ and his Apostles, and bettered (in respect
of the accedents) by them, that same is perpetuall: But
such is the gouernement by the Eldershippe, as appeareth in
the 12. reason of the 1. chap. Therefore it is perpetuall.
            12 If there be any reason why this gouernement should
be alterable (being once set in the church by Christ) it is eyther
in respect of the extraordinarie offices ceased, or the addition
of the Magistrate: But not of the former, because the
Church hath neuer had any neede of extraordinary giftes,
but God hath giuen them, & so will he euer: nor of the latter,
for that the Magistrates office is to defende the buylding
of the church by that order which Christ hath set downe, and
not to alter any thing therein: Therefore it is perpetuall.
            13 Eyther this gouernement is the best and perpetuall, or
els there is none, and so Christ should bee thought to haue
left his Church without a gouernement, which is disproued
in the 7. and 8. reasons, in the firste chap. for this was once established
by Christ, and so was no other: But some gouernment
must needes be the best and perpetuall: Therefore this
is perpetuall.
            14 No man may iustlie forbid (speaking of the Church
gouuernement) to returne to the olde constitution of the
Church of God,Cōfe. Heluet. Tigur. Bern. Gene. Polo. Hun. Scotl. ca. 18. and to receyue it before the custome of
men.
            15 Experience teacheth this order (speaking of the church
gouernement) was not for one age,Caluin in. li. 4. ca. 3. s. 8. but necessarie to all ages.
            16 Though the cōmon wealth change hir gouernment,P. Mart. Rom. 3.
yet the Church must keepe hirs still.
            17 Lamenteth,Bucer de re▪ Christi 15. that some were founde among them that
are esteemed forwardest, which would not haue the same discipline
vsed now a dayes, that was in the Apostles times, obiecting
the difference of times and men.
            18 The Apostles haue written these lawes (speakinge of
Discipline) not for a day,M. Whitak. against Duraeus. or for the first age, but to endure
for all times to come: and therefore haue ratified them with

a most earnest obtestation, 1. Tim. 6. 14. that these commandements
should be kept vntill the day of the Lord.
            Therefore, if the causes of once ordayning an Eldership,
be perpetuall: if Christ be the authour of it, and left it in the
Church by the Apostles: if it be Gods commaundement, not
yet repealed: if the partes of it, and giftes for it be perpetuall:
if it be grounded vpon the generall commaundements and
rules of the scriptures: if it haue sufficient power from God,
to begin, continue, and confirme a Church: if it was agreed
vpon by the 12. Apostles, and Paule before they met togither:
if it haue the same groundes with the preaching of the word:
if it haue as good grounds to bee perpetuall as the Apostles,
&c. to be for a time: if it be the perpetuall remedie against all
the diseases of the Church: if it was vnder the lawe, and inriched
by Christ and his Apostles vnder the Gospell: if it bee
neyther alterable in respect of the extraordinarie offices ceased,
nor the Magistrate added to the Church: if it be the onlie
gouernement, that challengeth authoritie from God: if
no man may iustlie forbid it: if it be necessarie for all times:
if the common wealth may chaunge hir gouernement, but
not the Church: if the difference of times and men bee nothing
against it: lastlie, if the rules that the Apostles gaue for
it, be confirmed with a charge, to be kept vntill the comming
of Christ; then must it needes followe, that the gouernement
of the Church by an Eldership ought to be perpetuall.
            They obiecte that many inconueniences would followe
vppon this gouernement,Obiection against the perpetuitie of the Eldership, and answeres to the same. which are seuerallie to bee
answered.
            1 Obiection. By this euery parishe shall followe their Seniors,
and then there wilbe so many Elderships, so many diuers
fashions, seeing one may not medle with another.
            
               Answere. The gouernement desired is vniforme for euerie
Church, and admitteth no change, no not in outwarde
ceremonies, without a Synode of the choyce men of seuerall
Elderships.
            2 Obiection If they being all meane men, chuse an Earle,
he may not refuse, but be at their becke and commaundement.
            
               
               Answere. No man that is chosen is compelled to an office
against his will, but he that despiseth to consult with others
in Gods matters, because they bee poore, reprocheth
God that made them, Prou. 17. 5.
            3 Obiection. It ouerburdeneth the parrishe, to prouide
for the nourishment of so many church-officers.
            
               Answere. It is not necessarie that they should prouide for
any moe of them, sauinge those that are exercised in the ministerie
of the worde, vnlesse any of the rest may neede the liberalitie
of the Church.
            4 Obiection. It bringeth in a newe popedome and tyrannie
into the Church.
            
               Answere. It is blasphemie to tearme the gouernement of
Christ so, because we refuse the tyranny of the pope, shall we
therefore doe what we list, and not yeelde obedience to the
scepter of Christ.
            5 Obiection. It is a kinde of Donatisme to chalenge such
authoritie ouer Princes.
            
               Answere. And it is flatterie to suffer princes to doe what
they liste: this is the obiection of Gualter, who is a professed
enemie to discipline.
            6 Obiection. It taketh away princes authoritie in causes
Ecclesiasticall.
            
               Answere. No more then it did from Dauid in his time,
not so much as the Bb. doe nowe, for the prince requireth
but this, to see the Church well ordered, which the Eldership
alloweth and craueth.
            7 Obiection. It transformeth the state of the common
wealth, into a meere popularitie, and will alter the gouernement
thereof.
            
               Answere. It neyther transformeth nor altereth any thing
in it, for let it be shewed what damage would come by this
discipline to any Magistracie, from the Princes throne, to the
office of the headborow.
            8 Obiection. It will breede contention and partialitie in
iudgement.
            
               Answere. Where can be greater contention then the Bb.
maintaine for their kingdome, or greater partialitie then in

them, to their kins folkes, seruauntes, Sycophants, &c.
            9 Obiection. It will bee contemned, and so good order
neglected.
            
               Answere. None euer deserued more contempt, then the
Bb. and their officers doe, for all their pompe: but God whose
ordinance it is, will procure sufficient awe vnto it: marke
howe these obiections stande togither, in the 4. it was tyrannie,
and here it is too contemptible, these be contrary.
            10 Obiection. All alterations be daungerous.
            
               Answere. Neuer (where we change from the obedience
of Antichrist, to the seruice 
                  〈◊〉
                the liuinge God) was it euer
daungerous to amende thi
                  •
                
               
                  •
               amis
                  •
               e, by that course whiche
is described of God: if it were, let the particular of it appeare:
this might well haue bin Steuen Gardiners reason for poperie,
in the time of King Henrie the eight.
            The Church must be gouerned onely by the rules of gods
worde, this is in effect the proposition of the first chap.The 3. proposition. whervnto
all those reasons there alleadged may be referred: there
is aduouched generally, the certayne groundes of the whole
Discipline, against the imagined libertie left to the Church:
here is affirmed the particular direction of the Church gouuernement,
by the authoritie of the Eldershipp, to proceede
according to the rules of Gods reuealed will, and not by that
cursed and monstrous cannon lawe, which is made manifest
vnto vs by these reasons:
            1 All gouernours are to execute their authoritie, by the
same warrant from which they haue it: But the gouernours
of the Church of God, haue their warrant to bee gouernours
onelie from the worde, 1. Cor. 12. 28. Therefore they must
gouerne the church onely by the worde.
            2 The Church is to be gouerned by that which the Ministers
may teache vnto the same, for they are taught to the
ende that they may obey, and so be gouerned by the same:
But the Ministers may teache nothing but the worde of God,
1. Cor. 11. 23. Therefore the church is to be gouerned onely
by the worde of God.
            3 That which maketh the Church obedient vnto Christ,
must be the direction whereby it is to be gouerned: Only the

worde of God maketh the church obedient vnto Christe:
Therefore it is to be gouerned by the rules of Gods word.
            4 Euery kingdome or housholde, must be gouerned onlie
by the lawes of the King, or orders of the housholder: The
Church is the kingdome and house of God, and his worde is
the onely lawe that he hath giuen for the same: Therefore
it must be gouerned onely by the worde of God.
            5 That which was ordayned to destroy the church of god,
can not be a good rule to gouerne the same by: But such is
the canon lawe, for it was ordayned to strengthen the kingdome
of Antichrist: Abstract. Therefore it can not bee a
good rule to direct the church by, and consequentlie, it must
be gouerned by the worde, for no other rule is offered vnto
vs, but the one of these twaine.
            6 That whiche was inuented by the Dragon, that persecuteth
the woman and her childe, that same cannot be good
for the Church, which is that woman: But such is the cannon
lawe, for it was inuented by Antichrist, whiche is that
Dragon: Therefore it can not be good for the rulinge of the
church, and consequentlie, &c.
            7 That which strengtheneth the power of darkenes and
ignorance, can not be good to guide them, that must walke
in light and knowledge: But the cannon lawe strengtheneth
the power of darknes and ignorance, for it increaseth poperie,
as appeareth by this, that there is scarce an officer towards
it, in these dayes of knowledge, but he is a papist: Therefore
it cannot be good to guide the church of God.
            8 That which destroyeth the church of God, can not bee
good to rule the same: But the cannon lawe destroyeth it, for
it crosseth euery faithfull Minister in the discharge of his duetie,
and euery good christian, walking in the wayes of godlines,
and nippeth in the head euery good action, as experience
teacheth vs: Therefore it cannot be a good rule to gouuerne
the church by.
            9 That which hath bredd moe trayterous papistes in England,
then the Seminaries at Rome and Rhemes, that same
can not be good to gouerne the church of God: But such is
the cannon lawe, for it hath kept out Discipline, nourished

ignorance, and fostered superstition and poperie, in all estates
of people, that neuer came at those Seminaries: Therefore
it can not bee a good rule to gouuerne the Church of God
by.
            10 That which nourished the hope of Antichrist, to return
hither againe, can not bee good to direct in the gouernment
of the church: But such is the cannon lawe, for it keepeth the
cages for those vncleane birdes: as Archb. and L. Bb. seas,
Arches, Cathedrall churches, &c. Therefore it can not bee a
good rule for the direction of the church.
            11 That which all the Churches haue cast off, as vnfit for
the gouernement of the Church, can not bee good for the
same: But all the churches, that haue forsaken the pope (yea
they that haue not receyued the discipline of Christ wholie)
haue cast off the cannon lawe: Therefore it can not bee good
for the same.
            12 Yea, we our selues mislike it, as appeareth by a statute
made vnder Ed. 6.
            Therefore, if gouernours are to rule by the same authoritie
whereby they are gouernours: if the Church must be gouerned,
by that which the Ministers may teache: if the worde
of God onely, make the Church obedient vnto Christ: if euerie
kingdome must be ruled by the lawes of their King: and
if the cannon lawe be ordayned to destroye the Church: if it
was inuented to persecute the church: if it strengthen the power
of darkenesse and ignorance: if it kill the church of God:
if it breede moe traiterous papistes, then the Seminaries at
Rome and Rhemes: if it nourishe the hope of Antichrists returne:
lastlie, if all the churches that haue forsaken the pope,
haue cast it of also: yea if we our selues doe mislike it: then
must it needes followe, that the Church ought to bee gouerned,
onely by that golden rule of Gods worde, & not by that
leaden lumpe of the cannon lawe.
         
         
            CHAP. 15.
            THe office of the Church gouernement, is meere Ecclesiasticall,
and therefore the gouernours of the church may

not meddle, but onely in Church-matters, as for example,
vocation, and abdication, deciding of controuersies, in doctrine
and manners so farre as appertayneth to conscience,
and the church censures, T. C. booke 1. pag. 206. Discipl. Eccle.
126. but they thinke that church-gouernours, may also
meddle in ciuill causes: Whitgift pa. 749. and their practize,
that take vpon them to be Councellors of state, to iudge ciuillie,
as punish with imprisonment, &c. But this is disprooued,
and so the former proued by these reasons:
            1 That which our Sauiour Christ refused, because it belonged
not vnto him, ruling and teaching the church, that
same is not lawfull for any Ecclesiasticall person to doe: But
Christ refused to deuide the inheritance, Luke 12. 14. onely
because he came to buylde a spirituall kingdome, for otherwise
he being God, had authoritie ouer all thinges: Therfore
it is not lawfull for Ecclesiasticall persons, to bee iudges of
ciuill causes.
            2 That which was forbidden the Apostles, is vnlawful for
euery Ecclesiasticall officer, for they were the chiefe vnder
Christ, and had (after a sort) all offices in themselues, vntill
they could plant them in others: But such dominiō was forbidden
them, as the Kinges of the nations, and other ciuill
Magistrates haue, Luke 22. 28. which is, to rule ciuilly: Therfore
they may not exercise any ciuill authoritie.
            3 If necessarie dueties are to be lefte, rather then our dueties
to the Church should not be thorowly discharged, then
may not a church-officer deale in ciuill iurisdiction, which is
lesse necessarie vnto him: But the former is true, as appeareth
by the wordes of Christ, to him that would haue buried
his father, Luke 9. 59. 60. Therefore they may not exercise anie
ciuill authoritie.
            4 If he that hath an office, must atrende vpon it, then may
he not meddle in another, for he can not attende them both
at once: But the former is true, Rom. 12. 7. Therefore maye
no Church-officer medle with temporall iurisdiction.
            5 As the Souldiour is in his warfare, so are Church-officers,
in the ruling of Gods church: But the Souldiour entangleth
not him selfe in the things of this life, because they are

of another nature to his warfare: which place Cyprian alleadgeth
against a minister, that became an executour to his
friendes will: Therefore church-officers may not meddle
with ciuill offices, because they are of another nature, then
his calling.
            6 Those things that in them selues are of contrarie quallitie,
can not concurre in one subiect: But the gouernments
of the Church and common wealth bee such, not onelie in
this, that they are the next speciall members of one generall,
but also, in that the one is spirituall, and the other temporall,
the one respecteth the soule, and the other the bodie: Therefore
they can not be in one man togither, and consequentlie,
&c.
            7 If the gouernement of the Church, both in euery particular
mans office, and in the generall Eldership, bee a matter
of great waight, and the abilitie of man, very small in euery
good action, then may not a church-officer meddle in
another calling, whereby hee is made lesse able to discharge
his duetie: But the former is true, as all men may see, that
looke into the worde of God, what is required of such men,
and knowe by the same worde, the manifolde infirmities &
vntowardnes of man: Therefore the latter must needes bee
true also.
            8 If the Apostles (who were the most able of all others)
founde them selues vnfitt for two offices, whiche were both
Ecclesiasticall: then is the best church-gouernour vnfitt for
two, which be of more difference one from another, as bee
the gouernement of the church and common wealth: But
the former is true, as appeareth Actes 6. 2. Therefore the latter
must needes be true also.
            9 That which we iustly reprooue in the papistes, muste
needes (if we doe like) be founde more vnlawfull and intollerable
in ourselues: But we iustly reprooue the papistes, for
hauing in their handes both the swordes, that is, the Ecclesiasticall
and ciuill iurisdiction: Therefore it is more intollerable,
being founde in any of vs.
            10 If it be lawfull for an Ecclesiasticall person, to exercise
the office of the ciuill Magistrate, then (on the contrary)

it is lawfull for the ciuill Magistrate, to exercise the offices of
Ecciesiasticall persons, for there is as good reason for the one
as the other: But the latter is vnlawfull: for who would like
of any L. Mayor, to step into the pulpit and preach, &c. Therfore
the first is vnlawfull also.
            11 They may not intangle them selues with worldly offices,Can. App. cap. 80.
but attende vpon their Ecclesiasticall affaires.
            12 None of the Clarkes or Cleargie,Conc. Cal. cap. 3. & 7. shall receyue any
charge of those which are vnder age, the cause of that decree
is there saide to be, for that there were certaine Ministers,
that were stewardes to noble men: and in the 7. cannon, that
none of them should receyue any secular honors.
            13 The Bishops shall onely attende vnto prayer,4. Concil. Cart. ca. 20. reading
and preaching.
            14 He bringeth diuers reasons to prooue,Caluin in. lib. 4. ca. 11. sect. 9. that Bishops may
neither vsurpe, nor take (beeing offered vnto them) any ciuill
office.
            15 He sheweth howe the offices are to bee distinguished,Beza confe. cap. 5. sect. 32. & 42.
and in what sorte it is sayd, that the fathers dealt in the things
of this life, and howe the corporall punishmentes by the Apostles
were particular and extraordinarie.
            16 When both the offices meete in one man,P. Martyr vpon 10. 13. the one hindereth
the other, so that he that exerciseth the one, cannot minister
the other.
            17 There is no man so wise and holy,Bucer vpon Matth. 5. which is able to exercise
both the ciuill, and Ecclesiasticall power, and therefore
he that will exercise the one, must leaue the other.
            Therefore,The conclusion. if Christe refused to iudge in temporall causes,
because it belonged not to his office: if ciuill dominion was
forbidden the Apostles: if necessarie dueties are rather to bee
lefte vndone, then our diligence in the matters of the church
should be lessened: if he that hath an office, must attende vppon
it: if we may not bee intangled with any hinderance: if
the ciuill and Ecclesiasticall functions, bee of contrarie natures:
if euery office in the Church, be more then any one can
perfectlie discharge: if the Apostles founde them selues vnfit
for two offices of like nature: if we iustlie reprooue the papistes
for their two swordes: if a Magistrate may not preache:

if they may not meddle with worldlie offices, nor be tutours
to Orphans, but attende onely vnto the ministerie of the
worde, &c. if they may neither vsurpe, nor take (being offered)
any ciuill office: if they be to be distinguished to seueral
persons, or els one hindereth the other: lastlie, if none bee able
to execute both, then must it needes followe, that Ecclesiasticall
officers may not beare ciuill offices: and consequentlie
the office of the church-gouernement, is meere Ecclesiasticall.
            
               Their obiections herevnto be these:
               1 Obiection.
                  Obiections for ciuil of fices in Ecclesiasticall persons. It countenanceth and maintayneth religion,
to haue ciuill authoritie.
               
                  Answere. It is (in deede) the papistes reason for their
two swordes, which M. Caluin confuteth, Institut. booke 4.
cap. 11. sect. 9.
               2 Obiction. It is good to punish vice by corporall punishment,
that Gods worde may be the better obeyed.
               
                  Answere. It is good to preache Gods worde to men, that
they may obey their Prince for conscience sake: may the Magistrate
therefore preache? we may not doe euery thing that
is good, but onely that which is agreeable to our callings.
               3 Obiection. Eli and Samuel, were both Priests & Iudges.
               
                  Answere. They were extraordinarie (for God separated
those two offices in Moses, and gaue the one vnto Aaron) &
so was Eliahs killing of the false prophetes, & Christes whipping
of the buyers and sellers out of the Temple.
               4 Obiection. Peter killed Ananias, therefore Bishops may
haue prisons.
               
                  Answere. It was by his worde onely, and not by any ciuill
punishement, if they can doe the like, Peters example will
serue their turnes, if not, then must it bee (with the former)
extraordinarie.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 16.
            THe placing and displacing of Church-officers, appertayneth
vnto the Eldership. This is prooued in the 7.
chap. and their obiections are there aunswered for the

first part, which is the placing: but the latter part is to be cleared
by some moe reasons, because the Bishops doe displace
the best Ministers at their pleasure, which is prooued to be a
most wicked action, by these reasons.
            1 Those that are called vnto the ministerie by the Lorde
from heauen, and out wardlie by the meanes of men, so long
as they are blameles in doctrine and conuersation, 1. Tim. 3.
10. can not be displaced, without hainous wickednes against
the manifest will of God: But such are the Ministers that the
Bishops doe daily displace, as they confesse them selues, when
(euen) in their sermons they iustifie their doctrine, in saying,
that they differ onely in outwarde rites: and as their greatest
enimies will saye, when they are asked of such mens liues:
Therefore they can not bee displaced without great wickednes.
            2 Those that are carefull to discharge the duetie of Gods
Ministers, both in teaching, and giuinge example to their
flockes, can not be displaced without great impietie: Such
are these Ministers, that are daily displaced, as appeareth by
this, that they preache more diligentlie then any other, and
that they followe not the course of the worlde, in adding liuing
vnot liuing, but many of them (being as woorthie for
their giftes, as the worthiest) liue poorelie, rather then they
will want the comfort of a good conscience: Therefore they
can not be put to silence without great sinne.
            3 To depriue Gods people of their spirituall comfort, is a
grieuous and horrible wickednes: To put such to silence as
are before mentioned, is to depriue Gods people of their spirituall
comfort: which if anie man will denie, all the godlie
where such a one dwelleth, shall tell him hee lyeth: Therefore
to displace such Ministers, is a haynous and horrible wickednes.
            4 That which giueth occasion to the weake to stumble &
fall away from the Gospell, is a haynous and horrible sinne:
But such is the displacing of those Ministers, as appeareth by
this, that many doubt whether that which he hath taught be
true, whom the professors of the Gospell doe displace, and by
this, that many who had made good beginnings, by the discontinuance

of their Teachers, doe fall away: Therefore to
displace those Ministers, is a haynous and horrible sinne.
            5 Those whose labours God doeth blesse, can not bee displaced
without fighting against God, and consequentlie great
impietie: But such are the Ministers that the Bb. doe daily displace,
as all that loue the Gospell in euery countrie, can witnes:
Therefore to displace them is great impietie.
            6 That action whiche giueth the common enimie iust
cause to reioyce, and hope to get the victorie, is a haynous &
horrible offence: But such is the displacing of those Ministers
as appeareth in euery countrie, where such Ministers are displaced,
and such enemies doe dwell: Therefore to displace
such, is a haynous and horrible offence.
            7 That action that causeth the doers thereof to bee esteemed
enimies to the Gospell, must needes be a haynous sinne:
But such is the putting of those Ministers to silence, for it maketh
the people that haue any loue to religion, thinke that
they are not of God in so doing, for say they, hee that loueth
Christ, can not crosse the course of the Gospell, as these men
doe: Therefore the displacing of them is a haynous sinne.
            8 That which letteth in more wickednes at once, then
the diligent preaching of the worde could driue out in diuers
yeares, must needes be a haynous sinne: But such is the
displacing of these Ministers: for, prophaning of the Saboth,
and all disorder, commeth into a congregation the same day
that such a Minister, that hath long laboured against it is displaced,
as experience in such places prooueth: Therefore to
displace such ministers is a haynous sinne.
            9 That which interrupteth the course of the Gospel, without
warraunt eyther from Gods worde, or the lawes of the
lande, is a haynous and horrible sinne: Such is the displacing
of those Ministers, as is prooued in all the writinges on our
side: and lastlie, in the answere to D. Bridges: therefore to displace
such Ministers, is a haynous and horrible sinne.
            Therefore, if the Ministers that be vsuallie displaced, bee
called of God: if they discharge the duetie of good ministers,
both in doctrine and life: if the displacing of them, be to depriue
Gods people of their spirituall comfort: if it giue occasion

to some to doubt of the Gospell, and to fall away: if God
giue a blessing vnto their labours: if the displacing of them,
giue the enimie matter to reioyce, and hope to ouercome: if
it cause the displacers to be esteemed enimies to the Gospell:
if it let in more wickednesse in one day, then preachinge can
throwe out in many yeeres: if it interrupte the course of the
Gospell, without warrant eyther from the worde of God, or
lawes of the lande, then must it needes followe, that the displacing
of those Ministers, is a most haynous and horrible
sinne against the Lord.
         
         
            CHAP. 17.
            THe Eldership is to admonishe euery one, by whome
offence appeareth vnto them to growe in the church:
There is no question betweene vs, about admonition
it self, but this they denie, that the execuion of of any discipline
(and therefore of this point) belongeth vnto the Eldership:
which point is proued in the seuerall chapters going before:
so that I neede not saye any thing of this, sauing with (a reason
or twaine) to shewe the necessitie and benefite of it in the
Church of God.
            1 That whiche priuate men offended, are commaunded
to seeke vnto for the redresse of the offendour, is a necessarie,
and an ordinarie way for the amendement of them that doe
offende in the Church of God: But such is the admonition of
those that are in authoritie, and cary the name of the church,
Matth. 18. 15. see chap. 14. and the firste proposition of the
same: Therefore admonition in such cases by the Eldership,
is a necessarie and ordinary way, for their amendement that
doe offende.
            2 That which is more auaylable to bring the offendor to
repentance, then priuate admonition, eyther by one, or moe,
the same is very profitable and necessarie in the Churche of
God: But such is the publike admonition by the gouernours
of the Church, as appeareth by this, that Christ maketh it a
remedie, when the other two will not preuayle, Matth. 18. 15
Therefore it is verie profitable and necessarie in the Churche
of God.
            
               
3 That which maketh men more afraide to offende, then
any admonition that priuate men can giue, is profitable and
necessarie in the Church of God: But such is the Eldershipp,
before whom men knowe they shalbe brought, if they doe
not amende: Therefore it is very profitable and necessarie in
the Church of God.
            4 That which hath a greater promise to doe good, then
priuate admonition, is very necessarie in the Church of God:
But such is the admonition that is giuen by the Eldershipp,
because it preuayleth when the former doeth not: Therefore
it is profitable in the church of God.
            5 That without which, all dueties of charitie can not bee
exercised towardes sinners, is needfull to be in the Church of
God: But without admonition by the Eldership, all duties
of charitie cannot be exercised towardes sinners: Therefore it
is needfull to be in the church of God.
            6 That which would bridle the outragious sinns of some,
and keepe in the derision and mockerie, that priuate admonitions
doe receyue, is needfull to be in the Church of God:
But this would admonition by the Eldership doe: for if men
knewe that they should aunswere vnto the Church for their
ill demeanour, to them that rebuke them for sinning, they
would refraine (at least for feare) from such kinde of outrage:
Therefore it is needefull to be in the church of God.
            Therefore,The conclusion. seeing publike admonition before the Eldership
is to be sought, by those that are offended, and cannot be
satisfied: seeing it is more auaylable then priuate admonition:
seeing it maketh men more afraide to offende: seeing it
hath a greater promise: seeing without it all dueties of charitie,
can not be exercised towardes the sinner: lastlie, seeing it
would bridle the outragious sinnes of many: Therefore it
must needes followe, that it is very profitable, and necessarie
to be in the church of God.
         
         
            CHAP. 18.
            THose that be not reclaimed from their faultes by admonition,
are by the Eldershippe to bee suspended from the

Lordes supper, or being officers of the Church, from the execution
of their office, vntill they doe eyther giue good testimonie
of their amendement, or iust cause to be further proceeded
against. Neither is there any controuersie betweene
them and vs, about this poynt: sauing that (as in the former)
they will denie it to appertaine to the Eldership, whiche is
prooued before. I will therefore (for their vnderstandinge
that desire direction in the trueth) firste, shewe that it is a
course that hath warrant in the scriptures: secondlie, that it
is of very profitable vse in the Church of God: the first is thus
prooued:
            1 Whatsoeuer is enioyned, as a duetie to be done by euerie
Christian, if he leaue it vndone,Suspention warranted by the word being vpon such groūds as the word setteth down. he is to be compelled by
the gouernours of the Church to doe it, Luke 14. 17. 23. But
if a mans brother haue anie thing against him, and he make
no conscience to leaue his gifte there, and be firste reconciled,
Mat. 5. 24. he is to be compelled to doe it: Therefore separation
from the Lordes Supper, is warraunted by the
worde.
            2 If that commaundement of Christ, Matth. 7. 6. giue not
that which is holy vnto dogges, can neyther be properly vnderstood
of them, that were neuer of the Church, nor them
that be excommunicated, then is it a warraunt for such separation
of the vnworthy, and consequentlie, that separation is
warraunted in the worde: But the former is true, as appeareth
by this, that the meanest of the Iewes did knowe, that
holy things belonged to neyther of them, and so the commaundement
had bin needles: Therefore suspention is warranted
by the worde.
            3 If there be sinners that are not to be excommunicated,
and yet it were offensiue to giue them the Lords Supper, then
is this course warranted by the worde, for els should Christe
haue left his Church destitute of direction, in common and
vsuall difficulties, which is prooued in the first chap. to bee otherwise:
But such sinners there are, as the notorious sinner
repenting: men mainly suspected of notorious transgressions,
&c. Therefore suspention hath his warrant in the word.
            4 The course that God prescribed in the shadow, for corporall

purifyings, must in the body (in respect of the substance)
be obserued in the spirituall cleansing of euery member
of the Church: But many were separated from the publike
sacrifices for a season, by reason of their corporall vncleanes,
who, yet were not worthie to bee excommunicated:
Therefore must also some be kept from the Lords supper for
a season, who yet appeare not so haynouslie to haue sinned,
as to deserue excommunication.
            5 The Church can not without great offence, suffer one
that hath fallen into some open sinne, or that is vehemently
suspected, to haue hayuouslie offended, cōtinue in the administration
of any publike function: But the Church cannot
iustlie displace such a man at the first, making shewe of repentance,
or standing vpon his purgation: Therefore he must
be separated for a time.
            6 That which was commaunded vnder the lawe to bee
done to the priest, that was vncleane in body, or suspected to
be a leaper, that same must much more vnder the Gospell, be
done vnto the Minister, or other Church officer, that hath
sinned, or is suspected to haue committed a great sinne: But
such a priest was to be separated from offering of sacrifices for
a certaine time: Therefore much more must the like be done
to a Church-officer in the like case.
            Therefore, if the Church be to compell a priuate man to
doe his duetie:The conclusion. if giue not holy things to dogges, bee vnderstoode
of them within the church: if there bee sinners that
can not without offence be admitted to the Lordes supper, &
yet deserue not excommunication: if for corporall vncleannes
vnder the lawe, they were to abstaine a certaine time: and
if the church can not without great offence, suffer him that
hath committed an open sinne (though he repent) or that is
vehemently suspected of a notorious sinn, cōtinue in the execution
of his office, vntill the Congregation bee satisfied:
Lastlie, if the priest that was vncleane, or suspected of leprosie,
might not offer sacrifices: then is it plaine, that both the
separation of some men from the Lordes supper, and other
from the execution of their publike function for a time, is a
thing warranted by the worde of God.
            
               
The latter part, which is, that this kinde of suspention
hath a profitable vse in the Church of God, is thus proued:
            1 That which keepeth the godly in more carefull obedience,
and keepeth in the hypocrites, that they breake not
out, is very profitable for the Church of God: But such is the
vse of the separation from the Lordes Supper, and from executing
publike function in the Church: Therefore it is profitable
in the church of God.
            2 That whiche remooueth (euen) the appearance of offence,
from the Church of God, is very profitable for the
same: But such is the separation: Therefore it is profitable for
the Church of God.
            3 That which declareth vnto the worlde, that the Church
of God is carefull to practise that which it professeth, is verie
profitable: But such is this separation, for it sheweth that they
cannot away with vngodly life: no, nor among them selues:
Therefore it is profitable for the church of God.
            4 That which giueth occasion to the Church, to be exercised
in the action of religion, with more sounde comfort, is
profitable for the same: But such is this separation, for euery
one shall see thereby, the vnworthy (for whose sakes, God
might be angrie with them all, Iosh. 7. 11.) weeded from among
them: Therefore it is profitable for the Church of
God.
            5 That which is a speciall meanes to procure the Lorde
(in mercie) to continue his worde vnto his Church, is profitable
for the same: such is this separation, for it is a notable
meanes to keepe men in obedience to that whiche they professe:
Therefore it is profitable for the Church of God.
            Therefore, if separation of the knowne, or suspected sinner,
from the Lordes supper, and such a Church-officer from
the execution of his publike function, doe keepe men in obedience
that be godly, and restrayneth hypocrites from outrage:
if it remooue the very appearance of euill: if it lett the
world see, that the Church laboureth to practize that, which
it doeth professe: if it make euery member of the Church,
to be exercised in the actions of religion, with greater comfort:

Lastlie, if it be a speciall meane to procure the Lorde in
mercie, to continue his worde: then must it needes followe,
that it is of verie profitable vse vnto the Church of God.
         
         
            CHAP. 19.
            WHen neyther admonition, nor suspention will
serue to reclay me the offendor, but that it doth
appeare, that he abydeth in impenitencie, and
is incorrigible, the Eldership, after mature deliberation, and
commending of the partie vnto the prayers of the Church,
(he yet remaining obstinate) is to proceede to excommunication:
which containeth these propositions in question betwixt
vs and the Bishops.
            
               1 It may not be done, but vpon great and waightie occasion.
               2 It may not bee done by any one man, but by the Eldership,
the whole Church consenting therevnto.
            
            The former is holden by vs, T. C. 1. booke, pag. 183. disc.
Eccle. 130. and denied by them in their practise, that sende it
out (many times) for not paying of sixe pence. But our assertion
is thus prooued, and their godles practise disproued.
            1 That which Christ hath ordayned for the last remedie
against sinne,The proofe of the firste proposition▪
                and onely to bee vsed when neyther admonition,
reprehension, nor separation from the externall communion
of the Saintes for a time will serue: that same is not to
be vsed, but vpon great extremitie: But such is excommunication,
as appeareth, Mat. 18. 15. Therefore it may not bee vsed,
but vpon most waightie occasion, that is in the case (onlie)
of extremitie, when no other meanes will serue the
turne.
            2 That whiche cutteth a man off from the Church of
God, and giueth him ouer vnto Satan, as one in a desperate
case, that same may not be vsed but in greatest extremitie:
But such is excommunication, being vsed according as God
hath left it vnto his Church, 1. Cor. 5. 5. Therefore it may
not be vsed, but in greatest extremitie.
            3 That which a man will doe in the cutting off, of his

hande or his foote, that same must the Church doe, in excommunication:
for it is the cutting off, of a member: But
a man will trie all other wayes, and will neuer cutt of his
hande or his foote, vntill he see it incurable, and readie to
infect the other partes of his bodie: Therefore excommunication
may not be vsed, but in case of greatest extremitie.
            4 That which is contrarie to naturall affection, and worketh
that which a louing heart doeth tremble to thinke of:
that same may not bee done but in greatest extremitie: But
such is the excommunication, for it depriueth the party excommunicated
of our loue, and throweth him into the most
wretched case, that can befall vnto man in this life: Therefore
it may not be done, but in case of greatest extremitie.
            Therefore if excommunication be ordained of Christ,The conclusion. as
a remedie, onely when all other helpes will not serue: if it
cutt the partie from Gods Church, and giue him ouer vnto
Satan: if it must be proceeded vnto, as a man doeth to the
cutting off of his hande or foote: lastlie, if it be a worke contrarie
vnto the naturall affection of man, and effecteth that
which a louing heart doeth tremble to thinke vppon: then
must it needes followe, that it is to be proceeded vnto, onely
in the cases of greatest extremitie, and after that all other
meanes haue bin vsed, and doe appeare not to preuayle.
            The latter poynt (whiche is,The proofe of the secōd proposition that excommunication may
not be done by one man, but by the Eldership, the whole
Church consenting therevnto) is holden by vs, T. C: booke
1. pag. 183. Discipl. Ecclest. 130. &c. and denied by them,
Whitgift pag. 662. and their continuall practize. But our assertion
is thus prooued, and their opinion & practize, found
to be erroneous and vngodlie.
            1 That whiche Christe commaunded to bee done by the
Church, may not be done by one man, vnles you take my L.
Grace for the Church, as Whitgift doeth, page 662. whiche
needeth no confutation: But Christe commaunded that excommunication
should be done by the Church, Mat. 18. 15.
Therefore it may not be done by one man.
            2 That whiche Paule enioyned the Church, when they
were met togither, to doe, may not be done by one man: But

he commaunded them to excommunicate the incestuous
person, when they were met togither, 1. Cor. 5. 5. Therefore
it may not be done by one man.
            3 That which hath neede of greatest aduice, and greatest
authoritie, may not be done by one man: but such is the matter
of excommunication, being the denouncinge of that against
a man, which he will most hardlie beleeue, and beinge
the waightiest point of discipline: Therefore it may not bee
done by one man.
            4 Those must excommunicate, that are to deale in the
other partes of Discipline, as shall appeare in the reasons following,
and (as I thinke) no man will denie: But the other
partes of Discipline are exercised not by one, but by the
Churh, as hath bene prooued: Therefore not one, but the
Church is to excommunicate.
            5 As it was ministred among the Iewes, so must it be in
the Church for euer: which appeareth by this, that it is translated
vnto vs from them (as the Greeke word Synedrion, being
by a corrupt imitation, called Sanedrim, by the Rabbins,
doeth import) and had nothing ceremoniall in it: But it was
executed among them by the Church, and not any one, Ioh.
9. 22. Therefore the Church is to excommunicate, and not
one man.
            6 Cyprian sayeth, he would neuer doe any thing in his
charge,Cyprian li. 3. epist. 10. without the counsell of his Elders, and cōsent of the
people.
            7 The Elders, and other Church-officers, haue as well power
to absolue, as the Bishop.Epist. 14.
            
            8 For so much as absolution belongeth vnto all,Epist. 19. I alone
dare not doe it.
            9 If there be any that haue committed such a fault, that
he is to be put away from the partaking of the prayers of the
Church,Tertul. Apo. cap. 39. &c. There doe beare rule certayne of the most approoued
auncients or Elders of the Church, which haue obtayned
this honor, not by money, but by good report.
            10 It helpeth much to make the party more ashamed,Augu. lib. 3. cont. epist. permen.
that he be excommunicated by the whole church: also in his
bookes of Baptisme, against the Donatists often.
            
               
11 The Elders haue interest in other censures of the
Church,Ierom. ad Demetriad. epist. 1. Bucer de regno Christ. lib. 1. cap. 9. and the Church it selfe in excommunication.
            12 S. Paule accuseth the Corinthians, for that the whole
Church had not excommunicated the incestuous person.
            13 The Elders had the gouuernement in excommunication.
            14 It is very daungerous to permit so waightie a matter
to one man,P. Martyr in 1. Cor. 5. and therefore that tyrannie may be auoyded, &
this censure executed with greater fruite and grauitie, the order
that the Apostle there vseth, is still to be obserued.
            15 Hee sheweth that it partayneth not to one man,Caluin. in. st
                     •
                  t. lib. 4. cap. 11. se. 6. that
it is a wicked fact, that one should take the authoritie to him
selfe, that is common to others: that it openeth a way to tyrannie:
taketh from the Church their right, and abrogateth
the Ecclesiasticall senate, ordayned by Iesus Christ.
            16 The Bishops,Cha. 12, se. 6 when they excommunicated of themselues
alone, did it ambitiouslie, contrarie to the decrees of
godly cannons: See Bucer against Gropper, and vpon Ephes.
4. De animicura, also Zuinglius in Ecclesiast.
            17 It is plentifullie forbidden (euen) by that filthie puddle,See Abstract page 165.
the cannon lawe, and therefore it must needes bee a haynous
sinne, when it findeth faulte with it.
            Therefore,The conclusion. if excommunication be to be executed (by the
commaundement of Christ) of the Church: if S. Paule enioyned
it vnto the church: if it haue neede of greatest aduice
and authoritie: if it belong to them that may execute the other
partes of Discipline: if it was so executed amonge the
Iewes: if to absolue, be as well in the Elders power, as the Bishops:
if Cyprian durst not doe it alone: if it was the action
(in Tertullians time) of the most approoued Elders: if to bee
by the whole church, helpeth much to make the partie more
ashamed: if the whole church haue interest in it: if the whole
Church at Corinth was reprooued, for not doing it: if it bee
to waightie a matter for one man: if the executing of it by
one, ouerturneth the order appointed by Christ: bringeth in
tyrannie: maintayneth ambition: and lastlie, be forbidden by
the cannon lawe it selfe, then must it needes followe, that it
belongeth not vnto one man to excommunicate, but vnto

the Eldershippe, and that with the consent of the whole
Church.
            Their obiections herevnto in defence of their owne practise
be these:
            1 Obiection. The right of excommunication, was in Saint
Paule, and not in the rest.
            
               Answere. He gaue onely direction in that, as in all other
matters, which he wrote of vnto them, but if they had not
throwne out the incestuous person, he had remayned still vnexcommunicated,
for all that which S. Paul had sayde vnto
them.
            2 Obiection. Christ gaue Peter and euery Apostle power
to binde, and lose in earth and in heauen, which interpreters
expounde by Matth. 18. 15.
            
               Answere. That power was of denouncing Gods iudgements,
or pronouncing his mercie in preaching, and not of
this action: they are expounded one by another, because of
the ratifying of them both in heauen alike.
            3 Obiection. Paule did excommunicate Hymeneus and
Philetus.
            
               Answere. That is, being moderator of the action, he pronounced
it, not that he did it alone: The same aunswere is to
be made vnto the Fathers, as Ambrose, &c. who are saide to
excommunicate.
            Therfore vpon these grounds of Scriptures, Fathers Coū
               cels,The conclusion of the whol book.
Emperours, Lawes, Histories, newe Writers, and cleare
light of reason, I conclude, thatChap. 1. Christ hath prescribed
vnto vs an exacte, and perfect platforme of gouerninge his
Church at all times, and in all places: which is this,Cha. 10. and 11. that
there ought to be no ministers of the worde, but Pastours &
Teachers, whiche are to beChap. 4. called by the people, andChap. 7.
ordained by the Eldership, are ofChap. 10. equal authoritie in their
seuerall congregations, mustChap. 10 with all faithfull diligence
imploye the
                  •
               selues, in the ministerie of the worde and Sacramentes,
Chap. 1
                     •
                  
                that there are to bee in euery Congregation,
certaine Elders, whose office is to ouersee the behauiour of
the people, and assist their pastour, in the gouernement of

the Church: alsoChap. 13 Deacons, who are to be imployed only
in receyuing, and bestowing the liberalitie and goods of the
Church, to the reliefe of the poore, and other necessarie vses:
Lastlie,Chap. 14. that there must be in euery Congregation, an Eldership,
of Pastour, Teacher, (if they can haue any) and Elders,
who are in common, to see that the Church bee well
gouerned, not onely in maintayning the profession and practize
of the worde in generall,Chap. 17 but also in admonishing,
reprehending, orChap. 18. separatinge from the Lordes Supper,
them that walke offensiuely, andChap. 19 lastlie in excommunicating
them, that by no other meanes can bee reclaimed.
So that all and euery gouernement, contrarie
or besides this, whether in parte or in
whole, swarueth frō that order, which
Christ hath set downe in his
worde, and therefore
is vnlawfull.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   