
      
         
            
            
            
            
            ¶ Articles to be inquyred in thordinary viſitation of the moſt reuerende father in GOD, the Lorde Cardinall Pooles grace Archcbyſhop of Caunterbury wythin hys Dioces of Cantorbury. In the yeare of our Lorde God. m v.c.l ot ✚
            
            
               ¶Touching the clergy.
               
                  FIrſt, whether ye deuine ſeruice  in the church at times, dayes, and houres, be obſerued, and kept duely or no.
               Item, whether the parſons  vicars and curates, do comly, and decently in theyr maners and doynges, behaue theym ſelfes or no.
               Item, whether they do reuerently and dwely miniſtes  the ſacramentes and ſacramentalles or no.
               Item, whether any of their paryſhoners doe dye without miniſtracion of the ſacramentes, throughe

                  
the necligence of theyr curates or no.
               
                   Item, whether the ſayde parſons, vicars, or Curates, do haunt tauernes or ale houſes, encreaſinge therby infamy and ſlaunder or no.
               
                   Item, whether they be diligent in teachynge the mydwyffes howe to chryſten chyldren in tyme of neceſſitie, according to the Canons of the church or no
               
                   Item, whether they ſee that the Fonte be comlye kepte, and haue holly water alwayes ready for children to be chriſtened.
               
                   Item, if they do kepe a booke of all the names of them that be reconciled to the duty of the church.
               
                   Item, whether ther be any preeſtes that late vnlawfully had womē vnder pretenſed mariage, And he therto are not reconſiled, and to declare theyr names and dwellyng places.
               
                   Item, whether they do diligently teache their pariſhoners the articles of the fayth, and the ten commaundementes.
               
                  Item, whether they doo decentlye obſerue thoſe thinges that do concerne the ſeruice of the Church and all thooſe thynges thattende too a good and a Chryſtian lyfe, accordynge to the Cannons of the Churche.
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
               
               lye to them that fall ſicke, with light, and wyth a litle ſacrynge bell.
               Item, whether the comen ſcoles be wel kept, and  that the ſchole maiſters be diligent in teaching, and be alſo catholyke, and mē of good and vpryght iudgemēt, and that they be examined and approued by the ordinary.
               Item, whether any do take vpō them to miniſter  the goodes of thoſe that be dead without aucthorytie from thordinary.
               Item, whether the poore people in euery paryſhe  be charitably prouided for
               Item, whether there do burne a lampe, or a candel  before the ſacramente. And if there doe not that then it be prouided for with expedicion.
               Item, whether infantes and children be brought  to be confyrmed in conuenient time.
               Item, whether any do kepe or haue in theyr cuſtody  any herenious or vnlawful bokes.
               Item, whether any do withholde anye monye or  goodes bequeathed to the amendynge of the hyghe wayes, or any other charitable dede.
               Item, whether anye haue put awaye their wiues  or any wyues to withdraw themſelues from their

                  
huſbands, beyng not lefully diuorſed.
               
                   Item, whether any do violate or breake the ſondayes and holydayes, doyng their daily labors and exerciſes vpon the ſame.
               
                   Item, whether the tauernes or alehouſes, vpon the Sondayes and hol
                     •
                  dayes in the time of Maſſe Matens and Euenſonge, do kepe open their dores and do receiue people into theyr houſes to dryncke and eate, and therby neglect their duties in cōming to the church.
               
                   Item, whether any haue or do depraue or contēn the aucthoritie or iuriſdiction of the Popes holynes or the Sea o
                     •
                   Rome.
               
                   Item, whether any minſtrels, or ani other perſōs do vſe to ſyng any ſonges againſt the holy Sacramentes, or any other the rytes and Ceremonyes of the churche.
               
                   Itē, whether there be any hoſpitals within your pariſhes, & whether the foundacions of them be duely & truly obſerued & kept. And whether the charitable contribucions of the ſame be done accordingly.
               
                   Item, whether any goodes plate, Iewels or poſſeſſions be taken away, or withholden from the ſayde hoſpitals and by whome.
            
            ¶God ſaue the Kynge and Quene.
         
      
      
         
            Prynted at Cantorbury By Jhon Michel.
            
            
         
      
   